

Ecce dedi vobis omnes herbas smentantes semen, qiue sunt. Gen: 1. 29.

Excideret ne tibi diuini muneris Author
Praesentem monstrat quaelibet herba Deum.
Ceres


Pomona


THE HERBALL OR GENERAL History of Plants.

Gathered by John Gerarde of London Master in CHIRVRGERIE

Very much Enlarged and Amended by Thomas Johnson Citizen and Apothecarye of
LONDON

THEOPHRASTUS


DIOSCORIDES


London Printed by Adam Islip Joice Norton and Richard Whitakers Anno 1633.



Io: Pain sculp:
VIRIS PRVDENTIA, VIRTVTE, ART, RERVMQVE VSV SPECTATISSIMIS, DIGNISSIMIS
RICHARDO EDWARDS RECTORI, SIVE MAGISTRO; EDWARDO COOK, LEONARDO STONE
GVARDIANIS, CAETERISQVE CLARISS. SOCIET. PHARMACEVT. LAND. SOCIIS, HOS SVOS IN
EMACVLANDO, AVGENDOQVE HANC PLANTARVM HISTORIAM, LABORES, STVDIORVM BOTANICORVM
SPECIMEN, AMORIS SYMBOLVM, EX ANIMO D. D. VESTRAE, PVBLICAEQVE VTILITATIS
STVDIOSISSIMVS

THOM. JOHNSON.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE HIS SINGVLAR GOOD LORD AND MASTER, SIR WILLIAM CECIL
KNIGHT, BARON OF Burghley, Master of the Court of Wards and Liueries,
Chancellor of the University of Cambridge, Knight of the most noble Order of
the Garter, one of the Lords of her Majesty's most honorable Privy Council,
and Lord high Treasurer of England.
AMong the manifold creatures of God (right Honorable, and my singular good
Lord) that have all in all ages diversely entertained manv excellent wits, and
drawn them to the contemplation of the divine wisdom, none have provoked men's
studies more, or satisfied their desires so much as Plants have done, and that
upon just and worthy causes; For if delight may provoke men's labor, what
greater delight is there than to behold the earth apparelled with plants, as
with a robe of embroidered work, set with Orient pearls, and garnished with
great (...) of rare and costly jewels? If this variety and perfection of
colors may affect the eye, it is such in herbs and flowers, that no Apelles,
no Zeuxis ever could by any art express the like: if odours or if taste may
work satisfaction, they are both so (...) in plants, and so comfortable, that
no confection of the Apothecaries can equal their excellent virtue. But these
delights are in the outward senses: the principal delight is in the mind,
siugularly enriched with the knowledge of these visible things, setting forth
to us the invisible wisdom and admirable workmanship of almighty God. The
delight is great, but the use greater, and joined often with necessity. In the
first ages of the world they were the ordinary meat of men, and have
continued ever since of necessaire use both for meats to maintain life, and
for medicine to recover health. The hidden virtue of them is such, that (as
Pliny notes) the very brute Pli. li. (...). ca. 27.
Ibid, (...). 22. c. 2.
beasts have found it out: and (which is another use that he observes) from
thence the Dyars took the beginning of their Art.

Furthermore, the necessary use of these fruits of the earth does plainly
appear by the great charge and care of almost all men in planting and
maintaining of gardens, not as ornaments only, but as a necessary provision
also to their houses. And here beside the (...), to speak again in a word of
delight, gardens, especially such as your Honor has, furnished with many rare
Simples, do singularly delight, when in them a man does behold a flourishing
show of Summer beauties in the midst of Winters force, and a goodly spring of
flowers, when abroad a leaf is not to be seen. Besides these and other
causes, there are many examples of those that have honored this science: for to
pass by a multitude of the Philosophers, it may please your Honor to call to
remembrance that which you know of some noble Princes, that have joined this
study with their most important matters of state: Mithridates the great was
famous for his knowledge herein, as (...) Plut. (...) (...). adul and (...).
notes. Euax also King of Arabia, the happy garden of the world for principal
Simples, wrote of this argument, as Pliny shows. Diocletian likewise, might
Plin. lib. 25.
cap. 2,
have had his praise, had he not drowned all his honor in the blood of his
persecution. To conclude this point, the example of Solomon is before the rest,
and greater, whose wisdom and knowledge was such, that he was able to set
out the nature of all plants from the highest Cedar to the lowest Moss. But my
very good (...), that which sometime was the study of great Philosophers and
mighty Princes, is now neglected, except it be of some few, whose spirit and
wisdom has carried them among other parts of wisdom and counsel, to a care
and study of special herbs, both for the furnishing of their gardens, and
furtherance of their knowledge: among whom I may justly affirm and publish
your Honor to be one, being my self one of your servants, and a long time
witness thereof: for under your Lordship I have served, and that way employed
my principal study and almost all my time, now by the space of twenty years.
To the large and singular furniture of this noble Island I have added from
(...) places all the variety of herbs and flowers that I might any (...)
obtain, I have labored with the soil to make it fit for plants, and with the
plants, that they might delight in the soil, that so they might live and
prosper under our clymat, as in their native and proper country: what my
success has been, and what my furniture is, I leave to the report of them
that have (...) your Lordships gardens, and the little plot of mine own
especial care and husbandry. But because gardens are private, and many times
finding an ignorant or a negligent successor, come soon to ruin, there be
that have solicited me, first by my pen, and after by the Press to make my
Labors common, and to free them from the danger whereunto a garden is subject:
wherein when I was overcome, and had brought this History or report of the
nature of Plants to a just volume, and had made it (as the Reader may by
comparison see) richer than former Herbals, I found it no question unto whom I
might (...) my (...); for considering your good Lordship, I found none of whose
favor and (...) I might sooner presume, seeing I have found you ever my very
good Lord and Master. Again, considering my duty and your Honors merits, to
whom may I better recommend my Labors, than to him unto whom I owe my self,
and all that I am able in any service or (...) to perform? Therefore under
hope of your Honorable and accustomed favor I present this Herball to your
Lordships protection; and not as an exquisite Work (for I know my meannesse)
but as the greatest gift and chiefest argument of duty that my labor and
service can afford: where of if there be no other fruit, yet this is of some
use, that I have ministered Matter for Men of riper wits and deeper judgments
to polish, and to add to my large additions where any thing is defective, that
in time the Work may be perfect. Thus I humbly take my leave, beseeching God
to grant you yet many days to live to his glory, to the support of this State
under her Majesty our dread (...), and that with great increase of honor in
this world, and all fullness of glory in the world to come.

Your Lordships most humble and obedient Servant, JOHN GERARD.

LANCELOTVS BRVNIVS MEDICVS REGINEVS IOHANNI GERARDO Chirurgo peritissimo, and
rei Herbariae callentissimo S. P. D.
CVM singularum medicinae partium cognitio atque intelligentia libero homine
digna consenda est; tum earum nulla vel antiquitate, vel dignitate, vel (...),
vel denique iucunditate, cum stirpium cognitione iure comparari debet.
Antiquissimam eam esse ex eo liquet, quod quum ceterae medicinae parts (sicut
reliquae etiam arts) ab ipsis hominibus (prout eos dura pressit necessitas)
primum excogitatae and inuentae fuerunt: sola herbarum arborumque cognitio ante
hominem formatum condita, eidemque (...) creato ab ipso mundi archetecto donata
videri potest Cuius tanta apud antiqua secula existimatio (...) dignitas erat,
vt and ipsius inuentionem sapientissimo Deorum Apollini veteres tribuerint, and
reges celeberrimi in stirpium viribus indagandis studium laborem que (...)
consumere, summae sibi apud posteros laudi honorique futurume ensuerint. Iam
(...) plantarum vtilitas, atque etiam necessitas, adeo late patet, vt eius
(...) nullius vel acutissimi hominis animus capere, nedum meus calamus
exprimere queat. Stirpium enim complurimae nobis in cibos, alimentumque cedunt:
innumerae aduersus morbos remedia suppeditant: ex alijs domos, naues,
instrumenta tam bellica quam rustica fabricamus: aliquot etiam earum vestes
nostris corporibus subministrant. In quibus singulis recensendis diutius
persistere, hominis esset intemperanter abutentis and otio and literis. Quantas
autem, and quam varias voluptates ex stirpium (...) (...) oculis capiamus, sieve
fragrantia naribus hauriamus, sine summa inearum conditorem impietate inficiari
non possumus. Adeo vt absque stirpium open and subsidio vita nobis ne vitalis
quidem haberi (...).

Quum igitur res plantaria reliquis omnibus medicinae partibus antiquitate
antecedat; dignitate, nulli cedat; vtilitate insuper oblectatione que caeteras
long superer, quis futurus est, adeo, aut insensatus vt non exploratum habeat,
aut ingratus, (...) non ingenue agnoscat, quanta vniuersis Anglis commoda,
quantasque voluptates tuus mi Gerarde in stirpium inuestigatione and cultu
labor indefessus, studium inexhaustum, immensique sumptus (...) de stirpibus
edito libro allaturi sunt. Macte itaque ista tua virtute, istoque de republica
been merendi studio, and quod insigni tua cum laud ingressus es virtutis
gloriaeque curriculum, eidem insiste (...) and gnauiter, neque a re plantaria
promouenda prius desiste, quam eam a te ad vmbilicum iam ferme productam ipse
plene absoluas atque perficias. Sic enim and tibi adhuc superstiti gloriam
paries immortalem, and post obitum (...) tui nominis celebritatem relinques, vt
tuarum laudum posteros nostros nulla vnquam captura sit obliuio.

Been vale. Ex Aula Reginea Westminster. ipsis Call. December. 1597.
MATTHIAS DE L'OBEL IOHANNI GERARDO felicitatem.
QVum Londinum appuli, in sinu gauisus sum Gerarde amicissime, dum typographo
formis excudenda Plantarum collectanea (...) commissa vidi, de quibus (...),
nulla die peritur as (...) Anglia tibi Rei-herbarioe familiam vniuersam,
medicatricis artis partem, antiquissimum, iucund: ss: mum and vtilissimum
Authoris (...) diligentia in stirpium sine (...) (...) (...) commendatur.
studium, retegere cupido, debet. Priscorum enim Theophrasti, Dioscoridis,
Plinij, and Galeni scripta, passim toto orb pervulgata, tanquam fontes:
Neotericorum autem, seu rivulos, Brunfelsij, Fuchsij, Tragi, Ruellij,
Matthioli, Dodonaei, Turneri, Clusij, Dalescampij, Camerarij, Tabernaemontani,
Penae, (...) amque nouam methodum and ordinem, a Gramine and notioribus ad
Triticea, generatim and speciatim, materno idiomate, Anglicoe genti tuoe
cultissimoe, Reipublicoe voluptabili commodo, (...); quo ipsa stimulata, h.
rbarum delitias and hortorum (...) ssimum and amoenissimum cultum (...),
maximorum (...), Regum and Heroum tam priscorum quam nuperorum exemplo. Nec
satis hoctibi fuit; (...) mulio (...) (...) proestitisti, quod copiam multarum
elegantissimarum plantarum in Anglia sponte (...) ab alijs hactenus
proetermissarum, bistoriam descripsisti, magna hoc studio captorum vtilitate
and oblectamento: Singulas enim regiones pecu liares quasdam plantas, quas in
alijs non facilc reperias, gignere certum. Neque magni tibi fuit boec
inspectione and e viuis Nature oe typis nosse; quippe qui diu herbas indigenas,
inquilinas and peregrinas cum nuperrime solo erumpent s and pululantes, tum
adultas, semineque (...), (...) tuo suburbano aluisti and fouisti: Exactum enim
cognosendarum ex figura aut fact superficiaria (...) studium generatim
consistit (Dioscoride test) in frequenti and assidua, temporis omnis,
inspectione. Sed alia est interioris and substantialie formoe plantarum, quoe
oculis cerni non potest, solers cognitio; quam etiam, quantum potes
percunctando, seniorum Groecorum Medicorum more, aperire (...). Solebant autem
antiqut suorum. Medicaminum experimenta, in Reipublicoe vtilitatem, scriptis
tabellis dare, quibus apud Epheseos templi syluaticoe Dianoe (...)
vestiebantur. Compertum etiam est Hippocratem discendi cup. dum, (...) region
bus peragratis, idem proestitisse, and in methodum commemorabiliorem
restituisse and illustrasse. (...) enim est Reipublicoe quam nostris commodis
(...). Non est igitur quod (...) (...) procacis oetat is conuiciatores maledict
Zoili scripta tua obtrectent: (...) (...) (...) potuisti, coetera doctioribus
iudicijs relinquens; (...) and exoticis incompertarum (...) adhuc virium
mangonizatis and lenocinijs allectis Floristarum floribus a Flora Dea meretrice
nobili (...), valetudini and vtilitati potius consulens, quam voluptati, valeri
(...). Nonnullt siquidem ex alijs libris herbarum transcriptores rapsodi,
ignotis sibi vivis plantis ad medendum maxim (...), assignant incertis, dubijs
and supposititijs (...) aut simplicibus facultates (...) simplicis medicamenti,
maximo errore and (...) periclitatione (vnum enim soepe simplex compositionem
(...) reddit peruertit aut deprauat) quibus nec tuto nec temere credendum;
(...) ettam minus (...) herbarum experimentis fallacibus, quibus etiam neque
nisi notissimis morbis (...), (...) and (...), eorundemque (...) (...), (...)
pop (...) iu n me (...) (...) and (...) depulimus errores.
(...), ne inoportunus earum vsus (...) venenum quam remedium sit. Summo (...)
oeg (...) dispendig and (...) (...) (...) (...) periclitatores procaces,
contempt is and neglectis (...) (...), Hippocratis and Galeni (...), per
satutis discrimina and hominum strages medentum (...) (...). Omitto, (...)
ergo, vulgi opifices, textores sellularios, sord dissimos (...),
interpolatores, circulatores forenses and veteratores scutica dignos, qui (...)
and (...) artibus suis fastiditis, (...) insanioe lucro, se Medicos
Theophrasteos, quem v. x (...) summis labris degustarunt, profitentur. Non
inuenusle Syluius in (...) Initio prologi Pharmac. Praeparand.
(...) (...), dum ait, Quam quisque nouit artem, hanc exerceat vnam, atque
(...), and totus in ea versetur, etc. (...) sub sinem (...) rursus (...), Faxit
Deus vt quisque (...) exercet (...), pernoscat, and Medicus nihil (...) quae ad
morbos cito and tuto (...) vtilia vel (...) esse (...), ignoret. Praeualet
Medicus vbi (...) fides suspecta est, qui ipse simplicia and composita
pernoscit; imo quam infamiae notam (...) (...) (...), dum ignarus horum
simplicium medicamentorum, tanquam asinus (...) ad (...) (...) rogata, (...)
motis, velut annuit: quid quod illi (...) etiam (...) (...) illudit.
Absurdissimus est ac saepe ridiculus (...) (...) facit, (...) (...) ignarus;
and Pharmacopoeo ignorantiae suspectum merito se reddit. (...) (...) (...)
(...) Syluium, ibidem loci.

Medico quam plurima perscrutanda, vt satis superque ad artem medicatricem
perdiscendam, annos paucos haudquaquam sufficere, testantur ipsius
experientissimi and Diuini (...) verba (...) inquit; Epist. ad Democritum.
Ego enim ad finem Medicinae non perueni, etiamsi iam senex sim. Et statim per
initia Aphorismorum vitam breuem and artem long am (...). Quomodo ergo tuto
medebuntur multilaruati Medici aut Medicastri tam repent creati, nulla
Medicinae part, Medicamentorumve fa cultatibus perspectis? (...) adulatores,
assentatores, dubitatores, rixatores, periclitatores and Gnathonicos
parasistratos histrionibus qui in tragoedijs introducuntur similimos fecit
Hippocrates. Quemadmodum enim illi (inquit) figuram quidem and habitum ac
personam eorum quos referunt habent, illi ipsi autem vere non sunt: Sic and
Medici fama quidem and nomine multi, Multi (...) lunt (...) quam esse.
re autem and opere valde pauci. Itaque cum paulo ante Medicinam omnium artium
praeclarisstmam esse dixerit: Verum propter ignorantiam eorum qui eam exercent,
and ob vulgi ruditatem, qui tales pro Medicis iudicat and habet; iam eo res
deuenisse, vt omnium artium long vilissima censeatur. At vero hoc peccatum ob
hanc potissimum causam committi videtur; soli namque Medicinae nulla paena in
rebus-publicis statuta est, praeterquam ignominiae. Ne animam and (...)
laederit, aut illi insignis ignominia inureretur ob huiusmodi ardua and noxia
discrimina, bonus ille and syncerus Dodonaeus (quamvis mult as herbas ex alijs
and Fuchsio transcripserit, cuius methodo vsus est, quemque inchoauerat, vt
ipsemet mihi retulit, vernacula Germanica inferiori lingua vertere)
vulgatissimis, notissimis ijsque paucis ex (...) herbarum millibus,
quinquagenis aut septuagenis herbis quibus vtebatur, potius contentus fuit,
quam innumeris sibi ignot is periclitari: melius enim omnino medicamento
carere, abstinere, and naturae com mittere, quam abuti. Vtinam huius nostrae
aetatis quamplures auso potiti, medicinam factitantes, eo studio, candore and
voto mederentur: Illis id for sitan nequaquam euenerit, quod Philosophis
(Hippocrate defuncto) discipulis suis inexpertis and parum adhuc exercitatis
medendo, id est necando (vt memoriae traditumest) contingit: quamobrem ars
Medica Athenis, Roma and per vniuersam Graeciam centum and septuaginta annis,
interdicta et exul fuit. Merito igitur caute et tute agendum: Opiatis et
Diagrediatis, Colocynthide, Tithymalis, Esula, Lathyride, Mercurio, Stibio, and
similibus molestissimis simplicibus cum cautione vtendum: optimis ducibus and
experientissimus senioribus praeceptoribus adhaerendum, quoru^ sub vexillis
fidissime and tutissime rara and praeclara, ob barbariem fere extincta, patrum
and auorum remedia, maximo et pristino artis ornamento et proximi vtilitate
renouantur, et in vsum reuocantur; neglectis, spretis, et exclusis Empiricis
verbosis, inuidiosis, suspensis, ambagiosis et exitiosis opinionibus, quibus
Mundus immundus regitur et labitur; qui cum decipi velit, decipiatur: in cuius
fallacias per apposite finxit et cecinit olim hos versiculos eruditissimus
collega D Jacobus Paradisus nobilis Gandauensis alludens adnomen tanti
versutissimi herois Nostradami Salonensis Gallo-prouinciae,

Nostra-damus, cum verba damus, quia fallere nostrum;
Et cum verba damus, nil nisi Nostra-damus.

Vale. Londini ipsis Calendis December. 1597
In GERARDI Botanologian (...).
VLtimus ecce Gerardus: at edit an optimus herbas?
Quid ni? non not as sed dedit ille novas.
Ergo ne inuideas, videas cum nomen and omen
(...), mirum est ardua quantagerit.
(...)
Sic liber est promus, condus vt (...) erat.
Et (...) caelumque solumque subegit.
(...)
ANTONIUS HVNTONVS. Medicinae candidatus.

Ad Iohannem Gerardum Chirurgum Herbariumque peritissimum.
NVlla oculos hominum species magis allicit illa,
Quam praestante manu duxit generosus Apelles.
Nulla aures animosque magis facundia, quam quae
Se fusam loquitur Ciceronis ab ore diserti:
Haec eadem hunclibrum commendat causa, Gerarde,
Cui pro laud satis tali natum esse parente,
Artifices cui inter dextras pro numine, nomen
Nobilius reliquis herbae, plantaeque magistris.
Illi etenim Europae succos, (...) liquores
Quaeque arentesolo sitiens parit Africa, (...):
Tu veterum inuentis noua consuis omnia, siqua
Indus vterque dedit nostram fotura salutem,
Sive aliunde vehit nostras mercator ad oras,
Hocipso vtilius. Quia quae sunt (...) scriptis,
Illa manu expertus medico, and been dives ab horto
Explorata diu multumque emittis in auras,
Quae curent hominum languentia corpora, multi
Praestantesque viridocuere fideliter artem.
Sed (...) plantas, quem verba iuvabunt
Sicanimo, sic (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
Prosilit, at stricto cedit victoria ferro
Quae tibi pro tanto cedit victoria ferro
Praemia persoluer, Myrti laurique coronas?
Istam nouit edax mercedem abolere vetustas.
At tibi pro studio impensisque laboribus istis.
Queis hominum curas sertam tectamque salutem,
Ille opifex rerum, custosque authorque salutis
Aeterna stacuit frontem redimire corona.
G. Lannaeus Medicus.

In historiam plantarum, Io. Gerardi ciuis and Chirurgi Londinensis, M. Iacobi
Ihonstonij Scoti Ballinerifae Regij pagi portionarij Epigramma.
DEsine, quae vastis pomaria montibus Atlas
Clauserat (Hesperij munera rara soli)
Auratis folijs auratos desine ramos
Mirari, and ramis pendula poma suis.
Singula cum Domino periere, and Gorgone viso
In montis riguit vescera versus Atlas.
Alcinoi perijt qui, cedat pensilis (...),
Quem celebrat prisci temporis aurafugax:
Vna Gerardini species durabilis horti
Aeterno famae marmore sculpta manet.
Hic quicquid Zephyrus produxit, quicquid and Eurus,
Antiquus quicquid and novus orbis haber,
Intulit in patriam naturamque (...) art:
Sic nullo cedit (...) Britanna solo.
Quod magis est Graium and Latium concludit in vno
Margin, and Anglorum iam facit ore loqui:
Sic erit (...) hinc vt viuas, horte (...),
Cultoris studio nobilitate tui.
In Plantarum historiam, a solertissimo viro, Reique Herbariae peritissimo, D.
Iohanne Gerardo, Anglice editam Epigramma.
EGregiam certe (...), decus immortale refertis
Tu, socijque tui, magnum and memorabile nomen
(Illustris DEVORAX) raptoribus orbis IBERIS
Deuictis class Anglorum; Tuque (Dicasta
Maxim EGERTONE) veterem superans Rhadamanthum,
HEROVM merito (...) censendus in albo.
Neclaus vestra minor (sacrae pieratis alumni)
Qui mentes hominum diuina pascitis esca.
Ornatis Patriam cuncti, nomenque Britannum
Augetis, vobisque viam munitis ad astra.
Quin agite, in partem saltem permittite honoris
Phoebei veniant Vates, qui pellere gnari
Agmina morborum, humanae insidiantia vitae.
Huius and ingentes, serena front labores
ANGLO-DIOSCORIDIS, Patriae, vestraeque saluri
Excipite exhaustos: paulum huc diuortite in HORTOS
Quos CHORTEIA colit, quos Flora exornat, and omnes
Naiades, and Dryades, Charites, Nymphaeque Britannae.
Corporibus hic grata salus, animisque voluptas.
Hic laxate animos: HABITAVIT NVMEN IN HORTIS.
Fran. Hering Med. D.

Thomas Newtonus, Cestreshyrius, D. Io. Gerardo, amico non vulgari, S.
POst tot ab ingenuis conscripta (...) mystis,
Herbarum vires qui reserare docent.
Tu tandem prodis Spartamque hanc (...) ornas,
Dum reliquis (...) praeripuisse studes.
Nec facis hoc, rutilo vt possis ditarier auro,
Nec tibi vt accrescat grandis acervus opum;
Sed prodesse volens, vestitos gramine colles
Perlustras, and agros, frondiferumque nemus.
Indeque Paeonias (apis instar) colligis herbas,
Inque tuum stirpes congeris alueolum.
Mill tibi species plantarum, milleque notae;
Hortulus indicio est, quem colis ipse domi.
Pampineae vites, redolens cedrus, innuba laurus,
Nota tibi, (...) est pinguis oliua tibi.
Balsama, narcyssus, rhododaphne, nardus, amomum,
Saluia, dictamnus, galbana nota tibi.
Quid multis? radix, stirps, flos, cum cortice ramus,
Spicaque cum siliquis est been nota tibi.
Gratulor ergo tibi, cunctisq, ( Gerarde) Britannis,
Namptwicoque (...) gratulor, atque meo.
Nam (...) (...) me genuere parents,
Tu meliore tamen sydere (...) eras.
Macte animo, pergasque precor, (...); laborem
Urge etiam vlterius. Viuitur ingenio.
(...) habeant alij, gemmas, nitidosque pyropos,
Plantas (...) and flores scribe Gerarde. Vale.
Vere and ex animo tuus, Tho. Newton, Ilfordensis (...)

To the well affected Reader and peruser of this Book, St. Bredwell Physician,
greeting.
OPen is the camp of glory and honor for all men, says the younger Pliny:
not Plin. Iun. in pan.
only men of great birth and dignity, or men of office endued witb public
charge and titles, are seen therein, and (...) the garland of praise and
preferment waiting to crown their merits, but even the common soldier
likewise: so as he, whose name and note was crst all obscure, may by (...) acts
of valor obtain a place among the noble. The school of science keeps
semblable proportion: whose amplitude, as not always, nor only, men of great
titles and degrees, labor to illustrate; so whosoeucr does, may confidently
account of, at the least, his name to be immortal. What is he then that will
deny his voice of gracious commendation to the Authors of this Book: to every
one, no doubt, there is due a condign measure. Turnerus. Dodonaeus. Pena. L
(...). Tabernamontanus.
The first gatherers out of the Ancients, and augmentors by their own pains,
have (...) spread the odor of their good names, through all the Lands of
learned habitations. D. Priest, for his translation of so much as Dodonaeus,
has thereby left a tomb for his honorable sepulture. M. Gerard coming last,
but not the least, has many ways accommodated the whole work unto our
English Nation: for this Historic of Plants, as it is richly replenished by
those five men's labors laid together, so yet could it full ill have wanted
that new accession he has made unto it. Many things has he nourished in his
garden, and observed in our English fields, that never came into their pens
to write of. Again, the greatest number of these plants, having never been
written of in the English tongue, would have wanted names for the vulgar sort
to call them by: in which defect he has bin curiously careful, touching both
old and new names to make supply. And lest the Reader should too often languish
with frustrate desire, to find some plant he reads, of rare virtue, he
spares not to tell (if himself have seen it in England) in what wood,
pasture or ditch the same may be seen and gathered. Which when I think of,
and therewithal remember, with what cheerful alacrity, and resolute
attendance he has many-yeares tilled this ground, and now brought forth the
fruit of it, whether I should more commend his great diligence to attain this
skill, or his large bencuolence in bestowing it on his country, I cannot
easily determine. This booke-birth thus brought forth by Gerard, as it is
inform and disposition fair and comely, every species being referred to his
likeliest genus, of whose stock it came: so is it accomplished with surpassing
variety, unto such spreading growth and strength of every lim, as that it may
seem some heroical Impe of illustrious race, able to draw the (...) and
expectation of every man unto it. Somewhat rare it will be here for a man to
move a question of this nature, and depart again without some good
satisfaction. Mamfold will be the use both to the Physician and others: for
every man delights in knowledge naturally, which (as Aristotle said) is in
prosperity an ornament, in adversity arefuge. But this book above many
others Laert. l. 5. cap. 1.
will suit with the most, because it both plenteously ministers knowledge,
which is the food of the mind, and does it also with a familiar and pleasing
taste to (...) capacity. Now as this commodity is communicated to all, and
many shall-receiue much fruit thereof, so I wish some may have the mind to
return a benefit again; that it might not be (...) in all that Iuvenall
says, Scirevolunt (...). (...). (...).
omnes, mercedem soluere nemo: (i.) All desire to know, none to yield reward.
Let men think, that the perfection of this knowledge is the high advancement of
the health of man that perfection is not to be attained, but by strong endeavor:
neither can strong endeavor be accomplished without free maintenance. This has
not he, who is forced to labor for his daily bread: but if he, who from the
short hours of his daily and necessary travel, stealing as it were some, for
the public behoof, and setting at length those pecces together, can bring
forth so comely a garment as this, meet to cover or put away the ignorance of
many: what may be thought he would do, if public maintenance did free him
from that private care, and unite his thoughts to be wholly intent to the
general good. O Reader, if such men as this stick not to rob themselves of
such wealth as thou haste to enrich thee, with that substance thou want,
detract not to share out of thine abundance to merit and encourage their
pains: that so fluxible riches, and permanent sciences, may the one become a
prop unto the other. Although praise and reward joined as companions to
fruitful endeavors, are (in (...)) (...) (...).
desired of all men, that undertake losses, labors, or dangers for the
public behoof: because they add sinews (as it were) unto reason, and able
her more and more to resine her self: yet do they (...). (...). in (...).
not embrace that honor in respect of it self, nor in respect of those that
conferredit upon them, but as having thereby an argument in themselves, that
there is something in them worthy estimation among men: which then doubleth
their diligence to deserve it more abundantly. Admirable and for the imitation
of Princes, was that act of Alexander, who setting Aristotle to compile
commentaries Plin. lib. 8. cap. 16.
of the bruit creatures, allowed him for the better performance thereof,
certain thousands of men, in all Asia and Greece, most skillful obseruers of
such things, to give him information touching all beasts, fishes, fowls,
serpents, and flies. What came of it? A book written, wherein all learned men
in all ages since do exercise themselves principally, for the knowledge of the
creatures. Great is the number of those that of their own private have
labored in the same matter, from his age down to our present time, which all
do not in comparison satisfy us. Whereas if in those ensuing ages there had
risen still new Alexanders, there (certainly) would not have wanted Aristotle's
to have made the evidence of those things an hundred fold more cleared unto us,
than now they be. Whereby you may perceive the unequal effects that follow
those unsuitable causes of public and private maintenances unto labors and
studies. Now that I might not despair in this my exhortation, I see examples
of this munisicence in our age to give me comfort: Ferdinand the Emperor
Gryllus in orat. de peregr. studij medic.
and Cosmus Medices Prince of Tuscane are herein registered for furthering this
science of plants, in following of it themselves and becoming skillful
therein: which course of theirs could not be holden without the supporting and
advancing of such as were studious to excel in this kind. Bellonius likewise
(whom for honors cause I name) a man of high attempts in natural science,
Bellon. de negl. stirp. cul. prob. 9.
greatly extolleth his Kings liberality, which endued him with free leisure to
follow the study of plants, seconded also herein by Montmorencie the
Constable, the Cardinals Castilion and Lorraine, with Oliuerius the Chancellor;
by whose means he was enabled to perform those his notable (...) in Italy,
Africa and Asia: the sweet fruit whereof, as we have received some taste by his
observations, so we should plenteously have been filled with them, if violent
death by most accursed robbers had not cut him off. And as I find these
examples of comfort in foreign nations, so we are (I confess) much to be
thankful to God, for the experience we have of the like things at home. If
(nevertheless) unto that Physic lecture lately so well erected, men who have
this worlds goods shall have hearts also of that spirit, to add some ingenious
labourer in the skill of simples, they shall mightily augment and adorn the
whole science of Physic. But if to that likewise they join a third, namely
the art of Chimicall preparation; that out of those good creatures which God
has given man for his health, pure substances may be procured for those that
be sick, (I fear not to say it, though I see how Momus scorneth) this present
generation would purchasemore to the perfection of Physic, than all the
generations past since Galens time have done: that I say, nothing of this one
fruit that would grow thereof, to wit, the discovering and abolishing of these
pernicious impostures and sophistications which mount promising Paracelsians
every where obtrude, through want of a true and constant light among us to
discern them by. In which behalf, remembering the mournful speech of grave
Hippocrates; The art of Physic truly excels all arts, how beit, Hipp. de
Lege.
through the ignorance partly of those that exercise it, and partly of those
that judge rashly of Physicians, it is accounted of all arts the most
inferior: I say in like manner, the art of Chimistrie is in it self the most
noble instrument of natural knowledges; but through the ignorance and impiety,
partly of those that most audaciously profess it without skill, and partly of
them that impudently condemn that they know not, it is of all others most
basely despised and scornfully rejected. A principal remedy to remove such
contumelious disgrace from these two pure virgins of one stock and lineage, is
this that I have now insinuated, even by erecting the laboratory of an
industrious Chimist, by the sweet garden of flourishing simples. The Physic
reader by their means shall not only come furnished with authorities of the
Ancients, and sensible probabilities for that he teaches, but with real
demonstrations also in many things, which the reason of man without the light
of the furnace would never have reached unto. I have uttered my hearts desire,
for promoting first the perfection of my profession, and next by necessary
consequence, the healthie lives of men. If God open men's hearts to provide for
the former, it cannot be but that the happy fruits shall be seen in the later.
Let the ingenious learned judge whether I have reason on my side: the partial
addicted sect I (...), as (...) that never mean good to posterity.

George Baker, one of her Majesty's chief Chirurgions in ordinary, and M. of
the Chirurgions of the City of London, to the Reader.
ARistotle, a Prince amongst the Philosophers, writing in his Metaphysics of
the nature of mankind, says, that man is naturally inclined and desirous
ofscience. The which sentence does teach us, that all creatures (being
virtuously given) do strive to attain to perfection, and draw near in what
they can to the Creator; and this knowledge is one of the principal parts
which does concern the perfection of understanding: for of the same does
follow, that all such are generally inclined to know the means by the which
they may conserve their life, health, and reputation. And although it be
necessary for man to learn and know all sciences, yet nevertheless the
knowledge of natural philosophy ought to be preferred, as being the most
necessary; and moreover it does bring with it a singular pleasure and
contentment. The first inuentor of this knowledge was Chiron the Centaure, of
great renown, son to Saturn and Phillyre: and others say that it was
invented of Apollo: and others of Esculape his son; esteeming that so excellent
a science could never proceed but from the gods immortal, and that it was
impossible for man to find out the nature of Plants, if the great worker,
which is God, had not first instructed and taught him. For, as Pliny says, if
any think that these things have bin invented by man, he is ungrateful for
the works of God. The first that we can learn of among the Greeks that have
diligently written of herbs, have bin Orpheus, Musaeus, and Hesiode, having
bin taught by the Egyptians: then Pythagoras of great renown for his wisdom,
which did write books of the nature of Plants, and did acknowledge to learn
the same from Apollo and Esculape. Democrite also did compose books of Plants,
having first traveled over all Persia, Arabia, Ethiopia, and Egypt. Many other
excellent spirits have taken great pleasure in this science, which to
accomplish have hazarded their lives in passing many unknown regions, to
learn the true knowledge of Elleborus, and other Medicaments: of which number
were Hippocrates, Crateua, Aristotle, Theophrast, Diocles Caristius, Pamphylus,
(...), Hierophile, Dioscorides, Galen, Pliny, and many others, which I leave to
name, fearing to be too long. And if I may speak without partiality of the
Author of this book, his great pains, his no less expenses in traveling
(...) and (...) for the attaining of his skill have bin extraordinary. For he
was never content with the knowledge of those simples which grow in those
parts, but upon his (...) cost and (...) has had out of all parts of the world
all the rare simples which by any means he could attain unto, not only to
have them brought, but has procured by his excellent knowledge to have them
growing in his garden, which as the time of the year does serve may be seen:
for there shall you see all manner of strange trees, herbs, roots, plants,
flowers, and other such rare things, that it would make a man wonder, how one
of his degree, not having the purse of a number, could ever accomplish the
same. I protest upon my conscience, I do not think for the knowledge of Plants,
that he is inferior to any: for I did once see him tried with one of the best
strangers that ever came into England, and was accounted in Paris the only
man, being recommended unto me by that famous man Master Amb. Pareus; and he
being here was desirous to go abroad with some of our Herbarists, for the
which I was the mean to bring them together, and one whole day we spent
therein, searching the rarest Simples: but when it came to the trial, my
French man did not know one to his four. What does this man deserve that has
taken so much pains for his country, in setting out a book, that to this day
never any in what language soever did the like? First for correcting their
faults in so many hundred places, being falsely named, mistaken the one for the
other; and then the pictures of a great number of plants now newly cut. If this
man had taken this pains in Italy and Germany, where Matthiolus did write, he
should have sped as well as he did: For (says he) I had so great a desire ever
to finish my Book, that I never regarded any thing in respect of the public
good, not so much as to think how I should finish so great a charge, which I
had never carried out, but that by Gods stirring up of the renowned Emperor
Ferdinando of famous memory, and the excellent Princes had not helped me with
great sums of money, so that the Commonwealth may say, That this blessing does
rather proceed of them than from me. There have been also other Princes of
Almaine which have bin liberal in the preferring of this Book, and the most
excellent Elector of the Empire the Duke of Saxony, which sent me by his Post
much money toward my charges: the liberality of the which and the magnificence
toward me I cannot commend sufficiently. They which followed in their
liberality were the excellent Frederick Count Palatine of the Rhine, and the
excellent Ioachim Marquis of Brandeburg, which much supplied my wants: and the
like did the reverend Cardinal and Prince of Trent, and the Excellent
Archbishop of Saltzperg, the Excellent Dukes of Bauare and Cleues, the duke of
Megapolencis Prince of Vandalis, the State Republique of Noremberg, the
liberality of whom ought to be celebrated for ever: and it does much rejoice
me that I had the help and reward of Emperors, Kings, Electors of the Roman
Empire, archdukes, Cardinals, Bishops, Dukes and Princes, for it gives more
credit to our Labors than any thing that can be said. Thus far Matthiolus his
own writing of the liberality of Princes toward him. What age do we live in
here that will suffer all virtue to go unrewarded? Master Gerard has taken more
pains than ever Matthiolus did in his Commentaries, and has corrected a number
of faults that (...) passed over; and I dare affirm (in reverence be it spoken
to that Excellent man) that Master Gerard does know a great number of Simples
that were not known in his time: and yet I doubt whether he shall taste of the
liberality of either Princ, Duke, Earl, Bishop, or public Estate. Let a man
excel never so much in any excellent knowledge, nevertheless many times he is
not so much regarded as a Iester, a Boaster, a Quacksaluer or Mountebanke: for
such kind of men can (...), dissemble, make of trifles great matters, in
praising of this rare secret, or that excellent spirit, or this Elixer or
Quintessence; which when it shall come to the trial, nothing shall be found but
boasting words.

VALE.
To the courteous and well willing Readers.
ALthough my pains have not been spent (courteous Reader) in the gracious (...)
of golden Mines, nor in the tracing after silver (...), whereby my native
country might be enriched with such merchandise as it has most in request and
admiratson; yet has my labor (Itrust) been otherwise profitably employed, in
descrying of such a harmless treasure of herbs, trees, and plants, as the
earth frankely without violence offers unto our most necessary uses.
Harmless I call (...), because they were such delights as man in the
perfectest state of his innocence did erst enjoy: and treasure I may well
(...) them, seeing both Kings and Princes have esteemed them as Jewels; since
wise men have made their whole life as a pilgrimage to attain to the knowledge
of them: by the which they have gained the hearts of all, and opened the
mouths of many, in (...) of those rare virtues which are contained in these
terrestrial creatares. I (...) blind Pluto is now adays more sought after
than quick sighted Phoebus: (...) yet this (...) met all, or excrement of the
earth (which was first deeply buried least it should be an eyesore to (...)
the corrupt heart of man) by forcible entry made into the bowels of the earth,
is rather snatched at of man to his own destruction, than directly sent of
God, to the comfort of this life. And yet behold in the compassing of this
worldly dross, what care, what cost, what (...), what mystical proofs, and
chymicall trials are set abroach; when as notwithstanding the ch efest end is
but uncertain wealth. Contrariwise, in the expert knowledge of herbs, what
pleasures still renewed with variety? what small expense? what security? and
yet what an apt and ordinary means to (...) man to that most desirea benefit
of health? Which as I devoutly wish unto my native country, and to the
careful nursing mother of the same; so having bent my labors to the
benefiting of such as are studiously practiced in the (...) thereof, I thought
it a chief point of my duty, thus out of my poor store (...) offer up these
my far fetched experiments, together with mine own countries (...) treasure,
combined in this compendious Herball (not unprofitable though unpolished) unto
your wise constructions and courteous considerations. The drift whereof is a
ready introduction to that excellent art of Simpling, which is neither so base
nor contemptible as perhaps the English name may seem to intimate: but such it
is, as altogether has been a study for the wisest, an exercise for the (...),
a pastime for the best. From whence there spring (...) not only to adorn
thegarlands of the Muses, to deck the bosoms of the beautiful, to (...) the
gardens of the curious, to (...) the glorious crowns of Kings; but also such
fruit as learned Dioscorides long traveled for; and princely Mithridates
reserved as precious in his own closet: Mithridates I mean, better known by
his sovereign Mithridate, than by his sometime speaking two and (...)
languages. But what this famous Prince did by tradition, Euax king of the
Arabians did (...) in a discourse written of the virtues of herbs, and
dedicated it unto the Emperor Nero. Every (...) (...) can make mention of the
herb Lysimachia, whose virtues were sound out by King Lysimachus, and his
virtues no less (...) in the self same plant, than the name of Phydias,
queintly beaten into the shield of Pallas, or the first letters of Ajax or
Hyacinthus (whether you please) registered in that beloned flower of Apollo. As
for Artemisia, first called (...), whether the title thereof sprang from (...),
Diana her self, * or from the renowned Queen of Caria, which (...) the use
thereof unto posterity, it (...) as a (...) to (...) the memories of them both
for ever. What should we speak of Gentiana, bearing (...) the cognizance of
Gentius? or of (...) other herbs taking their denominations of their princely
(...)? What should I say of those royal personages, Iuba, Attalus, (...),
Achilles, Cyrus, Masynissa, Semyramis, Dioclesian? but only thus, to (...)
their princely loucs to (...) (...), and their euerlosting honors (which (...)
old Plinius dead, nor (...) Lipsius (...) will permit to die?) Crescent herbae,
crescetis amores: crescent herbae, (...) (...). But (...) his wonted faculty
wanted the (...) of such a roy all (...), King Solomon, (...) all the rest for
wisdom, of greater royalty than they all ((...) the (...) of the (...)-(...)
him) he only (I say) might yield hereunto sufficient (...) (...) (...), in that
his (...) wisdom thought no scorn to sloupe unto the lowly (...). I (...)
not (...) the common colors of antiquity, when notwithstanding the world can
brag of no more ancient Monument than Paradise and the garden of Eden: and the
fruits of the earth may contend for seignioritie, seeing their mother was the
first Creature that conceived, and they themselves the first fruit she brought
forth. Talk of perfect happiness or pleasure, and what place was so sit for
that as the garden place where Adam was set to be the Herbarist? Whither did
the Poets hunt for their sincere dolights, but into the gardens of Alcinous, of
Adonis, and the Orchards of Hesperides? Where did they dream that Heaven
should be, but in the pleasant garden of Elysium? Whither do all men walk for
their honest recreation, but thither where the earth has most benesicially
painted her face with flourishing colors? And what season of the year more
longed for than the Spring, whose gentle breath enticeth forth the kindly
sweets, and makes them yield their fragrant smells? who would therefore look
dangerously up at Planets, that might sasely look down at Plants? And if true
he the old proverb, Quae supra nos, nihil ad nos; I suppose this new saying
cannot be false, Quae infra nos, ea maxim ad nos. Easy therefore is this
treasure to be gained, and yet precious. The science is nobly supported by wise
and Kingly Favorites: the subject thereof so necessary and delectable, that
nothing can be confected either delicate for the taste, dainty for smell,
pleasant for sight, wholesome for body, (...) or restoratiue for health, but it
borrows the relish of an herb, the (...) of a flower, the color of a leaf,
the (...) of a plant, or the decoction of a root. And such is the treasure that
this my Treatise is furnished with all, (...) though mine Art be not able to
(...) Nature in her lively portraitures; yet have I counterfeited likeness for
life, shapes and shadows for substance, being ready with the bad Painter to
(...) the imperfections of my pensill with my pen, choosing rather to score upon
my pictures such rude marks as may describe my meaning, than to let the
beholder to guess at random and miss. I have here theresore set down not
only the names of sundry Plants, but also their natures, their proportions and
properties, their affects and effects, their increase and decrease, their
flourishing and fading, their (...) varieties and (...) (...), as well of those
which our own Country yields, as of others which I have fetched further, or
(...) by perusing diverse Herbals set forth in other languages, wherein none of
my countrymen has to my knowledge taken any pains, since that excellent
Work of Master Doctor Turner. After which time Master Lyte a Worshipful
Gentleman translated Dodonaeus out of French into English: and since that,
Doctor Priest, one of our London (...), has (as I heard) translated the last
Edition of Dodonaeus, and meant to (...) the (...); but being prevented by
death, his translation likewise perished. Lastly my (...), one of the least
among many, have (...) to (...) forth unto the view of the world the first
fruits of these mine (...) Labors, which if they be such as may content the
Reader, I shall (...) my selfewell rewarded, otherwise there is no man to be
blamed but my self, being a work I confess for greater Clerks to undertake:
yet may my blunt attempt serve as a whet stone to set an edge upon some sharper
wits, by whom I wish this my course Discourse might be both fined and refined.
(...) I confess have escaped, some by the Printers oversight, some through
defects in my self to perform so great a Work, and some by means of the
greatness of the Labor, and that I was constrained to seek after my living,
being void of friends to bear some part of the burden. The rather therefore
accept this at my hands (loving Contrymen) as a token of my good will; and I
trust that the best and well minded will not rashly condemn me, although some
thing have passed worthy reprehension. But as for the slanderer or Envious I
pass not for them, but return upon themselves any thing they shall without
cause either murmr in corners, or iangle insecret. Farewell.

From my House in Holborn within the Suburbs of London, this first of December,
1597. Thy sincere and unfeigned Friend, JOHN GERARD.

TO THE READER.
Courteous READER,
THere are many things which I think needful to impart unto thee, both
concerning the knowledge of plants in general, as also for the better
explaining of some things pertinent to this present History, which I have here
set forth much amended and enlarged. For the general differences, affections,
etc. of Plants, I hold it not now so fitting nor necessaric for me to insist
upon them; neither doc I intend in any large discourse to set forth their many
and great uses and virtues: give me leave only to tell you, That God of his
infinite goodness and bounty has by the medium of Plants, bestowed almost all
food, clothing, and medicine upon man. And to this offspring we also owe (for
the most part) our houses, shipping, and infinite other things, though some of
them Proteus like have run through diverse shapes, as this paper wereon I write,
that first from seed became Flax; then after much vexation thread, then cloth,
where it was cut and mangled to serve the Fashions of the time: but afterward
rejected and cast aside, yet unwilling so to forsake the service of man for
which God had created it, again it comes (as I may term it) to the Hammer,
from whence it takes a morenoble form and aptitude to be employed to Sacred,
Civil, Foreign and Domesticke uses.. I will not speak of the many and
various objects of delight that these present to the senses, nor of sundry
other things, which I could plentifully in this kind deliver: but rather
acquaint you from what Fountains this Knowledge may be drawn, by showing what
Authors have delivered to us the History of Plants, and after what manner
they have done it; and this will be a means that many controversies may be the
more easily understood by the less learned and judicious Reader.

He whose name we first find upon record (though doubtless some had treated
thereof Solomon.
before) that largely writ of Plants, was the wisest of men, even King Solomon,
who certainly would not have meddled with this subject, if he in his wisdom
had not known it worthy himself, and exceeding fitting: First for the honor
of his Creator, whose gifts and blessings these are: Secondly for the good of
his Subjects, whereof without doubt, he in this work had a special regard in
the curing of their diseases and infirmities. But this kingly work being lost,
I will not insist upon it, but come to such as are yet extant, of which
(following the course of antiquity) that of Theophrastus first takes place.

Now (...) succeeded Arislotle in the government of the School at Athens, (...)
about the 114 Olymp. which was some 322 years before Christ. He among many
other things writ a History of Plants in ten books, and of the causes of
them, eight books; of the former ten there are nine come to our times
reasonable perfect; but there now remain but six of the eight of the causes of
Plants. Some looking upon the Catalogue of the books of Theophrastus his
writing, set forth in his life, written by Diogenes Laertius, may wonder that
they find no mention of these books of Plants, amongst these he (...) up, and
indeed I thought it somewhat strange, and so much the more, because this his
(...) is set forth by Daniel Heinsius before his* Edition of (...), and there
also no mention (...). (...). 1613.
neither in the Greek nor Latin of those works. Considering this, I thinking
to have said something thereof, I found the doubt was long since cleared by the
learned (...) in his notes upon `` Laertius, where page (...). for (...), and
(...) he Excus ab (...). (...). 1593.
wishes you to read (...) and (...) Thus being certain of the Author, let
me say somewhat of the work, which though by the injury of time it has
suffered much, yet is it one of the chiese pieces of Antiquity, from whence
the knowledge of Plants is to be drawn. Theophrastus as he followed Aristotle
in the School, so also in his manner of writing, for according as Aristotle
has delivered his Historia Animalium, so has he set forth this of plants,
not by writing of each species in particular, but of their differences and
(...). Hist. pl. l. 1. cap. 1.
nature, by their parts, affections, generations and life. Which how hard a
thing it was, he tells you in his second Chapter, and renders you this reason,
Because there is nothing common to (...)
all Plants, as the mouth and belly is to other living creatures, etc. Now by
this manner of writting you may learn the general differences and affections
of Plants, but cannot come to the particular knowledge of any without much
labor: for you must go to many places to gather up the description of one
Plant: neither does he (nor is it necessary for any writing in this manner)
make mention of any great number, and of many it may be but once. His works
being in Greek were translated into Latin by Theodore Gaza, who did them but
(...) side, for he omitted some things, otherwhiles rendered them contrary to
the mind of the Author: but above all, he took to himself too much liberty
in giving of names in imitation of the Greek, or of his own invention, when
it had been better by much for his Reader to have had them in the Greek, as
when he renders (...), Agitalorium, (...), Solaris, etc. The learned Julius
Scaliger has set forth (...) siones upon these books, where in he has both
much explained the mind of Theophrastus, and showed the errors of Gaza. Some
since his time have promised to do something to this Author, as Daniel
Heinsius, and Spigelius, but twenty years are past since, and I have not yet
heard of any thing done in this kind by either of them. Thus much for (...).

Let me not pass over Aristotle in silence, though his books writ of this
subject were (...)
but two, and these according to the conjecture of Julius Scaliger (who has
made a large and curious examination of them) have either perished, or come to
us not as they were originally written by Arislotle, but as they have been by
some later man put into Greek. Amongst other things Scaliger has these
concerning those two books: Reor e textrina Theophrasti detracta sila (...),
(...); clavos additos, tametsi neque aureos, neque purpureos. Quod si protinus
autorem (...) dari vis ad Arabum diligentiam propius accedit: And afterward
thus: Attribuere viri docti, alius alij, at quidem qui aliorum viderem nihil
Planudem autorem factenti malim assentiri, extant enim illius alijs in libris
similis vestigia semlatiniet at is, etc. Thus much for Aristotle, whom as you
see I have placed after his Scholar, because there is such doubt of these
books carried about in his name, and for that Scaliger as you see thinks them
rather taken out of Theophrastus, than written by his Master.

The next that orderly follows is Pedacius Dioscorides Anazarbeus, who lived
(according Dioscorides.
to Suidas) in the time of Cleopatra, which was some few years before the
birth of our Savior. Now Suidas has confounded* Dioscorides Anazarbeus with
Dioscorides Phacas, but (...) and. (...).
by some places in Galen you may see they were different men: for our
Anazarbean Dioscorides was of the Empericke sect, but the other was a follower
of (...) and of the Rational sect. He writ not only of Plants, but de tota
materia medica; to which study he was addicted even from his childe-hood,
which made him travel much ground, and lead a military life, the better to
accomplish his ends: and in this he attained to that perfection, that few or
none since his time have attained to, of the excellency of his work, which is
as it were the foundation and groundwork of all that has been since
delivered in this De simpl. med. facult. (...). 6. proem.
nature. Hear what Galen one of the excellentest of Physicians, and one who
spent no small time in this study, asfirmes: But, says he, the Anazarbean
Dioscorides in five books has written of the necessary matter of medicine,
not only making mention of herbs, but also of trees, fruits, ``liquours and
juices, as also of all mineralls, and of the parts of living (...)
creatures: and in mine opinion he has with the greatest perfection persormed
this work of the matter of Medicine: for although many before him have written
well upon this subject, yet none have writ so well of all. Now Dioscorides
follows not the method of Theophrastus, but treats of each kind of herb in
particular, first giving the names, then the description, and then the place
where they usually grow, and lastly their virtues. Yet of some, which then were
as frequently known with them, as Sage, Rosemary, an Ash or Oak tree are with
us, he has omitted the descriptions, as not necessary, as indeed at that time
when they were so vulgarly known, they might seem so to be: but now we know
the least of these, and have no certainty, but some probable conjectures do
direct us to the knowledge of them. He was not curious about his words nor
method, but plainly and truly delivered that whereof he had certain and
experimental knowledge, concerning the description and nature of Plants. But
the general method he observed you may find set sorth by (...) in his Edition
of Matthiolus, immediately after the preface of the first book, whereto I refer
the curious, being too long for me in this place to insist upon. His works
that have come to us are five books de materia Medica. One de let (...) (...),
corumque praecautione et curatione: another de Cane rabido, deque not is (...)
morsus (...) (...) animalium venenum relinquentium sequuntur: a third De eorum
(...). These eight books within these two last centuries of years have been
translated out of Greek into Latin, and commented upon by diverse, as
Hermolaus Barbarus, Johannes Ruellius, Marcellus (...), etc. But of these and
the rest, as they offer themselves, I shall say somewhat hereafter. There is
also another work which goes under his name, and may well be his. It is (...)
sieve de facile parabilibus, divided into two books, translated and confirmed
with the consent of other Greek Physicians, by the great labor of John
Moibane a Physician of Auspurge, who lived not to finish it, but left it to be
perfected and set forth by Conrade Gesner.

The next that takes place is the laborious Caius Plinius secundus, who lived
in the time Pliny.
of Vespasian, and was suffocated by the sulphurous vapors that came from
mount Vesuvius, falling at that time on fire; he through overmuch curiosity to
see and find out the cause thereof approaching too nigh, and this was Anno
(...), 79. He read and writ exceeding much, though by the injury of time we
have no more of his than 37. books de Historia Mundi. which also have received
such wounds, as have tried the best skill of our Critickes, and yet in my
opinion in some places require medicas manus. From the twelfth to the end of
the twenty seventh of these books he treats of Plants, more from what he
found written in other Authors, than from any certain knowledge of his own,
in many places following the method and giving the words of (...), and in other
places those of Dioscorides, though he never make mention of the later of them:
he also mentions, and no question followed many other Authors, whose writings
have long since perished. Sometimes he is pretty large, and otherwhiles so
brief, that scarce any thing can thence be gathered. From the seventeenth unto
the twenty seventh he variously handles them, what method you may quickly see
by his Elenchus, contained in his first book, but in the twenty seventh he
handles those whereof he had made no, or not sufficient mention, after an
Alphabeticall order, beginning with Aethyopis, Ageratum, Aloe, etc. so going on
to the rest.

I must not pass over in silence, neither need I long insist upon Galen,
Paulus Aegineta, (...). Paulus. Aetius.
and Aetius, for they have only alphabetically named Plants and other simple
Medicines, briefly mentioning their temperature and faculties, without
descriptions (some very few, and those brief ones, excepted) and other things
pertinent to their history.

The next that present themselves are two (...), who abuse the World under
(...).
feined titles, and their names have much more antiquity than the works
themselves: the first goes under the title of Aemilius Macer a famous Poet, of
whom Ovid makes mention in these verses:

Saepe suas volucres legit mihi grandior aevo,
Quaeque nocet Serpens, quae iuuat herba Macer.
Pliny also makes mention of this Macer: he in his Poems imitated Nicander,
but this work that now is carried about under his name, is written in a rude,
and somewhat barbarous verse, far different from the style of those times
wherein Macer lived, and no way in the subject immitating Nicander. It seems
to have been written about 400 or 500 years ago.

The other also is of an unknown Author, to whom the Printers have given the
title (...).
of Apuleius Madaurensis, and some have been so absurdly bold of late, as to
put it unto the works of Apuleius; yet the vncurious style and method of the
whole book will convince them of error, if there were no other argument. I
have seen some four manuscripts of this Author, and heard of a fifth, and
all of them seem to be of good Antiquity: the figures of them all for the
most part have some resemblance each of other: the first of these I saw some
nine years ago with that worthy lover and storer of Antiquities, Sir Robert
Cotton: it was in a fair Saxon hand, and as I remember in the Saxon tongue;
but what title it carried, I at that time was not curious to observe. I saw
also another after that, which seemed not to be of any small standing, but
carelessly observed not the title. But since I being informed by my friend
Master Goodyer (as you may find in the Chapter of Saxifrage of the Ancients)
that his Manuscript which was very ancient, acknowledged no such Author as
Apuleius, I begun a little to examine some other Manuscripts, so I procured a
very fair one of my much honored friend Sr. Theod. Mayern: in the very
beginning of this is writ, In hoc continentur libri (...) medicinae (...),
Platonis Apoliensis vrbis de dinersis herbis; Sexti Papiri placiti ex
Animalibus, etc. A little after in the same page at the beginning of a table
which is of the virtues, are these words, In primo libro sunt herbae
descriptae, quas. Apoliensis Plato descripsit, etc. and thus also he is named
in the title of the Epistle or Proeme; but at the end of the work is explicit
liber Platonis de herbis masculinis, etc. With this in all things agrees that
of Mr. Goodyer, as he has affirmed to me. Besides these, I found one with Mr.
John Tradescant, which was written in a more ignorant and barbarous time, as
one may conjecture by the title, which is thus at the very beginning. In nomine
domini incipit Herboralium Apulei Platonis quod accepit a Scolapio, and Chirone
(...) magistro. Then follows (as also in the former, and in the printed
books) the tract ascribed to Antonius Musa, de herba Betonica: after that are
these words, Liber Medicinae Platonis herbaticus explicit. By this it seems
the Author of this work either was named, or else called himself Plato, a
thing not without example in these times. This work was first printed at
Basil, 1528. amongst some other works of Physic, and one Albanus Torinus
set it forth by the help of many Manuscripts, of whose imperfections he much
complains, and I think not without cause: after this, Gabriel Humelbergius of
Rauenspurge in Germany set it forth with a Comment upon it, who also complains
o the imperfections of his copies, and thinks the work not perfect: indeed
both the editions are faulty in many places: and by the help of these
Manuscripts I have seen they might be mended (if any thought it worth their
labor) in some things, as I observed in cursorily looking over them. One thing
I much marvel at, which is, that I find not this Author mentioned in any
Writer of the middle times, as Platearius, Bartholomaeus Anglus, etc. Now I
conjecture this work was originally written in Greek, for these reasons:
first, because it has the Greek names in such plenty, and many of them
proper, significant, and in the first place: Secondly some are only named in
Greek, as Hierobulbon, Artemisia Leptophyllos, and Artemisia tagantes,
Batrachion, Gryas (which I judge rather Greek than Latin) etc. Besides in
both the written books in very many places amongst the names I find this word
Omoeos, but diversely written; for I conjecture the Greek names were written in
the Greek character, and (...): amongst them; and then also when the rest of
the work was translated, which afterward made the transcribers who understood
it not to write it variously, for in the one book it is always written (...),
and in the other Omoeos, and sometimes Omeos, as in the Chapter of Brittanica,
the one has it thus, Nomen herbaeistius Britanica, Amoeos dicunt (...)
Damasinium, etc. The other thus: Nomen (...) Brittanica, Omeos Damasinius, etc.
and in the chap. of Althaea the one has it thus: Nomen buius herbae Altea
Amoeos vocant hanc herbam Moloche, etc. The other (...) herbae (...) omoeos
Moloce, etc. If it be certain which Philip Ferrarius affirms in his Lexicon
Geographicum, that the city Apoley is Constantinople, then have I found
Apoliensis vrbis, of which I can find no mention in any ancient or modern
Geographer besides; and then it is more than probable that this was written in
Greek, and it may be thought differently translated, which occasions such
diversity in the copies, as you shall find in some places. Now I conjecture
this work was written about some 600. years ago.

From these Ancients have sprung all, or the greatest part of the knowledge,
that the middle or later times have had of Plants; and all the controversies
that of late have so stuffed the books of such as have writ of this subject,
had their beginning by reason that the carelessness of the middle times were
such, that they knew little but what they transcribed out of these Ancients,
never endeavoring to acquire any perfect knowledge of the things themselves: so
that when as learning (after a long Winter) began to spring up again, men
began to be somewhat more curious, and by the notes and descriptions in these
ancient Authors they have labored to restore this lost knowledge; making
inquiry, first whether it were known by (...), Dioscorides, or any of the
Ancients, then by what name. But to return to my Authors.

About An. Dom. 1100. or a little after, lived the Arabians Auicen, Auerrhoes,
Mesve, Rhasis The (...).
and Serapio; most of these writ but briefly of this subject; neither have we
their works in the Arabicke wherein they were written, but barbarously
translated into Latin, and most part of these works were by them taken out of
the Greeks, especially Dioscorides and Galen; yet so as they added somewhat of
their own, and otherwhiles confounded other things with those mentioned by the
Greeks, because they did not well know the things whereof they writ. Auicen,
Auerrhoes, and Rhasis alphabetically and briefly (following the method of
Galen) give the names, temperature, and virtues, of the chiefest simple
medicines. (...). (...). (...). Serapio.
But Serapio after a particular tract of the temperature and qualities of
simple medicines in general, comes to treat of them in particular, and therein
follows chiefly Dioscorides, Galen, and Paulus, and diverse Arabians that went
before him. This is the chief work in this kind of the Arabians, which have
come to us; he himself tells us his method in his preface, which is (when he
comes to particulars) first of medicines temperate, then of those that are hot
and dry in the first degree; then those cold and dry in the same degree:
after that, those hot and dry in the second degree, etc. and in each of these
tracts he follows the order of the Arabicke Alphabet.

In or after the times of the Arabians until about the year 1400. There were
diverse obscure and barbarous writers, who by sight knew little whereof they
writ, but took out of the Greeks, Arabians, and one another, all that they
writ, giving commonly rude figures, seldom setting down any descriptions: I
will only name the chief of them that I have seen, and as near as I can
guess in that order that one of them succeeded another. For the particular
times of their living is somewhat difficult to be found out. One of the
ancientest of them seems to be Isidore; then (...) whose work is Alphabetical
Isodore. Platearius.
and entitled Circa instans. the next (...) Syluaticus, who flourished about
the year (...). Angl.
1319. his work is called Pandectae: a little after him was Bartholomaeus
Anglus, whose works (as that of Isodore, and most of the rest of those times)
treat of diverse other things besides Plants, as Beasts, Birds, Fishes, etc. His
work is called De proprietatibus rerum: the Authors name was Bartholmew
Glanuill, who was descended of the Noble Family of the Earls of Suffolk; and
he wrote this work in Edward the thirds time, about the year Hortus sanitat.
of our Lord, 1397. After all these, and much like them is the Hortus sanitatis
whose Author I know not. But to leave these obscure men and their writings, let
me reckon some of later time, who with much more learning and judgment have
endeavored to illustrat this part of Physic.

About some 200 year ago learning again beginning to flourish, diverse
begun to leave and (...) the confused and barbarous writings of the middle
times, and to have recourse to the Ancients, from whence together with purity
of language, they might acquire a more certain knowledge of the things treated
of, which was wanting in the other. (...). (...).
One of the first that took pains in this kind was Hermolaus Barbarus
Patriarch of Aquileia, who not only translated Dioscorides, but writ a
Commentary upon him in five books, which he calls his Corollarium; in this
work he has showed himself both judicious and learned.

After him Marcellus Virgilius Secretary to the State of Florence, a man of no
less learning (...). Virg.
and indgement than the former, set forth Dioscorides in Greek and Latin with
a Comment upon him.

Much about their time also John Ruellius a French Physician, who flourished in
the year (...). (...).
1480, translated Dioscorides into Latin, whose translation has been the most
follwed of all the rest. Moreover he set forth a large work, De natura
Stirpium, divided into three books, wherein he has accurately gathered all
things out of sundry writers, especially the Greeks and Latins; for first
having (after the manner of Theophrastus) delivered some common precepts and
Aduertisements pertaining to the form, life, generation, ordering, and other
such accidents of plants; he then comes to the particular handling of each
species.

Much about this time, the Germans began to beautify this so necessary part
of Otho (...).
Physic; and amongst them Otho Brunfelsius, a Physician of good account, writ
of plants, and was the first that gave the lively figures of them; but he
treated not in all of above 288 Plants. He commonly observes this method in his
particular chapters: First the figure (yet he gives not the figures of all he
writes of) then the Greek, Latin, and Germane names; after that, the
description and history out of most former Authors; then the temperature and
virtues, and lastly, the Authors names that had treated of them. His work is
in three parts or tomes, the first was printed in 1530. the second in 1531, and
the third in 1536.

Next after him was Hieronymus Tragus a learned, ingenious, and honest writer,
who set (...). Tragus.
forth his works in the German tongue, which were shortly after translated
into Latin by David Kiber. He treats of most of the Plants commonly growing in
Germany, and I can observe no general method he keeps, but his particular one
is commonly this: he first gives the figure with the Latin and high Dutch
name; then commonly a good description; after that the names, then the
temperature, and lastly the virtues, first inwardly, then outwardly used. He
has figured some 567, and described some 800. his figures are good, (and so
are most of the rest that follow.) His works were set forth in Latin, An.
1552.

In his time lived Leonhartus Fuchsius, a German Physician, being also a
learned and diligent (...). Fuch.
writer, but he has taken many of his descriptions as also virtues word
forword out of the Ancients, and to them has put figures; his general method
is after the Greek Alphabet, and his particular one thus: First the names in
Greek and Latin, together ofttimes with their Etymologies, as also the German
and French names, then the kinds after that the form, the place, time,
temperature, then the virtues: first out of the (...), as Dioscorides, Galen,
Pliny, etc. and sometimes from the late Writers, whom he does not
particularize, but expresses in general ex recentioribus. His work was set
forth at Basil, 1542, in Fol. containing, 516 figures; also they were set forth
in Octavo, the history first, with all the figures by themselves together at
the end with the Latin and high Dutch names.

About this time, and a little after, flourished Conrade Gesner also a German
Physician, (...) (...),
who set sorth diverse things of this nature, but yet lived not to sinish the
great and general work of Plants, which he for many years intended, and about
which he had taken a great deal of pains, as may be gathered by his Epistles.
He was a very learned, painful, honest and judicious writer, as may appear by
his many and great works; whereof those of Plants were first a (...)
Alphabeticall History of plants without figures, gathered out of Dioscorides,
(...), Pliny, etc with the virtues briefly, and for the most part taken out of
Paulus (...), with their names in Greek and French put in the margent: this was
printed at Venice, 1541, in a small (...). He set forth a catalogue of Plants,
in Latin, Greek, High Dutch and French, printed at Zurich, 1542. Also another
tract De (...) and (...) (...) cum mont is (...), (...) Pilati (...) (...), An.
1552. in quarto. He also set forth the four Books of Valerius Cordus (who died
in his time) and his Sylua (...) (...) (...) at Strausburgh, 1561. in sol. and
to these he added a Catalogue of the Germane Gardens with an Appendix and (...)
to Cordus his History. Also another treatise of his De (...) (...), was set
forth at Zurich by Wolphius, An. 1587, in Octavo.

At the same time lived Adam (...) a Physician of Frankeford, whose natural
history Lonicerus.
was there printed, An. 1551, and the first part thereof is of Plants; and
four years after he added another part thereto, treating also of Plants. I
find no general method observed by him, but his particular method usually is
this: first he gives the figure, then the names in Latin and Dutch, then the
temperature, etc as in Tragus, from whom and (...), he borrows the most part of
his first tome, as he does the 2. from Matthew. and Amat Lusitanus. P. And.
(...). (...).


In his time the Italian Physician Petrus Andreas (...) set forth his
Commentaries upon Dioscorides, first in Italian with 957 large and very fair
figures, and then afterward in Latin at Venice, with the same figures, An.
1568. After this he set forth his Epitome in Quarto, with 921 smaller figures.
Now these his Commentaries are very large; and he has in them delivered the
history of many Plants not mentioned by (...); but he is justly reprehended by
some, for that he every where taxes and notes other Writers, when as he
himself runs into many errors, and some of them wilful ones, as when he
gives figures framed by his own fancy, as that of Dracontium (...), (...),
etc. and falsified othersome in part, the better to make them (...) with
Dioscori. his description, as when he pictures Arbor Indae with prickles, and
gives it (...) the true Acatia: and he oft-times gives bare figures without
description of his own, but says, it is that described by Dioscorides, Nullis
(...) not is, for which the Authors of the Aduersaria much declaime against
him. It had bin fit for him, or any one that takes such a work in (...), to
have showed by describing the plant he gives, and conferring it with the
description of his Author, that there is not any one note wanting in the
description, virtues, or other particulars which his Author sets down; and if
he can show that his is such, then will the contrary opinions of all others
fall of themselves, and need no confutation.

(...) (...) also about the same time set forth Commentaries upon Dioscorides,
(...) (...) (...) (...).
adding the names in diverse Languages but without figures, at Strausbourgh, An.
1554. in (...): he dissented from (...) in many things; whereupon (...) writ an
Apology against him. He has performed no great matter in his Enarrations upon
Dioscorides, but was an Author of the honesty of (...), for as the one
deceived the world with (...) figures, so the other by feined cures to
strengthen his opinion, as Crato judges of his (...) Medicinales (another work
of his) which he thinks, potius (...), quam (...).

Rembertus Dodonaeus a Physician borne at (...) in Brabant, about this time
begun to (...). (...).
write of Plants. He first set forth a History in Dutch, which by Clusius
was turned into French, with some additions, Anno Domini, (...). And this was
translated out of French into English by Master Henry Lite, and set forth with
figures, Anno Dom. 1578. and diverse times since printed, but without Figures.
In the year 1552, Dodonaeus set forth in Latin his (...) Historia, and within
a while after his Florum, purgantium, and (...) Historia. Afterward he put
them all together, his former, and those his later Works, and divided them
into thirty Books, and set them forth with 1305 figures, in fol. An. 1583.
This edition was also translated into English, which became the foundation of
this present Work, as I shall show hereafter. It has since been printed in
Latin, with the addition of some few new figures: and of late in Dutch, Anno
1618. with the addition of the same figures; and most of these in the Exoticks
of Clusius, and great store of other additions. His general method is this:
first he diuides his Works into six Pemptades or fiues: the fifth Pemptas or
five books of these contain Plants in an Alphabeticall order, yet so as that
other Plants that have affinity with them are comprehended with them, though
they fall not into the order of the Alphabet. The second Pempt. contains
Flores Coronarij, Plantae odoratae and vmbelliferae. The third is De Radicibus,
Purg antibus Herbis, convolvulis, deleterijs ac perniciosis Plantis, Filicibus,
Muscis and Fungis. The fourth is De Frumentis, Leguminibus, palustribus and
aquatilibus. The fifth, De Oleribus and Carduis. The sixth, de Fruticibus and
Arboribus. The particular method is the same used by our Author.

In the year 1570, Peter Pena and Matthias Lobel did here at London set forth
a Work, Peter Pena. (...). Lobel.
entitled Stirpium Aduersaria noua; the chief end and intention whereofbeing
to find out the Materia medica of the Ancients. The general method is the same
with that of our Author, which is, putting things together as they have most
resemblance one with another in external form, beginning with Grasses,
Corns, etc. They give few figures, but sometimes refer you to Fuchsius,
Dodonaeus, and Matthiolus: but where the figure was not given by former
Authors, then they commonly give it; yet most part of these figures are very
small and imperfect, by reason (as I conjecture) they were taken from dried
plants. In this Work they insist little upon the virtues of Plants, but
succinctly handle controversies, and give their opinions of Plants, together
with their descriptions and names, which sometimes are in all these languages,
Greek, Latin, French, high and low Dutch, and English: otherwhiles in but one
or two of them. Some Writers for this Work call them Doctissimi Angli; yet
neither of them were borne here, for Pena (as I take it) was a French man, and
Lobel was borne at Ryssele in Flanders, yet lived most part of his later time
in this Kingdom, and here also ended his days. In the year 1576 he set sorth
his Observations, and joined them with the Aduersaria, by them two to make one
entire Work: for in his Observations he gives most part of the figures and
virtues belonging to those herbs formerly described only in the Aduersaria;
and to these also adds some new ones not mentioned in the former Work. After
which he set forth an Herball in Dutch, wherein he comprehended all those
Plants that were in the two former Works, and added diverse other to them, the
Work containing some 2116 figures; which were printed afterward in a longish
form, with the Latin names, and references to the Latin and Dutch books.
After all these, at London, Anno 1605, he again set forth the Aduersaria,
together with the second part thereof, wherein is contained some forty
figures, being most of them of Grasses and Flowers; but the descriptions were
of some 100 plants, varieties and all. To this he added a Treatise of Balsam
(which also was set forth alone in Quarto, Anno 1598.) and the Pharmacopaea of
Rondeletius, with Annotations upon it. He intended another great Work, whose
title should have been Stirpium Illustrationes, but was prevented by death.

Some six years after the Edition of the Aduersaria, Anno 1576, that learned,
diligent, Carol. Clusius.
and laborious Herbarist Carol. Clusius set forth his Spanish Observations,
having to this purpose traveled over a great part of Spain; and being
afterward called to the Imperial Court by Maximilian the second, he viewed
Austria and the adjacent provinces, and set forth his there Observation, Anno
1583. He also translated out of Spanish the Works of Garcias ab Orta and
Christopher Acosta, treating of the simple medicines of the East Indies, and
Nicolas Monardus, who writ of those of the West Indies. After this he put into
one body both his Spanish and Pannonicke Observations, with some other, and
those he comprehends in six books, entitled Rariorum Plantarum Historia:
whereto he also adds an Appendix, a treatise of Mushroms, six Epistles
treating of Plants, from Honorius Bellus Honor. Bellus.
an Italian Physician living at Cydonia in Candy; as also the description of
mount Baldus, being a Catalogue with the description and figures of some rare
and not before written of Plants there growing, written by John Pona an
Apothecarie of Verona (This Description John Pona.
of Pona's was afterward with some new descriptions and thirty six figures set
forth alone in Quarto, An. 1608.) This first Volume of Clusius was printed in
Antwerp, Anno 1601, in Folio: and in the year 1605 he also in Folio set forth
in another volume six books of Exoticks containing various matter, as plants,
or some particles of them, as Fruits, Woods, Barks, etc. as also the forenamed
translations of Garcias, Acosta, and Monardus: Three Tracts besides of the same
Monardus; the first, De lapide Bezaar, and Herba Scorsonera. The second, De
Ferro and eius facultatibus: The third, De Niue and eius commodis. To these he
also added Bellonius his Observations or Singularities, and a tract of the same
Author, Deneglecta Scirpium cultura, both formerly translated out of French
into Latin by him. He was borne at (...) or Arras, the chief city of Artois,
Anno 1526. and died at Leyden, Ann. 1609. After his death, by Euerard Vorstius,
Peter Paw, or some others, were set forth some additions and emendations of his
former Works, together with his funeral Oration made by Vorstius, his Epitaph,
etc. in Quarto, Anno 1611, by the name of his Curae Posteriores.

In the year 1583, Andreas Caesalpinus an Italian Physician, and Professor at
Pisa, set (...). Caesalp.
forth an history of Plants, comprehended in sixteen books: his Work is
without figures, and he often times gives the Tuscane names for Latin; wherefore
his work is the more difficult to be understood; unless it be by such as have
been in Tuscanie, or else are already well exercised in this study. He commonly
in his own words diligently for the most part describes each Plant, and then
makes inquiry whether they were known by the Ancients. He seldom sets down
their faculties, unless of some, to which former Writers have put down none.
In the first book he treats of Plants in general, according as Theophrastus
does: but in the following books he handles them in particular: he makes the
chief (...) of Plants to consist in the similitude of their seeds and seed
vessels.

Ioachimus Camerarius a Physician of Noremberg flourished about this time: He
set Ioach. Camer.
forth the Epitome of Matthiolus, with some additions and accurate figures, in
Quarto, at Frankfort, 1586: in the end of which Work (as also in that set
forth by Matthiolus himself) is (...) Baldi, or a journey from Verona to mount
Baldus, written by (...) Calceolarius Fr. Calceolariu
an Apothecario of Verona. Another Work of Camerarius was his Hortus Medicus,
being an Alphabeticall enumeration of Plants, wherein is set forth many things
concerning the names, ordering, virtues, etc. of Plants. To this he anexed
(...) Saxonot huringical Iohannis Thalij, or an alphabeticall Catalogue written
by John Thalius, of such (...). (...).
Plants as grew in Harkwald a part of Germany between Saxony and Durengen.
This was printed also at Frankfort in Quarto, An. 1588.

In the year 1587 came forth the great History of Plants printed at Lions,
which is therefore vulgarly termed Historia Lugdunensis: it was begun by
Dalechampius: but he Hist. Lugd.
dying before the finishing thereof, one John Molinaeus set it forth, but put
not his name thereto. It was intended to comprehend all that had written
before, and so it does, but with a great deal of confusion; which occasioned
Bauhine to write a treatise of the errors committed therein, in which he shows
there are about four hundred figures twice or thrice over. The whole number of
the figures in this Work are 2686. This History is divided into eighteen
books, and the Plants in each book are put together either by the places of
their growings, as in Woods, copses, mountains, waterie places, etc. or by
their external shape, as vmbelliferous, bulbous, etc. or by their qualities,
as purging, poisonous, etc. Herein are many places of Theophrastus and other
ancient Writers explained. He commonly in each chapter gives the names, place,
form, virtue, as most other do. And at the end thereof there is an Appendix
containing some Indian plants, for the most part out of Acosta; as also diverse
Syrian and Egyptian plants described by (...). (...).
Reinold Rawolfe a Physician of Ausburgh.

At this time, to wit Anno 1588, Iacobus Theodorus Tabernamont anus set forth
an History Tabernamont.
of Plants in the Germane tongue, and some twelve years after his Figures
being in all 2087, were set forth in a long sorme, with the Latin and (...)
names put unto them; and with these same Figures was this Work of our Author
formerly printed.

Prosper Alpinus a Physician of Padua in Italy, in the year 1592 set forth a
Treatise of Prosp. Alpinus.
some Egyptian Plants, with large yet not very accurate figures: he there
treats of some 46 plants, and at the end thereof is a Dialogue or Treatise of
Balsam. Some six years agone, Anno 1627, his Son set forth two books of his
fathers, De Plantis Exoticis, with the figures cut in Brass: this Work
contains some 136 Plants.

Fabius Columna a gentleman of Naples, of the house of Columna of Rome, An.
1592 set Fab. (...).
forth a Treatise called Phytobasanos, or an Examination of Plants; fot therein
he examines and asserts some plants to be such and such of the Ancients: and in
the end of this work he gives also the history of some not formerly described
plants. He also set sorth two other books, De minus cognitis, or of less
known Plants: the first of which was (...) at Rome, Anno 1606; and the other
1616. He in these works, which in all contain little above two hundred thirty
six plants, shows himself a man of an exquisit judgment, and very learned and
diligent, duly examining and weighing each circumstance in the writings of the
Ancients.

Caspar Bauhine, a Physician and Professor of Basil, besides his Anatomicall
Works, set Casp. Bauhine.
forth diverse of Plants. Anno 1596 he set forth his Phytopinax, or Index of
Plants, wherein he follows the best method that any yet found: for according
to Lobels method (which our Author followed) he begins with Grasses, Rushes,
etc. but then he briefly gives the Etymology of the name in Greek and
Latin, if any such be, and tells you who of the Ancients writ thereof, and in
what part of their Works: and lastly (which I chiefly commend him for) he gives
the Synonima's or several names of each plant given by each late Writer, and
quoteth the pages. Now there is nothing more troubles such as newly enter into
this study, than the diversity of names, which sometimes for the same plant
are different in each Author; some of them not knowing that the plant they
mention was formerly written of, name it as a new thing; others knowing it writ
of, yet not approving of the name. In this Work he went but through some half
of the history of Plants. After this, Anno 1598, he set forth Matthiolus his
Commentaries upon Dioscorides, adding to them 330 Figures, and the descriptions
of fifty new ones not formerly described by any; together with the Synonima's
of all such as were described in the Work. He also Anno 1613 set forth
Tabernamontanus in Dutch, with some addition of history and figures. In Anno
1620 he set forth the Prodromus, or (...) of his (...) Botanicum, wherein he
gives a hundred and forty new figures, and describes some six hundred plants,
the most not described by others. After this, Anno 1623, he set forth his Pinax
Theatri Botanici, whose method is the same with his Phytopinax, but the
quotations of the pages in the several Authors are omitted. This is indeed the
Index and sum of his great and general Work, which should contain about
six thousand plants, and was a Work of forty years: but he is dead some nine
years agone, and yet this his great work is not in the Press, that I can
hear of.

Basil Besler an Apothecarie of Noremberg, Anno 1613 set forth the garden of
the Bishop Basil Besler.
of Eystet in Bauaria, the figures being very large, and all curiously cut in
(...), and printed upon the largest paper: he only gives the Synonima's and
descriptions, and divides the work first into four parts, according to the
four seasons of the year; and then again he subdiuides them, each into
three, so that they agree with the months, putting in each Classis the plants
that flourish at that time.

These are the chief and greatest part of those that either in Greek (...)
Latin (whose Works have come to our hands) have delivered to us the history of
Plants; yet there are some who have used great diligence to help forward this
knowledge, whose names I will not pass over in silence. The first and
antientest of these was Aloysius Anguillara a physician Aloys. Anguill.
of Padua, and President of the public Garden there: his opinions of some
plants were set forth in Italian at Venice, 1561.

Melchior Guillandinus, who succeeded Anguillara in the garden at Padua, writ
an Apology Melchior Guillandinus.
against Matthiolus, some Epistles of plants, and a Commentary upon three
Chapters of Pliny, De Papyro.

Ferantes Imperatus an Apothecary of Naples also set forth a Natural History
divided Fer. Imperato.
into twenty eight books, printed at Naples Anno 1599. In this there is
something of Plants: but I have not yet seen the opinions of Anguillara, nor
this Natural History: yet you shall find frequent mention of both these in
most of the forementioned Authors that writ in their time, or since, wherefore
I could not omit them.

Let me now at last look home, and see who we have had that have taken pains
in this kind. The first that I find worthy of mention is Dr. William Turner,
the first of whose Will. Turner.
works that I have seen, was a little book of the names of herbs, in Greek,
Latin, English, Dutch, and French, etc. printed at London Anno 1548. In the
year 1551 he set forth his Herbal or History of Plants, where he gives the
figures of Fuchsius, for the most part: he gives the Names in Latin, Greek,
Dutch, and French: he did not treat of many Plants; his method was according to
the Latin alphabet. He was a man of good judgment and learning, and well
performed what he took in hand.

After this, Dodonaeus was translated into English by Mr. Lyte, as I formerly
mentioned. (...), Lyte.
And some years after, our Author set forth this Work, whereof I will
presently treat, having first made mention of a Work set forth between that
former Edition, and this I now present you withal.

Mr. John Parkinson an Apothecarie of this city (yet living and laboring for
the common (...). Parkinson.
good) in the year 1629 set forth a Work by the name of Parad sus terrestris,
wherein he gives the figures of all such plants as are preserved in gardens,
for the beauty of their flowers, for use in meats or sauces; and also an
Orchard of all trees bearing fruit, and such shrubs as for their raritie or
beauty are kept in Orchards and gardens, with the ordering, planting and
preserving of all these. In this Work he has not supersicially handled these
things, but accurately descended to the very varieties in each species:
wherefore I have now and then referred my Reader addicted to these delights, to
this work especially in flowers and fruits, wherein I was loath to spend too
much time, especially seeing I could add nothing to what he had done upon that
subject before. He also there promised another work, the which I think by
this time is fit for the Press.

Now am I at length come to this present Work, whereof I know you will expect
I should say somewhat; and I will not frustrate your expectation, but labor to
satisfy you in all I may, beginning with the Author, then his work, what it
was, and lastly what it now is.

For the Author Mr. John Gerard I can say little, but what you also may gather
out of John Gerard.
this work; which is, he was borne in the year 1545. in Cheshire, at
Namptwich, from whence he came to this city, and betook himself to Surgerie,
wherein his endeauours were such, as he therein attained to be a Master of that
worthy profession: he lived some ten years after the publishing of this work,
and died about the year 1607. His chief commendation is, that he out of a
propense good will to the public advancement of this knowledge, endeavored
to perform therein more than he could well accomplish; which was partly
through want of sufficient learning, as (besides that which he himself says
of himself in the chapter of Water Docke) may be gathered by the translating
of See the (...) Edition in the places here mentioned.
diverse places out of the Aduersaria; as this for one in the description of *
Aster Atticus, (...) pedales terni aut quaterni: which is rendered, A stalk
four or five foot long. He also by the same defect called burnt Barley, page
(...).
Hordeum d stichon; and divided the titles of honor from the name of the
person whereto they did belong, making two names thereof, p. 66.
beginning one clause with * Julius Alexandrinus says, etc. and the next with,
Caesarius Archiater p. 147.
says. He also was very little conversant in the writings of the Ancients,
neither, as it may seem by diverse passages, could he well distinguish
between the ancient and modern writers: for he in one place says, [* Neither
by Dioscorides, Fuchsius, or any other p. 518.
ancient writer once remembered.] Diverse such there are, which I had rather
pass over in silence, than here set down: neither should I willingly have
touched hereon, but that I have met with some that have too much admired him,
as the only learned and judicious writer. But let none blame him for these
defects, seeing he was neither wanting in pains nor good will, to perform what
he intended; and there are none so simple but know, that heavy burdens are
with most pains undergone by the weakest men: and although there were many
faults in the work, yet judge well of the Author; for as a late writer well
says, Falli and hallucinari humanum est; solitudinem quaerat oportet, qui vult
cum perfectis Cun. li. 3. ca. 3. de (...). Heb.
viuere. Pensanda vitijs bona cuiusque sunt, and qua mayor pars ingenij stetit,
ca iudicandum de homine est.

Now let me acquaint you how this Work was made up. Dodonaeus his Pemptades
coming forth Anno 1583, were shortly after translated into English by Dr.
Priest a physician of London, who died either immediately before or after the
finishing of this translation. This I had first by the relation of one who knew
Dr. Priest and (...). Gerard: and it is apparent by the work it self, which
you shall find to contain the Pemptades of Dodonaeus translated, so that
diverse chapters have scarce a word more or less than what is in him. But I
cannot commend my Author for endeavoring to hide this thing from us, cauilling
(though commonly unjustly) with Dodonaeus, wheresoever he names him, making it
a thing of hearsay, * that Dr. Priest translated Dodonaeus: when in the
Epistle of See his (...) to the (...).
his friend Mr. Bredwell, prefixed before this work, are these words: [The
first gatherers out of the Ancients, and augmenters by their own pains, have
already spread the odor of their good names through all the lands of learned
habitations: Dr. Priest for translating so much as Dodonaeus, has hereby left
a tomb for his honorable sepulture. Mr. Gerard coming last, but not the
least, has many ways accommodated the whole work unto our English Nation,
etc.] But that which may serve to clear all doubts, if any can be in a thing
so manifest, is a place in Lobels Annotations upon Rondeletius his
Pharmacopeia, where page 59. he finds fault with Dodonaeus, for using
barbarously the word Seta for Sericum: and with Dr. Priest, who (says he) at
the charges of Mr. Norton translated Dodonaeus, and deceived by this word Seta,
committed an absurd error in translating it a bristle, when as it should have
been silk. This place so translated is to be seen in the chapter of the
Skarlet Oak, at the letter F. And Lobel well knew that it was Dr. Priest that
committed this error, and therefore blames not Mr. Gerard, to whom he made
show of friendship, and who was yet living: but yet he covertly gave us to
understand, that the work wherein that error was committed, was a translation
of Dodonaeus, and that made by Dr. Priest, and set forth by Mr. Norton. Now
this translation became the groundwork whereupon Mr. Gerard built up this
Work: but that it might not appear a translation, he changes the general
method of Dodonaeus, into that of Lobel, and therein almost all over follows
his Icones both in method and names, as you may plainly see in the Grasses and
Orchides. To this translation he also added some plants out of Clusius, and
othersome out of the Aduersaria, and some fourteen of his own not before
mentioned. Now to this history figures were wanting, which also Mr. Norton
procured from Frankfort, being the same wherewith the Works of Tabernamontanus
were printed in Dutch: but this fell cross for my Author, who (as it seems)
having no great judgment in them, frequently put one for another: and besides,
there were many plants in those Authors which he followed, which were not in
Tabernamontanus, and diverse in him which they wanted, yet he put them all
together, and one for another; and often times by this means so confounded all,
that none could possibly have set them right, unless they knew this (...) of
these errors. By this means, and after this manner was the Work of my Author
made up, which was printed at the charges of Mr. Norton, An. 1597.

Now it remains I acquaint you with what I have performed in this Edition,
which is either by mending what was amiss, or by adding such as formerly were
wanting: some places I helped by putting out, as the Kinds in the Chapter of
Stonecrop, where there was but one mentioned. I have also put out the Kinds in
diverse places else where they were not very necessary, by this means to get
more room for things more necessary: as also diverse figures and descriptions
which were put in two or three places, I have put them out in all but one, yet
so, as that I always give you notice where they were, and of what. Some words
or passages are also put out here and there, which I think needless to
mention. Sometimes I mended what was amiss or defective, by altering or adding
one or more words, as you may frequently observe if you compare the former
edition with this, in some few chapters almost in any place. But I think I
shall best satisfy you if I briefly specify what is done in each particular,
having first acquainted you with what my general intention was: I determined,
as well as the shortness of my time would give me leave, to retain and set
forth whatsoever was formerly in the book described, or figured without
descriptions (some varieties that were not necessary excepted) and to these I
intended to add whatsoever was figured by Lobel, Dodonaeus, or Clusius, whose
figures we made use of; as also such plants as grow either wild, or usually in
the gardens of this kingdom, which were not mentioned by any of the forenamed
Authors; for I neither thought it fit nor requisite for me, ambitiously to aim
at all that Bauhine in his Pinax reckons up, or the Exotickes of Prosper
Alpinus contain, not mentioned in the former. This was my general intention.
Now come I to particulars, and first of figures: I have, as I said, made use of
those wherewith the Works of Dodonaeus, Lobel, and Clusius were formerly
printed, which, though some of them be not so sightly, yet are they generally
as truly expressed, and sometimes more. When figures not agreeable to the
descriptions were formerly in any place, I give you notice thereof with a mark
of alteration before the title, as also in the end of the Chapter; and if they
were not formerly in the book, then I give you them with a mark of addition.
Such as were formerly figured in the book, though put for other things; and so
having no description therein, I have caused to be new cut and put into their
fit places, with descriptions to them, and only a mark of alteration. The next
are the descriptions, which I have in some places lightly amended, without
giving any notice thereof; but when it is much altered, then give I you this
mark at the beginning thereof; but if it were such as that I could not help
it but by writing a new one, then shall you find it with this mark at the
beginning and end thereof, as also whatsoever is added in the whole book,
either in description or otherwise. The next is the Place, which I have seldom
altered, yet in some places supplied, and in others I have put doubts, and do
suspect othersome to be false, which because I had not yet viewed, I left as I
found. The Time was a thing of no such moment, for any matter worth mentioning
to be performed upon, wherefore I will not insist upon it. Names are of great
importance, and in them I should have been a little more curious if I had had
more time, as you may see I at the first have been; but finding it a
troublesome work, I have only afterward where I judged it most needful
insisted upon it: Bauhinus his Pinax may supply what you in this kind find
wanting. In many places of this work you shall find large discourses and
sometimes controversies handled by our Author in the names; these are for the
most part out of Dodonaeus, and some of them were so abbreuiated, and by that
means confounded, that I thought it not worth my pains to mend them, so I
have put them out in some few places, and referred you to the places in
Dodonaeus out of which they were taken, as in the chapter of Alehoofe: it may
be they are not so perfect as they should be in some very few other places;
(for I could not compare all) but if you suspect any such thing, have recourse
to that Author, and you shall find full satisfaction.

Now come I to the Temper and Virtues. These commonly were taken forth of the
forementioned Author, and here and there out of Lobels Observations, and
Camerarius his Hortus medicus. To these he also added some few Receipts of his
own: these I have not altered, but here and there showed to which they did
most properly belong; as also if I found them otherwise than they ought, I
noted it; or if in unfit places, I have transferred them to the right place,
and in diverse things whereof our Author has bin silent, I have supplied that
defect.

For my additions I will here say nothing, but refer you to the immediate
ensuing Catalogue, which will inform you what is added only in figure, or
description, or in both, by which, and these two formerly mentioned marks, you
may see what is much altered or added in the Work; for this mark put either to
figure, or before any clause, shows it to have bin otherwise put before; or
that clause whether it be in description, Place, Time, Names, or Virtues to be
much altered. This other mark put to a figure shows it not to have been
formerly in the work, but now added; and put in any other place it shows all
is added until you come to another of the same marks. But because it is
sometimes omitted, I will therefore give notice in the Errata where it should be
put, in those places where I observe either the former or later of them to be
wanting.

Further, I must acquaint you how there were the descriptions of a few plants
here and there put in unfitting places, which made me describe them as new
added, as Saxifragamaior Matthioli, Persicaria siliquosa, of which in the
chapter of Persicaria there was an ill description, but a reasonable good one
in the chapter of Astrantia nigra. Papauer spinosum, was figured and described
amongst the Cardui; now all these (as I said) I added as new in the most
fitting places: yet found them afterward described, but put them out all,
except the last, whose history I still retaining, with a reference to the
preceding figure and History. Note also, wheresoever my Author formerly
mentioned Clusius, according to his Spanish or Pannonicke Observations, I have
made it, according to his History, which contains them both with additions.

Also I must certify you, (because I know it is a thing that some will think
strange, that the number of the pages in this book do no more exceed that of
the former, considering there is such a large accession of matter and figures)
the cause hereof is, each page contains diverse lines more than the former, the
lines themselves also being longer; and by the omission of descriptions and
figures put twice or thrice over, and the Kinds, unnecessarily put in some
places, I gained as much as conveniently I could, being desirous that it might
be bound together in one volume.

Thus have I showed what I have performed in this Work, entreating you to take
this my Labor in good part; and if there be any defect therein (as needs there
must in all humane works) ascribe it in part to my haste and many businesses,
and in some places to the want of sufficient information, especially in
Exoticke things; and in other some, to the little conversation I formerly had
with this Author, before such time as (overcome by the importunity of some
friends, and the general want of such a Work) I took this task upon me.
Furthermore I desire, that none would rashly censure me for that which I have
here done; but they that know in what time I did it, and who themselves are
able to do as much as I have here performed; for to such alone I shall give
free liberty, and will be as ready to yield further satisfaction if they
desire it, concerning any thing I have here asserted, as I shall be apt to
neglect and scorn the censure of the Ignorant and Unlearned, who I know are
still forward to verify our English proverb A fools (...) is soon shot.


I must not in silence pass over those from whom I have received any favor or
encouragement, whereby I might be the better enabled to perform this Task. In
the first place let me remember the only Assistant I had in this Work, which
was Mr. John Goodyer of Maple-Durham in Hampshire, from whom I received many
accurate descriptions, and some other observations concerning plants; the which
(desirous to give every man his due) I have caused to be so printed, as they
may be distinguished from the rest: and thus you shall know them; in the
beginning is the name of the plant in Latin in a line by it self, and at the
end his name is inserted; so that the Reader may easily find those things that
I had from him, and I hope together with me will be thankful to him, that he
would so readily impart them for the further increase of this knowledge.

Mr. George Bowls of Chisselhurst in Kent must not here be forgot, for by his
trauells and industry I have had knowledge of diverse plants, which were not
thought nor formerly known to grow wild in this kingdom, as you shall find
by diverse places in this book. Thomas Hickes John Buggs.
My loving friends and fellow Travelers in this study, and of the same
profession, whose company I have formerly enjoyed in searching over a great
part of Kent, and who are William Broad. Job Weal.
still ready to do the like in other places, are here also to be remembered, and
that the rather, Leonard Buckner.
because this Knowledge amongst us in this city was almost lost, or at least
too much James Clarke.
neglected, especially by those to whom it did chiefly belong, and who ought
to be ashamed Robert Lorkin.
of ignorance, especially in a thing so absolutely necessary to their
profession. They should indeed know them as workmen do their tools, that is
readily to call them by their names, know where to (...), and whence to procure
the best of each kind; and lastly, how to handle them.

I have already much exceeded the bounds of an Epistle, yet have omitted many
things of which I could further have informed thee Reader, but I will leave
them until such time as I find a grateful acceptance; or some other occasion
that may again inuit me to set Pen to Paper; which, That it may be for my
Countries good and Gods glory, shall ever be the prayers and Endeauours of thy
WellWisher

From my house on Snow-hill, October. 22. 1633. THOMAS JOHNSON:

A Catalogue of Additions.
BEcause the marks were not so carefully and right put to these Figures, which
were not formerly in the book, I have thought good to give you the names of
all such as are added, either in figure or description, or both: together with
the book, chapter, and number or place they hold in each chapter. F stands for
figure, D for Description, and where both are added, you shall find both these
letters; and where the letter C is put, the History of the whole Chapter is
added.

BOOK. 1.
CHap. 2. 1. Gram. min. rub. sive Xerampelinum, f. Chap. 5. 3. Gram. arund.
minus Dise. Chap. 6. 1 Gram. toment. arundin. f. 2. Gram. pan. elegans d.
Chap. 8 3. Gram. typhoides spica longis. d. Chap. 13. 3. Gram. Panic. spic.
simp. d. Chap. 14. 1 Gram. pal. echin. f. 3. Gram. capit. glob. d. 4. Gram.
mont. echin. d.
Chap. 16. 8. Gram. cyper. spy. d. Chap. 20, 3. Gram. dactyloides. f. d. Chap.
21. C.
1. Gram. Cyp. ang. may. fd 2. Psendocyperus. f. d. 3. Cyperus long. inod. f.
d. 4. Cyperus rot. inod. fd 5 Cyper. Gram. mil. f. d.
Chap. 22. C.
1 Gram. mont. auen. f. d. 2. Gram. muror spic. long. f. d. 3. Gram. cristatum.
f. d. 4. Gram. spica secal. d. 5. Gram. spica. Brizae d. 6. Gram. lanatum d. 7.
Gram. iunc. (...). d 8. Gram. Loliac. min. d. 9. Gram. (...). d. 10. Gram.
sparteum min. d 11. Gram. alopecur. sp. aspera. d. 12. Gram. scoparium. d.
Chap. 24. 3. Cyperus rotund. Syriacus. d. 4. Cyp. min. Cret. d. 5. Cyp.
rotund. modorus. f. d.
Chap. 25. Cyp. (...). d. C. Chap. 26. Galanga mayor. C. Galanga minor. C.
Chap. 27. Cyperus Indicus. C. Chap. 28. Zedoaria. C. Chap. 29. (...). (...)
cap. (...). f. d. Chap. 34. 5. Spartum nost. par. f. d. 6. Spart. Austriacum.
f. d.
Chap. 39. 4 Phalangium antiq. f. d. 5. Phalang. Virgin. f d
Chap. 42. 4. Iris Byzantina, d. 7. Iris flo. cerul. obsol. f-d. 8. Chamaeiris
niuea, f. d. 9. Chamaeir. lat. fl. rub. f. d. 10. Chamaeir. (...). f. d. 11
Cham. variegat. f. d.
Chap. 45. 3. Calamus aromat. f. d. Chap. 63. 3. Panicum Americanum, f. d.
Chap. 64. 3. Phalar. prat. altera. f d Chap. 65. 2. Alopecuros Anglica. pal. d.
Chap. 68. 2 Melampyrumpurp. f d 3 Melampyr. caerul. fd 4 Melampyr. Lut. fd
Chap. 70. 5 Asphodelus minimus, fd Chap. 71 3 Asphod. Lanc. ver. fd Chap. 74.
1 Iris bulbosa Lut. fd 4 Iris bulb. versicol, fd 6 Iris bulb. flo. cin. fd 7
Iris bulb. flo. alb. fd
Chap. 75 2 Sisynrichium minus, f Chap. 76 4 Gladiolus lacustris. fd Chap. 77 2
Hyacinthus stel. albicans, f 3 Hyacinthus stel. bifol. fd 6 Hyac. stel. Byzant.
f d 8 Hyac. stel. Some. fd 9 Hyac. stel. aest. may. f d 10 Hyac. stel. aest.
min. fd 12 Hyac. Peruv. f d
Chap. 78 3 Hyac. stel. ver. d. Chap. 79 6 Hyac. Or. polyanth. fd 7 Hyac. Or.
purp. fd 8 Hyac. Or. alb. fd 9 Hyac. Brumalus, fd 10 Hyac. Or. caul folioso,
fd 11 Hyac. Or. flo. pleno, fd 12 Hyac. Or. flo. caerul. pleno. fd 13 Hyac. Or.
flo. cand. plen. fd 14 Hyac. obsolet. flo. Hisp. fd 15 Hyac. min. Hisp. fd 16
Hyac. Ind. tuber. fd
Chap. 80 3 Hyacinthus com. Byzant. f 4 Hyacinth. com. ramosus. d 5 Hyacinth.
com. ram. eleg. fd
Chap. 84. 4 (...) medio-croceus serot. polyanth. fd 5 Narc. medio purp. flo.
plen. fd 11 Nare. flore pleno albo, fd 12 Narc. flo. plen. medio lut. fd 13
Narc. flore plen. med. versic. fd 14 Narc. iuncifol. rosealut. fd 18 Narc.
iuncifol. amplo call. fd 19 Narc. iuncifol. reflex. flo. alb. fd 19 Narc.
iuncifol. reflex. min. fd 20 Narc. iuncifol. mult. fd 23. Narc. vernus praec.
flau. fd
Chap. 85. 3 Pseudonarcissus Hisp. f 4 Pseudonarc. min. hispan. fd 5
Pseudonarc. albo flore fd
Chap. 86. C
1 Narcis. omnium maximus fd 2 Narcis. (...). Robini. d 3 Pseudonarc. flo.
pleno f d 4 Narcis. Wilmot. d Narc. Tradescant. d Narc. Parkinson. d 5 Narcis.
(...). Indicus fd 6 Narcis. (...). mont. min. fd 7 Narc. mont. iuncifol. flore
fimbriato fd 8 Narc. omnium. min. mont. alb. fd
Chap. 87. tuliparam fig. 23. Chap. 88. 2 Leucoium bulbo sum praecox By zant.
fd 5 Leucoiumbulb. Aut. min. fd 6 Leuc. bulb. vern. min. d
Chap. 89. 3 Frittillaria Aquitan. min. flo. obsol. fd. 9 Prittill. alb. (...)
fd Cum (...) and notis nouem aliarum varietatum.
Chap. 90. 3 Crocus vernus flo. lut. f 4 Crocus vern. flo. albo f 5 Crocus
vern. flo. purp. f 6 Croc. mont. Autum. f 7 Croc. mon. Autum. flo. may. albid.
caerul. fd 8 Crocus Autum. flo. alb. f 9 Crocus vernus angustifol. flo. viol.
fd 10 Crocus vernus lat. flo. flau. striis viol. f d. 11 Croc. vern. lat.
striat. (...). dupl. d
Chap. 91 5 Colchicum montanum min. versic. flo. fd 9 Celchicum latifolium. fd
10 Colchicum versic. flore fd 11 (...). flo. pleno. fd 12 Colchicum biflor. fd
13 Colchicum vernum fd 14 Colchicum variegat. Chiense. fd 15 Hermodactyli
offic. fd.
Chap. 92. 4 Ornithogalum (...) minus. fd 5 Ornithogalum luteum minus. fd 6
Balbus vnifolius fd 7 Ornithogalium maius Arabicum. fd 8 Ornithogalum spicatum
fd 9 Ornithogalum Neapolitanum fd
Chap. 93. 3 Cepa Hispaniea oblonga fd 4 Ascalonitides. fd.
Chap. 94. I Scilla Hispanica vulg. fd 6 (...) tertius Matthioli. fd
Chap. 95 Porrum sectivum aut tonsile fd Chap. 96 3 Ampeloprason, sive Porrum
syl. fd Chap. 97. 2 Allium syl. rubent. null. fd Chap. 99 2 Scorodoprasum primum
Clus. f 3 Scorodoprasum minus f d 4 (...). fd
Chap. 100. 6 Moly (...) flore (...). fd. 7 Moly minus flo. albo. fd
Chap. 101. C.
1 Moly Narcissinis foliis prim. f d 2. Moly Narc. foliis secund. fd 3 Moly
Narc. fol. tertium fd 4 Moly mont. latifol. 1 Clus. fd 5 Moly mont. secund.
Clus. fd 6 Moly mont. 3 Clus. fd 7 Moly mont. 4 spec. 1 Clus. fd 8 Moly mont. 4
spec. 2. Clus. fd 9 Moly mont. 5 Clus. fd.
Chap. 103. 2 Lilium rubrum, f d 4 Lilium cruentum bulbif. f 5 Lil. cruent.
secundum caul. bulb. don. f. 6 Lilium purpureum minus fd
Chap. 105 2 Lilium Byzantinum. flo. purpur. sang. fd 3 Lilium Byzant. flo.
dilute rubent. fd 4 Lilinm Byzant. miniatum polyanth, fd
Chap. 106. 1 Lilium rubrum anoustif. fd 2 Lilium rubrum praecox. d 3 Lilium
mont. Flo. Flav. (...). fd 4 Lilium mont. flore flavo non punct. fd
Chap. 110. 5 Cynosorchis minor. Pannon. fd Chap. (...). 3 Cynosorchis morio
minor. fd Chap. 112. 4 (...) minor Batauica fd Chap. (...). 15 (...) trifol.
minor. fd 16 Orchis angustifol. d
Chap. 115. 3 Orchis palmata Pannon. 8. Clus. fd Chap. 116. 9 Serapias
Batrachites altera fd Chap. 117. 5 Palma Christi max. fd Chap. 118. 2 Nidus
auis flore and caul violat. d
LIB 2.
CHap. 1. 2 Rapum radice oblonga fd Chap. 2. (...) Rapistrum arvense alt. fd
Chap. 3. 1 Bunias, f 2 Bunias syl. (...) f
Chap. 5. 1 (...) sativus f 2 Radicula sat. min. f
Chap. 7. 3 Lepidium annuum fd Chap. 9. 1 Sinapi sativum, f 2 Sinapi vulgar d
3 Sinapi sat. alt. f 4 Sinapi album, fd 5 Sinapi syl. minus f
Chap. 10. 1 Eruca sativa, f 3 Eruca syl. angustifolia f 4 Eruca Nasturtio
cogn. tenuifol. f 5 Eruca marina f 6 Eruca aquatica, d
Chap. 15. 2 Erysimum alterum Italicum, f Chap. 17. 2 Siummaius angustifol. d 3
Sium vmbellatum repens d 4 Sium alterum Olusatri facie, fd 6 Sium Matthioli and
Ital. fd
Chap. 18. 3 Cardamine altera flo. pleno fd 7 Sium minus impatiens, fd 8
Cardamine pumila (...) fol. fd
Chap. 19. 6 Thlaspi amarum d Chap. 20 Thlaspi Cand. flo, alb. fd Chap. 21. 8
Thlaspi (...) minus, fd Chap. 22. 4 Thlaspi fruticosum folio Leuc. mar. f 5
Thlaspi hederaceum, fd
Chap. 23. 2 Turritis mayor f d C.
Chap. 24. 1 Draba Dioscoridis fd 2 Drabaprim a repens fd 3 Draba altera repens
fd 4 Draba sive Arabis quorundam. d
Chap. 27. 3 Erigeron tomentosum alterum, fd Chap. 28. 2 Iacobaea angustifolia,
fd 3 (...) (...). fd
Chap. 29. 5 Cichorium spinosum. fd Chap. 31. 3 Chondrilla lutea, f 4
Chondrilla Hispanica, f 9 Cichorium verrucarium. fd
Chap. 32. 3 Dens leonis bulbosus. fd Chap. 33. 2 Sonchus asperior. fd 5
Sonchus laeuis muralis, fd 6 Sonchus laeuis angustif. fd 9 Sonchus arborescens
alt. fd 10 Sonchus syluaticus d
Chap. 34. 9 Hieracium falcatum alterum. fd Chap. 35. 5 Hieracium parvum
Creticum. fd 6 (...) Dentis Leonis folio (...). fd
Chap. 36. C.
1 Pulmon. Gallica, sive aurea Lat. fd 2 Pulm. Gal. sive aur. angustif. fd 3
Hierac. hort. (...). f d
Chap. 38. C.
1 Lactuca syl. may. fd 2 Lactuca syl. minor fol. integris. d 3 Lactuca syl.
fol. dissect. fd
Chap. 12. 3 Betarubra Romana. f Chap. 43. 1 (...) maius alb. f 3 (...) minus
alb. f 4 Blitum minus rubrum. f
Chap. 44. 5 Amaranthus pannicula incurva holoserica. fd Chap. 45. 3 Atriplex
syl. sieve Polyspermon. d 5 Atrip. syl. vulgaris. fd 6 Atrip. syl. altera. fd 7
Atrip. syl. angustifol. fd 8 Atrip. baccifera. fd
Chap. 47. 1 Atrip. syl. latif. f 2 Atrip syl. latif. alt. fd
Chap. 52. 1 (...). f 3 Phyllon thelygon. d
Chap. 54. 2 (...) Matthew. f Chap. 55. 2 Solanum somniferum. fd Chap. 58. 2
(...). flo. alb. f Chap. 66. 3 Hyoscyamus alb. min. fd 4 Hyoscyanus alb. Cret.
fd 5 Hyoscyamus slo. rub. fd
Chap. 68 3 Tabacum min. fd Chap. 71. 2 Capsicum rotundior. siliq. fd cum 12.
(...) varietatibus.
Chap. 72. 3 Papuer corniculatum phaenic. glab. fd Chap. 73. 3 Papauer
simbriatum album. fd 5 Papaver syl. fd
Chap. 76. 7 Anemone latifolia duplo slauo slore fd C.
Chap. 77. 1 Anemone latif. flo. coccin. fd 2 Anem. (...). flo. mag. coccin. fd
3 Anem. latif. Byzant. fd 4 Anem. ten. flo. ampl. sang. fd 5 Anem ten. flo.
Coccin. fd 6 Anem. ten. flo. dilute purp. fd 7 Anem. ten. flo. exalb. fd 8
Anem. ten. flo. cerul. striat. fd 9 Anem. ten. flo plen. coccin. fd 10 Anem.
ten. flo. atropurp. fd
Chap. 78. 3 Anem. nemorum. slo. pleno alb. f 4 Anem. nem. slo. pleno. purp. fd
Chap. 79. 4 Pulsatilla Flore minore. fd 5 Pulsatil. flo. lut. d
Chap. 81. (...). Lapathum. syl. fol. min. acuto. fd Chap. 82. 5 Lapathum
sativum. sang. f Chap. 83. 2 Rha capitatum angustif. fd 3 (...) antiq. fd.
Chap. 87. 3 Ophris bifolia bulb. fd Chap. 88. 2 Ophioglosson abortivum. f
Chap. 89. 3 Lunaria min. ramosae, fd Chap. 99. 2. Pyrola 2 tenerior. Clus. fd 3
Pyrola 3 fruticans Clus. fd 4 Pyrola 4 min. Clus. fd
Chap. 92. 3 (...) folio (...). fd 4 Limonio congener Clus. fd
Chap. 93. 2 Tripolium vulg. min. f Chap. 96. 2 Plantago aquat. minor stel. fd
Chap. 97. 6 Plantago panniculis sparsis. fd Chap. 99. 4 Holosteum sive
Lcontopod, Cret. fd 5 (...). sive Leontod. Creat, alt fd
Chap. 104 Herba Dorea Lobel. f Herba Dorca altera d
Chap. (...). 2 Gentiana min. purp. fd C.
Chap. 107. 1 (...) verna mayor. fd 2 Gent. Alpin. vern. d 3 Gent fugax min. d
4 Gent. fugax may. d.
Chap. 109. 2 Sp culum Veneris minus. fd Chap. 112. 2 (...) Mariae alter. fd
Chap. 114. 3 Persicaria pusilla repens. fd 4 Persicaria siliquosa. fd
Chap. 116. 5 Trachelium maius petraeum fd Chap. 117. 7 Campanula Cymbalariae
fol. d Chap. 118. 4 Rapunculus Alp. Cornicul. fd 5 Rapunculus cornic. mont. fd
6 Rapunculus (...), fd
Chap. 119. 4 Leucoium syl. d 5 Leuc. luteum flo. ampl. d 6 (...) Flo. albo. d
Chap. 120. 2 Leucoium flo. multipl. fd 3 Leucoium spinosum Cret. fd
Chap 121. 2 Leucoium marinum purp. d Chap. 122. 2 Viola matronalis flore.
multipl. d 3. 4 Vioia Mat. Flo. obsol. sive Leucoium Melancholicum. fd
Chap. 124. 2. Alyssum Dioscoridis f Chap 126. 3 Lychnis Coronaria mult. fd
Chap. 127. 1 Lychnis syl. rub. Flo. f Chap. 127. 7 Lychnis caliculis striatis
2. Clus. d 8 Lych. syl. alb 9. Clus. d
C.
Chap. 128. 1 Lychnis syl. multipl. purp. fd 2 Lychnis syl. alba mult. fd 3
Lychnis abortiva flo. mult. virid. fd 4 Lych. syl. lat. Clus. fd 5 Lych. mont.
repens fd
Chap. 129. 2 2 Lysimachia lutea min. fd 3 Lysimachia lut. Flo glob. fd 4
Lysimachia lut. virgin. fd 7 Chamaenerion. f 8 Chamaenerion alt. angustif. fd 9
Lysimachia caerulea. f 10 Lysimachia galericulata. f 1 Lysimachia purp. minor.
fd
Chap. 131. C.
1 Coniza (...). fd 2 Coniza (...). fd 3 Coniza media. d 4 Coniza minim. d 5
Coniza folijs lacin. fd 6 Conizapalustris serratifol. d 7 Coniza Aust. Clus. fd
8 Coniza incana, f. d. 9 Coniza Alpina pilosis. f. d. 10 Coniza caerulea acris,
f. d.
Chapter 132. 2 Aster Ital. f. d. 5 Aster Conizoides Gesn. f. 6 After lut. sup.
Clus. f. 7 After lut. fol. succisae, f. 8 Aster (...) folio, f. 9 After
Austriacus 5. Clus. f. 10 Aster 6. Clus. f. 11 Aster 7. Clus. f. 12 Aster
Virginian. fruticos. d. 13 Aster fruticosus minor, d
Chapter 133. Glastum syluestre, f. Chapter 135. 2 Sesamoides Salamanticum parvum, d. 3
Sesamoides parvum Matthew. d.
Chapter 139. 10 Tithymalus characias angustifol. f. d. 11 Tithymalus eharacias
serratifol. f. d. 12 Tithymalus dendroides ex cod. Caes. f. 17 Esula exigua
Tragi, f. d. 23 Apios radice oblonga, f. d.
Chapter 141. 1 Aloe vulgaris, f. Chapter 142. 2 Sedum maius (...), f. 5 Sedum maius
angustifol. f.
Chapter 143. 3 Sedum minus aestivum, f. 4 Sedum minus flo. amplo. f. 5 Sedum
medium teretifolium, f. d. 6 Aizoon Scorpisides, f. 7 Sedum Portlandicum, f. 8
Sedum petraeum, f.
Chapter 144. C
1 Sedum minus palustre, f. d. 2 Sedum Alpinum 1 Clus. f. d. 3 Sedum Alpinum 3
Clus. f. d. 4 Sedum Alpinum 4 Clus. f. d. 5 Sedum petraeum Bupleuri folio, f.
d.
Chapter 147. 3 Telephium legitimum (...), f. d. Cha. 149. 1 Halimus latifolius, f.
2 Halimus (...). procumbens, f. 3 Halimus vulgaris, d. 4 Vermicularis frutex
minor, f. 5 Vermicularis frutex mayor, f.
Chapter 150. 5 Chamaepitys spuria alt. Dod. f. 6 Chamaepitys Austr. f.
Chapter 151. 2 Vmbelicus ven. sieve Cotyl. al. f. 3 Vmbelicus ven. min. d. 4
Cotyledon min. mont. alt. f. d. 6 Cymbalaria Italica, f. d.
Chapter 155. 2 Kali maius sem. cochleato, f. 3 Kali minus, f.
Chapter 157. 2 Cerinthe asperior flore flauo, f. d. Chapter 158. 3 Hypericum
tomentosum Lob. f. d. 4 Hypericum supinum glabrum, f. d. 5 Hypericum pulchrum
Tragi, d.
Chap. 159. 2 Ascyron supinum palustre, d. Chapter 160. 2 Androsaemum hypericoides,
f. d. Chapter 161. C.
1 Coris Matthew. f. d. 2 Coris (...) Monspel. f. d.
Chapter 162. 2 Centaurium maius alt. f. Chapter 164. 5 Antirrhinum min. repens, f. d.
Chapter 165. 3 Linaria purp. alt. f. 4 Linaria Valentina Clus. f. 7 Osyris flaua
syl. f. d. 8 Linaria quadrifol. supina, d. 12 (...) folio, f. 13 Passerina
altera, d. 14 Linaria adulterina, d.
Chapter 166. Linumsativum, f. Chapter 107. 3 Linum syl. latifol. f. 5 Linum syl.
catharticum, f. d. 6 Linum syl. latifol. 3 Clus. d. 7 Linum marinum lut. f. d.
Chapter 170. 3 Polygonum mariuum max. d. Chapter 171. 2 Anthyllis Valentina Clus. f. 3
Polygonum serpillifolium, f. d. 5 Saxifraga Anglicana alsinefolia, d. 6
Saxifraga palustris alsinefolia, f. d.
Cha. 172. 2 Millegrana minima, f. Chapter 173. 7 Serpillum citratum, f. 8
Serpillum hirsutum, f. d.
Chapter 175. 4 Satureia Cretica, f. d. Chapter 177. 5 Hyssopus parua angust. (...), f.
d. Chapter 178. 2 Gratiolae angustifolia, f. d. Chapter 180. 4 Staechas summis caulic,
nudis, f. d. Chapter 182. Caryophyll. sig. 4. Chapter 183. Caryophyll plum. albus
odorat. f. d. 8 Caryophyll. (...). Alpinus, f. d. 11 Caryophyll. prat. f. 13
Caryophyll. mont. hum. lat. f. 14 Caryophyll. mont. alb. f. d. 17 Caryophyll.
hum. flore cand. amaeno, f. d.
Chapter 184. 5 Armeria prolifera, Lob. d. Chapter 185. 3 Armeria prat. flo. pleno, f.
Chapter 186. 3 Muscipula angustifol. f. d. Chapter 188. C.
1 Saxifrag. mag. Mat. f. d. 2 Saxifrag. antiq. Lob. f. d.
Chapter 189. 4 Ptarmica Imperati, d. Chapter 191. 3 Lithospermum Anchusae, fac. f. 4
Anchusa degener, f.
Chapter 192 11 Alsine rotundifolia, f. d. 12 Alsine palust. serpillsfol. f. d. 13
Alsine baccifera, f. d.
Chapter 194. 3 Anagallis tenuifol. f. d. Chapter 195. 3 Anagallis aquat. rotundisol.
f. d. 4 Anagallis aquat. 4. Lob. f. d. 5 Cepaea, f. d.
Chapter 196. 1 Anthyllis lentifolia, f. 2 Anthyllis marina incana, f. 3 Anthyllis
altera Italorum, d.
Chapter 197. 5 Veronica fruticans serpilifol. f. d. 7 Veron. spicata lat. d. 8
Veronica supina, f.
Chapter 198. 3 Nummularia flo. purp. f. d. Chapter 205. 8. Gnaphalium Americanum. f.
13 Gnaphalium oblongo folio, f. d. 14 Gnaphalium minus lat. fol, f. d.
Chapter 207. 1 Staechas citrina, f. 2 Amaranthus luteus latifol. d.
Chapter 208. 3 Ageratum folijs non serratis, f. 4 Ageratum floribus albis, f. d,
Chapter 209. 4 Tanacetum in odor. maius, f. d. Chapter 210. 3 Matricaria Alpina Clus.
f. Chapter 211. 5 Polium lanandulae folio, f. d. Chapter 213. 3 Teucrium maius Pann. f.
d. 4 Teucrium petraeum pumil. f. d.
Chapter 215. Scorodonia, f. Chapter 219. 3 Tragoriganum Cretense, f. d. Chapter 221. 1
Pulegium regium, f. 2 Pulegium mas, f.
Chapter 222. 4 Ocimum Indicum, f. d. Chapter 223. 3 Corchorus, f. 4 Acinos Anglicum
Clusis, d. 5 Clinopodium Austr. f. d. 6 Clinopodium Alpinum, f. d. 7 Acinos
odoratiss. d.
Chapter 225. 4. Menthacardiaca, f. Mentha spicata alt. f. d.
Chapter 227. 3 Mentastrum, f. d. 4 Mentastr. niv. Angl. f. d. 5 Mentastrum minus,
f. d. 6 Mentastr. mont. 1 Clus. f. d. 7 Mentastrum tuberos. rad. Clus. f. d.
Chapter 229. 3 Melissa Fuch. flo. alb. and purp. f. 2. 4 Herba Iudaioa Lob. f.
Chapter 231. 3 Stachys spinosa Cretica, f. d. 4 Stach is Lusitan. f. d. 5
Sideritis scordioides, f. 6 Sideritis Alpina Hyssopifolia, f.
Chapter 232. C.
1 Sideritis vulgaris, f. d. 2 Sideritis augustifol. f. d. 3 Sideritis procumb.
ramosa, f. d. 4 Sideritis procumbens non ramosa, f. d. 5 Sideritis humilis lato
obtuso folio, d. 6 Sideritis latisolia (...), f. d. 7. Sideritis arvenfis
(...). d.
Chapter 233. Marrubium aquat. f. Chapter 234. 2 Marrubium nigrum longifol. f. d. Chapter
235. 2 Lanium Pannon. f. 5 Galeopsis vera, f. d. 6 Lamium (...). 3 Clus. f. d.
Chapter 238. 2 Cannabis foem. f. Chapter 239. 2 Cannabis spuria alt. f. 3 Cannabis
spuria tert. f.
Chapter 240. 2 Eupat. Cannabinum (...), f. Chapter 245. 5 Scrophularia Ind. f. 3
Scrophularia flo. lut. f. d.
Chapter 247. 2 (...) Austr. d. 8 Scabiosa mont. alb. f. d. 13 Scabiosa min.
Bellidis fol. f. d. 14 Scabiosa flo. pall. d. 15 Scabiosa prolifera, f. d. 16
Scabiosa rubra Indica, f. d. 17 Scabiosa astivalis Clus. f. d.
Chapter 249. 7 (...) Austr. villosa, f. d. 8 Iacea capitulis hirsut. d.
Chapter 250. 4 Staebe Rosmarini fol. f. d. 5 Stabe ex Cod. Caesar. f. d.
Chapter 251. 9 Cydnus repens latifol. f. d. 10 Cyanus repens angustifol. f. d.
Chapter 253. 4 Viperaria angustifol. (...), f. 5 Viper. Pannon. angust. d.
Chapter 256. 1 (...) segetum, f. 3 Chrysanth. Alp. 1 Clus. f. d. 4 Chrysanth. Alp.
2 Clus. f. d. 5 Chrysanth. Cret. f. d. 6 Chrysanth. Baeticum (...), d. 7
Chrysanth. tenuisol. Baet. Boel. d.
Chapter 260. Flos solis pyramidalis, f. d. C. Chapter 262. 3. Leucantbemum Alpinum
Clus. f. d. Chapter 264. 5 Doronicum angustsfol. Austr. f. d. 6 Doronicum Stiriacum
flo. amp. f. d. 7 Doronicum maximum, f. d.
Chapter 205. 7 Saluia absinthites, d. 8 Saluia Cret. pomifera and non pomif. f. 2.
d.
Chapter 266. 2 Verbascum angustis saluiae fol. f. 3 Phlomos Lychnites Sir. f. d.
Chapter 267. 3 Colus louis, f. Chapter 268. 3 Horminum syl. latifol. f. d. 4 Horminum
syl. flo. alb. f. d. 5 Horminum Syl. flo. rub. f. d.
Chapter 271. 3 Blattaria flo. viridi, f. 4 Blattaria flo. ex vir. purpurasc. f. 5
Blattaria flo. albo, f. d. 6 Blattaria flo. amplo, f. d. 7 Blattaria flo. lut.
f. d.
Chapter 273. 8 Primula veris (...), f. Chapter 277. 3 Digitalis lutca, f. 4 Digitalis
ferruginea f. 5 Digitalis ferrug. minor, d.
Chapter 278. Bacchar. Monspel. f. Chapter 283. 3. Buglossa sylmin. f. d. Chapter 284. 2
Anchusa lutea, f. 3 Anchusa minor, f.
Chapter 283. 2 Echium vulgar, f. 3 Echium pullo slore, f. d. 4 Echium rebro flo.
f. d.
Chapter 286. 2 Cynoglossum Cret. f. Cynogloss. Cret. alt. f. d. Cynogloss, nunus
fol. virente, f.
Chapter 287. 3 Symphytum tuberosum, f. 4 Symphytumpar. Borag. fac. f. d.
Chapter 290. 2 Tussilago Alpina, f. d. Chapter 292. C.
1 Cacaliaincano folio, f. d. 2 Cacalia solio glabro, f. d.
Chapter 297. 2 Potamogeiton angust. d. 3 Potamogeiton 3 Dod. f. 4 Potamogeiton
long. acut. folijs, f. d.
Chapter 298. 2 Tribulus aquat. min. quer. slo. f. d. 3 Tribulus aquat. number.
Muscat. flo. f. d.
Chapter 300. 4 Millefolium tennuifol. f. 5 Millefol. palustr. galeric. f. 6
Myriophyllon aquat. minus, d.
Chapter 302. 3 Stellaria aquatica, f. Chapter 304. 2 Arum Aegyptiacum, f. Chapter 307. 2
Soldanella Alp. mayor. f. 3 Soldanella Alp. minor, f. d.
Chapter 308. 2 Gramen Parnassi flo, dupl. f. Chapter 309. Saxifraga albapetraea, f. d.
Chapter 310. 3 Cyclamen. vernum, f. 4 Cyclamen vernum album, f. d. 5 An Cyclaminos
alt. f.
Chapter 311. 4 Aristolochia Saracenica, f. 5 Pistolochia, f. 6 Pist. Cret. sieve
Virginiana, f. d.
Chapter 314. 2 Hedera saxatilis, f. d. Chapter 315. 3 Hedera Virginiana, d. Chapter 317. 4
Convolvulus argenteus, d. Chapter 318. 2 Conuolvulus caer. sol. rot. f. d. 3
Convolv. caerul. min. f. d.
Chapter 319. 3 Scamminium Monspel. f. Chapter 321. 3 Bryonia nigra (...) florens, d.
Chapter 322. Ialapium, d. Chapter 326. 3 Clematis caer. flo. pleno, f. d. Chapter 327.
Clematis cruciata Alpina, f. d. Chapter 330. 2 Clematis Daphnoides mator, f. Chapter
334. Apocynum Sir. Clus. f. Chapter 336. 2 Periploca latifolia, f. Chapter 337. 6
Polygonatum Virginianum, d. Chapter 342. 2 Curullus minor, f. Chapter 345. Macocks
Virginiani, d. Melones aquat. edules, Virg. d.
Chapter 352. 5 Malua aestiua Hispanica, f. d. Chapter 353. 5 Alcea fruticosa cannab.
f. Chapter 355. 3 Alcea Egypt. f. d. Chapter 356. 2 Geranium colum. maius dissect.
fol. d. 3 Geran. saxatile, d.
Chapter 360. 2 (...) baetrachioides alt. f. d. 3 Geran. Batrachioides pullo Fl. f.
d. 4 Geran. (...). long. rad. f. d.
Chapter 363. C.
1 Geranium bulb. Pen. f. d. 2 Geran. nodosum Plateau, f. d. 3 Geran. argent.
Alp. f. d. 4 Geran. batrach. flo. var. d. 5 Geran. Ind. flo. maculato, d.
Chapter 367. 13 Ranunculus hirsut. Alp. flo alb. f. d. 14 Ran. mont. hirsut. purp.
f. d.
Chapter 369. 2 Ranunculus (...). Flo. plen. min. f. d. 3 Ran. Asiat. Flo. plen.
prolifero, f. d. 5 Ran. grum. rad. ramosus, f. d. 6 Ran. grum. rad. Flo. alb.
f. d. 7 Ran. Asiat. grum. rad. Flo. flav. var. f. d.
Chapter 371. C.
1 Ran. Cret. latifol. f. d. 2 Ran. folio plant. f. d. 3 Ran. mont. Flo. min.
f. d. 4 Ran. mont. Flo. maj. f. d. 5 Ran. praecox rut. fol. f. d. 6 Ran.
praecox Thalietrifol. f. d. 7 Ran. parvus echinat. f. d.
Chapter 376. 4 Aconitum lycoct. ex cod: Cas. f. 5 Acon. lycoct. hirsut. f. d. 6
Acon. Violaceum, f. d. 7 Aconitum purp. Neuberg. f. d. 8 Aconitum max.
Iudenberg. f. d. 9 Acon. max. (...). coma. f. d.
Chapter 380. 5 Poeoniapromiscua, f. 6 Poeonia foemina pumila, f. 7 Poeonia Byzant.
f. d.
Chapter 381. 5 Poeonia Pentaphyll. alt. f. Chapter 382. 6 Pentaphyllon sup. Torm. fac.
d. 9 Pentaphyll. incanum minus rep. d. 11 Quinquefol. syl. minus f. d. 12
Quinquesol. min. flo. aur. f. d. 13 Pentaphyllum fragif. f. d.
Chapter 385. 4 Caryophyll. mont. purp. f. d. 5 Caryophyll. Alp. min. f. d.
Chapter 386 Fragaria fructu (...), d. Chapter 387. 3 Archangelica, f. Chapter 391.
Laserpitium, f. Chapter 395. 2 Coriandrum alt. min. od. f. Chapter 396. 3 Apium, sieve
Petrosel. Virgin. d. Chapter 398. Oreoselinum, f. Chapter 399. 1 Petroselinum Macedon.
Fuch. f. Chapter 400. Selinum Sij fol. f. d. C. Chapter 402. Apium syl. sieve Thesselium
(...). f. Chapter 403. 2 Caucalis Apij fol. f. 4 Caucalis mayor, f d. 5 Caucalis
minor flosc. rub. f. d. 6 Caucalis nodo. echinato sem. f. d.
Chapter 407. 2 Pastinaca satiua atrorubens, f. Chapter 414. 2 Anisum Ind. stell. f. d.
Chapter 415. 2 Ammi Creticum, f. 3 Ammi perpusil. f.
Chapter 416. 2 Cerefolium syl. d. 4 Myrrhis altera (...), f. d. 5 Myrrhis
Aequicolor. noua, d. 6 Cicutaria alba, d.
Chapter 417. 2 Anthriscus, f. d. Chapter 419. 2 Barba Capri Tragi, d. Chapter 421. 3
Pimpinella (...) max. d. Chapter 422. 1 Saxifraga Ang. fac. (...) prat. f. 2
Saxifraga Pannon. f. d.
Chap. 424. 2 Seseli Cretic. maj. f. 3 Seseli montanum maius, f. 4 Seseli
Massiliense, f.
Chapter 425. 2 Meum alt. Ital. f. 2 Ferulago, f.
Chapter 427. 3 Panax Asclepium, f. d. Chapter 435. 2 Chelidon. may. fol. mag.
dissecto, f. d. Chapter 440. 6 Valeriana Mexican. f. 8 Valeriana annua Clus. f. d.
9 Valor. Alp. lat. f. d. 10 Valor. Alp. angust. f. d.
Chapter 442. 3 Consolidareg. Flo. dup. f. d. 4 Consol reg. elat. Flo. plen. f. d.
Chapter 443. 4 Melanthium Dam. Flo. plen. f. d. 6 Nigella Hisp. Flo. amp. f. d.
Chapter 447. 4 Aquilegia var. f. d. 5 Aquil. Flo. inuerso rubro, f. d. 6 Aquil.
Flo. inuerso albo, f. d. 7 Aquil. Flo. ros. f. d. 8 Aquil. degener, f. d.
Chapter 457. 6 Drypis, f. Chapter 460. 4 Rubia spicata Cretica, f. d. 5 Rubia
synanchica, d. 6 Rubia minima, f. d.
Chapter 462. 2 Rubia cruciata leuis, f. d. Chapter 463. 2 Asperula Flo. (...). f. 3
Sagina spergula, f. 4 Spergula marina, d. 5 Spergula rubra, d.
Chapter 565. Filicis maris variet. f. d. Chapter 467. 3 Polypodium Ind. f. d. Chapter 468.
Dryopteris (...). f. d. Chapter 70. 3 Hemionitis mayor, f. 4 Hem. minor, f. 5 Hem.
peregrina, f.
Chapter 472. 4 Chamasilix mar. (...). f. Chapter 475. 2 Acanthus syl. (...). f. Chapter
478. 2 Carduus globos. acut. f. 3 Carduus glob. min. f. 5 Carduus glob. cap.
latiore, f. 6 Carduus criocephalus, f.
Chapter 481. 1 Carlina caulescens, f. 3 Carlina acaulos min. Flo. (...). f. d.
Chapter 485. 5 (...). plan. f. d. Chapter 487. 3 Dipsacus minor, f. Chapter 488. 1
Carthamus, f. Chapter 490. 9 Picnomos, d. Chapter 493. C.
1 (...) max. (...). rad. f. d. 2 Cirsium may. alter. f. d. 3 Cirsium fol. non
birsut. f. d. 4 Cirs. mont. cap. parv. f. d. 5 Cirs. mont. Angl. f. 3. d. 6
Carduus mollis fol. dissect. f. d. 7 Card. moll. fol. (...), f. d.
Chapter 494. 3 Trifol. may. Flo. alb. f. 4 Trifol. may. Flor. purp. f. 5 Trifol.
lut. lupul. f. 6 Trifol. lut. min. f.
Chapter 496. 6. Coronopus ex cod. Caes. f. d. 8 Trifol. lut. sil. corn. f. d.
Chapter 497. 1 Lagopus max. f. 2 Lagop. may. spica long. f. d. 3 Lagop. angust.
Hisp. f. d.
Chapter 500. Foenum-Graecum syl. f. Chapter 501. Lotus siliqua quad. f. d. Chapter 502.
Medica fruct. cochleat. spin. f. d. 4 var. Chapter 506. C.
1 Trifol. siliqua lun. f. d. 2 Trifol. ang. Alp. f. d. 3 Trifol. spin. Cret.
f. d. 4 Trifol. fragif. f. d. 5 Trifol. stell. hirsut. d. 6 Trif. stell. glab.
d.
Chapter 507. Faba vulgaris, d. Chapter 508. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, (...). pegrin. var. 9. cum
fig. 3. d. 9. Chapter 509. 4 Lupinus may. flo. caer. f. d. Chapter 515 1 Vicia, f. 2
Vicia max. dumet. d. 3 Vicia syl. flo. alb. f. d. 5 Vicia syl. sieve Cracca min.
f. d.
Chapter 516. 1 Lathyrus may. latifol. f. 2 Lath. ang. flo. alb, f. 3 Lath. angust.
flo. purp. f. d. 4 Lath. Egypt. f. d. 5 Lath. ann. sil. Orobi, f. d. 6 Lath.
syl, flo. lut. f.
Chapter 518. 2 Hedysarum glycyrrhizatum, f. 3 Hedysar. may. siliquis artic. f. 4
Securidaca min. pal. (...). f. 5 Secur. min. lut. f. d. 6 Secur. sil. (...).
dent. f. d. 7 Hedysar. clyp. f.
Chapter 519. 2 Astragalus syl. f. d. Chapter 520. 3 Astragalus Matthew. f. 4
Astragaloides, f.
Chapter 521. 3 Ornithopodium may. f. 4 Ornithopod. min. f. 5 Scorpioides
leguminosa, f. d.
Chapter 526 C.
1 Orobus venet. f. d. 2 Orobus syl. vernus, f. d. 3 Orob. mont. flo. alb. f.
d. 4 Orob. mont. angust. f. d.
Chapter 527. C.
1 Ochrus sieve (...), f. d. 2 (...) sylv. f. d. 3 Aphaca, f. d. 4 Legumen mar.
long. rad. d.
Chapter 528. 3 Talictrum may. Hispan. d. Chapter 531. 6 Ruta canin. f. d.
LIB. 3.
CHAPTER 2. 6 Rosa lut. multipl. f. d. 8 Rosa Cinnam. flo. simpl. f.
Chapter 3. 2 Rosa syl. odor. flo. (...). f. Chapter 4. 2 Rubus repens fructu caesio,
d. Chapter 5. 19 Cistus ann. flo. mac. f. d. 20 Cistus folio sampsuch. f. d.
Chapter 6. 7 Chamaecistus serpillifol. f. d. 8 Chamaecistus Fris. f. d.
Chapter 7. 15 Cistus Ledon folijs Rosm. f. d. Chapter 12. Glycyrrhiza vulg. f. Chapter 17.
Orobanches triplex var. f. 3. Chapter 20. 5 Genista spinosa humilis, d. Chapter 25. 2
Tragacantha min. icon accur. 3 Poterion Lob. f.
Chapter 26. 1 Acacia Diosc. f. Chapter 27. 2 Lycium Hisp. f. Chapter 28. 1 Rhamnus slo.
alb. f. Rhamn. alt. slo. purp. f. d. 2 Rhamnus 2 Clus. f. d. 3 Rhamnus 3 Clus.
d.
Chapter 30. 1 Rhamnus solut. f. 2 Rhamn. sol. min. f. d. 3 Rham. sol. pumil. d.
Chapter 34. Ilicis ramus slor. f. Chapter 35. Cerri minoris ram. cum flo. f. Chapter 37. 2
Galla mayor alt. f. d. Chapter 40. 2 Picea pumila, f. Chapter 42. 8 (...) Austr. f. d.
9 Pinaster mar. min. f. d.
Chapter 43. 2 Abtes mas, f. Abietis ramus cum (...), f.
Chapter 47. Taxus glandif. and baccif. d. Taxus tant. flor. d.
Chapter 48. 3 Iuniperus Alp. min. f. d. Chapter 49. 3 Cedrus lycia alt. f. d. Chapter 50.
3 Sabina bac c. alt. f. d. Chapter 52. 3 Ericamai. flo. alb. d. 9 Erica baccif.
procumbens, f. 10 Erica baccif. ten. d. 11 Ericapum. 3. Dod. f. d. 12 Erica
(...) per interualla ramis, f. d. 13 Erica peregrin. Lob. f. d. 14 Erica coris
folio 7 Clus. f. d. 15 Erica Coris fol. 9 Clus. f. d.
Chapter 54. 2 Vitex lat. serat. folio, f. d. Chapter 55. 8 Salix hum. repens, f. Chapter
61. 3 Syringa Arabica, f. d. Chapter 71. 2 Myrtus Baetica lat. f. 3 Myrt. exot. f.
4 Myrt. fruct. alb. f. 5 Myrtus min. f. 6 Myrt. Baeticasyl. f. d.
Chapter 73. 6 Vitis Idaea fol. subrotund. may, d. Chapter 77. 2 Sambucus fructu alb.
f. Chapter 89. Auellana (...). Byz. f. d. Chapter 91. 3 Castaneae Peru. fruct. f. d.
Chapter 94. 5 Persica flo. pleno, d. Chapter 98. 2 Mespilus sativa (...). f. d. 4
Chamaemespilus, f.
Chapter 113. 2 Alnus hirsut. f. d. Chapter 116. 1 Vlmus (...). fol. lato scabro, d. 2
Vlmus min. fol. angusto scabro, f. d. 3 Vlmus fol. latiss. scab. f. d. 4 Vlmus
fol. glab. d.
Chapter 118. 1 Acer may. f. Chapter 119. 5 Populus alba (...) minor, f. Chapter 122. 2
Zizypha Cappadocica, f. Chapter 124. Guaiacuns Patau. angust. d. Chapter 133. 2 (...),
f. Chapter 136 Musae fructus exact. icon, f. d. Chapter 145. 3 Balsamum Alp. f. d. Chapter
146. 2 Molle arboris adultaramus, f. Chapter 153. 5 Piper caudatum, f. Chapter 159. C.
Fructus Indici and exotic. quorum fig. ad. 26, descr. 35.
Chapter 162. 6 Muscus Pyxidatus, f. 12 Musc. cleuat. fol. Cypr. d. 14 Musc. parv.
stell. f. d.
Chapter 164. 3 Lichen mar. rotund. f. d. 4 Quernus mar. var. f. d. 5 Quern. mar.
secund. f. d. 6 Quern. mar. tertia, f. d. 7 Quern. mar. quarta, f. d. 8 Alga,
f. d. 9 Fucus phasganoides and polys, f. d. 10 (...) spong. nod. f. d. 11
Conferua, f. d.
Chapter 165. 7 Fucus ferul. f. d. 8 Fucus tenuifol. alt. f. d. 9 Muscus mar. Clus.
f. d. 10 Muscus mar. tertius Dod. f. d. 11 (...) mar. Belg. Clus. f. d.
Chapter 166. 5 Coraloides alb. f. d. 6 Coral. rub. f. d. 8 Spong. infundibnli
forma, f. d. 9 Spongia ramosa, f d.
Chapter 167. (...) fig. 14. The Appendix contains fig. 46. descrip. 72.
THE FIRST BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF PLANTS: Containing Grasses, Rushes, Reeds,
Corn, Flags, and Bulbous, or Onion-rooted Plants.
IN this History of Plants it would be tedious to use by way of introduction,
any curious discourse upon the general (...) of Plants, contained in Latin
under Arbor, Frutex, (...), Herba: or to speak of the differing names of their
several parts, more in Latin than our vulgar tongue can well express. Or to
go about to teach thee, or rather to beguile thee by the smell or taste, to
guess at the temperature of Plants: when as all and every of these in their
place shall have their true face and note, whereby thou may both know and use
them.

In three books therefore, as in three gardens, all our Plants are bestowed;
sorted as near as might be in kindred and neighborhood.

The first book has Grasses, Rushes, Corn, Reeds, Flags, Bulbous or
Onion-tooted Plants,

The second, most sorts of herbs used for meat, medicine, or sweet smelling.

The third has Trees, Shrubs, Bushes, Fruit-bearing Plants, Rosins, Gummes,
Roses, Heathes, Mosses, Mushroms, Coral, and their several kinds.

Each book has chapters, as for each herb a bed: and every Plant presents
thee with the Latin and English name in the title, placed over the picture of
the Plant.

Then follows the kinds, description, place, time, names, natures, and
virtues, agreeing with the best received opinions.

Last of all thou have a general Index, as well in Latin as English, with a
careful supply likewise of an Index b linguis, of barbarous names.

And thus having given thee a general view of this garden, now with our
friendly labors we will accompany thee, and lead thee through a Grasse-plot,
little or nothing of many Herbarists heretofore touched; and begin with the
most common or best known Grass, which is called in Latin, Gramen pratense:
and then by little and little conduct thee through most pleasant gardens and
other delightful places, where any herb or plant may be found fit for meat
or medicine.

CHAP. 1. Of Medow-Grasse.
THere be sundry and infinite kinds of Grasses not mentioned by the Ancients,
either as unnecessary to be set down, or unknown to them: only they make
mention of some few, whose wants we mean to supply, in such as have come to
our knowledge, referring the rest to the curious searcher of Simples.

The Description.
1 COmmon Meadow Grass has very small tufts or roots, with thick hairy threads
depending upon the highest turfe, matting and creeping on the ground with a
most thick and appatant show of wheaten leaves, lifting up long thin ioynted
and light stalks, a foot or a cubit high, growing small and sharp at the top,
with a loose (...) hanging downward, like the tuft or top of the common Reed.

2 Small meadow Grass differs from the former in variety of the soil; for
as the first kind grows in meadows, so does this small grass clothe the
hilly and more dry grounds untilled, and barren by nature; a Grass more fit
for sheep than for greater cattle. And because the kinds of Grass do differ
apparently in root, tuft, stalk, leaf, sheath, ear, or crest, we may assure
our selves that they are endowed with several virtues, formed by the Creator
for the use of man, although they have been by a common negligence hidden and
unknown. And therefore in this our Labor we have placed each of them in their
several bed, where the diligent searcher of Nature may, if so he please, place
his learned observations.

1 Gramen pratense. Meadow Grass.
2 Gramen pratense minus. Small Medow-grasse.


The Place.
Common Medow-grasse grows of it self unset or vnsowen, every where, but the
small meadow grass for the most part grows upon dry and barren grounds, as
partly we have touched in the description.

The Time.
Concerning the time when Grass springs and seedeth, I suppose there is none
so simple but knows it, and that it continues all the whole year, seeding
in June and July. Neither needs it any propagation or replanting by seed or
otherwise; no not so much as the watery Grasses, but that they recover
themselves again, although they have been drowned in water all the Winter
long, as may appear in the wild fennes in Lincolnshire and such like places.

The Names.
Grass is called in Greek, (...): in Latin, Gramen, as it is thought, a
gradiendo, quod (...) is (...) serpat crebroquenouas spargat radices: for it
grows, goes, or spreads it self unset or vnsowen, naturally over all
fields or grounds, clothing them with a fair and perfect green. It is
yearly mowed, in some places twice, and in some rare places thrice, then is it
dried and withered by the (...) of the Sun, with often turning it; and then
is it called Foenum, nescio an a foenore aut foetu. In English, Hay: in French,
Le herb du (...).

The Nature.
The roots and seeds of Grass are of more use in physic than the herb, and
are accounted of all Writers moderately to open obstructions, and provoke urine.

The Virtues.
The decoction of Grass with the roots of Parsley drunk, helps the
dissurie, and provoke

The roots of Grass, according to Galen, do glue and consolidate together new
and bleeding

The juice of Grass mixed with honey and the powder of Sothernwood taken in
drink, kills

Fernelius says, that grass does help the obstructions of the liver, reins
and kidneys and the Nephritis.

Hay sodden in water till (...) be tender, and applied hot to the chaps of
beasts that be chap-fallen,

CHAP. 2. Of Red Dwarfe-Grasse.
The Description.
1 Dwarf Grass is one of the least of Grasses. The root consists of many
little bulbes, covered with a reddish (...) or skin, with very many small
hairy and white strings: the tuft or ear is of a reddish color, and not much
differing from the grass called Ischaemon, though the ear be softer, broader,
and more beautiful.

1 Gramen minimum rubrum, sieve Xerampelinum. Red Dwarfe-grasse.
2 Gramen minimum album. White Dwarfe-grasse.


2 This kind of Grass has small hairy roots; the leaves are small and short,
as also the stalk, which on the top thereof bears a pannicle not much unlike
the small meadow (...), but less: the color thereof is sometimes white, and
otherwhiles reddish; whence some have given two figures, which I thinking
needless, have only retained the later, and for the former given the figure
of another Grass, intended by our Author to be comprehended in this Chapter.

3 Small hard Grass has small roots compact of little strings or threads, from
which come forth many sour rushy leaves of the length of an inch and a half:
the tuft or ear is compact of many pannicles or very little ears, which to
your feeling are very hard or harsh. This Grass is unpleasant, and no
wholesome food for cattle.

4 Rush-grasse is a small plant some handful high, having many small rushy
leaves tough and pliant, as are the common Rushes: whereupon do grow small
scaly or chaffie husks, in stead of flowers, like those of Rushes, but
smaller. The root is threddy like the former. There is a variety of this to be
found in bogs, with the seeds bigger, and the leaves and whole plant lesser.

3 Gramen minus duriusculum. Small hard Grass.
4 Gramen junceum. Rush-grasse, or Toad-grasse.


The Place.
The Dwarfe-grasse does grow on heathy rough and dry barren grounds in most
places of England. That which I have given you I have not as yet observed
growing in any part of England.

The white Dwarfe-grasse is not so common as the former, yet does it grow very
plentifully among the Hop gardens in Essex and many other places.

Small Hard-grasse grows in moist fresh marshes, and such like places.

Rush-grasse grows in salt marshes near unto the sea, where the marshes
have been overflowed with salt water. It also grows in many wet woods,
lanes, and such places, as in the lane going by Totenham Court toward
Hampstead. The lesser variety hereof grows on the bogges upon Hampstead
heath.

The Time.
These kinds of Grasses do grow, flower, and flourish when the common Meadow
grass does.

The Names.
It suffices what has been said of the names in the description, as well in
English as Latin; only that some have deemed White Dwarfe-grasse to be called
Xerampelinum.

Rush-grasse has been taken for Holosteum Matthioli.

The Names in particular.
1 This I here give you in the first place is the Gramenminimum Xerampelinum of
Lobel: it is the Gramen of Matthiolus, and Gramen bulbosum of Daleschampius.
Our Author did not understand what Xerampelinus signified, when as he said the
white Dwarfe-grasse was so termed; for the word imports red, or murrey, such a
color as the withered leaves of Vines are of. 2. Tabern calls this, Gramen
panniculatum minus. 3. Lobel calls this, Exile Gramen durius. 4. This by
Matthiolus was called Holostium: by Thalius, Gramen epigonatocaulon: by
Tabernamontanus, Gra. (...), that is, Toad-grasse.

The Nature and Virtues.
These kinds of Grasses do agree as it is thought with the common
(...)-grass, in nature and virtues, notwithstanding they have not been used
in physic as yet, that I can read of.

The first figure was only a variety of the second, according to (...); yet
in my judgment it was the same with the third, which is (...) (...).

CHAP. 3. Of Corne-Grasse.
The Description.
1 COrne-grasse has many grassie leaves resembling those of Rye, or rather
Otes, amongst the which comes up slender benty stalks, kneed or ioynted like
those of corn, whereupon grows a fair tuft or pannicle not much unlike to
the feather-like tuft of common Reed, but rounder compact together like unto
Millet. The root is threddy like those of Otes.

1 Gramen segetale. Corne-grasse.
2 Gramen (...). Reed-grasse, or Bent.


2 Reed-grasse has many thin grassie leaves like the former: the bushy top,
with his long feather-like pannicles doresemble the common Reed, which is
lightly shaken with the wind, branched upon a long slender reeden stalk,
kneed or ioynted like corn. The root is small and fibrous.

The Place and Time.
These kinds of Grasses grow for the most part near hedges, and in fallow
fields in most places. Their time of springing, flouring, and fading may be
referred to the common Medow-grasse.

The Names.
The first is called in English, Corne-grasse. Lobelius calls this, Segetum
gramen pannicula speciosa latiore: others termeit Gramen segetale, for that it
usually grows among corn; the which I have not as yet seen.

The second is called in English, Reed-grasse: of Lobelius in Latin, Gramen
agrorum latiore, arundinacea, and comosa pannicula, for that his tuft or
pannicles do resemble the Reed: and Spicaventi agrorum, by reason of his
feather-top, which is easily shaken with the wind. Some in English, much
agreeable to the Latin name, call these, Windle-strawes. Now I take this last
to be the Grass with which we in London do usually adorn our chimneys in
Summer time: and we commonly call the bundle of it handsomely made up for our
use, by the name of Bents.

The Temperature and Virtues.
These Grasses are thought to agree with common Grass, as well in temperature
as virtues, although not used in physic.

CHAP. 4. Of Millet Grass.
1 Gramen Miliaceum. Millet Grass.
This which I give you in the second place is not of the same (...) that was
figured in the former edition; for that picture was of (...) (...) (...) (...)
of (...). which has a running root and large specious pannicle like to a Reed,
of a brown color. But it is most apparent that our Author meant this, and
framed his description by looking upon this figure, especially the later part
thereof. The (...) figure of this was in the second place in the next Chapter.
2 Gramen majus aquaticum. Great Water-grasse.


The Description.
1 MIllet Grass is but a slender Grass, bearing a tuft or ear like unto the
common Medow-grasse, but consisting of small seeds or chaffie heads like to
Milium, or (...), whereof it took the name. The stalk or leaves do resemble
the Bent, wherewith country people do trim their houses.

2 The great Water-grasse in root, leaf, tuft, and reeden stalk does very
well resemble the Grass called in Latin, Gramen sulcatum, or Pictum; and by
our English women, Lady-laces, because it is stripped or furrowed with white and
green streakes like silk laces; but yet differs from that, that this Water
grass does get unto it self some new roots from the middle of the stalks and
joints, which the other does not. This is a large Grass, having stalks almost
as thick as ones little finger, with the leaves answerable unto them, and a
little rougish: the tuft is somewhat like a reed, but less, and whitish
colored.

The Place, (...), Nature, and Virtues.
The former grows in meadows, and about hedges, and the later is to be found
in most fenny and watery places, and have their virtues and natures common with
the other Grasses, for any thing that we can find in writing. The reason of
their names may be gathered out of the description.

CHAP. 5. Of Darnell Grass.
The Description.
1 DArnell Grass, or Gramen Sorghinum, as Lobel has very properly termed it,
has a brownish stalk thick and knotty, set with long sharp leaves like unto
the common Dogs Grass: at the top whereof grows a tuft or ear of a grayish
color, somewhat like (...), whereof it took his name.

1 Gramen Sorghinum. Darnell Grass.
The figure that (...) in the second place was of (...) (...) (...), being the
second of the precedent Chapter. The true figure of this was page 21. (...) the
title of (...) (...) (...). The third being there also, as I have touched in
the (...).
2 Gramen harundinaceum panniculatum. Wild Reed.


2 Wild Reed, or Gramen harundinaceum (...), called also Calamogrostis, is far
bigger than Couch grass, or Dogs grass, and in stalks and leaves more rough,
rugged, and cutting. It is bad food for cattle, though they want, or be very
hungry; and deadly to Sheep, because that, as the Husbandman says, it is a
cause of leanness in them, thirst, and consumption: it cutteth their 3 Gramen
arundinaceum minus. The lesser Reed-Grasse.
tongue, straitneth the gullet or throat, and draws down blood into the
stomach or maw; whereof ensues inflammation, and death for the most part. And
not only this Calamogrostis is hurtful, but also all other kinds of shearing
leaued reeds, flagges, sedge, or the like, which have as it were edges; and cut
on both sides like knives as well men's fingers, as cattels mouths. This herb
is in a mean between reed and grass. The root is white, creeping downwards
very deep. The spike or ear is like unto the reed, being soft and cottony,
somewhat resembling Pannicke.

3 This in root, stalks, and leaves is like to the last described, but that
they are lesser: the top or head is a long single spike or ear, not severed or
parted into many ears like (...) top of the precedent, and by (...) and the
magnitude it may chiefly be distinguished from it. This was in the twelfth
place in the sixteenth chapter, under the title of Gramen harundinaceum minus:
and the Calamogrostis but now described, was also there again in the eleventh
place.

The Place.
The first grows in fields and orchards almost every where; the other grow in
fenny waterish places.

The Names.
2 This in Lincolneshire is called Sheeregrasse, or Hen: in other parts of
England, wild Reed: in Latin, Calamogrostis: out of the Greek, (...) As for
their natures and virtues we do not find any great use of them worth the
setting down.

CHAP. 6. Of Feather-top, Fern, and Wood-grasse.
The Description.
1 THis might fitly have been put to those mentioned in the foregoing chapter,
but that our Author determined it for this, as may appear by the mention made
of it in the names, as also by the description hereof, framed from the figure
we here give you. This Grass is garnished with chaffie and downie tufts, set
upon a long benty stalk of two cubits high or somewhat more, naked without any
blades or leaves, for the most part. His root is tough and hard. The top is
commonly of a red or murrey color, and the leaves soft and downy.

2 This, whose figure was formerly by our Author given for the last described,
though very much different from it, is a very pretty and elegant (...): it in
roots and leaves is not unlike to the usual meadow Grass; the stalk rises to
the height of a foot, and at the top thereof it bears a beautiful pannicle,
(whence the French and Spanish Nations call it Amourettes, that is, the Lovely
Grass.) This head consists of many little ears, shaped much like those of the
ordinary Quaking Grass, longer and flatter, being composed of more scales, so
that each of them somewhat resembles the leaf of a small Fern, whence I have
called it Ferne-Grasse. These tops when they are ripe are white, and are
gathered where they grow naturally to beautify garlands.

3 Wood-grasse has many small and threddy roots, compact together in manner of
a (...); from which spring immediately out of the earth many grassy leaves,
among the which are sundry 1 Gramen tomentosum arundinaceum. Feather-top, or
Woolly Reed-grasse.
2 Gramen panniculatum elegasis. Ferne-grasse.
3 (...) syluaticum majus. The greater Wood-grasse.
benty stalks, naked and without leaves or blades like the former, bearing at
the top a soft spikie tuft or ear much like unto a Fox-taile, of a brownish
color.

4 This in leaves, stalks, roots, manner and place of growing is like the last
described: the only difference between them is, That this has much less,
yet sharper or rougher ears or tufts. The figure and description of this was
formerly given by our Author in the sixteenth chapter, and ninth place, under
the title of Gramen syluaticum minus. But because the difference between the
last described and this is so small, we have spared the figure, to make room
for others more (...) and note-worthy.

The Time and Place.
1 This kind of Grass grows in fettil fields and pastures.

2 The second grows in diverse places of Spain and France.

The other two grow in Woods.

The Names.
1 Lobelius in Latin calls this Gramen tomentosum and Acerosum. Some have
taken it for the second kind of (...); but most commonly it is called Gramen
plumosum: and in English, a Bent, or Feather-top Grass.

2 Gramen panniculatum is called by some Heragrostis in Greek. Lobel calls
this Gramen panniculosum phalaroides. And it is named in the Hist. Lugd. Gramen
filiceum, seu polyanthos: that is, Fern, or many-floured Grass.

3 Gramen syluaticum, or as it pleases others, Gramen nemorosum, is called in
our tongue, wood Grass, or shadow Grass.

CHAP. 7. Of great Fox-taile Grass.
The Description.
1 THe great Fox-taile Grass has many threddy roots like the common Meadow
grass; and the stalk rises immediately from the root, in fashion like unto
Barley, with two or three leaves or blades like Otes; but is nothing rough in
handling, but foft and downie, and somewhat hoarie, bearing one ear or tuft on
the top, and never more; fashioned like a Fox-taile, whereof it took his name.
At the approach of Winter it dies, and recouereth it self the next year by
falling of his seed.

1 Gramen Alopecuroides majus Great Fox-taile Grass.
2 Gramen Alopecuroides minus. Small Fox-taile Grass.


2 The lesser Fox-taile Grass has a tuffe and hard root compact of many small
strings, yielding a strawie stalk like the former, though somewhat lesser, with
the like top or crest, but of a whitish color.

3 Great bastard Fox-taile Grass has a strawie stalk or stem, which rises
to the height of a cubit and an half, having a small root consisting of many
fibers. His leaf is small and grassie, and has on his top one tuft or spike,
or ear of a hard chaffie substance, some three inches long, composed of
longish seeds, each having a little beard or own.

4 Small bastard Fox-taile Grass does resemble the former, saving that this
kind does not send forth such large stalks and ears as the other, but
smaller, and not so close packed together, neither having so long beards or
awnes.

3 Gramen Alopecurinum majus. Great bastard Fox-taile Grass.
4 Gramen Alopecurinum (...). Small bastard Fox-taile Grass.


The Place and Time.
These wild bastard Fox-taile Grasses do grow in the moist furrows of
fertile fields, toward the later end of Summer.

The Names.
The first by Lobel and Tabern. is called Gramen phalaroides. The other Lobel
calls 2 Gramen Alopecuroides. 3. minus. 4. minus alterum.

CHAP. 8. Of Great Cats-taile Grass.
The Description.
1 GReat Cats-taile Grass has very small roots, compact of many small skins
or threads, which may easily be taken from the whole root. The stalk rises up
in the midst, and is somewhat like unto wild Barley, kneed and ioynted like
corn, of a foot high or thereabout; bearing at the top a handsome round close
compact ear resembling the Catstaile.

2 The small Cats-taile grass is like unto the other, differing chiefly in
that it is lesser than it. The root is thick and cloued like those of Rush
Onions, or Ciues, with many small strings or hairie threads annexed unto it.

3 There is another that grows plentifully in many places about London, the
which may fitly be referred to this Classis. The root thereof is a little
bulbe, from whence arises a stalk some two foot or better high, set at each
joint with long grassie leaves: the spike or ear is commonly Gramen Typhinum
minus. Small Cats-taile Grass.
four or five inches long, closely and handsomely made in the fashion of the
precedent, which in the shape it does very much resemble.

The Place and Time.
These kinds of Grasses do grow very well near waterie places, as Gramen
Cyperoides does, and flourish at the same time that all the others do.

The latter may be found by the bridge entering into Chelsey field, as one goes
from Saint James to little Chelsey.

The Names.
The Latins borrow these names of the Greeks, and call it Gramen Typhinum, of
Typha, a Cats tail: and it may in English as well be called round Bent-grasse,
as Cats-taile Grass.

The last described is by (...), who first gave the figure and description
thereof in his Prodomus, page 10. called Gramen Typhoides maximum spica
longissima; that is, The largest Foxetaile Grass with a very long ear.

CHAP. 9. Of Cyperus Grass.
1 Gramen Cyperoides. Cyperus Grass.
2 Gramen Iunceum aquaticum. Rushy Water-Grasse.


The Description.
1 CYperus Grass has roots somewhat like Cyperus, whereof it took his name:
his leaves are long and large like unto the common reed: the stalk does grow
to the height of a cubit in some places; upon which grows little scaly knobs
or ears, spike fashion, somewhat like unto Cats-taile, or Reed-mace, very
chaffie, rough, and rugged.

2 Rushy Water-grasse has his roots like the former, with many fibers or
strings hanging at them; and creeps along upon the uppermost face of the
earth, or rather mud, wherein it grows, bearing at each joint one slender
benty stalk, set with a few small grassie blades or leaves, bringing forth at
the top in little hoods, small feather-like tufts or ears.

The Place, Time, and Names.
They grow, as I have insinuated, in myrie and muddy grounds, in the same
season that others do. And concerning their names there has been said enough
in their titles.

CHAP. 10. Of Water-Grasse.
1 Gramen aquaticum. Water-grasse.
2 Gramen aquaticum spicatum. Spiked Water-grasse.


The Description.
1 WAter-grasse, or as we term it, Water Burre-grasse, has a few long narrow
slender and ioynted leaves: among which rises up a stalk of two foot high,
bearing upon his small and tender branches certain little rough knobs, or
brownish sharp pointed seeds made up into cornered heads: his root is small
and threddy.

The figure of this plant is not well expressed, for it should have had the
leaves made narrower, and joints expressed in them, like as you may see in the
Gramen junceum syluaticum, which is the ninth in the sixteenth chapter; for
that and this are so like, that I know no other difference between them, but
that this has leaves longer and narrower than that, and the heads smaller and
whiter. There is a reasonable good figure of this in the Historia Lugd. p.
1001. under the name of Arundo minima.

2 Spiked Water-grasse has long narrow (...): the stalk is small, single, and
naked, without leaves or blades, bearing along the same toward the top an
ear or spike made of certain small buttons, resembling the buttonie flowers
of Sea Worme-wood. His root is thick and tough, full of fibers or threads.

The Place and Time.
They differ not from the former kinds of Grasses in place and time: and their
names are manifest.

The Nature and Virtues.
Their nature and virtues are referred unto Dogs Grass, whereof we will speak
hereafter.

CHAP. 11. Of Flote-Grasse.
1 Gramen fluviatile. Flote-grasse.
2 Gramen fluviatile spicatum. Spiked Flote-grasse.


The Description.
1 FLote-grasse has a long and round root somewhat thick, like unto
Dogs-grasse, set on even joints with small strings or threads; from the which
rise up long and crooked stalks, crossing, winding, and folding one within
another with many flaggie leaves, which horses eat greedily of. At the top of
these stalks, and somewhat lower, there come forth very many little ears of a
whitish color, composed of two ranks of little chaffie seeds set alternately,
each of these small ears being almost an inch in length.

2 Spike Flote-Grasse, or spiked Flote-grasse bears at the top of each
slender creeping stalk one spiked ear and no more, and the other many, which
makes a difference betwixt them; otherwise they are one like the other. His
root is compact, tufted; and made of many thrummie threads.

The Place.
The first of these grows every where in waters. The second is harder to be
found.

The Names.
The first is called Gramen fluviatile, and also Gramen aquis innatans: in
English, Flote-grasse. Tragus calls it, Gramen Anatum, Ducks-grasse.

The second is called Gramen (...) spicatum, and fluviatile album by
Tabernamontanus. Likewise in English it is called Flote-grasse, and
Floter-grasse, because they swim and flote in the water.

CHAP. 12. Of Kneed-Grasse.
The Description.
1 KNeed-grasse has straight and upright strawie stalks, with joints like to
the straw of corn, and bears small grassie leaves or blades spiked at the
top like unto Pannick, with a rough ear of a dark (...) color. His roots are
hairy and threddy, and the joints of the straw are very large and conspicuous.

1 Gramen geniculatum. Kneed-grasse.
2 Gramen geniculatum aquaticum. Water Kneed-grasse.


2 Water Kneed-grasse has many long and slender stemmes, ioynted with many
knobby and gouty knees like unto Reed, set with broad flaggy leaves somewhat
sharp pointed; bearing at the top a tuft or pannicle divided into sundry small
branches, of a duskish color. His root is threddie like the other.

The Place, Time, and Names.
These Grasses do grow in fertile moist meadows; not differing in time from
others. And they are called Geniculata, because they have large joints like as
it were knees.

We have nothing delivered us of their nature and properties,

CHAP. 13. Of Bearded Panicke Grass.
1 Gramen Paniceum. Bearded Panick Grass.


The Description.
1 BEarded Panicke grass has broad and large leaves like barley, somewhat
hoarie, or os an oner-worne russet color. The stalks have two or three joints
at the most, and many (...) on the top, without order; upon some stalks more
(...) on others fewer, much like unto the ear of wild Panicke, but that this
has many (...) or awnes, which the other wants.

2 Small Pannicke Grass, as Lobelius writes, in roots, leaves, joints, and
stalks is like the former, saving that the ear is much less, consisting of
fewer rows of seed, contained in small chaffie blackish husks. This, as the
former, has many ears upon one stalk.

3 This small Pannicke Grass from a threddy root sends forth many little
stalks, whereof some are one handful, other-some little more than an inch
high; and each of these stalks on the top sustaines one single ear, in shape
(...) like unto the ear of wild Pannicke, but about half the length. The
stalks of this are commonly crooked, and set with grassie leaves like to the
rest of this kind. The figure hereof was unfitly placed by our Author in the
sixteenth place in the eighth chapter, under the title of Gramen (...) spicatum.

2 Gramen paniceum parvum. Small Panicke Grass.


The Place and Time.
The first of these two does grow near unto mud walls, or such like places not
manured, yet fertile or fruitful.

The second grows in shallow waterie plashes of pastures, and at the same
time with others. I have not as yet observed any of these three growing wild.

3 Gramen Pannici effigy spica simplici. Single eared Pannicke Grass.


The Names and Virtues.
They are called Panicke Grasses, because they are like the Italian corn
called Panicke. Their nature and virtues are not known.

CHAP. 14. Of Hedgehog Grass.
It is evident by the name and description, that our Author (...) this which we
here give you in the (...) place; yet his figure was of another Grass (...)
like the (...), which figure and description you may find here expressed in the
third place.
1 Gramen palustre (...). Hedgehog Grass.
2 Gramen exile Hirsutum. Hairy-grasse,


3 Gramen Capitulis globosis. Round headed Siluer-grasse.


The Description.
1 Hedgehog Grass has long stiff flaggy leaves with diverse stalks
proceeding from a thick spreading root; and at the top of every stalk grow
certain round and pricking knobs fashioned like an hedgehog.

It is evident by the name and description, that our Author (...) this which we
here give you in the (...) place; yet his figure was of another Grass (...)
like the (...), which figure and description you may find here expressed in the
third place.
2 The second is rough and hairie: his roots do spread and creep under the mud
and mire as Cyperus does; and at the top of the stalks are certain round soft
heads, their color being brown, intermixed with yellow, so that they look
prettily when as they are in their prime.

3 This Grass (whose figure was formerly in the first place in this Chapter)
has a small and fibrous root, from which rise leaves like those of Wheat, but
with some long white hairs upon them like those of the last described: at the
tops of the stalks (which are some foot or better high) there grow two or three
round heads consisting of (...) and white downie threads. These heads are said
to shine in the night, and therefore they in Italy call it (according to
Caesalpinus) (...), quia noctu lucet.

4 To this I may add another growing also in Italy, and first described by
Fabius Columna. It has small creeping ioynted roots, out of which come small
fibers, and leaves little and very narrow at the first, but those that are upon
the stalks are as long again, incompassing the stalks, as in Wheat,
Dogs-grasse, and the like. These leaves are (...) all along, and a little
forked at the end: the straw or stalk is very slender, at the top whereof
grows a sharp prickly round head, much after the manner of the last
described: each of the seed-vessels whereof this head consists ends in a
prickly stalk having five or seven points, whereof the uppermost that is in
the middle is the longest. The seed that is contained in these prickly vessels
is little and transparent, like in color to that of Cow-wheat. The flowers (as
in others of this kind) hang trembling upon yellowish small threads.

The Place and Time.
It is evident by the name and description, that our Author (...) this which we
here give you in the (...) place; yet his figure was of another Grass (...)
like the (...), which figure and description you may find here expressed in the
third place.
1 2 They grow in watery medows and fields, as you may see in Saint Georges
fields and such like places.

3 4 Both these grow in diverse mountainous places of Italy; the later whereof
flowers in May.

The Names.
The first is called Hedgehog Grass, and in Latin, Gramen Echinatum, by
reason of those prickles which are like unto a hedgehog.

The second hairy Grass is called Gramen exile hirsutum Cyperoides, because it
is small and little, and rough or hairy like a Goat: and Cyperoides, because
his roots do spring and creep like the Cyperus.

3 This by Anguillara is thought to be Combretum of Pliny; it is Gram. lucidum
of (...); and Gramen hirsutum capitulo globoso, of Bauhine, Pin. page 7.

4 Fabius Columna calls this, Gramen montanum Echinatum tribuloides capitatum:
and Bauhine names it, Gramen spica subrotunda echinata. We may call it in
English, Round headed Caltrope Grass.

The Virtues.
3 The head of this (which I have thought good to call Siluer-grasse) is very
good to be applied to green wounds, and effectual to stay bleeding, Caesalp.

CHAP. 15. Of Hairy Wood-(...).
The Description.
1 HAiry Wood-grasse has broad rough leaves somewhat like the precedent, but
much longer, and they proceed from a threddy root, which is very thick, and
full of strings, as the common Grass, with small stalks rising up from the
same roots; but the top of these stalks is divided into a number of little
branches, and on the end of every one of them stands a little flower or husk
like the top of Allium Vrsinum, or common Ramsons, wherein the seed is
contained when the flower is fallen.

2 Cyperus Wood-grasse has many sheary grassie leaves, proceeding from a root
made of many hairy strings or threads: among which there rises up sundry
straight and upright stalks, on whose tops are certain scaly and chaffie
husks, or rather spikie blackish ears, not much unlike the catkins or tags
which grow on Nut-trees, or Aller trees.

1 Gramen hirsutum nemorosum. Hairy Wood-grasse.
2 Gramen Cyperinum nemorosum. Cyperus Wood-grasse.


The Place, Time, and Names.
These two grow in woods or shadowie places, and may in English be called
Wood-grasses. Their time is common with the rest.

Their Nature and Virtues.
There is nothing to be said of their nature and virtues, being as unknown as
most of the former.

CHAP. 16. Of Sea Spike-Grasse.
The Description.
Formerly in the eighth place (but very vnsitly) was the sigure of Gramen (...)
spica (...). being the third in the (...) chapter. The ninth also is restored
to his due place, being the (...) in the (...) chapter. The two Reed-grasses
that were in the eleventh and (...) places are also before in the (...) Chapter.
1 SEa Spike-grasse has many small hollow round leaves about six inches long,
rising from a bushy threddy white fibrous root, which are very soft and smooth
in handling. Among these leaves there do spring up many small rushy stalks;
along which are at the first diverse small flouring round buttons; the sides
whereof falling away, the middle part grows into a longish seed-vessell
standing upright.

1 Gramen marinum spicatum. Sea Spike-grasse.
2 Gramen spicatum alterum. Saltmarsh Spike grass.


Formerly in the eighth place (but very vnsitly) was the sigure of Gramen (...)
spica (...). being the third in the (...) chapter. The ninth also is restored
to his due place, being the (...) in the (...) chapter. The two Reed-grasses
that were in the eleventh and (...) places are also before in the (...) Chapter.
2 Salt-marsh Spike-grasse has a woody tough thick root with some small hairy
threads fastened thereunto; out of which arise long and thick leaves very like
those of that Sea-grasse we vulgarly call Thrift. And amongst these leaves grow
up slender naked rushy stalks which have on one side small knobs or buttons of
a greenish color hanging on them.

3 The third has many rushy leaves tough and hard, of a brown color, well
resembling Rushes: his root is compact of many small tough and long strings.
His stalk is bare and naked of leaves unto the top, on which it has many
small pretty chaffie buttons or heads.

4 The fourth is like the third, saving that it is larger; the stalk also is
thicker and taller than that of the former, bearing at the top such husks as
are in Rushes.

5 Great Cypress Grass has diverse long three-square stalks proceeding from
a root compact of many long and tough strings or threads. The leaves are long
and broad, like unto the sedge called Carex. The spike or ear of it is like
the head of Plantaine, and very prickly, and commonly of a yellowish green
color.

6 Small Cypress Grass is like unto the other in root and leaves, saving that
it is smaller. His stalk is smooth and plain, bearing at the top certain
tufts or pannicles, like to the last described in roughness and color.

3 Gramen junceum marinum. Sea Rush-grasse.
4 Gramen junceum maritimum. Marish Rush-grasse.
5 Gramen palustris Cyperoides. Great Cypress Grass.
6 Gramen Cyperoides parvum. Small Cypress Grass.


7 Gramen aquaticum Cyperoides vulgatius. Water Cypress Grass.
Formerly in the eighth place (but very vnsitly) was the sigure of Gramen (...)
spica (...). being the third in the (...) chapter. The ninth also is restored
to his due place, being the (...) in the (...) chapter. The two Reed-grasses
that were in the eleventh and (...) places are also before in the (...) Chapter.
8 Gramen Cyperoides spicatum. Spike Cypress Grass.
9 Gramen (...) syluaticum. Wood Rushy-grasse.


7 The first of these two kinds has many crooked and crambling roots of
awoody substance, very like unto the right Cyperus, differing from it only in
smell, because the right Cyperus roots have a fragrant smell, and these none at
all. His leaves are long and broad, rough, sharp or cutting at the edges like
sedge. His stalk is long, big, and three square, like to Cyperus, and on his
top a chaffie vmbel or tuft like unto the true Cyperus.

8 The second kind has many broad leaves like unto those of Gillouers, but of
a fresher green: amongst the which rises up a short stalk some handful or
two high, bearing at the top three or four short ears of a reddish murrey
color, and these ears grow commonly together at the top of the stalk, and not
one under another. There is also another lesser sort hereof, with leaves and
roots like the former, but the stalk is commonly shorter, and it has but one
single ear at the top thereof. You have the figures of both these expressed in
the same table or piece. This kind of Grass is the Gramen spicatum (...)
Vetonicae of Lobel.

9 This has long tough and hairy strings growing deep in the earth like a
turfe, which make the root; from which rise many crooked tough and rushy
stalks, having toward the top scaly and chaffie knobs or buttons. This grows
some half yard high, with round brownish heads, and the leaves are ioynted as
you see them expressed in the figure we here give you.

The Place, Time, Names, Nature, and Virtues.
All the Grasses which we have described in this chapter do grow in marish and
watery places near to the sea, or other fenny grounds, or by muddy and myrie
ditches, at the same time that the others do grow and flourish. Their names are
easily gathered of the places they grow in, or by their Descriptions, and are
of no virtue nor property in medicine, or any other necessary use as yet
known.

CHAP. 17. Of Couch-Grasse, or Dogs-grasse.
1 Gramen Caninum. Couch-grasse, or Dogs-grasse.
2 Gramen Caninum nodosum. Knotty Dogs-grasse.


The Description.
1 THe common or best known Dogs-grasse, or Couch-grasse has long leaves of a
whitish green color: the stalk is a cubit and a half high, with joints or
knees like wheaten straw, but these joints are covered with a little short down
or woollinesse. The plume or tuft is like the reed, but smaller and more
chaffie, and of a grayish color: it creeps in the ground hither and thither
with long white roots, ioynted at certain distances, having a pleasant sweet
taste, and are platted or wrapped one within another very intricately, insomuch
as where it happens in gardens amongst pot-herbes, great labor must be taken
before it can be destroyed, each piece being apt to grow, and every way to
dilate it self.

2 Knotty Dogs grass is like unto the former in stalk and leaf, but that
they are of a deeper color; also the spike or ear is greener, and about some
two handfulls long, much in shape resembling an Oate, yet far smaller, and is
much more dispersed than the figure (...) to you. The roots of this are
somewhat knotty and tuberous, but that is chiefly about the Spring of the
year, for afterward they become less and less until the end of Summer. And
these bulbes do grow confusedly together, not retaining auy certain shape or
number.

The Place.
1 The first grows in gardens and arable lands, as an infirmity or plague of
the fields, nothing pleasing to Husbandmen; for after that the field is plowed,
they are constrained to gather the roots together with harrowes and rakes; and
being so gathered and laid upon heaps, they set them on fire lest they should
grow again.

2 The second grows in plowed fields and such like places, but not every where
as the other. I have found of these in great plenty, both growing, and plucked
up with harrowes, as before is rehearsed, in the fields next to S. (...) wall
as ye go to Chelsey, and in the fields as ye go from the Tower Hill of London
to Radcliffe.

The Time.
These Grasses seldom come to show their ear before July.

The Names.
It is called Gramen Caninum, or Sanguinale, and Vniola. The Countrymen of
Brabant name it (...): others, Ledt grass: of the Grecians, (...) of the
Latins, by the common name, Gramen. It is of some named (...): in English,
Couch-grasse, Quitch-Grasse, and Dogs-grasse.

Gramen Caninum bulbosum, or nodosum, is called in English, Knobby, or Knotty
Couch-grasse.

The Nature.
The nature of Couch-grasse, especially the roots, agrees with the nature of
common Grass: although that Couch-grasse be an unwelcome guest to fields and
gardens, yet his physic virtues do recompense those hurts; for it opens the
stoppings of the liver and reins, without any manifest heat.

The learned Physicians of the College and Society of London do hold this
bulbous Couch grass in temperature agreeing with the common Couch-grasse, but
in virtues more effectual.

The Virtues.
Couch-grasse heals green wounds. The decoction of the root is good for the
kidneys and (...) and Galen do agree, that the root stamped and laid upon
green wounds does heal them speedily.

The decoction thereof serves against griping pains of the belly, and
difficulty of making

Marcellus an old Author makes mention in his 26 chapter, That seven and
twenty knots of the Gramen, or Grass, boiled in wine till half be consumed,
pressed forth, strained, and given to drink to him that is troubled with the
strangurie, has so great virtue, that after the Patient has once begun to
make water without pain, it may not be given any more. But it must be given
with water only to such as have a Fever. By which words it appears, That
this knotted Grass was taken for that which is properly called Gramen, or
Agrostis; and has bin also commended against the stone and diseases of the
bladder.

The later Physicians do use the roots sometimes of this, and sometimes of the
other indifferently.

CHAP. 18. Of Sea Dogs-Grasse.
The Description.
1 THe Sea Dogs-grasse is very like unto the other before named: his leaves are
long and slender, and very thick compact together, set upon a knotty stalk
spiked at the top like the former. Also the root crambleth and creeps hither
and thither under the earth, occupying much ground by reason of his great
increase of roots.

This Grass (whereof Lobel gave the first figure and description, under the
name of Gramen geniculatum Caninum marinum) I conjecture to be that which
grows plentifully upon the banks in the (...) marshes by Dartford in Kent,
and most other salt places by the sea; as also in many banks and orchards about
London, and most other places far from the sea. Now Lobels figure being not
good, and the description not extant in any of his Latin Works; I cannot
certainly affirm any thing. Yet I think it fit to give you an exact
description of that I do probably judge to be it; and not only so, but I judge
it to be the same Grass that Bauhine in his Prodromus has set forth, page 17.
under the name of Gramen latifolium spicatriticea compacta. This is a very tall
Grass; for it sends forth a stalk commonly in good ground to the height of a
yard and an half: the leaves are large, stiff, and green, almost as big as
those of white Wheat; the which it also very much resembles in the ear, which
usually is some handful and an half long, little spokes standing by course
with their flat sides toward the straw. About the beginning of July it is hung
with little 1 Gramen Caninum marinum. Sea Dogs-grasse.
2 Gramen Caninum marinum (...). Sea Couch-grasse.
whitish yellow flowers such as Wheat has. The roots of this are like those of
the first described. This sometimes varies in the largeness of the whole
Plant, as also in the greatness, sparsednesse, and compactnesse of the ear..

2 The second Sea Dogs-grasse is according unto Lobel somewhat like the former:
his roots are more spreading and longer, dispersing themselves under the ground
farther than any of the rest. The leaves are like the former, thick bushed at
the top, with a cluster or bush of short thick leaves one folded within
another. The stalk and tuft is of a middle kind, between Ischaemon and the
common Couch-grasse.

The Place, Time, Names, Nature, and Virtues.
They grow on the sea shore at the same time that others do; and are so called
because they grow near the sea side. Their nature and virtues are to be
referred unto Dogs-grasse.

CHAP. 19. Of upright Dogs-Grasse.
The Description.
1 Upright Dogs-grasse, or Quich-grasse, by reason of his long spreading
ioynted roots is like unto the former, and has at every knot in the root
sundry strings of hairie substance, shooting into the ground at every joint as
it spreads: the stalks ly creeping, or rise but a little from the ground, and
at their tops have spokie pannicles far smaller than the common Couch-grasse.
By which notes of difference it may easily be discerned from the other kinds
of Dogs-grasse.

1 Gramen Caninum supinum. Upright Dogs-grasse.


2 Ladies Laces has leaves like unto Millet in fashion, rough and sharp
pointed like to the Reed, with many white veins or ribs, and silver streakes
running along through the midst of the leaves, fashioning the same like to
laces or ribbons wouen of white and green silk, very beautiful and fair to
behold: it grows unto the height of wild Pannicke, with a spoky top not very
much unlike, but more compact, soft, white, and chaffie. The root is small and
hairie, and white of color like unto the Medowgrasse.

2 Gramen (...). Lady-lace Grass.


The Place.
1 Upright Dogs-grasse grows in dunged grounds and fertile fields.

2 Lady-laces grows naturally in woody and hilly places of Sauoy, and answers
common Grass in his time of seeding.

It is kept and maintained in our English gardens, rather for pleasure than
virtue, which is yet known.

The Names.
Lobelius calls the later, Gramen sulcatum, and striatum, or Gramen pictum:
in English, the Furrowed Grass, the white Chamelion Grass, or streaked
Grass; and usually of our English women it is called Lady-laces, or painted
Grass: in French, Aiguillettes d'armes.

The Nature and Virtues.
The virtues are referred unto the Dogsgrasses.

CHAP. 20. Of Dew-Grasse.
The Description.
1 DEw-grasse has very hard and tough roots long and fibrous: the stalks are
great, of three or four cubits high, very rough and hairy, ioynted and kneed
like the common Reed: the leaves are large and broad like unto corn. The (...)
or ear is divided into sundry branches, chaffie, and of a purple color;
wherein is contained seed like Milium, wherewith the Germans do make pottage
and such like meat, as we in England do with Otemeale; and it is sent into
Middleborough and other towns of the Low Countries, in great quantity for the
same purpose, as Lobel has told me.

2 The second kind of Dew-grasse or Ischaemon is somewhat like the first kind
of Medowgrasse, resembling one the other in leaves and stalks, saving that the
crest or tust is spread or stretched out abroad like a Cocks foot set down upon
the ground, whereupon it was called Galli (...), by Apuleius. These tops are
clear and upright, of a glistering purple color, or rather violet; and it is
divided into four or five branches like the former Dew-grasse. The root
consists of a great many small fibers.

3 To these may fitly be added another Grass, which Clusius has judged to be
the medicinal Grass of the Ancients: and Lobel referres it to the Dogs
grasses, because it has a root iointed thick, and creeping like as the
Dogs-grasses: the stalks are some foot high, round, and of a purplish color:
but the top is very like to that of the last described, of a dark purple
color.

1 Gramen Mannae esculentum. Dew-grasse.
2 Ischaemon vulgar. Cocks-foot grass.


The Place and Time.
1 The first grows naturally in Germany, Bohemia, Italy, and in the
territories of (...) and Carinthia, as Matthiolus reports.

2 The second grows near unto rough banks of fields, as I have seen in the
hilly banks near Greenhithe in Kent. It differs not in time from those we
have spoken of.

3 Gramen dactiloides radice repent. Cocks-foot Grassewith (...) roots.


3 This grows plentifully in most parts of Spain and France; and it is
probable, that this was the grass that our Author found near Greenhithe in
Kent.

The Names.
1 The Germans call it (...): That is to say, Coeli ros; whereupon it was
called Gramen Mannae: it seems to be Milij syluestris spurium quoddam genus,
a certain wild or bastard kind of Millet. Leonicenus and Ruellius name it
Capriola, and Sanguinaria: some would have it to be Gramen (...) Plinij, but
because the description thereof is very short, nothing can be certainly
affirmed. But they are far deceived who think it be Coronopus, as some very
learned have set down: but every one in these days is able to control that
error. Lobel calls it Gramen Mannae esculentum, for that in Germany and
other parts, as (...) and Italy, they use to eat the same as a kind of
breadcorne, and also make pottage therewith as we do with Otemeale; for the
which purpose it is there sown as Corn, and sent into the Lowcountries, and
there sold by the pound. In English it may be called Manna-grasse, or
Dewgrasse; but more fitly Rice-grasse.

2 This is judged to be Ischaemon of Pliny; and Galli crus of Apuleius.

The (...)
These Grasses are astringent and drying, in (...) sweet like the common
Dogs-grasse.

The Virtues.
Apuleius says, if a plaster be made of this

As in the description I told you, this plant in his tuft or ear is divided
into sundry branches, Apuleius reports, If ye take that ear which is divided
only into three parts, it wonderfully helps the running or dropping of the
eyes, and those that begin to be bleare eyed, being bound about the neck, and
so used for certain days together, it turns the humors away from the weak
part.

Manna Grass, or Rice-grasse is said to be very good to be put into pultesses,
to discuss

The Cocks-foot Dogs-grasse is very good in all cases, as the other
Dogs-grasses are, and equally

CHAP. 21. Of diverse Cyperus Grasses.
The Description.
1 THe first of these has reasonable strong fibrous roots, from whence rise
stiff long and narrow leaves like those of other Cyperus Grasses: the stalks
also (as it is proper to all the plants of this kindred) are three square,
bearing at their tops some three brownish ears soft and chaffie like the rest
of this kind, and standing upright, and not hanging down as some others do.

2 This has pretty thick creeping black roots, from whence arise three
square stalks set with leaves shorter, yet broader than those of the last
described; and from the top of the stalk come forth three or four
foot-stalkes, whereupon do hang longish rough scaly and yellowish heads.

3 The roots of this are black, without smell, and somewhat larger than those
of the last 1 Gramen Cyperoides angustifolium majus. Great narrow leaued
Cyperus Grass.
2 Pseudocyperus. Bastard Cyperus.
3 Cyperus longus inodorus syluestris. Long Bastard Cyperus.
described: the 3 square stalk also is some two (...) high, bearing at the top
dispersedly round (...) heads somewhat like those of the wood Rush-grasse: the
leaves are somewhat sharp and triangular like those of the other Cyperus.

4 This Cyperus has creeping black roots, having here and there knotty
tuberous heads for the most part, putting up leaves like those of the last
described, as also a stalk bearing at the top long chaffy ears like to some
others of this kind.

5 This Cyperus Grass has pretty thick fibrous and black roots, from whence
arises a stalk some cubit high, pretty stiff, triangular, ioynted, set at
each joint with a large green leaf which at the bottom incompasses the
stalk, which is omitted in the figure. At the top of the stalk, as in the
true Cyperus, come forth two or three pretty large leaves, between which rise
up many small foot-stalkes very much branched, and bearing many black seeds
somewhat like Millet or rushes.

The Place and Time.
All these grow in ditches and (...) places, and are to be found with their
heads about the middle of Summer, and some of them sooner.

The Names.
The first of these by Lobel is called Gramen palustre majus.

2 This by Gesuer, Lobel, and Dodonaeus is called Pseudocyperus.

3 Lobel names this, Cyperus longus inodor us syluestris.

4 He also calls this, Cyperus (...) (...).

5 This is the Cyperus graminea (...) of Lobel and Pena: the Iuncus latus in
the Histor. Lugd. page 988. and the Pseudocyperus polycarpos of Thalius.

4 Cypcrus rotundus inodorus syluestris. Round Bastard Cyperus.
5 Cyperus gramineus miliaceus. Millet Cyperus grass.


The Temper and Virtue.
None of these are made use of in physic; but by their taste they seem to be
of a cold and astringent quality.

CHAP. 22. Of diverse other Grasses.
The Description.
1 THis Ote or Hauer-grasse, described by Clusius, has small creeping roots:
the stalks are some cubit high, slender ioynted, and set with short narrow
leaves: at the top of the stalk grows the ear, long, slender, and bending,
composed of downy husks containing a seed like to a naked Ote. The seed is
ripe in July. It grows in the mountainous and shadowie woods of Hungary,
Austria, and Bohemia. Our Author mistaking himself in the figure, and as much
in the title, gave the figure of this for Burnt Barley, with this title,
Hordeum Distichon. See the former edition, page 66.

2 I cannot omit this elegant Grass, found by M. Goodyer upon the walls of the
ancient city of Winchester, and not described as yet by any that I know of. It
has a fibrous and stringy root, from which arise leaves long and narrow, which
growing old become round as those of Spartum or Mat-weed: amongst these grassie
leaves there grows up a slender stalk some two foot long, scarce standing
upright, but often times hanging down the head or top of the ear: it has some
two ioints, and at each of these a pretty grassy leaf. The ear is almost a
foot in length, composed of many small and slender hairy tufts, which when they
come to maturitie look of a grayish or whitish color, and do very well
resemble a Capons tail; whence my friend, the first obseruer thereof, gave it
the title of Gramen (...), or Capons-taile Grass: by which name I received the
seed thereof, which sown, took root, and flourishes.

1 Gra. montanum avenaceum. Mountain Hauer-grasse.
2 Gramen murorum spica (...). Capon-taile Grass.


3 Next to this I think fit to place the Gramen Cristatum, or Cocks-combe
grass of (...). This Grass has for the root many white fibrous threads thick
packt together; the leaves are but short, about the bigness of the ordinary
meadow grass; the stalks are some cub it and half high, with some two or three
knots a piece: the leaves of the stalk are some four or five inches long: the
ear is small, longish, of a pale green color, somewhat bending, so that in
some sort it resembles the comb of a Cock, or the seed-vessell of that plant
which is called Caput Gallinaccum. This is ordinarily to be found in most
meadows about Mid-summer.

4 There is also commonly about the same time in our meadows to be found a
Grass growing to some cub it high, having a small stalk, at the top whereof
there grows an ear some inch and an half, or two inches long, consisting as
it were of two ranks of corn: it very much resembles Rieboth in shape and
color, and in his short bearded awnes, wherefore it may very fitly be termed
Gramen secalinum, or Rie-grasse. Yet is it not Gramen spica secalina which
Bauhine describes in the fifty seventh place, in his Prodromus, page 18. for
that is much taller, and the ear much larger than this of my description.

5 In diverse places about hedges, in July and August is to be found a fine
large tall Grass, which Bauhine (who also first described it) has under the
name of Gramen spica (...). This has stalks as tall as Rye, but not so
thick, neither are the leaves so broad: at the top of the stalk grow diverse
pretty little flattish ears consisting of two ranks of (...) husks or
seed-vessells, which have yellowish little flowers like to those of Wheat.

6 There is also commonly to be found about May or the beginning of June, in
meadows and such places that grass which in the Historia Lugdun. is set forth
under the (...) of Cramen Lanatum Daleschampij: the stalks and leaves are much
like the common (...) grass, but that they are more whitish and hairy; the
head or panicle is also soft and woolly, and it is commonly of a gray, or else
a murrie color.

7 There is to be found in some bogs in Summer time about the end of July a
pretty rushie grass some foot or better in height, the stalk is hard and
rushie, having some three ioints, at each whereof therecomes forth aleafe as in
other grasses; and out of the bosom of the two uppermost of these leaves comes
out a slender stalk being some 2 or 3 inches high, and at the top thereof
grows as in a little vmble a pretty white (...) flower; and at, or nigh to the
top of the maine stalk there grow three or four such sloures clustering
together upon little short and slender foot stalks: the leaves are but small,
and some handful or better long; the root I did not observe. This seems to
have some (...) with the (...) junceum aquaticum, formerly described in the
ninth chapter. I never found this but once, and that was in the company of M.
Thomas Smith, and M. James Clarke, Apothecaries of London; we riding into
Windsore Forest (...) the search of rare plants, and we found this upon a bogge
near the high way side at the (...) (...) the great park. I think it may
very fitly be called Gramen (...) leucanthemum: White (...) rush-grasse.

8 The last year at Margate in the Isle of Tenet, near to the sea side and by
the chalky (...) I observed a pretty little grass which from a small white
fibrous root sent up a number of (...) of an unequal height; for the longest,
which were those that lay partly spread upon the (...), were some handful high,
the other that grew straight up were not so much; and of this, one inch and
half was taken up in the spike or ear, which was no thicker than the rest of
the stalk, and seemed nothing else but a plain smooth stalk, unless you
looked upon it earnestly, and then you might perceive it to be like Darnell
grass: wherefore in the Iournal! that I wrote of this Simpling voyage, I called
it page 3. Gramen parvum marinum spica Loliacea. I judge it to be the (...)
that Bauhinc in his Prodromus, page 19 has set forth under the name of Gramen
(...) (...) spica simplici. It may be called in English, Dwarf Darnell Grass.

9 The Darnell grass that I compared the ear of this last described unto, is
not the Gramen (...) (which our Author called Darnel-grasse) but another grass
growing in most places with stalks about some span high, but they seldom
stand upright, the ear is made just like that which hereafter chap. 58. is
called Lolium rubrum, Red Darnell, of which I judge this a variety, differing
little therefrom but in smallness of growth.

10 Upon Hampsted heath I have often observed a small grass whose longest
leaves are seldom above two or three inches high, and these leaves are very
green, small, and perfectly round like the Spartum Austriacum, or
Feather-grasse: I could never find any stalk or ear upon it: wherefore I
have brought it into the Garden to observe it better. In the forementioned
Iournall, page 33. you may find it under the name of Gramen Spartium
capillacco folio minimum. It may be this is that grass which Bauhine set forth
in his Prodromus, page 11. under the title of Gramen sparteum Monspeliacum
capillacco folio minimum. I have thought good in (...) place to explain my
meaning by these two names to such as are studious of plants, which may happen
to light by chance (for they were not intended for public) upon our Iournall,
that they need not doubt of my meaning.

11 I must not pass over in silence two other Grasses, which for any thing
that I know are strangers with us, the one I have seen whith M. Parkinson, and
it is set forth by Bauhine, page 30. of his Prodromus. The other by Lobell in
the second part of his Adversaria, page 468. The first (which Bauhine fitly
calls Gramen alopecuriodes spica aspera, and thinks it to be Gram. Echinatum
Daleschampij, described Hist. Lugd. page 432.) has a fibrous and white root,
from which arises a stiff stalk divided by many knots, or knees: the leaves
are like to the other fox-taile grasses, but grecner: the ear is rough, of
some inch in length, and grows as it were upon one side of the stalk: the
ear at first is green, and shows yellowish little flowers in August.

12 This other Grass which Lobell in the quoted place figures and describes by
the name of Gramen Scoparium Ischaemi panniculis Gallicum, has roots some
cubit long, slender, and very stiff, (for of these are made the head brushes
which are vulgarly used) the straw is slender, and some cubit high, being here
and there ioynted like to other Grasses: the top has four or five ears
standing after the manner of Cocks foot Grass, whereof it is a kind. It
grows naturally about Orleance, and may be called in English, Brush-grasse.

CHAP. 23. Of Cotton Grass.
The Description.
1 THis strange Cotton grass, which L'Obelius has comprehended under the
kinds of Rushes; notwithstanding that it may pass with the Rushes, yet I
find in mine own experience, that it does rather resemble grass than rushes,
and may indifferently be taken for either, for that it does participate of
both. The stalk is small and rushy, garnished with many grassy leaves along
the same, bearing at the top a bush or tuft of most pleasant down or cotton
like unto the most fine and soft white silk. The root is very tough, small and
threddy.

2 This Water Gladiole, or grassy Rush, of all others is the fairest and most
pleasant to behold, and serves very well for the decking and trimming up of
houses, because of the beauty and braueric thereof: consisting of sundry small
leaves, of a white color mixed with carnation, growing at the top of a bare
and naked stalk, five or six foot long, and sometime more. The leaves are long
and flaggy, not much unlike the common reed. The root is threddy, and not long.

1 Gramen Tomentarium. Cotton Grass.
2 Gladiolus palustris Cordi. Water Gladiole.


The place and time.
1 Cotton grass grows upon bogs and such like moorish places, and it is to
be seen upon the bogs on Hampsted heath. It grows likewise in Highgate park
near London.

2 Water Gladiole grows in standing pooles, motes, and water ditches. I found
it in great plenty being in company with a Worshipful Gentleman Master Robert
Wilbraham, at a Village fifteen miles from London called Bushey. It grows
likewise near Redriffe by London, and many other places: the season answers
all others.

The Names.
1 Gramen Tomentosum is called likewise Iuncus bombicinus: of Cordus, Linum
pratense, and Gnaphalium Hicronymi Bockij. In English Cotton grass.

2 Water Gladiole is called of L' Obelius, Iuncus Cyperoides floridus
paludosus, Flowring Cypress Rush: Iuncus, for that his stalk is like the
rush: Cyperoides, because his leaves resemble Cyperus: Floridus, because it
has on the top of every stalk a fine vmble or tuft of small flowers, in
fashion of the Lilly of Alexandria, the which it is very like, and therefore I
had rather call it Lilly graffe.

The nature and virtues.
Cordus says, That Iuncus bombicinus sodden in wine, and so taken, helps the
throws and gripings of the belly, that women have in their childing.

There be also sundry kinds of Grasses wholly unknown, or at the least not
remembered of the old Writers, whereof some few are touched in name only by the
late and new Writers: now for as much as they have only named them, I will
refer the better consideration of them to the industry and diligence of
painful searchers of nature, and prosecute my purposed labor, to unfold the
diverse sorts and manifold kinds of Cyperus, Flags, and Rushes: and because
that there is added unto many of the Grasses before mentioned, this difference,
Cyperoides, that is to say, resembling Cyperus, I thought it therefore
expedient to join next unto the history of grasses, the discourse of Cyperus,
and his kinds, which are as follow.

CHAP. 24. Of English Galingale.
1 Cyperus longus. English Galingale
2 Cyperus rotundus vulgaris. Round Galingale.


The Description.
1 ENglish Galingale has leaves like unto the common Reed, but lesser and
shorter. His stalk is three square, two cubits high: upon whose top stand
sundry branches, every little branch bearing many small chaffy spikes. The root
is black and very long, creeping hither and thither, occupying much ground by
reason of his spreading: it is of a most sweet and pleasant smell when it is
broken.

2 The common round Cyperus is like the former in leaves and tops, but the
roots are here and there knotty and round, and not altogether so well smelling
as the former.

3 There is also another Cyperus which grows in Syria and Egypt, whose roots
are round, blackish, and large, many hanging upon one string, and having a
quick and aromaticke smell: the leaves and spokyn-tufts resemble the former.

4 There is said to be another kind of this last described, which is lesser,
and the roots are blacker, and it grows in Creet, now called Candy.

5 There is also another round Cyperus which grows about ditches and the
banks of Rivers whereas the salt water sometimes comes: the roots of this are
hard and black without smell, many hanging sometimes upon one string: the
stalk and leaves are much like the former, but the heads unlike, for they are
rough and blackish, about the bigness of a filbert, and hang some six or seven
at the top of the stalk. It flowers in July and August.

5 Cyperus rotundus littorcus. Round Salt-marsh Cyperus.


The place and time.
1 2 The first and second of these grow naturally in fenny grounds, yet will
they prosper exceedingly in gardens, as experience has taught us.

3 4 The former of these grows naturally in Syria and Egypt, the later in
Candy.

5 This grows plentifully in the Marshes below Grauesend, in Shipey, Tenet,
and other places.

The name in general.
Cyperus is called in Greek, (...) Or (...): of the Latins as well Cypirus as
Cyperus: of some Iuncus quadratus: of Pliny Iuncus Angulosus, and Triangularis:
of others Aspalathum and (...): in French Souchet: in Dutch Galgan: in Spanish
Iunco odorosa: By us Cyperus and English Galangall.

The names in particular.
1 This is called Cyperus longus, and Cyperus longus Oderatior: in English,
Common Cyperus, and English Gallingall. 2 This is called Cyperus rotundus
vulgaris, Round English Galangall. 3 Cyperus rotundus Cyriacus, or Aegyptiacus,
Syrian or Egyptian round Cyperus. 4 Cyperus minor Creticus, Candy round
Cyperus. 5 Cyperus rotundus inodorus Littoreus, Round Salt-marsh Cyperus, or
Galingale.

The nature.
Dioscorides says, That Cyperus has an heating quality. Galen says, The
roots are most effectual in medicine, and are of an heating and drying
quality: and some do reckon it to be hot and dry in the second degree.

The virtues.
It makes a most profitable drink to break and expel

If it be boiled in wine, and drunk, it provoke urine, drives forth the
stone, and brings

The same taken as aforesaid, is a remedy against the stinging and poison of
Serpents. Fernelius says, The root of Cyperus used in Baths helps the
coldness and stopping of the

He writes also, that it increases blood by warming the body, and makes good
digestion;

The powder of Cyperus does not only dry up all moist ulcers either of the
mouth, privy members, Fernelius.

CHAP. 25. Of Jtalian Trasi, or Spanish Galingale.
1 Cyperus Esculentus sine Caul and flore. Italian Trasi, or Spanish
Galingall, without stalk and flower.
2 Cyperus Esculentus, sine Trasi Italorum. Italian Trasi, or Spanish Galingall.


1 THe Italian Trasi, which is here termed Spanish Galingale, is a plant that
has many small roots, hanging at stringy fibers like as our ordinary Dropwort
roots do, but they are of the bigness of a little Medlar, and have one end
flat and as it were crowned like as a Medlar, and it has also sundry streakes
or lines, seeming to divide it into several parts; it is of a brownish color
without, and white within; the taste thereof is sweet almost like a Chestnut.
The leaves are very like those of the garden Cyperus, and never exceed a cubit
in length. Stalks, flowers, or seed it has none, as John Pona an Apothecary
of Verona, who diligently observed it nigh to that city whereas it naturally
grows, affirms; but he says there grows with it much wild Cyperus, which as
he judges has given occasion of their error who give it the stalks and
flowers of Cyperus, or English Galingale, as Matthiolus and others have done.
It is increased by setting the roots first steeped in water, at the beginning
of November. I have here given you the figure of it without the stalk,
according to Pona, and with the stalk, according to Matthiolus and others.

The Names.
The Italian Trasi is called in Greek by Theophrastus (...) Hist. plant. 4.
cap. 10. as Fabius Columna has proved at large: Pliny terms it Anthalium: the
later writers Cyperus Esculentus, and Dulcichinum: The Italians, Trasi, and
Dolzolini, by which names in Italy they are cried up and down the streets, as
Oranges and Lemmons are here.

The (...) and virtues.
The milk or cream of these Bulbous roots being drunk, mundifies the breast
and lungs,

The same cream is also good to be drunk against the heat and sharpness of
the urine, especially

CHAP. 26. Of the true Galingale, the greater and the lesser.
1 Galanga major. The greater Galingale.
2 Galanga minor. The lesser Galingale.


THe affinity of name and nature has induced me in this place to insert these
two, the bigger and the lesser Galingale; first therefore of the greater.

The Description.
1 The great Galingale, whose root only is in use, and brought to us from Iava
in the East Indies, has flaggy leaves some two cubits high, like these of
Cats-taile or Reed-mace: the root is thick and knotty, resembling those of our
ordinary flagges, but that they are of a more whitish color on the inside, and
not so large. Their taste is very hot and biting, and they are somewhat reddish
on the outside.

2 The lesser growing in China, and commonly in shops called Galingale, without
any addition, is a small root of a brownish red color both within and without;
the taste is hot and biting, the smell aromaticall, the leaves (if we may
believe Garcias ab Horto) are like those of Myrtles.

The Names.
1 The first is called by Matthiolus, Lobell, and others, Galanga major. Some
think it to be the Acorus of the Ancients: and Pena and Lobell in their Stirp.
Aduers. question whither it be not the Acorus Galaticus of Dioscorides. But
howsoever, it is the Acorus of the shops, and by many used in Mithridate in
stead of the true. The Indians call it Lancuaz.

2 The lesser is called Galanga, and Galanga minor, to distinguish it from the
precedent. The Chinois call it (...): the Indians Lancuaz: we in England term
it Galingale, without any addition.

Their temper and virtue.
These roots are hot and dry in the third degree, but the lesser are somewhat
the hotter.

They strengthen the stomach, and mitigate the pains thereof arising from
cold and flatulencies.

The smell, especially of the lesser, comforts the too cold brain; the
substance thereof being

They are useful against the Collicke proceeding of flatulencies, and the
flatulent affects of

CHAP. 27. Of Turmericke.
THis also challenges the next place, as belonging to this Tribe, according to
Dioscorides; yet the root, which only is brought us, and in use, does more on
the outside resemble Ginger, but that it is yellower, and not so flat, but
rounder. The inside thereof is of a Saffron color, the taste hot and
bitterish; it is said to have leaves larger than those of Millet, and a leafie
stalk. There is some variety of these roots, for some are longer, and others
rounder, and the later are the hotter, and they are brought over often times
together with Ginger.

The place.
It grows naturally in the East Indies about Calecut, as also at Goa.

The Names.
This without doubt is the Cyperus Indicus of Dioscorides, Lib. 1. Cap. 4. It
is now vulgarly by most Writers, and in shops, called by the name of Terra
merita, and Curcuma: yet some term it Crocus Indicus, and we in English call
it Turmericke.

The temperature and virtues.
This root is certainly hot in the third degree, and has a quality to open
obstructions, and it

CHAP. 28. Of Zedoarie.
Zerumbeth, sieve Zedoaria rotunda. Round Zedoarie.


ZEdoarie is also a root growing naturally in the woods of Malavar about
Calecut and Cananor in the Indies; the leaves thereof are larger than Ginger,
and much like them; the root is also as large, but consisting of parts of
different figures, some long and small, others round; their color is white,
and often times brownish on the inside, and they have many fibers coming out of
them, but they are taken away together with the outward rind before they come
to us. These roots have a strong medicine-like smell, and somewhat an
ungrateful taste.

The Names.
Some call the long parts of these roots Zedoaria, and the round (whose figure
we here give you) Zerumbeth, and make them different, whenas indeed they are
but parts of the same root, as Lobell and others have well observed. Some make
Zedoaria and Zerumheth different, as Auicen: others confound them and make them
one, as Rhases and Serapio. Some think it to be (...) of Aegineta: but that is
not so; for he says, (...) It is an Aromaticke, and therefore chiefly mixed
in ointments: which is as much as if he should have said, That it was put into
ointments for the smells sake, which in this is no ways grateful, but rather
the contrary.

The temperature and virtues.
It is hot and dry in the second degree; it discusses flatulencies, and fattens
by a certain hidden

It kills all sorts of worms, and is much used in Antidotes against the
plague, and such like

CHAP. 29. Of Rushes.
I Do not here intend to trouble you with an accurate distinction and
enumeration of Rushes; for if I should, it would be tedious to you, laborious
to me, and beneficial to neither. Therefore I will only describe and reckon
up the chief and more note-worthy of them, beginning with the most usual and
common.

The Description.
1 The roots of our common Rushes are long and hairy, spreading largely in the
ground, from which, as from one entire tuft, proceed a great company of small
rushes; so exceedingly well known, that I shall not need to spend much time
about the description thereof.

2 There be sundry sorts of Rushes besides the former, whose pictures are not
here expressed, and the rather, for that the general description of Rushes, as
also their common use and service, are sufficient to lead us to the knowledge
of them. This great Water-Grasse or Bul-Rush, in stead of leaves brings forth
many strait twiggie shoots or springs, which be round, smooth, sharp pointed,
and without knots. Their tuft or flower breaks forth a little beneath the
top, upon the one side of the Rush, growing upon little short stems like Grape
clusters, wherein is contained the seed after the fashion of a spears point.
The roots be slender and full of strings. Pliny, and Theophrastus before him,
affirm that the roots of the Rush do die every year, and that it grows
again of the seed. And they affirm likewise that the male is barren, and
grows again of the young shoots; yet I could never observe any such thing.

3 There grows a Rush to the thicknes of a Reed, and to some two yards and an
half, or three yards high, in diverse fenny grounds in this kingdom; it is
very porous and light, and they usually make mats, and bottom chaires
therewith. The seeds are contained in reddish tufts, breaking out at the top
thereof. The roots are large and ioynted, and it grows not unless in waters.

4 (...) acutus, or the sharp Rush, is likewise common and well known; not
much differing from Iuncus laeuis, but harder, rougher, and sharper pointed,
fitter to straw houses and chambers than any of the rest; for the others are so
soft and pithy, that they turn to dust and filth with much treading; where
contrariwise this rush is so hard that it will last sound much longer.

5 There is also another pretty small kind of Rush growing to some foot in
height, having smooth stalks which end in a head like to that of the ordinary
Horse-taile. This rush has also one little (...) toward the bottom thereof.
It grows in watery places, but not so frequently as the former.

1 (...) laeuis. Common Rushes.
4 Iuncus acutus. Sharp Rush, or hard Rush.
3 Iuncus aquaticus maximus. Great Water-Rush, or Bul-Rush.


The place.
1 Iuncus laeuis grows in fertile fields, and meadows that are somewhat
moist.

2 3 5 Grow in standing pooles, and by rivers sides in sundry places.

4 Iuncus acutus grows upon dry and barren grounds, especially near the
furrows of plowed land. I need not speak of their time of growing, they being
so common as they are.

The Names.
The Rush is called in Greek (...) in Latin Iuncus: in high Dutch Binken: in
low Dutch Biesen: in Italian Giunco: in Spanish Iunco: in French Ionc: in
English Rushes.

2 3 The Grecians have called the Bull-Rush (...). The greater are commonly in
many places termed Bumbles.

1 Iuncus laeuis is that Rush which Dioscorides called (...).

4 Iuncus acutus is called in Greek (...): In Dutch (...) Bresen.

5 This is called by Lobell, Iuncus aquaticus minor Capitulis Equiseti: By
Daleschampius, Iuncus clauatus, or Club-Rush.

The Nature and virtues.
These Rushes are of a dry nature.

The seed of Rushes dried at the fire, and drunk with wine alayed with water,
stays the (...)

Galen yields this reason thereof, because that their temperature consists
of an earthy essence, Galen yields the reason as before.

The tender leaves that be next the root make a convenient ointment against the
bitings of the Phalangium.

The seed of the Bull-Rush is most soporiferous, and therefore the greater care
must be had in

CHAP. 30. Of Reeds.
The kinds.
OF Reeds the Ancients have set down many sorts. (...) has brought them all
first into two principal kinds, and those has he divided again into more
sorts. The two principal are these, Auleticae, or Tibiales Arundines, and
Arundo vallatoria. Of these and the rest we will speak in their proper places.

1 Arundo vallatoria. Common Reed.
2 Arundo Cypria. Cypress Canes.


The Description.
1 THe common Reed has long strawie stalks full of knotty joints or knees
like unto corn, whereupon do grow very long rough flaggy leaves. The tuft or
spoky ear does grow at the top of the stalks, brown of color, barren and
without seed, and does resemble a bush of feathers, which turns into fine
down or cotton which is carried away with the wind. The root is thick, long,
and full of strings, dispersing themselves far abroad, whereby it does greatly
increase. Bauhinus reports, That he received from D. Cargill a Scottishman a
Reed whose leaves were a cubit long, and two or three inches broad, with some
nerves apparently running along the leaf; these leaves at the top were
divided into two, three, or four points or parts; as yet I have not observed
it. Bauhine terms it Arundo Anglica (...) in (...) dissectis.

1 The Cypress Reed is a great Reed having stalks exceeding long, sometimes
twenty or thirty foot high, of a woody substance, set with very great leaves
like those of Turkey wheat. It carries at the top the like downie tuft that
the former does.

3 Arundo farcta. Stuffed Canes.
4 Calamus sagittalis Lobelij. Small stuffed Reed.
5 Nastos Clusij. Turkey walking staves.
6 Arundo scriptoria. Turkey writing Reeds.


3 These Reeds Lobelius has seen in the Low countries brought from
Constantinople, where, (...) it (...) said, the people of that country have
procured them (...) the parts of the Adriaticke sea side where they do grow.
They are full stuffed with a spongeous substance, so that there is no hollownesse
in the same, as in Canes and other Reeds, except here and there certain small
pores or passages of the bigness of a pinnes point; in manner such a pith as
is to be found in the Bull-Rush, but more firm and solid.

4 The second differs in smalnesse, and that it will wind open in fleakes,
otherwise they are very like, and are used for darts, arrows, and such like.

5 This great sort of Reeds or Canes has no particular description to answer
your expectation, for that as yet there is not any man which has written
thereof, especially of the manner of growing of them, either of his own
knowledge or report from others: so that it shall (...) that ye know that that
great cane is used especially in Constantinople and thereabout, of aged and
wealthy Citisens, and also Noblemen and such great personages, to make them
walking staves of, caruing them at the top with sundry Scutchions, and pretty
toys of imagerie for the beautifying of them; and so they of the better sort
do garnish them both with silver and gold, as the figure does most lively set
forth unto you.

6 In like manner the smaller sort has not as yet been seen growing of any
that have been curious in herbarisme, whereby they might set down any
certainty thereof; only it has been used in Constantinople and thereabout,
even to this day, to make writing pens withal, for the which it does very
fitly serve, as also to make pipes, and such like things of pleasure.

The place.
The common Reed grows in standing waters and in the edges and borders of
rivers almost every where: and the other being the angling Cane for Fishers
grows in Spain and those hot Regions.

The time.
They flourish and flower from April to the end of September, at what time they
are cut down for the use of man, as all do know.

The Names.
The common Reed is called Arundo and Harundo vallatoria: in French Roseau: in
Dutch (...): in Italian Can a far siepo: of Diosc. Phragmitis: in English,
Reed.

Arundo Cypria; or after Lobelius, Arundo Donax: in French Can: in Spanish
Cana: in Italian, Calami a far Connochia: In English, Pole reed, and Cane, or
Canes.

The nature.
Reeds are hot and dry in the second degree, as Galen says.

The virtues.
The roots of reed stamped small draw forth thorns and splinters (...) in any
part of man's body.

The same stamped with vinegar ease all luxations and members out of joint.

And likewise stamped they heal hot and (...) inflammations. The ashes of them
mixed

The great Reed or Cane is not used in physic, but is esteemed to make slears
for (...),

CHAP. 31. Of Sugar Cane.
The Description.
1 SVgar Cane is a pleasant and profitable Reed, having long stalks seven or
eight foot high, ioynted or kneed like unto the great Cane; the leaves come
forth of every joint on every side of the stalk one, like unto wings, long,
narrow, and sharp pointed. The Cane it self, or stalk is not hollow as other
Canes or Reeds are, but full, and stuffed (...) a spongeous substance in taste
exceeding sweet. The root is great and long, creeping along within the upper
crust of the earth, which is likewise sweet and pleasant, but less hard or
woody than other Canes or Reeds; from the which there does shoot forth many
young siens, which are cut away from the maine or mother plant, because they
should not draw away the nourishment from the old stock, and so get unto
themselves a little moisture, or else some substance not much worth, and cause
the stock to be barren, and themselves little the better; which shoots do
serve for plants to set abroad for increase.

Arundo Saccharina. Sugar Cane.


The place.
The Sugar Cane grows in many parts of Europe at this day, as in Spain,
Portugal, Olbia, and in Prouence. It grows also in Barbary, generally almost
every where in the Canarie Islands, and in those of Madera, in the East and
West Indies, and many other places. My self did plant some shoots thereof in
my garden, and some in Flanders did the like: but the coldness of our clymate
made an end of mine, and I think the Flemings will have the like profit of
their labor.

The time.
This Cane is planted at any time of the year in those hot countries where it
does naturally grow, by reason they (...) no frosts to hurt the young shoots at
their first planting.

The Names.
The Latins have called this plant Arundo Saccharina, with this additament,
Indica, because it was first known or brought from India. Of some it is called
Calamus Saccharatus: in English Sugar Cane: in Dutch (...).

The Nature and virtues.
The Sugar or juice of this Reed is of a temperate quality; it dries and
cleanses the stomach, makes smooth the roughness of the breast and lungs,
clears the voice, and puts away hoarsenesse, the cough, and all (...) and
bitterness, as Isaac says in Dictis.

The use.
Of the juice of this Reed is made the most pleasant and profitable sweet,
called Sugar, whereof is made infinite confections, confectures, syrups, and
such like, as also preserving and conseruing of sundry fruits, herbs, and
flowers, as Roses, Violets, Rosemary flowers, and such like, which still
retain with them the name of Sugar, as Sugar Roset, Sugar violet, etc. The
which to write of would require a peculiar volume, and not pertinent unto this
history, for that it is not my purpose to make of my book a Confectionarie, a
Sugar Bakers furnace, a Gentlewomans preserving pan, nor yet an Apothecaries
shop or Dispensatorie; but only to touch the chiefest matter that I purposed
to handle in the beginning, that is, the nature, properties, and descriptions
of plants. Notwithstanding I think it not amiss to show unto you the ordering
of these reeds when they be new gathered, as I received it from the mouth of an
Indian my servant: he says, They cut them in small pieces, and put them into a
trough made of one whole tree, wherein they put a great stone in manner of a
millstone, whereunto they tie a horse, buffle, or some other beast which
draws it round: in which trough they put those pieces of Canes, and so crush
and grind them as we do the barks of trees for Tanners, or apples for Cider.
But in some places they use a great wheel, wherein slaves do tread and walk
as dogs do in turning the spit: and some others do feed as it were the bottom
of the said wheel, wherein are some sharp or hard things which do cut and
crush the Canes into powder. And some likewise have found the invention to
turn the wheel with water works, as we do our iron mills. The Canes being
thus brought into dust or powder, they put them into great cauldrons with a
little water, where they boil until there be no more sweetness left in the
crushed reeds. Then do they strain them through mats and such like things,
and put the liquor to boil again unto the consistence of honey, which being
cold is like unto sand both in show and handling, but somewhat softer; and so
afterward it is carried into all parts of Europe, where it is by the Sugar
Bakers artificially purged and (...) to that whiteness as we see.

CHAP. 32. Of Flowring Reed.
Arundo florida. Flowring Reed.


The Description.
FLourishing Reed has a thick and fat stalk of four or five foot high,
great below near the ground, and smaller toward the top, taper-wise: whereupon
do grow very fair broad leaves full of ribs or sinews like unto Plantaine, in
shape representing the leaves of white Hellebor, or the great Gentian, but much
broader and larger every way: at the top of which stalks do grow phantasticke
flowers of a red or vermilion color; which being faded, there follow round,
rough, and prickly knobs, like those of Sparganium, or water-Burre, of a brown
color, and from the middle of those knobs three small leaves. The seed
contained in those knobs is exceeding black, of a perfect roundnesse, of the
bigness of the smallest pease. The root is thick, knobby, and tuberous, with
certain small threads fixed thereto. There is a variety of this, having flowers
of a yellow or Saffron color, with red spots.

The place.
It grows in Italy in the garden of Padua, and many other places of those hot
regions. My self have planted it in my garden diverse times, but it never came
to flowring or seeding, for that it is very impatient to endure the injury of
our cold clymate. It is a native of the West Indies.

The time.
It must be set or sown in the beginning of April, in a pot with fine earth,
or in a bed made with horsedung, and some earth strawed thereon, in such manner
as Cucumbers and Muske-Melons are.

The Names.
The name Arundo Indica is diversely attributed to sundry of the Reeds, but
principally unto this, called of Lobelius, Cannacorus: of others, Arundo
florida, and Harundo florida: in English, the Flowring Reed.

The Nature and virtues.
There is not any thing set down as touching the temperature and virtues of
this Flourishing Reed, either of the Ancients, or of the new or later Writers.

CHAP. 33. Of Paper Reed.
PAper Reed has many large flaggie leaves somewhat triangular and smooth, not
much unlike those of Cats-taile, rising immediately from a tuft of roots compact
of many strings, among st the which it shoots up two or three naked stalks,
square, and rising some six or seven cubits high above the water; at the top
whereof there stands a tuft or bundle of chaffie threads set in comely order,
resembling a tuft of flowers, but barren and void of seed.

Papyrus Nilotica. Paper Reed.


The place.
This kind of Reed grows in the Rivers about Babylon, and near the city
Alcaire, in the river Nilus, and such other places of those countries.

The time.
The time of springing and flourishing answers that of the common Reed.

The Names.
This kind of Reed which I have Englished Paper Reed, or Paper plant, is the
same (as I do read) that Paper was made of in Egypt, before the invention of
paper made of linen clouts was found out. It is thought by men of great
learning and understanding in the Scriptures, and set down by them for truth,
that this plant is the same Reed mentioned in the second chapter of Exodus;
whereof was made that basket or cradle, which was dawbed within and without
with (...) of that country, called Bitumen Iudaicum, wherein Moses was put
being committed to the water, when Pharaoh gave commandment that all the male
children of the Hebrews should be drowned.

The nature, virtues, and use.
The roots of Paper Reed do nourish, as may appear by the people of Egypt,
which

The ashes burned assuage and consume hard apostumes, tumors, and corrasiue
ulcers in any

The burnt paper made hereof does perform those effects more forcibly.

The stalks hereof have a singular use and privilege in opening the channels
or hollow passages

The people about Nilus do use to burn the leaves and stalks, but especially
the roots.

The frailes wherein they put Raisins and Figs are sometimes made hereof; but
generally with Spartum, described in the (...) Chapter.

CHAP. 34. Of Mat-Weed.
The kinds.
There be diverse kinds of Mat-Weeds, as shall be declared in their several
descriptions.

The Description.
THe herb Spartum, as Pliny says, growerh of it self, and sends forth from
the root a multitude of slender rushie leaves of a cubit high, or higher, tough
and pliable, of a whitish color, which in time drawetll narrow together,
making the flat leaf to become round, as is the Rush. The stub or stalk
thereof bears at the top certain feather-like tufts coming forth of a
sheath or husk, among the which chaffie husks is contained the seed, long and
chaffie. The root consisterh of many strings folding one within another, by
means whereof it comes to the form of a turfe or hassocke.

1 Spartum Plinij Clufio. Plinies Mat-Weed.
2 Spartum alterum Plinij. Hooded Mat-Weed.


2 The second likewise Pliny describes to have a long stalk not much unlike
to Reed, but lesser, whereupon do grow many grassie leaves, rough and pliant,
hard in handling as are the Rushes. A spokie chaffie tuft grows at the top of
the stalk, coming forth of a hood or sinewie sheath, such as encloseth the
flowers of Onions, Leekes, Narcissus, and such like, before they come to
flowring, with seed and roots like the precedent.

3 English Mat-weed has a rushie root, deeply creeping and growing in heaps
of sand and gravel, from the which arise stiff and sharp pointed leaves a
(...) and a half long, of a whitish color, very much resembling those of
Camels hay. The stalk grows to the height of a cubit or more, whereupon does
grow a spike or ear of some five or six inches long, somewhat resembling Rye;
it is the thickness of a finger in the midst, and smaller toward both the
ends. The seed is brown, as small as Canarie seed, but round, and somewhat
sharp at the one end. Of this plant neither Sheep nor any other Cattle will
raste or eat.

4 The other English Mat-Weed is like unto the former, saving that the roots of
this are long, not unlike to Dogs Grass, but do not thrust deep into the
ground, but creep only under the upper crust of the earth. The tuft or ear
is (...), and more resembling the head of Canary seed than that of Rye.

5 Lobell gives a figure of another smaller Rush, leaued Spartum, with small
heads, but he has not described it in his Latin Works, (...) I can say
nothing certainly of it.

6 To this kindred must be added the Feathered Grass, though not partaking
with the former in place of growth. Now it has many small leaves of a foots
length round, green, and sharp pointed, not much in form unlike the first
described Mat-weed, but much less: amongst these leaves rise up many small
stalks not exceeding the height of the leaves, which bear a spike unlike the
forementioned Mat-weeds, having 3 or four (...) ending in, or sending up very
fine white Feathers, resembling the smaller sort of feathers of the wings of
the Bird of Paradise. The root consists of many small grassie sibres.

3 Spartum Anglicanum. English Mat-Weed, or Helm.
4 Spartum Anglicanum alterum. Small English Mat-Weed, or Helm.
6 Spartum Austriacum. Feather-Grasse.


The place.
1 2 These two grow in diverse places of Spain.

3 I being in company with M. Tho. Hicks, William Broad, and three other London
(...) besides, in August, 1632, to find out rare plants in the Island of
Tenet, found this bigger English one in great plenty, as soon as we came to
the sea side, going between Margate and Sandwich.

4 5 These it may be grow also upon our Coasts; howeuer they grow near the sea
side in diverse parts of the Low Countries.

6 This elegant Plant Clusius first observed to grow naturally in the
mountains nigh to the Bathes of Baden in Germany, and in diverse places of
Austria and Hungary. It is nourished for the beauty in sundry of our English
gardens.

The time.
These bear their heads in the middle, and some in the later end of Summer.

The Names.
1 This is called Spartum primum Plinij; that is, the first Mat-Weed described
by Pliny: in Spain they call it Sparto: the French in Prouence term it Olpho.

2 This is Spartum alterum Plinij, Pliny his second Mat-Weed, or Hooded
Mat-weed, it is called Albardin in Spain.

3 This is Spartum tertium of Clusius, and Gramen Sparteum secundum
Schaenanthinum of Taber. Our Author gave Clusius his figure for his first, and
Tabernamontanus figure for the second Spartum Anglicanum; but I will think
them both of one plant (though Bauhine distinguish them) until some shall make
the contrary manifest. This the Dutch call (...); and our English in Tenet,
Helm. Turner calls it Sea-Bent.

4 This is Spartum herba 4 Batavicum of Clusius; Gramen Sparteum, or Iunci
Spartium of Tabern. and our Author gave Tabern. figure in the 23 Chapter of
this Book under the title of Iuncus marinus gramineus; Lobell calls it Spartum
nostras alterum.

5 Lobell calls this Spartum nostras parvum.

6 Clusius calls this Spartum Austriacum; Daleschampius, Gramen pinnatum; we in
England call it Gramen plumosum, or Feathered Grass.

The temperature, virtues, and use.
These kinds of grassie or rather rushie Reed have no use in physic, but
serve to make Mats, Turner affirms, That they made hats of the English one in
Northumberland in his time.

They do likewise in sundry places of the Islands of Madera, Canaria, Saint
Thomas, and other

The Feather-Grasse is worn by sundry Ladies and Gentlewomen in stead of a
Feather, the which it exquisitely resembles.

CHAP. 35. Of Camels Hay.
1 Scoenanthum Camels Hay.
2 Scoenanthum adulterinum. Bastard Camels Hay.


The Description.
1 CAmels Hay has leaves very like unto Mat-Weed or Helm; his roots are many,
in quantity mean, full of small hairs or threads proceeding from the bigger
Root deeply growing in the ground, having diverse long stalks like Cyperus
Grass, set with some smaller leaves even unto the top, where do grow many
small chaffie tufts or pannicles like unto those of the wild Oats, of a
reasonable good smell and savor, when they are broken, like unto a Rose, with
a certain biting and nipping of the tongue.

2 Francis Penny, of famous memory, a good Physician and skillful Herbarist,
gathered on the coast of the Mediterranean sea, between Aigues Mortes and
Pescaire, this beautiful plant, whose roots are creeping, and stalks and
leaves resemble Squinanth. The flowers are soft, pappous, and thick compact,
and some five or six inches in length, like to Fox-taile; they in color
resemble white silk or silver. Thus much Lobell. Our Author described this in
the first place, Chapter 23. under Iuncus Marinus Gramineus, for so Lobell also
calls it.

The place.
1 This grows in Africa, Nabathaea, and Arabia, and is a stranger in these
Northern Regions.

2 The place of the second is mentioned in the description.

The time.
Their time answers the other Reeds and Flags.

The Names.
1 Camels Hay is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Iuncus odoratus, and
Scoenanthum: in shops Squinanthum, that is, Flos Iunci: in French, Pasteur de
Chammeau: in English, Camels Hay, and Squinanth.

2 This Lobell calls Iuncus marinus gramineus, and Pseudoschaenanthum: We call
it Bastard Squinanth, and Fox-taile Squinanth.

The temper.
This plant is indifferently hot, and a little astrictiue.

The virtues.
Camels Hay provoke urine, moves the terms, and breaks wind about the
stomach.

It causes aching and heaviness of the head, Galen yields this reason
thereof, because it heateth

According to Dioscorides, it dissolues, digests, and opens the passages of the
veins.

The flowers or chaffie tufts are profitable in drink for them that piss
blood anywayes: It is

The same boiled in wine helps the inflammation of the matrix, if the woman
do sit over the

CHAP. 36. Of Burre-Reed.
The Description.
1 THe first of these plants has long leaves, which are double edged, or
sharp on both sides, with a sharp crest in the middle, in such manner raised
up that it seems to be triangle or three square. The stalks grow among the
leaves, and are two or three foot long, being divided into many branches,
garnished with many prickly husks or knops of the bigness of a nut. The root
is full of hairy strings.

2 The great Water Burre differs not in any thing from the first kind in
roots or leaves, save that the first has his leaves rising immediately from
the tuft or knop of the root; but this kind has a long stalk coming from
the root, whereupon, a little above the root, the leaves shoot out round about
the stalk successively, some leaves still growing above others, even to the
top of the stalk, and from the top thereof downward by certain distances. It
is garnished with many round wharles, or rough coronets, having here and there
among the said wharles one single short leaf of a pale green color.

The place.
Both these are very common, and grow in moist meadows, and near unto
watercourse. They plentifully grow in the fenny grounds of Lincolnshire, and
such like places; in the ditches about S. George his fields, and in the ditch
right against the place of execution, at the end of Southwark, called S. Thomas
Waterings.

The time.
They bring forth their burry bullets or seedy knots in August.

1 Sparganium Ramosum. Branched Burre-Reed.
2 Sparganium latifolium. Great Water-Burre.


The Names.
These Plants of some are called Sparganium: Theophrastus in his fourth Book
and eighteenth Chapter calls them Butomus: of some, Platanaria: I call them
Burre-Reed: in the Arabian tongue they are called Safarhe Bamon: in Italian
Sparganio: of Dodoneus, Carex: Some call the first Sparganium ramosum, or
Branched Burre-Reed. The second, Sparganium non ramosum, Notbranching
Burre-Reed.

The temperature.
They are cold and dry of complexion.

The virtues.
Some write, that the knops or rough burres of these plants boiled in wine, are
good against

CHAP. 37. Of Cats Tail.
The Description.
CAts Tail has long and flaggy leaves, full of a spongeous matter, or pith,
among which leaves grows up a long smooth naked stalk, without knot,
fashioned like a spear, of a firm or solid substance, having at the top a
brown knop or ear, soft, thick and smooth, seeming to be nothing else but a
deal of flocks thick set and thrust together, which being ripe turns into
a down, and is carried away with the wind. The Roots be hard, thick, and
white, full of strings, and good to burn, where there is plenty thereof to be
had.

The place.
It grows in pooles and such like standing waters, and sometimes in running
streams.

I have found a smaller kind hereof growing in the ditches and marshie grounds
in the Isle of Shepey, going from Sherland house to Feuersham.

The time.
They flower and bear their mace or torch in July and August.

Typha. Cats Tail.


The Names.
They are called in Greek (...): in Latin Typha: of some Cestrum Morionis: in
French Marteau Masses: in Dutch, (...), and (...): In Italian Mazza sorda: in
Spanish Behordo, and Iunco amacorodato: In English, Cats Tail, and Reed-Mace.
Of this Cars Tail Aristophanes makes mention in his Comedy of Frogs, where he
brings them forth one talking with (...), being very glad that they had spent
the whole day in skipping and leaping inter Cyperum and Phleum, among Galingale
and Cats Tail. Ovid seems to name this plant Scirpus; for he terms the
mats made of the leaves, Cats-taile Mats, as in his sixth Book Fastorum,

At Dominus, discedite, ait, plaustroque morantes
Sustulit, in plaustro scirpea matta fuit.
The nature.
It is cold and dry of complexion.

The virtues.
The soft Down stamped with swines grease well

Some practitioners by their experience have found, Hippoglosson into powder,
and mixed with the yelks of eggs hard sodden, and so eaten, is a most perfect
medicine against the disease in children called in Greek (...), which is, when
the gut called Intestinum caecum is fallen into the cods. This medicine must be
ministered every day fasting for the space of thirty days, the quantity
thereof to be ministered at one time is 1. ^. This being used as before is
specified does not only help children and striplings, but grown men also, if
in time of their cure they use convenient ligature or trussings, and fit
consounding plasters upon the grieved place, according to art appointed for
that purpose in Chirurgerie.

This Down in some places of the Isle of Elie, and the low countries adjoining
thereto, is gathered

It has been also often proved to heal kibed or humbled heels (as they are
termed) being

CHAP. 38. Of Stitchwort.
The Description.
1 STitchwort, or as Ruellius terms it Holosteum, is of two kinds, and has
round tender stalks full of joints leaning toward the ground; at every joint
grow two leaves one against another. The flowers be white, consisting of many
small leaves set in the manner of a star. The roots are small, jointed, and
threddy. The seed is contained in small heads somewhat long, and sharp at the
upper end, and when it is ripe it is very small and brown.

2 The second is like the former in shape of leaves and flowers, which are set
in form of a star; but the leaves are orderly placed, and in good
proportion, by couples two together, being of a whitish color. When the
flowers be vaded then follow the seeds, which are enclosed in bullets like the
seed of flax, but not so round. The chiues or threads in the middle of the
flower are sometimes of a reddish, or of a blackish color. There are more
differences of this plant, or rather varieties, as differing little but in the
largeness of the leaves, flowers, or stalks.

The place.
They grow in the borders of fields upon bank sides and hedges, almost every
where.

The time.
They flourish all the Summer, especially in May and June.

Gramen Leucanthemum. Stitchwort.


The Names.
Some (as Ruellius for one) have thought this to be the plant which the
Grecians call (...): in Latin, Tota ossea: in English, All-Bones; whereof I
see no reason, except it be by the figure Antonomia; as when we say in English,
He is an honest man, our meaning is that he is a knave: for this is a tender
herb having no such bony substance. Dodonaeus questions, whether this plant be
not Crataeogonon; and he calls it Gramen Leucanthemum, or White-floured Grass.
The quality here noted with B. is by Dioscorides given to Crataeogonon; but it
is with his (...), (that is) Some say or report so much: which phrase of speech
he often uses when as he writes faculties by hearsay, and doubts himself
of the truth of them.

The nature.
The seed of Stitchwort, as Galen writes, is sharp and biting to him that
(...) it; and to him that uses it very like to Mill.

The virtues.
They are wont to drink it in Wine with the pwoder

Diverse report, says Dioscorides, That the Seed of

CHAP. 39. Of Spiderwort.
The Description.
1 THe obscure description which Dioscorides and Pliny have set down for
Phalangium, has bred much contention among late Writers. This plant Phalangium
has leaves much like Couch Grass, but they are somewhat thicker and fatter,
and of a more whitish green color. The stalks grow to the height of a cubit.
The top of the stalk is beset with small branches, garnished with many little
white flowers, compact of six little leaves. The threads or thrums in the middle
are whitish, mixed with a fair yellow, which being fallen, there follow black
seeds, enclosed in small round knobs, which be three cornered. The roots are
many, tough, and white of color.

2 The second is like the first, but that his stalk is not branched as the
first, and floureth a month before the other.

3 The third kind of Spiderwort, which Carolus Clusius names Asphodelus
minor, has a root of many threddy strings, from the which immediately rise up
grassie leaves, narrow and sharp pointed: among the which come forth diverse
naked strait stalks divided toward the top into sundry branches, garnished on
every side with fair starre-like flowers, of color white, with a purple vein
dividing each leaf in the midst: they have also certain chiues or threads in
them. The seed follows enclosed in three square heads like unto the kinds of
Asphodils.

4 This Spiderwort has a root consisting of many thick, long, and white
fibers, not much unlike the precedent, out of which it sends forth some five or
six green and firm leaves, somewhat hollowed in the middle, and mutually
inuoluing each other at the root: amongst these there rises up a round green
stalk, bearing at the top thereof some nine or ten flowers, more or less;
these consist of six leaves apiece, of color white (the three innermost leaves
are the broader, and more curled, and the three outmost are tipped with green at
the tops.) The whole flower much resembles a white Lilly, but much smaller.
Three square heads, containing a dusky and unequal seed, follow after the
flower.

1 Phalangium Ramosum. Branched Spiderwort.
2 Phalangium non ramosum. Vnbranched Spiderwort.
3 Phalangium Cretae. Candy Spiderwort.
4 Phalangium Antiquorum. The true Spiderwort of the Ancients.


5 Phalangium Virginianum Tradescanti. Tradescants Virginian Spiderwort.


5 This plant in my judgment cannot be sitlier ranked with any than these last
described; therefore I have here given him the fifth place, as the last commer.
This plant has many creeping stringy roots, which here and there put up green
leaves, in shape resembling those of the last described: amongst these there
rises up a pretty stiff stalk jointed, and having at each joint one leaf
incompassing the stalk, and out of whose bosom often times little branches
arise: now the stalk at the top usually diuides it self into two leaves, much
after the manner of Cyperus; between which there come forth many flowers
consisting of three pretty large leaves a piece, of color deep blew, with
reddish chiues tipped with yellow standing in their middle. These fading (as
usually they do the same day they show themselves) there succeed little heads
covered with the three little leaves that sustained the flower. In these heads
there is contained a long blackish seed.

The place.
1. 2. 3. These grow only in gardens with us, and that very rarely. 4 This
grows naturally in some places of Sauoy. 5 This Virginian is in many of our
English gardens, as with M. Parkinson, M. Tradescant, and others.

The time.
1. 4. 5. These flower in June: the second about the beginning of May: and the
third about August.

The Names.
The first is called Phalangium ramosum, Branched Spiderwort. 2 Phalangium non
ramosum, Vnbranched Spiderwort. Cordus calls it Liliago. 3 This, Clusius calls
Asphodelus minor: Lobell, Phalangium Cretae, Candy Spiderwort. 4 This is
thought to be the Phalangium of the Ancients, and that of Matthiolus: it is
Phalangium Allobrogicum of Clusius, Sauoy Spiderwort. 5 This by M. Parkinson
(who first has in writing given the figure and description thereof) is aptly
termed Phalangium Ephemerum Virginianum, Soone-fading Spiderwort of Virginia,
or Tradescants Spiderwort, for that M. John Tradescant first procured it from
Virginia. Bauhine has described it at the end of his Pinax, and very unfitly
termed it Allium, sieve Moly Virginianum.

The nature.
Galen says, Phalangium is of a drying quality, by reason of the tenuitie of
parts.

The virtues.
Dioscorides says, That the leaves, seed, and flowers, or any of them drunk
in Wine, prevails Phalangium, and all other venomous beasts.

The roots tunned up in new ale, and drunk for a month together, expels
poison, yea although

CHAP. 40. Of the Flower de-luce.
The kinds.
THere be many kinds of Iris or Flower de-luce, whereof some are tall and
great, some little, small, and low; some smell exceeding sweet in the root,
some have no smell at all: some flowers are sweet in smell, and some without;
some of one color, some of many colors mixed: virtues attributed to some,
others not remembered: some have tuberous or knobby roots, others bulbous or
Onion roots, some have leaves like flags, others like grass or rushes.

The Description.
1 THe common Flower de-luce has long and large flaggy leaves like the blade
of a sword, with two edges, amongst which spring up smooth and plain stalks
two foot long, bearing flowers toward the top, compact of six leaves joined
together, whereof three that stand upright are bent inward one toward another;
and in those leaves that hang downward there are certain rough or hairie
welts, growing or rising from the nether part of the leaf upward, almost of a
yellow color. The roots be thick, long, and knobby, with many (...) threads
hanging thereat.

2 The water Flower de-luce, or Water flag, or Bastard Acorus, is like unto the
garden Flower de-luce in roots, leaves, and stalks, but the leaves are much
longer, sometimes of the height of four cubits, and altogether narrower. The
flower is of a perfect yellow color, and the Root knobby like the other; but
being cut, it seems to be of the color of raw flesh.

1 Iris vulgaris. Flower de-luce.
2 Iris palustris lutea. Water-flags, or Flower de-luce.


The place.
The Water Flower de-luce or yellow flag prospers well in moist medows, and
in the borders and brinks of rivers, ponds, and standing lakes. And although it
be a water plant of nature, yet being planted in gardens it prospers well.

The Names.
Flower de-luce is called in Greek (...): Athenaeus and Theophrastus read
(...): as though they should say, Consecratrix; by which name it is also called
of the Latins Radix Marica, or rather Radix Naronica, of the river Naron, by
which the best and greatest store do grow. Whereupon Nicander in his Treacles
commends it thus:

Iridem quam aluit Drilon, and Naronis (...). Which may thus be Englished:

Iris, which Drilon water feeds,
And Narons banks with other weeds.
The Italians, Giglio azurro: in Spanish, Lilio Cardeno: in French, Flambe: The
Germans, (...), (...): in Dutch, (...).

The second is called in Latin, (...) palustris lutea, Pseudoacorus, and
Acorus palustris: in English, Water flags, Bastard Flower de-luce, or Water
Flower de-luce: and in the North they call them Seggs.

The nature.
1 The roots of the Flower de-luce being as yet fresh and green, and full of
juice, are hot almost in the fourth degree. The dried roots are hot and dry in
the (...) degree, burning the throat and mouth of such as taste them.

2 The bastard Flower de-luce his root is cold and dry in the third degree, and
of an astringent or binding facultic.

The virtues.
The root of the common Flower de-luce clean washed, and stamped with a few
drops of Rose

The juice of the same does not only mightily and vehemently draw forth
choler, but most

The dry roots attenuate or make thin thick and tough humors, which are
hardly and with

They are good in a loch or licking medicine for shortness of breath, an old
cough, and all infirmities

They remedy those that have evil spleenes, and those that are troubled with
convulsions or Dioscorides; and drunk with wine it brings down the monthly
courses of women.

The decoction is good in women's baths, for it mollifieth and opens the
matrix.

Being boiled very soft, and laid to plaister-wise it mollifieth or softneth
the kings evil, and old

The roots of our ordinary flags are not (as before is delivered) cold and dry
in the third degree, Dodonaeus affirms; but hot and dry, and that at the least
in the second degree, as any that thoroughly tastes them will confess. Neither
are the faculties and use (as some would persuade us) to be neglected; for as
Pena and Lobell affirm, though it have no smell, nor great heat, yet by reason
of other faculties it is much to be preferred before the Galanga major, or
foreign Acorus of shops, in many diseases; for it imparts more heat and
strength to the stomach and neighboring parts than the other, which rather
preyes upon and dissipates the innate heat and implanted strength of those
parts. It binds, strengthens, and condenses: it is good in bloody flixes, and
stays the Courses.

CHAP. 40. Of Flower de-luce of Florence.
The Description.
1 THe Flower de-luce of Florence, whose roots in shops and generally every
where are called Ireos, or Orice (whereof sweet waters, sweet pouders, and such
like are made) is altogether like unto the common Flower de-luce, saving that
the flowers of the Ireos is of a white color, and the roots exceeding sweet of
smell, and the other of no smell at all.

2 The white Flower de-luce is like unto the Florentine Flower de-luce in
roots, flaggy leaves, and stalks; but they differ in that, that this Iris has
his flower of a bleake white color declining to yellowness; and the roots
have not any smell at all; but the (...) is very sweet, as we have said.

3 The great Flower de-luce of Dalmatia has leaves much broader, thicker, and
more closely compact together than any of the other, and set in order like
wings or the fins of a Whale fish, green toward the top, and of a shining
purple color toward the bottom, even to the ground: amongst which rises up a
stalk of four foot high, as my self did measure often times in my garden:
whereupon does grow fair large flowers of a light blew, or as we term it, a
watchet color. The flowers do smell exceeding sweet, much like the Orange
flower. The seeds are contained in square cods, wherein are packed together
many flat seeds like the former. The root has no smell at all.

1 Iris Florentina. Flower de-luce of Florence.
2 Iris alba. White Flower de-luce.
3 Iris Dalmatica major. Great Flourede-luce of Dalmatia.


4 Iris Dalmatica minor. Small Dalmatian Iris.
5 Iris Biflora. Twice-flouring Flower (...).
6 Iris (...). Violet Flower de-luce.
7 Iris Pannonica. Austrian Flower de luce.


8 Iris Camerarij. Germane Flower de-Iuce.


4 The small Flower de-Iuce of Dalmatia is in show like to the precedent, but
rather resembling Iris biflora, being both of one stature, small and dwarf
plants in respect of the greater. The flowers be of a more blew color. They
flower likewise in May as the others do; but beware that ye never cast any cold
water upon them presently taken out of a Well; for their tenderness is such,
that they wither immediately, and rot away, as I my self have proved: but those
which I left vnwatred at the same (...) live and prosper to this day.

5 This kind of Flower de-luce came first from Portugal to us. It brings
forth in the Spring time flowers of a purple or violet color, smelling like a
violet, with a white hairy welt down the middle. The root is thick and short,
stubborn or hard to break. In leaves and show it is like to the lesser Flower
de-luce of Dalmatia, but the leaves be more spread abroad, and it commonly has
but one stalk, which in Autumn floureth again, and brings forth the like
flowers; for which cause it was called Iris biflora.

6 Iris violacea is like unto the former, but much smaller, and the flower is
of a more deep violet color.

7 Carolus Clusius, that excellent and learned Father of Herbarists, has set
forth in his Pannonicke Observations the picture of this beautiful Flower
de-luce, with great broad leaves, thick and fat, of a purple color near unto
the ground, like the great Dalmatian Flower de-luce, which it does very well
resemble. The root is very sweet when it is dry, and strives with the
Florentine Iris in sweetness. The flower is of all the other most confusedly
mixed with sundry colors, insomuch that my pen cannot set (...) (...) line or
streake, as it deserves. The three leaves that stand upright do claspe or
embrace one another, and are of a yellow color. The leaves that look
downward, about the edges are of a pale color, the middle part of white, mixed
with a line of purple, and has many small purple lines stripped over the said
white flower, even to the brim of the pale colored edge. It smells like the
Hauthorne flowers being lightly smelled unto.

8 The Germane Flower de-luce, which Camerarius has set forth in his Book
named Hortus Medicus, has great thick and knobby roots: the stalk is thick
and full of juice: the leaves be very broad in respect of all the rest of the
Flower de-luces. The flower grows at the top of the stalk, consisting of six
great leaves blew of color, welted down the middle, with white tending to
yellow; at the bottom next the stalk it is white of color, with some
yellowness fringed about the said white, as also about the brims or edges,
which greatly sets forth his beauty; the which Ioachimus Camerarius, the
son of old Camerarius of Noremberg, had sent him out of Hungary, and did
communicate one of the plants thereof to Clusius; whose figure he has most
lively set forth with this description, differing somewhat from that which
Ioachimus himself did give unto me (...) his being in London. The leaves,
says he, are very large, twice so broad as any of the others. The stalk is
single and smooth; the flower grows at the top, of a most bright shining blew
color, the middle rib tending to whiteness, the three upper leaves somewhat
yellowish. The root is likewise sweet as Ireos.

The place.
These kinds of Flower de-luces do grow wild in Dalmatia, Goritia, and
Piedmont; notwithstanding our London gardens are very well stored with every
one of them.

The time.
Their time of flouring answers the other Flower de-luces.

The Names.
The Dalmatian Flower de-Iuce is called in Greek of Athenaeus and Theophrastes
(...): it is named also (...) of the heavenly Bow or Rainbow: upon the same
occasion (...) or Admirable: for the Poets sometime do call the Rainbow (...):
in Latin Iris, and in English Flower de-luce. Their several titles do
sufficiently distinguish them, whereby they may be known one from another.

The nature.
The nature of these Flower de-luces are answerable to those of the common
kind; that is to say, the dry roots are hot and dry in the latter end of the
second degree.

The virtues.
The juice of these Flower de-luces does not only mightily and vehemently draw
forth choler, but most especially waterie humors, and is a singular good
purgation for them that have the Dropsy, if it be drunk in sweet wort or whay.

The same are good for them that have evil spleenes, or that are troubled with
cramps or convulsions, and for such as are bit with Serpents. It profits also
much those that have the (...), or running of the reins, being drunk with
Vinegar, as Diosc. says; and drunk with Wine they bring down the monthly
terms.

CHAP. 42. Of Variable Flower de-luces.
1 Iris lutea variegata. Variable Flourede-(...).
2 Iris Chalcedonica. Turkey Flower de-(...).


The Description.
1 THat which is called the Flower de-luce of many colors loses his leaves in
Winter, and in the Spring time recouereth them anew. I am not able to express
the sundry colors and mixtures contained in this flower: it is mixed with
purple, yellow, black, white, and a fringe or black thrum down the middle of
the lower leaves, of a whitish yellow, tipped or frized, and as it were a
little raised up; of a deep purple color near the ground.

2 The second kind has long and narrow leaves of a blackish green, like the
stinking Gladdon; among which rise up stalks two foot long, bearing at the top
of every stalk one flower compact of six great leaves: the three that stand
upright are confusedly and very strangely stripped, mixed with white and a
duskish black color. The three leaves that hang downward are like a gaping
hood, and are mixed in like manner, (but the white is nothing so bright as of
the other) and are as it were shadowed over with a dark purple color somewhat
shining: so that cording to my judgment the whole flower is of the color of a
Ginny hen: a rare and beautiful flower to behold.

3 Iris maritima Narbonensis. The Sea Flower de-luce.
4 Iris syluestris Bizantina. Wild Bizantine Flower de-luce.
5 Chamaeiris Angustifolia. Narrow leafed Flower de-(...).
6 (...) (...). Grass Flower de-(...).


7 Iris flore caeruleo obsoleto polyanthos. Narrow-leafed many-floured Iris.
8 Chamaeiris nivea (...) Candida. White Dwarf Iris.
9 Chamaeiris latifolia flore rubello. Red floured Dwarf Iris.


10 Chamaeiris Lutea. Yellow Dwarf Iris.
11 Camaeiris variegata. Varigated Dwarf Iris.


3 The French, or rather Sea Flower de-luce (whereof there is also another of
the same kind altogether lesser) have their roots without any savor. In show
they differ little from the garden Flower de-luce, but that the leaves of these
are altogether slenderer, and unpleasant in smell, growing plentifully in the
rough crags of the rocks under the Alps, and near unto the sea side. The
which Pena found in the grassie grauelly grounds of the sea coast near to
Montpellier. The learned Doctor Assatius a long time supposed it to be Medium
Diosc. Matthiolus deceived himself and others, in that he said, That the root
of this plant has the sent of the peach: but my self have proved it to be
without savor at all. It yields his flowers in June, which are of all the
rest most like unto the grass Flower de-luce. The taste of his root is hot,
bitter, and with much tenuitie of parts, as has been found by physical proof.

4 This Iris Bizantina has long narrow leaves like those of the last
described; very narrow, sharp pointed, having no ungrateful smell; the stalks
are some cubit and an half in length, and sometimes more; at the top they are
divided into 2 or 3 branches that have 2 or 3 flowers a piece, like in shape to
the flowers of the broad leafed variegated bulbous Iris; they have also a good
smell: the ends of the hanging-downe leaves are of a dark color; the other
parts of them are variegated with white, purple, or violet color. The three
other leaves that stand up are of a deep violet or purple color. The root is
blackish, slender, hard, knotty.

5 Narrow leafed Flower de-luce has an infinite number of grassie leaves much
like unto Reed, among which rise up many stalks: on the ends of the same
spring forth two, sometimes three right sweet and pleasant flowers, compact of
nine leaves. Those three that hang downward are greater than the rest, of a
purple color, stripped with white and yellow; but those three small leaves
that appear next, are of a purple color without mixture: those three that
stand upright are of an horseflesh color, tipped with purple, and under each
of these leaves appear three small brown aglets like the tongue of a small
bird.

6 The small grassie Flower de-luce differs from the former in smalnesse and
in thinness of leaves, and in that the stalks are lower than the leaves, and
the flowers in shape and color are like those of the stinking Gladdon, but
much less.

There are many other varieties of the broad leafed Flower de-luces besides
these mentioned by our Author; as also of the narrow leafed, which here we
do not intend to insist upon, but refer such as are desirous to trouble
themselves with these nicities, to Clusius and others. Notwithstanding I judge
it not amiss to give the figures and brief descriptions of (...) more of the
Dwarf Flower de-luces, as also of one of the narrower leafed.

7 This therefore which we give you in the seventh place is Iris slorc (...)
obsoleto, etc. (...). The leaves of this are small and long like those of the
wild (...) Flower de-luce; (...) (...) (which is not very big) has many strong
threads or fibers coming out of it: the stalk (which is somewhat tall) diuides
it self into two or three branches, whereon grow flowers in shape like those
of the other Flower de-luces, but their color is of an ouer-worne blew, or Ash
color.

8 Many are the differences of the Chamaeirides latifoliae, or Broad leafed
(...) Flower deluces, but their principal distinction is in their flowers; for
some have flowers of violet or purple color, some of white, other some are
variegated with yellow and purple, etc. Therefore I will only name the color,
and give you their figure, because their shapes differ little. This eighth
therefore is Chamaeiris nivea aut Candida, White Dwarf Iris: The ninth,
Chamaeiris (...) flore rubello, Red floured Dwarf Iris: The tenth, Camaeiris
lutea, Yellow Dwarf Iris: The eleventh, Chamaeiris variegata, Variegated
Dwarf Iris. The leaves and stalks of these plants are usually about a foot
high; the flowers, for the bigness of the plants, large, and they flower
betimes, as in April. And thus much I think may suffice for the names and
descriptions of these Dwarf varieties of Flower de-luces.

The place.
These plants do grow in the gardens of London, amongst Herbarists and other
Lovers of Plants.

The nature.
They flower from the end of March to the beginning of May.

The Names.
The Turkey Flower de-luce is called in the Turkish tongue Alaia Susiani, with
this additament from the Italians, Fiore Belle pintate; in English, Flower
de-luce. The rest of the names have (...) touched in their titles and history.

Their nature and virtues.
The faculties and temperature of these rare and beautiful flowers are
referred to the (...) sorts of Flower de-luces, whereunto they do very well
accord.

There is an excellent oil made of the flowers and roots of Flower de-luce, of
each a like quantity, Oleum Irinum, made after the same manner that oil of
Roses, Lillies, and such like be made: which oil profits much to strengthen
the sinews and joints, helps the cramp proceeding of repletion, and the
disease called in Greek Peripneumonia.

The flowers of French Flower de-luce distilled with Diatrion sandalon, and
Cinnamon, and the Hollerius and Gesner testify.

CHAP. 43. Of stinking Gladdon.
The Description.
STinking Gladdon has long narrow leaves like Iris, but smaller, of a dark
green color, and being rubbed, of a stinking smell very loathsome. The stalks
are many in number, and round toward the top, out of which do grow flowers like
the Flower de-luce, of an ouer-worne blew color, or rather purple, with some
yellow and red streakes in the midst. After the flowers be vaded there come
great husks or cods, wherein is contained a red berry or seed as big as a
pease. The root is long, and threddy underneath.

The place.
Gladdon grows in many gardens: I have seen it wild in many places, as in
woods and shadowie places near the sea.

The time.
The stinking Gladdon floureth in August, the seed whereof is ripe in September.

The Names.
Stinking Gladdon is called in Greek (...) by Dioscorides; and (...) by
Theophrastus, according to Pena: in Latin Spatula (...) among the
Apothecaries: it is called also Xyris: in English, stinking Gladdon, and
Spurgewort.

The nature.
Gladdon is hot and dry in the third degree.

The virtues.
Such is the faculty of the roots of all the Irides before named, that being
pounding they provoke

Xyris. Stinking Gladdon.


They are effectual against the cough; they easily

It helps the Kings Evil, and Buboes in the Pliny says. If it be drunk in
Wine it provoke the terms, and being put in Baths for women to sit over, it
provoke the like effects most exquisitly. The root put in manner of a
pessarie hastneth the birth. They cover with flesh bones that be bare, being
used in plasters. The roots boiled soft, and used plaisterwise, (...) all old
hard tumors, and the (...) of the throat called Strumae, that is, the Kings
Evil; and emplaistered with honey it draws out broken bones.

The meal thereof heals all the rifts of the fundament, Condilomata; and
opens Hemorrhoides. The juice sniffed or drawn up into the nose, provoke
sneesing, and draws down by the nose great store of filthy excrements, which
would fall into other parts by secret and hidden ways, and (...) of the
channels.

It profits being used in a pessarie, to provoke the

It prevails much against all evil affections of the

The Root of Xyris or Gladdon is of great force (...) says) by reason of his
tenuitie of parts, and of his attracting, drying, and digesting faculty, which
chiefly consists in the seed or fruit, which mightily provoke urine.

The root given in Wine, called in physic Passum, profits much against
Convulsions, Ruptures, Rhabarbarum and Asarum do, in that they concoct and take
away the cause of the laske; otherwise no doubt it moves unto the stool, as
Rheubarb, Asarum, and the other Irides do. Hereof the Country people of
Somersetshire have good experience, who use to drink the decoction of this
Root. Others do take the infusion thereof in ale or such like, wherewith they
purge themselves, and that unto very good purpose and effect.

The seed thereof mightily purges by urine, as Galen says, and the country
people have found

CHAP. 44. Of Ginger.
The Description.
1 GInger is most impatient of the coldness of these our Northern Regions, as
my self have found by proof, for that there have been brought unto me at
several times sundry plants thereof, fresh, green, and full of juice, as well
from the West Indies, as from Barbary and other places; which have sprouted and
budded forth green (...) in my garden in the heat of Summer, but as soon as
it has been but touched with the first sharp blast of Winter, it has
presently perished both blade and root. The true form or picture has not
before this time been set forth by any that has written; but the World has
been deceived by a counterfeit figure, which the reverend and learned
Herbarist Matthias Lobell did set forth in his Observations. The form whereof
notwithstanding I have here expressed, with the true and undoubted picture
also, which I received from Lobelius his own hands at the impression hereof.
The cause of whose former error, as also the means whereby he got the
knowledge of the true Ginger, may appear by his own words sent unto me in
Latin, which I have here inserted. His words are these:

How hard and uncertain it is to describe in words the true proportion of
Plants, (having no other guide than skillful, but yet deceitful forms of
them, sent from friends, or other means) they best do know who have deepliest
waded in this sea of Simples. About thirty years past or more, an honest and
expert Apothecarie William Dries, to satisfy my desire, sent me from Antwerpe
to London the picture of Ginger, which he held to be truly and lively drawn: I
my self gave him credit easily, because I was not ignorant, that there had bin
often Ginger roots brought green, new, and full of juice, from the Indies to
Antwerpe; and further, that the same had budded and grown in the said Dries
Garden. But not many years after, I perceived that the picture which was sent
me by my Friend was a (...), and before that time had been drawn and set forth
by an old Dutch Herbarist. Therefore not suffering this error any further to
spread abroad, (which I discovered not many years past at Flushing in Zeeland,
in the Garden of William of Nassau Prince of Orange, of famous memory, through
the means of a worthy person, if my memory fail me not, called Vander Mill;
at what time he opened, and loosed his first young buds and shoots about the
end of Summer, resembling in leaves, and stalks of a foot high, the young and
tender shoots of the common Reed, called Harundo vallatoria) I thought it
convenient to impart thus much unto Master John Gerard, an expert Herbarist,
and Master of happy success in Surgerie; to the end he might let posterity
know thus much, in the painful and long labored travels which now he has in
hand, to the great good and benefit of his Country. The plant it self brought
me to Middleborrough, and set in my Garden, perished through the hardness of
the Winter.

Thus much have I set down, truly translated out of his own words in Latin;
though too favorably by him done to the commendation of my mean skill.

1 (...) ficta Icon. The feigned figure of (...).
1 Zinziberis verior Icon. The true figure of Ginger.


The place.
Ginger grows in Spain, Barbary, in the Canary Islands, and the Azores. Our
men which sacked Domingo in the Indies, dug it up there in sundry places
wild.

The time.
Ginger flourishes in the hot time of Summer, and loses his leaves in Winter.

The Names.
Ginger is called in Latin Zinziber and Gingiber: in Greek, (...): In French,
Gigembre.

The nature.
Ginger heateth and dries in the third degree.

The virtues.
Ginger, as Dioscorides reports, is right good with meat in sauces, or
otherwise in conditures:

CHAP. 45. Of Aromaticall Reeds.
2 Acorus verus officinis falso Calamus, cumjulo. The true Acorus with his
flower.
Acorus verus sine julo. The true Acorus without the flower.


The Description.
1 THis sweet smelling Reed is of a dark dun color, full of joints and knees,
easy to be broken into small splinters, hollow, and full of a certain pith
cobweb-wife, somewhat gummy in eating, and hanging in the teeth, and of a
sharp bitter taste. It is of the thickness of the little finger, as Lobelius
affirms of some which he had seen in Venice.

2 Bastard Calamus has flaggy leaves like unto the Water flower de-luce or
flagge, but narrower, three foot long; of a fresh green color, and aromaticke
smell, which they keep a long time, although they be dried. Now the stalk
which bears the flower or fruit is much like another lease, but only from the
fruit downwards, whereas it is somewhat thicker, and not so broad, but almost
triangular. The flower is a long thing resembling the Cats-tailes which grow on
Hasels; it is about the thickness of an ordinary Reed, some inch and half
long, of a greenish yellow color, curiously chequered, as if it were wrought
with a needle with green and yellow silk intermixed. I have not as yet seen
it bear his tuft in my garden, and have read that it is barren, and by proof
have seen it so: yet for all that I believe Clusius, who says he has seen
it bear his flower in that place where it does grow naturally, although in
England it is altogether barren. The root is sweet in smell, and bitter in
taste, and like unto the common Flagge, but smaller, and not sored.

3 Calamus Aromaticus Antiquorum. The true Aromaticall Reed of the Ancients.


3 I think it very fitting in this place to acquaint you with a Plant, which
by the conjecture of the most learned (and that not without good reason) is
judged to be the true Calamus of the Ancients. Clusius gives us the history
thereof in his Notes upon Garcias ab Horto, lib. 1. ca. 32. in these words:
When as (says he) this History was to be the third time printed, I very
opportunely came to the knowledge of the true Calamus Aromaticus; the which the
learned Bernard Paludanus the Frisian, returning from Syria and Egypt, freely
bestowed upon me, together with the fruit Habhel, and many other rare seeds,
about the beginning of the year 1579. Now we hauc caused a figure to be
exactly drawn by the fragments thereof (for that it seems so exquisitly to
accord with Dioscorides his description.) In mine opinion it is rather to be
judged an vmbelliferous plant than a reedy; for it has a straight stalk
parted with many knots or joints, otherwise smooth, hollow within, and invested
on the inside with a slender filme like as a Reed, and it breaks into shiuers
or splinters, as Dioscorides has written: it has a smell sufficiently strong,
and the taste is grateful, yet bitter, and pertaking of some astriction: The
leaves, as by remains of them might appear, seem by couples at cuery joint
to engirt the stalk: the root at the top is somewhat tuberous, and then ends
in fibers. Twenty five years after Paludanus gave me this Calamus, the learned
Anthony Coline the Apothecarie (who lately translated into French these
Commentaries the fourth time set forth, Anno 1593) sent me from Lions pieces of
the like Reed, certifying me withal, That he had made use thereof in his
Composition of Treacle. Now these pieces, though in form they resembled those
I had from Paludanus, yet had they a more bitter taste than his, nether did
they partake of any astriction; which peradventure was to be attributed to the
age of one of the two. Thus much Clusius.

The place.
The true Calamus Aromaticus grows in Arabia, and likewise in Syria,
especially in the moorish grounds between the foot of Libanus and another
little hill, not the mountain Antilibanus, as some have thought, in a small
valley near to a lake, whose plashes are dry in Summer. Pliny 12. 22.

Bastard or false Calamus grows naturally at the foot of a hill near to Prusa
a city of Bithynia, not far from a great lake. It prospers exceeding well in
my garden, but as yet it bears neither flowers nor stalk. It grows also in
Candia, as Pliny reports: in Galatia likewise, and in many other places.

The time.
They lose their leaves in the beginning of Winter, and do recover them again
in the Spring of the year. In May this year 1632, I received from the
Worshipful Gentleman M. Thomas Glynn of Glynnlhivon in Carnaruanshire, my very
good friend, the pretty Iulus, or flower of this plant; which I could never see
here about London, though it grows with us in many Gardens, and that in great
plenty.

The Names.
The want of the true Calamus being supplied by Acorus as a (...), was the
cause (as Pena and Lobell probably conjecture) that of a substitute it took
the prime place upon it; and being as it were made a Viceroy, would needs be
King. But the falsenesse of the title was discovered by Matthiolus, and others,
and so it is sent back to its due place again; though notwithstanding it yet
in shops retains the title of Calamus.

1 The figure that by our Author was given for this, is supposed, and that (as
I think truly) to be but a counterfeit, of Marthiolus his invention; who
therein has been followed (according to the custom of the world) by diverse
others. The description is of a small Reed called Calamus oderatus Libani, by
Lobell in his Observations, and figured in his Irones, p. 54.

2 This is called (...) and (...) by the Greeks: by some, according to
Apulcius, (...); and in Latin it is called Acorus and Acorum; and in shops, as
I have formerly said, Calamus Aromaticus: for they usually take Galang a major,
(described by me, Chap. 26.) for Acorus. It may besides the former names be
fitly called in English, The sweet Garden Flag.

3 This is judged to be the (...) of Dioscorides; the (...) of Theophrastus;
that is, the true Calamus Aromaticus that should be used in Compositions.

The nature of the true Acorus, or our sweet garden Flag.
Dioscorides says, the roots have an heating faculty: Galen and Pliny do
affirm, that they have thin and subtle parts, both hot and dry.

The virtues of the same.
The decoction of the root of Calamus drunk provoke urine, helps the pain
in the side, liver,

It is of great effect, being put in broth, or taken in fumes through a close
stool, to provoke

The juice strained with a little honey, takes away the dimnes of the eyes,
and helps much

The root boiled in wine, stamped and applied plaisterwise unto the cods, does
wonderfully

The quantity of two scruples and an half of the root drunk in four ounces
of Muskadel, helps

The root is with good success mixed in counterpoysons. In our age it is put
into Eclegma's,

The root of this preserved is very pleasant to the taste, and comfortable to
the stomach and

The choice.
The best Acorus, as Dioscorides says, is that which is substantial, and well
compact, white within, not rotten, full, and well smelling.

Pliny writes, That those which grow in Candia are better than those of
Pontus, and yet those of Candia worse than those of the Eastern countries, or
those of England, although we have no great quantity thereof.

The faculties of the true Calamus out of Dioscorides.
It being taken in drink moves urine; wherefore boiled with the roots of
grass or Smallage

It moves the Courses, either drunk or otherwise applied. Also the fume
thereof taken by the

It is boiled also in baths for women, and decoctions for Glysters; and it
enters into plasters

CHAP. 46. Of Corn.
THus far have I discoursed upon Grasses, Rushes, Spartum, Flags, and Flower
deluces: my next labor is to set down for your better instruction, the
history of Corn, and the kinds thereof, under the name of Grain; which the
Latins call Cerialia semina, or Bread-corne; the Grecians, (...) and (...); of
which we purpose to discourse. There belong to the history of Grain all such
things as be made of Corn, as Far, Condrus, Alica, Tragus, Amylum, Ptisana,
Polenta, Maza, (...) or Malt, Zythum, and whatsoever are of that sort. There be
also joined unto them many seeds, which Theophrastus in his eighth book
places among the grains; as Millet, Sorgum, Panicke, Indian wheat; and such
like. Galen in his first book of the Faculties of nourishments, reckons up
the diseases of Grain, as well those that come of the grain it self
degenerating, or that are changed into some other kind, and made worse through
the fault of the weather, or of the soil; as also such as be cumbersome by
growing among them, do likewise fitly succeed the grains. And beginning with
corn, we will first speak of Wheat, and describe it in the first place,
because it is preferred before all other corn.

1 Triticum spica mutica. White Wheat.


The Description.
1 THis kind of Wheat which Lobelius, distinguishing it by the care, calls
Spica Mutica, is the most principal of all other, whose ears are altogether
bare or naked, without awnes or chaffie beards. The stalk rises from a
threddy root, compact of many strings, joynted or kneed at sundry distances;
from whence shoot forth grassie blades and leaves like unto Rye, but broader.
The plant is so well known to many, and so profitable to all, that the meanest
and most ignorant need no larger description to know the same by.

2 The second kind of Wheat, in root, stalks, joints, and blades, is like the
precedent, differing only in care, and number of grains, whereof this kind
does abound, having an ear consisting of many ranks, which seems to make the
ear double or square. The root and grain is like the other, but not bare and
naked, but bristled or bearded, with many small and sharp eiles or awnes, not
unlike to those of Barley.

3 Flat Wheat is like unto the other kinds of Wheat in leaves, stalks, and
roots, but is bearded and bordered with rough and sharp ailes, wherein
consists the difference. I know not what our Author means by this flat Wheat;
but I conjecture it to be the long rough eared Wheat, which has bluish ears
when as it is ripe, in other things resembling the ordinary red wheat.

4 The fourth kind is like the last described, and thus differs from it, in
that, that this kind has many small ears coming forth of one great ear, and
the beards hereof be shorter than of the former kind.

5 Bright wheat is like the second before described, and differs from it in
that, that this kind is four square, somewhat bright and shining, the other
not.

I think it a very fit thing to add in this place a rare observation, of the
transmutation of one species into another, in plants; which though it have
been observed of ancient times, as by Theophrastus, de cause. plant. lib. 3.
cap. 6. whereas amongst others he mentions the change of (...), Spelt into
oats: and by Virgill in these verses;

Grandia saepe quibus mandauimus Hordea sulcis,
(...) Lolium, and steriles dominantur (...).
That is;
In furrows where great Barley we did sow,
Nothing but Darnel and poor Oats do grow;
yet none that I have read have observed, that two several grains, perfect in
each respect, did grow at any time in one ear: the which I saw this year
1632, in an ear of white Wheat, which was found by my very good Friend Master
John Goodyer, a man second to none in his industry and searching of plants,
nor in his judgment or knowledge of them. This ear of wheat was as large and
fair as most are, and about the middle thereof grew three or four perfect
Oats in all respects: which being hard to be found, I held very worthy of
setting down, for some reasons not to be insisted upon in this place.

The place.
Wheat grows almost in all the countries of the world that are inhabited and
mannured, and requires a fruitful and fat soil, and rather Sunny and dry,
than watery grounds and shadowie: for in a dry ground (as Columella reports)
it grows harder and better compact: in a moist and dark soil it
degenerateth sometime to be of another kind.

2 Triticum aristis circumvallatum. Bearded Wheat, or Red-Wheat.


The time.
They are most commonly sown in the fall of the leaf, or Autumn: sometime in
the Spring.

The Names.
Wheat is called of the Grecians (...): of the Latins, Triticum, and the white
Wheat Siligo. Triticum does generally signify (...) kind of Corn which is
threshed out of the ears, and made clean by fanning or such ordinary means.
The Germans call it (...): in low Dutch, (...): in Italian, Grano: the
Spaniards, Trigo: the French men, Bled, ou Fourment: in England we call the
first, WhiteWheat, and Flaxen Wheat. Triticum Lucidum is called. Bright Wheat:
Red Wheat is called in Kent, Duck-bill Wheat, and Normandy Wheat.

The nature.
Wheat (says Galen) is very much used of men, and with greatest profit. Those
Wheats do nourish most which be hard, and have their whole substance so closely
compact as they can scarcely be bit asunder; for such do nourish very much:
and the contrary but little.

Wheat, as it is a medicine outwardly applied, is hot in the first degree, yet
can it not manifestly either dry or moisten. It has also a certain
clamminesse and stopping quality.

The virtues.
Raw Wheat, says Dioscorides, being eaten, breeds worms in the belly: being
chewed and applied, it does (...) the biting of mad dogs.

3 Triticum Typhinum. Flat Wheat.
4 Triticum multiplici spica. Double eared Wheat.


The flower of wheat being boiled with honey and water, or with oil and water,
takes away

The bran of Wheat boiled in strong Vinegar, cleanses away scurfe and dry
scales, and dissolueth

The grains of white Wheat, as Pliny writes in his two and twentieth book,
and seventh

The dried powder of red Wheat boiled with vinegar, helps the shrinking of
sinews.

The meal of Wheat mingled with the juice of Henbane, and plaisterwise
applied, appeaseth 5 Triticum lucidum. Bright Wheat.
inflammations, as Ignis sacer, or Saint Anthonies Fire, and such like, staying
the flux of humors to the joints, which the Grecians call Rheumatismata. Paste
made of fine meal, such as Booke-binders use, helps such as do spit blood,
taken warm one spoonful at once. The bran of wheat boiled in sharp vinegar,
and rubbed upon them that be scuruie and mangie, eases the party very much.

The leaven made of Wheat has virtue to

The fine flower mixed with the yolke of an ana one handful: boil them in
water and oil until they be tender: then stamp them very small in a stone
mortar, and add thereto the yolks of three eggs, oil of Roses, and oil of
Violets, ana (...) ij. Incorporate them altogether; but if the inflammation
grow to an Erysipelas, then add thereto the juice of Nightshade, Plantaine,
and Henbane, ana (...) ij. it eases an Erysipelas, or Saint Anthonies fire,
and all inflammations very speedily.

Slices of fine white bread laid to infuse or

The oil of wheat pressed forth between two plates of hot iron, heals the
chaps and chinks

The same used as a Balsame does excellently heal wounds, and being put among
salues or unguents,

CHAP. 47. Of Rye.
The Description.
THe leaf of Rye when it first comes up, is somewhat reddish, afterward
green, as be the other grains. It grows up with many stalks, slenderer than
those of wheat, and longer, with knees or joints by certain distances like
unto Wheat: the ears are orderly framed up in ranks, and compassed about with
short beards, not sharp but blunt, which when it floureth stands upright,
and when it is filled up with seed it leans and hangs downward. The seed is
long, blackish, slender, and naked, which easily falls out of the husks of
it self. The roots be many, slender, and full of strings.

The place.
Rye grows very plentifully in the most places of Germany and Polonia, as
appears by the great quantity brought into England in times of dearth, and
scarcity of corn, as happened in the year 1596, and at other times, when there
was a general want of corn, by reason of the abundance of rain that fell
the year before; whereby great penury ensued, as well of cattle and all
other victuals, as of all manner of grain. It grows likewise very well in
most places of England, especially toward the North.

Secale. Rye.


The time.
It is for the most part sown in Autumn, and sometimes in the Spring, which
proves to be a Grain more subject to putrefaction than that which was sown
in the fall of the leaf, by reason the Winter does overtake it before it can
attain to his perfect maturitie and ripeness.

The Names.
Rye is called in high Dutch, (...): in LowDutch, (...): in Spanish, Centeno:
in Italian, Segala: in French, Seigle: which sounds after the old Latin name
which in Pliny is Secale and Farrago, lib. 18. cap. 16.

The temperature.
Rye as a medicine is hotter than wheat, and more forcible in heating, wasting,
and consuming away that whereto it is applied. It is of a more clammy and
obstructing nature than Wheat, and harder to digest; yet to rusticke bodies
that can well digest it, it yields good nourishment.

The virtues.
Bread, or the leaven of Rye, as the Belgian

Rye Meal bound to the head in a Linen

CHAP. 48. Of Spelt Corn.
The Description.
SPelt is like to Wheat in stalks and ear: it grows up with a multitude of
stalks which are kneed and joynted higher than those of Barley: it brings
forth a disordered ear, for the most part without beards. The corns be
wrapped in certain dry husks, from which they cannot easily be purged, and
are joined together by couples in two chaffie husks, out of which when they be
taken they are like unto wheat corns: it has also many roots as wheat has,
whereof it is a kind.

The place.
It grows in fat and fertile moist ground.

The time.
It is altered and changed into Wheat it self, as degenerating from bad to
better, contrary to all other that do alter or change; especially (as
Theophrastus says) if it be cleansed, and so sown, but that not forthwith, but
in the third year.

The Names.
The Grecians have called it (...) and (...): the Latins Spelta: in the
Germane tongue (...), and (...): in low Dutch, (...): in French, Espeautre: of
most Italians, Pirra, Farra: of the Tuscans, Biada: of the Millanois, Alga: in
English, Spelt Corn. Dioscorides makes mention of two kinds of Spelt: one of
which he names (...) or single: another, (...) which brings forth two corns
joined together in a couple of husks, as before in the description is
mentioned. That Spelt which Dioscorides calls Dicoccos, is the same that
Theophr. and Galen do name Zea. The most ancient Latins have called Zea or
Spelta by the name of Far, as Dionysius Halicarnassaeus does sufficiently
testify: The old Romans (says he) did call sacred marriages by the word (...)
because Zea sieve Speltae. Spelt Corn.
the Bride and Bridegroom did eat of that Far which the Grecians do call
(...) The same thing Asclepiades affirms in Galen, in his ninth Book
according to the places affected, writing thus; Farris quod Zea appellant: that
is to say, Far which is called Zea, etc. And this Far is also named of the
Latins, Ador, (...), and Semen adoreum.

The temper.
Spelt, as Dioscorides reports, nourishes more than Barley. Galen writes in
his Books of the Faculties of simple Medicines, Spelt is in all his
temperature in a mean between Wheat and Barley, and may in virtue be referred
to the kinds of Barley and Wheat, being indifferent to them both.

The virtues.
The flower or meal of Spelt corn boiled in

Spelt (says Turner) is common about Weisenburgh

CHAP. 49. Of Starch Corn.
(...) Amyleum. Starch Corn.


The Description.
THis other kind of Spelta or Zea is called of the Germane Herbarists Amyleum
Frumentum, or Starch corn; and is a kind of grain sown to that end, or a
three months grain, and is very like unto wheat in stalk and seed; but the
ear thereof is set round about, and made up with two ranks, with certain
beards, almost after the manner of Barley, and the seed is closed up in chaffie
husks, and is sown in the Spring.

The place.
Amil corn, or Starch corn is sown in Germany, Polonia, Denmark, and other
those Eastern Regions, as well to feed their cattle and pullen with, as also
to make starch; for the which purpose it does very fitly serve.

The time.
It is sown in Autumn, or the fall of the leaf, and oftentimes in the
Spring; and for that cause has been called Trimestre, or three months grain:
it brings his seed to ripeness in the beginning of August, and is sown in
the Low Countries in the Spring of the year.

The Names.
Because the Germans have great use of it to make starch with, they do call it
(...): We think good to name it in Latin Amyleum frumentum: in English it
may be called (...), after the Germane word; and may likewise be called Starch
Corn. Tragus and Fuchsius took it to be Triticum (...), or three months
wheat; but it may rather be referred to the Farra: (...) Columella speaks of
a grain called Far Halicastrum, which is sown in the Spring; and for that
cause it is named Trimestre, or three months Far. If any be desirous to learn
the making of Starch, let them read Dodoneus last edition, where they shall be
fully taught; my self not willing to spend time about so vain a thing, and
not pertinent to the story. It is used only to feed cattle, pullen, and make
starch, and is in nature somewhat like to wheat or Barley.

CHAP. 50. Of Barley.
The Description.
BArley has an helm or straw which is shorter and more brittle than that of
Wheat, and has more joints; the leaves are broader and rougher; the ear is
armed with long, rough, and prickly beards or ailes, and set about with sundry
ranks, sometimes two, otherwhiles three, four, or six at the most, according
to (...); but eight according to Tragus. The grain is included in a long
chaffie husk: the roots be slender, and grow thick together. Barley, as Pliny
writes, is of all grain the softest, and least subject to casualtie, yielding
fruit very quickly and profitably.

1 Hordeum Distichon. Common Barley.
2 Hordeum Polystichum vernum. Bear Barley, or Barley Big.


1 The most usual Barley is that which has but two rows of Corn in the
ear, each grain set just opposite to other, and having his long own at his
end, is covered with a husk sticking close thereto.

2 This which commonly has four rows of corn in the ear, and sometimes
more, as we have formerly delivered, is not so usually sown with us; the ear
is commonly shorter than the former, but the grain very like; so that none who
knows the former, but may easily know the later at the first sight.

The place.
They are sown, as Columella teaches, in loose and dry ground, and are well
known all Europe through.

2 The second is sown commonly in some parts of York shire and the
Bishopric of Durham.

The Names.
1 The first is called of the Grecians (...): in high Dutch, (...): in Low
Dutch, (...): in Italian, Orzo: in Spanish, (...): in French, Orge: in English,
Barley.

2 The second is called of the Grecians (...), and also (...): Columella
calls it Galaticum; and Hippocrates, (...) of our English Northern people,
Big, and Big Barley. Crimmon (says Galen in his Commentaries upon the second
book of Hippocrates his Prognostics) is the grosser part of Barley meal
being grossly ground. Malt is well known in England, insomuch that the word
needs no interpretation; notwithstanding because these Works may chance into
the hands of Strangers, that never heard of such a word, or such a thing, by
reason it is not (...) where made; I thought good to lay down a word of the
making thereof. First, it is steeped in water until it swell; then is it taken
from the water, and laid (as they term it) in a Couch; that is, spread upon an
even floor the thickness of some foot and an half; and thus is it kept
until it Come, that is, until it send forth two or three little strings or
fangs at the end of each Corn: then it is spread usually twice a day, each day
thinner than other, for some eight or ten days space, until it be pretty dry,
and then it is dried up with the heat of the fire, and so used. It is called
in high Dutch, (...): in low Dutch, (...): in Latin of later time, Maltum:
which name is borrowed of the Germans. Actius a Greek Physician names Barley
thus prepared, (...), or Bine: The which Author affirms, That a plaster of
the meal of Malt is profitably laid upon the swellings of the Dropsy. Zythum,
as Diodorus Siculus affirms, is not only made in Egypt, but also in
Galatia. The air is so cold (says he, writing of Galatia) that the country
brings forth neither wine nor oil; and therefore men are compelled to make a
compound drink of Barley, which they call Zythum. Dioscorides names one kind
of Barley drink Zythum; another, Curmi. Simeon Zethi a later Grecian calls
this kind of drink by an Arabicke name, (...): in English we call it Beer and
Ale which is made of Barley Malt.

The temperature.
Barley, as Galen writes in his book of the Faculties of nourishments, is not
of the same temperature that Wheat is; for Wheat does manifestly heat, but
contrariwise what medicine or bread soever is made of Barley, is found to have
a certain force to cool and dry in the first degree, according to Galen in
his book of the faculties of Simples. It has also a little abstersive or
cleansing quality, and does dry somewhat more than Bean meal.

The virtues.
Barley, says Dioscorides, does cleanse, provoke urine, breeds windiness,
and is an enemy to

Barley meal boiled in an honied water with figs, takes away inflammations:
with Pitch,

With Melilot and Poppy seeds it takes away the pain in the sides: it is a
remedy against

Boiled with wine, myrtles, the bark of the pomegranate, wild pears, and the
leaves of brambles,

Further, it serves for Ptisana, Polenta, Maza, Malt, (...), and Beer. The
making whereof if any Lobelius Aduersaria, in the chapter of Barley. But I
think our London Beere-Brewers would scorn to learn to make beer of either
French or Dutch, much less of me that can say nothing therein of mine own
experience more than by the Writings of others. But I may deliver unto you a
Confection made thereof (as Columella did concerning sweet wine sodden to the
half) which is this; Boil strong (...) till it come to the thickenesse of
honey, or the form of an unguent or salve, which applied to the pains of the
sinews and joints (as having the property to abate aches and pains) may for
want of better remedies be used for old and new sores, if it be made after this
manner.

Take strong ale two pound, one Ox gall, and boil them to one pound with a
soft fire, continually Olibanum one ounce, flowers of Camomil and melilot of
each ^ i. Rue in fine powder ^ s. a little honey, and a small quantity of the
powder of Comin seed; boil them all together to the form of an unguent, and
so apply it. There be sundry sorts of Confections made of Barley, as Polenta,
Ptisana, made of water and husked or hulled barley, and such like. Polenta is
the meat made of parched Barley, which the Grecians do properly call (...)
Maza is made of parched Barley tempered with water, after Hippocrates and
Xenophon: Cyrus having called his soldiers together, exhorts them to drink
water wherein parched Barley has been steeped, calling it by the same name,
Maza. Hesychius does interpret (...) to be Barley meal mixed with water and
oil.

Barley meal boiled in water with garden Nightshade, the leaves of garden
Poppie, the powder of Foenugreeke and Lineseed, and a little Hogs grease, is
good against all hot and burning swellings, and prevails against the Dropsy,
being applied upon the belly.

CHAP. 51. Of Naked Barley.
Hordeumnudum. Naked Barley.


The Description.
HOrdeum nudum is called Zeopyrum, and Tritico-Speltum, because it is like to
Zea, otherwise called Spelta, and is like to that which is called French
Barley, whereof is made that noble drink for sick Folks, called Ptisama. The
plant is altogether like unto Spelt, saving that the ears are rounder, the
eiles or beards rougher and longer, and the seed or grain naked without
husks, like to wheat, the which in it is yellowish color it somewhat resembles.

The place.
It is sown in sundry places of Germany, for the same uses as Barley is.

The Names.
It is called Hordeum Nudum, for that the Corn is without husk, and
resembles Barley. In Greek it is called (...), because it participateth in
similitude and nature with Zea, that is, Spelt, and Puros, (that is) wheat.

The virtues.
This Barley boiled in water cools unnatural

Against the shortness of the breath, and pains of the breast, may be added to
all the foresaid,

Being boiled in the Whay of Milk, with the leaves of Sorrel, Marigolds, and
Scabious, it

Hordeum Spurium. Wall Barley.


CHAP. 52. Of Wall Barley.
The Description.
THis kind of wild Barley, called of the Latins Hordeum Spurium; is called
of Pliny, Holcus; in English, Wall Barley, Way Barley, or after old English
Writers, Way Bennet. It grows upon mud walls and stony places by the ways
sides; very well resembling Selfe-sowed Barley, yet the blades are rather like
grass than Barley. This grows some foot and better in height, with grassie
leaves, the ear is very like that of Rye, and the corn both in color and
shape absolutely resembles it; so that it cannot be fitlier named than by
calling it wild Rye, or Rye grass.

The virtues.
This Bastard wild Barley stamped and applied (...).

CHAP. 53. Of Saint Peter's Corn.
1 Brizamonococcos. S. Peter's Corn.
2 Festuca Italica. Hauer Grass.


The Description.
1 BRiza is a Corn whose leaves, stalks, and ears are less than Spelt; the
ear resembles our ordinary Barley, the corn growing in two rows, with awnes
at the top, and husks upon it not easily to be gotten off. In color it much
resembles barley; yet Tragus says it is of a blackish red color.

2 This Aegilops in leaves and stalks resembles wheat or barley, and it grows
some two handfuls high, having a little ear or two at the top of the stalk,
wherein are enclosed two or three seeds a little smaller than Barley, having
each of them his own at his end. These seeds are wrapped in a crested filme or
skin, out of which the awnes put themselves forth.

(...) says, That he by his own trial has found this to be true, That as
Lolium, which is our common Darnel, is certainly known to be a seed degenerate
from wheat, being found for the most part among wheat, or where wheat has
been: so is Festuca a seed or grain degenerating from barley, and is found
among Barley, or where barley has been.

The place.
1 Briza is sown in some parts of Germany and France; and my memory deceiues
me if I have not often times found many ears thereof amongst ordinary barley,
when as I lived in the further side of Lincolneshire, and they there called it
Brant Barley.

2 This Aegilops grows commonly amongst their Barley in Italy and other hot
countries.

The Names.
1 Briza Monococcos, after Lobelius, is called by Tabernamontanus, Zea
Monococcos: in English, Saint Peter's Corn, or Brant Barley.

2 Festuca of Narbone in France is called (...): in Latin, Aegilops
Narbonensis, according to the Greek: in English, Hauer-grasse.

The nature.
They are of quality somewhat sharp, having faculty to digest.

The virtues.
The juice of Festuca mixed with Barley meal dried, and at times of need
moistened with Rose Aegilops, or Fistula in the corner of the eye: it mollifieth
and disperseth hard lumps, and asswageth the swellings in the joints.

CHAP. 54. Of Otes.
The Description.
1 AVena Vesca, Common Otes, is called Vesca, a Vescendo, because it is used in
many countries to make sundry sorts of bread; as in Lancashire, where it is
their chiefest bread corn for Iannocks, Hauer cakes, Tharffe cakes, and those
which are called generally Oten cakes; and for the most part they call the
grain Hauer, whereof they do likewise make drink for want of Barley.

2 Auena Nuda is like unto the common Otes; differing in that, that these naked
Otes immediately as they be threshed, without help of a Mill become Otemeale
fit for our use. In consideration whereof in Northfolke and Southfolke they are
called vnhulled and naked Otes. Some of those good house-wiues that delight not
to have any thing but from hand to mouth, according to our English proverb,
may (whiles their pot does sees) go to the barn, and rub forth with their
hands sufficient for that present time, not willing to provide for to morrow,
according as the Scripture speaks, but let the next day bring with it.

The nature.
Otes are dry and somewhat cold of temperature, as Galen says.

The virtues.
Common Otes put into a linen bag, with a little bay salt quilted handsomely
for the same

If Otes be boiled in water, and the hands or feet of such as have the Serpigo
or Impetigo, that is; contra (...) Gallicum: it does perfectly cure the same in
six (...) so anointing and sweating.

Otemeale is good for to make a fair and well colored maid to look like a
cake of tallow, especially

Otemeale used as a (...) dries and moderately discusses, and that without
biting; for

1 Auena (...). Common Otes.
2 Auena Nuda. Naked Otes.


CHAP. 55. Of Wild Otes.
The description.
1 BRomos sterilis, called likewise Auena fatua, which the Italians do call by
a very apt name Vena vana, and Auena Cassa, (in English, Barren Otes, or wild
Otes) has like leaves and stalks as our Common Otes; but the heads are
rougher, sharp, many little sharp husks making each ear.

2 There is also another kind of Bromos or wild Otes, which Dodoneus calls
Festuca altera, not differing from the former wild Otes in stalks and leaves,
but the heads are thicker, and more compact, each particular ear (as I may
term it) consisting of two rows of seed handsomely compact and joined
together; being broader next the straw, and narrower as it comes to an end.

The time and place.
The first in July and August may be found almost in every hedge; the later is
to be found in great plenty in most Rye.

The Names.
1 This is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Bromos stirilis by Lobell:
Aegylops prima by Matthiolus: in English, Wilde-Otes, or Hedge-Otes.

2 Lobell calls this Bromos sterilis altera: Dodonaeus terms it Festuca
altera: in Brabant they call it Drauich: in English, Drauke.

1 Bromos sterilis. Wild Otes.
2 Bromos (...). Drauke, or small wild Otes.


The Nature and virtues.
1 It has a drying faculty (as Dioscorides says.) Boil it in water together
with the roots until OZaena and filthy ulcers of the nose, dipping a linen
cloth therein, and putting it up into the nosthrils; some add thereto A loes
finely poudred, and so use it.

Also boiled in Wine with dried Rose leaves, it is good against a stinking
breath.

CHAP. 56. Of Bearded Wild Otes.
The Description.
AEGylops Bromoides Belgarum is a Plant indifferently partaking of the nature
of Aegilops and Bromos. It is in show like to the naked Otes. The seed is
sharp, hairy, and somewhat long, and of a reddish color, enclosed in
yellowish chaffie husks like as Otes, and may be Englished, Crested or bearded
Otes. I have found it often among Barley and Rye in sundry grounds. This is
likewise unprofitable and hurtful to (...); whereof is no mention made by the
Ancients worthy the noting.

CHAP. 57. Of Burnt Corn.
Aegilops Bromoides. Bearded Wild Otes.


The Description.
1 HOrdeum vstum, or (...) Hordei, is that burnt or (...) Barley which is
altogether unprofitable and good for nothing, an enemy unto corn; for that in
stead of an ear with corn, there is nothing else but black dust, which
spoileth bread, or whatsoever is made thereof.

2 Burnt Otes, or Vstilago Auenae, or Auenacea, is likewise an unprofitable
Plant, degenerating from Otes, as the other from Barley, Rye, and Wheat. It
were in vain to make a long harvest of such evil corn, considering it is not
possessed with one good quality. And therefore thus much shall suffice for the
description.

3 Burnt Rye has no one good property in physic, appropriate either to man,
birds, or beast, and is a hurtful malady to all corn where it grows;
having an ear in shape like to corn, but in stead of grain it does yield a
black powder or dust, which causes bread to look black, and to have an
evil taste: and that corn where it is, is called smootie corn, and the thing
it self Burnt Corn, or blasted corn.

1 Hordeum vstum, sieve (...) hordei. Burnt Barley.
2 Vstilago (...). Burnt Otes.
3 Vstilago Secalina. Burnt Rye.


CHAP. 58. Of Darnell.
1 Lolium album. White Darnell.
2 Lolium rubrum. Red Darnell.


The Description.
1 AMong the hurtful weeds Darnell is the first. It brings forth leaves or
stalks like those of wheat or barley, yet rougher, with a long ear made up of
many little ones, every particular one whereof contains two or three grains
lesser than those of wheat, scarcely any chassie husk to cover them with; by
reason whereof they are easily shaken out and scattered abroad.

2 Red Darnell is likewise an unprofitable corn or grass, having leaves like
barley. The joints of the straw or stalk are sometimes of a reddish color,
bearing at the top a small and tender (...), flat, and much in form resembling
the former.

The place.
They grow in fields among wheat and barley, of the corrupt and bad seed, as
Galen says, especially in a moist and dankish soil.

The time.
They spring and flourish with the corn, and in August the seed is ripe.

The Names.
1 Darnell is called in Greek, (...) in the Arabian Tongue, Zizania and
Sceylen: In French, Yuray: in Italian, Loglio: in low Dutch, Dolick: in
English, Darnell: of some, Iuray, and Raye: and of some of the Latins,
Triticum temulentum.

2 Red Darnell is called in Greek (...), or Phoenix, because of the crimson
color: in Latin, Lolium Rubrum, and Lolium Murinum: of some, Hordeum Murinum,
and Triticum Murinum: in Dutch, (...) (...): in English, Red Darnell, or great
Darnell Grass.

The temperature.
Darnell is hot in the third degree, and dry in the second. Red Darnell dries
without sharpness, as Galen says.

The (...).
The seed of Darnell, Pigeons dung, oil Olive, and powder of Lineseed, boiled
to the sorme of

The new bread wherein Darnel is, eaten hot, causes drunkenness: in like
manner does beer

Darnell taken with red wine stays the flux of the belly, and the overmuch
flowing of women's

Dioscorides says, That Darnell meal does stay and keep back eating sores,
Gangrenes, and

The seed of Darnell ginen in white or Rhenish wine, provoke the flowers or
menses.

A fume made thereofwith parched barley meal, myrrh, saffron, and frankincense,
made in form

Red Darnell (as Dioscorides writes) being drunk in sour or harsh red Wine,
stops the

The Danger.
Darnell hurts the eyes, and makes them dim, if it happen in corn either
for bread or drink: which thing Ovid in his first book Fastorum has
mentioned, in this verse:

Et careant lolijs oculos vitiantibus agri. And hereupon it seems that the
old proverb came, That such as are dim sighted should be said, Lolio
victitare.

CHAP. 59. Of Rice.
Oryza. Rice.


The Description.
RIce is like unto Darnell in show, as Theophrastus says: it brings not
forth an ear, like corn, but a certain mane or plume, as Mill, or Miller, or
rather like Panick. The leaves, as Pliny writes, are fat and full of
substance, like to the blades of leeks, but broader: but (if neither the soil
nor climate did alter the same) the plants of Rice that did grow in my garden
had leaves soft and grassie like barley. The flower did not show it self with
me, by reason of the injury of our unseasonable year 1596. Theophrastus
concludes, that it has a (...) of a purple color. But, says my Author, Rice
has leaves like unto Dogs grass or Barley, a small straw or stem full of
joints like corn: at the top whereof grows a bush or tuft far unlike to
barley or Darnell, garnished with round knobs (...) small gooseberries, wherein
the seed or grain is contained: every such round knob has one small rough
aile, tail, or beard like unto barley hanging thereat. Aristobulus, as Strabo
reports, shows, That Rice grows in water in Bactria, and near Babylon,
and is two yards high, and has many ears, and brings forth plenty of seed.
It is reaped at the setting of the seven stars, and purged as Spelt and
Otemeale, or hulled as French Barley.

The place.
It grows in the territories of the Bactrians, in Babylon, in Susium, and in
the lower part of Syria. It grows in those days not only in those countries
before named, but also in the fortunate Islands, and in Spain, from whence it
is brought unto us, purged and prepared as we see, after the manner of French
Barley. It prospers best in fenny and waterish places.

The time.
It is sown in the Spring in India, as Eratosthenes witnesses, when it is
moistened with Summer showers.

The Names.
The Grecians call it (...), or as Theophrastus says, (...): the Latins keep
the Greek word Oryza: in French it is called Riz: in the Germane tongue,
(...), and (...): in English, Rice.

The temperature and virtues.
Galen says, That all men use to stay the belly with this grain, being boiled
after the same manner that Chondrus is. In England we use to make with milk
and Rice a certain food or pottage, which does both meanly bind the belly,
and also nourish. Many other good kinds of food is made with this grain, as
those that are skillful in cookerie can tell.

CHAP. 60. Of Millet.
Milium. Mill, or Millet.


The Description.
MIlium rises up with many hairy stalks knotted or jointed like wheat. The
leaves are long, and like the leaves of the Common Reed. It brings forth on
the top of the stalk a spoky bush or mane, called in Greek (...), like the
plume or feather of the Pole reed, hanging downwards, of color for the most
part yellow or white; in which grows the seed, small, hard, and glistering,
covered with a few thin husks, out of which it easily falls. The roots be
many, and grow deep in the ground.

2 Milium nigrum is like unto the former, saving that the ear or plume of this
plant is more loose and large, and the seed somewhat bigger, of a shining
black color.

The place.
It loves light and loose mould, and prospers best in a moist and rainy
time. And after Columella, it grows in greatest abundance in Campania. I
have of it yearly in my garden.

The time.
It is to be sown in April and May, and not before, for it ioyeth in warm
weather.

The Names.
It is named of the Grecians, (...): of some, (...): and of Hippocrates,
Paspale, as Hermolaus says: In Spanish, Mijo: in Italian, Miglio: in
High Dutch, (...): in French, Millet: in Low Dutch, (...): in English, Mill, or
Millet.

The temper.
It is cold in the first degree, as Galen writes, and dry in the third, or in
the later end of the second, and is of a thin substance.

The virtues.
The meal of Mill mixed with tar is laid to the bitings of serpents, and all
venomous beasts.

There is a drink made hereof bearing the name of Sirupus Ambrosij, or Ambrose
his syrup, which Henricus Rantszonius in his book of the government of health
sets down in this manner: Take (says he) of vnhusked Mill a sufficient
quantity, boil it till it be broken; then take five ounces of the hot
decoction, and add thereto two ounces of the best white wine, and so give it
hot unto the patient, being well covered with clothes, and then he will sweat
thoroughly. This is likewise commended by Johannes Heurneus, in his book of
Practice.

Millet parched, and so put hot into a linen bag, and applied, helps the
griping pains of the

CHAP. 61. Of Turkey Corn.
1 Frumentum Asiaticum. Corn of Asia.
2 Frumentum Turcicum. Turkey Corn.


The kinds.
OF Turkey corns there be diverse sorts, notwithstanding of one stock or
kindred, consisting of sundry colored grains, wherein the difference is easy
to be discerned, and for the better explanation of the same, I have set forth
to your view certain ears of different colors, in their full and perfect
ripeness, and such as they show themselves to be when their skin or filme
does open it self in the time of gathering.

The form of the ears of Turkey Wheat.

3 Frumenti Indici spica. Turkey wheat in the husk, as also naked or bare.


The Description.
1 Corn of Asia bears a long great stem or stalk, covered with great leaves
like the great Cane reed, but much broader, and of a dark brownish color
toward the bottom: at the top of the stalks grow idle or barren tufts like
the common Reed, sometimes of one color, and sometimes of another. Those (...)
which are fruitful do grow upon the sides of the stalks, among the leaves,
which are thick and great, so covered with skins or filmes, that a man cannot
see them until ripeness have discovered them. The grain is of sundry
colors, sometimes red, and sometimes white, and yellow, as my self have seen
in mine own garden, where it has come to ripeness.

4 Frumentum (...) luteum. Yellow Turkey wheat.
5 Frumentum Indicum rubrum. Red Turkey wheat.
6 Frumentum Indicum Caeruleum. Blew Turkey wheat.


2 The stalk of Turkey Wheat is like that of the Reed, full of spongie pith,
set with many joints, five or six foot high, big beneath, and now and then of
a purple color, and by little and little small above: the leaves are broad,
long, setwith veins like those of the Reed. The ears on the top of the stalk
be a spanne long, like unto the feather top of the common Reed, divided into
many plumes hanging downward, empty and barren without seed, yet blooming as
Rye does. The flower is either white, yellow, or purple, that is to say, even
as the fruit will be. The Fruit is contained in very big (...), which grow
out of the joints of the stalk, three or four from one stalk, orderly placed
one above another, covered with cotes or filmes like husks and leaves, as if
it were a certain sheath; out of which do stand long and slender beards, soft
and tender, like those laces that grow upon Sauorie, but greater and longer,
every one fastened upon his own seed. The seeds are great, of the bigness of
common peason, (...) in that part whereby they are fastened to the (...), and in
the outward part round: being of color sometimes white, now and then yellow,
purple, or red; of taste sweet-and pleasant, very closely joined together in
eight or ten orders or ranks. This grain has many roots, strong, and full
of strings.

The place.
These kinds of grain were first brought into Spain, and then into other
provinces of Europe: not (as some suppose) out of Asia minor, which is the
Turks Dominions; but out of America and the Islands adjoining, as out of
Florida and Virginia, or Norembega, where they use to sow or set it, and to
make bread of it, where it grows much higher than in other countries. It is
planted in the gardens of these Northern regions, where it comes to
ripeness when the summer falls out to be fair and hot, as my self have
seen by proof in mine own garden.

The time.
It is sown in these countries in March and April, and the fruit is ripe in
September.

The Names.
Turkey wheat is called of some Frumentum Turcicum, and Milium Indicum, as also
(...), and Maiz, or Mays. It in all probability was unknown to the ancient
both Greek and Latin Authors. In English it is called Turkey corn, and Turkey
wheat. The Inhabitants of America and the Islands adjoining, as also of the
East and West Indies, do call it Mais: the Virginians, Pagatowr.

The temperature and virtues.
Turkey wheat does nourish far less than either wheat, rye, barley, or otes.
The bread which is made thereof is meanly white, without bran: it is hard and
dry as Biscuit is, and has in it no clamminesse at all; for which cause it is
of hard digestion, and yields to the body little or no nourishment; it slowly
descends, and binds the belly, as that does which is made of Mill or
Panick. We have as yet no certain proof or experience concerning the virtues
of this kind of Corn; although the barbarous Indians, which know no better,
are constrained to make a virtue of necessity, and think it a good food:
whereas we may easily judge, that it nourishes but little, and is of hard and
evil digestion, a more convenient food for swine than for men.

CHAP. 62. Of Turkey Millet.
Sorghum. Turkey Millet.


The Description.
TVrky Millet is a stranger in England. It has many high stalks, thick, and
jointed commonly with some nine joints, beset with many long and broad leaves
like Turkey Wheat: at the top whereof grows a great and large tuft or (...)
like the great Reed. The seed is round and sharp pointed, of the bigness of a
Lentill, sometimes red, and now and then of a fuller black color. It is
fastened with a multitude of strong slender roots like unto threads: the whole
plant has the form of a Reed: the stalks and ears when the seed is ripe are
red.

The place.
It ioyeth in a fat and moist ground: it grows in Italy, Spain, and other
hot regions.

The time.
This is one of the Summer grains, and is ripe in Autumn.

The Names.
The Millanois and other people of Lombardy call it Melegua, and Melega: in
Latin, Melica: in Hetruria, Saggina: in other places of Italy, Sorgho: in
Portugal, Milium Saburrum: in English, Turkey Mill, or Turkey Hirsse.

This seems to be the Milium which was brought into Italy out of India, in the
reign of the Emperor Nero: the which is described by Pliny, lib. 18. cap. 7.

The temperature and virtues.
The seed of Turkey Mill is like unto Panicke-In taste and temperature. The
country People sometimes make bread hereof, but it is brittle, and of little
nourishment, and for the most part it serves to fatten hens and pigeons with.

CHAP. 63. Of Panick.
1 Panicum Indicum Indian Panick.
2 (...) Caeruleum. Blew Panicke.


The kinds.
THere be sundry sorts of Panicke, although of the Ancients there have been
set down but two, that is to say, the wild or field Panicke, and the garden
or manured Panicke.

The descrip tin.
1 THe Panick of India grows up like Millet, whose straw is knotty, or full
of joints; the ears be round, and hanging downward, in which is contained a
white or yellowish seed, like Canarie seed, or Alpisti.

2 Blew Panick has a reddish stalk like to Sugar cane, as tall as a man,
thicker than a finger, full of a fungous pith, of a pale color: the stalks be
upright and knotty; these that grow near the root are of a purple color: on
the top of the stalk comes forth a spike or ear like the water Cats Tail,
but of a blew or purple color. The Seed is like to naked Otes: The Roots are
very small, in respect of the other parts of the plant.

3 Panicum Americanum (...). West-Indian Panicke with a very long ear.


3 To these may be added another West-Indian Panicke, sent to Clusius from M.
James (...) of London. The ear hereof was thick, close, compact and made
Taper-fashion, smaller at the one end than at the other; the length thereof was
more than a foot and half. The shape of the seed is much like the last
described, but that many of them together are contained in one hairie husk,
which is fastened to a very short stalk, as you may see represented apart by
the side of the figure

4 Panicum vulgar. Common or Germane Panicke.
5 Panicum syluestre. Wild Panicke.


4 Germane Panicke has many hairy roots growing thick together like unto
wheat, as is all the rest of the plant, as well leaves or blades, as straw or
stalk. The ear grows at the top single, not unlike to Indian Panicke, but
much lesser. The grains are contained in chaffie scales, red declining to
tawny.

5 The wild Panicke grows up with long reeden stalks, full of joints, set
with long leaves like those of Sorghum, or Indian Panicke: the tuft or
feather-like top is like unto the common reed, or the ear of the grass called
Ischaemon, or Manna grass. The root is small and threddy.

The place and time.
The kinds of Panick are sown in the Spring, and are ripe in the beginning of
August. They prosper best in hot and dry Regions, and wither for the most part
with much watering, as does Mil and Turkey wheat: they quickly come to
ripeness, and may be kept good a long time.

The Names.
Panick is called in Greek (...), and (...). Diocles the Physician names it
Mel Frugum: the Spaniards, Panizo: the Latins, Panicum, of Pannicula: in
English, Indian Panicke, or Otemeale.

The temperature.
Panicks nourish little, and are driers, as Galen says.

The virtues.
Panicke stops the laske, as Millet does, being boiled (as Pliny reports)
in Goats milk,

Bread made of Panick nourishes little, and is cold and dry, very brittle,
having in it neither

CHAP. 64. Of Canary seed, or Pety Panicke.
1 Phalaris. Canarie seed.
2 Phalaris pratensis. Quaking grass.


The Description.
1 CAnarie seed, or Canarie grass after some, has many small hairy roots,
from which arise small strawie stalks ioynted like corn, whereupon do grow
leaves like those of Barley, which the whole plant does very well resemble. The
small (...) ear grows at the top of the stalk, wherein is contained small
seeds like those of Panicke, of a yellowish color, and shining.

2 Shakers, or Quaking Grass grows to the height of half a foot, and
sometimes higher, when it grows in fertile meadows. The stalk is very small
and benty, set with many grassie leaves like the common meadow grass, bearing
at the top a bush or tuft of flat scaly pouches, like those of Shepherds
purse, but thicker, of a brown color, set upon the most small and weak hairy
foot stalks that may be found, whereupon those small pouches do hang: by
means of which small hairy strings, the knaps which are the flowers do
continually tremble and shake, in such sort that it is not possible with the
most steadfast hand to hold it from shaking.

3 There is also another Grassie plant which may fitly be referred to these:
the leaves and stalks resemble the last described, but the heads are about the
length and breadth of a small (...), and handsomely compact of light scaly
filmes much like thereto; whence some have termed it Gramen Lupuli glumis. The
color of this pretty head when it comes to ripeness is white.

The place.
1 Canarie seed grows naturally in Spain, and also in the Fortunate or
Canary Islands, and does grow in England or any other of these cold Regions, if
it be sown therein.

3 Phalaris pratensis altera. Pearl Grass.


2 Quaking Phalaris grows in fertile pastures; and in dry meadows.

3 This grows naturally in some (...) of Spain, and it is sown yearly in
many of our London Gardens.

The time.
1 3 These Canarie seeds are sown in May, and are ripe in August.

The Names.
1 Canary seed, or Canarie corn is called of the Grecians, (...): the Latins
retaining the same name Phalaris: in the Islands of Canarie, Alpisti: in
English, Cana rye seed, and Canary grass.

2 Phalaris pratensis is called also Gramen tremulum: in Cheshire about
Nantwich, Quakers and Shakers: in some places, Cow-quakes.

3 This by some is termed Phalaris altera: Clusius calls it Gramen Amourettes
majus: Bauhine, Gramen tremulum maximum: In English they call it Pearle-Grasse,
and Garden-Quakers.

The Nature and virtues.
I find not any thing set down as touching the temperature of Phalaris,
notwithstanding it is thought to be of the nature of Millet.

The juice and seed, as Galen says, are thought to be profitably drunk
against the pains of the bladder. Apothecaries succedaneum, or quid pro quo.
We use it in England also to feed the Canarie Birds.

(...). Fox-taile.


CHAP. 65. Of Fox-Taile.
The Description.
1 FOx-taile has many grassie leaves or blades, rough and hairy, like unto
those of Barley, but less and shorter. The stalk is likewise soft and hairy;
whereupon does grow a small spike or ear, soft, and very downy, bristled with
very small hairs in shape, like unto a Fox-taile, whereof it took his name,
which dies at the approach of Winter, and recouereth it self the next year by
falling of his seed.

There is one or two varieties of this Plant in the largeness and smalnesse of
the ear.

2 Besides these forementioned strangers, there is also another which grows
naturally in many watery Salt places of this kingdom, as in Kent by Dartford,
in Essex, etc. The stalks of this plant are grassy, and some two foot high,
with leaves like Wheat or Dogs Grass. The ear is very large, being commonly
four or five inches long, downy, soft like silk, and of a brownish color.

The place.
1 This kind of Fox-taile Grass grows in England, only in gardens.

The time.
1 This springs up in May, of the seed that was scattered the year before,
and bears his tail with his seed in June.

2 This bears his head in July.

The Names.
1 There has not been more said of the ancient or later writers, as touching
the name, than is set down, by which they called it in Greek Alopecuros; that
is in Latin, Cauda vulpis: in English, Fox-taile.

2 This by Lobell is called Alopecuros alter a maxima Anglica paludosa; that
is, The large English Marsh Fox-taile.

The temperature and virtues.
I find not any thing extant worthy the memory, either of his nature or
virtues.

CHAP. 66. Of Jobs Tears.
Lachrimae Job. Jobs Tears.


The Description.
Jobs Tears has many knotty stalks, proceeding from a tuft of threddy roots,
two foot high, set with great broad leaves like unto those of reed; amongst
which leaves come forth many small branches like straw of corn: on the end
whereof does grow a gray shining seed or grain (...) to break, and like in
shape to the seeds of Gromell, but greater, and of the same color, whereof I
hold it a kind: every of which grains are bored through the midst like a
bead, and out of the hole comes a small idle or barren chaffie ear like unto
that of Darnell.

The place.
It is brought from Italy and the countries adjoining, into these countries,
where it does grow very well, but seldom comes to ripeness; yet my self
had ripe seed thereof in my garden, the Summer being very hot.

The time.
It is sown early in the Spring, or else the winter will overtake it before it
come to ripeness.

The Names.
Diverse have thought it to be Lithospermi (...), or a kind of Gromell, which
the seed does very notably resemble, and does not much differ from Dioscorides
his Gromell. Some think it Plinies Lithospermum; and therefore it may very
aptly be called in Latin, Arundo Lithospermos, that is in English, Gromell
reed, as Gesner says. It is generally called Lachrima (...), and Lachrima
Iobi: of some it is called Diospiros: in English it is called Jobs Tears, or
Jobs Drops, for that every grain resembles the drop or tear that falls
from the eye.

The Nature and virtues.
There is no mention made of this herb for the use of physic: only in
France and those places (where it is plentifully growing) they do make beads,
bracelets, and chains thereof, as we do with pomander and such like.

CHAP. 67. Of Buck-wheat.
(...). Buckwheat, or Bucke.


The Description.
BVck-wheat may very well be placed among the kinds of grain or corn, for
that oftentimes in time of necessity bread is made thereof, mixed among other
grain. It has round fat stalks somewhat crested, smooth and reddish, which
is divided in many arms or branches, whereupon do grow smooth and soft leaves
in shape like those of Iuie or one of the Bindeweeds, not much unlike Basil,
whereof Tabernamontanus called it Ocymum Cereale: The flowers be small, white,
and clustred together in one or more tufts or vmbels, slightly dashed over here
and there with a flourish of light Carnation color. The seeds are of a dark
blackish color, triangle, or three square like the seed of black Binde-weed,
The root is small and threddy.

The place.
It prospers very well in any ground, be it never so dry or barren, where it
is commonly sown to serve as it were in stead of a dunging. It quickly comes
up, and is very soon ripe: it is very common in and about the Namptwich in
Cheshire, where they sow it as well for food for their cattle, pullen, and
such like, as to the use aforesaid. It grows likewise in Lancashire, and in
some parts of our South country, about London in Middlesex, as also in Kent and
Essex.

The time.
This base kind of grain is sown in April and the beginning of May, and is
ripe in the beginning of August.

The Names.
Buck-wheat is called of the high Almaines, (...): of the base Almaines, (...);
that is to say, Hirci triticum, or Goats wheat: of some, Fagi triticum, Beech
Wheat: In Greek, (...), by Theophrastus; and by late Writers; (...): in
Latin, Fago triticum, taken from the fashion of the seed or fruit of the Beech
tree. It is called also Fegopyrum, and Tragopyron: In English, French wheat,
Bullimong, and Buck-wheat: In French, Dragee aux (...):

The temper.
Buck-wheat nourishes less than Wheat, (...), Barley, or Otes; yet more than
either Mill or Panicke.

The virtues.
Bread made of the meal of Buck-wheat is of easy digestion, and speedily
passes through the belly, but yields little nourishment.

CHAP. 68. Of Cow Wheat.
1 Melampyrum album. White Cow-wheat.
2 Melampyrum purpureum. Purple Cow-wheat.
3 Melampyrum caeruleum. Blew Cow-wheat.
4 Melampyrum luteum. Yellow Cow-wheat.


The Description.
1 MElampyrum grows upright, with a straight stalk, having other small
stalks coming from the same, of a foot long. The leaves are long and narrow,
and of a dark color. On the top of the branches grow bushy or spikie ears
full of flowers and small leaves mixed together, and much iagged, the whole
ear resembling a Foxe-taile. This ear begins to flower below, and so
upward by little and little unto the top: the small leaves before the opening
of the flowers, and likewise the buds of the flowers, are white of color. Then
come up broad husks, wherein are enclosed two seeds somewhat like wheat, but
smaller and browner. The root is of a woody substance.

2 3 These two are like the former in stalks and leaves, but different in the
color of their flowers, the which in the one are purple, and in the other
blew. Clusius calls these, as also the Crataeogonon treated of in the next
Chapter, by the names of Parietariae sylvestres.

4 Of this kind there is another called Melampyrum luteum, which grows near
unto the ground, with leaves not much unlike Hearts horn, among which rises up
a small straw with an ear at the top like Alopecuros, the common Fox-taile,
but of a yellow color.

The place.
1 The first grows among corn, and in pasture grounds that be fruitful: it
grows plentifully in the pastures about London.

The rest are strangers in England.

The time.
They flower in June and July.

The Names.
Melampyrum is called of some Triticum vaccinium: in English, Cow-wheat, and
Horse-floure: in Greek, (...): The fourth is called Melampyrum luteum: in
English, Yellow Cow-wheat.

The Danger.
The seed of Cow Wheat raises up fumes, and is hot and dry of nature, which
being taken in meats and drinks in the manner of Darnell, troubles the brain,
causing drunkenness and headache.

CHAP. 69. Of Wild Cow-Wheat.
1 Crataeogonon album. Wild Cow-wheat.


The Description.
1 THe first kind of wild Cow-Wheat Clusius in his Pannonick history calls
Parietaria sylvestris, or wild Pellitorie: which name, according to his own
words, if it do not fitly answer the Plant, he knows not what to call it, for
that the Latins have not given any name thereunto: yet because some have so
called it, he retains the same name. Notwithstanding he refers it unto the
kinds of Melampyrum, or Cow-wheat, or unto Crataeogonon, the wild Cow-wheat,
which it does very well answer in diverse points. It has an hairy four square
stalk, very tender, weak, and easy to break, not able to stand upright
without the help of his neighbors that dwell about him, a foot high or more;
whereupon do grow long thin leaves, sharp pointed, and oftentimes lightly snipt
about the edges, of a dark purplish color, sometimes greenish, set by couples
one opposite against the other; among the which come forth two flowers at one
joint, long and hollow, somewhat gaping like the flowers of a dead nettle, at
the first of a pale yellow, and after of a bright golden color; which do
flower by degrees, first a few, and then more, by means whereof it is long in
flouring. Which being past, there succeed small cups or seed vessels, wherein
is contained brown seed not unlike to wheat. The whole plant is hairy, not
differing from the plant Stichwort.

2 Red leafed wild Cow-wheat is like unto the former, saving that the leaves
be narrower; and the tuft of leaves more iagged. The stalks and leaves are of
a reddish horseflesh color. The flowers in form are like the other, but in
color differing; for that the hollow part of the flower with the heel or
spur is of a purple color, the rest of the flower yellow. The seed and
vessels are like the precedent.

3 Crataeogonon Euphrosine. Eyebright Cow-wheat.


The Description.
3 This kind of wild Cow-wheat Tabernamontanus has set forth under the title
of Odontites: others have taken it to be a kind of Euphrasia or Eyebright,
because it does in some sort resemble it, especially in his flowers. The stalks
of this plant are small, woody, rough, and square. The leaves are indented
about the edges, sharp pointed, and in most points resembling the former
Cow-wheat; so that of necessity it must be of the same kind, and not a kind
of Eyebright, as has been set down by some.

The place.
These wild kinds of Cow-wheat do grow commonly in fertile pastures, and
bushy Copses, or low woods, and among bushes upon barren heaths and such like
places.

The two first do grow upon Hampsted heath near London, among the Juniper
bushes and bilberry bushes in all the parts of the said heath, and in every
part of England where I have traveled.

The time.
They flower from the beginning of May, to the end of August.

The Names.
1 The first is called of Lobelius, Crataeogonon: and of Tabernamontanus,
Milium Syluaticum, or Wood Millet, and Alsine syluatica, or WoodChickweed.

2 The second has the same titles: in English, Wild Cow-wheat.

3 The last is called by Tabernamontanus, Odontites: of Dodonaeus, Euphrasia
altera, and Euphrosine. Hippocrates called the wild Cow-wheat, Polycarpum, and
Polycritum.

The Nature and virtues.
There is not much set down either of the nature or virtues of these plants:
only it is reported that the seeds do cause giddiness and drunkenness as
Darnell does.

The seed of Crataeogonon made in fine powder, and given in broth or otherwise,
mightily provoke Venerie.

Some write, that it will likewise cause women to bring forth male children.

See the virtues attributed to Crataeogonon by Dioscorides before, Chap. 38. B.

CHAP. 70. Of White Asphodill.
The kinds.
Having finished the kinds of corn, it follows to show unto you the sundry
sorts of Asphodils, whereof some have bulbous roots, other tuberous or knobby
roots, some of yellow color, and some of mixed colors: notwithstanding
Dioscorides makes mention but of one Asphodill, but Pliny sets down two;
which Dionysius confirms, saying, That there is the male and female Asphodil.
The latter age has observed many more besides the bulbed one, of which Galen
makes mention.

1 Asphodelus non ramosus. White Asphodill.
2 Asphodelus ramosus. Branched Asphodill.


The Description.
1 THe white Asphodill has many long and narrow leaves like those of leeks,
sharp pointed. The stalk is round, smooth, naked, and without leaves, two
cubits high, garnished from the middle upward with a number of flowers
starre-fashion, made of five leaves apiece; the color white, with some dark
purple streakes drawn down the backe-side. Within the flowers be certain
small chiues. The flowers being past, there spring up little round heads,
wherein are contained hard, black, and 3 square seeds like those of Buck-wheat
or Staues-acre. The toot is compact of many knobby roots growing out of one
head, like those of the Peonie, full of juice, with a small bitterness and
binding taste.

2 Branched Asphodill agrees well with the former description, saving that
this has many branches or arms growing out of the stalk, whereon the flowers
do grow, and the other has not any branch at all, wherein consists the
difference.

3 Asphodill with the reddish flower grows up in roots, stalk, leaf, and
manner of growing like the precedent, saving that the flowers of this be of a
dark red color, and the others white, which (...) forth the difference, if
there be any such difference, or any such plant at all: for I have conferred
with many most excellent men in the knowledge of plants, but none of them can
give me certain knowledge of any such, but tell me they have heard it
reported that such a one there is, and so have I also, but certainly I cannot
set down any thing of this plant until I hear more certainty: for as yet I
give no credit to my Author, which for reverence of his person I forbear to
name.

4 The yellow Asphodill has many roots growing out of one head, made of sundry
tough, fat, and oleous yellow sprigs, or gross strings, from the which rise up
many grassy leaves, thick and gross, tending to squarenesse; among the which
comes up a strong thick stalk set with the like leaves even to the flowers,
but less: upon the which do grow starre-like yellow flowers, otherwise like
the white Asphodill.

3 Asphodelus (...) rubente. Red Asphodill.
4 Asphodelus (...). Yellow Asphodill.
5 Asphodelus minimus. Dwarf Asphodil.


5 Besides these there is an Asphodill which Clusius for the smalnesse calls
Asphodelus minimus. The roots thereof are knotty and tuberous, resembling those
of the formerly described, but less: from these arise five or six very narrow
and long leaves; in the midst of which grows up a stalk of the height of a
foot, round and without branches, bearing at the top thereof a spoke of
flowers, consisting of six white leaves a piece, each of which has a streake
running along it, both on the inside and outside, like as the first
described. It flowers in the beginning of July, when as the rest are past their
flowers. It loses the leaves in Winter, and gets new ones again in the
beginning of April.

The time and place.
They flower in May and June, beginning below, and so flouring upward: and they
grow naturally in France, Italy, Spain, and most of them in our London Gardens.

The Names.
Asphodill is called in Latin, Asphodelus, Albucum, (...), and Hastula Regia:
in Greek, (...): in English, Asphodill, not Daffodil; for Daffodill is
Narcissus, another plant differing from Asphodill. Pliny writes, That the
stalk with the flowers is called Anthericos; and the root, that is to say, the
bulbs Asphodelus.

Of this Asphodill (...) makes mention in his Works, where he says, (...)
fools know not how much good there is in the Mallow and in the Asphodill,
because the roots of Asphodill are good to be eaten. Yet Galen does not believe
that he meant of this Asphodill, but of that bulbed one, whereof we will make
mention hereafter. And he himself testifies, that the bulbes thereof are not
to be (...) without very long seething; and therefore it is not like that
Hesiod has commended any such: (...) he seems to understand by the Mallow
and the Asphodil, such kind of food as is easily prepared, and soon made
ready.

The nature.
These kinds of Asphodils be hot and dry almost in the third degree.

The virtues.
After the opinion of Dioscorides and (...), the roots of Asphodill eaten,
provoke urine and the

One dram thereof taken in wine in manner before rehearsed, helps the pain
in the sides, ruptures,

The roots boiled in dregs of wine cure foul eating ulcers, all inflammations
of the dugges or

The juice of the root boiled in old sweet Wine, together with a little myrrh
and saffron, makes

Galen says, the roots burnt to ashes, and mixed with the grease of a ducke,
helps the Alopecia,

The weight of a dram thereof taken with wine helps the drawing together of
sinews, cramps,

The like quantity taken in broth provoke vomit, and helps those that are
bitten with any

The juice of the root cleanses and takes away the white morphew, if the face
be anointed

CHAP. 71. Of the Kings Spear.
1 Asphodelus luteus minor. The Kings Spear.
2 Asphodelus Lancastriae. (...) Asphodil.


3 Asphodelus Lancastriae verus. The true Lancashire Asphodil.


The Description.
1 THe leaves of the Kings Spear are long, narrow, and chamfered or furrowed,
of (...) bluish green color. The stalk is round, of a cubit high. The
flowers which grow (...) from the middle to the top are very many, in shape
like to the flowers of the other; which being past, (...) come in place thereof
little round heads or seed-vessels, wherein the seed is contained. The roots in
like manner are very many, long, and slender, smaller than those of the other
yellow sort. Upon the sides whereof grow forth certain strings, by which the
plant it self is easily increased and multiplied.

2 There is found in these days a certain waterie or marish Asphodill like
unto this last described, in stalk and flowers, without any difference at all.
It brings forth leaves of a beautiful green somewhat chamfered, like to
those of the Flower de-luce, or corne-flag, but narrower, not full a span long.
The stalk is strait, a foot high, whereupon grow the flowers, consisting of
six small leaves: in the middle whereof come sorth small yellow chiues or
threads. The seed is very small, contained in long sharp pointed cods. The root
is long, ioynted, and creeps as grass does, with many small strings.

3 Besides the last described (which our Author I fear mistaking, termed
Asphodelus Lancastriae) there is another water Asphodill, which grows in many
rotten moorish grounds in this kingdom, and in Lancashire is used by women to
die their hair of a yellowish color, and therefore by them it is termed
Maiden-haire, if we may believe Lobell.) This plant has leaves of some two
inches and an half, or three inches long, being somewhat broad at the bottom,
and so sharper toward their ends. The stalk seldom attaines to the height of
a foot, and it is smooth without any leaves thereon; the top thereof is adorned
with pretty yellow star-like flowers, whereto succeed longish little cods,
usually three, yet sometimes four or five square, and in these there is
contained a small red seed. The root consists only of a few small strings.

The place.
1 The small yellow Asphodill grows not of it self wild in these parts,
notwithstanding we have great plenty thereof in our London gardens.

2 The Lancashire Asphodill grows in moist and marish places near unto the
Town of Lancaster, in the moorish grounds there, as also near unto Maudsley
and Martom, two Villages not far from thence; where it was found by a
Worshipful and learned Gentleman, a diligent searcher of simples, and fervent
lover of plants, M. Thomas Hesket, who brought the plants thereof unto me for
the increase of my garden.

I received some plants thereof likewise from Master Thomas Edwards,
Apothecarie in Excester, learned and skillful in his profession, as also in the
knowledge of plants. He found this Asphodill at the foot of a hill in the West
part of England, called (...) hill, near unto a village of the same name.

This Asphodill figured and described out of Dodonaeus, and called Asphodelus
Lancastriae by our Author, grows in an heath some two miles from Bruges in
Flanders, and diverse other places of the Low Countries; but whether it grow in
Lancashire or no, I can say nothing of certainty: but I am certain, that
which I have described in the third place grows in many places of the West of
England; and this year 1632, my kind friend M. George Bowls sent me some
plants thereof, which I keep yet growing. Lobell also affirms this to be the
Lancashire Asphodill.

The time.
They flower in May and June: most of the leaves thereof remain green in the
Winter, if it be not extreme cold.

The Names.
Some of the later Herbarists think this yellow Asphodill to be Iphyon of
Theophrastus, and others judge it to be Erizambac of the Arabians. In Latin it
is called Asphodelus luteus: of (...) it is called (...) Regia. We have
Englished it, the Spear for a King, or small yellow Asphodill.

2 The Lancashire Asphodill is called in Latin, Asphodelus Lancastriae: and
may likewise be called Asphodelus palustris, or Pseudoasp hodelus luteus, or
the Bastard yellow Asphodill.

3 This is Asphodelus minimus luteus palustris Scoticus and Lancastriensis, of
Lobell; and the Pseudoasphodelus pumilio folijs Iridis, of Clusius, as far as
I can judge; although Bauhine distinguishes them.

The temperature and virtues.
It is not yet found out what use there is of any of them in nourishment or
medicines.

CHAP. 72. Of Onion Asphodill.
Asphodelus Bulbosus. Onion Asphodill.


The Description.
THe bulbed Asphodill has a round bulbus or Onion root, with some fibers
hanging thereat; from the which come up many grassie leaves, very well
resembling the Leeke; among the which leaves there rises up a naked or (...)
stem, garnished toward the top with many (...) flowers, of a whitish green on
the inside, and wholly green without, consisting of six little leaves sharp
pointed, with certain chiues or threads in the middle. After the flower is
past there succeeds a small knop or head three square, wherein lies the seed.

The place.
It grows in the gardens of Herbarists in London, and not elsewhere that I
know of, for it is not very common.

The time.
It floureth in June and July, and somewhat after.

The Names.
The stalk and flowers being like to those of the Asphodill before mentioned,
do show it to be Asphodeli species, or a kind of Asphodill; for which cause
also it seems to be that Asphodil of which Galen has made mention in his
second book of the Faculties of nourishments, in these words; The root of
Asphodill is in a manner like to the root of Squill, or Sea Onion, as well in
shape as bitterness. Notwithstanding, says Galen, my self have known certain
countrymen, who in time of famine could not with many boilings and steepings
make it fit to be eaten. It is called of Dodonaens, Asphodelus foemina, and
Asphodelus Bulbosus, Hyacintho-Asphodelus, and Asphodelus Hyacinthinus by
Lobell, and that rightly; for that the root is like the Hyacinth, and the
flowers like the Asphodill: and therefore as it does participate of both
kinds, so likewise does the name: in English we may call it Bulbed Asphodill.
Clusius calls it Ornithogalum majus, and that fitly.

The nature.
The round rooted Asphodil, according to Galen, has the same temperature and
virtue that Aron, Arisarum, and Dracontium have, namely an abstersive and
cleansing quality.

The virtues.
The young sprouts or springs thereof is a singular medicine against the yellow
Iaundise, for that the root is of power to make thin and open.

Galen says, that the ashes of this Bulbe mixed with oil or hens grease
cures the falling of the Alopecia or scalld head.

CHAP. 73. Of Yellow Lillies.
The kinds.
BEcause we shall have occasion hereafter to speak of certain Cloued or
Bulbed Lillies, we will in this chapter entreat only of another kind not
bulbed, which likewise is of two sorts, differing principally in their roots:
for in flowers they are Lillies, but in roots Asphodils, participating as it
were of both, though nearer approaching unto Asphodils than Lillies.

1 Lilium non bulbosum. The yellow Lilly.
2 Lilium non bulbosum Phoeniceum. The Day-Lillie.


The Description.
1 THe yellow Lilly has very long flaggie leaves, chamfered or channelled,
hollow in the midst like a gutter; among the which rises up a naked or bare
stalk, two cubits high, branched toward the top, with sundry brittle arms or
branches, whereon do grow many goodly flowers like unto those of the common
white Lilly in shape and proportion, of a shining yellow color; which being
past, there succeed three cornered husks or cods, full of black shining seeds
like those of the Peonie. The root consists of many knobs or tuberous clogs,
proceeding from one head, like those of the white Asphodill or Peonie.

2 The Day-Lillie has stalks and leaves like the former. The flowers be like
the white Lilly in shape, of an Orange tawny color: of which flowers much
might be said which I omit. But in brief, this plant brings forth in the
morning his bud, which at noone is full blown, or spread abroad, and the same
day in the evening it shuts it self, and in a short time after becomes as
rotten and stinking as if it had been trodden in a dunghill a month together,
in foul and rainie weather: which is the cause that the seed seldom follows,
as in the other of his kind, not bringing forth any at all that I could ever
observe; according to the old proverb, Soon ripe, soon rotten. His roots are
like the former.

The place.
These Lillies do grow in my garden, as also in the gardens of Herbarists, and
lovers of fine and rare plants; but not wild in England, as in other countries.

The time.
These Lillies do flower somewhat before the other Lillies, and the yellow
Lilly the soonest.

The Names.
Diverse do call this kind of Lilly, Liliasphodelus, Liliago, and also
Liliastrum, but most commonly Lilium non bulbosum: In English, Liriconfancie,
and yellow Lilly. The old Herbarists name it Hemerocallis: for they have two
kinds of Hemerocallis; the one a shrub or woody plant, as witnesses
Theophrastus, in his sixth book of the history of Plants. Pliny sets down
the same shrub among those plants, the leaves whereof only do serve for
garlands.

The other Hemerocallis which they set down, is a Flower which perishes at
night, and buddeth at the Sunnerising, according to (...); and therefore it is
fitly called (...); that is, Fair or beautiful for a day: and so we in
English may rightly term it the Day-Lillie, or Lilly (...) a day.

The nature.
The nature is rather referred to the Asphodils than to Lillies.

The virtues.
Dioscorides says, That the root stamped with honey, and a mother pessarie
made thereof with

The leaves stamped and applied do allay hot swellings in the dugges, after
women's travel in

The roots and the leaves be laid with good success upon burnings and
scaldings.

CHAP. 73. Of Bulbed Flower de-Luce.
1 (...) Bulbosa Latifolia. Broad leaued Bulbous Flower de-luce.
2 Iris Bulbosa Anglica. Onion Flower de-Luce.


The kinds.
LIke as we have set down sundry sorts of Flower de-luces, with flaggy leaves,
and tuberous or knobby roots, varying very notably in sundry respects, which we
have distinguished in their proper Chapters: it rests that in like manner we
set forth unto your view certain bulbous or Onion-rooted Flower de-luces,
which in this place do offer themselves unto our consideration, whereof there
be also sundry sorts, sorted into one chapter as follows.

3 Iris Bulbosa flore vario. Changeable Flower de-luce.
4 Iris Bulbosa versicolor Polyclonos. Many branched changeable Flower de-luce.


The Description.
1 THe first of these, whose figure here we give you under the name of Iris
Bulbosa Latifolia, has leaves somewhat like those of the Day-Lillie, soft, and
somewhat palish green, with the under sides somewhat whiter; amongst which
there rises up a stalk bearing at the top thereof a Flower a little in shape
different from the formerly described Flower de-luces. The color thereof is
blew; the number of the leaves whereof it consists, nine: three of these are
little, and come out at the bottom of the Flower as soon as it is opened;
three more are large, and being narrow at their bottom, become broader by
little and little, until they come to turn downwards, whereas then they are
shapen somewhat roundish or obtuse. In the midst of these there runs up a
yellow variegated line to the place whereas they bend back. The three other
leaves are arched like as in other Flowers of this kind, and divided at their
upper end, and contain in them three threads of a whitish blew color.

This is called Iris Bulbosa Latifolia, by Clusius; and Hyacinthus Poetarum
Latifolius, by Lobell.

It flowers in January and February, whereas it grows naturally, as it does
in diverse places of Portugal and Spain. It is a tender plant, and seldom
thriues well in our gardens.

2 Onion Flower de-luce has long narrow blades or leaves, crested, chamfered,
or streaked on the back side as it were welted; below somewhat round, opening
it self toward the top, yet remaining as it were half round, whereby it
resembles an hollow trough or gutter. In the bottom of the hollownesse it
tends to whiteness; and among these leaves do rise up a stalk of a cubit
high; at the top whereof grows a fair blew Flower, not differing in shape
from the common Flower de-luce: the which being past, there come in the place
thereof long thick cods or seed-vessels, wherein is contained yellowish seed
of the bigness of a tare or fitch. The root is round like an Onion, covered
over with certain brown skins or filmes. Of this kind there are some five
or six varieties, caused by the various colors of the Flowers.

5 Iris Bulbosa Flore luteo cum flore and semine. Yellow bulbed Flower de-luce
in flower and seed.


3 Changeable Flower de-luce has leaves, stalks, and Roots like the former,
but lesser. The Flower has likewise the form of the Flower de-luce, that is
to say, it consists of six greater leaves, and three lesser; the greater
leaves fold backward and hang downward, the lesser stand upright; and in the
middle of the leaves there rises up a yellow welt, white about the brimmes,
and shadowed all over with a wash of thin blew tending to a Watchet color.
Toward the stalk they are stripped over with a light purple color, and
likewise amongst the hollow places of those that stand upright (which cannot be
expressed in the figure) there is the same fair purple color; the smell and
savor very sweet and pleasant. The root is Onion fashion, or bulbous like the
other.

4 There is also another variegated Flower de-luce, much like this last
described, in the color of the Flower; but each plant produces more branches
and Flowers, whence it is termed Iris Bulbosa versicolor polyclonos,
Many-branched changeable Flower de-luce.

5 Of which kind or sort there is another in my Garden, which I received from
my Brother James Garret Apothecarie, far more beautiful than the last
described; the which is dashed over, in stead of the blew or watchet color,
with a most pleasant gold yellow color, of smell exceeding sweet, with bulbed
roots like those of the other sort.

6 It is reported, that there is in the garden of the Prince Elector the
Lantgraue of Hessen, one of this sort or kind, with white Flowers, the which
as yet I have not seen.

Besides these sorts mentioned by our Author, there are of the narrow leaued
bulbous Flower de-luces, some twenty four or more varieties, which in shape of
roots, leaves, and Flowers differ very little, or almost nothing at all; so
that he which knows one of these may presently know the rest. Wherefore because
it is a thing no more pertinent to a general history of Plants, to insist
upon these accidental nicities, than for him that writes a history of Beasts
to describe all the colors, and their mixtures, in Horses, Dogs, and the like;
I refer such as are desirous to inform themselves of those varieties, to such
as have only and purposely treated of Flowers and their diversities, as
De-Bry, Swerts, and our Countreyman M. Parkinson, who in his Paradisus
terrestris, set forth in English, Anno 1629. has iudiciously and exactly
comprehended all that has been delivered by others in this nature.

6 Iris Bulbosa (...) cinereo. Ash-colored Flower de-(...).
7 Iris Bulbosa flore albido. Whitish Flower de-luce.


The place.
The second of these bulbed Flower de-luces grows wild, or of it self, in
the corn fields of the West parts of England, as about Bathe and Wells, and
those places adjacent; from whence they were first brought into London, where
they be naturalised, and increase in great plenty in our London gardens.

The other sorts do grow naturally in Spain and Italy wild, from whence we
have had Plants for our London gardens, whereof they do greatly abound.

The time.
They flower in June and July, and seldom after.

The Names.
The Bulbed Flower de-luce is called of Lobelius, Iris Bulbosa, and also
Hyacinthus flore Iridis: of some, Hyacinthus Poetarum; and peradventure it is
the same that Apuleius mentions in the one and twentieth Chapter, saying,
That Iris, named among the old Writers Hieris, may also be called, and not
improperly, Hierobulbus, or Hieribulbus: as though you should say, Iris
Bulbosa, or (...) Ireos; unless you would have (...), called a greater or
larger Bulbe: for it is certain, that great and huge things were called of the
Ancients, (...), or Sacra: in English, Holy.

The nature.
The nature of these Bulbed Flower de-luces are referred to the kinds of
Asphodils.

The virtues.
Take, says Apuleius, of the herb Hierobulbus six ^. Goats suet as much, Oil
of Alcanna one pound; mix them together, being first stamped in a stone mortar,
it takes away the pain of the

(...), if a woman do use to wash her face with the decoction of the (...),
(...) with the meal of Lupines, it forthwith cleanses away the freckles and
morphew, and such like deformities.

CHAP. 75. Of Spanish Nut.
1 Sisynrichium majus. Spanish Nut.
2 Sisynrichium minus. Small Spanish Nut.
3 Iris Tuberosa. Velvet Flower de-luce.


The Description.
1 SPanish Nut has small grassie leaves like those of the Stars of Bethlem,
or Ornithogalum; among which rises up a small stalk of half a foot high,
garnished with the like leaves, but shorter. The Flowers grow at the top, of a
sky color, in shape resembling the Flower de-luce, or common Iris; but the
leaves that turn down are each of them marked with a yellowish spot: they
fade quickly, and being past, there succeed small cods with seeds as small as
those of Turnips. The root is round, composed of two bulbes, the (...) lying
upon the other as those of the Corn flag usually do; and they are covered with
a skin or filme in shape like a Net. The Bulbe is sweet in taste, and may be
eaten before any other bulbed (...).

2 There is set forth another of this kind, somewhat lesser, with Flowers that
smell sweeter than the former.

3 Velvet Flower de-luce has many long square leaves, spongeous or full of
pith, trailing upon the ground, in shape like to the leaves (...) Rushes: among
which rises up a stalk of a foot high, bearing at the top a Flower like the
Flower de-luce. The lower leaves that turn downward are of a perfect black
color, soft and smooth as is black Velvet; the blackness is welted about
with greenish yellow, or as we term it a Goose-turd green; of which color
the uppermost leaves do consist: which being past, there follows a great knob
or crested seed vessel of the bigness of a man's thumb, wherein is contained
round white seed as big as the Fetch or tare. The root consists of many
knobby bunches like fingers.

The place.
These bastard kinds of Flower de-luces are strangers in England, except it be
among some few diligent Herbarists in London, who have them in their gardens,
where they increase exceedingly; especially the last described, which is said
to grow wild about Constantinople, Morea, and Greece: from whence it has
been transported into Italy, where it has been taken for Hermodactylus, and
by some expressed or set forth in writing under the title Hermodactylus; whereas
in truth it has no semblance at all with Hermodactylus.

The time.
The wild or Bastard Flower de-luces do flower from May to the end of June.

The Names.
1 2 These bulbed bastard Flower de-luces, which we have Englished Spanish
Nuts, are called in Spain, Nozelhas; that is, little Nuts: the lesser sort
Parua Nozelha, and Macuca: we take it to be that kind of nourishing Bulbe
which is named in Greek, (...): of Pliny, Sisynrichium.

3 Some, as Ulysses Aldroandus, would have this to be Louchitis Prior, of
Dioscor. Matthiolus makes it Hermodactylius verus, or the true Hermodactill:
Dodonaeus and Lobell more fitly refer it to the Flower de-luces, and call it
Iris tuberosa.

The Nature and virtues.
Of these kinds of Flower de-luces there has been little or nothing at all
left in writing concerning their natures or virtues; only the Spanish nut is
eaten at the tables of rich and delicious, nay vicious persons, in sallads or
otherwise, to procure lust and lechery.

CHAP. 76. Of Corne-Flagge.
1 Gladiolus Narbonensis. French Corne-Flag, or Sword-Flag.
2 Gladiolus Italicus. Italian Corne-Flag, or Sword-Flag.


4 Gladiolus Lacustris. Water Sword-Flag.


The Description.
1 FRench Corne-Flagge has small stiff leaves, ribbed or chamfered with long
nerves or sinews running through the same, in shape like those of the small
Flower deluce, or the blade of a sword, sharp pointed, of an ouer-worne green
color, among the which rises up a stiff brittle stalk two cubits high,
whereupon do grow in comely order many fair purple Flowers, gaping like those
of Snapdragon, or not much differing from the Fox-Gloue, called in Latin
Digitalis. After them come round knobbie seed-vessels, full of chaffie seed,
very light, of a brown reddish color. The root consists of two Bulbes, one
set upon the other; the uppermost whereof in the beginning of the Spring (...)
lesser, and more full of juice; the lower greater, but more loose and lithie,
which a little while (...) perishes.

2 Italian Corn-Flag has long narrow leaves with many ribs or nerves running
through the same: the stalk is stiff and brittle, whereupon do grow Flowers
orderly placed upon one side of the stalk, whereas the precedent has his
flowers placed on both the sides of the stalk, in shape and color like the
former, as are also the roots, but seldom seen one above another, as in the
former.

3 There is a third sort of Corne-Flag which agrees with the last described in
every point, saving that the Flowers of this are of a pale color, as it were
between white, and that which we call Maidens Blush.

4 This Water Sword-Flag, described by (...) in his Cur. Post. has leaves
about a span long, thick and hollow, with a partition in their middles, like
as we see in the cods of StockeGillouers, and the like: their color is
green, and taste sweet, so that they are an acceptable food to the wild Ducks
ducking down to the bottom of the water; for they sometimes lie some else
under water: which notwithstanding is ouer-topt by the stalk, which springs up
from among these leaves, and bears Flowers of color white, larger than those
of Stock-Gillouers, but in that hollow part that is next the stalk they are of
a bluish color, almost in shape resembling the Flowers of the Corne-Flag, yet
not absolutely like them. They consist of five leaves, whereof the two
uppermost are reflected toward the stalk; the three other being broader hang
downwards. After the flowers there follow round pointed vessels filled with
red seed. It flowers at the end of July.

It was found in some places of West-Friseland, by John Dortman a learned
Apothecary of Groningen. It grows inwaters which have pure gravel at the
bottom, and that bring forth no plant besides.

Clusius, and Dortman who sent it him, call it Gladiolus Lacustris, or
Stagnalis.

The place.
These kinds of Corne-Flags grow in meadows, and in earable grounds among
corn, in many places of Italy, as also in the parts of France bordering
thereunto. Neither are the fields of Austria and Morauia without them, as
Cordus writes. We have great plenty of them in our London Gardens, especially
for the garnishing and decking them up with their seemly Flowers.

The time.
They flower from May to the end of July.

The Names.
Corne-Flag is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Gladiolus; and of some,
Ensis: of others, (...), and Gladiolus Segetalis. Theophrastus in his discourse
of Phasganum makes it the same with Xiphion. Valerius Cordus calls
Corne-Flag Victorialis foemina: others, Victorialis rotunda: in the Germane
Tongue, Seigwurtz: yet we must make a difference between Gladiolus and
Victorialis longa; for that is a kind of Garlic found upon the highest
Alpish mountains, which is likewise called of the Germans Seigwurtz. The
Flowers of Corne-Flag are called of the Italians, Monacuccio: in English,
Corne-Flag, Corne-Sedge, Sword-Flag, Corn Gladin: in French, Glais.

The nature.
The root of Corne-Flag, as Galen says, is of force to draw, waste, or consume
away, and dry, as also of a subtle and digesting quality.

The virtues.
The root stamped with the powder of Frankincense and wine, and applied,
draws forth splinters

Being stamped with the meal of Darnell and honied water, does waste and make
subtle hard

Some affirm, that the upper root provoke bodily lust, and the lower causes
barrenness.

The upper root drunk in water is profitable against that kind of bursting in
children called (...).

The root of Corne-Flag stamped with hogs grease and wheaten meal, has been
found by late (...) Scrophulae, and such like swellings in the throat.

The cods with the seed dried and beaten into powder, and drunk in Goats milk
or Asses milk,

CHAP. 77. Of Starry Hyacinths and their kinds.
1 Hyacinthus stellatus Fuchsij. Starry Iacinth.
2 Hyacinthus stellaris albicans. The white floured starry Iacinth.


The kinds.
THere be likewise bulbous or Onion rooted plants that do orderly succeed,
whereof some are to be eaten, as Onions, Garlic, Leekes, and Ciues;
notwithstanding I am first to entreat of those bulbed roots, whose fair and
beautiful Flowers are received for their grace and ornament in gardens and
garlands: the first are the Hyacinths, whereof there is found at this day
diverse sorts, differing very notably in many points, as shall be declared in
their several descriptions.

3 Hyacinthus stellatus bifolius. Two-leaued starry Iacinth.
4 Hyacinthus stellatus Lilifolius cum flore and semine. The Lilly leaued
starry Iacinth in flower and seed.
(...) (...) stellaris (...). The starry Iacinth of Constantinople.


The Description.
1 THe first kind of Iacinth has three very fat thick brown leaves, hollow
like a little trough, very brittle, of the length of a finger: among which
shoot up fat, thick brownish stalks, soft and very tender, and full of juice;
whereupon do grow many small blew Flowers consisting of six little leaves spread
abroad like a star. The seed is contained in small round bullets, which are
so ponderous or heavy that they lie trailing upon the ground. The root is
bulbous or Onion fashion, covered with brownish scales or filmes.

2 There is also a white floured one of this kind.

3 There is found another of this kind which seldom or never has more than
two leaves. The roots are bulbed like the other. The Flowers be whitish,
starre-fashion, tending to blewnesse, which I received of Robinus of Paris.

8 Hyacinthus stellaris Someri. Summers starry Iacinth.
9 Hyacinthus stellatus aestivus major. The greater starry Summer Iacinth.


4 This kind of Hyacinth has many broad leaves spread upon the ground, like
unto those of Garden Lilly, but shorter. The stalks do rise out of the midst
thereof bare, naked, and very smooth, an handful high; at the top whereof do
grow small blew flowers starre-fashion, very like unto the precedent. The root
is thick and full of juice, compact of many scaly cloves of a yellow color.

There are some ten or eleven varieties of starry Iacinths, besides these two
mentioned by our Author. They differ each from other either in the time of
flouring (some of them flouring in the Spring, other some in Summer) in their
bigness, or the colors of their flowers. The leaves of most of them are much
like to our ordinary Iacinth, or Hare-bels, and lie spread upon the ground.
Their flowers in shape resemble the last described, but are usually more in
number, and somewhat larger. The color of most of them are blew or purple, one
of them excepted, which is of an Ash color, and is known by the name of
Summers his Iacinth. I think it not amiss to give you their usual names,
together with some of their figures; for so you may easily impose them truly
upon the things themselves whenever you shall see them.

5 Hyacinthus stellaris Byzantinus nigra radice, flore (...).

The blew starry Iacinth of Constantinople, with the black root.

6 Hyacinthus stellatus Byzantinus major (...) (...).

The greater blew starry Iacinth of Constantiple.

7 Hyacinthus stellatus Byzantinus alter flore boraginis.

The other blew starry Iacinth of Constantinonople, with Flowers somewhat
resembling Borage.

8 Hyacinthus stellaris aestivus, sieve exoticus Someri flore cinereo.

Ash colored starry Iacinth, or Summers Iacinth.

9 Hyacinthus stellatus aestivus major.

The greater starry Summer Iacinth.

10 Hyacinthus stellatus aestivus minor.

The lesser starry Summer Iacinth.

11 Hyacinthus stellaris Poreti flore (...) strijs purpureis.

Porets starry Iacinth with blew Flowers, having purple streakes along their
middles.

12 Hyacinthus (...) stellaris flore (...) caeruleo.

The Spanish starry Iacinth with deep blew flowers.

13 There is another starry Iacinth more large and beautiful than any of these
before mentioned. The leaves are broad and not very long, spread upon the
ground, and in the midst of them there rises up a stalk which at the top
bears a great spoke of fair starry flowers, which first begin to open
themselves below, and so show themselves by little and little to the top of the
stalk. The usual sort hereofhath blew or purple flowers. There is also a sort
hereof which has flesh-coloured flowers, and another with white Flowers: This
is called Hyacinthus stellatus Peruanus, The starry Iacinth of Peru.

10 Hyacinthus stellatus aestivus minor. The lesser starry Summer Iacinth.
13 Hyacinthus Peruanus. Hyacinth of Peru.


Those who are studious in varieties of Flowers, and require larger
descriptions of these, may have recourse to the Works of the learned Carolus
(...) in Latin, or to M. Parkinsons Work in English, where they may have full
satisfaction.

The place.
The three-first mentioned Plants grow in many places of Germany in woods and
mountains, as (...) and Gesner do testify: In Bohemia also upon diverse banks
that are full of Herbs. In England we cherish most of these mentioned in this
place, in our gardens, only for the beauty of their flowers.

The time.
The three first begin to flower in the midst of January, and bring forth
their seed in May. The other flowers in the Spring.

The Names.
1 The first of these Hyacinths is called Hyacinthus stellatus, or Stellaris
Fuchsij, of the starre-like Flowers: Narcissus caeruleus Bockij: of some, Flos
Martius stellatus.

3 This by Lobell is thought to be Hyacinthus Bifolius, of Theophrastus: Tragus
calls it Narcissus caeruleus: and Fuchsius, Hyacinthus caeruleus minor mas. We
may call it in English, The small two leaued starrie Iacinth.

4 The Lilly Hyacinth is called Hyacinthus Germanicus Liliflorus, or Germane
Hyacinth, taken from the country where it naturally grows wild.

The virtues.
The faculties of the starry Hyacinths are not written of by any. But the Lilly
leaued Iacinth, (which grows naturally in a hill in Aquitaine called Hos,
where the Herdmen call it Sarahug) is said by them to cause the heads of such
cattle as feed thereon to swell exceedingly, and then kills them: which shows
it has a malign and poisonous quality. Clus.

CHAP. 78. Of Autumn Hyacinths.
1 Hyacinthus Autumnalis minor. Small Autumn Iacinth.
2 Hyacinthus Autumnalis major. Great Autumn Iacinth.


The Description.
1 AVtumne Iacinth is the least of all the Iacinths: it has small narrow
grassy leaves spread abroad upon the ground; in the midst whereof springs
up a small naked stalk an handful high, set from the middle to the top with
many small starre-like blew flowers, having certain small loose chiues in the
middle. The seed is black contained in small husks: the root is bulbous.

2 The great Winter Iacinth is like unto the precedent, in leaves, stalks, and
flowers, not differing in any one point but in greatness.

3 To these I think it not amiss to add another small Hyacinth, more
different from these last described in the time of the flouring, than in shape.
The root of it is little, small, white, longish, with a few fibers at the
bottom; the leaves are small and long like the last described. The stalk,
which is scarce an handful high, is adorned at the top with three or four
starry flowers of a bluish Ash color, each flower consisting of six little
leaves, with six chiues and their pointals, of a dark blew, and a pestill in
the midst. It flowers in April.

The place.
The greater Autumn Iacinth grows not wild in England, but it is to be found
in some gardens.

The first or lesser grows wild in diverse places of England, as upon a bank
by the Thames side between Chelsey and London.

The time.
They flower in the end of August, and in September, and sometimes after.

The Names.
1 The first is called Hyacinthus Autumnalis minor, or the lesser Autumn
Iacinth, and Winter Iacinth.

2 The second, Hyacinthus Autumnalis major, the great Autumn Iacinth, or
Winter Iacinth.

3 This is called by Lobell, Hyacinthus parvulus stellaris vernus, The small
starry Spring Iacinth.

CHAP. 79. Of the English Iacinth, or Hare-Bels.
1 Hyacinthus Anglicus. English Hare-bels.
2 Hyacinthus albus Anglicus. White English Hare-bels


The Description.
1 THe blew Hare-bels or English Iacinth is very common throughout all England.
It has long narrow leaves leaning toward the ground, among the which spring
up naked or bare stalks laden with many hollow blew Flowers, of a strong sweet
smell, somewhat stuffing the head: after which come the coddes or round knobs,
containing a great quantity of small black shining seed. The root is bulbous,
full of a slimy glewish juice, which will serve to set feathers upon arrows in
stead of glue, or to paste books with: whereof is made the best starch next
unto that of Wake-robin roots.

4 Hyacinthus Orientalis caeruleus. The blew Oriental Iacinth.
5 Hyacinthus Orientalis Polyanthos. Many floured Oriental Iacinth.


2 The white English Iacinth is altogether like unto the precedent, saving that
the leaves hereof are somewhat broader, the Flowers more open, and very white
of color.

3 There is found wild in many places of England, another sort, which has
Flowers of a fair carnation color, which makes a difference from the other.

There are also sundry other varieties of this sort, but I think it
unnecessary to insist upon them, their difference is so little, consisting not
in their shape, but in the color of their Flowers.

The blew Hare-bels grow wild in woods, copses, and in the borders of fields
every where through England.

The other two are not so common, yet do they grow in the woods by Colchester
in Essex, in the fields and woods by South-fleet, near unto Graues-end in
Kent, as also in a piece of ground by Canturbury called the Clapper, in the
fields by Bathe, about the woods by Warrington in Lancashire, and other places.

The time.
They flower from the beginning of May unto the end of June.

The Names.
1 The first of our English Hyacinths is called Hyacinthus Anglicus, for that
it is thought to grow more plentifully in England than elsewhere; of Dodonaeus,
Hyacinthus non scriptus, or the unwritten Iacinth.

2 The second, Hyacinthus Belgicus candidus, or the Low Country Hyacinth with
white Flowers.

3 This third is called Hyacinthus Anglicus, aut (...) (...), Carnation
Harebels.

6 Hyacinthus Orientalis polyanthos alter. The other many-Floured Oriental
Iacinth.
7 Hyacinthus Orientalis (...). Reddish purple Oriental Iacinth.
8 Hyacinthus Orientalis albus. White Oriental Iacinth.
9 Hyacinthus Brumalis. Winter Iacinth.


The Description.
4 The Oriental Iacinth has great leaves, thick, fat, and full of juice,
deeply hollowed in the middle like a trough: from the middle of those leaves
rises up a stalk two hands high, bare without leaves, very smooth, soft, and
full of juice, laden toward the top with many fair blew Flowers, hollow like a
bell, greater than the English Iacinth, but otherwise like them. The root is
great, bulbous, or Onion fashion, covered with many scaly reddish filmes or
pillings, such as cover Onions.

5 The Iacinth with many Flowers (for so does the word Polyanthos import) has
very many large and broad leaves, short and very thick, fat, or full of slimy
juice: from the middle whereof rise up strong thick gross stalks, bare and
naked, set from the middle to the top with many blew or sky colored Flowers
growing for the most part upon one side of the stalk. The root is great,
thick, and full of slimy juice.

10 Hyacinthus Orientalis caul folioso Oriental Iacinth with leaves on the
stalk.
11 Hyacinthus Orientalis florepleno. The double floured Oriental Iacinth.


6 There is another like the former in each respect, saving that the flowers
are wholly white on the inside, and white also on the outside, but three of the
out-leaues are of a pale whitish yellow. These flowers smell sweet as the
former, and the heads wherein the seeds are contained are of a lighter green
color.

7 There is come unto us from beyond the seas diverse other sorts, whose figures
are not extant with us; of which there is one like unto the first of these
Oriental Iacinths, saving that the flowers thereof are purple colored; whence
it is termed Hyacinthus purpuro rubeus.

8 Likewise there is another called Orientalis albus, differing also from the
others in color of the flowers, for that these are very white, and the others
blew.

9 There is another called Hyacinthus Brumalis, or winter Iacinth: it is like
the others in shape, but differs in the time of flouring.

10 There is another Hyacinth belonging rather to this place than any other,
for that in root, leaves, flowers, and seeds it resembles the first described
Oriental Iacinth; but in one respect it differs not only from them, but also
from all other Iacinths: which is, it has a leauie stalk, having sometimes
one, and otherwhiles two narrow long leaves coming forth at the bottom of 14
Hyacinthus obsoleto flore Hispanicus major. Thegreater dusky floured Spanish
Iacinth.
15 Hyacinthus minor Hispanicus. The lesser Spanish Iacinth.
16 Hyacinthus Indicus (...). The tuberous rooted Indian Iacinth.
the setting on of the flower. Whereupon Clusius calls it Hyacinthus Orientalis
(...) solioso: That is, the Oriental Hyacinth with leaves on the stalk.

Of double floured Oriental Hyacinths.
Of this kindred there are two or three more varieties, whereof I will give you
the description of the most notable, and the names of the other two; which,
with that I shall deliver of this, may serve for sufficient description. The
first of these (which Clusius calls Hyacinthus Orientalis subvirescente flore,
or, the greenish floured double Oriental Iacinth) has leaves, roots, and
seeds like unto the formerly described Oriental Iacinths; but the flowers
(wherein the difference consists) are at the first, before they be open, green,
and then on the out side next to the stalk of a whitish blew; and they consist
of six leaves whose tips are whitish, yet retaining some manifest greenes: then
out of the midst of the flower comes forth another flower consisting of three
leaves, whitish on their inner side, yet keeping the great vein or streake
upon the outer side, each flower having in the middle a few chiues with
blackish pendants. It flowers in April.

12 This variety of the last described is called Hyacinthus Orientalis flore
(...) pleno, The double blew Oriental Iacinth

13 This, Hyacinthus Orientalis candidissimus flore pleno, The milke-white
double Oriental (...).

14 This, which Clusius calls Hyacinthus obsoletior Hispanicus, has leaves
somewhat narrower, and more flexible than the Muscari, with a white vein
running along the inside of them: among these leaves there rises up a stalk
of some foot high, bearing some fifteen or sixteen flowers, more or less, in
shape much like the ordinary English, consisting of six leaves, three standing
much out, and the other three little or nothing. These flowers are of a very
dusky color, as it were mixed with purple, yellow, and green: they have no
smell. The seed, which is contained in triangular heads, is smooth, black,
scaly, and round. It flowers in June.

15 The lesser Spanish Hyacinth has leaves like the Grape-floure, and small
flowers shaped like the Oriental Iacinth, some are of color blew, and other
some white. The seeds are contained in three cornered seed-vessels. I have
given the figure of the white and blew together, with their seed-vessels.

16 This Indian Iacinth with the tuberous root (says Clusius) has many long
narrow sharp pointed leaves spread upon the ground, being somewhat like to
those of Garlic, and in the midst of these rise up many round firm stalks
of some two cubits high, and often times higher, sometimes exceeding the
thickness of ones little finger; which is the reason that oftentimes, (...)
they be borne up by something, they lie along upon the ground. These stalks
are at (...) spaces ingirt with leaves which end in sharp points. The tops of
these stalks are adorned with many white flowers, somewhat in shape resembling
those of the Oriental Iacinth. The roots are knotty or tuberous, with diverse
fibers coming out of them.

The place.
These kinds of Iacinths have been brought from beyond the Seas, some out of
one country, and some out of others, especially from the East countries,
whereof they took their names Orientalis.

The time.
They flower from the end of January unto the end of April.

The nature.
The Hyacinths mentioned in this Chapter do lightly cleanse and bind; the
seeds are dry in the third degree; but the roots are dry in the first degree,
and cold in the second.

The virtues.
The Root of Hyacinth boiled in Wine and drunk, stops the belly, provoke
urine, and

The seed is of the same virtue, and is of greater force in stopping the laske
and bloody flix. Being

The roots, after the opinion of Dioscorides, being beaten and applied with
white Wine, (...)

The seed given with Southerne-wood in Wine is good against the Iaundice.

CHAP. 80. Of Fair baired Iacinth.
The Description.
1 THe Fair haired Iacinth has long fat leaves, hollowed along the inside,
trough fashion, as are most of the Hyacinths, of a dark green color tending
to redness. The stalk rises out of the midst of the leaves, bare and
naked, soft and full of slimie juice, which are beset round about with many
small flowers of an ouerworne purple color: The top of the spike consists of
a number of fair shining purple flowers, in manner of a tuft or bush of
hairs, whereof it took his name Comosus, or fair haired. The seed is
contained in small bullets, of a shining black color, as are most of those of
the Hyacinths. The roots are bulbous or Onion fashion, full of slimy juice,
with some hairy threads fastened unto rheir bottom.

2 White haired Iacinth differs not from the precedent in roots, stalks,
leaves, or seed. The flowers hereof are of a dark white color, with some
blackness in the hollow part of them, which sets forth the difference.

3 Of this kind I received another sort from Constantinople, resembling the
first hairy Hyacinth very notably: but differs in that, that this is
altogether greater, as well in leaves, roots, and flowers, as also is of
greater beauty without all comparison.

1 Hyacinthus comosus. Fair haired Iacinth.
2 Hyacinthus comosus albus: White haired Iacinth.
3 Hyacinthus comosus Bizantinus. Faire-haired Iacinth of Constantinople.
5 Hyacinthus comosus ramosus elegantior. Fair curld-haired branched Iacinth.


4 There are two other more beautiful haired Iacinths nourished in the gardens
of our prime Florists. The first of these has roots and leaves resembling the
last described: the stalk commonly rises to the height of a foot, and it is
divided into many branches on every side, which are small and threddy; and then
at the end as it were of these threddy branches there come forth many smaller
threads of a dark purple color, and these spread and diuaricate themselves
diverse ways, much after the manner of the next described; yet the threads are
neither of so pleasing a color, neither so many in number, nor so finely
curled. This is called Hyacinthus comosus ramosus purpureus, The fair haired
branched Iacinth.

5 This is a most beautiful and elegant plant, and in his leaves and roots he
differs little from the last described; but his stalk, which is as high as the
former, is divided into very many slender branches, which subdivided into great
plenty of curled threads variously spread abroad, make a very pleasant show.
The color also is a light blew, and the flowers usually grow so, that they are
most dilated at the bottom, and so straiten by little and little after the
manner of a Pyramide. These flowers keep their beauty long, but are succeeded
by no seeds that yet could be obserned. This by Fabius Columna (who first made
mention hereof in writing) is called Hyacinthus (...) panniculosa coma: By
others, Hyacinthus comosus ramosus elegantior, The fair curld-haire Iacinth.

These flower in May.

6 Hyacinthus botryoides (...). Blew Grape-floure.
7 Hyacinthus botryoides caeruleus major, Great Grape-floure.


6 The small Grape flower has many long fat and weak leaves trailing upon the
ground, hollow in the middle like a little trough, full of slimie juice like
the other Iacinths; amongst which come forth thick soft smooth and weak
stalks, leaning this way and that way, as not able to stand upright by reason
it is surcharged with very heavy flowers on his top, consisting of many little
bottle-like blew flowers, closely thrust or packed together like a bunch of
grapes, of a strong smell, yet not unpleasant, somewhat resembling the savor
of the Orange. The root is round and bulbous, set about with infinite young
cloves or roots, whereby it greatly increases.

7 The great Grape-floure is very like unto the smaller of his kind. The
difference (...), in that this plant is altogether greater, but the leaves are
not so long.

8 The sky-colored Grape-floure has a few leanes in respect of the other
Grape-floures, the which are (...), fuller of juice, stiff and upright,
whereas the others traile upon the ground. The flowers grow at the top, thrust
or packt together like a bunch of Grapes, of a pleasant bright sky color,
every little bottle-like flower set about the hollow entrance with small white
spots not easy to be perceived. The roots are like the former.

8 Hyacinthus Botryoides caeruleus major. Great Grape-floure.


9 The white Grape-floure differs not from the sky-colored Iacinth, but in
color of the flower: for this Iacinth is of a pleasant white color tending to
yellownes, tipped about the hollow part with White, whiter than White it self;
otherwise there is no difference.

The Place.
These plants are kept in gardens for the beauty of their flowers, wherewith
our London gardens do abound.

The Time.
They flower from February to the end of May.

The Names.
The Grape-floure is called Hyacinthus (...), and Hyacinthus (...) Dodonaei: of
some, Bulbus Esculentus, Hyacinthus syluestris cordi, Hyacinthus exiguus Tragi.
Some judge them to be (...), of (...).

The fair haired Iacinth described in the first place is the Hyacinthus of
Dioscorides and the Ancients.

The Nature and Virtues.
The virtues set down in the precedent Chapter properly belong to that kind
of Hyacinth which is described in the first place in this Chapter.

CHAP. 81. Of Muscari, or Musked Grape-floure.
The Description.
1 YEllow Muscarie has five or six long leaves spread upon the ground, thick,
fat, and full of slimie juice, turning and winding them selves crookedly this
way and that way, hollowed along the middle like a trough, as are those of
fair haired Iacinth, which at the first budding or springing up are of a
purplish color; but being grown to perfection, become of a dark green
color: amongst the which leaves rise up naked, thick, and fat stalks,
infirm and weak in respect of the thickness and greatness thereof, lying
also upon the ground as do the leaves; set from the middle to the top on every
side with many yellow flowers, every one made like a small pitcher or little
box, with a narrow mouth, exceeding sweet of smell like the savor of musk,
whereof it took the name Muscari. The seed is enclosed in puffed or blown up
cods, confusedly made without order, of a fat and spongeous substance, wherein
is contained round black seed. The root is bulbous or onion fashion, whereunto
are annexed certain fat and thick strings like those of Dogs grass.

2 Ash-colored Muscari or grape-floure, has large and fat leaves like the
precedent, not differing in any point, saving that these leaves at their first
springing up are of a pale dusky color like ashes. The flowers are likewise
sweet, but of a pale bleake color, wherein consists the difference,

1 Muscari (...). Yellow musked Grape-floure.
2 Muscari Clusij. Ash-colored Grape-floure.
Muscari caulis siliquis (...). The stalk of Muscari hanged with the
seed-vessels.


The Place.
These Plants came from beyond the Thracian Bosphorus, out of Asia, and from
about Constantinople, and by the means of Friends have been brought into these
parts of Europe, whereof our London gardens are possessed.

The Time.
They flower in March and April, and sometimes after.

The Names.
They are called generally Muscari: In the Turkey Tongue, Muschoromi, Muscurimi,
Tipcadi, and Dipcadi, of their pleasant sweet smell: Of Matthiolus, Bulbus
Vomitorius. These plants may be referred unto the Iacinths, whereof undoubtedly
they be kinds.

The Nature and Virtues.
There has not as yet any thing been touched concerning the nature or virtues
of these Plants, only they are kept and maintained in gardens for the pleasant
smell of their flowers, but not for their beauty, for that many stinking field
flowers do in beauty far surpass them. But it should seem that Matthiolus
called them Vomitorius, in that he supposed they procurevomiting; which of
other Authors has not bin remembered.

CHAP. 82. Of Woolly Bulbus.
Bulbus Eriophorus. Woolly Iacinth.


The Description.
THere has fallen out to be here inserted a bulbous plant consisting of many
Bulbes, which has passed current amongst all our late Writers. The which I am
to set forth to the view of our Nation, as others have done in sundry languages
to theirs, as a kind of the Iacinths, which in roots and leaves it does very
well resemble; called of the Grecians, (...): in Latin, Laniferus, because of
his abundance of Wooll-resembling substance, wherewith the whole Plant is in
every part full fraught, as well roots, leaves, as stalks. The leaves are
broad, thick, fat full of juice, and of a spider-like web when they be broken.
Among these leaves rises up a stalk two cubits high, much like unto the
stalk of Squilla or Sea-Onion; and from the middle to the top it is beset
round about with many small starre-like blew flowers without smell, very like
to the flowers of Asphodill; beginning to flower at the bottom, and so upward
by degrees, whereby it is long before it has done flouring: which flowers the
learned Physician of Vienna, Johannes Aicholzius, desired long to see; who
brought it first from Constantinople, and planted it in his Garden, where he
nourished it ten years with great curiosity: which time being expired,
thinking it to be a barren plant, he sent it to Carolus Clusius, with whom in
some few years it did bear such flowers as before described, but never since
to this day. This painful Herbarist would gladly have seen the seed that
should succeed these flowers; but they being of a nature quickly subject to
perish, decay, and fade, began presently to pine away, leaving only a few
(...) and idle seed-vessels without fruit. My self has been possessed with
this plant at the least twelve years, whereof I have yearly great increase of
new roots, but I did never see any token of budding or flouring to this day:
notwith standing I shall be content to suffer it in some base place or other of
my garden, to stand as the cipher o at the end of the figures, to attend his
time and leisure, as those men of famous memory have done. Of whose
temperature and virtues there has not any thing been said, but kept in
gardens to the end aforesaid.

CHAP. 83. Of two feigned Plants.
The Description.
1 I Have thought it convenient to conclude this history of the Hyacinths with
these two bulbous Plants, received by tradition from others, though generally
holden for feigned and adulterine. Their pictures I could willingly have
omitted in this history, if the curious eye could elsewhere have found them
drawn and described in our English Tongue: but because I find them in none, I
will lay them down here, to the end that it may serve for excuse to others who
shall come after, which list not to describe them, being as I said condemned
for feined and adulterine, nakedly drawn only. And the first of them is
called (...) (...) by others, Bulbus Bomb cinus (...). The description
consists of these points, viz. The flowers (says the Author) are no less
strange than wonderful. The leaves and roots are like to those of Hyacinths,
which has caused it to occupy this place. The flowers resemble the Daffodils
or Narcissus. The whole plant consists of a woolly or flockie matter: which
description with the Picture was sent unto Dodonaeus by Johannes Aicholzius. It
may be that Aicholzius received instructions from the Indies, of a plant called
in Greek (...), which grows in India, whereof Theophrastus and Athenaeus do
write in this manner, saying, The flower is like the Narcissus, consisting of a
flockie or woolly substance, which by him seems to be the description of our
bombast Iacinth.

1 Bulbus Bombicinus Commentitius. False bumbaste Iacinth.
2 Tigridis flos. The flower of Tygris.


2 The second feigned picture has been taken of the Discouerer and others of
later time, to be a kind of Dragons not seen of any that have written
thereof; which has moved them to think it a feigned picture likewise;
notwithstanding you shall receive the description thereof as it has come to my
hands. The root (says my Author) is bulbous or Onion fashion, outwardly
black; from the which spring up long leaves, sharp pointed, narrow, and of a
fresh green color: in the midst of which leaves rise up naked or bare
stalks, at the top whereof grows a pleasant yellow flower, stained with many
small red spots here and there confusedly cast abroad: and in the midst of
the flower thrusts forth a long red tongue or style, which in time grows to
be the cod or seed-vessell, crooked or wreathed, wherein is the seed. The
virtues and temperature are not to be spoken of, considering that we assuredly
persuade our selves that there are no such plants, but mere fictions and
devices, as we term them, to give his friend a gudgeon.

Though these two have been thought commentitious or feigned, yet Bauhinus
seems to vindicate the latter, and John Theodore de Bry in his Florilegium
has set it forth. He gives two Figures thereof, this which we here give you
being the one; but the other is far more elegant, and better resembles a
natural plant. The leaves (as Bauhine says) are like the sword-flag, the root
like a leeke, the flowers (according (...) De Bries Figure) grow sometimes two
or three of a stalk: the flower consists of two leaves, and a long style or
pestill: each of these leaves is divided into three parts, the uttermost being
broad and large, and the innermost much narrower and sharper: the tongue or
style that comes forth of the midst of the flower is long, and at the end
divided into three crooked forked points. All that De Bry says thereof is
this; Flos Tigridis rubet egregie circa medium tamen pallet, albusque est and
maculatus; ex Mexico a Casparo Bauhino. That is; Flos Tigridis is wondrous red,
yet is it pale and whitish about the middle, and also spotted; it came from
about Mexico, I had it from Caspar Bauhine.

CHAP. 84. Of Daffodils.
The Kinds.
DAffodill, or Narcissus, according to Dioscorides, is of two sorts: the
flowers of both are white, the one having in the middle a purple circle or
coronet; the other with a yellow cup circle or coronet. Since whose time there
has been sundry others described, as shall be set forth in their proper places.

1 Narcissus medio purpureus. Purple circled Daffodill.
4 Narcissus medio croceus serotinus Polyanthos. The late many floured
Daffodill with the Saffron-coloured middle.


The Description.
1 THe first of the Daffodils is that with the purple crown or circle, having
small narrow leaves, thick, fat, and full of slimie juice; among the which
rises up a naked stalk, smooth and hollow, of a foot high, bearing at the top
a fair milk-white flower growing forth of a hood or thin filme, such as the
flowers of onions are wrapped in: in the midst of which flower is a round
circle or small coronet of a yellowish color, purfled or bordered about the
edge of the said ring or circle with a pleasant purple color; which being
past, there follows a thick knob or button, wherein is contained black
round seed. The root is white, bulbous or Onion fashion.

2 The second kind of Daffodill agrees with the precedent in every respect,
saving that this Daffodill floureth in the beginning of February, and the
other not until April, and is somewhat lesser. It is called Narcissus medio
purpureus praecox; That is, Timely purple ringed Daffodill. The next may have
the addition praecocior, More timely: and the last in place, but first in time,
praecocissimus, Most timely, or very early flouring Daffodill.

5 Narcissus (...)-(...) flore pleno. Double floured (...) circled Daffodill.
6 Narcissus minor serotinus. The late flouring small Daffodill.
7 Narcissus medioluteus. Primrose Pearls, or the common white Daffodill.
8 Narcissus medioluteus polyanthos. French Daffodill.


9 Narcissus Pisanus. Italian Daffodill.
10 Narcissus albus multiplex. The double white Daffodill of Constantinople.
11 Narcissus flore pleno (...). The other double white Daffodill.
12 Narcissus flore pleno, medio luteo. Double white Daffodil with the middle
yellow.


3 The third kind of Daffodil with the pnrple ring or circle in the middle,
has many small narrow leaves, very flat, crookedly bending toward the top;
among which rises up a slender bare stalk, at whose top does grow a fair and
pleasant flower, like unto those before described, but lesser, and floureth
sooner, wherein consists the difference.

There is also another somewhat less, and flouring somewhat earlier than the
last described.

4 This in roots, leaves, and stalks differs very little from the last
mentioned kinds; but it bears many flowers upon one stalk, the out-leaues
being like the former, white, but the cup or ring in the middle of a saffron
color, with diverse yellow threads contained therein.

5 To these may be added another mentioned by Clusius, which differs from these
only in the flowers; for this has flowers consisting of six large leaves
fairly spread abroad, within which are other six leaves not so large as the
former, and then many other little leaves mixed with threads coming sorth of
the middle. Now there are purple welts which run between the first and
second rank of leaves, in the flower, and so in the rest. This flowers in May;
and it is Narcissus pleno flore quintus, of Clusius.

13 Narcissus flore pleno, medio versicolore. Double Daffodill with a diverse
colored middle.
14 Narcissus totus albus. Milk white Daffodill.


6 This late flouring Daffodill has many fat thick leaves, full of juice,
among the which rises up a naked stalk, on the top whereof grows a fair
white flower, having in the middle a ring or yellow circle. The seed grows in
knobby seed vessels. The root is bulbous or Onion fashion. It floureth later
than the others before described, that is to say, in April and May.

7 The seventh kind of Daffodill is that sort of Narcissus or Primerose
peerless that is most common in our country gardens, generally known every
where. It has long fat and thick leaves, full of a slimie juice; among which
rises up a bare thick stalk, hollow within and full of juice. The flower
grows at the top, of a yellowish white color, with a yellow crown or circle
in the middle; and floureth in the month of April, and sometimes sooner. The
root is bulbous fashion.

8 The eighth Daffodill has many broad and thick leaves, fat and full of
juice, hollow and spongeous. The stalks, flowers, and roots are like the
former, and differs in that, that this plant brings forth many flowers upon
one stalk, and the other fewer, and not of so perfect a sweet smell, but more
offensive and stuffing the head. It has this addition, Polyanthos, that is, of
many flowers, wherein especially consists the difference.

9 The Italian Daffodill is very like the former, the which to distinguish in
words, that they may be known one from another, is impossible. Their flowers,
leaves, and roots are like, saving that the flowers of this are sweeter and
more in number.

15 Narcissus Iuncifolius praecox. Rush Daffodill, or Iunquilia.
16 Narcissus Iuncifolius serotinus. Late flouring Rush Daffodill.


10 The double white Daffodill of Constantinople was senr into England unto the
right honorable the Lord Treasurer, among other bulbed sloures: whose roots
when they were planted in our London gardens, did bring forth beautiful
flowers, very white and double, with some yellowness mixed in the middle
leaves, pleasant and sweet in smell, but sinee that time we never could by any
industry or manuring bring them unto flouring again. So that it should
appear, when they were discharged of that birth or burden which they had
begotten in their own country, and not finding that matter, soil, or clymate
to beget more flowers, they remain ever since barren and fruitless. Besides,
we found by experience, that those plants which in Autumn did shoor forth
leaves, did bring forth no flowers at all; and the others that appeared not
until the Spring did flourish and bear their flowers. The stalks, leaves, and
roots are like unto the other kinds of Daffodils. It is called of the Turks,
Giul Catamer lale; That is, Narcissus with double flowers. Notwithstanding we
have received from beyond the seas, as well from the Low Countries, as also
from France, another sort of greater beauty, which from year to year does
yield forth most pleasant double flowers, and great increase of roots, very
like as well in stalks as other parts of the plant, unto the other sorts of
Daffodils. It differs only in the flowers, which are very double and thick
thrust together, as are the flowers of our double Primrose, having in the
middle of the (...) some few chiues or welts of a bright purple color, and the
other mixed with yellow as aforesaid.

11 This alsowith double white flowers, which Clusius sets forth in the sixth
place, is of the same kind with the last described; but it bears but one or
two flowers upon a stalk, whereas the other has many.

12 This, which is Clusius his Narcissus flore pleno 2. is in roots, leaves,
and stalks very like the precedent; but the flowers are composed of six large
white out-leaues; but the middle is filled with many fair yellow little leaves
much like to the double yellow wall-floure. They smell sweet like as the last
mentioned.

13 This differs from the last mentioned only in that it is less, and that
the middle of the flower within the yellow cup is filled with longish narrow
little leaves, as it were crossing each other. Their color is white, but mixed
with some green on the outside, and yellow on the inside.

14 The milk white Daffodill differs not from the common white Daffodill, or
Primrose peerless, in leaves, stalks; roots, or flowers, saving that the
flowers of this plant has not any other color in the flower but white,
whereas all the others are mixed with one color or other.

17 Narcissus juncifolius Roseoluteus. Rose or round floured Iunquilia.
18 Narcissus juncifolius amplo calice. White Iunquilia with the large cup.
19 Narcissus juncifolius reflexus flore (...). The white reflex Iunquilia.


15 The Rush Daffodill has long, narrow, and thick leaves, very smooth and
flexible, almost round like Rushes, whereof it took his syrname Iuncifolius or
Rushie. It springs up in the beginning of January, at which time also the
flowers do shoot forth their buds at the top of small rushy stalks, sometimes
two, and often more upon one stalk, made of six small yellow leaves. The cup
or crown in the middle is likewise yellow, in shape resembling the other
Daffodills, but smaller, and of a strong sweet smell. (...) (...) is bulbed,
white within, and covered with a black skin or filme.

16 This Rush Daffodil is like unto the precedent in each respect, saving that
it is altogether lesser, and longer before it come to flouring. There is also a
white floured one of this kind.

17 There is also another Rush Daffodill or Iunquilia, with flowers not sharp
pointed, but round with a little cup in the middle: the color is yellow or
else white. This is Lobels Narcissus juncifolius flore (...) circinitatis roseo.

18 There is also another Iunquilia whose leaves and stalks are like those of
the first described Rushy Daffodill, but the cup in the midst of the flower
is much larger. The color of the flower is commonly white. Clusius calls this
Narcissus 1 (...) amplo calice.

19 There are three or four reflex Iunquilia's, whose cups hang down, and the
six incompassing leaves turn up or back, whence they take their names. The
flowers of the first are yellow; those of the second all white, the cup of the
third is yellow, and the reflex leaves white. The fourth has a white cup, and
yellow reflex leaves. This seems to be Lobels Narcissus montanus minimus
coronatus.

20 This is like to the ordinary lesser Iunquilia, but that the flowers are
very double, consisting of many long and large leaves mixed together; the
shorter leaves are obtuse, as if they were clipped off. They are wholly yellow.

19 Narcissus Iuncifolius reflexus minor. The lesser reflex Iunquilia.
20 Narcissus juncifolius multiplex. The double Iunquilia.


21 The Persian Daffodill has no stalk at all, but only a small and tender
foot stalk of an inch high, such as the Saffron flower has: upon which short
and tender stalk does stand a yellowish flower consisting of six small leaves;
of which the three innermost are narrower than those on the out side. In the
middle of the flower does grow forth a long style or pointall, set about with
many small chiues or threads. The whole flower is of an unpleasant smell, much
like to Poppy. The leaves rise up a little before the flower, long, smooth, and
shining. The root is bulbed, thick, and gross, blackish on the out side, and
pale within, with some threads hanging at the lower part.

22 The Autumn Daffodill brings forth long smooth, glittering leaves, of a
deep green color: among which rises up a short stalk, bearing at the top
one flower and no more, resemling the flower of Mead Saffron or common Saffron,
consisting of six leaves of a bright shining yellow color; in the middle
whereof stand six threads or chiues, and also a pestell or clapper yellow
likewise. The root is thick and gross like unto the precedent.

23 To this last may be adjoined another which in shape somewhat resembles it.
The leaves are smooth, green, growing straight up, and almost a fingers
breadth; among which rises up a stalk a little more than half a foot in
height; at the top of which grows forth a yellow flower not much unlike that
of the last described Autumn Narcisse: it consists of six leaves some inch
and half in length, and some half inch broad, sharp pointed, the three inner
leaves being somewhat longer than the outer. There grow forth out of the
midst of the flower three whitish chiues, tipped with yellow, and a pestell in
the midst of them longer than any of them. The root consists of many coats,
with fibers coming forth of the bottom thereof like others of this kind. It
flowers in February.

21 Narcissus Persicus. The Persian Daffodill.
22 Narcissus Autumnalis major. The great Winter Daffodill.


24 Small Winter Daffodill has a bulbous root, much like unto the root of Rush
Daffodil, but lesser: from the which rises up a naked stalk without leaves,
on the top whereof grows a small white flower with a yellow circle in the
middle, sweet in smell, something stuffing the head as do the other Daffodils.

The Place.
The Daffodils with purple coronets do grow wild in sundry places of France,
chiefly in Bourgondie, and in Suitzerland in meadows.

The Rush Daffodill grows wild in sundry places of Spain, among grass and
other herbs. Dioscorides says, That they be especially found upon mountains.
Theocritus affirms the Daffodils to grow in meadows, in his nineteenth Eidyl.
or twentieth, according to some editions: where he writes, That the fair
Lady Europa entering with her Nymphs into the meadows, did gather the sweet
smelling Daffodils; in these Verses:

(...), etc.

Which we may English thus:
But when the Girls were come into
The meadows flouring all in sight,
That Wench with these, this Wench with those
Trim flowers, themselves did all delight:
She with the Narcisse good in (...),
And she with Hyacinths content.
But it is not greatly to our purpose particularly to seek out their places of
growing wild, seeing that we have them all and every of them in our London
gardens, in great abundance. The common white Daffodill grows wild in
fields and sides of Woods in the West parts of England.

The Time.
They flower for the most part in the Spring, that is, from the beginning of
February unto the end of April.

The Persian and Winter Daffodils do flower in September and October.

23 Narcissus vernus praecocior (...) flore. The timely Spring yellow Daffodill.
24 Narcissus Autumnalis minor. Small Winter Daffodill.


The Names.
Although their names be set forth in their several titles, which may serve
for their appellations and distinctions; notwithstanding it shall not be
impertinent to add a supply of names, as also the cause why they are so called.

The Persian Daffodill is called in the Sclauonian or Turkish tongue, Zaremcada
Persiana, and Zaremcatta, as for the most part all other sorts of Daffodils
are. Notwithstanding the double floured Daffodill they name Giul catamer lale:
Which name they generally give unto all double flowers.

The common white Daffodil with the yellow circle they call Serin Cade, that is
to say, the kings Chalice; and Deuebohini, which is to say, Camels neck, or as
we do say of a thing with long spindle shinnes, Long-shankes, urging it from
the long neck of the flower.

The Rush Daffodill is called of some Ionquillias, of the similitude the leaves
have with Rushes. Of Dioscorides, Bulbus Vomitorius, or Vomiting Bulbe,
according to Dodonaeus.

Generally all the kinds are comprehended under this name Narcissus, called of
the Grecians (...): in Dutch, (...): in Spanish, Iennetten: in English,
Daffodilly, Daffodowndilly, and Primerose peerless.

Sophocles names them the garland of the infernal gods, because they that are
departed and dulled with death, should worthily be crowned with a dulling
flower.

Of the first and second Daffodill Ovid has made mention in the third book of
his Metamorphosis, where he describes the transformation of (...) fair boy
Narcissus into a flower of his own name; saying,

Nusquam corpus erat, croceum pro corpore florem
Inueniunt, folijs medium cing entibus albis.
But as for body none remained; in stead whereof they found
A yellow flower, with milk white leaves ingirting of it round.
Pliny and Plutarch affirm, as partly has been touched before, that their
narcoticke quality was the very cause of the name Narcissus, that is, a
quality causing sleepiness; which in Greeks is (...): or of the fish
Torpedo, called in Greek (...), which benummes the hands of them that touch
him, as being hurtful to the sinews; and brings dullness to the head, which
properly belongs to the Narcisses, whose smell causes drowsinesse.

The Nature.
The roots of Narcissus are hot and dry in the second degree.

The Virtues.
Galen says, That the roots of Narcissus have such wonderful qualities in
drying, that they consound

The roots of Narcissus stamped with honey, and applied plaister-wise, helps
them that are burned

Being used in manner aforesaid, it helps the great wrenches of the ankles,
the aches and pains

The same applied with honey and nettle seed helps Sun burning and the
morphew.

The same stamped with barrowes grease and leven of rye bread, hastneth to
maturation hard impostumes,

Being stamped with the meal of Darnell and honey, it draws forth thorns
and stubs out of

The root, by the experiment of Apuleius, stamped and strained, and given in
drink, helps the

The roots whether they be eaten or drunken, do move vomit, and being mingled
with Vinegar

CHAP. 85. Of the Bastard Daffodill.
The Description.
1 THe double yellow Daffodill has small smooth narrow leaves, of a dark
green color; among which rises up a naked hollow stalk of two hands high,
bearing at the top a fair and beautiful yellow flower, of a pleasant sweet
smell: it sheddeth his flower, but there follows no seed at all, as it
happens in many other double flowers. The root is small, bulbous, or onion
fashion, like unto the other Daffodils, but much smaller.

2 The common yellow Daffodill or Daffodowndilly is so well known to all that
it needs no description.

3 We have in our London gardens another sort of this common kind, which
naturally grows in Spain, very like unto our best known Daffodill in shape
and proportion, but altogether fairer, greater, and lasts longer before the
flower does fall or fade.

4 This has leaves and roots like the last described, but somewhat less; the
flower also is in shape not unlike that of the precedent, but less, growing
upon a weak slender green stalk, of some fingers length: the seed is
contained in three cornered, yet almost round heads. The root is small,
bulbous, and black on the outside.

5 This has a longish bulbous root, somewhat black on the outside, from which
rise up leaves not so long nor broad as those of the last described: in the
midst of these leaves springs up a stalk, slender, and some half foot in
height; at the top of which, forth of a whitish filme, breaks forth a flower
like in shape to the common Daffodill, but less, and wholly white, with the
brim of the cup welted about. It flowers in April, and ripens the seeds in
June.

The Place.
The double yellow Daffodill I received from Robinus of Paris, which he
procured by means of friends from Orleance and other parts of France.

1 Pseudonarcissus luteus multiplex. Double yellow Daffodill.
2 Pseudonarcissus Anglicus. Common yellow Daffodill.
3 Pseudonarcissus Hispanicus. The Spanish yellow Daffodill.
4 Pseudonarcissus minor Hispanicus. The lesser Spanish Daffodill.


5 Pseudonarcissus albo flore. White Bastard Daffodill.


The yellow English Daffodill grows almost every where through England. The
yellow Spanish Daffodill does likewise deck up our London Gardens, where they
increase infinitely.

The time.
The double Daffodill sends forth his leaves in the beginning of February,
and his flowers in April.

The Names.
The first is called Pseudonarcissus multiplex, and Narcissus luteus
Polyanthos: in English, the double yellow Daffodill, or Narcissus.

The common sort are called in Dutch, Geel Sporckel bloemen: in English, yellow
Daffodill, Daffodilly, and Daffodowndilly.

The Temperature.
The temperature is referred unto the (...) of (...).

The Virtues.
Touching the virtues hereof, it is found out by experiment

The distilled water of Daffodils does cure the Palsy, Nicholas Belson,
sometimes of Kings College in (...).

CHAP. 86. Of diverse other Daffodils or Narcisses.
THere are besides the forementioned sorts of Daffodils, sundry others, some of
which may be referred to them; other some not. I do not intend an exact
enumeration of them, it being a thing not so fitting for a history of Plants,
as for a Florilegie, or book of flowers. Now those that require all their
figures, and more exact descriptions, may find satisfaction in the late Work
of my kind friend M. John Parkinson, which is entitled Paradisus terrestris:
for in other Florilegies, as in that of De Bry, Swertz, etc. you have barely
the names and figures, but in this are both figures, and an exact history or
declaration of them. Therefore I in this place will but only briefly describe
and name some of the rarest that are preserved in our choice gardens, and a few
others whereof yet they are not possessed.

The Descriptions.
1 The first of these, which for the largeness is called Nonpareille, has
long broad leaves and roots like the other Daffodils. The flower consists of
six very large leaves of a pale yellow color, with a very large cup, but not
very long: this cup is yellower than the incompassing leaves, narrower also at
the bottom than at the top, and unevenly cut about the edges. This is called
Narcissus omnium maximus, or Non pareille; the figure well expresses the
flower, but that it is somewhat too little. There is a variety of this with
the open leaves and cup both yellow, which makes the difference. There is also
another Non pareille, whose flowers are all white, and the six leaves that
stand spread abroad are usually a little folded, or turned in at their ends.

2 Besides these former there are four or five double yellow Daffodils, which
I cannot pass over in silence; the first is that, which is vulgarly amongst
Florists known by the name of Robines Narcisse; and it may be was the same our
Author in the precedent chapter mentions he received from Robine; but he giving
the figure of another, and a description not well (...) this, I can affirm
nothing of certainty. This double Narcisse of Robine grows with a stalk
(...) foot in height, and the flower is very double, of a pale yellow color,
and it seems commonly to (...) it self into some six partitions, the leaves
of the flower lying one upon another even to the middle of the flower. This may
be called Narcissus pallidus multiplex Robini, Robines double pale Narcisse.

1 Narcissus omnium maximus. The (...) Daffodill.
3 Pseudonarcissus flore pleno. The double yellow Daffodill.


3 The next to this is that which from our Author, the first obseruer thereof,
is vulgarly called Gerrards Narcisse: the leaves and root do not much differ
from the ordinary Daffodill; the stalk is scarce a foot high, bearing at the
top thereof a flower very double; the six outmost leaves are of the same
yellow color as the ordinary one is; those that are next are commonly as
deep as the tube or trunk of the single one, and amongst them are mixed also
other paler colored leaves, with some green stripes here and there among those
leaves: these flowers are sometimes all contained in a trunk like that of the
single one, the six out-leaues excepted: other whiles this enclosure is is
broke, and then the flower stands fair open like as that of the last
described. Lobel in the second part of his Aduersaria tells, That our Author
Master Gerrard found this in Wiltshire, growing in the garden of a poor old
woman; in which place formerly a Cunning man (as they vulgarly term him) had
dwelt.

This may be called in Latin, according to the English, Narcissus multiplex
Gerardi, Gerrards double Narcisse.

The figure we here give you is expressed somewhat too tall, and the flower is
not altogether so double as it ought to be.

4 There are also two or three double yellow Daffodils yet remaining. The first
of these is called Wilmots Narcisse, (from Master Wilmot, late of Bow) and this
has a very fair double and large yellow flower composed of deeper and paler
yellow leaves orderly mixed.

The second (which is called Tradescants Narcisse, from Master John Tradescant
of South-Lambeth) is the largest and (...) of all the rest; in the largeness
of the (...) it exceeds Wilmots, which otherwise it much resembles; some of the
leaves whereof the flower consists are sharp pointed, and these are of a paler
color; other some are much more obtuse, and these are of a deeper and fairer
yellow.

This may be called Narcissus Roseus Tradescanti, Tradescants Rose Daffodill.

The third M. Parkinson challenges to himself; which is a flower to be
respected, not so much for the beauty, as for the various composure thereof,
for some of the leaves are long and sharp pointed, others obtuse and curled, a
third sort long and narrow, and usually some few hollow, and in shape
resembling a horn; the utmost leaves are commonly streaked, and of a yellowish
green; the next to them fold themselves up ronnd, and are usually yellow, yet
sometimes they are edged with green. There is a deep yellow pestill divided
into three parts, usually in the midst of this flower. It flowers in the end of
March. I usually (before M. Parkinson set forth his Florilegie, or garden of
flowers) called this flower Narcissus (...), by reason of its various shape and
color: but since I think it fitter to give it to the Author, and term it
Narcissus multiplex varius Parkinsoni, Parkinsons various double Narcisse.

5 Narcissus Iacobaeus Indicus. The Indian or Iacobaean Narcisse.
6 Narcissus juncifolius montanus minimus. The least Rush-leaued Mountain
Narcisse.


5 Now come I to treat of some more rarely to be found in our gardens, if at
all. That which takes the first place is by Clusius called Narcissus Iacobaeus
Indicus, the Indian or Iacobaean Narcisse. The root hereof is much like to an
ordinary onion, the leaves are broad like the other Narcisses, the stalk is
smooth, round, hollow, and without knots, at the top whereof, out of a certain
skinny husk comes forth a fair red flower like that of the flouring Indian
reed, but that the leaves of this are somewhat larger, and it has six chiues
or threads in the middle thereof of the same color as the flower, and they are
adorned with brownish pendants; in the midst of these there stands a little
farther out than the rest, a three forked style, under which succeeds a
triangular head, after the falling of the flower.

This gives his flower in June or July.

6 This Lobell calls Narcissus montanus juncifolius minimus, The least
Rush-leaued mountain Narcisse. The leaves of this are like the Iunquilia; the
stalk is short, the flower yellow, with the six winged leaves small and paler
colored, the cup open and large to the bigness of the flower.

7 This also is much like the former; but the six incompassing leaves are of a
greenish faint yellow color; the cup is indented, or unequally curled about
the edges, but yellow like the precedent. Lobell calls this Narcissus montanus
juncifolius flore (...), The mountain Rush-leaued Narcisse with an indented or
curled cup.

7 Narcissus montanus juncifolius flore fimbriato, The mountain Rush leaued
Narcisse with an indented or curled cup.
8 Narcissus omnium minimus montanus albus. The least mountain white Narcisse.


8 The leaves of this are as small as the Autumn Iacinth, the stalk some
handful high, and the flower like the last described, but it is of a whitish
color. Lobell calls this last described, Narcissus omnium minimus montanus
albus, The least mountain white Narcisse. These three last usually flower in
February.

CHAP. 87. Of Tulipa, or the Dalmatian Cap.
The Kinds.
TVlipa, or the Dalmatian Cap is a strange and foreign flower, one of the
number of thebul bed flowers, whereof there be sundry sorts, some greater, some
lesser, with which all studious and painful Herbarists desire to be better
acquainted, because of that excellent diversity of most brave flowers which it
(...). Of this there be two chief and general kinds, viz. Praecex and
Serotina; the one does bear his flowers timely, the other later. To these two
we will add another sort called Media, flouring between both the others. And
from these three sorts, as from their heads, all other kinds do proceed, which
are almost infinite in number. Notwithstanding, my loving friend M. James
Garret, a curious searcher of Simples, and learned Apothecary of London, has
undertaken to find out, if it were possible, the infinite sorts, by diligent
sowing of their seeds, and by planting those of his own propagation, and by
others received from his Friends

1 Tulipa Bononie nsis. Italian Tulipa.
2 Tulipa Narbonensis. French Tulipa.
3 Tulipa praecox tota lutea. Timely flouring Tulipa.
4 Tulipa Coccinea serotina. Late flouring Tulipa.


5 Tulipa media sanguinea albis oris. Apple bloome Tulipa.
6 Tulipa Candida suaue (...) oris. Blush colored Tulipa.
7 Tulipa bulbifera. Bulbous stalked Tulipa.
8 Tulipa sanguinea luteo fundo. The bloud-red Tulip with a yellow bottom.
beyond the seas for the space of twenty years, not being yet able to attain
to the end of his travel, for that each new year brings forth new plants of
sundry colors, not before seen: all which to describe particularly were to
roll Sisiphus stone, or number the sands. So that it shall suffice to speak of
and describe a few, referring the rest to some that mean to write of Tulipa a
particular volume.

9 Tulipa purpurea. The purple Tulip.
10 Tulipa rubra amethistina. The bright red Tulip.


The Description.
1 THe Tulipa of Bolonia has fat, thick, and gross leaves, hollow, furrowed
or chanelled, bending a little backward, and as it were folded together: which
at their first coming up seem to be of a reddish color, and being thoroughly
grown turn into a whitish green. In the midst of those leaves rises up a
naked fat stalk a foot high, or something more, on the top whereof stands
one or two yellow flowers, sometimes three or more, consisting of six small
leaves, after a sort like to a deep wide open cup, narrow above, and wide in
the bottom. After it has been some few days floured, the points and brims
of the flower turn backward, like a Dalmatian or Turkish cap, called Tulipan,
Tolepan, Turban, and Turfan, whereof it took his name. The chiues or threads
in the middle of the flowers be sometimes yellow, otherwhiles blackish or
purplish, but commonly of one ouer-worne color or other, Nature seeming to
play more with this flower than with any other that I do know. This flower is
of a reasonable pleasant smell, and the other of his kind have little or no
smell at all. The seed is flat, smooth, shining, and of a gristly substance.
The root is bulbous, and very like to a common onion of Saint Omers.

2 The French Tulipa agrees with the former, except in the black bottom
which this has in the middle of the flower, and is not so sweet of smell,
which sets forth the difference.

3 The yellow Tulipa that floureth timely has thick and gross leaves full of
juice, long, hollow, or gutter fashion, set about a tender stalk, at the top
whereof does grow a fair and pleasant shining yellow flower, consisting of six
small leaves without smell. The root is bulbous or like an onion.

11 Tulipa flore albo strijs purepureis. The white Tulip with purple streakes.
12 Tulipa flore albo oris dilute rubentibus. The white Tulip with light red
edges.
13 Tulipa flore pallido. The straw-coloured Tulip.
14 Tulipa flammea strijs flauescentibus. The flame colored Tulip with
yellowish streakes.
15 Tulipa polyclonos minor serotina flore rubro vel flauo, Clusij. The lesser
many-branched late Tulip of Clusius, with red, or else yellow flowers.
16 Tulipa serotina polyclados major flo. (...) fundo nigro, Clusij. Clusius
his greater many branched Tulip with a yellow flower, and black bottom.


17 Tulipa pumilio obscure rubeus oris virentibus. The dwarf Tulip with dark
red flowers edged with green.
18 Tulipa pumilio flore purpurascenti intus candido. The Dwarf Tulip with a
purplish flower, white within.
19 Tulipa pumilio lutea. The yellow Dwarf Tulip.
20 Tulipa Persica flore rubro, oris albidis elegans. The pretty Persian Tulip
having a red flower with whitish edges.
21 Tulipa aurea oris rubentibus. The gold yellow with red edges


(...) fourth kind of Tulipa, that floureth later, has leaves, stalks, and
roots like unto the (...). The flowers hereof be of a skarlet color, welted or
bordered about the edges with (...) middle part is like unto a heart tending to
whiteness, spotted in the same whitenes with (...) or spots. The seed is
contained in square cods, flat, tough, and sinewie.

22 Tulipa miniata. The Vermilion Tulip.
23 Tulipa albo and rubro striatus. The white and red striped Tulip.


5 The fifth sort of Tulipa, which is neither of the timely ones, nor of the
later flouring sort, but one that buddeth forth his most beautiful flowers
between both. It agrees with the last described Tulipa, in leaves, stalks,
roots, and seed, but differs in flowers. The flower consists of six small
leaves joined together at the bottom: the middle of which leaves are of a
pleasant bloody color, the edges be bordered with white, and the bottom next
unto the stalk is likewise white; the whole flower resembling in color the
blossoms of an Apple tree.

6 The sixth has leaves, roots, stalks, and seed like unto the former, but
much greater in every point. The flowers hereof are white, dashed about the
brimmes or edges with a red or blush color. The middle part is stripped
confusedly with the same mixture, wherein is the difference.

7 Carolus Clusius sets forth in his Pannonicke history a kind of Tulipa
that bears fair red flowers, black in the bottom, with a pestell in the
middle of an ouer-worne greenish color; of which sort there happens some to
have yellow flowers, agreeing with the others before touched: but this brings
forth increase of root in the bosom of his lowest leaf next to the stalk,
contrary to all the other kinds of Tulipa.

8 Lobelius in his learned Observations has set forth many other sorts; one he
calls Tulipa Chalcedonica, or the Turkey Tulipa, saying it is the least of the
small kinds or Dwarf Tulipa's, whose flower is of a sanguine red color, upon
a yellow ground, agreeing with the others in root, leaf, and stalk.

9 He has likewise set forth another; his flower is like the Lilly in
proportion, but in color of a fine purple.

10 We may also behold another sort altogether greater than any of the rest,
whose flower is in color like the stone called Amethist, not unlike to the
flowers of Peonie.

11 We have likewise another of greater beauty, and very much desired of all,
with white flowers dashed on the backside, with a light wash of watchet color.

24 Tulipa luteo and rubro striatus. The red and yellow Fools coat.
25 Tulipa flore color is sulphur The sulphur-coloured (...)
26 Tulipa rubra oris pallidis. The red Tulip with pale edges.


12 There is another also in our London gardens, of a snow white color; the
edges slightly washed over with a little of that we call blush color.

13 We have another like the former, saving that his flower is of a straw
color.

14 There is another to be seen with a flower mixed with streaks of red and
yellow, resembling a flame of fire, whereupon we have called it Flambant.

There be likewise so many more differing so notably in color of their
flowers, although in leaves, stalk, and roots for the most part one like
another, that (as I said before) to speak of them severally would require a
peculiar volume.

Therefore not to trouble you any further, I have given you only the figures
and names of the notablest differences which are in shape; as, the dwarf
Tulipa's, and the branched ones, together with the color of their flowers,
contained in their titles, that you need not far to seek it.

There be a sort greater than the rest, which in form are like; the leaves
whereof are thick, long, broad, now and then somewhat folded in the edges; in
the midst whereof does rise up a stalk a foot high, or something higher, upon
which stands only one flower bolt upright, consisting of six leaves, after a
sort like to a deep wide cup of this form, viz. the bottom turned upwards,
with threads or chiues in the middle, of the color of Saffron. The color of
the flower is sometimes yellow, sometimes white, now and then as it were of a
light purple, and many times red; and in this there is no small varieties of
colors, for the edges of the leaves, and oftentimes the nails or lower part
of the leaves are now and then otherwise colored than the leaves themselves,
and many times there does run all along these streakes some other colors.
They have no smell at all that can be perceived. The roots of these are
likewise bulbed, or Onion fashion; every of the which to set forth severally
would trouble the writer, and weary the Reader; so that, what has bin said
shall suffice touching the description of Tulipa's. True it is that our Author
here affirms, The varieties of these flowers are so infinite, that it would
both tire the Writer and Reader to recount them. Yet for that some are more in
love with flowers than with Plants in general, I have thought good to direct
them where they may find somewhat more at large of this Plant: Let such
therefore as desire further satisfaction herein have recourse to the
Florilegies of De (...), Swerts, Robin, or to M. Parkinson, who has not only
largely treated of the flowers in particular, but also of the ordering of them.

27 Tulipa lutea serotina. The late flouring yellow Tulip.
28 Tulipa serotina lutea gutt is sanguineis fundo nigro. The late Yellow with
sanguine spots and a black bottom.


The Place.
Tulipa grows wild in Thracia, Cappadocia, and Italy; in Bizantia about
Constantinople, at Tripolis and Alepo in Syria. They are now common in all the
gardens of such as affect flowers, all over England.

The Time.
They flower from the end of February unto the beginning of May, and somewhat
after; although Augerius Busbequius in his journey to Constantinople, saw
between Hadrianople and Constantinople, great abundance of them in flower
every where, even in the midst of Winter, in the month of January, which
that warm and temperate climate may seem to perform.

The Names.
The later Herbarists by a Turkish and strange name call it Tulipa, of the
Dalmatian Cap called Tulipa, the form whereof, the flower when it is open
seems to represent.

It is called in English after the Turkish name Tulipa, or it may be called
Dalmatian Cap, or the Turks Cap. What name the ancient Writers gave it is not
certainly known. A man might fuspect it to be (...), if it were a Bulbe that
might be eaten, and were of force to make milk cruddy; for Theophrastus
reckons it among those Bulbes that may be eaten: and it is an herb, as
Hesychius says, wherewith milk is crudded. Conradus Gesnerus and diverse
others have taken Tulipa to be that Satyrium which is syrnamed Erythronium,
because one kind has a red flower; or altogether a certain kind of
Satyrium: with which it does agree reasonable well, if in Dioscorides his
description we may in stead of (...), read (...) or (...); for such mistakes
are frequent in ancient and modern Authors, both in writing and printing. In
the Turkey Tongue it is called Cafe lale, Cauale lale, and likewise Turban and
Turfan, of the Turks Cap so called, as beforesaid of Lobelius.

29 (...) Holias alba strijs and punctis sanguineis. The white Holias with
sanguine spots and streakes.
30 Tulipa media sature purpurea fundo (...). A middle Tulip of a deep Purple
color with a bluish bottom.


I do verily think that these are the (...), the Lillies of the field
mentioned by our Savior, Mat. 6. 28, 29. for he says, That Solomon in all his
royalty was not arrayed like one of these. The reasons that induce me to think
thus are these: First, their shape; for their flowers resemble Lillies, and in
these places whereas our Savior was conversant they grow wild in the fields.
Secondly, the infinite variety of color, which is to be found more in this
than any other sort of flower: and thirdly, the wondrous beauty and mixtures
of these flowers. This is my opinion, and these my reasons, which any may
either approve of or gainsay as he shall think good.

The Temperature and Virtues.
There has not been any thing set down of the ancient or later Writers as
touching the Nature or Virtues of the Tulipa's, but they are esteemed
especially for the beauty of their flowers.

The roots preserved with sugar, or otherwise dressed, may be eaten, and are no
unpleasant

CHAP. 88. Of Bulbous Violets.
The Kinds.
THeophrastus has mentioned one kind of bulbous Leucoion, which Gaza
translates Viola alba, or the white Violet. Of this Viola Theophrasti, or
Theophrastus his Violet, we have observed three sorts, whereof some bring forth
many flowers and leaves, others fewer; some flower very early, and others
later, as shall be declared.

1 Leucoium bulbosum praecox minus. Timely flouring bulbous Violet.
2 Leucoium bulbosum praecox Byzantinum. The Byzantine early bulbous Violet.


The Description.
1 THe first of these bulbous Violets rises out of the ground, with two small
leaves flat and crested, of an ouerworne green color, between the which
rises up a small and tender stalk of two hands high; at the top whereof
comes forth of a skinny hood a small white flower of the bigness of a
Violet, compact of six leaves, three bigger, and three lesser, tipped at the
points with a light green: the smaller are fashioned into the (...) form of a
heart, and pretily edged about with green; the other three leaves are longer,
and sharp pointed. The whole flower hangs (...) his head, by reason of the
weak foot stalk whereon it grows. The root is small, white, and bulbous.

2 There are two varieties of this kind which differ little in shape, but the
first has a flower as big again as the ordinary one, and Clusius calls it
Leucoium bulbosum praecox Byzantinum, The greater early Constantinopolitan
bulbous Violet. The other is mentioned by Lobel, and differs only in color of
flowers; wherefore he calls it (...) triphyllum flore caerulco, The blew
floured bulbous Violet.

3 (...) bulbosum serotinum. Late flouring bulbous Violet.
4 Leucoium bulbosum majus polyanthemum. The many floured great bulbous violet.
5 Leucoium bulbosum Autumnale minimum. The least Autumn bulbous Violet


3 The third sort of bulbed Violets has narrow leaves like those of the leeke,
but lesser and smoother, not unlike to the leaves of the bastard Daffodill. The
stalks be slender and naked, two hands high, whereupon do grow fair white
flowers, tipped with a yellowish green color, with many small chiues or
threads in the midst of the flower. The seed is contained in small round
buttons. The root is white and bulbous.

4 The great bulbed Violet is like unto the third in stalk and leaves, yet
greater and higher. It brings forth on every stalk not one flower only, but
five or six, blowing or flouring one after another, altogether like the other
flowers in form and bigness.

5 This small bulbous plant may be annexed to the former, the root is small,
compact of many coats: the leaves are also small, and the stalk an handful
high, at the top whereof there hang down one or two small white flowers
consisting of six leaves a piece, much resembling the last described, but far
less. It flowers in (...).

6 Besides these, Clusius makes mention of a small one much like this, and it
flowers in the Spring, and the flowers are somewhat reddish nigh the stalk,
and smell sweet. Clusius calls this, Leucoium bulbosum vernum minimum, The
smallest Spring bulbous Violet.

The Place.
These plants do grow wild in Italy and the places adjacent. Notwithstanding
our London (...) have taken possession of most of them many years past.

The Time.
The first floureth in the beginning of January; the second in September; and
the third in May; the rest at their seasons mentioned in their descriptions.

The Names.
The first is called of Theophrastus, (...); which Gaza renders Viola alba, and
Viola Bulbosa, or Bulbed Violet. Lobelius has from the color and shape called
it (...), and that very properly, considering how it does as it were
participate of two sundry plants, that is to say, the root of the Narcissus,
the leaves of the small Lilly, and the white color; taking the first part
(...), of his whiteness; Narcisso, of the likeness the roots have unto
Narcissus; and Lirium, of the leaves of Lillies, as aforesaid. In English we
may call it the bulbous Violet; or after the Dutch name, (...) (...); that is,
Summer fools, and (...). Some call them also Snow drops. This name Leucoium,
without his Epithet Bulbosum, is taken for the Wall-floure, and stock
Gillofloure, by all modern Writers.

The Nature and Virtues.
Touching the faculties of these bulbous Violets we have nothing to say, seeing
that nothing is set down hereof by the ancient Writers, nor any thing observed
by the modern, only they are maintained and cherished in gardens for the
beauty and rareness of the flowers, and sweetness of their smell.

CHAP. 89. Of Turkey or Ginny-hen Flower.
1 (...). Checquered Daffodill.
2 Frittillaria variegata. Changeable Checquered Daffodil.


The Description.
1 THe Checquered Daffodill, or Ginny-hen Flower, has small narrow grassie
leaves; among which there rises up a stalk three hands high, having at the
top one or two flowers, and sometimes three, which consists of six small
leaves checquered most strangely: wherein Nature, or rather the Creator of all
things, has kept a very wonderful order, surpassing (as in all other things)
the curiousest painting that Art can set down. One square is of a greenish
yellow color, the other purple, keeping the same order as well on the backside
of the flower, as on the inside, although they are blackish in one square, and
of a Violet color in an other; insomuch that every leaf seems to be the
feather of a Ginny hen, whereof it took his name. The root is small, white,
and of the bigness of half a garden bean.

2 The second kind of Checquered Daffodill is like unto the former in each
respect, saving that this has his flower dashed over with a light purple, and
is somewhat greater than the other, wherein consists the difference.

3 Frittillaria Aquitanica minor flore luteo obsoleto. The lesser dark yellow
Fritillarie.
9 Frittillaria alba praecox. The early white Fritillarie.


There are sundry differences and varieties of this flower, taken from the
color, largenes, doubleness, earliness and latenes of flouring, as also from
the many or few branches bearing flowers. We will only specify their
varieties by their names, seeing their form differs little from those you have
here described.

4 Fritillaria maxima ramosapurpurea. The greatest branched purple checquered
Daffodill.

5 Fritillaria flore purpureo pleno. The double purple floured checquered
Daffodill.

6 Fritillaria polyanthos flauoviridis. The yellowish green many floured
checquered Daffodill.

7 Fritillaria lutea Someri. Summers his yellow Checquered Daffodill.

8 Fritillaria alba purpureo tessulata. The white Fritillarie checquered with
purple.

9 Fritillaria albapraecox. The early white Fritillarie or Checquered Daffodill.

10 Fritillaria minor (...) luteo absoleto. The lesser dark yellow Fritillarie.

11 Fritillaria angustifolia lutea variegata paruo flore, and altera flore
majore. Narrow leaued yellow (...) Fritillarie with small flowers; and another
with a larger flower.

12 Fritillaria (...) pluribus floribus. The least Fritillarie with many
flowers.

Fritillaria Hispanica vmbellifera. The Spanish Fritillarie with the flowers
standing as it were in an vmbell.

The Names.
The Ginny hen flower is called of (...), Flos Melcagris: of Lobelius,
Lilio-narcissus variegata, for that it has the flower of a Lilly, and the root
of Narcissus: it has been called Fritillaria, of the table or board upon
which men play at Chesse, which square checkers the flower does very much
resemble; some thinking that it was named Fritillus: whereof there is no (...);
for Martialis seems to call Fritillus, Abacus, or the Tables whereat men play
at Dice, in the fifth Book of his Epigrams, writing to Galla.

Iam tristis, nucibus puer relictis,
Clamoso reuocatur a magistro:
Et blando male (...) Fritillo
Arcanamodo raptus e popina
Aedilem rogat vdus aleator. etc.
The sad Boy now his nuts cast by,
Called unto Schole by Masters cry:
And the drunk Dicer now betrayed
By flattring Tables as he played,
Is from his secret tippling house drawn out,
Although the Officer he much besought. etc.
In English we may call it Turky-hen or Ginny-hen Flower, and also Checquered
Daffodill, and Fritillarie, according to the Latin.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Of the faculty of these pleasant flowers there is nothing set down in the
ancient or later Writer, but are greatly esteemed for the beautifying of our
gardens, and the bosoms of the beautiful.

CHAP. 90. Of true Saffron, and the wild or Spring Saffrons.
Crocus florens and sine flore. Saffron with and without flower.


The Description.
ALthough I have expressed two pictures of Saffrons, as you see, yet are you to
understand that these two do but set forth one kind of plant, which could not
so easily be perceived by one picture as by two, because his flower does first
rise out of the ground nakedly in September, and his long small grassy leaves
shortly after the flower, never bearing flower and leaf at once. The which to
express, I thought it convenient to set down two pictures before you, with
this description, viz. The root is small, round, and bulbous. The flower
consists of six small blew leaves tending to purple, having in the middle
many small yellow strings or threads; among which are two, three, or more thick
fat chiues of a fiery color somewhat reddish, of a strong smell when they be
dried, which does (...) and trouble the head. The first picture sets forth
the Plant when it bears flowers, and the other expresses nothing but leaves.

1 Crocus vernus. Early flouring wild Saffron.
2 Crocus vernus minor. Small wild Saffron.


The Place.
Common, or the best known Saffron grows plentifully in Cambridge-shire,
Saffron-Walden, and other places thereabout, as corn in the fields.

The Time.
Saffron begins to flower in September, and presently after spring up the
leaves, and remain green all the Winter long.

The Names.
Saffron is called in Greek, (...): in Latin, Crocus: in Mauritania,
Saffaran: in Spanish, (...): in English, Saffron: in the Arabicke tongue,
Zahafaran.

The Temperature.
Saffron is a lirtle astringent or binding, but his hot quality does so
overrule in it, that in the whole essence it is in the number of those herbs
which are hot in the second degree, and dry in the first: therefore it also
has a certain force to concoct, which is furthered by the small astriction
rhat is in it, as Galen says.

The Virtues.
Auicen affirms that it causes headache, and is hurtful to the brain,
which it cannot do by

Also Saffron strengthens the heart, concocteth crude and raw humors of the
chest, opens

3 Crocus vernus flore luteo. Yellow Spring Saffron.
4 Crocus vernus flore albo. White Spring Saffron.
5 Crocus (...) flore (...). Purple Spring Saffron.
6 Crocus montanus (...). Autumn mountain Saffron.


It is also such a special remedic for those that have consumption of the
lungs, and are, as we

Dioscorides teaches, That being given in the same sort it is also good
against a surfeit.

It is commended against the stoppings of the liver and gall, and against the
yellow Iaundise: Dioscorides writes, That it makes a man well colored. It is
put into all drinks that are made to help the diseases of the intrailes, as
the same Author affirms, and into those especially which bring down the
flowers, the birth, and the after burden. It provoke urine, stirs fleshly
lust, and is used in Cataplasmes and pultesses for the matrix and fundament,
and also in plasters and seare-cloaths which serve for old swellings and
aches, and likewise for hot swellings that have also in them S. Anthonies fire.

7 Crocus montanus Autumnalis flore majore albido caeruleo. Autumn mountain
Saffron with a large whitish blew flower.
8 Crocus Autumnalis flore albo. White Autumn Saffron.


It is with good success put into compositions for infirmities of the ears.

The eyes being anointed with the same dissolved in milk, or fennel or rose
water, are preserved

The chiues steeped in water, serve to illumine or (as we say) limne pictures
and imagerie, as also Crocomagna, Oxycroceum, and (...), with diverse other
emplaisters and electuaries cannot be made without this Saffron.

The weight of ten grains of Saffron, the kernels of Wall-nuts two ounces,
Figs two ounces,

9 Crocus vernus angustifolius flore violaceo. Narrow leaued Spring Saffron
with a violet flower.
10 Crocus vernus latifolius flore flauo strijs violaceis. Broad leaued Spring
Saffron with a yellow flower and purple streaks.
11 Crocus vernus latifolius striatus flore duplici. Double floured streaked
Spring Saffron.


The Kinds of Spring Saffron
OF wild Saffrons there be sundry sorts, differing as well in the color of
the flowers, as also in the time of their flouring. Of which, most of the
figures shall be set forth unto you.

The Description of wild Saffron
1 THe first kind of wild Saffron has small short grassie leaves, surrowed or
chanelled down the midst with a white line or streake: among the leaves rise
up small flowers in shape like unto the common Saffron, but differing in
color; for this has flowers of mixed colors; that is to say, the ground of
the flower is white, stripped upon the back with purple, and dashed over on the
inside with a bright shining murrey color; the other not. In the middle of the
flowers come forth many yellowish chiues, without any smell of saffron at all.
The root is small, round, and covered with a brown skin or filme like unto
the roots of common Saffron.

2 The second wild Saffron in leaves, roots, and flowers is like unto the
precedent, but altogether lesser, and the flowers of this are of a purple
violet color.

3 We have likewise in our London gardens another sort, like unto the
otherwilde Saffrons 12 Crocus vernus latifolius flore purpureo. Broad leaued
Spring Saffron with the purple flower.
13 Crocus vernus flore cinereo striato. Spring Saffron with an Ash-colored
streaked flower.
14 Crocus vernus latifolius flore flauovario duplici. Broad leaued Spring
Saffron with a double flower yellow and streaked.
in every point, saving that this has flowers of a most perfect shining yellow
color, seeming a far off to be a hot glowing cole of fire, which makes the
difference.

4 There is found among Herbarists another sort, not differing from the others,
saving that this has white flowers, contrary to all the rest.

5 Lovers of Plants have gotten into their gardens one sort hereof with purple
or Violet colored flowers, in other respects like unto the other.

6 Of these we have another that floureth in the fall of the (...), with
flowers like to the common Saffron, but destitute of those chiues which yield
the color, smell, or taste that the right manured Saffron has.

7 And of this last kind there is another with broader leaves, and the flower
also is larger, with the leaves thereof not so sharp pointed, but more round;
the color being at the first whitish, but afterward intermixed with some
blewnesse.

8 There is also another of Autumn wild Saffrons with white flowers, which
sets forth the distinction.

Many sorts there are in our gardens besides those before specified, which I
thought needless to entreat of, because their use is not great. Therefore I
will only give the figures and names of some of the chief of them, and refer
such as delight to see or please themselves with the varieties (for they are no
specificke differences) of these plants, to the gardens and the books of
Florists, who are only the preseruers and admirers of these varieties, not
sought after for any use but delight.

The Place.
All these wild Saffrons we have growing in our London Gardens. Those which
do flower in Autumn do grow upon certain craggy rocks in Portugal, not far
from the sea side. The other have been sent over unto us, some out of Italy,
and some out of Spain, by the labor and diligence of that notable learned
Herbarist Carolus Clusius; out of whose Observations, and partly by seeing them
in our own gardens, we have set down their descriptions.

That pleasant plant that brings forth yellow flowers was sent unto me from
Robinus of Paris, that painful and most curious searcher of Simples.

The Time.
They flower for the most part in January and February; that of the mountain
excepted, which floureth in September.

The Names.
All these Saffrons are unprofitable, and therefore they be truly said to be
Croci syluestres, or wild Saffrons: in English, Spring Saffrons, and vernall
Saffrons.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Of the faculties of these we have nothing to set down, for that as yet there
is no known use of them in Physic.

CHAP. 91. Of Meadow Saffron.
The Kinds.
THere be sundry sorts of Meadow Saffrons differing very notably as well in the
color of their flowers, as also in stature and Country, from whence they had
their being, as shall be declared.

1 Colchicum Anglicum Purpureum. Purple English Meadow Saffron.
2 Colchicum Anglicum album. White English Meadow Saffron.


The Description.
1 Meadow Saffron has three or four leaves rising immediately forth of the
ground, long, broad, smooth, fat, much like to the leaves of the white Lilly in
form and smoothness: in the middle whereof spring up three or four thick
cods of the bigness of a small Wall-nut, standing upon short tender
foot-stalkes three square, and opening themselves when they be ripe, full of
seed something round, and of a blackish red color: and when this seed is ripe,
the leaves together with the stalks do fade and fall away. In September the
flowers bud forth, before any leaves appear, standing upon short tender and
whitish stemmes, like in form and color to the flowers of Saffron, having in
the middle small chiues or threads of a pale yellow color, altogether unfit
for meat or medicine. The root is round or bulbous, sharper at the one end than
at the other, flat on the one side, having a deep clift or furrow in the same
flat side when it floureth, and not at any time else: it is covered with
blackish coats or filmes; it sends down unto the lowest part certain
strings or threads. The root it self is full of a white substance, yielding a
juice like milk, whilst it is green and newly dug out of the earth. It is
in taste sweet, with a little bitterness following, which draws water out of
the mouth.

3 Colchicum Pannonicum florens and sine flore. Hungary mede Saffron with and
without Flower.


2 The second kind of Mede Saffron is like the precedent, differing only in
the color of the flowers, for that this plant does bring forth white leaves,
which of some has been taken for the true Hermodactylus; but in so doing they
have committed the greater error.

3 These two figures express both but one and the self same plant, which is
distinguished because it never bears flowers and leaves both at one time. So
that the first figure sets it forth when it is in leaves and seed, and the
other when it floureth; and therefore one description shall suffice for them
both. In the Spring of the year it brings forth his leaves, thick, fat,
shining, and smooth, not unlike the leaves of Lillies, which do continue green
unto the end of June; at which time the leaves do wither away, but in the
beginning of September there shoots forth of the ground naked milk white
flowers without any green leaf at all: but so soon as the Plant has done
bearing of flowers, the root remains in the ground, not sending forth any
thing until February in the year following.

It bears plentiful store of reddish seed in loose triangular heads. The root
hereof is bigger than that of the last described.

That which was set forth by our Author in the fourth place, under the title of
Colchicum (...) (...), was nothing but the former (...) (...) (...) in seed.
The ninth and tenth were the same with the first and second. The sixth and
(...), which are (...) (...) and (...) I have left with their (...) and
history, (...) they be suspected to be (...); and (...) probably gesses, that
the latter is the (...) (...), the Painter making the leaves (...) the flower
too round, and those of the plant (...) broad and short.
4 The small meadow Saffron has three or four thick fat leaves narrower than
any of the rest. The flower appears in the fall of the leaf, in shape,
color, and manner of growing like the common mede Saffron, but of a more
reddish purple color, and altogether lesser. The leaves in this, contrary to
the nature of these plants, presently follow after the flower, and so continue
all the Winter and Spring, even until May or June. The root is bulbous, and
not great; it is covered with many blackish red coats, and is white within.

5 This meadow Saffron has roots and leaves like to those of the last
described, but the leaves of the flower are longer and narrower, and the color
of them is white on the inside, green on the middle of the back part, and the
rest thereof of a certain flesh color.

4 Colchicum montanum minus Hispanicum cum flore and semine. Small Spanish
meadow Saffron in flower and seed.


6 The meadow Saffron of Illyria has a great thick and bulbous root, full of
substance: from which rises up a fat, thick, and gross stalk, set about
from the lower part to the top by equal distances, with long, thick, and
gross leaves, sharp pointed, not unlike to the leaves of leekes; among which
leaves do grow yellowish flowers like unto the English meadow Saffron, but
smaller.

7 The Assyrian meadow Saffron has a bulbous root, made as it were of two
pieces; from the middle cleft whereof rises up a soft and tender stalk set
with fair broad leaves from the middle to the top: among which comes forth
one single flower like unto the common meadow Saffron, or the white Anemone of
Matthiolus description.

8 The mountain wild Saffron is a base and low plant, but in shape altogether
like the common meadow Saffron, but much lesser. The flowers are smaller, and of
a yellow color, which sets forth the difference. The leaves and roots (as
Clusius affirms) are more like to the Narcisses; and therefore he calls this
Narcissus Autumnalis minor, The lesser Autumn Narcisse.

9 This, whose figure we here give you, is by Clusius called Colchicum
Byzantinum latifolium, The broad leaued Colchicum of Constantinople. The leaves
of this are not in form and magnitude much unlike to those of the white
Hellebor, neither less neruous, yet more green. It bears many flowers in
Autumn, so that there come sometimes twenty from one root. Their form and
color are much like the ordinary sort, but that these are larger, and have
thicker stalks. They are of a lighter purple without, and of a deeper on the
inside, and they are marked with certain veins running along these leaves.
The roots and seeds of this plant are thrice as large as those of the common
kind.

10 This has roots and leaves like to the first described, but the flower is
shorter, and grows upon a shorter stalk, so that it rises but little above
the earth: the three inner leaves are of a reddish purple; the three out leaves
are either wholly white, or purplish on the middle in the inside, or streaked
with fair purple veins, or spotted with such colored spots: all the leaves of
the flower are blunter and rounder than in the common kind.

11 This in leaves, roots, manner and time of growing, as also in the color of
the flowers, differs not from the first described, but the flowers, as you may
perceive by the figure here expressed, are very double, and consist of many
leaves.

5 Colchicum montanum (...) versicolore flore. The lesser mountain Saffron
with a various colored flower.
6 Colchicum Illyricum. Greek meadow Saffron.


12 This Colchicum differs little from the first ordinary one, butthat the
flowers are somewhat less, and the three out-leaues are somewhat bigger than
the three inner leaves; the color is a little deeper also than that of the
common one; but that wherein the principal difference consists, is, That this
flowers twice in a year, to wit, in the Spring and Autumn: and hence Clusius
has called it Colchicum biflorum, Twice-flouring Mede Saffron.

13 This also in the shape of the root and leaves is not much different from
the ordinary, but the leaves of the flower are longer and narrower, the color
also when they begin to open and show themselves, is white, but shortly after
they are changed into a light purple: each leaf of the flower has a white
thread tipped with yellow growing out of it, and in the middle stands a white
three forked one longer than the rest. The flower grows up between three or
four leaves narrower than those of the ordinary one, and broader than those
of the small Spanish kind. Clusius, to whom we are beholden for this, as also
for most of the rest, calls it Colchicum vernum, or Spring Mede-Saffron,
because it then flowers together with the Spring Saffrons and Dogs Tooth.

14 There are other Mede-Saffrons besides these I have mentioned, but because
they may be 7 Colchicum Syriacum Alexandrinum. Assyrian Mede Saffron.
referred easily to some of these, for that their difference chiefly consists
either in the doubleness or color of the flowers, whereof some are striped,
some fraided, others variegated, I will not insist upon them, but refer such
as desire their further acquaintance to look into the gardens of our Florists,
as M. Parkinsons, M. Tuggies, etc. or else into the book of flowers set forth
not long since by M. Parkinson, where they shall find them largely treated of.
Yet I (...) pass over in silence that curious Colchicum which is called by
some, Colchicum variegatum Chiense. The flower thereof is very beautiful,
consisting of six pretty broad and sharp pointed leaves, all curiously
checkered over with deep blew or purple, the rest of the flower being of a
light whitish color: the leaves, that rise up in the Spring, are not very
long, but somewhat broad and sharp pointed; the root is like others of this
kind. I have given you an exact and large figure of this, as I took it from
the growing flower some three years agone, it being at that time amongst her
Majesty's flowers kept at Edgcombe in Surry, in the garden of my much honored
friend Sir John Tunstall, Gentleman Usher unto her Majesty.

15 I give you here in this place the true Hermodactill of the shops, which
probably by all is adjudged to this Tribe, though none can certainly say what
flowers or leaves it bears: the Roots are only brought to us, and from what
place I cannot tell; yet I conjecture from some part of Syria or the adjacent
countries. Now how hard it is to judge of Plants by one part or particle, I
shall show you more at large when I come to treat of Pistolochia, wherefore I
will say nothing thereof in this place. These roots, which wanting the malign
quality of Colchicum, either of their own nature, or by dryness, are
commonly about the bigness of a Chestnut, smooth, flattish, and sharp at the
one end, but somewhat full at the other, and on the one side there is a little
channel or hollownesse, as is in the roots of Mede-Saffron where the stalk of
the flower comes up. Their color is either white, brown, or blackish on the
outside, and very white within, but those are the best that are white both
without and within, and may easily be made into a fine white meal or powder.

8 Colchicum parvum montanum luteum. Yellow mountain Saffron.


The Place.
Meadow Saffron, or Colchicum, grows in Messinia, and in the Isle of Colchis,
whereof it took his name. The titles of the rest do set forth their native
countries; notwithstanding our London gardens are possessed with the most part
of them.

The two first do grow in England in great abundance, in fat and fertile
meadows, as about Vilford and Bathe, as also in the meadows near to a small
village in the West part of England, called Shepton Mallet, in the meadows
about Bristoll, in Kingstroppe meadow near unto a Water-mill as you go from
Northampton to Holmeby House, upon the right hand of the way, and likewise in
great plenty in Nobottle wood two miles from the said town of Northampton, and
many other places. The rest for the most part may be (...) in the gardens of
the Florists among us.

9 Colchicum latifolium. Broad leaued Mede Saffron.
10 Colchicum ver sicolore flore. Party-colored Mede Saffron.


The Time.
The leaves of all the kinds of Mede-Saffron do begin to show themselves in
February; The seed is ripe in June. The leaves, stalks, and seed do perish in
July, and their pleasant flowers do come forth of the ground in September.

The Names.
Dioscorides calls Meadow Saffron (...): some, (...): notwithstanding there is
another Ephemeron which is not deadly. Diverse name it in Latin Bulbus
agrestis, or wild Bulbe: in high Dutch it is called Zeitloosen: in low Dutch,
Tilteloosen: in French, Mort au Chien. Some have taken it to be the true
Hermodactyl, yet falsely. Other some call it Filius ante Patrem, although there
is a kind of Lysimachia or Loose-strife so called, because it first brings
forth his long cods with seed, and then the flower after, or at the same time
at the end of the said cod. But in this MedeSaffron it is far otherwise,
because it brings forth leaves in February, seed in May, and flowers in
September, which is a thing clean contrary to all other plants whatsoever,
for that they do first flower, and after seed; but this Saffron seedeth first,
and four months after brings forth flowers: and therefore some have thought
this a fit name for it, (...) ante Patrem: and we accordingly may 11 Colchicum
flore pleno. Double floured Mede-Saffron.
12 Colchicum biflorum. Twice-flouring Mede-Saffron.
13 Colchicumvernum. Spring Mede-Saffron.
14 Colchicum variegatum Chiense. Checquered Mede Saffron of Chio.
15 Hermodactyli Officinarum. The true Hermodactyls of the shops.
call it, The Son before the Father.

Our Author in this chapter was of many minds; for first, in the deseription
of Colchicum Anglicum, being the second, he reproues such as make that white
floured Colchicum the true Hermodactyl. Then in the description of the eighth
he has these words, which being omitted in that place I here set down. Of all
these kinds (says he) of Meadow Saffrons it has not been certainly known
which has been the true Hermodactyll; notwithstanding we have certain
knowledge that the Illyrian Colchicum is the Physical Hermodactyll. Yet when
he comes to speak of the names, after that out of Dodonaeus he had set down
the truth in these words; But notwithstanding that Hermodactyll which we do use
in compound medicines, differs from this (to wit, Colchicum) in many notable
points, for that the true Hermodactyll has a bulbe or round root, which being
dried continues very white within, and without not wrinkled at all, but full
and smooth, of a mean hardness; and that he had out of the same Author
alleged the words of Valerius Cordus and Auicen, (which are here omitted) he
concludes contrary to the truth, his first admonition, and second assertion,
That the white Meadow Saffron which we have in the West part of England, growing
especially about Shepton Mallet, is the Hermodactyll used in shops.

Those we have in shops seem to be the Hermodactyls of Paulus (...); yet not
those of Nicholaus and Actuarius, which were cordial, and increasers of sperme;
the which the Authors of the Aduersaria, page 55. think to be the Behen album
and rubrum of the Arabians. And to these unknown ones are the virtues set
down by our Author in the third place under C, to be referred.

The Temperature.
Meadow Saffron is hot and dry in the second degree.

The Virtues of Hermodactyls.
That which was set forth by our Author in the fourth place, under the title of
Colchicum (...) (...), was nothing but the former (...) (...) (...) in seed.
The ninth and tenth were the same with the first and second. The sixth and
(...), which are (...) (...) and (...) I have left with their (...) and
history, (...) they be suspected to be (...); and (...) probably gesses, that
the latter is the (...) (...), the Painter making the leaves (...) the flower
too round, and those of the plant (...) broad and short.
The roots of Hermodactyls are of force to purge, and are properly given (says
Paulus) to

The same stamped, and mixed with the whites of eggs, barley meal, and crumbs
of bread, and

The same strengthens, nourishes, and makes good juice, increases sperme or
natural seed,

The correction.
The powder of Ginger, long Pepper, Annise seed or Cumine seed, and a little
Masticke, corrects the churlish working of that Hermodactyll which is used in
Shops. But those which have eaten of the common meadow Saffron must drink the
milk of a cow, or else death presently ensues.

The Danger.
The roots of all the sorts of Mede Saffrons are very hurtful to the stomach,
and being eaten they kill by choking, as Mushromes do, according unto (...);
whereupon some have called it Colchicum strangulatorium.

CHAP. 92. Of Star of Bethlem.
The Kinds.
THere be sundry sorts of wild field Onions called Stars of Bethlehem,
differing in stature, taste, and smell, as shall be declared.

1 Ornithogalum. Star of Bethlehem.
2 Ornithogalum luteum, sieve Cepa agraria. Yellow, or wild Star of Bethlehem.


The Description.
1 Our common Star of Bethlehem has many narrow leaves, thick, fat, full of
juice, and of a very green color, with a white streake down the middle of
each leaf: among the which rise up small naked stalks, at the top whereof
grow flowers compact of six little leaves, stripped on the backeside with lines
of green, the inside being milkewhite. These flowers open themselves at the
rising of the Sun, and shut again at the Sun setting; whereupon this Plant
has been called by some, Bulbus Solsequius. The flowers being past, the seed
does follow enclosed in three cornered husks. The root is bulbous, white both
within and without,

That which was the second of our (...). under the (...) of (...) (...), and
the third under (...) (...) were figures of the same plant, but in the (...),
as (...) (...), the bottom leaves are omitted, because they fall away when as
it is grown up to flower.
2 The second sort has two or three grassy leaves proceeding from a cloven
bulbous root. The stalk rises up in the midst naked, but toward the top
there do thrust forth more leaves like unto the other, but smaller and
shorter; among which leaves do step forth very small, weak, and tender
foot-stalkes. The flowers of this are on the backeside of a pale yellow
stripped with green, on the inside of a bright shining yellow color, with
Saffron colored threads in their middles. The seed is contained in triangular
vessels.

That which was the second of our (...). under the (...) of (...) (...), and
the third under (...) (...) were figures of the same plant, but in the (...),
as (...) (...), the bottom leaves are omitted, because they fall away when as
it is grown up to flower.
3 This Star of Hungary, contrary to the custom of other plants of this
kind, sends forth before Winter five or six leaves spread upon the ground,
narrow, and of some fingers length, somewhat whitish green, and much
resembling the leaves of Gillofloures, but somewhat roughish. In April the
leaves beginning to decay, amongst them rises up a stalk bearing at the (...)
a spoke of flowers, which consisting of six leaves apiece show themselves open
in May; they in color are like the first described, as also in the green
streake on the lower side of each leaf. The seed is black, round, and
contained in triangular heads. The root is bulbous, long, and white.

4 This fourth, which is the Ornithogalum Hispanicum minus of Clusius, has a
little white root which sends forth leaves like the common one, but narrower,
and destitute of the white line wherewith the other are marked. The stalk is
some two handfulls high, bearing at the top thereof some seven or eight flowers
growing each above other, yet so, as that they seem to make an vmbell: each of
these flowers has six leaves of a shitish blew color, with so many white
chiues or threads, and a little bluish vmbone in the midst. This flowers in
April.

5 This fifth first sends up one only leaf two or three inches long, narrow,
and of a whitish color, and of an acide taste: nigh whereto rises up a small
stalk some inch or two high, having one or two leaves thereon, between which
come forth small star-floures, yellow within, and of a greenish purple without.
The seed, which is reddish and small, is contained in triangular heads. The
root is white, round, and covered with an Ash-colored filme.

3 Ornithogalum Pannonicum. Star of Hungary.
4 Ornithogalum Hispanicum minus. The lesser Spanish Star-floure.


6 I think it not amiss, hereto to add another small bulbous plant, which
Clusius calls Bulbus (...), The one leaued Bulbe. This from a small root sends
forth one rush-leafe of some foot in length, which about two inches above the
earth, being somewhat broader than in the other places, and guttered, sends
forth a little stalk some three inches long, whose top is set with three
little flowers, each standing above other, about the bigness here presented
unto your view in the figure: each of those consists of six very white
leaves, and are not much unlike the flowers of the grass of Parnassus, but yet
without leaves to sustain the flower, as it has: six white threads tipped with
yellow, and a three square head with a white pointall possess the midst of
the flower; the smell thereof is somewhat like that of the flowers of the
Haw-thorne. It flowers in the midst of June.

7 Having done with these two small plants, I must acquaint you with three or
four larger, belonging also to this Classis. The first of these is that which
Dodonaeus calls Ornithogalum majus, and Clusius, Ornithogalum Arabicum: This by
Lobel and some others is called Lilium Alexandrinum, 5 Ornithogalum luteum
parvum. Dwarf yellow Star of Bethlehem.
6 Bulbus vnifolius. The one leaued Bulbe.
7 Ornithogalum majus Arabicum. The great Arabicke Star-floure.
or the Lilly of Alexandria, as our Author calls it in the chapter of
Cotton-grasse. This fair, but tender plant, has broad green leaves coming
from a large white flat bottomed root; amongst which (...) up a stalk some
cubit high, whose top is garnished with sundry pretty large flowers made of
six very white leaves, with a shining blackish head, ingirt with six white
threads tipped with yellow. This flowers in May.

8 This, which is commonly called Ornithogalum spicatum, has large leaves and
roots, and the flalke grows some cubit or more high, whereon grow many
starre-floures in shape and color like those of the ordinary, but larger, and
they begin to flower below, and flower upwards to the top. There is a larger
sort of this Spicatum, whose flowers are not streaked with green on their
backs. There is also a lesser, differing from the first of these only in
bigness.

9 This Neapolitan has three or four long leaves not much unlike those of the
Hyacinths, but narrower, the stalk is pretty thick, some foot high, and has
usually growing thereon some five or six flowers hanging one way, though their
stalks grow alternately out of each side of the maine stem. These flowers
are composed of six leaves, being about an inch long, and some quarter of an
inch broad, white within, and of an Ash-colored green without, with white
edges, the middle of the flower is possessed by another little flower,
consisting also of six little leaves, having in them six threads headed with
yellow, and a white pointall. A black wrinkled seed is contained in three
cornered heads, which by reason of their bigness weigh down the stalk. This
flowers in April.

8 Ornithogalum spicatum. Spike fashioned Star-floure.
9 Ornithogalum Neapolitanum. The Neapolitan Star-floure.


The Place.
Stars of Bethlehem, or Star-floures, especially the first and second, grow in
sundry places that lie open to the air, not only in Germany and the
Low Countries, but also in England, and in our gardens very common. The yellow
kind Lobell found in Somersetshire in the corn fields. The rest are
strangers in England; yet we have most of them, as the third, fourth, eighth,
and ninth, in some of our choice gardens.

The Time.
These kinds of bulbed plants do flower from April to the end of May.

The Names.
Touching the names, Dioscorides calls it (...): Pliny, Ornithogale: in high
Dutch it is called Feldz (...), Ackerz (...): as you should say, (...) agraria:
in English, Stars of Bethlehem.

The rest are named in their titles and history; but Clusius questions whether
the Bulbus vnifolius be not (...) of Theophrastus, 7. hist. 13. Bauhinus seems
to affirm the Spicatum to be Moly of Dioscorides and Theophrastus, and
Epimedium of Pliny.

The Nature.
These are temperate in heat and dryness.

The Virtues.
The virtues of most of them are unknown; yet Hieronymus Tragus writes, That
the root of the

The roots, says Dioscorides, are eaten both raw and boiled.

CHAP. 93. Of Onions.
The Kinds.
THere be, says Theophrastus, diverse sorts of Onions, which have their
syr-names of the places where they grow: some also lesser, others greater; some
be round, and diverse others long; but none wild, as Pliny writes.

1 Cepa alba. White Onions.
3 Cepa Hispanica oblonga. Longish Spanish Onions.


The Description.
1 THe Onion has narrow leaves, and hollow within; the stalk is single,
round, biggest in the middle, on the top whereof grows a round head covered
with a thin skin or filme, which being broken, there appear little white
flowers made up in form of a ball, and afterward black seed three cornered,
wrapped in thin white skins. In stead of the root there is a bulbe or round
head compact of many coats, which oftentimes becomes great in manner of a
Turnep, many times long like an egg. To be brief, it is covered with very
fine skins for the most part of a whitish color.

2 The red Onion differs not from the former but in sharpness and redness
of the roots, in other respects there is no difference at all.

3 There is also a Spanish kind, whose root is longer than the other, but in
other respects very little different.

4 There is also another small kind of Onion, called by Lobel, Ascalonit is
Antiquorum, or Scallions; this has but small roots, growing many together: the
leaves are like to Onions, but less. It seldom bears either stalk, flower,
or seed. It is used to be eaten in sallads.

The Place.
The Onion requires a fat ground well dug and dunged, as Palladius says.
It is cherished every where in kitchen gardens: it is now and then in beds
sown alone, and many times mixed with other herbs, as with Lettuce,
Parseneps, and Carrets. Palladius likes well that it should be sown with
Sauory, because, faith Pliny, it prospers the better, and is more wholesome.

4 Ascalonitides. Scallions.


The Time.
It is sown in March or April, and sometimes in September.

The Names.
The Onion is called in Greek, (...): in Latin, Cepa, and many times Cepe in
the neuter gender: the shops keep that name. The old Writers have given unto
this many syr-names of the places where they grow, for some are named Cipriae,
Sardiae, Creticae, (...), Ascaloniae, of a town in Judea, otherwise called
Pompeiana: in English, Onions. Moreover, there is one named Marisca, which the
Contrymen call Vnio, says Columella; and thereupon it (...) that the French
men call it (...), as (...) thinks: and peradventure the Low. Dutch men name
it (...), of the French word corrupted: they are called Setaniae which are very
little and sweet; and these are (...) to be those which Palladius names
Cepullae, as though he called them parvae Cepae, or little Onions.

There is an Onion which is without an head or bulbe, and has as it were a
long neck, and spends it self wholly in the leaves, and it is often cropped
or cut for the pot like the Leekes. This Theophrastus names (...): of this
Pliny also writes, in his nineteenth book, and sixth chapter. There is with us
two principal forts of Onions, the one serving for a sauce, or to season meat
with, which some call (...), and others Pallacana: and the other is the headed
or common Onion, which the Germans call Onion zwibel: the Italians, Cipolla:
the Spaniards, Cebolla, Ceba, and Cebola.

The Temperature.
All Onions are sharp, and move tears by the smell. They be hot and dry, as
Galen says, in the fourth degree, but not so extreme hot as Garlic. The juice
is of a thin waterie and airy substance: the rest is of thick parts.

The Virtues.
The Onions do bite, attenuate, or make thin, and cause dryness: being
boiled they do lose

they also break wind, provoke urine, and be more soluble boiled than raw;
and raw they nourish

They be naught for those that are choleric, but good for such as are replete
with raw and

Galen writes, That they provoke the Hemorrhoides to bleed if they be laid
unto them, either

The juice of Onions sniffed up into the nose, purges the head, and draws
forth raw (...)

Stamped with salt, rue, and honey, and so applied, they are good against the
biting of a mad

Roasted in the embers, and applied, they ripen and break cold Apostumes,
Biles, and such

The juice of Onions mixed with the decoction of Penniriall, and anointed upon
the goutie

The juice anointed upon a pild or bald head in the sun, bringing again the
hair very speedily.

The juice takes away the heat of scalding with water or oil, as also
burning with fire and William (...), one of the Queens Chirurgions; and before
him by Ambrose Parey, in his Treatise of (...) (...) by gun shot.

Onions sliced, and dipped in the juice of Sorrel, and given unto the sick of
a tertian Ague, to

The Hurts.
The Onion being eaten, yea though it be boiled, causes headache, hurts the
eyes, and makes a man dim sighted, dulleth the senses, ingendreth
windiness, and provoke (...) sleep, especially being eaten raw.

CHAP. 94. Of Squils, or Sea-Onions.
1 Scilla Hispanica vnlgaris. The common Spanish Squill.


The Description.
1 THe ordinary Squill or sea Onion has a pretty large root, composed of
sundry white coats filled with a certain viscous humiditie, and at the bottom
thereof grow forth sundry white and thick fibers. The leaves are like those of
Lillies, broad, thick, and very green, lying spread upon the ground, and
turned up on the sides. The stalk grows some cubit or more high, straight,
naked without leaves, beautified at the top with many star-(...) flowers,
very like (...) of the bigger Ornithogalum. The seed is contained in (...)
three cornered seed-vessels, being it self also black, smooth, and chaffie. It
flowers in August and September, and the seed is ripe in October. The leaves
spring up in November and December, after that the seed is ripe, and stalk
decayed.

2 The great Sea Onion, which (...) has set forth in his Spanish history,
has very great and broad leaves, as Dioscorides says, longer than those of
the Lilly, but narrower. The bulbe or headed root is very great, consisting of
many coats or scaly filmes of a reddish color. The flower is sometimes yellow,
sometimes purple, and (...) of a light blew. Clusius says it is like that of
the former, I think he means both in (...) and color.

3 The sea-Onion of Valentia, (...) rather the (...) (...), has many long and
sat leaves, and narrow like those of Narcissus, but (...) (...) (...), lying
upon the ground; among which rises up a stalk a foot high, bare and naked,
(...) at (...) (...) a tuft of white flowers, in shape like unto our common
yellow Daffodil. The seed is enclosed in thick knobby husks, black, flat,
and thick, very soft, in shape like unto the seeds of Aristolochia longa, or
long Birth-wort. The root is (...), white, long, and bulbous.

4 Red floured Sea Dasfodill, or sea Onion, has a great bulbe or root like to
the precedent; the leaves long, fat, and sharp pointed, the stalk bare and
naked, bearing at the top sundry fair red flowers in shape like to the last
described.

2 Pancratium Clusij. Great Squill, or Sea Onion.
3 Pancratium Marinum. Sea Onion of Valentia.


5 The yellow floured sea Daffodill, or sea Onion, has many thick fat leaves
like unto the common Squill or sea Onion, among which rises up a tender
straight stalk full of juice; bearing at the top many flowers like the common
yellow Daffodill. The seed and root is like the precedent.

6 To these may fitly be added that elegant plant which is known by the name
of Narcissus tertius of Matthiolus, and may be called White Sea Daffodill. This
plant has large roots, as big sometimes as the ordinary Squill; the leaves
are like those of other Daffodils, but broader, rounder pointed, and not very
long. The stalk is pretty thick, being sometimes round, otherwhiles cornered,
at the top whereof grow many large white flowers: each flower is thus composed;
it has six long white leaves, in the midst grows forth a white pointall which
is encompassed by a welt or cap divided into six parts, which six are again by
threes divided into eighteen iagges ordiuisions, a white thread tipped with
green, of an inch long, coming forth of the middle of each division. This
floureth in the end of May. It is said to grow naturally about the sea coast of
Illyria.

The Place.
The first is found in Spain and Italy, not far from the sea side.

The second also near unto the sea, in Italy, Spain, and Valentia. I have had
plants of them brought me from sundry parts of the Mediterranean sea side, as
also from Constantinople, where it is numbered among the kinds of Narcissus.

The third grows in the sands of the sea, in most places of the coast of
Narbone, and about Montpellier.

The fourth grows plentifully about the coasts of Tripolis and Aleppo, near
to the sea, and also in the salt marshes that are sandy (...) lie open to the
air.

The Time.
They flower from May to the end of July, and their seed is ripe in the end of
August.

The Names.
The first is called of the Grecians, (...): and of the Latins also Scilla:
the Apothecaries name it Squilla: Diverse, Cepamuris: the Germans, Mere zwibel:
the Spaniards, Cebolla albarrana: the Frenchmen, Oignon de (...): in English,
Squill, and Sea Onion.

The second is called (...), and Scilla rubr a major.

3, 4, 5. These are all figures of the same plant, but the least (which is the
worst) is the figure of the (...), where it is called Pancratium marinum:
Dodonaeus calls it Narcissus marinus: and Clusius, Hemerocallis Valentina; and
it is judged to be the (...) of Theoporastus, Lib. 6. Hist. cap. 1. The
Spaniards call this Amores mios: the Turks, Con (...) the Italians, Giglio
marino. These three (as I said) differ no otherwise than in the color of their
flowers.

The sixth is Narcissus tertius, or Constantinopolitanus, of Matthiolus: (...)
calls it Lilionarcissus Hemerocallidis facie.

4 Pancratium floribus rubris. Red floured sea Daffodill.
6 Narcissus tertius Matthioli. The white sea Daffodill.


The Temperature.
The sea Onion is hot in the second degree, and cutteth very much, as Galen
says. It is best (...) it is taken baked or roasted, for so the vehemency of
it is taken away.

The Virtues of Squills.
The root is to be covered with paste or clay, (as (...) teaches) and then put
into an oven

It is likewise baked in an earthen pot close covered and set in an oven. That
is to be taken

These slices of the Squill are used to make oil, wine, or vinegar of Squill.
Of this vinegar of

This Onion roasted or baked is mixed with potions and other medicines which
provoke urine,

One part of this Onion being mixed with eight parts of salt, and taken in the
morning fasting

The inner part of Squilla boiled with oil and turpentine, is with great
profit applied to the

It drives forth long and round worms if it be given with honey and oil.

The Pancratium marinum, or Hemerocallis Valentina (says Clusius) when as I
lived with Rondeletius, at Montpellier, was called Scilla; and the Apothecaries
thereof made the trochisces for the composition of Treacle: afterward it began
to be called Pancratium flore Lilij. Rondeletius also was wont to tell this
following story concerning the poisonous and malign quality thereof. There
were two Fishermen, whereof the one lent unto the other (whom he hated) his
knife, poisoned with the juice of this Hemerocallis, for to cut his meat
withal; he suspecting no treachery cut his victuals therewith, and so eat
them, the other abstaining therefrom, and saying that he had no stomach. Some
few days after, he that did eat the victuals died; which showed the strong
and deadly quality of this plant: which therefore (as Clusius says) cannot be
the Scilla Epimenidia of Pliny, which was eatable, and without malignitie

CHAP. 95. Of Leekes.
(...) Porrum capitatum. Headed, or set Leeke.
2 Porrum sectivum aut tonsile. Cut, or unset Leeke.


The Description.
1 THe leaves or the blades of the (...) be long, somewhat broad, and very
many, having a keele or crest in the backside, in smell and taste like to the
Onion. The stalks, if the blades be not often cut, do in the second or third
year grow up round, bringing forth on the top flowers made up in a round head
or ball as does the Onion. The seeds are like. The bulbe or root is long and
slender, especially of the unset Leeke. That of the other Leeke is thicker and
greater.

2 Most Writers distinguish the common Leeke into Porrum capitatum and (...);
and Lobel gives these two figures wherewith we here present you. Now both these
grow of the same seed, and they differ only in culture; for that which is
often cut for the use of the kitchen is called Sectivum: the other, which is
headed, is not cut, but spared, and removed in Autumn.

The Place.
It requires a mean earth, fat, well dunged and dug. It is very common
every where in other countries, as well as in England.

The Time.
It may be sown in March or April, and it to be removed in September or
October.

The Names.
The Grecians call it (...): the Latins, Porrum. The Emperor Nero had great
pleasure in this root, and therefore he was called in scorn, Porrophagus. But
Palladius in the masculine gender called it Porrus: the Germans, (...): the
Brabanders, (...): the Spaniards, Puerro: the French, Porrean: the Englishmen,
Leeke, or Leekes.

The Temperature.
The Leeke is hot and dry, and does attenuate or make thin as does the Onion.

The Virtues.
Being boiled it is less hurtful, by reason that it loses a great part of
his sharpness: and yet being so used it yields no good juice. But being
taken with cold herbs his too hot quality is tempered.

Being boiled and eaten with Ptisana or barley cream, it concocteth and
brings up raw humors

The juice drunk with honey is profitable against the bitings of venomous
beasts, and likewise

The same juice, with vinegar, frankincense, and milk, or oil of roses,
dropped into the ears,

Two drams of the seed, with the like weight of myrtill berries drunk, stop the
spitting of blood

Lobel commends the following Loch as very effectual against phlegmatic
Squinances, and Bdellium half an ounce, juice of Liquorice, two ounces, of
sugar candy dissolved in a sufficient quantity of juice of Leekes, and boiled
in (...) to the height of a (...), as much as shall be requisite to make the
rest into the form of an Eclegma.

The Hurts.
It heateth the body, ingendreth naughty blood, causes troublesome and
terrible dreams, offends the eyes, dulleth the sight, hurts those that are
by nature hot and choleric, and is noisome to the stomach, and breeds
windiness.

CHAP. 96. Of Ciues or (...), and wild Leekes.
The Kinds.
THere be diverse kinds of Leekes, somewilde, and some of the garden, as shall
be declared. Those called Ciues have been taken of some for a kind of wild
Onion: but all the Authors that I have been acquainted with, do accord that
there is not any wild Onion.

1 Schoenoprason. Ciues or Chiues.
2 Porrum vitigineum. French Leekes, or Vine Leekes.
3 Ampeloprason sieve porrum siluestre. Wild Leeke.


The Description.
1 CIues bring forth many leaves about a hand-full high, long, slender, round,
like to little rushes; amongst which grow up small and tender stalks, sending
forth certain knops with flowers like those of the Onion, but much lesser.
They have many little bulbes (...) headed roots fastened together: out of which
grow down into the earth a great number of little strings, and it has both
the smell and taste of the Onion and Leeke, as it were participating of both.

2 The Vine Leeke or French Leeke grows up with blades like those of Leekes:
the stalk is a cubit high, on the top whereof stands a round head or button,
covered at the first with a thin skin, which being broken, the flowers and
seeds come forth like those of the Onion. The bulbe (...) headed root is round,
hard, and sound, which is quickly multiplied by sending forth many bulbes.

3 The wild Leeke has leaves much like unto those of Crow-garlicke, but
larger, and more acride. The flowers and seeds also resemble those of the
Crow-garlicke, the seeds being about the bigness of corns of wheat, with small
strings coming forth at their ends.

The Time and Place.
1 Ciues are set in gardens, they flourish long, and continue many years, they
suffer the cold of Winter. They are cut and polled often, as is the unset Leeke.

2 The Vine-leeke grows of it self in Vineyards, and near unto Vines in hot
regions, whereof it both took the name Vine-Leeke, and French Leeke. It bears
his green leaves in Winter, and withers away in the Summer. It grows in
most gardens of England.

Thus far our Author describes and intimates to you a garden Leeke, much like
the ordinary in all respects, but somewhat larger. But the following names
belong to the wild Leeke, which here we give you in the third place.

The Names.
Ciues are called in Greek, (...), Shoenoprasum: in Dutch, (...), as though
you should say, Iunceum Porrum, or Rush Leeke: in English, Ciues, Chiues, Ciuet
and Sweth: in French, Brelles.

The figure of (...) was in the first place, in the Chapter next bat one, by
the name of Allium (...).
2 The Vine-leeke, or rather wild Leeke, is called in Greek, (...), of the
place where it naturally grows: it may be called in Latin, Porrum Vitium, or
Vitigineum Porrum: in English, after the Greek and Latin, Vine Leeke, or
French Leeke.

The Temperature.
Ciues are like in faculty unto the Leeke, hot and dry. The Vine leeke heateth
more than does the other Leeke.

The Virtues.
Ciues attenuate or make thin, open, provoke urine, engender hot and gross
vapors, and are hurtful to the eyes and brain. They cause troublesome
dreams, and work all the effects that the Leeke does.

The Vine-leeke, or Ampeloprason, provoke urine mightily, and brings down
the flowers. Dioscorides writes.

CHAP. 97. Of Garlic.
The Description.
1 THe bulbe or head of Garlic is covered with most thin skins or filmes
of a very lightwhite purple color, consisting of many cloves severed one from
another, under which in the ground below grows a tassell of threddy fibers:
it has long green leaves like those of the Leeke, among which rises up a
stalk at the end of the second or third year, whereupon does grow a tuft of
flowers covered with a white skin, in which, being broken when it is ripe,
appears round black seeds.

2 There is also another Garlic which grows wild in some places of Germany
and France, which in shape much resembles the ordinary, but the cloves of the
roots are smaller and redder. The flower is also of a more duskie and dark
color than the ordinary.

The Place and Times.
Garlic is seldom sown of seed, but planted in gardens of the small cloves
in November and December, and sometimes in February and March.

The Names.
It is called in Latin, (...) in Greek, (...): The Apothecaries keep the
Latin name: the Germans call it (...): the Low Dutch, Look: the Spaniards,
Aios, Alho: the Italians, Aglio: the French, (...) or (...) the Bohemians,
Czesnek: the English, Garlic, and poor man's Treacle.

The Temperature.
Garlic is very sharp, hot, and dry, as Galen says, in the fourth degree,
and exulcerateth the skin by raising blisters.

The Virtues.
Being eaten, it heateth the body extremely, attenuateth and makes thin
thick and gross Galen names it Theriaca Rusticorum, or the husbaudmans
Treacle.

It yields to the body no nourishment at all, it ingendreth naughty and
sharp blood. (...) such as are of a hot complexion must especially abstain
from it. But if it be boiled in water until such time as it has lost his
sharpness, it is the less forcible, and retains no longer his evil juice,
as Galen says.

It takes away the roughness of the throat, it helps an old cough, it
provoke urine, it breaks

It kills worms in the belly, and drives them forth. The milk also wherein
it has been

1 Allium. Garlic.
2 Allium syluestre rubentibus nucleis. Wild Garlic with red cloves.


It helps a very cold stomach, and is a preservative against the contagious
and pestilent

The decoction of Garlic used for a bath to sit over, brings down the
flowers and secondines Dioscorides says.

It takes away the morphew, tetters, or ring-wormes, scabbed heads in
children, dandraffe and

With Fig leaves and Cumin it is laid on against the bitings of the Mouse
called in Greek,

CHAP. 98. Of Crow-Garlicke and Ramsons.
The Description.
1 THe wild Garlic or Crow-garlicke has small tough leaves like unto
rushes, smooth and hollow within; among which grows up a naked stalk, round,
slipperie, hard and sound: on the top whereof, after the flowers be gone, grow
little seeds made up in a round cluster like small kernels, having the smell
and taste of Garlic. In stead of a root there is a bulbe or round head without
any cloves at all.

2 Ramsons do send forth two or three broad longish leaves sharp pointed,
smooth, and of a light green color. The stalk is a span high, smooth and
slender, bearing at the top a cluster of white star-fashioned flowers. In stead
of a root it has a long slender bulbe, which sends down a multitude of
strings, and is covered with skins or thick coats.

1 Allium syluestre. Crow Garlic.
2 Allium vrsinum. Ramsons.


The Time.
They spring up in April and May. Their seed is ripe in August.

The Place.
The Crow Garlic grows in fertile pastures in all parts of England. I found
it in great plenty in the fields called the Mantels, on the backside of
Islington by London.

Ramsons grow in the Woods and borders of fields under hedges, among the
bushes. I found it in the next field unto Boobies barn, under that hedge that
bordereth upon the lane; and also upon the left hand, under an hedge adjoining
to a lane that leads to Hampsted, both places near London.

The Names.
Both of them be wild Garlic, and may be called in Latin, Alliua
syluestria: in Greek, (...): The first, by (...) and Lobell is called Allium
syluestretenuifolium.

Ramsons are named of the later practioners, Allium Vrsinum, or Bears
Garlic: Allium latifolium, and Moly Hippocraticum: in English, Ramsons,
Ramsies, and Buckrams.

The Nature.
The temperatures of these wild Garlickes are referred unto those of the
gardens.

The Virtues.
Wild Garlic, or Crow-Garlicke, as Galen says, is stronger and of more
force than the garden

The leaves of Ramsons be stamped and eaten of diverse in the Low Countries,
with fish for a

The same leaves may very well be eaten in April and May with butter, of such
as are of a strong

The distilled water drunk breaks the stone, and drives it forth, and
provoke urine.

CHAP. 99. Of Mountain Garlicks:
1 Scorodoprasum. Great mountain Garlic.
2 Scorodoprasum primum Clusij. Clusius his great mountain Garlic.


The Description.
1 2 THe great Mountain Garlic has long and broad leaves like those of
Leekes, but much greater and longer, embracing or clasping about a great thick
stalk, soft and full of juice, bigger than a man's finger, and (...) toward the
top; upon which is set a great head bigger than a tennise ball, covered with a
skin after the manner of an Onion. The skin when it comes to perfection
breaks, and discovers a great multitude of whitish flowers; which being
past, black seeds follow, enclosed in a three cornered husk. The root is
(...), of the bigness of a great Onion. The whole plant smells very strong
like unto Garlic, and is in show a Leeke, whereupon it was called
Scorodoprasum, as if we should say, Garlic Leeke; participating of the Leeke
and Garlic, or rather a degenerate Garlic grown monstrous.

I cannot certainly determine what difference there may be between the (...)
expressed by the first figure, which is our Authors, and the second figure
which is taken out of Clusius. Now the history which Clusius gives us to the
second, the same is (out of him) given by our Author to the first: so that by
this reason they are of one and the same plant. To the which opinion I rather
incline, than affirm the contrary with Bauhine, who distinguishing them, puts
the first amongst the Leekes, under the name of Porrum folio latissinio:
following Tabernamontanus, who first gave this figure, under the name of Porrum
(...).

3 This plant is lesser in all the parts than the former; the root is set about
with longer and slenderer bulbes wrapped in brownish skins; the flowers and
leaves are like, yet smaller than Garlic.

3 Scorodoprasum minus. The lesser leeke-leaued Garlic.
4 Ophioscoridon. Vipers Garlike.


4 The third, which Clusius makes his second Scorodoprasum, has stalks some
two cubits high, having many leaves like those of Leekes from the bottom of
the stalk to the middle thereof; their smell is between that of Leekes and
Garlic; the rest of the stalk is naked, green, smooth, sustaining at the top
a head composed of many bulbes, covered with a whitish skin ending in a long
green point; which skin by the growth of the bulbes being broken, they show
themselves, being first of a purplish, and afterward of a whitish color,
amongst which are some flowers. The top of the stalk at first twines it self,
so that it in some sort represents a serpent; then by little it vntwines
again, and bears the head straight up. The root consists of many cloves much
like that of Garlic.

5 The broad leaued Mountain Garlic, or rather the Mountain Ramsons, rises
up with a stalk a cubit high, a finger thick, yet very weak, full of a
spongeous substance, near to the bottom of a purplish color, and green
above, bearing at the top a multitude of small whitish flowers, somewhat
gaping, star-fashion. The leaves are three or flower, broad ribbed like the
leaves (...) (...) Gentian, resembling those of Ramsons, but greater. The root
is great and long, covered with many scaly coats and hairy strings.

5 Allium Alpinum latifolium, seu Victorialis. Broad leaued Mountain Garlic.


The Place.
The great mountain Garlic grows about Constantinople, as says Clusius. I
received a plant of it from M. Thomas Edwards Apothecary of Excester, who found
it growing in the West parts of England.

Victorialis grows in the mountains of Germany, as says Carolus Clusius,
and is yet a stranger in England for any thing that I do know.

. The Time.
Most of these plants flower in the months of June and July.

The Names.
Of the first and second I have spoken already. The third is Scorodoprassum
minus of Lobell. The fourth is Allium sativum secundum of (...), and
Scorodoprasum secundum of Clusius. The fifth is Allium anguinum of Matthiolus;
Ophioscoridon of (...), and Victorialis of Clusius and others, as also Allium
Alpinum. The Germans call it Seigmurtz.

The Temper.
They are of a middle temper between Leekes and Garlic.

Their Virtues.
Scorodoprasum, as it partakes of the temper, so also of the virtues of Leekes
and Garlic; that is, it attenuates gross and tough matter, helps
expectoration, etc.

Victorialis is like Garlic in the operation thereof. Some (as (...) writes)
hang the root thereof about the necks of their cattle being fallen blind, by
what occasion (...) it happen, and persuade themselves that by this means they
will recover their sight. Those that work in the mines in Germany affirm,
That they find this root very powerful in defending them from the assaults of
impure spirits or devils, which often in such places are troublesome unto them.
Clus.

CHAP. 100. Of Moly, or the Sorcerers Garlic.
The Description.
1 THe first kind of Moly has for his root a little whitish bulbe somewhat
long, not unlike to the root of the unset Leeke, which sends forth leaves
like the blades of (...) or grass: among which does rise up a slender weak
stalk, fat and sull of juice, at the top whereof comes forth of a skinny
filme a bundle of milke-white flowers, not unlike to those of Ramsons. The
whole plant has the smell and taste of Garlic, whereof no doubt it is a
kind.

2 Serpents Moly has likewise a small bulbous root with some fibers fastened to
the bottom, from which rise up weak grassie leaves of a shining green color,
crookedly winding and turning themselves toward the point like the tail of a
Serpent, whereof it took his name: the stalk is tough, thick, and full of
juice, at the top whereof stands a cluster of small red bulbes, like unto the
smallest cloue of Garlic, before they be pilled from their skin. And among
those bulbes there do thrust forth small and weak foot-stalkes, every one
bearing at the end one small white flower tending to a purple color: which
being past, the bulbes do fall down upon the ground, where they without help
do take hold and root, and thereby greatly increase, as also by the infinite
bulbes that the root does cast off: all the whole plant does smell and taste of
Garlic, whereof it is also a kind.

3 Homers Moly has very thick leaves, broad toward the bottom, sharp at the
point, and 1 Moly (...). (...) his Moly.
2 Moly Serpentinum. Serpents Moly.
3 Moly (...). Homers Moly.
hollowed like a trough or gutter, in the bosom of which leaves near unto the
bottom comes forth a certain round bulbe or ball of a goose-turd green
color: which being ripe and set in the ground grows and becomes a fair
plant such as is the mother. Among those leaves rises up a naked smooth thick
stalk, of two cub its high, as strong as a small walking staff: at the top of
the stalk stands a bundle of fair whitish flowers, dashed over with a wash
of purple color, smelling like the flowers of Onions. When they be ripe there
appears a black seed wrapped in a white skin or husk. The root is great
and bulbous, covered with a blackish skin on the outside, and white within,
and of the bigness of a great Onion.

4 Indian Moly has verythicke fat short leaves, and sharp pointed; in the
bosom whereof comes forth a thick knobby bulbe like that of Homers Moly. The
stalk is also like the precedent, bearing at the top a cluster of scaly bulbes
included in a large thin skin or filme. The root is great, bulbous fashion,
and full of juice.

5 Caucafon, or withering Moly, has a very great bulbous root, greater than
that of Homers Moly, and fuller of a slimie juice; from which do arise three or
four great thick and broad leaves withered alwaie at the (...); wherein
consists the difference between these leaves and those of Homers Moly, which
are not so. In the middle of the leaves rises up a bunch of smooth greenish
bulbes set upon a tender footstalke, in shape and bigness like to a great
garden Worm, which being ripe and planted in the earth, do also grow unto a
fair plant like unto their mother.

These two last mentioned (according to Bauhine, and I think the truth) are
but figures of one and the same plant; the later whereof is the better, and
more agreeing to the growing of the plant.

6 To these may be fitly added two other Molyes: the first of these, which is
the yellow Moly, has roots whitish and round, commonly two of them growing
together; the leaves which it sends sorth are long and broad, and somewhat
resemble those of the Tulip, and usually are but two in number; between which
rises up a stalk some foot high, bearing at the top an vmbell of fair yellow
star-like flowers tipped on their lower sides with a little green. The whole
plant smells of Garlic.

4 Moly Indicum. Indian Moly.
5 Caucafon. Withering Moly.


7 This little Moly has a root about the bigness of an Hasell nut, white,
with some fibers hanging thereat; the stalk is of an handful or little more
in height, the top thereof is adorned with an vmbel of ten or twelve white
flowers, each of which consists of six leaves, not sharp pointed, but turned
round, and pretty large, considering the bigness of the plant. This plant has
also usually but two leaves, and those like those of Leekes, but far less.

The Place.
These plants grow in the garden of M. John Parkinson Apothecarie, and with M.
John Tradescant and some others, studious in the knowledge of plants.

The Time.
They spring forth of the ground in February, and bring forth their flowers,
fruit, and seed in the end of August.

The Names.
Some have derived the name Moly from these Greek words, (...): that is, to
drive away diseases. It may probably be argued to belong to a certain bulbous
plant, and that a kind of Garlic, by the words (...), and (...). The former,
Galen in his Lexicon of some of the difficulter words used by Hippocrates, thus
expounds: (...). That is, Moliza is a Garlic having a simple or single head,
and not to be parted or distinguished into cloves: some term it Moly.
Erotianus in his Lexicon expounds the later thus: (...) (says he) (...), etc.
That is; Molyx is a head of Garlic, round, and not to be parted into cloves.

The Names in particular.
1 this is called Moly by Matthiolus; Moly Angustifolium by Dodonaeus; Moly
Dioscorideum by Lobel and Clusius.

2 This, Moly Serpentinum vocatum, by Lobel and the Author of the Hist. Lugd.

3 This same is thought to be the Moly of Theophrastus and Pliny, by Dodonaeus,
Clusius, etc. and some also would have it to be that of Homer, mentioned in his
twentieth Odyss. Lobel calls it Moly Liliflorum.

4 5 The fourth and fifth being one, are called Caucafon, and Moly Indicum by
Lobel, Clusius, and others.

6 This is Moly Montanum latifolium flauo flore of Clusius, and Moly luteum of
Lobel, Aduersar, par. 2.

7 This same is Moly minus of Clusius.

6 Moly latifolium flore (...). Broad leaued Moly with the yellow flower.
7 Moly minus flore albo. Dwarf white floured Moly.


The Temperature and Virtues.
These Molyes are very hot, approaching to the nature of Garlic, and I doubt
not but in time some excellent man or other will find out as many good virtues
of them, as their stately and comely proportion should seem to be possessed
with. But for my part, I have neither proved, nor heard of others, nor found in
the writings of the Ancients, any thing touching their faculties. Only
Dioscorides reports, That they are of marvelous efficacy to bring down the
terms, if one of them be stamped with oil of Flower de-luce according to art,
and used in manner of a pessarie or mother suppositorie.

CHAP. 79. Of diverse other Molyes.
BEsides the Garlickes and Molyes formerly mentioned by our Author, and those I
have in this Edition added, there are diverse others, which, mentioned by
Clusius, and belonging unto this Tribe, I have thought good in this place to
set forth. Now for that they are more than conveniently could be added to the
former chapters, (which are sufficiently large) I thought it not amiss to
allot them a place by themselves.

1 Moly (...) folijs primum. The first Narcisse-leaued Moly.
2 Moly (...) folijs secundum. The second Narcisse-leaued Moly.


The Description.
1 THis, which in face nighest represents the Molyes described in the last
Chapter, has a root made of many scales, like as an Onion in the upper part,
but the lower part is knotty, and runs in the ground like as Solomon's Seal;
the Onion-like part has many fibers hanging thereat; the leaves are like those
of the white Narcisse, very green and shining, amongst which rises up a
stalk of a cubit high, naked, firm, green, and crested; at the top come
forth many flowers consisting of six purplish leaves, with as many chiues on
their insides: after which follow three (...) heads, opening when they are
ripe, and containing a round black seed.

2 This other being of the same kind, and but a variety of the former, has
softer and more Ash-colored leaves, with the flowers of a lighter color. Both
these flower at the end of June, or in July.

3 This has five or six leaves equally as broad as those of the last
described, but not so long, being somewhat twined, green, and shining. The
stalk is some foot in length, smaller than that of the former, but not less
stiff, crested, and bearing in a round head many flowers, in manner of growing
and shape like those of the former, but of a more elegant purple color. In
seed and root 3 Moly Narcissinis folijs tertium. The third Narcisse-leaued Moly.
4 Moly montanum (...) (...). Clusij. The first broad leaued mountain Moly.
5 Moly montanum (...) Clusij. The second mountain Moly.
it resembles the precedent. There is also avarietie of this kind, with leaves
longer and narrower, neither so much twined, the stalks weaker, and flowers
much lighter colored.

This flowers later than the former, to wit, in July and August.

All these plants grow naturally in Leitenberg and other hills near to Vienna
in Austria, where they were first found and (...) by (...) Clusius.

4 This has a stalk some two cubits high, which even to the middle is
encompassed with leaves much longer and broader than those of Garlic, and
very like those of the Leeke: on the top of the smooth and rush-like (...)
grows a tuft consisting of many dark purple colored bulbs growing close
together, from amongst which come forth pretty long stalks bearing light
purple starre-fashioned flowers, which are succeeded by three cornered
seed-vessels. The root is bulbous, large, consisting of many cloves, and having
many white fibers growing sorth thereof. Moreover, there grow out certain round
bulbes about the root, almost like those which grow in the head, and being
planted apart, they (...) plants of the same kind. This is Allium, sieve Moly
montanum latifolium 1. Clusij.

5 This has a smooth round green stalk some cubit high, whereon do grow
most commonly three leaves narrower than those of the former, and as itwere
grassy. The top of the (...) sustaines a head wrapped in two lax filmes, each
of them running out with a sharp point like two horns, which opening
themselves, there appear many small bulbes heaped together, amongst which are
flowers composed of six purplish little leaves, and fastened to long stalks.
The root is round and white, with many long white fibers hanging thereat.
Clusius calls this, Allium, sieve Moly montanum secundum. And this is Lobels
Ampeloprason proliferum.

6 Like to the last described is this in height and shape of the stalk and
leaves, as also in the forked or horned skin inuoluing the head, which
consists of many small bulbes of a reddish green color, and ending in a
long green point; amongst which, upon long and slender stalks hang down
flowers like in form and magnitude to the former, but of a whitish color,
with a dark purple streake along the middle, and upon the edges of each
leaf. The root is round and white, like that of the last described. This
Clusius gives under the title of Allium sieve Moly (...) tertium.

6 Moly montanum 3. Clus. The third mountain Moly.
7 Moly montani quarti spec. 1. Clus. The fourth mountain Moly; (...) first
(...) thereof.


7 This also has three rushy leaves, with a round stalk of some cubit high,
whose top is likewise adorned with a forked membrane, containing many pale
colored flowers hanging upon long stalks, each flower consisting of six
little leaves, with the like number of chiues, and a pestil in the midst. This
tuft of flowers cut off with the top of the stalk, and carried into a chamber,
will yield a pleasant smell (like that which is found in the flowers in the
earlier Cyclamen) but it will quickly decay. After these flowers are past
succeed three cornered heads containing a black small seed, not much unlike
Gillofloure seed. The root is round like the former, sometimes yielding
off-sets. This is Alij montani 4. species 1. of Clusius.

8 There is another kind of this last described, which grows to almost the
same height, and has like leaves, and the head ingirt with the like skinny
long pointed husks; but the flowers of this are of a very dark color. The
roots are like the former, with off-sets by their side. This is Clusius his
Moly montani quarti species secunda. The roots of the three last described
smell of garlic, but the leaves have rather an hearby or grasse-like smell.

The fifth and sixth of these grow naturally in the Styrian and Austrian Alps.
The seventh grows about Presburg in Hungary, about Niclaspurg in Morauia, but
most abundantly about the Baths in Baden.

8 Moly (...) quarti species (...) Clusij. The second kind of the fourth
mountain Moly.
9 Moly montanum quintum Clusij. The fifth mountain Moly.


9 This grows to the like height as the former, with a green stalk, having
few leaves thereupon, and naked at the top, where it carries a round head
consisting of many star-like small flowers, of a fair purple color, fastened
to short stalks, each flower being composed of six little leaves, with as
many chiues, and a pestill in the middle. The root is bulbous and white, having
sometimes his off-sets by his sides. The smell of it is like Garlic. This
grows also about Presburgh in Hungary, and was there observed by Clusius to
bear his flower in May and June. He calls this Allium, seu Moly montanum
quintum.

CHAP. 102. Of White Lillies.
The Kinds.
THere be sundry sorts of Lillies, whereof some be wild, or of the field;
others tame, or of the garden; some white, others red; some of our own
countries growing, others from beyond the seas: and because of the variable
sorts we will divide them into chapters, beginning with the two white Lillies,
which differ little but in the native place of growing.

The Description.
1 THe white Lilly has long, smooth, and full bodied leaves, of a grassie or
light green color. The stalks be two cubits high, and sometimes more, set or
garnished with the like leaves, but growing smaller and smaller toward the top;
and upon them (...) grow fair white flowers strong of smell, narrow toward the
foot of the stalk whereon they do grow, wide or open in the mouth like a
bell. In the middle part of them do grow small tender pointals tipped with a
dusty yellow color, ribbed or (...) on the back side, consisting of six small
leaves thick and fat. The root is a bulbe made of scaly cloves, full of tough
and clammie juice, wherewith the whole plant does greatly abound.

2 The white Lilly of Constantinople has very large and fat leaves like the
former, but narrower and lesser. The stalk rises up to the height of three
cubits, set and garnished with leaves also like the precedent, but much less.
Which stalk oftentimes does alter and degenerate from his natural roundnesse
to a flat form, as it were a lath of wood furrowed or chanelled along the
same, as it were ribs or welts. The flowers grow at the top like the former,
saving that the leaves do turn themselves more backward like the Turks cap,
and bears many more flowers than our English white Lilly does.

1 Lilium album. The white Lilly.
2 Lilium album Bizantinum. The white Lilly of Constantinople.


The Place.
Our English white Lilly grows in most gardens of England. The other grows
naturally in Constantinople and the parts adjacent, from whence we had plants
for our English gardens, where they flourish as in their own country.

The Time.
The Lillies flower from May to the end of June.

The Names.
The Lilly is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Lilium, and also Rosa
Iunonis, or Juno's Rose, because as it is reported it came up of her milk that
fell upon the ground. For the Poets feign, That Hercules, who (...) had by
Alcumena, was put to Juno's breasts whilst she was asleep; and after the
sucking there fell away abundance of milk, and that one part was spilt in the
heavens, and the other on the earth; and that of this sprang the Lilly, and of
the other the circle in the heavens called Lacteus Circulus, or the milky way,
or otherwise in English Watling street. Saint Basil in the explication of the
44. Psalm says, That no flower so lively sets forth the frailty of man's life
as the Lilly. It is called in high Dutch, (...) (...): in low Dutch, (...)
(...): in Italian, Giglio: in Spanish, Lirio blanco: in French, Lys blanc: in
English, the white Lilly.

The other is called Lilium album Bizantinum, and also Martagon album
Bizantinum: in English, the white Lilly of Constantinople: of the Turks
themselves, Sultan Zambach, with this addition, (that they might be the better
known which kind of Lilly they meant when they sent roots of them into these
countries) Fa sioragrandi Bianchi; so that Sultan Zambach fa sioragrandi
Bianchi, is as much to say as, Sultans great Lilly with white flowers.

The Nature.
The white Lilly is hot, and partly of a subtle substance. But if you regard
the root, it is dry in the first degree, and hot in the second.

The (...).
The root of the garden Lilly stamped with honey gleweth together sinews that
be cut in sunder.

The Root stamped with Vinegar, the leaves of Henbane, or the meal of Barley,
cures the

The same root roasted in the embers, and stamped with some (...) of Rye bread
and Hogs

The flowers steeped in Oil Olive, and shifted two or three times during
(...), and set in

Florentinus a writer of husbandry says, That if the root be (...) opened, and
therein be put

Julius Alexandrinus the Emperors Physician says, That the water thereof
distilled and drunk

He also says, the leaves boiled in red Wine, and applied to old wounds or
(...), do much Galen in his seventh book (...) (...). med. facultat.

The root of a white Lilly stamped and strained with wine, and given to drink
for two or three William Godorus, Sergeant Surgeon to the Queens Majesty: who
also has cured many of the Dropsey with the juice thereof, tempered with
Barley meal, and baked in cakes, and so eaten ordinarily for some month or
six weeks together with meat, but no other bread during that time.

CHAP. 103. Of Red Lillies.
The Kinds.
THere be likewise sundry sorts of Lillies, which we do comprehend under one
general name in English, Red Lillies, whereof some are of our own countries
growing, and others of beyond the seas, thewhich shall be distinguished
severally in this chapter that follows.

The Description.
1 THe gold-red Lilly grows to the height of two, and sometimes three cubits,
and often higher than those of the common white Liily. The leaves be blacker
and narrower, set very thick about the stalk. The flowers in the top be many,
from ten to thirty flowers, according to the age of the plant, and fertility
of the soil, like in (...) and greatness to those of the white Lilly, but of
a red color tending to a Saffron, sprinkled or poudred with many little black
specks; like to rude imperfect draughts of certain letters. The roots be great
bulbes, consisting of many cloves, as those of the white Lilly.

2 In stead of the Plantaine leaued red Lilly, described and figured in this
second place by our Author out of Tabernamontanus, for that I judge both the
figure and description counterfeit, I have omitted them, and here give you the
many-floured red Lilly in his stead. This has a root like that of the last
described, as also leaves and stalks; the flower also in shape is like that of
the former, but of a more light red color, and in number of flowers it
exceeds the precedent, for sometimes it bears sixty flowers upon one stalk.

3 This red Lilly is like unto the former, but not so tall; the leaves be fewer
in number, broader, and downy toward the top of the stalk, where it bears
some bulbes. The flowers in shape be like the former, saving that the color
hereof is more red, and thick dashed with black specks. The root is scaly like
the former.

4 There is another red Lilly which has many leaves somewhat ribbed, broader
than the last mentioned, but shorter, and not so many in number. The stalk
grows to the height of two cubits, and sometimes higher, whereupon do grow
flowers like the former: among the footstalk of which flowers come forth
certain bulbes or cloued roots, brown of color, tending unto redness; which
do fall in the end of August upon the ground, taking root and growing in the
same place, whereby it greatly increases, for seldom or never it brings
forth seed for his propagation.

1 Lilium aureum. Gold-red Lilly.
2 Lilium rubrum. The red Lilly.


5 There is another sort of red Lilly having a fair scaly or cloued root,
yellow above, and brown toward the bottom; from which rises up a fair
stiff stalk crested or furrowed, of an ouer-worne brown color, set from the
lower part to the branches, whereon the flowers do grow with many leaves,
confusedly placed without order. Among the branches close by the stem grow
forth certain cloves or roots of a reddish color, like unto the cloves of
Garlic before they are pilled: which being fallen upon the ground at their
time of ripeness, do shoot forth certain tender strings or roots that do take
hold of the ground, whereby it greatly increases. The flowers are in shape
like the other red Lillies, but of a dark Orange color, resembling a flame of
fire spotted with black spots.

6 This has a much shorter stalk, being but a cubit or less in height, with
leaves blackish, and narrower than those before going. The flowers, as in the
rest, grow out of the top of the stalk, and are of a purplish Saffron color,
with some blackish spots. The root in shape is like the precedent.

The Place.
These Lillies do grow wild in the plowed fields of Italy and Languedocke, in
the mountains and valleys of Hetruria and those places adjacent. They are
common in our English gardens, as also in Germany.

The Time.
These red Lillies do flower commonly a little before the white Lillies, and
sometimes together with them.

3 Lilium cruentum latifolium. The fiery red Lilly.
4 Lilium cruentum (...). Red bulbe-bearing Lilly.


The Names.
1 The first of these is thought by some to be the Bulbus cruentus of
Hippocrates; as also the Lilium purpureum of Dioscorides: Yet Matthiolus and
some others would have it his Hemerocallis. Dodonaeus and Bapt. Porta think it
the Hyacinthus and (...) (...) of the Poets, of which you shall find more
hereafter. It is the Martagon Chymistarum of Lobell, and the Lilium aureum
(...) of Tabernamontanus.

2 This is Martagon Chymistarum alterum of Lobell. 3 This is Clusius his (...)
(...) secundum. 4 Martagon bulbiferum primum of Clusius. 5 This (...) (...)
Lilium purpureum tertium, and it is Martagon bulbiferum tertium of Clusius. 6
This last Lobell and (...) call Lilium purpureum minus.

I have thought good here also to give you that discourse touching the Poets
Hyacinth, which being translated out of Dodonaeus, was formerly unfitly put
into the chapter of (...); which therefore I there omitted, and have here
restored to his due place, as you may (...) by Dodonaeus, Pempt. 2. lib. 2.
cap. 2.

There is a Lilly which Ovid, Metamorph. lib. 10. calls Hyacinthus, of the boy
(...), of whose blood he feigneth that this flower sprang, when he perished as
he was (...) (...) (...), for whose sake, he says, that Apollo did print
certain letters and notes of his (...). These are his words:

Eccecruor, quifusus humo signauerat herbas,
Desinit esse cruor, Tyrioquenitentior ostro
Flos oritur, formamque capit, quam Lilia, si non
Purpureus color his argenteus esset in illis.
Non satis hoc Phoebo est, (is enim fuit auctor honoris)
Ipse suos gemitus folijs inscribit, and ai ai,
Flos habet inscriptum, funestaque litera ducta est.
Which lately were elegantly thus rendered in English by M. Sands:

Behold! the blood which late the grass had died
Was now no blood: from thence a flower full blown,
Far brighter than the Tyrian scarlet shone:
Which seemed the same, or did resemble right
A Lilly, changing but the red to white.
Nor so contented, (for the Youth received
That grace from Phoebus) in the leaves he weau'd
The sad impression of his sighs, Ai, Ai,
They now in funeral characters display, etc.
5 Lilium cruentum secundum caulem bulbulis donatum. Red Lilly with bulbes
growing along the stalk.
6 Lilium purpureum minus. The small red Lilly.


Theocritus also has made mention of this Hyacinth, in Bions Epitaph, in the
19. Eidyl. which Eidyl by some is attributed to Moschus, and made his third.
The words are these:

(...).
(...).
In English thus:
Now Iacinth speak thy letters, and once more
Imprint thy leaves with Ai, Ai, as before.
Likewise Virgill has written hereof in the third Eclog of his Bucolicks.

Et me Phoebus amat, Phoebo sua semper apud me
Munerasunt, lauri and suaue rubens Hyacinthus.
Phoebus loves me, his gifts I always have,
The e're green Laurel, and the lacinth brave.
In like manner also Nemesianus in his second Eclog of his Bucolicks:

Te sine me, misero (...) Lilia nigra videntur,
Pallentesque Rosae, nec dulce rubens Hyacinthus:
At si tu venias, and candida Lilia fient
Purpureaeque Rosae, and dulce rubens Hyacinthus.
Without thee, Love, the Lillies black do seem;
The Roses pale, and Hyacinths I deem
Not lovely red. But if thou come to me,
Lillies are white, red Rose and Iacinths be.
The Hyacinths are said to be red which Ovid calls purple; for the red color
is sometimes termed purple. Now it is thought this Hyacinthus is called
Ferrugineus, for that it is red of a rusty iron color: for as the putrefaction
of brass is named Aerugo; so the corruption of iron is called Ferrugo, which
from the reddish color is styled also Rubigo. And certainly they are not a few
that would (...) Color ferrugineus to be so called from the rust which they
think Ferrugo. Yet this opinion is not allowed of by all men; for some judge,
that Color ferrugineus is inclining to a blew, for that when the best iron is
heated and wrought, when as it is cold again it is of a color near unto
blew, which from Ferrum (or iron) is called Ferrugineus. These latter ground
themselves upon Virgils authority, who in the sixth of his Aeneidos describes
Charons ferrugineous barge or boat, and presently calls the same blew. His
words are these:

Ipseratem conto subigit velisque ministrat,
Et ferruginea subuectat corpora Cymba,
He thrusting with a pole, and setting sails at large,
Bodies transports in ferrugineous barge.
And then a little after he adds;

Coeruleam aduertit puppim, ripaeque propinquat.
He then turns in his blew Barge, and the shore
Approches nigh to.
And Claudius also, in his second book of the carrying away of Proserpina,
does not a little confirm their opinions; who writes, That the Violets are
painted, ferrugine dulci, with a sweet iron color.

Sanguineo splendore rosas, vaccinea nigro
Induit, and aulci violas ferrugine pingit.
He trimmes the Rose with bloody bright,
And Prime-tree berries black he makes,
And decks the Violet with a sweet
Dark iron color which it takes.
But let us return to the proper names from which we have digressed. Most of
the later Herbarists do call this Plant Hyacinthus Poeticus, or the Poets
Hyacinth. Pausanias in his second book of his Corinthiackes has made mention
of Hyacinthus called of the Hermonians, Comosandalos, setting down the
ceremonies done by them on their festival days, in honor of the goddess
Chthonia. The Priests (says he) and the Magistrates for that year being, do
lead the troop of the pomp; the women and men follow after; the boves
solemnly lead forth the goddess with a stately show: they go in white
vestures, with garlands on their heads made of a flower which the Inhabitants
call Comosandalos, which is the blew or sky-colored Hyacinth, having the marks
and letters of mourning as aforesaid.

The Nature.
The flower of the red Lilly (as Galen says) is of a mixed temperature, partly
of thin, and partly of an earthly essence. The root and leaves do dry and
cleanse, and moderately digest, or waste and consume away.

The Virtues.
The leaves of the herb applied are good against the stinging of Serpents.

The same boiled and tempered with vinegar are good against burnings, and heal
green wounds

The root roasted in the embers, and pounded with oil of Roses cures burnings,
and softneth

The same stamped wtth honey cures the wounded sinews and members out of
joint. It takes

Stamped with Vinegar, the leaves of Henbane, and wheat meal, it remoueth hot
swellings of

The roots boiled in Wine (says Pliny) causes the corns of the feet to fall
away within (...)

Being drunk in honied water, they drive out by siege unprofitable blood.

CHAP. 104. Of Mountain Lillies.
The Description.
1 THe great mountain Lilly has a cloued bulbe or scaly root like to those of
the Red Lilly, yellow of color, very small in respect of the greatness of the
plant: From the which rises up a stalk, sometimes two or three, according to
the age of the plant; whereof the middle stalk commonly turns from his
roundnesse into a flat sorme, as those of the white Lilly of Constantinople.
Upon these stalks do grow fair leaves of a blackish green color, in
roundles and spaces as the leaves of Woodroofe, not unlike to the leaves of
white Lilly, but smaller at the top of the stalks. The flowers be in number
infinite, or at the least hard to be counted, very thick set or thrust
together, of an ouerworne purple, spotted on the inside with many small specks
of the color of rusty iron. The whole flower does turn it self backward at
such time as the Sun has cast his beams upon it, like unto the Tulipa or
Turks Cap, as the Lilly or Martagon of Constantinople does; from the middle
whereof do come forth tender pointalls with small dangling pendants hanging
thereat, of the color the flower is spotted with.

1 Lilium montanum majus. The great mountain Lilly.
2 Lilium montanum minus. Small Mountain Lilly.


2 The small mountain Lilly is very like unto the former in root, leaf,
stalk, and flowers: differing in these points; The whole plant is lesser, the
stalk never leaves his round form, and bears fewer flowers.

There are two or three more varieties of these plants mentioned by Clusius;
the one of this lesser kind, with flowers on the outside of a flesh color,
and on the inside white, with blackish spots; as also another wholly white
without spots. The third variety is like the first, but differs in that the
flowers blow later, and smell sweet.

These plants grow in the woody mountains of Styria and Hungary, and also in
such like places on the North of Francfort, upon the Moene.

The small sort I have had many years growing in my garden; but the greater I
have not had till of late, given me by my loving friend M. James Garret
Apothecarie of London.

The Time.
These Lillies of the mountain flower at such time as the common white Lilly
does, and sometimes sooner.

The Names.
The great mountain Lilly is called of Tabernamontanus, Lilium Saracenicum,
received by Master Garret aforesaid from Lisle in Flanders, by the name of
Martagon Imperiale: of some, Lilium Saracenicum mas: It is Hemerocallis flore
rubello, of Lobel.

The small mountain Lilly is called in Latin, Lilium montanum, and Lilium
syluestre: of Dodonaeus, Hemerocallis: of others, Martagon: but neither truly;
for that there is of either, other Plants properly called by the same names. In
high Dutch it is called Goldwurtz, from the yellowness of the roots: in low
Dutch, Lilikens van Caluarien: in Spanish, Lirio Amarillo: in French, Lys
Sauvage: in English, Mountain Lilly.

The Nature and Virtues.
There has not been any thing left in writing either of the nature or virtues
of these plants: notwithstanding we may deem, that God which gave them such
seemly and beautiful shape, has not left them without their peculiar
virtues; the finding out whereof we leave to the learned and industrious
Searcher of Nature.

CHAP. 105. Of the Red Lilly of Constantinople.
1 Lilium Bizantinum. The red Lilly of Constantinople.
2 Lilium Byzantinum flo. purpuro sanguineo. The Byzantine purplish
sanguine-coloured Lilly.


The Description.
1 THe red Lilly of Constantinople has a yellow scaly or cloued Root like unto
the Mountain Lilly, but greater: from the which arises up a fair fat stalk
a finger thick, of a dark purplish color toward the top; which sometimes
does turn from his natural roundnesse into a flat form, like as does the
great mountain Lilly: upon which stalk grow sundry fair and most beautiful
flowers, in shape like those of the mountain Lilly, but of greater beauty,
seeming as it were framed of red wax, tending to a red lead color. From the
middle of the flower comes forth a tender pointall or pestell, and likewise
many small chiues tipped with loose pendants. The flower is of a reasonable
pleasant savor. The leaves are confusedly set about the stalk like those of
the white Lilly, but broader and shorter.

2 This has a large Lilly-like root, from which arises a stalk some cubit or
more in height, set confusedly with leaves like the precedent. The flowers also
resemble those of the last described, but usually are more in number, and they
are of a purplish sanguine color.

3 Lilium Byzantinum flo. dilute rubente. The light red Byzantine Lilly.
4 Lilium Byzantinum miniatum polyanthos. The Vermilion Byzantine manyfloured
Lilly.


3 This differs little from the last, but in the color of the flowers, which
are of a lighter red color than those of the first described. The leaves and
stalks also, as Clusius observes, are of a lighter green.

4 This may also more fitly be termed a variety from the former, than
otherwise: for according to Clusius, the difference is only in this, that the
flowers grow equally from the top of the stalk, and the middle flower rises
higher than any of the rest, and sometimes consists of twelve leaves as it were
a twinne, as you may perceive by the figure.

The Time.
They flower and (...) with the other Lillies.

The Names.
The Lilly of Constantinople is called likewise in England, Martagon of
Constantinople: of Lobel, Hemerocallis Chalcedonica, and likewise Lilium
Bizantinum: of the Turks it is called Zufiniare: of the Venetians, Marocali.

The Nature and Virtues.
Of the nature or virtues there is not any thing as yet set down, but it is
esteemed especially for the beauty and rareness of the flower; referring what
may be gathered hereof to a further consideration.

CHAP. 106. Of the narrow leaued reflex Lillies.
The Description.
1 THe root of this is not much unlike that of other Lillies; the stalk is
some cubit high, or better; the leaves are many and narrow, and of a darker
green than those of the ordinary Lilly; the flowers are reflex, like those
treated of in the last chap. of a red or Vermilion color. This flowers in the
end of May: wherefore Clusius calls it Lilium rubrum praecox, The early red
Lilly.

1 Lilium rubrum angustifolium. The red narrow leaued Lilly.
3 Lilium mont. flore flauo punctato. The yellow mountain Lilly with the
spotted flower.


2 This Plant is much more beautiful than the last described; the roots are
like those of Lillies, the stalk some cubit and an half in height, being
thick set with small grassie leaves. The flowers grow out one above another,
in shape and color like those of the last described, but ofrtimes are more in
number, so that some one stalk has borne some 48 flowers. The root is much
like the former.

4 Lilium mont. flore flauo non punctato. The yellow Mountain Lilly with the
unspotted flower.


3 This in roots is like those before described; the stalk is some 2 cubits
high, set confusedly with long narrow leaves, with three conspicuous nerves
running along them. The flowers are at first pale colored, afterward
yellow, consisting of six leaves bended back to their stalks, and marked with
blackish purple spots.

4 There is also another differing from the last described only in that the
flower is not spotted, as that of the former.

The Place.
These Lillies are thought Natives of the Pyrenean mountains, and of late
years are become Denizons in some of our English gardens.

The Time.
The first (as I have said) flowers in the end of May: the rest in June.

The Names.
1 This is called by Clusius, Lilium rubrum praecox.

2 Clusius names this, Lilium rubrum praecox 3. angustifolium. Lobel styles it,
Hemerocallis Macedonica, and Martagon Pomponeum.

3 This is Lilium slauo flore maculis distinctum of Clusius, and Lilium
montanum flauo (...). of Lobel.

4 This being a variety of the last, is called by Clusius, Lilium flauo flore
maculis (...) distinctum.

The Temper and Virtues.
These in all likelihood cannot much differ from the temper and virtues of
other Lillies, which in all their parts they so much resemble.

CHAP. 107. Of the Persian Lilly.
The Description.
THe Persian Lilly has for his root a great white bulbe, differing in shape
from the other Lillies, having one great bulbe firm or solid, full of juice,
which commonly each year sets off or increases one other bulbe, and
sometimes more, which the next year after is taken from the mother root, and
so brings forth such flowers as the old plant did. From this root rises up a
fat thick and straight stem of two cubits high, whereupon is placed long
narrow leaves of a green color, declining to blewnes as does those of the
woade. The flowers grow along the naked part of the stalk like little bells,
of an ouer-worne purple color, hanging down their heads, every one having his
own foot-stalke of two inches long, as also his pestell or clapper from the
middle part of the flower; which being past and withered, there is not found
any seed at all, as in other plants, but is increased only in his root.

The Place.
This Persian Lilly grows naturally in Persia and those places adjacent,
whereof it took his name, and is now (by the industry of Travelers into
those countries, lovers of Plants) made a Denizon in some few of our London
gardens.

The Time.
This plant floureth from the beginning of May, to the end of June.

The Names.
This Persian Lilly is called in Latin, Lilium Persicum, Lilium Susianum,
Pennacio Persiano, and Pannaco Persiano, either by the Turks themselves, or by
such as out of those parts brought them into England; but which of both is
uncertain. Alphonsus Pancius, Physician to the Duke of Ferrara, when as he
sent the figure of this Plant unto Carolus Clusius, added this title, Pennacio
Persiano e Piantabellissima and e specie di Giglio o Martagon, diuerso della
corona Imperiale: That is in English, This most elegant plant Pennacio of
Persia is a kind of Lilly or Martagon, differing from the flower called the
Crown Imperial.

Lilium Persicum. The Persian Lilly.


The Nature and Virtues.
There is not any thing known of the nature or virtues of this Persian Lilly,
esteemed as yet for his rareness and comely proportion; although (if I might
be so bold with a stranger that has vouchsafed to travel so many hundreds of
miles for our acquaintance) we have in our English fields many scores of
flowers in beauty far excelling it.

CHAP. 108. Of the Crown (...).
The Description.
THe Crown Imperial has for his root a thick firm and solid bulbe, covered
with a yellowish filme or skin, from the which rises up a great thick fat
stalk two cubits high, in the bare and naked part of a dark ouerworne dusky
purple color. The leaves grow confusedly about the stalk like those of the
white Lilly, but narrower: the flowers grow at the top of the stalk,
incompassing it round in form of an Imperial crown (whereof it took his
name) hanging their Corona Imperialis. The Crown Imperial.
Corona Imperialis duplici corona. The double Crown Imperial.
Corona Imperialis cum semine. Crown Imperial with the seed.
heads downward as it were bells: in color it is yellowish; or to give you the
true color, which by words otherwise cannot be expressed, if you lay sap
berries in steep in fair water for the space of two hours, and mix a little
Saffron with that infusion, and lay it upon paper, it shows the perfect
color to limne or illumine the flower withal. The backside of the said flower
is streaked with purplish lines, which does greatly set forth the beauty
thereof. In the bottom of each of these bells there is placed six drops of
most clear shining sweet water, in taste like sugar, resembling in show fair
Orient pearls; the which drops if you take away, there do immediately appear
the like: notwithstanding if they may be suffered to stand still in the flower
according to his own nature, they will never fall away, no not if you strike
the plant until it be broken. Amongst these drops there stands out a
certain pestell, as also sundry small chiues tipped with small pendants like
those of the Lilly: above the whole flowers there grows a tuft of green leaves
like those upon the stalk, but smaller. After the flowers be faded, there
(...) cods or seed-vessels six square, wherein is contained flat seeds, tough
and limmer, of the color of Mace. The whole plant, as well roots as flowers,
do savor or smell very like a Fox. As the plant grows old, so does it wax
rich, bringing forth a Crown of flowers amongst the uppermost green leaves,
which some make a second kind, although in truth they are but one and the
self same, which in time is thought to grow to a triple crown, which happens
by the age of the root, and fertility of the soil; whose figure or tipe I
have thought good to adioyne with that picture also which in the time of his
infancy it had.

The Place.
This plant likewise has been brought from Constantinople amongst other
bulbous roots, and made Denizons in our London gardens, whereof I have great
plenty.

The Time.
It floureth in April, and sometimes in March, when as the weather is warm
and pleasant. The seed is ripe in June.

The Names.
This rare and strange Plant is called in Latin, Corona Imperialis, and Lilium
Byzantinum: the Turks do call it Cauale lale, and Tusai. And as diverse have
sent into these parts of these roots at sundry times, so have they likewise
sent them by sundry names; some by the name Tusai; others, Tousai, and
Tuyschiachi, and likewise Turfani and Turfanda. Clusius, and that not without
good reason, judges this to be the Hemerocallis of Dioscorides, mentioned lib.
3. cap. 120.

The Nature and Virtues.
The virtue of this admirable plant is not yet known, neither his faculties or
temperature in working. If this be the (...) of (...), you may (...) the
virtues thereof specified page 99. of this Work; where in my judgment they
are not so sitly placed as they might have been here: yet we at this day have
no knowledge of the physical operation of either of those plants mentioned in
that place, or of this treated of in this chapter.


CHAP. 109. Of Dogs Tooth.
The Description.
1 THere has not long since been found out a goodly bulbous rooted plant, and
termed Satyrion, which was supposed to be the true Satyrion of Dioscorides,
after that it was cherished, and the virtues thereof found out by the studious
searchers of nature. Little difference has bin found betwixt that plant of
Dioscorides and this Dens caninus, except in the color, which (as you know)
does commonly vary according to the diversity of places where they grow, as it
falls out in Squilla, Onions, and the other kinds of bulbous plants. It has
most commonly two leaves, very seldom three; which leaf in shape is very like
to Allium Vrsinum, or Ramsons, though far less. The leaves turn down to
the groundward; the stalk is tender and flexible like to Cyclamen, or
Sow-bread, about an handful high, bare and without leaves to the root. The
proportion of the flower is like that of Saffron or the Lilly flower, full of
streams of a purplish white color. The root is big, and like unto a date,
with some fibers growing from it: unto the said root is a small flat half
round bulbe adjoining, like unto Gladiolus, or Corn-flag.

2 The second kind is far greater and larger than the first, in bulbe,
stalk, leaves, flower, and cod. It yields two leaves for the most part,
which do close one within another, and at the first they do hide the flower
(for so long as it brings not out his flower) it seems to have but one leaf
like the Tulipa's, and like the Lillies, though shorter, and for the most part
broader; wherefore I have placed it and his kinds next unto the Lillies,
before the kinds of Orchis or stones. The leaves which it bears are spotted
with many great spots of a dark purple color, and narrow below, butby little
and little toward the top wax broad, and after that grow to be sharp pointed,
in form somewhat near Ramsons, but thicker and more oleous. When the leaves be
wide opened the flower shows it self upon his long weak naked stalk,
bowing toward the earth-ward, which flower consists of six very long leaves
of a sine delayed purple color, which with the heat of the Sun opens it
self, and bends his leaves back again after the manner of the Cyclamen
flower, within which there are six purple chiues, and a white three forked
style or pestell. This flower is of no pleasant smell, but commendable for the
beauty: when the flower is faded, there succeeds a three square husk or
head, wherein are the seeds, which are very like them of Leucoium butbosum
praecox; but longer, slenderer, and of a yellow color. The root is long,
thicker below than above, set with many white fibers, waxing very tender in the
upper part, having one or more off-sets, or young shoots, from which the stalk
arises out of the ground (as has been said) bringing forth two leaves, and
not three, or only one, save when it will not flower.

3 The third kind is in all things like the former, save in the leaves, which
are narrower, and in the color of the flower, which is altogether white, or
consisting of a color mixed of purple and white. Wherefore since there is no
other difference, it shall suffice to have said thus much for the description.

The Place.
These three plants grow plentifully at the foot of certain hills in the green
and moist grounds of Germany and Italy, in Styria not far from Gratz, as also
in Modena and Bononia in Italy, and likewise in some of the choice gardens of
this country.

The Time.
They flower in April, and sometimes sooner, as in the middle of March.

1 Dens caninus. Dogs tooth.
2 Dens caninus flore albo angustioribus (...). White Dogs tooth.


The Names.
This plant is called in Latin, Dens caninus; and some have judged it Satyrium
Erythronium. Matthiolus calls it Pseudohermodactylus. The men of the country
where it grows call it (...): and the Physicians about Styria call it
Dentali. The secoud may for distinctions sake be termed Dens caninus flore
albo, angustioribus folijs; that is, Dogs tooth with the white flower and
narrow leaves.

The Nature.
These are of a very hot temperament, windy, and of an excrementitious nature,
as may appear by the virtues.

The Virtues.
The Women that dwell about the place where these grew, and do grow, have with
great profit

Being drunk with Wine it has been proved maruellously to assuage the
Collicke passion.

It strengthens and nourishes the body in great measure, and being drunk
with water it cures

CHAP. 110. Of Dogs stones.
The Kinds.
STones or Testicles, as Dioscorides says, are of two sorts, one named
Cynosorchis, or Dogs stones, the other Orchis Serapias, or Serapias his stones.
But because there be many and sundry other sorts differing one from another, I
see not how they may be contained under these two kinds only: therefore I have
thought good to divide them as follows. The first kind we have named
Cynosorchis, or Dogs stones: the second, Testiculus Morionis, or Fools stones:
the third, Tragorchis, or Goats stones: the fourth, Orchis Serapias, or
Serapia's stones: the fifth, Testiculus odoratus, or sweet smelling stones, or
after Cordus, Testiculus Pumilio, or Dwarf stones.

The (...) of the first (...) second were (...) (...) the (...) (...): the
third was of the (...) (...) (...), following in the next chapter.
1 Cynosorchismaior. Great Dogs stones.
The (...) of the first (...) second were (...) (...) the (...) (...): the
third was of the (...) (...) (...), following in the next chapter.
2 Cynosorchis major altera. White Dogs stones.


The Description.
1 GReat Dogs stones has four, and sometimes five, great broad thick leaves,
somewhat like those of the garden Lilly, but smaller. The stalk rises up a
foot or more in height; at the top whereof does grow a thick tuft of carnation
or horseflesh colored flowers, thick and close thrust together, made of many
small flowers spotted with purple spots, in shape like to an open hood or
helmet. And from the hollow place there hangs forth a certain ragged chiue or
tassell, in shape like to the skin of a Dog, or some such other four footed
beast. The roots be round like unto the stones of a Dog, or two olives, one
hanging somewhat shorter than the other, whereof the highest or uppermost is
the smaller, but fuller and harder. The lowermost is the greatest, lightest,
and most wrinkled or shriueled, not good for any thing.

2 Whitish Dogs stones has likewise smooth, long broad leaves, but lesser and
narrower than those of the first kind. The stalk is a span long, set with
five or six leaves clasping or embracing the same round about. His spikie
flower is short, thick, (...), compact of many small whitish purple colored
flowers, spotted on the inside with many small purple spots and little lines or
streakes. The small flowers are like an open hood or helmet, having hanging out
of every one as it were the body of a little man without a head, with arms
stretched out, and thighs stradling abroad, after the same manner almost that
the little boys are wont to be pictured hanging out of Saturnes mouth. The
roots be like the former.

3 Spotted Dogs stones bring forth narrow leaves, ribbed in some sort like unto
the leaves of narrow Plaintaine or Rib-wort, dashed with many black streakes
and spots. The stalk is a cubit and more high: at the top whereof does grow a
tuft or ear of violet-coloured flowers, mixed with a dark purple, but in the
hollownesse thereof whitish, not of the same form or shape that the others are
of, but lesser, and as it were resembling somewhat the flowers of Larkes-spur.
The roots be like the former.

4 Marish Dogs stones have many thick blunt leaves next the root, thick
streaked with lines or nerves like those of Plantaine. The flower is of a
whitish red or carnation: the stalk and roots be like the former.

The (...) of the first (...) second were (...) (...) the (...) (...): the
third was of the (...) (...) (...), following in the next chapter.
3 Cynosorchis maculata. Spotted Dogs stones.
4 Cynosorchis palustr is. Marish Dogs stones.


5 This has five or six little leaves; the stalk is some handful or better
in height, set aboutwith somewhat less leaves: the tuft of flowers at the top
of the stalk are of a purple color, small, with a white lip divided into
four partitions hanging down, which also is lightly spotted with purple; it
has a little spur hanging down on the hinder part of each flower. The seed
is small, and contained in such twined heads as in other plants of this kind.
The roots are like the former, but much less.

The Place.
These kinds of Dogs stones do grow in moist and fertile meadows. The marish
Dogs stones grow for the most part in moist and waterish woods, and also in
marish grounds. The 5 grows in many hilly places of Austria and Germany.

The Time.
They flower from the beginning of May to the midst of August.

The Names.
The first and second are of that kind which Dioscorides calls Cynosorchos;
that is in English, Dogs stones, after the common or vulgar speech; the one the
greater, the other the lesser.

1 This is Cynosorchis prior of Dodonaeus; Cynosorchis nostra major of Lobel.

2 Dodonaeus names this Cynosorchis altera. (...), Cynosorchis majoris secunda
species.

3 This Lobel calls Cynosorchis (...), etc. Tabern. Cynosorchis maculata.

4 Dodonaeus calls this, Cynosorchis tertia: Lobel, Cynosorchis major altera
nostras: Tabernam. Cynosorchis major quarta.

5 This is Clusius his Orchis Pannonica quarta.

The Temperature.
These kinds of Dogs stones be of temperature hot and moist; but the greater
or fuller stone seems to have much superfluous windiness, and therefore
being drunk it stirs up fleshly lust.

5 Cynosorchis minor Pannnonica. The lesser Austrian Dogs stones.


The second, which is lesser, is quite contrary in nature, tending to a hot
and dry temperature; therefore his root is so far from moving venerie, that
contrariwise it staieth and keeps it back, as (...) teaches.

He also affirms, that Serapia's stones are of (...) more dry faculty, and
do not so much prevail to stir up the lust of the flesh.

The Virtues.
Dioscorides writes that it is reported, That if

It is further reported, That in Thessalia the

The Choice.
Our age uses all the kinds of stones to stir up venery, and the
Apothecaries mix any of them indifferently with compositions serving for that
purpose. But the best and most effectual are these Dogs stones, as most have
deemed: yet both the bulbes or stones are not to be taken indifferently, but
the harder and fuller, and that which contains most quantity of juice, for
that which is wrinkled is less profitable, or not fit at all to be used in
medicine. And the fuller root is not always the greater, but often the lesser,
especially if the roots be gathered before the plant has shed his flower, or
when the stalk first comes up; for that which is fuller of juice is not the
greatest before the seed be perfectly ripe. For seeing that every other year
by (...) one stone or bulbewaxeth full, the other empty and perishes, it
cannot be that the harder and fuller of juice should be always the greater;
for at such time as the leaves come forth, the fuller then beginns to increase,
and whilst the same by little and little increases, the other does decrease
and wither till the seed be ripe: then the whole plant, together with the
leaves and stalks does forthwith fall away and perish, and that which in the
mean time increased, remains still fresh and full unto the next year.

CHAP. 111. Of Fools Stones.
The Description.
1 THe male Fool stones has five, sometimes six long broad and smooth leaves,
not unlike to those of the Lilly, saving that they are dashed and spotted in
sundry places with black spots and streakes. The flowers grow at the top, tuft
or spike fashion, somewhat like the former, but thrust more thick together, in
shape like to a fools hood, or cocks comb, wide open, or gaping before, and
as it were crested above, with certain ears standing up by every side, and a
small tail or spur hanging down, the backeside declining to a violet color,
of a pleasant savor or smell.

The first was of (...) (...), being the third in the (...) chapter.
1 Cynosorchis Morio mas. The male Fool stones.
2 Cynosorchis Morio foemina. The female Fool stones.


2 The Female Fools stones have also smooth narrow leaves, ribbed with nerves
like those of Plantaine. The flowers be likewise gaping, and like the former,
as it were open hoods, with a little horn or heel hanging behind every one
of them, and small green leaves sorted or mixed among them, resembling cocks
combs, with little ears, not standing straight up, but lying flat upon the
hooded flower, in such sort, that they cannot at the sudden view be perceived.
The roots are a pair of small stones like the former. The flowers of this sort
do vary infinitely in color, according to the soil or country where they
do grow: some bring forth their flowers of a deep violet color, some as white
as snow; some of a flesh color, and some garnished with spots of diverse
colors, which are not possible to be distinguished.

3 This has narrow spotted leaves, with a stalk some foot or more high, at
the top whereof grows a tuft of purple flowers in shape much like those of the
last described, each flower consisting of a little hood, two small wings or
side leaves, and a broad lip or leaf hanging down.

3 Cynosorchis Morio minor. The lesser spotted Fools stones.


The Place.
These kinds of Fools stones do grow naturally to their best liking in
pastures and fields that seldom or never are dunged or manured.

The Time.
They flower in May and June. Their stones are to be gathered for medicine in
September, as are those of the Dogs stones.

The Names.
The first is called Cynosorchis Morio: of Fuchsius, Orchis mas angustifolia:
of Apuleius, Satyrion: and also it is the Orchis Delphinia of (...) Gemma.

The second is Cynosorchis morio foemina of Lobel: Orchis angustifolia foemin.
of Fuchsius: Testiculus Morionis foemina of Dodonaeus.

3 This is Cynosorchis minimis and secundum caulem, etc. maculosis folijs, of
Lobel.

The Temperature.
Fools stones both male and female are hot and moist of nature.

The Virtues.
These Fools stones are thought to have the virtues of Dogs stones, whereunto
they are referred.

CHAP. 112. Of Goats Stones.
The Description.
1 THe greatest of the Goats stones brings forth (...) leaves, ribbed in some
sort like unto the broad leaued Plantaine, but larger: the stalk grows to
the height of a cubit, set with such great leaves even to the top of the stalk
by equal distances. The tuft or bush of flowers is small and flat open, with
many tender strings or laces coming from the middle part of those small
flowers, crookedly tangling one with another, like to the small tendrels of the
Vine, or rather the laces or strings that grow upon the herb Sauorie. The
whole flower consists of a purple color. The roots are like the rest of the
Orchides, but greater.

2 The male Goats stones have leaves like to those of the garden Lilly, with a
stalk a foot long, wrapped about even to the tuft of the flower with those his
leaves. The flowers which grow in this bush or tuft be very small, in form
like unto a Lizard, because of the twisted or writhen tails, and spotted
heads. Every of these small flowers is at the first like a round close husk,
of the bigness of a pease, which when it opens there comes out of it a
little long and tender spur or tail, white toward the setting of it to the
flower, the rest spotted with red dashes, having upon each side a small thing
adjoining unto it, like to a little leg or foot; the rest of the said tail is
twisted crookedly about, and (...) downward. The whole plant has a (...) or
stinking smell or savor like the smell of a Goat, whereof it took his name.

3 The female Goats stones have leaves like the male kind, saving that they be
much smaller, having many flowers on the tuft resembling the flies that feed
upon flesh, or rather ricks. The stones or roots, as also the sinell are like
the former.

1 Tragorchis maximus. The greatest Goat stones.
2 Tragorchis mas. The male Goat stones.
3 Tragorchis foemina. The female Goats stones.
4 Tragorchis minor Bataulca. The small Goat stones of Holland.


4 This also because of the unpleasant smell may sitly be referred to this
Classis. The roots hereof are small, and from them arise a stalk some half a
foot high, beset with three or four narrow leaves: the tuft of flowers which
grows on the top of this stalk is small, and the color of them is red
without, but somewhat paler within; each flower hanging down a lip parted in
three.

The Place.
1. 2. 3. These kinds of Goats stones delight to grow in fat clay grounds, and
seldom in any other soil to be found.

4 This grows upon the sea banks in Holland, and also in some places near
(...) the Hage.

The Time.
They flower in May and June with the other kinds of Orchis.

The Names.
1 Some have named this kind of Goats stones in Greek, (...): in Latin,
Testiculus Hircinus, and also Orchis Saurodes, or Scincophora, by reason that
the flowers resemble Lizards.

The second may be called Tragorchis mas, male Goats stones; and Orchu
Saurodes, or Scincophora, as well as the former.

The third, Tragorchis foemina, as also Coriosmites, and Coriophora, for that
the flowers in shape and their ungrateful smell resemble Ticks, called in
Greek (...):

The Nature and Virtues.
The temperature and virtues of these are referred to the Fools stones,
notwithstanding they are seldom or never used in physic, in regard of the
stinking and loathsome smell and savor they are possessed with.

CHAP. 113. Of Fox Stones.
1 Orchis Hermaphroditica. Butter-fly Satyrion.
These Figures in this Chapter were formerly much misplaced: as thus; The
second was (...) (...) (...). fol. (...). being the tenth. The third was of
Triorchis (...) (...) of Tabern. being a variety of (...) morio (...). The
fifth was of Orchis (...). The sixth, of Orchis (...). The seventh and eighth
were only transposed, (...) put the one for the other. The ninth was of the
second, called (...) (...) (...). The tenth was of the third, called (...)
(...). The eleventh was of (...). The twelfth was of Strateumatica minor. The
(...) was a variety of the fourth. The fourteenth was of Orchis (...), which
we here give you in the sixteenth place.
2 Testiculus psycodes. Gnat Satyrion.


The Kinds.
THere be diverse kinds of Fox-stones, differing very much in shape of their
leaves, as also in flowers: some have flowers wherein is to be seen the shape
of sundry sorts of living creatures; some the shape and proportion of flies, in
other gnats, some humble bees, others like unto honey Bees; some like
Butter-flies, and others like Waspes that be dead; some yellow of color,
others white; some purple mixed with red, others of a brown ouer-worne color:
the which severally to distinguish, as well those here set down, as also those
that offer themselves daily to our view and consideration, would require a
particular volume; for there is not any plant which does offer such variety
unto us as these kinds of Stones, except the Tulipa's, which go beyond all
account: for that the most singular Simplest that ever was in these later ages,
Carolus Clusius (who for his singular industry and knowledge herein is worthy
triple honor) has spent at the least sieve and thirty years, sowing the seeds
of Tulipa's from year to year, and to this day he could never attain to the
end or certainty of their several kinds of colors. The greatest reason
whereof that I can yield is this; that if you take the seeds of a Tulipa that
bare white flowers, and sow them in some pan or tub with earth, you shall
receive from that seed plants of infinite colors: contrariwise, if you sow the
seeds of a plant that bears flowers of variable colors, the most of those
plants will be nothing like the plant from whence the seed was taken. It shall
be sufficient therefore to set down most of the varieties, and comprehend them
in this chapter.

The Description.
1 BVtter-fly Orcis, or Satyrion, bears next the root two very broad leaves
like those of the Lilly, seldom three: the flowers be white of color,
resembling the shape of a Butter-fly: the stalk is a foot high; the root is
two stones like the other kinds of stones or Cullions, but somewhat sharper
pointed.

These Figures in this Chapter were formerly much misplaced: as thus; The
second was (...) (...) (...). fol. (...). being the tenth. The third was of
Triorchis (...) (...) of Tabern. being a variety of (...) morio (...). The
fifth was of Orchis (...). The sixth, of Orchis (...). The seventh and eighth
were only transposed, (...) put the one for the other. The ninth was of the
second, called (...) (...) (...). The tenth was of the third, called (...)
(...). The eleventh was of (...). The twelfth was of Strateumatica minor. The
(...) was a variety of the fourth. The fourteenth was of Orchis (...), which
we here give you in the sixteenth place.
3 Testiculus Vulpinus 2. sphegodes. Humble Be Orchis.
4 Testiculus Vulpinus major sphegodes. Waspe Orchis.


2 Waspe Satyrion comes forth of the ground, bearing two, sometimes three
leaves like the former, but much smaller. The stalk grows to the height of
an hand, whereon are placed very orderly small flowers like in shape to Gnats,
and of the same color. The root is like the former.

3 The Humble Be Orchis has a few small weak and short leaves, which grow
scatteringly about the stalk: the flowers grow at the top among the small
leaves, resembling in shape the humble Be. The root consists of two stones
or bulbes, with some few threads annexed thereunto.

4 The Waspe Satyrion grows out of the ground, having stalks small and
tender. (...) leaves are like the former, but somewhat greater, declining to a
brown or dark color. The flowers be small, of the color of a dry Oken
leaf, in shape resembling the great Be, called in English an Hornet or drone
Be. The root is like the other.

5 The leaves of Be Satyrion are longer than the last before mentioned,
narrower, turning themselves against the Sun as it were round. The stalk is
round, tender, and very fragile. At the top grow the flowers, resembling the
shape of the dead carcass of a Be. The stones or bulbes of the roots be
smaller and rounder than the last described.

6 The Fly Satyrion is in his leaves like the other, saving that they be not of
so dark a color: the flowers be smaller and more plentifully growing about the
stalk, in shape like unto flies, of a greenish color.

These Figures in this Chapter were formerly much misplaced: as thus; The
second was (...) (...) (...). fol. (...). being the tenth. The third was of
Triorchis (...) (...) of Tabern. being a variety of (...) morio (...). The
fifth was of Orchis (...). The sixth, of Orchis (...). The seventh and eighth
were only transposed, (...) put the one for the other. The ninth was of the
second, called (...) (...) (...). The tenth was of the third, called (...)
(...). The eleventh was of (...). The twelfth was of Strateumatica minor. The
(...) was a variety of the fourth. The fourteenth was of Orchis (...), which
we here give you in the sixteenth place.
5 Orchis Melittias. Be Orchis.
These Figures in this Chapter were formerly much misplaced: as thus; The
second was (...) (...) (...). fol. (...). being the tenth. The third was of
Triorchis (...) (...) of Tabern. being a variety of (...) morio (...). The
fifth was of Orchis (...). The sixth, of Orchis (...). The seventh and eighth
were only transposed, (...) put the one for the other. The ninth was of the
second, called (...) (...) (...). The tenth was of the third, called (...)
(...). The eleventh was of (...). The twelfth was of Strateumatica minor. The
(...) was a variety of the fourth. The fourteenth was of Orchis (...), which
we here give you in the sixteenth place.
6 Orchis Myodes. Fly Satyrion.


7 Yellow Orchis rises out of the ground with brown leaves, smaller than the
last before mentioned: the stalk is tender and crooked. The flowers grow at the
top yellow of color, in shape resembling the yellow flies bred in the dung of
Kine after rain.

8 The small yellow Satyrion has leaves spread upon the ground, at the first
coming up; the slender stalk rises up in the midst, of half a hand high.
The flowers grow scatteringly toward the top, resembling the flies last before
mentioned, dark or rusty of color. The stones or bulbes are very round.

9 Birds Orchis has many large ribbed leaves, spread upon the ground like unto
those of Plantaine; among the which rise up tender stalks covered even to the
tuft of the flowers with the like leaves, but lesser, in such sort that the
stalks cannot be seen for the leaves. The flowers grow (...) the top, not so
thick set or thrust together as the others, purple of color, like in shape
unto little Birds, with their wings spread abroad ready to fly. The roots be
like the former.

10 Spotted Birds Satyrion has leaves like unto the sormer, saving that they
be (...) or spotted here and there with dark spots or streakes, having a
stalk covered with the like leaves, so that the plants differ not in any
point, except the black spots which this kind is dashed with.

11 White Birds: Satyrion has leaves rising immediately forth of the ground
like unto the blades or leaves of Leekes, but shorter; among the which rises
up a slender naked stalk two handfulls high; on the top whereof be white
flowers resembling the shape or form of a small bird ready to fly, or a white
Butter-fly with herwings spread abroad. The roots are round, and smaller than
any of the former.

12 Soldiers Satyrion brings forth many broad large and ribbed leaves, spread
upon the ground like unto those of the great plantaine: among the which rises
up a fat stalk full of sap or juice, clothed or wrapped in the like leaves
even to the tuft of flowers, whereupon do grow little flowers resembling a
little man having a helmet upon his head, his hands and legs cut off, white
upon the inside, spotted with many purple spots, and the back part of the
flower of a deeper color tending to redness. The roots be greater than any of
the other kinds of Satyrions.

These Figures in this Chapter were formerly much misplaced: as thus; The
second was (...) (...) (...). fol. (...). being the tenth. The third was of
Triorchis (...) (...) of Tabern. being a variety of (...) morio (...). The
fifth was of Orchis (...). The sixth, of Orchis (...). The seventh and eighth
were only transposed, (...) put the one for the other. The ninth was of the
second, called (...) (...) (...). The tenth was of the third, called (...)
(...). The eleventh was of (...). The twelfth was of Strateumatica minor. The
(...) was a variety of the fourth. The fourteenth was of Orchis (...), which
we here give you in the sixteenth place.
7 Orchis Myodes Lutea. Yellow Satyrion.
These Figures in this Chapter were formerly much misplaced: as thus; The
second was (...) (...) (...). fol. (...). being the tenth. The third was of
Triorchis (...) (...) of Tabern. being a variety of (...) morio (...). The
fifth was of Orchis (...). The sixth, of Orchis (...). The seventh and eighth
were only transposed, (...) put the one for the other. The ninth was of the
second, called (...) (...) (...). The tenth was of the third, called (...)
(...). The eleventh was of (...). The twelfth was of Strateumatica minor. The
(...) was a variety of the fourth. The fourteenth was of Orchis (...), which
we here give you in the sixteenth place.
9 Orchis Myodes minor. Small yellow Satyrion.


13 Soldiers Cullions has many leaves spread upon the ground, but lesser than
the soldiers Satyrion, as is the whole plant. The backside of the flowers are
somewhat mixed with whiteness, and sometimes are ash colored: the inside of
the flower is spotted with white likewise.

14 Spider Satyrion has many thin leaves like unto those of the Lilly,
scatteringly set upon a weak and feeble stalk; whereupon does grow small
flowers, resembling as well in shape as color the body of a dead humble Be,
or rather of a Spider; and therefore I think Lobel, who was the Author of this
name, would have said Arachnitis, of (...) a Spider.

15 This by right should have been put next the Gnat Satyrion, described in
the second place. It has short, yet pretty broad leaves, and those commonly
three in number, besides those small ones set upon the stem. The flowers are
small, and much like those of the second formerly described.

16 Our Author gave you this figure in the fourteenth place, under the title of
Orchis (...); but it is of the Orchis 16. minor of Tabernam. or Orchis
Angustifolia of (...). This Orchis is of the kind of the Myodes, or Fly
Satyrions, but his leaves are far longer and (...)

These Figures in this Chapter were formerly much misplaced: as thus; The
second was (...) (...) (...). fol. (...). being the tenth. The third was of
Triorchis (...) (...) of Tabern. being a variety of (...) morio (...). The
fifth was of Orchis (...). The sixth, of Orchis (...). The seventh and eighth
were only transposed, (...) put the one for the other. The ninth was of the
second, called (...) (...) (...). The tenth was of the third, called (...)
(...). The eleventh was of (...). The twelfth was of Strateumatica minor. The
(...) was a variety of the fourth. The fourteenth was of Orchis (...), which
we here give you in the sixteenth place.
9 Orchis Ornithophora. Birds Satyrion.
These Figures in this Chapter were formerly much misplaced: as thus; The
second was (...) (...) (...). fol. (...). being the tenth. The third was of
Triorchis (...) (...) of Tabern. being a variety of (...) morio (...). The
fifth was of Orchis (...). The sixth, of Orchis (...). The seventh and eighth
were only transposed, (...) put the one for the other. The ninth was of the
second, called (...) (...) (...). The tenth was of the third, called (...)
(...). The eleventh was of (...). The twelfth was of Strateumatica minor. The
(...) was a variety of the fourth. The fourteenth was of Orchis (...), which
we here give you in the sixteenth place.
10 Orchis Ornithophora folio maculoso; Spotted Birds Orchis.
These Figures in this Chapter were formerly much misplaced: as thus; The
second was (...) (...) (...). fol. (...). being the tenth. The third was of
Triorchis (...) (...) of Tabern. being a variety of (...) morio (...). The
fifth was of Orchis (...). The sixth, of Orchis (...). The seventh and eighth
were only transposed, (...) put the one for the other. The ninth was of the
second, called (...) (...) (...). The tenth was of the third, called (...)
(...). The eleventh was of (...). The twelfth was of Strateumatica minor. The
(...) was a variety of the fourth. The fourteenth was of Orchis (...), which
we here give you in the sixteenth place.
11 Orchis Ornithophora candida. White Birds Orchis.
These Figures in this Chapter were formerly much misplaced: as thus; The
second was (...) (...) (...). fol. (...). being the tenth. The third was of
Triorchis (...) (...) of Tabern. being a variety of (...) morio (...). The
fifth was of Orchis (...). The sixth, of Orchis (...). The seventh and eighth
were only transposed, (...) put the one for the other. The ninth was of the
second, called (...) (...) (...). The tenth was of the third, called (...)
(...). The eleventh was of (...). The twelfth was of Strateumatica minor. The
(...) was a variety of the fourth. The fourteenth was of Orchis (...), which
we here give you in the sixteenth place.
12 Orchis Strateumatica. Soldiers Satyrion.
than any of the rest of that kind, and therein consists the only and
chiefest difference.

The Place.
These kinds of Orchis grow for the most part in moist meadows and fertile
pastures, as also in moist woods.

The Be, the Fly, and the Butter-fly Satyrions do grow upon barren chalkie
hills and heathie grounds, upon the hills adjoining to a village in Kent named
Green-hithe, upon long field downs by South-fleet, two miles from the same
place, and in many other places of Kent: likewise in a field adjoining to a
small grove of trees, half a mile from Saint Albons, at the South end thereof.
They grow likewise at Hatfield near S. Albons, by the relation of a learned
Preacher there dwelling, M. Robert Abot, an excellent and diligent Herbarist.

These Figures in this Chapter were formerly much misplaced: as thus; The
second was (...) (...) (...). fol. (...). being the tenth. The third was of
Triorchis (...) (...) of Tabern. being a variety of (...) morio (...). The
fifth was of Orchis (...). The sixth, of Orchis (...). The seventh and eighth
were only transposed, (...) put the one for the other. The ninth was of the
second, called (...) (...) (...). The tenth was of the third, called (...)
(...). The eleventh was of (...). The twelfth was of Strateumatica minor. The
(...) was a variety of the fourth. The fourteenth was of Orchis (...), which
we here give you in the sixteenth place.
13 Orchis Strateumatica minor. Soldiers (...).
These Figures in this Chapter were formerly much misplaced: as thus; The
second was (...) (...) (...). fol. (...). being the tenth. The third was of
Triorchis (...) (...) of Tabern. being a variety of (...) morio (...). The
fifth was of Orchis (...). The sixth, of Orchis (...). The seventh and eighth
were only transposed, (...) put the one for the other. The ninth was of the
second, called (...) (...) (...). The tenth was of the third, called (...)
(...). The eleventh was of (...). The twelfth was of Strateumatica minor. The
(...) was a variety of the fourth. The fourteenth was of Orchis (...), which
we here give you in the sixteenth place.
14 Orchis Andrachnitis. Spider Satyrion.


That kind which resembles the white Butter-fly grows upon the declining of
the hill at the North end of Hampsted heath, near unto a small cottage there
in the way side, as ye go from London to Henden a village thereby. It grows
in tfie fields adjoining to the pound or pinnefold without the gate, at the
Village called High-gate, near London: and likewise in the wood belonging to a
Worshipful Gentleman of Kent named Master Sidley, of South-fleet; where do
grow likewise many other rare and dainty Simples, that are not to be found
elsewhere in a great circuit.

The Time.
They flower for the most part from May to the end of August, and some of them
sooner.

The Names.
These kinds of Orchis have not bin much written of by the Ancients, neither
by the late writers to any purpose, so that it may content you for this time to
receive the names set down in their several titles, reserving what else might
be said as touching the Greek, French, or Dutch names, or any general
definition until a further consideration.

15 Orchis trifolia minor. Small Gnat Satyrion.
16 Orchis angustifolia. Narrow leaued Satyrion.


The Nature and Virtues.
The nature and virtues of these kinds of Orchis are referred unto the others,
namely to those of the Fox stones; notwithstanding there is no great use of
these in physic, but they are chiefly regarded for the pleasant and
beautiful flowers, wherewith Nature has seemed to play and disport her self.

CHAP. 114. Of Sweet Cullions.
The Kinds.
THere be sundry sorts of sweet smelling Testicles or Stones, whereof the first
is most sweet and pleasant in smell, the others of less smell or savor,
differing in flower and roots. Some have white flowers, others yellow; some
flesh colored; some dashed upon white with a little reddish wash: some have two
stones, others three, and some four, wherein their difference consists.

The Description.
1 THe first kind of Sweet stones is a small base and low plant in respect of
all the rest: The leaves be small, narrow, and short, growing flat upon the
ground; amongst the which rises up a small weak and tender stalk of a finger
long, whereupon do grow small white flowers spike fashion, of a pleasant sweet
smell. The roots are two small stones in shape like the other.

2 Triple Orchis has commonly three, yet sometimes four bulbes or tuberous
roots, somewhat long, set with many small fibers or short threads; from the
which roots rise immediately many flat and plain leaves, ribbed with nerves
along them like those of Plantaine: among the which come forth naked stalks,
small and tender, whereupon are placed certain small white flowers, trace
fashion, not so sweet as the former in smell and savor. The top of the stalk
whereon the flowers do grow, is commonly as if it were twisted or writhen
about.

3 Frieseland Lady traces has two small round stones or bulbes, of the
bigness of the pease that we call Rouncifalls; from the which rise up a few
hairy leaves, lesser than those of the triple stones, ribbed as the small
leafed Plantaine: among the which comes forth a small naked stalk, set round
about with little yellow flowers, not trace fashion as the former.

4 Liege Lady traces has for his roots two greater stones, and two smaller;
from the which come up two and sometimes more leaves, furrowed or made hollow
in the midst like to a trough, from the which rises up a slender naked stalk,
set with such flowers as the last described, saving that they be of an
ouerworne yellow color.

1 Testiculus (...). Lady Traces.
2 Triorchis. Triple Lady Traces.


The Place.
These kinds of Stones or Cullions do grow in dry pastures and heaths, and
likewise upon chalkie hills, the which I have found growing plentifully in
sundry places, as in the field by Islington, near London, where there is a
bowling place under a few old shrubby Oaks. They grow likewise upon the heath
at Barne-elmes, near unto the head of a conduit that sends water to the
house belonging to the late Sir Francis Walsingham. They grow in the field next
unto a Village called Thistleworth, as you go from Branford to her Majesty's
house at Richmond; also upon a common Heath by a Village near London called
Stepney, by the relation of a learned merchant of London, named M. James Cole,
exceedingly well experienced in the knowledge of Simples.

The yellow kinds grow in barren pastures and borders of fields about Ouenden
and Clare in (...). Likewise near unto Much Dunmow in Essex, where they were
showed me by a learned Gentleman Master James Twaights, excellently well seen
in the knowledge of plants.

I received some roots of the second from my kind friend M. Thomas Wallis of
Westminster, the which he gathered at Dartford in Kent, upon a piece of ground
commonly called the Brimth: but I could not long get them to grow in a garden,
neither do any of the other Satyrions Jove to be pent up in such straight
bounds.

3 Orchis Frisia lutea. Frieseland Lady-traces.
4 Orchis Leodiensis. Liege Lady-traces.


The Time.
These kinds of stones do flower from August to the end of September.

The Names.
The first is called in Latin Testiculus Odoratus: in English, Sweet smelling
Testicles or stones, not of the sweetness of the roots, but of the flowers. It
is called also Orchis spiralis, or Autumnalis, sor that this (as also that
which is set forth in the next place) has the top of the stalk as it were
twisted or twined spire fashion, and for that it comes to flouring in
Autumn: of our English women they be called Lady-traces; but every country
has a several name; for some call them Sweet Ballocks, sweet Cods, sweet
Cullions, and Stander-grasse. In Dutch, (...), and (...): In French, Satyrion.

The second sort is called Triorchis, and also Tetrorchis: in English, Triple
Lady-traces, or white Orchis.

The third is called Orchis Frisia: in English Frieseland Orchis.

The last of these kinds of Testicles or Stones is called of some in Latin,
Orchis Leodiensis, and Orchis Lutea, as also Basilica minor Serapias, and
Triorchis Aeginetae: In English, Yellow Lady-traces.

The Temperature.
These kinds of sweet Cullions are of nature and temperature like the Dogs
stones, although not used in Physic in times past; notwithstanding later
Writers have attributed some virtues unto them as follows.

The Virtues.
The full and sappy roots of Lady-traces eaten or boiled in milk, and drunk,
provoke venery,

CHAP. 115. Of Satyrion Royal.
The Description.
1 THe male Satyrion royal has large roots, knobbed, not bulbed as the others,
but branched or cut into sundry sections like an hand, from the which come up
thick and fat stalks set with large leaves like those of Lillies, but less;
at the top whereof grows a tuft of flowers, spotted with a deep purple
color.

1 Palma Christimas. The male Satyrion Royal.
2 Palma Christi foemina. The female Satyrion Royal.


2 The female Satyrion has cloven or forked roots, with some fibers joined
thereto. The leaves be like the former, but smaller and narrower, and
confusedly dashed or spotted with black spots: from the which springs up a
tender stalk, at the top whereof does grow a tuft of purple flowers, in
fashion like unto a Friars hood, changing or varying according to the soil and
clymat, sometimes red, sometimes white, and sometimes light carnation or flesh
color.

3 This in roots and leaves is like the former, but that the leaves want the
black spots, the stalk is but low, and the top thereof has flowers of a
whitish color, not spotted: they on the (...) resemble gaping hoods, with
ears on each side, and a broad lip hanging down; the back part ends in a
broad obtuse spur. These flowers smell like Elder blossoms.

The Place.
The royal Satyrions grow for the most part in moist and fenny grounds,
meadows, and Woods that are very moist and shadowie. I have found them in many
places, especially in the midst of a wood in Kent called Swainescombe wood
near to Grauesend, by the village Swainescombe, and likewise in Hampsted wood
four miles from London.

The Time.
They four in May and June, but seldom later.

3 Orchis Palmata Pannonica 8. Clus. The Austrian handed Satyrion.


The Names.
This (...) of purging and (...), which our Author out of (...), and he out of
(...), give to the root of Palma Christi, I doubt is mistaken and put in the
wrong place: for I judge it to belong to the Ricinus, which also is called
(...) Christi; for that Nicolus (...), a (...) of root must be taken as (...)
(...) (...); now the whole root of this plant is not so long. And besides,
(...) is known to have a vomitorie or (...) faculty.
Royal Satyrion, or finger Orchis is called in Latin, Palma Christi;
notwithstanding there is another herb or plant called by the same name, which
otherwise is called Ricinus. This plant is called likewise of some, Satyrium
Basilicum, or Satyrium regium. Some would have it to be Buzeiden, or Buzidan
Arabum, but Auicen says Buzeiden is a woody Indian medicine: and Serapio
says, Buzeiden be hard white roots like those of Behen album, and that it is
an Indian drug: but contrariwise the roots of Palma Christi are nothing less
than woody, so that it cannot be the same. Matthiolus would have Satyrion
royal to be the Digiti Citrini of (...); finding fault with the Monks which
set forth Commentaries upon Mesues Compositions, for doubting and leaving it to
the judgment of the discreet Reader. Yet do we better allow of the Monks
doubt, than of Matthiolus his assertion. For (...) words be these; What is
(...), or Digiti Citrini? and answering the doubt himself, he says, It is in
figure or shape like the palm of a man's hand, of a mixed color between yellow
and white, and it is hard, in which there is a little sweetness, and there is
a Citrine sort dusty and without sweetness. Rhasis also in the last book of
his Continent calls these, Digiti Crocei, or Saffron fingers; and he says it
is a gum or vein for Dyars. Now these roots are nothing less than of a
Saffron color, and wholly unfit for Dying. Wherefore without doubt these words
of Auicen and Rhasis, in the ears of men of judgment do confirm, That
Satyrion Royal, or Palma Christi, are not those Digiti Citrini. The Germans
call it Creutsblum: the low Dutch, Handekens cruyt: the French, Satyrion royal.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The Roots of Satyrion royal are like to Cynosorchis or Dogs stones, both in
savor and taste, and therefore are thought by some to be of like faculties.
Yet Nicolaus Nicolus, in the chapter of the cure of a Quartaine Ague, says,
That the roots of Palma Christi are of force to purge upward and downward; and
that a piece of the root as long as ones thumb stamped and given with wine
before the fit comes, is a good remedy against old Quartaines after
purgation: and reports, That one Baliolus, after he had endured 44 fits, was
cured therewith.

CHAP. 116. Of Serapia's Stones.
The Kinds.
THere be sundry sorts of Serapias stones, whereof some be male, others female;
some great, and some of a smaller kind; varying likewise in color of the
flowers, whereof some be white, others purple; altering according to the soil
or clymate, as the greatest part of bulbous roots do. Moreover, some grow in
marshie and fenny grounds, and some in fertile pastures, lying open to the Sun,
varying likewise in the shape of their flowers; retaining the form of flies,
Butter-flies, and Gnats, like those of the Fox stones.

1 Serapias Candido flore. White handed Orchis.
2 Serapias minor, nitente flore. Red handed Orchis.
3 Serapias palustris latifolia. Marish Satyrion.
4 (...) (...) (...). Fenny Satyrion.


The fifth was the figure of (...) (...) of (...) and is a kind of (...)
(...). 6 In this place formerly was the figure of the last before, to wit (...)
(...). (...) (...) was the figure of (...) (...), which should have been in
the sixth place in the 101 Chapter of the (...) Edition, being the 113 of this.
5 Serapias Montana. Mountain Satyrion.
The fifth was the figure of (...) (...) of (...) and is a kind of (...)
(...). 6 In this place formerly was the figure of the last before, to wit (...)
(...). (...) (...) was the figure of (...) (...), which should have been in
the sixth place in the 101 Chapter of the (...) Edition, being the 113 of this.
6 Serapias Gariophyllat a cum rad. and sem. Sweet Smelling Satyrion, with the
root and seed expressed at large.
7 Serapias Castrata. Gelded Satyrion.


The Description.
1 THe white handed Orchis or Satyrion has long and large leaves, spotted and
dashed with black spots, from the which does rise up a small fragile or
brittle stalk of two hands high, having at the top a bush or spoky tuft of
white flowers, like in shape to those of Palma Christi, whereof this is a
kind. The root is thick, fat, and full of juice, fashioned like the hand and
fingers of a man, with some tough and fat strings fastened to the upper part
thereof.

2 Red handed Satyrion is a small low and base herb, having a small tender
stalk set with two or three small leaves, like unto those of the Leeke, but
shorter. The flower grows at the top tuft fashion, of a glistering red
color, with a root fashioned like an hand, but lesser than the former.

3 Serapia's stones, or marish Satyrion has a thick knobby root, divided into
fingers like those of Palma Christi, whereof it is a kind: from which rise
thick fat and spongeous stalks, set with broad leaves like those of
Plantaine, but much longer, even to the top of the tuft of flowers; but the
higher they rise toward the top the smaller they are. The flower consists of
many small hooded flowers somewhat whitish, spotted within with deep purple
spots; the backside of these little flowers are Violet mixed with purple.

The fifth was the figure of (...) (...) of (...) and is a kind of (...)
(...). 6 In this place formerly was the figure of the last before, to wit (...)
(...). (...) (...) was the figure of (...) (...), which should have been in
the sixth place in the 101 Chapter of the (...) Edition, being the 113 of this.
8 Serapias Batrachites. Frog Satyrion.
9 Scrapias Batrachites altera. The other Frog Satyrion.


4 Fenny Satyrion (or Serapia's stones) differs little from the former,
saving that the leaves are smaller, and somewhat spotted, and the tuft of
flowers has not so many green leaves, nor so long, mixed with the flowers,
neither are they altogether of so dark orpurplish a color as the former. The
roots are like those of the last described.

5 (...) Orchis or Satyrion has thick fat and knobby roots, the one of them
for the most part being handed, and the other long. It grows like the former
in stalks, leaves, and flowers, but is somewhat bigger, with the leaves
smoother, and more shining.

6 Cloue Satyrion, or sweet smelling Orchis, has flat and thick roots divided
into fingers like those of Palma Christi, saving that the fingers are longer,
smaller, and more in number; from the which rise up long and narrow leaves like
those of Narcissus or Daffodill: among which comes forth a small tender
stalk, at the top whereof grows a purple tuft compact of many small flowers
resembling Flies, but in savor and smell like the Cloue, or Cloue
Gillo-floure; but far sweeter and pleasanter, as my self with many others
can (...) now living, that have both seen and smelt them in my garden. After
the flower is past; come many seed vessels filled with a small seed, and
growing after the manner as you see them here at large expressed in a figure,
together with the root also set forth at full.

7 Gelded Satyrion has leaves with nerves and sinews like to those of
Daffodill, set upon a weak and tender stalk, with flowers at the top white of
color, spotted within the flower, and in shape they are like Gnats and little
Flies. The stalk is gelded as it were, or the stones and hands cut off,
leaving for the root two long legs or fingers, with many strings fastened unto
the top.

8 Frog Satyrion has small flat leaves set upon a (...) weak stem; at the top
whereof grows a tuft of flowers compact of sundry small flowers, which in shape
do resemble little frogs, whereof it took his name. The root is likewise
gelded, only reserved two small misshapen lumps with certain fibers annexed
thereto.

9 This also may fitly be added to the last described, the root showing it to
be of a kind between the Serapia's and Orchis. It grows to the height of
the former, with short leaves engirting the stalk at their setting on. The
flowers on the top resemble a Frogge, with their long leaves; and if you look
upon them in another posture, they will somewhat resemble little Flies:
wherefore Lobel calls it as well Myoides, as Batrachites.

The Time.
These Plants flourish in the month of May and June, but seldom after, except
some degenerate kind, or that it has had some impediment in the time when it
should have floured, as often happens.

The Names.
We have called these kinds, Serapia's stones, or Serapiades, especially for
that sundry of them do bring forth flowers resembling Flies and such like (...)
and lascivious insects, as taking their name from Serapias the god of the
citisens of Alexandria in Egypt, who had a most famous Temple at Canopus,
where he was worshipped with all kind of lascivious wantonness, songs, and
dances, as we may read in Strabo, in his seventeenth Book. Apuleius confounds
the Orchides and Serapiades, under the name of both the Satyrions; and withal
says it is called Entaticos, Panion, and of the Latins, Testiculus Leporinus.
In English we may call them Satyrions, and finger Orchis, and Hares stones.

The Nature and Virtues.
(...) stones are thought to be in nature, temperature, and Verthes, like unto
the Satyrion Royal; and although not so much used in physic, yet doubtless
they work the effect of the other Stones.

CHAP. 117. Of Fenny Stones.
The Description.
1 THis has cleft or divided roots like fingers, much like unto the Roots of
other Palma Christi's; whereof this is a kind: from the which rises up a
stalk of a foot high, set here and there with very fair Lilly-like leaves, of
color red, the which do clip or embrace the stalks almost round about, like
the leaves of Thorow-wax. At the top of the stalk grows a fair bush of very
red flowers, among the which flowers do grow many small sharp pointed leaves.
The seed I could never observe, being a thing like dust that flies in the
wind.

2 The other Marish handed Satyrion differs little from the precedent, but in
the leaves and flowers, for that the leaves are smaller and narrower, and the
flowers are fair white, gaping wide open; in the hollownesse whereof appear
certain things obscurely hidden, resembling little helmets, which sets
forth the difference.

The first of these was the third in the (...) Chapter; in lieu whereof I give
you the (...) of (...), whose figure was here in the second place.
1 Serapias Dracontias palustris. Marish Dragon Satyrion.
The first of these was the third in the (...) Chapter; in lieu whereof I give
you the (...) of (...), whose figure was here in the second place.
2 Serapias palustris leptophylla (...). The other Marish handed Satyrion.


3 This third handed Satyrion has roots fashioned like an hand, with some
strings fastened to the upper part of them; from which rises up a fair stiff
stalk armed with large leaves, very notably dashed with blackish spots,
clipping or embracing the stalk round about: at the top of the stalk stands
a fair tuft of purple flowers, with many green leaves mingled amongst the
same, which makes the bush or tuft much greater. The seed is nothing else but
as it were dust like the other of his kind: and it is contained in such twined
vessels as you see expressed apart by the side of the figure; which vessels are
not peculiar to this, but common to most part of the other Satyrions.

4 The creeping rooted Orchis or Satyrion without testicles, has many long
roots dispersing themselves, or creeping far abroad in the ground, contrary to
all the rest of the Orchides: which Roots are of the bigness of strawes, in
substance like those of Sopewort; from the which immediately does rise four or
five broad smooth leaves like unto the small Plantaine, from the which shoots
up a small and tender stalk, at the top whereof grows a pleasant spikie ear
of a whitish color, spotted on the inside with little speckes of a bloody
color. The seed also is very small.

5 This from handed roots like others of this kind sends up a large stalk,
sometimes attaining to the height of two cubits; the leaves are much like to
those of the marish Satyrions; the flowers are of an elegant purple, with
little hoods like the top of an helmet (whence Gemma 3 Palma Christi palustris.
The third handed marish Satyrion.
4 Palma Christi, radice repent. Creeping Satyrion.
5 Palma Christi maxima. The greatest handed Satyrion.
(...) the plant, Cynosorch. conopsoea; and from the height he called it
Macrocanlos.) These flowers smell sweet, and are succeeded by seeds like those
of the rest of this kindred.

It delights to grow in grounds of an indifferent temper, not too moist nor too
dry. It flowers from mid-May to mid-Iune.

The Place.
They grow in marish and fenny grounds, and in shadowie woods that are very
moist.

The fourth was found by a learned Preacher called Master Robert Abbot, of
Bishops Hatfield, in a boggy grove where a Conduit head does stand, that
sends water to the Queens house in the same town.

It grows also plentifully in Hampshire, within a mile of a market Town
called Petersfield, in a moist meadow named Wood-mead, near the path leading
from Peters-field, toward Beryton.

The Time.
They flower and flourish about May and June.

The Names.
1 This is Cynosorchis (...) of Lobell and Gemma.

2 This is Cynosorchis palustris alter a Leptaphylla, of Lobell; Testiculus
Galericulatus, of Tabernamontanus.

3 Lobell and Gemma term this, Cynosorchis palustris altera Lophodes,
velnephelodes.

4 This is Orchis minor radice repent, of Camerarius.

5 This by Lobell and Gemma is called Cynosorchis macrocaulos, sieve Conopsoea.

The Temperature and Virtues.
There is little use of these in physic; only they are referred unto the
handed Satyrions, whereof they are kinds: notwitstanding Dalescampius has
written in his great Volume, that the Marish Orchis is of greater force than
any of the Dogs stones in procuring of lust.

Camerarius of Noremberg, who was the first that described this kind of
creeping Orchis, has set it forth with a bare description only; and I am
likewise constrained to do the like, because as yet I have had no trial
thereof.

CHAP. 118. Of Birds nest.
1 Satyrium abortinum, sieve Nidus anis. Birds nest.


The Description.
1 BIrds Nest has many tangling roots platted or crossed one over another very
intricately, which resembles a Crows nest made of sticks; from which rises
up a thick soft gross stalk of a brown color, set with small short leaves
of the color of a dry Oken leaf that has lien under the tree all the winter
long. On the top of the stalk grows a spikie ear or tuft of flowers, in
shape like unto Maimed Satyrion, whereof doubtless it is a kind. The whole
plant, as well sticks, leaves, and flowers, are of a parched brown color.

I received out of Hampshire from my often remembered friend Master Goodyer this
following description of a Nidus auis found by him the twenty ninth of June,
1621.

Nidus avis flore and caul (...) (...) (...); an Pseudoleimodoron Clus. Hist.
Rar. plant. page 270.
This rises up with a stalk about nine inches high, with a few small narrow
sharp pointed short skinny leaves, set without order, very little or nothing
at all wrapping or enclosing the stalk; having a spike of flowers like those
of Orobanche, without tails or leaves growing amongst them: which fallen,
there succeed small seed-(...). The lower part of the stalk within the ground
is not round like Orobanche, but slender or long, and of a yellowish white
color, with many small brittle roots growing underneath confusedly, wrapped or
solded together like those of the common Nidus auis. The whole plant as it
appears above ground, both stalks, leaves, and flowers, is of a violet or
deep purple color. This I found wild in the border of a field called
Marborne, near Habridge in Haliborne, a mile from a town called (...) in
Hampshire, being the land of one William Balden. In this place also grows
wild the (...) called Corona fratrum. Ioh. Goodyer.

The Place.
This bastard or unkindly Satyrion is very seldom seen in these Southerly
parts of England. It is reported, That it grows in the North parts of
England, near unto a village called Knaesborough. I found it growing in the
middle of a Wood in Kent two miles from Grauesend, near unto a worshipful
Gentleman's house called Master William Swan, of Howcke Green. The wood
belongs to one Master John Sidley: which plant I did never see elsewhere; and
because it is very rare, I am the more willing to give you all the marks in
the wood for the better finding it, because it does grow but in one piece of
the Wood: that is to say, The ground is covered all ouet in the same place
near about it with the herb Sanycle, and also with the kind of Orchis called
(...), or Butter-fly Satyrion.

The Time.
It floureth and flourishes in June and August. The dusty or mealy seed (if it
may be called seed) falls in the end of August; but in my judgment it is an
unprofitable or barren dust, and not any seed at all.

The Names.
It is called Satyrium abortirum: of some, Nidus auis: in French Nid d'oiseau:
in English, Birds nest, or Goose-nest: in Low Dutch, Uogels nest: in
High Dutch, Margen Drehen.

The Temperature and Virtues.
It is not used in Physic that I can find in any authority either of the
ancient or later Writers, but is esteemed as a degenerate kind of Orchis, and
therefore not used.

THE SECOND BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF PLANTS:
Containing the description, place, time, names, nature, and virtues of all
sorts of Herbs for meat, medicine, or sweet smelling use, etc.

WE have in our first book sufficiently described the Grasses, Rushes, Flags,
Corn, and bulbous rooted Plants, which for the most part are such as with
their brave and gallant flowers deck and beautify Gardens, and feed rather
the eyes than the belly. Now there remain certain other bulbes, whereof the
most (though not all) serve for food: of which we will also discourse in the
first place in this book, dividing them in such sort, that those of one kind
shall be separated from another. In handling these and such as next succeed
them, we shall treat of diverse, yea the most part of those Herbs that the
Greeks call by a general name (...) and the Latins, Olera: and we in
English, Salletherbes. When we have past over these, we shall speak of other
plants, as they shall have resemblance each to other in their external form.

CHAP. 1. Of Turnips.
The Kinds.
THere be sundry sorts of Turnips; some wild; some of the garden; some with
round roots globe fashion; other ouall or pear fashion; and another sort
longish or somewhat like a Radish: and of all these there are sundry varieties,
some being great, and some of a smaller sort.

The Description.
1 THe Turnep has long rough and green leaves, cut or snipt about the edges
with deep gashes. The stalk divides it self into sundry branches or arms,
bearing at the top small flowers of a yellow color, and sometimes of a light
purple: which being past, there do succeed long cods full of small blackish
seed like rape seed. The root is round like a bowl, and sometimes a little
stretched out in length, growing very shallow in the ground, and often showing
it self above the face of the earth.

2 This is like the precedent in each respect, but that the root is not made so
globous or bowle-fashioned as the former, but slenderer, and much longer, as
you may perceive by the sigure we here give you.

3 The small Turnep is like unto the first described, saving that it is lesser.
The root is much sweeter in taste, as my self has often proved.

4 There is another sort of small Turnep said to have red roots; and there are
other-some whose roots are yellow both within and without; some also are green
on the outside, and othersome blackish.

The Place.
The Turnep prospers well in a light, loose, and fat earth, and so loose, as
(...) Crescentius says, that it may be turned almost into dust. It grows in
fields and diverse vineyards or Hop gardens in most places of England.

The small Turnep grows by Hackney, in a sandy ground; and those that are
brought to Cheape-side market from that Village are the best that ever I tasted.

The Time.
Turnips are sown in the spring, as also in the end of August. They flower and
seed the second year after they are sown: for those which flower the same
year that they are sown are a degenerate kind, called in Cheshire about the
Namptwitch, Mad neeps, of their evil quality in causing frenzy and
giddiness of the brain for a season.

1 Rapum majus. Great Turnep.
2 Rapum radice oblonga. Longish rooted Turnep.


The Names.
The Turnep is called in Latin, Rapum: in Greek, (...): the name commonly
used in shops and every where is Rapa. The Lacedaemonians call it (...): the
Boetians, (...), as Athenaeus reports: in high Dutch, Ruben: in low Dutch,
Rapen: in French, Naueau rond: in Spanish, Nabo: in English, Turnep, and Rape.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The bulbous or knobbed root, which is properly called Rapum or Turnep, and
has given the

It avails not a little after what manner it is prepared; for being boiled in
water, or in a certain

The decoction of Turnips is good against the cough and hoarsenesse of the
voice, being drunk

(...) writes, That the Turnep it self being stamped, is with good success
applied upon mouldie or kibed heels, and that also oil of roses boiled in a
hollow turnep under the hot embers does cure the same.

The young and tender shootes or springs of Turnips at their first coming
forth of the

The seed is mixed with counterpoisons and treacles: and being drunk it is a
remedy against

They of the low countries do give the oil which is pressed out of the seed,
against the after

The oil washed with water does allaie the fervent heat and ruggedness of the
skin.

CHAP. 2. Of wild Turnips.
The Kinds.
THere be three sorts of wild Turnips; one our common Rape which bears the
seed whereof is made rape oil, and feeds singing birds: the other the common
enemy to corn, which call Charlock; whereof there be two kinds, one with a
yellow, or else purple flower, the other with a white flower: there is also
another of the water and marish grounds.

1 Rapum syluestre. Wild Turnips.
2 Rapistrum aruorum. Charlocke or Chadlocke.


The Description.
1 Wild Turnips or Rapes, have long, broad, and rough leaves like those of
Turnips, but not so deeply gashed in the edges. The stalks are slender and
brittle, somewhat (...), of two cubits high, dividing themselves at the top
into many arms or branches, whereon do grow little yellowish flowers: which
being past, there do succeed small long cods which contain the seed like that
of the Turnep, but smaller, somewhat reddish, and of a fiery hot and biting
taste as is the mustard, but bitterer. The root is small, and perishes when
the seed is ripe.

2 Charlocke, or the wild rape, has leaves like unto the former, but lesser,
the stalk and leaves being also rough. The stalks be of a cubite high,
slender, and branched; the flowers are sometimes purplish, but more often
yellow. The roots are slender, with certain threads or strings hanging on them.

There is also another variety hereof with the leaves less divided, and much
smoother than the two last described, having yellow flowers and cods not so
deeply joynted as the last described: this is that, which is set sorth by
Matthiolus under the name of Lampsana.

3 Water Chadlock grows up to the height of three foot or somewhat more, with
branches slender and smooth in respect of any of the rest of his kind, set
with rough ribbed leaves, deeply indented about the lower part of the leaf.
The flowers grow at the top of the branches, vmble or tust fashion, sometimes
of one color, and sometimes of another. The root is long, tough, and sull of
strings, creeping and putting forth many stalks: the seed vessels are short
and small. (...) has this under the title of Raphanus (...) alter.

2 Rapistrum aruense alterum. Another wild Charlocke.
3 Rapistrum aquaticum. Water Chadlocke.


The Place.
Wild Turnips or Rapes, do grow of themselves in fallow fields, and likewise
by highwayes near unto old walls, upon ditch-bankes, and near unto towns and
villages, and in other vntoiled and rough places.

The Chadlocke grows for the most part among corn in barraine grounds, and
often by the borders of fields and such like places.

Water Chadlocke grows in moist meadows and marish grounds, as also in water
ditches, and such like places.

The Time.
These do flower from March, till Summer be far spent, and in the mean
season the seed is ripe.

The Names.
Wild Turnep is called in Latin Rapistrum, Rapum syluestre, and of some,
Sinapi (...), or wild mustard: in high Dutch, (...): in low Dutch, (...): in
French, Vclar: in English, Rape, and Rape seed. Rapistrum aruorum is called
Charlock, and Carlock.

(...) Temperature.
The seed of these wild kinds of Turnips as also the water Chadlock, are hot
and dry as mustard seed is. Some have thought that Carlock has a drying and
clensing quality, and somewhat digesting.

The Virtues.
Diverse use the seed of Rape in steed of mustard seed, who either make hereof a
sauce bearing

Galen writes that these being eaten engender evil blood: yet Disoscorides
says, they warm the

CHAP. 3. Of Nauewes.
The Kinds.
THere be sundry kinds of Nape or Nauewes degenerating from the kinds of
Turnep; of which some are of the garden; and other wild, or of the field.

The Description.
1 NAuew gentle is like unto Turnips in stalks, flowers, and seed, as also in
the shape of the leaves, but those of the Nauew are much smoother; it also
differs in the root: the Turnep is round like a globe, the Nauew root is
somewhat stretched forth in length.

The figure that was in the first place is a kind of the long Turnep described
by me in the second place of the first chapter of this second book. (...) that
in the second place was a lesser kind of the same.
1 Bunias. Nauew Gentle.
The figure that was in the first place is a kind of the long Turnep described
by me in the second place of the first chapter of this second book. (...) that
in the second place was a lesser kind of the same.
2 Bunias (...) (...). Wild Nauew.


2 The small or wild Nauew is like unto the former, saving that it is
altogether lesser. The root is small, somewhat long, with threads long and
tough at the end thereof.

The (...).
Nauew-gentle requires a loose and yellow mould even as does the Turnep, and
prospers in a fruitful soil: he is sown in France, Bauaria, and other
places in the fields for the seeds sake, as is likewise that wild Colewort
called of the old writers Crambe: for the plentiful increase of the seeds
brings no small gain to the husbandmen of that country, because that being
pressed they yield an oil which is used not only in lamps, but also in the
making of soap; for of this oil and a lie made of certain ashes, is boiled a
soap which is used in the Lowe-countries every where to scour and wash linen
clothes. I have heard it reported that it is at this day sown in England for
the same purpose.

The wild Nauew grows upon ditch banks near unto villages and good towns,
as alsovpon fresh marshie banks in most places.

The Time.
The Nauew is sown, floureth and seedeth at the same time that the Turnep does.

The Names.
The Nauew is called in Latin Napus, and also Bunias: in Greek (...): the
Germans call it Steckruben: the Brabanders, Steckropen: in Spanish, Naps: in
Italian, Nauo: the Frenchmen, Naueau: in English, Nauew-gentle, or French
Naueau. The other is called Napus sylvestru, or wild Nauew.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The Nauew and the Turnep are all one in temperature and virtues, yet some
suppose that the Nauew is a little drier, and not so soon concocted, nor (...)
down so easily, and does withal engender less wind. In the rest it is
answerable to the Turnep.

The seeds of these taken in drink or broth are good against poison, and are
usually put into

CHAP. 4. Of Lions Turnep, or Lions leaf.
Leontopet alon. Lions leaf.


The Description.
Lions Turnep or Lions leaf, has broad leaves like unto Coleworts, or rather
like the pionyes cut and divided into sundry great gashes: the stalk is two
foot long, thick, and full of juice, dividing it self into diverse branches or
wings; in the tops whereof stand red flowers: afterward there appears long
cods in which lie the seeds like unto tares, or wild chichs. The root is
great, bumped like a Turnep, and black without.

The Place.
It grows among corn in diverse places of Italy, in Candie also, and in other
Provinces toward the South and East. The right honorable Lord Zouch brought a
plant hereof from Italy at his return into England, the which was planted in
his garden. But as far as I do know, it perished.

The Time.
It floureth in winter, as witnesses Petrus Bellonius.

The Names.
The Grecians call it (...), that is, Leonis folium, or Lions leaf: Pliny
does call it also Leontopetalon: Apuleius, Leontopodion: yet there is another
plant called by the same name. There be many bastard Names given unto it, as
Rapeium, Papauerculum, Semen Lconinum, Pes Leoninus, and Brumaria: in English
Lions leaf, and Lions Turnep.

The Temperature.
Lions Turnep is of force to digest; it is hot and dry in the third degree, as
Galen teaches.

The Virtues.
The root (says Dioscorides) taken in wine does help them that are bitten of
Serpents, and it

CHAP. 5. Of Radish.
The Kinds.
THere be sundry sorts of Radish, whereof some be long and white; others long
and black; some round and white; others round, or of the form of a pear, and
black of color; some wild, or of the field; and some tame, or of the garden,
whereof we will entreat in this present chapter.

1 Raphanus sativus. Garden Radish.
2 Radicula satina minor. Small garden Radish.


The Description.
1 THe garden Radish sends forth great and large leaves, green, rough, cut
on both sides with deep gashes, not unlike to the garden Turnep, but greater.
The stalks be round and parted into many branches; out of which spring small
flowers of a light purple color, made of four little leaves: and when they be
past, there do come in place sharp pointed cods huft or blown up toward the
stalk, full of spungious substance, wherein is contained the seed, of a light
brown color, somewhat greater than the seeds of Turnips or Coleworts. The
root is gross, long, and white both without and within, and of a sharp taste.

2 The small garden Radish has leaves like the former, but smaller, and more
brittle in handling. The stalk of two cubits high, whereon be the flowers like
the former. The seed is smaller, and not so sharp in taste. The root is small,
long, white both within and without, (...) a little that shows it self above
the ground of a reddish color.

3 Radish with a round root has leaves like the garden Turnep: among which
(...) springs up a round and smooth stalk, dividing it self toward the top
into two or three branches, whereon do grow small purplish flowers made of
(...) leaves (...): which being past, there do come in place small long cods
puffed up or bunched in two, and sometimes three places, full of pith as the
common Radish; wherein is contained the seed, somewhat smaller than the
Colewort seed, but of a hotter taste. The root is round and firm, (...)
waterish like the common Radish, more pleasant in taste, wholsomer, not causing
such stinking belchings as the garden Radish does.

4 The Radish with a root fashioned like a pear, grows to the height of
three or four cubits, of a bright reddish color. The leaves are deeply cut or
iagged like those of the (...), somewhat rough. The flowers are made of four
leaves, of a light carnation or fleshie color. The seed is contained in small
bunched cods like the former. The root is fashioned like a pear or long
Turnep, black without and white within, of a firm and solid substance. The
taste is quick and sharp, biting the tongue as the other kinds of Radish,
but more strongly.

3 Rhaphanus orbiculatus. Round Radish.
4 Rapharus (...), sieve xadice (...). The black, or Peare-fashion Radish.


The Place.
All the kinds of Radish require a loose ground which has been long manured
and is somewhat fat. They prosper well in sandy ground, where they are no t so
subject to worms, as in other grounds.

The Time.
These kinds of Radish are most fitly sown after the Summer Solstice in June
or Iulie: for being sown betimes in the spring they yield not their roots so
kindly nor profitably, for then they do for the most part quickly run up to
stalk and seed, where otherwise they do not flower and seed till the next
spring following. They may be sown ten months in the year, but as I said
before, the best time is in June and Iulie.

The Names.
Radish is called in Greek of Theophrastus, Dioscorides, Galen, and other old
writers (...) in shops, Raphanus, and (...) Radicula: in high Dutch, Rettich:
in low Dutch, Radus: in French, (...): in Italian, Raphano: in Spanish, Rauano:
in English, Radish, and Rabone: in the Bohemian tongue, Rzedfew. Caelius
affirms that the seed of Radish is called of Marcellus Empericus, (...); and
so likewise of (...) in the second chapter of the second book of his
Tetrabible: yet (...) does not read Bacanon, but Cacanon: The name of (...) is
also found in N. Myrepsus, in the 255. Composition of his first book.

The Temperature.
Radish does manifestly heat and dry, open and make thin by reason of the
biting quality that rules in it. Galen makes them hot in the third degree,
and dry in the second, and shows that it is rather a sauce than a
nourishment.

The Virtues.
Radish are eaten raw with bread in stead of other food; but being eaten after
that manner, they

Before meat they cause vomiting, and especially the rind: the which as it is
more biting (...)

Moreover, Radish provoke urine, and dissolueth cluttered sand, and drives
it (...), if a good Pliny writes, and (...) likewise, that it is good against
an old cough; and to make thin, thick and gross phlegm which sticks in the
chest.

In stead hereof the Physicians of our age do use water distilled thereof:
which likewise procures

The root sliced and laid over night in white or Rhenish wine, and drunk in
the morning, drives

The root stamped with honey and the powder of a sheep heart dried, causes
hair to grow in

The seed causes vomit, provoke urine: and being drunk with honied
vinegar, it kills and

The root stamped with the meal of Darnell and a little white wine vinegar,
takes away all

The root boiled in broth, and the decoction drunk, is good against an old
cough: it moves Those figures that were in the first and second place, were
varietyes of the long Turnep described in the second place, in the first
Chapter of this second book.


CHAP. 6. Of wild Radish.
The Description.
1 Wild Radish has a shorter narrower leaf than the common Radish, and more
deeply cut or iagged, almost like the leaves of Rocket, but much greater. The
stalk is slender and rough, of two cubits high, divided toward the top into
many branches. The flowers are small and white: the cod is long, slender, and
ioynted, wherein is the seed. The root is of the bigness of the finger, white
within and without, of a sharp and biting taste.

2 The water Radish has long and broad leaves, deeply indented or cut even to
the middle (...). The stalk is long, weak, and leans this way and that way,
being not able to stand upright without a prop, in so much that ye shall never
find it, no not when it is very young, but leaning down upon the mud or mire
where it grows. The flowers grow at the top made of four small yellow
leaves. The root is long, set in sundry spaces with small fibers or threads
like the rowell of a spur, hot and burning in taste more than any of the garden
Radishes.

The Place.
The first grows upon the borders of banks and ditches cast up, and in the
borders of fields.

The second grows in ditches, standing waters, and rivers; as on the stone
wall that bordereth upon the river Thames by the Sauoy in London.

1 Raphanus syluestris. Wild Radish.
2 Raphanus aquaticus. Water Radish.


The Time.
They flower in June, and the seed is ripe in August.

The Names.
The first of these is Rapistrum flore albo Erucae folijs, of Lobell:
Armoratia, or Rapistrum album of Tabernamontanus: and Raphanus sylvestris, of
our Author: in English, wild Radish.

The second is Radicula sylvestris of Dodonaeus: and Rhaphanus aquaticus, or
palustris of others: in English, water Radish.

The Temperature.
The wild Radishes are of like temperature with the garden Radish, but hotter
and drier.

The Virtues.
Dioscorides writes, that the leaves are received among the pot herbs, and
likewise the boiled

CHAP. 7. Of Horse Radish.
The Description.
1 HOrse Radish brings forth great leaves, long, broad, sharp pointed and
(...) about the edges, of a deep green color like those of the great garden
Docke, called, of some Monks Rubarbe, of others Patience, but longer and
rougher. The stalk is slender and brittle, bearing at the top small white
flowers: which being past, there follow small cods, wherein is the seed. The
root is long and thick, white of color, in taste sharp, and very much biting
the tongue like mustard.

2 Dittander or pepperwort, has broad leaves, long, and sharp pointed, of a
bluish green color like woad, (...) snipt or cut about the edges like a
saw. The stalk is round and tough: upon the branches whereof grow little
white flowers. The root is long and hard, creeping far abroad in the ground,
in such sort that when it is once taken in a ground, it is not possible to root
it out, for it will under the ground creep and shoot up and bud forth in many
places far abroad. The root also is sharp and biteth the tongue like pepper,
whereof it took the name pepperwort.

3 This which we give you in the third place has a small fibrous root, the
stalk grows up to the height of two cubits, and it is divided into many
branches furnished with white flowers, after which follow seeds like in shape
and taste to Thlaspi, or Treacle mustard. The leaves are somewhat like those of
Woad. This is nourished in some Gardens of the Low Countries, and Lobell was
the first that gave the figure hereof, and that under the same title as we
here give you it..

1 Raphanus rusticanus. Horse Radish.
2 Raphanus syluestris Offic. Lepidium Aeginetae Lob. Dittander, and Pepperwort.


The Place.
Horse Radish for the most part grows and is planted in gardens, yet have I
found it (...) in sundry places, as at Namptwich in Cheshire, in a place
called the Milne eye, and also at a small village near London called Hogsdon,
in the field next unto a farm house leading to Kings-land, where my very good
friend master Bredwell practitioner in Physic, a learned and diligent searcher
of Simples, and master William Martin one of the fellowship of Barbers and
(...), my dear and loving friend, in company with him found it, and gave me
knowledge of the place, where it flourishes to this day.

Dittander is planted in gardens, and is to be found wild also in England in
sundry places, as at Clare by Ouenden in Essex, at the Hall of Brinne in
Lancashire, and near unto Excester in the West parts of England. It delights
to grow in sandy and shadowie places somewhat moist.

The Time.
Horse Radish for the most part (...) in April or May, and the seed is ripe in
August, and that so rare or seldom seen, as that (...) (...) has written,
that it brings forth no seed at all. Dittander flowers in June and July.

The Names.
Horse Radish is commonly called Raphanus rusticanus, or Magnus, and of diverse
simply Raphanus (...): of the high Dutch men, (...), (...) (...) (...): in
French, Grand raifort: of the low Germans, (...): in English, mountain
radish, Great Raifort, and Horse Radish. It is called in the North part of
England, Redcole.

Diverse think that this Horse Radish is an enemy to Vines, and that the hatred
between them is so great, that if the roots hereof be planted near to the
Vine it bends backward from it, as not willing to have fellowship with it.

It is also reported that the root hereof stamped, and cast into good and
pleasant wine, does forthwith turn it into vinegar: but the old writers do
ascribe this enmity to the vine and Brassica, our coleworts, which the most
ancients have named (...)

Dittander is described of Pliny by the name of Lepidium in his 19. book, 9.
Chapter: likewise Aegineta makes mention of this plant, by the name Lepidium:
in shops, Raphanus (...), and Piperitis: the Germans call it, (...): the low
Dutch men, (...) (...): the English men, Dittander, Dittany, and Pepperwort.

3 Lepidium Annum. Annual Dittander.


The Temperature.
These kinds of wild Radishes, are hot and dry in the third degree: they
have a drying and clensing quality, and somewhat digesting.

The Virtues.
Horse Radish stamped with a little vinegar put

Oximel or syrup made with vinegar and honey,

The leaves boiled in wine, and a little oil

It profits much in the expulsion of the secondine

It mittigateth and asswageth the pain of the

It profits much against the collicke, strangurie,

The root stamped and given to drink, kills

The leaves of Pepperwort but especially the roots, be extreme hot, for they
have a burning Pliny in his 20. book, the 17. chap. and therefore by his hot
quality, it mendeth the skin in the face, and takes away scabs, scarres, and
manginesse, if any thing remain after the healing of ulcers and such like.

CHAP. 8. Of Winter Cresses.
The Description.
THe Winter Cresses has many green, broad, smoothe and flat leaves like unto
the common turnips, whose stalks be round, and full of branches, bringing
forth at the top small yellow flowers: after them do follow small cods,
wherein is contained small reddish seed.

1 Barbarea. Winter Cresses.


The Place.
It grows in gardens among pot herbs, and very common in the fields, near
to paths and high ways, almost every where.

The Time.
This herb is green all winter long, it floureth in May, and seedeth in June.

The Names.
Winter Cresse is called of the Latins, Cardamum, or Nasturtium Hibernum, of
some, Barbarea, and Pseudobunium: the Germans call it (...). (...) (...): in
low Dutch, (...) (...).

It seems to be Dioscorides his (...), that is to say, false or bastard
(...): in English, winter Cresses, or herb Saint Barbara.

The Nature.
This herb is hot and dry in the second degree.

The Virtues.
The seed of winter Cresse causes one to

The juice thereof mundifieth corrupt and filthy

In winter when salad herbs be scarce, this

This herb helps the scuruie, being boiled Cochlearia, causing it to work
the more effectually.

CHAP. 9. Of Mustard.
The Description.
1 THe tame or garden Mustard, has great rough leaves like to those of the
Turnep, but rougher and lesser. The stalk is round, rough, and hairie, of
three cubits high, divided into many branches, whereon do grow small yellow
flowers, and after them long cods, slender and rough, wherein is contained
round seed bigger then Rape seed, of color yellow, of taste sharp, and biting
the tongue as does our common field mustard.

2 Our ordinary Mustard has leaves like Turnips, but not so rough, the stalks
are smooth, and grow sometimes to three, four, or sieve cubits high, they have
many branches, and the leaves upon these branches, especially the uppermost,
are long and narrow, and hang downward on small stalks; the cods are short,
and lie flat and close to the branches, and are somewhat square; the seed is
reddish or yellow.

3 The other tame Mustard is like to the former in leaves, and branched
stalks, but lesser, and they are more whitish and rough. The flowers are
likewise yellow, and the seed brown like the Rape seed, which is also not a
little sharp or biting.

4 This which I give you bear being the Sinapi sativum alterum, of Lobel; and
the Sinapi album of the shops, grows but low, and it has rough crooked cods,
and whitish seeds; the stalks, (...), and leaves, are (...) like the first
described..

5 The wild Mustard has leaves like those of shepherds purse, but larger,
and more deeply indented, with a stalk growing to the height of two foot,
bearing at the top small yellow flowers made of four leaves: the cods be small
and-slender, wherein is contained reddish seed, much smaller than any of the
others, but not so sharp or biting.

The three figures in the (...) edition were all false: The first was of (...),
described in the precedent chapter: The second, of Eruca (...) (...) of (...).
The third, of Eruca (...). (...), (...).
1 Sinapi sativum. Garden Mustard.
The three figures in the (...) edition were all false: The first was of (...),
described in the precedent chapter: The second, of Eruca (...) (...) of (...).
The third, of Eruca (...). (...), (...).
3 Sinapi sativum alterum, Dod. Field Mustard.
4 Sinapi album. White Mustard.
The three figures in the (...) edition were all false: The first was of (...),
described in the precedent chapter: The second, of Eruca (...) (...) of (...).
The third, of Eruca (...). (...), (...).
5 Sinapi syluestre minus. Small wild Mustard.


The Place.
Our ordinary Mustard (whose description I have added) as also the wild and
small grow wild in many places of this kingdom, and may all three be found on
the banks about the back of Old-street, and in the way to Islington.

The Time.
Mustard may be sown in the beginning of the Spring: the seed is ripe in July
or August: (...) comes to perfection the same year that it is sown.

The Names.
The Greeks call Mustard, (...): the Athenians called it (...): the Latins,
Sinapi: the rude and barbarous, Sinapium: the Germans, (...): the French,
Seneue and Moustarde: the low- Dutchmen, (...) (...): the Spaniards, Mostaza,
and Mostalla: the Bohemians, Horcice: Pliny calls it Thlaspi, whereof
doubtless it is a kind: and some have called it Saurion.

These kinds of Mustard have been so briefly treated of by all Writers, that
it is hard to give the right distinctions of them, and a matter of more
difficulty than is expected in a thing so vulgarly known and used: I will
therefore endeavor in a few words to distinguish those kinds of mustard which
are vulgarly written of.

1 The first is Sinapi primum of Matthiolus and Dodonaeus; and Sinapi sativum
(...) aut Rapifolio of Lobel.

2 The second I cannot justly refer to any of those which are written of by
Authors; for it has not a cod like Rape, as Pena and Lobel describe it; nor a
seed bigger than it, as Dodonaeus affirms; yet I suspect, and almost dare
affirm that it is the same with the former mentioned by them, though much
differing from their figures and description.

3 The third (which also I suspect is the same with the fourth) is Sinapi
alterum of Matthiolus, and Sinapi agreste Apij, aut potius Laueris folio, of
Lobel: and Sinapi sativum alterum of Dodonaeus.

4 The fourth is by Lobel called Sinapi alterum sativum; and this is Sinapi
album Ofsicinarum, as Pena and Lobel affirm, Aduers. page 68.

5 The fifth is Sinapi syluestre of Dodonaeus: and Sinapi syluestre minus (...)
pastoris folio, of Lobel. It is much like Rocket, and therefore Bauhine fitly
calls it Sinapi Erucae folio: in English it may be called Small wild Mustard.

The Temperature.
The seed of Mustard, especially that which we chiefly use, does heat and make
thin, and also draws forth. It is hot and dry in the fourth degree,
according to Galen.

The Virtues.
The seed of Mustard pound with vinegar, is an excellent sauce, good to be
eaten with any gross

It is given with good success in like manner to such as be short winded, and
are stopped in the

It appeaseth the toothache being chewed in the mouth.

They use to make a gargarisme with honey, vinegar, and mustard seed, against
the tumors and

Mustard drunk with water and honey provoke the terms and urine.

The seed of mustard beaten and put into the nosthrils, causes sneesing, and
(...) women sick

It is good against the falling sickness, and such as have the Lithargie, if
it be laid plaisterwise

It helps the Sciatica, or ache in the hip or huckle bone: it also cures all
manner of pains

It is mixed with good success with drawing plasters, and with such as waste
and consume

It helps those that have their hair pulled off; it takes away the blew and
black marks that

The seed of the white Mustard is used in some Antidotes, as Electuarium (...)
ouo, etc.

CHAP. 10. Of Rocket.
The Kinds.
THere be sundry kinds of Rocket, some tame, or of the garden; some wild, or
of the field; some of the water, and of the sea.

The figure that was in the third place, under the title of (...). (...), is of
the same plant that in the Chapter of (...) is called (...), where you shall
find (...) treated of (...) large. And that in the first place is (...) (...)
of (...). and I question (...) it be not of (...) (...) (...).
1 Eruca satiua. Garden Rocket.
2 Eruca syluestris. Wild Rocket.


The Description.
1 GArden Rocket, or Rocket gentle, has leaves like those of Turnips, but not
near so great nor rough. The stalks rise up of a cubit, and sometimes two
cubits high, weak and brittle; at the top whereof grow the flowers of a whitish
color, and sometimes yellowish; which being past, there do succeed long cods,
which contain the seed, not unlike to rape seed, but smaller.

2 The common Rocket, which some keep in Gardens, and which is usually called
the wild Rocket, is lesser than the Roman (...), or Rocket-gentle, the leaves
and stalks narrower, and more iagged. The flowers be yellow, the cods also
slenderer, the seed thereof is reddish, and biteth the tongue.

3 This kind of Rocket has long narrow leaves almost such as those of
Tarragon, but thicker and fatter, resembling rather the leaves of Myagrum,
altogether unlike any of the rest of the Rockets, saving that the branch,
flower, and seed are like the garden Rocket.

4 There is another kind of Rocket, thought by that reverend and excellent
Herbarist Carelus Clusius to be a kind of Cresses; if not Cresses it self,
yet cousine germane at the least. Unto whose (...) (...) is indifferent,
whether to call it Rocket with thin and narrow leaves, or to call it Cousine
to the kinds of Cresses, having the taste of the one, and the shape of the
other. The leaves are much divided, and the flowers yellow.

5 There is is a wild kind of Sea-Rocket which has long weak and tender
branches trailing upon the ground, with long leaves like unto common Rocket, or
rather Groundswell, having small and whitish blew flowers; in whose place
comes small cods, wherein is contained seed like that of Barley.

6 Besides these there is another plant, whose figure which here I give was by
our Author formerly set forth in the precedent chapter, under the title of
Sinapi syluestre; together with a (...) kind thereof, under the name of Sinapi
sativum alterum. Now I will only describe the later, which I have sometimes
found in wet places: The root is woody: the stalk some foot long, crested, and
having many branches, lying on the ground: the leaf is much divided, and that
after the manner of the wild Rocket: the flowers are of a bright yellow, and
are succeeded by short crooked cods, wherein is contained a yellowish seed.

The figure that was in the third place, under the title of (...). (...), is of
the same plant that in the Chapter of (...) is called (...), where you shall
find (...) treated of (...) large. And that in the first place is (...) (...)
of (...). and I question (...) it be not of (...) (...) (...).
3 Eruca syluestris angustifolia. Narrow leaued wild Rocket.
4 Erucanasturtio cognata (...). Cressy-Rocket.


The Place.
Roman Rocket is cherished in Gardens.

Common or wild Rocket grows in most gardens of it self: you may see most
brick and stone walls about London and elsewhere covered with it.

The narrow leaued Rocket grows near unto water sides, in the chinkes and
creuises of stone walls among the mortar. I found it as ye go from Lambeth
bridge to the village of Lambeth, under a small bridge that you must pass over
hard by the Thames side.

I found Sea Rocket growing upon the sands near unto the sea in the Isle of
Thanet, hard by a house wherein Sir Henry Crispe did sometimes dwell, called
Queakes house.

The Time.
These Kinds of Rocket flower in the months of June and July, and the seed is
tipe in September.

The Roman Rocket dies every year, and recouereth it self again by the
falling of his own seed.

The Names.
Rocket is called in Greek; (...): in Latin, Eruca: in high Dutch, (...): in
(...), Roquette: in Low Dutch, Rakette: in Italian, Ruchetta: in Spanish,
Oruga; in English, Rocket, and Racket. The Poets do often times name it
Herbasalax: Eruca does signify likewise a certain canker worm, which is an
enemy to pot-herbes, but especially to Coleworts.

The first is called Eruca satiua, or Hortensis major: Great Garden Rocket.

2 The second, Eruca sylucstris: Wild Rocket.

3 This third is by Lobel called Eruca syluestris angustifolia: Narrow leaued
wild Rocket.

4 Clusius fitly calls this, Nasturtium syluestre: and he reprehendeth Lobel
for altering the name into Eruca Nasturtio (...): Cressy-Rocket.

5 The fifth is Eruca marina, (thought by Lobel and others to be Cakile
Serapionis,) Sea Rocket.

6 Eruca aquatica: Water Rocket.

5 Erucamarina. Sea Rocket.
The figure that was in the third place, under the title of (...). (...), is of
the same plant that in the Chapter of (...) is called (...), where you shall
find (...) treated of (...) large. And that in the first place is (...) (...)
of (...). and I question (...) it be not of (...) (...) (...).
6 Eruca aquatica. Water Rocket.


The Temperature.
Rocket is hot and dry in the third degree, therefore says Galen it is not fit
nor accustomed to be eaten alone.

The Virtues.
Rocket is a good sallet herb, if it be eaten with Lettuce, Purslane, and such
cold herbs; for being

The use of Rocket stirs up bodily lust, especially the seed.

It provoke urine, and causes good digestion.

Pliny reports, That whosoever takes the seed of Rocket before he be whipped,
shall be so hardened,

The root and seed stamped, and mixed with Vinegar and the gall of an Ox,
takes away freckles,

CHAP.11. Of Tarragon.
Draco herba. Tarragon.


The Description.
TArragon the sallade herb has long and narrow leaves of a deep green
color, greater and longer than those of common Hyssope, with slender brittle
round stalks two cubits high: about the branches whereof hang little round
flowers, never perfectly opened, of a yellow color mixed with black, like
those of common VVormewood. The root is long and fibrous, creeping far abroad
under the earth, as do the roots of Couch-grasse, by which sprouting forth it
increases, yielding no seed at all, but as it were a certain chaffie or
dustie matter that flies away with the wind.

The place.
Tarragon is cherished in gardens, and is increased by the young shootes:
Ruellius and such others have reported many strange tales hereof scarce worth
the noting, saying, that the seed of flax put into a radish root or sea
Onion, and so set, does bring forth this herb Tarragon.

The time.
It is green all Summer long, and a great part of Autumn, and floureth in
July.

The names.
It is called in Latin, Draco, Dracunculus hortensis, and Tragum vulgar by
Clusius; Of the Italians, Dragoncellum; in French, Dragon, in English, Tarragon.

It is thought to be that Tarchon which Auicen mentions in his 686. chapter:
but he writes so little thereof, as that nothing can certainly be affirmed of
it. Simeon Sethi the Greek also makes mention of Tarchon.

The temperature and virtues.
Tarragon is hot and dry in the third degree, and not to be eaten alone in
sallades, but joined with other herbs, as Lettuce, Purslain, and such like,
that it may also temper the coldness of them, like as Rocket does, neither do
we know what other use this herb has.

CHAP.12. Of garden Cresses.
The Description.
1 GArden Cresses or Town Cresses has small narrow iagged leaves, sharp and
burning in taste. The stalks be round, a cubite high, which bring sorth many
small white flowers, andafter little flat husks or seed vessels, like to
those of she pheards purse, wherein are contained seeds of a brown reddish
color. The root dies when the seed is ripe.

2 There is another kind in taste like the former, but in leaves far
different, which I recovered of seeds, sent me from Robinus dwelling in Paris.
The stalks rise up to the height of a foot, garnished with many broad leaves
deeply cut or indented about the edges: the middle of the leaf is decked and
garnished with many little small leaves or rather shreds of leaves, which make
the same like a curlde fan of feathers. The seed is like the former in shape.

3 Spanish Cresses rises forth of the ground like unto Basil, afterward the
leaves grow larger and broader, like those of Marigolds; among the which rises
up a crooked lymmer stalk, whereupon do grow smaall tufts or spokie rundles of
white flowers. The seed follows, brown of color, and bitter in taste. The
whole plant is of a loathfome smell and savor.

4 Stone-Cresse grows flat upon the ground, with leaves iagged and cut about
the edges like the oak leaf, resembling well the leaves of shepheardes purse.
I have not seen the flowers, and therefore they be not expressed in the figure;
notwithstanding it is reported unto me, that they be small and white of
color, as are those of the garden Cresses. The seed is contained in small
pouches or seed vessels, like those of Treacle mustard or Thlaspi.

The Place.
Cresses are sown in gardens, it skils not what soil it be; for that they
like any ground, especially if it be well watered. M. Bowls found the fourth
growing in Shropshire in the fields about Birch in the parish of Elesmere, in
the grounds belonging to M. Richard Herbert, and that in great plenty.

The Time.
It may be sown at any time of the year, unless it be in Winter; it grows
up quickly, and brings forth betimes both stalk and seed: it dies every
year, and recouereth it self of the fallen or shaken seed.

1 Nasturtium hortense. Garden Cresses.


The Names.
Cresses is called in Greek (...): in Latin Nasturtium; in English Cresses:
the Germans call it kersse: and in French, Cresson: the Italians, Nasturtio,
and Agretto: of some, town Cresses, and garden Karsse. It is called
Nasturtium, as Varro and (...) think a narribus torquendis, that is to say, of
writhing the nosthrils, which also by the loathsome smell and sharpness of the
seed does cause sneesing. The first is called Nasturtium hortense, Garden
Cresses. 2 Nasturtium hortense crispum, Garden Cresses with crispe, or curled
leaves. 3 Nasturtium Hispanicum, or Latifolium; Spanish Cresses, or
Broad-leaued Cresses. 4 This is Nasturtium (...) of Tabernamontanus (and not of
Lobell, as out Author termed it.) Stone Cresses.

The Temperature.
The herb of garden Cresses is sharp and biting the tongue; and therefore it
is very hot and dry, but less hot whilst it is young and tender, by reason of
the waterie moisture mixed therewith, by which the sharpness is somewhat
allaied.

The seed is much more biting then the herb, and is hot and dry almost in
the fourth degree.

The Virtues.
Galen says that the Cresses may be eaten with Velutiobsonium, and so the
Ancient (...) usually did; and the low-Countrie men many times do, who
commonly use to feed of Cresses with bread and butter. It is eaten with other
sallade herbs, as Tarragon and Rocket: and for this cause it is chiefly
sown.

It is good against the disease which the Germans call Scorbuch and Scorbuye:
in Latin, Scorbutus: which we in England call the Scuruie, and Scurby, and
upon the seas the Skyrby: it is as good and as effectual as the Scuruie
grass, or water Cresses.

Dioscorides says, if the seed be stamped and mixed with honey, it cures the
hardness of the

Dioscorides says it is hurtful to the stomach, and troubles the belly.

3 Nasturtium Hispanicum. Spanish Cresses.
4 Nasturtium Petreum. Stone Cresses.


It drives forth worms, brings down the flowers, kills the child in the
mothers womb,

Being inwardly taken, it is good for such as have fallen from high places: it
dissolueth cluttered

CHAP. 13. Of Indian Cresses.
The Description.
CResses of India have many weak and feeble branches, rising immediately from
the ground, dispersing themselves far abroad; by means whereof one plant does
occupy a great circuit of ground, as does the great Bindeweede. The tender
stalks divide themselves into sundry branches, trailing likewise upon the
ground, somewhat bunched or swollen up at every joint or knee, which are in
color of a light red, but the spaces between the ioints are green. The
leaves are round like wall peniwort, called Cotyledon, the footestalke of the
leaf comes forth on the backeside almost in the midst of the leaf, as
those of Frogbit, in taste and smell like the garden Cresses. The flowers are
dispersed throughout the whole plant, of color yellow, with a crossed star
overthwart the inside, of a deep orange color; unto the back part of the
same does hang a tail or spur, such as has the Larkes heel, called in
Latin Consolida Regalis, but greater, and the spur or heel longer; which
being past there succeed bunched and knobbed cods or seed vessels, wherein is
contained the seed, rough, brown of color, and like unto the seeds of the
beete, but smaller.

The Place.
The seeds of this rare and fair plant came first from the Indies into
Spain, and thence into France and Flanders, from whence I received seed that
bore with me both flowers and (...) especially those I received from my loving
friend John Robin of Paris.

The Time.
The seeds must be sown in the beginning of April, upon a bed of hot horse
dung, and some fine sifted earth cast thereon of an handful thick. The bed
must be covered in (...) places with hoopes or poles, to sustain the mat or
such like thing that it must be (...) with in the night, and laid open to the
Sun in the day time. The which being sprung up, and having gotten three
leaves, you must replant them abroad in the hottest place of the garden, and
most fine and fertile mold. Thus may you do with Muske-Melons, Cucumbers, and
all cold fruits that require haste; for that otherwise the frost will overtake
them before they come to fruit-bearing.

They may also be sown in good mold like as other seeds, and usually are.

Nasturtium Indicum cum flore and semine. Indian Cresses with flower and seed.


The Names.
This beautiful plant is called in Latin, Nasturtium Indicum: in English,
Indian Cresses. Although some have deemed it a kind of Conuolvulus, or
Binde-weed; yet I am well contented that it retain the former name, for that
the smell and taste show it to be a kind of Cresses.

The Nature and Virtues.
We have no certain knowledge of his nature or virtues, but are content to
refer it to the kinds of Cresses, or to a further consideration.

CHAP. 14. Of Sciatica Cresses.
The Description.
1 SCiatica Cresses has many slender branches growing from a stalk of a cubit
high, with small long and narrow leaves like those of Garden Cresses. The
flowers be very small, and yellow of color; the seed-vessels be little flat
chaffie husks, wherein is the seed of a reddish gold color, sharp and very
bitter in taste. The root is small, tough, white within and without, and of a
biting taste.

The plant whose figure I here give you in stead of that with the narrower
leaves of our Author, has leaves somewhat like Rocket, but not so deep cut
in, being only snipt about the edges: the upper leaves are not snipt, nor
divided at all, and are narrower. The flowers decking the tops of the branches
are small and white, the seed vessels are less then those of Cresses, and the
seed it self exceeding small, and of a blackish color; the root is woody,
sometimes single, (...) divided into two branches.

The Place.
It grows upon old walls and rough places by high ways sides, and such like:
I have found it in corn fields about Southfleete near to Grauesend in Kent.

Iberis Cardamantica. Sciatica Cresses.


The Time.
It floureth according to the late or (...) sowing of it in the fields, in June
and July.

The Names.
Sciatica Cresses is called in Greek (...), and (...): in Latin Iberis: of
Pliny, Heberis, and Nasturtium syluestre, and in like manner also Lepidium.
There is another Lepidium of Pliny: in English, Sciatrica Cresse. The first
described may be called Iberis Cardamantica tenuifolia, Small leaued Sciatica
Cresses. The second, Iberis latiore folio, broad leaued Sciatica Cresses.

The Nature.
Sciatica Cresse is hot in the fourth degree, and like to garden Cresses both
in smell and in taste.

The Virtues.
The roots gathered in Autumn, says Dioscorides, Galen in his ninth book of
medicines, according to the place grieved, cites out of Democrates, in
certain verses tending to that effect.

CHAP. 15. Of Bank Cresses.
The Description.
1 Bank Cresses has long leaves, deeply cut or jagged upon both sides, not
unlike to those of Rocket, or wild mustard. The stalks be small, limber or
pliant, yet very tough, and will twist and writhe as does the (...) or water
willow, whereupon do grow small yellow flowers, which being past there do
succeed little slender cods, full of small seeds, in taste (...) and biting
the tongue as those of Cresses.

2 The second kind of bank Cresses has leaves like unto those of Dandelion,
somewhat (...) Spinach. The branches be long, tough, and pliant like the other.
The flowers be yellowish, which are succeeded by small long cods, having leaves
growing amongst them: in these cods is contained small biting seed like the
other of this kind. The smell of this plant is very ungrateful.

The Place.
Bank Cresses is found in stony places among rubbish, by path ways, upon
earth or mudde (...), and in other vntoiled places.

The second kind of bank Cresses grows in such places as the former does: I
found it growing at a place by Chelmes forde in Essex called little Baddowe,
and in sundry other places.

If our Author meant this which I have described and given you the figure of,
(as it is probable he did) I doubt he scarce found it wild: I have seen it in
the garden of Master Parkinson, and it grows wild in many places of Italy.

The Time.
They flower in June and July; and the seed is ripe in August and September.

The Names.
Bank Cresses is called in Latin Irio and Erysimum: in Greek (...), and of
some, (...) according to Dioscorides: Theophrastus has an other Erysimum. The
first is called Irio, or Erysimum by Matthiolus (...), and others. (...),
Fuchsius and Tragus call it Verbena foemina, or recta. The second is Irio alter
of Matthiolus, and Saxifraga Romanorum, Lugd. It may be called Italian Bank
Cresses: or Roman Saxifrage.

1 Erysimum Dioscoridis, Lobelij. Bancke Cresses.
The figure that was here in the second place was of the (...) (...), or
Libanotis (...) sterilis of (...). You shall find mention of it (...) the
(...), or (...).
2 Erysimum alterum Italicum. Italian bancke Cresses.


The Nature.
The seed of bancke Cresses is like in taste to garden Cresses, and is as Galen
says of a fietie temperature, and does extremely attenuate or make thin.

The Virtues.
The seed of bancke Cresses is good against the rheum that falls into the
chest, by rotting

It remedieth the cough, the yellow jaundise, and the Sciatica or ache of the
hucklebones, if it

It is also drunk against deadly poisons, as Dioscorides adds: and being
made up in a plaster

The seeds of the Italian Bank Cresses, or Roman Saxifrage taken in the weight
of a dram, in a decoction of Grasseroots, effectually cleanse the reins, and
expel the stone, as the Author of the hist. Lugd. affirms.

CHAP. 16. Of Docke Cresses.
The figure that was here, was of the (...) (...), described in the second
chapter of this book; and the true figure of this plant here described was
(...). (...) under the name of (...) (...),
Lampsana. Docke Cresses.


The Description.
The figure that was here, was of the (...) (...), described in the second
chapter of this book; and the true figure of this plant here described was
(...). (...) under the name of (...) (...),
DOcke-Cresses is a wild Wort (...) pot-herbe having roughish hairy leaves of
an ouerworne green color, deeply cut or indented upon both sides like the
leaves of small Turnips. The stalks grow to the height of two or three cubits,
and sometimes higher, dividing themselves toward the top into sundry little
branches, whereon do grow many small yellow flowers like those of Hieracium, or
Hawke-weed; which decaying, are succeeded by little crested heads containing a
longish small seed somewhat like Lettice seed, but of a yellowish color: the
plant is also milkie, the stalk woody, and the root small, fibrous, and white.

The Place.
Dock-Cresses grow every where by Highwaies, upon walls made of mud or earth,
and in stony places.

The Time.
It floureth from May to the end of August: the seed is ripe in September.

The Names.
Docke-Cresses are called in Greek, (...) in Latin, Lampsana, and Napium, by
Dodonoeus: Tabernamontanus calls this, Sonchus syluaticus: Camerarius
affirms, That in Prussia they call it Papillaris.

The Nature.
Docke-Cresses are of nature hot, and somewhat abstersive or cleansing.

The Virtues.
Taken in meat, as Galen and Dioscorides affirm, it ingendreth evil juice
and naughty nourishment.

Camerarius affirms, That it is used with good success in Prussia against
vlcerated or sore

CHAP. 17. Of Water-Parsenep, and Watercresses.
1 GReat Water-Parsenep grows upright, and is described to have leaves of a
pleasant savor, fat and full of juice as those of Alexanders, but somewhat
lesser, resembling the Garden Parsenep: the stalk is round, smooth, and
hollow, like to Kexe or Cashes: the root consists of many small strings or
threads fastened unto the stalk within the water 1 Sium majus latifolium. Great
Water Parsenep.
Sium majus angustifolium. The lesser water Parsenep.
4 Sium alterum Olusatri facie. Long leaued Watercresses.
or miry ground: at the top go grow many white flowers, in spoky roundles like
fennel; which being bruised do yield a very strong savor, smelling like
Petroleum, as does the rest of the plant.

2 This plant much resembles the last described, and (...) up some cubit and a
half high, with many leaves finely snipt about the edges, growing upon one
rib, and commonly they stand bolt upright. The vmbell consists of little white
flowers: the root is small, and consists of many strings.

3 There is another very like this, but they thus differ: the stalks and
leaves of this later are less than those of the precedent, and not so many
upon one rib; the other grows upright, to some yard or more high: this never
grows up, but always creepes, and almost at every joint puts forth an vmbel
of flowers.

4 To these may be added another, whose root consists of abundance of writhen
and small black fibers; the stalks are like Hemlock, some three cubits high;
the leaves are long, narrow, and snipped about the edges, growing commonly two
or three together: the vmbel of flowers is commonly of a yellowish green: the
seed is like parsley seed, but in taste somewhat resembles (...), (...)
Creticus, and the rind of a Citron, yet seems somewhat hotter.

5 Water-Cresse has many fat and weak hollow branches trailing upon the
gravel and earth where it grows, taking hold in sundry places as it
creeps; by means whereof the plant spreads over a great compass of
ground. The leaves are likewise compact and winged with many small leaves set
upon a middle rib one against another, except the point leaf, which stands by
it self, as does that of the ash, if it grow in his naturallplace, which is in
a grauelly spring. The upper face of the whole plant is of a brown color, and
green under the leaves, which is a perfect mark to know the physical kind
from the others. The white flowers grow along the stalks, and are succeeded
by cods wherein the seed is contained. The root is nothing else but as it were
a thrumme or bundle of threads.

5 Nasturtium aquaticum, sieve Crateua Sium. Common Watercresses.
6 Sium Matthioli and (...). Italian Water-Cresse.


6 There is also another kind hereof, having leaves growing many on one
stalk, snipt about the edges, being in shape between the garden Cresses and
Cuckow-floures: the stalk is crested, and divided into many branches; the
flowers white, and are succeeded by cods like those of our ordinary
Water-Cresse last described.

The Place.
1 The first of these I have not found growing, nor as yet heard of within this
kingdom.

2 The second I first found in the company of M. Robert Larkin, going between
Redriffe and Deptford, in a rotten boggy place on the right hand of the way.

3 The third grows almost in every watery place about London.

4 This is more rare, and was found by Mr. Goodyer in the ponds about Moore
Park; and by M. George Bowls in the ditches about Ellesmere, and in diverse
ponds in Flint-shire.

5 The fifth is as frequent as the third, and commonly they grow near together.

6 This Lobel says he found in Piemont, in riuelets amongst the hills: I have
not yet heard that it grows with us.

The Time.
They spring and wax green in April, and flower in July.

The water Cresse to be eaten in sallads shows it self in March, when it is
best, and floureth in Summer with the rest.

The Names.
1 The first of these is Sium maius latifolium of Tabernamontanus.

2 This is Sion odoratum Tragi: Sium, of Matthiolus, Dodonaeus, and others: it
is taken to be Sium, or Lauer, of Dioscorides. Lobel calls it also Pastinaca
aquatica, or water Parsenep.

3 This may be called Sium vmbellatum repens, Creeping water Parsenep. Of this
there is a reasonable good figure in the Historia Lugdunensis, page 1092. under
the title of Sium verum Matthioli; but the description is of that we here give
you in the sixth place.

4 This is Sium alterum of Dodonaeus: and Sium alterum (...) facie of Lobel.

5 Many judge this to be the Sisymbrium alterum, or Cardamine of Dioscorides:
as also the (...) of Crateuas: and therefore Lobel terms it Sion Crateuae
erucae folium. It is called by Dodonaeus, and vulgarly in shops known by the
name of Nasturtium aquaticum, or water Cresses.

6 This is called Sium vulgar by Matthiolus: Lobel also terms it (...)
Malthioli and Italorum. This was thought by our Countryman Doctor Turner to
be no other than the second here described: of which opinion I must confess I
also was; but upon better consideration of that which Lobel and Bauhine have
written, I have changed my mind.

The Temperature.
Water-Cresse is evidently hot and dry.

The Virtues.
Water-Cresse being boiled in Wine or Milk, and drunk for certain days
together, is very

Being chopped or boiled in the broth of flesh, and eaten for thirty days
together, at morning, Menstrua.

CHAP. 18. Of wild Watercresses, or Cuckoo Flowers.
The Description.
1 THe first of the Cuckoo flowers has leaves at his springing up somewhat
round, and those that spring afterward grow iagged like the leaves of Greek
Valerian: among which rises up a stalk a foot long, set with the like leaves,
but smaller, and more iagged, resembling those of Rocket. The flowers grow at
the top in small bundles, white of color, hollow in the middle, resembling the
white sweet-Iohn: after which do come small chaffie husks or seed vessels,
wherein the seed is contained. The root is small and threddy.

2 The second sort of Cuckoo flowers has small iagged leaves like those of
small water Valerian, agreeing with the former in stalks and roots: the
flowers be white, ouerdasht or declining toward a light carnation.

3 The leaves and stalks of this are like those of the last described; neither
are the flowers which first show themselves much unlike them; but when as they
begin to fail, in their middle rise up heads of pretty double flowers made of
many leaves, like in color to these of the single.

4 The fourth sort of Cuckoo Flowers grows creeping upon the ground, with
small threddy stalks, whereon do grow leaves like those of the field Clauer,
or three leaued Grass: amongst which do come up small and tender stalks two
handfulls high, having flowers at the top in greater quantity than any of the
rest, of color white; and after them follow cods containing a small seed. The
root is nothing else but as it were a bundle of thrums or threads.

5 Milk white Lady-smocke has stalks rising immediately from the root,
dividing themselves into sundry small twiggy and hard branches, set with leaves
like those of Serpillum. The flowers grow at the top, made of four leaves of a
yellowish color: the root is tough and woody, with some fibers annexed
thereto. This is no other than the first described, differing only therefrom
in that the flowers are milk white, as our Author truly in the title of his
figure made them; yet forgetting himself in his description, he makes them
yellowish, contrary to himself and the truth.

1 Cardamine. Cuckoo flowers.
2 Cardamine altera. Ladies-smocks.
3 Cardamine altera flore pleno. Double floured Lady-smocke.
4 Cardamine Trifolia. Three leaued Lady-smocke.


6 Cardamine Alpina. Mountain Lady-Smocke.
7 Sium minus impatiens. The impatient Lady-smocke.
8 Cardamine pumila Bellidis folio Alpina. The Dwarf Dasie-leaued Ladysmocke
of the Alps.


6 Mountain Lady-smocke has many roots, nothing else but as it were a bundle
of threddy strings, from the which do come (...) three or four small weak or
tender leaves made of sundry small leaves, in show like to those of small water
Valerian. The stalks be small and brittle, whereupon do grow small flowers
like the first kind.

7 I should be blameworthy if in this place I omitted that pretty conditioned
Sium which is kept in diverse of our London gardens, and was first brought
hither by that great Treasurer of Natures rarieties, M. John Tradescani. This
plant has leaves set many upon a rib, like as the other Sium described in the
second place has; but they are cut in with two or three pretty (...) gashes:
the stalk is some cubit high, and divided into many branches, which have many
small white flowers growing upon them: after these flowers are past there
follow small long (...) containing a small white seed. Now the nature of this
plant is such, that if you touch but the cods when as the seed is ripe, though
you do it never so gently, yet will the seed fly all abroad with violence, as
disdaining to be touched: whence they usually call it Noli me tangere; as they
for the like quality name the Persicaria siliquosa. The nature of this plant
is somewhat admirable, for if the seeds (as I said) be fully ripe, though you
put but your hand near them, as profering to touch them, though you do it
not, yet will they fly out upon you, and if you expect no such thing, perhaps
make you afraid by reason of the suddenness thereof. This herb is written of
only by Prosper Alpinus, under the title of Sium Minimum: and it may be called
in English, Impatient Lady-smocke, or Cuckoo flower. It is an annual, and
yearly sowes it self by the falling seeds.

8 The leaves of this somewhat resemble those of Dasyes, but less, and lie
spread upon the ground, amongst which rises up a weak and slender stalk set
with 3 or 4 leaves at certain distances, it being some handful high, the top
is adorned with small white flowers consisting of four leaves apeece, after
which follow large and long cods, considering the smallnes of the plant; within
these in a double order is contained a small reddish seed, of somewhat a biting
taste. The root creepes upon the top of the ground, putting up new buds in
diverse places. Clusius found this growing upon the rocks on the Etscherian
mountain in Austria, and has given us the history and figure thereof under
the name of Plantula Cardamines emula, and Sinapi pumulum Alpinum.

The Time and Place.
That of the Alpish mountains is a stranger in these cold Countries: the rest
are to be found every where, as aforesaid, especially in the castle ditch at
Clare in Essex. The seventh grows naturally in some places of Italy.

These flower for the most part in April and May, when the Cuckowe does begin
to sing her pleasant notes with out stammering.

The Names.
They are commonly called in Latin, Flos Cuculi, by Brunfelsius and Dodonaeus,
for the reason aforesaid; and also some call them Nasturtium aquaticum minus,
or lesser water Cresse: of some, Cardamine, and Sisymbrium alterum of
Dioscorides: it is called in the Germane tongue, (...): in French, Passerage
sanuage: in English, Cuckowe flowers: in Northfolke, Canterbury bells: at the
Namptwich in Cheshire, where I had my beginning, Lady smockes, which has
given me cause to Christen it after my Country fashion.

The Nature and Virtues.
These herbs be hot and dry in the second degree: we have no certain proof
or authority of their virtues, but surely from the kinds of water Cresse they
cannot much differ, and therefore to them they may be referred in their
virtues. The figure that was in the fourth place; being of the same plant that
is described in the first place; the counterfeit stalks and heads being taken
away, as (...) rightly (...) observed; as also the description thereof, which
(as many other) our Author frames hy looking upon the figure, and the strength
of his own fancy: I (...) omitted as (...).


CHAP. 19. Of Treacle Mustard.
The Description.
1 TReacle mustard has long broad leaves, especially those next the ground,
the others lesser, slightly indented about the edges like those of Dandelion.
The stalks be long and brittle, divided into many branches even from the
ground to the top, where grow many small idle flowers tuft fashion, after which
succeed large, flat, thin, chaffie husks or seed vessels heart fashion,
wherein are contained brown flat seeds, sharp in taste, burning the tongue as
does mustard seed, leaving a taste or savor of Garlic behind for a farewell.

2 Mithridate Mustard has long narrow leaves like those of Woad, or rather Cow
Basil. The stalks be enclosed with small snipt leaves even to the branches,
Pyramidis fashion, that is to say, smaller and smaller toward the top, where it
is divided into sundry branches, whereon do grow small flowers: which being
past, the cods, or rather thin chaffie husks do appear full of sharp seed,
like the former. The root is long and slender.

3 The third kind of Treacle Mustard, named Knaves Mustard, (for that it is
too bad for honest men) has long, fat, and broad leaves, like those of Dwale
or deadly Night shade: in taste like those of Vuluaria or stinching Orach, set
upon a round stalk two cubits high, divided at the top into small arms or
branches, whereon do grow small foolish white spokie flowers. The seed is
contained in flat pouches like those of Shepherds purse, brown, sharp in
taste, and of an ill savor

4 Bowyers Mustard has the lower leaves resembling the ordinary Thlaspi, but
the upper are very small like tode flax but smaller. The stalks be small,
slender, and many. The flowers be small, and white, each consisting of four
leaves. The seeds be placed upon the branches from the lowest part of them to
the top, exceeding sharp and hot in taste, and of a yellowish color. The
root is small and woody.

5 Grecian mustard has many leaves spread upon the ground, like those of the
common Daisie, of a dark greenish color: from the midst whereof spring up
stalks two foot long, divided

1 Thlaspi Dioscoridis. Treacle (...).
2 Thlaspi Vulgatiss mum. Mithridate Mustard.
3 Thlaspi maius. Knaves Mustard.
4 Thlaspi minus. Bowyers Mustard.


5 Thlaspi Graecum. Grecian Mustard.
6 Thlaspi (...). Clownes Mustard.
7 Thlaspi Clypeatum Lobelij. Buckler Mustard.
8 Thlaspi minus Clypeatum. Small Buckler Mustard.
into many small branches, whereupon grow small white flowers composed of four
leaves, after which succeed round flat husks or seed vessels, set upon the
stalk by couples, as it were sundry paires of spectacles, wherein the seed is
contained, sharp and biting as the other. This is sometimes seen with yellow
flowers.

6 Clownes mustard has a short white fibrous root, from whence arises up a
stalk of the height of a foot, which a little above the root diuides it self
into some four or five branches, and these again are subdivided into other,
smaller so that it resembles a little shrub: longish narrow leaves notched
after the manee of Sciatica Cresses by turees garnish these branches, and these
leaves are as bitter as the smaller Centaury. The flowers stand thick together
at the tops of these branches in manner of little vmbels, and are commonly of a
light blew and white mixed together (being seldom only white, or yellow.)
After the flowers succeed seed vessels after the manner of the other plants of
this kind, and in them is contained a small hot seed

7 Buckler mustard has many large leaves, spread upon the ground like
Hieracium or Hawkeweede, somewhat more toothed or snipt about the edges: among
which comes up stalks small and brittle, a cubit high, garnished with many
small pale yellowish flowers: in whose place succeed many round flat cods or
pouches, buckler fashion, containing a seed like unto the others.

8 Small Buckler Mustard, is a very small, base, or low plant, having whitish
leaves like those of wild Time, set upon small, weak and tender branches. The
flowers grow at the top like the other buckler Mustard. The seed vessels are
like, but not so round, somewhat sharp pointed, sharp in taste, and burning
the tongue. The whole plant lies flat upon the ground, like wild Time.

The Place.
Treacle or rather Mithridate Mustard grows wild in sundry (...) in corn
fields, ditch banks, and in sandy, dry, and barren ground. I have found it in
corn fields between Croydon and Godsstone in Surrey, at South-fleete in Kent,
by the path that leads from Harnsey (a small village by London) unto Waltham
cross, and in many other places.

The other do grow under hedges, oftentimes in fields and in stony and
vntoiled places; they grow plentifully in Bohemia and Germany: they are seen
likewise on the stony banks of the river Rhene. They are likewise to be found
in England in sundry places wild, the which I have gathered into my garden. I
have found none but the first and second growing wild in any part of England
as yet; but I deny not, but that some of the other may be found, though not
all.

The Time.
These treacle Mustards are found with their flowers from May to July, and the
seed is ripe in the end of August.

The Names.
The Grecians call these kinds of herbs (...), of the husk or seed vessel,
which is like a little shield. They have also other names which be found among
the bastard words: as Scandulaceum, Capsella, Pes gallinaceus. Neither be the
later writers without their names, as Nasturtium tectorum, and Sinapi rusticum:
it is called in Dutch, Wild (...): in French, (...) sauuage: in English,
Treacle Mustard, dish Mustard, Bowyers Mustard: of some, Thlaspi, after the
Greek name, Churles mustard, and wild Cresses.

1 This is Thlaspi Dioscoridis Drabae, aut Chamelinae folio of Lobell: Thlaspi
Latius of Dodonaeus: and the second Thlaspi of Matthiolus.

2 This, Thlaspi Vulgatissimum Vaccariae folio of Lobell: the first Thlaspi of
Matthiolus, and second of Dodonaeus; and this is that Thlaspi whose seed is
used in shops.

3 This is Thlaspi majus of Tabernamontanus.

4 This is Thlaspi minus of Dodonaeus: Thlaspi: (...) of Fuchsius: Thlaspi
minus hortense Osyridis solio, etc. of Lobell: and Nasturtium sylvestre of
Thalius.

5 This is Alysson of Matthiolus: Thlaspi Graecum Polygonati folio, of Lobell
and Tabern.

6 This the Author of the Hist. Lug. calls Nasturtium sylvestre; Tabern. calls
it Thlaspi (...).

7 Lobell terms this Thlaspi parvum Hieracifolium, and Lunaria Lutea
Monspeliensium.

8 This is Thlaspi minus clypeatum Serpillifolio of Lobell. The figures of
these two last mentioned were transposed in the former Edition.


The Temperature.
The seed of these kinds of Treacle Mustards be hot and dry in the end of the
third degree.

The Virtues.
The seed of Thlaspi or treacle Mustard eaten, purges color both upward and
downward, provoke flowers, and breaks inward aposthumes.

The same used in clysters, helps the sciatica, and is good unto those
purposes for which Mustard seed serves.

The Danger.
The seed of these herbs be so extreme hot and vehement in working, that
being taken in too great a quantity, purges and scoureth even unto blood, and
is hurtful to women with child, and therefore great care is to be had in
giving them inwardly in any great quantity.

CHAP. 20. Of Candie Mustard.
The Description.
CAndie mustard excels all the rest, as well for the comely flowers that it
brings forth for the decking up of gardens and houses, as also for that it
goes beyond the rest in his physical virtues. It rises up with a very
brittle stalk of a cubit high, which divides it self into sundry bows or
branches, set with leaves like those of stock gillifioures, of a gray or
ouerworne green color. The flowers grow at the top of these stalk roundt,
hicke clustering together, like those of Scabious or devils bit, sometimes
blew, often purple, carnation or horse flesh, but seldom white for any thing
that I have seen; varying according to the soil or Clymate. The seed is
reddish, sharp, and biting the tongue, wrapped in little husks fashioned like
an heart. There is a lesser variety of this with white well smelling flowers,
in other respects little differing from the ordinary.

Thlaspi Candiae. Candie Mustard.
Thlaspi Candiae parvum slo albo. Small Candy mustard with a white flower.


The Place.
This grows naturally in some places of Austria, as also in Candy, Spain, and
Italy, from whence I received seeds by the liberality of the right Honorable
the Lord Edward Zouch, at his return into England from those parts. Clusius
found the later as he traveled through Switzerland into Germany.

The Time.
It floureth from the beginning of May unto the end of September, at which time
you shall have flowers and seeds upon one branch, some ripe, and some that will
not ripen at all.

The Name.
This plant is called by Dodonaeus (but not rightly) Arabis and Draba: as also
Thlaspi Candiae, which last name is retained by most writers: in English, Candy
Thlaspi, or Candy Mustard.

The Temperature.
The seed of Candie Mustard is hot and dry at the end of the third degree, as
is that called (...), or treacle mustard.

CHAP. 21. Of Treacle Mustard.
The Description.
1 ROund leaued Mustard has many large leaves laid flat upon the ground like
the leaves of the wild Cabbage, and of the same color; among which rise up
many (...) stalks of some two handfulls high or thereabouts, which are set
with leaves far unlike to those next the ground, enclosing or embracing the
stalks as do the leaves of Perfoliatum, or Thorow-wax. The flowers grow at the
top of the branches, white of color; which being past, there do succeed flat
husks or pouches like unto those of Shepherds purse, with hot seed biting the
tongue.

1 Thlaspi rotundifolium. Round leaued Mustard.
2 Thlaspi Pannonicum Clusij. Hungary Mustard.


2 Hungary Mustard brings forth slender stalks of one cubit high: the leaves
which first appear are flat, somewhat round like those of the wild Beet; but
those leaves which after (...) garnish the stalks are long and broad like
those of the garden Colewort, but lesser and softer, green on the upper side,
and under declining to whiteness, smelling like Garlic. The flowers be small
and white, consisting of four small leaves, which in a great tuft or vmbel do
grow thick thrust together: which being past, there follows in every small
husk one duskish seed and no more, bitter and sharp in taste. The root is
white and small, creeping under the ground far abroad like the roots of
Couch-grasse; preparing new shoots and branches for the year following,
contrary to all the rest of his kind, which are increased by seed, and not
otherwise.

3 Churles Mustard has many small twiggy stalks, slender, tough, and pliant,
set with small leaves like those of Cudweed, or Lauander, with small white
flowers: the husks and seeds are small, few, sharp, bitter, and unsavory:
the whole plant is of a whitish color.

4 Peasants Mustard has many pretty large branches, with thin and iagged
leaves like those of Cresses, but smaller, in savor and taste like to the
ordinary Thlaspi: the flowers be whitish, and grow in a small spoky tuft. The
seed in taste and savor is equal with the other of his kind and country, or
rather exceeds them in sharpness.

3 Thlaspi Narbonense Lobelij. Churles Mustard.
4 Thlaspi vmbellatum (...). Peasants Mustard of Narbone.
5 Thlaspi supinum luteum. Yellow Mustard.


5 Yellow Mustard has an exceeding number of whitish leaves spread upon the
ground in manner of a turfe or hassocke; from the midst whereof rises up an
upright stalk of three foot high, putting forth many small branches or arms:
at the top whereof grow many small yellow flowers like those of the
wall-floure, but much lesser: which being past, the husks appear flat,
pouch-fashion, wherein is the seed like Treacle Mustard, sharp also and biting.

6 White Treacle Mustard has leaves spread upon the ground like the other, but
smaller: the stalks rise up from the midst thereof, branched, set with
leaves smaller than those that lie upon the ground even to the top, where does
grow a tuft of white flowers in fashion like to those of the other Thlaspies:
the seed is like the other: The cods of this are sometimes flat, and
otherwhiles round: the flowers also grow sometimes spikefashion, otherwhiles in
an vmbell. I have given you two figures expressing (...) these varieties.

6 Thlaspi album supinum, and (...) White Treacle Mustard.
7 Thlaspi minus Clusij. Clusius his small Mustard.
8 Thlaspi petraeum minus. Small Rock Mustard.


7 This small kind of Mustard has a few small leaves spread upon the ground
like those of the lesser Dasie, but of a blewisher green color; from which
rise up small tender stalks set with three, and sometimes four small sharp
pointed leaves: the flowers grow at the top, small and white; the cods are
flat; pouch-fashion, like those of Shepherds purse, and in each of them there
is contained two or three yellowish seeds.

8 To these we may fitly add another small mountain Thlaspi, first described
by that diligent and learned Apothecarie John Pona of Verona, in his
description of Mount Baldus. This from a threddy root brings forth many small
whitish leaves lying spread upon the ground, and a little nicked about their
edges: among these rises up a stalk some two or three handfulls high,
diuaricated toward the top into diverse small branches, upon which grow white
little flowers consisting of four leaves (...): which fading, there follow
round seed-vessels, like to those of Myagrum: whence Pona, the first describer
thereof, calls it Thlaspi (...) myagrodes. The seed is as sharp and biting as
any of the other Thlaspies. This grows naturally in the chinkes of the rocks,
in that part of Baldus that is termed Vallis frigida, or, The cold Valley.

The Place.
These kinds of Treacle Mustard grow upon hills and mountains in come fields,
in stony barren and grauelly grounds.

The Time.
These flower in May, June, and July: the seed is ripe in September.

The Names.
1 This is Thlaspi oleraceum of Tabernamontanus: Thlaspi primum, of (...):
Thlaspi mitius rotundifolium of Columna. Our Author confounded it with that
whose figure is the first in the ensuing Chapter, and called it Thlaspi incanum.

2 Thlaspi montanum (...) of Clusius: and Thlaspi Pannonicum of Lobel and Taber.

3 Thlaspi Narbonense centunculi angustifolio, of Lobel: and Thlaspi maritimum
of Daleschampius.

4 Thlaspi vmbellatum Nasturtij hortensis solio Narbonense, of Lobel. The
figures of this and the precedent were transposed in the former edition.

5 Thlaspi supinum luteum of Lobel. Our Authors figure was a variety of the
next following.

6 Thlaspi album supinum of Lobel: Thlaspi montanum secundum of Clusius.

7 Thlaspi (...) of Clusius: Thlaspi minimum of Tabernamontanus.

8 Thlaspi petraeum myagrodes of Pona: Thlaspi tertium saxatile of Camerarius,
in his Epit. of Matthiolus.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The seeds of these churlish kinds of Treacle Mustard have a sharp or biting
quality, break (...) writes. They are mixed in counterpoysons, as Treacle,
Mythridate, and such like Compositions.

CHAP. 22. Of Woody Mustard.
The Description.
1 Woody Mustard has long narrow leaves declining to whiteness, like those
of the stock Gilloflower, but smaller, very like the leaves of Rosemary, but
somewhat broader, with rough stalks very tough and pliant, being of the
substance of wood: the flowers grow at the top, white of color: the seeds do
follow, in taste sharp and biting. The husks or seed-vessels are round and
somewhat longish.

2 Small woody Mustard grows to the height of two cubits, with many stalks
set with small narrow leaves like those of Hyssop, but rougher; and at the top
grow flowers like those of Treacle Mustard, or Thlaspi. The whole plant grows
as a shrub or hedge-bush.

3 Thorny Mustard grows up to the height of four cubits, of a woody
substance, like unto a hedge-bush, or wild shrub, with stalks beset with
leaves, flowers, and seeds like the last before mentioned; agreeing in all
points, saving in the cruel pricking sharp thorns wherewith this plant is
armed; the other not. The root is tough, woody, and some strings or fibers
annexed thereto.

1 Thlaspi fruticosum incanum. Hoary woody Mustard.
2 Thlaspi fruticosum minus. Small woody Mustard.
3 Thlaspi spinosum. Thorny Mustard.
4 Thlaspi fruticosum folio (...). Bushy Mustard.


5 Thlaspi hederacium. Iuy Mustard.


4 There is another sort of woody Mustard growing in shadowie and obscure
mountains, and rough stony places resembling the last described; saving that
this plant has no pricks at all, but many small branches set thick with
leaves, resembling those of the lesser sea (...): the flowers are many and
white; the seed like the other Thlaspies: the root is woody and fibrous.

5 There is (says Lobel) in Portland and about Plymouth, and upon other rocks
on the sea coast of England, a creeping little herb having small red crested
stalks about a spanne high: the leaves are thick and fashioned like Iuy; the
white flowers and small seeds do in taste and shape resemble the Thlaspies.

The Place.
1 The first of these grows about Mcchline.

2. 3. 4. These plants grow upon the Alpish and Pyrene mountains: in Piemont
and in Italy, in stony and rockie grounds.

The Time.
They flower when the other kinds of Thlaspies do; that is, from May to the
end of August.

The Names.
1 This Clusius and Lobel call Thlaspi incanum Mechliniense: Bauhine thinks it
to be the Iberis prima of Tabernamontanus, whose figure retained this place in
the former edition.

2 This is Thlaspi fruticosum alterum of Lobel: Thlaspi 5. Hispanicum of
Clusius.

3 Lobel calls this, Thlaspi fruticosum spinosum.

4 Camerarius calls this, Thlaspi sempervirens (...) folio Leucoij, etc. Lobel,
Thlaspi fruticosum folio Leucoij, etc.

5 This Lobel calls Thlaspi hederaceum.

The Nature and Virtues.
I find nothing extant of their nature or virtues, but they may be referred to
the kinds of Thlaspies, whereof no doubt they are of kindred and affinity, as
well in faculty as form.

CHAP. 23. Of Towers Mustard.
The Description.
1 TOwers Mustard has been taken of some for a kind of Cresses, and referred
by them to it: of some, for one of the Mustards, and so placed among the
Thlaspies as a kind thereof; and therefore my self must needs bestow it
somewhere with others. Therefore I have with Clusius and Lobel placed it among
the Thlaspies, as a kind thereof. It comes out of the ground with many long
and large rough leaves, like those of Hounds-tongue, especially those next the
ground: amongst which rises up a long stalk of a cubit or more high, set
abont with sharp pointed leaves like those of Woad. The flowers grow at the
top, if I may term them flowers, but they are as it were a little dusty chafe
driven upon the leaves and branches with the wind: after which come very small
cods, wherein is small reddish seed like that of Cameline or English Worm-seed,
with a root made of a tuft full of innumerable threads or strings.

2 This second kind has a thicker and harder root than the precedent, having
also fewer fibers; the leaves are bigger than those of the last described,
somewhat curled or sinuated, yet less, rough, and of a lighter green; in the
midst of these there rise up one or two stalks or more, usually some two
cubits high, divided into some branches, which are adorned with leaves almost
ingirting them round at there setting on. The flowers are like those of the
former, but somewhat larger, and the color is either white, or a pale yellow:
after these succeed many long cods filled with a seed somewhat larger than the
last described.

3 Gold of pleasure is an herb with many branches set upon a straight stalk,
round, and divided into sundry wings, in height two cubits. The leaves be long,
broad, and sharp pointed, somewhat snipt or indented about the edges like
those of Sow-thistles. The flowers along the stalks are white; the seed
contained in round little vessels is fat and oily.

1 Turritis. Towers Mustard.
2 Turritis major. Great Tower Mustard.


4 (...) Wormeseed rises up with tough and pliant branches, whereupou do grow
many small yellow flowers; after which come long slender cods like Flixe-weed,
or Sophia, wherein is contained small yellowish seed, bitter as Wormeseed or
Coliquintida. The leaves are small and dark of color, in shape like those of
the wild stock Gillofloures, but not so thick, nor fat. The root is small
and single.

The Place.
Towers Treacle grows in the West part of England, upon dunghils and such
like places. I have likewise seen it in sundry other places, as at Pyms by a
village called Edmonton near London, by the City walls of West-chester in
corn fields, and where flax did grow about Cambridge. The second is a
stranger with us; yet I am deceived if I have not seen it growing in M.
Parkinsons garden.

The other grow in the territory of Leiden in Zeeland, and many places of the
Low Countries; and likewise wild in sundry places of England.

The Time.
These herbs do flower in May and June, and their seed is ripe in September.

The Names.
1 This is (...) of Lobell: Turrita Vulgatior of Clusius.

2 This is Turrita mayor, of Clusius, who thinks it to be Brassica Virgata of
Cordus.

3 Matthiolus calls this, Pseudomyagrum: Tragus calls it, Sesamum: Dodonaeus,
Lobel, and others call it Myagrum.

4 This Lobel calls Myagrum thlaspi effigy. Tabernamontanus has it twice;
first under the name of Erysimum tertium: secondly, of Myagrum secundum. And so
also our Author (as I formerly noted) had it before under the name of Eruca
syluestris angustifolia; and here under the name of Camelina.

3 Myagrum. Gold of pleasure.
4 Camelina. Treacle Worm-seed.


The Temperature.
These Plants be hot and dry in the third degree.

The Virtues.
It is thought, says Dioscorides, That the roughness of the skin is
polished and made smooth Myagrum.

Ruellius teaches, That the juice of the herb heals ulcers of the mouth;
and that the poor

The seed of Camelina stamped, and given children to drink, kills the
worms, and drives The two (...) omitted are treated of at large in the
following Chapter.


CHAP. 24. Of Turkey Cresses.
Our Author did briefly in the precedent Chapter make mention of the two
plants we first mention in this Chapter; but that so briefly, that I thought
it convenient to discourse more largely of them, as also to add to them other
two, being by most Writers adjudged to be of the same Tribe or kindred. The
virtues of (...) first were by our Author out of Dodonaeus formerly put to the
Thlaspi Candiae, Chapter 20. from whence I have brought them to their proper
place, in the end of this present Chapter.

The Description.
1 The first has crested slender, yet firm stalks of some foot long, which
are set with leaves of some inch in length, broad at the setting on, sinuated
about the edges, and sharp pointed; their color is a whitish green, and
taste acride; the leaves that are at the bottom of the stalk are many, and
larger. The tops of the stalks are divided into many branches of an unequal
length, and sustain many flowers; each whereof consists of sour little white
leaves, so that together they much resemble the vmbell of the Elder when it is
in flower. Little swollen seed vessels divided into two cells follow the fading
flowers: the seed is whitish, about the bigness of millet; the root also is
white, slender and creeping.

2 This has creeping roots, from which arise many branches lying upon the
ground here and there, taking root also; the leaves, which upon the lower
branches are many, are in form and color much like those of the last
described, but-lesse, and somewhat suipt about the edges. The stalks are about
a handful high, or somewhat more, round, green, and hairy, having some leaves
growing upon them. The flowers grow spoke fashion at the top of the stalks,
white, and consisting of four leaves; which fallen, there follow cods
containing a small red seed.

1 Draba Dioscoridis. Turkey Cresses.
2 Draba prima repens. The first creeping Cresse.


3 From a small and creeping root rise up many shootes, which while they are
young have many thick juicy and dark green leaves rose fashion adorning
their tops, out of the midst of which spring out many slender stalks of some
foot high, which at certain spaces are encompassed (as it were) with leaves
somewhat lesser then the former, yet broader at the bottom: the flowers, cods,
and seed are like the last mentioned.

4 There is a plant also by some referred to this Classis; and I for some
reasons think good to make mention thereof in this place. It has a strong and
very long root of color whitish, and of as sharp a taste as Cresses; the
stalks are many, and often times exceed the height of a man, yet slender, and
toward their tops divided into some branches, which make no vmbell, but carry
their flowers dispersed; which consist of four small yellow leaves: after the
flower is past there follow long slender cods containing a small, yellowish,
acride seed. The leaves which adorn this plant are long, sharp pointed, and
snipt about the edges, somewhat like those of Saracens Confound, but that these
toward the top are more unequally cut in.

3 Draba altera repens. The other creeping Cresse.


The Time.
The first of these flowers in May and the beginning of June. The 2 and 3 in
April. The fourth in June and July.

The Place.
None of these (that I know of) are found naturally growing in this kingdom;
(...) last excepted, which I think may be sound in some places.

The Names.
1 This by a general consent of (...), Anguillara, Lobell, etc. is judged to
be the Arabis, or Draba of the Ancients.

2 Draba alter a of Clusius.

3 Draba tertia succulento folio, of Clusius: Eruca Muralis of Daleschampius.

4 This by Camerarius is set forth under the name of Arabis quorundam, and he
affirms in his Hor. Med. that he had it outof (...) under the name of
Solidago; The which is very likely, for without doubt this is the very plant
that our Author mistook for Solidago (...); for he bewraies himself in the
Chapter of Epimedium, whereas he says it has cods like Sarraccens Consound;
when as both he, and all other give no cods at all to Sarracens Consound. My
very good friend Mr. John Goodyer was the first, I think, that observed this
mistake in our Author; for which his observation, together with some others
formerly and hereafter to be remembered, I acknowledge my self beholden to him.

The Virtues, attributed to the first.
1 Dioscorides says, that they use to eat the dried seed of this herb with
meat, as we do pepper

They use likewise to boil the herb with the decoction of barley, called
Ptisana; which being

The rest are hot, and come near to the virtues of the precedent.

CHAP. 25. Of Shepheards-purse.
The Description.
1 THe leaves of Shepherds purse grow up at the first long, gashed in the
edges like those of Rocket, spread upon the ground: from these spring up very
many little weak stalks divided into sundry branches, with like leaves growing
on them, but lesser; at the top whereof are orderly placed small white flowers:
after these come up little seed vessels, flat, and cornered, narrow at the stem
like to a certain little pouch or purse, in which lies the seed. The root is
white not without strings. There in another of this kind with leaves not
sinuated, or cut in.

2 The small Shepherds purse comes forth of the ground like the Cuckoo
flower, which I have Englished Ladie-smockes, having small leaves deeply
indented about the edges; among which rise up many small tender stalks with
flowers at the top, as it were chasse. The husks and seed is like the other
before mentioned.

The Place.
These herbs do grow of themselves for the most part, near common high ways,
in (...) and untilled places, among rubbish and old walls.

1 Bursa Pastoris. Shepherds purse.
2 Bursa Pastoria minima. Small Shepherds purse.


The Time.
They flower, flourish, and seed all the Summer long.

The Names.
Shepherds purse is called in Latin, Pastorus bursa, or Pera pastoris: in
high Dutch, (...): in Low Dutch, (...) (...): in French, Bourse de pasteur on
Cure: in English, Shepherds purse or scrip: of some, Shepherds pouch, and
poor man's Parmacetie: and in the North part of England, Toy-wort, Pick-purse,
and Case-weed.

The Temperature.
They are of temperature cold and dry, and very much binding, after the opinion
of Ruellius, (...), and Dodonaeus; but Lobel and Pena hold them to be hot and
dry, judging the same by their sharp taste: which has caused me to insert
them here among the kinds of Thlaspi, considering the fashion of the leaves,
cods, seed, and taste (...): which do so well agree together, that I might very
well have placed them as kinds thereof. But rather willing to content others
that have written before, than to please my self, I have followed their order
in marshalling them in this place, where they may stand for cousine germans.

The Virtues.
Shepherds purse stays bleeding in any part of the body, whether the juice
or the decoction

In a Clyster it cures the bloody flix: it heals green and bleeding wounds:
it is marvelous

The decoction does stop the laske, the spitting and pissing of blood, and all
other fluxes of

CHAP. 26. Of Italian Rocket.
The Description.
1 ITalian Rocket has long leaves cut into many parts or divisions like those
of the Ash tree, resembling Ruellius his Bucks-horne: among which rise up
stalks weak and tender, but thick and gross, two foot high, garnished with
many small yellowish flowers like the middle part of Tansie flowers, of a
naughty savor or smell. The seed is small like sand or dust, in taste like
Rocket seed, whereof in truth we suspect it to be a kind. The root is long
and woody.

1 Rheseda Plinij. Italian Rocket.
2 (...) maxima. Crambling Rocket.


2 Crambling Rocket has many large leaves cut into sundry sections, deeply
divided to the middle rib, branched like the horns of a stag or heart: among
which there do rise up long fat and fleshy stalks two cubits high, lying flat
upon the ground by reason of his weak and feeble branches. The flowers grow at
the top, clustering thick together, white of color, with brownish threads in
them. The seed is like the former. Lobel affirms it grows in the Low Country
gardens with writhen stalks, sometimes ten or twelve cub its high, with leaves
much divided.

The Place.
These Plants grow in sandy, stony, grauelly, and chalky barren grounds. I have
found them in sundry places of Kent, as at South-fleet, upon Long-field downs,
which is a chalkie and hilly ground very barren. They grow at Greenhithe upon
the hills, and in other places of Kent. The first grows also upon the Wolds in
Yorke-shire. The second I have not seen growing except in gardens, and much
doubt whether it grow wild with us or no.

The Time.
These Plants do flourish in June, July, and August.

The Names.
The first is called of Pliny, Reseda, Erucaperegrina, and Eruca Cantabrica: in
English, Italian Rocket.

The second is called Reseda maxima: of Anguillara, Pignocomon, whereof I find
nothing extant worthy the memory, either of temperature or virtues.

CHAP. 27. Of Groundsell.
The Description.
1 THe stalk of Groundsell is round, chamfered and divided into many branches:
the leaves be green, long, and cut in the edges almost like those of Succorie,
but lesser, like in a manner to the leaves of Rocket. The flowers be yellow,
and turn to down, that is carried away with the wind. The root is full of
strings and threads.

1 Erigerum. Groundsell.
2 Erigerum Tomentosum. Cotton Groundsell.


2 Cotton Groundsel has a straight stalk of a brown purple color, covered
with a fine cotton or downy hair, of the height of two cubits. The leaves are
like those of S. James Wort, (...) Rag-wort; and at the top of the stalk grow
small knops, from which come flowers of a pale yellow color; which are no
sooner opened and spread abroad, but they change into down like that of the
Thistle, (...) the same hour of his flouring, and is carried away with the
wind: the root is small and tender.

3 There is another with leaves more iagged, and finelier cut than the last
mentioned, soft also and downie: the flowers are fewer, less and paler than in
the ordinary, but turn speedily into down like as the former.

The Place.
These herbs are very common throughout England, and do grow almost every
where.

The Time.
They flourish almost every month of the year.

3 Erigeron tomentosum alterum. The other Cotton Groundsell.


The Names.
Groundsel is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Senecio, because it waxes old
quickly: by a bastard name Herbutum: in Germany, Creuszwurtz: in Low Dutch,
Cruys crupt, and Cruysken cruyt: in Spanish, (...) cana: in Italian,
Cardoncello, Speliciosa: in English, Groundsel.

Cotton Groundsell seems to be all one with Theophrastus his Aphace; he
makes mention of Aphace in his seventh book, which is not only a kind of
pulse, but an herb also, unto which this kind of Groundsell is very like. For
as Theophrastus says, The herb Aphace is (...) of the pot herbs and kinds of
Succorie: adding further, That it floureth in haste, but yet soon is old, and
turns into down; and such a one is this kind of Groundsell. But Theophrastus
says further, That it floureth all the winter long, and so long as the Spring
lasts, as my self have often seen this Groundsell do.

The Temperature.
Groundsell has mixed faculties; it cools, and withal digesteth, as Paulus
Aegineta writes.

The Virtues.
The leaves of Groundsell boiled in wine or water,

The leaves and flowers stamped with a little Struma or Kings Evil.

The leaves stamped and strained into milk and drunk, helps the red gummes
and frets in

Dioscorides says, That with the fine powder of Frankincense it heals wounds
in the sinews.

Boiled in Ale with a little honey and vinegar, it provoke vomit, especially
if you add thereto Assarabacca.

CHAP. 28. Of Saint James his Wort.
The Kinds.
THe herb called Saint James his wort is not without cause thought to be a
kind of Groundsel: of which there be sundry sorts; some of the pasture, and
one of the sea; some sweet smelling; and some of a loathsome savor. All which
kinds I will set down.

The Description.
1 SAint James his wort or Rag-wort is very well known every where, and
brings forth at the first broad leaves, gashed round about like to the leaves
of common Wormwood, but broader, thicker, not whitish or soft, of a deep
green color, with a stalk which rises up above a cubit high, chamfered,
blackish, and somewhat red withal. The arms orwings are set with lesser
leaves like those of Groundsell or of wild Rocket. The flowers at the top be
of a yellow color like Marigolds, as well the middle button as the small
flowers that stand in a pale round about, which turn into down as does
Groundsell. The root is threddy.

2 This has stalks some cubit high, crested, and set with long whitish
leaves; the lower leaves are the shorter; but the upper leaves the longer, yet
the narrower: at the top of the stalk grow some four or five flowers as in an
vmbell, which are of a dark red color before they open

1 (...). Rag-wort.
2 Iacobaea angustifolia. Narrow leaued Rag-weed.
3 Iacobaea latifolia. Broad leaued Rag-weed,
4 Iacobaea marina. Sea Rag-weed.
themselves; but opened, of a bright golden color, and those are ingirt by
fifteen or more little leaves, which are of a flame color above, and red
underneath. The flowers fly away in down, and the seed is blackish, and like
that of the former. The roots are made of many strings like those of the
precedent.

3 This broad leaued Rag-weed has stiff crested stalks, which are set with
broad wrinckled sharp pointed leaves, of a green color: the bottom leaves
are the larger and rounder, the top leaves the less, and more divided. The
flowers grow at the top of the stalks, in shape and color like those of the
common Rag-weed, but much bigger: They also turn into Down as the former.

4 Sea Rag-wort grows to the height of two cubits: the stalks be not reddish
as the other, but contrariwise Ash-colored, gray and hoary: the leaves be
greater and broader than the other: the flowers grow at the top, of a pale
yellow color, covered on the cup or husk of the flower, as also the leaves,
with a certain soft white Down or freese: the flowers vanish into Down, and
fly away with the wind.

The Place.
Land Rag-wort grows every where in untilled pastures and fields, which are
somewhat moist especially, and near unto the borders of fields.

2 3 These grow upon the Austrian and Heluetian Alps.

The fourth kind of Rag-wort grows near the sea side in sundry places: I
have seen it in the field by Margate, by Queakes house, and by Byrchenton in
the Isle of Tenet: likewise it grows near the Kings ferry in the Isle of
Shepey, in the way leading to Sherland house, where Sr. Edward Hobby dwells:
and likewise at Queenborough castle in the same Isle; and in other places. I
have been at the former and later of these places to find out plants, yet
could I not see this plant. It grows in the garden of Mr. Ralph Tuggy; but I
fear hardly wild in this kingdom.

The Time.
They flower in July and August, at which time they are carried away with the
Down.

The Names.
The first is called in Latin, Herba S. Iacobi, or S. lacobi slos; and
Iacobaea: in High Dutch, Sant Jacobs bloumen: in Low Dutch, Sant Jacobs cruyt:
in French, Fluer de S. lacques: in English, S. James his Wort: the country
people do call it Stagger-wort, and Staner-wort, and also Rag-wort, and
Rag-weed. In Holdernesse in Yorke-shire they call it Seggrum.

The second is Iacobaea Pannonica (...). of Clusius.

The third is his Iacobaea latifolia. Gesner calls it Coniza montana.

The fourth is named Cineraria, or Ash-colored S. James Wort: some call it
Erigeron marinum, or Sea Groundsell: of some, (...). And by Prosper Alpinus,
Artemisia alba.

The Temperature.
S. James wort is hot and dry in the second degree, and also cleansing, by
reason of the bitterness which it has.

The Virtues.
It is commended by the later Physicians to be good for green wounds, and old
filthy Ulcers

It is much commended, and not without cause, to help old aches and pains in
the arms, hips,

Moreover, the decoction hereof gargarised is much set by as a remedy against
swellings and

The leaves stamped very small, and boiled with some hogs grease unto the
consumption of the

The Egyptians (says Prosper Alpinus) use the Sea Rag-wort, for many things:
for they commend

CHAP. 29. Of Garden Succorie.
The Kinds.
THere be sundry sorts of plants comprehended under the title of Cichoracea,
that is to say Cichorie, Endive, Dandelion, etc. differing not so much in
operation and working, as in shape and form, which has caused many to deem
them diverse, who have distinguished them (...) the titles aforesaid: of every
which kind there be diverse sorts, the which shall be (...) in (...) several
chapters, wherein the differences shall be expressed.

The Description.
1 GArden Succory is of two sorts, one with broad leaves, and the other with
narrow, deeply cut and gashed on both sides. The first has broad leaves
somewhat hairie, not much unlike to Endive, but narrower; amongst which do
rise up stalks, whereon are placed the like leaves, but smaller. The stalk
divides it self toward the top into many branches, whereon do grow little
blew flowers consisting of many small leaves, afterwhich follows white seed.
The root is tough, long, and white of color, continuing many years; from the
which as from every part of the plant does issue forth bitter and milkie juice.
The whole plant is of a bitter taste likewise.

2 Cichorium sativum. Garden Succorie.
3 Itybus (...). Garden Endive.


2 The second kind of Succorie is like unto the former, but greater in every
point. That which causes the difference is, that this bears flowers white of
color tending to blewnesse; the others blew, as I have said.

3 Garden Endive brings forth long leaves, broad, smooth, more green than
white, like almost to those of lettuce, something nicked in the edges. The
stalk grows up among the leaves, being round and hollow, divided into
branches; out of which being broken or cut there issues a juice like milk,
somewhat bitter: the flowers upon the branches consist of many leaves, in
color 5 Cichorium spinosum. Thornie Succory.
commonly blew, seldom white. The root is long, white, with strings growing
thereat, which withers after the seed is ripe.

4 Curled Endive has leaves not unlike to those of the curled or Cabbage
lettuce, but much greater; among which rise up strong and thick stalks, set
with the like leaves, but lesser, and not so notably curled or crisped. The
flours grow at the top, blew of color. The (...) perishes, as does the whole
plant, when it has brought forth his ripe seed.

5 To these may fitly be added the thorny or prickly Succory of Candy, being of
this kindred, and there used in defect of the true Succorie, in stead thereof.
The root is pretty long, white, with few fibers hanging thereat; the stalk is
hard, woody, and diuaricated into many branches, which commonly end in two or
three pricks like horns: The leaves are bitter, long, narrow, and sharp
pointed, and lie spread upon the ground, and are a little sinuated, or cut
about the edges: The flours, which usually grow upon little footstalkes at the
divisions of the branches, are much like those of the ordinary Succory, yet
much less, consisting of five blew leaves, with yellow chiues in the middle.
The seed is like those of the common Succory. It flowers in July and August.

The Place and Time.
This Succory, and these Endiues are only sown in gardens.

Endive being sown in the spring quickly comes up to flower, which seedeth
in harvest, and afterward dies. But being sown in July it remains till
winter, at which time it is taken up by the roots, and laid in the sun or
air for the space (...) two hours; then will the leaves be tough, and easily
endure to be wrapped upon an heap, and buried in the earth with the roots
upward, where no earth can get within it (which if it did, would cause
rottenness) the which so covered may be taken up at times convenient, and used
in sallades all the winter, as in London and other places is to be seen; and
then it is called white Endive, whereof Pliny seems not to be ignorant,
speaking to the same purpose in his 20. book and 8. chapter.

The Names.
These herbs be called by one name in Greek (...) notwithstanding for
distinctions sake they called the garden Succory, (...) and the wild Succory,
(...); Pliny names the Succory (...): and the bitterer Dioscorides calls
(...): in Latin, Intybum syluestre, Intybum agreste, Intybum (...), and
Cichorium: in shops it is called Cichorea, which name is not only allowed of
the later Physicians, but also of the Poet Horace in the 31. Ode of his first
book,

Me pascunt (...),
Me Cichorea, leuesque (...).
With us, says Pliny in his 20. book, 8. chapter, they have called Intybum
erraticum, or wild Endive, Ambugia (others read Ambubeia:) and some there be
that name it Rostrum porcinum: and others, as Guilielmus Placentinus, and
Petrus Crescentius, term it Sponsa (...): the Germans call it (...), which is
as much to say, as the keeper of the ways: the Italians, Cichorea: the
Spaniards, Almerones: the Englishmen, Cicorie and Succory: the Bohemians,
(...).

Endive is named in Greek (...) in Latin, Intybum sativum: of some, Endiuia:
of Auicen and Serapio, Taraxacon: of the Italians, Scariola, which name
remains in most shops; also Seriola, as (...) they should fitly call it
Seris, but not so well Serriola, with a double r: for Serriola is (...) sylue,
tris, or wild lettuce: it is called in Spanish, Serraya Enuide: in English,
Endive, and Scariole: and when it has been in the earth buried as aforesaid,
then it is called white Endive.

5 This was first set forth by Clusius under this name, Chondrillae genus
elegans (...) (...): since, by Pona and Bauhine, by the title we give you, to
wit, Cichorium spinosum. Honorius Bellus writes that in Candy where as it
naturally grows, they vulgarly term it (...) that is, (...) spina, the
Pitcher Thorn; because the people fetch all their water in stone pots or
Pitchers, which they (...) with this plant, to keep mice and other such things
from creeping into them: and it grows (...) round, that it seems by nature to
be provided sor that purpose.

The Nature.
Endive and Succorie are cold and dry in the second degree, and withal
somewhat binding: and because they be something bitter, they do also cleanse
and open.

Garden Endive is colder, and not so dry or clensing, and by reason of these
qualities they are thought to be excellent medicines for a hot liver, as Galen
has written in his 8. book of the compositions of medicines according to the
places affected.

The Virtues.
These herbs when they be green have virtue to cool the hot burning of the
liver, to help the

A syrup made thereof and sugar is very good for the diseases aforesaid.

The distilled water is good in potions, cooling and purging drinks.

The distilled water of Endive, Plantaine, and roses, profits against
excoriations in the conduit

These herbs eaten in sallades or otherwise, especially the white Endive, does
comfort the

The leaves of Succorie bruised are good against inflammation of the eyes, being
outwardly

CHAP. 30. Of wild Succorie.
The first figure was of (...) (...) sativum of (...). The second is (...)
(...). But the true figures of those our Author meant, were under (...). The
first, of (...) (...). The second, (...) Leonis (...); for that is (...) (...).
1 Cichorium syluestre. Wild Succorie.
The first figure was of (...) (...) sativum of (...). The second is (...)
(...). But the true figures of those our Author meant, were under (...). The
first, of (...) (...). The second, (...) Leonis (...); for that is (...) (...).
2 Cichorium luteum. Yellow Succorie.


The Kinds.
IN like manner as there be sundry sorts of (...) and Endiues, so is there
wild kinds of either of them.

The Description.
1 Wild Succorie has long leaves; somewhat snipt about the edges like the
leaves of Sow-thistle, with a stalk growing to the height of two cubits, which
is divided toward the top into many branches. The flowers grow at the top blew
of color: the root is tough, and wooddie, with many strings fastened thereto.

2 Yellow Succorie has long and large leaves, deeply cut about the edges like
those of the Hawkeweed. The stalk is branched into sundry arms, whereon do grow
yellow flours very double, resembling the flowers of Dandelion, or Pisse-abed;
the which being withered, it flies away in down with every blast of wind.

3 Intybum (...). Wild Endive.


3 Wild Endive has long smooth leaves slightly snipt about the edges. The
stalk is brittle and full of milkie juice, as is all the rest of the plant:
the flowers grow at the top, of a blew or sky color: the root is tough and
threddie.

4 Meadow Endive, or Endive with broad leaves, has a thick, tough, and wooddie
root with many strings fastened thereto, from which rise up many broad leaves
spread upon the ground like those of garden Endive, but lesser, and somewhat
rougher, among which rise up many stalks immediately from the root; (...) of
them are divided into sundry branches, whereupon do grow many flowers like
those of the former, but smaller.

The Place.
These plants do grow wild in sundry places in England, upon wild and
untilled barren grounds, especially in chalkie and stony places.

The Time.
They flower from the midst to the end of August.

The Names.
The first of these is Scris Picris of Lobell, or Cichorium syluestre: or
Intybus erratica of Tabernamontanus.

Yellow Succorie is not without cause thought to be Hyosiris, or (as some
copies have it) Hyosciris, of which Pliny in his 20. book and 8. chapter
writes; Hyosiris (says he) is like to Endive, but lesser and rougher: it is
called of Lobelius, Hedypnois: the rest of the names set forth in their seueall
titles shall be sufficient for this time.

The Temperature.
They agree in temperature with the garden Succorie, or Endive.

The Virtues.
The leaves of these wild herbs are boiled in pottage or brothes, for sick,
and feeble persons

They are judged to have the same virtues with those of the garden, if not of
more force in working.

CHAP. 31. Of Gum Succorie.
The Description.
1 GVmme Succorie with blew flowers has a thick and tough root, with some
strings annexed thereto, full of a milkie juice, as is all the rest of the
plant, the flowers excepted. The leaves are great and long, in shape like to
those of garden Succorie, but deeplier cut or iagged, somewhat after the manner
of wild Rocket: among which rise tender stalks very easy to be broken,
branched toward the top in two or sometimes three branches, bearing very
pleasant flowers of an azure color or deep blew; which being past, the seed
flies away in down with the wind.

1 Chondrilla coerulea. Blew Gum Succorie.
2 Chondrilla coerulea latifolia, Robinus Gum Succory.


2 Gum Succorie with broad leaves, which I have named Robinus Gum Succorie (for
that he was the first that made any mention of a second kind, which he sent me
as a great dainty, as indeed I confess it) in roots is like the former: the
leaves be greater, not unlike to those of Endive, but cut more deeply even to
the middle rib: the stalks grow to the height of two foot: the flowers
likewise are of an azure color, but sprinkled over as it were with silver
sand; which adds unto the flower great grace and beauty.

3 Yellow gum Succorie has long leaves like in form and division of the cut
leaves to those of wild Succorie, but lesser, covered all over with a hoarie
down. The stalk is two foot high, white and downie also, divided into sundry
branches, whereupon do grow torn flowers like those of Succorie, but in
color yellow, which are turned into down that is carried away with the wind.
The root is long, and of a mean thickness, from which, as from all the rest
of the plant, does issue forth a milky juice, which being dried is of a
yellowish red, sharp, or biting the tongue. There is found upon the branches
hereof a gum, as Dioscorides says, which is used at this day in physic in
the Isle Lemnos, as Bellonius witnesses.

4 Spanish Gum Succorie has many leaves spread upon the ground, in shape like
those of Groundsell, but much more divided, and not so thick nor fat: amongst
which rise up branched stalks set with leaves like those of Stoebe
salamanticaminor, or Siluer-weed, where of this is a kind. The flowers grow at
the top, of an ouerworne purple color, which seldom show themselves abroad
blown: The seed is like that of Carthamus in shape, but black and shining.

The figure of the third was of the same plant as the (...), and was (...) of
(...). The fourth was of (...) (...) (...) (...) of (...) (...) you (...) find
in the tenth place in the (...) and (...) Chapter.
3 Chondrilla lutea. Yellow Gum Succorie.
The figure of the third was of the same plant as the (...), and was (...) of
(...). The fourth was of (...) (...) (...) (...) of (...) (...) you (...) find
in the tenth place in the (...) and (...) Chapter.
4 Chondrilla Hispanica. Spanish Gum Succorie.


5 Rushy Gum Succorie has a tough and hard root, with a few short threads
fastened thereto; from the which rise up a few iagged leaves like those of
Succorie, but much more divided: The stalk grows up to the height of two
foot, tough and limmer like unto rushes, whereon are set many narrow leaves.
The flowers be yellow, single, and small; which being faded do fly away with
the wind: the whole plant having milky juice like unto the other of his kind.

There is another sort of this plant to be found in some places of this
kingdom, and it is mentioned by Bauhinus under the name of Chondrilla viscosa
humilis.

6 Sea Gum Succorie has many knobby or tuberous roots full of juice, of a
whitish purple color, with long strings fastened to them; from which
immediately rise up a few small thin leaves fashioned like those of Succory,
narrower below, and somewhat larger toward their ends; among which spring up
small tender stalks, naked, smooth, hollow, round, of some foot high, or
thereabout: each of these stalks have one flower, in shape like that of the
Dandelion, but lesser, The whole plant is whitish or hoary, as are many of the
sea plants.

7 Swines Succorie has white small and tender roots, from the which rise many
indented leaves like those of Dandelion, but much less, spread or laid flat
upon the ground; from the midst whereof rise up small soft and tender stalks,
bearing at the top double yellow flowers like those of Dandelion or Pisse-abed,
but smaller: the seed with the downy tuft flies away with the wind.

8 The male Swines Succorie has a long and slender root, with some few threads
or strings fastened thereto; from which spring up small tender leaves about the
bigness of those of Dasies, spread upon the ground, cut or snipt about the
edges confusedly, of an ouerworne color, full of a milky juice: among which
rise up diverse small tender naked stalks, bearing at the top of every stalk
one flower and no more, of a faint yellow color, and something double: which
being ripe,

5 Chondrilla (...). Rushy Gum Succorie.
6 Chondrilla marina Lobelij. Sea Gum Succorie.
7 (...), Porcellia. Swines Succorie.
8 Hyoseris mascula. Male Swines Succorie.
do turn into down that is carried away with the wind: the seed likewise
cleaves unto the said down, and is also carried away with the wind. The
whole plant perishes when it has perfected his seed, and recouereth it self
again by the falling thereof.

9 Cichorium verracarium. Wart-Succorie.


9 I think it expedient in this place to deliver unto you the history of the
Cichorium (...), or Zacintha of (...); of which our Author makes mention in
his Names and Virtues, although he neither gave figure, nor the least
description thereof. This Wart-Succory (for so I will call it) has leaves
almost like Endive, green, with pretty deep gashes on their sides; the
stalks are much crested, and at the top divided into many branches; between
which, and at their sides grow many short stalks with yellow flowers like
those of Succorie, but that these turn not into Down, but into cornered and
hard heads, most commonly divided into eight cells or parts, wherein the seed is
contained.

The Place.
These plants are found only in gardens in this country; the seventh and eighth
excepted, which (...) may be sound to grow in untilled places, upon ditches
banks and the borders of fields, or the like.

The Time.
They do flower from May to the end of August.

The Names.
Gum Succorie has been called of the Grecians, (...) of the Latins, (...),
and (...): Dioscorides and Pliny call it Cichorion, and (...), by reason of
some likeness they have with Succorie, especially the two first, which have
blew flowers as those of the Succories. Lobelius makes Cicherea verrucaria to
be Zacintha of (...).

Names in particular.
1 This is called Chondrilla coerulea Belgarum, of Lobel: Apate, of
Daleschampius.

2 Condrilla 2. of Matthiolus: Chondrilla (...) coerulea, of Tabernamontanus.

3 Chondrilla prior Discoridis, of (...) and Lobel.

4 Chondrilla rara purpurea, etc. of Lobel: Chondrilla Hispanica Narbonensis,
of Tabern. Seneciocarduus Apulus, of (...).

5 Chondrilla prima Dioscoridis, of Columna and Bauhinus: Viminea, viscosa, of
Lobel and Clusius.

6 Chondrilla altera Dioscoridis, of Columna: some think it to be (...) of
Theophrastus: Lobell calls it, Chondrilla pusilla marina lutea bullosa.

7 Hypochaeris, porcellia, of Tabernamontanus.

8 Hieracium minimum 9. of Clusius: Hyoseris latifolia, of (...). The two last
should have bin put among the Hieracia.

9 Cichorium verrucarium, and Zacinthus of Matthiolus and Clusius.

The Nature and Virtues.
These kinds of gum Succoric are like in temperature to the common Succory, but
drier.

The root and leaves tempered with honey, and made into Trochiskes, or little
flat cakes, with niter

The gum which is gathered from the branches, whereof it took his name, lays
down the Bellonius observes.

The gum poudered with myrrh, and put into a linen cloth, and a pessarie made
thereof like a

The seeds of Zazintha beat to powder, and given in the decreasing of the
Moon to the quantity Ioachimus Camerarius of Noremberg a famous city in
Germany. And Matthiolus affirms that he has known some helped of warts, by
once eating the leaves hereof in a Sallade.

CHAP. 32. Of Dandelion.
The Description.
1 THe herb which is commonly called Dandelion does send forth from the root
long leaves deeply cut and gashed in the edges like those of wild Succorie,
but smoother: upon every stalk stands a flower greater than that of
Succorie, but double, and thick set together, of color yellow, and sweet in
smell, which is turned into a round downie blowball, that is carried away with
the wind. The root is long, slender, and full of milkie juice when any part of
it is broken, as is the Endive or Succorie, but bitterer in taste than Succorie.

There are diverse varieties of this plant, consisting in the largeness,
smallness, deepenesse, or shallowness of the divisions of the leaf, as also
in the smoothness and roughness thereof.

1 Dens (...). Dandelion.
3 Dens Leonis bulbosus. Knottie rooted Dandelion.


2 There is also another kind of Succorie which may be referred heereunto,
whose leaves are long, cut like those of broad leafed Succorie: the stalks
(...) (...) unlike, being divided into branches as those of Dandelion, but
lesser, which also vanishes into down when the seed is ripe, having a long
and white root.

3 There is another Dens Lconis, or Dandelion, which has many knotty, and
tuberous roots like those of the Asphodil; the leaves are not so deeply cut in
as those of the common Dandelion, but larger, and somewhat more hairy: the
flowers are also larger, and of a paler yellow, which fly away in such down
as the ordinary.

The Place.
They are found often in meadows near unto water ditches, as also in gardens
and high ways much trodden.

The Time.
They flower most times in the year, especially if the winter be not extreme
cold.

The Names.
These plants belong to the Succory which Theophrastus, and Pliny call Aphaca,
or Aphace Leonardus: Fuchsius thinks that Dandelion is Hedypnois Plinij, of
which he writes in his 20. book, and eighth chapter, affirming it to be a
wild kind of broad leafed Succorie, and that Dandelion is Taraxacon: but
Taraxacon, as Auicen teaches in his 692. chapter, is garden Endive, as Serapio
mentions in his 143. chapter; who citing Paulus for a witness concerning the
faculties, sets down these words which Paulus writes of Endive and
Succorie. Diverse of the later Physicians do also call it Dens Leonis, or
Dandelion: it is called in high Dutch, (...): in Low Dutch, (...): in French,
Pissenlit ou couronne de prestre, or Dent de lion: in English, Dandelion: and
of diverse, Pisseabed. The first is also called of some, and in shops Taraxacon,
Caput monach, Rostrum porcinum, and Vrinaria. The other is Dens (...)
Monspeliensium of (...), and Cichoreum Constant inopolitanum, of (...).

The Temperature and Virtues.
Dandelion is like in temperature to Succorie, that is to say, to wild Endive.
It is cold, but it dries more, and does withal cleanse, and open by reason of
the bitterness which it has joined The (...) which was in the 2 place was of
the (...). (...), where you may (...) it, but to what plant the description may
be reserred, I cannot yet determine,


CHAP. 20. Of Sow-thistle.
1 Sonchus asper. Prickly Sow-thistle.
2 Sonchus asperior. The more (...) Sow-thistle.


The Kinds.
THere be two chief kinds of Sow-thistles; one tenderer and softer; the other
more pricking and wilder: but of these there be sundry sorts more found by the
diligence of the later Writers; all which shall be comprehended in this
chapter, and every one be distinguished with a several description.

The Description.
1 THe prickly Sow-thistle has long broad leaves cut very little in, but full
of small prickles round about the edges something hard and sharp, with a rough
and hollow stalk: the flowers stand on the tops of the branches, consisting of
many small leaves, single, and yellow of color; and when the seed is ripe it
turns into down, and is carried away with the wind. The whole plant is full
of a white milky juice.

2 There is another kind of this, whose leaves are sometimes prettily deep
cut in like as those of the ordinary Sow-thistle; but the stalks are commonly
higher than those of the last described, and the leaves more rough and prickly;
but in other respects not differing from (...) of this kind. It is also
sometimes to be found with the leaves less divided.

3 Sonchus Laeuis. Hares Lettuce.
4 Sonchus laeuis latifolius. Broad leaued Sow-thistle.


3 The stalk of Hares Lettuce, or smooth-Thistle is oftentimes a cub it high,
edged and hollow, of a pale color, and sometimes reddish: the leaves be
green, broad, set round about with deep cuts or gashes, smooth, and without
prickles. The flowers stand at the top of the branches, yellow of color, which
are carried away with the wind when the seed is ripe. This is sometimes found
with whitish, and with snow-white flowers, but yet seldom: whence our Author
made two kinds more, which were the fourth and fifth; calling the one, The
white floured Sowthistle; and the other, The snow-white Sow-thistle. Both these
I have omitted as impertinent, and give you others in their stead.

4 Broad leaued Sow-thistle has a long thick and milky root, as is all the
rest of the Plant, with many strings or fibers; from the which comes forth a
hollow stalk branched or divided into sundry sections. The leaves be great,
smooth, sharp pointed, and green of color: the flowers be white, in shape
like the (...). The flowers of this are for the most part yellow like as the
former.

5 Wall Sow-thistle has a fibrous woody root, from which rises up a round
stalk not crested: the leaves are much like to those of the other
Sow-thistles, broad at the setting on, then narrower, and after much broader,
and sharp pointed, so that the end of the leaf much resembles the shape of an
iuy leaf; these leaves are very tender, and of somewhat a whitish color on
the under side: the top of the stalk is divided into many small branches,
which bear little yellow flowers that fly away in down.

6 This has longish narrow leaves soft and whitish, unequally divided about
the edges. The stalks grow some foot high, having few branches, and those set
with few leaves, broad at their setting on, and ending in a sharp point: the
flowers are pretty large like to the great Hawk-weed, and fly away in down:
the root is long, white, and lasting. It flowers most part of Summer; and in
Tuscany, where it plentifully grows, it is much (...) in sallets, with oil
and vinegar, it having a sweetish and somewhat astringent taste.

5 Sonchus laeuis muralis. Wall (or Iuy-leaued) Sow-thistle.
6 Sonchus laeuis angustifolius. Narrow leaued Sow-thistle.


7 This blew floured Sow-thistle is the greatest of all the rest of the kinds,
somewhat resembling the last described in leaves; but those of this are
somewhat rough or hairy on the under side: the flowers are in shape like those
of the ordinary Sow-thistle, but of a fair blew color; which fading, fly
away in Down that carries with it a small ash-colored seed. The whole plant
yields milk as all the rest do.

8 Tree Sow-thistle has a very great thick and hard root set with a few hairy
threads; from which arises a strong and great stalk of a woody substance, set
with long leaves not unlike to (...), but more deeply cut in about the edges,
and not so rough: upon which do grow fair double yellow flowers, which turn
into Down, and are carried away with the wind. The whole plant is possessed with
such a milky juice as are the tender and hearby Sow-thistles; which certainly
(...) it to be a kind thereof: otherwise it might be referred to the
Hawke-weeds, whereunto in face and show it is like. This has a running root,
and the heads and tops of the stalks are very rough and hairy.

7 Sonchus slore (...). Blew-floured Sow-thistle.
8 Sonchus Arborescens. Tree Sow-thistle.
9 Sonchus arborescens alter. The other Tree Sow-thistle.
10 Sonchus syluaticus. Wood Sow-thistle.


9 This other Tree Sow-thistle grows to a man's height or more, having a firm
crested stalk, smooth, without any prickles, and set with many (...)
incompassing the stalk at their setting on, and afterward cut in with four,
or sometimes with two gashes only: the upper leaves are not divided at all: the
color of these leaves is green on the upper side, and grayish underneath: the
top of the stalk is hairy, and divided into many branches, which bear the
flowers in an equal height, as it were in an vmbell: the flowers are not
great, considering the largeness of the plant, but usually as big as those of
the common Sow-thistle, and yellow, having a hairy head or cap: the seed is
crested, longish, and ash-colored, and flies away with the down: the root is
thick, whitish, having many fibers, putting out new shoots, and spreading
every year. (...) makes this all one with the other, according to (...) his
description: but in my opinion there is some difference between them, which
chiefly consists, in that the former has larger and fewer flowers; the plant
also not growing to so great a height.

10 This plant (whose figure our Author formerly gave, page 148. under the
title of Erysimum sytuestre) has long knotty creeping roots, from whence
arises a round slender stalk some two foot high, (...) at first with little
leaves, which grow bigger and bigger as they come nearer the middle of the
stalk, being pretty broad at their setting on, then somewhat narrower, and so
broader again, and sharp pointed, being of the color of the Wall (or
Iuy-leaued) Sow-Thistle. The top is divided into many small branches, which end
in small scaly heads like those of the wild Lettuce, containing flowers
consisting of four bluish purple leaves, turned back and snipped at their
ends; there are also some threads in the middle of the flower, which turning into
Down, carry away with them the seed, which is small, and of an Ash Color.
Bauhine makes a bigger and a lesser of these, distinguishing between that of
Clusius (whose figure I here give you) and that of Columna; yet Fabius Columna
himself could find no difference, but that Clusius his plant had five leaves
in the flower, and his but four: which indeed Clusius in his description
affirms; yet his figure (as you may see) expresses but four: adding, That the
root is not well expressed; which notwithstanding Clusius describes according
to Columna's expression.

The Place.
The first sour grow wild in pastures, meadows, woods, and marshes near the
sea, and among pot-herbes.

The fifth grows upon walls, and in woody mountainous places.

The Tree Sow-thist'e grows amongst corn in waterie places.

The sixth, seventh and tenth are strangers in England.

The Time.
They flower in June, July, August, and sometimes later.

The Names.
Sow-thistle is called in Greek, (...): in Latin, Sonchus: of diverse,
Cicerbitae, lactucella, and Lacterones: Apuleius calls it Lactuca Leporina,
or Hares-thistle: of some, Brassica Leporina, or Hares Colewort. The English
names are sufficiently touched in their several titles: In Dutch it is called
Hasen Latouwe: the French, Palace delieure.

Names in particular.
1 This is Sonchus asper major of Cordus: Sonchus tenerior aculeis asperior of
Lobel: Sonchus 3. asperior of Dodonaeus.

2 This is Sonchus asper, of Matthiolus, Fuchsius, and others.

3 This, Matthiolus, Dodonaeus, Lobel, and others call Sonchus laeuis: Tragus
calls it Intybus (...) tertia.

4 This Tabernamontanus only gives, under the title as you have it here.

5 Matthiolus styles this, Sonchus laeuis (...): Caesalpinus calls it Lactuca
murorum: and Tabern. Sonchus syluaticus quartus: Lobel, Sonchus alter folio
sinuato hederaceo.

6 Lobel calls this, Sonchus laeuis Matthioli: it is Terracrepulus of (...):
and Crepis of Daleschampius.

7 Clusius and Camerarius give us this under the title of Sonchus coeruleus.

8 Only Tabern. has this figure, under the title our Author gives it: (...)
puts it amongst the Hieracia, calling it Hieracium arborescens palustre.

9 This Bauhine also makes an Hieracium, and would persuade us that Clusius his
description belongs to the last mentioned, and the figure to this: to which
opinion (...) cannot consent. Clusius gives it under the name of Sonchus 3
laeuis (...) (...).

10 This Clusius gives under the name of Sonchus laeuior Pannonicus 4. flore
purp. Tabern. calls it Libanotis Theophrasti sterilis: Columna has it by the
name of (...) (...) (...) (...) Cordus, Gesner, Thalius, and (...) refer it to
the Lactucae syluestres: the last of them (...) it, (...) (...)
purpuro-coerulea.

The Temperature.
The Sow-thistles, as Galen writes, are of a mixed temperature; for they
consist of a watery and earthy substance, cold, and likewise binding.

The Virtues.
Whilst they are yet young and tender they are eaten as other pot-herbes are;
but whether they

Sow-thistle given in broth takes away the gnawings of the stomach proceeding
of an hot

The juice of these herbs does cool and temper the heat of the fundament and
privy parts.

CHAP. 34. Of Hawke-weed.
The Kinds.
HAwke-weed is also a kind of Succorie; of which Dioscorides makes two sorts,
and the later Writers more: the which shall be described in this chapter
following, where they shall be distinguished as well with several titles as
sundry descriptions.

1 Hieracium majus Dioscoridis. Great Hawke-weed
2 Hieracium minus, sieve Leporinum. Small Hares Hawk-weed, or Yellow Diuels-bit.


The Description.
2 THe great Hawke-weed has large and long leaves spread upon the ground, in
shape like those of the Sow-thistle: the stalk grows to the height of two
cubits, branched into sundry arms or divisions, hollow within as the young
Kexe, reddish of color; whereupon do grow yellow flowers thick and double,
which turn into Down that flies away with the wind when the seed is ripe.
The root is thick, tough and threddy.

2 The small Hawke-weed, which of most writers has been taken for yellow
Diuels-bit, has long leaves (...) cut about the edges, with some sharp
roughness thereon like unto Sow-thistle. The stalks and flowers are like the
former: the root is compact of many small strings, with a small knob, or as it
were the stumpe of an old root in the middle of those strings, cut or bitten
off; whereupon it took his name Devils bit.

3 Black Hawke-weed has very many long iagged leaves, not much unlike to
those of Bucks horn, spread flat and (...) abroad upon the ground, which the
picture cannot express as is requisite, in so little room: among which rise
up many stalks slender and weak, the flowers growing at the top yellow and
very double: it has also a threddy root.

Our Author formerly gave three figures, and so many descriptions of this small
(...), which I have contracted into two; for the onelydifference that I can
find is, that the one has the root as it were bitten off, with the leaves
less cut in; the other has a root (...) (...), and fibrous as the former; the
leaves also in this are much more finely and deep cut in: in other respects
there is no difference.

3 Hieracium nigrum. Black Hawke-weed.
4 Hieracium (...). Succory Hawke-weed.


4 Succory Hawke-weed has many long and large leaves spread upon the ground,
deeply cut on both sides almost to the middle rib; from which rise up small
stalks and flowers like those of the less Dandelion, but lesser. The root
consists of many small threddy strings.

5 Endive Hawke-weed has many broad leaves, indented about the edges very like
unto Garden Endive, but narrower; among which rise up stalks a foot or more
high, slender, hairy, and brittle: the flowers are yellow, and grow at the top
double, and thick set in a scaly husk like the Knapweed or Iacea, having great
thick and threddy roots. This has a stalk sometimes more, and otherwhiles
less rough, with the leaves sometimes more cut in, more long and narrow, and
again otherwhiles more short and broad.

6 Long rooted Hawk-weed has many broad leaves spread upon the ground,
slightly and confusedly indented about the edges, with somewhat a bluntish
point; among which leaves spring up strong and tough stalks a foot and half
high, set on the top with fair double yellow flowers much like unto a
Pisse-abed. The root is very long, white and tough.

7 Sharp Hawk-weed has leaves like those of Languebeefe or Ox-tongue, but
much narrower, sharp about the edges, and rough in the middle: the stalks be
long and slender; set with the like leaves, butlesser: the flowers grow at the
top, double and yellow: the root is tough and threddy.

5 Hieracium intybaceum. Endiues Hawke-weed.
6 Hieracium longius (...). Long rooted Hawke-weed.
7 Hieracium (...). Sharp Hawke-weed.
8 Hieracium falcatum Lobelij. Crooked Hawke-weed.


8 Crooked or falked Hawkeweed has leaves like unto the garden Succory, yet
much smaller, and less divided, slightly indented on both sides, with tender,
weak, and crooked stalks; whereupon do grow flowers like those of Lampsana,
of a black, or pale yellow color, and the root small and threddy. The seeds
are long, and falcated, or crooked, so that they somewhat resemble the foot or
claws of a bird, and from these seeds the plant has this Epithet, Falcatum,
or crooked in manner of a Sicle or Sith.

9 This in leaves is not much unlike the last described, but that they are
somewhat broader, and less cut in, having little or no bitterness nor
milkinesse, the stalks are some foot high commonly bending, or falling upon
the ground; the flowers are small and yellow, and seem to grow out of the
midst of the seed, whenas indeed they grow at the top of them, the rest being
but an empty husk which is falcated like that of the last described. This
figure we give you was taken before the flowers were blown, so that by that
means the falcated or crooked seed vessels are not expressed in this, but you
may see there manner of growing by the former.

9 Hieracium falcatum alterum. The other crooked Hawkeweed.
10 Hieracium Latifolium montanum. Broad leaued mountain Hawkeweed.


10 The broad leaued (...) Hawkeweed has broad, long, smooth leaves, deeply
(...) toward the stalk, resembling the leaves of the greatest Sowthistle. The
stalk is (...), and spungious, full of a milkie juice, as is the rest of the
plant, as also all the other of his (...): the flowers grow at the top of the
stalks, double and yellow.

11 The narrow leaued mountain Hawkeweed has leaves like those of the (...)
described, but narrower. The stalks be fat, hollow, and full of milk: the
flowers grow at the (...) double, and yellow of color. The root is small and
threddy.

There is a small mountain Hawkeweed having leaves like unto the former, but
more deeply cut about the edges, and sharper pointed; the stalks are tender
and weak; the flowers be double and yellow like those of Pilosella, or great
Mouse-care; the root is small and threddy.

The Place.
These kinds of herbs do grow in vntoiled places near unto the borders of
(...) fields, in meadows, highways, wood, mountains, and hilly places, and
near to the brinks of ditches. The two falcated Hawkeweeds grow only in some
few gardens.

11 Hieracium montanum Latifolium minus. The lesser broad leaued mountain
Hawke-weed.


The Time.
They flower for the most part all the summer long, some sooner, and others
later.

The Names in general.
These plants are all contained under the name of Hieracium: which is called in
Greek also (...): diverse name it in Latin, (...), which is termed in French,
Cichoree iaulne: in English, Hawkeweed. These herbs took there name from a
Hawke, which is called in Latin (...), and in Greek, (...) for they are
reported to clear their sight by conueying the juice hereof into their eyes.
(...) calls it Porcellia for it is numbered among the Succories, they are
called also Lampuca.

Yellow Hawkeweed is called of some (...) diaboli, or yellow Devils bit, for
that the root does very well resemble the bitten or cropped root of the common
Devils bit, being like Scabious.

The Names in particular.
1 Matthiolus, Fuchsius, Dodonaeus, and others call this Hieracium (...).

2 3 These are varieties of the same plant, the first of them being called by
Fuchsius, (...), and Matthiolus, Hieracium minus, Lobell calls it, Hieracium
minus praemorsa radice. That sort of this with more cut leaves is by
Tabernamontanus (...), Hieracium nigrum.

4 Lobell calls this Hieracium folijs and facie Chondrillae; Bauhinus makes
this to differ from (...) which our Author gave in this 4. place out of Tabern.
for he terms this Hieracium (...) (...) hirsutum, and the other, (...)
Chondrillae folio Glabrum; the one smooth leaued, the other rough; yet that
which grows frequently with us, and is very well represented by this figure,
has smooth leaves, as he also observed it to have in Italy and about
Mountpelier in France.

5 This is Hieracium alterum grandius, and Hieracium montanum angustifolium
primum of (...).

6 Lobell calls this from the length of the root (though sometimes it be not so
long) Hieracium Longius radicatum; as also Taber. Hieracium macrorhizon, it is
thought to be the Apargia of (...), by Daleschampius in the Hist. Lugd. page
562. but the figure there that bears the title is of Huracium minus.

7 Tabernamontanus first gave this under the name of Hieracium intybaccum
asperum: Bauhine refers it to the wild yellow Succories, and calls it
Cichoreum montanum angustifolium hirsutie asperum.

8 This Lobell calls Hieracium Narbonense falcata siliqua.

9 He calls this Hieracium facie Hedypnois: and Caesalpinus terms this
Rhagadiolus; and the last mentioned, Rhagadiolus alter.

10 This by Tabernamontanus is called Hieracium montanum majus Latifolium; The
figure of this was given by our Author, chap. 30. under the title of Chondrilla
Hispanica.

11 Tabernamontanus also styles this Hieracium montanum Latifolium minus.

The Nature.
The kinds of Hawkeweed are cold and dr ie, and somewhat binding.

The Virtues.
They are in virtue and operation like to Sonchus or Sowthistle, and being used
after the same

They be good for the eie-sight, if the juice of them be dropped into the eyes,
especially that

Therefore as Dioscorides writes, it is good for an hot stomach, and for
inflammations if it be

The herb and root being stamped and applied, is a remedy for those that be
stung of the scorpion;

CHAP. 35. Of Clusius Hawkeweed.
The Kinds.
THere be likewise other sorts of Hawkeweeds, which Carolus Clusius has set
forth in his Pannonicke observations, the which likewise require a particular
chapter, for that they do differ in form very notably.

1 Hieracium primum latifolium Clusij. The first Hawkeweed of Clusius.
2 Hieracium 5. Clusij. Clusius his 5. kind of Hawkeweed.


The Description.
1 THe first of Clusius his Hawkeweeds have great broad leaves spread upon the
ground, somewhat hairie about the edges, oftentimes a little iagged, also soft
as is the leaf of Mullen, or Higtaper, and sometimes dashed here and there with
some black spots, in shape like the garden Endive, full of a milkie juice:
among which rises up a thick hollow stalk of a cubit high, dividing it self
at the top into two or three branches, whereupon do grow sweet smelling
flowers not unlike to those of yellow Succorie, set or placed in a black
hoarie and woollie cup or husk, of a pale bleake yellow color, which turns
into a downie blowball that is carried away with the wind: the root enters
deeply into the ground, of the bigness of a finger, full of milk, and
covered with a thick black bark.

2 The second sort of great Hawkeweed according to my computation, and the 5.
of Clusius, has leaves like the former, that is to say soft, and hoarie, and
as it were covered with a kind of white woollinesse or hairinesse, bitter in
taste, of an inche broad. The stalk is a foot high, at the top whereof does
grow one yellow flower like that of the great Hawkeweed, which is carried away
with the wind when the seed is ripe. The root is black and full of milkie
juice, and has certain white strings annexed thereto.

3 This kind of Hawkeweed has black roots a finger thick, full of milkie
juice, deeply thrust into the ground, with some small fibers belonging
thereto: from which come up many long leaves half an inch or more broad,
covered with a soft down or hairinesse, of an ouerworne (...) color: and
amongst the leaves come up naked and hard stalks, whereupon do grow yellow
flowers set in a woollie cup or chalice, which is turned into down, and carried
away with his seed by the wind.

4 The fourth Hawkeweed has a thick root above a finger long, blackish,
creeping upon the top of the ground, and putting out some fibers, and it is
divided into some heads, each whereof at the top of the earth puts out some
six or seven longish leaves some half an inche broad, and somewhat hoarie,
hairie, and soft as are the others precedent, and these leaves are snipt about
the edges, but the deepest gashes are nearest the stalks, where they are cut
in even to the middle rib, which is strong and large. The stalk is smooth,
naked, and somewhat high: the flowers be yellow and double as the other.

3 Hieracium 6. Clusij. Clusius his 6. Hawkeweed.
4 Hieracium 7. Clusij. Clusius his 7. Hawkeweed.


5 The same Author has also set forth another Hieracium, under the name of
Hieracium parvum Creticum, which he thus describes; this is an elegant little
plant spreading some six, or more leaves upon the top of the ground, being
narrower at that part whereas they adhere to the (...), and broader at the
other end, and cut about the edges, having the middle rib of a purple color;
amongst these rise up two or three little stalks about a foot high, without
knot until you come almost to the top, whereas they are divided into two
little branches, at which place (...) forth leaves much divided; the flowers
grow at the top of a sufficient bigness, considering the magnitude of the
plant, and they consist of many little leaves lying one upon another, on the
upper side wholly white, and on the under side of a flesh color. The root is
single, longish, growing small toward the end, and putting forth stringy
fibers on the sides. Thus much Clusius, who received this figure and
description from his friend Jacques Plateau of Tournay. I conjecture this to be
the same plant that Bauhine has somewhat more accurately figured and described
in his Prod. page 68. under the title of Chondrilla purpurascens foetida: which
plant being an annual, I have seen growing some years since with Mr. Tuggy at
Westminster; and the last Summer with an honest and skillful Apothecarie one
Mr. Nicholas Swayton of Feuersham in Kent: but I must confess I did not
compare it with Clusius; yet now I am of opinion, that both these figures and
descriptions are of one and the same plant. It flowers in July and August, at
the later end of which month the seeds also come to ripeness.

6 This other (not described by Clusius, but by Lobel) has long rough leaves
cut in and toothed like to Dandelion, with naked hairy stalks, bearing at
their tops fair large and very double yellow flowers, which fading fly away in
down. It grows in some meadows.

5 Hieracium parvum Creticum. Small Candy Hawk-weed.
6 Hieracium Dentis leonis folio hirsutum. Dandelion Hawk-weed.


The Place.
These kinds of Hawke-weeds, according to the report of Clusius, do grow in
Hungary and Austria, and in the grassy dry hills, and herby and barren Alpish
mountains, and such like places: notwithstanding if my memory fail me not I
have seen them growing in sundry places in England; which I mean, God
willing, better to observe hereafter, as opportunity shall serve me.

The Time.
He says they flower from May to August, at what time the seed is ripe.

The Names.
The Author himself has not said more than here is set down as touching the
names, so that it shall suffice what has now been said, referring the handling
thereof to a further consideration.

The Nature and Virtues.
I find not any thing at all set down either of their nature or virtues, and
therefore I forbear to say any thing else of them, as a thing not necessary
to write of their faculties upon my own conceit and imagination.

CHAP. 36. Of French or Golden Lung-wort.
1 Pulmonaria Gallica sieve aurea latifolia. Broad-leaued French or golden
Lung-wort.
2 Pulmonaria Gallica sieve aurea (...) Narrow leaued French or golden Lung-wort.


The Description.
1 THis which I here give you in the first place, as also the other two, are of
the kinds of Hawke-weed, or Hieracium; wherefore I thought it most fit to treat
of them in this place, and not to handle them with the Pulmonaria maculosa, or
Sage of Jerusalem: whereas our Author gave the name Pulmonaria Gallorum, and
pointed at the description; but his figure being false, and the description
imperfect, I judged it the best to handle it here next to those plants which
both in shape and qualities it much resembles. This first has a pretty large
yet fibrous and stringy root; from the which arise many longish leaves, hairy,
soft, and unequally divided, and commonly cut in the deepest nearest the
stalk; they are of a dark green color, and they are sometimes broader and
shorter, and otherwhiles narrower and longer (whence Tabernamontanus makes
three sorts of this, yet are they nothing but varieties of this same plant.)
Amongst these leaves grow up one or two naked stalks, commonly having no more
than one leaf apiece, and that about the middle of the stalk; these stalks
are also hairy, and about a cubit high, divided at their tops into sundry
branches, which bear double yellow flowers of an indifferent bigness, which
fading and turning into down, are together with the seed carried away with the
wind. This whole plant is milky like as the other Hawk-weeds.

2 This Plant (though confounded by some with the former) is much different
from the last described; for the root is small and fibrous; the leaves also are
small, of the bigness, and somewhat of the shape (though otherwise indented)
of Dasie leaves, whitish and hoarie; the stalk is not above an handful high,
crested, hoary, and set with many longish narrow leaves; and at the top on
short foot-stalkes it bears four or five flowers of a bright yellow color,
and pretty large, 3 Hieracium hortense latifolium, sieve Pilosella major. Golden
Mouse-eare, or Grimme the Colliar.
considering the smallness of the plant. The flowers, like as others of this
kind, fly away in down, and carry the seeds with them.

3 This plant (which some also have confounded with the first described) has a
root at the top, of a reddish or brownish color, but whitish within the earth,
and on the lower side sending forth whitish fibers: it brings forth in good
and fruitful grounds leaves about a foot long, and two or three inches broad,
of a dark green color, and hairy, little or nothing at all cut in about the
edges; amongst these leaves rises up a stalk some cubit high, round, hollow,
and naked, but that it sometimes has a leaf or two toward the bottom, and
toward the top it puts forth a branch or two. The flowers grow at the top as
it were in an vmbell, and are of the bigness of the ordinary Mouse-eare, and of
an orange color. The seeds are round, and blackish, and are carried away with
the down by the wind. The stalks and cups of the flowers are all set thick
with a blackish down or hairinesse as it were the dust of coals; whence the
women, who keep in it gardens for novelty sake, have named it Grim the Colliar.

The Time.
All these flower in June, July, and August, about the later part of which
month they ripen their seed.

The Place.
1 I received some plants of this from Mr. John Goodyer, who first found it May
27, 1631. in flower; and the 3 of the following May, not yet flouring, in a
copse in Godlemen in Surrey, adjoining to the orchard of the Inn whose sign
is the Antilope.

2 This I had from my kind friend Mr. William Coote, who wrote to me, That he
found them growing on a hill in the Lady Bridget Kingsmills ground, in an old
Roman camp, close by the Decumane port, on the quarter that regards the
West-South-West, upon the skirts of the hill.

3 This is a stranger, and only to be found in some few gardens.

The Names.
1 This was first set forth by Tragus, under the name of Auricula muris major:
and by Tabern. (who gave three figures expressing the several varieties
thereof) by the name of Pulmonaria Gallicasiue aurea: Daleschampius has it
under the name of Corchorus.

2 This was by Lobel (who first set it forth) confounded with the former, as
you may see by the title over the figure in his Observations, page 317. yet his
figure does much differ from that of Tragus, who neither in his figure nor
description allows so much as one leaf upon the stalk; and Tabernamontanus
allows but one, which it seldom wants. Now this by Lobels figure has many
narrow leaves; and by the Description, Aduers. page 253. it is no more than an
handful, or handful and half high: which very well agrees with the plant we
here give you, and by no means with the former, whose naked stalks are at
least a cubit high. So it is manifest that this plant I have described is
different from the former, and is that which Pena and Lobel gave us under the
title of Pulmonaria Gallorum flore Hieracij. Bauchine also confounds this with
the former.

3 Basil Besler in his Hortus Eystettensis has well expressed this plant under
the title of Hieracium latifolium peregrinum Phlomoides: Bauhinus calls it
Hieracium hortense floribus atropurpurascentibus; and says that some call it
Pilosella major: and I judge it to be the Hieracium Germanicum of Fabius
Columna. This also seems rather to be the herb Costa of Camerarius, than the
first described; and I dare almost be bold to affirm it the same: for he says
that it has fat leaves lying flat upon the ground, and as much as he could
discern by the figure, agreed with the Hieracium latifolium of Clusius: to
which indeed in the leaves it is very like, as you may see by the figure which
is in the first place in the foregoing chapter, which very well resembles this
plant, if it had more and smaller flowers.

The Temper and (...).
I judge these to be temperate in quality, and endued with a light astriction.

1 The decoction or the distilled water of this herb taken inwardly, or
outwardly applied,

It also is good against the internal inflammations and hot distempers of the
heart, stomach,

The juice of this herb is with good success dropped into the ears when they
are troubled

Lastly, The water has the same quality as that of Succorie. Tragus.

2 (...) and Lobel affirm this to be commended against whitlowes, and in the
diseases of the

3 This (if it be the Costa of Camerarius) is of singular use in the Pthisis,
that is, the vlceration Came.

CHAP. 37. Of Lettuce.
1 Lactuca (...). Garden Lettuce.
2 Lactuca crispa. Curled Lettuce.


The Kinds.
THere be according to the opinion of the Ancients, of Lettuce two sorts; the
one wild, or of the field; the other tame, or of the Garden: but time, with
the industry of later Writers have found out others both wild and tame, as
also artificial, which I purpose to lay down.

The Description.
1 GArden Lettuce has a long broad leaf, smooth, and of a light green color:
the stalk is round, thick set with leaves full of milky juice, bushed or
branched at the top: whereupon do grow yellowish flowers, which turn into
down that is carried away with the wind. The seed sticks fast unto the
cottony down, and flies away likewise, white of color, and somewhat long:
the root has hanging on it many long tough strings, which being cut or broken,
do yield forth in like manner as does the stalk and leaves, a juice like to
milk. And this is the true description of the natural Lettuce, and not of the
artificial; for by manuring, transplanting, and having a regard to the Moon
and other circumstances, the leaves of the artificial Lettuce are oftentimes
transformed into another shape: for either they are curled, or else so drawn
together, as they seem to be like a Cabbage or headed Colewort, and the leaves
which be within and in the midst are something white, tending to a very light
yellow.

5 Lactuca capitata. Cabbage Lettuce.
6 Lactuca intybacea. Lumbard Lettuce.


2 The curled Lettuce has great and large leaves deeply cut or gashed on both
the sides, not plain or smooth as the former, but intricately curled and cut
into many sections. The flowers are small, of a bleake color, the which do
turn into down, and is carried away with the wind. The seed is like the
former, saving that it changes sometime into blackness, with a root like unto
the former.

3 This small sort of curled Lettuce has many leaves hackt and torn in pieces
very confusedly, and withal curled in such an admirable sort, that every great
leaf seems to be made of many small leaves set upon one middle rib,
resembling a fan of curled feathers used among Gentlewomen: the flowers, roots,
and seeds agree with the former.

4 The Sauoy Lettuce has very large leaves spread upon the ground, at the first
coming up broad, cut or gasht about the edges, crisping or curling lightly
this or that way, not unlike to the leaves of Garden Endive, with stalks,
flowers, and seeds like the former, as well in shape, as yielding that milky
juice wherewith they do all abound.

5 Cabbage Lettuce has many plain and smooth leaves at his first growing up,
which for the most part lie flat still upon the ground: the next that do
appear are those leaves in the midst, which turn themselves together,
embracing each other so closely, that it is formed into that globe or round
head, whereof the simplest is not ignorant. The seed hereof is black, contrary
to all the rest; which may be as it were a rule whereby ye may know the seed of
Cabbage Lettuce from the other sorts.

6 The Lumbard Lettuce has many great leaves spread upon the ground like unto
those of the garden Endive, but lesser. The stalks rise up to the height of
three foot: the flowers be yellowish, which turn into down and fly away with
the wind: the seed is white as snow.

The Place.
Lettuce delights to grow, as Palladius says, in a mannured, fat, moist, and
(...) ground: it must be sown in fair weather in places where there is plenty
of water, as Columella says, and prospers best if it be sown very thin.

The Time.
It is certain, says Palladius, that Lettuce may well be sown at any time of
the year, but especially at every first spring, and so soon as winter is
done, till summer be well nigh spent.

The Names.
Garden Lettuce is called in Latin, Lactuca (...): Galen names it (...): the
Pythagorians (...) some judge it to be Lactuca, a Lactco succo, called of the
milkie (...) which issues forth of the wounded stalks and roots: the
Germans name it (...): the low Duch, (...): the Spaniards, Lechuga, and
Alface: the English, Lettuce: and the French, Laictue. When the leaves of this
kind are curled or crompled, it is named of Pliny, Lactucacrispa: and of
Columella, Lactuca (...): in English, curled or crompled Lettuce.

The Cabbage Lettuce is commonly called Lactuca capitata, and Lactuca sessilis:
Pliny names it Lactuca Laconica: Columella, Lactuca Baetica: Petrus
Crescentius, Lactuca Romana: in English, Cabbage Lettuce, and Loved Lettuce.

There is another fort with reddish leaves, called of Columella, Lactuca
Cypria: in English, red Lettuce.

The Temperature.
Lettuce is a cold and moist pot-herbe, yet not in the extreme degree of cold
or moisture, but altogether moderately; for otherwise it were not to be eaten.

The Virtues.
Lettuce cools the heat of the stomach, called the heart-burning; and
helps it when it is

Lettuce makes a pleasant sallad, being eaten raw with vinegar, oil, and a
little salt: but if it

It is served in these days, and in these countries in the beginning of
supper, and eaten first before Martial testifies to be done in his time,
maruelling why some did use it for a service at the end of supper, in these
verses.

Claudere quae coenas Lactuca solebat anorum,
Dic mihi, cur (...) incohatilla dapes?
Tell me why Lettuce, which our Grandsires last did eat,
Is now of late become, to be the first of meat?
Notwithstanding it may now and then be eaten at both those times to the health
of the body:

The juice which is made in the veins by Lettuce is moist and cold, yet not
ill, nor much in quantity: Galen (...) that it does neither bind the belly
nor loose it, for it has in it no harshnes nor stiptike quality by which the
belly is stayed, neither is there in it any sharp or biting faculty, which
scoureth and provoke to the stool.

But howsoever Galen writes this, and howsoever the same wants these
qualities, yet it is found Martial very well knew, writing in his 11. book of
Epigrams in this manner: Prima tibi dabitur; ventri Lactuca mouendo Vtilis.

Lettuce being outwardly applied mitigateth all inflammations; it is good for
burnings and scaldings, if it be laid thereon with salt before the blisters do
appear, as Pliny writes.

The juice of Lettuce cools and quenches the natural seed if it be too much
used, but procures sleep.

CHAP. 38. Of Wild Lettuce.
The Description.
THere are three sorts of wild Lettuce growing wild here with us in England,
yet I know not any that have mentioned more than two; yet I think all three of
them have been written of, though two of them be confounded together and made
but one (a thing often happening in the history of Plants) and unless I had
seen three distinct ones, I should my self have been of the same opinion.

1 The first and rarest of these has long and broad leaves, not cut in, but
only snipt about the edges, and those leaves are they that are on the lower
part of the stalk almost to the middle thereof: then come leaves (...) thence
to the top, which are deeply divided with large gashes: the stalk if it grow
in good grounds exceeds the height of a man, (for I have seen it grow in a
garden to the height of eight or nine foot) it is large, round, and smooth, and
toward the top divided into many branches which bear yellow flowers somewhat
like to the garden Lettuce, after which also succeed blackish seeds like to
other plants of this kind. The whole plant is full of a clammy milky juice,
which has a very strong and grievous smell of Opium.

1 Lactuca syl. mayor odore Opij. The greater wild Lettuce smelling of Opium.
3 Lactuca sylvestris folijs dissectis. The wild Lettuce with the divided
Leaf.


2 This has broad leaves only cut about the edges, but not altogether so large
as those of the last described: the stalk, which commonly is two cubits or
better high, is also smooth, and divided into many branches, bearing such
flowers and seeds as the last described; and this also has a milky juice of
the same smell as the last described, from which it differs only in the
magnitude, and that this has all the leaves whole, and not some whole and some
divided, as the former.

3 This in stalks, flowers and seeds is like to the last described, but the
leaves are much different, for they are all deeply (...) or cut in like as the
leaves of Succory, or Dandelion. This also is sull of a milky juice, but has
not altogether so strong a sent of Opium as the two former, though it partake
much thereof. The stalk of this is sometimes a little prickly, and so also is
the middle rib upon the backeside of the leaf. All these three have woody
roots which die every year, and so they come up again of the scattered seed.

The Place.
The first of these was found in Hampshire by Mr. Goodyer and the seeds hereof
sent to Mr. Parkinson in whose garden I saw it growing some two years ago.
The other grow plentifully between London and (...) Church, about the ditches
and highway side.

The Time.
They come up in the Spring, and sometimes sooner, and ripen their seed in July
and August.

The Names.
1 I take the first of these to be the Lactuca Sylvestris of Dioscorides and
the Ancients, and that which the Authors of the Adversaria gave us under the
title of (...) (...) (...) (...) folio, Lactucae siore, Opij odore vehementi,
soporisero and (...).

2 This is the (...) of Tragus, page 268. and the Thesion of (...), page 564.
(...) confounds this with the former.

3 This is the Lactuca Sylvestris prior, of Tragus: the Lactuca Sylvestris of
(...), Fuchsius, Dodonaeus, and others: it is the Seris Domestica of Lobell.

The Temper.
These certainly, especially the two first, are cold, and that in the later end
of the third or beginning of the fourth degree (if (...) be cold in the fourth.)

The Virtues.
Some (says Dioscorides) mix the milkie juice hereof with Opium; (for his
(...) is our Opium.) in the making thereof.

He also says, that the juice hereof drunk in Oxycrate in the quantity of 2
obuli, (which make Argemon in Greek, as also the mystines or darkness of
sight.

Also beaten and applied with woman's milk it is good against burns and
scaldes.

Lastly, it procures sleep, asswages pain, moves the courses in women, and is
drunk against

The seed taken in drink, like as the Garden Lettuce, hinders generation of
seed and venereous

CHAP. 39. Of Lambs Lettuce, or Corn sallad.
1 Lactuca Agnina. Lambs Lettuce.
2 Lactuca Agnina latifolia. Corn sallade.


The Description.
1 THe plant which is commonly called Olus album, or the white pot-herbe (which
of some has been set out for a kind of Valerian, but improperly, for that it
does very notably resemble the Lettuce, as well in form, as in meat to be
eaten, which property is not to be found in Valerian, and therefore by reason
and authority I place it as a kind of Lettuce) has many slender weak
stalks trailing upon the ground, with certain edges a (...) high when it
grows in most fertile ground; otherwise a hand or two high, with sundry joints
or knees: out of every one whereof grow a couple of leaves narrow and long, not
unlike to Lettuce at the first coming up, as well in tenderness as taste in
eating; and on the top of the stalks stand upon a broad tuft as it were
certain white flowers that be marvelous little, which can scarsely be known
to be flowers, saving that they grow many together like a tuft or vmbel: it
has in stead of roots a few slender threads like unto hairs.

2 The other kind of Lettuce, which Dodonaeus in his last edition sets forth
under the name of Album olus: the Low Country men call it (...), and use it
for their meat called Wermose; with us, Loblollie. This plant has small long
leaves a finger broad, of a pale green color; among which shoots up a small
cornered and slender stem half a foot high, ioynted with two or three joints
or knees, out of which proceed two leaves longer than the first, bearing at the
top of the branches tufts of very small white flowers closely compact together,
with a root like the former.

Both these are of one plant, differing in the bigness and broadnesse of the
leaf and the whole plant besides.

The Place.
These herbs grow wild in the corn fields; and since it has grown in use
among the French and Dutch strangers in England, it has been sown in gardens
as a sallad herb.

The Time.
They are found green almost all Winter and Summer.

The Names.
The Dutchmen do call it (...); that is to say, Album olus: of some it is
called (...): the French term it Sallade de Chanoine it may be called in
Greek, (...): in English, The White Pot-herbe; but commonly, Corn sallad.

The Temperature and Virtues.
This herb is cold and something moist, and not unlike in faculty and
temperature to the garden Lettuce; in stead whereof, in Winter and in the first
months of the Spring it serves for a sallad herb, and is with pleasure eaten
with vinegar, salt and oil, as other sallads be, among which it is none of the
worst.

CHAP. 40. Of Coleworts.
The Kinds.
DIoscorides makes two kinds of Coleworts; the tame and the wild: but
Theophrastus makes more kinds hereof; the (...) or curled Cole, the smooth
Cole, and the wild Cole. Cato imitating Theophrastus, sets down also three
Coleworts: the first he describes to be smooth, great, broad leaued, with a
big stalk; the second ruffed; the third with little stalks, tender, and very
much biting. The same distinction also Pliny makes, in his twentieth book,
and ninth chapter; where he says, That the most ancient Romans have divided
it into three kinds; the first roughed, the second smooth, and the third which
is properly called (...), or Colewort. And in his nineteenth book he has also
added to these, other more kinds; that is to say, Tritianum, Cumanum,
Pompeianum, Brutianum, Sabellium, and Lacuturrium.

The Herbarists of our time have likewise observed many sorts, differing either
in color or else in form; other headed with the leaves drawn together, most
of them white, some of a deep green, some smooth leaued, and others curled or
ruffed; differing likewise in their stalks, as shall be expressed in their
several descriptions.

1 (...) vulgaris (...). Garden Colewort.
2 Brassica (...) crispa. Curled Garden Cole.
3 Brassica rubra. Red Colewort.
4 Brassica capitata alba. White Cabbage Cole.


The Description.
1 THe Garden Colewort has many great broad leaves of a deep black green
color, mixed with ribs and lines of reddish and white colors: the stalk
grows out of the midst from among the leaves, branched with sundry arms
bearing at the top little yellow flowers: and after they be past, there do
succeed long cods full of round seed like those of the Turnep, but smaller,
with a woody root having many strings or threads fastened thereto.

2 There is another lesser sort than the former, with many deep cuts on both
sides even to the midst of the rib, and very much curled and roughed in the
edges; in other things it differs not.

3 The red kind of Colewort is likewise a Colewort of the garden, and
differs from the common in the color of his leaves, which tend unto
redness; otherwise very like.

4 There is also found a certain kind hereof with the leaves wrapped together
into a round head or globe, whose head is white of color, especially toward
Winter when it is ripe. The root is hard, and the stalks of a woody
substance. This is the great ordinary Cabbage known every where, and as
commonly eaten all over this kingdom.

5 Brassica capitata rubra. Red Cabbage Cole.
6 Brassica patula Open Cabbage Cole.


5 There is another sort of Cabbage or loved Colewort which has his leaves
wrapped together into a round head or globe, yet lesser than that of the white
Cabbage, and the color of the leaves of a lighter red than those of the former.

6 The open loved Colewort has a very great hard or woody stalk, whereupon
do grow very large leaves of a white green color, and set with thick white
ribs, and gathers the rest of the leaves closely together, which be lesser
than those next the ground; yet when it comes to the shutting up or closing
together, it rather dilateth it self abroad, than closes all together.

7 Double Colewort has many great and large leaves, whereupon do grow here
and there other small iagged leaves, as it were made of ragged shreds and
iagges set upon the smooth leaf, which gives show of a plume or fan of
feathers. In stalk, root, and every other part besides it does agree with the
Garden Colewort.

8 The double crispe or curled Colewoort agrees with the last before described
in every respect, only it differs in the leaves, which are so intricately
curled, and so thick set over with other small cut leaves, that it is hard to
see any part of the leaf it self, except ye take and put aside some of those
iagges and ragged leaves with your hand.

9 Brassica florida. Cole-Florie.
10 Brassica Tophosa. Swollen Colewoort.


9 Cole flore, or after some Colieflore, has many large leaves slightly
indented about the edges, of a whitish green color, narrower and sharper
pointed than Cabbage: in the midst of which leaves rises up a great white
head of hard flowers closely thrust together, with a root full of strings; in
other parts like unto the Coleworts.

10 The swollen Colewort of all other is the strangest, which I received from a
worshipful merchant of London master Nicholas (...), who brought the seed
thereof out of France; who is greatly in love with rare and fair flowers and
plants, for which he does carefully send into Syria, having a servant there at
Aleppo, and in many other countries, for the which my self and likewise the
whole land are much bound unto him. This goodly Colewort has many leaves of a
bluish green, or of the color of (...), bunched or swollen up about the edges
as it were a piece of leather wet and broiled on a gridiron, in such strange
sort that I cannot with words describe it to the full. The flowers grow at the
top of the stalks, of a bleake yellow color. The root is thick and strong
like to the other kinds of Coleworts.

11 Sauoy Cole is also numbered among the headed Colewoorts or (...). The leaves
are great and large very like to those of the great Cabbage, which turn
themselves upwards as though they would embrace one another to make a loved
Cabbage, but when they come to the shutting up they stand at a stay, and rather
show themselves wider open, than shut any nearer together; in other respects it
is like unto the Cabbage.

12 The (...) Sauoy Cole in every respect is like the precedent, saving that
the leaves, hereof do somewhat curle or crispe about the middle of the plant:
which plant if it be opened in the spring time, as sometimes it is, it sends
sorth branched stalks, with many small white flowers at the top, which being
past their follow long cods and seeds like the common or first kind (...).

13 This kind of Colewoort has very large leaves deeply iagged even to the
middle rib in face resemblinggreat and rank parsley. It has a great and
thick stalk of three (...) high. whereupon do grow flowers, cods, and seed
like the other Colewoorts.

11 Brassica Sabanda. Sauoy Cole.
12 Brassica Sabauda crispa. Curled Sauoy Cole.
13 Brassica Selinoides. Parseley Colewoort.
The fifteenth and sixteenth figures were (...) transposed.
15 Brassica marina Anglica. English sea Colewoorts.


14 The small cut Colewoort has very large leaves, wonderfully cut, hackt and
hewn even to the middle rib, resembling a kind of curled parsley, that shall
be described in his place, (which is not common nor has not been known nor
described until this time) very well agreeing with the last before mentioned,
but differs in the curious cutting and iagging of the leaves: in stalk
flowers and seed not unlike.

The fifteenth and sixteenth figures were (...) transposed.
16 Brassica syluestris. Wild Colewoorts.


15 Sea Colewoort has large and broad leaves very thick and curled, and so
brittle that they cannot be handled without breaking, of an ouerworne green
color, tending to graynesse: among which rise up stalks two cubits high,
bearing small pale flowers at the top; which being past their follow round
knobs wherein is contained one round seed and no more, black of color, of the
bigness of a tare and a fetch: And therefore Pena and Lobell called it
Brassica marina monospermos.

16 The wild Colewoort has long broad leaves not unlike to the tame
Colewoort, but lesser, as is all the rest of the plant, and is of his own
nature wild, and therefore not sought after as a meat, but is sown and
husbanded up on ditch banks and such like places for the seeds sake, by which
oftentimes great gain is gotten.

The Place.
The greatest sort of Colewoorts do grow in gardens, and do love a soil
which is fat and thoroughly dunged and well manured: they do best prosper when
they be removed, and every of them grow in our English gardens, except the
wild, which grows in fields and new dug ditch banks.

The sea Colewoort grows naturally upon the bayche and brims of the sea,
where there is no earth to be seen, but sand and rolling pibble stones, which
those that dwell near the sea do call Bayche: I found it growing between
Whytstable and the I Will of Thanet near the brinke of the sea, and in many
places near to Colchester and elsewhere by the sea side.

The Time.
Pertus Crescentius says that the Colewoort may be sown and removed at any
time of the year; whose opinion I altogether mislike. It is sown in the
spring, as March, April, and oftentimes in May, and sometimes in August, but
the special time is about the beginning of September.

The Colewoort, says Columella, must be removed when it attaineth to six
leaves, after it is come up from seed; the which must be done, in April or May,
especially those that were sown in Autumn; which afterward flourish in the
winter months, at what time, they are fittest for meat.

But the Sauoy-Cole, and the Cole florey, must be sown in April, in a bed of
hot horsedung, and covered with straw or such like, to keep it srom the cold,
and frosty mornings; and when it has gotten six leaves after this sort, then
shall you remove him as aforesaid, otherwise if you tarry for temperate weather
before you sow, the year will be spent, before it come to ripeness.

The Names.
Every of the Colewoorts, is called in Greek by Dioscorides and Galen (...):
it is also called (...): so named, not only because it drives away
drunkenness, but also for that it is like in color to the precious stone
called the Amethyst: which is meant by the first and garden Colewoort. The
Apothecaries and the common Herbarists do call it Caulis, of the goodness of
the stalk: in the Germane tongue it is called (...) (...): in French, des
Choux: in English, Colewoorts.

Cole-florey is called in Latin Brassica Cypria, and Cauliflora: in Italian,
Caulifiore: it seems to agree with Brassica (...) of Pliny, whereof he
writes in his 19. book, and 8. chapter.

The Temperature.
All the Colewoorts have a drying and binding faculty, with a certain nitrous
or salt quality, whereby they mightily cleanse, either in the juice, or in the
broth. The whole substance or body of the Colewoort is of a binding and drying
faculty, because it leaves in the decoction this salt quality; which lies in
the juice and watery part thereof: the water where in it is first boiled,
draws to it self all the quality; for which cause the decoction thereof
loses the belly, as does also the juice of it, if it be drunk: but if the
first broth in which it was boiled be cast away, then does the Colewoort dry
and bind the belly. But it yields to the body small nourishment, and does
not engender good, but a gross and Melancholicke blood. The white Cabbage is
best next unto the Cole-florey; yet Cato does chiefly commend the russet Cole:
but he knew neither the white ones, nor the Cole-florey; for if he had, his
censure had been otherwise.

The Virtues.
Dioscorides teaches, that the Colewoort being eaten is good for them that
have dim eyes,

The same author affirms, that if it be boiled and eaten with vinegar, it is
a remedy for those

It is reported, that the raw Colewoort being eaten before meat, does preserve
a man from Cassius and Dionysius Vticensis do write in their books of
tillage: yet does not Athenaeus ascribe that virtue of driving away
drunkenness to the leaves, but to the seeds of Colewoort.

Moreover, the leaves of Colewoorts are good against all inflammations, and hot
swellings;

The juice of Colewoorts, as Dioscorides writes, being taken with
floure-deluce and niter, does

The same being applied with the powder of Fennugreeke, takes away the pain
of the gout,

Being conveyed into the nosthrils, it purges the head: being put up with
barley meal it brings

Pliny writes, that the juice mixed with wine, and dropped into the ears, is
a remedy against

The seed, as Galen says, drives forth worms, takes away freckles of the
face, sun-burning,

They say that the broth where in the herb has been sodden is marvelous
good for the sinews Carcinomata, which cannot be healed by any other means,
if they be washed therewith.

CHAP. 41. Of Rape-Cole.
The Description.
1 THe first kind of Rape Cole has one single long root, garnished with many
threddy strings: from which rises up a great thick stalk, bigger than a
great Cucumber or great Turnep: at the top whereof shoots forth great broad
leaves, like unto those of Cabbage Cole. The flowers grow at the top on slender
stalks, compact of four small yellow flowers: which being past the seed
follows enclosed in little long cods, like the sed of Mustard.

2 The second has a long fibrous root like unto the precedent; the tuberous
stalk is very great and long, thrusting forth in some few places here and
there, small footstalkes; whereupon do grow smooth leaves, slightly indented
about the edges: on the top of the long Turnep stalk grow lean stalks and
flowers like the former. This second differs from the former only in the
length of the swollen stalk, whence they call it Caulorapum longum, or Long
Rape Cole.

The Place.
They grow in Italy, Spain, and some places of Germany, from whence I have
received seeds for my garden, as also from an honest and curious friend of
mine called master Goodman, at the Minories near London.

1 Caulorapum rotundum. Round rape Cole.


The Time.
They flower and flourish when the other Colewoorts do, whereof no doubt they
are kinds, and must be carefully set and sown, as musk Melons and Cucumbers
are.

The Names.
They are called in Latin, Caulorapum, and Rapocaulis, bearing for their
stalks, as it were Rapes and Turnips, participating of two plants, the
Colewort and Turnep; whereof they took their names.

The Temperature and Virtues.
There is nothing set down of the faculties of these plants, but are accounted
for dainty meat, contending with the Cabbage Cole in goodness and pleasant
taste.

CHAP. 42. Of Beets.
The Description.
1 THe common white Beet has great broad leaves, smooth, and plain: from which
rise thick crested or chamfered stalks: the flowers grow along the stalks
clustering together, in shape like little stars; which being past, there
succeed round and uneven (...) seed. The root is thick, hard, and great.

1 Beta alba. White Beets.
2 Beta rubra. Red Beets.


3 Beta rubra Romana. Red Roman Beet.


2 There is another sort like in shape and proportion to the former, saving
that the leaves of this be streaked with red here and there confusedly, which
sets forth the difference.

3 There is likewise another sort hereof, that was brought unto me from beyond
the seas, by that courteous merchant master Let, before remembered, the which
has leaves very great, and red of color, as is all the rest of the plant, as
well root, as stalk, and flowers, full of a perfect purple juice tending to
redness: the middle rib of which leaves are for the most part very broad (...)
thick, like the middle part of the Cabbage leaf, which is equal in goodness
with the leaves of Cabbage being boiled. It grew with me 1596. to the height of
viijcubits, and did bring forth his rough and uneven seed very plentifully:
with which plant nature does seem to play and sport herself: for the seeds
taken from that plant, which was altogether of one (...) and sown, does bring
(...) plants of many and variable colors, as the worshipful gentleman master
John Norden can very well testify, unto whom I gave some of the seeds (...),
which in his garden bruoght forth many other of beautiful colors.

The Place.
The Beete is sown in gardens: it loves to grow in a (...) and fertile
ground. The ordinary white Beet grows wild upon the seacoast of Tenet and
diverse other places by the Sea, for this is not a different kind as some would
have it.

The Time.
The fittest time to sow it is in the spring: it flourishes and is green all
summer long, and likewise in winter, and brings forth his seed the next year
following.

The Names.
The Grecians have named it (...): the Latins, Beta: the Germans, Maugolt:
the Spaniards, Aselgas: the French, de la Poree, des (...), and Beets:
Theophrastus says, that the white Beete is surnamed (...), that is to say,
(...), or of Sicilia: hereof (...) the name Sicla, by which the Barbarians, and
some Apothecaries did call the Beet; the which word we in England doevse, taken
for the same.

The Nature.
The white Beets are in moisture and heat temperate, but the other kinds are
dry, and all of them abstersive: so that the white Beete is a cold and moist
pot-herbe, which bath joined with it a certain salt and nitrous quality, by
reason whereof it (...) and draws phlegm out of the nosthrils.

The Virtues.
Being eaten when it is boiled, it quickly descend eth, loses the belly, and
provoke to the

The juice conveyed up into the nosthrils does gently draw sorth phlegm, and
purges the head.

The great and beautiful Beet last described may be used in winter for a
sallad herb, with

The greater red Beet or Roman Beet, boiled and eaten with oil, (...) and
pepper, is a most

CHAP. 43. Of Blites.
The Description.
1 THe great white Blite grows three or four foot high, with grayish or
white round stalks: the leaves are plain and smooth, almost like to those of
the white Orach, but not so soft nor mealy: the flowers grow thrust together
like those of Orach: after that comes the seed enclosed in little round flat
husky skins.

2 There is likewise another sort of Blites very smooth and flexible like the
former, saving that the leaves are reddish, mixed with a dark green color,
as is the stalk and also the rest of the plant.

3 There is likewise found a third sort very like unto the other, saving that
the stalks, branches, leaves, and the plant is altogether of a green color.
But this grows upright, and creepes not at all.

4 There is likewise another in our gardens very like the former, saving that
the whole Plant traileth upon the ground: the stalks, branches, and leaves are
reddish: the seed is small, and clustering together, green of color, and like
unto those of Ruellius his Coronopus, or Bucks-horne.

1 Blitum majus album. The great white Blite.
2 Blitum majus rubrum. The great red Blite.


The Place.
The Blites grow in Gardens for the most part, although there be found of them
wild many times.

The Time.
They flourish all the Summer long, and grow very green in Winter likewise.

The Names.
It is called in Greek, (...): in Latin, Blitum: in English, Blite, and
Blites: in Fr ench, Blites, or Blitres.

3 Blitum minus album. The small white Blite.
4 Blitum minus rubrum. The small red Blite.


The Nature.
The Blite (says Galen in his sixth book of the faculties of simple
medicines) is a pot-hearbe which serves for meat, being of a cold moist
temperature, and that chiefly in the second degree. It yields to the body
small nourishment, as in his second book of the faculties of nourishments he
plainly shows; for it is one of the pot-herbes that be unsavory or without
taste, whose substance is waterish.

The Virtues.
The Blite does nourish little, and yet is fit to make the belly soluble,
though not vehemently,

CHAP. 44. Of Floure-Gentle.
The Kinds.
THere be diverse sorts of floure-Gentle, differing in many points very notably;
as in greatness and smallness; some purple, and others of a skarlet color;
and one above the rest wherewith Nature has seemed to delight her self,
especially in the leaves, which in variable colors do strive with the Parats
feathers for beauty.

1 Amaranthus purpureus. Purple Floure-Gentle.
2 Amaranthus (...). Scarlet Floure-Gentle.
3 Amaranthus tricolor. Floramor and (...).
4 Amaranthus Pannicula sparsa. Branched Floure-Gentle.


The Description.
1 PVrple flower Gentle rises up with a stalk a cubit high, and sometime
higher, streaked or chamfered along the same, often reddish toward the root,
and very smooth: which divides it self toward the top into small branches,
about which stand long leaves, broad, sharp pointed, soft, slippery, of a
green color, and sometimes tending to a reddish: in stead of flowers, come up
ears or spokie tufts, very brave to look upon, but without smell; of a
shining light purple, with a gloss like velvet, but far passing it: which when
they are bruised, do yield a juice almost of the same color, and being
gathered, do keep their beauty a long time after, insomuch that being set in
water, it will revive again as at the time of his gathering, and it remains
so, many years, whereupon likewise it has taken its name. The seed stands
in the ripe ears, of color black, and much glittering: the root is short,
and full of strings.

5 Amaranthus pannicula incurua holoserica. Velvet Flowers Gentle.


2 The second sort of flower Gentle has leaves like unto the former: the
stalk is upright with a few small slender leaves set upon it: among which do
grow small clusters of scaly flowers, of an ouerworne scarlet color. The seed
is like the former.

3 It far exceeds my skill to describe the beauty and excellency of this rare
plant called Floramor; and I think the pensill of the most curious painter will
be at a stay, when he shall come to set him down in his lively colors: but to
color it after my best manner this I say: Floramor has a thick knobby root,
whereupon do grow many threddy strings: from which rises a thick stalk, but
tender and soft, which begins to divide himself into sundry branches at the
ground and so upward, whereupon (...) grow many leaves, wherein does consist
his beauty: for in few words, every leaf does resemble in colors the most
fair and beautiful feather of a Parrat, especially those feathers that are
mixed with most sundry colors, as a stripe of red, and a line of yellow, a
dash of white, and a rib of green color, which I cannot with words set forth,
such are the sundry mixtures of colors that nature has bestowedin her
greatest iollitie upon this flower: the flowers do grow between the
foot-stalkes of those leaves and the body of the stalk or trunk, base, and of
no moment in respect of the leaves, being as it were little chassie husks of an
ouerworne (...) color: the seed is black, and shining like burnished horn. I
have not seen this thus variegated as our Author mentions, but the leaves are
commonly of three colors; the lower part, or that next to the stalk is
green; the middle red, and the end yellow; or else the end red; the middle
yellow, and the bottom green.

4 This plant has a great many of threads and strings, of which his roots do
consist. From which do rise up very thick fat stalks, crested and streaked,
exceeding smooth, and of a shining red color, which begin at the ground to
divide themselves into branches; whereupon do grow many great and large leaves
of a dark green color tending to redness, in show like those of the red
Beet, streaked and dashed here and there with red, mixed with green. The
flowers grow along the stalks, from the midst thereof even to the top, in
shape like Panicum, that is, a great number of chaffie confused ears thrust
hard together, of a deep purple color. I can compare the shape thereof to
nothing so (...) as to the velvet head of a Stag, compact of such soft matter
as is the same: wherein is the seed, in color white, (...), and bored through
the middle.

5 This in stalks and leaves is much like the purple flower Gentle, but the
heads are larger, bended round, and laced, or as it were wouen one with another
looking very beautifully like to Crimson velvet: this is seldom to be found
with us; but for the beauties sake is kept in the Gardens of Italy, whereas the
women esteemed it not only for the comeliness and beauteous aspect,

1 Atriplex satiua alba. White Orach.
2 Atriplex satiua (...). Purple Orach.
3 Atriplex (...), sieve Polyspermon. Wild Orach, or All-seed.
4 Atriplex marina. Sea Orach.
but also for the efficacy thereof against the bloody issues, and sanious
ulcers of the womb and kidneyes, as the Authors of the Aduersaria affirm.

The Place and Time.
These pleasant flowers are sown in gardens, especially for their great beauty.

They flower in August, and continue flourishing till the frost overtake them,
at what time they perish. But the Floramor would be sown in a bed of hot
horse-dung, with some earth strewed thereon in the end of March, and ordered as
we do musk Melons, and the like.

The Names.
This plant is called in Greek (...), because it does not wither and wax old:
in Latin, Amaranthus purpureus: in Duch, Samatbluomen: in Italian, Fior
velluto: in French, Pass velours: in English, flower Gentie, purple Velvet
flower, Floramor; and of some flower Velure.

The Temperature, and Virtues.
Most attribute to flower Gentle a binding faculty, with a cold and dry
temperature.

It is reported they stop all kinds of bleeding; which is not manifest by any
apparantquality Bole armoniacke, sanguis Draconis, terra Sigillata, and such
like of red color do stop blood: But Galen, lib. 2. and 4. de simp. facult.
plainly shows, that there can be no certainty gathered from the colors,
touching the virtues of simple and compound medicines: wherefore they are ill
persuaded, that think the flower Gentle to stanch bleeding, to stop the laske
or bloody flix, because of the color only, if they had no other reason to
induce them thereto.

CHAP. 45. Of Orach.
The Description.
1 THe Garden white Orach has an high and (...) stalk, with broad sharp
pointed leaves like those of Blite, yet (...) and softer. The flowers are small
and yellow, growing in clusters: the seed round, and like a leaf (...) with a
thin skin, or filme, and grows in clusters. The root is woody and fibrous:
the leaves and stalks at the first are of a glittering gray color, and
sprinkled as it were with a meal or flower.

2 This differs from the former, only in that it is of an ouerworne purple
color.

3 This might more fitly have been placed amongst the Blites; yet finding the
figure here (though a contrary description) I have let it enjoy the place. It
has a white and slender root, and it is somewhat like, yet less then the
Blite, with narrow leaves somewhat resembling Basil: it has abundance of
small flowers, which are succeeded by a numerous sort of seeds, which are
black and shining.

4 There is a wild kind growing near the sea, which has pretty broad
leaves, cut deeply about the edges, sharp pointed, and covered over with a
certain mealinesse, so that the whole plant as well leaves, as stalks and
flowers, look of an hoary or gray color. The stalks lie spread, on the shore
or Beach, whereas it usually grows.

5 The common wild Orach has leaves unequally sinuated, or cut in somewhat
after the manner of an oaken leaf, and commonly of an ouerworne grayish
color: the flowers and seeds are much like those of the garden, but much less.

6 This is like the last described, but the leaves are lesser and not so much
divided, the seeds grow also in the same manner as those of the precedent.

7 This also in the face and manner of growing is like those already described,
but the leaves are long and narrow, sometimes a little notched: and from the
shape of the leaf Lobell called it Atriplex Syluestris polygoni, aut Helxines
folio.

8 This elegant Orach has a single and small root, putting forth a few fibers,
the stalks are some foot high, divided into many branches, and lying along
upon the ground; and upon these grow leaves at certain spaces whitish and
unequally divided, somewhat after the manner of the wild Orach; about the
stalk or setting on of the leaves grow as it were little berries, somewhat
like a little mulberry, and when these come to ripeness, they are of an
elegant red color, and make a fine show. The seed is small round and ash
colored.

The Place.
The Garden Oraches grow in most gardens. The wild Oraches grow near
paths-(...) and ditch sides; but most commonly about dung-hils and such fat
places. Sea Orach I have (...) at Queeneborough, as also at Margate in the I Will
of Thanet: and most places about the sea side. The eighth grows only in some
choice gardens, I have seen it diverse times with Mr. Parkinson.

5 Atriplex syluestris vulgaris. Common wild Orach.
6 Atriplex syluestris altera. The other wild Orach.
7 Atriplex syluestris angustifolia. Narrow leaued wild Orach.
8 Atriplex baccifera. Berry-bearing Orach.


The Time.
They flower and seed from June to the end of August.

The Names.
Garden Orach is called in Greek, (...): in Latin, Atriplex, and Aureum Olus:
in Dutch, (...): in French, Arrouches ou bonnes dames: in English, Orach, and
Orage: in the Bohemian tongue, Leboda: Pliny has made some difference between
Atriplex and Chrysolachanum, as though they differed one from another; for of
Atriplex he writes in his twentieth book; and of Chrysolachanum in his twenty
eighth book, and eighth chapter: where he writes thus, Chrysolachanum, says
he, grows in Pinetum like Lettuce: it heals cut sinews if it be forthwith
applied.

3 This wild Orach has been called of Lobel, Polyspermon Cassani Bassi, or
All seed.

The Temperature.
Orach, says Galen, is of temperature moist in the second degree, and cold in
the first.

The Virtues.
Dioscorides writes, That the garden Orach is both moist and cold, and that it
is eaten boiled

It consumes away the swellings of the throat, whether it be laid on raw or
sodden.

The seed being drunk with meade or honied water, is a remedy against the
yellow jaundice. Galen thinks, that for that cause it has a clensing
quality, and may open the stoppings of the The figure which was in the second
place was of (...) (...) 2. of (...). The figure in the fourth place was of the
wild Orach, that I have described in the (...) place.


CHAP. 46. Of Stinking Orach.
Atriplex olida. Stinking Orach.


The Description.
STinking Orach grows flat upon the ground and is a base and low plant with
many weak and feeble branches, whereupon do grow small leaves of a grayish
color, sprinkled over with a certain kind of dusty mealinesse, in shape like
the leaves of Basil: amongst which leaves here and there confusedly be the
seeds dispersed, as it were nothing but dust or ashes. The whole plant is of a
most loathsome savor or smell; upon which plant if any should chance to rest
and sleep, he might very well report to his friends, that he had reposed
himself among the chiese of Scoggins heirs.

The Place.
It grows upon dunghills, and in the most filthy places that may be found, as
also about the common pissing places of great princes and Noblemens houses.
Sometime it is found in places near brick kilns and old walls, which does
somewhat alter his smell, which is like tosted cheese: but that which grows
in his natural place smells like stinking salt-fish, whereof it took his name
Garosmus.

The Time.
It is an herb for a year, which springs up, and when the seed is ripe it
perishes, and recouereth it self again of his own seed; so that if it be
gotten into a ground, it cannot be destroyed.

The Names.
Stinking Orach is called of Cordus, Garosmus, because it smells like
stinking fish: it is likewise called Tragium Germanicum, and Atriplex (...)
olens, by Pena and Lobel: for it smells more stinking than the rammish male
Goat: whereupon some by a figure have called it Vulvaria: and it may be called
in English, stinking Mother-wort.

The Nature and Virtues.
There has been little or nothing set down by the Ancients, either of his
nature or virtues, notwithstanding Hyppocrates says, when the mother does
stifle or strangle, such things are to be applied unto the (...) as have a
rank and stinking smell.

CHAP. 47. Of Goose-foot.
The Description.
1 GOose-foot is a common herb, and thought to be a kind of Orach: it rises
up with a stalk a cubit high or higher, somewhat chamfered and branched: the
leaves be broad, smooth, sharp pointed, shining, having certain deep cuts
about the edges, and resembling the foot of a goose: the flowers be small,
something red: the seed stands in clusters upon the top of the branches,
being very like the seed of wild Orach, and the root is divided into sundry
strings.

2 This differs from the last described, in that the leaves are sharper cut,
and more divided, the seed somewhat smaller, and the color of the whole plant
is a deeper or darker green.

1 Atriplex syluestris latifolia, sieve Pes Anserinus. Goose-foot.
2 Atriplex syluestris latifolia (...). The other Goose-foot.


The Place.
It grows plentifully in obscure places near old walls and highways, and in
desert places.

The Time.
It flourishes when the Orach does, whereof this is a wild kind.

The Names.
The later Herbarists have called it Pes anserinus, and Chenopodium, of the
likeness the leaves have with the foot of a Goose: in English, Goose-foot, and
wild Orach.

The Temperature.
This herb is cold and moist, and that no lesser than Orach, but as it
appears more cold

The Virtues.
It is reported that it kills swine if they do eat thereof: it is not used
in Physic: and (...) less as a sallade herb.

CHAP. 48. Of English Mercury.
Bonus Henricus. English Mercury, or good Henry.


The Description.
GOod Henry called Tota bona, so named of the later Herbarists, is accounted
of them to be one of the Dockes, but not properly. This brings forth very
many thick stalks, set with leaves two foot high; on the branches whereof
toward the top stand green flowers in clusters, thick thrust together. The
seed is flat like that of the Orach, whereof this is a kind. The leaves be
fastened to long foote-stalkes, broad behind, and sharp pointed, fashioned
like the leaves of Aron, or Wake-robin, white, or grayish of color, and as it
were covered over with a fine meal: in handling it is fat and olious, with a
very thick root, and parted into many divisions, of a yellow color within,
like the sharp pointed Docke.

The Place.
It is commonly found in untilled places, and among rubbish near common ways,
old walls, and by hedges in fields.

The Time.
It floureth in June and July especially.

The Names.
It is called of some (...) Anserinus, and Tota bona: in English, All-Good, and
Good Henry: in Cambridgshire it is called Good king Harry: the Germans call
it Guter Heinrick, of a certain good quality it has, as they also name a
certain pernicious herb, Malus Henricus, or bad Henry. It is taken for a
kind of Mercury, but improperly, for that it has no participation with
Mercury, either in form or quality, except ye will call every herb Mercury
which has power to loose the belly.

The Temperature.
Bonus Henricus, or Good Henry is moderately hot and dry, clensing and
scouring withal.

The Virtues.
The leaves boiled with other pot-herbes and eaten, makes the body soluble.

The same bruised and laid upon green wounds, or foale and old ulcers, does
scour, mundisie

CHAP. 49. Of Spinach.
Spinacia. Spinach.


The Description.
1 SPinach is a kind of Blite, after (...) notwithstanding I rather take it
(...) kind of Orach. It brings (...) (...) and tender leaves of a dark
green color, full (...) juice, sharp pointed, and in the largest part (...)
nether end square; parted oftentimes with a deep gash on either side next to
the (...) foot-stalke: the stalk is round, a foot high, (...) within: on the
tops of the branches stand little flowers in clusters, in whose places does
(...) (...) prickly seed. The root consists of many small threads.

2 There is another sort found in our (...) like unto the former in goodness,
as also in (...), saving that the leaves are not so great, (...) (...) deeply
gasht or indented: and the seed (...) prickles at all, for which cause it is
called (...) Spinach.

The Place.
It is sown in gardens without any great (...): or industry, and forsakes
not any ground being but indifferent fertile.

The Time.
It may be sown almost at any time of (...) year, but being sown in the
spring it quickly grows up, and comes to perfection within two months: but
that which is sown in the fall of the leaf grows not so soon to
perfection, yet continues all the win terand seedeth presently upon the first
spring.

The Names.
It is called in these days Spinachia: of some, Spinacheum olus: of others,
Hispanicum olus: (...) names it (...): the Arabians and Serapio call it
Hispane: the Germans, Spinet: in (...), Spinach and Spinach: in French,
Espinas.

The Nature.
Spinach is evidently cold and moist almost in the second degree, but rather
moist. It is (...) the pot-herbes whose substance is waterie, and almost
without taste, and therefore quickly (...) death and loses the belly.

The Virtues.
It is eaten boiled, but it yields little or no nourishment at all: it is
something windy, and

This herb of all other pot-herbes and sallade herbs makes the greatest
diversity of (...)

CHAP. 50. Of Pellitorie of the wall.
The Description.
PEllitorie of the wall has round tender stalks somewhat brown or reddish of
color and somewhat shining: the leaves be rough like to the leaves of
Mercury, nothing (...) about the edges. The flowers be small, growing close to
the (...): the seed is black and very small, covered with a rough husk which
hangs fast upon garments: the root is somewhat reddish.

Parietaria. Pellitorie of the wall.


The Place.
It grows near to old walls in the moist corners of Churches and stone
buildings, among rubbish and such like places.

The Time.
It comes up in May: it seedeth in (...) and August (...) the root only
continues and (...) to be sound in Winter.

The Names.
It (...) commonly called (...), or by a (...) word (...), because it grows
(...) to (...): and (...) the same cause it is named of (...) (...): also (...)
of (...) and (...) of the (...) y. There is also another (...) (...) (...)
(...): some call it (...), of (...) which sometimes seed hereon: (...), (...).
and (...), because it serves to scour glasses, pipkins, and such like: it is
called in high-(...), Tag vnd nacht: in Spanish, (...) del muro: in English,
Pellitorie of the wall: in French, (...).

The Temperature.
Pellitorie of the wall (as Galen says) has force to scour, and is something
cold and moist.

The Virtues.
Pellitory of the wall boiled, and the (...)

Dioscorides says, That the juice tempered with Ceruse or white lead makes a
good ointment (...) also (...), Lib. (...). cap. 17.

It is applied (says he) to pains of the feet with Goats suet and wax of
Cyprus; where in stead

Dioscorides adds, That the juice hereof is a remedy for old (...), and
takes away hot swellings

It is affirmed, That if three ounces of the juice be drunk it provoke urine
out of hand.

The leaves tempered with oil of sweet almonds in manner of a pultesse, and
laid to the pained parts, is a remedy for them that be troabled with the
stone, and that can hardly make water.

CHAP. 51. Of French Mercury.
The Kinds.
THere be two kinds of Mercury reckoned for good, and yet both sometimes wild;
besides two wild never found in gardens, unless they be brought thither.

The Description.
1 THe male garden Mercury has tender stalks full of (...) and branches,
whereupon do grow green leaves like Pellitorie of the wall, but snipt about
the edges: (...) which come forth two hairy bullets round, and joined together
like those of Goosegrasse or Cleuers, each containing in it self one small
round seed the root is tender, and (...) of white hairy strings.

2 The female is like unto the sormer in leaves, stalks, and manner of growing,
differing but in the flowers and seed: for this kind has a greater quantity
of flowers and seed growing together like little clusters of grapes, of a
yellowish color. The seed for the most part is lost before it can be gathered.

1 Mercurialis mas. Male Mercury.
2 Mercurialis foemina. Female Mercury.


The Place.
French Mercury is sown in Kitchen gardens among pot-herbes; in Vineyards,
and in moist shadowie places: I found it under the dropping of the Bishops
house at Rochester; from whence I brought a plant or two into my garden, since
which time I cannot rid my garden from it.

The Time.
They flower and flourish all the Summer long.

The Names.
It is called in Greek, (...) and (...) or Mercury his herb; whereupon the
Latins call it Mercurialis: it is called in Italian, Mercorella: in English,
French Mercury: in French, Mercuriale, Vignoble, and Foirelle, quia Fluidam
laxamue alvum reddit, Gallobelgae enim foize and foizeus, ventris Fluorem
vocant.

The Temperature.
Mercury is hot and dry, yet not above the second degree: it has a cleansing
faculty, and (as Galen writerh) a digesting quality also.

The Virtues.
It is used in our age in clisters, and thought very good to cleanse and scour
away the excrements Dioscorides reports, that the decoction hereof purges
waterish humors.

The leaves stamped with butter, and applied to the fundament, provoke to the
stool; and the

Costaeus in his book of the nature of plants says, that the juice of
Mercury, Hollihocks, and purslane

CHAP. 52. Of Wild Mercury.
1 Cynocrambe. Dogs Mercury.
The figure of the (...) was omitted, and in stead thereof was put the figure
of Phyllon (...).
2 Phyllon arrhenogonon, sieve (...), Male childrens Mercury.
3 Phyllon Thelygonon, sieve Foeminificum. Childrens Mercury, the female.


The Description.
1 DOgs Mercury is somewhat like unto the garden Mercury, saving the leaves
hereof are greater, and the stalk not so tender, and yet very (...), growing
to the height of a cubit, without any branches at all, with small yellow
flowers. The seed is like the female Mercury. It is also found like the male
Mercury, as you see them both expressed in the figure; and so there is both male
and female of this Mercury also

2 Male childrens Mercury has three or four stalks, or more: the leaves be
somewhat long; not much unlike the leaves of the olive tree, covered over with a
soft down or (...) gray of color; and the seed also like those of Spurge,
growing two together, being first of an ash color, but after turn to a blew.

3 This is much in shape like to the last described, but the stalks are
weaker, and have more leaves upon them; the (...) also are small and mossy, and
they grow upon long (...), whereas the seeds of the other are (...) to very
short ones: the seed is (...) in round little heads, being sometimes (...),
otherwhiles three or more in a cluster.

The Place.
They grow in woods and copses, in the borders of fields, and among bushes and
hedges. (...) But the two last described are not in England, for any thing that
I know.

The Dogs Mercury I have found in many places about Green-hithe, Swains-(...)
(...), Grauesend, and South-fleet in Kent; in Hampsted wood, and all the
villages thereabout, (...) miles from London.

The Time.
These flourish all the Summer long, until the extreme frost do pull them
down.

The Names.
Dogs Mercury is called in Greek, (...): in Latin, Canina, and Brassica
Canina, and (...) syluesiris: in English, Dogs Cole, and Dogs Mercury.

Childrens Mercury is called Phyllon thelygonon, and Phyllon Arrhenogonon.

The Temperature and Virtues.
These wild kinds of Mercury are not used in physic; notwithstanding it is
thought they agree as well in nature as quality with the other kinds of
Mercury.

It is reported by the Ancients, that the male Phyllon conduces to the
generation of boys, and

At Salamantica they give and much commend the decoction of either of these
against the bitings

The Moors at Granado use them frequently in women's diseases.

CHAP. 53. Of Torne-sole.
1 Heliotropium maius. Great Torne-sole.
The second and third figures were formerly transposed: the fourth was the
figure of the (...) Scorpion-(...) described in the fourth place, in the (...)
(...) Chapter.
2 Heliotropium minus. Small Torne-sole.


The Kinds.
THere be four sorts of Torne-sole, differing one from another in many notable
points, as in greatness and smallness, in color of flowers, in form and
shape.

The description.
1 THe great Tornesole has great straight stalks covered with a white hairy
cotton, especially about the top; the leaves are soft and hairy in handling, in
shape like the leaves of Basil: the flowers grow at the top (...) the
branches, in color white, thick (...) in rows upon one side of the stalk,
which stalk does bend or turn backward (...) (...) (...) of a scorpion: the
root is small and hard.

2 The small Tornesole has many little and weak branches trailing upon the
ground, where upon do grow small leaves, like those of the lesser Basil. The
flowers do grow without any certain order, amongst the leaves and tender
branches, gray of color, with a little spot of (...) in the midst, the which
turn into crooked tails like those of the precedent, but not altogether so
much.

The second and third figures were formerly transposed: the fourth was the
figure of the (...) Scorpion-(...) described in the fourth place, in the (...)
(...) Chapter.
3 Heliotropium supinum Clusij and L'obelij. (...) Tornesole.
4 Heliotropium Tricoccum, Widowwaile Tornsole.


3 Hairy Tornesole has many feeble and weak branches trailing upon the
ground, set with small leaves, lesser than the great (...), of which it is a
kind, having the seed in small (...) husks, which do turn back like the (...)
of a scorpion, just after the manner of the first described.

4 This kind of Tornesole has leaves very like to those of the great
Tornsole, but of a blacker green color: the flowers be yellow and
unprofitable; for they are not succeeded by the (...), but after them comes
out the fruit hanging upon small (...)-stalks three square, and in every corner
there is a small seed like to (...) of the Tychimales; the root is (...) and
threddy.

The Place.
Tornsole, as Dioscorides says, does grow in fennie grounds and near unto
pooles and lakes. They are strangers in England as yet: It does grow about
Montpelier in Languedock, where it is had in great use to stain and die clouts
withal, wherewith through Europe meat is colored.

The Time.
They flourish especially in the Summer solstice, or about the time when the
sun enters into Cancer.

The Names.
The Graecians call it Heliotropium: the Latins keep these names,
Heliotropium magnum, and Scorpiurum: of Ruellius, Herba Cancri: it is named
Heliotropium, not because is is turned about at the daily motion of the sun,
but by reason it flowreth in the summer solstice, at which time the sun being
farthest gone from the Aequinoctiall circle, returns to the same: and
Scorpiurum of the twiggie tops, that bow backward like a scorpions tail: of
the Italians, Tornesole bobo; in French, Tournsol: some think it to be Herba
Clytiae, into which the Poets feign Clytia to be metamorphosed; whence one
has these verses:

Herba velut Clytiae semper petit obuia solemn,
Sic pia men's Christum, quo prece spectet, habet.
The Nature.
Tornsole, as Paulus Aegineta writes, is hot and dry, and of a binding faculty.

The Virtues.
A good handful of great Tornsole boiled in wine, and drunk, does gently
purge the body

The same boiled in wine and drunk is good against the stingings of Scorpions,
or other venomous

The seed stamped and laid upon warts and such like excrescences, or
superfluous out-growings,

The small Tornesole and his seed boiled with Hyssope, Cresses, and saltpeter
and drunk, drives

With the small Tornsole they in France do die linen rags and clouts into a
perfect purple

CHAP. 54. Of Scorpion Grass.
The Description.
1 SCorpion grass has many smooth, plain, even leaves, of a dark green
color; stalks small, feeble and weak, trailing upon the ground, and occupying
a great circuit in respect of the plant. The flowers grow upon long and slender
footstalk, of color yellow, in shape like to the flowers of broom; after
which succeed long, crooked, rough cods, in shape and color like unto a
Caterpiller; wherein is contained yellowish seed like unto a kidney in form.
The root is small and tender the whole plant perishes when the seed is ripe.

2 There is another Scorpion grass, found among (or rather resembling) pease
and tares, and thereupon called Scorpioides Leguminosa, which has small and
tender roots like small threads; branches many, weak and tender, trailing upon
the ground, if there be nothing to take hold upon with his clasping and crooked
seed vessels; otherwise it rampeth upon whatsoever is near unto it. The leaves
be few and small: the flowers very little and yellow of color: the seed
follows, little and blackish, contained in little cods, like unto the tail
of a Scorpion.

3 There is another sort almost in every shallow grauelly running stream,
having leaves like to Becabunga or Brooklime. The flowers grow at the top of
tender fat green stalks, blew of color, and sometimes with a spot of yellow
among the blew; the whole branch of flowers do turn themselves likewise round
like the scorpions tail.

There is also another growing in watrie places, with leaves like innto
Anagallis aquatica, or water Chickweed, having like slender stalks and
branches as the former, and the flowers not unlike, saving that the flowers of
this are of a light blew or watched color, somewhat bigger, and laid more
open, whereby the yellow spot is better seen.

4 There is likewise another sort growing upon most dry grauelly and barren
ditch banks, with leaves like those of or Mouse-(...): this is called Myosotis
scorpioides; it has rough and hairy leaves, of an ouerworne russet color: the
flowers do grow upon weak, feeble, and rough branches, as is all the rest of
the plant. They likewise grow for the mostpart upon one side of the stalk,
blew of color, with a like little spot of yellow as the others, turning
themselves back again like the tail of a Scorpion.

There is another of the land called Myosotis Scorpioides repens, like the
former: but the flowers are thicker thrust together, and do not grow all upon
one side as the other, and part of the flowers are blew, and part purple,
confusedly mixed together.

The Place.
1, 2 These Scorpion grasses grow not wild in England, notwithstanding I have
received seed of the first from beyond the seas, and have dispersed them
through England, which are esteemed of gentlewomen for the beauty and
strangeness of the crooked cods resembling Caterpillars.

The others do grow in waters and streams, as also on dry and barren banks.

The Time.
The first floureth from May to the end of August: the others I have found all
the summer long.

The Names.
1 Fabius Columna judges this to be the Clymenon of Dioscorides: others call it
Scorpioides, and Scorpioides bupleuri folio.

2 This is the Scorpioides of Matthiolus, Dod. Lobell, and others; and I judge
it was this plant our Author in this place intended, and not the Scorpioides
Leguminosa of the Aduersaria, for that has not a few leaves, but many upon one
rib; and besides, Dodonaeus, whom in descriptions and history our Author
chiefly follows, describes this immediately after the other: Guillandinus,
Caesalpinus, and Bauhine judge it to be the Telephium of Dioscorides.

3 This and the next want no names, for almost every writer has given them
several ones: Brunfelsius called it Cynoglossa minor: Tragus, Tabernamontanus,
and our Author ( page 537. of the former edition) have it under the name of
Euphrasia Caerulea: Dodonaeus calls it Scorpioides foemina: Lonicerus,
Leontopodium; Caesalpinus, Heliotropium minus in palustribus: Cordus and
Thalius, Echium palustre.

4 This is Auricula muris minor tertia; Euphrasia quarta, and Pilosella
sylvestris of Tragus: Scorpioides mas of Dodonaeus; Alsine Myosotis: and
Myosotis hirsuta repens of Lobell; Heliotropium minus alterum of Caesalpinus;
Echium minimum of (...); and Echium palustre alterum of Thalius our Author had
it thrice: first in the precedent chapter, by the name of Heliotropium rectum,
with a figure: secondly in this present chapter; without a figure: and thirdly
page 514. also with a figure under the name of Pilosella flore caeruleo.

The Nature and Virtues.
There is not any thing remembered of the temperature: yet Dioscorides says,
that the laeues of Elemni, is profitable against such hurts as require a
healing medicine.

CHAP. 55. Of Nightshade.
The Kinds.
THere be diverse Nightshades, whereof some are of the garden; and some that
love the fields, and yet every of them found wild; whereof some cause
sleepiness even unto death: others cause sleepiness, and yet Physical: and
others very profitable unto the health of man, as shall be declared in their
several virtues.

The Description.
1 GArden Nightshade has round stalks a foot high, and full of branches,
whereon are set leaves of a blackish color, soft and full of juice, in shape
like to leaves of Basil, but much greater: among which do grow small white
flowers with yellow pointals in the middle; which being past, there succeed
round berries, green at the first, and black when they be ripe, like those of
Iuy: the root is white, and full of hairy strings.

2 The root of this is long; pretty thick and hard, being covered with a
brownish skin; from this root grow up many small stalks of the height of a cubit
and better, somewhat thick withal: the leaves that grow along the stalk are
like those of the Quince tree, thick, white, soft and downye. The flowers grow
about the stalk at the setting on of the leaf, somewhat long and of a pale
color, divided into sour parts, which are succeeded by seeds contained in
hairy or woolly receptacles: which when they come to ripeness are red, or of a
reddish saffron color.

The Place.
This Nightshade comes up in many places, and not only in gardens, of which
not withstanding

1 Scorpioides Bupleuri folio, Penae and L'Obelij. Scorpion grass, or
Caterpillars.
2 Scorpioides (...). Matthiolus his Scorpion (...).
3 (...) scorpioides palustris. Water Scorpion grass.
4 Myosotis scorpioides aruensis (...), Mouse-eare Scorpion grass.
it has taken his surname, and in which it is often found growing with other
herbs; but also near common high ways, the borders of fields, by old walls
and ruinous places.

2 This grows not with us, but in hotter Countries Clusius found it growing
among rubbish at Malago in Spain.

1 Solanum Hortense. Garden Nightshade.
2 Solanum (...). Sleepie Nightshade.


The Time.
It flowreth in Summer, and oftentimes till Autumn be well spent; and then the
fruit comes to ripeness.

2 This Clusius found in flower and with the seed ripe in February; for it
lives many years in hot Countries, but in cold it is but an annual.

The Names.
It is called of the Graecians (...): of the Latins, Solanum, and Solanum
Hortense: in shops, Solatrum: of some, Morella, Vua Lupina, and Vua Vulpis: in
Spanish likewise; Morella, and Yerua Mora: Marcellus an old Physic writer,
and diverse others of his time called it Strumum: Pliny in his 27. book chap.
8. shows that it is called Cucubalus: both these words are likewise extant in
(...) among the confused names of Nightshade; who comprehending all the kinds
of Nightshade together in one chapter; being so many, has strangely and
absurdly confounded their names, In English it is called Garden Nightshade,
Morel, and Petie Morell: in French, Morelle, Gallobelgis: feu ardent:
quiamedetur igni sacro.

The Temperature.
Nightshade (as Galen says in his book of the faculties of simple medicines)
is used for those infirmities that have need of cooling and binding; for these
two qualities it has in the second degree: which thing also he affirms in
his book of the faculties of nourishments, where he says that there is no
pot-herbe which we use to eat that has so great astriction or binding as
Nightshade has; and therefore Physitious do worthily use it, and that seldom
as a nourishment, but always as a medicine.

The Virtues.
1 Dioscorides writes, that Nightshade is good against S. Anthonies fire, the
shingles, pain of these remedies, than of the disease it self: for as (...)
writes in the 6. book of his Aphorisms, the 25. particular, that it is not
good, that S. (...) fire should be driven from the outward parts to the inward.
And likewise in his Prognostics he says, that it is necessary that S.
Anthonies sire should break forth, and that it is death to have it driven in;
which is to (...) (...) not only of S. Anthonies fire, but also of other like
burstings out procured by (...). For by using of these kinds of cooling and
repelling medicines, the bad, corrupt, and sharp (...) are driven back
inwardly to the chiese and principal parts, which cannot be done without great
danger and hazard of life. And therefore we must not unadvisedly, lightly, or
rashly (...) such kind of medicines upon the coming out of Saint Anthonies
fire, the shingles, or such (...) pimples and blemishes of the skin.

The juice of the green leaves of Garden Nightshade mixed with Barley meal,
is very (...)

The juice mixed with oil of Roses, Ceruse, and Littarge of gold, and applied,
is more (...)

The Figure in the second place was of the (...) (...), or (...) (...), treated
of at large in the 61. Chap of this Book, and (...) (...) (...) (...) here:
and in stead thereof another put in the place.
Neither the juice hereof, nor any other part is usually given inwardly, yet
it may without

The leaves stamped are profitably put into the ointment of Popler buds, called
(...) (...),

2 The bark of the root of Sleepie Nightshade, taken in the weight of 31. has
a (...) Opium, and the fruit thereof vehemently prouokes urine. But (as Pliny
says) the remedies hereof are not of such esteem that we should long insist
upon them, especially seeing we are furnished with such store of medicines
less harmefull, yet serving (...) the same purpose.

CHAP. 56. Of sleepy Nightshade.
Solanum Laethale. Dwale, or deadly Nightshade.


The Description.
DWale or sleeping Nightshade (...) round blackish stalks six foot high,
whereupon do grow great broad (...) of a dark green color; among which do
grow small hollow flowers bell fashion, of an ouerworne purple color; in the
place whereof come forthgreatround berrios of the bigness of the black cherry,
green at the (...), but when they be ripe of the color of (...) iette or
burnished horn, soft and full of purple juice: among which juice lie the (...)
like the berries of Iuy: the root is very great, thick, and long lasting.

The Place.
It grows in vntoiled places near unto high ways and the sea marshes, and
such like places.

It grows very plentifully in Holland in Lincolnshire, and in the I Will of Ely
at a place called Walsoken, near unto Wisbitch

I found it growing without the gate of Highgate near unto a pound or pinsold
on the left hand.

The Time.
This flourishes all the Summer and Spring, bears his seed and flower in
July and August.

The Names.
It is called of Dioscorides, (...): of Theophrastus, (...): of the Latins,
(...) somniferum, or sleeping Nightshade; and Solanum laethale, or deadly
Nightshade; and Solanum (...), raging Nightshade: of some, Apollinaris minor
vlticana, and Herba Opsago: in English, Dwale, or sleeping Nightshade: the
Venetians and Italians call it Bella dona: the Germans, Dollwurtz: the low
Dutch, Dulle besien: in French, Morelle mortelle: it comes very near unto
(...) his Mandragoras, (which differs from Dioscorides his Mandragoras.)

The Nature.
It is cold even in the fourth degree.

The Virtues.
This kind of Nightshade causes sleep, troubles the mind, brings madness
if a few of the (...) in his 6. book does likewise write of Mandrake in this
manner; Mandrake causes sleep, and if also much of it be taken it brings
death.

The green leaves of deadly Nightshade may with great advice be used in such
cases at Pettimorrell:

The leaves hereof laid unto the temples cause sleep, especially if they be
imbibed or moistened

CHAP. 57. Of winter Cherries.
The Description.
1 THe red winter Cherrie brings forth stalks a cubit long, round, slender,
smooth, and somewhat reddish, reeling this way and that way by reason of his
weakness, not able to stand upright without a supporter: whereupon do grow
leaves not unlike to those of common Nightshade, but greater; among which
leaves come forth white flowers, consisting of five small leaves: in the middle
of which leaves stands out a berry, green at the first, and red when it is
(...), in color of our common Cherry and of the same bigness, enclosed in a
thin husk or little bladder, it is of a pale reddish color, in which berrie
is contained many small flat seeds of a pale color. The roots be long, not
unlike to the roots of Couch-grasse, ramping and creeping within the upper
crust of the earth far abroad, whereby it increases greatly.

2 The black winter Cherrie has weak and slender stalks somewhat crested,
and like unto the tendrels of the vine, casting it self all about, and takes
hold of such things as are next unto it: whereupon are set jagged leaves
deeply indented or cut about the edges almost to the middle ribbe. The flowers
be very small and white standing upon long foote-stalkes or stemmes. The
skinnie bladders succeed the flowers, parted into three sells or chambers,
every of the which contains one seed and no more, of the bigness of a small
pease, and black of color, having a mark of white color upon each berrie,
in proportion of an heart. The root is very small and threddie.

The Place.
The red winter Cherrie grows upon old broken walls, about the borders of
fields, and in moist shadowie places, and in most gardens, where some cherish
it for the beauty of the berries, and others for the great and worthy virtues
thereof.

2 The black winter Cherrie is brought out of Spain and Italy, or other hot
regions, from whence I have had of those black seeds marked with the shape of
a man's heart, white, as aforesaid: and haueplanted them in my garden where they
have borne flowers, but have perished before the fruit could grow to maturitie,
by reason of those unseasonable years, 1594. 95. 96.

The Time.
The red winter Cherrie bears his flowers and fruit in August.

The black bears them at the same time, where it does naturally grow.

The Names.
The red winter (...) is called in Greek, (...) in Latin, Vesicaria, and
Solanum Vesicarium: in shops, (...): Pliny in his 21. book names it
Halicacabus, and Vesicaria, of the little bladders: or as the same Author
writes, because it is good for the bladder and the stone: it is called in
Spanish, Vexiga de porro: in French, Alquequenges, Bagenauldes, and Cerises
d'outre mer: in English, red Nightshade, Winter Cherries, and Alkakengie.

1 (...) (...). Red winter Cherries.
2 Halicacabum Peregrinum. Black winter Cherries.


The black winter Cherrie is called Halacacabum Peregrinum, Vesicaria
Peregrina, or strange (...) Cherrie: of Pena and Lobel it is called, Cor Indum,
Cor Indicum: of others, Pisum (...). in English, the Indian heart, or heart
pease: some have taken it to be Dorycnion, but they are greatly deceived, being
in truth not any of the Nightshades; it rather seems to agree with the grain
named of Serapio, Abrong, or Abrugi, of which he writes in his 153. chapter in
these words: It is a little grain spotted with black and white, round, and
like the grain Maiz, with which notes this does agree.

The Temperature.
The red winter Cherrie is thought to be cold and dry, and of subtle parts.

The leaves differ not from the temperature of the garden Nightshade, as Galen
says.

The Virtues.
The fruit bruised and put to infuse or steep in white wine two or three
hours, and (...) boiled

CHAP. 58. Of the Marvel of the World.
Mirabilia Peruuiana flore luteo. The marvel of Peru with yellowish flowers.
Mirabilia Peruuiana flore albo. The marvel of Peru with white flowers.


The description.
THis admirable plant called the marvel of Peru, or the marvel of the World,
springs forth of the ground like unto Basil in leaves; amongst which it
sends out a stalk two cubits and a half high, os the thickenesse of a
finger; full of juice, very firm, and of a yellowish green color, knotted or
(...) with ioints somewhat bunching forth, of purplish color, as in the female
Balsamina: which stalk divides it self into sundry branches or boughs, and
those also knottie like the stalk. His branches are decked with leaves growing
by couples at the ioints like the leaves of wild Peascods, green, fleshie,
and sull of ioints; which being rubbed do yield the like unpleasant smell as
wild Peascods do, and are in taste also very unsavory, yet in the latter
end they leave a taste and sharp smacke of Tabaco. The stalks toward the top
are garnished with long hollow single flowers, folded, as it were, into five
parts before they be opened; but being fully blown do resemble the flowers of
Tabaco, not ending into sharp corners, but blunt and round as the slowers of
Bindeweede, and larger than the flowers of Tabaco, glittering oftentimes with a
sine purple or Crimson color; many times of an horseflesh; sometime yellow;
sometime pale, and sometime resembling an old red or yellow color; sometime
whitish, and most commonly two colors occupying half the flower, or
intercoursing the whole flower with streakes and orderly streams, now yellow,
now purple, divided through the whole; having sometime great, sometime little
spots of a purple color, sprinkled and scattered in a most variable order, and
brave mixture. The ground or field of the whole flower is either pale, red,
yellow, or white, containing in the middle of the hollownesse a prick or
pointell set round about with six small strings or chiues. The flowers are
very sweet and pleasant, resembling the (...) or white Daffodill, and are very
suddenly fading; for at night they are flowred wide open, and so continue
until eight of the clock the next morning: at which time they begin to
close or shut up (after the manner of the Bindeweede) especially if the weather
be very hot: but if the air be more temperate they remain open the whole day,
and are closed only at night, and so perish, one flower lasting but only one
day, like the true Ephemerum or Hemerocailis. This marvelous variety does not
without cause bring admiration to all that observe it. For if the flowers be
gathered and reserved in several papers, and compared with those flowers that
will spring and flourish the next day, you shall easily perceive that one is
not like another in color, though you should compare one hundredth which slower
one day, and another hundred which you gathered the next day; and so from day
to day during the time of their (...). The cups and husks which contain and
embrace the flowers are divided into five pointed sections, which are green,
and, as it were, consisting of skins, wherein is contained one seed and no
more, covered with a blackish skin, having a blunt point whereon the flower
grows; but on the end next the cup or husk it is (...) with a little five
cornered crown. The seed is as big as a pepper corn, which os it (...)
(...) with any light motion. Within this seed is contained a white kernel,
which being bruised, resolves into a very white pulpe like starch. The root is
thick and like unto a great (...), outwardly black, and within white, sharp
in taste, wherewith is mingled a superficial sweetness. It brings new flowers
from July unto October in infinite number, yea even until the (...) (...)
cause the whole plant to perish: notwithstanding it may be reserned in pots,
and set in chambers and cellars that are warm, and so defended from the
injury of our cold climate; provided always that there be not any water cast
upon the pot, or set forth to take any moisture in the air until March
following; at which time it must be taken forth of the pot and replanted in
the garden. By this means I have preserved many (though to small purpose)
because I have sown seeds that have borne flowers in as ample manner and in as
good time as those reserved plants.

Of this wonderful herb there be other sorts, but not so amiable (...) so
full of variety, and (...) the most part their flowers are ail of one color.
But I have since by practice found out another way to keep the roots for the
year following with very little difficulty, which never fails. At the first
frost I dig up the roots and put up or rather hide the roots in a butter
ferkin, or such like (...), filled with the sand of a river, the which I suffer
still to stand in some corner of a house where it never receives moisture
until April or the midst of March, if the weather be warm; at which time I
take it from the sand and plant it in the garden, where it does flourish
exceeding well and increases by roots; which that does not which was either
sown of seed the same year, nor those plants that were preserved after the
other manner.

The Place.
The seed of this strange plant was brought first into Spain, from Peru,
whereof it took his name Mirabilia Peruana, or (...): and since dispersed into
all the parts of Europe: the which my self have planted many years, and have
in some temperate years received both flowers and ripe seed.

The Time.
It is sown in the midst of April, and brings forth his variable flowers in
September, and perishes with the first frost, except it be kept as aforesaid.

The Names.
It is called in Peru of those Indians there, Hachal. Of others after their
name Hachal Indi: of the high and low Dutch, Solanum Odoriferum: of some,
Iasminum mexicanum: and of Carolus (...), Admirabilia Peruuiana: in English
rather the Marvel of the World, than of Peru alone.

The Nature and Virtues.
We have not as yet any instructions from the people of India concerning the
nature or virtues of this plant: the which is esteemed as yet rather for his
rareness, beauty, and sweetness of his flowers, than for any virtues known;
but it is a pleasant plant to deck the gardens of the curious. Howbeit Iacobus
Antonius Cortusus of Padua has by experience found out, that two (...) of the
root thereof taken inwardly does very notably purge waterish humors.

CHAP. 59. Of Mad Apples.
The Description.
RAging Apples has a round stalk of two foot high, divided into sundry
branches, set with broad leaves somewhat indented about the edges, not unlike
the leaves of white (...), of a dark brown green color, somewhat rough.
Among the which come the flowers of a white color, and some timeschanging into
purple, made of six parts, wide open like a star with certain yellow chiues
or thrums in the middle; which being past the fruit (...) in place, set in a
cornered cup or husk after the manner of the great Nightshade, great and
somewhat long, of the bigness of a swans egg, and sometimes much greater, of a
white color, sometimes yellow, and often brown, wherein is contained small
flat seed of a yellow color. The root (...) thick, with many threads fastened
thereto.

Malainsana. Mad or raging Apples.


The Place.
This plant grows in Egypt almost every where in sandy fields even of it
self, bringing forth fruit of the bigness of a great Cucumber, as Petrus
Bellonius reports in the second book of his singular observations.

We had the same in our London Gardens, where it has borne flowers; but the
Winter approaching before the time of ripening, it perished: notwithstanding it
came to bear fruit of the bigness of a goose egg one extraordinary
temperate year, as I did see in the garden of a worshipful Merchant Mr.
Haruie in Limestreet, but never to the full ripeness.

The Time.
This herb must be sown in April in a bed of hot horse doung, as
Muske-Melons are, and floureth in August.

The Names.
Petrus Bellonius has judged it to be Malinathalla (...). In the Dukedom of
Millaine it is called Melongena: and of some, Melanzana: in Latin, Mala (...):
and in English, Mad Apples in the German tongue, Dollopffel: In Spanish,
Verangenes.

The Nature.
The herb is cold almost in the fourth degree.

The use and danger.
The people of Tolledo do eat them with great devotion being boiled with fat
flesh, putting

Petrus Bellonius, and Hermolaus (...), report that in Egypt and Barbary they
use to eat the Mala insana boiled or roasted under ashes, with oil, vinegar,
and pepper, as people use to eat Mushroms. But I rather wish English men to
content themselves with the meat and sauce of our own Country, than with
fruit and sauce eaten with such peril: for doubtless these apples have a
mischienous quality, the use whereof is utterly to be forsaken. And as we see
and know many have eaten and do eat Mushroms more for wantonness than for
need: for there are two kinds thereof (...) and deadly, which being in the
handling of an unskillful cook, may procure untimely death. Therefore it is
better to esteem this plant and have him in the Garden for your pleasure and
the rareness threof, than for any virtue or good qualities yet known.

CHAP. 60. Of Apples of Love.
The Description.
TThe Apple of Love brings forth very long round stalks or branches, fat and
full of juice, trailing upon the ground, not able to sustain himself upright
by reason of the tenderness of the (...), and also the great weight of the
leaves and fruit wherewith it is surcharged the leaves are great and deeply cut
or iagged about the edges, not unlike to the leaves of Agrimony, but greater,
and of a whiter green color: among which come (...) yellow flowers growing
short stems or foot stalks, clustering together in bunches: which being fallen,
there do come in place fair and goodly apples, chamfered, vncuen, and bunched
out in many places; of a bright shining red color, and the bigness of a goose
egg or a large pippin. The pulpe or meat is very full of moisture, soft,
reddish, and of the substance of a wheat plumme. The seed is small, flat and
rough: the root small and threddie: the whole Plant is of a rank and stinking
savor.

There has happened unto my hands another sort, agreeing very notably with the
former, as well in leaves and stalks as also in flowers and roots, only the
fruit hereof was yellow of color, wherein consisted the difference.

Poma (...). Apples of Love.


The Place.
Apples of Love grow in Spain, Italy, and such hot Countrics, from whence my
self have received seeds for my garden, where they do increase and prosper.

The Time.
It is sown in the beginning of April in a bed of hot horse dung, after the
manner of (...) Melons and such like cold fruits.

The Names.
The Apple of Love is called in Latin (...) Aureum, Poma Amoris, and
Lycopersicum: of some, (...): in English, Apples of Love, and Golden Apples: in
French, Pommes (...). Howbeit there be other golden Apples whereof the Poets
do fable, growing in the Gardens of the daughters of Hesperus, which a Dragon
was appointed to keep, who, as they fable, was killed by Hercules.

The Temperature.
The Golden Apple, with the whole herb it self is cold, yet not fully so cold
as Mandrake, after the opinion of (...). But in my judgment it is very cold,
(...) perhaps in the highest degree of coldness: my reason is, because I have
in the hottest time of Summer cut away the superfluous branches from the mother
root, and cast them away carelessly in the allies of my garden, the which
(notwithstanding the extreme heat of the Sun, the hardness of the trodden
allies, and at that time when no rain at all did fall) have grown as fresh
where I cast them, as before I did cut them off; which argues the great
coldness contained therein. True it is, that it does (...) also a great
moisture wherewith the plant is possessed, but as I have said, not without
great cold, which I leave to every man's censure.

The Virtues.
In Spain and those hot Regions they use to eat the Apples prepared and boiled
with (...),

Likewise they do eat the Apples with oil, vinegar and pepper mixed together
for sauce to

CHAP. 61. Of the Ethiopian Apple.
The Description.
THe Apple of Aethiopia has large leaves of a whitish green color, deeply
indented about the edges, almost to the middle rib; the which middle rib is
armed with a few sharp prickles. The flowers be white, consisting of six small
leaves, with a certain yellow pointel in the midst. Mala Aethiopica. Apples of
Aethiopia.
The fruit is round, and bunched with uneven lobes or banks lesser than the
golden Apple, of color red, and of a firm and sollid substance; wherein are
contained small flat seeds. The root is small and threddy.

The Place.
The seeds of this plant have been brought unto us out of Spain, and also
sent into (...) and Flanders: but to what perfection it has come unto in those
parts I am ignorant, but mine perished at the first approach of Winter. His
first original was from Aethiopia, whereof it took his name.

The Time.
This Plant must be sown as Muske-Melons, and at the same time. They flower in
July, and the fruit is ripe in September.

The Names.
In English (...) have thought good to call it the Ethiopian Apple, for the
reason before alleged: in Latin, Mala Aethiopica: of some it has been
thought to be Malinathalla. This is the Solanum pomiferum of Lobel and others;
by which name our Author also formerly had it, in the fiftieth chapter of the
former edition.

The Nature.
The temperature agrees with the Apple of Love.

The Vertucs.
These Apples are not used in physic that I can read of; only they are used
for a sauce and service unto rich men's tables to be eaten, being first boiled
in the broth of fat flesh with pepper and salt, and have a less hurtful (...)
than either mad apples or golden Apples.

CHAP. 62. Of Thornie-Apples.
The Description.
1 THe stalks of Thorny-apples are oftentimes above a cubit and a half high,
seldom higher, an inch thick, upright and straight, having very few branches,
sometimes none at all, but one upright stem; whereupon do grow leaves smooth
and even, little or nothing indented about the edges, longer and broader than
the leaves of Nightshade, (...) of the mad Apples. The flowers come forth of
long toothed cups, great, white of the form of a bell, or like the flowers of
the great Withwinde that rampeth in hedges; but altogether greater and wider at
the mouth, sharp cornered at the brimmes, with certain white chiues or threads
in the midst, of a strong ponticke savor, offending the head when it is
smelled unto: in the place of the flower comes up round fruit full of short
and blunt prickles, of the bigness of a green Wall-nut when it is at the
biggest, in which are the seeds of the bigness of tares or of Mandrakes, and
of the same form. The herb it self is of a strong savor, and does stuff the
head, and causes drowsinesse. The root is small and threddy.

2 There is another kind hereof altogether greater than the former, whose
seeds I received of the right honorable the Lord Edward Zouch; which he brought
from Constantinople, and of his liberality did bestow them upon me, as also
many other rare and strange seeds; and it is that Thornapple that I have
dispersed through this land, whereof at this present I have great use in
Surgery, as well in burnings and scaldings, as also in virulent and malign
ulcers, apostumes, and such like. The which plant has a very great stalk in
fertile ground, bigger than a man's arm, smooth, and green of color, which a
little above the ground divides it self into sundry branches or arms, in
manner of an hedge tree; whereupon are placed many great leaves cut and
indented deeply about the edges, with many uneven sharp corners: among these
leaves come white round flowers made of one piece in manner of a bell, shutting
it self up close toward night, as do the flowers of the great Binde-weed,
whereunto it is very like, of a sweet smell, but so strong, that it offends the
senses. The fruit follows round, sometimes of the fashion of an egg, set
about on every part with most sharp prickles; wherein is contained very much
seed of the bigness of tares, and of the same fashion. The root is thick,
made of great and small strings: the whole plant is sown, (...) his fruit, and
perishes the same year. There are are some varieties of this plant, in the
color and doubleness of the flowers.

1 Stramonium Peregrinum. The Apple of Peru.
2 Stramonium spinosum. Thorny Apples of Peru.


The Place.
1 This plant is rare and strange as yet in England: I received seeds thereof
from John Robin of Paris, an excellent Herbarist; which did grow and bare
flowers, but perished before the fruit came to ripeness.

2 The Thorne-apple was brought in seed from Constantinople by the right
honorable the Lord Edward Zouch, and given unto me, and bears fruit and ripe
seed.

The Time.
The first is to be sown in a bed (...) horse-dung, as we do cucumbers and
Muske-melons.

The other may be sown in March or April, as other seeds are.

The Names.
The first of these Thorne-apples may be called in Latin, Stramonia, and
Pomum, or Malum spinosum: of some, Corona regia, and Melospinum: The Grecians
of our time name it (...), or rather (...); as though they should say, a nut
stuffing, and causing drowsinesse and disquiet sleep: the Italians,
Paracoculi: it seems to Valerius Cordus to be Hyoscyamus Peruvianus, or
Henbane of Peru: (...) (...) doubts whether it should be inserted among the
Night-shades as a kind thereof: of (...) and others it is thought to be Nux
methel: Serapio, cap. 375. says, That Nux (...) is like unto Nux vomica; the
seed whereof is like that of Mandrake: the husk is rough or full of prickles;
the taste pleasing and strong: the quality thereof is cold in the fourth
degree. Which description agrees herewith, except in the form or shape it
should have with Nux vomica: Anguillara suspecteth it to be Hippomanes which
Theocritus mentions, wherewith in his second Eclog he shows that horses are
made mad: for Crateuas, whom Theocritus his Scholiast does cite, writes, That
the plant of Hippomanes has a fruit full of prickles, as has the fruit of
wild Cucumbers. In English it may be called Thorne-apple, or the Apple of Peru.

The words of Theocritus, Eidyll. 2. are these:

(...).

Which is thus in English:

Hippomanes'mongst the Arcadians springs, by which even all
The Colts and agile Mares in mountains mad do fall.
Now in the Greek Scholia amongst the Expositions there is this: (...), etc.
That is; (...) says, That the plant has a fruit like the wild Cucumber, but
blacker; the leaves are like a poppie, but thorny or prickly. Thus I expound
these words of the Greek Scholiast, being page (...) of the edition set forth
by Dan. Heinsius, Ann. Dom. 1603. Julius Scaliger blames Theocritus, because he
calls Hippomanes (...) a Plant: but Heinsius, as you may see in his notes upon
Theocritus, page 120, probably judges, that (...) in this place signifies
nothing but (...) a Thing [ growing.] Such as are curious may have recourse to
the places quoted, where they may find it more largely handled than is fit for
me in this place to insist upon. There is no plant at this day known, in mine
opinion, whereto Crateuas his description may be more fitly referred, than to
the Papauer spinosum, or (...) infernalis, which we shall hereafter describe.

The Nature.
The whole plant is cold in the fourth degree, and of a drowsy and numming
quality, not inferior to Mandrake.

The Virtues.
The juice of Thorne-apples boiled with hogs grease to the form of an unguent
or salve, cures Lobel a Merchants wise there being most grievously burned with
lightning, and not finding ease or cure in any other thing, by this found
helpewhen all hope was past, by the report of Mr. William Ram, public
Notarie of the said town, was perfectly cured.

The leaves stamped small, and boiled with oil Olive until the herbs be as
it were burnt, then

CHAP. 63. Of Bitter-sweet, or Woody Nightshade.
The Description.
BItter-sweet brings forth woody stalks as does the Vine, parted into many
slender creeping branches, by which it climeth and takes hold of hedges and
shrubs next unto it. The bark of the oldest stalks are rough and whitish, of
the color of ashes, with the outward rind of a bright green color, but the
younger branches are green as are the leaves: the wood brittle, having in it a
spongie pith; it is clad with long leaves, smooth, sharp pointed, lesser than
those of the Binde-weed. At the lower part of the same leaves does grow on
either side one small or lesser leaf like unto two ears. The flowers be
small, and somewhat clustered together, consisting of five little leaves
apiece, of a perfect blew color, with a certain prick or yellow pointall in
the middle: which being past, there do come in place fair berries, more long
than round, at the first green, but very red when they be ripe; of a sweet
taste at the first, but after very unpleasant, of a strong savor, growing
together in clusters like burnished coral. The root is of a mean bigness, and
full (...) strings.

I have found another sort which brings forth most pleasant white flowers
with yellow pointals in the middle, in other respects agreeing with the former.

The Place.
Bitter-sweet does grow in moist places about ditches, rivers, and hedges,
almost every where.

Amara-dulcis. Bitter-sweet.


The other sort with the white flowers I found in a ditch side against the
right honorable the Earl of Sussex his garden wall at his house in Bermonsey
street by London, as you go from the court which is full of trees, (...) farm
house near thereunto.

The Time.
The leaves come forth in the Spring, the flowers in July, the berries are
(...) in August.

The Names.
The later Herbarists have named this plant Dulcamara, Amarodulcis, and
Amaradulcis; that is in Greek, (...): they call it also (...) lignosum, and
Siliquastrum: Pliny calls it Melortum: Theophrastus, Vit is syluestris: in
English we call it Bitter-sweet, and Woody Nightshade. But every Author must
for his credit say something, although to small purpose; for Vit is syluestris
is that which we call our Ladies Seal, which is no kind of Nightshade: for
Tamus and Vitu sylucstris are both one; as likewise Solanum lignosum or
Fruticosum; and also Solanum rubrum: whereas indeed it is no such plant, nor
any of the Nightshades, although I have followed others in placing it here.
Therefore those that use to mix the berries thereof in compositions of diverse
cooling ointments, in stead of the berries of Nightshade have committed the
greater error; for the fruit of this is not cold at all, but hot, as forthwith
shall be showed. Dioscorides says it is (...) altera; describing it by the
description of those with white flowers aforesaid, whereunto it does very well
agree. Dioscorides (...) his Muscoso (...) with a mossy flower, that is, such
an one as consists of small chiues or threads, which can by no means be
agreeable to the flower of this plant.

The Temperature.
The leaves and fruit of Bitter-sweet are in temperature hot and dry, clensing
and wasting away.

The (...).
The (...) of the leaves is reported to remove the stoppings of the liver and
gall; and (...)

The juice is good for those that have fallen from high places, and have been
thereby bruised,

Hieronymus Tragus teaches to make a decoction of Wine with the wood finely
sliced and cut

Dioscorides does ascribe unto Cyclaminus altcra, or Bitter-sweet with white
flowers as I conceive

The fruit (says he) being drunk in the weight of one dram, with three ounces
of white wine,

It is drunk against difficulty of breathing: it thoroughly cleanses women
that are newly

CHAP. 64. Of Binde-weed Nightshade.
The Description.
INchanters Nightshade has leaves like to Peti-morel, sharp at the point
like unto Spinach: the stalk is straight and upright, very brittle, two foot
high: the flowers are white tending to carnation, with certain small brown
chiues in the midst: the seed is contained in small round Circaea Lutctiana.
Inchanters Nightshade.
bullets, rough and very hairy. The roots are tough, and many in number, (...)
themselves deep into the ground, and (...) far abroad; whereby it does greatly
increase, insomuch that when it has once taken fast rooting, it can hardly
with great labor be rooted out or destroyed.

The Place.
It grows in obscure and dark places, about dung-hills, and in vntoiled
grounds, by path-wayes and such like.

The Time.
It flourishes from June to the end of September.

The Names.
It is called of Lobel, Circaea Lutctiana: in English, Inchanters Nightshade,
or Binde-weed Nightshade.

The Nature and Virtues.
There is no use of this herb either in physic or Surgerie that I can read
of; which has happened by the corruption of time and the error of some who
have taken (...) for Circaea; in which error they have still persisted unto
this day, attributing unto Circaea the virtues of Mandragoras; by which means
there has not any thing been said of the true Circaea, by reason, as I have
said, that Mandragoras has been called Circaea: but doubtless it has the
virtue of Garden Nightshade, and may serve in stead thereof without error.

CHAP. 65. Of Mandrake.
The Description.
THe male Mandrake has great broad long smooth leaves of a dark green
color, flat spread upon the ground: among which come up the flowers of a pale
whitish color, standing every one upon a single small and weak foot-stalke of
a whitish green color: in their places grow round Apples of a yellowish
color, smooth, soft, and glittering, of a strong smell; in which are contained
flat and smooth seeds in fashion of a little kidney, like those of the
Thorne-apple. The root is long, thick, whitish, divided many times into two or
three parts resembling the legs of a man, with other parts of his body
adjoining thereto, as the privy part, as it has been reported; whereas in
truth it is no otherwise than in the roots of carrots, parseneps, and such
like, forked or divided into two or more parts, which Nature takes no account
of. There has been many ridiculous tales brought up of this plant, whether of
old wives, or some runnagate Surgeons or physicke-mongers I know not, (a title
bad enough for them) but sure some one or more that sought to make themselves
famous and skillful above others, were the first brochers of that error I
speak of. They add further, That it (...) never or very seldom to be found
growing naturally but under a gallows, where the matter that has fallen from
the dead body has given it the shape of a man; and the matter of a woman, the
substance of a female plant, with many other such doltish dreams. They fable
further and affirm, That he who would take up a plant thereof must tie a dog
thereunto to pull it up, which will give agreat shreeke at the digging up;
otherwise if a man should do it, he should surely die in short space after.
Besides many fables of loving matters, too full of scurrilitie to set forth in
print, which I forbear to speak of. All which dreams and old wives tales you
shall from henceforth cast out of your books and memory; knowing this, that
they are all and every part of them false and most untrue: for I my self and
my servants also have dug up, planted, and replanted very many, and vet
never could either perceive shape of man or woman, but sometimes one straight
root, sometimes two, and often six or seven branches coming from the maine
great root, (...) as Nature list to bestow upon it, as to other plants. But the
idle drones that have little or nothing to do but eat and drink, have
bestowed some of their time in caruing the roots of Brionie, forming them to
the shape of men and women: which falsifying practice has confirmed the error
amongst the simple and unlearned people, who have taken them upon their report
to be the true Mandrakes.

The female Mandrake is like unto the male, saving that the leaves hereof be of
a more (...) (...) dark green color; and the fruit is long like a pear, and
the other is round like an apple.

Mandragoras mas and foemina. The male and female Mandrake.


The Place.
Mandrake grows in hot Regions (...) (...) woods and mountains, as in mount
Garganus in Apulia, and such like places; we (...) them only planted in
gardens, and are not elsewhere to be sound in England.

The Time.
They spring up with their leaves in March, and sloure in the end of April:
the fruit is ripe in August.

The Names.
Mandrake is called of the Grecians (...): of diverse, (...), and Circaea, of
(...) the witch, who by art could procure (...): for it has been thought that
the (...) hereof serves to win love: of some, (...) (...), and (...): some of
the Latins have called it Terrae malum, and Terrestre malum, and Canina malus:
Shops, and also other Nations do receive the Greek name. Dioscorides says,
That the male is called of diverse (...): and describes also another Mandrake
by the name of (...), which, as much as can be gathered by the description, is
like the male, but less in all parts: in English we call it Mandrake, Mandrage,
and Mandragon.

The Temperature.
Mandrake has a predominate cold faculty, as Galen says, that is to say cold
in the third degree: but the root is cold in the fourth degree.

The Virtues.
(...) dath particularly set down many faculties hereof; of which
notwithstanding there

The Apples are milder, and are reported that they may be eaten, being boiled
with pepper and

Galen says that the Apples are something cold and moist, and that the bark
of the root is of

The juice of the leaves is very profitably put into the ointment called
Populeon, and all cooling

The juice drawn forth of the roots dried, and taken in small quantity,
purges the belly exceedingly

It is good to be put into medicines and colliries that do mitigate the pain
of the eyes; and put

The green leaves stamped with barrowes grease and barley meal, cool all hot
swellings and

A suppositorie made with the same juice, and put into the (...) causes
sleep.

The wine wherein the root has been boiled or infused provoke sleep and
asswageth pain.

The smell of the Apples moves to sleep likewise; but the juice works more
effectually if

Great and strange effects are supposed to be in the Mandrakes, to cause women
to be fruitful Rahel desired to have her sisters Mandrakes (as the text is
translated) but if we look well into the circumstances which there we shall
find, we may rather deem otherwise. Young (...) brought home amiable and
sweet smelling flowers (for so signifies the Hebrew word, which is used
Cantic. 7. 13. in the same sense:) and the lad brought them home, rather for
their beauty and smell, than for their virtue. Now in the flowers of Mandrake
there is no such delectable or amiable smell as was in these amiable flowers
which (...) brought home. Besides, we read not that Rahel conceived hereupon,
for Leah Jacobs wise had four children before God granted that blessing of
fruitfulness unto Rahel. And last of all (which is my chiefest reason) Jacob
was angry with Rahel when she said, Give me children else I die: and demanded
of her, whether he were in the stead of God or no, who had withheld from her
the fruit of her body. And we know that the Prophet David says, Children and
the fruit of the womb are the inheritance, that comes from the Lord, Psalm.
127.

Serapio, Auicen, and Paulus Aegineta doewrite, that the seed and fruit of
Mandragoras taken Dioscorides wrote the same long before them.

He that would know more hereof, may read that chapter of doctor (...) his
book, concerning this matter, where he has written largely and learnedly of
this Simple.

CHAP. 66. Of Henbane.
1 Hyoscyamus Niger. Black Henbane.
2 Hyoscyamus Albus. White Henbane.


The Description.
1 THe common black Henbane has great and soft stalks: leaves very broad,
soft, and woolly, somewhat iagged, especially those that grow near unto the
ground, and those that grow upon the stalk, narrower, smaller, and sharper.
The flowers are bell fashion, of a faint yellowish white, and brown within
toward the bottom; when the flowers are gone, there comes hard knobby
husks, like small cups or boxes, wherein are small brown seeds.

2 The White Henbane is not much unlike to the black, saving that his leaves
are smaller, whiter and more woolly, and the flowers also whiter. The cods are
like the other, but without pricks; it dies in winter, and must likewise be
sown again the next year.

3 Hyoscyamus albus minor. The lesser White Henbane.
4 Hyoscyamus albus Creticus. White Henbane of Candy


3 This other white Henbane is much like the last described, but that it is
lesser: the leaves smaller and rounder, hanging upon pretty long stalks, the
flowers and seed vessels are like those of the last mentioned.

4 This is softer and tenderer than the last described, the leaves also hang
upon long footstalkes, and are covered over with a soft downines: and they are
somewhat broader, yet thinner and more sinuated than those of the white, and
somewhat resemble the form of a vine leaf, being snipt about the edges; the
stalks are also covered with a white down. The flowers are of a gold yellow,
with a velvet colored circle in their middles: the root is sufficiently thick
and large: Clusius had the figure and description of this from his friend
Jacques Plateau, who had the plant growing of seed received from Candy.

5 The stalk of this grows some cubit high, being pretty stiff, about the
thickenesse of ones little finger, and covered over with a soft and white
down: the leaves grow dispersed upon the stalk, not much unlike those of the
common kind, but lesser and more divided, and white (while they are young)
covered with a slender and long downinesse: the top of the stalk is divided
into certain branches that bend or hang down their (...), which alternately
amongst (...), lesser and undivided leaves carry cups like as the common one,
ending in five pretty stiff points, in which are contained flowers at first
somewhat like the common kind, but afterward, as they grow bigger, they
change into an elegant red purplish color, with deep colored veins: neither
is the ring or middle part purple as in the common kind, but whitish, having a
purplish pointall, and five threads in the middle: the seeds and seed vessels
are like those of the common kind. Clusius received the seed (...) from
Paludanus returning from his travails into Syria and Egypt, wherefore he calls
it Hyoscyamus Aegyptius, Egyptian Henbane.

5 Hyoscyamus slore rubello. Henbane with a reddish flower.


The Place.
Black Henbane grows almost every where by highways, in the borders of
fields, about dung-hills and vntoiled places; the white Henbane is not found
but in the gardens of those that love physical plants: the which grows in my
garden, and does sow it self from year to year.

The Time.
They spring out of the ground in May, bring forth their flowers in August, and
the seed is ripe in October.

The Names.
Henbane is called of the Grecians, (...): of the Latins, Apollinaris, and
(...) (...): of the Arabians, as Pliny says, Altercum: of some, Faba (...), or
Jupiters beam: of Pythagoras, Zoroastes, and (...) (...), Alterculum, (...),
and Calicularis: of the Tuscanes, Fabulonia, and Faba lupina: of Matthaeus
syluaticus, Dens Caballinus, Milimandrum, (...): of Iacobus a Manlijs,
Herbapinnula: in shops it is called Iusquiamus, and Hyoscyamus: in English,
Henbane in Italian, Hyosquiamo: in Spanish, Velenno: in high Dutch, (...)
(...): in French, Hannebane, Endormie: the other is called Hyoscyamus albus, or
white Henbane.

The Temperature.
These kinds of Henbane are cold in the fourth degree.

The Virtues.
Henbane causes drow sinesse, and mitigateth all kind of pain: it is good
against hot and

The leaves stamped with the ointment Populcon, made of poplar buds, asswageth
the pain of the

Towash the feet in th e (...) of Henbane causes sleep; or given in a clister
it does the

The leaves, seed, and juice taken inwardly causes an unquiet sleep like unto
the sleep of drunkenness,

The seed of white (...) is good against the cough, the falling of waterie
humors into the

The root boiled with vinegar, and the same holden hot in the mouth, eases the
pain of the

CHAP. 67. Of yellow Henbane, or English Tabaco.
Hyoscyamus luteus. Yellow Henbane.


The Description.
YEllow Henbane grows to the height of two cubits: the stalk is thick,
(...), and green of color, full of a spongeous pith, and is divided into
sundry branches set with smooth and even leaves, thick, and full of juice. The
flowers grow at the tops of the branches, orderly placed, of a pale yellow
color, something lesser than those of the black Henbane. The cups wherein the
flowers do stand are like, but lesser, tenderer, and without sharp points,
wherein is set the husk or cod somewhat (...), full of very small seed like the
seed of Marjerome. The root is small and threddy.

The Place.
Yellow Henbane is sown in gardens, where it does prosper exceedingly,
insomuch that it cannot be destroyed where it has once (...) it (...), and it
is dispersed into the most parts of England.

The Time.
It floureth in the Summer months, and (...) till Autumn be far spent, in
which time the seed comes to perfection.

The Names.
Yellow Henbane is called Hyoscyamus (...): of some, Petum, and Petun: of
others, (...), of Nicot a Frenchman that brought the seeds from the Indies, as
also the seeds of the (...) Tabaco, whereof this has been taken for a kind;
insomuch that Lobel has called it (...) Hyoscyamus, or doubtful Henbane, as a
plant participating of Henbane and Tabaco: and it is (...) of diverse in stead
of Tabaco, and called by the same name, for that it has been brought from
(...), a place so called in the Indies, as also from Virginia and Norembega,
for Tabaco; which doubtless taken in (...) works the same kind of
drunkenness that the right Tabaco does. Some use to call this (...), in
English, being a name taken from the Latin.

The Nature.
This kind of Henbane is thought of some to be cold and moist; but after Lobel
it rather (...) than cooles at all, because of the biting taste, as also that
rosenninesse or gummines it is (...) sessed of; which is evidently perceived
both in handling and chewing it in the mouth.

The Virtues.
This herb avails against all apostumes, tumors, inueterate ulcers, botches,
and such like, (...)

It is used of some in stead of Tabaco, but to small purpose or profit,
although it do stupifie and

CHAP. 68. Of Tabaco, or Henbane of Peru.
The Kinds.
THere be two sorts or kinds of Tabaco; one greater, the other lesser: the
greater was brought into Europe out of the provinces of America, which we call
the West Indies; the other from Trinidada, an Island near unto the continent
of the same Indies. Some have added a third sort: and others make the yellow
(...) a kind thereof.

1 Hyoscyamus Peruvianus. Tabaco or Henbane of Peru.
2 Sana Sancta Indorum. Tabaco of Trinidada.


The Description.
1 TAbaco, or Henbane of Peru has very great stalks of the bigness of a
childs (...), growing in fertile and well dunged ground of seven or eight foot
high, dividing it self into sundry branches of great length; whereon are
placed in most comely order very fair long leaves, broad, smooth, and sharp
pointed, (...), and of a light green color, so fastened about the stalk, that
they seem to embrace and compass it about. The flowers grow at the top of the
stalks, in shape like a bell-floure, somewhat long and cornered, hollow
within, of a light carnation (...), tending to whiteness toward the brimmes.
The seed is contained in long (...) pointed cods or seed-vessels like unto the
seed of yellow Henbane, but somewhat smaller and browner of color. The root is
great, thick, and of a woody substance, with some (...) strings anexed
thereunto.

2 Trinidada Tabaco has a thick tough and fibrous root, (...) which
immediately rise up long broad leaves and smooth, of a greenish color, lesser
than those of Peru: among which rises up a stalk dividing it self at the
ground into diverse branches, whereon are set confusedly the like leaves, but
lesser: at the top of the stalks stand up long necked hollow flowers of a pale
purple (...) to a blush color: after which succeed the cods or seed-vessels,
including many small seeds like unto the seed of Marjerome. The whole plant
perishes at the first approach of Winter.

3 Tabacum minimum. Dwarf Tabaco.


3 This third is an herb some spanne or better long, not in face unlike the
precedent, neither defective in the hot and burning taste. The flowers are much
less than those of the yellow Henbane, and of a greenish yellow. The leaves
are small, and narrower those of Sage of Jerusalem. The root is small and
fibrous.

The Place.
These were first brought into Europe (...) of America, which is called the
West Indies, in which is the province or country of Peru: but being now
planted in the gardens of Europe it prospers very well, and comes from seed
in one year to bear both flowers and seed. The which I take to be better for
the constitution of our bodies than that which is brought from India; and that
growing in the Indies better for the people of the same Country:
notwithstanding it is not so thought, nor received of our Tabaconists; for
according to the English Proverb, Far fetched and dear bought is best for
Ladies.

The Time.
Tabaco must be sown in the most (...) (...) that may be found, carlesly cast
abroad in the sowing, without raking it into the ground or any such pain or
industry taken as is requisite in the so ving of other seeds, as my self have
found by proof, who have experimented every way to cause it quickly to grow:
for I have committed some to the earth in the end of March, some in April, and
some in the beginning of May, because I durst not hasard all my seed at one
time, lest some unkindly blast should happen after the sowing, which might be
a great enemy thereunto.

The Names.
The people of America call it Petun: Some, as Lobel and Pena, have given it
these Latin names, Sacra herba, Sancta herba, and Sana Sancta Indorum: and
other, as Dodonaeus, call it Hyoscyamus (...), or Henbane of Peru: Nicolaus
Monardus (...) it Tabacum. That it is Hyoscyami species, or a kind of Henbane,
not only the form being like to yellow Henbane, but the quality also does
declare; for it brings drowsinesse, troubles the senses, and makes a man as
it were drunk by taking of the fume only; as Andrew Theuet testifies, (and
common experience shows:) of some it is called Nicotiana: the which I refer
to the yellow Henbane, for distinctions sake.

The Temperature.
It is hot and dry, and that in the second degree, as Monardis thinks, and is
withal of power to discuss or resolve, and to cleanse away filthy humors,
having also a small astriction, and a stupifying or benumming quality, and it
purges by the stool: and Monardis writes that it has a certain power to
resist poison. And to prove it to be of an hot temperatute, the biting quality
of the leaves does show, which is easily perceived by taste: also the green
leaves laid upon ulcers in (...) parts may serve for a proof of heat in this
plant; because they do draw out filth and corrupted matter, which a cold Simple
would never do. The leaves likewise being chewed draw forth phlegm and water,
as does also the fume taken when the leaves are dried: which things declare
that this is not a little (...); for what things soever, that being chewed or
held in the mouth bring forth phlegm and water, the same be all accounted hot;
as the root of Pellitorie of Spain, of Saxifrage, and other things of like
power. Moreover, the benumming quality hereof is not hard to be perceived, for
upon the taking of the fume at the mouth there follows an infirmity like
unto drunkenness, and many times sleep; as after the taking of Opium: which
also shows in the taste a biting quality, and therefore is not without
heat; which when it is chewed and inwardly taken, it does forthwith show,
causing a certain heat in the chest, and yet withal troubling the wits, as
Petrus Bellonius in his third Book of Singularities does declare; where also
he shows, that the Turks oftentimes do use Opium, and take one dram and
a half thereof at one time; without any other hurt following, saving that they
are thereupon (as it were) taken with a certain light drunkenness. So also
this Tabaco being in taste biting, and in temperature hot, has notwithstanding
a benumming quality. Hereupon it seems to (...), that not only this Henbane
of Peru, but also the juice of poppie otherwise called Opium, (...) of diverse
parts; some biting and hot, and others extreme cold, that is to say,
stupifying or benumming: if so be that this benumming quality proceed of
extreme cold (as Galen and all the old Physicians do hold opinion) Then should
this be cold; but if the benumming faculty does not depend of an extreme cold
quality, but proceeds of the effence of the substance; then Tabaco is not
cold and benumming; but hot and benumming, and the latter not so much by reason
of his temperature, as through the property of his substance; no otherwise
than a purging medicine, which has his sorce not from the temperature, but
from the essence of the whole substance.

The Virtues.
Nicolaus Monardis says, that the (...) hereof are a remedy for the pain in
the head called the

It is a present remedy for the fits of the Mother: it mitigateth the pain of
the gout if it be

It is likewise a remedy for the toothache, if the teeth and gums be rubbed
with a linen cloth

The juice boiled with Sugar in form of a sirrup and inwardly taken, drives
forth worms of

The same does likewise scour and cleanse old and rotten ulcers, and brings
them to perfect

In the Low Countries it is used against scabbes and filthiness of the
skin, and for the cure Theuct says) abstain from the herb Petun or
Tabaco, and do in no wise use it.

The weight of four ounces of the juice hereof drunk purges both upwards
and downwards,

Moreover the same man reported, that he had cured many countriemen of agues
with the distilled

Likewise there is an oil to be taken out of the leaves that heals
merry-gals, kibed heels and

It is good against poison, and takes away the malignitie thereof, if the
juice be given to drink

The dry leaves are used to be taken in a pipe set on fire and sucked into the
stomach, and thrust

Some use to drink it (as it is termed) for wantonness or rather custom,
and cannot forbear

It is taken of some physically in a pipe for that purpose once in a day at the
most, and that in

Some have reported that it little prevails against an hot disease, and that
it profits

They that have seen the proof hereof have credibly reported, that when the
Moors and Indians

The priests and Inchanters of the hot countries do take the fume thereof
until they be (...),

The (...) or distilled water of the first kind is very good against catarrhes,
the dizzinesse of the

It cleereth the sight and takes away the webs and (...) thereof, being
anointed with the

The oil or iui ce dropped into the ears is good against deaseness; a cloth
dipped in (...) same

Many notable medicines are made hereof against the old and inueterate cough,
against (...)

It is also given to such as are accustomed to swoune, and are troubled with
the Collicke

It is used in outward medicines either the herb boiled with oil, wax, rosin
and turpentine, as

It is excellent good in burnings and scaldings with fire, water, oil,
lightning, or such like, boiled

I do make hereof an excellent balsame to cure deep wounds and punctures,
made by some the roots of round Aristolochia or Birthwoort in most fine powder
two ounces, sufficient wax to give it a body; the which keep for thy wounded
poor neighbor, as also the old and filthy ulcers of the legs and other parts
of such as have need of help.

The figures were formerly transposed.

CHAP. 69. Of Tree Nightshade.
Amomum Plinij. Tree Nightshade.


The Description.
THis rare and pleasant Plant, called tree Nightshade, is taken of some to be a
kind of Ginnie pepper, but not rightly; of others for a kind of Nightshade,
whose judgment and censure I gladly admit; for that it does more fitly answer
it both in the form and nature. It grows up like unto a small shrubbe or
woody hedge bush, two or three cubits high, covered with a greenish bark set
with many small twiggie branches, and garnished with many long leaves very
green, like unto those of the Peach tree. The flowers are white, with a
certain yellow prick or pointell in the middle, like unto the flowers of
garden Nightshade. After which succeed small round berries very red of
color, and of the same substance with Winter Cherries, wherein are contained
little flat yellow seeds. The root is compact of many small (...) yellow
strings.

The Place.
It grows not wild in these cold regions, but we have them in our gardens,
rather for pleasure than profit, or any good quality as yet known.

The Time.
It is kept in pots and tubs with earth and such like in houses during the
extremity of Winter, because it cannot endure the coldness of our cold
climate; and is set abroad into the Garden in March or April: it floureth in
May, and the fruit is ripe in September.

The Names.
Tree Nightshade is called in Latin Solanum Arborescens: of some,
Strychnodendron: and some judge it to be (...) of (...): it is Pseudocapsicum
of Dodonaeus.

The Nature and Virtues.
We have not as yet any thing set down as touching the temperature or virtues
of this Plant, but it is referred of some to the kinds of Ginnie pepper, but
without any reason at all; for Ginny pepper though it bring forth fruit very
like in shape unto this plant, yet in taste most unlike, for that Capsicum or
Ginny pepper is more sharp in taste than our common pepper, and the other has
no taste of biting at all, but is like unto the Berries of Garden Nightshade in
taste, although they differ in color: which has moved some to call this plant
red Nightshade, of the color of the berries: and Tree Nightshade, of the
woody substance which does continue and grow from year to year: and Ginnie
pepper dies at the first approach of Winter.

CHAP. 70. Of Balm Apple, or Apple of Jerusalem.
1 Balsamina mas. The male Balsam Apple.
2 Balsamina foemina. The female Balsam Apple.


The Description.
1 THe male Balm Apple has long, small, and tender branches, set with leaves
like those of the vine; and the like small clasping tendrels wherewith it
catches hold of such things as do grow near unto it, not able by reason of
his weakness to stand upright without some pole or other thing to support it.
The flowers consist of five small leaves of a mean bigness, and are of a
faint yellow color: which being past, there do come in place long Apples,
something sharp toward the point almost like an egg, rough all over as it
were with small harmless prickles, red both within and without when they be
ripe, and cleave in sunder of themselves: in the Apple lies great broad flat
seeds, like those of Pompion or Citrull, but something black when they be
withered. The root is threddie, and disperseth it self far abroad in the
ground.

2 The female Balm Apple does not a little differ from the former: it brings
forth stalks not running or climing like the other, but a most thick and fat
truncke or stock full of juice, in substance like the stalks of Purslane, of a
reddish color and somewhat shining. The leaves be long and narrow, in shape
like those of Willow or the Peach tree, somewhat toothed or notched about the
edges: among which grow the flowers of an incarnate color tending to
blewnesse, having a small spur or tail annexed thereto as has the Larks
heel, of a fair light crimson color: in their places come up the fruit or
Apples rough and hairy, but lesser than those of the former, yellow when they
be ripe, which likewise cleave asunder of themselves and cast abroad their
seeds much (...) unto Lentils, says mine Author. But those which I have from
year to year in my Garden bring forth seed like the Cole-florey or Mustard
seed; whether they be of two kinds, or the climate (...) alter the (...), it
(...) disputable.

The Place.
These plants do prosper best in hot Regions: they are strangers in England,
and do with great labor and industry grow in these cold Countries.

The Time.
They must be sown in the beginning of April in a bed of hot horse dung, even
as MuskeMelons, Cucumbers, and such like cold fruits are; and replanted abroad
from the said bed into the most hot and fertile place of the Garden at such
time as they have gotten three leaves a (...).

The Names.
Diversely (...) this plant been named; some calling it by one name, and some by
another, every one as it seemed good to his fancy. Baptista Sardus calls it
Balsamina (...): others, Viticella, and Charantia, as also Pomum (...), or
(...) of Jerusalem: in English, Balm (...) Italian, Caranza: in the Germane
tongue, Balsam opffel: in French, Merueille some of the Latins have called it
Pomum mirabile, or marvelous Apples. It is thought to be named Balsamina,
because the oil wherein the ripe Apples be steeped or infused, is taken to be
profitable for many things, as is Opobalsamum, or the liquour of the plant
Balsamum.

The female Balsam Apple is likewise called (...), and oftentimes in the Neuter
Gender Balsaminum: Gesner chooses rather to name it Balsamina amygdaloides:
(...) Cordus, Balsamella: others, Balsamina foemina: in English, the Female
Balm Apples.

The Nature.
The fruit or apples hereof, as also the leaves, do notably dry, having
withal a certain moderate coldness very near to a mean temperature, that
is after some hot, in the first, and dry in the second degree.

The (...).
The leaves are reported to heal green wounds if they be bruised and laid
thereon; and taken

The leaves of the male Balsamina dried in the shadow, and beaten into powder
and given in

The oil which is drawn forth of the fruit does cure all green and fresh
wounds as the true

It profits women that are in great extremity of childe-birth in taking away
the pain of the

It cures the Hemorrhoides and all other pains of the fundament, being
thereto applied with

The leaves drunken in wine, heal ruptures.

I find little or nothing written of the property or virtues of the female
kind, but that it is

Oil olive in which the fruit (the seed taken forth) is either set in the
Sun, as we dowhen we

It cures the ulcers of the dugs or paps, the head of the yard or matrix, as
also the inflammation

This apple is with good success applied unto wounds, pricks and hurts of the
sinews. It has

It is reported that such as be barren are made fruitful herewith, if the
woman first be bathed in

CHAP. 71. Of Ginnie or Indian Pepper.
1 Capsicum longioribus siliquis. Long codded Ginnie Pepper.
2 Capsicum rotundioribus siliquis. Round codded Ginnie Pepper.
3 Capsicum minimis siliquis. Small codded Ginnie Pepper.
(...) siliquae variae. Varieties of the cods of Ginnie Pepper.


The Description.
1 THe first of these plants has square stalks a foot high or (...) more, set
with many thick and fat leaves, not unlike to those of garden Nightshade, but
narrower and sharper pointed, of a dark green color. The (...) grow along
the stalks, out of the wings of the leaves, of a white color, having for the
most part five small (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) a star, with a green button
in the middle. (...) them grow the cods, (...) at the first, and when they be
ripe of a brave color glittering like red coral, in which is contained little
flat seed; of a light yellow color, of a hot biting taste like common pepper,
as is also the cod it self: which is song, and as big as a finger, and sharp
pointed.

2 The difference that is between this and the last described is small, for it
consists in nothing but that the cods are pretty large and round, after the
fashion of cherries, and not so long as those of the former.

3 The third kind of Ginnie pepper is like unto the precedent in leaves,
flowers, and stalks. The cods hereof are small, round, and red, very like to
the berries of Dulcamara or woody Nightshade, both in bigness, color, and
substance, wherein consists the difference: notwithstanding the seed and cods
are very sharp and biting, as those of the first kind.

Capsici siliquae variae. Varieties of the cods of Ginnie pepper.


There are many other varieties of Ginnie pepper, which chiefly consist in the
shape and color of the cods: wherefore I thought good (and that chiefly
because it is a plant that will hardly brook our climate) only to present you
with the figures of their several shapes, whereof the cods of (...) stand or
grow upright, and other some hang (...): such as desire further information of
this plant, may be abundantly satisfied in Clusius his Curaeposter. from page
95. to page 108. where they shall find these treated of at large in a treatise
written in Italian by Gregory de Regio, a Capuchine Friar, and sent to Clusius,
who translating it into Latin, left it to be set forth with other his
observations, whith was (...) 2. years after his death, to wit Anno (...)
1611. The figures we here give are the same which are in that tractate.

The Place.
These plants are brought from foreign countries, as Ginnie, India, and those
parts, into Spain and Italy: from whence we have received seed for our English
gardens, where they come to (...): but the cod does not come to that bright red
color which naturally it is (...) with, which has happened by reason of these
unkindly years that are past: but we expect better when God shall send us a
hot and temperate year.

The Time.
The seeds hereof must be sown in a bed of hot horse-dung, as muske-Melons
are, and (...) into a pot when they have gotten three or four leaves, that it
may the more conveniently (...) carried from place to place to receive the heat
of the sun: and are toward Autumn to be carried into some house, to avoid
the injury of the cold nights of that time of the year, when it is (...)
bear his fruit.

The Names.
(...) calls it in Greek (...): in Latin, Capsicum: and it is thought to be
that which (...) names Zinziber caninum, or dogs Ginger: and Pliny,
Siliquastrum, which is more like in taste to pepper than is Panax, and it is
therefore called Piperitis, as he has written in his 19. book, 12. chap.
(...) (says he) has the taste of pepper and Siliquastrum, for which cause it
is called Piperitis. The later Herbarists do oftentimes call it Piper Indianum,
or Indicum, sometimes Piper (...), or Piper Hispanicum: in English it is called
Ginnie pepper, and Indian pepper: in the Germane tongue, (...) Pfeffer: in low
Dutch, (...) Peper: in French, Poiure (...) well known in the shops at
Billingsgate by the name of Ginnie pepper, where it is usually to be bought.

The Temperature.
Ginnie pepper is extreme hot and dry even in the fourth degree: that is to
say, far hotter (...) drier then (...) shows dogs ginger to be.

The Virtues.
Ginnie pepper has the taste of pepper, but not the power or virtue,
notwithstanding in Spain (...) writes that it kills dogs.

It is said to die or color like Saffron; and being received in such sort as
Saffron is usually (...),

It dissolueth the swellings about the throat called the Kings Evil, as
kernels and cold swellings;

CHAP. 72. Of horned Poppie.
The Description.
1 THe yellow horned Poppie has whitish leaves very much cut or jagged,
somewhat like the leaves of garden Poppie, but rougher and more hairie. The
stalks be long, round, and brittle. The flowers be large and yellow, consisting
of four leaves; which being past, there come long husks or cods, crooked like
an horn or cornet, wherein is contained small black seed. The root is
great, thick, scaly, and rough, continuing long.

2 The second kind of horned Poppie is much slenderer and lesser than the
precedent, and has leaves with like deep cuts as Rocket has, and something
hairie. The stalks be very slender, brittle, and branched into diverse arms or
wings; the flowers small, made of four little leaves, of a red color, with a
small struck of black toward the (...); after which comes the seed, enclosed
in slender, long, crooked cods full of blackish seed. The root is small and
single, and dies every year.

3 This is much like the last described, and according to Clusius, rather a
variety than difference. It is distinguished from the last mentioned by the
smoothnes of the leaves, and the color of the flowers, which are of a pale
yellowish red, both which accidents Clusius affirms happen to the (...),
toward the later end of summer.

4 There is another sort of horned Poppie altogether lesser than the last
described, having tenderer leaves, cut into fine little parcels: the flower is
likewise lesser, of a blew purple color like the double Violers

1 (...) (...) flore lut co. Yellow horned Poppie.
2 (...) (...) (...) rubro. Red horned Poppie.
3 Papauer (...) (...) glabrum. Red horned Poppie (...) smooth leaves.
4 Papauer cornutum flore violaceo. Violet colored horned Poppie.


The Place.
The yellow horned Poppie grows upon the sands and banks of the sea: I have
found it growing near unto Rye in Kent, in the Isles of Shepey and Thanet, at
Lee in Essex, at Harwich, at Whitestable, and many other places along the
English coast.

The second grows not wild in England. Angelus Palea, and Bartholomaeus ab
Vrbe-veterum, who have commented upon Mesue, write that they found this red
horned Poppie in the kingdoms of Arragon and Castile in Spain, and the fields
near unto common paths. They do grow in my Garden very plentifully.

The Time.
They flower from May to the end of August.

The Names.
Most Writers have taken horned Poppie, especially that with red flowers to be
Glaucium: neither is this their opinion altogether improbable; for as (...)
says, Glaucium has leaves like those of horned Poppey, but (...), that is to
say fatter, (...), low, or lying on the ground, of a strong smell and of a
bitter taste; the juice also is much like in color to Saffron. Now Lobel and
Pena witness, that this horned Poppie has the same kind of juice, as my
self likewise can testify. Dioscorides says that Glaucium grows about
Hierapolis, a city in Syria; but what hinders that it should not be found
also somewhere else? (...) things show it has a great affinity with Glaucium,
if it be not the true and legitimate Glaucium of D oscorides. Howbeit the first
is the Mecon (...), or Papauer cor niculatum of the Ancients, by the common
consent of all late Writers: in English, Sea Poppie' and Horned Poppie: in
Dutch, (...) and Horn Heule: in the Germane Tongue, (...): in French, Pauot
(...): in Spanish, Dormider a marina.

The Nature.
Horned Poppies are hot and dry in the third degree.

The Virtues.
The root of horned Poppie boiled in water unto the consumption of the one
half, and drunk,

The seed taken in the quantity of a spoonefull loses the belly gently.

The juice mixed with meal and honey, mundifieth old rotten and filthievlcers.

The leaves and flowers put into unguents or salues appropriate for green
wounds, digest them The figure that formerly was in the (...) place of this
chap. under the title of (...) (...) (...) (...), was of a (...) called by
(...), (...) (...). (...). You shall find it hereafter in the (...) place. The
Description as far as I can judge (...) of the (...) (...) which (...) page 909.


CHAP. 73. Of Garden Poppies.
The Description.
1 THe leaves of white Poppie are long, broad, smooth, longer than the leaves
of (...), whiter, and cut in the edges: the stem or stalk is straight and
brittle, oftentimes a yard and a half high: on the top whereof grow white
flowers, in which at the very beginning appears a small head, accompanied
with a number of threads or chiues, which being full grown is round, and yet
something long withal, and has a cover or crownet upon the top; it is with
many filmes or thin skins divided into coffers or several partitions, in which
is contained abundance of small round and whitish seed. The root grows deep,
and is of no estimation nor continuance.

2 Like unto this is the black garden Poppie, saving that the flowers are not
so white and shining, but usually red, or at least spotted or straked with some
lines of purple. The leaves are greater, more iagged, and sharper pointed. The
seed is likewise blacker, which makes the difference.

3 There is also another garden Poppie whose leaves are much more sinuated, or
crested, and the flower also is all iagged or finely cut about the edges, and
of this sort there is also both black and white. The flowers of the black are
red, and the seed black; and the other has both the flowers and seed white.

4 There are diverse varieties of double Poppies of both these kinds, and their
colors are commonly either white, red, dark purple, scarlet, or mixed of some
of these. They differ from the former only in the doubleness of their flowers.

1 Papauer sativum album. White garden Poppie.
2 Papauer sativum nigrum. Black Garden Poppie.
3 Papauer simbriatum album. White iagged Poppie.
4 Papauer flo. multipl. albo and nigro. The double white and black Poppie.


5 There is also another kind of (...) which ost times is sound wild; the
slalles, (...) flowers, and heads are like, but less than those of the (...):
the (...) are of an (...) bluish purple color; after which sollow heads short
and round, which under their cover or crownet have little holes by which the
seed may fall out; contrary to the heads of the sormer, which are close and
open not of themselves. There is also a double one of this kind.

The Place.
These kind of Poppies are sown in gardens, and do afterward come of the
fallings of their seed.

The Time.
They flower most commonly in June. The seed is perfected in July and August.

5 Papauer syluestre. Wild Poppie.


The Names.
Poppie is called of the Graecians (...): of the Latins, Papauer: the shops
keep the Latin name: it is called in high Dutch, Magsamen: in low Dutch (...)
and Mancop: in English, Poppie and Cheesebowls: in French, Pauot, and Oliette,
by the Wallons.

The garden Poppie which has black seeds, is surnamed of Dioscorides (...),
or wild, and is as he says called (...), because Opium flows from it: of
Pliny and of the Latins, Papauer nigrum. whereof there be many variable
colors, and of great beauty, although of evil smell, whereupon our
gentlewomen do call it Ione Silver pin.

The Temperature.
All the Poppies are cold, as Galen testifies in his book of the Faculties of
simple medicines.

The Virtues.
This seed, as Galen says in his book of the Faculties

The oil which is pressed out of it is pleasant and

A greater force is in the knobs or heads, which do Opium, but more gentle.
Opium, or the condensed juice of Poppie heads is strongest of all: (...) (which
is the juice of the heads and leaves) is weaker. Both of them any ways taken
either inwardly, or outwardly applied to the head, provoke sleep. Opium
somewhat too plentifully taken does also (...) death, as Pliny truly writes.

It mitigateth all kind of pains: but it leaves behind it oftentimes a
mischief worse than

The use of it, as Galen in his 11. book of medicines according to the places
affected, says, is so

So also colliries or eye medicines made with Opium have been hurtful to
many; insomuch Opium to mittigate the extreme pains of the ears brings
hardness of hearing. Wherefore all those medicines and compounds are to be
shunned that are to be made of Opium, and are not to be used but in extreme
necessity; and that it is, when no other mitigater or asswager of pain does
any thing prevail, as Galen in his third book of Medicines, according to the
places affected, does evidently declare.

The leaves of poppie boiled in water with a little sugar and drunk, causes
sleep: or if it be boiled

The heads of Poppie boiled in water with sugar to a sirrup causes sleep, and
is good against

The green knops of Poppie stamped with barley meal, and a little barrowes
grease, helps S. Ignis sacer.

The leaves, knops and seed stamped with vinegar, woman's milk, and saffron,
cures an Erysipelas,

The seed of black Poppy drunk in wine stops the flux of the belly, and the
overmuch flowing

A Caudle made of the seeds of white poppy, or made into Almond milk, and so
given causes

It is manifest that this wild Poppy (which I have described in the fifth
place) is that of Diacodium is to be made; as Galen has at large treated in
his seventh book of Medicines, according to the places affected. Crito also,
and after him Themison and Democrates do appoint (...), or the wild Poppy, to
be in the same composition; and even that same Democritus adds, that it
should be that which is not sown: and such an one is this, which grows
without sowing. Dod.

CHAP. 74. Of Corne-Rose, or wild Poppy.
1 Papauer Rhoeas. Red Poppy, or Corne-rose.
4 Papauer spinosum. Prickly Poppy.


The Description.
1 THe stalks of red Poppy be black, tender, and brittle, somewhat hairy: the
leaves are cut round about with deep gashes like those of Succory or wild
Rocket: the flowers grow forth at the tops of the stalks, being of a beautiful
and gallant red color, with blackish threads compassing about the middle part
of the head: which being fully grown, is lesser than that of the garden Poppy:
the seed is small and black.

2 There is also a kind hereof in all (...) agreeing with the former, saving
that the flowers of this are very double and beautiful, and therein only
consists the difference.

3 There is a small kind of red Poppy growing commonly wild together with the
first described, which is lesser in all parts, and the flowers are of a fainter
or ouerworne red, inclining somewhat to orange.

4 Besides these there is another rare plant, which all men, and that very
fitly, have referred to the kinds of Poppy. This has a slender long and
fibrous root, from which arises a stalk some cubit high, divided into sundry
branches, round, crested, prickly, and full of a white pith. The leaves are
divided after the manner of horned poppy, smooth, with white veins and prickly
edges: the flower is yellow, and consists of four or five leaves; after which
succeeds a longish head, being either four, five, or six cornered, having many
yellow threads incompassing it: the head whilst it is tender is reddish at the
top, but being ripe it is black, and it is set with many and stiff pricks.
The seed is round, black, and pointed, being six times as big as that of the
ordinary Poppy.

The Place.
They grow in earable grounds, among wheat, spelt, rye, barley, otes, and other
grain, and in the borders of fields. The double red, and prickly Poppy are not
to be found in this kingdom, unless in the gardens of some prime herbarists.

The Time.
The fields are garnished and ouerspred with these wild poppies in June and
August.

The Names.
Wild Poppy is called in Greek of Dioscorides, (...): in Latin, Papauer
erraticum: (...) according to the Greek names it Papauer sluidum: as also
Lobel, who calls it Pap. Rhoe as, because the flower thereof soon falls away.
Which name (...) as may for the same cause be common, not only to these, but
also to the others, if it be so called of the speedy falling of the flowers:
but if it be syrnamed Rhoe as of the falling away of the seed (as it appears)
then shall it be proper to that which is described in the fifth place in the
foregoing chapter, out of whose heads the seed easily and quickly falls; as it
does also out of this, yet less manifestly. They name it in French
Cocquelicot, Confanons, Pauot sauvage: in Dutch, Collen bloemen; Coren rosen:
in high Dutch, Klapper Rossen: in English, Red Poppy, and Corne-rose.

4 Some have called this Ficus infernalis, from the Italian name Figo del
inferno. But Clusius and Bauhine have termed it Papauer spinosum: and the later
of them would have it (and that not without good reason) to be Glaucium of
Dioscorides, (...). 3. cap. 100. And I also probably conjecture it to be the
Hippomanes of Crateuas, mentioned by the Greek Scholiast of Theocritus, as I
have formerly briefly declared Chap. 62.

The Nature.
The faculty of the wild poppies is like to that of the other poppies; that
is to say cold, and causing sleep.

The Virtues.
Most men being led rather by false experiments than reason, commend the
flowers against the Baptista Sardus might be counted the Author of this error;
who has written, That most men have given the flowers of this poppy against
the pain of the sides, and that it is good against the spitting ofbloud.

CHAP. 75. Of Bastard wild Poppy.
The Description.
THe first of these bastard wild Poppies has slender weak stemmes a foot
high, rough and hairy, set with leaves not unlike to those of Rocket, made of
many small leaves deeply cut or iagged about the edges. The flowers grow at the
top of the stalks, of a red color, with some small blackness toward the
bottom. The seed is small, contained in little round knobs. The seed is small
and threddy.

2 The second is like the first, saving that the cods hereof be long, and the
other more round, wherein the difference does consist.

The Place.
These plants do grow in the corn fields in Somersetshire, and by the hedges
and highways, as yetrauell from London to Bathe. Lobel found it growing in
the next field unto a village in Kent called Southfleet, my self being in his
company, of purpose to discover some strange plants not hitherto written of.

Mr. Robert Lorkin and I found both these growing in Chelsey fields, as also in
those belonging to Hamersmith: but the shorter headed one is a flower of a more
elegant color, and not so plentiful as the other.

1 Argemone capitulotorulo. Bastard wild Poppy.
2 Argemone capitulo longiore. Long codded wild Poppy.


The Time.
They flower in the beginning of August, and their seed is ripe at the end
thereof.

The Names.
The bastard wild Poppy is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Argemone,
Argemonia, (...), Concordalis, and Herba liburnica: of some, Pergalium, Arsela,
and Sacrocolla Herba: in English, Wind rose, and bastard wild poppy.

The Temperature.
They are hot and dry in the third degree.

The Virtues.
The leaves stamped, and the juice dropped into the eyes eases the
inflammation thereof; and Argema, whereof it took his name: which disease when
it happens on the black of the eye it appears white; and contrariwise when it
is in the white then it appears black of color.

The leaves stamped and bound unto the eyes or face that are black or blew by
means of some

The leaves and roots stamped, and the juice given in drink, helps the
wringings or gripings

The herb stamped, cures any wound, ulcer, canker, or fistula, being made up
into an unguent

The juice taken in the weight of two drammes, with wine, mightily expels
poison or venom.

The juice takes away warts if they be rubbed therewith; and being taken in
meat it helps

CHAP. 76. Of Winde-floures.
The Kinds.
THe stock or kindred of the Anemones or Winde-floures, especially in their
varieties of colors, are without number, or at the least not sufficiently
known unto any one that hathwritten of plants. For Dodonoeus has set forth
five sorts; Lobel eight; Tabernamontanus ten: My self have in my garden twelve
different sorts: and yet I do hear of diverse more differing very notably from
any of these; which I have briefly touched, though not figured, every new
year bringing with it new and strange kinds; and every country his peculiar
plants of this sort, which are sent unto us from far countries, in hope to
receive from us such as our country yields.

1 Anemone tuberosa radice. Purple Winde-floure.
2 Anemone coccinea multiplex. Double Skarlet Winde-floure.


The Description.
1 THe first kind of Anemone or Winde-floure has small leaves very much snipt
or iagged almost like unto Camomile, or Adonis flower: among which rises up a
stalk bare or naked almost unto the top; at which place is set two or three
leaves like the other: and at the top of the stalk comes forth a fair and
beautiful flower compact of seven leaves, and sometimes eight, of a violet
color tending to purple. It is impossible to describe the color in his full
perfection, considering the variable mixtures. The root is tuberous or knobby,
(...) very brittle.

3 Anemone maxima Chalcedonica polyanthos. The great double Winde-floure of
Bithynia.
4 Anemone Chalcedonica simplici flore. The single Winde-floure of Bithynia.
5 Anemone Bulbocastani radice. Chestnut Winde-floure.


2 The second kind of Anemone has leaves like to the precedent, insomuch that
it is hard to distinguish the one from the other but by the flowers only: for
those of this plant are of a most bright and fair skarlet color, and as
double as the Marigold; and the other not so. The root is knobby and very
brittle, as is the former.

3 The great Anemone has double flowers, usually called the Anemone of
Chalcedon (which is a city in Bithynia) and great broad leaves deeply cut in
the edges, not unlike to those of the field Crow-foot, of an ouerworne green
color: amongst which rises up a naked bare stalk almost unto the top, where
there stand two or three leaves in shape like the others, but lesser; sometimes
changed into reddish stripes, confusedly mixed here and there in the said
leaves. On the top of the stalk stands a most gallant flower very double, of
a perfect red color, the which is sometimes striped amongst the red with a
little line or two of yellow in the middle; from which middle comes forth
many blackish thrums. The seed is not to be found that I could ever observe,
but is carried away with the wind. The root is thick and knobby.

4 The fourth agrees with the first kind of Anemone, in roots, leaves, stalks,
and shape of flowers, differing in that, that this plant brings forth fair
single red flowers, and the other of a violet color, as aforesaid.

5 The fifth sort of Anemone has many small iagged leaves like those of
Coriander, proceeding from a knobby root resembling the root of Bulbocastanum
or earth Chestnut. The stalk rises up amongst the leaves of two hands high,
bearing at the top a single flower, consisting of a pale or border of little
purple leaves, sometimes red, and often of a white color set about a blackish
pointall, thrummed over with many small blackish hairs.

6 Anemone latifolia Clusij. Broad leaued Winde-floure.
7 Anemone latifolia (...) (...). The double yellow wind-floure.


6 The sixth has very broad leaves in respect of all the rest of the Anemones,
not unlike to those of the common Mallow, but green on the upper part, and
tending to redness underneath, like the leaves of Sow-bread. The stalk is
like that of the last described, on the top whereof grows a fair yellow
star-floure, with a head ingirt with yellow thrums. The root (says my Author)
is a finger long, thick and knobby.

7 There is also another whose lower leaves resemble those of the last
described, yet those which grow next above them are more divided or cut in:
amongst these leaves rises up a stalk

8 Anemone Geranifolia. Storkes bill Winde-floure.
9 Anemone Matthioli. Matthiolus white Winde-floure.
10 Anemone trifolia. Three leaued Winde-floure.
11 Anemone Papaueracea. Poppy Winde-floure.
some foot high, the top whereof is adorned with a flower consisting of two
ranks of leaves, whereof those on the outside are larger, rounder pointed, and
sometimes snipt in a little; the rest (...) narrower and sharper pointed: the
color of these leaves is yellow, deeper on the inside, and on the outside
there are some small purple veins running along these leaves of the flower.
The root is some two inches long, the thickenesse of ones little finger, with
some tuberous knobs hanging thereat

8 The eighth has many large leaves deeply cut or iagged, in shape like those
of the Storks bil or Pinke-needle; among which rises up a naked stalk, set
about toward the top with the like leaves, but smaller and more finely cut,
bearing at the top of the stalk a single flower consisting of many small blew
leaves, which do change sometimes into purple, and oftentimes into white, set
about a blackish pointall, with some small threads like unto a pale or border.
The root is thick and knobby.

9 The ninth sort of Anemone has leaves like unto the garden Crow-foot: the
stalk rises up from amongst the leaves, of a foot high, bearing at the top
fair white flowers made of five small leaves; in the middle whereof are many
little yellow chiues or threads. The root is made of many slender threads or
strings, contrary to all the rest of the Winde-floures.

10 The tenth sort of Anemone has many (...) like unto the common meadow
Trefoile, fleightly snipt about the edges like a saw: on the top of the slender
stalks stands a single white flower tending to purple, consisting of eight
small leaves, resembling in shape the flowers of common field Crow-foot. The
root is knobby, with certain strings (...) thereto.

11 The eleventh kind of Anemone has many iagged leaves cut even to the
middle rib, resembling the leaves of Geranium Columbinum, or Doves foot. The
leaves that do embrace the tender weak stalks are flat and slightly cut: the
flowers grow at the top of the stalks, of a bright shining purple color, set
about a blackish pointall, with small thrums or chiues like a pale. The root is
knobby, thick, and very brittle, as are most of those of the Anemones.

The Place.
All the sorts of Anemones are strangers, and not found growing wild in
England; notwithstanding all and every sort of them do grow in my garden very
plentifully.

The Time.
They do flower from the beginning of January to the end of April, at what
time the flowers do fade, and the seed flies away with the wind, if there be
any seed at all; the which I could never as yet observe.

The Names.
Anemone, or Wind flower is so called, (...); that is to say, of the wind;
for the flower does never open it self but when the wind does blow, as Pliny
writes: whereupon also it is named of diverse Herba venti: in English,
Winde-floure.

Those with double flowers are called in the Turkey tongue Giul, and Gul
Catamer: and those with small iagged leaves and double flowers are called Lale
benzede, and Galipoli lale. They do call those with small iagged leaves and
single flowers Binizate and binizade, and Binizante.

The Temperature.
All the kinds of Anemones are sharp, biting the tongue; and of a binding
quality.

The Virtues.
The leaves stamped, and the juice sniffed up into the nose purges the head
mightily.

The root champed or chewed procures spitting, and causes water and phlegm to
run forth out

It profits in collyries for the eyes, to cease the inflammation thereof.

The juice mundifieth and cleanses malign, virulent, and corrosiue ulcers.

The leaves and stalks boiled and eaten of Nurses cause them to have much
milk: it provoke

CHAP. 77. Of diverse other Anemones, or Winde-floures.
The Kinds.
THese flowers which are in such esteem for their beauty may well be divided
into two sorts, that is, the Latifolia, or broad leaued, and the Tenuifolia, or
narrow leaued: now of each of these sorts there are infinite varieties, which
consist in the singleness and doubleness of the flowers, and in their
diversity of colors; which would ask a large discourse to handle exactly.
Wherefore I only intend (besides those set down by our Author) to give you
the figures of some few others, with their description, briefly taken out of
the Works of the learned and diligent Herbarist Carolus Clusius; where such as
desire further discourse upon this subject may be abundantly satisfied: and
such as do not understand Latin may find as large satisfaction in the late
Work of Mr. John Parkinson; whereas they shall not only have their history
at large, but also learn the way to raise them of seed, which has been a
thing not long known (except to some few;) and thence has risen this great
variety of these flowers, wherewith some gardens so much abound.

The Description.
1 THe root of this is like to that of the great double red Anemone described
in the third place of the precedent chapter; and the leaves also are like, but
lesser and deeper colored. The stalk grows some foot high, slender and
green, at the top whereof grows a single flower, consisting of eight leaves
of a bright shining skarlet color on the inside, with a paler colored ring
incompassing a hairy head set about with purple thrums: the outside of the
flower is hairy or downie. This is Anem. latifol. simpl. slo. 16. of Clusius.

1 Anemone latifolia slore coccineo. The broad leaued skarlet Anemone.
2 Anemone latifolia slore magno coccineo. The skarlet Anemone with the large
flower.


2 This in shape of roots and leaves is like the former, but the leaves are
blacker, and more shining on their upper sides: the stalk also is like to
others of this kind, and at the top carries a large (...) consisting of eight
broad leaves, being on the inside of a bright skarlet color, without any
circle; and the thrums that ingirt the hairy head are of a sanguine color.
This head (as in others of this kindred) grows larger after the falling of the
flower, and at length turns into a downie substance, wherein a smooth black
seed is enclosed like as in other Anemones; which sown as soon as it is ripe
usually comes up before winter. This is Anem. latifol. simpl. slore 17. of
(...).

3 This differs not from the former but in flowers, which are of an
orange-tawny color, like that of Come-rose, or red Poppy; and the bottomes of
the leaves of the flowers are of a paler color, which make a ring or circle
about the hairy head. This is the eighteenth of Clusius.

Besides these varieties here mentioned, there are many others, which in the
color of the leaves of the flower, or the nails which make a circle at the
bottom thereof, do differ each from other. Now let us come to the narrow
leaued ones, which also differ little but in color of their flowers.

3 Anemone latifolia Byzantina. The broad leaued Anemone of Constantinople.
4 Anemone tenuifolia flore amplo sanguineo. Small leaued Anemone with the
sanguine flower.
5 Anemone tenuifolia flore coccineo. The small leaued skarlet Anemone.
6 Anemone tenuifol. flo. dilute purpureo. The light purple small leaued
Anemone.


7 Anemone tenuifol. flo. exalbido. The whitish small leaued Anemone.
8 Anemone teuuifolia flo. carneo striato. The striped flesh-coloured Anemone.
9 Anemone tenuifol. flo. pleno coccin. The small leaued double crimson Anemone.
10 Anemone tenuifol. flo. pleno atropurpurascente. The double dark purple
Anemone.


4 The root of this is knotty and tuberous like those of other Anemones, and
the leaves are much divided and cut in like to those of the first described in
the former Chapter: the stalk (which has three or four leaves ingirting it,
as in all other Anemones) at the top sustaineth a fair sanguine flower
consisting of six large leaves with great white nails. The seeds are contained
in downie heads like as those of the former. This is (...). tenuifol. simpl.
flo. 6. of Clusius.

5 This differs from the former in the flower, which consists of six leaves
made somewhat rounder than those of the precedent: their color is between a
skarlet and sanguine. And there is a variety hereof also of a brick color.
This is the eighth of Clusius.

6 This differs from the rest, in that the flower is composed of some fourteen
or more leaves, and these of a light purple, or flesh-colors. This is the ninth
of Clusius.

7 The flower of this is large, consisting of six leaves, being at the first of
a whitish green, and then tending to a flesh color, with their nails green
on the outside, and white within, and the threads in the middle of a flesh
color. There is a lesser of this kind, with the flower of a flesh color, and
white on the outside, and wholly white within, with the nails greenish. These
are the tenth and eleventh of Clusius.

8 This flower also consists of six leaves of a flesh color, with whitish
edges on the outside; the inside is whitish, with flesh colored veins running
to the midst thereof.

Besides these single kinds there are diverse double both of the broad and
narrow leaued Anemones, whereof I will only describe and figure two, and refer
you to the forementioned Authors for the rest, which differ from these only in
color.

9 This broad leaued double Anemonie has roots, stalks, and leaves like those
of the single ones of this kind, and at the top of the stalk there stands a
fair large flower composed of two or three ranks of leaves, small and long,
being of a kind of skarlet or orange-tawny color; the bottomes of these
leaves make a whitish circle, which gives a great beauty to the flower; and the
downie head is ingirt with sanguine threads tipped with blew. This is the (...)
major 1. of Clusius.

10 This in shape of roots, leaves, and stalks resembles the formerly
described narrow leaued Anemones, but the flower is much different from them;
for it consists first of diverse broad leaves, which incompasse a great number
of smaller narrow leaves, which together make a very fair and beautiful
flower: the outer leaves hereof are red, and the inner leaves of a purple
Velvet color.

Of this kind there are diverse varieties, as the double white, crimson, blush,
purple, blew, carnation, rose-coloured, etc.

The Place and Time.
These are only to be found in gardens, and bring forth their flowers in the
Spring.

Their Names.
I judge it no ways pertinent to set down more of the names than is already
delivered in their several titles and descriptions.

Their Temper and Virtues.
These are of a hot and biting faculty, and not (that I know of) at this day
used in medicines,

Trallianus also says, That the flowers beaten in oil, and so anointed, cause
hair to grow where

The virtues set down in the former Chapter do also belong to these here
treated of, as these here delivered are also proper to them.

CHAP. 78. Of wild Anemones, or Winde-floures.
The Kinds.
LIke as there be many and diverse sorts of the garden Anemones, so are there of
the wild kinds also, which do vary especially in their flowers.

1 Anemone nemorum lutea. Yellow wild Wind flower.
2 Anemone nemorum alba. White wind flower.
3 Anemone nemorum flo. pleno albo. The double white wood Anemone.
4 Anemone nemorum flo. pleno purpurascente. The double purplish wood Anemone.


The Description.
1 THe first of these wild Anemones has iagged leaves deeply cut or
indented, which do grow upon the middle part of a weak and tender stalk: at
the top whereof does stand a pretty yellow flower made of six small leaves,
and in the middle of the flower there is a (...) blackish pointell, and
certain slender chiues or threads. The root is small, some ewhat knottie and
very brittle.

2 The second has iagged leaves, not unlike to water Crowfoot or mountain
Crowfoot. The flower grows at the top of the stalk not unlike to the
precedent in shape, saving that this is of a milk white color, the root is
like the other.

There is also of this single kind two other varieties, the one with a purple
flower, which (...) may therefore call Anemone nemorum purpurea, the wild
purple Winde-floure. And the (...) with a Scarlet (or rather a Blush) colored
flower, which we may term Anemone (...) (...). The wild Scarlet wind flower.
These two differ not in other respects from the white wind (...).

3 There is in some choice gardens one of this kind with white flowers very
double, (...) of the Scarlet Anemone, and I had one of them given me by a
worshipful Merchant of (...), called Mr. John Franqueuille, my very good
friend.

4 This in roots and stalks is like the last described wood Anemones, or wind
flowers. But this and the last mentioned double one have leaves on two places
of their stalks; whereas the (...) ones have them but in one, and that is about
the middle of the stalks. The flower of this (...) one consists of some forty
or more little leaves, whereof the outermost are the biggest; the (...) or
nails of these leaves are of a deep purple, but the other parts of a lighter
blush color.

The Place.
All these wild single Anemones grow in most woods and copses through England,
except that with the yellow flower, which as yet I have not seen:
notwithstanding I have one of the greater kinds which bears yellow flowers,
whose figure is not expressed nor yet described, for that it does very notably
resemble those with single flowers, but is of small moment, either in beauty
of the flower, or otherwise. The double ones grow only in some few gardens.

The Time.
They flower from the midst of February unto the end of April, or the midst
of May.

The Names.
The first of these by most Writers is referred to the Ranunculi, or (...); and
Lobel calls it fitly Ranunculus nemorosus luteus: only Dodonaeus, Caesalpinus,
and our Author have made it an Anemone.

2 This with the varieties also, by Tragus, Fuchsius, Cordus, (...), Lobell,
and others, is made a Ranunculus: yet Dodonaeus, Caesalpinus, and our Author
have referred it to the Anemones. Clusius thinks this to be Anemone, (...) of
Theophrastus.

3 Clusius calls this Anemone Limonia, or Ranunculus syluarum flo. pleno albo.

4 And he styles this Anem. limonia, or Ranunc. syl. (...) pleno purpurascente.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The faculties and temperature of these plants are referred to the garden sorts
of Anemones.

CHAP. 79. Of Bastard Anemones, or Pasque flowers.
The Description.
1 THe first of these Pasque flowers has many small leaves finely cut or
iagged, like those of Carrots: among which rise up naked stalks, rough and
hairie; whereupon do grow beautiful flowers bell fashion, of a bright delaied
purple color: in the bottom whereof grows a tuft of yellow thrums, and in
the middle of the thrums it thrusts forth a small purple pointell: when the
whole flower is past there succeeds an head or knop compact of many gray
hairy locks, and in the solid parts of the knops lies the seed flat and
hoarie, every seed having his own small hair hanging at it. The root is
thick and knobby, of a finger long, running right down, and therefore not
like unto those of the Anemone, which it does in all other parts very notably
resemble, and whereof no doubt this is a kind.

2 There is no difference at all in the leaves, roots, or seeds, between this
red Pasque flower and the precedent, nor in any other point, but in the color
of the flowers: for whereas the other are of a purple color, these are of a
bright red, which sets forth the difference.

3 The white Pass flowers has many fine iagged leaves, closely couched or
thrust together, which resemble an Holi-water sprinckle, agreeing with the
others in roots, seeds, and shape of flowers, saving that these are of a
white color, wherein chiefly consists the difference.

4 This also in shape of roots and leaves little differs from the precedent,
but the flowers are lesser, of a darker purple color, and seldom open or show
themselves so much abroad as the other of the first described, to which in all
other respects it is very like.

5 There is also another kind with leaves less divided, but in other parts
like those already described, saving that the flower is of a yellow color
something inclining to a red.

1 Pulsatilla vulgaris. Purple Pass flower.
2 Pulsatilla rubra. Red Pass flower.


The Place.
Ruellius writes, that the Pass flower grows in France in vntoiled places:
in Germany they grow in rough and stony places, and oftentimes on rocks.

Those with purple flowers do grow very plentifully in the pasture or close
belonging to the parsonage house of a small village six miles from Cambridge,
called Hildersham: the Parsons name that lived at the impression hereof was Mr.
Fuller, a very kind and loving man, and willing to thew unto any man the said
close, who desired the same.

The Time.
They flower for the most part about Easter, which has moved me to name it
Pasque Flower, or Easter flower: and often they do flower again in September.
The yellow kind flowers in May.

The Names.
Pass flower is called commonly in Latin Pulsatilla: and of some, Apium
risus, and herba venti. Daleschampius would have it to be Anemone Limonia and
Samolus of Pliny: in French, Coquelourdes: in Dutch, (...): in English, Pasque
flower, or Pass flower, and after the Latin name Pulsatill, or Flaw flower:
in Cambridge-shire where they grow, they are named Couentrie bells.

3 Pulsatilla flore albo. White Pass flower.
4 Pulsatilla flore minore. The lesser purple Pass flower.


The Temperature.
Pass flower does extremely bite, and exulcerateth and eats into the skin
if it be stamped and applied to any part of the body; whereupon it has been
taken of some to be a kind of Crowfoot, and not without reason, for that it is
not inferior to the Crowfoots: and therefore it is hot and dry.

The Virtues.
There is nothing extant in writing among Authors of any peculiar virtue, but
they (...) only for the adorning of gardens and garlands, being flowers of
great beauty.

CHAP. 80. Of Adonis flower.
The Description.
1 THe first has very many slender weak stalks, trailing or leaning to the
ground, set on (...) part with fine iagged leaves very deeply cut like those
of Camomill, or rather those of May-weed: upon which stalks do grow small red
flowers, in shape like the field Crowfoot, with a blackish green pointell in
the middle, which being grown to (...) turns into a small greenish bunch of
seeds, in shape like a little bunch of grapes. The root is small and threddie.

2 The second differs not from the precedent in any one point, but in the
color of the flowers, which are of a perfect yellow color, wherein (...) the
difference.

The Place.
The red flower of Adonis grows wild in the West parts of England among
their (...), even as May-weed does in other parts, and is likewise an enemy to
corn as May-weed is: from thence I brought the seed, and have sown it in my
garden for the beauty of the flowers sake. That with the yellow flower is a
stranger in England.

1 Flos Adonis flore rubro. Adonis, with red flowers.


The Time.
They flower in the Summer moreths, May, June, and July, and sometimes later.

The Names.
Adonis flower is called in Latin Flos Adonis, and Adonidis: of the Dutchmer,
(...): in English we may call it (...) Maythes, by which name it is called of
them that dwell where it grows naturally, and generally Red Camomill: in
Greek, (...), (...) Eranthemum: our London women (...) (...) (...)
Rose-a-rubie.

The Temperature.
There has not been any that has (...) of the Temperature hereof; (...), so
far as the taste thereof (...) (...) is something hot, but not much.

The Virtues.
The seed of Adonis flower is thought to

CHAP. 81. Of Dockes.
The Kinds.
DIoscorides sets forth four kinds of Dockes; wild or sharp pointed
Docke; Garden Docke; round leafed Docke; and the Sour Docke called Sorrel:
besides these the later Herbarists have added certain other Dockes also, which
I purpose to make mention of.

The Description.
1 THat which among the Latins signifies to soften, case, or purge the
belly, the (...) signification has (...), among the Graecians: whereof
Lapathum and (...) (as (...) (...) do read) took their names sor herbs which
are used in pottage and medicine, very well (...) to have the power of
cleansing: of these there be many kinds and differences, great (...) (...)
where growing, among whom is that which is now called sharp pointed Docke, or
(...) (...) Docke. It grows in most meadows and by running streams, having
long narrow leaves (...) and hard pointed: among the which comes up round
hollow stalks of a brown color, (...) joints like knees, garnished with such
like leaves, but smaller: at the end whereof grow (...) flowers of a pale
color, one above another; and after them comes a brownish three (...) seed,
lapped in brown chaffie husks like Patience. The root is great, long, and
(...) within.

There is a variety of this with crisped or (...) leaves whose figure was by
our Author given in the second place in the following chapter, under the Title
of (...) minus.

2 The second kind of sharp pointed Docke is like the first, but much smaller,
and does (...) his seed in rundles about his branches in chaffie husks, like
Sorrel, not so much in use as the former, called also sharp pointed Docke.

3 This in roots, stalks, and seeds is like to the precedent; but the leaves
are (...), and rounder than those of the first described, and therein consists
the chief difference (...) this and (...).

The Place.
These kinds of Docks do grow, as is (...) said, in meadows (...) by rivers
sides.

The first figure in the (...) edition was of (...) (...), (...) (...) first in
the next chapter; (...) the figure of that we (...) (...) in the (...) (...)
this chapt. was that in the first place (...) the (...) (...). (...) the (...)
title.
1 Lapathum acutum. Sharp pointed Docke.
2 Lapathum acutum minimum. Small sharp Docke.
3 Lapathum syluestre (...). minus (...). The roundish leaued wild Docke.


The Time.
They flower in June and July.

The Names.
They are called in Latin (...) (...) mex, Lapatium, and (...): of (...) (...)
in English, Docke, and sharp pointed (...), (...) greater and the lesser: of
the Graecians, (...): in high Dutch, (...), (...): in Italian, Rombice: in
Spanish, Romaza, (...), in Low Dutch, (...) (which word is (...) of Lapathum)
and also (...): in French, (...).

The third is Lapathum folio (...), or minus (...) of (...); and (...) (...).
of Tabern.

The Nature and Virtues.
These herbs are of a mixture between cold and heat, and almost dry in the
third degree, especially the seed which is very astringent.

The powder of any of the kinds of (...) drunk in (...), stops the laske and
bloody (...), and caseth the pains of the stomach.

The roots boiled til they be very soft, and stamped with barrowes grease, and
made into an ointment helps the itch and all (...) (...) and mangines. And
for the same purpose it shall (...) necessary to boil them in water, as
aforesaid, and the party to be bathed and rubbed therewith.

CHAP. 82. Of Water Dockes.
Tha: figure that was in the first place was of the (...) fol (...) (...)
described by me in the third place of the preceding chapter. The second was of
(...) acutum crispum of (...). The third was of Hydrolapathum (...).
1 (...) magnum. Great Water (...).
Tha: figure that was in the first place was of the (...) fol (...) (...)
described by me in the third place of the preceding chapter. The second was of
(...) acutum crispum of (...). The third was of Hydrolapathum (...).
2 Hydrolapathum minus. Small Water Docke.
Tha: figure that was in the first place was of the (...) fol (...) (...)
described by me in the third place of the preceding chapter. The second was of
(...) acutum crispum of (...). The third was of Hydrolapathum (...).
3 Hippolapathum sativum Patience, or Munkes Rubarb.
4 Hippolapathum rotundifolium. Bastard Rubarb.


5 Lapathum sativum sanguineum. Bloudwoort.


The Description.
1 THe Great water Docke has very long and great leaves, sti ffe, and hard,
not unlike to the Garden Patience, but much longer. The stalk rises up to a
great height, often times to the height of five foot or more. The (...) grows
at the top of the stalk in spokie tusts, brown of color. The seed is
contained in chaffie husks, three square, of a shining pale color. The root
is very great, thick, (...) without, and yellowish within.

2 The small water Docke has short narrow leaves, set upon a stiff stalk.
The flowers grow from the middle of the stalk upward in spokie rundles, set in
spaces by certain distances round about the stalk, as are the flowers of
Horehound: Which Docke is of all the kinds most common and of less use, and
takes no pleasure or delight in any one soil or dwellingplace, but is found
almost every where, as well upon the land as in waterie places, but especially
in gardens among good and wholesome pot-herbes, being there better known than
welcome or desired: wherefore I intend not to spend further time about his
description.

3 The Garden Patience has very strong stalks, furrowed or chamfered, of eight
or nine foot high when it grows in fertile ground, set about with great large
leaves like to those of the water Docke, having along the stalks toward the
top flowers of a light purple color declining to brownenesse. The seed is
three square, contained in thin chaffie husks, like those of the common Docke.
The root is very great, brown without, and yellow within, in color and taste
like the true Rubarb.

4 Bastard Rubarb has great broad round leaves, in shape like those of the
great Bur-docke. The stalk and seeds are so like unto the precedent, that the
one cannot be known from the other, saving that the seeds of this are somewhat
lesser. The root is exceeding great and thick, very like unto the Rha of
Barbary, as well in proportion as in color and taste; and purges after the
same manner, but must be taken in greater quantity, as witnesses that famous
learned Physician now living, Mr. Doctor Bright, and others, who have
experimented the same.

5 This fifth kind of Docke is best known unto all, of the stock or kindred
of Dockes; it has long thin leaves, sometimes red in every part thereof, and
often stripped here and there with lines and strakes of a dark red color;
among which rise up stiff brittle stalks of the same color: on the top
whereof come forth such flowers and seed as the common wild docke has. The
root is likewise red, or of a bloody color.

The Place.
They do grow for the most part in ditches and watercourse, very common
through England. The two last save one do grow in gardens; my self and others
in London and elsewhere have them growing for our use in Physic and
chirurgerie. The last is sown for a pot-herbe in most gardens.

The Time.
Most of the dockes do rise up in the Spring of the year, and their seed is
ripe in June and August.

The Names.
The docke is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Rumex, and Lapathum; yet Pliny
in his 19 Book, 12. Chapter, seems to attribute the name of Rumex only to
the garden docke.

The Monks Rubarbe is called in Latin Rumex sativus, and Patientia, or
Patience, which word is borrowed of the French, who call this herb Patience:
after whom the Dutch men name this pot herb also Patientie: of some,
Rhabarbarum Monachorum, or Monks Rubarbe: because as it should seem some
Monk or other have used the root hereof in stead of Rubarbe.

Bloudwoort, or bloody Patience, is called in Latin Lapathum sanguineum: of
some, Sanguis Draconis, of the bloody color wherewith the whole plant is
possessed, and is of pot-herbes the chief or principal, having the property of
the bastard Rubarbe; but of less force in his purging quality.

The Temperature.
Generally all the Dockes are cold, some little and moderately, and some more:
they do all of them dry, but not all after one manner: notwithstanding some
are of opinion that they are dry almost in the third degree.

The Virtues.
The leaves of the Garden Docke or Patience may be eaten, and are somewhat
cold, but more Dioscorides writes, that all the Dockes being boiled do
mollify the belly: which thing also Horace has noted in his second book of
Sermons, the fourth Satyr, writing thus,

-- Si dura morabitur alvus
Mugilus, and viles pellent obstantia conchae,
Et lapathi brcuis herba.
He calls it a short herb, being gathered before the stalk be grown up; at
which time it is fittest

And being sodden, it is not so pleasant to be eaten as either Beetes or
Spinach: it ingendreth

The leaves of the sharp pointed Dockes are cold and dry: but the seed of
Patience, and the

The decoction of the roots of Monks Rubarbe is drunk against the bloody
flix, the laske, the Dioscorides writes.

It is also good against the spitting of blood, being taken with Acacia (or his
succedaneum, the Pliny writes.

Monks Rubarb or Patience is an excellent wholesome pot-herbe; for being put
into the pottage

If you take the roots of Monks Rubarb, and red Madder, of each half a pound;
Sena sour

The seed of bastard Rubarb is of a manifest astringent nature, insomuch that
it (...) the bloody

There have not been any other faculties attributed to this plant either of
the ancient or later no graduate, but a Country Scholar, as the whole framing
of this History does well declare: but I hope my good meaning will be well
taken, confidering I do my best; not doubting but some of greater learning
will perfect that which I have begun according to my small skill, especially
the ice being broken unto him, and the wood rough hewed to his hands.
Notwithstanding I think it good to say thus much more in mine own defense,
that although there be many wants and defects in me, that were requisite to
perform such a work; yet may my long experience by chance happen upon some
one thing or other that may do the learned good: considering what a notable
experiment I learned of one John Bennet a Surgeon of Maidstone in Kent, a
man as slenderly learned as my self, which he practiced upon a Butchers boy of
the same town, as himself reported unto me; his practice was this: Being
desired to cure the foresaid lad of an ague, which did grievously vex him, he
promised him a medicine, and for want of one for the present (for a shift as
himself confessed unto me) he took out of his garden three or four leaves of
this plant of Rubarb, which my self had among other simples given him, which
he stamped and strained with a draught of ale, and gave it the lad in the
morning to drink: it wrought extremely downward and upward within one hour
after, and never ceased until night. In the end the strength of the boy
overcame the force of the Physic, it gave over working, and the lad lost his
ague; since which time (as he says) he has cured with the same medicine many
of the like malady, having ever great regard unto the quantity, which was the
cause of the violent working in the first cure. By reason of which accident,
that thing has been revealed unto posterity, which heretofore was not so much
as dreamed of. Whose blunt attempt may set an edge upon some sharper wit, and
greater judgment in the faculties of plants, to seek farther into their
nature than any of the Ancients have done: and none fitter than the learned
Physicians of the College of London; where are many singularly well learned and
experienced in natural things.

The roots sliced and boiled in the water of Carduus Benedictus to the
consumption of the third Anne Wylbraham, upon diverse of her poor Neighbors
with good success.

CHAP. 83 Of Rubarb.
IT has happened in this as in many other foreign medicines or simples, which
though they be of great and frequent use, as Hermodactyls, Muskc, Turbeth, etc.
yet have we no certain knowledge of the very place which produces them, nor of
their exact manner of growing, which has given occasion to diverse to think
diversely, and some have been so bold as to counterfeit figures out of their
own fancies, as Matthiolus: so that this saying of Pliny is found to be very
true, Nulla medicinae pars (...) incerta, quam quae ab alio quam nostro orhe
petitur. But we will endeavor to show you more certainty of this here treated
of than was known until of very late years.

The Description.
1 THis kind of Rubarb has very great leaves, somewhat snipt or indented
about the edges like the teeth of a Saw, not unlike the leaves of Enula
campana, called by the vulgat sort Elecampane, but greater: among which rises
up a straight stalk of two cubits high, bearing at the top a scaly head like
those of Knappe-weed, or Iaceamaior: in the middle of which knap or head
thrusts forth a fair flower consisting of many purple threads like those of
the Artichoke; which being past, there follows a great quantity of down,
wherein is wrapped long seed like unto the great Centorie, which the whole
plant does very well resemble. The root is long and thick, blackish without,
and of a pale color within: which being chewed makes the spittle very yellow,
as does the Rubarb of Barbary.

2 This other bastard Rha, which is also of Lobels description, has a root
like that of the last described: but the leaves are narrower almost like those
of the common Docke, but hoarie on the other side: the stalk grows up
straight, and bears such heads and flowers as the precedent.

3 I have thought good here to omit the counterfeit figure of Matthiolus, given
us in this place by our Author; as also the History, which was not much
pertinent, and in lieu of them to present you with a perfect figure and
description of the true Rha Ponticum of the Ancients, which

1 Rha Capitatum L'obelij. Turkey Rubarbe.
2 Rha Capitatum angusti fulium. The other bastard Rubarbe.
3 Rha verum antiquorum. The true Rubarbe of the Ancients.
Rhabarbarum siccatum. The dry roots of Rubarbe.
was first of late discovered by the learned Prosper Alpinus, who writ a
peculiar tract thereof, and it is also again figured and described in his
work de Plant is exoticis. Our Countryman (...) John (...) has also set forth
very well both the figure and description hereof, in his (...). This plant has
many large roots (...) spreading in the ground, of a yellow color, from which
grow up many very great leaves like those of the Butter-burre, but of a fresh
green color, with great and manifest veins dispersed over them. The stalk
also is large and cre sted, sending forth sundry branches bearing many small
white flowers, which are succeeded by seeds three square and brownish, like as
those of other Docks. (...). Lister one of his Majesty's Physicians was the
first that enricht this kingdom with this elegant and useful plant, by
sending the seeds thereof to (...). Parkinson. (...) Alpinus proves this to be
the true Rha of the Ancients, described by Dioscorides, Lib. 3. cap. 2. yet
neither he nor any other (that I know of) have observed a sault, which I more
than probably suspect to be in the text of Dioscorides in that place, which is
in the word (...), which I judge should be (...), that is, yellow, and not
black, as Ruellius and others have translated it: now (...) is a word
frequently used by Dioscorides, as may appear by the Chapters of Hieracium
magnum and parvum, Conyra, Peucedanum, Ranunculus, and diverse others, and I
suspect the like fault may be found in some other places of the same Author.
But I will no further insist upon this, seeing the thing it self in all other
respects, as also in yellowness shows it self to be that described by
Dioscorides, and that my conjecture must therefore be true. And besides, the
root whereto he compares it is (...), that is (...), or rather ex slauo
rubescens, as any versed in reading Dioscorides may easily gather by diverse
places in him. Now I here omit his words, because they are in the next
description alleged by our Author, as also the description of our ordinarily
used Rubarb, for that it is sufficiently described under the following title of
the choice thereof. Mr. Parkinson is of opinion that this is the true Rubarbe
used in shops, only less heavy, bitter, and strong in working, by reason of
the diversity of our climat from that whereas the dried Rubarb brought us
usually grows. This his opinion is very probable, and if you compare the roots
together, you may easily be induced to be of the same belief.

4 The Ponticke Rubarbe is lesser and slenderer than that of Barbary. Touching
Pontick Rubarbe Dioscorides writes thus: Rha that diverse call Rheon, which
grows in those places that are beyond Bosphorus, from whence it is brought,
has yellow roots like to the great Centorie, but lesser and redder, (...),
that is to say, without smell ( Dodonaeus thinks it should be (...), that is,
well smelling) spongie, and something light. That is the best which is not
worme-eaten, and tasted is somewhat viscide with a light astriction, and chewed
becomes of a yellow or Saffron color.

The Place.
It is brought out of the Country of Sina (commonly called China) which is
toward the East in the upper part of India, and that India which is without the
river Ganges: and not at all Ex Scenitarum prouincia, (as many do unadvisedly
think) which is in Arabia the Happy, and far from China: it grows on the
sides of the river Rha now called Volga, as Amianus Marcellus says, which
river springs out of the Hyperborean mountains, and running through
Muscouia, falls into the Caspian or Hircan sea.

The Rha of the Ancients grows naturally, as Alpinus says, upon the hill
Rhodope in Thrace, now called Romania. It grows also as I have been informed
upon some mountains in Hungary. It is also to be found growing in some of our
choice gardens.

The choice of Rubarbe.
The best Rubarbe is that which is brought from China fresh and new, of a light
purplish red, with certain veins and branches, of an uncertain variety of
color, commonly whitish: but when it is old the color becomes ill favored
by turning yellowish or pale, but more, if it be worm eaten: being chewed in
the mouth it is somewhat gluie and clammie, and of a sassron color, which
being rubbed upon paper or some white thing shows the color more plainly:
the substance thereof is neither hard or closely compacted, nor yet heavy; but
something light, and as it were in a middle between hard and loose and
something spungie: it has also a pleasing smell. The second in goodness is
that which comes from Barbary. The last and worst from Bosphorus and Pontus.

The Names.
It is commonly called in Latin Rha Barbarum, or Rha Barbaricum: of diverse,
Rheu Barbarum: the Moors and Arabians do more truly name it Raued Seni, a
Sinensi prouincia; from whence it is brought into Persia and Arabia, and
afterward into Europe: and likewise from Tanguth, through the land of Cataia
into the land of the Persians, whereof the Sophie is the ruler, and from thence
into Egypt, and afterward into Europe. It is called of the Arabians and the
people of China, and the parts adjacent, Rauend Cini, Raued Seni, and Raued
Sceni: in shops, Rhabarbarum: in English, Rubarb, and Rewbarbe.

4 Rha Ponticum Siccatum. Rubarb of Pontus dried.


The Temperature.
Rubarb is of a mixed substance, temperature and faculties: some of the parts
thereof are earthy, binding and drying: others thin, airious, hot, and purging.

The Virtues.
Rubarb is commended by Dioscorides against

Moreover he says, that it takes away

Galen affirms it to be good for burstings,

But touching the purging faculty neither Dioscorides nor Galen has written
any thing, because it was not used in those days to purge with. Galen held
opinion, that the thin airious parts do make the binding quality of more
force; not because it does resist the cold and earthy substance, but by reason
that it carries the same, and makes it deeply to pierce, and thereby to work
the greater effect; the dry and thin essence containing in it self a purging
force and quality to open obstructions, but helped and made more facile by the
subtle and airious parts. Paulus Aegineta seems to be the first that made
trial of the purging faculty of Rubarb; for in his first book, Chap. 43. he
makes mention thereof, where he reckons up Turpentine among those medicines
which make the bodies of such as are in health soluble: But when we purpose,
says he, to make the turpentine more strong, we add unto it a little Rubarb.
The Arabians that followed him brought it to a further use in physic, as
chiefly purging downward choler, and oftentimes phlegm.

The purgation which is made with Rubarb is profitable and fit for all such as
be troubled with

It is a good medicine against the pleurisy, inflammation of the lungs, the
squinancie or Squincie,

Rubarb is undoubtedly an especial good medicine for the liver and infirmities
of the gall; for

It also mightily strengthens the intrals themselves: insomuch as Rubarb is
justly termed of Galen in his eleventh book of the method or manner of curing,
affirms that such kind of medicines are most fit and profitable for the
liver, as have joined with a purging and opening quality an astringent or
binding power. The quantity that is to be given is from one dram to two; and
the infusion from one and a half to three.

It is given or steeped, and that in hot diseases, with the infusion or
distilled water of Succory,

It is also oftentimes given being dried at the fire, but so, that the least or
no part thereof at all

The same being dried after the same manner does also stay the overmuch flowing
of the monthly

Mesues says, That Rubarb is an harmless medicine, and good at all times,
and for all ages, and

My friend Mr. Sampson Johnson Fellow of Magdalen College in Oxford assures
me, That the Physicians of Vienna in Austria use scarce any other at this day
than the Rubarb of the Ancients, which grows in Hungary not far from thence:
and they prefer it before the dried Rubarb brought out of Persia and the East
Indies, because it has not so strong a binding faculty as it, neither does it
heat so much; only it must be used in somewhat a larger quantity.

CHAP. 84. Of Sorrel.
The Kinds.
THere be diverse kinds of Sorrel, differing in many points, some of the
garden, others wild; some great, and some lesser.

1 Oxalis, sieve Acetosa. Sorrel.
2 Oxalis tuberosa. Knobbed Sorrel.


The Description.
THough Dioscorides has not expressed the Oxalides by that name, yet none
ought to doubt but that they were taken and accounted as the fourth kind of
Lapathum. For though some like it not well that the seed should be said to be
Drimus; yet that is to be understood according to the common phrase, when
acride things are confounded with those which be sharp and sour; else we
might accuse him of such ignorance as is not amongst the simplest women.
Moreover, the word Oxys does not only signify the leaf, but the savor and
tartness, which by a figure drawn from the sharpness of knives edges is
therefore called sharp: for (...) signifies a sharp or sourc juice which
pierces the tongue like a sharp knife: whereupon also Lapathum may be called
Oxalis, as it is indeed. The leaves of this are thinner, tenderer, and more
unctuous than those of Lapatium acutum, broader next to the stem, horned and
crested like Spinach and Atriplex. The stalk is much streaked, reddish, and
full of juice: the root is yellow and (...); the seed sharp, cornered and
shining, growing in chaffie husks like the other Docks.

2 The second kind of Oxalis or Sorrel has large leaves like Patience,
confusedly growing together upon a great tall stalk, at the top whereof grow
tufts of a chaffie substance. The root is tuberous, much like the Peonie, or
rather Filipendula, fastened to the lower part of the stem with small long
strings and laces.

3 The third kind of Sorrel grows very small, branching hither and thither,
taking hold (by new shoots) of the ground where it grows, whereby it
disperseth it self far abroad. The leaves are little and thin, having two
small leaves like ears fastened thereto, in show like the herb Sagittaria: the
seed in taste is like the other of his kind.

4 The fourth kind of Sorrel has leaves somewhat round and cornered, of a
whiter color than the ordinary, and having two short ears anexed unto the
same. The seed and root in taste is like the other Sorrels.

3 Oxalis tenuifolia. Sheep Sorrel.
4 Oxalis Franca seu Romana. Round leaued, or French Sorrel.


5 This kind of curled Sorrel is a stranger in England, and has very long
leaves, in shape like the garden Sorrel, but curled and crumpled about the
edges as is the curled Colewort. The stalk rises up among the leaves, set
here and there with the like leaves, but lesser. The flowers, seeds, and roots
are like the common Sorrel or sour Docke.

6 The small Sorrel that grows upon dry barren sandy ditch-banks, has small
grassy leaves somewhat forked or crossed over like the cross hilt of a rapier.
The stalks rise up amongst the leaves, small, weak, and tender, of the same
sour taste that the leaves are of. The flower, seed, and root is like the
other Sorrels, but altogether lesser.

6 Oxalis minor. Small Sorrel.


7 The smallest sort of Sorrel is like unto the precedent, saving that the
lowest leaves that ly upon the ground be somewhat round, and without the little
ears that the other has, which sets forth the difference.

8 There is also kept in some gardens a very large sorrel, having leaves
thick, whitish, and as large as an ordinary Docke, yet shaped like Sorrel,
and of the same acide taste. The stalks and seed are like those of the
ordinary, yet whiter colored.

The Place.
The common Sorrel grows for the most part in moist meadows and gardens. The
second by waters sides, but not in this kingdom that I know of. The fourth
also is a garden plant with us, as also the fifth: but the third and last grow
upon grauelly and sandy barren ground and ditch banks.

The Time.
They flourish at that time when as the other kinds of Docks do flower.

The Names.
Garden Sorrel is called in Greek (...), and (...): of Galen, (...): that is
to say, Acidum lapathum, or Acidus rumex, sour Docke: and in shops commonly
Acetosa: in the Germane Tongue, (...): in Low Dutch, Surckele, and Surinck: the
Spaniards, Azederas, Agrelles, and Azedas: in French, Ozeille, and Surelle,
Aigrette: in English, Garden Sorrel.

The second is called of the later Herbarists Tuberosa acetosa, and Tuberosum
lapathum: in English Bunched or Knobbed Sorrel.

The third is called in English Sheep Sorrel: in Dutch, Schap Surkel.

The fourth, Roman Sorrel, or round leaued Sorrel.

The fifth, Curled Sorrel.

The sixth and seventh, Barren Sorrel, or Dwarf Sheep Sorrel.

The eighth is called Oxalis, or Acetosa maxima latifolia, Great broad leaued
Sorrel.

The Nature.
The Sorrels are moderately cold and dry.

The Virtues.
Sorrel does undoubtedly cool and mightily dry; but because it is sour it
likewise cutteth

The juice hereof in Summer time is a profitable sauce in many meats, and
pleasant to the taste:

The leaves are with good success added to decoctions which are used in Agues.

The leaves of Sorrel taken in good quantity, stamped and strained into some
Ale, and a posset

The leaves sodden, and eaten in manner of a Spinach tart, or eaten as meat,
sostneth and loosneth

The seed of Sorrel drunk in gross red wine stops the laske and bloody
flix.

CHAP. 85. Of Bistort or Snake-weed.
The Description.
1 THe great Bistort has long leaves much like Patience, but smaller, and more
wrinkled or crumpled, on the upper side of a dark green, and underneath of a
bluish green color, much like Woad. The stalk is long, smooth, and tender,
having at the top a spiked knap or ear, set full of small whitish flowers
declining to carnation. The root is all in a lump, without fashion; within of
a reddish color like unto flesh, in taste like the kernel of an Acorne.

2 The small Bistort has leaves about three inches long, and of the breadth of
a man's nail; the upper side is of a green color, and underneath of an
ouerworne greenish color: amongst the which rises up a stalk of the height
of a spanne, full of joints or knees, bearing at the top such flowers as the
great Bistort bears; which being fallen, the seeds appear of the bigness of a
tare, reddish of color, every seed having one small green leaf fastened
thereunto, with many such leaves thrust in among the whole bunch of flowers and
seed. The root is tuberous like the other, but smaller, and not so much crooked.

1 Bistorta major. Snake-weed.
2 Bistorta minor. Small Snake-weed.


3 Broad leaued Snake-weed has many large uneven leaves, smooth and very
green; among which rise up small brittle stalks of two hands high, bearing at
the top a fair spike of flowers like unto the great Bistort. The root is
knobby or bunched, crookedly turned or wrythed this way and that way, whereof
it took his name Bistorta. It differs from the first only in that the root is
somewhat more twined in, and the leaves broader and more crumpled.

The Place.
1 The great Bistort grows in moist and waterie places, and in the dark
shadowie Woods, and is very common in most gardens.

2 The small Bistort grows in great abundance in Westmerland, at Crosby,
Rauenswaith, at the head of a Park belonging to one Mr. Pickering: from whence
it has been dispersed into many gardens; as also sent unto me from thence for
my garden.

The Time.
They flower in May, and the seed is ripe in June.

The Names.
Bistorta is called in English Snake-weed: in some places, Oisterloit: in
Cheshire, Passions, and Snake-weed, and there used for an excellent Pot-herbe.
It is called Bistorta of his wrythed roots, and also Colubrina, Serpentaria,
Brittanica; Dracontion, Plinij; Dracunculus, Dodonaei; and Limonium (...).

The Nature.
Bistort does cool and dry in the third degree.

The Virtues.
The juice of Bistort put into the nose prevails much against the Disease
called Polypus, and

The root boiled in wine and drunk, stops the laske and bloody flix; it
stays also the overmuch

The root taken as aforesaid stays vomiting, and heals the inflammation and
soreness of

CHAP. 86. Of Scuruy-Grasse, or Spoon-wort.
The Description.
1 ROund leaued Scuruy-Grasse is a low or base herb: it brings forth leaves
upon small stems or footstalk of a mean length, coming immediately from the
root, very many in number, of a shining green color, somewhat broad, thick,
hollow like a little spoone, but of no great depth, uneven, or cornered about
the edges: among which leaves spring up small stalks of a spanne high, whereon
do grow many little white flowers: after which comes the seed, small and
reddish, contained in little round pouches or seed-vessels: the roots be small,
white, and threddy. The whole plant is of a hot and spicie taste.

2 The common Scuruy-grasse or Spoone-wort has leaves somewhat like a spoone,
hollow in the middle, but altogether unlike the former: the leaves hereof are
bluntly toothed about the edges, sharp pointed, and somewhat long: the stalks
rise up among the leaves, of the length of half a foot; whereon do grow white
flowers with some yellowness in the middle: which being past, there succeed
small seed-vessels like unto a pouch, not unlike to those of Shepherds purse,
green at the first, next yellowish, and lastly when they be ripe, of a brown
color, or like a filberd nut. The root is small and tender, compact of a
number of threddy strings very thick thrust together in manner of a little
turfe.

The Place.
The first grows by the sea side at Hull, at Boston, and Lynne, and in many
other places of Lincolnshire near unto the sea, as in Whaploade and Holbecke
Marshes in Holland in the same Country. It has been found of late growing
many miles from the sea side, upon a great hill in Lancashire called
Ingleborough hill; which may seem strange unto those that do not know that it
will be content with any soil, place, or clyme whatsoever: for proof whereof,
my self have sown the seeds of it in my garden, and given them unto others,
with whom they flower, flourish, and bring forth their seed, as naturally as by
the sea side; and likewise retain the same hot spicie taste: which proves
that they refuse no culture, contrary to many other sea-plants.

The second, which is our common scuruie grass, grows in diverse places upon
the brimmes of the famous river Thames, as at Woolwich, Erith, Greenhithe,
Grauesend, as well on the Essex shore as the Kentish; at Portsmouth, Bristow,
and many other places along the Western coast: but toward the North I have
not heard that any of this kind has grown.

The Time.
It floureth and flourishes in May. The seed is ripe in June.

2 Cochlearia rotundifolia. Round leafed Scuruie grass.
2 Cochlearia Britannica. Common English Scuruie grass.


The Names.
We are not ignorant that in low Germany, this has seemed to some of the best
learned to be the true Britannica, and namely to those next the Ocean in
Friesland and Holland. The Germans call it (...): that is, Cochlearia or
Spoonwort, by reason of the compassed roundnes and hollownes of the leaves,
like a spoone; and have thought it to be Plinie's Britannica, because they
find it in the same place growing, and endued with the same qualities. Which
excellent plant Caesar's soldiers (when they removed their camps beyond the
Rhene) found to prevail (as the Frisians had taught it them) against that
plague and hurtful disease of the teeth, gums, and sinews, called the
Scuruie, being a deprivation of all good blood and moisture, in the whole
body, called Scorbutum; in English, the Scuruie, and Skyrby, a disease
happening at the sea among Fishermen, and fresh water soldiers, and such as
delight to sit still without labor and exercise of their bodies; and
especially above the rest of the causes, when they make not clean their biscuit
bread from the flower or mealines that is upon the same, which does spoil
many. But since this agrees not with Plinies description, and that there be many
other water plants; as Nasturtium, Sium, Cardamine, and such others, like in
taste, and not unlike in proportion and virtues, which are remedies against the
diseases aforesaid, there can be no certain argument drawn therefrom to
prove it to be Britannica. For the leaves at their first coming forth are
somewhat long like Pyrola or Adders tongue, soon after somewhat thicker, and
hollow like a navel, after the manner of Sun-dew, but in greatness like
Soldanella, in the compass somewhat cornered, in fashion somewhat like a
spoone: the flowers white, and in shape like the Cuckoo flowers: the seed
reddish, like the seed of Thlaspi, which is not to be seen in Britannica, which
is rather holden to be Bistort or garden Patience, than Scuruie grass. In
English it is called Spoonewort, Scruby grass, and Scuruie grass.

The Temperature.
Scuruie grass is evidently hot and dry, very like in taste and quality to
the garden Cresses, of an aromaticke or spicie taste.

The Virtues.
The juice of Spoonewoort given to drink in Ale or Beer, is a singular
medicine against the Hippocrates, Voluulus Hematites: of Pliny, Stomacace: of
Marcellus, Oscedo: and of the later writers, Scorbutum: of the Hollanders and
Frisians, Scuerbuyck: in English, the Scuruie: either giving the juice in
drink as aforesaid, or putting six great handfuls to steep, with long pepper,
grains, annise-seede, and liquorice, of each one ounce, the spices being
braied, and the herbs bruised with your hands, and so put into a pot, such as
is before mentioned in the chapter of bastard Rubarbe, and used in like manner;
or boiled in milk or wine and drunk for certain days together it works
the like effect.

The juice drunk once in a day fasting in any liquor, ale, beer, or wine,
does cause the foresaid

There is a disease (says Olaus magnus in his history of the Northern
regions) haunting the Pliny (...): Stomacace: and that which belongs to the
thighs (...): Marcellus an old writer names the infirmities of the mouth
(...): which disease comes of a gross cold and tough blood, such as
malancholy juice is, not by adustion, but of such a blood as is the feculent or
drossie part thereof: which is gathered in the body by ill diet, slothfulness
to work, laisinesse (as we term it) much sleep and rest on ship-boord, and
not looking to make clean the bisquet from the mealinesse, and unclean
keeping their bodies, which are the causes of this disease called the scuruie
or scyrby; which disease does not only touch the outward parts, but the inward
also: for the liver oftentimes, but most commonly the spleen, is filled with
this kind of thick, cold and tough juice, and is swollen by reason that the
substance thereof is slack, spungie and porous, very apt to receive such kind
of thick and cold humors. Which thing also Hippocrates has written of in the
second book of his (...): (...) gums (says he) are infected, and their
mouths stink that have great spleenes or milts: and whosoever have great
milts and use not to bleed, can hardly be cured of this malladie, especially of
the ulcers in the legs, and black spots. The same is affirmed by Paulus
Aegineta in his third book, 49. chapter, where you may easily see the
difference between this disease and the black jaunders; which many times are so
confounded together, that the distinction or difference is hard to be known,
but by the expert surgeon: who oftentimes serving in the ships, as well her
Majesty's as merchants, are greatly pestered with the curing thereof: it shall
be requisite to carry with them the herb dried: the water distilled, and the
juice put into a bottle with a narrow mouth, full almost to the neck, and the
rest filled up with oil olive, to keep it from putrefaction: the which
preparations discreetly used, will stand them in great stead for the disease
aforesaid.

The herb stamped and laid upon spots and blemishes of the face, will take
them away within

CHAP. 87. Of Twayblade, or herb Bifoile.
The Description.
1 Herb Byfoile has many small fibers or threddy strings, fastened unto a
small knot or root, from which rises up a slender stom or stalk, tender, fat,
and full of juice; in the middle whereof are placed in comely order two broad
leaves ribbed and chamfered, in shape like the leaves of Plantaine: upon the
top of the stalk grows a slender greenish spike made of many small flowers,
each little flower resembling a gnat, or little gosling newly hatched, very
like those of the third sort of Serapias stones.

2 Ophris Trifolia, or Trefoile Twaiblade, has roots, tender stalks, and a
bush of flours like the precedent; but differs in that, that this plant has
three leaves which do clip or embrace the stalk about; and the other has but
two, and never more, wherein especially consists the difference: although in
truth I think it a degenerate kind, and has gotten a third leaf per
accidens, as does sometimes chance unto the Adders Tongue, as shall be declared
in the Chapter that follows.

3 This kind of Twaiblade, first described in the last edition of Dodonaeus,
has leaves, flowers, and stalks like to the ordinary; but at the bottom of
the stalk above the fibrous roots it has a bulbe greenish within, and covered
with two or three skins: it grows in moist and (...) low places of Holland.

1 Ophris (...). Twaiblade.
3 Ophris bifolia bulbosa. Bulbous Twaiblade.


The Place.
The first grows in moist meadows, fenny grounds, and shadowie places. I have
fonnd it in many places, as at South fleet in Kent, in a Wood of Master Sidleys
by Long-field Downs, in a Wood by London called Hampstead Wood, in the fields
by High-gate, in the Woods by Ouenden near to Clare in Essex, and in the Woods
by Dunmow in Essex. The second sort is seldom seen.

The Time.
They flower in May and June.

The Names.
It is called of the later Herbarists, Bifolium, and Ophris.

The Nature and Virtues.
These are reported of the Herbarists of our time to be good for green wounds,
burstings, and

CHAP. 88. Of Adders-Tongue.
The Description.
1 OPhioglosson, or Lingua Serpentis (called in English Adders tongue; of some,
Adders Grass, though improperly) rises forth of the ground, having one leaf
and no more, fat or oleous in substance, of a finger long, and very like the
young and tender leaves of Marigolds: from the bottom of which leaf springs
out a small and tender stalk one finger and a half long, on the end whereof
does grow a long small tongue not unlike the tongue of a serpent, whereof it
took the name.

2 I have seen another like the former in root, stalk, and leaf; and (...),
in that this plant has two, and sometimes more crooked tongues, yet of the
same fashion, which if my judgment fail not chances per accidens, even as we
see children borne with two thumbes upon one hand: which moves me so to
think, for that in gathering twenty bushels of the leaves a man shall hardly
find one of this fashion.

1 Ophioglosson. Adders-Tongue.
2 Ophioglosson abortivum. Misshapen Adders-Tongue.


The Place.
Adders-Tongue grows in moist meadows throughout most parts of England; as in
a Meadow near the preaching Spittle adjoining to London; in the Mantels by
London, in the meadows by Cole-brooke, in the fields in Waltham Forest, and
many other places.

The Time.
They are to be found in April and May; but in June they are quite vanished
and gone.

The Names.
Ophioglossum is called in shops Lingua serpentis, Linguace, and Lingualace: it
is also called Lancea Christi, Enephyllon, and Lingua vulneraria: in English,
Adders tongue, or Serpents tongue: in Dutch, Natertonguen: of the Germans,
Nater zungelin.

The Nature.
Adders-tongue is dry in the third degree.

The Virtues.
The leaves of Adders tongue stamped in a stone mortar, and boiled in Oil
Olive unto the consumption John's wort, if it do not far surpass it by many
degrees: whose beauty is such, that very many Artists have thought the same to
be mixed with Verdigrease.

CHAP. 89. Of One-berry, or Herb True-loue, and Moone-wort.
1 Herba Paris. One-Berry, or Herb True-loue.
2 Lunaria minor. Small Moone-wort.


The Description.
1 Herb Paris rises up with one small tender stalk two hands high; at the
very top whereof come forth four leaves directly set one against another in
manner of a Burgundian Cross or True-loue knot: for which cause among the
Ancients it has bin called Herb True-(...). In the midst of the said leaf
comes forth a star-like flower of an herby or grassie color; out of the
midst whereof there arises up a blackish brown berrie: the root is long and
tender, creeping under the earth, and dispersing it self hither and thither.

2 The small Lunary springs forth of the ground with one (...) like
Adders-tongue, iagged or cut on both sides into five or six deep cuts or
notches, not much unlike the leaves of Scolopendria, or (...), (...) a green
color; whereupon does grow a small naked stem of a finger long, bearing at the
top many little seeds clustering together; which being gathered and laid in a
platter or such like thing for the space of three weeks, there will fall from
the same a fine dust or meal of a whitish color, which is the seed if it
bring forth any. The root is slender, and compact of many small threddy strings.

In England (says Camerarius) there grows a certain kind of Lunaria, which
has many leaves, and sometimes also sundry branches; which therefore I have
caused to be delineated, that other Herbarists might also take notice hereof.
Thus much Camerarius, Epit. Mat. p. 644. where he gives an elegant figure of a
variety having more leaves and branches than the ordinary, otherwise not
differing from it.

3 Besides this variety there is another kind set forth by Clusius; whose
figure and description I think good here to set down. This has a root
consisting of many fibers somewhat thicker than those of the common kind: from
which arise one or two winged leaves, that is, many leaves set to one stalk;
and these are like the leaves of the other Lunaria, but that they are longer,
thicker, and more divided, and of a yellowish green color. Amongst these
leaves there comes up a stalk fat and juycie, bearing a greater tuft of
flowers or seeds (for I know not whether to call them) than the ordinary, but
otherwise very like thereto. It grows in the mountains of Silesia, and in
some places of Austria.

3 Lunaria minor ramosa. Small branched Moon-wort.


The Place.
Herba Paris grows plentifully in all these places following; that is to say,
in Chalkney wood near to wakes (...), seven miles from Colchester in Essex,
and in the wood by Robinhoods well, near to Nottingham; in the parsonage
orchardat Radwinter in Essex, near to Saffron Walden; in Blackburne at a place
called Merton in Lancashire; in the Moore by Canturbury called the Clapper; in
Dingley wood, six miles from Preston in Aundernesse; in Bocking park by
Braintree in Essex; at Hesset in Lancashire, and in Cotting wood in the North
of England; as that excellent painful and diligent Physician Mr. Doctor
Turner of late memory does record in his Herbal.

Lunaria or small Moone-wort grows upon dry and barren mountains and heaths.
I have found it growing in these places following; that is to say, about Bathe
in Somersetshire in many places, especially at a place called Carey, two miles
from Bruton, in the next Close unto the Churchyard; on Cocks Heath between
Lowse and Linton, three miles from Maidstone in Kent: it grows also in the
ruins of an old bricke-kilne by Colchester, in the ground of Mr. George Sayer,
called Miles end: it grows likewise upon the side of Blacke-heath, near unto
the style that leads unto Eltham house, about an hundred paces from the
style: also in Lancashire near unto a Wood called Fairest, by Latham:
moreover, in Nottinghamshire by the West wood at Gringley, and at Weston in the
Ley field by the West side of the town; and in the Bishops field at York,
near unto Wakefield, in the Close where Sir George Sauill his house stands,
called the Heath Hall, by the relation of a learned Doctor in Physic called
Mr. John Mershe of Cambridge, and many other places.

The Time.
Herba Paris floureth in April, and the berry is ripe in the end of May.

Lunaria or small Moone-wort is to be seen in the month of May.

The Names.
One-berry is also called Herb True-loue, and Herb Paris: in Latin, Herba
Paris, and (...) tetraphyllum by Gesner and Lobel.

Lunaria minor is called in English Small Lunarie, and Moon-wort.

The Nature.
Herb Paris is exceeding cold; whereby it represses the rage and force of
poison.

Lunaria minor is cold and dry of temperature.

The Virtues.
The berries of Herb Paris given by the space of twenty days, are excellent
good against

The same is ministered with great success unto such as are become peevish, or
without understanding, Baptista Sardus, and Matthiolus have recorded. Since
which time there has been further experience made thereof against poison, and
put in practice in the city of Paris, in Louaine, and at the baths in (...),
by the right excellent Herbarists Matthias de L'obel, and Petrus Pena, who
having often read, that it was one of the Aconites, called (...), and so by
consequence of a poisoning quality, they gave it unto dogs and lambs, who
received no hurt by the same: wherefore they further prosecuted the experience
thereof, and gave unto two dogs fast bound or coupled together, a dram of
Arsenicke, and one dram of Mercury sublimate mixed with flesh ( in the
Aduersaria it is but of each half a dram, and there page 105. you may find
this History more largely set down.) which the dogs would not willingly eat,
and therefore they had it crammed down their throats: unto one of these dogs
they gave this Antidote following in a little red wine, whereby he recovered
his former health again within a few hours: but the other dog which had none
of the medicine, died incontinently.

This is the receipt.

R. (...) Angelicae ((...)) domesticam, and syluestrem, Vicetoxici, Valerianae
domesticae, Polipodij querni, radicum Altheae, and Vrticae, ana 3. iiij,
Corticis Mezerei Germanici, 3. ij. granorum herbae Paridis, N. 24. foliorum
eiusdem cumtoto, Number. 36. Ex maceratis in aceto radicibus, and siccatis fit
omnium pulvis.

The people in Germany do use the leaves of Herb Paris in green wounds, for
the which it is (...) Camerarius (...); who likewise says, that the powder of
the roots given to drink, does (...) cease the gripings and pain of the
Collicke.

Small Moonewoort is singular to heal green and fresh wounds: it staieth the
bloody flix. It Martagon, whereas in truth they are all but drowsy dreams and
illusions; but it is singular for wounds as aforesaid.

CHAP. 90. Of Winter-Greene.
The Description.
1 PYrola has many tender and very green leaves, almost like the leaves of
Beete, but (...) in my opinion like to the leaves of a Peare-tree, whereof it
took his name Pyrola, for that it is Pyriformis. Among these leaves comes up
a stalk garnished with pretty white flowers, of a very pleasant sweet smell,
like Lillium Conuallium, or the Lilly of the Valley. The root is small and
threddie, creeping far abroad under the ground.

2 This differs from the last described in the slenderness of the stalks, and
smalnesse of the leaves and flowers: for the leaves of this are not so thick
and substantial, but very thin, sharp pointed, and very finely snipt about
the edges, blacker; and resembling a Peare-tree leaf. The flowers are like
those of the former, yet smaller and more in number: to which succeed five
cornered seed vessels with a long pointell as in the precedent: the root also
creepes no less than that of the former, and here and there puts up new
stalks under the moss. It grows upon the Austrian and Styrian Alps, and
flowers in June and July.

3 This is an elegant plant, and sometimes becomes shrubbie, for the new and
short branches growing up each year, (...) remain firm and green for some
years, and grow straight up, until at length borne down by their own weight
they fall down and hide themselves in the moss. It has commonly at each
place where new branches grow forth, two, three, or four thick very green
and shining leaves, almost in form and magnitude like to the leaves of
Laureola, yet snipt about the edges, of a very drying taste, and then
bitterish. From among these leaves at the Spring of the year new branches
shoot up, having small leaves like (...) upon them, and at their tops 1
Pyrola. Winter Green.
2 Pyrola 2 tenerior Clus. The smaller Winter-Greene.
3 Pyrola 3. fruticans Clus. Shrubby Winter-Greene.
4 Pyrola 4. minima Clus. Round leaued Winter Green.
5 Monophyllon. One Blade.
grow flowers like to those of the first described, yet somewhat larger, of a
whitish purple color; which fading, are succeeded by five cornered seed
vessels containing a very small seed; the roots are long and creeping. It
grows a little from Vienna in Austria in the woods of Entzestorf, and in
diverse places of Bohemia and Silesia.

4 This from creeping roots sends up short stalks, set at certain spaces with
small, round, and thin leaves, also snipt about the edges, amongst which upon a
naked stem grows a flower of a pretty bigness, consisting of five white
sharpish pointed leaves with ten threads, and a (...) pointell in the midst. The
seed is contained in such heads as the former, and it is very small. This
grows in the shadowie places of the Alps of Sneberge, Hochbergerin,
Durrenstaine, toward the roots of these great mountains. Clus.

5 Monophyllon, or Vnifolium, has a leaf not much unlike the greatest leaf
of Iuie, with many ribs or sinews like the Plantaine leaf; which single leaf
does always spring forth of the earth alone, but when the stalk rises up, it
brings upon his sides two leaves, in fashion like the former; at the top of
which slender stalk come forth fine small flowers like Pyrola; which being
vaded, there succeed small red berries. The root is small, tender, and
creeping far abroad under the upper face of the earth.

The Place.
1 Pyrola grows in Lansdale, and Crauen, in the North part of England,
especially in a close called Crag-close.

2 Monophyllon grows in Lancashire in Dingley wood, six miles from Preston in
Aundernesse; and in Harwood, near to Blackburne likewise.

The Time.
1 Pyrola floureth in June and July, and grows winter and summer.

2 Monophyllon floureth in May, and the fruit is ripe in September.

The Names.
1 Pyrola is called in English Winter-greene: it has been called Limonium of
diverse, but untruly.

2 Monophyllon, according to the etymology of the word, is called in Latin
Vnifolium: in English, One-blade, or One-leafe.

The Nature:
1 Pyrola is cold in the second degree, and dry in the third.

2 Monophyllon is hot and dry of complexion.

The Virtues.
Pyrola is a most singular wound-hearbe, either given inwardly, or applied
outwardly: the leaves

The decoction hereof made with wine, is commended to close up and heal wounds
of the entrails,

The leaves of Monophyllon, or Vnifolium, are of the same force in wounds with
Pyrola, especially

CHAP. 91. Of Lilly in the valley, or May Lilly.
1 Lilium conuallium. Conuall Lillies.
2 Lilium conuallium floribus suaue-rubentibus. Red Conuall Lillies.


The Description.
1 THe Conuall Lilly, or Lilly of the Valley, has many leaves like the
smallest leaves of Water Plantaine; among which rises up a naked stalk half
a foot high, garnished with many white flowers like little bells, with blunt and
turned edges, of a strong savor, yet pleasant enough; which being past, there
come small red berries, much like the berries of Asparagus, wherein the seed is
contained. The root is small and slender, creeping far abroad in the ground.

2 The second kind of May Lillies, is like the former in every respect; and
herein varieth or differs, in that this kind has reddish flowers, and is
thought to have the sweeter smell.

The Place.
1 The first grows on Hampsted heath, four miles from London, in great
abundance: near to Lee in Essex, and upon Bushie heath, thirteen miles from
London, and many other places.

2 That other kind with the red flower is a stranger in England: howbeit I have
the same growing in my garden.

The Time.
They flower in May, and their fruit is ripe in September.

The Names.
The Latins have named it Lilium Gonuallium: Gesner does think it to be
Callionymum: in the Germane tongue, Meyen blumlen: the low Dutch, Meyen
bloemkens: in French, Muguet: yet there is likewise another herb which they
call Muguet, commonly named in English, Woodroof. It is called in English
Lilly of the Valley, or the Conuall Lilly, and May Lillies, and in some
places Liriconfancie.

The Nature.
They are hot and dry of complexion.

The Virtues.
The flowers of the Valley Lilly distilled with wine, and drunk the quantity
of a spoonful, restores

The water aforesaid does strengthen the memory that is weakened and
diminished, it helps

The flowers of May Lillies put into a glass, and set in a hill of antes close
stopped for the space

CHAP. 92. Of Sea Lauander.
1 Limonium. Sea Lauander.
2 Limonium parvum. Rock Lauander.


The Description.
1 THere has been among writers from time to time, great contention about
this plant Limonium, no one author agreeing with another: for some have called
this herb Limonium; some another herb by this name; and some in removing the
rock, have mired themselves in the mud, as Matthiolus, who described two
kinds, but made no distinction of them, nor yet expressed which was the true
Limonium; but as a man herein ignorant, he speaks not a word of them. Now
then to leave controversies and cauilling, the true Limonium is that which has
fair leaves, like the Limon or Orange tree, but of a dark green color,
somewhat fatter, and a little crumpled: amongst which leaves rises up an hard
and brittle naked stalk of a foot high, divided at the top into sundry other
small branches, which grow for the most part upon the one side, full of little
bluish flowers, in show like Lauander, with long red seed, and a thick root
like unto the small Docke.

2 There is a kind of Limonium like the first in each respect, but lesser,
which grows upon rocks and chalkie cliffes.

3 Besides these two here described, there is another elegant Plant by Clusius
and others referred to this kindred: the description thereof is thus; from a
long slender root come forth long green leaves lying spread upon the ground,
being also deeply sinuated on both sides, and somewhat roughish. Amongst these
leaves grow up the stalks welted with slender indented skins, and toward
their tops they are divided into sundry branches after the manner of the
ordinary one; but these branches are also winged, and at their tops they carry
flowers some four or five clustering together, consisting of one thin crispe
or crumpled leaf of a light blew color (which continues long, if you gather
them in their perfect vigor, and so dry them) and in the midst of this blew
comes up little white flowers, consisting of five little round leaves with some
white threads in their middles. This plant was first observed by (...) at Ioppa
in Syria: but it grows also upon the coasts of Barbary, and at Malacca and
Cadiz in Spain: I have seen it growing with many other rare plants, in the
Garden of my kind friend Mr. John Tradescant at South Lambeth.

4 Clusius in the end of his fourth Book Historiae Plantarum, sets forth this,
and says, he received this figure with one dried leaf of the plant sent him
from Paris from Claude Gonier an Apothecarie of that city, who received it (as
you see it here expressed) from Lisbone. Now Clusius describes the leaf that it
was hard, and as if it had been a piece of leather, open on the upper side, and
distinguished with many large purple veins on the inside, etc. for the rest of
his description was only taken from the figure (as he himself says) which I
hold impertinent to set down, seeing I here give you the same figure, which
by no means I could omit, for the strangeness thereof, but hope that some or
other that travel into foreign parts may find this elegant plant, and know
it by this small expression, and bring it home with them, that so we may come
to a perfecter knowledge thereos.

3 Limonium folio sinuato. Sea-Lauander with the indented leaf.
4 Limonio congener, Clus. Hollow leaued Sea-Lauander:


The Place.
1 The first grows in great plenty upon the walls of the fort against
Grauesend: but abundantly on the banks of the River below the same town, as
also below the Kings Storehouse at Chattam: and fast by the Kings Ferrey going
into the Isle of Shepey: in the salt marshes by Lee in Essex: in the Marsh by
Harwich, and many other places.

The small kind I could never find in any other place but upon the chalky
cliffe going from the town of Margate down to the sea side, upon the left
hand.

The Time.
They flower in June and July.

The Names.
It shall be needless to trouble you with any other Latin name than is
expressed in their titles: the people near the sea side where it grows do call
it Marsh Lauander, and sea Lauander.

This cannot be the Limonium of Dioscorides, for the leaves are not longer than
a (...), nor the stalk so tall as that of a Lilly, but you shall find more
hereafter concerning this in the Chapter of water Plantaine. I cannot better
refer this to any plant described by the Ancients than to Britannica described
by Dioscorides, lib. 4. cap. 2.

The Nature.
The seed of Limonium is very astringent or binding.

The Virtues.
The seed beaten into powder, and drunk in wine, helps the collicke,
strangurie, and Dysenteria.

The seed taken as aforesaid, staieth the overmuch flowing of women's terms,
and all other

CHAP. 93. Of Serapias Turbith, or Sea Starwort.
1 Tripolium vulgar (...). Great Sea Starwort.
2 Tripolium vulgar minus. Small Sea Starwort.


The Description.
1 THe first kind of Tripolium has long and large leaves somewhat hollow or
furrowed, of a shining green color deolining to blewnesse, like the leaves of
Woade: among which rises up a stalk of two cubits high, and more, which
toward the top is divided iuto many small branches garnished with many flowers
like Camomill, yellow in the middle, set about or (...) with small bluish
(...), like a pale, as in (...) (...) (...) (...), which (...) (...) a whitish
rough (...), that flies away with the (...). The (...) is long and (...).

2 There is another kind of Tripolium like the first, but much smaller,
wherein (...) the difference.

The Place.
These (...) grow plentifully along the (...) coasts in many places, as by
(...) fort (...) Grauesend, in the I Will of Shepey in sundry places, in a marsh
which is (...) the town walls (...) Harwich, in the marsh by Lee in (...), in
a (...) which is between the I Will of Shepey and (...), especially where it
ebbeth and (...): being brought into gardens, it flourishes a (...) time, but
there it waxes huge, great, and rank; and changes the great roots into
strings.

The Time.
These herbs do flower in May and June.

The Names.
It is reported by men of great fame and learning, that this plant was called
Tripolium, because it does change the color of his flowers thrice in a day.
This run: our we may believe, and it may be true, for that we see and perceive
things of as great and greater wonder to proceed out of the earth. This herb I
planted in my garden, whither (in his season) I did repair to find out the
truth hereof, but I could not epsy any such variableness herein; (...) thus
much I may say, that as the heat of the sun does change the color of oiuers
flowers, so it fell out with this, which in the morning was very fair, but
afterward of a pale or wan color. Which (...) that to be but a fable which
Dioscorides says is (...) by some, that in one day it changes the color of
his flowers thrice: that is to say, in the morning it is white, at noone
purple, and in the evening (...): or crimson. But it is not (...), that there
may be sound three colors of the flowers in one day, by reason that the
flowers are not all (...) together (as before I (...) touched) but one after
another by little and little. And there may easily be observed three colors in
them, which is to be understood of them that are beginning to flower, that are
perfectly floured, and those that are falling away. For they that are blowing
and be not wide open and perfect, are of a purplish color, and those that are
(...) and wide open, of a whitish blew; and such as have fallen away have a
white down: which changing happens (...) sundry other plants. This herb is
called of (...), Turbith: women that (...) by the sea side, call it in English,
blew Daisies, or blew Camomill; and about (...) it is called Hogs beans, sor
that the swine do greatly desire to seed thereon: as also for that the knobs
about the roots do somewhat resemble the Garden Bean. It is called in Greek
(...): and diverse others (...): it may be fitly called Aster Marinus, or
Amellus Marinus: in English, Sea (...), Serapio's Turbith: of some, Blew
Daisies. The Arabian (...), does call Sea (...), Turbith, and after (...),
(...): yet Actuarius the Grecian does think that Turbith is the root of
Alypum: Mesues judged it to be the root of an herb like fennel. The History
of Turbith of the shops shall be discoursed upon in his proper place.

The Nature.
Tripolium is hot in the third degree, as Galen says.

The Virtues.
The root of Tripolium taken in wine by the quantity of two drams, drives
forth by siege (...)

It is an excellent herb against poison, and comparable with Pyrola, if not of
greater efficacy in

CHAP. 94. Of Turbith of Antioch.
The Description.
GArcias a Portugal Physician says that Turbith is a plant having a root which
is neither great nor long: the stalk is of two spans long, sometimes much
longer, a finger thick, which creeps in the ground like Iuie, and brings
sorth leaves like those of the marish Mallow. The flowers be also like those of
the Mallow, of a reddish white color: the lower part of the stalk only, which
is next to the root and gummie, is that which is profitable in medicine, and is
the same that is used in shops: they choose that for the best which is hollow,
and round like a reed, brittle, and with a smooth bark, as also that whereunto
does cleave a congealed gum, which is said to be gummosum, or gummy, and
somewhat white. But, as Garcias says, it is not always gummie of his own
nature, but the Indians because they see that our merchants note the best
Turbith by the gumminesse, are wont before they gather the same, either to
writhe or else lightly to bruise them, that the sap or liquor may issue out;
which root being once hardened, they pick out from the rest to sell at a
greater price. It is likewise made white, as the (...) Author shows, being
dried in the sun: for if it be dried in the shadow it waxes black, which
notwith standing may be as good as the white which is dried in the Sun.

Turbith Alexandrinum officinarum. Turpetum, or Turbith of the shops.


The Place.
It grows by the sea side, but yet not so near that the wash or water of the
sea may come to it, but near about, and that for two or three miles in
untilled grounds, rather moist than dry. It is found in Cambaya, Surrate, in
the I Will Dion, (...), and in places hard adioining; also in Guzarate, where it
grows (...), from (...) great abundance of it is brought into Persia, Arabia,
Asia the less, and also into Portingale and other parts of Europe: but that is
preferred which grows in Cambaya.

The Names.
It is called of the Arabians, Persians, and Turks Turbith: and in Guzarata
(...): in the province Canara, in which is the city Goa, Tiguar: likewise in
Europe the learned call it diversely, according to their several fancies, which
has bred sundry controversies, as it has fallen out as well in Hermodactyls,
as in Turbith; the use and possession of which we cannot seem to want: but
which plant is the true Turbith, we have great cause to doubt; Some have
thought (...) Tripolium marinum, described in the former chapter, to be
Turbith: others have supposed it to be one of the Tithymales, but which kind
they know not: Guillandinus says, that the root of Tithymalus myrsinitis is
the true Turbith; which caused Lobeltus and Pena to pluck up by the roots all
the kinds of Tithymales, and dry them very curiously; which when they had
beheld, and thoroughly tried, they found it nothing so. The Arabians and half
Moors that dwell in the East parts have given diverse names unto this plant:
and as their words are diverse, so have they diverse significatious; but this
name Turbith they seem to interpret to be any milky root which does strongly
purge phlegm, as this plant does. So that as men have thought good, pleasing
themselves, they have made many and diverse constuctions which have troubled
many excellent learned men to know what root is the true (...). But briefly to
set down my opinion, not varying from the judgment of men which are of great
experience; I think assuredly that the root of Scammony of Antioch is the true
and undoubted Turbith, one reason especially that moves me so to think is,
for that I have taken up the roots of Scammony which grew in my garden, and
compared them with the roots of Turbith, between which I found little (...) no
difference at all

Through all Spain (as Clusius in his notes upon Garcias testifies) they use
the roots of Thapsia for Turbith which also have been brought hither, and I
keep some of them by me, but they purge little or nothing at all being dry,
though it may be the green root or juice may have some purging faculty.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The Indian physicians use it to purge phlegm, to which if there be no fever
they add ginger,

Mesues writes, that Turbith is hot in the third degree; and that it voideth
thick tough it with Dates, sweet Almonds, and certain other things, making
thereof a composition (that the Apothecaries call an Electuarie) which is named
(...): common in shops, and in (...) use among expert Physicians.

There is given at one time of this Turbith one dram (more or less) two at the
most: but in the

CHAP. 95. Of Arrow-head, or Water-archer.
1 Sagittaria mayor. Great Arrow-head.
2 Sagittaria minor. Small Arrow-head.


The Description.
1 THe first kind of Water-archer or Arrow-head, has large and long leaves,
in shape like the sign Sagittarius, or rather like a bearded broad Arrow head.
Among which rises up a fat and thick stalk, two or three foot long, having
at the top many pretty white flowers, declining to a light carnation, compact
of three small leaves: which being past, there come after great rough knops or
burres wherein is the seed. The root consists of many strings.

2 The second is like the first, and differs in that this kind has smaller
leaves and flowers, and greater burres and roots.

3 The third kind of Arrow-head has leaves in shape like the broad
Arrow-head, standing upon the ends of tender foot stalks a cubit (...): among
which rise up long naked smooth stalks of a greenish color, from the middle
whereof to the top do grow flowers like to the (...). The root is small and
threddie.

The Place.
These herbs do grow in the watrie ditches by Saint George his field near
unto London; in the Tower ditch at London; in the ditches near the walls of
Oxford; by Chelmesford in Essex, and many other places, as namely in the ditch
near the place of execution, called Saint Thomas Waterings not far from London.

The Time.
They flower in May and June.

The Names.
Sagittaria, may be called in English the Water-archer, or Arrow-head. Some
would have it the (...) of Theophrastus; and it is the Pistana Magonis, and
Sagitta of (...) lib. 21. cap. 17.

The Nature and Virtues.
I find not any thing extant in writing either concerning their virtues or
temperament, but doubtless they are cold and dry in quality, and are like
Plantaine in faculty and temperament.

CHAP. 96. Of Water Plantaine.
1 Plantago aquatica mayor. Great Water Plantaine.
2 Plantago aquatica minor stellata. Starry headed small Water (...).
3 Plantago aquatica humilis. Dwarf water Plantaine.


The Description.
1 THe first kind of water Plantaine has fair great large leaves like the
land Plaintaine, but smoother, and full of ribs or sinews: among which rises
up a tall stem four foot high, dividing it self into many slender branches,
garnished with infinite small white flowers, which being past there appear
triangle husks or buttons wherein is the seed. The root is as it were a great
tuft of threads or thrums.

2 This plant in his roots and leaves is like the last described, as also in
the stalk, but much less in each of them, the stalk being about some foot
high; at the top whereof stand many pretty starre-like skinny seed-vessels,
containing a yellowish seed.

3 The second kind has long, little, and narrow leaves, much like the
Plantaine called Ribwoort: among which rise up small and feeble stalks branched
at the top, whereon are placed white flowers, consisting of three slender
leaves; which being fallen, there come to your view round knobs, or rough burs:
the root is threddy.

The Place.
1 This herb grows about the brinkes of rivers, ponds and ditches almost
every where.

2 3 These are more rare. I found the second a little beyond Ilford, in the way
to Rumford, and Mr. Goodyer found it also growing upon Hounslow heath. I found
the third in the Company of Mr. William Broad, and Mr. Leonard Buckner, in a
ditch on this side Margate in the Isle of Tenet.

The Time.
They flower from June till August.

The Names.
The first kind is called Plantago (...), that is, water Plantaine. The second
Lobell calls Alismapusillum Angustifolium muricatum, and in the Hist. Lugd. it
is called Damasonium stellatum. The third is named Plantago aquatical humilis,
that is, the low water Plantaine.

I think it fit here to restore this plant to his ancient dignity, that is,
his names and titles wherewith he was anciently (...) by Dioscorides and Pliny.
The former whereof calls it by sundry names, and all very significant and
proper, as (...): thus many are Greek, and therefore ought not to be rejected,
as they have been by some without either reason or authority. For the
barbarous names we can say nothing; now it is said to be called Limonium,
because (...): it grows in wet or overflowed meadows: it is called Neuroides,
because the leaf is composed of diverse strings or fibers running from the one
end thereof to the other, as in Plantain, which therefore by Dioscordies is
termed by the same reason (...): Also it may be as fitly termed Lonchitis sor
the similitude which the leaf has to the top or head of a lance which (...)
properly signifies, as that other plant described by Dios. lib. 3. cap. 161.
for that the seed (a less eminent part) resembles the same thing. And for
Potamogeiton which signifies a neighbor to the River or water, I think it
loves the water as well, and is as near a neighbor to it as that which takes
it is name from thence, and is described by Dioscorides, lib. 4. cap. 101. Now
to come to Pliny, lib. 20. cap. 8. he calls it, Beta silvestris, Limonion, and
Neuroides: the two later namesare out of Dioscorides, and I shall show you
where also you shall find the former in him. Thus much I think might serve
for the vindication of my assertion, sor I dare boldly affirm that no late
writer can fit all these names to any other plant, and that makes me more to
wonder that all our late Herbarists as Matthiolus, Dodonaeus, (...),
Caesalpinus, Daleschampius, but above all Pena and Lobell, who Aduers. page
126. call it to question, should not allow this plant to be Limonium,
especially seeing that Anguillara had before or in their time asserted it so to
be; but whether he gave any reasons or no for his assertion, I cannot tell,
because I could never by any means get his Opinions, but only find by Bauhine
his Pinax that such was his opinion hereof. But to return from whence I
digrest, I will give you Dioscorides his description, and a brief explanation
thereof, and so desist; it is thus: It has leaves like a Beet, thinner and
larger, 10. or more; a stalk slender, straight, and as tall as that of a
Lilly, and full of seeds of an astringent taste. The leaves of this you see are
larger than those of a Beet, and thin, and as I formerly told you in the names,
neruous; which to be so may be plainly gathered by Dioscorides his words in
the description of white Hellebore, whose leaves he compares to the leaves of
Plantaine and the wild Beet: now there is no wild Beet mentioned by any of the
Ancients, but only this by Pliny in the place (...) quoted, nor no leaf more
fit to compare those of white Hellebore to, than those of water Plantaine,
especially sor the nerves and fibers that run along the leaves; the stalk
also of this is but slender considering the height, and it grows straight, and
as high as that of a Lilly, with the top plentirifully stored with astringent
seed; so that no one note is wanting in this, nor scarce any to be found in the
other plants that many have of late set forth for Limonium.

The Nature.
Water Plantaine is cold and dry of temperature.

The Virtues.
The leaves of water Plantaine, as some Authors report, are good to be laid
upon the legs of such

Dioscordies and Galen commend the seed hereof given in Wine, against (...),
Dysenteries,

Pliny says, the leaves are good against burns.

CHAP. 97. Of Land Plantaine.
1 Plantago latifolia. Broad leaued Plantaine.
2 Plantago incana. Hoarie Plantaine.


The Description.
1 AS the Greeks have called some kinds of Herbs Serpents tongue, Dogs
tongue, and Ox tongue; so have they termed a kind of Plantaine Arnoglosson,
which is as if you should say Lambs tongue, very well known unto all, by
reason of the great commodity and plenty thereof growing every where; and
therefore it is needless to spend time about them. The greatness and fashion
of the leaves has been the cause of the varieties and diversities of their
names

2 The second is like the first kind, and differs in that, that this kind
of Plantaine has greater, but shorter spikes or knaps: and the leaves are of
an hoarie or ouerworne green color: the stalks are likewise hoary and hairy.

3 The small Plantaine has many tender leaves ribbed like unto the great
Plantaine, and is very like in each respect unto it, saving that it is
altogether lesser.

4 The spiked Rose Plantaine has very few leaves, narrower than the leaves of
the second kind of Plantaine, sharper at the ends, and further growing one
from another. It bears a very double flower upon a short stem like a rose, of
a greenish color tending to yellowness. The seed grows upon a spikie tuft
above the highest part of the plant; notwithstanding it is but very low in
respect of the other Plantaines above mentioned.

4 Plantago Rosea spicata. Spiked Rose Plantaine.
5 Plantago Rosea exotica. Strange Rose Plantaine.
6 Plantago panniculis sparsis. Plantaine with spoky tufts.


5 The fifth kind of Plantaine has been a stranger in England and elsewhere,
until the impression hereof. The cause why I say so is, the want of
consideration of the beauty which is in this plant, wherein it excels all
the other. Moreover, because that it has not bin written of or recorded before
this present time, though plants of lesser moment have been very curiously set
forth. This plant has leaves like unto them of the former, and more orderly
spread upon the ground like a Rose: among which rise up many small stalks like
the other plantaines, having at the top of every one a fine double Rose
altogether unlike the former, of an hoary or rusty green color.

I take this set forth by our Author to be the same with that which Clusius
received from James Garret the younger, from London; and therefore I give you
the figure thereof in this place, together with this addition to the history
out of Clusius: That some of the heads are like those of the former Rose
Plantaine; other some are spike fashion, and some have a spike growing as it
were out of the midst of the Rose, and some heads are otherwise shaped: also
the whole plant is more hoary than the common Rose Plantaine.

6 This plantain must not here be forgot, though it be somewhat hard to be
found: his leaves, roots, and stalks are like those of the ordinary, but in
stead of a compact spike it has one much divided after the manner as you see
it here expressed in the figure, and the color thereof is greenish.

The Place.
The greater Plantaines do grow almost every where.

The lesser Plantaine is found on the sea coasts and banks of great (...),
which are sometimes washed with brackish water.

The Rose Plantaines grow with us in gardens; and the sixth with spokie tufts
grows in some places in the Isle of Tenet, where I first found it, being in
company with Mr. Thomas (...), Mr. Leonard Buckner, and other London
Apothecaries, Anno 1632.

The Time.
They are to be seen from April unto September.

The Names.
Plantaine is called in Latin Plantago, and in Greek (...), and Arnoglossa;
that is to say, Lambs tongue: the Apothecaries keep the Latin name: in
Italian, Plantagine, and Plantagine: in Spanish, (...): the Germans, (...): in
Low Dutch, (...): in English, Plantain, and Weybred: in French, Plantain.

The Temperature.
Plantaine (as Galen faith) is of a mixed temperature; for it has in it a
certain waterie coldness, with a little harshnesse, earthy, dry, and cold:
therefore they are cold and dry in the second degree. To be brief, they are
dry without biting, and cold without benumming. The root is of like
temperature, but drier, and not so cold. The seed is of subtle parts, and of
temperature less cold.

The Virtues.
Plantaine is good for ulcers that are of hard curation, for fluxes, issues,
rheumes, and rottenness,

The juice or decoction of Plantaine drunken stops the bloody flix and all
other fluxes of

Plantaine leaves stamped and made into a Tansie, with the yelkes of eggs,
stays the inordinate

The root of Plantaine with the seed boiled in white Wine and drunk, opens
the conduits

The juice dropped in the eyes does cool the heat and inflammation thereof. I
find in ancient

The leaves are singular good to make a water to wash a sore throat or mouth,
or the privy parts

The leaves of Plantaine stamped and put into Oil Olive, and set in the hot
Sun for a month Balneum Mariae) and then strained, prevails against the
pains in the ears, the yard, or matrix, (being dropped into the ears, or
cast with a syringe into the other parts before rehearsed) or the pains of the
fundament; proved by a learned Gentleman Mr. William Godowrus Sergeant Surgeon
to the Queens Majesty.

CHAP. 98. Of Rib-wort.
The Description.
1 RIb-wort or small Plantaine has many leaves flat spread upon the ground,
narrow, sharp pointed, and ribbed for the most part with five nerves or
sinews, and therefore it was called Quinque-neruia; in the middle of which
leaves rises up a crested or ribbed stalk, bearing at the top a dark or
dusky knap, set with a few such white flowers as are the flowers of wheat. The
root and other parts are like the other Plantaines.

There is another less kind of this Rib-wort, which differs not from the last
mentioned in any thing but the smallness thereof.

2 Rose Rib-wort has many broad and long leaves of a dark green color,
sharp pointed, and (...) with five nerves or sinews like the common Rib-wort;
amongst which rise up naked (...) (...), chamfered, or crested with certain
sharp edges: at the top whereof grows a great and large tuft of such leaves
as those are that grow next the ground, making one entire tuft or vmbel, in
shape resembling the rose (whereof I thought good to give it his syrname Rose)
which is from his flower.

This also I think differs not from that of Clusius; wherefore I give his
figure in the place of that set forth by our Author.

1 Plantago quinqueneruia. Ribwort Plantaine.
2 Plantago quinqueneruiarosea. Rose Ribwort.


The Place.
Ribwort grows almost every where in the borders of path-wayes and fertile
fields.

Rose Ribwort is not very common in any place, notwithstanding it grows in my
garden, and wild also in the North parts of England; and in a field near
London by a village called Hogsdon, found by a learned merchant of London Mr.
James Cole, a lover of plants, and very skillful in the knowledge of them.

The Time.
They flower and flourish when the other Plantaines do.

The Names.
Ribwort is called in Greek, (...): and of some, (...): in Latin, Plantago
minor, Quin queneruia, and Lanceola, or Lanceolata: in high Dutch, Spitziger
Wegrich: in French, Lanceole: in Low Dutch, Hondtsribbe; that is to say in
Latin, Costa canina, or Dogs rib: in English, Ribwort, and Ribwort Plantaine.

The second I have thought meet to call Rose Ribwort in English, and
Quinqueneruiarosea in Latin.

The Temperature.
Ribwort is cold and dry in the second degree, as are the Plantains.

The Virtues.
The virtues are referred to the kinds of Plantaines.

CHAP. 99. Of Sea Plantaines.
1 Holosteum Salamanticum. Flouring sea Plantaine.
2 Holosteum parvum. Small sea Plantaine.
3 Plantago marina. Sea Plantaine.


The Description.
1 CArolus Clusius that excellent Herbarist has referred these two sorts of
Holosteum unto the kinds of Sea Plantaine. The first has long leaves like the
common Rib-wort, but narrower, covered with some hairinesse or wollinesse:
among which there rises up a stalk, bearing at the top a spike like the
kinds of Plantaine, beset with many small flowers of an herby color,
declining to whiteness. The seed is like that of the Plantaine: the root is
long and woody. This flowers in April or May.

2 The second is like the former, but smaller, and not so gray or hoary: the
flowers are like to Coronopus, or the lesser Ribwort. This flowers at the same
time as the former.

3 The third kind, which is the sea Plantaine, has small and narrow leaves
like Bucks-horn, but without any manisest incisure, cuttings or notches upon
the one side: among which rises up a spikie stalk, like the common kind, but
smaller.

4 Holosteum, sieve Leontopodium Creticum. Candy Lions foot.
5 Holosteum, sieve Leontopod. Cret. alterum. The other Candy Lions foot.


4 These two following Plants are by Clusius and Bauhine referred to this
Tribe; (...) I think it fitting to place them here. The (...) of them from a
reddish, and as it were sealy root growing less by little and little, and
divided into fibers, sends forth many leaves, narrow, hoary, an handful long,
and having three nerves or ribs running along each of them: amongst these
come sorth diverse foot-stalkes, covered with a soft reddish down, and being
some two or three inches long, having heads somewhat thick and reddish: the
flowers are whitish, with a blackish middle, which makes it seem as if it were
persorated or holed. Now when the plant grows old, and withers, the stalks
becoming more thick and stiff, bend down their heads toward the root, so
that in some sort they resemble the foot of a (...).

5 This Plant which is figured in the upper place (for I take the lower to be
an exacter figure of the last described) has leaves like to the small sea
Plantaine, but tenderer, and standing upright; and amongst these on little
foot-stalkes grow heads like those of Psyllium, but prettier, and of a whitish
red color.

The Place.
The two first grow in most of the kingdoms of Spain. Carolus Clusius
writes, that he never saw greater or whiter than near to Valentia a city of
Spain, by the highways. Since, they have been found at Bastable in the isle
of Wight, and in the isles of Gernsey and Iarsey.

The third does grow near unto the sea in all the places about England where I
have traveled, especially by the sorts on both the sides of the water at
Grauesend; at Erith near London; at Lee in Essex; ar Rye in (...); at
West-Chester, and at Bristow.

The fourth and fifth grow in Candy, from whence they have been sent to Padua
and diverse other places.

The Names.
Holosteum is also called by Dodonaeus, Plantago angustifolia albidu, or
Plantago Hispaniensis: in English, Spanish hairy small Plantaine, or flouring
sea Plantaine.

The fourth is called by Clusius, Leontopodium Creticum: by some it has been
thought to be Catanance of Dioscorides: the which Honorius Bellus will not
allow of: Bauhine calls it Holosteum, sieve Leontopodium Creticum.

The fifth is Leontopodium Creticum alterum of Clusius; the Habbures of
Camerarius; and the Holosteum Creticum alterum of Bauhine.

The Temperature and Virtues,
Galen says, That Holosteum is of a binding and drying faculty.

Galen, Dioscorides, and Pliny have proved it to be such an excellent wound
herb, that it presently

These herbs have the same faculties and virtues that the other Plantains
have, and are thought to be the best of all the kinds. That which was formerly
in the fourth place of this chapter, under the name of Holosteum (...), you
shall find hereafter under the title of (...) (...); for under that name out
Author also gave (...) sigure thereof, with a description; and I judge it more
sitly placed in that place, than here amongst the (...).


CHAP. 100. Of Sea Buck-horne Plantaines.
1 Coronopus. Sea Buck-horne.
2 Coronopus, sieve Serpentina minor. Small Sea Buck-horne.


The Description.
1 THe new Writers following as it were by tradition those that have written
long agone, have been content to hear themselves speak and set down
certainties by uncertain speeches; which has wrought such confusion and
corruption of writings, that so many Writers, so many several opinions; as may
most evidently appear in these plants and in others: And my self am content
rather to suffer this (...) to pass, than by correcting the error, to renew
the old wound. But for mine own opinion thus I think, the plant which is
reckoned for a kind of Coronopus is doubtless a kind of Holosteum: my reason
is, because it has grassie leaves, or rather leaves like Veronica (...) or
wild Pinks, a root like those of Garyophyllata or Auens, and the spikie ear
of Holosteum or Sea Plantaine: which are certain arguments that these writers
have never seen the Plant, but only the picture thereof, and so have set
down their opinions by hearsay.

This plant likewise has been altogether unknown unto the old Writers. It
grows most plentifully upon the cliffes and rocks and the tops of the barren
mountains of Auergne in France, and in many places of Italy.

2 The second sort of wild sea Plantaine or Serpentina differs not from the
former but only in quantity and slenderness of his stalks, and the
smallness of his leaves, which exceed not the height of two inches. It grows
on the hills and rocks near the washings of the sea at Massilia in great
plenty almost every where among the Tragacanthum, having a most thick and
spreading cluster of leaves after the manner of Sedum minimum saxeum montanum,
somewhat like Pinaster, or the wild Pine, as well in manner of growing, as
stiffenesse, and great increase of his slender branches. It has the small seed
of Plantaine, or Serpentina vulgaris, contained within his spiky ears. The
root is somewhat long, woody, and thick, in taste somewhat hot and
aromaticall.

3 Coronopus sieve Serpentina minima. Small Buck-horne Plantaine.
4 Cauda Muris. Mouse-taile.


3 This small sea plant is likewise one of the kinds of sea Plantaine,
participating as well of Buck-horne as of Holostium, being as it were a
degenerate kind of sea Plantaine. It has many grassie leaves very like unto
the herb Thrift, but much smaller; among which come sorth little tender
foot-stalkes, whereon do grow small spikie knops like those of sea Plantaine.
The root is tough and threddy.

4 Mouse-taile or Cauda muris resembles the last kind of wild Coronopus or
sea Plantaine, in small spikie knops, leaves, and stalks, that I know no
reason to the contrary, but that I may as well place this small herb among
the kinds of Coronopus or Bucks horn, as other Writers have placed kinds of
Holostium in the same section: and if that be pardonable in them, I trust this
may be tolerated in me, considering that without controversy this little and
base herb is a kind of Holostium, having many small short grassie leaves
spread on the ground, an inch long or somewhat more: among which do rise small
tender naked stalks of two inches long, bearing at the top a little blackish
torch or spikie knop in shape like that of the Plantaines, resembling very
notably the tail of a Mouse, whereof it took his name. The root is small and
threddy.

The Place.
The first and second of these plants are strangers in England; notwithstanding
I have heard say that they grow upon the rocks in Silley, Garnsey, and the Isle
of man.

Mouse-taile grows upon a barren ditch bank near unto a gate leading into a
pasture on the right hand of the way, as ye go from London to a village called
Hampstead; in a field as you go from Edmonton (a village near London) unto a
house thereby called Pims, by the foot-paths sides; in Woodford Row in Waltham
Forest, and in the Orchard belonging to Mr. Francis (...) in Essex, and in
other places.

The Time.
They flower and flourish in May and June.

The Names.
Matthiolus writes, That the people of Goritia do commonly call these two
former plants Serpentaria and Serpentina; but improperly, for that there be
other plants which may better be called Serpentina than these two: we may call
them in English wild sea Plantaine, whereof doubtless they are kinds.

Mouse-taile is called in Latin Cauda muris, and Cauda murina: in Greek,
(...), or (...). Myosuros is called of the Frenchmen Queue de souris: in
English, Bloud-strange, and Mouse-taile.

The Temperature.
Coronopus is cold and dry much like unto the Plantaine. Mouse-taile is cold
and something drying, with a kind of astriction or binding quality.

The Virtues.
Their faculties in working are referred unto the Plantaines and Harts-horne.

CHAP. 101. Of Bucke-horne Plantaines, or Harts-horne.
1 Cornu Ceruinum. Harts-horne.
2 Coronopus Ruellij. Swines Cresses, or Bucks-horne.


The Description.
1 BVcks-horne or Harts-horne has long narrow hoary leaves, cut on both the
sides with three or four short starts or knags, resembling the branches of a
hearts horn, spreading it self on the ground like a star: from the middle
whereof spring up small round naked hairy stalks; at the top whereof do grow
little knops or spikie torches like those of the small Plantaines. The root is
slender and threddy.

2 Ruellius Bucks-horne or Swines Cresses has many small and weak straggling
branches, trailing here and there upon the ground, set with many small cut or
iagged leaves, somewhat like the former, but smaller, and nothing at all hairy
as is the other. The flowers grow among the leaves, in small rough clusters, of
an (...) greenish color: which being past, there come in place little flat
pouches broad and rough, in which the seed is contained. The root is white,
threddy, and in taste like the garden Cresses.

The Place.
They grow in barren plains, and untilled places, and sandy grounds; as in
Touthill field near unto Westminster, at Waltham twelve miles from London, and
upon Blacke-heath also near London.

The Time.
They flower and flourish when the Plantaines do, whereof these have been
taken to be kinds.

The Names.
Bucks-horne is called in Latin (...) (...), or Harts-horne: diverse name it
Herba stella, or (...), although there be another herb so called: in
Low Dutch, Hertzhooren: in Spanish, Guiabella: in French, Corn de Cerf: It is
thought to Dioscorides his (...), which does signify (...) pedem, a Crows
foot. It is called also by certain bastard names, as Harenarea, Sanguinaria,
and of many, Herb Iuy, or herb Eve.

The Temperature.
Bucks-horne is like in temperature to the common Plantaine, in that it
binds, cools, and dries.

The Virtues.
The leaves of Buckes-horne boiled in drink, and given morning and evening for
certain Duke; and the like by an excellent Apothecarie of the same Town
called Mr. Buckstone.

The leaves and roots stamped with Bay salt, and tied to the wrests of the
arms, take away

CHAP. 102. Of Saracens Consound.
The Description.
1 SAracens Consound has many long narrow leaves cut or slightly snipt about
the edges: among which rise up fair brown hollow stalks of the height of
four cubits; along which even from the bottom to the top it is set with long
and pretty large leaves like them of the Peach tree: at the top of the stalks
grow fair starre-like yellow flowers, which turn into down, and are carried
away with the wind. The root is very fibrous or threddy.

The Place.
Saracens Consound grows by a wood as ye ride from great Dunmow in Essex,
unto a place called Clare in the said country; from whence I brought some
plants into my garden.

I formerly in the twenty fourth Chapter of this second book told you what
plant our Author took for Saracens Consound, and (as I have been credibly
informed) kept in his garden for it. Now the true Solidago here described and
figured was found Anno 1632, by my kind Friends Mr. George Bowls and Mr.
William Coot, in Shropshire in Wales, in a hedge in the way as one goes from
Dudson in the parish of Cherbery to Guarthlow.

The Time.
It floureth in July, and the seed is ripe in August.

The Names.
Saracens Consound is called in Latin Solidago Saracenica, or Saracens
Comfrey, and (...) (...): in Dutch, (...) (...): of some, Herba fortis: in
English, Saracens Consound, or Saracens Wound-wort.

The figure that was formerly in this place was of Consolida (...) of (...);
and the true figure belonging to (...) (...) was in the next (...) save one,
under the title of (...) (...) (...).
Solidago Saracenica. Saracens Consound.


The Nature.
Saracens Consound is dry in the third degree, with some manifest heat.

The Virtues.
Saracens Consound is not inferior to Cartwright a Gentleman of Grayes Inn,
who was grievously wounded into the lungs, and that by Gods permission in short
space.

The leaves boiled in water and drunk,

The decoction of the leaves made in

CHAP. 103. Of Golden Rod.
The Description.
1 GOlden Rod has long broad leaves somewhat hoary and sharp pointed; among
which rise up brown stalks two foot high, dividing themselves toward the top
into sundry branches, charged or laden with small yellow flowers; which when
they be ripe turn into down which is carried away with the wind. The root is
threddy and brown of color. Lobel makes this with vnsnipt leaves to be that
of Arnoldus de villa noua.

2 The second sort of Golden Rod has small thin leaves broader than those of
the first described, smooth, with some few cuts or nickes about the edges, and
sharp pointed, of a hot and harsh taste in the throat being chewed; which
leaves are set upon a fair reddish stalk. It took his name from the flowers
which grow at the top of a gold yellow color: which flowers turn into Down,
which is carried away with the wind, as is the former. The root is small,
compact of many strings or threads.

The Place.
They both grow plentifully in Hampstead Wood, near unto the gate that leads
out of the wood unto a Village called Kentish town, not far from London; in a
wood by Rayleigh in (...), hard by a Gentleman's house called Mr. Leonard,
dwelling upon Dawes heath; in Southfleet and in Swainescombe wood also, near
unto Grauesend.

The Time.
They flower and flourish in the end of August.

The Names.
It is called in English Golden Rod: in Latin, (...) (...), because the
branches are like a golden rod: in Dutch, Gulden roede: in French, verge d'or.

1 Virga aurea. Golden Rod.
2 Virga aurea Arnoldi Villanouani. Arnold of the new town his Golden rod.


The Temperature.
Golden Rod is hot and dry in the second degree: it cleanses, with a certain
astriction or binding quality.

The Virtues.
Golden Rod provoke urine, wastes away the stones in the kidneys, and
expels them, and Arnoldus Villanouanus by good reason has commended it
against the stone and pain of the kidneys.

It is of the number of those plants that serve for wound-drinks, and is
reported that it can fully

Arnoldus writes, That the distilled water drunk with wine for some few days
together, works

It is extolled above all other herbs for the stopping of blood in
sanguinolent ulcers and bleeding

CHAP. 103. Of Captain Andreas Dorias his Wound-woort.
The figure that was here was of (...) (...).
Herba Doria L'obelij. Dorias Woundwoort.


The Description.
THis plant has long and large thick and fat leaves, sharp pointed, of a
bluish green like unto Woad, which being broken with the hands has a pretty
spicie smell. Among these leaves rises up a stalk of the height of a tal man,
diui led (...) the top into many other branches, whereupon grow small yellowish
flowers, which turns into down that flies away with the wind. The root is
thick almost like Helleborus albus.

Of which kind there is another like the former, but that the leaves are
rougher, somewhat bluntly indented at the edges, and not so fat and gross.

Herba Doria altera.

This herb grows up with a green round brittle stalk, very much champhered,
sinewed, or surrowed, about four or five foot high, full of white pith like
that of Elder, and sends forth small branches: the leaves grow on the stalk
outof order, and are smooth, sharp pointed, in shape like (...) of Herba
Doria, but much shorter and narrower, the broadest and longest seldom being
above ten or eleven inches long, and scarce two inches broad, and are more
finely and smally nickt or indented about the edges; their smell being nothing
pleasant, but rather when together with the stalk they are broken and rubbed
yield forth a smell having a small touch of the smell of Hemlocke. Out of the
bosoms of these leaves spring other smaller leaves or branches. The flowers
are many, and grow on small branches at the tops of the stalks like those of
Herba Doria, but more like those of Iacobaea, of a yellow color, as well the
middle button, as the small leaves that stand round about, every flower having
commonly eight of those small leaves. Which being past the button turns into
down and contains very small long seeds which fly away with the wind. The
root is nothing else but an infinite of small strings which most hurtfully
spread in the ground, and by their infinite increasing destroys and starueth
other herbs that grow near it. Its natural place of growing I know not; for
I had it from Mr. John Coys, and yet keep it growing in my garden. John
Goodyer.

The Place.
These plants grow naturally about the borders or brinkes of rivers near to
Narbone (...) France, from whence they were brought into England, and are
contented to be made denizons in my garden, where they flourish to the height
aforesaid.

The Time.
They floured in my garden about the twelfth of June.

The Nature.
The roots are sweet in smell, and hot in the third degree.

The Virtues.
Two drams of the roots of Herba Doria boiled in wine and given to drink,
draws down waterish

The same is with good success used in medicines that expel poison.

All these Plants mentioned in the three last Chapters, to wit, Solidago, Virga
aurea and this (...) Dorea, are by (...) fitly comprehended under the title of
Virga aurea; because they are much alike in shape, and for that they are all of
the same faculty in medicine.

CHAP. 105. Of Felwoort, or Baldmoney.
The Kinds.
THere be diverse sorts of Gentians or Felwoorts, whereof some be of our own
country; others more strange and brought further off: and also some not before
this time remembered; either of the ancient or later writers, as shall be set
forth in this present chapter.

The Description.
THe first kind of Felwoort has great large leaves, not unlike to those of
Plantaine, very well resembling the leaves of the white Hellebore: among which
rises up a round hollow stalk as thick as a man's thumb, full of ioints or
knees, with two leaves at each of them, and toward the top every joint or knot
is set round about with small yellow starre-like flowers, like a coronet or
garland: at the bottom of the plant next the ground the leaves do spread
themselves abroad, embracing or clipping the stalk in that place round about,
set together by couples one opposite against another. The seed is small,
brown, flat, and smooth like the seeds of the Stock Gillo-floure. The root
is a finger thick. The whole Plant is of a bitter taste.

1 Gentiana mayor. Great Felwoort.
2 Gentiana mayor purpurea, 1. Clusij. Great Purple Felwoort.


3 Gentiana mayor ij. (...) flore Clusij. Blew floured Felwoort.
4 Gentiana minor Cruciata. Crossewoort Gentian.
5 Gentiana Pennei minor. Spotted Gentian of Dr. Penny.


2 This described by Clusius, has leaves and stalks like the precedent; these
stalks are some cubite and half or two cubits high, and toward the tops
they are ingirt with two or three coronets of fair purple flowers, which are
not starfashioned, like those of the (...), but long and hollow, divided as it
were into some five or six parts or leaves, which toward the bottom on the
inside are spotted with deep purple spots: these flowers are without smell,
and have so many chiues as they have iagges, and these chiues compass the
head, which is parted into two cells, and contains store of a smooth, chaffie,
reddish seed. The root is large, yellow on the outside; and white within, very
bitter, and it sends forth every year new shoots. It grows in diverse places of
the Alps; it flowers in August, and the seeds are ripe in September.

3 Carolus Clusius also sets forth another sort of a great Gentian, rising
forth of the ground with a stiff, firm or solid stalk, set with leaves like
unto (...), by couples one opposite against another, even from the bottom to
the top in certain distances: from the bosom of the leaves there shoot forth
set upon slender foot-stalkes certain long hollow flowers like bells, the mouth
whereof ends in five sharp corners. The whole flower changes many times his
color according to the soil and climate; now and then purple or blew,
sometimes whitish, and often of an ash color. The root and seed is like the
precedent.

4 Crosse-woort Gentian has many ribbed leaves spread upon the ground, like
unto the leaves of Sopewoort, but of a blacker green color: among which rise
up weak iointed stalks trailing or leaning toward the ground. The flowers
grow at the top in bundles thick thrust together, like those of sweet
Williams, of a light blew color. The root is thick, and creeps in the
ground far abroad, whereby it greatly increases.

5 Carolus Clusius has set forth in his Pannonicke history a kind of
Gentian, which he received from Mr. Thomas Penny of London, Dr. in Physic,
of famous memory, and a second Dioscorides for his singular knowledge in
Plants: which Tabernamontanus has set forth in his Dutch book for the seventh
of Clusius, wherein he greatly deceived himself, and has with a (...)
description wronged others.

This twelfth sort or kind of Gentian after Clusius, has a round stiff
stalk, firm and solid, somewhat reddish at the bottom, iointed or kneed
like unto (...) Gentian. The (...) are broad, smooth, full of ribs or
sinews, set about the stalks by couples, (...) opposite against another. The
flowers grow upon small tender stalks, compact of five slender bluish leaves,
spotted very curiously with many black spots and little lines; having in the
middle five yellow chiues. The seed is small like sand: the root is little,
garnished with a few strings of a yellowish color.

The Place.
Gentian grows in shadowie woods, and the mountains of Italy, Sclauonia,
Germany, France, and Burgundy; from whence Mr. Isaac de Laune a learned
Physician sent me plants for the increase of my garden. Crossewoort Gentian
grows in a pasture at the West end of little Rain in Essex on the North side
of the way leading from Braintree to Much-Dunmow; and in the horse way by the
same close.

The Time.
They flower and flourish in August, and the seed is ripe in September.

The Names.
Gentius King of Illyria was the first finder of this herb, and the first that
used it in medicine, for which cause it was called Gentian after his own name:
in Greek (...): which name also the Apothecaries retain unto this day, and
call it Gentiana: it is named in English Felwoort Gentian; Bitterwoort;
Baldmoyne, and Baldmoney.

1 This by most Writers is called Gentiana, and Gentiana mayor Lutea.

2 Gesner calls this Gentiana punicea; Clusius, Gentiana mayor flore purpurco.

3 This is Gentiana folijs hirundinariae of Gesner: and Gentiana Asclepiadis
folio of (...).

4 This, Cruciata, or Gentiana Cruciata, of Tragus, Fuchsius, Dodon. Gesner and
others: it is the Gentiana minor of Matthiolus.

5 Clusius calls this Gentiana mayor pallida punctis distincta.

The Temperature.
The root of Felwoort is hot, as Dioscorides faith, clensing or scouring:
diverse copies have, that it is likewise binding, and of a bitter taste.

The Virtues.
It is excellent good, as Galen says, when there is need of attenuating,
purging, clensing, and removing

It is reported to be good for those that are troubled with crampes and
convulsions; for such Theriaca diatessaron: which Aetius calls Mysterium, a
mystery or hid secret.

This is of such force and virtue, says Pliny, that it helps cattle which
are not only troubled

The root of Gentian given in powder the quantity of a dram, with a little
pepper and herb

The decoction drunk is good against the stoppings of the liver, and cruditie
of the stomach,

CHAP. 106. Of English Felwoort.
The Description.
HOllow leafed Felwoort or English Gentian has many long tough roots,
dispersed hither and thither within the upper crust of the earth; from which
immediately rises a fat thick stalk, iointed or kneed by certain distances,
set at every knot with one leaf, and sometimes more, keeping no certain
number: which leaves do at the first enclose the stalks round about, being
one whole and entire leaf without any incisure at all, as it were a hollow
trunk; which after it is grown to his fullness, breaks in one side or
other, and becomes a flat ribbed leaf, like unto the great Gentian or
Plantaine. The flowers come forth of the bosom of the upper leaves, set upon
tender foot stalks, in shape like those of the small Bindweed, or rather the
flowers of Sopewoort, of a whitish color, washed about the brims with a little
light carnation. Then follows the seed, which as yet I have not observed.

Gentiana concaua. Hollow Felwoort.


The Place.
I found this strange kind of Gentian in a small grove of a wood called the
Spinie, near unto a small village in Northampton shire called Lichbarrow:
elsewhere I have not heard of it.

The Time.
It springs forth of the ground in April, and brings forth his flowers and
seed in the end of August.

The Names.
I have thought good to give unto this plant, in English, the name Gentian,
being doubtless a kind thereof. The which has not been set forth, nor
remembered by any that have written of plants until this time. In Latin we may
call it Gentiana concaua, of the hollow leaves. It may be called also hollow
leaued Felwoort.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Of the faculties of this plant as yet I can say nothing, referring it unto the
other Gentians, until time shall disclose that which yet is secret and
unknown.

Bauhine received this plant with the figure thereof from Doctor Lister one of
his Majesty's Physicians, and he referres it unto Saponaria, calling it
Saponaria concaua Anglica; and (as far as I can conjecture) has a good
description thereof in his Prodrom. page 103. Now both by our Author and
Bauhines Description, I gather, that the root in this Figure is not rightly
expressed, for that it should be long, thick, and creeping, with few fibers
adhering thereunto; when as this figure expresses an annual woody root. But
not having as yet seen the plant, I can assirme nothing of certainty.

CHAP. 107. Of Bastard Felwoort.
The Description.
Our Author in this Chapter so confounded all, that I knew not well how,
handsomely to set all right; for his descriptions they were so barren, that
little might be gathered by them, and the figures agreed with their titles, but
the place contradicts all; for the first figured is found in England; and the
second is not that ever I could learn: also the second flowers in the spring,
according to Clusius and all others that have written thereof, and also by our
Authors own title, truly put over the figure: yet he said they both flower
and flourish from August to the end of September. These things considered, I
thought it fitter both for the Readers benefit, and my own credit to give you
this chapter wholly new with additions, rather than mangled and confused, as
otherwise of necessity it must have been.

1 This elegant Gentianella has a small yellowish creeping root, from which
arise many green smooth thick hard and sharp pointed leaves like those of
the broad leaued Myrtle, yet larger, and having the veins running along the
leaves as in Plantaine. Amongst the leaves come up short stalks, bearing very
large flowers one upon a stalk; and these flowers are hollow like a
Bel-floure, and end in five sharp points with two little ears between each
division, and their color is an exquisite blew. After the flower is past there
follows a sharp pointed longish vessel, which opening it self into two
equal parts, shows a small crested dark colored seed.

1 Gentianella verna mayor. Spring large floured Gentian.
2 Gentianella Alpina verna. Alps Felwoort of the spring time.


2 This second rises up with a single slender and purplish stalk, set at
certain spaces with six or eight little ribbed leaves, standing by couples one
against another. At the top stands a cup, out whereof comes one long flower
without smell, and as it were divided at the top into five parts; and it is of
so elegant a color, that it seems to exceed blewnesse it self; each of the
foldes or little leaves of the flower has a whitish line at the side, and
other five as it were pointed leaves or appendices set between them: and in
the midst of the flower are certain pale colored chiues: a longish sharp
pointed vessel succeeds the flower which contains a small hard round seed. The
root is small, yellowish and creeping, putting up here and there stalks
bearing flowers, and in other places only leaves lying orderly spread upon the
ground.

3 Gentianella fugax minor. Bastard or Dwarf Felwoort.


3 Besides these two whose roots last long and increase every year, there are
diverse other Dwarf or Bastard Gentians which are annual, and wholly perish
every year as soon as they have perfected their seed; and therefore by Clusius
they are fitly called Gentianae fugaces. Of these I have only observed two
kinds (or rather varieties) in this Kingdom, which I will here describe unto
you. The first of these, which is the lesser, and whose figure we here give
you, is a proper plant some two or three inches high, divided immediately from
the root into three or four or more branches, set at certain spaces with
little longish leaves, being broadest at the setting on, and so growing
narrower or sharper pointed. The tops of these stalks are beautified with
long, hollow, and pretty large flowers, considering the magnitude of the plant,
and these flowers are of a dark purplish color, and at their tops divided
into five parts. The root is yellowish, small, and woody. The seed which is
small and round is contained in longish vessels. The stalks and leaves are
commonly of a dark green, or else of a brownish color.

4 This from a root like, yet a little larger than the former, sends up a
pretty stiff round stalk of some span high; which at certain spaces is set
with such leaves as the last described, but larger: and out of the bosoms of
these leaves from the bottom to the top of the stalk come forth little foot
stalks, which usually carry three flowers a piece; two set one against
another, and the third upon a stalk somewhat higher; and sometimes there comes
forth a single flower at the root of these foot stalks. The flowers in their
shape, magnitude and color, are like those of the last mentioned, and also the
seed and seed vessels. The manner of growing of this is very well presented by
the figure of the third Gentian, formerly described in the Chapter last save
one aforegoing.

The Place.
1 2 These grow not wild in England that I know of, but the former is to be
found in most of our choice Gardens. As with Mr. Parkinson, Master Tradescant,
and Master Tuggye, etc.

3 4 These are found in diverse places, as in the Chalke-dale at Dartford in
Kent, and according to our Author (for I know he meant these) in Waterdowne
Forest in Sussex, in the way that leads from Charlwoods lodge, unto the house
of the Lord of Abergauenie, called Eridge house by a brook side there,
especially upon a Heath by Colbrooke near London: on the Plain of Salisburie,
hard by the turning from the said Plain, unto the right Honorable the Lord of
Pembrooks house at Wilton, and upon a Chalkie bank in the high way between
Saint Albons and Goramberrie.

The Time.
1 2 These two flower in April and May. The other from August unto the end of
October.

The Names.
1 This is the Gentiana 4. of Tragus. The Gentianella Alpina of Gesner;
Gentianella (...) flore and Heluetica of Lobel; the Gentiana 5. or (...) mayor
verna of (...).

2 Gesner called this Calathiana verna: Lobel, (...) Alpina: and (...),
Gentiana 6. and Gentianella minor verna.

3 This is the Calathiana vera of Daleschampius: and the Gentiana fugax 5. or
Gentiana 11. (...) of Clusius.

4 I take this to be Clusius his Gentiana fugax 4. or Gentiana 10. We may call
this in (...), Small Autumn Gentian.

Their Temperature and Virtues.
These by their taste and form should be much like to the greater Gentians in
their operation and working, yet not altogether so effectual.

CHAP. 106. Of Calathian Violet, or Autumn Bel-floure.
The Description.
AMong the number of the base Gentians there is a small plant, which is late
before it comes up, having stalks a span high, and sometimes higher, narrow
leaves like unto Time, set by couples about the stalks by certain distances:
long hollow flowers growing at the top of the stalks, like a cup called a
Beaker, wide at the top, and narrower toward the bottom, of a deep blew
color tending to purple, with certain white threads or chiues in the bottom:
the (...) at the mouth or brim is five cornered before it be opened, but when
it is opened it appears with five (...) or pleats. The whole plant is of a
bitter taste, which plainly shows it to be a kind of wild Gentian. The root
is small, and perishes when it has perfected his seed, and recouereth it
self by (...) of the same.

Pneumonanthe. Calathian Violet.


The Place.
It is found sometimes in Meadows, oftentimes in untilled places. It grows
upon Long-field downs in Kent, near unto a village called Longfield by (...),
upon the chalkie cliffes near Greene-Hythe and Cobham in Kent, and many other
places. It likewise grows as you ride from Sugar-loafe hill unto Bathe, in
the West country.

This plant I never found but once, and that was on a wet Moorish ground in
Lincolnshire, 2. or 3. miles on this side Caster, and as I remember, the place
is called Netleton Moore. Now I suspect that our Author knew it not; first,
because he describes it with leaves like unto Time, when as this has long
narrow leaves more like to Hyssop or Rosemary. Secondly, for that he says the
root is small and perishes when as it has perfected the seed: whereas this
has a living, stringie and creeping root. Besides, this seldom or never
grows on (...) cliffes, but on wet Moorish grounds and Heaths: wherefore I
suspect our Author took the small Autumn Gentian (described by me in the
fourth place of the last Chapter) for this here treated of.

The Time.
The gallant flowers hereof be in their bravery about the end of August, and
in September.

The Names.
This is thought to be Viola Calathiana of Ruellius, yet not that of Pliny; and
those that desire to know more of this may have recourse to the (...) chapter
of the first book of the 2. Pempt. of Dodon. his Latin Herball, whence our
Author took those words that were formerly in this place, though he did not
well understand nor express them. It is called Viola Autumnalis, or Autumn
Violet, and seems to be the same that (...) Cordus does call Pneumonanthe,
which he says is named in the Germane tongue (...), or Lung-floure: in
English, Autumn Bel-floures, Calathian Violets, and of some, Haruestbels.

The Temperature.
This wild Felwoort or Violet is in Temperature hot, somewhat like in faculty
to Gentian, whereof it is a kind, but far weaker in operation.

The Virtues.
The latter Physicians hold it to be effectual against pestilent diseases, and
the bitings and stingings

CHAP. 109. Of Venus Looking-glass.
The Description.
1 BEsides the former Bel-floures, there is likewise a certain other, which is
low and little; the stalks whereof are tender, two spans long, divided into
many branches most commonly lying upon the ground. The leaves about the stalks
are little, slightly nicked in the edges. The flowers are small, of a bright
purple color tending to blewnes, very beautiful, with wide mouths like broad
bells, having a white (...) or thread in the middle. The flowers in the day time
are wide open, and about the setting of the Sun are shut up and closed fast
together, in five corners, as they are before their first opening, and as the
other Bel-floures are. The roots be (...) slender, and perish when they have
perfected their seed.

2 There is another which from a small and woody root sends up a straight
stalk, sometimes but two or three inches, yet otherwhiles a foot high, when as
it lights into good (...). This stalk is crested and hollow, having little
longish leaves crumpled or sinuated about the edges set thereon: and out of the
bosoms of those leaves toward the top of the stalk and sometimes lower, come
little branches bearing little winged cods, at the tops of which in the midst
of five little green leaves stand small purple flowers, of little or no
beauty; which being past the cods become much larger, and contain in them a
small yellowish seed, and they still retain at their tops the five longish
green leaves that encompassed the flower. This plant is an annual like as the
former.

1 Speculum Veneris. Venus Looking-glass.
2 Speculum Veneris minus. Codded corn violet.


The Place.
It grows in ploughed fields among the corn, in a plentiful and fruitful
soil. I found it in a field among the corn by Greene-hithe, as I went from
thence toward Dartford in Kent, and in many other places thereabout, but not
elsewhere: from whence I brought of the seeds for my Garden, where they come up
of themselves from year to year by falling of the seed.

That which is here figured and described in the first place I never found
growing in England, I have seen only some branches of it brought from Leiden
by my friend Mr. William Parker. The other of my description I have diverse
times found growing among the corn in Chelsey field, and also have had it
brought me from other places by Mr. George Bowls, and Mr. Lconard Buckner.

The Time.
It floureth in June and July, and the seed is ripe in the end of August.

The Names.
It is called (...) Aruensis, and of some O nobrychis, but improperly, of other
Cariophyllus (...), or corn Gillofloure, or Corn pinke, and Speculum Veneris,
or Ladies glass The Brabanders in their tongue call it Urowen Spiegel.

Tabernamontamus has two figures thereof, the one under the name of Viola
aruensis, and the other by the title of Viola Pentagonia, because the flower
has five folds or corners. 2 This of my description is not mentioned by any
Author; wherefore I am content to follow that name which is given to the
former, and term it in Latin Speculum Veneris minus: and from the color of
the flower and codded seed vessel, to call it in English, Codded Corn Violet.

The Temperature and Virtues.
We have not found any thing written either of his virtue or temperature, of
the ancient or late Writers.

CHAP. 110. Of Neesing root, or Neesewoort.
1 Helleborus albus. White Hellebor.
2 Helleborus albus praecox. Timely white Hellebor.


The Description.
1 THe first kind of white Hellebor has leaves like unto great Gentian, but
much broader, and not unlike the leaves of the great Plantaine, folded into
pleats like a garment pleated to be laid up in a chest; amongst these leaves
rises up a stalk a cubite long, (...) toward the top full of little
starre-like flowers, of an herbie green color tending to whiteness, which
being past there come small husks containing the seed. The root is great and
thick, with many small threads hanging thereat.

2 The second kind is very like the first, and differs in that, that this
has black reddish flowers, and comes to flouring before the other kind,
and seldom in my garden comes to seeding.

The Place.
The white Hellebor grows on the Alps, and such like mountains where Gentian
does grow. It was reported unto me by the bishop of Norwich, that white
Hellebor grows in a wood of his own near to his house at Norwich. Some say
likewise that it does grow upon the Mountains of Wales. I speak this upon
report, yet I think not, but that it may be true. Howbeit I dare assure you,
that they grow in my garden at London, where the first kind floureth and
seedeth very well.

The Time.
The first floureth in June, and the second in May.

The Names.
Neesewoort is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Veratrum Album, Helleborus
albus, and Sanguis Herculeus. The Germans call it (...) nieswurt: the Dutchmen,
(...): the Italians, Elleboro bianco: The Spaniards, Verde gambre blanco: the
French, Ellebore blanch: and we of England call it white Hellebor, Nieswoort,
Lingwoort, and the root Neesing powder.

The Temperature.
The root of white Hellebor, is hot and dry in the third degree.

The Virtues.
The root of white Hellebor procures vomit mightily, wherein consists his
chief virtue,

This strong medicine made of white Hellebor, ought not to be given inwardly
unto delicate

The root of Hellebor cut in small pieces, such as may aptly and conveniently
be conveyed into Dioscorides is attributed to the black Hellebor, and not to
this.

The powder drawn up into the nose causes sneesing, and purges the brain
from gross and

The root given to drink in the weight of two pence, takes away the fits of
agues, kills Mice Pliny adds that it is a medicine against the Lousie evil.

CHAP. 111. Of Wild white Hellebor.
The Description.
1 HElleborine is like unto white Hellebor, and for that cause we have given it
the name of Helleborine. It has a straight stalk of a foot high, set from the
bottom to the tuft of flowers, with fair leaves, ribbed and chamfered like
those of white Hellebor, but nothing near so large, of a dark green color.
The flowers be orderly placed from the middle to the top of the stalk, hollow
within, and white of color, straked here and there with a dash of purple, in
shape like the flowers of Satyrion. The seed is small like dust or motes in the
Sun. The root is small, full of juice, and bitter in taste.

2 The second is like unto the first, but altogether greater, and the flowers
white, without any mixture at all, wherein consists the difference.

3 The third kind of Helleborine, being the 6. after Clusius account, has
leaves like the first described, but smaller and narrower. The stalk rises up
to the height of two spans; at the top whereof grow fair shining purple
colored flowers, consistiug of six little leaves, within or among which lies
hid things like small helmets. The plant in proportion is like the (...) of
this kind. The The root is small, and creeps in the ground.

1 Helleborine. Wild white Hellebore.
3 Helleborine (...). 6. Clusij. Narrow leafed wild Neesewoort.


The Place.
They be found in dankish and shadowie places; the first was found growing in
the woods by Digges well pastures, half a mile from Welwen in Hartfordshire:
it grows in a wood five miles from London, near unto a bridge called
Lockbridge: by Nottingham near Robinhoods well, where my friend Mr. Steven
Bredwell a learned Physician found the same: in the woods by Dunmowe in Essex:
by Southfleet in Kent; in a little grove of Juniper, and in a wood by Clare in
Essex.

The Time.
They flower in May and June, and perfect their seed in August.

The Names.
The likeness that it has with white Hellebor, does show it may not
improperly be named Helleborine, or wild white Hellebor, which is also called
of Dioscorides and Pliny (...), or Epipactis; But from whence that name came it
is not apparent: it is also named (...)

The Temperature.
They are thought to be hot and dry of nature.

The Virtues.
The faculties of these wild Hellebors are referred unto the white Neesewoort,
whereof they

It is reported that the decoction of wild Hellebor drunken, opens the
stoppings of the Liver,

CHAP. 112. Of our Ladies Slipper.
The Description.
1 Our Ladies Shoo or Slipper has a thick knobbed root, with certain marks
or notes upon the same, such as the roots of Solomon's Seal have, but much
lesser, creeping within the upper crust of the earth: from which rises up a
stiff and hairy stalk a foot high, set by certain spaces with fair broad
leaves, ribbed with the like sinews or nerves as those of the Plantaine. At
the top of the stalk grows one single flower, seldom two, fashioned on the
one side like an egg; on the other side it is open, empty, and hollow, and of
the form of a shoo or slipper, whereof it took his name; of a yellow color
on the outside, and of a shining deep yellow on the inside. The middle part is
compassed about with four leaves of a bright purple color, often of a light
red or obscure crimson, and sometimes yellow as in the middle part, which in
shape is like an egg, as aforesaid.

2 This other differs not from the former, unless in the color of the flower;
which in this has the four long leaves white, and the hollow leaf or slipper
of a purple color.

1 Calceolus Mariae. Our Ladies Slipper.
2 Calceolus Mariae alter. The other Ladies Slipper.


The Place.
Ladies Slipper grows upon the mountains of Germany, Hungary, and Poland. I
have a plant thereof in my garden, which I received from Mr. Garret Apothecary,
my very good friend.

It is also reported to grow in the North parts of this kingdom; and I saw it
in flower with Mr. Tradescant the last Summer.

The Time.
It floureth about the midst of June.

The Names.
It is commonly called Calceolus D. Mariae, and Marianus: of some, Calceolus
Sacerdotis: of some, Alisma, but improperly: in English, Our Ladies shoo or
slipper: in the Germane tongue, (...) (...), (...): and of some, Damasonium not
hum.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Touching the faculties of our Ladies Shoo we have nothing to write, it being
not sufficiently known to the old Writers, no nor to the new.

CHAP. 113. Of Sope-wort.
The Description.
THe stalks of Sope-wort are slipperie, slender, round, ioynted, a cubit high
or higher: the leaves are broad, set with veins very like broad leaued
Plantaine, but yet lesser, standing out of every joint by couples for the most
part, and especially those that are the nearest the roots bowing backwards. The
flowers in the top of the stalks and about the uppermost joints are many, well
smelling, sometimes of a beautiful red color like a Rose; other-while of a
light purple or white, which grow out of long cups consisting of five leaves,
in the middle of which are certain little threads. The roots are thick, long,
creeping aslope, having certain strings hanging out of them like to the roots
of black Hellebor: and if they have once taken good and sure rooting in any
ground it is impossible to destroy them.

There is kept in some of our gardens a variety of this, which differs from it
in that the flowers are double and somewhat larger: in other respects it is
altogether like the precedent.

1 Saponaria. Sope-wort, or Bruse-wort.


The Place.
It is planted in gardens for the flowers sake, to the decking up of houses,
for the which purpose it chiefly serves. It grows wild of it self near to
rivers and running brooks in sunny places.

The Time.
It floureth in June and July.

The Names.
It is commonly called Saponaria, of the great scouring quality that the
leaves have: for they yield out of themselves a certain juice when they are
bruised, which scoureth almost as well as Soap: although Ruellius describe a
certain other Sopewort. Of some it is called Alisma, or Damasonium: of others,
Saponaria Gentiana, whereof doubtless it is a kind: in English it is called
Sopewort, and of some Bruisewort.

The Temperature and Virtues.
It is hot and dry, and not a little scouring withal, having no use in
physic set down by any Author of credit.

Although our Author and such as before Septalius reports that it was one
Zapata a Spanish Empericke. Since whose time it has been written of by
Rudius, lib. 5. de morbis occult. and venenat. cap. 18. And by Caesar
Claudinus, de ingressu ad infirmos, page 411. and page 417. But principally by
Ludouicus Septalius, Animaduers. med. lib. 7. number. 214. where treating of
decoctions in use against the French Poxes, he mentions the singular effect of
this herb against that filthy disease. His words are these: I must not in this
place omit the use of another Alexipharmicall decoction, being very effectual
and useful for the poorer sort; namely that which is made of Sope-wort, an
herb common and known to all. Moreover, I have sometimes used it with happy
success in the most contumacious disease: but it is of somewhat an ungrateful
taste, and therefore it must be reserved for the poorer sort. The decoction is
thus made: R. (...) virid. M. ij. infundantur per noctem in lib. viij, (...)
mox excoquantur ad cocturam Saponariae: (...) libra vna cum dimidia aquae cum
herbaiam cocta excoletur cum expressione, quae reseruetur pro potione matutina
ad sudores proliciendos sumendo (...) vij, aut viij, quod vero (...) (...) cum
passulis aut saccaro pro (...) cum cibis: aestate and biliosis naturis addi
poterit aut Sonchi, aut Cymbalariae M. j. Valet and pro (...) ad (...)
absumenda cum M. (...). Cymbalariae, and addito tantundem Philipendulae. Thus
much Septalius, who says that he had used it (...) ac saepius, often and often
again.

Some have commended it to be very good to be applied to green wounds, to
hinder inflammation, and speedily to heal them.

CHAP. 114. Of Arsmart or Water-Pepper.
The Description.
1 ARsmart brings forth stalks a cubit high, round, smooth, ioynted or
kneed, dividing themselves into sundry branches; whereon grow leaves like those
of the Peach or of the Sallow tree. The flowers grow in clusters upon long
stems, out of the bosom of the branches and leaves, and likewise upon the
stalks themselves, of a white color tending to a bright purple: after which
comes forth little seeds somewhat broad, of a reddish yellow, and sometimes
blackish, of an hot and biting taste, as is all the rest of the Plant, and like
unto pepper, whereof it took his name; yet has it no smell at all.

1 Hydropiper. Arsmart.
2 Persicaria maculosa. Dead or spotted Arsmart.


2 Dead Arsmart is like unto the precedent in stalks, clustering flowers,
roots and seed, and differs in that, that this plant has certain spots or
marks upon the leaves, in fashion of a half moon, of a dark blackish color.
The whole plant has no sharp or biting taste, as the other has, but as it
were a little sour smacke upon the tongue. The root is likewise full of
strings or threads, creeping up and down in the ground.

3 This in roots, leaves, and manner of growing is very like the first
described, but lesser by much in all these (...): the flowers also are of a
whitish, and sometimes of a purplish color: it grows in barren grauelly and
wet places.

4 I have thought good to omit the impertinent description of our Author fitted
to this plant, and to give one somewhat more to the purpose: the stalks of
this are some two foot high, tender, green, and sometimes purplish, hollow,
smooth, succulent and transparent, with large and eminent joints, from whence
proceed leaves like those of French Mercury, a little bigger, and broader
toward their stalks, and thereabout also cut in with deeper notches: from the
bosoms of each of these leaves come forth long stalks hanging downwards, and
divided into three or four branches; upon which hang flowers yellow, and much
gaping, with crooked spurs or heels, and spotted also with red or sanguine
spots: after these are past succeed the cods, which contain the seed, and they
are commonly two inches long, slender, knotted, and of a whitish green color,
crested with greenish lines; and as soon as the seed begins to be ripe, they
are so impatient that they will by no means be touched, but presently the seed
will fly out of them into your face. And this is the cause that Lobel and
others have called this Plant Noli me tangere. As for the like reason some of
late have imposed the same name upon the Sium minimum of Alpinus, formerly
described by me in the seventh place of the eighteenth chapter of this book,
page 260.

3 Persicaria pusilla repens. Small creeping Arsmart.
4 Persicaria siliquosa. Codded Arsmart.


The Place and Time.
They grow very common almost every where in moist and waterish plashes, and
near unto the brims of rivers, ditches, and running brooks. They flower from
June to August.

The codded or impatient Arsmart was first found to grow in this kingdom by
the industry of my good friend Mr. George Bowls, who found it at these
places: first in Shropshire, on the banks of the river Kemlet at Marington in
the parish of Cherberry, under a Gentleman's house called Mr. LLoyd; but
especially at Guerndee in the parish of Cherstocke, half a mile from the
foresaid River, amongst great Alder trees in the highway.

The Names.
1 Arsmart is called in Greek (...): of the Latins, Hydropiper, or Piper
aquaticum, or Aquatile, or water Pepper: in High Dutch, (...) (...): in
Low Dutch, (...) (...): in French, Curage, or Culrage: in Spanish, Pimenta
aqualica: in English, Water-Pepper, Culrage, and Arsesmart, according to the
operation and effect when it is used in the abstersion of that part.

2 Dead Arsmart is called Persicaria, or Peach-wort, of the likeness that the
leaves (...) with those of the Peach tree. It has been called (...) of the
leaden colored marks which are seen upon it: but Pliny would have Plumbago
not to be so called of the color, but rather of the (...), by reason that it
helps the infirmity of the eyes called Plumbum. Yet there is another
Plumbago which is rather thought to be that of Plinies description, as shall be
showed in his proper place. In English we may call it Peach-wort, and dead
Arsmart, because it does not bite those places as the other does.

3 This is by Lobel set forth, and called Persicaria pusilla repens: of
Tabernamont anus, Persicaria pumila.

4 No plant I think has found more variety of names than this: for Tragus
calls it Mercurialis syluestris altera; and he also calls it Esula: Leonicerus
calls it Tithymalus syluestris: Gesner, Camerarius, and others, Nolime tangere:
Dodonaeus, Impatiens herba: Caesalpinus, Catanance altera: in the Hist. Lugd.
(where it is some three times over) it is called besides the names given it by
others, Chrysaea: Lobel, Thalius, and others call it Persicaria siliquosa: yet
none of these well pleasing Columna, he has accurately described and figured
it by the name of Balsamita altera: and since him Bauhine has named it
Balsamina lutea: yet both these and most of the other keep the title of Noli
me tangere.

The Temperature.
Arsmart is hot and dry, yet not so hot as Pepper, according to Galen.

Dead Arsmart is of temperature cold, and something dry.

The Virtues.
The leaves and seed of Arsmart do waste and consume all cold swellings,
dissolve and scatter

The same bruised and bound upon an impostume in the joints of the fingers
(called among the

The leaves rubbed upon a tired jades back, and a good handful or two laid
under the saddle,

It is reported that Dead Arsmart is good against inflammations and hot
swellings, being applied

The faculties of the fourth are not yet known. Lobel says it has a venenate
quality: and Tragus says a vomitorie: yet neither of them seems to affirm
any thing of certainty, but rather by hearsay.

CHAP. 115. Of Bell-Floures.
The Description.
1 COuentry-Bells have broad leaves rough and hairy, not unlike to those of the
Garden Buglosse, of a swart green color: among which do rise up stiff hairie
stalks the second year after the sowing of the seed: which stalks divide
themselves into sundry branches, whereupon grow many fair and pleasant
bell-floures, long, hollow, and cut on the brim with five slight gashes,
ending in five corners toward night, when the flower shuts it self up, as
do most of the Bell-floures: in the middle of the flowers be three or four
whitish chiues, as also much downy hair, such as is in the ears of a Dog or
such like beast. The whole flower is of a blew purple color: which being past,
there succeed great square or cornered seed-vessels, divided on the inside into
diverse cells or chambers, wherein do lie scatteringly many small brown flat
seeds. The root is long and great like a Parsenep, garnished with many threddy
strings, which perishes when it has perfected his seed, which is in the
second year after his sowing, and recouereth it self again by the falling of
the seed.

2 The second agrees with the first in each respect, as well in leaves,
stalks, or roots, and differs in that, that this plant brings forth
milke-white flowers, and the other not so.

Viola Mariana. Blew Couentry-Bells.


The Place and Time.
They grow in woods, mountains, and (...) valleys, and under hedges among the
bushes, (...) about Couentry, where they grow very plentifully abroad in the
fields, and are there called Couentry-bels; and of some about London
Canturbury-bels, but improperly, for that there is another kind of Bell-floure
growing in Kent about Canturbury, which may more fitly be called
Canturbury-bells, because they (...) there more plentifully than in any other
Country. These pleasant Bel-floures we have in our London gardens especially
sor the beauty of their flower, although they be kinds of Rampions, and the
roots eaten as Rampions are.

They flower in June, July, and August; the seed waxes ripe in the mean time;
for these plants bring not forth their flowers all at once; but when one
floureth another seedeth.

The Names.
Couentry bells are called in Latin Viola Mariana: in English, Mercuries
violets, or Couentry Rapes; and of some, Mariets. It has bin taken to be
Medium, but unfitly: of some it is called Rapu^ syluestre: which the Greeks call
(...)

The Temperature and Virtues.
The root is cold and somewhat binding, and not used in physic, but only for
a sallet root boiled and eaten with oil, vinegar, and pepper.

CHAP. 116. Of Throat-wort, or Canturbury-Bells.
(...) Trachelium majus. Blew Canturbury-Bels.
3 Trachel. majus Belg. sieve Giganteum. Giant Throatwort.


The Description.
1 THe first of the Canterbury bells has rough and hairy brittle stalks,
crested into a certain squarenesse, dividing themselves into diverse branches,
whereupon do grow very rough sharp pointed leaves, cut about the edges like
the teeth of a saw; and so like the leaves of nettles, that it is hard to know
the one from the other, but by touching them. The flowers are hollow, hairy
within, and of a perfect blew color, bell fashion, not unlike to the Couentry
bells. The root is white, thick, and long lasting. There is also in some
Gardens kept a variety hereof having double flowers.

2 The white Canterbury bells are so like the precedent, that it is not
possible to distinguish them, but by the color of the flowers; which of this
plant is a milk white color, and of the other a blew, which sets forth the
difference.

4 Trachelium minus. Small Canterbury bells.
5 Trachelium majus petroeum. Great Stone Throtewort.


Our Author much mistaking in this place (as in many other) did again figure
and describe the third and fourth, and of them made a fifth and sixth, calling
the first Trachelium Giganteum; and the next Viola Calathiana; yet the figures
were such as Bauhine could not conjecture what was meant by them, and therefore
in his (...), he says, Trachelium Giganteum, and Viola (...) apud Gerardum,
quid? but the descriptions were better, wherefore I have omitted the former
description and here given you the later.

3 Giants Throtewort has very large leaves of an ouerworne green color,
hollowed in the middle like the Moscouites spoone, and very rough, slightly
intended about the edges. The stalk is two cubits high, whereon those leaves
are set from the bottom to the top; from the bosom of each leaf comes
forth one slender footestalke, whereon does grow a fair and large flower
fashioned like a bell, of a whitish color tending to purple. The pointed
corners of each flower turn themselves back like a scrole, or the Dalmatian
cap; in the middle whereof comes forth a sharp style or clapper of a yellow
color. The root is thick, with certain strings annexed thereto.

4 The smaller kind of Throtewort has stalks and leaves very like unto the
great Throtewoort, but altogether lesser, and not so hairy: from the bosom of
which leaves shoot forth very beautiful flowers bell fashion, of a bright
purple color, with a small pestle or clapper in the middle, and in other
respects is like the precedent.

5 This from a woody and wrinkled root of a pale purple color sends forth
many rough crested stalks of some cubit high, which are unorderly set with
leaves, long, rough, and snipt lightly about their edges, being of a dark
color on the upper side, and of a whitish on their under part. At the tops of
the stalks grow the flowers, being many, and thick thrust together, white of
color, and divided into five or seven parts, each flower having yellowish
threads, and a pointall in their middles. It flowers in August, and was first
set forth and described by Pona in his description of Mount Baldus.

The Place.
The first described and sometimes the second grows very plentifully in the
low woods and hedge-rowes of Kent, about Canterbury, Sittingborne, Grauesend,
Southfleet, and Greenehyth, especially under Cobham Parke-pale in the way
leading from Southfleet to Rochester, at Eltham about the park there not far
from Greenwich; in most of the pastures about Watford and Bushey, fifteen
miles from London.

3 The third was kept by our Author in his Garden, as it is also at this day
preserved in the garden of Mr. Parkinson: yet in the year 1626 I found it in
great plenty growing wild (...) (...) banks of the River Ouse in Yorkshire,
as I went from York to visit Selby the place (...) (...) was borne, being ten
miles from thence.

The fourth grows in the meadow next unto Ditton ferrie as you go to
Windsore, upon (...) chalky hills about Greenehithe in Kent; and in a field by
the high way as you go from thence to Dartford; in Henningham park in Essex;
and in Sion meadow near to Brandford, eight miles from London.

The fifth grows on Mount Baldus in Italy.

The Time.
All the kinds of bell flowers do flower and flourish from May until the
beginning of August, except the last, which is the plant that has been taken
generally for the Calathian violet, which floureth in the later end of
September; notwithstanding the Calathian violet or Autumn violet is of a most
bright and pleasant blew or azure color, as those are of this kind, although
this plant sometimes changes his color from blew to whiteness by some one
accident or other.

The Names.
1 2 Throtewoort is called in Latin Ceruicaria, and Ceruicaria major: in
Greek, (...): of most, Vuularia: of Fuchsius, Campanula: in Dutch, Halscruyt:
in English, Canterbury bells, Haskewoorte, Throtewoort, or Vuula woort, of the
virtue it has against the pain and swelling thereof.

3 This is the Trachelium majus Belgarum of Lobell, and the same (as I before
noted) that our Author formetly set forth by the name of Trachelium Giganteum,
so that I have put them, as you may see, together in the title of the plant.

4 This is the Trachelium maius of Dodonoeus, Lobell, and others: the
Ceruicaria minor of Tabernamontanus; and (...) of Tragus: Our Author gave this
also another figure and description by the name of Viola (...), not knowing
that it was the last save one which he had described by the name of Trachelium
minus.

The Temperature.
These plants are cold and dry, as are most of the Bell flowers.

The Virtues.
The Ancients for any thing that we know have not mentioned, and therefore not
set down Vuula or almonds, and all manner of cankers and vlcerations in the
mouth, if the mouth and throat be gargarized and washed with the decoction of
them: and they are of all other herbs the chief and principal to be put into
lotions, or washing waters, to iniect into the privy parts of man or woman
being boiled with honey and Allom in water, with some white wine.

CHAP. 117. Of Peach-bells and Steeple-bells.
The Description.
1 THe Peach-leaued Bell-floure has a great number of small and long leaves,
rising in a great bush out of the ground, like the leaves of the Peach tree:
among which rises up a stalk two cubits high: along the stalk grow many
flowers like bells, sometime white, and for the most part of a fair blew
color; but the bells are nothing so deep as they of the other kinds; and
these also are more dilated or spread abroad than any of the rest. The seed is
small like Rampions, and the root a tuft of laces or small strings.

2 The second kind of Bell-floure has a great number of fair bluish or
Watchet flowers, like the other last before mentioned, growing upon goodly tall
stems two cubits and a half high, which are garnished from the top of the
plant unto the ground with leaves like Beets, disorderly placed. This whole
plant is exceeding full of milk, insomuch as if you do but break one leaf of
the plant, many drops of a milky juice will fall upon the ground. The root is
very great, and full of milk also: likewise the knops wherein the seed should
be are empty and void of seed, so that the whole plant is altogether barren,
and must be increased with slipping of his root.

1 Campanula persicifolia. Peach-leaued Bell-floure.
2 Campanula lactescens pyramidalis. Steeple milky Bell-floure.


3 The small Bell-floure has many round leaves very like those of the common
field Violet, spread upon the ground; among which rise up small slender stems,
disorderly set with many grassie narrow leaves like those of flax. The small
stem is divided at the top into sundry little branches, whereon do grow pretty
blew flowers bell-fashion. The root is small and threddy.

4 The yellow Bell-floure is a very beautiful plant of an handful high,
bearing at the top of his weak and tender stalks most pleasant flowers
bel-fashion, of a fair and bright yellow color. The leaves and roots are like
the precedent, saving that the leaves that grow next to the ground of this
plant are not so round as the former. Certainly our Author in this place meant
to set forth the Campanula lutea linifolia store volubilis, described in the
Aduers. page 177. and therefore I have given you the figure thereof.

3 Campanula rotundifolia. Round leaued Bell-floure.
The figure in the fourth place was of (...) (...) 3. of (...). whereof you
shall (...) mention in the following chapter.
4 Campanula lutea linifolia. Yellow Bell-floure.
5 Campanula minor alba, sieve purpurea. Little white or purple Bel-floure.


5 The little white Bell-floure is a kind of wild Rampions, as is that which
follows, and also the last save one before described. This small plant has a
slender root of the bigness of a small straw, with some few strings anexed
thereto. The leaves are somewhat long, smooth, and of a perfect green color,
lying flat upon the ground: from thence rise up small tender stalks, set here
and there with a few leaves. The flowers grow at the top, of a milk white
color.

6 The other small Bell-floure or wild Rampion differs not from the
precedent but only in color of the flowers; for as the others are white,
these are of a bright purple color, which sets forth the difference.

7 Besides these here described, there is another very small and rare
Bellfloure, which has not been set forth by any but only by Bauhine, in his
Prodrom. under the title of Campanula Cymbalariae folijs, and that fitly; for
it has thin and small cornered leaves much after the manner of Cymbalaria,
and these are set without order on very small weak and tender stalks some
handful long; and at the tops of the branches grow little small and tender
Bell-floures of a blew color. The root, like as the whole plant, is very small
and threddy. This pretty plant was first discovered to grow in England by
Master George Bowls, Anno 1632. who sound it in Montgomerie shire, on the dry
banks in the highway as one rides from Dolgeogg a Worshipful Gentleman's
house called Mr. Francis Herbert, unto a market town called Mahuntleth, and in
all the way from thence to the sea side. It may be called in English, The
tender Bellfloure.

The Place.
The two first grow in our London gardens, and not wild in England.

The rest, except that small one with yellow flowers, do grow wild in most
places of England, especially upon barren sandy heaths and such like grounds.

The Time.
These Bell-floures do flourish from May unto August.

The Names.
Their several titles set forth their names in English and Latin, which is as
much as has been said of them.

The Temperature and Virtues.
These Bell-floures, especially the four last mentioned, are cold and dry, and
of the nature of Rampions, whereof they be kinds.

CHAP. 118. Of Rampions, or wild Bell-floures.
1 Rapuntium majus. Great Rampion.
2 Rapuntium parvum. Small Rampion.


The Description.
1 THe great Rampion being one of the Bell-floures, has leaves which appear
or come forth at the beginning somewhat large and broad, smooth and plain, not
unlike to the leaves of the smallest Beet. Among which rise up stemmes one
cubit high, set with such like leaves as those are of the first springing up,
but smaller, bearing at the top of the stalk a great thick bushy (...) full
of little long flowers closely thrust together like a Fox-taile: which small
flowers before their opening are like little crooked horns, and being wide
opened they are small blew-bells, sometimes white, or sometimes purple. The
root is white, and as thick as a man's thumb.

2 The second kind being likewise one of the bel-floures, and yet a wild kind
of Rampion, has leaves at his first coming up like unto the garden
Bell-floure. The leaves which spring up afterward for the decking up of the
stalk are somewhat longer and narrower. The flowers grow at the top of tender
and brittle stalks like unto little bells, of a bright blew color, sometimes
white or purple. The root is small, long, and somewhat thick.

3 This is a wild Rampion that grows in woods: it has small leaves spread
upon the ground, bluntly indented about the edges: among which rises up a
straight stem of the height of a cubit, set from the bottom to the top with
longer and narrower leaves than those next the ground: at the top of the
stalks grow small Bell-floures of a watchet bluish color. The root is thick
and tough, with some few strings anexed thereto.

There is another variety of this, whose figure was formerly by our Author set
forth in the fourth place of the last chapter: it differs from this last only
in that the flowers and other parts of the plant are lesser a little than those
of the last described.

3 Rapunculus nemorosus. Wood Rampions.
4 Rapunculus Alpinus (...). Horned Rampions of the Alps.


4 This which grows amongst the rocks in the highest Alps has a woody and
very wrinckled root an handful and half long, from which arise many leaves
set on pretty long stalks, somewhat round, and divided with reasonable deep
gashes, having many veins, and being of a dark green color: amongst these
grow up little stalks, having one leaf about their middles, and three or
four set about the flower, being narrower and longer than the bottom leaves.
The flowers grow as in an vmbell, and are shaped like that Chymicall vessel we
usually call a Retort, being big at their bottomes, and so becoming smaller
toward their tops, and having many threads in them, whereof one is longer than
the rest, and comes forth in the middle of the flower: it flowers in August.
Pona was the first that described this, under the name of Trachelium (...)
minus.

5 The roots of this other kind of horned Rampion grow after an unusual
manner; for first or lowermost is a root like to that of a Rampion, but
slenderer, and from the top of that comes forth as it were another root or
two, being smallest about that place whereas they are fastened to the under
root; and all these have small sibres coming from them. The leaves which first
grow up are smooth, and almost like those of a Rampion, yet rounder, and made
somewhat after the manner of a violet leaf, but nothing so big: at the bottom
of the stalk come forth 7 or eight long narrow leaves snipt about the edges,
and sharp pointed, and upon the rest of the stalk grow also three or (...)
narrow sharp pointed leaves. The flowers which are of a purple color, at first
(...) those of the last described; but afterward part themselves into five
slender strings with threads in the middles; which decaying, they are succeeded
by little cups ending in five little pointels, and containing a small yellow
seed. This is described by Fabius Columna, under the name of (...) Corniculatum
montanum: And I received seeds and roots hereof from Mr. Goodyer, who sound it
growing plentifully wild in the enclosed chalkie hilly grounds by Maple-Durham
near Petersfield in Hampshire.

6 This which is described in Clusius his Curae poster. by the name of
Pyramidalis, and was first found and sent to him by Gregory de Reggio a
Capuchine Friar, is also of this kindred; wherefore I will give you a brief
description thereof. The root is white, and long lasting; from which come
diverse round hairie and writhen stalks, about a span long more or less. At
the top of these stalks and all amongst the leaves, grow many elegant blew
flowers, which are succeeded by seed vessels like those of the lesser
Trachelium, being full of a small seed. The whole plant yields milk like as
the rest of this kind, and the leaves as well in shape as hoarinesse on (...)
under sides, well resemble those of the second French or Golden Lungwoort of my
description. It was first found growing in the chinkes of hard rocks about the
mouths of Caves, in the mountains of Brescia in Italy by the foresaid Friar.

5 Rapunculus Corniculatus montanus. Mountain horned Rampions.
6 Rapunculus saxatilis, sive (...) alter. Rock Rampion.


The Place.
The first is sown and set in Gardens, especially because the roots are eaten
in Sallads. The second grows in woods and shadowie places, in fat and clayie
soiles.

The Time.
They flower in May, June, and July.

The Names.
Rampions by a general name are called Rapuntium and Rapunculus; and the first
by reason of the long spokie tufte of flowers is called Rapuntium maius
Alopecuri comoso (...) by Lobell and Pena, Rapunculum syluestre: and Rapunculus
syluestris spicatus by others. The second, which is the ordinary Rampion is
called Rapunculus, and Rapuntium minus; Lobell thinks it the Pes (...) of
Auicen; and Columna judges it to be Erinus of Nicander and Dioscorides. The
third is the Rapunculus nemor osus secundus of (...) anus; and the variety of
it is Rapunc. nemor. tertius. The names of the rest are shown in their
descriptions.

The Temperature.
The roots of these are of a cold temperature, and something binding.

The Virtues.
The roots are especially used in sallads, being boiled and eaten with oil,
vinegar, and pepper.

Some affirm, that the decoction of the roots are good for all inflammations
of the mouth, and

CHAP. 119. Of Wall-floures, or yellow Stocke-Gillo-floures.
The Kinds.
THese plants which we term commonly in English, Wal-floures and Stock
Gillofloures are comprehended under one general name of Leucoion, (i) Viola
alba, White Violet, (...) signifying white, and (...) a Violet; which as some
would have it is not from the whiteness of the flower, for that the most and
most usual of them are of other colors, but from the whitenes or hoarinesse
of the leaves, which is proper rather to the Stock Gillouers than to the
wal-floures, I therefore think it fit to distinguish them into Leucoia folijs
viridibus, that is VVal-floures; and Leucoia foliis (...), Stock Gillouers.
Now these again are distinguished into several species, as you may find by
the following Chapters. Moreover you must remember there is another Viola alba
or Leucoion (which is thought to be that of Theophrastus and whereof we have
treated in the first book) which is far different from this, and for
distinction sake called Leucoium bulbosum.

1 Viola Lutea. VVal-floure.
2 Violalutea multiplex. Double VVal-floure.


4 Leucoium syluestre. Wild wall flower.


The Description.
1 THe stalks of the Wall flower are full of green branches, the leaves are
long, narrow, smooth, slippery, of a blackish green color, and lesser than
the leaves of stock (...). The flowers are small, yellow, very sweet of
smell, and made of four little leaves; which being past, there succeed long
slender cods, in which is contained flat reddish seed. The whole plant is
shrubby, of a wooddie substance, and can easily endure the cold of winter.

2 The double Wall flower has long leaves green and smooth, set upon stiff
branches, of a wooddie substance: whereupon do grow most pleasant sweet yellow
flours very double; which plant is so well known to all, that it shall be
needless to spend much time about the description.

3 Of this double kind we have another sort that brings his flowers open all
at once, whereas the other does flower by degrees, by means whereof it is long
in flouring.

4 This plant which was formerly seated in the fourth place of the following
chapter, I have brought to enjoy the same place in this, for that by reason of
the greenesse of his leaves and other things he comes nearest to these here
described, also I will describe it anew, because the former was almost wholly
false: It has many green leaves at the top of the root like to these of the
wall flower, but narrower, and bitter of taste; among which rise up one or more
stalks of a foot or more in height, crested and set with carinated leaves. The
flowers grow at the tops of the stalks many together, consisting of four
yellow leaves a piece, lesser than those of the ordinary wall flowers; there
flowers are succeeded by long cods containing a flat seed. The root is long and
whitish, with many fibers.

5 Besides these, there is in some gardens kept another wall-floure differing
from the first in the bigness of the whole plant, but especially of the
flower, which is yellow and single, yet very large and beautiful.

6 Also there is another with very green leaves, and pure white and well
smelling flowers.

The Place.
The first grows upon brick and stone walls, in the corners of churches
every where, as also among rubbish and such other stony places.

The double Wall-floure grows in most gardens of England.

The Time.
They flower for the most part all the year long, but especially in winter,
whereupon the people in Cheshire do call them Winter-Gillofloures.

The Names.
The Wallfloure is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Viola lutea, and Leucoium
luteum: in the Arabicke tongue, Keyri: in Spanish, Violettas Amarillas: in
Dutch, Uiolieren: in French, Girofflees iaulnes, Violieres des murailles: in
English, Wall-Gillofloure, Wall-floure, yellow stock Gillofloure, and
Winter-Gillofloure.

The Temperature.
All the whole shrub of Wall-Gillofloures, as Galen says, is of a clensing
faculty, and of thin parts.

The Virtues.
Dioscorides writes that the yellow Wall-floure is most used in physic, and
more than the rest

The herb boiled with white wine, honey, and a little allom, does cure hot
ulcers, and cankers of

The leaves stamped with a little bay salt, and bound about the wrists of the
hands, takes away

A decoction of the flowers together with the leaves, is used with good
success to mollify

The oil also made with these is good to be used to anoint a Paralyticke, as
also a goutie part

Also a strong decoction of the flowers drunk, moves the Courses, and
expels the dead

CHAP. 120. Of Stock Gillofloures.
1 Leucoium album, sieve purpureum, sieve violaceum. White, purple, or Violet
colored Stock Gillofloure.
2 Leucoium flore multiplici. Double Stock Gillofloure.


The Description.
1 THe stalk of the great stock Gillofloure is two foot high or higher,
round, and parted into diverse branches. The leaves are long, white, soft, and
having upon them as it were a down like unto the leaves of willowe, but
softer: the flowers consist of four little leaves growing all along the upper
part of the branches, of a white color, exceeding sweet of smell: in their
places come up long and narrow cods, in which is contained broad, flat, and
round (...). The root is of a woody substance, as is the stalk also.

The purple stock Gillofloure is like the precedent in each respect, saving
that the flowers of this plant are of a pleasant purple color, and the others
white, which sets forth the difference: of which kind we have some that
bear double flowers, which are of diverse colors, greatly esteemed for the
beauty of their flowers, and pleasant sweet smell.

3 Leucoium spinosum Creticum. Thornie Stock Gillouers.


This kind of Stock (...) that bears flowers of the color of a Violet,
that is to say of a blew (...) to a purple color, which sets forth the
difference betwixt this plant and the other stock Gillofloures; in every other
respect is like the precedent.

2 There were formerly 3 figures of the single Stocks, which differ in nothing
but the color of their flowers; wherefore we have made them content with one,
and have given (which was formerly wanting) a figure of the double Stock, of
which there are many and pretty varieties kept in the garden of my kind
friend Mr. Ralph Tuggye at Westminster, and set forth in the books of such as
purposely treat of flowers and their varieties.

3 To these I think it not amiss to add that plant which Clusius has set
forth under the name of Leucoium spinosum Creticum. It grows some foot or more
high, bringing forth many stalks which are of a grayish color, and armed at
the top with many and strong thorny prickles: the leaves which adorn these
stalks are like those of the stock Gillouer, yet less and somewhat hoary;
the flowers are like those of Mulleine, of a whitish yellow color, with some
purple threads in their middles; the cods which succeed the flowers are small
and round, containing a little seed in them. They use, says Honorius Bellus to
heat ovens therewith in Candy, where it plentifully grows; and by reason of
the similitude which the prickles hereof have with Stoebe and the white color,
they call it Gala Stivida, or Galastivida, and not because it yields milk,
which Gala signifies.

The Place.
1. 2. These kinds of Stock Gillofloures do grow in most Gardens throughout
England.

The Time.
They flower in the beginning of the Spring, and continue flouring all the
Summer long.

The Names.
The Stock Gillofloure is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Viola alba: in
Italian, Viola bianca: in Spanish, (...) blanquas: in English, Stock
Gillofloure, Garnsey Violet, and Castle Gillofloure.

The Temperature and Virtues.
They are referred unto the VVal-floure, although in virtue much inferior; yet
are they not used

Ioachimus Camerarius reports, that a conserve made of the flowers of Stock
Gillofloure, and

CHAP. 121. Of Sea Stock Gillofloures.
The Kinds.
OF Stock Gillofloures that grow near unto the Sea there be diverse and
sundry (...), differing as well in leaves as flowers, which shall be
comprehended in this Chapter next following.

1 Leucoium marinum flore candido L'obelij. White Sea Stock Gillofloures.
2 Leucoium marinum purpureum L'obelij. Purple sea Stock Gillofloures.
3 Leucoium marinum latifolium. Broad leafed sea stock Gillofloure.


The Description.
1 THe Sea stock (...) has a small woody root very threddie; from which
rises up an (...) white stalk of two foot high, divided into diverse, small
branches, whereon are placed confusedly many narrow leaves of a (...) hoarie
substance. The flowers grow at the top of the branches, of a whitish color,
made of four little leaves; which being past, there follow long coddes and
seed, like unto the garden stock Gillofloure.

2 The purple stock Gillofloure has a very long tough root, thrusting it
self deep into the ground; from which rise up thick, fat, soft, and hoarie
stalks. The leaves come forth of the stalks next the ground, long, soft,
thick, full of (...), covered over with a certain downie (...), and sinuated
somewhat (...) on both sides, after the manner you may see expressed in the
figure of the (...) described in this Chapter. The stalk is (...) here and
there with the like leaves, but lesser. The flowers grow at the top of the
stalks, compact of sour small leaves, of a light purple color. The seed is
contained in long crooked cods like the garden stock Gillofloure.

The figure of Lobels which here we give you was taken of a dried plant, and
therefore the leaves are not expressed so (...) as they should be.

3 This sea stock Gillofloure has many broad leaves spread upon the ground,
somewhat snipt or cut on the edges; amongst which rise up small naked stalks,
bearing at the top many little flowers of a (...) color tending to a purple.
The seed is in long cods like the others of his kind.

4 The great Sea stock Gillofloure has many broad leaves, growing in a great
tuft, slightly indented about the edges. The flowers grow at the top of the
stalks, of a gold yellow color. The root is small and single.

5 The small yellow Sea stock Gillofloure has many smooth, hoary, and sost
leaves, set upon a branched stalk: on the top whereof grow pretty sweet
smelling yellow flowers, bringing his seed in little long cods. The root is
small and threddy. The Flowers of this are sometimes of a red, or purplish
color.

4 Leucoium (...) (...) maius Clusij and L'obelij. The yellow Sea stock
Gillofloure.
5 Leucoium marinum minus L'obelij and Clus. Small yellow Sea stock
Gillofloure.


The Place.
These plants do grow near unto the sea side, about Colchester, in the Isle of
Man, near Preston in Aundernesse, and about Westchester.

I have not hard of any of these wild on our coasts but only the second,
which it may be grows in these places here set down; for it was gathered by
Mr. George Bowls upon the Rocks at Aberdovye in Merioneth shire.

The Time.
They flourish from April to the end of August.

The Names.
There is little to be said as touching the names, more than has been touched
in their several titles.

The Temperature and Virtues.
There is no use of these in Physic, but they are esteemed for the beauty of
their flowers.

CHAP. 122. Of Dames Violets, or Queens Gillofloures.
The Description.
1 DAmes Violets or Queens Gillofloures, have great large leaves of a dark
green color, somewhat snipt about the edges: among which spring up (...) of
the height of two cubits, set with such like leaves: the flowers come forth at
the tops of the branches, of a (...) purple color, very like those of the
stock Gillofloures, of a very (...) (...), after which come up long cods,
wherein is contained small long blackish seed. The root is slender and threddie.

The Queens white Gillofloures are like the last before remembered, saving that
this (...) brings forth fair white flowers, and the other purple.

2 By the industry of some of our Florists, within this two or three years
has (...) brought to our knowledge a very beautiful kind of these Dame
Violets, having very fair double white flowers, the leaves, stalks and roots,
are like to the other plants before described.

1 Viola Matronalis (...) purpureo, sive albo. Purple, or white Dames Violets.
3 Viola matronalis (...) (...). Russet Dames Violets.


3 This plant has a stalk a cubit high, and is divided into many branches,
upon which in a confused order grow leaves like those of the Dame Violet, yet a
little broader and thicker, being first of somewhat an acide, and afterward of
an acride taste; at the tops of the branches in long cups grow flowers like
those of the Dames violet, consisting of four leaves, which stand not fair
open, but are twined aside, and are of a ouerworn russet color, composed as it
were of a yellow and brown with a number of black purple veins diuaricated
over them. Their smell on the day time is little or none, but in the evening
very pleasing and sweet. The flowers are succeeded by long, and here and there
swollen cods, which are almost quadrangular and contain a reddish seed like
that of the common kind. The root is fibrous, and usually lives not above two
years, for after it has borne seed it dies; yet if you cut it down and keep
it from seeding, it sometimes puts forth shouts whereby it may be increased. I
very much suspect that this figure and description which I here give you taken
out of Clusius, is no other plant than that which is kept in some of our
gardens, and set soorth in the (...) (...) by the name of Leucoium
Melancholicum: now I judge the occasion of this error to have come from the
figure of Clusius which we here present you with, for it is in many particulars
different from the description: first in that it expresses not many branches.
secondly, in that the leaves are not snipt and divided: thirdly, in that the
Flowers are not expressed wrested or twined: fourthly, the veins are not rightly
expressed in the flower; and lastly, the cods are omitted. Now the Leucoium
melancholicum has a hairy stalk divided into sundry branches of the height
formerly mentioned, and the leaves about the middle of the stalk are somewhat
(...) or deeply or unequally cut in; the shape and color of the flower is the
same with that now 4 Leucoium melancholicum. The Melancholy flower.
described, and the seed vessels the same, as far as I remember: for I must
consesse, I did not in writing take any particular note of them though I have
diverse times seen them, neither did I ever compare them with this description
of Clusius; only I took some (...) agone an exact figure of a branch with the
upper leaves and flowers, whereof one is expressed as they usually grow twining
back, and the rest fair open, the better to set forth the veins that are
spread over it. There are also expressed a cod or seed vessel, and one of the
leaves that grow about the middle of the stalk; all which are agreeable to
Clusius description in mine opinion; wherefore I only give you the figure that
I then drew, with he title that I had it by.

The Place.
They are sown in gardens for the beauty of their flowers.

The Time.
They especially flower in May and June, the second year after they are sown.

The Names.
Dames Violet is called in Latin Viola matronalis, and Viola Hyemalis, or
Winter Violets, and Viola Damascena: It is thought to be the Hesperis of Pliny,
lib. 21. cap. 7. so called, for that it smells more, and more pleasantly in the
evening or night, than at any other time. They are called in French Violettes
des Dames, and de domas, and Girofflees des dames, or Matrones Violettes. in
English, Damask Violets, winter Gillofloures, Rogues Gillofloures, and close
Sciences.

The Temperature.
The leaves of Dames Violets are in taste sharp and hot, very like in taste
and faculty to Eruca or Rocket, and seems to be a kind thereof.

The Virtues.
The distilled water of the flowers hereof is counted to be a most effectual
thing to procure

CHAP. 123. Of White Satin flower.
The Description.
1 Bolbonac or the Satin flower has hard and round stalks, dividing
themselves into many other small branches, beset with leaves like Dames
Violets, or Queens Gillofloures, somewhat broad, and snipt about the edges,
and in fashion almost like Sauce alone, or Jack by the hedge, but that they
are longer and sharper pointed. The stalks are charged or laden with many
flowers like the common stock (...), of a purple color, which being (...),
the seed comes forth contained in a flat thin cod, with a sharp point or
prick at one end, in fashion of the Moon, and somewhat blackish. This cod is
composed of three filmes or skins, whereof (...) two outmost are of an
ouerworne ash color, and the innermost, or that in the middle, whereon the
seed does hang or cleave, is thin and clear shining, like a shred of white
Satin newly cut from the piece. The whole plant dies the same year that it
has borne seed, and must be sown yearly. The root is compact of many
tuberous parts like key clogs, or like the great Asphodill.

2 The second kind of Bolbonac or white Satin has many great and broad
leaves, almost like those of the great burre Docke: among which rises up a
very tall stem of the height of four cubits, stiff, and of a whitish green
color, set with the like leaves, but smaller. The flowers grow upon the
slender branches, of a purple color, compact of four small leaves like those
of the stock Gillofloure; after which come thin long cods of the same
substance and color of the former. The root is thick, whereunto are fastened
an infinite number of long threddie strings: which root dies not every year
as the other does, but multiplieth it self as well by falling of the seed, as
by new shoots of the root.

1 Viola Lunaris sive Bolbonac. White Satin.
2 Viola Lunaris longioribus siliquis. Long codded white Satin.


The Place.
These plants are set and sown in gardens; notwithstanding the first has been
found wild in the woods about Pinner, and Harrow on the hill, twelve miles
from London; and in Essex likewise about Horn-church.

The second grows about Watford, fifteen miles from London.

The Time.
They flower in April the next year after they be sown.

The Names.
They are commonly called Bolbonac by a barbarous name: we had rather call it
with (...) and Clusius, Viola latifolia, and Viola lunaris, or as it pleases
most Herbarists, Viola peregrina: the Brabanders name it Penninck blocmen, of
the fashion of the coddes, like after a sort to a groat or testerne, and Paesch
bloemen, because it always floureth near about the Feast of Easter: most of
the later Herbarists do call it Lunaria: Others, Lunaria Graeca, either of the
fashion of the seed, or of the silver brightness that it has, or of the
middle skin of the cods, when the two outtermost skins or husks and seeds
likewise are fallen away. We call this herb in English Penny flower, or Money
flower, Silver Plate, Pricke-songwoort; in Norfolk, Satin, and White Satin,
and among our women it is called Honesty: it seems to be the old Herbarists
Thlaspi alterum, or second Treacle mustard, and that which Crateuas describes,
called of diverse Sinapi Persicum; for as Dioscorides says, Crateuas makes
mention of a certain Thlaspi or Treacle Mustard, with broad leaves and big
roots, and such this Violet has, which we surname Latifolia or broad leased:
generally taken of all to be the great Lunaria, or Moonwoort.

Their Temperature and Virtues.
The seed of Bolbonac is of Temperature hot and dry, and sharp of taste, and
is like in taste and

A certain Chirurgian of the Heluetians composed a most singular unguent for
wounds of the

CHAP. 124. Of Galen and Dioscorides Moonwoorts or Madwoorts.
1 Alyssum Galeni. Galens Madwoort.
That which was formerly described in the second place, being a kind of (...),
I have here omitted, that I may give you it more (...) amongst the (...) of
that name and kindred hereafter.
2 Alyssum Dioscoridis. Dioscorides Moonwoort or Madwoort.


The Description.
1 THis might be one of the number of the Horehounds, but that Galen used it
not for a kind thereof, but for Alysson, or Madwoort: it is like in form and
show unto Horehound, and also in the number of the stalks, but the leaves
thereof are lesser, more curled, more hoary, and whiter, without any manifest
smell at all. The little coronets or spokie whurles that compass the stalks
round about are full of sharp prickles: out of which grow flowers of a bluish
purple color like to those of Horehound. The root is hard, woody, and diversely
parted.

2 I have one growing in my garden, which is thought to be the true and right
Lunary or Moonwoort of Dioscorides description, having his first leaves
somewhat round, and afterward more long, whitish, and (...), or somewhat woolly
in handling: among which rise up rough brittle stalks, some cubite high,
divided into many branches, whereupon do grow many little yellow flowers; the
which being past, there follow flat and rough husks, of a whitish color, in
shape like little targets or bucklers, wherein is contained flat seed, like to
the seeds of stock Gillofloures, but bigger. The whole husk is of the same
substance, fashion, and color that those are of the white Satin.

The Place.
These Plants are sown now and then in Gardens, especially for the rareness
of the m; the seed being brought out of Spain and Italy, from whence I
received some for my Garden.

The Time.
They flower and flourish in May; the seed is ripe in August, the second year
after their sowing.

The Names.
Madwoort, or Moonwoort is called of the Graecians (...) or (...): of the
Latins Alyssum: in English, Galens Madwoort: of some, Heale-dog: and it has
the name thereof, because it is a present remedy for them that are bitten of a
mad dog, as Galen writes; who in his second book Di Antidotis, in Antoninus
Cous his composition describes it in these words: Madwoort is an herb very
like to Horehound, but rougher, and more full of prick les about the flowers:
it bears a flower tending to blew.

2 The second by Dodonaeus, Lobell, Camerarius and others, is reputed to be
the Alysson of Dioscorides, Gesner mames it Lunarta (...); and Columna,
Leucoium Montanum Lunatum.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Galen says it is given unto such as are enraged by the biting of a mad dog,
which thereby are perfectly cured, as is known by experience, without any
artificial application or method at all.

CHAP. 125. Of Rose Campion.
Lychnis Chalcedonica. Flower of Constantinople.


The Kinds.
THere be diverse sorts of Rose Campions; some of the Garden, and others of the
Field: the which shall be divided into several chapters: and first of the
Campion of Constantinople.

The Description.
THe Campion of Constantinople has sundry upright stalks, two cubits high and
full of joints, with a certain roughness; and at every joint two large leaves,
of a brown green color. The flowers grow at the top like Sweet-Williams, or
rather like Dames violets, of the color of red lead, or Orange tawny. The root
is somewhat sharp in taste.

There are diverse varieties of this, as with white and blush colored flowers,
as also a double kind with very large, double and beautiful flowers of a
Vermelion color like as the single one here described.

The Place.
The flower of Constantinople is planted in Gardens, and is very common almost
every where.

The white and blush single, and the double one are more rare, and not to be
found but in the Gardensof our prime Florists.

The Time.
It floureth in June and July, the second year after it is planted, and many
years after; (...) it consists of a root full of life; and endures long,
and can away with the cold of our clymate.

The Names.
It is called Constantinopolitanus (...), and Lychnis Chalcedonica: of
Aldrouandus, Flos Creticus, (...) Flower of Candy: of the Germans, (...)
Hierosolymitanus, or Flower of Jerusalem: in English, Flower of Constantinople;
of some, Flower of Bristow, or Nonesuch.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Flower of Constantinople, besides that grace and beauty which it has in
gardens and garlands, is, for ought we know, of no use, the virtues thereof
being not as yet found out.

CHAP. 126. Of Rose-Campion.
1 Lychnis Coronaria rubra. Red Rose Campion.
2 Lychnis Coronaria alba. White Rose Campion.


The Description.
1 THe first kind of Rose-Campion has round stalks very knotty and woolly,
and at (...) knot or joint there do stand two woolly soft leaves like Mulleine,
but lesser, and much narrower. The flowers grow at the top of the stalk, of a
perfect red color; which being past, there follow round cods full of blackish
seed. The root is long and threddy.

2 The second Rose Campion differs not from the precedent in stalks, leaves,
or fashion of the flowers: the only difference consists in the color; for
the flowers of this plant are of a milk white color, and the other red.

3 This also in stalks, roots, leaves, and manner of growing differs not from
the former; but the flowers are much more beautiful, being composed of some
three or four ranks or orders of leaves lying each above other.

3 Lychnis coronaria multiplex. Double Rose Campion.


The Place.
The Rose Campion grows plentifully in most gardens.

The Time.
They flower from June to the end of August.

The Names.
The Rose Campion is called in Latin Dominarum Rosa, Mariana Rosa, (...) Rosa,
Coeli flos: of Dioscorides, (...): that is, Lychnis Coronaria, or Satiua: Gaza
translateth (...), Lucernula, because the leaves thereof be soft, and fit to
make weeks for candles, according to the testimony of Dioscorides: it was
called Lychnis, or Lychnides, that is, a torch, or such like light, according
to the signification of the word, clear, bright, and light-giuing flowers: and
therefore they were called the Gardners Delight, or the Gardeners Eye: in
Dutch, Christ's eye: in French, Oeillers, and Oeilets Dieu: in High Dutch,
(...), and (...).

The Temperature.
The seed of Rose-Campion, says Galen, is hot and dry after a sort in the
second degree.

The Virtues.
The seed drunken in wine is a remedy for them that are stung with a Scorpion,
as Dioscorides testifies.

CHAP. 127. Of wild Rose-Campions.
The Description.
1 THe wild Rose-Campion has many rough broad leaves somewhat hoary and
woolly; among which rise up long soft and hairy stalks branched into many
arms, set with the like leaves, but lesser. The flowers grow at the top of the
stalks, compact of five leaves of a reddish color: the root is thick and
large, with some threads anexed thereto.

There also grows commonly wild with us another of this kind, with white
flowers, as also another that has them of a light blush color.

2 The sea Rose Campion is a small herb, set about with many green leaves
from the lower part upward; which leaves are thick, somewhat lesser and
narrower than the leaves of sea Purslane. It has many crooked stalks spread
upon the ground, a foot long; in the upper part whereof there is a small white
flower, in fashion and shape like a little cup or box, after the likeness of
Behen album, or Spatling Poppy, having within the said flower little threads of
a black color, in taste salt, yet not unpleasant.

It is reported unto me by a Gentleman one Mr. Tho. Hesket, that by the sea
side in Lancashire, from whence this plant came, there is another sort hereof
with red flowers.

3 This brings many stalks from one root, round, long, and weaker than those
of the first described, lying usually upon the ground: the leaves grow by
couples at each joint, long, soft, and hairy; amongst which alternately grow
the flowers, about the bigness of those of the first described, and of a blush
color; and they are also succeeded by such seed-vessels, containing a reddish
seed. The root is thick and fibrous, yet commonly outliues not the second
year.

The figure that was in the first place, and was intended for our ordinary
wild (...), is that which you see here in the eighth place; and those that
were in the sixth and eighth places you (...) hereafter find with (...) or
Catch-fly, whereto they are of (...). That figure which was in the ninth place,
out of (...). under the title of (...) (...), as also the (...), I have omitted
as impertinent: For the figure Bauhine (...) (who corrected and again set
forth the Works of (...)) could not tell what to make thereof; but (...) (...)
sit? an Muscipula flore (...)? Which if it be, you shall find that (...)
hereafter described, under the (...) of (...) (...) (...): for our Authors
description it is not worth the speaking of, being framed only from (...).
1 Lychnis syluestris rubello flore. Red wild Campion.
2 Lychnis marina Anglica. English Sea Campion.
3 Lychnis syluestris hirta, 5. Clusij. Wild hairy Campion.
4 Lychnis syluestris 8. (...). Hoary wild Campion.


5 Lychnis hirta minima, 6. Clus. Small Hairy Campion.
The figure that was in the first place, and was intended for our ordinary
wild (...), is that which you see here in the eighth place; and those that
were in the sixth and eighth places you (...) hereafter find with (...) or
Catch-fly, whereto they are of (...). That figure which was in the ninth place,
out of (...). under the title of (...) (...), as also the (...), I have omitted
as impertinent: For the figure Bauhine (...) (who corrected and again set
forth the Works of (...)) could not tell what to make thereof; but (...) (...)
sit? an Muscipula flore (...)? Which if it be, you shall find that (...)
hereafter described, under the (...) of (...) (...) (...): for our Authors
description it is not worth the speaking of, being framed only from (...).
6 Lychnis syluestris ineana, Lob. Ouerworne Campion.
7 Lychnis caliculis striatis 2. Clusij. Spatling Campion.
The figure that was in the first place, and was intended for our ordinary
wild (...), is that which you see here in the eighth place; and those that
were in the sixth and eighth places you (...) hereafter find with (...) or
Catch-fly, whereto they are of (...). That figure which was in the ninth place,
out of (...). under the title of (...) (...), as also the (...), I have omitted
as impertinent: For the figure Bauhine (...) (who corrected and again set
forth the Works of (...)) could not tell what to make thereof; but (...) (...)
sit? an Muscipula flore (...)? Which if it be, you shall find that (...)
hereafter described, under the (...) of (...) (...) (...): for our Authors
description it is not worth the speaking of, being framed only from (...).
8 Lychnis syluestris alba 9. (...) Whitewilde Campion.


4 The fourth kind of wild Campions has long and slender stems, dividing
themselves into sundry other branches, which are full of joints, having many
small and narrow leaves proceeding from the said joints, and those of a whitish
green color. The flowers do grow at the top of the stalk, of a whitish
color on the inner side, and purplish on the outer side, consisting of five
small leaves, every leaf having a cut in the end, which makes it of the shape
of a forke: the seed is like the wild Poppy; the root somewhat gross and
thick, which also perishes the second year.

5 The fifth kind of wild Campion has three or four soft leaves somewhat
downy, lying flat upon the ground; among which rises up an hairy ash-colored
stalk, divided into diverse branches; whereupon do grow at certain spaces,
even in the setting together of the stalk and branches, small and grasse-like
leaves, hairy, and of an ouerworne dusky color, as is all the rest of the
Plant. The flowers grow at the top of the branches, composed of five small
forked leaves of a bright shining red color. The root is small, and of a
woody substance.

6 The sixth kind of wild Campion has many long thick (...) and hoary
leaves spread upon the ground, in shape and substance like those of the garden
Campion, but of a very dusty ouerworne color: among which rise up small and
tender stalks set at certain distances by couples, with such like leaves as
the other, but smaller. The flowers do grow at the top of the stalks in little
tufts like those of sweet Williams, of a red color. The root is small, with
many threddy strings fastened to it.

7 This grows some cubit high, with stalks distinguished with sundry joints,
at each whereof are set two leaves, green, sharp pointed, and somewhat
stiff: the flowers grow at the tops of the branches, like to those of
Muscipula or Catch-fly, yet somewhat bigger, and of a dark red: which past,
the seed (which is ash-colored, and somewhat large) is contained in great cups
or vessels covered with a hard and very much crested skin or filme; whence it
is called Lychnis caliculis striatis, and not Cauliculis striatis, as it is
falsely printed in Lobels Icones, which some as foolishly have sollowed. The
root is single, and not large, and dies every year.

8 That which our Author figured in this place had green leaves and red
flowers, which no way sorted with his description: wherefore I have in lieu
thereof given you one out of Clusius, which may fitly carry the title. This at
the top of the large fibrous and living root sends forth many leaves somewhat
green, and of some fingers length, growing broader by degrees, and at last
ending again in a sharp point. The stalks are some cubit high, set at each
joint with two leaves as it were embracing it with their foot-stalkes; which
leaves are less and less as they are higher up, and more sharp pointed. At
the tops of the branches grow the flowers, consisting of five white leaves
deeply cut in almost to the middle of the flower, and have two sharp pointed
appendices at the bottom of each of them, and five chiues or threads come forth
of their middles: these when they fade contract and twine themselves up, and
are succeeded by thick and sharp pointed seed-vessels, containing a small
round Ash-colored seed. I conjecture that the figure of the Lychnis plumaria,
which was formerly here in the ninth place out of Tabern. might be of this
plant, as well as of that which Bauhine refers it to, and which you shall find
mentioned in the end of the chapter.

The Place.
They grow of themselves near to the borders of plowed fields, meadows, and
ditch banks, common in many places. I have observed none of these, the (...)
and second excepted, growing wild with us.

The sea Campion grows by the sea side in (...), at a place called Lytham,
five miles from Wygan, from whence I had seeds sent me by Mr. Thomas Hesketh;
who has heard it reported, that in the same place does grow of the same kind
some with red flowers, which are very rare to be seen. This plant (in my last
Kentish Simpling voyage, 1632, with Mr. Thomas Hickes, Mr. Broad, etc.) I found
growing in great plenty in the low marish ground in Tenet that lies directly
opposite to the town of Sandwich.

The Time.
They flower and flourish most part of the Summer even unto Autumn.

The Names.
The wild Campion is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Lychnis syluestris: in
English, wild Rose Campion.

The Temperature.
The temperature of these wild Campions are referred unto those of the garden.

The Virtues.
Theweight of two drammes of the seed of Wild Campion beaten to powder and
drunk, does purge choler by the stool, and it is good for them that are stung
or bitten of any venomous beast.

CHAP. 128. Of diverse other wild Campions.
The Description.
1 THe first of these which we here give you is like in leaves, stalks, roots,
and manner of growing unto the ordinary wild Campion described in the first
place of the precedent Chapter; but the flowers are very double, composed of a
great many red leaves thick packt together, and they are commonly set in a
short and broken husk or cod. Now the similitude that these flowers have to
the iagged cloth buttons anciently worn in this kingdom gave occasion to our
Gentlewomen and other lovers of flowers in those times to call them Bachelours
Buttons.

2 This differs not in shape from the last described, but only in the color of
the flowers, which in this plant are white.

1 Lychnis syl. multiplex purpurea. Red Bachelors Buttons.
2 Lychnis syl. alba multiplex. White Bachelors Buttons.


3 Neither (...) roots, leaves, or stalks is there any difference between
this either degenerate or accidental variety of Bachelors buttons, from the
two last mentioned; only the flowers hereof are of a greenish color, and
sometimes through the midst of them they send up stalks, bearing also tufts
of the like double flowers.

4 This (says Clusius) has fibrous roots like to those of Primroses; out of
which come leaves 3 Lychnis abortiua flore multiplici viridi. Degenerate
Bachelors Buttons with green flowers.
5 Lychnis syl. latifolia Clus. Broad leaued wild (...).
5 Lychnis mont anarepens. Creeping mountain Campion.
of a sufficient magnitude, not much unlike those of the great yellow
Beares-eare, yet whiter, more downy, thick, and iuycie. The next year after
the sowing thereof it sends up a stalk of two or three cubits high, here and
there sending forth a viscous and glutinous juice, which detaines and holds
fast flies and such insects as do chance to light thereon. At the top of the
branches it yields many flowers set as it were in an vmbel, even sometimes an
hundred; yet sufficiently small, considering the magnitude of the plant; and
each of these consists of five little yellowish green forked leaves.

5 The stalks of this are slender, ioynted, and creeping like to those of the
greater Chickweed, and at each joint grow two leaves like those of the myrtle,
or of Knot-grasse yet somewhat broader. The flowers grow in such long cups like
as those of Saponaria, and are much (...), yet of the same color. The root is
small.

The Place.
1. 2. These are kept in many Gardens of this kingdom for their beauty,
especially the first, which is the more common.

The fourth grows naturally in Candy; and the fisth by riuelets in the
mountainous places of (...).

The Time.
These flower in June and July with the other wild Campions.

The Names.
1 The first of these is Lychnis agrestis multiflora of Lobel; and Ocymoides
flore pleno of Camerarius.

2 The second is by Pena and Lobel also called Lychnis syluestris multiflora:
it is the Ocymastrum multiflorum of Tabernamontanus; by which title our Author
also had it in the former edition, p. 551.

3 Lobel has this by the name of Lychnis agrestis abortiua multiplici viride
flore.

4 Clusius calls this Lychnis syluestris latifolia; and he says he had the
seed from Joseph de Casa Bona, by the name of Muscipula auriculae vrsi facie:
Bauhine has it by the name of Lychnis (...) vrsi facie.

5 This (according to Bauhine) was set forth by Matthiolus, by the name of
Cneoron aliud Theophrasti: it is the Ocimoides repens polygonifolia flore
Saponariae, in the Aduersaria: and Saponaria minor Daleschampij, in the Hist.
Lugd. It is also Ocimoides Alpinum, of Gesner; and Ocymoides repens, of
Cameraius.

The Nature and Virtues.
The natures and virtues of these, as of many others, lie hid as yet, and so
may continue, if chance, or a more curious generation than yet is in being do
not find them out.

CHAP. 129. Of Willow-herbe, or Loose-strife.
1 Lysimachia lutea. Yellow Willow-(...).
2 Lysimachia lutea minor. Small yellow Willow-herbe.


The Description.
1 THe first kind of Willow-herbe has long and narrow leaves of a grayish
green color, in shape like the Willow or Sallow leaves, standing three or
four one against another at several distances round about the stalk; which
toward the top divides it self into many other branches, on the tops whereof
grow tufts of fair yellow flowers, consisting of five leaves apiece, without
smell: which being past, there comes forth seed like Coriander. The root is
long and slender.

2 This lesser of Clusius his description has a stalk a cubit high, and
sometimes higher sirme, hard, and downy; about which at certain distances grow
commonly four leaves together, yet sometimes but three, and they are soft and
somewhat downy, lesser than those of the former, being first of an acide taste,
and then of an acride; and they are usually marked on their lower sides with
black spots. About the top of the stalk, out of the bosoms of each leaf
come forth little branches bearing some few flowers, or else foot-stalkes
carrying single flowers, which is more usual toward the top of the stalk.
The flowers are yellow, with somewhat a strong smell, consisting of five sharp
pointed yellow leaves, with so many yellow threads in their middle. The root is
ioynted, or creeping here and there, putting up new shouts.

3 Lysimachia lutea flore globoso. Yellow Willow-herbe with bunched flowers.
4 Lysimachia lutea (...). Tree Primrose.


3 This also may fitly be referred to the former. The stalk is a cubit high,
straight, and as it were ioynted, naked often times below by the falling away of
the leaves; but from the middle to the top set with two leaves at a joint, like
those of the former; and out of their bosoms on short stalks grow round tufts
of small yellow flowers as in bunches: the root which creepes sends forth many
small fibers at each joint. This was set forth by Lobel under the title of
Lysimachia lutea altera, or Lysimachia (...): Dodonaeus has it by the name of
Lysimachium aquatile: and Clusius calls it Lysimachia lutea tertia, sieve minor.

4 This Virginian has been described and figured only by Prosper Alpinus,
under the title of (...) Virginianus: and by Mr. Parkinson, by the name of
Lysimachia lutea siliquosa Virginiana: Also (...) in the Appendix of his Pinax
has a large description thereof, by the name of (...) lutea corniculata. The
root hereof is longish, white, about the thickness of ones thumb, from (...)
grows up a tall stalk divided into many branches of an ouerworne color, and
a little hairie: the leaves are like those of the former, but somewhat sinuated
along their edges, and having (...) middle vein of a whitish color: toward
the tops of the branches amongst the leaves come (...) thick cods, which
growing smaller on their tops sustain pretty large yellow flowers (...) of
four leaves, with a pestill in the middle upon which stand four yellowish
thrums in fashion of a cross; and there are also eight threads with their
pointals in the middles of them. These flowers have somewhat the smell of a
Primrose (whence Mr. Parkinson gave it the English name, which I have also here
given you:) after the flowers are fallen, the cods grow to be some two inches
long, being thicker below, and sharper at the top, and somewhat twined, which in
fine open themselves into four parts to shatter their seed, which is black
and small; and sown, it grows not the first year into a stalk, but sends up
many large leaves lying handsomely one upon another Rose-fashion. It flowers in
June, and ripens the seed in August.

5 The second kind of Willow-herbe in stalks and leaves is like the first, but
that the leaves are longer, narrower, and greener. The flowers grow along the
stalk toward the top, spike-fashion, of a fair purple color: which being
withered turn into down, which is carried away with the wind.

5 Lysimachia purpurea spicata. Spiked Willow-herbe.
6 Lysimachia siliquosa. Codded Willow-herbe.


6 This Lysimachia has leaves and stalks like unto the former. The flower
grows at the top of the stalk, coming out of the end of a small long cod,
of a purple color, in shape like a stock Gillofloure, and is called of many
Filius ante Patrem (that is, The Son before the Father) because that the cod
comes forth first, having seeds therein, before the flower does show it self
(...). The leaves of this are more soft, large, and hairy than any of the
former: they are also snipt about the edges, and the flower is large, wherein
it differs from the twelfth, hereafter described; and from the eleventh in the
hairinesse of the leaves, and largeness of the flowers also, as you shall
find hereafter.

7 This being thought by some to be a bastard kind, is (as I do esteem it) of
all the rest the most goodly and stately plant, having leaves like the greatest
Willow or Ozier. The branches come out of the ground in great numbers, growing
to the height of six foot, garnished with brave flowers of great beauty,
consisting of four leaves a piece, of an orient purple color, having some
threads in the middle of a yellow color. The cod is long like the last spoken
of, and full of downy matter, which flies away with the wind when the cod is
opened.

8 This also, which is the Chamaenerion of Gesner, as also his Epilobion, quasi
(...), a Violet or flower upon a cod, may justly challenge the next place.
Dodonaeus calls it Pseudolysimachium 7 Chamaenerion. Rose bay Willow-herbe.
8 (...) alterum angastifolium. Narrow leaued Willow-floure.
9 Lysimachia coerulea. Blew Loose-strife.
10 Lysimachiagalericulata. Hooded Loose-strife.
11 Lysimachia campestris. Wild Willow-herbe.
purpureum minus: and it is in the Histor Lugdun. under the name of Linaria
rubra. It grows up with stalks some foot high, set with many narrow leaves
like those of Toad-flax, of a grayish color, and the stalk is parted into
diverse branches, which at their tops upon long cods carry purple flowers
consisting of four leaves apiece. The root is long, yellowish, and woody.

9 There is another bastard Loose-strife or Willow-herbe having stalks like
the other of his kind. whereon are placed long leaves snipt about the edges,
in shape like the great Veronica or herb Fluellen. The flowers grow along the
stalks, spike-fashion, of a blew color; after which succeed small cods or
pouches. The root is small and fibrous: it may be called Lysimachia coerulea,
or blew Willow-herbe.

10 We have likewise another Willowherbe that grows near unto the banks of
(...) and watercourse. This I found in a waterie lane leading from the Lord
Treasurer his house called Theobalds, unto the backeside of his
slaughterhouse, and in other places, as shall be declared hereafter. Which
Lobel has called Lysimachia galericulata, or hooded Willowherbe. It has many
small tender stalks trailing upon the ground, beset with diverse leaves somewhat
snipt about the edges, of a deep green color, like to the leaves of Scordium
or water Germander: among which are placed sundry small blew flowers fashioned
like a little hood; in shape resembling those of Ale-hoofe. The root is small
and fibrous, dispersing it self under the earth far abroad, whereby it
greatly increases.

11 The wild Willow-Herbe has frail and very brittle stalks, slender,
commonly about the height of a cubit, and sometimes higher; whereupon do grow
sharp pointed leaves somewhat snipt about the edges, and set together by
couples. There come forth at the first long slender coddes, wherein is
contained small seed, wrapped in a cottony or downy wool, which is carried
away with the wind when the seed is ripe: at the end of which comes forth a
small flower of a purplish color; whereupon it was called Filius ante Patrem,
because the flower does not appear until the cod be filled with his seed. But
there is another Son before the Father, as has been declared in the Chapter
of Medow-Saffron. The root is small and threddie. This differs from the sixth
only in that the leaves are less, and less hairy, and the flower is smaller.

12 The Wood VVillow-hearbe has a slender stalk divided into other smaller
branches, whereon are set long leaves rough and sharp pointed, of an ouerworne
green color. The flowers grow at the tops of the branches, consisting of
four or five small leaves, of a pale purplish color tending to whiteness:
after which come long cods, wherein are little seeds wrapped in a certain
white Down that is carried away with the wind. The root is threddie. This
differs from the sixth in that it has lesser flowers. There is also a lesser
sort of this hairie Lysimachia with small flowers.

There are two more varieties of these codded Willow-herbes; the one of which
is of a middle growth, somewhat like to that which is described in the eleventh
place, but less, with the leaves also snipped about the edges, smooth, and not
hairie: and it may fitly be called Lysimachia siliquosa glabra media, or minor,
The lesser smooth-leaued Willow-herbe. The other is also smooth leaued, but
they are lesser and narrower: wherefore it may in Latin be termed, Lysimachia
siliquosa glabra minor angustifolia: in English, The lesser smooth and narrow
leaued Willow-herbe.

13 This lesser purple Loose-strife of Clusius, has stalks seldom exceeding
the height of a cubit, they are also slender, weak and quadrangular, toward
the top, divided into branches growing one against another, the leaves are
less and narrower than the common (...) kind, and growing by couples, unless
at the top of the stalks and branches, whereas they keep no certain order;
and amongst these come here and there cornered cups containing flowers composed
of six little red leaves with threads in their middles. The root is hard, woody,
and not creeping, as in others of this kind, yet it endures all the year, and
sends forth new shoots. It flowers in lune and July, and was found by Clusius
in diverse wet meadows in Austria.

The Place.
The first yellow Lysimachia grows plentifully in moist medewos, especially
along the meadows as you go from Lambeth to Battersey near London, and in many
other places throughout England.

13 Lysimachia purpurea minor Clus. Small purple Willow herb.


The second and third I have not yet seen.

The fourth grows in many gardens.

The fifth grows in places of greater moisture, yea almost in the running
streams and standing waters, or hard by them. It grows under the Bishops
house wall at Lambeth, near the water of Thames, and in moist ditches in most
places of England.

The sixth grows near the waters (and in the waters) in all places for the
most part.

The seventh grows in Yorkshire in a place called the Hook, near unto a
close called a Cow pasture, from whence I had these plants, which do grow in
my garden very goodly to behold, for the decking up of houses and gardens.

The eighth I have not yet found growing.

The ninth grows wild in some places of this kingdom, but I have seen it
only in Gardens.

The tenth grows by the ponds and waters sides in Saint James his Park, in
Tuthill fields and many other places.

The eleventh grows hard by the Thames, as you go from a place called the
Devils Neckerchiefe to Redreffe, near unto a style that stands in your way
upon the Thames bank, among the plankes that do hold up the same bank. It
grows also in a ditch side not far from the place of execution, called
Saint Thomas Waterings.

The other varieties of this grow in wet places, about ditches, and in woods
and such like moist grounds.

The Time.
These herbs flower in June and July, and oftentimes until August.

The Names.
Lysimachia, as Dioscorides and Pliny write took his name of a special virtue
that it has in appeasing the strife and unruliness which falls out among
oxen at the plough, if it be put about their yokes: but it rather retains
and keeps the name Lysimachia, of King Lysimachus the son of Agathocles,
the first finder out of the nature and virtues of this herb, as Pliny says in
his 25. book chap. 7. which retains the name of him unto this day, and was
made famous by Erasistratus. Ruellius writes, that it is called in French
Cornelle and Corneola: in Greek, (...): of the Latins, Lysimachium: of Pliny,
Lysimachia: of the later Writers, Salicaria: in high Dutch, (...): in English,
Willow herb, or herb Willow, and Loose strife.

Chamaenerium is called of Gesner, Epilobton: in English, Bay Willow, or bay
yellow herb.

The names of such as I have added have been sufficiently set sorth in their
titles and Histories.

The Nature.
The yellow Lysimachia, which is the chief and best for Physic uses, is cold
and dry, and very astringent.

The Virtues.
The juice, according to Dioscordies, is good against the bloody flix, being
taken either by potion

It is excellent good for green wounds, and stancheth the blood: being also
put into the nosthrils,

The smoke of the burned herb drives away serpents, and kills flies and
gnats in a house; Pliny speaks of in his 25. book, chap. 8. Snakes, says he,
craull a way at the smell of Loosstrife. The same Author affirms in his 26
book, last chap. that it dies hair yellow, which is not very unlike to be
done by reason the flowers are yellow.

The others have not been experimented, wherefore until some matter worthy the
(...) does

The juice of yellow Lysimachia taken inwardly, stops all flux of blood,
and the Dysenteria

The juice put into the nose, stops the bleeding of the same, and the
bleeding of wounds, and

The same taken in a mother suppositorie of wool or cotton, bound up with
threads (as the manner

It is reported, that the fume or smoke of the herb burned, does drive away
flies and gnats, and

CHAP. 130. Of Barren-woort.
Epimedium. Barren Woort.


The Description.
THis rare and strange plant was sent to me from the French Kings Herbarist
Robinus, dwelling in Paris at the sign of the black head, in the street
called Du bout du Monde, in English, The end of the world. This herb I planted
in my garden, and in the beginning of May it came sorth of the ground, with
small, hard and woodie crooked stalks: whereupon grow rough and sharp pointed
leaves, almost like Alliaria, that is to say, Sauce alone, or lack by the
hedge. Lobel and Dod. say, that the leaves are somewhat like Iuie; but in my
indgement they are rather like Alliaria, somewhat snipt about the edges, and
turning themselves flat upright, as a man turns his hand upwards when he
receives money. Upon the same stalks come forth small flowers, consisting of
sour leaves, whose outsides are purple, the edges on the inner side red, the
bottomeyellow, and the middle part of a bright red color, and the whole flower
somewhat hollow. The root is small, and creeps almost upon the uppermost face
of the earth. It bears his seed in very small cods like Saracens Consound, (
to wit that of our Author (...) described, page 274.) but shorter: which came
not to ripeness in my garden, by reason that it was dried away with the
extreme and unaccustomed heat of the Sun, which happened in the year 2590.
since which time from year to year it brings seed to perfection. Further,
Dioscorides and Pliny do report, that it is without flower or seed.

The place.
It grows in the moist meadows of Italy about Bononia and Vincentia: it
grows in the garden of my friend Mr. John Milion in Old-street, and some
other gardens about town.

The Time.
It floureth in April and May, when it has taken sast hold and settled it
self in the earth a year before.

The Names.
It is called Epimedium: I have thought good to call it Barren woort in
English; not because that Dioscorides says it is barren both of flowers and
seeds, but because (as some authors affirm) being drunk it is an enemy to
conception.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Galen affirms that it is moderately cold, with a waterie moisture: we have
as yet no use hereof in Physic.

CHAP. 131. Of Fleabane.
1 Conyza mayor. Great Fleawoort.
2 Conyza minor vera. Small Fleabane.


THe smalnesse of the number of these plants here formerly mentioned, the
confusion notwithstanding in the figures, their nominations and history, not
oneagreeing with another, has caused me wholly too mit the descriptions of our
Author, and to give you new, agreeable to the figures; together with an
addition of diverse other plants (...) to this kindred. Besides there is one
thing I must advertise you of, which is, that our Author in the first place
described the Bacchar is Monspeliensium of Lobel, or Conyza mayor of
Matthiolus, and it is that which grows in Kent and Essex on chalkie hills; yet
he gave no figure of it, but as it were forgetting what he had don, allotted it
a particular chap. afterward, where also another figure was put for it, but
there you shall now find it, though I must confess that this is as sit or a
fitter place for it; but I will follow the course of my Author, whose matter,
not method I endeavor to amend.

The Description.
1 This great Fleawoort or Fleabane, from a thick long living fibrous root
sends forth many stalks of some yard high or more; hard, woody, rough, fat,
and of an ou erworne color: the leaves are many, without order, and
alternately embrace the stalks, twice as big as those of the Olive tree, rough
and fat, being as it were besmeared with a gumminesse or fattinesse, and of a
yellowish green color: the flowers grow after a sort spoke fashion, standing
at the ends of footstalkes coming out of the bosoms of the leaves, and they
are yellow and round almost like to Groundswell, and fly away in down like as
they do; the seed is small and ash colored. (...) whole plant is fattie and
glutinous, with a strong, yet not altogether unpleasant smell. This grows not
that I know of in these cold Countries, unless sown in gardens. Clusius sound
it by Lisbone, and in diverse places of Spain. He, as also Dodonaeus, Lobel,
and others, call this Conyzamaior, and it is thought to be the Conyzamas of
Theophrastus, and Conyzamaior of Dioscorides.

2 The lesser seldom sends up more than one stalk, and that of a cubit high,
yet usually not so much: it is divided into little branches, and also rough and
glutionous as the precedent, but more green. The leaves are three times less
than those of the former, somewhat shaped like those of Toad-flax, yet hairy
and unctious; the tops of the branches as in the bigger, carry less, and
less shining and sightly flowers, vanishing in like sort into down. The root
is single and annual, and the whole plant more imelling than the former. This
is judged the Conyza foemina of (...); and Con. minor of Dioscorides; it is the
Con. minor of Gesner, Lobel, Clusius and others. It grows in diverse of Spain
and Province in France, but not here, unless in Gardens.

The (...) was (...) of Conyza media; the second was of (...) minima; and the
third of Conyza (...) (...).
3 Conyzamedia. Middle Fleawoort.
The (...) was (...) of Conyza media; the second was of (...) minima; and the
third of Conyza (...) (...).
4 Conyzaminima. Dwarf Fleabane.


3 The root of this middle kind is pretty large and fibrous, from whence
arises a branched stalk of some cubite high, engirt at certain spaces with
thick, rough, grayish green leaves: at the tops of the branches grow pretty
fair yellow flowers of the bigness of a little Marigold; which fading turn to
down, and are carried away with the wind. This flowers in July and August,
and may be found growing in most places about rivers and pond sides, as in S.
James his Park, Tuthill fields, etc. This is Conyzamedia of Matthiolus,
Dodonaeus, and others. Some have referred it unto the Mints, as Fuchsius, who
makes it Calaminthae 3. genus; and Lonicerus, who calls it Mentha Lutea. In
Cheape-side the herbe-women call it Herb Christopher, and sell it to
Empericks, who with it (as they say) make Medicines for the eyes, but against
what affect of them, or with what success I know not.

4 In like places, or rather such as are plashy in winter this may be
plentifully found growing. The roots are small and fibrous; from whence arises
a branched stalk some foot high, set with small longish leaves somewhat
roundish pointed, soft also and woolly, with a smell not altogether unpleasant,
like as the last described: the flowers are composed of many yellowish threads
like to the middle part of Camomill flowers, or those of Tanscy: and as the
former, turn into down, and are carried away with the wind; it flowers in
July and August. This is the Conyzaminor of Tragus, Mathiolus, and others:
Lobel and Dodon. call it Conyzaminima.

5 This cut leaued Fleabane has small fibrous roots, from which arise thick,
crested, and hollow stalks, divided toward the tops into sundry branches: the
leaves that incompasse the stalk are gashed, or else only sinuated on the
edges: the flowers are star fashion and yellow, and also fly away in down;
the whole plant is covered over with a soft and tender down, and has somewhat
the smell of Honey. This is a variety of the third, and is called by Dodon.
Conyzaemediae altera. Lobel names it Conyza helenit is folijs laciniatis.

6 The figure which you have in this sixth place was formerly unfitly given by
our Author for Solidago Saracenica; it has a large root which sends forth
many fibers, and a crested hollow stalk some two cubits or more high, which
is unorderly set, with long, yet narrow snipt leaves somewhat hairie and sharp
pointed: the top is divided into branches, which bear pretty large yellow
flowers, made after the manner of those of Ragwort, and like as they, are also
carried away with the wind. This Thalius calls Conyzamaxima serratifolia. It is
the Lingua mayor of Daleschampius, and the Consolida palustris of
Tabernamontanus. It grows near water sides, and flowers toward the latter
end of Summer: I have not yet heard that it does grow wild amongstvs.

5 Conyza folijs laciniatis. Great iagged leaued Fleabane.
6 Conyza palustris serratifolia. Water snipt Fleabanc.


7 Conyza Austriaca Clusij. Austrian Fleabane.
8 Conyza incana. Hoary Fleabane.
9 Conyza Alpina pilosissima. Hairie Fleabane of the Alps.
The (...) was (...) of Conyza media; the second was of (...) minima; and the
third of Conyza (...) (...).
10 Conyza Caerulea (...). Blew floured (...).


7 The stalks of this are about a foot high, straight, stiff, hard, and
covered with a (...) down: the leaves at the root grow upon long stalks, and
are soft and (...); but those which are higher up, have a short, or else no
stalk at all, and rubbed, they yield no unpleasant smell, and tasted, they are
somewhat bitter and acride. The flowers that grow upon the tops of the branches
are large, and fashioned like those of Elecampane, and are of the same yellow
color. The root is long, slender and blackish, creeping and putting up new
stalks; it has many white fibers and a resinous smell. Clusius sound it
growing on dry hilly places in Austria, and calls it Conyza 3. (...).

8 This which Lobel sets forth under the title of Conyza helentis (...) incana,
I take to be the same Plant that I last figured and described out of Clusius,
only the root is better expressed in Clusius his figure; otherwise by the (...)
I cannot find any difference, though (...) reckon it up in his Pinax, as
differing therefrom.

9 This also seems not much to differ from the last mentioned, but only in
the hairinesse of the leaves and stalks, and that the flowers are smaller.
This (...) calls Conyza (...) (...) incana: Helenitis, because the flowers and
leaves have some semblance of (...); and Mellita, (...) that they smell
somewhat like Honey. These last grow upon mountains, but none of them with us
in England that I can yet hear of.

10 This has a small fibrous and yellowish root, of a very hot and biting
taste, which sends up diverse longish leaves about the head thereof; the stalk
is some foot and half high, and set alternately with twined, longish, narrow
and somewhat rough leaves of an ouerworne green color; the top of the stalk
and branches are (...) with (...) set in longish scaly heads like those of
(...): the outer little leaves are of a (...) blew color, and the inner threads
are yellow. It (...) in August, and the flowers quickly turn into down, and
are carried away with the wind. It grows in many Chalkie hills, and I first
observed it in the company of Mr. George (...), Mr. John Bugs and others, close
by Farmingham in Kent; and the last year Mr. William Broad found it growing at
the Blockehouse at Grauesend. Tragus calls it Tinctorius flos alter: Dodonaeus
because the flower quickly turns to down makes it (...) quartum: and Gesner
for that the root is hot, and draws rheum like as Pellitorie of Spain, which
therefore is used against the Toothache, names it Dentelaria, he also calls it
Conyza muralis, and Conyzoides Caerulea: Tabernamontanus also calls it Conyza
caerulea: and lastly, Fabius Columna has it by the name of Amellus Montanus,
to which kind it may in mine opinion be as fitly referred, as to these
Conyza's. Our Author had the figure hereof in the third place in this Chapter.

The Place, Time, and Names.
All these have been sufficiently shown in their particular Titles and
Descriptions.

The Nature.
Conyza is hot and dry in the third degree.

The Virtues.
The leaves and flowers be good against the strangurie, the iaundise, and the
gnawing or griping

The same taken with Vinegar, helps the Epilepsie or falling sickness.

If Women do sit over the decoction thereof, it greatly (...) their pains of
the Mother.

The Herb burned, where (...), Gnats, fleas, or any venomous things are, does
drive them

CHAP. 132. Of Starre-woort.
The Description.
1 THe first kind of (...) or Inguinalis, has large broad leaves like
Verbascum (...) or the great Conyza: among which rises up a stalk four or
five handfuls high, hard, rough and hairie, beset with leaves like Rose
Campions, of a dark green color. At the top of the said stalks come forth
(...), of a shining and glistering golden color; and underneath about these
flowers grow five or six long leaves, sharp pointed and rough, not much in
shape unlike the fish called Stella marina. The flowers turn into down, and
are carried away with the wind. The root is fibrous, of a binding and sharp
taste.

2 The second called Italian Starrewoort has leaves not much unlike Marigolds,
but of a dark green color, and rough, and they are somewhat round at the
upper end: the stalks are many, and grow some cubite high; and at their tops
are divided into sundry branches, which bear (...) bluish purple flowers,
yellow in their middles, and shaped like Marigolds, and almost of the same
bigness, whence some have called them blew Marigolds.

3 The third kind has leaves so like Italian Starwort, that a man can
scarcely at the sudden distinguish the one from the other The single stalk is
a cubit long, upright and slender; on the top whereof grow fair yellow
flowers, like those of Enula Campana, and they fly away in down: the root is
small and threddie.

4 The fourth kind in tallness and flower is not much unlike that last before
specified, but in stalk and leaves more hairie, and longer, somewhat like our
small Hounds-tongue; and the roots are less fibrous or threddie than the
former.

5 There is another sort that has a brown stalk, with leaves like the small
Coniza. The flowers are of a dark yellow, which turn into down that flies
away with the wind like Conyza. The root is full of threads or strings.

6 There is also another that has leaves like the great Campion, somewhat
hairie; amongst which come up crooked crambling stalks, leaning lamely many
ways. Whereupon do grow fair yellow flowers, Starre-fashion; which past,
the cups become so hard, that they will scarcely be broken with ones nails to
take forth the seed. The root is long and straight as a finger, with some few
strings annexed unto the uppermost part thereof. It grows wild in some parts
of Spain.

1 (...) (...). Starrewoort.
2 (...) Italorum. Italian (...).


7 There grows another kind of Starrewoort, which has many leaves like
(...) but thinner, and of a more green color, covered with a woollie
hairinesse, sharp and bitter in taste; amongst which (...) up a round stalk
more than a cubite high; (...) growing unto a (...) color; set with the like
leaves, but smaller and sharper pointed, dividing it self toward the top into
some few branches; whereon do grow large yellow flowers like Doronicum or
Sonchus. The root is thick and crooked. This is (...) Pannonicus mayor, sive
(...) of Clus. and his (...) primus.

8 We have seen growing upon wild Mountains another sort, which has leaves
much lesser than the former, somewhat like to the leaves of Willow, of a fair
green color, which do adorn and deck up the stalk even to the top;
whereupon do grow yellow flowers star fashion, like unto the former. The
root is small and tender, creeping far abroad, whereby it mightily
increases. This is (...) Pannonicus salignis (...): sive (...) 4. Austriacus
2. of Clusius. It is (...) luteum of Tabern. And our Author gave the Figure
hereof for Aster Italorum.

9 Clusius has set forth a kind that has an upright stalk, somewhat hairy,
two cubits high, beser with leaves somewhat woollie like to those of the
Sallow, having at the top of the stalk fair yellow flowers like (...)
Campana, which turn into down that is carried away with the wind. the root is
thick, with some (...) or threads fastened thereto. This is Aster lanuginoso
folio, sive 5. of Clusius. Our Author gave the figure hereof under the title
of Aster Hirsutus: it is Aster (...) (...) of Taber.

10 He has likewise described another sort, that has leaves, stalks,
flowers, and roots like the ninth, but never grows to the height of one
cubite. It brings forth many stalks, and the leaves that grow disorderly
upon them are narrower, blacker, harder and sharper pointed than the former,
not unlike those of the common Ptarmica, yet not snipt about the edges: the
flowers are yellow and like those of the last described, but less. This is the
Aster (...) sive sextus of Clusius.

11 There is likewise set forth in his Pannonicke observation, a kind of Aster
that has many small hairie leaves like the common great Daisie: among which
rises up an hairy stalk of a foot high, having at the top fair blew flowers
inclining to purple, with their middle yellow, which turn (in the time of
seeding) into a (...) down, that flies away with the wind. The whole plant
has a drying, binding, and bitter taste. The root is threddie like the common
Daisie, or that of Scabious. This is Asper Alpinus (...) flore, sive 7. of
Clusius.

3 Aster montanus flore amplo. Mountain Starwoort.
4 Aster hirsutus. Hairie Srarwoort.
5 Aster Conyzoides Gesneri. Fleabane Starrewoort.


6 Aster Luteus supinus Clusij. Creeping Starwoort.
7 Aster luteus foliis Succisae. Scabious leaued Starwoort.
8 Aster Salicis folio. Willow leaued Starwoort.
9 Aster Austriacus, 5 Clus. Sallow leaued Starwoort.


12 There are kept in the (...) of Mr. Tradescant, Mr. (...), and others, two
(...) different much from all these formerly mentioned: the first of them is to
be esteemed, for that it flowers in October and November when as few other
flowers are to be found: the root is large and living, which sends up many
small stalks some two cubits high, woody, slender, and not hollow, and toward
the top they are divided into abundance of small twiggie branches: the (...)
that grow alternately upon the stalks, are long, narrow, and sharp pointed,
having sour or six scarce discernable nicks on their edges: the flowers which
plentifully grow on small branches much after the manner of those of Virga
aurea, consist of twelve white leaves set in a ring, with many threads in their
middles; which being young are yellow, but becoming elder and larger they are
of a reddish color, and at length turn into down. I have thought fit to call
this plant, not yet described by any that I know of, being reported to be a
Virginian, by the name of Aster Viginianus fruticosus, Shrubbie Starwoort.

13 This which in gardens flowers some month before the former, grows not so
high, neither are the stalks so straight, but often crooked, yet are they
divided into many branches which bear small bluish flowers like those of the
former: the leaves are longish and narrow. This also is said to have come from
Canada or Virginia; and it may be called Aster fruticosus minor, Small shrubby
Starwoort.

10 Aster 6 Clusij. Narrow leaued Starwoort.
11 Aster 7. Clusij. Dwarf Dasie leaued Starwoort.


The Place.
The kinds of Starwoort grow upon mountains and hilly places, and sometimes
in woods and (...) lying by rivers sides.

The two first kinds do grow upon Hampstead heath four miles from London, in
Kent upon Southfleet Downs, and in many other such downie places. I could
never yet find nor hear of any of these Starfloures to grow wild in this
kingdom, but have often seen the Italian Starwort growing in gardens. These
two kinds that our Author mentions to grow on Hampstead heath and in Kent,
are no other than two Hieracia, or Hauke-weedes, which are much differing from
these.

The Time.
They flower from July to the end of August.

The Names.
This herb is called in Greek (...), and also (...): in Latin, Aster (...),
(...), and Inguinalis: of some, Asterion, Asteriscon, and Hyophthalmon: in high
Dutch, Megetkraut: in Spanish, Bobas: in French, Estrille, and Asper goutte
men: in English, Starwoort and Sharewoort.

The Nature.
It is of a mean temperature in cooling and drying. Gaten says it does
moderately waste and consume, especially while it is yet soft and new gathered.

That with the blew flower or purple, is thought to be that, which is of Virgil
called (...) Amellus: of which he makes mention in the fourth book of his
Georgickes.

Est etiam flos in pratis, cui nomen Amello
Fecere agricolae: facilis quaerentibus herba;
Namque vno ingentemtollit de cespite sylvam:
Aureus ipse, sed in solijs, quae plurima circum
Funduntur, violae sublucet purpura nigrae.
In English thus.
In Meades there is a flower Amello (...),
By him that seeks it easy to be found,
For that it seems by many branches framed
Into a little Wood: like gold the ground
Thereof appears, but leaves that it beset
Shine in the color of the Violet.
The Virtues.
The (...) of Aster or Inguinalis stamped, and applied unto botches,
imposthumes, and venereous in Inguine, that is, the flank or share) does
mightily maturate and suppurate them, whereof this herb Aster took the name
(...).

It helps and prevails against the inflammation of the fundament, and the
falling sorth of Saccus ventris.

The flowers are good to be given unto children against the Squinancie, and the
falling sickness. That figure which formerly was in the second place under the
title of Aster Atticus, was of the eighth here described; also in the third
place (...) (...) these two figures which we here give you, whereof the former
is of Aster (...), and the latter of (...) (...); and that which was under the
title of (...) (...) in the fourth place, belongs to the ninth description.


CHAP. 133. Of Woade.
The Description.
1 GLastum or Garden Woad has long leaves of a bluish green color. The
stalk grows two cubits high, set about with a great number of such leaves as
come up first, but smaller, branching it self at the top into many little
twigs, whereupon do grow many small yellow flowers: which being past, the seed
comes forth like little blackish tongues: the root is white and single.

2 There is a wild kind of VVoad very like unto the former in stalks, leaves,
and fashion, saving that the stalk is tenderer, smaller, and browner, and the
leaves and little tongues narrower; otherwise there is no difference betwixt
them.

The Place.
The tame or garden VVoad grows in fertile fields, where it is sown: the
wild kind grows where the tame kind has been sown.

The Time.
They flower from June to September.

The Names.
VVoad is called in Greek (...): in Latin, (...), and Glastum: (...) in his
fifth book of the French wars says, that all the Brittons do color
themselves with VVoad, which gives a blew color: the which thing also Pliny
in his 22. book, chap. 1. does testify: in France they call it Glastum which
is like unto Plantaine, wherewith the British wives and their daughters are
colored all over, and go naked in some kind of sacrifices. It is likewise
called of diverse Guadum: of the Italians, Guado; a word as it seems, wrung
out of the word Glastum. in Spanish and French, (...): in Dutch, (...): in
English, VVoad, and VVade.

1 Glastum sativum. Garden Woade.
2 Glastum syluestre. Wild (...).


The Nature.
Garden Woade is dry without sharpness: the wild Woade dries more, and is
more sharp and biting.

The Virtues.
The decoction of Woade drunken is good for such as have any stopping or
hardness in the

It serves well to dye and color cloth, profitable to some few; and hurtful
to many.

CHAP. 134. Of Cow-Basill.
The Description.
1 THis kind of wild Woade has fat long leaves like Valeriana rubra (...),
or (...) rubrum: the stalk is small and tender, having thereupon little purple
flowers consisting of four leaves; which being past, there come square
cornered husks full of round black seed like Coleworts. The whole plant is
covered over with a clammy substance like Bird-lime, so that in hot weather the
leaves thereof will take flies by the wings (as (...) does) in such manner that
they cannot escape away.

2 Ephemerum Matthioli has long fat and large leaves like unto Woad, but much
less; among which rises up a round stalk a cubit high, dividing it self
into many branches at the top, the which are set with many small white flowers
consisting of five leaves; which being past, there (...) little round bullets
containing the seed. The root is small and full of fibers.

The Place.
Cow-Basill grows in my garden: but Ephemerum is a stranger as yet in England.

The Time.
They flower in May and June.

1 Vaccaria. Cow-Basill.
2 Ephemerum Matthioli. Quicke-fading flower.


The Names.
1 Cow-Basill is by Cordus called Thamecnemon: by some, according to Gesner,
Lychnis and Perfoliatarubra: Lobel terms it (...) syluestris, and Vaccaria:
the last of which names is retained by most late Writers.

2 This by Lobel is said to be Ephemerum of Matthiolus; yet I think Matthiolus
his figure, (which was in this place formerly) was but a counterfeit, and so
also do Columna and (...) judge of it; and Bauhine thinks this of (...) to be
some kind of Lysimachia.

The Nature and Virtues.
I find not any thing extant concerning the Nature and Virtues of Vaccaria or
Cow-Basill. (...) (as Dioscorides writes) boiled in wine, and the mouth washed
with the decoction thereof, takes away the toothache.

CHAP. 135. Of Sesamoides, or Bastard Weld or Woade.
The Description.
1 THe great Sesamoides has very long leaves and many, slender toward the
stalk, and broader by degrees toward the end, placed confusedly upon a thick
stiff stalk: on the top whereof grow little foolish or idle white flowers:
which being past, there (...) small seeds like unto Canarie seed that birds are
fed withal. The root is thick, and of a woody substance.

2 This lesser (...) of Salamanca, from a long living, white, hard, and pretty
thick root sends up manv little stalks set thick with small leaves like those
of Line; and from the middle to the top of the stalk grow many flowers, at
first of a geeenish purple, and then putting forth yellowish threads; out of
(...) midst of which appear as it were four green grains, which when the
flower is fallen grow into little cods full of a small blackish seed. It grows
in a stony soil upon the hills near Salamanca, where it flowers in May, and
shortly after perfects his seed.

1 Sesamoides Salamanticum magnum. Great bastard Woade.
2 Sesamoides Salamanticum parvum. Small Bastard Woade.
3 Sesamoides parvum Matthioli. Bucks-horne Gum-Succorie


3 Our Author formerly in the Chapter of Chondrilla spoke (in Dodonaeus his
words) against the making of this plant a Sesamoides; for of this plant were
the words of Dodonaeus; which are these: Diverse (says he) have taken the plant
with blew flowers to be Sesamoides parvum, but without any reason; for that
Sesamoides has borrowed his name from the likeness it has with Sesamum: but
this herb is not like to Sesamum in any one point, and therefore I think it
better referred unto the Gum Succories; for the flowers have the form and
color of Gum Succory, and it yields the like milky juice. Our Author it
seems was either forgetful or ignorant of what he had said; for here he made
it one, and described it merely by the figure and his fancy. Now I following
his tract, have (though unfitly) put it here, because there was no history nor
figure of it formerly there, but both here, though false and imperfect. This
plant has a root somewhat like that of Goats-beard; from which arise leaves
rough and hairy, divided or cut in on both sides after the manner of
Bucks-horne, and larger than they. The stalk is some foot high, divided into
branches, which on their tops carry flowers of a fair blew color like those
of Succorie, which stand in rough scaly heads like those of Knapweed.

The Place.
These do grow in rough and stony places, but are all strangers in England.

The Time.
These flower in May and June, and shortly after ripen their seed.

The Names.
1 (...) think none of these to be the Sesamoides of the Ancients: The first
is set forth by Clusius under the name we here give you: it is the Muscipula
altera muscoso flore of Lobel: Viscago mayor of Camerarius.

2 This also Clusius and Lobel have set forth by the same name as we give you
them.

3 Matthiolus, Camerarius, and others have set this forth for Sesamoides
parvum: in the Historia Lugd. it is called Catanance quorundam: but most fitly
by Dodon. Chondrillae species tertia, The third kind of Gum-Succory.

The Temperature.
Galen affirms that the seed contains in it self a bitter quality, and
says that it heateth, breaks, and scoureth.

The Virtues.
Dioscorides affirms, that the weight of an halfe-penny of the seed drunk
with Meade or honied

The same being applied does waste hard knots and swellings. That which here
formerly enjoyed the third place, by the title of Sesamoides (...) Scaligert,
was no other than the plant that is hereafter described by the name of (...)
(...), where you may (...) both the figure and description.


CHAP. 136. Of Dyers Weed.
Luteola. Dyers weed or yellow weed.


The Description.
DYers weed has long narrow and greenish yellow leaves, not much unlike to
woad, but a great deal smaller and narrower; from among which comes up a
stalk two cubits high, beset with little narrow leaves: even to the top of the
stalk come forth small pale yellow flowers, closely clustering together one
above another, which do turn into small buttons, cut as it were crosse-wise,
wherein the seed is contained. The root is very long and single.

The Place.
Dyers weed grows of it self in moist, barren, and untilled places, in and
about Villages almost every where.

The Names.
Pliny, lib. 33. cap. 5. makes mention by the way of this herb, and calls
it Lutea: Vitruvius in his seventh book, Lutum: it is the Anticarhinum of
Tragus: and Pseudostruthium of Mathiolus: Virgill, in his Bucolickes, Eglog 4.
calls it also Lutum: in English, Welde, or Dyers weed.

The Time.
This herb flourishes in June and July.

The Nature.
It is hot and dry of temperature.

The Virtues.
The root as also the whole herb heates and dries in the third degree: it
cuts, attenuates, resolves, opens, digests. Some also commend it against the
punctures and bites of venomous creatures, not only outwardly applied to the
wound, but also taken inwardly in drink.

Also it is commended against the infection of the Plague: some for these
reasons term it Theriacaria; Mat.

CHAP. 137. Of Staues-acre.
Staphis-agria. Staues-acre.


The Description.
STaues-acre has straight stalks of a (...) color, with leaves cloven or cut
into sundry sections, almost like the leaves of the wild Vine. The flowers do
grow upon short stems, fashioned somewhat like unto our common Monks hood, of a
perfect blew color; which being past, there succeed welted husks like those
of Wolfsbane, wherein is contained triangular brownish rough seed. The root is
of a woody substance, and perishes when it has perfected his seed.

The Place.
It is with great difficulty preserved in our cold countries, albeit in some
mild VVinters I have kept it covered over with a little Fern, to defend it
from the injury of the March wind, which does more harm unto plants that
(...) forth of hot Countries, than does the greatest frosts.

The Time.
It floureth in June, and the seed is ripe the second year of his sowing.

The Names.
It is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Herba Pedicularis, and Peduncularia,
as Marcellus reports. Pliny in his 26 Book, chap. 13. seems to name it Vua
Taminia: of some, Pituitaria, and Passula montana: in shops, Staphis-agria: in
Spanish, Yeruapiolente: in French, Herb aux poulx: in High Dutch, Lens Kraut:
in Low Dutch, (...): in English, Staues-acre, Louse-wort, and Louse-pouder.

The Temperature.
The seeds of Staues-acre are extreme hot, almost in the fourth degree, of a
biting and burning quality

The Vcrtues.
Fifteen seeds of Staues-acre taken with honied water, will cause one to vomit
gross phlegm Dioscorides notes. And for this cause they are rejected, and not
used of the physicians, either in provoking vomit, or else in mixing them with
other inward medicines.

The seed mingled with oil or grease, drives away lice from the head, beard,
and all other parts

The same boiled in Vinegar, and holden in the mouth, asswageth the toothache.

The same chewed in the mouth draws forth much moisture from the head, and
cleanses the

The same tempered with vinegar is good to be rubbed upon lousie apparel, to
destroy and drive

The seeds hereof are perilous to be taken inwardly without good advice, and
correction of the

CHAP. 138. Of Palma Christi.
The Description.
1 (...), Palma Christi, or Kik has a great round hollow stalk five cubits
high, of a brown color, died with a (...) purple upon green. The leaves are
great and large, parted into sundry sections or divisions, fashioned like the
leaves of a fig tree, but greater, spread or wide open like the hand of a man;
and has toward the top a bunch of flowers clustering together like a bunch of
grapes, whereof the lowest are of a pale yellow color, and wither away without
bearing any fruit; and the uppermost are reddish, bringing forth three cornered
husks which contain seed as big as a kidney bean, of the color and shape of
a certain vermin which haunteth cattle, called a Tik.

2 This Palma Christi of America grows up to the height and bigness of a
small tree or hedge shrub, of a woody substance, whose fruit is expressed by
the figure, being of the bigness of a great bean, somewhat long, and of a
blackish color, rough and scaly.

1 Ricinus. Palma Christi.
2 Ricinus Americanus. Palma Christi of America.


The Place.
The first kind of Ricinus or Palma Christi grows in my garden, and in many
other gardens likewise.

The Time.
Ricinus or Kik is sown in April, and the seed is ripe in the end of August.

The Name, and canse thereof.
Ricinus (whereof mention is made in the fourth chapter and sixth verse of the
prophecy of Jonas) was called of the Talmudists, (...) Kik, for in the Talmud
we read thus, (...) Velo beschemen Kik: that is, in English, And not with the
oil of Kik: which oil is called in the Arabian tongue, Alkerua, as Rabbi
Samuel the son of (...) testifies. Moreover a certain Rab bine moves a
question, saying, what is Kik? Hereunto (...) Lachish makes answer in Ghemara,
saying, Kik is nothing else but Jonas his Kikaijon. And that this is true, it
appears by that name (...): which the ancient Greek Physicians, and the
Aegiptians used; which Greek word comes of the Hebrew word Kik. Hereby it
appears, that the old writers long ago called this plant by the true and
proper name. But the old Latin writers knew it by the name Cucurbita, which
evidently is manifested by an history which Saint Augustine records in his
Epistle to Saint Jerome, where in effect he writes thus; That name (...) is of
small moment, yet so small a matter caused a great tumult in Africa. For on a
time a certain Bishop having an occasion to entreat of this which is mentioned
in the fourth chapter of Jonas his prophecy (in a collation or sermon, which
he made in his cathedral church or place of assembly) said, that this plant
was called Cucurbita, a Gourde, because it increased unto so great a quantity,
in so short a space, or else (says he) it is called Hedera. Upon the nouelty
and untruth of this his doctrine, the people were greatly offended, and thereof
suddenly arose a tumult and hurly burly; so that the Bishop was enforced to go
to the Jews, to ask their judgment as touching the name of this plant. And
when he had received of them the true name, which was Kikaijon: he made his
open recantation, and confessed his error, and was justly accused for a
falsifier of the holy scripture. The Greeks called this plant also (...): i.
Ricinus, by reason of the similitude that the seed has with that insect, to
wit, a Tik.

The Nature.
The seed of Palma Christi, or rather Kik, is hot and dry in the third degree.

The Virtues.
(...) his seed taken inwardly, opens the belly, and causes vomit, drawing
slimy phlegm

The broth of the meat supped up, wherein the seed has been sodden, is good
for the collicke and Sciatica: it prevails also against the jaundise and
dropsy.

The oil that is made or drawn from the seed is called Oleum Cicinum: in
shops it is called (...) de Cherua. it heateth and dries, as was said before,
and is good to anoint and rub all rough hardness and scuruinesse gotten by
itch.

This oil, as Rabbi David Chimchi writes, is good against extreme coldness
of the body.

CHAP. 139. Of Spurge.
The Description.
1 THe first kind of Sea Spurge rises forth of the sands, or baich of the
sea, with sundry reddish stems or stalks growing upon one single root, of a
woody substance: and the stalks are beset with small, fat, and narrow leaves
like unto the leaves of Flax. The flowers are yellowish, and grow out of
little dishes or saucers like the common kind of Spurge. After the flowers
come triangle seeds, as in the other Tithymales.

2 The second kind (called Helioscopius, or Solisequius: and in English,
according to his Greek name, Sun Spurge, or time Tithymale, of turning or
keeping time with the sun) has sundry reddish stalks of a foot high: the
leaves are like unto Purslane, not so great nor thick, but snipt about the
edges: the flowers are yellowish, and growing in little platters.

3 The third kind has thick, fat, and slender branches trailing upon the
ground, beset with leaves like Knee-holme, or the great Myrtle tree. The seed
and flowers are like unto the other of his kind.

4 The fourth is like the last before mentioned, but it is altogether lesser,
and the leaves are narrower; it grows more upright, otherwise alike.

5 Cypres Tithymale has round reddish stalks a foot high, long and narrow
like those of Flax, and growing bushie, thick together like as those of the
Cypres tree. The flowers, seed, and root, are like the former, sometimes
yellow, oftentimes red.

6 The sixth is like the former, in flowers, stalks, roots, and seeds, and
differs in that, this kind has leaves narrower, and much smaller, growing
after the fashion of those of the Pine tree, otherwise it is like.

7 There is another kind that grows to the height of a man; the stalk is
like the last

1 Tithymalus paralius. Sea Spurge.
2 Tithymalus Helioscopius. Sun Spurge.
3 Tithymalus Myrtifolius latifolius. Broad leaued Myrtle Spurge.
4 Tithymalus Myrsinitis angustifolius. Narrow leaued myrtle Spurge.


5 Tithymalus Cupressinus. Cypress Spurge.
6 Tithymalus Pineus. Pine Spurge.
The seventh figure was formerly of (...) (...) 3. (...) of (...): The 8. and
9. were both of the (...) plant: the 12. was the figure of the (...) (...)
(...), whose (...) I (...) you in the 17. place.
7 Tithymalus Myrsinitis arborescens. Tree Myrtle Spurge.
The seventh figure was formerly of (...) (...) 3. (...) of (...): The 8. and
9. were both of the (...) plant: the 12. was the figure of the (...) (...)
(...), whose (...) I (...) you in the 17. place.
8 Tithymalus Characias (...). Sweet wood Spurge.


The seventh figure was formerly of (...) (...) 3. (...) of (...): The 8. and
9. were both of the (...) plant: the 12. was the figure of the (...) (...)
(...), whose (...) I (...) you in the 17. place.
9 (...) Characias Amygdaloides. Unsavory Wood-spurge.
10 Tithymalus Characias angustisolius. Narrow leaued Wood-spurge.
11 Tithymalus Characias serratifolius, Cut leaued Wood-spurge.
12 Tithymalus platyphyllos. Broad leaued Spurge.
mentioned, but divided into sundry branches a finger thick, and somewhat
hairy, not red as the others, but white: the leaves be long and narrow,
whitish, and a little downy: the flowers are yellow, but in other points like
to the rest of this kind.

8 The eighth kind rises up with one round reddish stalk two cubits high,
set about with long thin and broad leaves like the leaves of the Almond tree:
the flowers come forth at the top like the others, and of a yellow color. The
seed and root resemble the other of his kind.

9 The ninth (which is the common kind growing in most woods) is like the
former, but his leaves be shorter and (...), yet like to the leaves of an
Almond tree: the flowers are also yellow; and the seed contained in three
cornered seed-vessels.

10 This fourth kind of Tithymalus Characias, or Valley Tithymale (for so the
name imports) has long, yet somewhat narrower leaves than the former, whitish
also, yet not hoary; the vmbels or tufts of flowers are of a greenish yellow,
which before they be opened do represent the shape of a longish fruit, as an
Almond, yet in color it is like the rest of the leaves: the flowers and seeds
are like those of the former, and the root descends deep into the ground.

11 The fifth Characias has also long leaves sharp pointed, and broader at
their setting on, and of a light green color, and snipt or cut about the
edges like the teeth of a saw. The vmbels are smaller, yet carry such flowers
and seeds as the former.

12 This kind has great broad leaves like the young leaves of Woad, set round
about a stalk of a foot high, in good order: on the top whereof grow the
flowers in small platters like the common kind, of a yellow color declining
to purple. The whole plant is full of milk, as are all the rest before
specified.

13 Tithymalus Dendroides ex Cod. (...). Great Tree Tithymal.
14 Esula mayor Germanica. Quacksaluers Turbith.


13 There is another kind of Tithymale, whose figure was taken forth of a
Manuscript of the Emperors by Dodonaeus, that has a stalk of the bigness of
a man's thigh, growing like a tree unto the height of two tall men, dividing it
self into sundry arms or branches toward the top, of a red color. The leaves
are small and tender, much like unto the leaves of Myrtus: the seed is like
unto that of wood Tithymale, or Characias, according to the authority of peter
Bellone.

14 There is a kind of Tithymale called Esula mayor, which Martinus Rulandus
had in great (...), as by his extraction which he used for many infirmities may
and does appear at large, in his books entitled Centuriae curationum
Empiricarum, dedicated unto the duke of Bauaria. This plant of Rulandus has
very great and many roots covered over with a thick bark, plaited as it were
with many surculous sprigs; from which arise sundry strong and large stemmes of
a fingers thickness, in height two cubits, beset with many pretty large and
long leaves like Lathyris, but that they are not so thick: the seed and flower
are not unlike the other Tithymales.

15 This is like the fifth, save that it has smaller and more feeble branches;
and the whole plant is altogether lesser, growing but some span or foot high;
and the flowers are of a red or else a green color.

16 There is another rare and strange kind of Esula, in alliance and likeness
near unto (...) minor, that is the small Esula or (...) used among the
Physicians and Apothecaries of Venice as a kind of Esula, in the Confection of
their Benedicta and Catharticke pills, in stead of the true Esula: It yields
a fungous, rough, and brown stalk two cubits high, dividing it self into
sundry branches, furnished with stiff and fat leaves like Licorice, growing
together by couples. The flowers are pendulous, hanging down their heads like
small bells, of a purple color, and within they are of a dark color like
Aristolochia rotunda.

The seventh figure was formerly of (...) (...) 3. (...) of (...): The 8. and
9. were both of the (...) plant: the 12. was the figure of the (...) (...)
(...), whose (...) I (...) you in the 17. place.
15 Esula minor, sen Pityusa. Small Esula.
16 Esula Veneta maritima. Venetian Sea-Spurge.


17 There grows in many chalkie grounds and such dry hilly places, among
corn, a small Spurge which seldom grows to two handfuls high; the root is
small, and such also are the stalks and leaves, which grow pretty thick
thereon; which often times are not sharp, but flat pointed: the seed-vessels and
flowers are very small, yet fashioned like those of the other Tithymales. It is
to be found in corn fields in July and August.

18 The bigger Cataputia or the common garden Spurge is best known of all the
rest, and most used; wherefore I will not spend time about his description.

The small kind of Cataputia is like unto the former, but lesser, whereby it
may easily be distinguished; being likewise so well known unto all, that I
shall not need to describe it.

These two (I mean the bigger and lesser Cataputia of our Author) differ not
but by reason of their age, and the fertilenesse and barrenness of the soil,
whence the leaves are sometime broader, and otherwhiles narrower.

17 Esula exigua Tragi. Dwarf Esula.
18 (...) seu Cataputia minor. Garden Spurge.
19 Peplus, five Esula rotunda. Petty Spurge.
20 Peplis. Isope Spurge.


21 Chamaesyce. Spurge Time.
22 Apios vera. Knobbed Spurge.
23 Apios radice oblonga. Long knottie rooted Spurge.


19 The fifteenth kind called Peplus, has a small, and fibrous root, bringing
forth many fruitful branches two handfuls long, but little and tender, with
leaves like the Sun Tithymale, but rounder and much smaller: it has also small
yellow flowers: which being past there appears a slender pouchet, three
cornered like the other Tithymales, having within it a very medullous whitish
seed like Poppie, the whole plant yielding a milky juice, which argues it to
be a kind of Tithymale.

20 As in name so in shape this twentieth resembles Peplus, and comes in
likelihood nearer the signification of Peplum, or Flammeolum than the other;
therefore Dioscorides affirms it to be (...) amphilaphes, for that it
brings forth a greater plenty of branches, more closely knit and wound
together, with shining twists and claspers an handful and a half long. The
leaves are lesser than those of Peplus, of an indifferent likeness and
resemblance between Chamaesyce and wild Purslane. The seed is great, and
likethat of Peplus: the root is small and single.

21 The one and twentieth kind may be easily known from the two last before
mentioned, although they be very like. It has many branches and leaves
creeping on the ground of a pale green color, not unlike to Herniaria, but
giving milk as all the other Tithymales do, bearing the like seed, pouch, and
flowers, but smaller in each respect.

22 The two and twentieth kind of Tithymale has a round root like a small
Turnep, as every Author does report: yet my self have the same plant in my
garden which does greatly (...), of which I have given diverse unto my friends,
whereby I have often viewed the roots, which do appear unto me somewhat
tuberous, and therein nothing answering the descriptions which (...), Pena, and
others have expressed and set sorth. This argues, that either they were (...),
and described the same by (...)-say, or else the plant does degenerate being
brought from his (...) soil. The leaves are (...) all along a small rib like
(...), somewhat (...), green above, and reddish (...). The seed grows among
the leaves like the seed of Peplus. The whole plant is full of milk like the
other Tithymales.

Our Author (...) (...) taxes other Writers of plants, and (...) and Pena by
name, which (...) that he either never read, or else understood not what they
writ, for neither of them (nor any other that I know of) resembles the root of
this to a Turnep, but say it has a tuberous pear fashioned root, etc as you
may see in Diosc. lib. 4. cap. 177. and in the (...) (...), page 204. The
leaves also grow not by couples one against another, as in (...), but rather
alternately, or else without any certain order, as in other Tithymales.

23 This, says (...), has also a tuberous root, but not pear fashioned like
as the former, but almost every where of an equal thickness; being about an
inch and sometimes two inches long, and the lower part thereof is divided into
sour other roots, or thick sibers, growing smaller by little and little, and
sending forth some few fibers: it is black without, and white within, and full
of a milkie juice: the (...) are short and weak, set with little leaves like
those os the former: the flowers are of a yellowish red color, and the seed
is contained in such vessels as the other Tithymales. This is (...) tuberosus,
or Ischas (...) of Clusius.

The Place.
The first kind of Spurge grows by the Sea side upon the rolling Sand and
Baich, as at Lee in Essex, at Lang-tree point right against Harwich, at
Whitstable in Kent, and in many other places.

The second grows in grounds that lie waste, and in (...) earable soil,
almost every where.

The third and fourth, as also the foureteenth and eighteenth, grow in gardens,
but not wild in England.

The ninth Spurge called Characias grows in most VVoods of England that are
dry and warm.

The eighteenth and nineteenth grow in salt marshes (...) the sea, as in the
isle of Thanet by the sea side, betwixt Reculvers and Margate in great (...).

The Time.
These plants flower srom June to the end of July.

The Names.
(...) (...) is called in (...) (...) (...): in Spanish, (...) (...): in high
Dutch, Dolfer milch, that is to say (...) (...), or Wolfes milk. Wood Spurge
is called (...) (...). The first is called in English Sea Spurge, or Sea
VVartwoort. The second, Sun Spurge; the third and sourth, Myrtle Spurge: the
sisth Cypress Spurge; or among women, VVelcome to our house; the sixth Pine
Spurge; the seventh shrub Spurge, and tree Myrtle Spurge; the eighth and ninth
(...) Spurge; the (...) Broad leafed Spurge: the thirteenth Great Tree Spurge:
the (...) and sisteenth Quack saluers Spurge; the sixteenth Venice Spurge, the
seventeenth Dwarf Spurge; the eighteenth common Spurge; the nineteenth and
twentieth Petie Spurge; the one and twentieth Spurge Time: The two and
twentieth, True Apios or the knobbed (...).

The Temperature.
All the kinds of Tithymales or Spurges are hot and dry almost in the fourth
degree, of a sharp

Some write by report of others, that it inflameth exceedingly, but my self
speak by experience; Rich, dwelling in the same town, I took but one drop of
it into my mouth; which nevertheless did so inflame and swell in my throat
that I hardly escaped with my life. And in like case was the gentleman, which
caused us to take our horses, and post for our lives unto the next farm house
to drink some milk to quench the extremity of our heat, which then ceased.

The Virtues.
The juice of Tithymale, I do not mean sea Tithymale, is a strong medicine to
open the belly,

The juice mixed with honey, causes hair to fall from that place which is
anointed therewith,

The juice or milk is good to stop hollow teeth, being put into them warily,
so that you touch

The same cures all roughness of the skin, manginesse, leprie, scurfe, and
running scabs, and the

It kills fish, being mixed with any thing that they will eat.

These herbs by mine advise would not be received into the body, considering
that there be so

CHAP. 140. Of Herb Terrible.
1 Alypum montis (...). Herb Terrible.
2 Tarton-Raire Gallo-Prouinciae. Gutwoort.


The Description.
1 Herb Terrible is a small shrub two or three cubits high, bran ched with
many small twigges, having a thin rind first brown, then purple, with many
little and thin leaves like Myrtle. The flowers are rough like the middle of
Scabious flowers, of a blew purple color. The root is two fingers thick,
brown of color, and of a wooddie substance: the whole plant very bitter, and
of an unpleasant taste like Chamelaea, yea somewhat stronger.

2 Tartonraire, called in English Gutwoort, grows by the sea, and is
Catharticall, and a stranger with us. In the mother tongue of the Massilians,
it is called Tartonraire, of that abundant and unbridled (...) of purging,
which many times does cause (...), and such like immderate fluxes, especially
when one not skillful in the use thereof shall administer the powder (...)
(...) leaves, mixed with any liquor. This plant grows in manner of a shrub,
like (...), and (...) geth forth many small, tough, and pliant twigs, set about
with a thin and cottony hairinesse, and (...) many leaves of a glistering
silver color, growing from the lowest part even to the top, (...) like Alypum
before mentioned: and upon these tough and thick branches (if my memory fail
(...)) do grow small flowers, first white, afterward of a pale yellow: the seed
is of a russet color: (...) hard and woody, not very hot in the mouth,
leaving upon the tongue some of his inbred heat and taste, somewhat resembling
common Turbith, and altogether without milk.

The Place.
These plants do grow upon the mountains in France, and other places in the
grauelly grounds, and are as yet strangers in England.

The Time.
They flourish in August and September. The first Clusius found flouring in
diverse parts of Spain, in February and March; and I conjecture the other
flowers about the same time, yet I can find nothing said thereof in such as
have delivered the history of it.

The Names.
There are not any other names appropriate to these plants more than are set
forth in the titles.

The first of these is the Alypum mont is Ceti, and Herba terribilis of Lobel;
Clus. calls it Hippoglossum Valentinum; and in Hist. Lugd. it is named Alypum
Penae, and Empetrum Phacoides. The second is the Tartonraire Galloprouinciae
Massiliensium, in the Aduersaria; Sesamoides maius multorum of Dalesc. and the
Sesamoides maius Scalegeri of Tabern. by which title our Author also gave his
figure, in the 397. page of the former Edition.

The Temperature and Virtues.
There is nothing either of their nature or virtues, more than is set forth in
the Descriptions.

Both these plants have a strong purging faculty like as the Tithymales; but
the latter is far more powerful, and comes near to the quality of Mezereon;
wherefore the use of it is dangerous, by reason of the violence and great heat
thereof.

CHAP. 141. Of Herb Aloe, or Sea Housleeke.
1 Aloe vulgaris, sive Semperviuum marinum. Common Aloe, or Sea-Housleeke.
2 Aloe folio mucronato. Prickly herb Aloe, or Sea Housleeke.


The Description.
1 Herb Alloebath leaves like those of sea Onion, very long, broad, smooth,
thick, bending backewards, notched in the edges, set with certain little blunt
prickles, full of tough and clammie juice like the leaves of Housleeke. The
stalk, as (...) says, is like to the stalk of Affodill: the flower is
whitish; the seed like that of Affodill; the root is single, of the fashion of
a thick pile thrust into the ground. The whole herb is extreme bitter, so is
the juice also that is gathered thereof.

2 There is another herb Aloe that grows likewise in diverse provinces of
America; the leaves are two cubits long, also thicker, broader, greater, and
sharper pointed than the former, and it has on the edges far harder prickles.
The stalk is three cubits high, and a finger thick, the which in long cups
bears violet colored flowers.

The Place.
This plant grows very plentisully in India, and in Arabia, Coelosyria, and
Egypt, from whence the juice put into skins is brought into Europe. It grows
also, as Dioscorides writes, in Asia, on the sea coasts, and in Andros, but
not very fit for juice to be drawn out. It is likewise found in Apulia, and
in diverse places of Granado and Andalusia, in Spain, but not far from the sea:
the juice of this is also unprofitable.

The Time.
The herb is always green, and likewise sends forth branches, though it
remain out of the earth, especially if the root be covered with lome, and now
and then watered: for so being hanged on the seelings and upper posts of dining
rooms, it does not only continue a long time green, but it also grows and
brings forth new leaves: for it must have a warm place in winter time, by
reason it pineth away if it be frozen.

The Names.
The herb is called in Greek (...): in Latin, and in shops also, Aloe: and
so is likewise the juice. The plant also is named (...): but they are bastard
words: it is called (...) because it lives not only in the earth, but also
out of the earth. It is named in French, (...): in Spanish, Azeuar, and Yerua
bauosa: in English, Aloes; herb Aloes, Sea Houseleeke, Sea Aigrene.

The herb is called of the latter Herbarists oftentimes Semperviuum, and
Semperviuum (...), because it lasts long after the manner of House-leeke. It
seems also that (...) in his tenth book names it Sedum, where he sets
down remedies against the canker-wormes in trees.

Profuit and plant is latices infundere amaros
Marrubij, multoque Sedi contingere succo.
In English thus:
Liquours of Horehound profit much b'ing poured on trees:
The same effect Sea Housleeke works as well as these.
For he recites the juice of Sedum or Houseleeke among the bitter juices, and
there is none of the Housleekes bitter but this.

The Temperature.
Aloe, that is to say, the juice which is used in Physic, is good for many
things. It is hot, and that in the first or second degree, but dry in the
third, extreme bitter, yet without biting. It is also of an emplaisticke or
clammie quality, and something binding, externally applied.

The Virtues.
It purges the belly, and is withal a wholesome and convenient medicine for
the stomach, if Paulus Aegineta writes, when all purging medicines are (...)
to the stomach, (...) only is comfortable. And it purges more effectually if
it be not washed: and if it be, it then strengthens the stomach the more.

It brings forth choler, but especially it purges such excrements as be in
the stomach, the Aloes is an enemy to all kinds of (...); and defends the
body from all manner of corruption. It also preserves dead carkases from
putrefying; it kills and purges away all manner of worms of the belly. It
is good against a stinking breath proceeding from the imperfection of the
stomach: it opens the piles or hemorrhoides of the fundament; and being
taken in a small quantity, it brings down the monthly course: it is thought
to be good and profitable against obstructions and stoppings in the rest of the
intrals. Yet some there be who think, that it is not convenient for the liver.

One dram thereof given, is sufficient to purge. Now and then half a dram
or little more

It heals up green wounds and deep sores, cleanses ulcers, and cures such
sores as are hardly

Dioscorides says, that it must be torrified or parched at the fire, in a
clean and red hot vessel, Spatula, or Iron Ladle, till it be torrified in
all the parts alike: and that it must also be washed; to the end that the
unprofitable and sandy dross may sink down unto the bottom, and that which
is smooth and most perfect be taken and reserved.

The same Author also teaches, that mixed with honey it takes away black
and blew spots,

The juice of this herb Aloe: (whereof is made that excellent and most
familiar purger, called Aloe Succotrina, the best is that which is clear and
shining, of a brown yellowish color) it opens the belly, purging cold,
flegmaticke, and choleric humors, especially in those bodies that are
surcharged with surfeiting, either of meat or drink, and whose bodies are
fully repleat with humors, fairing daintily, and wanting exercise. This Aloes
I say, taken in a small quantity after supper (or rather before) in a stewed
prune, or in water the quantity of two drammes in the morning, is a most
sovereign medicine to comfort the stomach, and to cleanse and drive forth all
superfluous humors. Some use to mix the same with Cinnamon, Ginger, and Mace,
for the purpose above said; and for the Iaundies, spitting of blood, and all
extraordinary issues of blood.

The same used in ulcers, especially those of the secret parts or fundament, or
made into powder,

The same taken inwardly causes the Hemorrhoids to bleed, and being laid
thereon it causes

CHAP. 142. Of Housleeke or Sengreene.
The Kinds.
SEngreene, as Dioscorides writes, is of three sorts, the one is great, the
other small, and the third is that which is called (...), biting Stone-crop, or
Wall pepper.

The Description.
1 THe great Sengreene, which in Latin is commonly called Iovis Barba,
Jupiters beard, brings forth leaves hard adjoining to the ground and root,
thick, fat, full of tough juice, sharp pointed, growing close and hard
together, set in a circle in fashion of an eye, and bringing forth very many
such circles, spreading it self out all abroad: it oftentimes also sends
forth small strings, by which it spreads farther, and makes new circles;
there rises up oftentimes in the middle of these an upright stalk about a
foot high, covered with leaves growing less and less toward the points,
parted at the top into certain wings or branches, about which are flowers
orderly placed, of a dark purplish color: the root is all of strings.

2 There is also another great Housleek or Sengreen (syrnamed tree Housleeke)
that brings sorth a stalk a cubit high, sometimes higher, and often two;
which is thick, hard, woody, tough, and that can hardly be broken, parted into
diverse branches, and covered with a thick gross bark, which in the lower
part reserueth certain prints or impressed marks of the leaves that are
fallen away. The leaves are fat, well bodied, full of juice, an inch long and
somewhat more, like little tongues, very curiously minced in the edges,
standing upon the tops of the branches, having in them the shape of an eye. The
flowers grow out of the branches, which are divided into many springs; which
flowers are slender, yellow, and spread like a star; in their places comes up
very fine seed, the springs withering away: the root is parted into many
offsprings. This plant is always green, neither is it hurt by the cold in
winter, growing in his native soil; whereupon it is named (...), and
Semperuivum, or Sengreene.

1 (...) maius. Great Housleeke.
2 Sedum maius arborescens. Tree Housleeke.


3 There is also another of this kind, the circles whereof are answerable in
bigness to those of the former, but with lesser leaves, more in number, and
closesly set, having standing on the edges very fine hairs as it were like
soft prickles. This is somewhat of a deeper green: the stalk is shorter, and
the flowers are of a pale yellow. This is the third of Dodonaeus description,
(...). 1. lib. 5. cap. 8.

4 There is likewise a third to be referred hereunto: the leaves hereof be of a
whitish green, and are very curiously nicked round about. The flower is great,
consisting of six white leaves; This is that described by Dodonaeus in the 4.
place: and it is the Cotyledon altera secunda of Clusius.

5 There is also a fourth, the circles whereof are lesser, the leaves sharp
pointed, very closely set, of a dark red color on the top, and hairy in the
edges: the flowers on the sprigs are of a gallant purple color. This is the
fifth of Dodonaeus; and the Cotyledon alterateria of Clusius.

The Place.
1 The great Sengreen is well known not only in Italy, but also in France,
Germany, Bohemia, and the Lowe-Countries. It grows on stones in mountains,
upon old walls, and ancient buildings, especially upon the tops of houses. The
form hereof does differ according to the nature of the soil; for in some
places the leaves are narrower and lesser, but mo in number, and have one only
circle; in some they are fewer, thicker, and broader: they are green, and of a
deeper green in some places; and in others of a lighter green: for those
which we have described grow not in one place, but in diverse and sundry.

5 Sedum maius angustifolium. Great narrow leaued Housleeke.


2 Great Sengreene is found growing of it self on the tops of houses, old
walls, and such like places in very many provinces of the East, and of Greece:
and also in the (...) of the Mediterranian sea; as in Crete, which now is
called Candy, Rhodes, Zant; and others; neither is Spainc without it: for (as
(...) Clusius witnesses) it grows in many places of Portingale; otherwise it
is cherished in earthen pots. In cold countries, and such as (...) Northward,
as in both the Germanies, it neither grows of it self, nor yet lasts long,
though it be carefully planted, and diligently looked unto, but through the
extremity of the weather, and the overmuch cold of winter it perishes.

The Time.
The stalk of the first does at length flourc after the Summer Solstice, which
is in (...) about Saint Barnabies day, and now and than in the month of
August; but in April, that is to say, after the aequinoctiall in the spring,
which is about a month after the spring is begun, there grow out of this among
the leaves small strings, which are the groundwork of the circles, by which
being at length full grown, it spreads it self into very many circles.

2 Housleeke that grows like a tree, does flower in Portingale at the
beginning of the year presently after the winter Solstice, which is December,
about S. Lucies day.

The Names.
The first is commonly called Iovis barba, or Jupiters beard, and also Sedum
maius vulgar: the Germans call it (...), (...) (...): they of the
Low Countries, Donderbaert: the Hollanders, (...): the Frenchmen, Ioubarbe:
the Italians, (...) maggiore: the Spaniards, (...), yerua pentera: the
Englishmen, Housleeke, and Sengreene, and Aygrcene: of some, Jupiters eye,
Bullocks (...), and Jupiters beard: of the Bohemians, Netreske. Many take it to
be (...) altera Disocoridis; but we had rather have it one of the Sengreenes
for it is continually green, and always flourishes, and is hardly hurt by
the extremity of winter.

The other without doubt is (...) his (...): that is, Semperuivum magnum, or
Sedum majus, great Housleek, or Sengreen: Apulcius calls it Vitalis, and
Semperflorium: it is also named (...).

The Temperature.
The great Housleeks are cold in the third degree: they are also dry, but not
much, by reason of the watery essence that is in them.

The Virtues.
They are good against Saint Anthonies fire, the shingles, and other creeping
ulcers and inflammations, Galen says, that proceed of rheumes and fluxes: and
as Dioscorides teaches, against the inflammations (...) fiery heat in the
eyes: the leaves, says Pliny, being applied, or the juice laid on, are a
remedy for rheumatike and watering eyes.

They take away the fire in burnings and scaldings; and being applied with
Barley meal dried,

Dioscoridcs teaches, that they are given to them that are troubled with a hot
laske: that they

The juice put up in a pessary do stay the fluxes in women, proceeding of a hot
cause: the leaves

The juice mixed with Barley meal and vinegar prevails against S. Anthonies
fire, all hot burning

The juice of Housleeke, Garden Nightshade, and the buds of Poplar boiled in
Axungia porci,

The juice hereof takes away corns from the toes and feet, if they be washed
and bathed (...), Nicholas Belson, a man painful and curious in searching
forth the secrets of Nature.

The decoction of Housleeke, or the juice thereof drunk, is good against the
bloody flixe, and

CHAP. 143. Of the Lesser Housleekes or Prickmadams.
1 Sedum minus haematoides. Pricke-madame.
2 Sedum minus Officinarum. White floured Prickmadam.


The Description.
1 THe first of these is a very little herb, creeping upon the ground with many
slender stalks, which are compassed about with a great number of leaves, that
are thick, full of ioints, little, long, sharp pointed, inclining to a green
blew. There rise up among these, little stalks, a handful high, bringing forth
at the top, as it were a shadowie tuft; and in these fine yellow flowers: the
root is full of strings.

2 The other little Sengreene is also a small herb, bringing forth many
slender stalks, seldom above a span high; on the tops whereof stand little
flowers like those of the other, in small 3 Sedum minus aectivum. Small Summer
Sengreene.
4 Sedum minus (...) (...). Small large (...) (...).
5 Sedum medium teretifolium. Small (...).
6 (...) Scorpioides. Scorpion Sengreene.
7 Sedum Portlandicum. Portland Sengreene.
8 Sedum petraeum. Small rock Sengreene.
loose tufts; but they are white and something lesser: the leaves about the
stalks are few and little, but long, blunt, and round, bigger than wheaten
corns, something lesser than the kernels of the Pine Apples, otherwise not
unlike; which oftentimes are something red, stalks and all: the root creeps
upon the superficial or uppermost part of the earth, sending down slender
threads.

3 There is a small kind of Stonecrop, which has little narrow leaves,
thick, sharp pointed, and tender stalks, full of fattie juice; on the top
whereof do grow small yellowe flowers, Star fashion. The root is small, and
running by the ground.

4 There is likewise another Stonecrop called Frog Stonecrop, which has little
tufts of leaves rising from small and and threddie roots, creeping upon the
ground like unto Kali or Frog-grasse; from the which tufts of leaves rises a
slender stalk, set with a few such like leaves, having at the top pretty
large yellow flowers, the smalnesse of the plant being considered.

5 This is like that which is described in the second place, but that the
stalks are lesser, and not so tall, and the flowers of this are star fashioned,
and of a golden yellow color.

6 There is another Stonecrop, or Prickmadam called Aizoon Scorpioides, which
is altogether like the great kind of Stonecrop, and differs in that, that
this kind of Stonecrop or Prickmadam has his tuft of yellow flowers turning
again, not much unlike the tail of a Scorpion, resembling Myositis
Scorpioides, and the leaves somewhat thicker, and closer thrust together. The
root is small and tender.

7 There is a plant called Sedum Portlandicu^, or Portland Stonecrop, of the
English Island called Portland, lying in the South coast, which has goodly
branches and a rough rind. The leaves imitate Laureola, growing among the
Tithymales, but thicker, shorter, more fat and tender. The stalk is of a
woody substance like Laurcola, participating of the kinds of Crassula,
Semperviuum, and the Tithymales, whereof we think it to be a kind; yet not
daring to deliver any uncertain sentence, it shall be less prejudicial to
the truth, to account it as a (...), degenerating from both kinds.

Pena and Lobel, who first set this forth knew, not very well what they
should say thereof; nor any since them: wherefore I have only given you their
figure put to our Authors description.

8 There is a plant which has received his name Sedum Petraeum; because it
does for the most part grow upon the rocks, mountains, and such like stony
places, having very small leaves, coming forth of the ground in tufts like
Pseudo-Moly; that is, our common herb called Thrift: amongst the leaves come
forth slender stalks an handful high, laden with small yellow flowers like
unto the common Prick-Madam: after which come little thick sharp pointed
cods, which contain the seed, which is small, flat, and yellowish.

The Place.
The former of these grows in gardens in the Low Countries: in other places
upon stone walls and tops of houses in England almost every where.

The other grows about (...) in the borders of fields, and in other places
that lie open to the Sun.

The Time.
They flower in the Summer months.

The Names.
The lesser kind is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Sedum, and Semperuivum
minus: of the Germans, Kleyn Donderbaer, and Kleyn Hauszwurtz: of the
Italians, Semperuino minore: of the Frenchmen, Tricque-madame: of the English
men, Pricke-Madam, Dwarf House-leeke, and small Sengreene.

The second kind is named in shops Crassula minor; and they syrname it minor,
for difference between it and the other Crassula, which is a kind of Orpin:
it is also called Vermicularis: in Italian, Pignola, Granellosa, and Grasella:
in Low Dutch, Blader loosen: in English, Wild PrickeMadam, Great Stone-crop,
or Worme-grasse. That which is vulgarly known and called by the name of
Stone-crop is the Illecebra described in the following chapter, and such as
grow commonly with us of these small Houseleekes mentioned in this chapter are
generally named PrickeMadames: but our Author has confounded them in this and
the next chapter; which I would not alter, thinking it sufficient to give you
notice thereof.

The Temperature and Virtues.
All these small Sengreens are of a cooling nature like unto the great ones,
and are good for those things that the others be. The former of these is used
in many places in sallads, in which it has a fine relish, and a pleasant
taste: it is good for the heart-burne.

CHAP. 144. Of diverse other small Sengreenes.
The Description.
1 THe stalk of this small water Sengreene is some spanne long, reddish,
succulent, and weak: the leaves are longish, a little rough, and full of
juice: the flowers grow upon the tops of the stalks, consisting of six purple
or else flesh-coloured leaves; which are succeeded by as many little cods
containing a small seed: the root is small and threddy, and the whole plant
has an insipide or waterish taste. This was found by Clusius in some waterie
places of Germany about the end of June; and he calls it Sedum minus 3 sieve
palustre.

2 This second from small fibrous and creeping roots sends up sundry little
stalks set with leaves like those of the ordinary Pricke-Madam, yet less,
thick, and flatter, and of a more (...) taste: the flowers, which are pretty
large, grow at the tops of the branches, and consist of sieve pale yellowish
leaves. It grows in diverse places of the Alps, and flowers about the end of
July, and in August. This is the Sedum minus 6. or Alpinum 1. of Clusius.

3 This has small little and thick leaves, lying bedded, or compact close
together, and are of an Ash color inclining to blew: the stalks are some two
inches long, slender, and almost naked; upon which grow commonly some three
flowers consisting of five white leaves apiece, with some yellow threads in the
middle. This mightily increases, and will mat and cover the ground for a good
space together. It flowers in August, and grows upon the craggy places of the
Alps. Clusius calls it (...) minus nonum, sieve Alpinum 3.

4 The leaves of this are somewhat larger and longer, yet thick, and somewhat
hairy about their edges; at first also of an acide taste, but afterward
bitterish and hot: it also sends forth shoots, and in the midst of the
leaves it puts forth stalks some two inches high, which at the top as in an
vmbel carry some six little flowers consisting of (...) leaves apiece, having
their bottomes of a yellowish color. It is found in the like places, and
flowers at the same time as the former. Clusius makes it his Sedum minus 10.
Alpinum 4. and in the (...). Lugd. It is called Iasme montana.

1 Sedum minus palustre. Small water Sengreene.
2 Sedum Alpinum 1. Clusij. Small Sengreene of the Alps.
Sedum Alpinum (...). (...). White Sengreene (...) the Alps.
4 Sedum Alpinum 4. Clusij. Hairy Sengreene of the Alps.


5 Sedum petraeum Bupleurifolio. Long leaued Rock Sengreene.


5 For these four last described we are beholden to Clusius; and for this
fifth to (...), who thus describes it: It has one (...) and large root with
few or no fibers, but (...) (...) bunching out here and there: it (...) (...)
with a thick bark, and is of a (...) (...) color on the outside: the (...)
(...) (...), long and narrow, lying spread (...) (...) (...) the stalk grows
some (...) high, and is round and naked, and at the top carries (...) (...) of
7 sharp pointed pale yellow leaves; which are succeeded by seeds like (...)
(...) (...), and of a strong smell. It (...) (...) the middle of July, and the
seed is (...) (...) the middle of August. (...), who (...) observed this
growing (...) (...) (...) in Italy, sets it forth by the (...) (...) (...)
(...) Bupleurifolio. (...) has it by (...) (...) (...) (...) Alpina Graminco
folio, and (...) angustisolium Alpinum.

The Temper and (...).
The three first described without doubt

CHAP. 145. Of Stone-crop, called Wall-pepper.
(...) sieve Illecebra minor acris. Wall-Pepper, or Stone-crop.


The Description.
THis is a low and little herb: the stalks be slender and short: the leaves
about these stand very thick, and small in growth, full bodied, sharp
pointed, and (...) (...): the flowers stand on the top, and (...) (...) little,
of color yellow, (...) of a (...) (...) taste: the root is nothing but (...).

The Place.
It grows (...) where in stony and dry places, and in chinks and crannies of
(...) walls, and on the tops of houses: it is always green, and therefore it is
very fitly placed among the Sengreenes.

The Time.
It floureth in the Summer months.

The Names.
This is Tertium sempervivum Dioscoridis, (...) Dioscorides his third
Sengreene, which he says is called of the Grecians (...), and (...): and of
the Romans, Illecebra. Pliny also witnesses, that the Latins name it (...).
Yet there is another (...), and another (...), the Germans call this (...)
(...), and Katzen treuble: the French men, (...) (...): the Low Country men,
Muer Pepper: the English men, Stone-crop, and Stone hoar, little Stone-crop,
Pricket, Mouse-taile, Wall-Pepper, Country Pepper, and Jack of the Butterie.

The Temperature.
This little herb is sharp and biting, and very hot. Being outwardly applied
it raises blisters, and at length exulcerateth.

The Virtues.
It wastes away hard kernels, and the Kings Evil, if it be laid unto them, as
Diosoorides writes.

The juice hereof extracted or drawn forth, and taken with vinegar or other
liquor, procures

CHAP. 146. Of Orpyne.
The Description.
1 THe Spanish Orpyne sends forth round stalks, thick, slipperie, having as
it were little joints, somewhat red now and then about the root: the leaves in
like manner be thick, smooth, gross, full of tough juice, sometimes slightly
nicked in the edges, broader leafed, and greater than those of Purslane;
otherwise not much unlike; which by couples are set opposite one against another
upon every joint, covering the stalk in order by two and two: the flowers in
the round tufts are of a pale yellow: the root grows full of bumpes like unto
long kernels, waxing sharp toward the point: these ketnels be white, and have
strings growing forth of them,

1 Crassula major Hispanica. Spanish Orpyne.
2 Crassula sieve faba inuersa. Common Orpyne.


2 The second, which is our common Orpyne, does likewise rise up with very many
round stalks that are smooth, but not ioynted at all: the leaves are gross or
corpulent, thick, broad, and oftentimes somewhat nicked in the edges, lesser
than those of the former, placed out of order. The flowers be either red or
yellow, or else whitish: the root is white, well bodied, and full of kernels.
This plant is very full of life: the stalks set only in clay continue green
a long time; and if they be now and then watered they also grow. We have a
wild kind of Orpyne growing in corn fields and shadowy woods in most places
of England, in each respect like that of the garden, saving that it is
altogether lesser.

The Place.
They prosper best in shadowie and stony places, in old walls made of lome or
stone. Oribasius says, That they grow in Vineyards and tilled places. The
first grows in gardens; the other every where: the first is much found in
Spain and Hungary; neither is Germany without it; for it grows upon the
banks of the river of Rhene near the Vineyards, in rough and stony places,
nothing at all differing from that which is found in (...).

The second grows plentifully both in Germany, France, Bohemia, England, and
in other countries among vines, in old (...) daubed and stony walls.

The Time.
The Orpynes flower about August or before.

The Names.
The first is that which is called of the Grecians (...), and (...): of the
Latins, Telephium, and Sempervivum syluestre, and Illecebra: but Illecebra by
reason of his sharp and biting quality does much differ from it, as we have
declared in the former Chapter. Some there be (...) name it (...), or Portulaca
syluestris: yet there is another Portulaca syluestris, or wild Purslane, like
to that which grows in gardens, but lesser: we may call this in English,
Spanish Orpyne, Orpyne of Hungary, or ioynted Orpyne.

The second kind of Orpyne is called in shops Crassula, and Crassula Fabaria,
and Crassula mayor, that it may differ from that which is described in the
chapter of little Housleeke: it is named also Fabaria: in High Dutch,
Mundkraut, Knauenkraut, Fortzwang, and Fotzweyn: in Italian, Fabagrassa: in
French, Ioubarbe des vignes, Feue espesse: in Low Dutch, Smer wortele, and
Hemel Sluetel: in English, Orpyne; also Liblong, or Liue-long.

The Temperature.
The Orpyns be cold and dry, and of thin or subtle parts.

The Virtues.
Dioscorides says, That being laid on with Vinegar it takes away the white
morphew: Galen Galen attributes unto it an hot faculty, though the taste
shows the contrary: which aforesaid scouring faculty declares, That the
other two also be likewise cold. But cold things may as well cleanse, if
dryness of temperature and thinness of essence be joined together in them.

CHAP. 147. Of the smaller Orpyns.
The Description.
1 THe Orpyn with purple flowers is lower and lesser than the common Orpyn: the
stalks be slenderer, and for the most part lie along upon the ground. The
leaves are also thinner and longer, and of a more blew green, yet well bodied,
standing thicker below than above, confusedly set together without order: the
flowers in the tufts at the tops of the stalks be of a pale blew tending to
purple. The roots be not set with lumpes or knobbed kernels, but with a
multitude of hairy strings.

2 This second Orpyn, as it is known to few, so has it found no name, but
that some Herbarists do call it Telephium sempervivum or virens: for the
stalks of the other do wither in winter, the root remains green; but the
stalks and leaves of this endure also the sharpness of Winter; and therefore
we may call it in English, Orpyn everlasting, or Neuer-dying Orpyn. This has
lesser and rounder leaves than any of the former: the flowers are red, and
(...) root fibrous.

3 Clusius received the seeds of this from Ferranto Imperato of Naples, under
the name of 1 Telephium floribus purpureis. Purple Orpyn.
2 Telephium semper-virens. Neuer-dying Orpyn.
2 Telephium legitimum Imperati. Creeping Orpyn.
Telephium legitimum; and he has thus given us the history thereof: It
produces from the top of the root many branches spread upon the ground, which
are about a foot long, set with many leaves, especially such as are not come to
flower; for the other have fewer: these leaves are smaller, less thick also
and succulent than those of the former kinds, neither are they so brittle:
their color is green, inclining a little to blew: the tops of the branches are
plentifully stored with little flowers growing thick together, and composed of
five little white leaves apiece: which fading, there succeed cornered
seed-vessels full of a brownish seed. The root is sometimes as thick as ones
little finger, tough, white, divided into some branches, and living many
years.

The Place, Time, Names, Temperature, and Virtues.
The first grows not in England. The second flourishes in my garden. The third
is a stranger with us. They flower when the common Orpyn does. Their names are
specified in their several descriptions: and their temperature and faculties
in working are referred to the common Orpyn.

CHAP. 148. Of Purslane.
The Description.
1 THe stalks of the great Purslane be round, thick, somewhat red, full of
juice, smooth, glittering, and parted into certain branches trailing upon the
ground: the leaves be an inch long, something broad, thick, fat, glib,
somewhat green, whiter on the neither side: the flowers are little, of a faint
yellow, and grow out at the bottom of the leaves. After them springs up a
little husk of a green color, of the bigness almost of half a barley corn,
in which is small black seed: the root has many strings.

1 Portulaca (...). Garden Purslane.
2 Portulaca silvestris. Wild Purslane.


2 The other is lesser and has like stalks, but smaller, and it spreads on
the ground: the leaves be like the former in fashion, smoothness, and
thickness, but far lesser.

The Place.
The former is fitly sown in gardens, and in the ways and allies thereof
being dug and dunged; it delights to grow in a fruitful and fat soil not
dry.

The other comes up of his own accord in allies of gardens and vineyardes,
and oftentimes upon rocks: this also is delighted with watery places being once
sown, if it be let alone till the seed be ripe it does easily spring up afresh
for certain years after.

The Time.
It may be sown in March or April; it flourishes and is green in June, and
afterward even until winter.

The Names.
Purslane is called in Greek, (...): in Latin, Portulaca: in high Dutch,
Burkelkraut: in French, Poupier: in Italian, (...): in Spanish, Verdolagas: in
English, Purslane, and Porcelane.

The Temperature.
Purslane is cold, and that in the third degree, and moist in the second: but
wild Purslane is not so moist.

The Virtues.
Raw Purslane is much used in sallades, with oil, salt, and vinegar: it
cools an hot (...),

Purslane is likewise commended against worms in young children, and is
singular good, especially

The leaves of Purslane either raw, or boiled, and eaten as sallades, are good
for those that

The same taken in like manner is good for the bladder and kidneys, and
allaieth the out ragious

The juice of Purslane stops the bloody flux, the flux of the hemorroides,
monthly terms,

The same thrown up with a mother syringe, cures the inflammations, frettings,
and (...)

The leaves eaten raw, take away the pain of the teeth, and fasteneth them;
and are good for

The seed being taken, kills and drives forth worms, and stops the
laske.

CHAP. 149. Of sea Purslane, and of the shrubby Sengreens.
The Description.
1 SEa Purslane is not a herb as garden Purslane, but a little shrub: the
stalks whereof be hard and woody: the leaves fat, full of substance, like in
form to common Purslane, but much whiter and harder: the mossie purple flowers
stand round about the upper parts of the stalks, as do almost those of Blyte,
or of Orach: neither is the seed unlike, being broad and flat: the root is
woody, long lasting, as is also the plant, which bears out the winter with
the loss of a few leaves.

2 There is another sea Purslane or Halimus, or after Dodonaus, Portulaca
marina, which has leaves like the former, but not altogether so white, yet are
they somewhat longer and narrower, not much unlike the leaves of the Olive
tree. The slender branches are not above a cubit or cubit and half long, and
commonly lie spread upon the ground, and the flowers are of a deep ouerworne
herby color, and after them follow seeds like those of the former, but
smaller.

3 Our ordinary Halimus or sea Purslane has small branches some foot or better
long, lying commonly spread upon the ground, of an ouerworne grayish color, and
sometimes purple; the leaves are like those of the last mentioned, but more fat
and thick, yet less hoary. The flowers grow on the tops of the branches, of
an herby purple color, which is succeeded by small seeds like to that of the
second kind.

4 There is found another wild sea Purslane, whereof I have thought good to
make mention; which does resemble the kinds of Aizoons. The first kind
grows upright, with a trunk like a small tree or shrub, having many upright
woody branches, of an ash color, with many thick, dark, green leaves like
the small Stone crop, called Vermicularis: the flowers are of an herby
yellowish green color: the root is very hard and fibrous: the whole plant is
of a salt tang taste, and the juice like that of Kaly.

5 There is another kind like the former, and differs in that, this strange
plant is greater, the leaves more sharp and narrower, and the whole plant more
woody, and comes near to the form of a tree. The flowers are of a greenish
color.

1 Halimus latifolius. Tree Sea Purslane.
2 Halimus angustifolius procumbens. Creeping Sea Purslane.
The figure that was formerly given by our Author by the title of Portulaca
marina, and is set forth by (...). under the same name, is either of none of
these plants, or else it is imperfect. (...) knows not what to make of it, but
questions, (...)?
3 Halimus vulgaris, sieve Portulaca marina. Common Sea Purslane.
4 Vermicular is frutex minor. The lesser shrubby Sengreen.


5 Vermicularis frutex major. The greater Tree Stone-crop.


The Place.
The first and second grow upon the Sea coasts of Spain and other hot
countries: and the third grows in the salt marshes near the sea side, as
you pass over the Kings ferrey unto the isle of Shepey, going to Sherland
house (belonging sometime unto the Lord Cheiny, and in the year 1590, unto the
Worshipful Sr. Edward Hobby) fast by the ditches sides of the same marish: it
grows plentifully in the isle of Thanet as you go from Margate to Sandwich,
and in many other places along the coast. The other sorts grow upon banks and
heaps of sand on the Sea coasts of Zeeland, Flanders, Holland, and in like
places in other countries, as besides the Isle of Purbecke in England; and on
Rauen-spurne in Holdernesse, as I my self have seen.

The Time.
These flourish and flower especially in July and August.

The Names.
Sea Purslane is called Portulaca Marina: In Greek, (...): it is also called
in Latin Halimus: in Dutch, Zee (...): in English, Sea Purslane.

The bastard ground Pines are called of some, Chamepitys virmiculata: in
English, Sea ground Pine: or more fitly, Tree Ston-crop, or Pricket, or Shrubby
Sengreene.

The Temperature.
Sea Purslane is (as Galen says) of unlike parts, but the greater part thereof
is hot in a mean, with a moisture unconcocted, and somewhat windy.

The Virtues.
The leaves (says Dioscorides) are boiled to be eaten: a dram weight of the
root being drunk Galen does also report, that the young and tender buds are
wont in Cilicia to be eaten, and also laid up in store for use.

Clusius says, That the learned Portugal Knight Damianus a Goes assured him,
That the leaves

CHAP. 150. Of Herbe-Iuy, or Ground Pine.
The Description.
1 THe common kind of Chamaepitys or Ground Pine is a small herb and very
tender, creeping upon the ground, having small and crooked branches trailing
about. The leaves be small, narrow and hairy, in savor like the Fur or Pine
tree; but if my sense of smelling be perfect, me thinks it is rather like unto
the smell of hemp. The flowers be little, of a pale yellow color, and
sometimes white: the root is small and single, and of a woody substance.

2 The second has pretty strong four square ioynted stalks, (...) and hairy;
from which grow pretty large hairy leaves much cloven or cut: the flowers are
of a purple color, and grow about the stalks in roundles like the dead Nettle:
the seed is black and round, and the whole plant sauoureth like the former:
which shows this to be fitly referred to the Chamaepytis, and not to be well
called Chamaedrys (...), or Iagged Germander, as some have named it.

1 Chamaepitys mas. The male ground Pine.
2 Chamaepitys foemina. The female Ground Pine.
3 Chamaepitys 3. Dodon. Small Ground Pine.
4 (...) a muscata Monspeliaca. French Herbe-Iuy or Ground Pine.


3 This kind of Herb-Iuy, growing for the most part about Montpelier in
France, is the least of all his kind, having small white and yellow flowers, in
smell and proportion like unto the others, but much smaller.

4 There is a wild or bastard kind of Chamaepitys, or Ground Pine, that has
leaves somewhat like unto the second kind, but not iagged in that manner, but
only snipt about the edges. The root is somewhat bigger, woody, whitish, and
bitter, and like unto the root of Succorie. All this herb is very rough, and
has a strong unpleasant smell, not like that of the ground-Pines.

5 Chamaepitys spuria altera Dodon. Bastard Ground Pine.
6 Chamaepitys Austriaca. Austrian Ground Pine.


5 There is another kind that has many small and tender branches beset with
little leaves for the most part three together, almost like the leaves of the
ordinary Ground Pine: at the top of which branches grow slender white flowers;
which being turned vpside down, or the lower part upward, do somewhat resemble
the flowers of Lamium: the seeds grow commonly four together in a cup, and are
somewhat big and round: the root is thick, whitish, and long lasting.

6 There grows in Austria a kind of Chamaepitys, which is a most brave and
rare plant, and of great beauty, yet not once remembered either of the ancient
or new Writers, until of late that famous Carolus Clufius had set it forth in
his Pannonicke Observations; who for his singular skill and industry has won
the garland from all that have written before his time. This rare and strange
plant I have in my garden, growing with many square stalks of half a foot
high, beset even from the bottom to the top with leaves so like our common
Rosemary, that it is hard for him which does not know it exactly to find the
difference; being green above, and somewhat hairy and hoarie underneath: among
which come forth round about the stalks (after the manner of roundles or
coronets) certain small cups or chalices of a reddish color; out of which come
the flowers like unto Archangell in shape, but of a most excellent and stately
mixed color, the outside purple declining to (...) and sometimes of a violet
color. The flower gapeth like the mouth of a beast, and has as it were a
white tongue; the lower and upper jaws are white likewise, spotted with many
bloody spots: which being past, the seeds appear very long, of a shining
black color, (...) in order in the small husks as the Chamaepitys spuria.
The root is black and hard, with many hairy strings fastened thereto.

The Place.
These kinds of Chamaepitys (except the two last) grow very plentifully in
Kent, especially about Grauesend, Cobham, Southfleet, Horton, Dartford, and
Sutton, and not in any other shire in England that ever I could find.

None of these, except the first, for any thing I know, or can learn, grow
wild in England; the second I have often seen in Gardens.

The Time.
They flower in June, and often in August.

The Names.
Ground Pine is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Ibiga, Aiuga, and Abiga: in
shops, Iua Arthritica and Iua moschata: in Italian, (...): in Spanish,
Chamaepitoes: in High Dutch, Bergiss (...) nicht: in low Dutch, (...) (...): in
French; Iue moschate: In English, Herb Iuie, Forget me not, Ground Pine, and
field Cypress.

1 The first of these is the Chamaepitys prima, of Matthiolus, Dodonaeus and
others, and is that which is commonly used in shops and in Physic.

2 This (...) calls Chamaedrys altera: Lobel, Chamaedrys Laciniatis folijs:
(...), (...) vera; (...), Iva moschata; and Dodon. (whom in this Chapter we
chiefly follow) (...) mapitys altera.

3 Thirdly, this is the Chamaepitys 1. of Fuchsius and others; the Chamaepitys
(...) Dioscoridisodo atior of Lobel; and the Chamaepitys 3. of Matthiolus and
Dodon.

4 Gesner calls this Chamaepitys species Monspellij: Clusius, Dodon. Anthyllis
altera; and Lobel; Anthyllis Chamepityides minor; and Tabern. Iua Moschata
(...).

5 This is Chamaepitys adulterina of Lobel: (...) and Aiuga adulterina of
Clusius: and Chamaepitys spuria altera of Dondon.

6 This is Chamaepitys Austriaca of Clusius; and Chamaepitys caerulea of
Camerarius.

The Nature.
These herbs are hot in the second degree, and dry in the third.

The Virtues.
The leaves of Chamaepytis tunned up in Ale, or infused in wine or sodden with
honey, and drunk

Chamaepytis stamped green with honey cures wounds, malignant and rebellious
ulcers, and dissolueth

The decoction drunk, dissolueth congealed blood, and drunk with vinegar,
drives forth the

It cleanses the intrals: it helps the infirmities of the liver and kidneies;
it (...) the yellow

The powder hereof taken in pills with a fig, mollifieth the belly: it wastes
away the hardness Dioscorides.

Clusius of whom mention was made, has not said any thing of the Virtues of
(...) Austriaca:

CHAP. 152. Of Nauelwoort, or Penniwoort of the Wall.
The Description.
1 THe great Nauelwoort has round and thick leaves, somewhat bluntly indented
about the edges, and somewhat hollow in the midst on the upper part, having a
short tender stem fastened to the midst of the leaf, on the lower side
underneath the stalk, whereon the flowers do grow, is small and hollow, an
handful high and more, beset with many small flowers of an ouerworne incarnate
color. The root is round like an olive, of a white color.

The root is not well expressed in the figure, for it should have been more
unequal or tuberous, with the fibers not at the bottom but top thereof.

2 The second kind of Wall Penniwoort or Nauelwoort has broad thick leaves
somewhat deeply indented about the edges: and are not so round as the leaves
of the former, but somewhat long toward the setting on, spread upon the ground
in manner of a tuft, set about the tender stalk, like to Sengreene or
Housleeke; among which rises up a tender stalk whereon do grow the like
leaves. The flowers stand on the top consisting of five small leaves of a white
color, with red spots in them. The root is small and threddie. This by some is
called Sedum Serratum.

3. This third kind has long thick narrow leaves, very finely snipt or nickt
on the edges, which lie spread very orderly upon the ground; and in the midst of
them rises up a stalk some foot high, which bears at the top thereof upon
three or four little branches, diverse white flowers consisting of five leaves
apiece.

4 The leaves of this are long and thick, yet not so finely snipt about the
edges, nor so narrow as those of the former: the stalk is a foot high, set
here and there with somewhat shorter and rounder leaves than those below; and
toward the top thereof, out of the bossomes of these leaves come sundry little
foot-stalkes, bearing on their tops pretty large flowers of color white, and
spotted with red spots. The roots are small, and here and there put up new
tufts of leaves, like as the common Housleeke.

5 There is a kind of Nauelwoort that grows in waterie places, which is
called of the husbandmen Sheeps bane, because it kills sheep that do eat
thereof: it is not much unlike the precedent, but the round edges of the leaves
are not so even as the other; and this creeps upon the ground, and the other
upon the stone walls.

1 Vmbilicus Veneris. Wall Penniwoort.
2 Vmbilicus Ven. sive Cotyledon altera. Iagged or Rose Penniwoort.


6 Because some in Italy have used this for Vmbilicus Veneris, and othersome
have so called it, I thought it not amiss to follow Matthiolus, and give you
the history thereof in this place, rather than to omit it, or give it in
another which may be perhaps as unfit, for indeed I cannot sitly rank it with
any other plant. Bauhine sets it between Hedera Terrestris, and (...) (...):
and Columna refers it to the Linaria's, but I must confess I cannot refer it
to any; wherefore I think it as proper to give it here as in any other place.
The branches of this are many, long, slender, and creeping, upon which grow
without any certain order many little smooth thick leaves fashioned like
those of Ivy, and fastened to stalks of some inch long: and together with
these stalks come sorth others of the same length, that carry spur-fashioned
flowers, of the shape and bigness of those of the female Fluellen: their
outside is purple, their inside blew, with a spot of yellow in the opening. The
root is small, creeping, and threddie. It flowers toward the end of Summer, and
grows wild upon walls in Italy, but in gardens with us. (...) calls it
Cymbalaria (to which Lobel adds) Italica Hederaceo folio: Lonicerus terms it
Vmbilicus Veneris (...): and lastly Columna calls it Linaria hederae folio.

The Place.
The first kind of Penniwoort grows plentifully in Northampton upon every
stone wall about the town, at Bristow, Bathe, Wells, and most places of the
West Country upon stone walls. It grows upon Westminster Abbey, over the
door that leads from Chaucers tomb to the old palace. In this last place it
is not now to be found.

The second, third, and fourth grow upon the Alps near Piedmont, and Bauier,
and upon the mountains of Germany: I found the third growing upon Bieston
Castle in Cheshire.

The fifth grows upon the Bogges upon Hampstead Heath, and many such rotten
grounds in other places.

The Time.
They are green and flourish especially in VVinter: They flower also in the
beginning of Summer.

The Names.
Nauelwoort is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Vmbilicus Veneris, and
Acetabulum: of diverse, Herba Coxendicum: Iacobus Manlius names it Scatum
Coeli, and Scatellum: in Dutch, (...): in Italian, Cupertoiule: in French,
Escuelles: in Spanish, Capadella: of some, Hortus Veneris, or Venus garden, and
Terrae vmbilicus, or the Nauel of the earth: in English, Penniwoort,
Wall-penniwoort, Ladies navel, Hipwoort and Kidney-woort.

Water Penniwoort is called in Latin Cotyledon palustris: in English,
Sheepe-killing Pennigrasse, Penny-rot, and in the North Country VVhite-rot:
for there is also Red-rot, which is Rosa solis: in Northfolke it is called
Flowkwoort. Columna and Bauhine fitly refer this to the Ranunculi, or Crowfeet;
for it has no affinity at all with the Cotyledons (but only in the
roundnesse of the leaf) the former of them calls it Ranunculus aquaticus
vmbilicatofolio, and the later, Ranunculus aquat. Cotyledonis folio.

The Temperature.
Nauelwoort is of a moist substance and somewhat cold, and of a certain
obscure binding quality: it cools, repelleth, or drives back, scoureth,
and consumes, or wastes away, as Galen testifies.

The Water Pennywoort is of an hot and vlcerating quality, like to the
Crowfeet, whereof it is a kind. The bastard Italian Nauelwoort seems to
partake with the true in cold and moisture.

The Virtues.
The juice of Wall Pennywoort is a singular remedy against all inflammations
and hot tumors,

The leaves and roots eaten do break the stone, provoke urine, and prevail
much against the

The ignorant Apothecaries do use the Water Pennywoort in stead of this of
the wall, which

3 Vmbilicus Veneris minor. Small Nauelwoort.
4 Cotyledon minor montana altera. The other small mountain Nauelwoort.
5 Cotyledon palustris. Water Penniwoort.
6 Cymbalaria Italica. Italian Bastard Nauelwoort.


CHAP. 152. Of Sea Pennywoort.
1 Androsace Matthioli. Sea Nauel-woort.
2 Androsace annua spuria. One Summers Nauell-woort.


The Description.
1 THe Sea Nauel-woort has many round thick leaves like unto little saucers,
set upon small and tender stalks, bright, shining, and smooth, of two inches
long, for the most part growing upon the furrowed shells of cockles or the like,
every small stem bearing upon the end or point, one little buckler and no more,
resembling a navel; the stalk and leaf set together in the middle of the
same. Whereupon the Herbarists of Montpelier have called it (...) Marinus, or
sea Nauel. The (...) and stalks of this plant, whilst they are yet in the
water, are of a pale ash color, but being taken forth, (...) presently wax
white, as Sea Moss, called (...), or the shel of a Cockle. It is thought to be
barren of seed, and is in taste saltish.

2 The second Androsace has little smooth leaves, spread upon the ground like
unto the leaves of small Chickweed or Henbit, whereof doubtless it is a kind:
among which rises up a slender stem, having at the top certain little chaffie
flowers of a purplish color. The seed is contained in small (...) husks, of a
reddish color, and a bitter taste. The whole plant perishes when it has
perfected his seed, and must be sown again the next year: which plant was
given to Mathiolus by Cortusus, who (as he (...)) received it from Syria; but I
think he said so to make Matthiolus more (...): but surely I surmise he
picked it out of one old wall or other, where it does grow even as the small
Chickweed, or Nailewoort of the wall do.

The figure that was here was that imperfect one of (...); and the description
of our Author was framed by it, unless the last part thereof, which was taken
out of the Aduersaria page 166. to amend both these, we here present you with
the true figure and description, taken out of the works of the judicious and
painful Herbarist Carolus Clusius. It has (says he) many leaves lying flat
upon the ground, like to those of Plantaine, but lesser and of a pale green
color, and (...) about the edges, soft also and iuicie, and of somewhat a
biting taste. Amongst these leaves rise up five or six stalks of an handful
high, commonly of a green, vet sometimes of a purple color, naked and somewhat
hairy, which at their tops carry in a circle five roundish leaves also a little
toothed and hairy; from the midst of which arise five or more (...), each
bearing a greenish rough or hairie, cup and parted also into five little leaves
or iags, in the midst of which stands a little white flower parted also into
five; after which succeed pretty large seed vessels which contain an unequal
red seed like that of (...), but bigger: the root is single and slender, and
dies as soon as the seed is perfected. It grows naturally in diverse places of
Austria, and amongst the corn about the Bathes of Baden; whereas it flowers in
April, and ripens the seed in May and June.

The Place.
Androsace will not grow any where but in water: great store of it is about
Frontignan by Montpellier in Languedoc, where every fisherman does know it.

The second grows upon old stone and mud walls: notwithstanding I have (the
more to grace Matthiolus great jewel) planted it in my garden.

The Time.
The bastard Androsace floureth in July, and the seed is ripe in August.

The Names.
Androsace is of some called Vmbilicus marinus, or sea Navel.

The second is known and called by the name of Androsace altera (...).

The Temperature.
The sea Navel is of a diureticke quality, and more dry than Galen thought
it to be, and less hot than others have deemed it: there can no moisture be
found in it.

The Virtues.
Sea Nauelwoort provoke urine, and digesteth the filthiness and sliminesse
gathered in the

Two drams of it, as Dioscorides says, drunk in wine, brings down great
store of urine out of

CHAP. 153. Of Rose-woort, or Roseroot.
Rhodia radix, Rose-root.


The Description.
ROsewoort has many small, thick, and fat stems, growing from a thick and
knobby root: the upper end of it for the most part stands out of the ground,
and is there of a purplish color, bunched and knobbed like the root of Orpin,
with many hairy strings hanging thereat, of a pleasant smell when it is broken,
like the damask rose, whereof it took his name. The leaves are set round
about the stalks, even from the bottom to the top, like those of the field
Orpin, but narrower, and more snipt about the edges. The flowers grow at the
top of a faint yellow color.

The Place.
It grows very plentifully in the North part of England, especially in a
place called Ingleborough Fels, near unto the brooks sides, and not elsewhere
that I can as yet find out, from whence I have had plants for my garden.

The Time.
It floureth and flourishes in July, and the seed is ripe in August.

The Names.
Some have thought it has taken the name Rhodia of the Island in the
Mediterranean sea, called Rhodes: but doubtless it took his name Rhodia radix,
of the root which smells like a rose: in English, Rose-root, and Rose-woort.

The Virtues.
There is little extant in writing of the faculties of Rosewoort: but this I
have found, that if the root be stamped with oil of Roses and laid to the
temples of the head, it (...) the pain of the head.

CHAP. 144. Of Sampier.
1 Crithmum marinum. Rock Sampier.
2 Crithmum Spinosum. Thornie Sampier.
3 (...) chrysanthemum. Golden Sampier.


The Description.
1 Rock Sampier has many fat and thick leaves, somewhat like those of the
lesser (...), of a spicy taste with a certain saltness; amongst which rises
up a stalk, divided into many small spraies or sprigs; on the top whereof do
grow (...) tufts of whitefloures, like the tufts of Fenell or Dill; after that
comes the seed like the seed of Fenell, but greater. The root is thick and
knobbie, being of smell delightful and pleasant

2 The second Sampier called (...) marina, or Sea Parsnep, has long fat
leaves, very much iagged or cut even to the middle rib, sharp or prickley
pointed, which are set upon large fat iointed stalks; on the top whereof do
grow (...) of whitish, or else reddish flowers. The seed is wrapped in thornie
husks. The root is thick and long, not unlike to the Parsnep, very good and
wholesome to be eaten.

3 Golden Sampier brings forth many stalks from one root, compassed about
with a multitude of long fat leaves, set together by equal distances; at the
top whereof come yellow flowers. The seed is like those of the Rock Sampier.

The Place.
Rock Sampier grows on the rockie cliffes at Dover, VVinchelsey, by Rye,
about Southhampton, the Isle of VVight, and most rocks about the West and
North-west parts about England.

The second grows near the Sea upon the sands, and Bayche between Whitstable
and the Isle of Thanet, by Sandwich, and by the sea near Westchester.

The third grows in the myrie marsh in the Isle of Shepey, as you go from the
Kings Ferrie, to Sherland house.

The Time.
Rock Sampier flourishes in May and June, and must be gathered to be kept in
pickle in the beginning of August.

The Names.
Rock Sampier is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Crithmum: and of diverse,
Bati: in some shops, Creta marina: of Petrus Crescentius, Cretamum, and Rincum
marinum: in high Dutch, (...): which is in Latin, Foeniculum marinum, or Sea
Fenell: in Italian, Fenocchio marino, Herba di San Pietro; and hereupon diverse
name it Sampetra: in Spanish, Perexil de la mer, Hinoio marino, Fenolmarin: in
English, Sampier, and Rock Sampier, and of some, Crestmarine; and these be
the names of the Sampier generally eaten in sallads.

The other two be also Crithma or Sampiers, but most of the later writers would
draw them to some other plant: for one calls the second Pastinaca marina, or
(...) Parsnep, and the third Aster atticus marinus; and Lobel names it (...)
Littoreum: but we had rather entertain them as Matthiolus does, among the
kinds of Crithmum, or Sampier.

The Temperature.
Sampier does dry, warm, and scour, as Galen says.

The Virtues.
The leaves, seeds, and roots, as Dioscorides says, boiled in wine and drunk,
provoke urine, and

The leaves kept in pickle, and eaten in sallads with oil and vinegar, is a
pleasant sauce for meat,

It is the pleasantest sauce, most familiar, and best agreeing with man's body,
both for digestion

CHAP. 155. Of Glass Saltwoort.
The Description.
1 GLassewoort has many gross, thick and round stalks a foot high, full of
fat and thick sprigges, set with many knots or ioints, without any leaves at
all, of a reddish green color. The whole Plant resembles a branch of Coral.
The root is very small and single.

2 There is another kind of Saltwoort, which has been taken among the ancient
Herbarists for a kind of Sampier. It has a little tender stalk a cubite
high, divided into many small branches, set full of little thick leaves very
narrow, somewhat long and sharp pointed, yet not pricking; amongst which
comes forth small seed, wrapped in a crooked husk, turned round like a
crooked perwinkle. The stalks are of a reddish color. The whole plant is of a
salt and biting taste. The root is small and threddie.

3 There is likewise another kind of Kali, whereof Lobel makes mention under
the name of Kali minus, which is like to the last before remembered, but
altogether lesser, having many slender weak branches lying commonly spread upon
the ground, and set with many small round long sharp pointed leaves, of a
whitish green color: the seed is small and shining, not much unlike that of
Sorrel: the root is slender with many fibers; the whole plant has a saltish
taste like as the former. Dodon. calls this Kali album.

1 Salicornia, sive Kali geniculatum. Glassewoort, Saltwoort, or Sea-grape.
2 Kali maius semine (...). Snaile Glassewoort.
3 Kali minus. Small Glassewoort.


The Place.
These plants are (...) be found in salt marshes almost every where.

The second excepted, which grows not here, but upon the coasts of the
Mediterranean sea.

The Time.
They flower and flourish in the Summer months.

The Names.
Saltwoort is called of the Arabians Kali, and Alkali. Auicen, chap. 724.
describes them under the name of Vsnen, which differs from Vsnee: for Vsnee
is that which the Graecians call (...): and the Latins, Muscus, or Moss of
some, as Baptista Montanus: it has bin judged to be Empetron.

The axen or ashes hereof are named of Matthaeus Siluaticus, Soda: of most, Sal
Alkali: diverse call it Alumen catinum. Others make this kind of difference
between Sal Kali, and (...) catinum, that Alumen catinum is the ashes it self:
and that the salt that is made of the ashes is Sal Alkali.

Stones are beaten to powder, and mixed with ashes, which being melted
together become the matter whereof glasses are made. Which while it is made red
hot in the furnace, and is melted, becoming liquide and fit to work upon, does
yield as it were a fat floting aloft; which, when it is cold, (...) as hard as
a (...), yet it is brittle, and quickly broken. This is commonly called
Axungiavitri. In English, (...) in French, Suin de Voirre: in Italian, Fior de
cristalo, (i) Flower of Crystal. The Herb is also called of diverse Kali
articulatum, or iointed Glasse-wo ort: and in English, Crabbe-grasse, and
Froggegrasse.

The Temperature.
Glasse-woort is hot and dry: the ashes are both drier and hotter, and that
even to the fourth degree: the ashes have a causticke or burning quality.

The Virtues.
A little quantity of the herb taken inwardly, does not only mightily
provoke urine, but in

A great quantity taken is mischievous and deadly. The smell and smoke also of
this herb

The ashes are likewise tempered with those medicines that serve to take away
scabs and filth Auicen and Serapio report.

We read in the copies of Serapio, that Glasse-woort is a tree so great, that
a man may stand under

The flower of Crystal, or (as they commonly term it, Sandeuer) does
wonderfully dry. It easily

CHAP. 156. Of Through Wax.
1 Perfoliata vulgaris. Common Thorow-waxe.
2 Perfoliata siliquosa. Codded Thorow-waxe


The Description.
1 THorow-wax or Thorow-leafe, has a round, slender, and brittle stalk,
divided into many small branches, which pass or go through the leaves, as
though they had been drawn or thrust through, and to make it more plain,
every branch does grow through every leaf, making them like hollow cups or
saucers. The seed grows in spokie tufts or rundles like Dill, long and
blackish. The flowers are of a faint yellow color. The root is single, white
and threddie.

2 Codded Thorow-wax reckoned by Dodonaeus among the Brassickes or Colewoorts,
and making it a kind thereof, and calling it Brassica syluestris perfoliata:
though in mine opinion without reason, since it has neither shape, affinity,
nor likeness with any of the Colewoorts, but altogether most unlike,
resembling very well the common Thorow-wax; whereunto I rather refer it. It
has small, tender, and brittle stalks two foot high, bearing leaves, which
wrap and enclose themselves round about, although they do not run through as the
other do, yet they grow in such manner, that upon the sudden view thereof, they
seem to pass through as the other: upon the small branches do grow little
white flowers: which being past, there succeed slender and long cods like those
of Turnips or Nauewes, whose leaves and cods do somewhat resemble the same,
from whence it has the name Napifolia, that is, Thorow-wax with leaves like
unto the Nauew. The root is long and single, and dies when it has brought
forth his seed.

There is a wild kind hereof growing in Kent, in many places among the corn,
like to the (...) in each respect, but altogether lesser: the which no doubt
brought into the garden would prove the very same.

The Place.
The first described grows plentifully in many places about Kent, and between
Farningham and Ainsford it grows in such quantity (as I have been informed by
Mr. Bowls) in the corn fields on the tops of the hills, that it may well be
termed the infirmity of them.

The later grows not wild with us that ever I could find, though Lobell
seems to affirm the contrary.

They grow in the gardens of Herbarists, and in my garden likewise.

The Time.
They flower in May and June, and their seed is ripe in August.

The Names.
1 It has been called from the beginning Perfoliata, because the stalk does
pass through the leaf, following the signification of the same: we call it in
English, Thorow-waxe, or Thorowleafe.

2 This by the most and best part of VVriters (though our Author be of another
opinion) is very fitly referred to the wild Cole-woorts, and called Brassica
campestris by Clusius and by Camerarius; Brassica agrestis by Tragus (...) yet
Lobel calls it Perfoliata Napifolia Anglorum siliquosa,

The Temperature.
Thorow-waxe is of a dry complexion.

The Virtues.
The decoction of Thorow-wax made of water or wine, heals wounds. The juice
is excellent

The green leaves stamped, boiled with wax, oil, rosine and turpentine,
makes an excellent unguent

CHAP. 157. Of Honie-woort.
The Description.
1 CErinthe or Honie-woort rises forth of the ground after the sowing of his
seed, with two small leaves like those of Basil; between the which leaves
comes forth a thick fat, smooth, tender, and brittle stalk full of juice,
that divides it self into many other branches; which also are divided in
sundry other arms or branches likewise, crambling or leaning toward the
ground, being not able without props to sustain it self, by reason of the
great weight 1 Cerinthe mayor. Great Honie-woort.
2 Cerinthe asperior flore flavo. Rough Honie-woort.
3 (...) minor. Small (...)-woort.
of leaves, branches, and much juice, the whole plant is surcharged with; upon
which branches are placed many thick rough leaves, set with very sharp
prickles like the rough skin ofa Thornebacke, of a bluish green color,
spotted very notably with white strakes and spots, like those leaves of the
true Pulmonaria or Cowslips of Jerusalem, and in shape like those of the codded
Thorow-waxe, which leaves do clip or embrace the stalks round about: from the
bosom whereof come forth small clusters of yellow flowers, with a hoope or
band of bright purple round about the middle of the yellow flower. The flower
is hollow, fashioned like a little box, of the taste of honey when it is
sucked, in the hollownesse whereof are many small chiues or threads; which being
past, there succeed round black seed, contained in soft skinnie husks. The root
perishes at the first approach of Winter. This varies in the color of the
flowers, which are yellow, or purple, and sometimes of both commixt.

2 The leaves of this other great Honiewort (of Clus. description) are shaped
like those last described, but that they are narrower at their setting on, and
rougher; the flowers are also yellow of color, but in shape and magnitude like
the former, as it is also in the seeds, and all the other parts thereof.

3 This other Cerinth or Honywort has small long and slender branches, reeling
this (...) and that way, as not able to sustain it self, very brittle, beset
with leaves not much unlike the precedent, but lesser, neither so rough nor
spotted, of a bluish green color. The flowers be small, hollow, and yellow.
The seed is small, round, and as black as Iet: the root is white, with some
(...), the which dies as the former. There is a taste as it were of new wax in
the flowers or leaves chewed, as the name does seem to import.

The Place.
These plants do not grow wild in England, yet I have them in my garden; the
seeds whereof I received from the right honorable the Lord Zouch, my honorable
good friend.

The Time.
They flower from May to August, and perish at the first approach of Winter, and
must be sown again the next Spring.

The Names.
1 The first of these by Gesner is called Cynoglossa montana and Cerinthe:
Dodonaeus calls it Maru herba: and Lobel and others, Cerinthe major.

2 The second is Cerinthe quorundam major flauo flore of Clusius.

3 The third by Dodonaeus is called Maru herba minor: and by Clusius, Cerinthe
quorundam minor flauo flore: Lobel also calls it Cerinthe minor.

The Temperature and Virtues.
(...) and Auicen seem to agree, that these herbs are of a cold complexion;
notwithstanding there is not any experiment of their virtues worth the writing.

CHAP. 158. Of S. John's wort.
1 Hypericum. S. John's wort.
2 Hypericum Syriacum. Rue S. John's wort.


The Description.
1 SAint John's wort has brownish stalks beset with many small and narrow
leaves, which if you behold betwixt your eyes and the light do appear as it
were bored or thrust through in an infinite number of places with pinnes points.
The branches divide themselves into sundry small twigs, at the top whereof do
grow many yellow flowers, which with the leaves bruised do yield a reddish
juice of the color of blood. The seed is contained in little sharp pointed
husks, black of color, and smelling like Rosin. The root is long, yellow,
and of a woody substance.

2 The second kind of S. John's wort named Syriacum, of those that have not
seen the fruitful and plentiful fields of England, wherein it grows
abundantly, having small leaves almost like to Rue or Herbe-Grace: wherein
Dodonaeus has failed, entituling the true Androsaemum by the name of (...);
whereas indeed it is no more like Rue than an Apple to an Oister. This plant is
altogether like the precedent, but smaller, wherein consists the difference.
It had been sitter for our Author to have given us a better and perfecter
description of this plant (which as he says grows so abundantly with us)
than so absurdly to cavil with Dodonaeus, for calling, as he says, the true
Androsaemum, Rutasyluestris: for if that be the true Androsaemum which
Dodonaeus made mention of by the foresaid name, why did not our Author figure
and describe it in the next chapter save one, for Androsaemum, but followed
Dodonaeus in figuring and describing Tutsan for it? See more hereof in the
chapter of Tutsan. I cannot say I have seen this plant; but Lobel the Author
and setter forth thereof thus briefly describes it: the leaves are four times
lesser than those of ours, which grow thick together as in rundles upon
stalks, being a cubit high. The flowers are yellow, and like those of our
common kind.

3 Woolly S. John's wort has many small weak branches trailing upon the
ground, beset with many little leaves, covered over with a certain soft kind
of downinesse: among which (...) forth weak and tender branches charged with
small pale yellow flowers. The seeds and roots are like unto the true S. John's
wort.

3 Hypericumtomentosum Lobelij. Lobels woolly S. John's wort.


The figure that our Author gave was of that which I here give you second in
the third place, under the title of Hyper. (...). Clusij; for Clusius says it
was his, and blames Lobel for making it all one with that he found about
Montpelier; whose figure also I give you first in the third place, that you may
see what difference you can observe by them: for Clusius says Lobels is but an
handful high; yet tells he not us how high his grows, neither instances how
they differ, neither can I gather it by Lobels description: but I conjecture it
is thus; That of Clusius his description is taller, more white and hairy, and
has the flowers growing along little footstalk, and not in manner of an
vmbel, as in the other.

4 Besides these two creeping hoary S. John's worts here described, there is
another small kind which is called by Dodonaeus, Hypericum minus; and by
Lobel, Hypericum minimum supinum Septentrionale. It grows some handful or
more high, with weak and slender branches set with leaves like those of the
ordinary kind, but less: the flowers are also like those of the first
described, but fewer in number, and less. It is to be found in dry and barren
grounds, and flowers at the same time as the the former.

5 I have observed growing in S. John's wood and other places, that kind of S.
John Wort which by Tragus is called Hypericum pulchrum; and both by him and
Lonicerus is thought to be Dioscorides his Androsaemum; the which we in English
may for distinctions sake call Upright Saint John's wort. It has roots like
those of the ordinary kind; from which arise straight slender stalks some
cubit high, set at equal spaces with pretty smooth leaves, broad, and almost
incompassing the stalk at their setting on, and being sometimes of a green,
and otherwhiles of a reddish color: toward the top they are parted into some
few branches, which bear such yellow flowers as the common kind, but somewhat
smaller. It flowers about the same time as the former, or a little after.

3 Hypericum tomentosum Clusij. Woolly S. John's wort of Clusius.
4 Hypericum supinum glabrum. Small creeping S. John's wort.


The Place.
They grow very plentifully in the pastures in every country.

The Time.
They flower and flourish for the most part in July and August.

The Names.
S. John's wort is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Hypericum: in shops,
Perforata: of diverse, Fugadaemonum: in Dutch, San Iohans kraut: in Italian,
Hyperico: in Spanish, Caraconzillo: in French, Mill Pertuys: in English, S.
John's wort, or S. John's (...).

The Temperature.
S. John's wort (as Galen teaches) is hot and dry, being of substance thin.

The Virtues.
S. John's wort with his flowers and seed boiled and drunken, provoke urine,
and is right good

The leaves, flowers, and seeds stamped, and put into a glass with oil Olive,
and set in the hot

Take white wine two pintes, oil olive four pounds, oil of Turpentine two
pounds, the leaves, per balneum Mariae, that is, in a kettle of water with some
(...) in the bottom, wherein the glass must stand to boil: which done,
strain the (...) (...) the herbs, and do as you did before, putting in the
like quantity of herbs, flowers, and seeds, but not any more wine. And so
have you a great secret for the purposes aforesaid,

Dioscorides says, That the seed drunk for the space of forty days
together, cures the (...),

The same Author says, That being taken with Wine it takes away Tertian and
Quartane

CHAP. 159. Of Saint Peter's wort, or square S. John's Grass.
1 Ascyron. S. Peter's wort.


The Description.
1 SAint Peter's wort grows to the height of a (...) and a half, having a
straight upright stalk somewhat brown, set by couples at certain distances,
with leaves much like those of S. John's wort, but greater, rougher, and rounder
pointed: from the bosom of which leaves come forth many smaller leaves, the
which are not bored through, as those of S. John's wort are; yet sometime there
be some few so bored through. The flowers grow at the top of the branches of a
yellow color: the leaves and flowers when they are bruised do yield forth a
bloody juice as does S. John's wort, whereof this is a kind. The root is tough,
and of a woody substance.

2 Upon diverse boggy grounds of this kingdom is to be found growing that S.
Peter's Wort which Clusius describes in his Auctarium, by the name of Ascyrum
supinum (...). This sends forth diverse, round hairy creeping stalks, which
here and there put out new fibers or roots; and these are set at certain
spaces with very round and hairie leaves of a whitish color, two at a joint,
and on the tops of these stalks grow a few small yellow flowers which consist
of five leaves a piece; these stalks seldom send forth branches, unless it be
one or two at the tops. It may well be called in English, Round leaued S.
Peter's wort.

The Place.
S. Peter's wort, or S. John's Grass grows plentifully in the North part of
England, especially in Landsdale and Crauen: I have found it in many places of
Kent, especially in a copse by Master Sidleys house near Southfleet.

The Time.
It floureth and flourishes when S. John's wort does.

The Names.
It is called in Greek (...): the Latins have no other name but this Greek
name Ascyron. It is called of some Androsaemum: Galen makes it both a kind of
Tutsan, and S. John's Wort: and says it is named Ascyron, and Ascyroides: in
English, S. Peter's wort, Square or great S. John's grass: and of some, Hardhay.
Few know it from S. John's wort.

The Temperature.
This herb is of temperature hot and dry.

The Virtues.
It is endued with the same virtues that S. John's wort is endued withal. The
seed, says Dioscorides, Galen does likewise affirm the same.

CHAP. 160. Of Tutsan or Parke-leaues.
The Description.
1 THe stalks of Tutsan be straight, round, chamfered or crested, hard and
woody, being for the most part two foot high. The leaves are three or four
times bigger than those of S. John's wort, which be at the first green;
afterward, and in the end of Sommet of a dark red color: out of which is
pressed a juice not like black blood, but Claret or Gascoigne wine. The
flowers are yellow, and greater than those of S. Peter's wort; after which
rises up a little round head or berry, first green, afterward red, last of
all black, wherein is contained yellowish red seed. The root is hard, woody,
and of long continuance.

2 This (which Dodonaeus did not unfitly call Ruta syluestris Hypericoides, and
which others have set forth for Androsaemum, and our Author the last chapter
save one affirmed to be the true (...), though here it seems he had either
altered his mind, or forgot what he formerly wrote) may fitly stand in
competition with the last described, which may pass in the first place for the
Androsaemum of the Ancients; for adhuc sub judice lis est. I will not here
insist upon the point of controversy, but give you a description of the plant,
which is this: It sends up round slender reddish stalks some two cubits high,
set with fewer yet bigger leaves than the ordinary S. John's Wort, and these
also more hairy: the flowers and seeds are like those of the common S. John's
wort, but somewhat larger. It grows in some mountainous and woody places, and
in the Aduersaria it is called Androsaemum excellentius, seu magnum: and by
Dodonaeus (as we but now noted) Ruta syluestris Hypericoides, thinking it to be
the Ruta syluestris which is described by Dioscorides, lib. (...). cap. 48. in
the old Greek edition of Manutius, (...). And in that of Marcellus Virgilius
his Interpretation, in the chapter and book but now mentioned; but rejected
amongst the Notha in the Paris Edition Anno 1549. You may find the description
also in Dodonaeus, Pempt. primae, lib. 3. cap. 25, whither I refer the curious,
being loath here to insist further upon it.

1 Clymenon Italorum. Tutsan, or Park leaves.
2 Androsaemum Hypericoides. Tutsan S. John's wort.


The Place.
Tutsan grows in woods and by hedges, especially in Hampsted wood, where the
Golden rod does grow; in a wood by Railie in Essex, and many other places.

The Time.
It floureth in July and August: the seed in the mean time waxes ripe. The
leaves become (...) in (...); at that time is very easily pressed forth his
winie juice.

The Names.
It is called in Greek (...): and the Latins also Androsaemon: it is likewise
called (...), as (...) witnesses. They are far from the truth that take it
to be Clymenum, and it is needless to find fault with their error. It is also
called Siciliana, and Herba Siciliana: in English, Tutsan, and Parke-leaues.

The Temperature.
The faculties are such as S. Peter's wort, which does sufficiently declare it
to be hot and dry.

The Virtues.
The seed hereof beaten to powder, and drunk to the weight of two drams, does
purge choleric Dioscorides writes; and is a singular remedy for the
Sciatica, provided that the Patient do drink water for a day or two after
purging.

The herb cures burnings, and applied upon new wounds it stancheth the blood,
and heals

The leaves laid upon broken shins and scabbed legs heals them, and many
other hurts and

CHAP. 161. Of Bastard S. John's wort.
1 Coris Matthioli. Matthiolus his bastard S. John's wort.
2 Coris coerulea Monspeliaca. French bastard S. John's wort.


THe diligence of these later times has been such to find out the Materia
medica of the Ancients, that there is scarce any plant described by them, but
by some or other of late there have been two or more several plants referred
thereto: and thus it has happened unto (...) which Dioscorides lib. 3. cap.
174. has set forth by the name of Coris; and presently describes after the
kinds of Hypericon, and that with these words; (...). Some also call this
Hypericon; to which Matthiolus and others have fitted a plant, which is indeed
a kind of Hypericon, as you may perceive by the figure and description which I
give you in the first place. Some (as (...)) refer it to Chamaepytis, (and
indeed by Dioscorides it is placed between Androsaemon and Chamaepytis) and to
this that which is described by Pena and Lobel in the Aduers. and by Clusius in
his History, may fitly be referred: this I give you in the second place.

The Description.
1 THe first has a woody thick and long lasting root, which sends up many
branches some foot or more high, and it is set at certain spaces with round
leaves like those of the small Glasse-wort or Sea-Spurry, but shorter: the tops
of the stalks are divided into (...) branches, which carry flowers like those
of S. John's wort, of a whitish red color, with threads in their middles having
little yellow pendants. It grows in Italy and other hot countries, in places
not far from the sea side. This is thought to be the true Coris, by Matthiolus,
Gesner, Lonicerus, Lacuna, Bellus, Pona, and others.

2 This from a thick root red on the outside sends up sundry stalks, some
but an handful, other some a foot or more long, stiff, round, purplish, set
thick with leaves like those of Heath, but thicker, more succulent and bitter,
which so netimes grow orderly, and otherwhiles out of order. The spikes or
heads grow on the tops of the branches, consisting of a number of little cups,
divided into five sharp points, and marked with a black spot in each
division: out of these cups comes a flower of a blew purple color, of a most
elegant and not fading color; and it is composed of four little biside
leaves, whereof the two uppermost are the larger: the seed, which is round and
blackish, is contained in seed-vessels having points somewhat sharp or
prickly. It flowers in April and May, and is to be found growing in many
places of Spain, as also about Mompelier in France; whence Pena and Lobel
called it Coris Monspeliaca; and Clusius, Coris quorundam Gallorum and
Hispanorum.

The Temperature.
These Plants seem to be hot in the second or third degree,

The Virtues.
Dioscorides says, That the seed of Coris drunk move the courses and urine,
are good against Phalangium, the Sciatica; and drunk in Wine, against that
kind of Convulsion which the Greeks call Opisthotonos, (which is when the
body is drawn backwards) as also against the cold fits in Agues. It is also
good anointed with oil, against the aforesaid Convulsion.

CHAP. 162. Of the great Centorie.
The Description.
1 THe great Centory brings forth round smooth stalks three cubits high: the
leaves are long, divided as it were into many parcels like to those of the
Walnut tree, and of an ouerworne grayish color, somewhat snipt about the edges
like the teeth of a saw. The flowers grow at the top of the stalks in scaly
knaps like the great Knapweed, the middle thrums whereof are of a light blew or
sky color: when the seed is ripe the whole knap or head turns into a downy
(...) like the head of an (...), wherein is found a long smooth seed, bearded
at one end like those of (...) Sattron, called Cartamus, or the seed of Cardus
Benedictus. The root is great, long, black on the outside, and of a sanguine
color on the inside, somewhat sweet in taste, and biting the tongue.

2 There is likewise another sort, having great and large leaves like those of
the water Docke, somewhat snipt or toothed about the edges. The stalk is
shorter than the other, but the root is more oleous or fuller of juice,
otherwise like. The flower is of a pale yellow purplish color, and the seed
like that of the former.

1 Centaurium magnum. Great Centorie.
2 Centaurium maius alterum. Whole leaued great Centorie.


The Place.
The great Centorie ioyeth in a fat and fruitful soil, and in Sunny banks
full of Grass and herbs. It grows very plentifully, says Dioscorides, in
Lycia, Peloponnesus, Arcadia, and Morea: and it is also to be found upon Baldus
a mountain in the territories of Verona, and likewise in my garden.

The Time.
It floureth in Summer, and the roots may be gathered in Autumn.

The Names.
It is called in Greek (...): of Theophrastus also Centauris: in diverse shops
falsely Rha Ponticum: for Rha Ponticum is Rha growing in the countries of
Pontus; a plant differing from great Centorie. Theophrastus and Pliny set down
among the kinds of Panaces or All-heales, this great Centorie, and also the
lesser, whereof we will write in the next chapter following. Pliny reciting the
words of Theophrastus, does in his twenty fifth book and fourth chapter write,
that they were found out by Chiron the Centaure, and syrnamed Centauria. Also
affirming the same thing in his sixth chapter (where he more largely expounds
both the Centauries) he repeateth them to be found out by Chiron: and
thereupon he adds, that both of them are named Chironia. Of some it is
reported, That the said Chiron was cured therewith of a wound in his foot, that
was made with (...) arrow that fell upon it when he was entertaining Hercules
into his house; whereupon it was called Chironium: or of the curing of the
wounds of his soldiers, for the which purpose it is most excellent.

The Temperature.
It is hot and dry in the third degree. Galen (...), by the taste of the root
it shows contrary qualities, so in the use it performs contrary effects.

The Virtues.
The root taken in the quantity of two drams is good for them that be bursten,
or spit blood;

There is not any part of the herb but it rather works miracles than
ordinary cures in green

The root of this Plant (says Dioscorides) is a remedy for ruptures, (...),
and cramps, taken

Galen says, that the juice of the leaves thereof performs those things that
the root does; Lycium, a kind of hard juice of a sharp taste.

CHAP. 163. Of Small Centorie.
The Description.
1 THe lesser Centorie is a little herb: it grows up with a cornered stalk
half a foot high, with leaves in form and bigness of S. John's wort: the
flowers grow at the top in a spoky bush or rundle, of a red color tending to
purple; which in the day time and after the Sun is up do open themselves, but
toward evening shut up again: after them come forth small seed-vessels, of
the shape of wheat corns, in which are contained very little seeds. The root
is slender, hard, and soon fading.

2 The yellow Centorie has leaves, stalks, and seed like the other, and is in
each respect alike, saving that the flowers (...) are of a perfect yellow
color, which sets forth the difference.

This is of two sorts; the one with broad leaves through which the stalks
pass; and the other has narrow leaves like those of the common Centorie.

1 Centaurium parvum. Small Centorie.
2 Centaurium parvum luteum Lobelij. Yellow Centorie.


The Place.
1 The first is growing in great plenty throughout all England, in most
pastures and grassie fields.

2 The yellow does grow upon the chalkie cliffes of Greenhithe in Kent, and
such like places.

The Time.
They are to be gathered in their flouring time, that is in July and August: of
some that gather them superstitiously they are gathered between the two Lady
days.

The Names.
The Greeks call this (...): in Latin it is called Centaurium minus; yet
Pliny names it Libadion, and by reason of his great bitterness, Fell terrae.
The Italians in Hetruria call it Biondella: in Spanish, Centoria: in Low Dutch,
(...): in English, Small, little, or common Centorie: in French, Centoire.

The Temperature.
The small Centorie is of a bitter quality, and of temperature hot and dry in
the second degree; and the yellow Centorie is hot and dry in the third degree.

The Virtues.
Being boiled in water and drunk it opens the stoppings of the liver, gall,
and spleen, it helps

Dioscorides, and Galen after him report, that the decoction draws down by
siege choler and

This Centorie being stamped and laid on whilst it is fresh and green, does
heal and closevp

The juice is good in medicines for the eyes; mixed with honey it cleanses
away such things Dioscorides teaches.

The Italian Physicians do give the powder of the leaves of yellow Centorie
once in three days Ioannes Postius has thus written:

Flos mihi suaue rubet, sed inest quoque succus amarus,
Qui juvat obsessum bile, aperitque jecur.
My flower is sweet in smell, bitter my juice in taste,
Which purge choler, and helps liver, that else would waste.
CHAP. 164. Of Calves snout, or Snapdragon.
The Description.
1 THe purple Snapdragon has great and brittle stalks, which divides it self
into many fragile branches, whereupon do grow long leaves sharp pointed, very
green, like unto those of wild flax, but much greater, set by couples one
opposite against another. The flowers grow at the top of the stalks, of a
purple color, fashioned like a frogs mouth, or rather a dragons mouth, from
whence the women have taken the name Snapdragon. The (...) is black, contained
in round husks fashioned like a calves snout, (whereupon some have called it
Calves snout) or in mine opinion it is more like unto the bones of a sheeps
head that has been long in the water, the flesh consumed clean away.

2 The second agrees with the precedent in every part, except in the color of
the flowers, for this plant brings forth white flowers, and the other purple,
wherein consists the difference.

3 The yellow Snapdragon has a long thick woody root, with certain strings
fastened thereto; from which rises up a brittle stalk of two cubits and a
half high, divided from the bottom to the top into diverse branches, whereupon
do grow long green leaves like those of the former, but greater and longer.
The flowers grow at the top of the maine branches, of a pleasant yellow color,
in shape like unto the precedent.

4 The small or wild Snapdragon differs not from the others but in stature:
the leaves are lesser and narrower: the flowers purple, but altogether smaller:
the heads or seed-vessels are also like those of the former.

5 There is another kind hereof which has many slender branches lying often
times upon the ground: the leaves are much smaller than these of the last
described: the flowers and seed-vessels are also like, but much lesser, and
herein consists the only difference.

1. 2. (...) purpureum sinc album. Purple or white floured Snapdragon.
3 (...) (...). Yellow (...).
4 Antirrhinum minus. Small Snapdragon.
5 Antirrhinum (...) repens. Small creeping Snapdragon.


The Place.
The three first grow in most gardens; but the yellow kind grows not common,
except in the gardens of curious Herbarists.

The fourth and fifth grow wild amongst corn in diverse places.

The Time.
That which has continued the whole Winter does flower in May, and the rest of
Summer afterward; and that which is planted later, and in the end of Summer,
floureth in the spring of the following year: they do hardly endure the
injury of our cold Winter.

The Names.
Snapdragon is called in Greek (...): in Latin also Antirrhinum: of Apuleius,
Canis cerebrum, Herba Simiana, Venustaminor, Opalis grata, and Orontium: it is
thought to be Leo herba, which Columella, lib. 10. reckons among the flowers:
yet Gesner has thought that this Leo is Columbine, which for the same cause he
has called (...): but this name seems to us to agree better with Calves
snout than with Columbine; for the gaping flower of Calves snout is more like
to Lions snap than the flower of Columbine: it is called in Dutch (...): in
Spanish, Cabeza de ternera: in English, Calves snout, Snapdragon, and Lions
snap: in French, Test de chien, and Test de Veau.

The Temperature.
They are hot and dry, and of subtle parts.

The Virtues.
The seed of Snapdragon (as Galen says) is good for nothing in the use of
physic; and the herb Bubonium or Star-wort, but not so effectual.

They report (says Dioscorides) that the herb being hanged about one
preserves a man from

Apuleius writes, that the distilled water, or the decoction of the herb and
root made in water, is

CHAP. 165. Of Tode-Flax.
1 Linaria vulgaris lutea. Great Tode-flax.
2 Linaria purpurea odorata. Sweet purple Tode-flax.


The Description.
1 LInaria being a kind of Antyrrhinum, has small, slender, blackish stalks;
from which do grow many long narrow leaves like flax. The flowers be yellow,
with a spur hanging at the same like unto a Larkes spur, having a mouth like
unto a frogs mouth, even such as is to be seen in the common Snapdragon; the
whole plant before it come to flower so much resembles Esula minor, that the
one is hardly known from the other, but by this old verse:

Esula lactescit, sine lacte Linaria crescit.
Esula with milk does flow,
Toad-flax without milk does grow.
2 The second kind of Tode-flax has leaves like unto Bellis mayor, or the
great Dasie, but not so broad, and somewhat iagged about the edges. The stalk
is small and tender, of a cubit high, beset with many purple flowers like unto
the former in shape. The root is long, with many threads hanging thereat, the
flowers are of a reasonable sweet savor.

3 The third, being likewise a kind of Tode-flax, has small and narrow leaves
like unto the first kind of Linaria: the stalk is a cubit high, beset with
flowers of a purple color, in fashion like Linaria, but that it wants the
tail or spur at the end of the flower which the other has. The root is
small and threddie.

4 Linaria Valentina has leaves like the lesser Centorye, growing at the
bottom of the stalk by three and three, but higher up toward the top,
without any certain order: the stalks are of a foot high; and it is called by
Clusius, Valentina, for that it was found by himself in Agro Valentino, about
Valentia in Spain, where it bears yellow flowers about the top of the stalk
like common Linaria, but the mouth of the flower is downie, or mossie, and the
tail of a purple color. It floureth at Valentia in March, and grows in the
meadows there, and has not as yet been seen in these Northern parts.

5 Osyris alba has great, thick, and long roots, with some threads or strings
hanging at the same, from which rise up many branches very tough and pliant,
beset toward the top with flowers not much unlike the common Toad-flaxe, but
of a pale whitish color, and the inner part of the mouth somewhat more wide
and open, and the leaves like the common Tode-flax.

The (...) in this chapter (...) most of them false placed, as thus: The third
was of (...), (...). 1. of (...), being the (...) (...) of Lobel, described in
the fifth place. The (...) was of the (...) (...) of Lobel, described here by
me in the fifth place. The seventh was of (...) 3, (...) of Clusius, which you
may (...) described by me in the eighth place. The (...) was of (...) (...) of
(...) being only a variety of the (...) set (...) in the (...) place. The
(...) was of the (...) (...), whose (...) I have given you in the fourteenth
place. That which was formerly under the title of (...) (...) is with a (...)
(...) thereto in the thirteenth place.
3 Linaria purpurea altera. Variable Tode-flax.
The (...) in this chapter (...) most of them false placed, as thus: The third
was of (...), (...). 1. of (...), being the (...) (...) of Lobel, described in
the fifth place. The (...) was of the (...) (...) of Lobel, described here by
me in the fifth place. The seventh was of (...) 3, (...) of Clusius, which you
may (...) described by me in the eighth place. The (...) was of (...) (...) of
(...) being only a variety of the (...) set (...) in the (...) place. The
(...) was of the (...) (...), whose (...) I have given you in the fourteenth
place. That which was formerly under the title of (...) (...) is with a (...)
(...) thereto in the thirteenth place.
4 Linaria Valentia Clus. Tode-flax of Valentia.


The (...) in this chapter (...) most of them false placed, as thus: The third
was of (...), (...). 1. of (...), being the (...) (...) of Lobel, described in
the fifth place. The (...) was of the (...) (...) of Lobel, described here by
me in the fifth place. The seventh was of (...) 3, (...) of Clusius, which you
may (...) described by me in the eighth place. The (...) was of (...) (...) of
(...) being only a variety of the (...) set (...) in the (...) place. The
(...) was of the (...) (...), whose (...) I have given you in the fourteenth
place. That which was formerly under the title of (...) (...) is with a (...)
(...) thereto in the thirteenth place.
5 Osyris alba, Lob. White Tode-flax.


6 Osyris purpurocaerulea is a kind of Todeflax that has many small and weak
branches, trailing upon the ground, beset with many little leaves like flax.
The flowers grow at the top of the stalk like unto the common kind, but of a
purple color declining to blewnesse. The root is small and threddie.

7 This has many small creeping branches some handful or better high, and
has such leaves, flowers, and seed, as the common kind, but all of them much
less, and therein consists the difference. It grows naturally in the dry
fields about Salamanca in Spain, and flowers all Summer long. Lobel calls it
Osyris flava syluestris; and Clusius, Linaria Hispanica.

8 The branches of this eight kind are spread upon the ground, and of the length
of those of the last described: the leaves are lesser than those of the common
Tode-flax, thick, iuicie, and of a whitish green color, and they grow not
disorderly upon the stalks, but at certain spaces sometimes three, but most
usually four together: the flowers in shape are like those of the ordinary
kind, but of a most perfect Violet color, and the lower lip where it gapes of
a golden yellow, the taste is bitter. After the flowers are past come vessels
round and thick, which contain a flat black seed in two partitions or cells:
the root is slender, white, and long lasting, and it flowers unto the end of
Autumn. It grows naturally upon the highest Alps. Gesner calls it Linaria
Alpina: and Clusius, Linariatertia Styriaca.

The (...) in this chapter (...) most of them false placed, as thus: The third
was of (...), (...). 1. of (...), being the (...) (...) of Lobel, described in
the fifth place. The (...) was of the (...) (...) of Lobel, described here by
me in the fifth place. The seventh was of (...) 3, (...) of Clusius, which you
may (...) described by me in the eighth place. The (...) was of (...) (...) of
(...) being only a variety of the (...) set (...) in the (...) place. The
(...) was of the (...) (...), whose (...) I have given you in the fourteenth
place. That which was formerly under the title of (...) (...) is with a (...)
(...) thereto in the thirteenth place.
6 Osyris (...). Purple Tode-flaxe.


9 Forasmuch as this plant is stalked and leafed like common Flax, and thought
by some to be Osyris; the new writers have called it Linosyris: it has stalks
very stiff and wooddie, beset with leaves like the common Linaria, with
flowers at the top of the stalks of a faint shining yellow color, in form
and shape somewhat like unto Conyza mayor. The whole plant grows to the
height of two cubits, and is in taste sharp and clammie, or glutinous, and
somewhat bitter. The root is compact of many strings, entangled one within
another.

10 Guillandinus calls this plant Hyssopus vmbellifera Dioscoridis, that is,
Dioscorides his Hysope, which bears a tuft in all points like Linosyris,
whereof it is a kind, not differing from it in show and leaves. The stalks are
a cubit high, divided above into many small branches, the (...) whereof are
garnished with tufts of small flowers, each little flower being parted into
five parts with a little thread or pestell in the middle, so that it seems full
of many golden hairs or thrums. The seed is long and blackish, and is carried
away with the wind. Bauhine in his Pinax makes this all one with the former,
but unfitly, especially if you mark the descriptions of their flowers which
are far unlike. Fabius Columna has proved this to be the Chrysocome described
by Diosc. lib. 4. cap. 55.

7 Osyris flavasyluestris. Creeping yellow Tode-flax.
8 Linaria quadrifoliasupina. Four leaued creeping Tode-flax.
The (...) in this chapter (...) most of them false placed, as thus: The third
was of (...), (...). 1. of (...), being the (...) (...) of Lobel, described in
the fifth place. The (...) was of the (...) (...) of Lobel, described here by
me in the fifth place. The seventh was of (...) 3, (...) of Clusius, which you
may (...) described by me in the eighth place. The (...) was of (...) (...) of
(...) being only a variety of the (...) set (...) in the (...) place. The
(...) was of the (...) (...), whose (...) I have given you in the fourteenth
place. That which was formerly under the title of (...) (...) is with a (...)
(...) thereto in the thirteenth place.
9 Linosyris Nuperorum, Lob. Golden Star-floured Tode-slax.


10 Linaria aurea Tragi. Golden Tode-flax.
11 Scoparia sive Osyris Graecorum. Bushieor Besome Tode-(...).
The (...) in this chapter (...) most of them false placed, as thus: The third
was of (...), (...). 1. of (...), being the (...) (...) of Lobel, described in
the fifth place. The (...) was of the (...) (...) of Lobel, described here by
me in the fifth place. The seventh was of (...) 3, (...) of Clusius, which you
may (...) described by me in the eighth place. The (...) was of (...) (...) of
(...) being only a variety of the (...) set (...) in the (...) place. The
(...) was of the (...) (...), whose (...) I have given you in the fourteenth
place. That which was formerly under the title of (...) (...) is with a (...)
(...) thereto in the thirteenth place.
12 Passerina linariae folio, Lob. Sparrowes Tode-flax.
The (...) in this chapter (...) most of them false placed, as thus: The third
was of (...), (...). 1. of (...), being the (...) (...) of Lobel, described in
the fifth place. The (...) was of the (...) (...) of Lobel, described here by
me in the fifth place. The seventh was of (...) 3, (...) of Clusius, which you
may (...) described by me in the eighth place. The (...) was of (...) (...) of
(...) being only a variety of the (...) set (...) in the (...) place. The
(...) was of the (...) (...), whose (...) I have given you in the fourteenth
place. That which was formerly under the title of (...) (...) is with a (...)
(...) thereto in the thirteenth place.
13 Passerina altera. Sparrow-tongue.


14 Linaria adulterina. Bastard Tode-flax.


11 Scoparia, or after Dodonaeus, Osyris, which the Italians call (...), has
very many shoots or sprigs rising from one small stalk, making the whole plant
to resemble a Cypres tree, the branches grow so handsomely: now it grows some
three foot high, and very thick and bushie, so that in some places where it
naturally grows they make besomes of it, whereof it took the name Scoparia.
The leaves be small and narrow, almost like to the leaves of flax. The flowers
be small, and of an hearbie color, growing among the leaves, which keep green
all the Winter. I never knew it here to ripen the seed, nor to out-(...) the
first frost.

12 This plant also for resemblance sake is referred to the Linaries, because
his leaves be like Linaria. At the top of the small branched stalks do grow
little yellowish flowers, pale of color, somewhat like the tops of Chrysocome.
John Mouton of Turnay takes it to be Chrysocome altera. And because there has
bin no concordance among Writers, it is sufficient to set forth his description
with his name Passerina. Bauhine refers it to the Gromills, and calls it (...)
(...) folio Monspeliacum.

13 This which Tabern. calls Lingua Passerina, and whose figure was given by
our Author for the former, has a small single whitish root, from which it
sends up a slender stalk some cubit and half high, naked on the lower part,
but divided into little branches on the upper, which branches are set thick
with little narrow leaves like those of Winter Sauorie or (...): amongst which
grow many little longish seeds of the bigness and taste of Millet, but
somewhat hotter and bitterer. The flowers consist of four small yellow leaves.
Tragus calls this (...); Dodonaeus makes it Lithospermum minus: and Columna
has set it forth by the name of Linaria altera (...) montana.

14 This which Clusius, has set forth by the name of Anonymos, or Namelesse,
is called in the Hist. Lugd. page 1150. Anthyllis montana; and by Tabern.
Linaria adulterina. It has many hard pale green branches of some foot high;
and upon these without any order grow many hard narrow long leaves like those
of flax, at first of a very tart, and afterward of a bitterish taste: the
tops of the stalks are branched into sundry foot-stalkes, which carry little
white flowers consisting of five small leaves lying starre-fashion, with some
threads in their middles: after which at length come single seeds five cornered,
containing a white pith in a hard filme or skin. The root is white, divided
into sundry branches, and lives long, every year sending up many stalks, and
sometimes creeping like that of Tode-flax. It flowers in May, and grows upon
mountainous places of Germany; Mr. Goodyer found it growing wild on the side
of a chalkie hill in an enclosure on the right (...) of the way, as you (...)
from Droxford to Poppie hill in Hampshire.

The Place.
The kinds of Tode-flax grow wild in many places, as upon stone walls,
grauelly grounds, barren meadows, and along by hedges.

I do not remember that I have seen any of these growing wild with us,
unless the first ordinary kind, which is every where common.

The Time.
They flower from June to the end of August.

The Names.
Tode-flax is called of the Herbarists of our time, Linaria, or Flax-weed, and
Vrinalis: of some, (...), in high Dutch, (...), and (...) (...) (...): low
Dutch, (...) (...): in English, Wild-flax, Tode-flax; and Flax-weed: the
eleventh is called in Italian, Bel-videre, or Fair in sight. The same plant is
also called Scoparia, and Herba studiosorum, because it is a fit thing to make
brooms of, wherewith scholars and students may sweep their own studies and
closets. The particular names are expressed both in Latin and English in their
several titles, whereby they may be distinguished. It is thought by most that
this Belvidere, or Scoparia is the Osyris described by Dioscorides lib. 4. cap.
143. For besides the notes, it has agreeing with the description: it is at
this day by the Greeks called (...)

The Temperature.
The kinds of Tode-flax are of the same temperature with wild Snap-dragons,
whereof they are kinds.

The Virtues.
The decoction os Tode-flax takes away the yellowness and deformity of the
skin, being

The same drunken, opens the stoppings of the Liver and spleen, and is
singular good against

The same decoction does also provoke urine, in those that piss drop after
drop, vnstoppeth the

CHAP. 166. Of Garden flax.
The figure that was formerly in this place for (...) (...) (...) was of (...)
(...) (...) 3. of Clusius, which is described by me in the (...) place in the
ensuing Chapter.
1 Linum sativum. Garden flax.


The Description.
Flax rises up with slender and round stalks The leaves thereof be long,
narrow, and sharp pointed: on the tops of the sprigs are fair blew flowers,
after which spring up little round knops or buttons, in which is contained the
seed, in form somewhat long, smooth, glib or slipperie, of a dark color. The
roots be small and threddie.

The Place.
It prospers best in a fat and fruitful soil, in moist and not dry places;
for it requires as Columella says a very fat ground, and somewhat moist.
Some, says Palladius, do sow it thick in a lean ground, and by that means
the flax grows fine. Pliny says that it is to be sown in grauelly places,
especially in furrows: Nec magis festinare aliud: and that it burns the
ground, and makes it worser: which thing also Virgil testifies in his
Georgickes.

Vrit lini campum seges, vrit Auena.
Vrunt lethaeo perfusa papauera somno.
In English thus:
Flax and Otes sown consume
The moisture of a fertile field:
The same works Poppie, whose
Juice a deadly sleep does yield.
The Time.
Flax is sown in the spring, it floureth in June and July. After it is cut
down (as (...) in his 19. book, first chapter says) the stalks are put into
the water subject to the heat (...) (...) sun, and some weight laid on them
to be steeped therein; the loosenes of the rind is a sign when it is well
steeped: then is it taken up and dried in the sun, and after used as most
huswiues can (...) better than my self.

The Names.
It is called both in Greek and Lain (...): Linum: in high Dutch, (...): in
Italian and Spanish, Lino: in French, Dulin: in low Dutch, (...): in English,
Flax, and Line.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Galen in his first book of the faculties of nourishments says, that diverse
use the seed hereof Garum, no otherwise than made salt.

They also use it mixed with honey, some likewise put it among bread but it is
hurtful to the

The same author in his books of faculties of simple medicines says, that
Lineseed being eaten

Lineseed as Dioscorides has written, has the same properties that Fenugreeke
has: it wastes

It draws forth of the chest corrupted phlegm and other filthy humors, if a
composition with

Being taken largely with pepper and honey made into a cake, it stirs up
lust.

The oil which is pressed out of the seed, is profitable for many purposes in
physic and surgery;

It softeneth all hard swellings; it stretches forth the sinews that are
shrunk and drawn together,

Some also give it to drink to such as are troubled with pain in the side and
collicke; but it

Lineseed boiled in water with a little oil, and a quantity of Annise-seed
impoudered and implaistered angina, or any swelling in the throat, helps the
same.

It is with good success used plaisterwise, boiled in vinegar, upon the
diseases called Coliaca and Dysenteria, which are bloody fluxes and pains of
the belly.

The seeds stamped with the roots of wild Cucumbers, draws forth splinters,
thorns, broken

The decoction is an excellent bath for women to sit over for the inflammation
of the secret

The seed of Line and Fenugreek made into powder, boiled with Mallows, violet
leaves, Smallage,

CHAP. 167. Of Wild Flax.
The Description.
1 THis Wild kind of Line or Flax has leaves like those of garden Flax,
but narrower, growing upon round bright and shining sprigs, a foot long, and
flowers like the manured flax, but of a white color. The root is tough and
small, with some fibers annexed thereto. This is sometimes found with deep blew
flowers, with violet colored flowers, and sometimes with white, streaked with
white, streaked with purple lines.

1 Linum sylvestre (...) albis. Wild white flax.
2 Linum sylvestre (...). Thin leaued wild flax.


2 The narrow and thin leafed kind of Line is very like to the common flax,
but in all points (...) The flowers consist of five leaves, which do soon fade
and fall away, having many stalks (...) from one root, of a cubit high, beset
with small leaves, yea lesser than those of (...) (...).

Our Author in the former edition gave two figures under this one title of
Linum (...) (...), making them the second and third; but the description of the
third was of the Rough broad leaued wild flax, whose (...) therefore we have
put in that place. Now the two whose figures were formerly here are but
varieties of one species, and differ thus; the former of them (whose figure we
have omitted as impertinent) has fewer leaves, which therefore stand thinner
upon the stalk, and the flowers are either blew or else white. The later,
whose figure you may find here set forth, has more leaves, and these growing
thicker together: the flower is of a light purple or flesh color.

3 There is a kind of wild flax which has many hairy branches, rising up
from a very small root, which does continue many years without sowing,
increasing by roots into many other plants, with stalks amounting to the
height of one cubite, beset with many rough and hairy broad leaves: at the top
of the stalks do grow many blew flowers, compact of five leaves, much greater
and fairer than (...) Line or flax; which being past, there succeed small
sharp pointed heads full of seeds, like Lineseed, but of a blackish shining
color.

4 Chamaelinum (of some called Linum (...) (...), and may be called in English
very low or Dwarf wild flax; sor this word (...) joined to any simple, does
signisie, that it is a low or dwarf kind thereof) being scarce an handsull
high, has pale yellow (...): but as it is in all things like unto flax, so
the flowers, leaves, and stalks, and all other parts thereof, are sour times
lesser than Linum.

5 There is also growing wild in this kingdom a small kind of wild (...),
which I take to be the Linocarpos described by Thalius, and mentioned by (...),
by the name of (...) (...) (...) (...) (...). Anno 1629, when as I (...) found
it, in a Iournall (written of such plants as we gathered) I (...) down this by
the name of Linum (...) (...) (...) (...); which my friend Mr. John Goodyer
seeing, he told me he had long known the plant, and referred it to Lines. but
there were some which called it in English, Mil-mountaine, and used it to
purge, and of late he has sent me this history of it, which you shall have as
I received it from him.

Linum syluestre (...). Mil-mountaine.
It rises up from a small white threddy crooked root, (...) with one, but most
commonly with five or six or more round stalks, about a foot or nine inches
high, of a brown or reddish color, every stalk dividing it self near the
top, or from the middle upward into many parts or branches of a greener color
than the lower part of the stalk: the leaves are small, smooth, of (...)
(...), of the bigness of Lentill leaves, and have in the middle one rib or
sinew, and no more that may be perceived, and grow along the stalk in very
good order by couples, one opposite against the other: at the tops of the small
branches grow the flowers, of a white color, consisting of five small leaves
apiece, the nails whereof are yellow: in the inside are placed small short
chiues also of a yellow color, after which come up little knobs or buttons,
the top whereof when the seed is ripe divides it self into five parts;
wherein is contained small, smooth, flat, slippery, yellow seed: when the seed
is ripe the herb perishes: the whole herb is of a bitter taste, and herby
smell. It grows plentifully in the unmanured enclosures of Hampshire, on
chalkie downs, and on Purfleet hills in Essex, and in many other places. It
rises forth of the ground at the beginning of the Spring, and floureth all the
Summer.

3 Linum syluestre latifolium. Broad leaued Wild flax.
4 (...) perpusillum. Dwarf Wild flax.


5 Linum syl. catharticum. Mil-mountaine.
6 Linum syl. latifolium 3. Clus. The third broad leaued Wild flax.
7 Linum marinum Luteum. Yellow floured Wild flax.


I came to know this herb by the name of Mil-mountaine, and his virtue by this
means. On the second of October 1617-going by Mr. Colsons shop an Apothecary
of Winchester in Hampshire, I saw this herb lying on his stall, which I had
seen growing long before: I desired of him to know the name of it, he told me
that it was called Mill-mountain, and he also told me that being at Doctor
Lake his house at Saint Cross a mile from Winchester, seeing a man of his
have this herb in his hand, he desired the name; he told him as before, and
also the use of it, which is this.

Take a handful of Mill mountain, the whole plant, leaves, seeds, flowers
and all, bruise it and put it in a small tun or pipkin of a pint filled with
white Wine, and set in on the embers to infuse all night, and drink that wine
in the morning fasting, and he said it would give eight or ten stools. This
Doctor Lake was afterward made Bishop of Bath and Wells, who always used
this herb for his purge, after the said manner, as his man affirmed, July 20.
1619. John Goodyer.

I have not as yet made trial hereof, but since in Gesn. de Lunarijs page 34.
I have found I have found the like or a more purging faculty attributed to
this herb, as I think (for I cannot refer it to any other) where he would
have it to be Helleborine of the Ancients: I think it not amiss here to set
down his words, because the book is not commonly to be had, being set forth
Anno 155 5. Ante annos 15. aut circiter cum Anglus quidam, ex Italia rediens,
me (...) (Turnerus is fuerit, vir excellent is tum in re medica tum alijs
plerisque disciplinis doctrinae, (...) (...) (...), vix sat is memini) inter
alias rariorum stirpium icones quas (...) as commodabat, Elleborinem quoque
(...) pictam, herbulam fruticosam, pluribus ab vna r adice cauliculis quinque
fere dig itorum (...) ate (...), foliolis perexiguis, binis per intervalla
(eiusmodi vt ex aspectu genus quoddam Alsinae exiguum (...)) (...) in summo
exiguis, rotundis tanquam lini. Hanc ajebat crescere in pratis siccis, vel
(...) (...), inutili radice, subamara, purgare vtrinque and in Anglia vulgo
vsurpari a rusticis. Thus much for Gesner.

6 Clusius amongst other wild Lines or Flaxes has set forth this, which from
a living, thick, writhen root, sends up many stalks almost a cubite high,
somewhat red and stiff, set with pretty large and thick leaves not rough and
hairie, but smooth and hard; the flowers grow plentifully on the tops of the
stalks, being large, and composed of five leaves of a fair yellow color,
with five threads coming forth of their middles, with as many smaller and
shorter hairs. The seed is contained in flatter heads than those of the first
described, containing a black, but not shining seed. It flowers in June and
July, and ripens the seed in August. It grows naturally upon diverse hills in
Germany.

7 Matthiolus and Dodonaeus have under the name of Linum syluestre; and Lobel
by the name of Linum marinum luteum Narbonense, set forth another yellow
floured wild flax. This grows with slender stalks some cubite high, set
with leaves like those of flax, but somewhat lesser, and fewer in number: at
the tops of the stalks grow flowers smaller than those of the common Line, and
yellow of color. It grows naturally upon the coasts of France that lie
toward the Mediterranean sea, but not in England that I have heard of.

The Place.
They grow generally in grauelly grounds. The first grows in well mannured
places, as in gardens and such like soiles. The second grows by the sea side.
The third and fourth grow upon rocks and cliffes near to the sea side. I have
seen them grow upon the sea banks by Lee in Essex, and in many places of the
Isle of Shepey. They grow also between Quinborow and Sherland house.

I have not seen any of these growing wild, but only the fifth of my
description.

The Time.
They flower from May to the midst of August.

The Names.
Their names are sufficiently expressed in their several titles.

The Nature and Virtues.
The faculties of these kinds of Wilde-flax are referred unto the manured
flax, but they are seldom used either in Physic or chirurgerie.

CHAP. 168. Of Black Saltwoort.
The Description.
IN old time, say the Authors of the Aduersaria, this plant was used for meat,
and received among the (...). It was called Glaux, by reason of the color of
the leaves, which are of a bluish gray color, called in Latin, Glaucus
color, such as is in the Sallow leaf: of others it is called Galax or Glax;
and Eugalacton, quasi lactea or lactisica, because it is good to increase milk
in the breasts of women, if it be much used. Ruellius and others have set down
Galega, Securidica, Polygala, and many other plants for the true Glaux, which
has bred a confusion. The true Glaux of Dioscorides has many small branches,
some creeping on the ground, and some standing upright, tender, and small,
beset with many little fat leaves like Tribulus terrestris, or Herniaria,
growing along the stalks by couples; between whom grow small purple flowers;
which being past, there succeed certain little bullets or seed vessels. The
root is very small and threddy, and taking hold of the upper face of the earth,
as it does run abroad, by which means it does mightily increase.

Glaux exigua maritima. Bla cke Saltwoort.


The Place.
The true Glaux or Milkwoortgroweth very plentifully in salt places and marshes
near the sea, from whence I have brought it into my garden, where it
prospers as well as in his native soil. I found it especially between
Whitstable and the Isle of Thanet in Kent, and by Grauesend in the same
county, by Tilbery Block-house in Essex, and in the isle of Shepey, going from
Kings ferry to Sherland house.

The Time.
It floureth in May, and the seed is ripe in June.

The Names.
The names have been sufficiently spoken of in the description. It shall
suffice to call it in English, Sea Milkwoort.

The Nature.
Paulus Acgineta says, it is hot and moist of temperature.

The Virtues.
This Milkwoort taken with milk, drink, or pottage, ingendereth store of
milk, and therefore it is good to be used by nurses that want the same.

CHAP. 169. Of Milke-woort.
The Description.
1 THere have been many plants nearly resembling Polygala, and yet not the
same indeed, which does verify the Latin saying, Nullum simile est idem. This
near resemblance does rather hinder those that have spent much time in the
knowledge of simples, than increase their knowledge. And this also has been an
occasion that many have imagined a sundry Polygala unto themselves, and so of
other plants. Of which number, this (whereof I speak) is one, obtaining this
name of the best writers and herbarists of our time, describing it thus. It
has many thick spreading branches, creeping on the ground: bearing leaves like
them of Herniaria, standing in rows like the Sea Milkwoort; among which do
grow small whorles, or crownets of white flowers, the root being exceeding
small and threddie.

2 The second kind of Polygala is a small herb with pliant slender stems, of
a wooddie substance, an handful (...), (...) by the ground; the leaves be
small and narrow like to Lintels, or little Hyssope. The flowers grow at the
top, of a blew color, fashioned like a little bird, with wings, tail, and
body, easy to be discerned by them that do observe the same: which being
past, there succeed small (...), like those of (...) pastoris, but lesser. The
root is small and wooddie

3 This third kind of Polygala or Milkewoort, has leaves and stalks like the
last (...) (...), and differs from it herein, that this kind has smaller
branches, and the leaves are not so thick thrust together, and the flowers are
like the other, but that they be of a red or purple color.

4 The fourth kind is like the last spoken of in (...) respect, but that it
has white flowers; otherwise it is very like.

5 Purple Milkewoort differs (...) the others in the color of the flowers;
it brings soorth (...) branches than the precedent, and the sloures are of a
purple color; wherein especially consists the difference.

1 Polygala repens. Creeping Milke-wort.
2 Polygala flore coeruleo. Blew Milke-wort.
3 Polygalarubris floribus. Red Milkewort.
4 Polygala albis floribus. White Milkewort.


6 The sixth Milke-wort is like unto the rest in each respect, saving that the
flowers are of an ouerworne ill favored color, which makes it to differ from
all the other of his kind.

The Place.
5 Polygala purpurea. Purple Milke-wort.


These plants or Milke-worts grow commonly in every wood or fertile pasture
wheresoever I have traveled.

The Time.
They flower from May to August.

The Names.
Milke-wort is called by Dodonaeus, Flos Ambarualis; so called because it does
especially flourish in the Cross or Gang week, or Rogation week; of which
flowers the maidens which use in the countries to walk the Procession do make
themselves garlands and nosegaies: in English we may call it Crosse-floure,
Procession-floure, Gangfloure, Rogation-floure, and Milkewort, of their virtues
in procuring milk in the breasts of nurses. Hieronymus Tragus, as also
Dioscorides calls it Polygalon. Gesner calls this Crucis flos; and in his
Epistles he names it Amarella: it is vulgarly known in Cheapside to the
herbe-women by the name of Hedge-Hyssop; for they take it for Gratiola, or
Hedge-Hyssop, and sell it to such as are ignorant for the same.

The Virtues.
Galen, Dioscorides, and Theophrastus do account these for Milkeworts, and
that they may without error be used for those purposes whereunto Glaux serves.

I doubt that this is not the Polygalon of Dioscorides; Gesner affirms that an
handful hereof steeped all night in wine, and drunk in the morning, will purge
choler effectually by stool without any danger, as he himself had tried.

CHAP. 170. Of Knot-Grasse.
The Description.
1 THe common male Knot-grasse creepes along upon the ground, with long slender
weak branches full of knots or joints, whereof it took his name. The leaves
grow upon the weak branches, like those of small S. John's wort, but longer and
narrower. The flowers are marvelous little, and grow out of the knots, of an
herby color; in their places come up triangular seed. The root is long,
slender, and full of strings.

2 The second differs not from the former, but only that it is altogether
lesser, wherein especially consists the difference. Because the difference is
no otherwise, I hane thought good to omit the figure.

3 The Authors of the Aduersaria mention another larger Knot-grasse which
grows in diverse places of the coast of the Mediterranean sea, having longer
and larger branches and leaves, and those of a white shining color. The seeds
grow at the joints in chaffie white husks; and the whole plant is of a salt
and astringent taste. They call it Polygonum marinum maximum.

The Place.
These Knot-grasses do grow in barren and stony places almost every where.

The Time.
They are in flower and seed all the Summer long.

The Names.
1 Polygonum mas vulgar. Common Knot-grasse.


Knot-grasse is called of the Grecians, (...): that is to say, Polygonum mas,
or Male Knot-grasse: in Latin, (...), Sangui naria: of Columella, Sanguinalis:
in shops, Centumnodia, and Corrigiola: of (...), Proserpinaca: in High Dutch,
(...): in Low Dutch, (...) gras, and (...) knop: in Italian, Polygono: in
Spanish, Corriola: in French, Renouce: in Wallon, Mariolaine de Cure: in
English, Knot-grasse, and Swines grass: In the North, Birds tongue.

The Temperature.
Knot-grasse (as Galen teaches) is of a binding quality, yet is it cold in
the second, if not in the beginning of the third degree.

The Virtues.
The juice of Knot-grasse is good against Brasanolus reports: and Camerarius
says he has cured many with the juice thereof, that have vomited blood, given
in a little stipticke Wine. It greatly prevails against the Gonorrhaea, that
is, the running of the reins, and the weakness of the back coming by means
thereof, being shred and made in tansie with eggs and eaten.

The decoction of it cures the disease aforesaid

The herb boiled in wine and honey cures the vleers and inflammations of the
secret parts of

Dioscorides says that it provoke urine, and helps such as do piss drop
after drop, when the

It is given unto Swine with good success, when they are sick and will not
(...) their meat;

CHAP. 171. Of sundry sorts of Knot-Grasses.
The Description.
1 THe snowie white and least kind of Polygonum or Knot-grasse, called of
Clusius, Paronychia (...), is a strange and worthy plant to behold, handle, and
consider, although it be but small. It is seldom above a foot long, having
small branches, thick, tough, hard, and full of joints; out of which the
leaves come forth like small teeth, lesser than the leaves of Herniaria, or
Thymum tenuifolium. At the top of the stalks stand most delicate flowers
framed by nature as it were, with fine parchment leaves about them, standing in
their singular whiteness and snowie color, resembling the perfect white
silk, so many in number at the top, and so thick, that they ouershadow the
rest of the plant beneath. The root is slender, and of a woody substance. The
seed is covered as it were with chafe, as it were with chafe, and is as small
as dust, or the motes in the Sun.

2 Anthyllis of Valentia, being likewise a kind of Knot-grasse, has small
leaves like Glaux exigna, or rather like Chamaesyce, set orderly by couples at
the joints: among which come flowers consisting of four little whitish purple
leaves, and other small leaves like the first but altogether lesser. The root
is small, black, and long, and of a woody substance.

Our Author, though he meant to have given us the figure of Knawell in the
third place, as may be perceived by the title, yet he described it in the
fourth, and in the third place went (...)

1 Polygonum montanum. Mountain Knot-grasse.
The fifth and sixth are of the same faculty, and may be used in the like
cases.
2 Anthyllis Valentina Clusij. Valentia Knot-grasse.
The fifth and sixth are of the same faculty, and may be used in the like
cases.
3 Polygonum serpillifolium. Small round leaued Knot-grasse.
The figure that formerly was in the second place was of Knawell, and that in
the third place of (...) (...) (...) of (...).
4 Polygonum Selinoides, sieve (...). Parsley Piert.
to describe Polygonum (...) of Pena; as may be gathered by the description
which should have (...), but that I opportunely received a better from my often
mentioned friend Mr. Goodyer; which therefore I thought good to impart unto you.

Polygonum alterum pusillo vermiculato Scrpilli foliolo Penae. This has many
small round smooth woody branches, somewhat reddish, trailing upon the ground,
nine inches or a foot long; whereon by small distances on short joints grow
tufts of very small short blunt topped smooth green leaves, in a manner round,
like those of the smallest Time, but much smaller, and without smell, dividing
themselves at the bosoms of those leaves into small branches; at the tops of
which branches grow small flowers, one flower on a branch, and no more,
consisting of (...) little round topped leaves apiece of a faint or pale
purplish color: I observed no seed. The root is woody, blackish without, very
bitter, with some taste of hear, and grows deep into the ground. The leaves
are nothing so full of juice as Aizoon. I found it flouring the third day of
September, 1621, on the ditch banks at Burseldon ferrey by the sea side in
Hampshire. (...). Goodyer.

4 Among the Knot-grasses may well be suited this small plant, but lately
written of, and not so commonly known as growing in England, being about an
handful high, and putting out from a fibrous root sundry slender stalks full
of little branches and joints: about which grow confusedly many narrow leaves,
for the most part of an unequal quantity, yet here and there two longer than
the rest, and much alike in greatness: at the outmost parts of the branches
and stalks (where it has thickest tufts) appear out of the midst of the
leaves little flowers of an herby color, which are succeeded by seed-vessels
ending in five sharp points: the whole plant is of a whitish color. If my
memory fail me not, Pena means this herbewhere he speaks of Saxisr. Angl.
in his Aduer. p. 103. and also reports that he found this plant by the way
side as he rode from London to Bristow, on a little hill not far from Chipnam:
his picture does very well resemble the kind of Knot-grasse called among the
Germans (...): and calling it (...) Anglicana causes me to think, that some
in the West parts where he found it do call it Saxifrage, as we do call sundry
other herbs, especially if they serve for the stone. My friend Mr. Stephen
Bredwel, Practitioner of physic in those parts, heard of a simple man who did
much good with a medicine that he made with Parsley Piert against the stone,
which he ministered unto all sorts of people. This my friend requested the poor
man to show him the herb called Parsley Piert; who frankly promised it him,
and the next morning brought him an handful of the herb, and told him the
compofition of his medicine withal, which you shall find set down in the
virtues, and proved by sundry of good account to be a singular remedy for the
same.

The figure that formerly was in the second place was of Knawell, and that in
the third place of (...) (...) (...) of (...).
5 Saxifraga Anglicana alsinefolia. Chick-weed Breake-stone.
The fifth and sixth are of the same faculty, and may be used in the like
cases.
6 Saxifraga palustris alsinefolia. Small water Saxifrage.


4 Our Author here in the fourth place described the Knawel, and he figured it
in the second place, under the title of Anthyllis Valentina Clusij: for the
figure which was in the third place we here give you in the fifth; and I
conjecture it is not of Knawel, but of (...) (...) of the Aduers. So that our
Authors words are true, if he meant of the picture which he set forth by the
name of Polygonum (...) sieve Knawel; but false if of the plant which he
described. But if the conjecture of (...) and Lobei be true, who judge their
Saxifraga Anglicana to be Synanchice (...), then it is neither of (...), as our
Author would have it, nor of this which I here give, but of a small plant which
you shall find amongst the Rubia's. Now this plant that I take to be the
Saxifraga (...) of (...) and Lobel, is a small little herb growing thick,
with very many branches some two or three inches high, with some stalks
standing upright, and other some creeping: at each joint grow two short narrow
sharp pointed green leaves, out of whose bosoms come diverse lesser leaves:
at the tops of the branches upon pretty long stalks grow upon each stalk one
round whitish scaly head, consisting commonly of four under greenish leaves
which make the cup, and four grayish or whitish leaves which are the flower.
Now after these come to some maturitie they appear all of a whitish color,
and through the thin filmes of these heads appears the seed, which at the
first view seems to be pretty large and black; for it lies all clustering
together; but if you rub it out you shall find it as small as sand, and of a
dark reddish color. The taste of this plant is very hot and piercing, like
that of Golden rod or our common Saxifrage, and without doubt it is more
effectual to move urine than the former Knawel. I have sound it growing in
many places about (...) and stone walls, and upon chalky barren grounds. I
called this in my Iournall Anno (...). 2. (...) minor altera flosculis albis
semine nigro; and questioned whether it were not Alsine (...) (...) minima
montana of Columna. But now I think it rather (if the number of leaves in the
flower did not disagree) the other which is described in the next place, of
which I since that time have received both the figure and description, as also
a dry plant from Mr. Goodyer. He conjectures it may be this plant which I have
here described, that is set forth in the Historia Lugd. page 1235. by the name
of Alsine muscosa.

Alsine palustris folijs (...): (...) Saxifraga palustris alsinefolia. 6 This
has a great number of very small grasse-like leaves, growing from the root,
about an inch long, a great (...) smaller and slenderer than small pinnes;
amongst which spring up (...) small slender round smooth firm branches some
handful or handful and half high, from which sometimes grow a few other
smaller branches, whereon at certain joints grow leaves like the former, and
those set by couples with other shorter coming forth of their bosoms; and so
by degrees they become shorter and shorter toward the top, so that toward the
top this plant somewhat resembles (...) (...). The (...) are great for the
slenderness of the plant, growing at the tops of the branches, each flower
consisting of five small blunt roundish topped white flowers, with white chiues
in the midst. The seed I observed not. The root is small, growing in the mire
with a few strings. This grows plentifully on the boggy ground below the red
Well of Wellingborough in Northampton shire. This has not been described that
I find. I observed it at the (...) aforesaid, August 12. (...). John Goodyer.

The Place.
The figure that formerly was in the second place was of Knawell, and that in
the third place of (...) (...) (...) of (...).
The first and second are strangers in England: the rest grow in places
mentioned in their descriptions.

The Time.
These flower for the most part from May to September.

The Names.
That which has been said of their names in their several descriptions shall
suffice.

The Nature.
They are cold in the second degree, and dry in the third, astringent and
making thick.

These, especially the three last, are hot in the second or third degree, and
of subtle parts; but the Parsley Piert seems not to be so hot as the other
two.

The Virtues.
Here according to my promise I have thought good to insert this medicin made
with Knawel; Petra pungens: for that barbarous word Parsley Piert was given by
some simple man ( as also the other, that sauors of as much simplicity) who
had not well learned the true term. The composition which follows must be
given in warm white wine, half a dram, two scruples, or more, according to
the constitution of the body which is to receive it.

The leaves of Parsley Piert, Mous-eare, of each one ounce when the herbs be
dried, bay berryes,

CHAP. 172. Of Rupture woort.
1 Herniaria. Rupture woort.
2 Millegranaminima. Dwarf Allseed.


The Description.
1 THere is also a kind of Knot grass commonly called in Latin Herniaria: in
English, Rupture woort, or Rupture grass. It is a base and low creeping herb,
having many small slender branches trailing upon the ground, yet very tough,
and full of little knots somewhat reddish, whereupon do grow very many small
leaves like those of Time; among which come forth little yellowish flowers
which turn into very small seed, and great quantity thereof, considering the
smallness of the plant, growing thick clustering together by certain spaces.
The whole plant is of a yellowish green color. The root is very slender and
single.

2 There is another kind of Herniaria, called Mill grana or All-seed, that
grows upright a handful high, with many small and tender branches, set with
leaves like the former, but few in number, having as it were two small leaves
and no more. The whole plant seems as it were covered over with seeds or
grains, like the seed of Panicke, but much lesser. I have not seen many plants
of this, but all that ever I yet saw never attained to the height of two
inches.

The Place.
1 It ioyeth in barren and sandy grounds, and is likewise found in dankish
places that lie wide open to the sun: it does grow and prosper in my garden
exceedingly. 2 I found this in Kent on a Heath not far from Chiste-hurst,
being in company with Mr. Bowls and diverse others, in July, 1630.

The Time.
It floureth and flourishes in May, June, July, and August.

The Names.
It is called of the later Herbarists Herniaria and Herniola; taken from the
effect in curing the disease Hernia: of diverse, Herba Turca, and Empetron; in
French, (...): in English, Rupture woort, and Burstwoort.

The Temperature and Virtue.
Rupture woort does notably dry, and thoroughly closes up together and
fasteneth. It is reported

CHAP. 173. Of wild Time.
1 Serpillum vulgre. Wild Time.
3 Serpillum majus flore purpurco. Great purple wild Time.


The Description.
1 BOth Dioscoridcs and Pliny make two kinds of Serpillum, that is, of
creeping or wild Time; whereof the first is our common creeping Time, which is
sowell known, that it needs no description; yet this ye shall understand,
that it bears flowers of a purple color, as every body knows. Of which
kind I found another sort, with flowers as white as snow, and have planted it
in my garden, where it becomes an herb of great beauty:

2 This wild Time that brings forth white flowers differs not from the
other, but only in the color of the flowers, whence it may be called Serpillum
vulgar flore albo. White floured Wild Time.

There is another kind of Serpillum, which grows in gardens, in smell and
savor resembling Marjerome. It has leaves like Organy, or wild Marjerome,
but somewhat whiter, putting forth many small stalks, set full of leaves like
Rue, but longer, narrower, and harder. The flowers are of a biting taste, and
pleasant smell. The whole plant grows upright, whereas the other creeps
along upon the earth, catching hold where it grows, and spreading it self far
abroad.

3 This great wild Time creeps not as the others do, but stands upright,
and brings forth little slender branches full of leaves like those of Rue;
yet narrower, longer, and harder. The flours be of a purple color, and of a
twingging biting taste: it grows upon rocks, and is hotter than any of the
others.

4 This other great one with white flowers differs not from the precedent,
having many knaps or heads, of a milk white color, which sets forth the
difference; and it may be called Serpillum maius flore albo. Great white
floured wild Time.

5 This wild Time creeps upon the ground, set with many leaves by couples
like those of Marjerom, but lesser, of the same smell: the flours are of a
reddish color. The root is very threddy.

6 Wild Time of Candy is like unto the other wild Times, saving that his
leaves are narrower and longer and more in number at each joint. The smell is
more aromaticall than any of the others, wherein is the difference.

7 There is a kind of wild Time growing upon the mountains of Italy, called
Serpillum

5 Serpillum folijs amaraci. Marjerome Time.
6 Serpillum Creticum. Wild Time of Candy.
7 Serpillum citratum. Limon Time.
8 Serpillum hirsutum. Hoary wild Time.
Citratum, that is, having the smell of a Pome Citron, or a limon, which gives
it the difference from the other wild times. It grows in many gardens also,
and (as I have been told) wild in diverse places of Wales.

8 This (which is the Serpillum Pannonicum 3. of Clusius) runs or spreds it
self far upon the ground. For though it have a hard and woody root like as
the former kinds, yet the branches which lie spread round about here and there
take root, which in time become as hard and woody as the former. The leaves
and stalks are like those of the last described, but rough and hoarie: the
flowers also are not unlike those of the common kind. The whole plant has a
kind of resinous smell. It flowers in June with the rest, and grows upon the
like mountainous places; (...) whether with us in England or no I cannot yet
affirm any thing of certainty.

The Place.
The first grows upon barren hills and vntoiled places: the second grows in
gardens. The white kind I found at (...) in Kent, in a barren field belonging
to one Mr. William Swan.

The Time.
They flower from May to the end of Summer.

The Names.
Wild Time is called in Latin Serpillum, a serpendo, of creeping: in high and
Low Dutch, (...), and Wilden Thymus, and also (...) Urouwen (...): in Spanish,
Serpoll: in Italian, Serpillo: in French, Pillolet: in English, Wild Time,
Puliall Mountain, Pella mountain, running Time, creeping Time, Mother of
Time: in shops it is called Serpyllum; yet some call it Pulegium montanum: and
it is every where (says Dodonaeus) thought to be the Serpyllum of the
Ancients. Notwithstanding it answers not so well to the wild Times as to
Dioscorides his Saxifranga; for if it be diligently compared with the
description of both the Serpilla and the Saxifranga, it shall be found to be
little like the wild Times, but very much like the Saxifranga: for (says
Dioscorides) Saxifranga is an herb like Time, growing on rocks, where our
common wild Time is ostentimes found.

Aelianus in his ninth book of his sundry Histories seems to number wild
Time among the flowers. Dionysius Junior (says he) coming into the city
Locris in Italy, possessed most of the houses of the city, and did strew them
with roses, wild Time, and other such kinds of flowers. Yet Virgil in the
second Eclog of his Bucolicks does most manifestly testify that wild Time is
an herb, in these words:

Thestylis and rapido fessis messoribus (...)
Allia, serpillumque, herbas contundit olentes.
Thestilis for mowers tired with parching heat,
Garlic, wild Time, strong smelling herbs does beat.
Out of which place it may be gathered, that common wild time is the true and
right Serpillum, or wild Time, which the Grecians call (...) Marcellus an old
ancient Author among the Frenchmen says it is called Gilarum; as Plinius
Valerianus says it is called of the same, Laurio.

The Temperature.
Wild Time is of temperature hot and dry in the third degree: it is of thin
and subtle parts, (...) and much biting.

The Virtues.
It brings down the desired sickness, provoke urine, applied in bathes
and fomentations it

Wild Time boiled in wine and drunk, is good against the wambling and
gripings of the belly,

It helps against the bitings of any venomous beast, either taken in drink,
or outwardly applied.

Aetius writes, That Serpillum infused well in Vinegar, and then sodden and
mingled with rose

Galen prescribes one dram of the juice to be given in vinegar against the
vomiting of blood,

CHAP. 174. Of Garden Time.
The Description.
1 THe first kind of Time is so well known that it needs no description;
because there is not any which are ignorant what Thymum durius is, I mean our
common garden Time.

2 The second kind of Time with broad leaves has many woody branches rising
from a threddy root, beset with leaves like Myrtus. The flowers are set in
rundles about the stalk like Horehound. The whole plant is like the common
Time in taste and smell.

1 Thymum durius. Hard Time.
The secoud figure was (...) (...) (...) described in the (...) place of the
(...) chapter; the third (...) of (...) (...), (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) of
(...).
2 Thymum latifolium. Great or broad leaued Time.


3 Time of Candy is in all respects like unto common Time, but differs in
that, that this kind has certain knoppy tufts not much unlike the spikes or
knots of Stoecados, but much lesser, beset with slender flowers of a purple
color. The whole plant is of a more gracious smell than any of the other
Times, and of another kind of taste, as it were sauouring like spice. The root
is brittle, and of a woody substance.

4 Doubtless that kind of Time whereon Epithymum does grow, and is called for
that cause Epithymum, and used in shops, is nothing else than Dodder that
grows upon Time; and is all one with ours, though Matthiolus makes a
controversy and difference thereof: for Pena traveling over the hills in
Narbone near the sea, has seen not only the garden Time, but the wild Time
also laden and garnished with this Epithymum. So that by his sight and mine
own knowledge I am assured, that it is not another kind of Time that bears
Epithymum, but is common Time: for I have often found the same in England, not
only upon our Time, but upon Sauorie, and other herbs also: notwithstanding
thus much I may conjecture, that the clymate of those Countries does yield the
same forth in greater abundance than ours, by reason of the intemperance of
cold, whereunto our country is subject.

The secoud figure was (...) (...) (...) described in the (...) place of the
(...) chapter; the third (...) of (...) (...), (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) of
(...).
3 Thymum Creticum. Time of Candy.
4 Epithymum Graecorum. Laced Time.


The Place.
These kinds of Time grow plentifully in England in most gardens every where,
except that with broad leaves, and Time of Candy, which I have in my garden.

The Time.
They flourish from May unto September.

The Names.
The first may be called hard Time, or common garden Time: the second, Broad
leaued Time; the third, Time of Candy; our English women call it Musk Time:
the last may be called Dodder Time.

The Temperature.
These kinds of Time are hot and dry in the third degree.

The Virtues.
Time boiled in water and honey drunken, is good against the cough and shortness
of the breath;

The same drunk with vinegar and salt purges phlegm: and boiled in Mede or
Methegline, it

Made into powder, and taken in the weight of three drams with Mede or honied
vinegar, called

The same (...) in like sort, is good against the Sciatica, the pain in the
side and breast, against

It is good to be given unto those that have the falling sickness to smell
unto.

(...), after Galen, is of more effectual operation in physic than Time,
being hot and dry Cuscuta, (...) right good effect to eradicat melancholy, or
any other humor in the spleen, or other disease, sprung by occasion of the
spleen.

It helps the long continued pains of the head, and besides his singular
effects about spleneticall

Dioscorides says, Epithymum drunk with honied water, expels by siege,
phlegm, and melancholy.

Of his native property it relieueth them which be melancholieke, swollen in
the face and other Epithymum, and take the fine powder thereof in the quantity
of four scruples in the liquour which the Apothecaries call Passum, or with
Oxymell and salt, which takes away all flatuous humors and ventosities.

CHAP. 175. Of Sauorie.
The Kinds.
THere be two kinds of Sauorie, the one that indureth VVinter, and is of long
continuance: the other an annual or yearly plant, that perishes at the time
when it has perfected his seed, and must be sown again the next year; which
we call Summer Sauorie, or Sauorie of a year. There is likewise another, which
is a stranger in England, called of Lobel Thymbra S. (...), denying it to be
the right Satureia, or Sauorie: whether that of Lobel, or that we have in our
English gardens be the true winter Sauorie, is yet disputable; for we think
that of S. Iulians rock to be rather a wild kind than otherwise. Pena and
Lobel do not deny, (...) affirm it in these words, Nullus non fatetur
Satureiam veram; that is, which none can deny to be the true Satureia or
Sauorie. Vid. (...). page 182.

1 Satureia hortensis. VVinter Sauorie.
2 Satureia hortensis aestiva. Summer Sauorie.


The Description.
1 WInter Sauorie is a plant resembling Hyssope, but lower, more tender and
brittle: it brings forth very many branches, compassed on every side with
narrow and sharp pointed leaves, longer than those of Time; among which grow
the flowers from the bottom to the top, out of small husks, of color white,
tending to a light purple. The root is hard and wooddie, as is the rest of the
plant.

2 Summer Sauorie grows up with a slender brittle stalk of a foot high,
divided into little branches: the leaves are narrow, lesser than those of
Hysope, like the leaves of winter Sauorie, (...) thinner set upon the branches.
The flowers stand hard to the branches, of a light purple tending to
whiteness. The root is small, full of strings, and perishes when it has
perfected his seed.

3 Satureia SanctiI uliani. Rock Sauorie.
4 Satureia Cretic. Candie Sauorie.


3 This small kind of Sauorie, which Lobel has set forth under the title of
Thymbra S. Iuliani, because it grows (...) upon the rough cliffes of the
(...) sea in Italy, called Saint Iulians rock, has tender twiggie branches
an handful high, of a wooddie substance, set full of leaves from the bottom to
the top, very thick thrust together like unto those of Time, saving that they
be (...) and narrower, bringing forth at the top of the sprigs a round spikie
tuft (...) small purplish flowers. The whole plant is whitish, tending to a
bleake color, and of a very hot and sharp taste, and also well smelling.

4 This in the opinion of Honorius Bellus, Clusius, and Pona, is thought, and
not without good reason, to be the true Thymbra, or Satureia of Dioscorides and
the Ancients, for (besides that it agrees with their description, it is to this
day called in Candie (...) and (...).) Clusius describes it thus: It sends
forth many branches immediately from the root like as Time, and those
quadrangular, rough, and of a purplish color: upon these grow alternately
little roughish leaves much like those of the true Time; and out of their
bosoms come little branches set with the like, but lesser leaves. The tops
of the branches are compassed with a rundle made of many little leaves,
whereout come flowers of a fine purple color, and like the flowers of Time,
being divided into four parts, whereof the lower is the broader, and hangs
down: The upper is also broad but shorter, and the other two less. Out of the
middle of the flower come five whitish threads, pointed with brown, and a
forked style. The seed is small and black like that of Time. The root hard and
wooddie. It floured with Clusius (who received the seeds out of Candie from
Honorius Bellus) in October and November.

The Place.
They are sown in Gardens, and bring forth their flowers the first year of
their sowing.

The Time.
They flower in July and August.

The Names.
Sauorie is called in Greek (...), neither has it any other true name in
Latin than Thymbra. The Interpreters would have it called Satureia, wherein
they are repugnant to Columella a Latin Writer, who does show a manifest
difference between Thymbra and Satureia, in his tenth book; where he
writes, that Sauorie has the taste of Time, and of Thymbra or the Winter
Sauorie.

Et Satureia Thymi referens Thymbraeque saporem. Notwithstanding this assertion
of Columella, Pliny lib. 19. cap: 8. makes Satureia, or Sauorie, to be that
Thymbra which is called also Cunila. Sauorie in High Dutch is called Kunel
Saturey, and Sadaney: in Low Dutch, Ceulen: which name, as it seems, is
drawn out Cunila: in Italian, Sauoreggia in Spanish, Axedrea, and Sagorida: in
French, Sarriette: in English, Sauorie, Winter Sauorie, and Summer Sauorie.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Winter Sauorie is of temperature hot and dry in the third degree, it makes
thin, cutteth, it

Summer Sauorie is not full so hot as winter Sauorie, and therefore says
Dioscorides, more fit to

CHAP. 176. Of Dodder.
Cuscuta sivc Cassutha. Dodder.


The Description.
CVscuta, or Dodder, is astrange herb, altogether without leaves or root, like
unto threads very much snarled or wrapped together, confusedly winding it self
about bushes and hedges, and sundry kinds of herbs. The threads are somewhat
red: upon which grow here and there little round heads or knops, bringing forth
at the first slender white flowers; afterward a small seed.

The Place.
This herb grows upon sundry kinds of herbs, as upon Time, VVinter
Sauorie, Germander, and such like, taking his name from the herb whereupon it
does grow, as that upon Time is called Epithymum, upon Line or flax Epilinum:
and so of others, as Dodonaeus sets forth at large: yet has he forgotten
one among the rest, which grows very (...) in Summer setshire upon nettles:
neither is it the least among many, either in beauty or operation, but
comparable to the best Epithymum: following therefore the example of
Dioscorides, I have thought good to call it Epiurtica, or rather (...), and so
of the rest according to the herbs whereon they do grow.

The Names.
The greatest is called in shops every where Cuscuta: and of diverse because it
grows upon (...) or Line, Podagra Lini; the better learned do name it
Cassutha, or Cassytha: and Gesnerus, (...): the Arabians, Kessuth and Chasuth:
in Dutch, Schorfte, and Dranghe: in High Dutch, Filkraut: in French, Gout
d'Lin, and Tigne de Lin: in English, Dodder.

The lesser and (...) which wrappeth it self upon Time and Sauorie, is called
of Dioscorides (...): the Apothecaries keep the name Epithymum: others, among
whom is Actuarius, name that Epithymum which grows upon Time only, and that
which grows on Sauorie Epithymbrum, and that also which hangs upon Stoebe,
they term Epistoebe, giving a peculiar name to every kind.

The Nature.
The nature of this herb changes and alters, according to the nature and
quality of the herbs whereupon it grows: so that by searching of the nature
of the plant you may easily find out the temperament of the laces growing upon
the same. But more particularly: it is of temperature somewhat more dry than
hot, and that in the second degree: it also cleanses with a certain astrictiue
or binding quality, and especially that which is found growing upon the
bramble: for it also receives a certain nature from his parents o n which it
grows; for when it grows upon the hotter herbs, as Time and Sauory, it
becomes hotter and drier, and of thinner parts: that which comes of Broom
provoke urine more forcibly, and makes the belly more soluble: and that is
moister which grows upon flax: that which is found upon the bramble has
joined with it as we have said a binding quality, which by reason of this
faculty joined with it is good to cure the infirmities of the Liver and Milt:
for seeing that it has both a purging and binding faculty united to it, it is
most singular good for the entrals: for Galen in his thirteenth Book of the
Method of curing, does at large declare that such Medicines are fittest of all
for the Liver and Milt.

The Virtues.
Dodder remooueth the stoppings of the liver and of the milt or spleen, it
disburdeneth the Mesues (...) in Scrapio; who also teaches, that the nature of
Dodder is to purge choler by the stool, and that more effectually if it have
Wormwood joined with it; but too much using of it is hurtful to the stomach:
yet Auicen writes that it does not hurt it, but strengthens a weak or
feeble stomach; which opinion also we do better allow of.

(...), or the Dodder which grows upon Time, is hotter and drier than the
Dodder that Galen says. It helps all the (...) of the milt: it is a remedy
against obstructions and hard swellings. It takes away old headaches, the
salling sickness, madness that comes of Melancholy, and especially that
which proceeds from the spleen and parts thereabout: it is good for those
that have the French disease, and such as be troubled with contagious ulcers,
the leprosy, and the scabbie evil.

It purges downwards black and Melancholicke humors, as Aetius, Actuarius,
and Mesue Dioscorides notes: that likewise purges by stool which grows
upon Sauorie and Scabious, but more weakly, as Actuarius says.

(...), or Dodder that grows upon flax, boiled in water or wine and drunk,
opens the stoppings

It is good against the ague which has continued a long time, and against the
iaundise, I mean

Epiurtica or Dodder growing upon nettles, is a most singular and effectual
medicine to provoke

CHAP. 177. Of Hyssope.
The Description.
1 DIoscorides that gave so many rules for the knowledge of simples, has left
Hyssope altogether without description, as being a plant so well known that
it needed none: whose example I follow not only in this plant, but in many
others which be common, to avoid tediousness to the Reader.

1 (...) (...). Hyssope with blew flowers.
2 Hyssopus Arabum slore rubro. Hyssope with reddish flowers.
(...) figure in the third place was of the (...) (...). 2. of (...) (...).
3 Hyssopus albis floribus. White floured Hyssope.
4 Hyssopus tenuifolia. Thin leafed Hyssope.


5 Hyssopus parva angustis folijs. Dwarf narrow leaued Hyssope.


2 The second kind of Hyssope is like the former, which is our common Hyssope,
and differs in that, that this Hyssope has his small and slender branches
decked with fair red flowers.

3 The third kind of Hyssop has leaves stalks, branches, seed, and root,
like the common Hyssope, and differs in the flowers only, which are as white
as snow.

4 This kind of Hyssope of all the rest is of the greatest beauty; it has a
wooddie root tough, and full of strings, from which rise up small, tough, and
slender flexible stalks, whereupon do grow infinite numbers of small
Fennel-like leaves, much resembling those of the smallest grass; of a pleasant
sweet smell, and aromatic taste, like unto the rest of the Hyssops but much
sweeter; at the top of the stalks do grow amongst the leaves small hollow
flowers, of a bluish color tending to purple. The seeds as yet I could never
observe.

5 This differs from the first described, in that the stalks are weaker and
shorter, the leaves also narrower, and of a darker color: the flowers grow
after the same manner, and are of the same color as those of the common kind.

We have in England in our gardens another kind, whose picture it shall be
needless to express, considering that in few words it may be delivered. It is
like unto the former, but the leaves are some of them white, some green, as
the other; and some green and white mixed and spotted, very goodly to behold.

Of which kind we have in our gardens moreover another sort, whose leaves are
wonderfully curled, rough, and hairie, growing thick thrust together, making
as it were a tuft of leaves; in taste and smell, and in all other things like
unto the common Hyssope.

I have likewise in my garden another sort of Hyssope, growing to the form of
a small wooddie shrub, having very fair broad leaves like unto those of
Numularia, or Monywoort, but thicker, fuller of juice, and of a darker green
color; in taste and smell like the common Hyssope.

The Place.
All these kinds of Hyssope do grow in my garden, and in some others also.

The Time.
They flower from June to the end of August.

The Names.
Hyssope is called in Latin Hyssopus: the which name is likewise retained
among the Germans, Brabanders, Frenchmen, Italians, and Spaniards. Therefore
that shall suffice which has been set down in their several titles.

This is by most Writers judged to be Hyssope used by the Arabian Physicians,
but not that of the Greeks, which is nearer to Origanum and Maricorme, as this
is to Satureia or Sauorie.

The Temperature and Virtues.
A decoction of Hyssope made with figs, and gargled in the mouth and throat,
ripeneth and breaks

The same made with figs, water, honey, and rue, and drunken, helps the
inflammation of the

The sirrup or juice of Hyssope taken with the sirrup of vinegar, purges by
stool tough and

The distilled water drunk, is good for those diseases before named, but not
with that speed and

CHAP. 178. Of Hedge Hyssope.
The Description.
1 HEdge Hyssope is a low plant or herb about a span long, very like unto the
common Hyssope, with many square stalks or slender branches, beset with leaves
somewhat larger than Hyssope, but very like. The flowers grow betwixt the
leaves upon short stems, of a white color declining to blewnesse. All the
herb is of a most bitter taste, like the small Centory. The root is little and
threddy, dilating it self far abroad; by which means it multiplieth
greatly, and occupies much ground where it grows.

1 (...). Hedge Hyssope.
2 Gratiola angustifolia. Grass Poley.
3 Gratiola latifolia. Broad leaued Hedge Hyssope.


2 Narrow leaued Hedge Hyssope from a small fibrous white root sends up a
reddish round crested stalk divided into sundry branches, which are set with
leaves like those of knot grass of a pale green color, and without any
stalks: out of the bosom! of these come flowers set in long cups composed of
four leaves of a pleasing blew color, which are succeeded by longish
seed-vessells containing a small dusky seed. The whole plant is without smell,
neither has it any bitterness or other manifest taste. It varies in leaves,
sometimes broader, and otherwhiles narrower, the plant growing sometimes but an
handful, and otherwhiles a foot high. Gesner called this Gratiola minor: and
Camerarius, Hyssopoides: and Bauhine only has figured it, and that by the
name of Hyssopifolia sieve Gratiola minor Cordus first mentioned it, and that by
the Dutch name of Grass Poley, which name we may also very fitly retain in
English.

3 Broad leaued (...) Hyssope has many small and tender branches, four
square, and somewhat hollow or surrowed, beset with leaves by couples one
opposite against another, like unto the former, but somewhat shorter, and much
broader: among which grow the flowers of a purple color, spotted on the inside
with white, and of a brighter purple than the rest of the flower, fashioned
like the smallest Antirrhinum, or least Snapdragon; which being past there
succeed little seed vessels, fashioned like the nut of a crossebow, which
contain small yellowish seed, extreme bitter of taste. The whole plant is
likewise bitter, as the common or well known Gratiola. The root is compact of
a great number of whitish strings, entangled one within another, which mightily
increases and spreads abroad.

This plant is only a lesser kind of the Lysimachia galericulata of Lobell,
which some have called Gratiola Latifolia: our Authors figure was very ill,
wherefore I have endeavored by the help of some dried plants and my memory to
present you with a better expression thereof.

The Place.
The first grows in low and moist places naturally, which I have planted in
my Garden. The second was found growing by my often mentioned friend Mr. Bowls
at Dorchester in Oxfordshire, at the back side of the enclosed grounds on the
left hand of the town, if you would ride from thence to Oxford in the grassie
places of the Champion corn fields. The third grows likewise in moist
places. I found it growing upon the bog or marrish ground at the further end of
Hampstead heath, and upon the same heath toward London, near unto the head of
the springs that were dug for water to be conveyed to London, 1590.
attempted by that careful citizen John Heart Knight, Lord Major of the City of
London: at which time my self was in his Lordships company, and viewing for my
pleasure the same goodly springs, I found the said plant, not heretofore
remembered.

The Time.
The first floureth in May: the second in June and July: the third in August.

The Names in general.
Hedge Hyssope is called in Latin Gratiola, and Gratia Dei, or the Grace of
God; notwithstanding there is a kind of Geranium, or Storkes bill, called by
the later name. Of Cordus, Limnesium, and Centauroides: of Anguillaria it is
thought to be Dioscorides his Papauer spumeum, or Spatling Poppy: but some
think Papauer spumeum to be that which we call Behen album: in Dutch it is
called (...) gratie: in Italian, Stanca cauallo, because that horses when they
have eaten thereof dowax lean, and languish thereupon: and in English, Gratia
Dei, and Hedge Hyssope. The seed hereof is called Gelbenech, which name the
Arabians retain unto this day.

Names in particular.
1 Matthiolus, (...) and others have called this Gratiola; Anguillara, Gratia
Dei; Cordus, Limnesium, Centauroides; he also thought it but unfitly to be the
Eupatoreum of Mesue: Gesner thinks it may be Polemonium palustre amarum of
Hippocrates, that write of the diseases of cattle.

2 Cordus called this Grass Poley; Gesner, Gratiola minor; Camerarius,
Hyssopoides: and Bauhine, Hyssopifolia.

3 This is not set forth by any but our Author, and it may fitly be named
Lysimachia galericulataminor, as I have formerly noted.

The Temperature.
Hedge Hyssope is hot and dry of temperature. And the first is only used in
medicine.

The Virtues.
Who so takes but one scruple of Gratiola bruised, shall perceive evidently his
effectual operation Conradus Gesnerus experimented this, and found it to be
true, and so have I my self, and many others.

Gratiola boiled, and the decoction drunk or eaten with any kind of meat, in
manner of a sallade,

Gratiola or Hedge Hyssope boiled in wine and given to drink, helps fevers
of what sort soever,

The extraction given with the powder of cinnamon and a little of the juice of
Calamint, prevails Ioachimus Camerarius.

CHAP. 179. Of Lauander Spike.
The Description.
1 LAuander Spike has many stiff branches of a wooddie substance, growing up
in the manner of a shrubbe, set with many long hoarie leaves, by couples for
the most part; of a strong smell, and yet pleasant enough to such as do love
strong savors. The flowers grow at the top of the branches spike fashion, of a
blew color. The root is hard and wooddie.

2 The second differs not from the precedent, but in the color of the
flowers: For this Plant brings milk white flowers; and the other blew,
wherein especially consists the difference.

3 We have in our English gardens a small kind of Lauander, which is
altogether lesser than the other, and the flowers are of a more purple color
and grow in much less and shorter heads, yet have they a far more grateful
smell: the leaves are also less and whiter than those of the ordinary sort.
This did, and I think yet does grow in great plenty, in his Majesty's private
Garden at White hall. And this is called Spike, without addition, and sometimes
Lauander Spike: and of this by distillation is made that vulgarly known and
used oil which is termed Oleumspicae, or oil of Spike.

1 Lavandula flore caeruleo. Common Lauander.
2 Lavandula flore albo. White floured Lauander.


The Place.
In Spain and Languedocke in France, most of the mountains and desert fields,
are as it were 3 Lavendula minor, sive Spica. Lauander Spike.
covered over with Lauander. In these cold countries they are planted in
gardens.

The Time.
They flower and flourish in June and July.

The Names.
Lauander Spike is called in Latin (...), and Spica: in Spanish, Spigo, and
Languda. The first is the male, and the second the semale. It is thought of
some to be that sweet herb Casia, whereof Virgil makes mention in the second
Eclog of his Bucolicks:

Tum Casia at que alijs intexens suavibus (...),
Mollia luteola pingit vacinia Caltha.
And then she will Spike and such sweet herbs infold
And paint the Iacinth with the Marygold.
And likewise in the fourth of his Georgicks, where he entreats of choosing
of seats and places for Bees, and for the ordering thereof, he says thus:

Haec circum Casiae virides, and (...) late
Serpilla, and grauiter spirantis copia Thymbrae
Floreat; etc. -- --, -- -- --
About them let fresh Lauander and store
Of wild Time with strong Sauorie to flower.
Yet there is another Casia called in shops Casia Lignea, as also Casia nigra,
which is named Casia (...); and another a small shrubbie plant extant among the
shrubs or hedge bushes, which some think to be the Casia Poetica, mentioned in
the precedent verses.

The Temperature.
Lauander is hot and dry, and that in the third degree, and is of a thin
substance, consisting of many airie and spiritual parts. Therefore it is good
to be given any way against the cold diseases of the head, and especially those
which have their original or beginning not of abundance of humors, but
chiefly of a cold quality only.

The Virtues.
The distilled water of Lauander smelt unto, or the temples and forehead bathed
therewith, is a

The flowers of Lauander picked from the knaps, I mean the blew part and not
the husk, mixed

Conserve made of the flowers with sugar, profits much against the diseases
aforesaid, if the

It profits them much that have the palsy, if they be washed with the
distilled water of the flowers or anointed with the oil made of the flowers,
and oil olive, in such manner as oil (...) roses is, which shall be expressed
in the treatise of Roses.

CHAP. 180. Of French Lauander, or Stickeadoue.
The Description.
1 FRench Lauander has a body like Lauander, short, and of a wooddie
substance, but slenderer, beset with long narrow leaves, of a whitish color,
lesser than those of Lauander: it has in the top bushy or spikie heads, well
compact or thrust together; out of the which grow forth small purple flowers,
of a pleasant smell. The seed is small and blackish: the root is hard and
wooddie.

2 This iagged Sticadoue has many small stiff stalks of a woody substance;
whereupon do grow iagged leaves in shape like unto the leaves of Dill, but of
an hoarie color: on the top of the stalks do grow spike flowers of a bluish
color; and like unto the common Lauander Spike: the root is likewise wooddie.
This by Clusius who first described it, as also by Lobel, is called Lavendula
multisido folio, or Lauander with the divided leaf; the plant more resembling
Lauander than Sticadoue.

3 There is also a certain kind e hereof, differing in smalnesse of the leaves
only, which are round about the edges nicked or toothed like a saw, resembling
those of Lauander cotton. The root is likewise wooddie.

4 There is also another kind of Stoechas which differs from the first or
ordinary kind, in that the tops of the stalks are not set with leaves almost
close to the head as in the common kind, but are naked and wholly without
leaves: also at the tops of the spike or flowers (as it were to recompense
their defect below) there grow larger and fairer leaves than in the other
sorts. The other parts of the plant differ not from the common Stoechas.

1 Stoechas sive spica hortulana. Sticadoue and Sticados.
2 Stoechas multisida. Iagged Sticados.


3 Stoechas folio serrato. Toothed Sticadoue.
4 Stoechas summis cauliculis nudis. Naked Sticadoue.


The Place.
These herbs do grow wild in Spain, in Languedocke in France, and the
Islands called Stoechades over against Massilia: we have them in our gardens,
and keep them with great diligence from the injury of our cold clymate.

The Time.
They are sown of seed in the end of April, and covered in the Winter from
the cold, or else set in pots or tubs with earth, and carried into houses.

The Names.
The Apothecaries call the flower Stoecados: Dioscorides, (...): Galen, (...),
by the dipthong in the first syllable: in Latin, Stoechas: in High Dutch,
Stichas kraut: in Spanish, Thomani, and Cantuesso: in English, French Lauander,
Steckado, Stickadoue, Cassidonie, and some simple people imitating the same
name do call it Cast me down.

The Temperature.
French Lauander says Galen is of temperature compounded of a little cold
earthie substance, by reason whereof it binds: it is of force to take away
obstructions, to extenuate or make thin, to scour and cleanse, and to
strengthen not only all the entrails, but the whole body also.

The Virtues.
Dioscorides teaches that the decoction hereof does help the diseases of the
chest, and is with

The later Physicians affirm, that Stoechas, and especially the flowers of it,
are most effectual against

The decoction of the husks and flowers drunk, opens the stoppings of the
liver, the lungs, the

CHAP. 181. Of Flea-wort.
The Description.
1 PSyllium, or the common Flea-wort has many round and tender branches, (...)
full of long and narrow leaves somewhat hairy. The top of the stalks are
garnished with sundry round chaffie knops, beset with small yellow flowers:
which being ripe contain many little shining seeds, in proportion, color, and
bigness like unto sleas.

2 The second kind of Psyllium or Flea-wort has long and tough branches, of a
woody substance like the precedent, but longer and harder, with leaves
resembling the former, but much longer and narrower. The chaffie tuft which
contains the seed is like the other, but more like the ear of Phalaris,
which is the ear of Alpisti, the Canarie seed which is meat for birds that
come from the Islands of Canarie. The root hereof lasts all the Winter, and
likewise keeps his green leaves, whereof it took this addition of
Sempervirens.

1 Psyllium sieve pulicaris herba. Flea-wort.
2 Psyllium sempervirens Lobelij. Never dying Flea-wort.


The Place.
These plants are not growing in our fields of England, as they do in France
and Spain yet I have them growing in my garden.

The Time.
They flower in June and July.

The Names.
Flea-wort is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Pulicaria, and Herba
Pulicaris: in shops, Psyllium: in English, Flea-wort; not because it kills
fleas, but because the seeds are like fleas: of some, Flea-bane, but
improperly: in Spanish, Zargatona: in French, L'herbe aus pulces: in Dutch,
Duyls vloye-cruyt.

The Temperature.
Galen and Serapio record, that the seed of Psyllium (which is chiefly used in
(...)) is cold in the second degree, and temperate in moisture and dryness.

The Virtues.
The seed of Flea-wort boiled in water or infused, and the decoction or
infusion drunk, purges

The seed stamped, and boiled in water to the form of a plaster, and applied,
takes away all

The same applied in manner aforesaid unto any burning heat, called S.
Anthonies fire, or any

Some hold that the herb strowed in the chamber where many fleas be, will
drive them away;

The Danger.
Too much Flea-wort seed taken inwardly is very hurtful to man's nature: so that
I wish you not to follow the mind of Galen and Dioscorides in this point,
being a medicine rather bringing a malady, than taking away the grief:
remembering the old proverb, A man may buy gold too (...); and the honey is too
dear that is lickt from thorns.

Dioscorides nor Galen mention no use of this inwardly; but on the contrary,
(...) in his sixth book, which treats wholly of the curing and preventing of
poisons, mentions this in the tenth chapter for a poison, and there sets down
the symptoms which it causes, and (...) you to the foregoing chapter for the
remedies.

CHAP. 185. Of Glove Gillofloures.
1 Caryophyllus maximus multiplex. The great double Carnation.
2 Caryophyllus multiplex. The double Cloue Gillofloure.


The Kinds.
THere are at this day under the name of Caryophyllus comprehended diverse and
sundry sorts of plants, of such various colors, and also several shapes, that
a great and large volume would not suffice to write of every one at large in
particular; considering how insinite they are, and (...) every year every
clymate and country brings forth new sorts, such as have not (...) bin
written of; some whereof are called Carnations, others Cloue Gillofloures, some
Sops in wine, some Pagiants, or Pagion color, Horseflesh, blunket, purple,
white, double and single Gillofloures, as also a Gillofloure with yellow
flowers: the which a worshipful Merchant of London Mr. Nicolas (...) procured
from Poland, and gave me thereof for my garden, which before that time was
never seen nor heard of in these countries. Likewise there be sundry sorts of
Pinkes comprehended under the same title, which shall be described in a
several chapter. There be under the name of Gillofloures also those flowers
which we call Sweet-Iohns and Sweet-Williams. And first of the great Carnation
and Cloue Gillefloure.

There are very many kinds both of Gillofloures, Pinkes, and the like, which
differ very little in their roots, leaves, seeds, or manner of growing, though
much in the color, shape, and magnitude of their flowers; whereof some are of
one color, other some of more; and of them some are striped, others spotted,
etc. Now I (holding it a thing not so fit for me to insist upon these
accidental differences of plants, having specifique differences enough to
treat of) refer such as are addicted to these commendable and harmless
delights to survey the late and ost mentioned Work of my friend Mr. John
Parkinson, who has accurately and plentifully treated of these varieties; and
if they require further satisfaction, let them at the time of the year repair
to the garden of Mistress Tuggy (the wife of my late deceased friend Mr. Ralph
Tuggy) in Westminster, which in the excellency and variety of these delights
exceeds all that I have seen: as also (...) himself whilst he lived
exceeded most, if not all of his time, in his care, industry, and skill in
raising, increasing, and preserving of these plants and some others; whose
loss therefore is the more to be lamented by all those that are lovers of
plants. I will only give you the figures of some three or four more, whereof
one is of the single one, which therefore some (...) a Pinke, though in mine
opinion unfitly, for that it is produced by the seed of most of the double
ones, and is of different color and shape as they are, varying from them only
in the singleness of the flowers.

Caryophyllus mayor and minor, rubro and albo variegati. The white Carnation,
and Pageant.
Caryophyllus purpureus profunde laciniatus. The blew, or deep purple
Gillofloure.


The Description.
1 THe great Carnation Gillow-floure has a thick round woody root, from
which rises up many strong ioynted stalks set with long green leaves by
couples: on the top of the stalks do grow very fair flowers of an excellent
sweet smell, and pleasant Carnation color, whereof it took his name.

2 The Cloue Gillofloure differs not from the Carnation but in greatness as
well of the flowers as leaves. The flower is exceeding well known, as also the
Pinks and other Gillofloures; wherefore I will not stand long upon the
description.

Caryophyllus simplex mayor. The single Gillofloure or Pinke.


The Place.
These Gillofloures, especially the Carnations, are kept in pots from the
extremity of our cold Winters. The Cloue Gillofloure endures better the cold,
and therefore is planted in gardens.

The Time.
They flourish and flower most part of the Summer.

The Names.
The Cloue Gillofloure is called of the later Herbarists (...) flos, of the
smell of cloves wherewith it is possessed: in Italian, Garofoli: in Spanish,
Clauel: in French, Oeilletz: in Low Dutch, Ginoffelbloemen: in Latin of most,
Ocellus Damascenus, Ocellus Barbaricus, and Barbarica: in English, Carnations,
and Cloue Gillofloures. Of some it is called Vetonica, and Herba Tunica. The
which (...) Gordonius has set down for Dioscorides his Polemonium.

That worthy Herbarist and learned Physician of late memory Mr. Doctor Turner
makes Caryophyllus to be Cantabrica; which Pliny, lib. 23. cap. 8. writes to
have been found out in Spain about Augustus time, and that by those of Biscay.

Johannes Ruellius says, That the Gillofloure was unknown to the old writers:
whose judgment is very good, especially because this herb is not like to that
of Vetonica or Cantabrica. It is marvel, says he, that such a famous flower,
so pleasant and sweet, should lie hid, and not be made known by the old
Writers: which may be thought not inferior to the rose in beauty, smell, and
variety.

The Temperature.
The Gillofloure with the leaves and roots for the most part are temperate in
heat and dryness.

The Virtues.
The conserve made of the flowers of the Cloue Gillofloure and sugar, is
exceeding cordial, and

It prevails against hot pestilentiall fevers, expels the poison and fury
of the disease, and Rich.

CHAP. 183. Of Pinks, or wild Gillofloures.
The Description.
1 THe double purple Pinke has many grassie leaves set upon small ioynted
stalks by couples, one opposite against another, whereupon do grow pleasant
double purple

1 Caryophyllus syluestris simplex. Single purple Pinks.
2 Caryophyllus syluestris simplex, suaue rubens. Single red Pinks.
3 Caryophyllus plumarius albus. White jagged Pinks.
Caryophyllus plumarius albus odoratior. Large white jagged Pinks.
flowers of a most fragrant smell, not inferior to the Cloue Gillofloure. The
root is small and woody.

There is also a single one of this kind, whose figure I here give you in
stead of the double one of our Author.

2 The single red Pinke has likewise many small grassie leaves lesser than the
former: The flowers grow at the top of the small stalks single, and of a sweet
bright red color.

3 The white iagged Pinke has a tough woody root: from which rise immediately
many grassie leaves, set upon a small stalk full of joints or knees, at every
joint two one against another even to the top; whereupon do grow fair double
purple flowers of a sweet and spicie smell, consisting of five leaves,
sometimes more, cut or deeply iagged on the edges, resembling a feather:
whereupon I gave it the name Plumarius, or feathered Pinke. The seed is soft,
blackish, and like unto Onion seed.

There is another varietic of this, with the leaves somewhat larger and greener
than the last mentioned: the flowers also are somewhat bigger, more cut in or
divided, and of a much sweeter smell.

4 This purple colored Pinke is very like the precedent in stalks, roots, and
leaves. The flowers grow at the top of the branches lesser than the last
described, and not so deeply iagged; of a purple color tending to blewnesse,
wherein consists the difference.

There be diverse sorts of Pinks more, whereof to write particularly were to
small purpose, considering they are all well known to the most, if not to all.
Therefore these few shall serve at this time for those that we do keep in our
gardens: notwithstanding I think it convenient to place these wilder sorts in
this same chapter, considering their nature and virtues do agree, and few or
none of them be used in physic, besides their neerenesse in kindred and
neighborhood.

4 Caryophyllus plumarius purpureus. Purple jagged Pinkes.
5 Cariophyllus plumarius syluestris albus. Whitewilde jagged Pinkes.


5 This wild iagged Pinke has leaves, stalks, and flowers like unto the
white iagged Pinke of the garden, but altogether lesser, wherein they
especially differ.

6 The purple mountain or wild Pinke has many small grassie leaves: among
which rise up slender stalks set with the like leaves, but lesser; on the top
whereof do grow small purple flowers, (...) finely with white or else yellowish
spots, and much lesser than any of the others before described.

6 Caryophyllus montanus purpureus. Wild Purple iagged Pinke.
7 Caryophyllus montanus Clusij. Clusius mountain Pinke.
8 Caryophyllus pumilio Alpinus. Dwarf Mountain Pinke.
9 Caryophyllus coeruleus sieve Aphyllanthos. Leafeles Pinke, or rushy Pinke.


7 The mountain Pinke of Clusius his description has many leaves growing into
a tuft like unto those of Thrift, and of a bitter taste: amongst which rise up
small slender foot-stalkes, rather than stalks or stems themselves, of the
height of two inches; whereupon do grow such leaves as those that were next the
ground, but lesser, set by couples one opposite to another: at the top of each
small foot-stalke does stand one red flower without smell, consisting of five
little leaves set in a rough hairy husk or hose five cornered, of a greenish
color tending to purple. The root is tough and thick, casting abroad many
shoots, whereby it greatly increases.

8 This for his stature may justly take the next place; for the stalk is some
inch high, set with little sharp pointed green grassie leaves: the flowers
which grow upon these stalks are composed of five little flesh-coloured leaves
a little divided in their upper parts: the seed is contained in black shining
heads, and it is small and reddish, and shaped somewhat like the fashion of a
kidney, whereby it comes nearer to the Lychnides, than to the Caryophylli or
Pinkes. The root is long, black, and much spreading, whereby this little plant
couers the ground a good space together like as a moss, and makes a curious
show when the flowers are blown, which is commonly in June. It

10 Caryophyllus montanus albus. White mountain Pinke.
11 Caryophyllus pratensis. Deptford Pinke.
12 Caryophyllus Virgineus. Maidenly Pinkes.
13 Caryophyllus montanus humilis latifolius. Small mountain broad leaued Pink.


14 Caryophyllus montanus albus. White mountain Pinke.
15 Caryophyllus Holostius. Wild Sea Pinke.
16 (...) (...) (...). Broad leased wild Pinke.
17 Caryophyl. humilis flor. cand (...). White Campion Pinke.
It grows naturally on diverse places of the Alps. Gesner called it Muscus
storidus: Pena, Ocimoides Muscosus: and Clusius, Caryophyllus pumilio Alpinus
9.

9 This leafe-lesse Pinke (as the Greek word does seem to import) has many
small rushy or benty leaves rising immediately from a tough rushy root: among
which rise up stalks like unto rushes, of a span high, without any joint at
all, but smooth and plain; on the top (...) of grows a small flower of a
bluish or sky color, consisting of four little leaves somewhat iagged in the
edges, not unlike those of wild flax. The whole plant is very bitter, and of a
hot taste.

10 The white mountain Pinke has a great thick and woody root; from the
which immediately rise up very many small and narrow leaves, finer and lesser
than grass, not unlike to the smallest rush: among which rise up little tender
stalks, ioynted or kneed by certain distances, set with the like leaves even
to the top by couples, one opposite against another: at the top whereof grow
pretty sweet smelling flowers composed of five little white leaves. The seed is
small and blackish.

11 There is a wild creeping Pinke which grows in our pastures near about
London, and in other places, but especially in the great field next to Detford,
by the path side as you go from Redriffe to Greenwich; which has many small
tender leaves shorter than any of the other wild Pinkes, set upon little
tender stalks which lie flat upon the ground, taking hold of the same in
sundry places, whereby it greatly increases; whereupon grow little reddish
flowers. The (...) is small, tough, and long lasting.

12 This Virgin-like Pinke is like unto the rest of the garden Pinkes in
stalks, leaves, and roots. The flowers are of a blush color, whereof it took
his name, which shows the difference from the other.

This whose figure I give you for that small leaued one that was formerly in
this place, has slender stalks some spanne high, set with two long narrow
hard sharp pointed leaves at each joint. The flowers (which grow commonly but
one on a stalk) consist of five little snipt leaves of a light purple color,
rough, and deeper colored about their middles, with two little crooked threads
or horns: the seed is chaffie and black: the root long, and creeping: it
flowers in April and May, and is the Flos caryophylleus syluestris:. of
Clusius.

13 Clusius mentions also another whose (...) are some three inches high: the
leaves broader, softer, and greener than the former: the (...) also that grow
upon the top of the stalks are larger than the former, and also consist of
five leaves of a deeper purple than the former, with longer hairs finely
intermixed with purple and white.

14 This from a hard woody root sends up such stalks as the former, which are
set at the joints with short narrower and darker green leaves: the flowers are
white, sweet smelling, consisting of five much divided leaves, having two
threads or horns in their middle. It flowers in May, and it is the Caryophyllus
syluestr is quintus of Clusius.

15 This wild sea Pinke has diverse small tender weak branches trailing upon
the ground, whereupon are set leaves like those of our smallest garden Pinke,
but of an old hoary color tending to whiteness, as are most of the sea
Plants. The flowers grow at the top of the stalks in shape like those of
Stitch-wort, and of a whitish color. Neither the seeds nor seed-vessels have I
as yet observed: the root is tough and single.

16 There is another of these wild Pinkes which is found growing in ploughed
fields, yet in such as are near unto the sea: it has very many leaves spread
upon the ground of a fresh green color; amongst which rise up tender stalks
of the height of a foot, set with the like leaves by couples at certain
distances. The flowers grow at the top many together, in manner of the
SweetWilliam, of a white, or sometimes a light red color. The root is small,
tough, and long lasting. This is a kind of Gramen Leucanthemum, or Holosteum
(...), described in the 38. Chapter of the first book.

17 Clusius makes this a Lychnis: and Lobel (whom I here follow) a Pinke,
calling it Caryophyllus minimus humil is alter exoticus flore candido amaeno.
This from creeping roots sends up every year many branches some handful and
better high, set with two long narrow green leaves at each joint: the flowers
which grow on the tops of the branches are of a pleasing white color, composed
of five iagged leaves without smell. After the flowers are gone there succeed
round blunt pointed vessels, containing a small blackish flat seed like to that
of the other Pinks. This has a viscous or clammy juice like as that of the
Muscipula's or Catch-flies. Clusius makes this his Lychnis syluestris decima.

The Place.
These kinds of Pinkes do grow for the most part in gardens, and likewise many
other sorts, the which were over long to write of particularly. Those that be
wild do grow upon mountains, stony rocks, and desert places. The rest are
specified in their descriptions.

The Time.
They flower with the Cloue Gillofloure, and often after.

The Names.
The Pinke is called of Pliny and Turner, Cantabrica and Stactice: of Fuchsius
and Dodonaeus, Vetonica altera, and Vetonica altilis: of Lobelius and Fuchsius,
Superba: in French, Gyrofslees, Oeilletz, and Violettes herbues: in Italian,
Garofoli, and Garoni: in Spanish, Clauis: in English, Pinkes, and Small
Honesties.

The Temperature.
The temperature of the Pinkes is referred unto the Cloue Gillofloures.

The Virtues.
These are not used in Physic, but esteemed for their use in Garlands and
Nosegaies. They Ruellius writes. Fuchsius says, that the roots are commended
against the infection of the plague; and that the juice thereof is profitable
to waste away the stone, and to drive it forth: and likewise to cure them that
have the falling sickness.

CHAP. 184. Of Sweet Saint John's and Sweet Williams.
1 Armeria alba. White John's.
2 Armeria alba and rubra multiplex. Double white and red John's.


The Description.
1 SWeet John's have round stalks as have the Gillofloures, (whereof they are a
kind) a cub it high, whereupon do grow long leaves broader than those of the
Gillofloure, of a green grassie color: the flowers grow at the top of the
stalks, very like unto Pinks, of a perfect white color.

2 The second differs not from the other but in that, that this plant has
red flowers, and the otherwhite.

We have in our London gardens a kind hereof bearing most fine and pleasant
white flowers, spotted very confusedly with reddish spots, which sets forth
the beauty thereof; and has bin taken of some (but not rightly) to be the
plant called of the later Writers Superba Austriaca, or the Pride of Austria.
It is now commonly in most places called London-Pride.

We have likewise of the same kind bringing forth most double flowers, and
these either very white, or else of a deep purple color.

3 Armeria rubra latifolia. Broad leaued Sweet-Williams.
4 Armeria suaue rubens. Narrow leaued Sweet-Williams.


3 The great Sweet-William has round ioynted stalks thick and fat, somewhat
reddish about the lower joints, a cub it high, with long broad and ribbed
leaves like as those of the Plantaine, of a green grassie color. The flowers
at the top of the stalks are very like to the small Pinkes, many joined
together in one tuft or spoky vmbel, of a deep red color: the root is thick
and woody.

4 The narrow leaued Sweet-William grows up to the height of two cubits, very
well resembling the former, but lesser, and the leaves narrower: the flowers are
of a bright red color, with many small sharp pointed grassie leaves standing
up amongst them, wherein especially consists the difference.

5 This little fruitful Pinke (whose figure our Author formerly gave in the
first place of the next chapter save one) has a small whitish woody root,
which sends forth little stalks some handful and better high; and these at
each joint are set with two thin narrow little leaves: at the top of each of
these stalks grows a single skinny smooth shining husk, out of which (as in
other Pinkes) grows not one only flower, but many, one still coming out as
another withers; so that often times out of one head come seven, eight, or nine
flowers one after another, which as they fade leave behind them a little pod
containing small black flattish seed. The flower is of a light red, and very
small, standing with the head somewhat far out of the hose or husk.

The Place.
These plants are kept and maintained in gardens more for to please the eye,
than either the nose or belly.

5 Armeria prolifera, Lob. Childing sweet Williams.


The Time.
They flourish and bring forth their flowers in April and May, somewhat before
the Gillofloures, and after bear their flowers the whole Summer.

The Names.
The sweet John, and also the sweet William are both comprehended under one
title, that is to say, Armeria of some, Superba, and Caryophyllus syluestris:
of some Herbarists, Vetonica agrestis, or Syluestris: of some, Herba tunica:
but it does no more agree herewith than the Cloue Gillofloure does with
Vetonica altera, or Polemonium. in French, Armoires: hereupon Ruellius names
them (...) Flores: in Dutch, (...): as though you should say, a bundell or
cluster, for in their vulgar tongue bundles of flowers or nose gaies they call
(...): doubt less they are wild kinds of Gillofloures: In English the first
two are called Sweet John's; and the two last, Sweet Williams, Tolmeiners, and
London Tufts.

The Temperature and Virtues.
These plants are not used either in meat or medicine, but esteemed for their
beauty to deck up gardens, the bosoms of the beautiful, garlands and crowns
for pleasure.

CHAP. 185. Of Crow flowers, or Wild Williams.
The Description.
1 BEsides these kinds of Pinkes before described, there is a certain other
kind, either of the Gillofloures or else of the Sweet Williams, altogether
and every where wild, which of some has been inserted amongst the wild
Campions; of others taken to be the true Flos Cuculi. Notwithstanding I am not
of any of their minds, but do hold it for neither: but rather a degenerate
kind of wild Gillofloure. The Cuckoo flower I have comprehended under the
title of Sisimbrium: Englished, Ladies smocks; which plant has been generally
taken for Flos Cuculi. It has stalks of a span or a foot high, whereupon the
leaves do stand by couples out of every joint; they are small and bluntly
pointed, very rough and hairy. The flowers are placed on the tops of the
stalks, many in one tuft, finely and curiously snipt in the edges, lesser than
those of Gillofloures, very well resembling the Sweet William (whereof no
doubt it is a kind) of a light red or Scarlet color.

2 This female Crow-floure differs not from the male, saving that this plant
is lesser, and the flowers more finely iagged like the feathered Pinke, whereof
it is a kind.

3 Of these Crow-floures we have in our gardens one that does not differ from
the former of the field, saving that the plant of the garden has many fair
red double flowers, and those of the field single.

The Place.
These grow all about in Meadows and pastures, and dankish places.

1 Armoraria pratensis mas. The male Crow flower.
3 Armoraria pratensis flore pleno. The double Crow-floure.


The Time.
They begin to flower in May, and end in June.

The Names.
The Crow flower is called in Latin Armoraria syluestris, and Armoracia: of
some, Flos Cuculi, but not properly; it is also called Tunix: of some, Armeria,
Armerius flos primus of Dodon. and likewise Caryophillus minor syluestris
folijs latioribus: in Dutch, (...): that is to say, Cornicis flores: in French,
Cuydrelles. In English, Crow flowers, wild Williams, marsh Gillofloures, and
Cockow Gillofloures.

The Temperatures and Virtues.
These are not used either in medicine or in nourishment: but they serve for
garlands and crowns, and to deck up gardens.

CHAP. 186. Of Catch-Flie, or Limewoort.
The Description.
1 THis plant, called Viscaria, or Lymewoort, is likewise of the stock and
kindred of the wild Gillofloures: notwithstanding Clusius has joined it with
the wild Campions, making it a kind thereof, but not (...). Lobel among the
Sweet Williams, whereof doubtless it is a kind. It has many leaves rising
immediately from the root like those of the Crow flower, or wild sweet
William: among which rise up many reddish stalks iointed or kneed at certain
spaces, set with leaves by couples one against another: at the top whereof come
forth pretty red flowers which being past there comes in place small
blackish seed. The root is large with many fibers. The whole plant, as well
leaves and stalks, as also the flowers, are here and there covered over with a
most thick and clammie matter like unto Bird-lime, which if you take in your
Our Author certainly intended in this first place to figure and describe the
Muscipula or Viscaria of Lobel, but the figure he here (...) in the first place
(...) that plant which I have given you in the last Chapter save one by the
name of (...) (...) (...). The figure which belonged to this place was in the
(...) of wild Campions, under the title of (...) (...) (...).
1 Viscaria, sieve Muscipula. Limewoort.
2 Muscipula Lobelij. Catch Fly.
3 Muscipula angustifolia. Narrow leaued Catch-flie.
hands, the sliminesse is such, that your fingers will stick and cleave
together, as if your hand touched Bird-lime: and furthermore, if flies do light
upon the same, they will be so entangled with the liminesse, that they cannot
fly away; insomuch that in some hot day or other you shall see many flies
caught by that means. VVhereupon I have called it Catch Fly, or Limewoort.
This is Lychnissyl. 3. of Clusius; Viscago of Camerarius; and Muscipula sieve
Viscaria of Lobel.

2 This plant has many broad leaves like the great sweet William, but shorter
(whereof it is likewise a kind) set upon a stiff and brittle stalk; from the
bosom of which leaves, spring forth smaller branches, clothed with the like
leaves, but much lesser. The flowers grow at the top of the stalks many
together tuft fashion, of a bright red color. The whole plant is also
possessed with the like liminesse as the other is, but less in quantity. This
is Lychissyl. 1. of Clusius; and Muscipula sive Armoraria altera of Lobel:
Dodonaeus calls it Armerius flos 3. in his first Edition: but makes it his
fourth in the last Edition in Folio.

3. There is also belonging unto this kindred another plant which Clusius makes
his Lychnissyl. 4. It comes up commonly with one stalk a foot or more high, of
a green purplish color, with two long sharp pointed thick green leaves, set
at each joint: from the middle to the top of the stalk grow little branches,
which upon pretty long stalks carry flowers consisting of five little round
leaves, yet divided at the tops; they are of a fair incarnate color, with a
deep purple ring in their middles, without smell: after the flowers are past
succeed skinny and hard heads, smaller toward the stalks, and thicker above;
and in these are contained very small dark red seeds. The root is thick and
black, with many fibers, putting up new shootes and stalks after the first
year, and not dying every year like as the two last described.

The Place.
These plants do grow wild in the fields in the West parts of England, among
the corn: we have them in our London gardens rather for toys of pleasure,
than any virtues they are possessed with, that has as yet been known.

The Time.
They flower and flourish most part of the Summer.

The Names.
Catch Flies has been taken for Behen, commonly so called, for the likeness
that it has with Behen rubente flore: or with Behen that has the red flower,
called of some Valeriana rubra, or red Valerian; for it is something like unto
it in iointed stalks and leaves, but more like in color: of Lobel, Muscipula
and Viscaria: of Dodon. Armerius flos tertius: of Clusius, Lychnis syluestris,
Silene Theophrasti, and Behen rubrum Salamanticum: in English, Catch Fly, and
Limewoort.

The Nature and Virtues.
The nature and virtues of these wild Williams are referred to the Wild
Pinkes and Gillofloures.

CHAP. 187. Of Thrift, or our Ladies Cushion.
1 Caryophyllus marinus minimus (...). Thrift or Sea Gillofloure.
2 Caryophyllus Mediterraneus. Leuant Thrift, or Sea Gillosloure.


The Description.
1 THrift is also a kind of Gillofloure, by Dodonaeus reckoned among grasses,
which brings forth leaves in great tufts, thick thrust together, smaller,
slenderer, and shorter than grass: among which rise up small tender stalks of
a spanne high, naked and without leaves; on the tops whereupon stand little
flowers in a spokie tuft, of a white color tending to purple. The root is long
and threddie.

The other kind of Thrift, found upon the mountains near unto the Leuant or
Mediterrancan sea, differs not from the precedent in leaves, stalks, or
flowers, but yet is altogether greater, and the leaves are broader.

The Place.
2 The first is found in the most salt marshes in England, as also in Gardens,
for the bordering up of beds and banks, for the which it serves very fitly.
The other is a stranger in these Northern Regions.

The Time.
They flower from May, till Summer be far spent.

The Names:
Thrift is called in Latin Gramen Polyanthemum, of the multitude of the
flowers: of some, Gramen marinum: of Lobel, Caryophyllus Marinus: In English,
Thrist, Sea-grasse, and our Ladies Cushion.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Their use in Physic as yet is not known, neither does any seek into the
Nature thereof, but esteem them only for their beauty and pleasure.

CHAP. 188. Of the Saxifrage of the Ancients, and of that great one of
Matthiolus, with that of Pena and Lobel.
THis name Saxifraga or Saxifrage, has of late been imposed upon sundry plants
far different in their shapes, places of growing, and temperature, but all
agreeing in this one faculty of expelling or driving the stone out of the
Kidneies, though not all by one mean or manner of operation. But because
almost all of them are described in their fit places by our Author, I will not
insist upon them: yet I think it not amiss a little to enquire, whether any
Saxifraga were known to the Ancients; and if known, to what kind it may
probably be referred. Of the Ancients, Dioscorides, Paulus (...), and Apuleius,
seem to mention one Saxifraga, but Pliny, lib. 22. cap. 21. by the way, shows
that some called Adianthum by the name of Saxifragum: but this is nothing to
the former; wherefore I will not insist upon it, but return to examine that
the other three have written thereof. Diosc. lib. 4. between the Chapters of
Tribulus and Limonium, to wit, in the seventeenth place has delivered the
History of this plant, both in the Greek Edition of Aldus Manutius, as also
in that of Marcellus (...), yet the whole Chapter in the Paris Edition, 1549,
is rejected and put amongst the Notha. The beginning thereof (against which
they chiefly except) is thus: (...) (i) Sarxiphagon, (...) vero Sarxifrangon,
alij vero Empetron, Romani, Sarxifranga. The first exception of Marcellus
Virgilius against this Chapter is Peregrina Graecis and aliena vox Saxifraga
est, etc. The second is, Quod (...) feliciores in componendis ad certiorem rei
(...) signisicationem vocibus Graeci, quam Latini, etc. The third is, Solam in
toto hoc opere primam, and a principio propositam audiri Romanam vocem, tamque
inopes in appellanda hac herba fuisse Graecos, vt nisi Romana voce eam
indicassent, nulla sibi futura esset. These are the arguments which he uses
against this Chapter; yet reiects it not, but by this means has occasioned
others without showing any reason, to do it: Now I will set down what my
opinion is concerning this matter, and so leave it to the judgment of the
Learned. I grant Marcellus, that Saxifraga is a strange and no Greek word; but
the name in the title, and first in the Chapter both in his own Edition and
all the Greek Editions that I have yet seen is (...), which none, no not he
himself can deny to have a Greek original (...) of eating the flesh: yet
because there is no such faculty as this denomination imports attributed
thereto by the Author, therefore he will not allow it to be so. But you must
note that many names are imposed by the vulgar, and the reason of the name not
alwais explained by those that (...) written of them, as in this same Author
(...) be seen in the Chapters of Catanance, Cynosbatos, Hemerocallis,
Crataeogonan, and diverse others, which are or seem to be significant, and to
import something by their name; yet he says nothing thereof. It may be that
which they would express by the name, was, that the herb had so piercing a
faculty that it would eat into the very flesh. The second and third Argument
both are answered, if this first word be Greek, as I have already showed it
to be, and there are not many words in Greek that more frequently enter into
such composition than (...): as Pamphagos, Polyphagos, Opsiphagos, and many
other may show. Moreover, it has been obsurd from Dioscorides, or any else
how simple soever they were, if they had known the first word to have been
Latin and Saxifraga, to say again presently after that the Romans called it
Saxifranga, or Saxifraga, for so it should be, and not Sarxifranga: but I fear
that the affinity of sounds more than of signification has caused this
confusion, especially in the middle times between us and Dioscorides, when
learning was at a very low (...). The chief reasons that induce me to think
this Chapter worthy to keep his former place in Dioscorides, are these:
First, the general consent of all both Greek and Latin copies (as Marcellus
says) how ancient soever they be. Secondly, the mention of this herb for the
same effect in some Greek Authors of a reasonable good antiquity; for Paulus
Aegineta testifies that (...). Then Trallianus amongst other things in a
Conditum Nephriticum mentions (...): but Nonus a later Greek calls it (...):
so that it is evident they knew and used some simple medicine that had both the
names of Sarxiphagon and Saxiphragos, which is the Latin Saxifraga. Now seeing
they had, and knew such a simple medicine, it remains we enquire after the
shape and figure thereof. Dioscorides describes it to be a shrubby plant,
growing upon rocks and craggie places, like (...) Epithymum: boiled in wine
and drunk, it has the faculty to help the (...) and Hicket; it also breaks
the stone in the bladder and prouokes urine. This word Epithymum is not found
in most copies, but a space left for some word or words that were wanting: But
Marcellus says, he found it expressed in a book which was Omnium (...) and
probatissimus: and Hermolaus Barbarus says, Veterem in Dioscoride picturam
huius (...) vidi, non plus folijs quam cirris minutis per ramos ex intervallo
conditis, nec frequentibus, in cacumine surculorum flocci seu arentes potius
quam flosculi, subrubida radice non sine fibris. A figure reasonable well
agreeing with this description of Hermolaus, I lately received from my friend
Mr. Goodyer, who writ to me that he had sought to know what Saxifraga (to wit,
of the Ancients) should be; and finding no ancient Author that had described
it to any purpose, he sought (...); which word (...) (says he) is the printed
title: my Manuscript acknowledges no Author but Apoliensis Plato; there is no
description neither, but the Manuscript has a figure which I have drawn and
sent you, and all that (...) that he has written of it, I should be glad to
have this figure cut and added to your work, together with his words, because
there has been so little written thereof by the Ancients. This his request I
thought fit to perform, and have (for the better satisfaction of the Reader)
as you see made a further inquiry thereof: wherefore I will only add this,
that the plants here described, and the Alsine Saxifraga of Colum. together
with the two Chickweed Saxifrages formerly described Chap. 171. come nearest of
any that I know to the figure and deliniation of this of the Ancients.

Nomen istius (...), Saxifraga.


Icon and descriptio ex Manuscripto vetutissimo.
Quidam dicunt eam Scolopendriam, alij Scoliomos, alij Vitis canum, quidam vero
Brucos. Itali Saxifragam. Egyptij Peperem, alij Lamprocam eam nominant.
Nascitur enim in Montibus and locis saxosis.

Vna cura ipsius ad calculos expellendos
Herbam istam Saxifragam contusam calculoso potum dabis in vino. Ipsevero si
febricitauerit cum aqua calida, tam presens (...) ab expert is traditum, vt
eodem die perfect is (...) calculis ad (...) vsque producit.

1 This first little herb, says Camerarius, has been called Saxifraga (...),
not from the greatness of his growth, but of his faculties: The stalk is
wooddie, writhen, and below sometimes as thick as ones little finger, from
which grow many small and hard branches, and those slender ones; the leaves are
little, long and sharp pointed: the flowers are white and small, and grow in
cups, which are finely snipt at the top in manner of a coronet, wherein is
contained a small red seed, the roots grow so fast impact in the Rocks, that
it cannot by any means be got out. It grows upon diverse rocks in Italy and
Germany; and it is the Saxifraga magna of Matthiolus, and the Italians.

1 Saxifraga magna Matthioli. Matthiolus his great Saxifrage.
2 Saxifraga Antiquorum, Lob. Saxifrage of the Ancients, according to Lob.


2 Pena and Lobel say, this grows in great plenty in Italy, in Dolphonie in
(...), and England, having many small slender branches a foot high, intricately
wrapped within one another, where they are set with many grassie joints: the
root is small and white with some few fibers: the leaves stand by couples at
the joints, being long and narrow; of the bigness and similitude of those of
the wild Pinks, or Rock Sauorie: upon each wooddie, small, capillarie,
straight, and creeping little branch, grows one little flower somewhat like a
Pinke, being finely (...) about the edges: and in the head is contained (...)
small reddish seed. The foresaid Authors call this Saxifragra, sive Saxifraga
Antiquorum.

The Virtues.
1 Matthiolus says, that Calceolarius of Verona mightily commended this plant
to him, for the Hieronymo de Tortis; but this made me most to wonder, for that
there were some stones amongst them, that seemed rather to come out of the
Bladder, than forth of the Kidneies.

2 This (say the Authors of the Aduers.) as it is the latest received in use
and name for Saxifrage, Epithymum, etc.

CHAP. 189. Of Sneesewoort.
The Description.
1 THe small Sneese-woort has many round and brittle branches, beset with long
and narrow leaves, (...) about the edges like a saw; at the tops of the stalks
do grow small single flowers like the wild field Daisie. The root is tender
and full of strings, creeping far abroad in the earth, and in short time
occupies very much ground: the whole plant is sharp, biting the tongue and
mouth like Pellitorie of Spain, for which cause some have called it wild
Pellitorie. The smell of this plant procures sneesing, whereof it took the
name (...), that is the herb which does procure sneesing, or Neesewoort.

2 Double floured Sneesewoort, or Ptarmica, is like unto the former in leaves,
stalks, and roots, so that unless you behold the flower, you cannot discern
the one from the other, and it is exceeding white, and double like unto double
Fetherfew. This plant is of great beauty, and if it be cut down in the time
of his flouring, there will come within a month after a supply or crop of
flowers fairer than the rest.

1 Ptarmica. Sneesewoort.
2 Ptarmica duplici flore. Double floured Sneeswoort.


3 There is also another kind hereof, of exceeding great beauty, having long
leaves somewhat narrow like those of (...) tree: the stalks are of a cubit
high, on the top whereof do grow very beautiful flowers of the bigness of a
small single Marygold, consisting of fifteen or sixteen large leaves, of a
bright shining red color tending to purple; set about a ball of thrummie
substance, such as is in the middle of the Daisie, in manner of a pale; which
flowers stand in scaly knops like those of Knapweed, or Matfellon. The root is
straight, and thrusts deep into the ground.

(...) Imperati; an (...) (...) species Clus. Cur. post. p. 32.

4 This rises up with a small hard tough cornered whitish woolly stalk,
divided into many branches, and those again divided into other branches like
those of Cyanus about two foot high, wherein grow long narrow whitish Cottonie
leaves out of order, of a bitter taste, whiter below than above, of the color
of the leaves of Wormwood, having but one rib or sinew and that in the middle
of the leaf, and commonly turn downwards: on the top of each slender branch
grows one small scaly head or knap, like that of Cyanus, which brings
forth a pale purple flower without smell, containing six, seven, eight, or
more, small hard dry sharp pointed leaves: in the middle whereof grows many
stiff chiues, their tops being of the color of the flowers: these flowers
fall not away till the whole herb perishes, but change into a rustie color:
amongst those chiues grow long flat blackish seed, with a little beard at the
top. The root is small, whitish, hard and threddie, and perishes when the seed
is ripe, and soon springs up by the fall of the seed, and remains green
all the Winter, and at the Spring sends forth a stalk as aforesaid. The
(...) touched or rubbed (...) forth a pleasant (...) smell. July 26. 1620. John
Goodyer.

3 Ptarmica Austriaca. Sneesewoort of Austrich.


The Place.
The first kind of Sneesewoort grows wild in dry and barren pastures in many
places, and in the three great fields next adjoining to a Village near London
called Kentish town, and in sundry fields in Kent about Southfleet.

The rest grow only in gardens.

The Time.
They flower from May to the end of September.

The Names.
Sneesewoort is called of some Ptarmica, and Pyrethrum syluestre, and also
Draco syluestris, or Tarcon syluestris: of most, Sternutamentoria, taken from
his effect, because it procures sneesing: of Tragus and Tabern. Tanacetum
acutum album: in English, wild Pellitorie, taking that name from his sharp and
biting taste; but it is altogether unlike in proportion to the true Pellitorie
of Spain.

The Nature.
They are hot and dry in the third degree.

The Virtues.
The juice mixed with Vinegar and holden in the mouth (...) much the pain of
the Toothache.

The herb chewed and holden in the mouth, brings mightily from the brain
slimie phlegm,

CHAP. 190. Of Hares Ears.
The Description.
1 NArrow leafed Hares Ears is called in Greek (...), and is reputed of the
(...) writers to be Bupleurum Plinij, from which the name or figure disagreeth
not: it (...) the long narrow and grassie leaves of Lachryma Job, or Gladiolus,
streaked or balked as it were with sundry stiff streakes or ribs running
along every leaf, as (...) speaks of his Heptapleuram. The stalks are a
cubite and a half long, full of knots or knees, very rough or stiff,
spreading themselves into many branches: at the tops whereof grow yellow
flowers in round tusts or heads like Dill. The root is as big as a finger, and
black like Peucedanum, whereunto it is like in taste, smell, and resemblance
of seed, which does the more persuade me that it is the true (...), whereof I
now speak, and by the authority of Nicander and Pliny confirmed.

1 Bupleurum angustifolium Monspeliense. Narrow leafed Hares Ear.
2 Bupleurum latifolium Monspeliense. Broad leafed Hares Ear.


2 The second kind called broad leafed Hares Ears, in figure, tuftes, and
flowers, is the very same with the former kind, save that the leaves are
broader and stiffer, and more hollow in the midst: which has caused me to call
it Hares Ears, having in the middle of the leaf some hollownesse resembling
the same. The root is greater and of a wooddie substance.

The Place.
They grow among Oken woods in stony and hard grounds in Narbon. I have found
them growing naturally among the bushes upon Bieston castle in Cheshire.

The Time.
They flower and bring sorth their seed in July and August.

The Names.
Hares Ear is called in Latin Bupleurum: in Greek, (...): the Apothecaries
of Montpelier in France do call it Auricula leporis, and therefore I term it
in English Hares-Eare: Valcrius Cordus names it Isophyllon, but whence he had
that name, it is not known.

The Temperature.
They are temperate in heat and dryness.

The Virtues.
Hippocrates has commended it in meats; for sallads and Pot-hearbs: but by the
authority of Glaucon and (...), it is effectual in medicine, having the taste
and savor of Hypericon, serving in the place thereof for wounds, and is taken
by Tragus for Panax Chironium, who does reckon it inter Herbas vulnerarias.

The (...) stamped with salt and wine, and applied, do consume and (...) away
the swelling

CHAP. 191. Of Gromell.
The Description.
1 THe great Gromell has long, slender and hairie stalks, beset with long,
brown and hoarie leaves; among which grow certain bearded husks, bearing at
the first small blew flowers; which being past, there succeeds a gray stony
seed somewhat shining. The root is hard, and of a wooddie substance.

2 The second kind of Gromell has straight, round, wooddie stalks, full of
branches: The leaves long, small, and sharp, of a dark green color; smaller
than the leaves of great Gromell: among which come forth little white flowers;
which being past, there does follow such seed as the former has, but smaller.

3 There is another kind of Gromell, which has leaves and stalks like the
small kind: the seed is not so white, neither so smooth and plain, but
somewhat shriueled or wrinckled. The leaves are somewhat rough like unto the
common Gromell, but the flowers are of a purple color, and in shape like those
of that wild kind of Buglosse, called Anchusa, for which cause it carries
that additament Anchusae facie.

4 There is also a degenerate kind hereof called Anchusa degener, being either
a kind of wild Buglosse, or a kind of wild Gromell, or else a kind of
neither of both, but a plant participating of both kinds: it has the seeds
and stalks of Milium solis, or Gromell: the leaves and roots of Anchusa,
which is Alkanet, and is altogether of a red color like the same.

1 Lithospermum maius. Great Gromell.
2 Lithospermum minus. Small Gromell.


3 Lithospermum Anchusae facie. Purple floured Gromell.
4 Anchusa degener facie Milij (...). Bastard Gromell.


The Place.
The two first kinds do grow in vntoiled places, as by the high ways sides,
and barren places, in the street at Southfleet in Kent, as you go from the
church unto an house belonging to a (...) of worship, called Mr. William Swan,
and in sundry other places.

The two last kinds grow upon the sands and Bach of the Sea, in the isle of
Thanet near (...), among the kinds of wild Buglosse there growing.

The Time.
They flower from the Summer Solstice, or from the twelfth day of June even
unto (...) and in the mean season the seed is ripe.

The Names.
Gromell is called in Greek (...), of the hardness of the seed: of diverse,
Gorgonium: of others, Aegonychon, Leontion, or Diosporon, or Diospyron, as
Pliny reads it, and also Heracleos of the Arabians, Milium soler: in shops,
and among the Italians, Milium solis: in Spanish, Mijo (...) sol: in French,
Gremill, and Herb aux perles: in English, Gromell: of some, Pearl plant; and
of others, Lichwale.

The Temperature.
The seed of Gromell is hot and dry in the second degree.

The Virtues.
The seed of Gromell pound, and drunk in White wine, breaks, dissolueth, and
drives forth

CHAP. 192 Of Chickeweed.
The Description.
1 THe great Chickeweede rises up with stalks a cubit high, and sometime
higher, a great many from one root, long and (...), slender, full of ioints,
with a couple of (...) growing out of every knot or joint above an inch broad,
and longer than the leaves of (...) of the wall, whereunto they are very like
in shape, but smooth without hairs or down, and of a light green color: the
stalks are something clear, and as it were transparent or thorow-shining, and
about the joints they be oftentimes of a very light red color, as be (...) of
(...) of the wall: the flowers be whitish on the top of the branches, like the
flowers of (...), but yet (...): in whose places succeed long knops, but not
great, wherein the seed is contained. The root (...) of fine little strings
like hairs.

2 The second Chickweed for the most part lies upon the ground: the stalks
are small, slender, long, and round, and also ioynted: from which slender
branches do spring leaves resembling the precedent, but much lesser, as is
likewise the whole herb, which in no respect attaineth to the greatness of the
same: the flowers are in like sort little and white: the knops or seed-heads
are like the former: the root is also full of little strings.

1 Alsine mayor. Great Chickweed.
2 Alsine minor, sieve media. Middle or small Chickweed.


3 The third is like the second, but far lesser: the stalks be most tender
and fine: the leaves are very small, the flowers very little, the root
marvelous slender.

4 Also there is a fourth kind which grows by the sea: this is like to the
second, but the stemmes are thicker, shorter, and fuller of joints: the leaves
in like sort be thicker: the knops or seed-heads be not long and round, but
somewhat broad, in which are three or four seeds contained.

5 The upright Chickweed has a very small single threddy root, from which
rises up a slender stem, dividing it self into diverse branches even from
the bottom to the top; whereon do grow small leaves, thick and fat in respect
of the others, in shape like those of Rue or HerbeGrace. The flowers grow at
the top of the branches, consisting of four small leaves of a blew color.

6 The stone Chickweed is one of the common Chickweeds, having very threddy
branches covering the ground far abroad where it grows: the leaves be set
together by couples: the flowers be small and very white: the root is tough and
very slender.

3 Alsine minima. Fine Chickweed.
4 Alsine marina. Sea Chickweed.
5 Alsine recta. Right Chickweed.
6 Alsine Petraea. Stone Chickweed.


7 Alsine folijs Veronicae. Speed-well Chickweed.
8 Alsine (...). Fountain Chickweed.
9 Alsine (...). River Chickweed.
10 Alsine (...). Marish Chickweed.


7 Speedwel Chickweed has a little tender stalk, from which come diverse small
arms or branches as it were wings, set together by couples; whereon do grow
leaves set likewise by couples, like those of Veronica, or herb Fluellen,
whereof it took his name. The flowers grow along the branches of a blew
color; after which come little pouches wherein is the seed: the root is small,
and likewise threddy. This in the Hist. Lugd. is called Elatine polyschides:
and Fabius Columna judges it to be the Alysson of Dioscorides.

8 There is a kind of Chickweed growing in the brinks and borders of Wels,
Fountains, and shallow Springs, having many threddy roots from which rise up
diverse tender stalks, whereupon do grow long narrow leaves; from the bosoms
of which come forth diverse smaller leaves of a bright green color. The
flowers grow at the top of the stalks, small, and white of color.

9 There is likewise another water Chickweed smaller than the last described,
having for his root a thick hassock or tuft of threddy strings: from which
rise up very many tender stems, strerching or trailing along the stream; (...)
grow long leaves set upon a middle rib, like those of Lentils or wild Fetch:
the flowers and seeds are like the precedent, but much smaller.

11 Alsine rotundifolia, sieve Portulaca (...). Water Purslane.
12 Alsine palustris serpillifolia. Creeping water Chickweed.
13 Alsine baccifera. Berry-bearing Chickweed.


10 There grows in the marish or waterish grounds another sort of Chickweed,
not much (...) like the rest of the stock or kindred of Chickweeds. It has a
long root of the bigness of a (...) straw, with diverse strings hanging
thereat, very like the root of Couch-grasse: from the which rises up diverse
vprightslender stalks, set with pretty large sharp pointed leaves standing by
couples at certain distances: on the top of the stalks grow small white
flowers like those of Stitchwort, but lesser, and of a white color.

11 To these water Chickweeds may fitly be added those two which I mentioned
and figured in my last iournall: the former of which, that I have there called
Alsine aquatica (...)-dioribus, sieve (...) (...), (that is) Round leaued
Chickweed, or water Purslane, has a small stringy root which sends forth
diverse creeping square branches, which here and there at the (...) put out
small fibers, and take root again: the leaves grow at the joints by couples,
somewhat longish, and round at the points, resembling those of Purslane, but
much smaller, and of a yellowish green color: at the bosoms of the leaves
come forth little flowers, which are succeeded by little round seed-vessels
containing a small round seed. Bauhine has set this forth by the name of
Alsine (...) minor folijs (...).

12 The other water Chickweed, which John Bauhine has mentioned by the name of
Serpillifolia; and Casper Bauhine by the title of Alsine palustris minor
Serpillifolia, has also weak and tender creeping branches lying spread upon
the ground; set with two narrow sharp pointed leaves at each joint, green
above, and of a whitish color below: at the setting on of these leaves grow
small vessels parted as it were into two, with a little crest on each side, and
in these is contained a very small seed. Both these may be found in waterie
places in (...) and August, as between Clapham heath and Touting, and between
Kentish town and Hampstead.

13 This Plant that Clusius and others have called Alsine repens major, and
some have thought the (...) altera of Dioscorides; and Cucubalus of Pliny, may
fitly be put in this rank; for it sends up many long weak branches like the
great Chickweed, set with two leaves at a joint, bigger than those of the
greatest Chickweed, yet like them in shape and color: at the tops of the
branches, out of pretty large cups come whitish green flowers, which are
succeeded by berries as big as those of (...), at first green, but afterward
black: the seed is small and smooth: the root white, very fibrous, long and
woody, and it endures for many years. It flowers most part of Summer, and
grows wild in sundry places of Spain and Germany, as also in Flanders and
England, according to Pena and Lobel: yet I have not seen it growing but in
the garden of my friend Mr. Pemble at Marribone. The Authors last mentioned
affirm the berries hereof to have a poisonous faculty like as those of Dwale
or deadly Nightshade.

The Place.
Chickweeds, some grow among bushes and briers, old walls, gutters of houses,
and shadowie places. The places where the rest grow are set forth in their
several descriptions.

The Time.
The Chickweeds are green in Winter, they flower and seed in the Spring.

The Names.
Chickweed or Chickenweed is called in Greek (...): in Latin it retains the
same name Alsine: of some of the Ancients it is called Hippia. The rest of the
plants are distinguished in their several titles, with proper names which
likewise sets forth the place of their growings.

The Temperature.
Chickweed is cold and moist, and of a waterish substance; and therefore it
cools without astriction or binding, as Galen says.

The Virtues.
The leaves of Chickweed boiled in water very soft, adding thereto some hogs
grease, the powder

The leaves boiled in Vinegar and salt are good against mangines of the hands
and legs, if they

Little birds in cadges (especially Linnets) are refreshed with the lesser
Chickweed when they Passerina.

CHAP. 193. Of the bastard Chickweeds.
The Description.
1 GErmander Chickweed has small tender branches trailing upon the ground,
beset with leaves like unto those of Scordium, or Water Germander. Among which
comeforth little blew flowers: which being saded, there appear small flat
husks or pouches, wherein lies the seed.. The root is small and threddy; which
being once gotten into a garden ground is hard to be destroyed, but naturally
comes up from year to year as a noisome weed.

1 Asine folijs trissaginis. Germander Chickweed.
2 Alsine corniculata Clusij. Horned Chickweed.
3 Alsine (...). Iuy Chickweed.
4 Alsine Hederula altera. Great Henne-bit.


2 Clusius, a man singular in the knowledge of plants, has set down this
herb for one of the Chickweeds, which does very well resemble the Storks bill,
and might have been there inserted. But the matter being of small moment I let
it pass; for doubtless it participateth of both, that is, the head or beak
of Storkes bill, and the leaves of Chickweed, which are long and hairy, like
those of Scorpion Mouse-eare. The flowers are small, and of an herby color;
after which come long horned cods or seed-vessels, like unto those of the
Storks bill. The root is small and single, with strings fastened thereto.

3 Iuie Chickeweed or small Henbit, has thin hairy leaves somewhat broad, with
two cuts or gashes in the sides, after the manner of those of ground Iuie,
whereof it took his name, resembling the back of a Be when she flies. The
stalks are small, tender, hairy, and lying flat upon the ground. The flowers
are slender, and of a blew color. The root is little and threddy.

4 The great Henbit has feeble stalks leaning toward the ground, whereupon
do grow at certain distances leaves like those of the dead Nettell; from the
bosom whereof come forth slender blew flowers tending to purple; in shape like
those of the small dead Nettle. The root is tough, single, and a few strings
hanging thereat.

The Place.
These (...) are sown in gardens among potherbes, in dark shadowie places,
and in the fields after the corn is reaped.

The Time.
They flourish and are green when the other Chickweedes are.

The Names.
The first and third is called Morsus Gallinae, Hens bit, Alsine Hederula, and
Hederacea: Lobell also calls the fourth Morsus Galinae folio (...) alter: in
high Dutch Hunerbisz: in French, Morsgelin, and Morgeline: in low Dutch,
Hoenderebeet: in English, Henbit the greater and the lesser.

The Temperature and Virtues.
These are thought also to be could and moist, and like to the other Chickweeds
in virtue and operation.

CHAP. 194. Of Pimpernell.
1 Anagallis mas. Male Pimpernell.
2 Anagallis foemina. Female Pimpernell.


The Description.
1 PImpernell is like unto Chickeweed; the stalks are four square, trailing
here and there upon the ground, whereupon do grow broad leaves, and sharp
pointed, set together by couples: from the bosom whereof come forth slender
tendrells, whereupon do grow small purple flowers tending to redness: which
being past there succeed fine round bullets, like unto the seed of Corianders,
wherein is contained small dustie seed. The root consists of slender strings.

2 The female Pimpernell differs not from the male in any one point, but in
the color of the flowers; for like as the former has reddish flowers, this
plant brings forth flowers of a most perfect blew color, wherein is the
difference.

3 Of this there is another variety set forth by Clusius by the name of
Anagallis tenuifolia Monelli, because he received the figure and History
thereof from John Monell of I ournay in France; it differs thus from the last
mentioned, the leaves are longer and narrower, somewhat like those of Gratiola,
and they now and then grow three at a joint, and out of the bosoms of the
leaves come commonly as many little footstalkes as there are leaves, which
carry flowers of a blew color with the middle purplish, and these are somewhat
larger than them of the former, otherwise like.

3 Anagallis tenuifolia. Narrow leaued Pimpernell.
4 Anagallis lutea. Yellow Pimpernell.


4 The yellow Pimpernell has many weak and seeble branches trailing upon the
ground, beset with leaves one against another like the great Chickweed, not
unlike to Nummularia, or Money woort; between which and the stalks, come
forth two single and small tender footestalkes, each bearing at their top one
yellow flower and no more. The root is small and threddy.

The Place.
They grow in plowed sields near path ways, in gardens and vineyardes, almost
every where. I found the female with blew flowers in a chalkie corn field in
the way from Mr. William Swains house of Southfleet to Long field downs, but
never any where else. I also being in Essex in the company of my kind friend
Mr. Nathaniel Wright found this among the corn at Wrightsbridge, being the
seat of Mr. John Wright his brother. The yellow Pimpernell grows in the woods
between High-gate and Hampstead, and in many other woods.

The Time.
They flower in Summer, and especially in the month of August, at what time
the husbandmen having occasion to go unto their harvest work, will first
behold the flowers of Pimpernell, whereby they know the weather that shall
follow the next day after: as for example, if the flowers be shut close up, it
betokens rain and foul weather; contrariwise, if they be spread abroad,
fair weather.

The Names.
It is called in Greek (...): in Latin also Anagallis: of diverse, (as Pliny
reports) Corchorus, but untruly: of Marcellus an old Writer, Macia; the word
is extant in Dioscorides among the bastard names. That with the crimson flower,
being the male, is named Phoenicion, and Corallion: of this is made the
composition or receipt called Diacorallion, that is used against the gout; which
composition Paulus Aegineta sets down in his seventh book. Among the
bastard names it has been called Aetitis, Aegitis, and Sauritis: in English,
Red Pimpernell, and blew Pimpernel.

The Temperature.
Both the sorts of Pimpernell are of a drying faculty without biting, and
somewhat hot, with a certain drawing quality, insomuch that it does draw forth
splinters and things fixed in the flesh, as Galen writes.

The Virtues.
Dioscorides writes, That they are of power to mitigate pain, to cure
inflammations or hot swellings,

The juice purges the head (...) gargarising or washing the throat therewith;
it cures the toothache

It helps those that be dim sighted: the juice mixed with honey cleanses the
vleers of the eye (...).

Moreover he affirms, That it is good against the stinging of Vipers, and
other venomous

It prevails against the infirmities of the liver and kidneyes, if the juice
be drunk with wine.

CHAP. 195. Of Brooke-lime, or water Pimpernell.
The Description.
1 BRooke-lime or Brooklem has fat thick stalks, round, and parted into
diverse branches: the leaves be thick, smooth, broad, and of a deep green
color. The flowers grow upon small tender foot-stalkes, which thrust forth of
the bosom of the leaves, of a perfect blew color, not unlike to the flowers
of land Pimpernell: the root is white, low creeping, with fine strings fastened
thereto: out of the root spring many other stalks, whereby it greatly
increases.

There is a lesser variety of this, which our Author set forth in the fourth
place, differing not from this but only in that it is less in all the parts
thereof; wherefore I have omitted the history and figure, to make room for
more conspicuous differences.

2 The great water Pimpernell is like unto the precedent, saving that this
plant has sharper pointed or larger leaves, and the flowers are of a more
whitish or a paler blew color, wherein (...) the difference.

There is also a lesser variety of this, whose figure and description our
Author gave in the next place; but because the difference is in nothing but
the magnitude I have made bold to omit it also.

3 Now that I have briefly given you the history of the four formerly
described by our Author, I will acquaint you with two or three more plants
which may fitly be here inserted: The first of these Lobel calls Anagallis
aquatica tertia; and therefore I have thought fit to give you it in the same
place here. It has a white and fibrous root; from which arises a round smooth
stalk a foot and more high, (yet I have sometimes found it not above three or
four inches high:) upon the stalks grow leaves round, green, and shining,
standing not by couples, but one above another on all sides of the stalks. The
leaves that (...) on the ground are longer than the rest, and are in shape
somewhat like those of the common Daisie, but that they are not snipped about
the edges: the flowers are white, consisting of one leaf divided into five
parts; and they grow at the first as it were in an vmbel, but afterward more
spike fashioned. It flowers in June and July, and grows in many waterie
places, as in the marshes of Dartford in Kent, also between Sandwich and
Sandowne castle, and in the ditches on this side Sandwich. (...) says, That
Guillandinus called it sometimes Alisma, and otherwhiles Cochlearia: and others
would have it to be Samolum of Pliny, lib. 25. cap. 11. Baubine himself fitly
calls it Anagallis aquatica folio rot undo non crenato.

1 Anagallis seu Becabunga. Brooke-lime.
2 Anagallis aquatica mayor. Great long leaued Brook-lime.
3 Anagallis aquatica rotundifolia. Round leaued water Pimpernel.


4 I conjecture this figure which we here (...) you with the Authors title to
be only the lesser variety of that which our Author describes in the second
place; but because I have no certainty hereof (for that Lobel has given us no
description thereof in any of his Latin Works, and also Bauhinus has
distinguished them) I am forced to give you only the figure thereof; not
intending to deceive my reader by giving descriptions from my fancy and the
figure, as our Author sometimes made bold to do.

5 This which is set forth by most writers for Cepoea, and which some may
object to be more fit to be put next the Purslanes, I will here give you,
having forgot to do it there; and I think this place not unfit, because our
Author in the Names in this Chapter takes occasion in Dodonoeus his words to
make mention thereof. It has a small unprofitable root, sending up a stalk
some soot high, divided into many weak branches, which are here and there set
with thick leaves like those of Purslane, but much less, and narrower, and
sharper pointed: the flowers which grow in good plenty upon the tops of the
branches are composed of five small white leaves; whereto (...) small heads,
wherein is contained a seed like that of Orpine. This by Matthiolus and others
is called Capoea: but Clusius doubts that it is not the true Cepoea of the
Ancients.

4 Anagallis aquatica quarta, Lob. Lobels fourth water Pimpernel.
5 Cepoea. Garden Brook-lime.


The Place.
They grow by rivers sides, small running brooks, and waterie ditches. The
yellow Pimpernell I found growing in Hampsted wood near London, and in many
other woods and copses.

The Time.
They bring forth their flowers and seed in June, July, and August.

The Names.
Water Pimpernel is called Anagallis (...): of most, (...), which is borrowed
of the Germane word Bachpunghen: in Low Dutch, Beeckpunghen: in French, Berle;
whereupon some do call it Berula: notwithstanding Marcellus reports, That
Berula is that which the Grecians call (...), or rather Cresses: it is thought
to be (...); that is to say, of the garden; which Dioscorides writes to be
like unto Purslane, whereunto this Brook-lime does very well agree. But if it
be therefore said to be (...), because it grows either only or for the most
part in gardens, this Pimpernel or Brook-lime shall not be like unto it, which
grows (...) where less than in gardens, being altogether of his own nature
wild, desiring to grow in waterie places, and such as be continually
overflowed: in English the first is called Brooklime, and the rest by no
particular names; but we may call them water Pimpernels, or Brook-limes.

The Temperature.
Brook-lime is of temperature hot and dry like water Cresses, yet not so much.

The Virtues.
Brooke-lime is eaten in sallads as Watercresses are, and is good against that
(...) malum of such as dwell near the Germane seas, which they call
Seuerbuycke: or as we term it, the Scuruie,

The herb boiled makes a good fomentation for swollen legs and the dropsy.

The leaves boiled, strained, and stamped in a stone mortar with the powder of
(...), Lincseeds,

The leaves of Brooke-lime stamped, strained, and given to drink in wine,
helps the strangurie,

The leaves of Brook-lime, and the tendrels of Asparagus, eaten with oil,
vinegar, and Pepper,

CHAP. 196. Of stinking Ground Pine.
The Kinds.
DIoscorides has anciently mentioned two sorts of Anthyllis: one with leaves
like to the Leatill, and the other like to Chamoepitys. To the first, some late
writers have referred diverse plants, as the two first described in this
Chapter; The Anthyllis Leguminosa Belgarum hereafter to be described; the
Anthyllis Valentina Clusij formerly set forth Chap. 171. To the second are
(...) the Iua Moschata Monspeliaca, described in the fourth place of the 150.
Chap. of this book; the (...) described formerly chap. 165. in the 14. place,
and that which is here described in the third place of this chapter, by the
name of (...) altera Italorum.

The Description.
1 THere has been much ado among Writers about the certain knowledge of the
true Anthyllis of Dioscorides: I will therefore set down that plant which of
all others is found most agreeable thereunto. It has many small branches full
joints, not above an handful high, creeping sundry ways, beset with small
thick leaves of a pale color, resembling Lenticula, or rather Alsine minor,
the lesser Chickweed. The flowers grow at the top of the stalk,
starre-fashion, of an herby color like box, or Sedum minus: it fostereth his
small seeds in a three cornered husk. The root is somewhat long, slender,
ioynted, and deeply thrust into the ground like Soldanella: all the whole
plant is saltish, bitter in taste, and somewhat (...).

1 Anthyllis lentifolia, sieve Alsine cruciata marina. Sea Pimpernell.
2 Anthyllis Marina incana (...). Many floured Ground Pine.


This description was taken out of the Aduersaria, page 195. where it is called
(...) prior lentifolia Peplios (...) maritima: also Clusius has described it
by the name of Alsines genus pelagicum: I have called it in my last iournall by
the name of Alsine cruciata marina, because the leaves which grow thick
together by couples cross each other, as it happens in most plants which have
square stalks with two leaves at each joint. I have Englished it Sea
Pimpernell, because the leaves in shape are as like those of Pimpernel as of
any other Plant; and also for that our Author has called another plant by the
name of Sea Chickeweed. The figure of the Aduersaria was not good, and Clusius
has none; which has caused some to reck on this Anthyllis of Lobel, and
Alsine of Clusius for two several plants, which indeed are not so. I have
given you a figure hereof which I took from the growing plant, and which well
expresses the growing thereof.

3 Anthyllis altera Italorum. Stinking ground (...).


2 There is likewise another sort of (...) or Sea Ground (...), but in truth
nothing else than a kind of Sea Chickeweed, having small branches trailing upon
the ground of two hands high, whereupon do grow little leaves like those of
Chickweed, not unlike those of (...), or Sea Lentils: on the top of the stalks
stand many small mossie flowers of a white color. The whole plant is of a
bitter and (...) taste. This is the Marina incana (...) Alsiae folia
Narbonensium of Lobel: it is the Paronychia altera of Matthiolus.

3 To this sigure (which formerly was given for the first of these by our
Author) I will now give you a brief description. This in the branches,
leaves, and whole face thereof is very like the French HerbeIuie, or Ground
Pine, but that it is much less in all the parts thereof, but chiefly in the
leaves which also are not snipt like those of the French Ground (...), but
sharp pointed: the tops of the branches are downie or woolly, and set with
little pale yellow flowers.

The Place.
These do grow in the Soath Isles belonging to England, especially in Portland
in the grauelly and sandy foords, which lie low and against the sea; and
likewise in the (...) of Shepey near the water side. I have only sound the
first described, and that both in Shepey, as also in West-gate bay by Margate
in the Isle of Thanet.

The Time.
They flower and flourish in June and (...).

The Names.
Their titles and descriptions sufficiently set forth their several names.

The Temperature.
These sea herbs are of a temperate faculty between hot and cold.

The Virtues.
Half an ounce of the dried leaves drunk, prevails greatly against the hot
piss, the (...),

The same (...) with Oxymell or honied water is good for the falling sickness,
given first at (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...)


CHAP. 197. Of Whiteblow, or Whitelow Grass.
The (...).
1 THe first is a very slender plant having a few small leaves like the least
Chickeweede, growing in little tufts, from the midst whereof rises up a small
stalk, three or four inches long; on whose top do grow very little white
flowers; which being past, there come in place small flat pouches composed of
three filmes; which being ripe, the two outsides fall away, leaving the middle
part standing long time after which is like white Satin, as is that of (...),
which our women call white Satin, but much smaller: the taste is somewhat
sharp.

2 This kind of (...), has small thick and fat leaves, (...) into three or
more divisions, much resembling the (...) of Rue, but a great deal smaller.
The stalks are like the former, and (...) leaves also; but the cases wherein
the seed is contained, are like unto the (...) (...) of Myositis Scorpioides,
or Mouseare Scorpion grass. The flowers are small and white.

There is another sort of Whitlow grass or (...), that is likewise a low or
base herb, having a small tough root, with some threddie strings annexed
thereto: (...) which rise up diverse slender tough stalks, set with little
narrow leaves consusedly like those of the smallest Chickweed whereof
doubtless these be kinds: along the stalks do grow very little white
flowers, asterwhich come the seeds in small buttons, of the bigness of a pins
head. Our Author seems here to describe the Paronychia 2. of Tabern.

1 Paronychia vulgaris. Common Whitlow grass.
2 Paronychia Rutacco folio. Rue leased or iagged Whitlow grass.


The Place.
These small, base and low herbs grow upon brick and stone walls, upon old
tiled houses; which are grown to have much moss upon them, and upon some
shadowie, and dry muddy walls. It grows plentifully upon the brick wall in
Chancerie Lane, belonging to the Earl of Southampton, in the Suburbs of
London, and sundry other places.

The Time.
These flower many times in January and February, and when hot weather
approaches, they are no more to be seen all the year after.

The Names.
The Graecians have called these plants (...) which Cicero calls Reduvia:
There be many kinds of plants, called by the said name of Paronychia, which
has caused many writers to doubt of the true kind: but you may very boldly
take these plants for the same, until time has revealed or raised up some new
plant, approaching nearer unto the truth: which I think will never be, so that
we may call them in English, Naile-woort, and Whitelow grass.

The Tmperatures and Virtues.
As touching the quality hereof, we have nothing to set down: only it has
been taken to Our Author he elgaue us two figures, and as many descriptions
of both these plants, wherefore I have emitted (...) of the figures, and the
more (...) (...).


CHAP. 198. Of the female Fluellen, or Speedwell.
The Description.
1 THe first kind of Elatine, being of Fuchsius and Matthiolus, called
Veronica foemina, (...) the female Fluellen, shoots from a small and fibrous
root many flexible and tender branches, dispersed flat upon the ground, ramping
and creeping with leaves like Nummularia, but that the leaves of Elatine are of
an hoarie, hairie, and ouerworne green color; among which come forth many
small flowers, of a yellow color mixed with a little purple, like unto the
small Snapdragon, having a certain tail or Spur fastened unto every such
flower, like the herb called Larkes spur. The lower iaw or chap of the
flower is of a purple color, and the upper iawe of a fair yellowe; which
being past, there succeedes a small black seed contained in round husks.

2 The second kind of Elatine has stalks, branches, flowers, and roots, like
the first: but the leaves are fashioned like the former, but that they have two
little ears at the lower end, somewhat resembling an arrow head, broad at the
setting on: but the spur or tail of the flower is longer, and more purple
mixed with the yellow in the flower.

1 Veronica foemina Fuchsij, sive Elatine. The Female Fluellen.
2 Elatine altera. Sharp pointed Fluellen.


The Place.
Both these plants I have found in sundry places where corn has grown,
especially barley, as in the fields about Southfleet in Kent, where within six
miles compass there is not a field wherein it does not grow.

Also it grows in a field next unto the house sometime belonging to that
honorable gentleman Sir Frances Walsingham, at Barn-elmes, and in sundry
places of Essex; and in the next field unto the Churchyard at Chiswicke near
London, toward the midst of the field.

The Time.
They flower in August and September.

The Names.
Their several titles set forth their names as well in Latin as English.

The Nature and Virtues.
These plants are not only of a singular astringent faculty, and thereby
help them that be Pena reports to have his nose eaten most griouously with
a canker or eating sore, who sent for the Physicians and Chirurgions that were
famously known to be the best, and they with one consent concluded to cut the
said nose off, to preserve the rest of his face: among these Surgeons and
Physicians came a poor sorry Barbar, who had no more skill than he had learned
by tradition, and yet undertook to cure the patient. This foresaid Barbar
standing in the company and hearing their determination, desired that he might
make trial of an herb which he had seen his master use for the same purpose,
which herb Elatine, though he were ignorant of the name whereby it was called,
yet he knew where to fetch it. To be short, this herb he stamped, and gave
the juice of it unto the patient to drink, and outwardly applied the same
plaisterwise, and in very short space perfectly cured the man, and stayed the
rest of his body from further corruption, which was ready to fall into a
leprosy, Aduersar. page 197.

Elatine helps the inflammation of the eyes, and defends humors flowing
unto them, being

The leaves sodden in the broth of a hen, or Veale, staieth the dysenterie.

The new writers affirm, that the female Fluellen opens the obstructions or
stoppings of the Paulus.

The weight of a dram or of a French crown, of the powder of the herb, with
the like weight of

CHAP. 192. Of Fluellen the male, or Paul's Betonie.
1 Veronica vera and mayor. Fluellen, or Speedwell.
The second and third were both (...) of that described in the third place: and
those that were (...) in the fifth and sixth places were also of the same
plant, to wit that which is here described in the sixth place and which was
formerly in the fifth.
2 Veronica recta mas. The male Speedwell.


The Description.
1 THe first kind of Veronica is a small herb, and creeps by the ground,
with little reddish and hairy branches. The leaf is something round and hairy,
indented or snipped round about the edges. The flowers are of a light blew
color, declining to purple: the seed is contained in little flat pouches: the
root is fibrous and hairy.

The second and third were both (...) of that described in the third place: and
those that were (...) in the fifth and sixth places were also of the same
plant, to wit that which is here described in the sixth place and which was
formerly in the fifth.
2 The second does also creep upon the ground, having long slender stemmes,
some foot high, and somewhat large leaves a little hairy, and pleasantly soft.
The flowers be blew like as those of the former, but somewhat bigger, and of a
brighter color; and they are also succeeded by round seed vessels.

3 The third kind of Veronica creeps with branches and leaves like unto
Serpillum, for which cause it has been called Veronica Serpillifolia. The
flowers grow along the small and tender branches, of a whitish color declining
to blewnesse. The root is small and threddie, taking hold upon the upper face
of the earth, where it spreads. The seed is contained in small pouches like
the former.

4 The fourth has a root somewhat wooddie, from the which rise up leaves like
unto the former. The small upright stalk is beset with the like leaves, but
lesser; at the top whereof comes forth a slender spike closely thrust
together, and full of bluish flowers, which are succeeded by many horned seed
vessels.

5 This has many wooddie round smooth branches, some handful and half high
or better: the leaves are like those of wild Time, but longer, and of a
blacker color, sometimes lightly snipt: at the tops of the branches grow
flowers of a whitish blew color, consisting of four, five, or else six e
little leaves a piece; which falling, there follow round seed vessels,
containing a round small and black seed. It flowers in August, and grows upon
cold and high mountains, as the Alps. Pona calls this Veronica Alpina minima
Serpillifolio: and Clusius has it by the name of Veronica 3. fruticans.

3 Veronica minor. Little Fluellen.
4 Veronica recta minima. The smallest Fluellen.


5 Veronica fruticans Serpillifolia. Shrubbie Fluellen.
6 Veronica assurgens, sive Spicata. Tree Fluellen.
The second and third were both (...) of that described in the third place: and
those that were (...) in the fifth and sixth places were also of the same
plant, to wit that which is here described in the sixth place and which was
formerly in the fifth.
7 Veronica spicata latifolia. Upright Fluellen.
8 Veronica supina. Leaning Fluellen.


6 The sixth kind of Veronica has many upright branches a foot high and
sometimes more, dividing themselves into sundry other small twigs; at the top
whereof do grow fair spikie tusts, bearing bright and shining blew flowers.
The leaves are somewhat long, indented about the edges like a saw: the root is
compact of many threads, or strings.

7 This has stalks some cubit high and sometimes more, and these not very
full of branches, yet having diverse joints, at each whereof do grow forth two
leaves, two or three inches long, and one broad, and these leaves are also
thick, smooth, and shining, lightly snipt or (...) about the edges, and of a
very astringent and drying taste, and at last somewhat biting. At the top of
the stalks grow spokie tufts or blew flowers like those of the last mentioned,
but of somewhat a lighter color, and they begin first to flower or show
themselves below, and so go upwards; the seed, which is small and black, is
contained in flat seed vessels: the root is thick with many fibers, every
year thrusting up new shoots. There is a variety of this with the leaves not
so black and shining, but having more branches; and another which has a
longer spike or tuft of (...). Clusius calls this Veronica erectior latifolia.

8 The eighth having his stalks leaning upon the ground looks with his face
upright, having sundry flexible branches, set with leaves like unto wild
Germander by couples, one right against another, deeply jagged about the edges,
in respect of the other before mentioned. The flowers are of a blew color: the
root is long, with some threads appendant thereto.

The Place.
Veronica grows upon banks, borders of fields, and grassie mole-hils, in
sandy grounds, and in woods, almost every where.

The fourth kind, my good friend Mr. Stephen Bredwell, practitioner in
physic found and showed it me in the close next adjoining to the house of Mr.
Bele, chief of the clerks of her Majesty's Counsel, dwelling at Barnes near
London. The sixth is a stranger in England, but I have it growing in my garden.

The Time.
These flower from May to September.

The Names.
The second and third were both (...) of that described in the third place: and
those that were (...) in the fifth and sixth places were also of the same
plant, to wit that which is here described in the sixth place and which was
formerly in the fifth.
These plants are comprehended under this general name Veronica; and Dodonaeus
would have the first of them to be the Betonica of Paulus Aegineta; and Turner
and Gesner the third: we do call them in English, Paul's Betony, or Speedwell:
in Welsh it is called Fluellen, and the Welsh people do attribute great virtues
to the same: in high Dutch, (...): in low Dutch, (...) (...), that is to say,
Honor and praise.

The Nature.
These are of a mean temperature, between heat and dryness.

The Virtues.
The decoction of Veronica drunk, sodereth and heals all fresh and old
wounds, cleanses the

The water of Veronica distilled with wine, and re-distilled so often until
the liquor wax of a reddish

CHAP. 198. Of herb Two pence.
The Description.
1 Herb Two pence has a small and tender root, spreding and dispersing it
self far within the ground; from which rise up many little, tender, flexible
stalks trailing upon the ground, set by couples at certain spaces, with
smooth green leaves somewhat round, whereof it took his name: from the bosom
of which leaves shoot forth small tender foot-stalkes, whereon do grow little
yellow flowers, like those of Cinkefoile or Tormentill.

2 There is a kind of Money woort or herb Two pence, like the other of his
kind in each respect, saving it is altogether lesser, wherein they differ.

3 There is another kind of Money-woort which has many very slender creeping
branches which here and there put forth fibers, and take root again: the
leaves are small and round, standing by couples one against another; and out of
the bosoms come slender foote-stalkes bearing pretty little whitish purple
flowers consisting of five little leaves standing together in manner of a
little bell-floure, and seldom otherwise: the seed is small, and contained in
round heads. This grows in many wet rotten grounds and upon bogges: I first
found it Anno 1626, in the Bishopric of Durham, and in two or three places of
Yorkshire, and not thinking any had taken notice thereof, I drew a figure of it
and called it Nummularia pusilla flore ex albo purpurascente; but since I have
found that Bauhine had formerly set it forth in his Prodromus by the name of
Nummularia flore purpurascente. It grows also on the bogges upon the heath,
near Burnt wood in Essex: it flowers in July and August.

1 Nummularia. Herb Two pence.
3 Nummularia flore purpurascente. Purple floured Money-woort.


The Place.
It grows near unto ditches and streams, and other watery places, and is
sometimes found in moist woods: I found it upon the bank of the river of
Thames, right against the Queens palace of White hall; and almost in every
country where I have traveled.

The Time.
It floureth from May till Summer be well spent.

The Names.
Herb Two pence is called in Latin (...), and Centummorbiae: and of diverse
Serpentaria. It is reported that if serpents be hurt or wounded, they do heal
themselves with this herb, whereupon came the name Serpentaria: it is thought
to be called Centummorbia, of the wonderful effect which it has in curing
diseases; and it is called Nummularia of the form of money, whereunto the
leaves are like: in Dutch, (...): in English, Money woort, Herb Two pence, and
Two penny grass.

The Temperature.
That this herb is dry, the binding taste thereof does show: it is also
moderate cold.

The Virtues.
The flowers and leaves stamped and laid upon wounds and ulcers does cure them:
but it works

The juice drunk in wine, is good for the bloody flix, and all other issues
in blood of man or

Boiled with wine and honey it cures the wounds of the inward parts, and
ulcers of the lungs, and

The herb boiled in wine with a little honey, or meade, prevails much
against the cough in

CHAP. 200. Of Bugle or Middle Comfrey.
The Description.
1 BVgula spreads and creeps along the ground like Money woort; the
leaves be long, fat, and oleous, and of a brown color for the most part. The
flowers grow about the stalks in rundles, compassing the stalk, leaving
between every rundle bare or naked spaces; and are of a fair blew color, and
often white. I found many plants of it in a moist ground upon Black Heath
near London, fast by a village called Charleton, but the leaves were green,
and not brown at all like the other.

1 Bugula. Middle Consound.
2 Bugula flore (...), sieve carneo. White or carnation floured Bugle.


2 Bugle with the white flower disfereth not from the precedent, in roots,
leaves, and stalks the only difference is, that this plant brings forth
fair milk white flowers, and the other those that are blew. It is also sound
with a flesh colored flower, and the leaves are less snipt than those of the
former. Bauhine makes mention of one much less than those, with round suipt
leaves and a yellow flower which he says he had out of England, but I have not
as yet seen it; nor found any other mention thereof.

The Place.
Bugula grows almost in every wood and copse, and such like (...) and moist
places, and is much planted in gardens: the other varieties are seldom to be
met withal.

The Time.
Bugula floureth in April and May.

The Names.
Bugle is reckoned among the Consounds or wound herbs: and it is called of
some Consolida media, Bugula, and Buglum: in High Dutch, Guntzel: in Low Dutch
Senegroen: of (...), Herba Laurentina: in English, Brown Bugle: of some,
Sicklewoort, and herb Carpenter, but not truly.

The Nature.
Bugle is of a mean temperature, between heat and dryness.

The Virtues.
It is commended against inward burstings, and members torn, rent, and
bruised: and therefore Ruellius writes that they commonly say in France, how
he needs neither Physician nor Surgeon that has Bugle and Sanickle, for it
does not only cure rotten wounds being inwardly taken, but also applied to them
outwardly; it is good for the infirmities of the Liver; it takes away the
obstructions, and strengthens it.

The decoction of Bugle drunken, dissolueth clotted or congealed blood within
the body, heals

The same opens the stoppings of the Liver and gall, and is good against the
iaundise and fevers

The same decoction cures the rotten ulcers and sores of the mouth and gums.

Bugula is excellent in curing wounds and scratches, and the juice cures the
wounds, ulcers and

CHAP. 201 Of Selfe-heale.
1 Prunella. Selfe-heale.
2 Prunella (...). The second Selfe-heale.


3 Prunella flore albo. White floured Self-(...).


The (...).
1 PRunell or Brunel has square hairy stalks of a foot high, beset with long,
hairy and sharp pointed leaves, and at the top of the stalks grow flowers
thick set together, like an (...) or spiky knap, of a brown color mixed with
blew flowers, and sometimes white, of which kind I found some plants in Essex
(...) Henningham castle. The root is small and very threddie.

2 Prunella altera, or after Lobel and Pena, Symphytum (...), has leaves like
the last described, but somewhat narrower, and the leaves that grow commonly
toward the tops of the stalks, are deeply divided or cut in, after the manner
of the leaves of the small Valerian, and sometimes the lower leaves are also
divided, but that is more seldom the heads and flowers are like those of the
former, and the color of the flowers is commonly purple yet sometimes it is
found with flesh colored, and otherwhiles with white or ash colored flowers.

3 The third sort of Selfe-heale is like unto the last described in root,
stalk, and leaves, and in every other point, saving that the flowers hereof
are of a perfect white color, and the others not so, which makes the
difference.

The figure which our Author gave in this third place, was of the Prunella
secunda of Tabern. which I judge to be all one with the Prunella 1. non
vulgaris of Clusius, and that because the flowers in that of Tabernamontanus
are expressed Ventre laxiore, which Clusius complains his drawer did not
observe; the other parts also agree: now this of Clusius has much larger
flowers than the ordinary, and those commonly of a deeper purple color, yet
they are sometimes (...), and otherwhiles of an ash color: the leaves also
are somewhat more hairie, long and sharp pointed, than the ordinary, and
herein consists the greatest difference.

The Place.
The first kind of Prunell or Brunell grows very commonly in all our
fields throughout England.

The second Brunel or Symphytum petraeum grows naturally upon rocks, (...)
mountains, and grauelly grounds.

The third for any thing that I know is a stranger with us: but the (...)
common kind I have found with white flowers.

The Time.
These plants flower for the most part all Summer long.

The Names.
Brunel is called in English Prunell, Carpenters herb, Selfe-heale, and
Hook-(...), and Sicklewoort. It is called of the later Herbarists Brunella:
and Prunella, of Matthiolus, Consolida minor, and Solidago minor; but says
Ruellius, the Daisie is the right Consolida minor, and also the Solidago minor.

The Nature.
These herbs are of the temperature of Bugula, that is to say, moderately hot
and dry, and something binding.

The Virtues.
The decoction of Prunell made with wine or water, does join together and make
whole and

Prunell bruised with oil of Roses and Vinegar, and laid to the forepart of
the head, swageth

To be short, it serves for the same that Bugle does, and in the world there
are not two better

It is commended against the infirmities of the mouth, and especially the
ruggedness, blackenesse, de Braun, which happens not without a continual
ague and frenzy. The remedy hereof is the decoction of Selfe-heale, with
common water, after blood letting out of the veins of the tongue: and the mouth
and tongue must be often washed with the same decoction, and sometimes a little
vinegar mixed therewith. This disease is thought to be unknown to the old
writers: but notwithstanding if it be conferred with that which Paulus Aegineta
calls Erysipelas (...), an inflammation of the brain, then will it not be
thought to be much differing, if it be not the very same.

CHAP. 202. Of the great Daisie, or Maudelen woort.
1 Bellis mayor. The great Daisie.


The Description.
1 THe great Daisie has very many broad leaves spread upon the ground, somewhat
indented about the edges, of the breadth of a finger, not unlike those of
groundswell: among which rise up stalks of the height of a cubit, set with the
like leaves, but lesser, in the top whereof do grow large white flowers with
yellow thrums in the middle like those of the single field Daisy or Mayweed,
without any smell at all. The root is full of strings.

The Place.
It grows in Meadows and in the borders of fields almost every where.

The Time.
It floureth and flourishes in May and June.

The Names.
It is called (as we have said) Bellis mayor, and also (...) media
vulnerariorum, to make a difrence between it and Bugula, which is the true
Consolida media: notwithstanding this is holden of all to be Consolida medij
generis, or a kind of middle Consound: in High Dutch, as Fuchsius reports,
(...): in English, the Great Daisie and Maudelen woort.

The Temperature.
This great Daisie is moist in the end of the second degree, and cold in the
beginning of the same.

The Virtues.
The leaves of the great Maudleine woort are good against all burning ulcers
and apostemes, against

The same made up in an unguent or salve with wax, oil, and turpentine, is
most excellent for

The juice, decoction, or distilled water, is drunk to very good purpose
against the rupture or any

The herb is good to be put into Vulnerarie drinks or potions, as one simple
belonging thereto

It likewise asswageth the cruel torments of the gout, used with a few Mallows
and butter boiled

The same receipt aforesaid used in Clysters, profits much against the
vehement heat in agues,

CHAP. 203. Of little Daisies.
The Description.
1 THe Daisie brings forth many leaves from a threddy root, smooth, fat,
long, and somewhat round withal, very slightly indented about the edges, for
the most part lying upon the ground: among which rise up the flowers, every one
with his own slender stem, almost like those of Camomill, but lesser, of a
perfect white color, and very double.

2 The double red Daisie is like unto the precedent in every respect, saving in
the color of the flowers: for this plant brings forth flowers of a red
color, and the other white as aforesaid.

These double Daisies are of two sorts, that is either smaller or larger; and
these again either white or red, or of both mixed together: wherefore I have
given you in the first place the figure of the small, and in the second that of
the larger.

3 Furthermore, there is another pretty double daisie which differs from the
first described only in the flower, which at the sides thereof puts forth many
foot-stalkes carrying also little double flowers, being commonly of a red
color; so that each stalk carries as it were an old one and the brood
thereof: whence they have fitly termed it the childing Daisie.

1 Bellis minor multiplex flore albo vel rubro. The lesser double red or white
Daisie.
2 Bellis media multiplex flore albo vel rubro. The larger double white or red
Daisie.


4 The wild field Daisie has many leaves spread upon the ground like those of
the garden Daisie: among which rise up slender stems; on the top whereof do
grow small single flowers like those of Camomill, set about a bunch of yellow
thrums, with a pale of white leaves, sometimes white, now and then red, and
often of both mixed together. The root is threddy.

5 There does likewise grow in the fields another sort of wild Daisie,
agreeing with the former in each respect, saving that it is somewhat greater
than the other, and the leaves are somewhat more cut in the edges, and larger.

6 The blew Italian Daisie has many small threddy roots, from the which rise
up leaves like 3 Bellis minor prolifera. Childing Daisie.
4 Bellis minor syluestris. The small wild Daisie.
5 Bellis media syluestris. The middle wild Daisie.
those of the common Daisie, of a dark green color: among which comes up a
fat stem set round about with the like leaves, but lesser. The flowers grow
at the top globe-fashion, that is, round like a ball, of a perfect blew color,
very like unto the flowers of Mountain Scabious.

7 The French blew Daisie is like unto the other blew Daisies in each respect,
saving it is altogether lesser, wherein consists the difference.

There were formerly three figures and descriptions of this blew Daisie, but
one of them might have served; for they differ but in the tallnesse of their
growth, and in the breadth and narrowness of their leaves.

The Place.
The double Daisies are planted in gardens: the others grow wild every where.

The blew Daisies are strangers in England; their natural place of abode is
set forth in their several titles.

6 Bellis coerulea sieve Globularia (...). The blew Italian Daisie.
7 Bellis coerulea Monspeliaca. Blew French Daisies.


The Time.
The Daisies do flower most part of the Summer.

The Names.
The Daisie is called in High Dutch Maszlieben: in low Dutch, Margrieten: in
Latin, Bellis minor, and Consolida minor, or the middle Consound: of Tragus,
Primula veris; but that name is more proper unto Primrose: of some, Herba
Margarita, or Margarites herb: in French, Marguerites, and Cassaudes: in
Italian, Fiori di prima very gentili. In English, Daisies, and Bruisewort.

The blew Daisie is called Bellis coerulea: of some, Globularia, of the round
form of the flower: it is also called Aphyllanthes, and Frondislora: in
Italian, Botanaria: in English, blew Daisies, and Globe Daisie.

The Temperature.
The lesser Daisies are cold and moist, being moist in the end of the second
degree, and cold in the beginning of the same.

The Virtues.
The Daisies do mitigate all kind of pains, but especially of the joints,
and gout proceeding

The leaves of Daisies used amongst other Pot-herbes do make the belly
soluble; and they

The juice of the leaves and roots snift up into the nosthrils, purges the
head mightily of foul

The same given to little dogs with milk keeps them from growing great

The leaves stamped takes away bruises and swellings proceeding of some (...),
if they be

The juice put into the eyes clears them, and takes away the watering.

The decoction of the field Daisie (which is the best for physics use) made in
water and drunk,

CHAP. 204. Of Mouse-eare.
The Description.
1 THe great Mouse-eare has great and large leaves greater than our common
(...), or Mouse-eare, thick, and full of substance: the stalks and leaves be
hoarie and white, with a silken mossinesse in handling like silk, pleasant and
fair in view: it bears three or four quadrangled stalks, somewhat knotty,
a foot long: the roots are hard, woody, and full of strings: the flowers come
forth at the top of the stalk, like unto the small Pisseabed, or Dandelion, of
a bright yellow color.

2 The second kind of Pylosella is that which we call Auricula muris, or
Mouse-eare, being a very common herb, but few more worthy of consideration
because of his good effect, and yet clean unremembered of the old Writers. It is
called Pylosella of the rough hairy and whitish substance growing on the
leaves, which are somewhat long like the little Daisie, but that they have a
small hollownesse in them resembling the ear of a Mouse: upon the which
consideration some have called it (...); wherein they were greatly deceived,
for it is nothing like unto the (...) of (...): his small stalks are likewise
hairy, slender, and creeping upon the ground; his flowers are double, and of a
pale yellow color, much like unto Sonchus, or Hieracium, or Hawkeweed.

1 (...) major. Great Mouse-eare.
2 Pylosella repens. Creeping Mouse-eare.


3 The small Mouse-eare with broad leaves has a small tough root, from which
rise up many hairy and hoarie broad leaves spread upon the ground; among which
grows up a slender stem, at the top whereof stand two or three small yellow
flowers, which being ripe turn unto down that is carried away with the wind.

The Place.
These plants do grow upon sandy banks and vntoiled places that lie open to
the air.

The Time.
They flower in May and June.

The Names.
Great Mouse-eare is called of the later herbarists Pylosella: the smaller
likewise Pylosella, and Auricula muris: in Dutch, Nagelcruijt, and Muysoor:
Lacuna thinks it Holostium: in French, Oreille derat, ou souris: in Italian,
Pelosella: in English, Mouse-eare.

The Temperature.
They are hot and dry of temperature, of an excellent astringent faculty, with
a certain hot tenuitie admixed.

The Virtues.
The decoction of Pylosella drunk does cure and heal all wounds, both inward
and outward: it

The leaves dried and made into powder, do profit much in healing of wounds,
being strewed

The decoction of the juice is of such excellency, that if steele-edged tools
red hot be drenched

This herb being used in gargarismes cures the looseness of the Vuula.

Being taken in drink it heals the fluxes of the womb, as also the diseases
called Dysenteria Enterocele: it glueth and consoundeth wounds, stays the
swelling of the spleen, and the bloody excrements procured thereby.

The Apothecaries of the Low Countries make a syrrup of the juice of this herb,
which they use I have in this chapter omitted two figures and one description:
the first of the two omitted figures, which should have been the third,
differs little from the first but in the smallness of the stalk, and fewness
of the flowers at the top thereof: the other, which was in the fourth place,
was figured and described by me formerly in the fourth place of the 54 chapter
of this book.


CHAP. 205. Of Cotton-weed or Cud-weed.
1 Gnaphalium Anglicum. English Cudweed.
2 Gnaphalium vulgar. Common Cudweed.


The Description.
1 ENglish Cudweed has sundry slender and upright stalks divided into many
branches, and grows as high as common Wormwood, whose color and shape it
does much resemble. The leaves shoot from the bottom of the turfe full of
hairs, in shape somewhat like a Willow leaf below, but above they be
narrower, and like the leaves of Psyllium or Flea-wort: among which do grow
small pale colored flowers like those of the small Coniza or Flea-bane. The
whole plant is of a bitter taste.

2 The second being our common Gnaphalium or Cudweed is a base or low herb,
nine or ten inches long, having many small stalks or tender branches, and
little leaves, covered all over with a certain white cotton or fine wool, and
very thick: the flowers be yellow, and grow like buttons at the top of the
stalks.

3 The third kind of Cudweed or Cotton-weed, being of the sea, is like unto
the other Cudweed last described, but is altogether smaller and lower, seldom
growing much above a handful high: the leaves grow thick upon the stalks,
and are short, flat, and very white, soft and woolly. The flowers grow at the
top of the stalks in small round buttons, of color and fashion like the other
Cudweed.

4 The fourth being the Cotton-weed of the hills and stony mountains, is so
exceeding white and hoary, that one would think it to be a plant made of
wool, which may very easily be known by his picture, without other description.

3 Gnaphalium marinum. Sea Cudweed.
4. 5. Gnaphalium montanum purpureum and album. White and purple mountain
Cotton-weed.


5 The fifth kind of Cotton-weed has leaves and stalks like the other of his
kind, and differs in that, that this plant bears a bush or tuft of purple
flowers, otherwise it is very like.

6 The sixth is like unto the last recited, but greater: the flowers are of an
exceeding bright red color, and of an aromaticall sweet smell.

7 The seventh kind of Gnaphalium or Cotton-weed of Clusius his description,
grows nine or ten inches high, having little long leaves like the small
Mous-eare, woolly within, and of a hoarie color on the outside: the stalks in
like manner are very woolly, at the top whereof comes forth a fair flower
and a strange, having such woolly leaves bordering the flower about, that a man
would think it to be nothing else but wool it self: and in the midst of
the flower come forth

6 Gnaphalium montanum (...) rubens. Bright red mountain Cotton-weed.
The figure that was formerly in the seventh place should have been in the
eleventh; and that in the eleventh in the (...).
7 Gnaphalium Alpinum. Rock Cotton-weed.
8 Gnaphalium Americanum. Live for ever.
9 Filago minor. Small Cud-weed.
sundry small heads of a pale yellow color, like unto the other of this kind.
The root is black and somewhat fibrous.

8 There is a kind of Cotton-weed, being of greater beauty than the rest, that
has strait and upright stalks 3 foot high or more, covered with a most soft
and fine wool, and in such plentiful manner, that a man may with his hands
take it from the stalk in great quantity: which stalk is beset with many
small long and narrow leaves, green upon the inner side, and hoary on the
other side, fashioned somewhat like the leaves of Rosemary, but greater. The
flowers do grow at the top of the stalks in bundles or tufts, consisting of
many small flowers of a white color, and very double, (...), or as it were
consisting of little silver scales thrust close together, which do make the
same very double. When the flower has long flourished, and is waxen old, then
comes there in the midst of the flower a certain brown yellow thrumme, such
as is in the midst of the Daisie: which flower being gathered when it is young,
may be kept in such manner as it was gathered (I mean in such freshness and
well liking) by the space of a whole year after, in your chest or elsewhere:
wherefore our English women have called it Liue-long, or Live for ever, which
name does aptly answer his effects. Clusius received this plant out of England,
and first set it forth by the name of Gnaphalium Americanum, or Argyrocome.

9 This plant has three or four small grayish cottony or woolly stalks,
growing strait from the root, and commonly divided into many little branches:
the leaves be long, narrow, whitish, soft, and woolly, like the other of his
kind: the flowers be round like buttons, growing very many together at the top
of the stalks, but nothing so yellow as Mouse-eare, which turn into down,
and are carried away with the wind.

10 (...), sieve Herba impia. Herb impious, or wicked Cudweed.
11 Leontopodium, sieve Pes Leoninus. Lions Cudweed.


10 The tenth is like unto the last before mentioned, in stalks, leaves, and
flowers, but much larger, and for the most part those flowers which appear
first are the lowest and basest, and they are ouertopt by other flowers which
come on younger branches, and grow higher, as children secking to ouergrow or
ouertop their parents, (as many wicked children do) for which cause it has
been called Herbaimpia, that is, the wicked Herb, or Herb Impious.

11 The eleventh plant comprehended under the title of Gnaphalium, (being
without doubt a kind thereof, as may appear by the shape of his flowers and
stalks, covered over with a soft wool like unto the other kinds of
Cotton-weed) is an handful high or thereabouts, beset with leaves The figure
that was formerly in the seventh place should have been in the eleventh; and
that in the eleventh in the (...).
12 Leontopodium (...). Small Lions Cudweed.
13 Gnaphalium oblongo (...). Long leaued Cudweed.
14 Gnaphalium minus latiore (...). Small broad leaued Cudweed.
like Gnaphalium Anglicum, but somewhat broader. At the top of the stalk
grows a flower of a blackish brown violet color, beset about with rough and
woolly hairie leaves, which make the whole flower to resemble the rough haired
foot of a Lion, of a Hare, or a Bear, or rather in mine opinionof a rough
footed Dove. The heads of these flowers when they are spread abroad carry a
greater circumference than is required in so small a plant; and when the flower
is faded, the seed is wrapped in such a deal of wool that it is scarsely to
be found out.

12 This small kind of (...) being likewise a kind of Cotton-weed, neither by
Dioscorides or any other ancient writer once remembered, has one single stalk
nine inches in height, and the leaves of Gnaphalium montanum; which leaves and
stalks are white, with a thick hoary woollinesse, bearing at the top pale
yellow flowers like Gnaphalium montanum: the root is slender and woody.

13 This, which Clusius calls Gnaphalium (...) 2. has small stalks so ne
handful high or somewhat more, of which some stand upright, others lie along
upon the ground, being round, hairy, and unorderly set with soft hoary leaves
ingirting their stalks at their setting on, and sharp pointed at their upper
ends. The tops of the stalks carry many whitish heads full of a yellowish
down: the root is thick and blackish, with some fibers.

14 This sends up one stalk parted into several branches set here and there
with broad (...) and hoarie leaves, and at the division of the branches and
amongst the leaves grow seven or eight little heads thick thrust together,
being of a grayish yellow color, and full of much down: the root is
unprofitable, and perishes as soon as it has perfected his seed. Clusius
calls this (...) Plateau 3. he having as it seems received them both from his
friend Jacques Plateau.

The Place.
The first grows in the dark woods of Hampsted, and in the woods near unto
Deptford by London. The second grows upon dry sandy banks. The third grows
at a place called Merezey, six miles from Colchester, near unto the sea side.
I also had it sent me from my worshipful friend Mr. Thomas Glynn, who gathered
it upon the sea coast of Wales.

The rest grow upon mountains, hilly grounds, and barren pastures.

The kind of Gnaphalium newly set forth (to wit Americanum) grows naturally
near unto the Mediterranean sea, from whence it has been brought and planted
in our English gardens. If this be true which our Author here affirms, it
might have have had a fitter (at least a nearer) denomination than from
America: yet Bauhine affirms that it grows frequently in Brasill, and it is
not improbable that both their assertions be true.

The Time.
They flower for the most part from June to the end of August.

The Names.
Cotton-weed is called in Greek Gnaphalion; and it is called Gnaphalion,
because men use the tender leaves of it in stead of bombaste or Cotton, as
Paulus Aegineta writes. Pliny says it is called Chamaexylon, as though he
should say Dwarf Cotton; for it has a soft and white cotton like unto
bombaste: whereupon also it was called of diverse (...), and (...): of others,
Centunculus, Centuncularis, and Albinum; which word is found among the bastard
names: but the later word, by reason of the white color, does reasonably well
agree with it. It is also called Bombax, Humilis filago, and Herba Impia,
because the younger, or those flowers that spring up later, are higher, and
ouertop those that come first, as many wicked children do unto their parents,
as before touched in the description: in English, Cotton-weed, Cud-weed,
Chaffe-weed, and petty Cotton.

The Nature.
These herbs be of an astringent or binding and drying quality.

The Virtues.
Gnaphalium boiled in strong lee cleanses the hair from nits and lice: also
the herb being laid

The same boiled in wine and drunken, kills worms and brings them forth,
and prevails

The fume or smoke of the herb dried, and taken with a funnell, being burned
therein, and received

CHAP. 206. Of Golden Moth-wort, or Cudweed.
The Description.
1 GOlden Moth-wort brings forth slender stalks somewhat hard and woody,
divided into diverse small branches; whereupon do grow leaves somewhat rough,
and of a white color, very much iagged like Southernwood. The flowers stand on
the tops of the stalks, joined together in tufts, of a yellow color
glittering like gold, in form resembling the scaly flowers of Tansie, or the
middle button of the flowers of Camomil; which being gathred before they be
ripe or withered, remain beautiful long time after, as my self did see in
the hands of Mr. Wade, one of the Clerks of her Majesty's Counsel, which were
sent him among other things from Padua in Italy. For which cause of long
lasting, the images and carved gods were wont to wear garlands thereof:
whereupon some have called it Gods flower. For which purpose (...) King of
Egypt did most diligently observe them, as Pliny writes.

1 Elyochryson, sieve Coma aurea. Golden Moth-wort.


The Place.
It grows in most untilled places of Italy and Spain, in meadows where the
soil is barren, and about the banks of rivers; it is a stranger in England.

The Time.
It flowers in August and September: notwithstanding Theophrastus and Plmy
reckon it among the flowers of the Spring.

The Names.
Golden Moth-wort is called of Dioscorides Elichryson: Pliny and Theophrastus
call it (...): Gaza translates it Aurelia: in English, Gold-floure, Golden
Moth-wort.

The Temperature.
It is (says Galen) of power to cut and make thin.

The Virtues.
Dioscorides teaches, that the tops thereof

The branches and leaves laid amongst (...) formerly were two (...) and
descriptions of the same Plant.


CHAP. 207. Of Golden Floure-Gentle.
The Description.
1 THis yellow Everlasting or Floure-Gentle, called of the later Herbarists
Yellow Stoecas, is a plant that has stalks of a span long, and slender,
whereupon do grow narrow leaves white and downie, as are also the stalks. The
flowers stand on the tops of the stalks, consisting of a scattered or
disordered scaly tuft, of a reasonable good smell, of a bright yellow color;
which being gathered before they be ripe, do keep their color and beauty a
long time without withering, as do most of the Cottonweeds or Cudweeds, whereof
this is a kind. The root is black and slender. There is some variety in the
heads of this plant, for they are sometimes very large and longish, as
Camerarius notes in his Epitome of (...); otherwhiles they are very compact and
round, and of the bigness of the ordinary.

2 This grows to some soot or more high, and has rough downie leaves like the
former, but broader: the flowers are longer, but of the same yellow color and
long continuance as those of the last described. This varies something in the
breadth and length of the leaves, whence Tabernamontanus gave three figures
thereof, and therein was followed by our Author, as you shall find more
particularly specified at the end of the chapter.

3 About Nemausium and Montpelier there grows another kind of Chrysocome, or
as Lobel terms it, Stoechas Citrina altera, but that as this plant is in all
points like, so in all points it is lesser and slenderer, blacker, and not of
such beauty as the former, growing more near unto an ash color, consisting of
many small twigs a foot long. The root is lesser, and has fewer strings
annexed thereto; and it is seldom found but in the cliffes and crags, among
rubbish, and on walls of cities. This plant is brown, without sent or savor
like the other: every branch has his own bunch of flowers coming forth of a
scaly or round head, but not a number heaped together, as in the first kind.
It prospers well in our London Gardens.

There were formerly the same number of (...); as are now in this Chapter, but
no (...) agreeing with the (...), the first was of (...) (...) being the (...)
(...) of (...): The second was of the (...) (...) of Tragus, which still keeps
the 2 place: and the 4. and 5. were only varieties of this, according to
(...): but if they be not varieties, but made to express the 2. figures of the
(...). which we here give, as I con (...) they were, then should the fourth
have been put in the third place, and the fifth in the fourth, and the third
should have been put in the fifth, as you may see now it is.
1 (...) Citrina, sieve Amaranthus luteus. Golden Stoechas, or Goldilockes.
There were formerly the same number of (...); as are now in this Chapter, but
no (...) agreeing with the (...), the first was of (...) (...) being the (...)
(...) of (...): The second was of the (...) (...) of Tragus, which still keeps
the 2 place: and the 4. and 5. were only varieties of this, according to
(...): but if they be not varieties, but made to express the 2. figures of the
(...). which we here give, as I con (...) they were, then should the fourth
have been put in the third place, and the fifth in the fourth, and the third
should have been put in the fifth, as you may see now it is.
2 Amaranthus luteus latifolius. Broad leaued Goldilockes.
There were formerly the same number of (...); as are now in this Chapter, but
no (...) agreeing with the (...), the first was of (...) (...) being the (...)
(...) of (...): The second was of the (...) (...) of Tragus, which still keeps
the 2 place: and the 4. and 5. were only varieties of this, according to
(...): but if they be not varieties, but made to express the 2. figures of the
(...). which we here give, as I con (...) they were, then should the fourth
have been put in the third place, and the fifth in the fourth, and the third
should have been put in the fifth, as you may see now it is.
3 Chrysocome capitulis conglobatis. Round headed Goldilockes.
There were formerly the same number of (...); as are now in this Chapter, but
no (...) agreeing with the (...), the first was of (...) (...) being the (...)
(...) of (...): The second was of the (...) (...) of Tragus, which still keeps
the 2 place: and the 4. and 5. were only varieties of this, according to
(...): but if they be not varieties, but made to express the 2. figures of the
(...). which we here give, as I con (...) they were, then should the fourth
have been put in the third place, and the fifth in the fourth, and the third
should have been put in the fifth, as you may see now it is.
4 Amaranthus luteus floreoblongo. Golden Cudweed.


4 There is a kind hereof being a very rare plant, and as rare to be found
where it naturally grows, which is in the woods among the Scarlet-Okes
between Sommieres and Mountpellier. It is a fine and beautiful plant, in show
passing the last described Stoechas Citrina altera: but the leaves of this
kind are broad, and somewhat hoarie, as is all the rest of the whole plant;
the stalk a foot long, and bears the very flowers of Stoechas Citrina
altera, but bigger and longer, and somewhat like the flowers of Lactuca
agrestis: the root is like the former, without any manifest smell, little
known, hard to find, whose faculties be yet unknown.

There were formerly the same number of (...); as are now in this Chapter, but
no (...) agreeing with the (...), the first was of (...) (...) being the (...)
(...) of (...): The second was of the (...) (...) of Tragus, which still keeps
the 2 place: and the 4. and 5. were only varieties of this, according to
(...): but if they be not varieties, but made to express the 2. figures of the
(...). which we here give, as I con (...) they were, then should the fourth
have been put in the third place, and the fifth in the fourth, and the third
should have been put in the fifth, as you may see now it is.
5 Heliochrysos syluectris. Wild Goldylockes.


There were formerly the same number of (...); as are now in this Chapter, but
no (...) agreeing with the (...), the first was of (...) (...) being the (...)
(...) of (...): The second was of the (...) (...) of Tragus, which still keeps
the 2 place: and the 4. and 5. were only varieties of this, according to
(...): but if they be not varieties, but made to express the 2. figures of the
(...). which we here give, as I con (...) they were, then should the fourth
have been put in the third place, and the fifth in the fourth, and the third
should have been put in the fifth, as you may see now it is.
5 This is a wild kind (which Lobel sets forth) that here may be inserted,
called Eliochrysos (...). The woolly or flockey leaf of this plant resembles
Gnaphalium vulgar, but that it is somewhat broader in the middle: the flowers
grow clustering together upon the tops of the branches, of a yellow color, and
almost like those of Maudline: the roots are black and wooddie.

The Place.
The first mentioned grows in Italy, and other hot countries: and the second
grows in rough and grauelly places almost every where near unto the Rhene,
especially between Spires and Worms.

The Time.
They flower in June and July.

The Names.
Golden flower is called in Latin Coma aurea, of his golden locks or
beautiful bush, and also Tineraria: in shops, Stoechas citrina, Amaranthus
luteus, (...), and Tragi: of some, Linaria aurea, but not truly: in Greek,
Chryscome: in Dutch, Reynbloemen, and Motten cruyt: in Italian, Amarantho
Giallo: in English, Gold-floure, Gods flower, Goldilockes, and Golden Stoechas.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The flowers of Golden Stoechados

CHAP. 208. Of Costmarie and Maudelein.
The Description.
1 COstmary grows up with round hard stalks two foot high, bearing long
broad leaves finely nicked in the edges, of an ouerworn whitish green color.
The tuft or bundle is of a golden color, consisting of many little flowers
like clusters, joined together in a rundle after the manner of golden
Stoechados. The root is of a woody substance, by nature very durable, not
without a multitude of little strings hanging thereat. The whole plant is of a
pleasant smell, savor, or taste.

2 Maudleine is somewhat like to Costmary (whereof it is a kind) in color,
smell, taste, and in the golden flowers, set upon the tops of the stalks in
round clusters. It brings forth a number of stalks, slender, and round. The
leaves are narrow, long, indented, and deeply cut about the edges. The cluster
of flowers is lesser than that of Costmarie, but of a better smell, and
yellower color. The roots are long lasting and many.

3 There is another kind of Balsamita minor, or Ageratum, which has leaves
lesser and narrower than the former, and those not snipt about the edges: the
vmbel or tuft of flowers is 1 Balsamita mas. Costmarie.
2 Balsamita foemina, sive Ageratum. Maudelein.
3 Ageratum folijs non serratis. Maudelein with uncut leaves.
4 Ageratum floribus albis. White floured Maudlein.
yellow like as the former, and you may call each of these last described at
your pleasure, either Ageratum, or Balsamita: the Graecians call it (...),
which is in Latin Ageratum, vel non (...), called in shops (though untruly)
Eupatorium Mesvae. The flowers are of a beautiful and seemly show, which will
not lose their excellency of grace in growing, until they bevery old, and
therefore called Ageratum, or Non senescens, as before; and are like in tuft to
Eliochryson, but of a white color; and this is thought to be the true and
right Ageratum of Dioscorides, although therehath been great, controversy
which should be the true plant.

4 This differs not from the common Maudelein, but in the color of the
flowers, which are white, when as those of the ordinary sort are yellow.

The Place.
They grow every where in gardens, and are cherished for their sweet flowers
and leaves.

The Time.
They bring forth their tufts of yellow flowers in the Summer months.

The Names.
Costmarie is called in Latin Balsamita mayor or mas: of some, Costus (...):
it is also called Mentha Graeca: and Saracenica Officinarum: of Tragus, Alisma:
of Matthiolus, (...) Graeca: of others, (...) (...) and Herbalassulata: of
some, Herba D. Mariae: in English, Costmarie, and Ale-coast: in High Dutch,
Frauwenkraut: in low Dutch, (...) windkraut: in French, Coq.

Maudlein is without doubt a kind of Costmarie, called of the Italians Herba
Giulia: of Valerius Cordus, Mentha Corymbifera minor: and Eupatorium Mesue: It
is judged to be Dioscorides his Ageratum, and it is the Costus minor hortensis
of Gesner: we call it in English Maudlein.

The Nature.
They are hot and dry in the second degree.

The Virtues.
These plants are very effectual, especially Maudlein, taken either inwardly
or else outwardly

Costmarie is put into Ale to steep, as also into the barrels and Stands
amongst those herbs

The leaves of Maudleine and Adders tongue stamped and boiled in Oil Olive,
adding thereto

The Conserve made with the leaves of Costmarie and Sugar, does warm and dry
the brain,

The leaves of Costmarie boiled in wine and drunken, cures the griping pain
of the belly, the

(...) is good for them that have the green sickness, or the dropsy,
especially in the beginning; and

The seed expels all manner of worms out of the belly, as wormseed does.

CHAP. 209. Of Tansie.
The Description.
1 TAnsie grows up with many stalks, bearing on the tops of them certain
clustered tufts, with flowers like the round buttons of yellow Roman
Cammomill, or Feuerfew (without any leaves paled about them) as yellow as gold.
The leaves be long, made as it were of a great many set together upon one
stalk, like those of Agrimony, or rather wild Tansie, very like to the female
Fern, but softer and lesser, and every one of them slashed in the edges as are
the leaves of Fern. The root is tough and of a wooddie substance. The whole
plant is bitter in taste, and of a strong smell, but yet pleasant.

2 The double English Tansie has leaves infinitely iagged and nicked, and
curled withal, like unto a plume of feathers: it is altogether like unto the
other, both in smell and taste, as also in flowers, but more pleasantly
smelling by many degrees, wherein especially consists the difference.

3 The third kind of Tansie has leaves, roots, stalks, and branches like the
other, and differs from them, in that this has no smell or savor at all,
and the flowers are like the common single Fetherfew.

4 Clusius has described another bigger kind of unsavory Tansie, whose figure
here we give you; it grows some cubit and half high, with crested stalks,
having leaves set upon somewhat longer stalks than those of the last described,
otherwise much like them: the flowers are much larger, being of the bigness of
the great Daisie, and of the same color: the seed is long and black: The
root is of the thicknes of ones finger, running upon the surface of the ground,
and putting forth some fibers, and it lasts diverse years, so that the plant
may be increased thereby. This flowers in May and June, and grows wild upon
diverse hills in Hungary and Austria.

1 Tanacetum. Tansie.
2 Tanacetum (...) Anglicum. Double English Tansie.
3 Tanacetum non odorum. Unsavory Tansie.
4 Tanacetum in odorum (...). Great unsavory Tansie.


The figure that was formerly in the (...) place was only the variety of the
ordinary Tansie, having a white flower, but (...) which agreed (...) the (...)
was page (...). under the title of (...). (...) (...) nobile.
4 Tanacetum minus album. Small white Tansie.


5 The fifth kind of Tansie (...) broad leaves, much iagged and well cut, like
the (...) of Fetherfew, but smaller, and more deeply cut. The stalk is small,
a foot long, whereupon do grow little tufts of little white flowers, like the
tuft of Milfoile or Yarrow. The herb is in smell and savor like the common
(...), but not altogether so strong.

The Place.
The first grows wild in fields as well as in gardens: the others grow in my
garden.

The Time.
They flower in July and August.

The Names.
The first is called (...); the second double Tansie, the third unsavory
Tansie, the last white Tansie: in Latin, Tanacetum, and Athanasia, as though
it were immortal: because the flowers do not speedily wither: of some,
Artemisia, but untruly.

The Nature.
The Tansies which smell sweet are hot in the second degree, and dry in the
third. That without smell is hot and dry, and of a mean temperature.

The Virtues.
In the Spring time are made with the leaves

The seed of Tansie is a singular and approved medicine against Worms, for in
what sort soever

The same pound, and mixed with oil Olive, is very good against the pain and
shrinking of the

Also being drunk with wine, it is good against the pain of the bladder, and
when a man cannot

CHAP. 210. Of Fetherfew.
The Description.
1 FEuerfew brings forth many little round stalks, divided into certain
branches. The leaves are tender, diversely torn and iagged, and nickt on the
edges like the first and nethermost leaves of Coriander, but greater. The
flowers stand on the tops of the branches, with a small pale of white leaves,
set round about a yellow ball or button, like the wild field Daisie. The root
is hard and tough: the whole plant is of a light whitish green color, of a
strong smell and bitter taste

2 The second kind of Feuerfew, Matricaria, or Parthenium, differs from the
former, in that it has double flowers; (...) in smell, leaves, and branches,
it is all one with the common Feuerfew.

3 There is a third sort called Mountain Feuerfew, of Carolus Clusius his
description, that has 1 Matricaria. Feuerfew.
2 Matricaria duplici flore. Double Feuerfew.
3 Matricaria Alpina Clusij. Mountain Feuerfew.
small and fibrous roots; from which proceed slender wooddie stalks, a foot
high and somewhat more, beset or garnished about with leaves like Camomill,
deeply iagged or cut, of the savor or smell of Feuerfew, but not so strong;
in taste hot, but not unpleasant. At the top of the stalks there come forth
small white flowers not like unto the first, but rather like unto Absynthium
album, or White Wormwood.

4 I have growing in my Garden another sort, like unto the first kind, but of
a most pleasant sweet savor, in respect of any of the rest. This seems to be
the Matricaria altera ex Ilua, mentioned by Camerarius in his Hortus medicus.

The Place.
The common single Feuerfew grows in hedges, gardens, and about old walls; it
ioyeth to grow among rubbish. There is oftentimes found when it is dug up a
little cole under the strings of the root, and never without it, whereof
Cardane in his book of Subtilties sets down diverse vain and trifling
things.

The Time.
They flower for the most part all the Summer long.

The Names.
Feuerfew is called in Greek of Dioscorides (...): of Galen, and Paulus one of
his sect, (...): in Latin, Parthenium, Matricaria, and Febrifuga, of Fuchsius,
(...) Tenuifolia: in Italian, Amarella: in Dutch, Moeder crupt: in French,
Espargoute: in English, Fedderfew and Feuerfew, taken from his force of driving
away Agues.

The Temperature.
Feuerfew does manifestly heat, it is hot in the third degree, and dry in the
second; it cleanses, purges, or scoureth, opens and fully performs all
that bitter things can do.

The Virtues.
It is a great remedy against the diseases of the matrix; it procures women's
sickness with speed;

Dioscorides also teaches, that it is profitably applied to Saint Anthonies
fire, to all hot inflammations,

The same Author affirms, that the powder of Feuerfew drunk with Oxymell, or
syrup of Vinegar,

Feuerfew dried and made into powder, and two drams of it taken with honey or
sweet wine, purges Vertigo, that is a swimming and turning in the head. Also
it is good for such as be melancholic, sad, pensive, and without speech.

The herb is good against the suffocation of the mother, that is, the
hardness and stopping of

The decoction of the same is good for women to sit over, for the purposes
aforesaid.

It is used both in drinks, and bound to the wrests with bay salt, and the
powder of glass stamped

CHAP. 211. Of Poley, or Pellamountaine.
1 Polium montanum album. White Poley mountain.
2 Polium montanum (...). Yellow Poley mountain.


The Description.
1 THe first kind of Polium; or in English Poley of the mountain, is a little
tender and sweet smelling herb, very hoarie, whereupon it took his name: for
it is not only hoary in part, but his hoarie flockinesse possesses the whole
plant, tufts and all, being no less hoarie than Gnaphalium, especially where
it grows near the Sea at the bending of the hills, or near the sandy shores
of the Mediterranean Sea: from his wooddie and somewhat threddie root shoots
forth straight from the earth a number of small round stalks nine inches long,
and by certain distances from the stalk proceed somewhat long leaves like
Gnaphalium, which have light nickes about the edges, that stand one against
another, enclosing the stalk: in the top of the stalks stand spokie tufts
of flowers, white of color like Serpillum. This plant is stronger of sent or
savor than any of the rest following, which sent is somewhat sharp, and
affecting the nose with his sweetness.

2 The tuftes of the second kind of Polium are longer than the tuftes or
flowers of the last before mentioned, and they are of a yellow color; the
leaves also are broader, otherwise they are very like.

3 From the wooddie roots of this third kind of Polium proceed a great number
of shootes like unto the last rehearsed, lying flat upright upon the ground,
whose slender branches take hold upon the upper part of the earth where they
creep. The flowers are like the other, but of a purple color.

4 The last kind of Polium, and of all the rest the smallest, is of an
indifferent good smell, in all points like unto the common Polium, but that it
is four times lesser, having the leaves not snipt, and the flowers white.

5 This sends up many branches from one root like to those of the first
described, but shorter and more shrubbie, lying partly upon the ground; the
leaves grow by couples at certain spaces, somewhat like, but lesser than those
of Rosemarie or Lauander, green above, and whitish beneath, not snipt about
their edges; their taste is bitter, and smell somewhat pleasant: the flowers
grow plentifully upon the tops of (...) branches, white of color, and in shape
not unlike those of the other Poleyes: they grow on a bunch together, and not
Spike fashion: the seed is blackish and contained in small vessels: the root is
hard and wooddie, with many fibers. Clusius calls this Polium 7. albo flore. It
is the Polium alterum of Matthiolius, and Polium recentiorum foemina Lavandulae
folio of Lobel. I here give you (as Clusius also has done) two figures to make
one good one: the former shows the flowers and their manner of growing; the
other, the seed vessels, and the leaves growing by couples, together with a
little better expression of the root.

3 Polium montanum purpureum. Purple Poley.


The Place.
These plants do grow naturally upon the mountains of France, Italy, Spain,
and other hot regions. They are strangers in England, notwithstanding I have
plants of that Poley with yellow flowers by the gift of Lobel.

The Time.
They flower from the end of May, to the beginning of August.

4 Polium montanum minimum. Creeping Poley.
5 Polium (...) folio, flore (...). Lavander leaued Poley.
Another figure of the Lauander leaued Poley.


The Names.
Poley mountain is called in Greek (...), of his hoarinesse, and in Latin
also Polium. Diverse suspect that Polium is (...), and that Dioscorides has
twice entreated of that herb, under diverse names; the kinds, the occasion of
the name, and likewise the faculties do agree. There be two of the Leucades,
one (...): that is of the mountain: the other, (...), which is that with the
broader leaf: it is called Leucas of the whitish color, and Polion of the
hoarinesse, because it seems like to a man's hoarie head; for whatsoever
waxes hoarie, is said to be white.

The Temperature.
Poley is of (...) dry in the third degree, and hot in the end of the second.

The Virtues.
Dioscorides says, it is a remedy for them that

It provoke urine, and is put into Mithridate,

It profits much against the bitings of venomous

The same drunk with vinegar, is good for the diseases of the milt and
spleen; it troubles the stomach, and afflicts the head, and provoke the
looseness of the belly.

CHAP. 212. Of Germander.
The Kinds.
THe old writers have set down no certain kinds of Germander, yet we have
thought it good, and not without cause, to entreat of mo sorts than have been
observed of all, dividing those under the title of Teucrium from (...):
although they are both of one kind, but yet differing very notably.

The Description.
3 THe first Germander grows low, with very many branches lying upon the
ground, tough, hard, and wooddie, spreading it self here and there: whereupon
are placed small leaves snipt about the edges like the teeth of a saw,
resembling the shape of an oken leaf. The flowers are of a purple color, very
small, standing close to the leaves toward the top of the branches. The seed is
little and black. The root slender and full of strings, creeping, and always
spreading within the ground, whereby it greatly increases. This is sometimes
found with bigger leaves, otherwhiles with less; also the flower is sometimes
white, and otherwhiles red in the same plant, whence Tabernam. gave two
figures, and our Author two figures and descriptions, whereof I have omitted
the later, and put the two titles into one.

2 The second Germander rises up with a little straight stalk a span long, and
sometimes longer, wooddie and hard like unto a little shrub: it is afterward
divided into very many little small branches. The leaves are indented and
nicked about the edges, lesser than the leaves of the former, great creeping
Germander: the flowers likewise stand near to the leaves, and on the upper
parts of the sprigs, of color sometimes purple, and oftentimes tending to
blewnesse: the root is diversely dispersed with many strings.

1 Chamaedrys mayor latifolia. Great broad leaued Germander.
2 Chamaedrys minor. Small Germander.


3 Chamaedrys syluestris. Wild Germander.


3 Wild Germander has little stalks, weak and feeble, edged or cornered,
somewhat hairie, and set as it were with ioints; about the which by certain
distances there come forth at each joint two leaves something broad, nicked in
the edges, and something greater than the leaves of creeping Germander, and
softer. The flowers be of a gallant blew color, made of four small leaves a
piece, standing orderly on the tops of the tender spriggie spraies; after which
come in place little husks or seed vessels. The root is small and threddie.

The Place.
These plants do grow in rocky and rough grounds, and in gardens they do easily
prosper.

The wild Germander grows in many places about London in Meadows and fertile
fields, and in every place wheresoever I have traveled in England.

The Time.
They flower and flourish from the end of May, to the later end of August.

The Names.
Garden Germander is called in Greek, (...), Chamaedrys: of some, Trissago,
and Trixago, and likewise Quercula minor; notwithstanding most of these names
do more properly belong to Scordium, or water Germander: in Italian,
Querciuola: in English, Germander, or English Treacle: in French, Germandre.
Before creeping Germander was known, this wild kind bare the name of
Germander amongst the Apothecaries, and was used for the right Germander in the
compositions of Medicines: but after the former were brought to light, this
began to be named Syluestris, and Spuria Chamaedrys: that is wild and bastard
Germander: of some, Teucrium pratense, and without error; because all the
sorts of plants comprehended under the title of Teucrium, are doubtless kinds
of Germander. Of some it has been thought to be the plant that Dioscorides
called (...), Hierabotane; that is to say, the Holy herb, if so be that the
Holy herb, and Verbenaca, or Veruaine, which is called in Greek (...), be
sundry herbs. Dioscorides makes them sundry herbs, describing them apart,
the one after the other: but other Authors, as Paulus, Aetius, and Oribasius,
make no mention of Herba Sacra, the Holy herb, but only of Peristereon: and
this same is found to be likewise called Hierabotane, or the Holy Herb, and
therefore it is evident that it is one and the selse same plant, called by
diverse names: the which things considered, if they say so, and say truly, this
wild Germander cannot be Hierabotane at all, as diverse have written and said
it to be.

The Temperature.
Garden Germander is of thin parts, and has a cutting faculty, it is hot and
dry almost in the third degree, even as (...) does write of Teucrium, or wild
Germandet.

The wild Germander is likewise hot and dry, and is not altogether without
force or power to open and cleanse: it may be counted among the number of them
that do open the liver and spleen.

The Virtues.
Germander boiled in water and drunk, delivers the body from all
obstructions or stoppings,

The leaves stamped with honey and strained, and a drop at sundry times put
into the eyes, takes

It provoke mightily the terms, being boiled in wine, and the decoction
drunk; with a fomentation

CHAP. 213: Of Tree Germander.
The Description.
1 THe first kind of Tree Germander rises up with a little straight stalk a
cubite high, wooddie and hard like unto a small wooddie shrubbe. The stalk
divides it self from the bottom unto the top into diverse branches, whereon
are set indented leaves nicked about the edges, in shape not much unlike the
leaf of the common Germander. The flowers grow among the leaves of a purple
color. The root is wooddie, as is all the rest of the plant.

1 Teucrium latifolium. Tree Germander with broad leaves.
2 Teucrium Pannonicum. Hungary Germander.


2 The Tree Germander of Hungary has many tough threddie roots, from which
rise up diverse weak and feeble stalks, reeling this way and that way;
whereupon are set together by couples, long leaves iagged in the edges, not
unlike those of the upright Fluellen: on the tops of the stalks stand the
flowers Spike fashion, thick thrust together, of a purple color tending
toward blewnesse.

3 This (which is the fourth of Clusius description) has diverse stalks some
cubite high, four square, rough, and set at certain spaces with leaves
growing by couples like those of the wild Germander: the tops of the stalks
are divided into sundry branches, carrying long spokes of blew flowers,
consisting of four leaves, whereof the uppermost leaf is the largest; and
distinguished with veins: after the flowers are past follow such (...) seed
vessels as in Fluellen: the root is fibrous and lives long, sending forth every
year new branches.

(...) (...) maius Pannonicum. Great Austrian Germander.
4 Teucrium petraeum pumilum. Dwarf Rock Germander.
5 Teucrium Baeticum. Spanish Tree Germander.
6 Teucrium Alpinum Cisti flore. Rough headed Tree Germander.


4 This Dwarf Germander sends up stalks some handful high, round, not
branched: the leaves grow upon these stalks by couples, thick, shining, a
little hairy and green on their upper sides, and whitish below: the tops of
the stalks carry spoky tufts of flowers, consisting of four or five bluish
leaves; which falling, there follows a seed-vessell, as in the Veronica's. The
root is knotty and fibrous, and grows so fast amongst the rocks that it
cannot easily be got out. It floureth in July. (...) describes this by the name
of Teucrium 6. Pumilum: and Pona sets it forth by the name of Veronica petraea
semper virens.

5 This Spanish Germander rises up often times to the height of a man, in manner
of a hedge bush, with one stiff stalk of the bigness of a man's little
finger, covered over with a whitish bark, divided sometimes into other
branches, which are always placed by couples one right against another, of an
ouerworne hoarie color; and upon them are placed leaves not much unlike the
common Germander; the upper parts whereof are of a grayish hoarie color, and
the lower of a deep green; of a bitter taste, and somewhat crooked, turning
and winding themselves after the manner of a welt. The flowers come forth from
the bosom of the leaves, standing upon small tender footstalkes of a white
color, without any helmet or hood on their tops, having in the middle many
threddy strings. The whole plant keeps green all the Winter long.

6 Among the rest of the Tree Germanders this is not of least beauty and
account, having many weak and feeble branches trailing upon the ground, of a
dark reddish color, hard and wood die; at the bottom of which stalks come
forth many long broad iagged leaves not unlike the (...), hoary underneath, and
green above, of a binding and drying taste. The flowers grow at the top of the
stalks, not unlike to those of Cistus foemina, or Sage-rose, and are white of
color, consisting of eight or nine leaves, in the middle whereof do grow many
threddy chiues without smell or savor: which being past, there succeeds a
tuft of rough threddy or flocky matter, not unlike to those of the great Auens
or Pulsatill: the root is woody, and set with some few hairie strings fastened
to the same.

The Place.
These plants do joy in stony and rough mountains and dry places, and such as
lie open to the Sun and air, and prosper well in gardens: and of the second
sort I have received one plant for my garden of Mr. Garret Apothecarie.

The Time.
They flower, flourish, and seed when the other Germanders do.

The Names.
Tree Germander is called in Greek (...), retaining the name of the former
Chamaedrys, and (...) according to the authority of Dioscorides and Pliny: in
Latin (...): in English, Great Germander, upright Germander, and Tree
Germander.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Their temperature and faculties are referred unto the garden Germander, but
they are not of such force and working, wherefore they be not much used in
physic.

CHAP. 214. Of Water Germander, or Garlic Germander.
The Description.
1 SCordium or water Germander has square hairie stalks creeping by the
ground, beset with soft whitish crumpled leaves, nickt and snipt round about
the edges like a Saw: among which grow small purple flowers like the flowers of
dead Nettle. The root is small and threddy, creeping in the ground very
deeply. The whole plant being bruised smells like Garlic, whereof it took
that name Scordium. This by reason of goodness of soil varieth in the
largeness thereof; whence Tabernamont anus and our Author made a bigger and a
lesser thereof, but I have omitted the later as superfluous.

The Place.
Water Germander grows near to Oxenford, by Ruley, on both sides of the
water, and in a meadow by Abington called Nietford, by the relation of a learned
Gentleman of S. (...) in the said town of Oxenford, a diligent (...), my very
good friend, called Mr. Richard Slater. Also it grows in great plenty in the
Isle of Elie, and in a meadow by Harwood in Lancashire, and diverse other places.

1 Scordium. Water Germander.


The Time.
The flowers appear in June and July: it is best to gather the herb in
August: it perishes not in Winter, but only loses the stalks, which come up
again in Summer: the root remains fresh all the year.

The Names.
The Grecians call it (...): the Latins do keep that name (...): the
Apothecaries have no other name: It is called of some Trixago Palustris,
Quercula, and also Mithridatium, of Mithridates the finder of it out. It took
the name Scordium from the smell of Garlic, which the Grecians call (...), and
(...), of the rancknesse of the smell: in High Dutch, (...) battenig: in
French, Scordion: in Italian, Chalamandrina palustre: in English, Scordium,
Water Germander, and Garlic Germander.

The Temperature.
Water Germander is hot and dry: it has a certain bitter taste, harsh and
sharp, as Galen witnesses.

The Virtues.
Water Germander cleanses the intrals, and likewise old ulcers, being mixed
with honey according

The decoction made in wine and drunk, is good against the bitings of
Serpents, and deadly

It is reported to mitigate the pain of the gout, being stamped and applied
with a little vinegar

Some affirm, that raw flesh being laid among the leaves of Scordium, may be
preserved a long

Being drunk with wine it opens the stoppings of the liver, the milt,
kidneys, bladder, and

The powder of Scordion taken in the quantity of two drams in meade or honied
water, cures Diascordium, which serves very notably for all the purposes
aforesaid.

The same medicine made with Scordium is given with very good success unto
children and

CHAP. 215. Of Wood Sage, or Garlic Sage.
The Description.
THat which is called Wild Sage has stalks four square, somewhat hairie,
about which are leaves like those of Sage, but shorter, broader, and softer:
the flowers grow up all upon one side of the stalk, open and forked as those
of dead Nettle, but lesser, of a pale white color: then grow the seeds four
together in one husk: the root is full of strings. It is a plant that lives
but a year: it smells of garlic when it is bruised, being a kind of
Garlic Germander, as appears by the smell of garlic wherewith it is
possessed.

The figure which (...) formerly here was of (...) (...) (...) of (...).
Scorodonia, sieve Saluia agrestis. Wood Sage, or Garlic Sage.


The Place.
It grows upon heaths and barren places: it is also found in Woods, and near
unto hedgerowes, and about the borders of fields: it somewhat delights in a
lean soil, and yet not altogether barren and dry.

The Time.
It floureth and seedeth in June, July, and August, and it is then to be
gathered and laid up.

The Names.
It is called of the later Herbarists Saluia (...): of diverse also Ambrosia;
but true (...) which is Oak of Cappadocia, differs from this. Valerius Cordus
names it Scordonia, or Scorodonia, and Scordium alterum. (...) says it is
called Boscisaluia, or Saluia Bosci: in high Dutch, (...) (...): in English,
wild Sage, wood Sage, and Garlic Sage.

It seems to be Theophrastus his (...), Sphacelus, which is also taken for
the small Sage, but not rightly.

The Temperature.
Wild Sage is of temperature hot and dry, yet less than common Sage;
therefore it is hot and dry in the second degree.

The Virtues.
It is commended against burstings, dry beatings, and against wounds: the
decoction thereof

Some likewise give the decoction hereof to drink, with good success, to them
that are infected Guiacum, in stead of Epithymum and other adiutories belonging
to the said decoction.

CHAP. 216. Of Eyebright.
The Description.
EVphrasia or Eyebright is a small low herb not above two handfuls high, full
of branches, covered with little blackish leaves dented or snipt about the
edges like a saw: the flowers are small and white, sprinkled and poudered on
the inner side, with yellow and purple speeks mixed therewith. The root is
small and hairie.

Euphrasia. Eyebright.


The Place.
This plant grows in dry medows, in green and grassie ways and pastures
standing against the Sun.

The Time.
Eyebright begins to flower in August and continues unto September, and
must be gathered while it floureth for physics use.

The Names.
It is commonly called Euphrasia, as also Euphrosyne; notwithstanding there is
another Euphrosyne, viz. Buglosse: it is called of some Ocularis, and
Ophthalmica of the effect: in highDutch, (...) (...): in Low Dutch, (...)
(...): in Italian, Spanish, and French, (...), after the Latin name: in
English, Eyebright.

The Nature.
This herb is hot and dry, but yet more hot than dry.

The Virtues.
It is very much commended for the eyes.

Eyebright stamped and laid upon the eyes, or the juice thereof mixed with
white Wine, and

Three parts of the powder of Eyebright, and one part of maces mixed
therewith, takes away That which was formerly here set forth in the second
place under the title of (...) cartules (...). was described by our Author
amongst the (...) grasses, in the third place, Chap. 54. and the figure is page
338. under the title of Myosotis (...) (...).


CHAP. 217. Of Marierome.
The Description.
1 SWeet Marjerome is a low and shrubby plant, of a whitish color and
marvelous sweet smell, a foot or somewhat more high. The stalks are slender,
and parted into diverse branches; about which grow forth little leaves soft and
hoarie: the flowers grow at the top in scaly or chaffie spiked ears, of a
white color like unto those of Candy Organy. The root is compact of many small
threads. The whole plant and every part thereof is of a most pleasant taste,
and aromaticall smell, and perishes at the first approach of Winter.

2 Pot Marierome or Winter Maierome has many threddy tough roots, from which
rise immediately diverse small branches, whereon are placed such leaves as the
precedent, but not so hoarie, nor yet so sweet of smell, bearing at the top of
the branches tufts of white flowers tending to purple. The whole plant is of
long continuance, and keeps green all the Winter; whereupon our English
women have called it, and that very properly, Winter Marierome.

3 Marierome Gentle has many branches rising from a threddy root, whereupon do
grow soft and sweet smelling leaves of an ouerworne russet color. The flowers
stand at the top of the stalks, 1 Mariorana mayor. Great sweet Marierome.
2 Mariorana mayor Anglica. Pot Marierome.
3 (...) (...). Marierome gentle.
compact of diverse small chaffie scales, of a white color tending to a blush.
The whole plant is altogether like the great sweet Marierome, saving that it is
altogether lesser, and far sweeter, wherein especially consists the
difference.

4 (...) is likewise a kind of Marierome, differing not from the last
described, saving in that, that this plant has in his natural country of
Candy, and not elsewhere, some laces or threads fastened unto his branches, such,
and after the same manner as those are that do grow upon Sauorie, wherein is
the difference.

The Place.
These plants do grow in Spain, Italy, Candy, and other Islands thereabout,
wild, and in the fields; from whence we have the seeds for the gardens of
(...) cold countries.

The Time.
They are sown in May, and bring forth their scaly or chaffie husks or ears
in August. They are to be watered in the middle of the day, when the Sun
shines hottest, even as Basil should be, and not in the evening nor morning,
as most Plants are.

The Names.
Marierome is called Mariorana, and (...), and also Marum and Sampsychum of
others: in highDutch, Mayoran: in Spanish, Mayorana, Moradux, and Almoradux: in
French, Mariolaine: in English, Sweet Marierome, Fine Marierome, and Marierome
gentle; of the best sort Marjerane. The pot Marjerome is also called Winter
Marjerome. Some have made a doubt whether Maiorana and Sampsychum be all one;
which doubt, as I take it, is because that Galen makes a difference between
them, entreating of them apart, and attribureth to either of them their
operations. But Amaracus Galeni is Parthenium, or Feuerfew. Dioscorides
likewise witnesses, that some do call (...), Parthenium; and Galen in his
book of the faculties of simple medicines, does in no place make mention of
Parthenium, but by the name of Amaracus. Pliny in his 21 book, chap. 2.
witnesses, that Diocles the physician, and they of Sicily did call that
Amaracus, which the Egyptians and the Syrians did call Sampsychum.

Virgill in the first book of his Aencidos shows, that Amaracus is a shrub
bearing flowers, writing thus:

Vbi mollis Amaracus illum Floribus, and dulci aspirans (...) vmbra. Likewise
Catullus in his Epithalamium, or marriage song of Iulia and Mallius says,

Cinge tempora floribus
(...) olcmis Amaraci.
Compass the temples of the head with flowers.
Of Amarac affording sweet savors.
Notwithstanding it may not seem strange, that Majorane is used in stead of
Sampsychum, seeing that in Galens time also Marum was in the mixture of the
ointment called Amaracinum vnguentum, in the place of Sampsychum, as he
himself witnesses in his first book of counterpoisons.

The Temperature.
They are hot and dry in the second degree; after some copies, hot and dry in
the third.

The (...).
Sweet Marjerome is a remedy against cold diseases of the brain and head,
being taken any

The leaves boiled in water, and the decoction drunk, helps them that are
entering into the

The leaves dried and mingled with honey, and given, dissolueth congealed or
clotted blood, and

The leaves are excellent good to be put into all odoriferous ointments,
waters, pouders, broths,

The dried leaves poudered, and finely searched, are good to be put into
Cerotes, or Cere-cloths

There is an excellent oil to be drawn forth of these herbs, good against
the shrinking of

CHAP. 218. Of wild Marjerome.
The Description.
1 BAstard Marjerome grows straight up with little round stalks of a reddish
color, full of branches, a foot high and sometimes higher. The leaves be
broad, more long than round, of a whitish green color: on the top of the
branches stand long spikie scaled ears, out of which shoot forth little white
flowers like the flouring of wheat. The whole plant is of a sweet smell, and
sharp biting taste.

2 The white Organy, or bastard Marjerome with white flowers, differing little
from the precedent, but in color and stature. This plant has whiter and
broader leaves, and also much higher, wherein consists the difference.

3 Bastard Marjerome of Candy has many threddy roots; from which rise up
diverse weak and feeble branches trailing upon the ground, set with fair
green leaves, not unlike those of Penny Royal, but broader and shorter: at
the top of those branches stand scaly or chaffie ears of a purple color. The
whole plant is of a most pleasant sweet smell. The root endured in my garden

1 Origanum (...). Bastard Marjerome.
The second and third figures were formerly (...).
2 Origanum album, Tabern. White bastard Marjerome.
The second and third figures were formerly (...).
3 Origanum Creticum. Wild Marjerome of Candy.
4 Origanum Anglicum. English wild Marjerome.
and the leaves also green all this winter long, 1597. although it has been
said that it does perish at the first frost, as sweet Marjerome does.

4 English wild Marjerome is exceedingly well known to all, to have long,
stiff, and hard stalks of two cubits high, set with leaves like those of
sweet Marjerome, but broader and greater, of a russet green color, on the top
of the branches stand tufts of purple flowers, composed of many small ones set
together very closely vmbell fashion. The root creeps in the ground, and is
long lasting.

The Place.
These plants do grow wild in the kingdom of Spain, Italy, and other of
those hot regions. The last of the four does grow wild in the borders of
fields, and low copses, in most places of England.

The Time.
They flower and flourish in the Summer months, afterward the seed is
perfected.

The Names.
Bastard Marjerome is called in Greek, (...); and that which is surnamed
Heracleoticum, (...) (...): of diverse it is called Cunila: in shops, Origanum
Hispanicum, Spanish Organy: our Euglish wild Marjerome is called in Greek of
Dioscoridcs, (...), and (...), Onitis, of some, Agrioriganum, or (...)
Origanum: in Italian, Origano: in Spanish Oregano: in French, Mariolaine
bastard: in English, (...), bastard Marjerome: and that of ours, wild
Marjerome, and grove Marjerome.

The Temperature.
All the Organies do cut, attenuate, or make thin, dry, and heat, and that in
the third degree; and Galen teaches that wild Marjerome is more forceable and
of greater strength; notwithstanding Organy of Candy which is brought dry out
of Spain (whereof I have a plant in my garden) is more biting than any of the
rest, and of greatest heat.

The Virtues.
Organy given in wine is a remedy against the bitings, and stingings of
venomous beasts, and cures Opium, or the juice of black poppy, or hemlockes,
especially if it be given with wine and raisons of the sun.

The decoction of Organy provoke urine, brings down the monthly course,
and is given

It is profitably used in a looch, or a medicine to be licked, against an old
cough and the stuffing

It heals scabs, itches, and scuruinesse, being used in bathes, and it takes
away the bad color

The weight of a dram taken with meade or (...) water, draws forth by stool
black and Dioscorides and Pliny write.

The juice mixed with a little milk, being poured into the (...), mitigateth
the pains

The same mixed with the oil of Ireos, or the roots of the white Florentine
flower de luce, and

The decoction loses the belly, and voideth choler; and drunk with vinegar
helps the infirmities

These plants are easy to be taken in potions, and therefore to good purpose
they may be used

CHAP. 219. Of Goats Marjerome, or Organy.
The Description.
1 THe stalks of Goats Organy are slender, hard and woody, of a blackish
color; whereon are set long leaves, greater than those of the wild Time,
sweet of smell, rough, and somewhat hairy. The flowers be small, and grow out
of little crowns or wharles round about the top of the stalks, tending to a
purple color. The root is small and threddy.

There were (...) (...) (...) in this chapter; the first whereof was of that
which is described in the second place: (...) second was of (...) of (...),
whereof here is no (...) (...) (...). The figure of the (...) (...) of (...)
(which as I have formerly said, (...) would have all one with that of (...))
was (...) (...) the name of (...) (...), page 459. of the former (...).
1 Tragoriganum Dod. Goats Marierome.
There were (...) (...) (...) in this chapter; the first whereof was of that
which is described in the second place: (...) second was of (...) of (...),
whereof here is no (...) (...) (...). The figure of the (...) (...) of (...)
(which as I have formerly said, (...) would have all one with that of (...))
was (...) (...) the name of (...) (...), page 459. of the former (...).
Tragoriganum Lob. Goats Marierome.
There were (...) (...) (...) in this chapter; the first whereof was of that
which is described in the second place: (...) second was of (...) of (...),
whereof here is no (...) (...) (...). The figure of the (...) (...) of (...)
(which as I have formerly said, (...) would have all one with that of (...))
was (...) (...) the name of (...) (...), page 459. of the former (...).
2 Tragoriganum Clusij. Clusius his Goats Marierome.
3 Tragoriganum Cretense. Candy Goats Marierome.


2 Carolus Clusius has set forth in his Spanish Observations another sort of
Goats Marierome growing up like a small shrub: the leaves are longer and more
hoarie than wild Marierome, and also narrower, of a hot biting taste, but of a
sweet smell, (...) not very pleasant. The flowers do stand at the top of the
stalks in spokie rundles, of a white color. The root is thick and woody.

3 This differs little in form and magnitude (...) the last described, but the
branches are of a blacker color, with rougher and darker colored leaves: the
flowers also are lesser, and of a purple color. Both this and the last
described continue always green, but this last is of a much more fragrant
smell. This flowers in March, and was found growing wild by Clusius in the
fields of Valentia: he calls it Tragoriganum Hispanicum tertium. Pena and Lobel
call it Tragoriganum Cretense apud Venetas; that is, the Candy Goats Marierome
of the Venetians.

The Place.
These plants grow wild in Spain, Italy, and other hot countries. The first
of these I found growing in diverse barren and chalky fields and highways
near unto Sittingburne and Rochester in Kent, and also near unto Cobham house
and Southfleet in the same county.

I doubt our Author was mistaken, for I have not heard of this growing wild
with us.

The Time.
They flower in the month of August. I remember (says Dodonaeus) that I have
seen Tragoriganum in the Low Countries, in the gardens of those that apply
their whole study to the knowledge of plants; or as we may say, in the gardens
of cunning Herbarists.

The Names.
Goats Organie is called in Greek (...): in Latin likewise Tragoriganum: in
English, goats Organie, and Goats Marierome.

The Temperature.
Goats Organies are hot and dry in the third degree: They are (says Galen) of
a binding quality.

The Virtues.
Tragoriganum or Goats Marierome is very good against the wamblings of the
stomach, and the

(...) bastard kinds of Organie or wild Marieromes have the (...) force and
faculties that

CHAP. 220. Of Herb Masticke.
The Description.
1 THe English and French herbarists at this day do in their vulgar tongues
call this herb Masticke or Mastich, taking this name Marum of Maro King of
Thrace; though some rather suppose the name corruptly to be derived from this
word Amaracus, the one plant being so like the other, that many learned have
taken them to be one and the self same plant: others have taken (...) for
Sampsuchus, which doubtless is a kind of Marierome. Some (as Dodonaeus) have
called this our Marum by the name of Clinopodium; which name rather belongs to
another plant than to Masticke. This grows some foot high, with little longish
leaves set by couples: at the tops of the stalks amongst white downie heads
come little white flowers: the whole plant is of a very sweet and pleasing
smell.

2 If any be desirous to search for the true Marum, let them be assured that
the plant last mentioned is the same: but if any do doubt thereof, for
novelties sake here is presented unto your view a plant of the same kind
(which cannot be (...)) for a special kind thereof, which has a most pleasant
sent or smell, and in show resembles Marierome and Origanum, consisting of
small twigs a foot and more long; the heads (...) like the common Marierome; but
the leaves are less, and like Myrtus: the root is of a (...) substance, with
many strings hanging thereat.

3 There is another kind hereof set forth by Lobel, which I have not as yet
seen, nor himself has well described, which I leave to a better
consideration. Though our Author knew not how to describe this creeping Marum
of Lobel, yet no question, if he had known so much, he would have given us the
figure thereof as well in this place, as in the third place of the next chapter
1 Marum. Herb Masticke.
2 Marum Syriacum. Assyrian Masticke.
That we here give you in the third place was formerly unfitly figured in the
third place of the ensuing Chapter by the name of (...) (...)
3 Marum supinum Lobelij. Creeping Masticke.
for a Penny-Royall; and might as well here as there, and much more fitly have
ventured at a description. But that which is defective in him and Lobel, I will
endeavor to supply out of Caesalpinus. This plant has many creeping branches
like to those of wild Time, but set with whiter and shorter leaves like to
those of the smaller (...), but somewhat narrower: the flowers grow in rundles
amongst the leaves, as in Calamint, and are of a purple color: the whole plant
is of a strong and sweet smell, and of an hot and bitter taste. Caesalpinus
thinks this to be the Sampsuchum of Dioscorides: and so also do the Authors of
the Aduersaria. Tabernamontanus calls it Marum repens.

The Place.
These plants are set and sown in the gardens of England, and there maintained
with great care and diligence from the injury of our cold clymate.

The Time.
They flower about August, and somewhat later in cold Summers.

The Names.
Masticke is called of the new writers Marum: and some, as Lobel and Anguillara
think it the (...) odorum of Theophrastus. Dodonaeus judges it to be the
Clinopodium of (...). Clusius makes it his Tragoriganum 1. and says he
received the seeds thereof by the name of Ambra dulcis.

The Nature.
These plants are hot and dry in the third degree.

The Virtues.
Dioscorides writes, that the herb is drunk, and likewise the decoction
thereof, against the bitings

The decoction boiled in wine till the third part be consumed, and drunk,
stops the laske (...)

CHAP. 221. Of Penny Royal, or pudding grass.
It is apparent by the titles and descriptions that our (...) in this chapter
followed (...) but the figures were not agreeable to the history, for the two
(...) figures were of the (...) (...) described in the third place; and the
third figure was of the (...) (...) described in the (...) place of the (...)
Chapter.
1 Pulegium regium. Penny Royal.
It is apparent by the titles and descriptions that our (...) in this chapter
followed (...) but the figures were not agreeable to the history, for the two
(...) figures were of the (...) (...) described in the third place; and the
third figure was of the (...) (...) described in the (...) place of the (...)
Chapter.
2 Pulegium mas. Upright Penny Royal.


The Description.
1 PVlegium regium vulgatum is so exceedingly well known to all our English
(...), (...) it needs no description, being our common Penny Royal.

2 The second being the male Penny Royal is like unto the former, in (...),
(...) and smell, and differs in that this male kind grows upright of
himself without (...), much like in show unto wild Marierome.

It is apparent by the titles and descriptions that our (...) in this chapter
followed (...) but the figures were not agreeable to the history, for the two
(...) figures were of the (...) (...) described in the third place; and the
third figure was of the (...) (...) described in the (...) place of the (...)
Chapter.
3 Pulegium angustifolium. Narrow leafed Penny Royal.


3 The third kind of Penny Royal grows like unto Time, and is of a wooddie
substance, somewhat like unto the thin leased Hyssope, of the savor of
common Penny Royal, but much stronger and more pleasant: the longish narrow
leaves stand upon the stalks by couples, with little leaves coming forth of
their bosoms: and toward the tops of the branches grow rundles of small
purple flowers. This grows plentifully about Montpellier and by the Authors of
the Aduersaria, who first set it forth, it is styled Pulegium, angustifol. sive
ceruinum Monspeliensium.

The Place.
The first and common Penny Royal grows naturally wild in moist and
ouerflown places, as in the Common near London called Miles end, about the
holes and ponds thereof in sundry places, from whence poor women bring plenty
to sell in London markets; and it grows in sundry other Commons near London
likewise.

The second grows in my garden: the third I have not as yet seen.

The Time.
They flower from the beginning of June to the end of August.

The Names.
Penny Royal is called in Greek (...), and oftentimes (...): in Latin,
Pulegium, and Pulegium regale, for difference sake between it and wild Time,
which of some is called Pulegium (...): in Italian, Pulegio: in Spanish, Poleo:
in Dutch, Poley: in French, Pouliot: in English, Penny Roy. all, Pudding
grass, Puliall Royal, and of some Organie.

The Nature.
Penny Royal is hot and dry in the third degree, and of subtle parts, as
Galen says.

The Virtues.
Penny Royal boiled in wine and drunken, provoke the monthly terms,
brings forth the secondine,

Penny Royal taken with honey cleanses the lungs, and cleereth the breast
from all gross and

The same taken with honey and Aloes, purges by stool melancholy humors;
helps the

The same taken with water and Vinegar asswageth the inordinate desire to
vomit, and the pains

If you have when you are at the sea Penny Royal in great quantity dry, and
cast it into corrupt

A Garland of Penny royal made and worn about the head is of great force
against the swimming

The decoction of Penny Royal is very good against ventositie, windiness, or
such like, and against

CHAP. 222. Of Basil.
The Description.
1 GArden Basil is of two sorts, differing one from another in bigness. The
first has broad, thick, and fat leaves, of a pleasant sweet smell, and of
which some one here and there are of a black reddish color, somewhat snipped
about the edges, not unlike the leaves of French Mercury. The stalk grows
to the height of half a cubite, dividing itself into diverse branches,
whereupon do stand small and base flowers sometimes whitish, and often tending
to a dark purple. The root is threddie, and dies at the approach of Winter.

1 Ocimum (...). Great Basil.
2 Ocimum medium citratum. Citron Basil.
3 Ocimum minus Gariophyllatum. Bush Basil.
4 Ocimum Indicum. Indian Basil.


2 The middle Basil is very like unto the former, but it is altogether lesser.
The whole plant is of a most odoriferous smell, not unlike the smell of a
Limon, or Citron, whereof it took his surname.

3 Bush Basil, or fine Basil, is a low and base plant, having a threddie
root, from which rise up many small and tender stalks, branched into diverse
arms or boughs; whereupon are placed many little leaves, lesser than those of
Penny Royal. The whole plant is of a most pleasing sweet smell.

4 This which some call Ocimum Indicum, or rather (as Camerarius says)
Hispanicum, sends up a stalk a foot or more high, four square, and of a purple
color, set at each joint with two leaves, and out of their bosoms come little
branches: the largest leaves are some two inches broad, and some three long;
growing upon long stalks, and deeply cut in about their edges, being also
thick, fat and iuicie, and either of a dark purple color, or else spotted
with more or less such colored spots. The tops of the branches end in spokie
tufts of white flowers with purple veins running along them. The seed is
contained in such seed vessels as that of the other Basils, and is round,
black and large. The plant perishes every year as soon as it has perfected
the seed. Clusius calls this Ocimum Indicum.

The Place.
Basil is sown in gardens, and in earthen pots. It comes up quickly, and
loves little moisture except in the middle of the day; otherwise if it be
sown in rainie weather, the seed will putrify, and grow into a iellie or
slime, and come to nothing.

The Time.
Basil floureth in June and July, and that by little and little, whereby it is
long a flouring, beginning first at the top.

The Names.
Basil is called in Greek (...), and more commonly with (...) in the first
syllable (...): in Latin, Ocimum. It differs from Ocymum which some have
called Cereale as we (says Dodonaeus) have showed in the History of Grain.
The later Graecians have called it (...): in shops likewise Basilicum, and
Regium: in Spanish, Albabaca: in French, Basilic: in English, Basil, garden
Basil, the greater Basil Royal, the lesser Basil gentle, and bush Basil:
of some, Basilicum Gariophyllatum, or Cloue Basil.

The Temperature.
Basil, as Galen teaches, is hot in the second degree, but it has adioined
with it a superfluous moisture, by reason whereof he does not like that it
should be taken inwardly; but being applied outwardly, it is good to digest or
distribute, and to concoct.

The Virtues.
Dioscorides says that if Basil be much eaten, it dulleth the sight, it
mollifieth the belly, breeds

The juice mixed with fine meal of parched Barley, oil of roses and Vinegar,
is good against inflammations,

The juice drunk in wine of Chios or strong Sack, is good against head ache.

The juice cleanses away the dimmenesse of the eyes, and dries up the humor
that falls into

The seed drunk is a remedy for melancholicke people; for those that are
short winded, and

If the same be snift up in the nose, it causes often neesing: also the herb
it self does the same.

There be that shun Basil and will not eat thereof, because that if it be
chewed and laid in the

They of Afric do also affirm, that they who are stung of the Scorpion and
have eaten of it,

The Later writers, among whom Simeon Zethy is one, do teach, that the smell
of Basil is good

CHAP. 223. Of wild Basil.
The Description.
1 THe wild Basil or Acynos, called of Pena, Clinopodium vulgarc, has square
hairie stems, beset with little leaves like unto the small Basil, but much
smaller, and more hairie, sharp pointed, and a little snipt toward the end of
the leaf, with small flowers of a purple color, fashioned like unto the
garden Basil. The root is full of hairie threads, and creeps along the
ground, and springs up yearly anew of it self without sowing. This is the
Clinopodium alterum of Matthiolus.

2 This kind of wild Basil called amongst the Graecians (...), which by
interpretation is Sine semine, or Sterilis, has caused sundry opinions and
great doubts concerning the words of Pliny and Theophrastus, affirming that
this herb has no flowers nor seeds; which opinions I am sure of mine own
knowledge to be without reason: but to omit controversies, this plant bears
purple flowers, wharled about square stalks, rough leaves and hairie, very
like in shape unto Basil: The stalks are some cubite and more high, parted
into few branches, and set at certain spaces with leaves growing by couples.
This is the Clinopodium vulgar of Matthiolus, and that of Cordus, Gesner, and
others; it is the Acinos of Lobel.

3 Scrapio and others have set forth another wild Basil under the title of
Molochia; and Lobel after the mind of John Brancion, calls it Corcoros,
which we have Englished, Fish Basil, the seeds whereof the said Brancion
received from Spain, saying that Corcoros (...) has the leaves of Basil: the
stalks are two handfuls high, the flowers yellow, growing close to the
stalks, bearing his seed in small long cods. The root is compact and made of an
innumerable company of strings, creeping far abroad like running Time. This
figure of Lobels which here we give you is (as Camerarius has observed)
imperfect, for it expresses not the long cods wherein the seed is contained,
neither the two little strings or beards that come forth at the setting on of
each leaf to the stalk.

1 Ocymum syluestre. Wild Basil.
2 Acynos. Stone Basil.


3 Corchoros. Fish Basil.
5 Clinopodium Austriacum. Austrian field Basil.
6 Clinopodium Alpinum. Wild Basil of the Alps.


4 It may be our Author would have described this in the first place, as I
conjecture by those words which he used in mentioning the place of their
growing; and [ Clinopodium (...) grows in great plenty upon Longfield downs
in Kent;] but to this neither figure nor description did agree, wherefore I
will give you the History thereof. It sends up many little square stalks some
handful and an half high, seldom divided into branches: at each joint stand
two small greenish leaves, little hairy, and not divided or snipt about the
edges, and much like those of the next described, as you see them expressed in
the figure: the little hollow and somewhat hooded flowers grow in roundles
toward the tops of the stalks, as in the first described, and they are of a
bluish violet color. The seeds I have not yet observed: the root is fibrous
and wooddie, and lasts for many years. The whole plant has a pretty pleasing
but weak smell. It flowers in July and August. I first observed it Anno 1626,
a little on this side Pomfret in Yorkshire, and since by Datford in Kent, and
in the I Will of Tenet. I have sometimes seen it brought to Cheapside market,
where the herb women called it Poley mountain, some it may be that have
taken it for Polium montanum misinforming them; Clusius first took notice of
this plant, and called it Acinos Anglicum, finding it growing in Kent, Anno,
1581. and he thinks it to be the Acinos of Dioscorides: now the virtues
attributed by Dioscorides to his Acinos are set down at the end of the chapter
under the letter B.

5 This which Clusius has also set forth by the name of (...), or Acinos
Austriacum, does not much differ from the last described, for it has tender
square hard stalks like those of the last described, set also with two leaves
at each joint, here and there a little snipt (which is omitted in the figure)
the flowers grow only at the tops of the stalks, and these pretty large, and
of a violet color (yet they are sometimes found white:) they hang commonly
forward, and at is were with there upper parts turned down. The seed vessels
are like those of the first described, and contain each of them four little
black seeds: This flowers in May, and the seed is ripe in June: It grows
about the bathes of Badon and in diverse places of Austria.

6 Pena also has given us knowledge of another, that from a sibrous root sends
up many quadrangular rough branches, of the height of the two former, set also
with two leaves at each joint, and these rough and lightly snipt about the
edges; the flowers grow thick together at the tops of the stalks of a dark
red color, and in shape like those of the mountain Calaminte. It flowers in
the beginning of July, and grows upon mount Baldus in Italy; Pona sets it
forth by the name of Clinopodium Alpinum.

7 To these I think fit to add another, whose description was sent me by Mr.
Goodyer, and I question whether it may not be the plant which Fabius Columna
(...), (...). (...). sets forth by the name of Acinos Dioscoridis; for he makes
his to be endued odore (...) (...): but to the purpose.

Acinos odoratissimum.

This herb has four, five, or more, four square hard woody stalks growing
from one root, divided into many branches, covered with a soft white
hairinesse, two or three foot long or longer, not growing upright, but trailing
upon the ground; the leaves grow on little-short footstalkes by couples of a
light green color, somewhat like the leaves of Basil, very like the leaves
of Acinos Lobelij, but smaller, about three quarters of an inch broad, and not
fully an inch long, somewhat sharp pointed, lightly notched about the edges,
also covered with a light soft hoary hairinesse, of a very sweet smell, little
inferior to Garden Marjerome, of a hot biting taste: out of their bosoms grow
other smaller leaves, or else branches; the flowers also grow forth of the
bosoms of the leaves toward the tops of the stalks and branches, not in
whorles like the said Acinos, but having one little short footstalke growing
forth of the bosom of each leaf, on which is placed three, four, or more
small flowers, gaping open, and divided into four unequal parts at the top,
like the flowers of Basil, and very near of the likeness and bigness of the
flowers of Garden Marjerome, but of a pale bluish color tending toward a
purple. The seed I never observed by reason it floured late. This plant I first
found growing in the Garden of Mr. William Yalden in Sheet near Petersfield
in Hampshire, (...) 1620. amongst sweet Marjerome, and which by chance they
bought with the seeds thereof. It is to be considered whether the seeds of
sweet Marjerome degenerate and send forth this herb or not. 11. October,
1621. John Goodyer.

The Place.
The wild kinds do grow upon grauelly grounds by water sides, and especially
I found the three last in the barren plain by an house in Kent two miles from
Dartford, called Saint Jones, in a village called Sutton; and Clinopodium vulg
are grows in great plenty upon Long field downs in Kent. One of the three
last of our Authors description is omitted, as you may find noted at the end
of the chapter: yet I cannot be persuaded that ever he found any of the four
he described ever wild in this kingdom, unless the secoad, which grows
plentifully in Autumn almost by every hedge: also the fourth being of my
description grows near Dartford and in many such dry barren places in sundry
parts of the kingdom.

The Time.
These herbs flower in June and July.

The Names.
Unprofitable Basil, or wild Basil is called by some Clinopodium.

The Nature.
The seed of these herbs are of complexion hot and dry.

The Virtues.
Wild Basil pound with wine appeaseth the pain of the eyes, and the juice
does mundifie the

The stone Basil howsoever it be taken stops the laske, and courses; and
outwardly applied

These plants are good for all such effects as require moderate heat and
astriction. The figure that was formerly in the third place of this chapter was
of the (...) (...) (...) (...) (...), and (...) (...) (...) by (...) (...) in
the fourth place of the next chapter save one, and there you (...) find it:
the (...) seems (...) be of the (...) (...) (...) (...) the (...), formerly
described by me in the fifth p ace of the 128. chapter (...) this (...); if
that the place and flowers in the (...) (...) of (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
to vary: howeuer I judge it the same and therefore have here excluded it.


CHAP. 224. Of Basil Valerian.
The Description.
1 THe first kind of Ocymastrum, called of Dodonaeus, Valerianarubra, brings
forth long and brittle stalks two cubits high, sull os knots or joints, in
which place is joined long leaves much like unto great Basil, but greater,
broader, and larger, or rather like the leaves of Woade. At the top of the
stalks do grow very pleasant and long red flowers, of the fashion of the
flowers of Valerian, which has caused Dodonaeus to call this plant red
Valerian; which being past, the seeds are carried away with the wind being,
few in number, and little in quantity, so that without great diligence the seed
is not to be gathered or preserved: for my self have often endeavored to see
it, and yet have lost my labor. The root is very thick, and of an excellent
sweet savor.

1 Valeriana rubra Dodonaei. Red Valerian.
2 Behen album. Spatling poppy.


2 The second is taken for Spumeum papauer, in respect of that kind of frothy
spattle, or spume, which we call Cuckoo spittle, that more abounds in the
bosoms of the leaves of these plants, than in any other plant that is known:
for which cause Pena calls it Papaver spumeum, that is, frothy, or spatling
Poppy: his flower does very little resemble any kind of Poppy, but only the
seed and cod, or bowl wherein the seed is contained, otherwise it is like
the other Ocymastrum; the flowers grow at the top of the stalks hanging
downwards, of a white color, and it is taken generally for Behen album: the
root is white, plain, and long, and very tough and hard to break.

The Place.
The first grows plentifully in my garden, being a great ornament to the
same, and not common in England.

The second grows almost in every pasture.

The Time.
These plants do flower from May to the end of August.

The Names.
Red Valerian has been so called of the likeness of the flowers and spoked
rundles with Valerian; by which name we had rather have it called, than rashly
to lay upon itan improper name. There are some also who would have it to be a
kind of Behen of the later Herbarists, naming the same (...) rubrum, for
difference between it and the other Behenalbum, that of some is called
Ocymastrum, and Papauer spumeum: which I have Englished, Spatling Poppie; and
is in truth another plant, much differing from Behen of the Arabians: it is
also called Valerianthon, Saponaria altera, Struthium Aldroandi, and Condurdum:
in English, red Valerian, and red Cow Basil.

Spatling Poppie is called Behen album, Ocymastrum alterum; of some,
Polemonium, and Papauer spumeum: in English, Spatling Poppie, frothie Poppie,
and white Ben.

The Nature.
These plants are dry in the second degree.

The Virtues.
The root of Behen Album drunk in wine, is good against the bloody flux: and
being pound

The decoction of the root made in water and drunk, provoke urine, it
helps the strangurie, That which was formerly here set sorth in the third
place by the name of Ocymastrum (...), is nothing else but the (...) (...)
multiplex, which I have described amongst the rest of the same kind in the
128. Chapter of this book.


CHAP. 225. Of Mints.
The Kinds.
THere be diverse sorts of Mints; some of the garden; other wild, or of the
field; and also some of the water.

The Description.
1 THe first tame or garden Mint comes up with stalks four square, of an
obscure red color somewhat hairie, which are covered with round leaves nicked
in the edges like a saw, of a deep green color: the flowers are little and
red, and grow about the stalks circle-wise, as those of Penny Royal: the
root creeps aslope in the ground, having some strings on it, and now and
then in sundry places it buddeth out afresh: the whole herb is of a pleasant
smell, and it rather lies down than stands up.

2 The second is like to the first in hairie stalks something round, in
blackish leaves, in creeping roots, and also in smell, but the flowers do not
at all compass the stalk about, but stand up in the tops of the branches
being orderly placed in little ears, or rather catkines or aglets.

3 The leaves of Speare-Mint are long like those of the Willow tree, but
whiter, softer, and more bairie: the flowers are orderly placed in the tops of
the stalks, and in ears like those of the second. The root hereof does also
creep no otherwise than does that of the first, unto which it is like.

4 There is another sort of Mint which has long leaves like to the third in
stalks, yet in leaves and in roots lesser; but the flowers hereof stand not in
the tops of the branches, but compass the stalks about circle-wise as do those
of the first, which be of a light purple color.

5 This has round leaves broader than the common Mint, rounder also, and as
crisp or curled as those described in the second place (of which it seems but
a larger variety:) the stakes are The figures which were formerly in this
Chapter were no way agreeable to the descriptions and names taken forth of
(...). The first was of the (...) (...) (...) of Lobel and Tab. The 2. was of
that which is described in the third place, the third was of the (...) Cattaria
(...) described in the third place of the next Chapter. The figure agreeing to
the 4. description was in the chapter next save one asore by the title of (...)
(...).
1 Mentha sativarubra. Red Garden Mints.
The figures which were formerly in this Chapter were no way agreeable to the
descriptions and names taken forth of (...). The first was of the (...) (...)
(...) of Lobel and Tab. The 2. was of that which is described in the third
place, the third was of the (...) Cattaria (...) described in the third place
of the next Chapter. The figure agreeing to the 4. description was in the
chapter next save one asore by the title of (...) (...).
2 Mentha cruciata, sive crispa. Cross Mint, or curled Mint.
The figures which were formerly in this Chapter were no way agreeable to the
descriptions and names taken forth of (...). The first was of the (...) (...)
(...) of Lobel and Tab. The 2. was of that which is described in the third
place, the third was of the (...) Cattaria (...) described in the third place
of the next Chapter. The figure agreeing to the 4. description was in the
chapter next save one asore by the title of (...) (...).
3 Mentha Romana. Spear Mint.
4 Mentha Cardiaca. Heart Mint.
5 Mentha spicata (...) Balsam Mint.
four square, and the flowers grow in ears or spokie tufts, like those of the
second.

The Place.
Most use to set Mints in Gardens almost every where.

The Time.
Mints do flower and flourish in Summer, in Winter the roots only remain:
being once set they continue long, and remain (...) and fast in the ground.

The Names.
Mint is called in Greek (...) and (...): the sweet smell says Pliny in his
19. book cap. 8. has changed the name among the Graecians when as otherwise
it should be called Mintha, from whence our old writers have derived the name:
for (...) signifies sweet, and (...) smell: The Apothecaries, Italians, and
French men, do keep the Latin name Mentha. the Spaniards do call it Yerua
buena, and Ortelana: in High Dutch, Muntz: in Low Dutch, Munte: in English,
Mint.

The first Mint is called in High Dutch, Diement: in Low Dutch, Bruyn heylighe:
he that would translate it into Latin, must call it Sacranigricans, or the holy
blackish mint: in English, brown Mint; or red Mint.

The second is also called in High Dutch Krausz diement, Krausz muntz, and
Krausz balsam: that is to say, Mentha cruciata: in French, Beaume crespu: in
English, CrosseMint, or curled Mint.

The third is called of diverse Mentha Sarracenica, Mentha Romana: it is called
in High Dutch Balsam muntz, Onser frawen muntz, Spitzer muntz, Spitzer balsam:
it may be called Mentha angustifolia: that is to say, Mint with the narrow
leaf: and in English, Spear Mint, common garden Mint, our Ladies Mint, brown
Mint, and Macrell Mint.

The fourth is called in High Dutch Hertzkraut, as though it were to be named
Cardiaca, or Cardiaca Mentha: in English, Hart-woort, or Heart-mint This is the
Sisymbrium sativum of Matthiolus, and Mentha hortensis altera of Gesner: the
Italians call it Sisembrio domestico, and Balsamita; the Germans, Kakenbalsam.

The Temperature.
Mint is hot and dry in the third degree. It is says Galen, somewhat bitter
and harsh, and it is inferior to Calamint. The smell of Mint, says Pliny does
stir up the mind, and the taste to a greedy desire to meat.

The Virtues.
Mint is marvelous wholesome for the stomach, it staieth the Hicket,
parbraking, vomiting and

It stops the casting up of blood, being given with water and vinegar, as
Galen teaches.

And in broth says Pliny, it staieth the flowers, and is singular good against
the whites, that is to Pliny teaches, does take away the headache.

It is good against watering eyes, and all manner of breakings out in the head,
and against the infirmities

It is poured into the ears with honey water. It is taken inwardly against
Scolopenders, Bearewormes,

It is applied with salt to the bitings of mad dogs. It will not suffer milk
to cruddle in the stomach Pliny adds to wax sour.) therefore it is put in
Milk that is drunk for fear that those who have drunk thereof should be
strangled.

It is thought, that by the same virtue it is an enemy to generation, by
ouerthickning the seed.

Dioscorides teaches, that being applied to the secret part of a woman before
the act, it hinders

Garden Mint taken in meat or drink warmeth and strengthens the stomach,
and dries up

Mints mingled with the leaves of parched Barley, consumes tumors and hard
swellings.

The water of Mints is of like operation in diverse medicines, it cures the
trenching and griping

It is singular against the gravel and stone in the kidneies, and against the
strangurie, being boiled

They lay it to the stinging of waspes and bees with good success.

CHAP. 226. Of Nep, or Cat Mint.
The Description.
1 CAt Mint or Nep grows high; it brings forth stalks above a cubit long,
cornered, chamfered, and full of branches: the leaves are broad, nicked in the
edges like (...) of Bawme, or of Horehound, but longer. The flowers are of a
whitish color, they partly compass about the uppermost sprigs, and partly
grow on the very top, they are set in a manner like an ear or catkin: the root
is diversely parted, and full of strings, and (...) a long time. The whole herb
together with the leaves and stalks is soft, and covered with a white down,
but lesser than Horse-mint; it is of a sharp smell, and pearceth into the head:
it has a hot taste with a certain (...) nesse.

2 Our Author figured this and described the next in the second place of this
Chapter. This has pretty large square stalks, set at each joint with two
leaves like those of Costmary, but of a gray or ouerworn color: the flowers
grow at the tops of the stalks in long spokie tufts like those of the last
described, and of a whitish color, the smell is pleasanter than that of the
last described.

1 Mentha Felina, seu Cattaria. Nep or Cat-mint.
2 Mentha Cattaria altera. Great Cat-mint.


3 There is also another kind hereof that has a longer and narrower lease, and
not (...) so white a color: the stalks hereof are four square: the flowers
be more plentiful, of a red light purple color inclining to blew, sprinkled
with little fine purple specks: the smell hereof is stronger, but the taste is
more biting. The figure of this was formerly in the third place of the last
chapter.

3 Mentha Cattaria angustifolia. Small Cat-Mint.


The Place.
The first grows about the borders of gardens and fields, near to rough
banks, ditches, and common ways: it is delighted with moist and waterie
places: it is brought into gardens.

The other two commonly grow in gardens with us.

The Time.
The Cat-Mints flourish by and by after the Spring: they flower in July and
August.

The Names.
The later Herbarists do call it Herba Cattaria, and Herba Catti, because the
Cats are very much delighted herewith; for the smell of it is so pleasant to
them, that they rub themselves upon it, and wallow or tumble in it, and also
feed on the branches and leaves very greedily. It is named of the Apothecaries
Nepcta: but Nepeta is properly called (as we have said) wild Penny-royall: in
High Dutch, Katzen Muntz: in LowDutch, Catte cruijt: in Italian, Gattaria, or
herba Gatta: in Spanish, Yerua Gatera: in English, Cat Mint and Nep. The true
Nepeta is Calamintha Pulegij odore.

The Temperature.
Nep is of temperature hot and dry, and has the faculties of the Calamints.

The Virtues.
It is commended against cold pains of the

It is used in baths and decoctions for women to sit over, to bring down their
sickness, and to

It is also good against those diseases for which the ordinary Mints do serve
and are used.

CHAP. 227. Of Horse-Mint or Water-Mint.
The Description.
1 WAter Mint is a kind of wild Mint, it is like to the first Garden M int;
the leaves thereof are round, the stalks cornered, both the leaves and stalks
are of a dark red color: the roots creep far abroad, but every part is
greater, and the herb it self is of a stronger smell: the flowers in the tops
of the branches are gathered together into a round ear, of a purple color.

2 The second kind of water Mint in each respect is like the others, saving
that the same has a more odoriferous savor being lightly touched with the
hand: otherwise being hardly touched, the savor is over hot to smell unto: it
bears his flowers in sundry tufts or roundles ingirting the stalks in many
places; and they are of a light purple color: the leaves are also less than
those of the former, and of an hoary gray color.

3 This common Horse-Mint has creeping roots like as the other Mints, from
which proceed stalks partly leaning, and partly growing upright: the leaves
are pretty large, thick, The figure that was in the first place was of the
Horse-Mint, and that in the second place should have been in the first, as now
it is.
1 Mentha aquatica, sieve Sisymbrium. Water Mint.
The figure that was in the first place was of the Horse-Mint, and that in the
second place should have been in the first, as now it is.
2 Calamintha aquatica. Water Calamint.
3 Mentastrum. Horse-Mint.
4 (...) niueum Anglicum. Party colored Horse-Mint.
5 Mentastrum minus. Small Horse-Mint.
6 Mentastrum montanum 1. (...). Mountain Horse-Mint.
7 Mentastrum (...) radice (...). Turnep-rooted Horse-Mint.
wrinkled, hoary and rough both above and be low, and lightly snipped about the
edges; the flowers grow in thick compact ears at the tops of the stalks, and
are like those of common Mint. The whole plant is of a more unpleasant sent
than any of the other Mints. It grows in diverse wet and moist grounds, and
flowers in June and July. This by most writers is called only Mentastrum,
without any other attribute.

4 In some of our English gardens (as (...) and Lobel observed) grows another
Horse-mint, much less, and better smelling than the last mentioned, having the
leaves partly green, and partly milk white; yet sometimes the leaves are some
of them wholly white, but more, and more commonly all green: the stalks,
flowers, and other parts are like those of the former, but less. This is the
Mentastrum (...) Anglicum, of Lobel; and Mentastrum alterum of Dodonaeus.

5 This grows in waterie places, having a stalk of a cubit or cubit and half
high, set with longish hoary leaves like those of Horse-mint: the flowers grow
in spokie tufts at the tops of the stalks, of a duskie purple color, and in
shape like those of the common Mint: the smell of this comes near to that of
the water Mint. This is the Mentastrifolia aquatica hirsuta, sieve (...) 3.
Dioscoridis, of Lobel: in the hist, Lugd, it is called Mentastrum minus
spicatum.

6 The stalk of this is some cubit and half high, square, and full of pith:
the leaves are like in shape to those of Cat-Mint, but not hoarie, but rather
green: the tops of the branches are set with roundles of such white flowers as
those of the Cats-mint: the smell of this plant is like to that of the
Horse-Mint; whence Clusius calls it Mentastrum montanum primum. It flowers in
August, and grows in the mountainous places of Austria.

7 The same Author has also set forth another by the name of Mentastrum
tuberosa radice. It has roughish stalks like the former, and longish crumpled
leaves somewhat snipt about the edges like those of the last described: the
flowers grow in roundles along the tops of the branches, and are white of
color, and like those of Cat-Mint. The root of this (which, as also the
leaves, is not well expressed in the figure) is like a Radish, and blackish on
the out side, sending sorth many succors like to little Turnips, and also
diverse fibers: these succors taken from the maine root will also take root and
grow. It flowers in June. Clusius received the seed of it from Spain.

The Place.
They grow in moist and waterie places, as in meadows near unto ditches that
have water in them, and by rivers.

The Time.
They flower when the other Mints do, and revive in the Spring.

The Names.
It is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Sisymbrium: in High Dutch, Roszmuntz,
Massermuntz: in French, Menthe (...): in English, Water Mint, Fish-Mint,
Brooke-Mint, and Horsemint.

The Temperature.
Water Mint is hot and dry as is the Garden Mint, and is of a stronger smell
and operation.

The Virtues.
It is commended to have the like virtues that the garden Mint has; and also
to be good against

The savor or smell of the Water-Mint rejoices the heart of man; for which
cause they use

There is no use hereof in physic whilst we have the garden Mint, which is
sweeter, and more

CHAP. 228. Of Mountain Mint or Calamint.
The Description.
1 Mountain Calamint is a low herb, seldom above a foot high, parted into
many branches: the stalks are four square, and have joints as it were, out of
every one whereof grow forth leaves something round, lesser than those of
Basil, covered with a very thin hairy down, as are also the stalks,
somewhat whitish, and of a sweet smell: the tops of the branches are gallantly
decked with (...), somewhat of a purple color; then grows the seed which is
black: the roots are full of strings, and continue.

2 This most excellent kind of Calamint has upright stalks a cubit high,
covered over with a woolly mossinesse, beset with rough leaves like a Nettle,
somewhat notched about the edges; among the leaves come forth bluish or
sky-colored flowers: the root is woody, and the whole plant is of a very good
smell.

3 There is another kind of Calamint which has hard square stalks, covered in
like manner as the other with a certain hoary or fine cotton. The leaves be in
shape like Basil, but that they are rough; and the flowers grow in roundles
toward the tops of the branches, sometimes three or four upon a stem, of a
purplish color. The root is threddy, and long lasting.

4 There is a kind of strong smelling Calamint that has also square stalks
covered with soft cotton, and almost creeping by the ground, having evermore
two leaves standing one against another, small and soft, not much unlike the
leaves of Penny-Royall, saving that they are (...) and whiter: the flowers grow
about the stalks like wharles or garlands, of a bluish purple color; the root
is small and threddy: the whole plant has the smell of Pennyroyal; whence it
has the addition of (...) odore.

1 (...) montana vulgaris. Calamint, or Mountain Mint.
The figure which formerly (...) in the second place belonged to the fourth
description; and the figure that belonged (...) was before falsely put for the
(...) or Wood-Sage. As also that which should have been put in the fourth
place was put in the first place of the last chapter save (...), for the Red
Garden (...).
2 Calamintha montana praestantior. The more excellent Calamint.
The figure which formerly (...) in the second place belonged to the fourth
description; and the figure that belonged (...) was before falsely put for the
(...) or Wood-Sage. As also that which should have been put in the fourth
place was put in the first place of the last chapter save (...), for the Red
Garden (...).
3 (...) (...) (...) Common Calamint.
The figure which formerly (...) in the second place belonged to the fourth
description; and the figure that belonged (...) was before falsely put for the
(...) or Wood-Sage. As also that which should have been put in the fourth
place was put in the first place of the last chapter save (...), for the Red
Garden (...).
3 Calamintha odore (...). Field Calamint.


The Place.
It delights to grow in mountains, and in the shadowy and grauelly sides
thereof: it is found in many places of Italy and France, and in other
countries: it is brought into gardens, where it prospers marvelous well, and
very easily sows it self. I have found these plants growing upon the chalkie
grounds and highwayes leading from Grauesend unto Canturbury, in most places,
or almost every where. I have only observed the third and fourth to grow wild
with us in England.

The Time.
It flourishes in Summer, and almost all the year through: it brings forth
flowers and seed from June to Autumn.

The Names.
It is called in Greek (...), (...), as though you should say, Elegans aut
vtilis Mentha, a gallant or profitable Mint: the Latins keep the name
Calamintha: Apuleius also names it amiss, Mentastrum, and confounds the
names one with another: the Apothecaries call it Montana Calamintha,
Calamentum, and sometime Calamentum montanum: in French, Calament: in English,
Mountain Calamint. The fourth is certainly the second Calamint of Dioscorides,
and the true (...) of the Ancients.

The Temperature.
This Calamint which grows in mountains is of a fervent taste, and biting,
hot, and of a thin substance, and dry after a sort in the third degree, as
Galen says: it digesteth or wastes away thin humors, it cutteth, and makes
thick humors thin.

The Virtues.
Therefore being inwardly taken by it self, and also with meade, or honied
water, it does manifestly

The same also is performed by the sallet oil in which it is boiled, if the
body be anointed and

The decoction thereof drunk provoke urine, brings down the monthly
sickness, and expels

It helps those that are bruised, such as are troubled with crampes and
convulsions, and that (...)) and it is a remedy says (...) for a choleric
passion, otherwise called the Felony.

It is good for them that have the yellow jaundice, for that it remoueth the
stoppings of the liver Galen) it is better to be laid to green than dry.

It kills all manner of worms of the belly, if it be drunk with salt and
honey: the iuyee dropped

Pliny says, that if the juice be conveyed up into the nosthrils it stancheth
the bleeding at the (...) writes to be good for nothing) helps the Squincie,
if it be gargarised, or the throat washed therewith, being used in Cute, and
Myrtle seed withal.

It is applied to those that have the Sciatica or ache in the huckle bone, for
it draws the humor Paulus Aegineta says, that for the pain of the haunches
or huckle bones it is to be used in Clysters.

Being much eaten it is good for them that have the leprosy, so that the
patient drink whay (...) Dioscorides witnesses.

Apuleius affirms, that if the leaves be often eaten, they are a sure and
certain remedy against

There is made of this an Antidote or composition, which Galen in his fourth
book of the Government of health describes by the name of Diacalaminthos, that
does not only notably digest or waste away crudities, but also is marvelous
good for young maidens that want their courses, if their bodies be first well
purged; for in continuance of time it brings them down very gently without
force.

CHAP. 229. Of Bawme.
The Description.
1 A Piastrum, or Melissa, is our common best known Balm or Bawme, having
many square stalks and blackish leaves like to Ballote, or black Hore-hound,
but larger, of a pleasant smell, drawing near in smell and savor unto a
Citron: the flowers are of a Carnation color; the root of a woody substance.

2 The second kind of Bawme was brought into my garden and others, by his seed
from the parts of Turkey, wherefore we have called it Turkey Balm: it excels
the rest of the kinds, if you respect the sweet savor and goodly beauty
thereof, and deserves a more lively description than my rude pen can deliver.
This rare plant has sundry small weak and brittle square stalks and
branches, mounting to the height of a cubit and somewhat more, beset with
leaves like to Germander or (...), indented or toothed very bluntly about the
edges, but somewhat sharp pointed at the top. The flowers grow in small
coronets, of a purplish blew color: the root is small and threddy, and dies
at the first approach of Winter, and must be sown anew in the beginning of May,
in good and fertile ground.

1 Melissa. Bawme.
2 Melissa Turcica. Turkey Bawme.


3 Fuchsius sets forth a kind of Bawme having a square stalk, with leaves
like unto common Bawme, but larger and blacker, and of an evil savor; the
flowers white, and much greater than those of the common Bawme; the root hard,
and of a woody substance. This varies with the leaves sometimes broader and
otherwhiles narrower: also the flowers are commonly purple, yet sometimes
white, and otherwhiles of diverse colors: the leaves are also sometimes
broader, otherwhiles narrower: wherefore I have given you one of the figures of
Clusius, and that of Lobel, that you may see the several expressions of this
plant. Clusius, and after him (...), refer it to the Lamium, or Arch-angell:
and the former calls it (...) (...): and the later, Lamium (...) Melissae
folio.

4 There is a kind of Bawme called Herba Iudaica, which Lobel calls Tetrahit,
that has many 3 Melissa (...) (...) albo. Bastard Bawme with white flowers.
3 Melissa Fuchsij flore purpureo. Bastard Bawme with purple flowers.
4 Herba Iudaica (...). Smiths Bawme, or Jews All-heale.
weak and tender square hairie branches; some leaning backward, and others
turning inward, dividing themselves into sundry other small arms or twigs,
which are beset with long rough leaves dented about, and smaller than the
leaves of Sage. And growing in another soil or clymat, you shall see the leaves
like the oken leaf; in other places like Marrubium Creticum, very hoary, which
caused Dioscorides to describe it with so many shapes, and also the flowers,
which are sometimes blew and purple, and oftentimes white: the root is small
and crooked, with some hairie strings fastened thereto. All the whole plant
draws to the favor of Balm, called Melissa. This might much more fitly have
been put to the rest of the (...), but that our Author had thrust it as by
force into this Chapter.

5 There be also two other plants comprehended under the kinds of Balm, the
one very like unto the other, although not known to many Herbarists, and have
been of some called by the title of (...): the first kind (...) calls
Cardiaca Melica, or Molucca Syriaca, so called for that it was first brought
out of Syria: it grows three cubits high, and yields many shoots from a
woody (...), full of many whitish strings; the stalks be round, somewhat
thick, and of a reddish color, which are hollow within, with certain obscure
prints or small furrows along the stalks, with equal spaces half kneed or
knotted, and at every such knee or joint stand two leaves one against another,
tufted like (...), but more rough and deeply indented, yet not so deeply as
our common (...), called Mother-wort, not so sharp pointed: about the knees
there come forth small little prickles, with (...) or eight (...) open wide
bells, having many corners thin like parchment, and of the same color,
somewhat stiff and long; and at the top of the edge of the bell it is cornered
and pointed with sharp prickles; and out of the middle of this prickly bell
rises a flower somewhat purple tending to whiteness, not unlike our (...) or
Cardiaca, which brings forth a cornered seed, the bottom flat, and smaller
toward the top like a steeple: the savor of the plant draws toward the sent
of Lamium.

6 The other kind of (...), otherwise called (...) (...) (whereof Pena
writes) (...) from the last (...) mentioned, in that the cups or bells wherein
the flowers grow are more prickly than the first, and much sharper, longer, and
more in number: the stalk of this is sour square, lightly hollowed or
furrowed; the seed three cornered, sharp upward like a wedge; the tunnels of
the flowers brownish, and not so white as the first.

5 Melissa molucca laeuis. Smooth Molucca Bawme.
6 Molucca spinosa. Thorny Molucca Bawme.


The Place.
Bawme is much sown and set in gardens, and oftentimes it grows of it self
in Woods and mountains, and other wild places: it is profitably planted in
gardens, as Pliny writes, lib. 21. cap. 12. about places where Bees are kept,
because they are delighted with this herb above others, whereupon it has
been called Apiastrum: for, says he, when they are strayed away, they do
find their way home again by it, as Virgil writes in his Georgicks:

Huctu (...) asperge liquores,
Trita Meliphylla, and (...) he nobile gramen.
Use here such help as husbandry does usually prescribe.
Bawme bruised in a mortar, and base Hony-wort beside.
All these I have in my garden from year to year.
The Time.
Bawme floureth in June, July, and August: it withers in the Winter; but the
root remains, which in the beginning of the Spring brings forth fresh
leaves and stalks.

The other sorts do likewise flourish in June, July, and August; but they do
perish when they have perfected their seed.

The Names.
Bawme is called in Greek (...): by Pliny, Melitis: in Latin, Melissa,
Apiastrum, and Citrago: of some, Melissophyllon, and Meliphyllon: in Dutch,
Consille de greyn: in French, Poucyrade, ou Melisse: in Italian, Cedronella,
and Arantiata: in Spanish, Torongil: in English, Balm, or Bawme.

The Temperature.
Bawme is of temperature hot and dry in the second degree, as Auicen says:
Galen says it is like Horehound in faculty.

The Virtues.
Bawme drunk in wine is good against the bitings of venomous beasts, comforts
the heart, and

Common Bawme is good for women which have the strangling of the mother, either
being eaten

The juice thereof glueth together green wounds, being put into oil, unguent,
or Balm, for

The herb stamped, and infused in Aquavitae, may be used unto the purposes
aforesaid (I mean

The hiues of Bees being rubbed with the leaves of Bawme, causes the Bees to
keep together,

The later age, together with the Arabians and Mauritanians, affirm Balm to
be singular good Auicen in his book written of the infirmities of the heart,
teaches that Bawme makes the heart merry and joyful, and strengthens the
vital spirits.

Serapio affirms it to be comfortable for a moist and cold stomach, to stir
up concoction, to

Dioscorides writes, That the leaves drunk with wine, or applied outwardly,
are good against

The leaves being mixed with salt (says the same Author) helps the Kings
Evil, or any other

Smiths Bawme or Carpenters Bawme is most singular to heal up green wounds
that are cut Dioscorides and Pliny have attributed like virtues unto this kind
of Bawme, which they call Iron-wort. The leaves (say they) being applied, close
up wounds without any peril of inflammation. Pliny says that it is of so
great virtue, that though it be but tied to his sword that has given the
wound, it stancheth the blood.

CHAP. 230. Of Horehound.
The Description.
1 WHite Horehound brings forth very many stalks four square, a cubit high,
covered over with a thin whitish (...): whereupon are placed by couples at
certain distances, thick whitish leaves somewhat round, wrinkled and nicked
on the edges, and covered over with the like downinesse; from the bosoms of
which leaves come forth small flowers of a feint purplish color, set round
about the stalk in round wharles, which turn into sharp prickly husks after
the (...) be past. The whole plant is of a strong savor, but not unpleasant:
the root is threddy.

2 The second kind of Horehound has sundry crooked slender stalks, divided
into many small branches covered over with a white hoarinesse or cottony down.
The leaves are likewise hoarie and (...), longer and narrower than the
precedent, lightly indented about the edges, and sharply pointed like the Turkey
Bawme, and of the same bigness, having small wharles of white

1 Marrubium album. White Horehound.
2 Marrubium (...). Snow white Horehound:
3 Marrubium Hispanicum. Spanish Horehound.
4 Marrubium Creticum. Candy Horehound.
flowers, and prickly rundles or seed-vessels set about the stalks by certain
distances. The root is likewise threddy.

3 Spanish Horehound has a stiff hoarie and hairy stalk, dividing it self
at the bottom into two wings or more arms, and likewise toward the top into
two others; whereupon are placed by couples at certain spaces fair broad
leaves, more round than any of the rest, and likewise more woolly and hairy.
The flowers grow at the top of the stalks, spike fashion, composed of small
gaping flowers of a purple color. The whole plant has the savor of Stoechados.

4 Candy Horehound has a thick and hard root, with many hairy threads fastened
thereunto; from which rise up immediately rough square stalks, set confusedly
with long leaves of a hoarie color, of a most pleasant strong smell. The
flowers grow toward the top of the stalks in (...) rundles, of a whitish
color.

The Place.
The first of these Horehounds, being the common kind, grows plentifully in
all places of England, near unto old walls, highwayes, and beaten paths, in
untilled places. It grows in all other countries likewise, where it alters
according to the situation and nature of the countries; for commonly that
which grows in Candy and in Hungary is much whiter, and of a sweeter smell, and
the leaves oftentimes narrower and lesser than that which grows in England
and these Northern Regions.

The Time.
They flower in July and August, and that in the second year after the sowing
of them.

The Names.
Horehound is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Marrubium: in shops,
Parassium, and also Marrubium. There be certain bastard names found in
Apuleius; as Melittena, Labeonia, and Vlceraria: in Italian, Marrubio: in
Spanish, Marruuio: in Dutch, Malroue: in French, Marubin: in English,
Horehound. Clusius calls the third Ocimastrum Valentinum.

The Temperature.
Horehound (as Galen teaches) is hot in the second degree, and dry in the
third, and of a bitter taste.

The Virtues.
Common Horehound boiled in water and drunk, opens the liver and spleen,
cleanses the

The same boiled in wine and drunk, brings down the terms, expels the
secondine, after

Syrrup made of the green fresh leaves and sugar, is a most singular remedy
against the cough

The same syrrup does wonderfully and above credit ease such as have lien long
sick of any

It is likewise good for them that have drunk poison, or that have been
bitten of Serpents.

The juice pressed forth of the leaves, and hardened in the Sun, is very good
for the same things,

Being drawn up into the nosthrils it cleanses the yellowness of the eyes,
and stays the running

CHAP. 231. Of wild Horehound.
The Description.
1 WIld Horehound is also like to common Horehound: there rises from the root
hereof a great number of stalks high and ioynted, and out of every joint a
couple of leaves opposite, or set one against another, somewhat hard, a little
longer than those of common Horehound, and whiter, as also the stalks are set
with soft hairs, and of a sweet smell: the flowers do compass the stalk
about as those do of common Horehound, but they are yellow, and the wharles be
narrower: the root is woody and durable.

1 (...). Wild Hore-hound.
2 Stachys (...). Wild (...) Horehound.
3 Stachys spinosa Cretica. Thorny Horehound.
4 Stachys Lusitanica. Portugal Wild Horehound.


5 Sideritis Scordioides. Germander Ironwoort.
6 Sideritis Alpina Hyssopifolia. Hyssop-leaued Iron-wort.


2 Besides this there is also another described by Fuchsius: the stalks hereof
are thick, four square, now and then two or three foot long: the leaves be
broad, long, hoarie, nicked in the edges, hairie as are also the stalks, and
much broader than those of the common Horehound: the flowers in the whorles
which compass the stalk about, are of a purple color; the seed is round and
blackish: the root hard and something yellow.

3 This thorny Stachys has leaves before it comes to send forth the stalk,
like those of the lesser Sage, but more white and hairie, those that grow upon
the stalks are much narrower: the stalks are square some foot high: and at the
parting of them into branches grow always two leaves one opposite against
another: the tops of the branches end in long sharp thornie prickles: the
flowers grow about the tops of the branches like those of Sage, but of
somewhat a lighter color. This grows naturally in Candy, about a Town called
Larda, where Honorius Bellus first observed it, there it is called
Guidarothymo, or Asses Time, though it agree with Time in nothing but the place
of growth. Clusius sets it forth by the name of Stachys spinosa.

4 Lobel has given us the figure and first description of this by the name of
Stachys Lusitanica. It has creeping and downie stalks some handful and half
high, set with little leaves: amongst which in rundles grow small flowers like
those of the other wild Horehounds; the whole plant is of somewhat a grateful
smell.

5 There is another wild Horehound of Mountpelier, called Sideritis
Monspelliaca Scordioides, sieve Scordij folio: being that kind of Sideritis or
wild (...) which is like unto Scordium, or water Germander, which grows to
the height of a handful and a half, with many small branches rising upright,
of a wooddie substance, having the tops and spokie coronets of Hyssop, but the
leaves do resemble Dioscorides his Scordium, save that they be somewhat lesser,
stiffer, more wrinckled (...) curled and hairie, than (...), or the Judicial
herb: the flowers do (...) those of the common Sauorie, in taste bitter, and of
an aromaticall smell.

6 Mountain Sideritis being also of the kinds of Horehound, was first found
by Valerandus (...), in the mountains of Sauoy, resembling very well the last
described, but the leaves are much narrower, and like those of Hyssope: the
flowers grow in small rough rundlets or tusts, pale of (...) like Marrubium or
Tetrahit; the root long and bending, of a wooddie substance, and purple color,
bitter in taste, but not unpleasant, whose virtue is yet unknown.

The Place.
These herbs are (...), they grow in rough and barren places, notwithstanding
I have them growing in my garden. My kind friend Mr. Buckner an Apothecary of
London the last year, being 1632, found the second of these growing wild in
Oxfordshire in the field joining to (...) Park a mile from the Town.

The Time.
They flower in the Summer months, and wither toward winter: the root
remains alive a certain time.

The Names.
The former is taken for the right Stachys, which is called in Greek (...): it
is known in shoppes and every where: we name it in English yellow Horehound,
and wild Horehoond. Lobel calls it Stachys Lychnites spuria Flandrorum.

The other wild Horehound, seeing it has no name, is to be called Stachys
spuria: for it is not the right, neither is it Sphacelus (as most have
suspected) of which Theophrastus has made mention it is called in English
purple Horehound, bastard wild Horehound, and Fuchsius his wild Horehound.
Fabius Columna proves the second to be the Sideritis Heraclia of Dioscorides
and the Ancients.

The Temperature.
These herbs are of a biting and bitter taste, and are hot in the third degree
according to (...).

The Stachys Fuchsij and Sideritides seem to be hot and dry in the first
degree.

The Virtues.
The decoction of the leaves drunk does draw down the menses and the
secondine, as Dioscorides

2 This is of singular use (as most of the herbs of this kind are) to keep
wounds from inflammation,

Aetius and Aegineta commend the use of it in medicines used in the cure of the
biting of a mad

CHAP. 232. Of the Fronwoorts or Alheales.
1 Sideritis vulgaris. Ironwoort, or Alheale.
2 Sideritis Angustifolia. Narrow leaued Alheale.


The Kinds.
THere are many plants that belong to this kindred of the (...), or Ironwoorts,
and some of them are already treated of, though in several places, and that
not very fitly by our Author; and one of them is also set forth hereafter by
the name of Clownes Alheale: these that are (...) handled, and properly belong
to this Chapter, are first the (...) (...) (...), being in the fourth place of
the 229. Chapter. Secondly, the Stachys Fuchsij (being the first (...) of
(...)) described in the second place of the last chapter. Thirdly, the (...)
Scordioides set forth in the fifth place and fourthly the Sideritis Alpina
Hyssopisolia set forth in the (...) place of the last chapter. Now besides all
these, I will in this Chapter give you the Descriptions (...) some others like
to them in face and Virtues, and all of them may be referred to the first S.
(...) (...) Dioscorides his description.

The Description.
1 THis has square stalks some cubite high, rough, and iointed with two
leaves at (...) joint which are wrinkled and hairie, of an indifferent
bigness, snipt about (...) (...) of a strong smell, and of a bitterish and
somewhat hottish taste: almost (...) (...) (...) joint grow branches, set with
lesser leaves: the flowers which in roundles incompasse (...) (...) the stalks
end in a spike, being somewhat hooded, whitish; well smelling, and marked on
the (...) with sanguine spots. The seed is rough and black, being contained in
five cornered seed (...) The root is hard and wooddie, sending forth many
stalks. This is the Sideritis (...) of (...) Cordus, (...), and others; it
has a very great affinity with the Panax Coloni, or Clownes A of our Author,
and the difference between them certainly is very small.

3 Siderit is procumbens (...). Creeping branched Ironwoort.
3 Sideritis procumbens (...) (...). Not branched Creeping (...).


2 The four square stalk of this plant is not above a foot high, and it is
presently from the root divided into diverse branches; the leaves are long and
narrow with some nerves or veins running 6 Sideritis latifolia glabra. Smooth
broad leaued Alheale.
along them, being also very hairie, but not snipt about the edges: the
flowers grow along the branches, and upon the main stalk in roundles like
those of the first mentioned, but lesser, and of a dark color, with a
yellowish spot on their insides: the seed is also contained in five cornered
vessels like as the former. It flowers in June and July, and grows amongst the
corn in Hungary and Austria. This is only set forth by Clusius, and that
under the name of Sideritis 6. Pannonica.

3 This has some branches lying along upon the ground, slender, quadrangular
and hairie, which at certain spaces are set with leaves growing by couples,
almost like those of the first, but much less, and snipt only from the middle
to the end: the flowers grow after the manner of the former, and (as Clusius
thinks) are like them, as is also the seed. Clusius has this by the name of
Sideritis 4.

4 The same Author has also given us another, which from the top of the root
sends soorth many branches, partly lying spread on the ground, and partly
standing upright, being hairy, iointed, and square like those of the former,
and such also are the leaves, but that they are less snipt about the edges:
and in their bosoms from the bottom of the stalks to the top grow roundles
of whitish flowers shaped like others of this kind. Clusius calls this
Sideritis 5. He had only the figures of these elegantly drawn by the hand of
Jacques Plateau, and so sent him.

5 This from a small wooddie root sends forth a square hairie stalk some half
foot high, and sometimes higher, and this stalk most commonly sends forth some
four branches, which subdiuide themselves into smaller ones, all of them
sometimes lying upon the ground, and the stalk standing upright; the leaves
grow by couples at each joint, from a broader bottom, ending in an obtuse
point, the lower leaves being some inch long, and not much less in breadth:
the flowers are whitish, or light purple, small and hooded, (...) the stalks
in roundles, which falling, (...) longish black seeds are contained in five
cornered vessels, I first found it August 1626 in flower and seed amongst the
corn in a field ioining to a wood side not far from Greene-hiue in Kent, and I
at that time, not finding it to be written of by any, called it Sideritis
humilis (...) (...) folio; but since I find that (...) has set it forth in
his Prodromus by the name of Sideritis Alsine Trissaginis folio.

6 This (which Tabernamontanus calls Alyssum (...), and whose figure was
formerly given with the same title by our Author in the 118 Chapter of the
former Edition, with a Description no ways agreeing therewith) grows up with
square stalks some cubite high, set with pretty large and green smooth leaves
snipt about the edges: the flowers grow in roundles at the tops of the
branches, being hooded, and of a pale yellow color. This grows in the Corn
sields in some places of Germany and Italy: and it is the Sideritis 2. of
Matthiolus in (...) opinion, who calls it Sideritis aruensis latifolia glabra.

7 There is another plant that grows frequently in the Corn fields of Kent,
and by Purfleet in Essex which may fitly be joined to these, for (...) calls it
Sideritis arvensis flore rubro, and in the Historia Lugd. it is named Tetrahit
angustifolium, and thought to be Ladanum (...) of Pliny, mentioned lib. 29.
cap. 8. and lib. 26. cap. 11. It has a stalk some (...) or better high, set
with sharp pointed longish leaves, having two or three nickes on their sides,
and growing by couples; at the top of the branches, and also the maine stalk
it self, stand in one or two roundles fair red hooded flowers: the root is
small and fibrous, dying every year when it has (...) the seed. It flowers in
July and August. This is also sometimes found with a white flower.

The Time, Place, etc.
All these are sufficiently delivered in the descriptions.

The Temperatures and Virtues.
These plants are dry with little or no heat, and are endued with an
astrictiue faculty. They conduce

They are also good for those things that are mentioned in the last chapter, in
B, and C.

Clusius says, the first and second are used in Stiria in fomentations, to
bathe the head against the

And the same Author affirms that he has known the decoction used with very
good success

CHAP. 233. Of Water Horehound.
1 Marubium aquaticum. Water Horehound.


The Description.
1 WAter Horehound is very like to black and stinking Horehound in stalk and
floured cups, which are rough, pricking, and compassing the stalks round about
like garlands: the leaves thereof be also black, but longer, harder, more
deeply gashed in the edges than those of stinking Horehound, yet not hairie at
all, but wrinkled: the flowers be small and whitish: the root is fastened with
many black strings.

The Place.
It grows in Brooks on the brinks of water ditches and near unto motes, for
it requires store of water, and grows not in dry places.

The Time.
It flourishes and flowers in the Summer months, in July and August.

The Names.
It is called Aquatile, and Palustre Marubium: In English, water Horehound.
Matthiolus takes it to be Species prima Sideritidis; or a kind of Ironwoort,
which Dioscorides has described in the first place; but with this does better
agree that which is called Herba Iudaica, or Glid woort; it much less agrees
with Sideritis secunda, or the second Ironwoort, which opinion also has his
favorers, for it is like in leaf to none of the Fernes. Some also think good
to call it Herba Aegyptia, because they that feine themselves Egyptians (such as
many times wander like vagabonds from city to city in Germany and other
places) do use with this herb to give themselves a swart color, such as the
Egyptians and the people of Afric are of; for the juice of this herb does
die every thing with this kind of color, which also holds so fast, as that
it cannot be wiped or washed away: insomuch as linen cloth being died
herewith, does always keep that color.

The Temperature.
It seems to be cold, and withal very astringent or binding.

The Virtues.
There is little use of the water Horehound in Physic. The figure that (...)
was in the (...) place was of the (...) (...) described in the next chapter;
and the figure and description that were in the second place by the name of
(...) (...) (...), were of the so much (...) (...) (...) (...) Clowns
(...)-heal of our Author, and therefore (...) (...) to (...) (...).


CHAP. 234. Of black or stinking Horehound.
The Description.
1 Black Horehound is somewhat like unto the white kind. The stalks be also
square and hairie. The leaves somewhat larger, of a dark swart or blackish
color, somewhat like the leaves of Nettles, snipt about the edges, of an
unpleasant and stinking savor. The flowers grow about the stalks in certain
spaces, of a purple color, in shape like those of Archangell or dead Nettle.
The root is small and threddie. I have found this also with white flowers.

2 To this may fitly be referred that plant which some have called Parietaria,
Sideritis, and Herbaventi, with the additament of Monspeliensium to each of
these denominations: but Bauhine, who I herein follow, calls it Marrubium
nigrum longifolium. It is thus described: the root is thick and very fibrous,
sending up many square rough stalks some cubite high, set at certain spaces
with leaves longer and broader than Sage, rough also and snipt about the edges:
and out of their bosoms come sloures, hooded, and purple of color, engirting
the stalks as in other plants of this kind. Some have thought this to be
Othonna of the Ancients, because the leaves not falling (...) in Winter, are
either eaten by the Worms, or wasted by the injury of the weather to the very
nerves or veins that run over them; so that by this means they are all
perforated, and easily blown through by each blast of wind: which caused some
to give it also the name of Herba (...). It grows in the corn fields about
Montpelier.

The figure was of (...) album, or Archangell with the white flower; and the
figure that should have been here was in the former Chapter.
1 Marrubium nigrum. Stinking Horehound.
2 Marrubium nigrum Longifolium. Long leaued Horehound.


The Place.
It is found in gardens amongst pot herbs, and oftentimes amongst stones and
rubbish in dry soiles.

The Time.
It floureth and flou risheth when the others do.

The Names.
It is called in Greek (...) and (...) as Pliny testifies in his 27. book,
8. chapter: of some, Marrubiastrum, or Marrubium spurium, or bastard Horehound:
in shops, Prasium foetidum, and Ballote: in Italian, Marrubiastro: in Spanish,
Marrauio negro: in French, Marubin noir and putant: in English stinking
Horehound.

The Temperature.
Stinking Horehound is hot and dry, and as Paulus Aegineta teaches, of a
sharp and clensing faculty.

The Virtues.
Being stamped with salt and applied, it cures the biting of a mad dog,
against which it is of great efficacy, as Dioscorides writes.

The leaves roasted in hot embers do waste and consume away hard lumpes or knots
in or about the fundament. It also cleanses foul and filthy ulcers, as the
same Author teaches.

CHAP. 235. Of Archangell, or dead Nettle.
The (...) (...) that was formerly in this Chapter, was of the (...) (...). of
(...) being a kind of dead Nettle that has the leaves (...) (...) (...), and
somewhat (...) than the ordinary one: the (...) that (...) have been here was
in the last Chapter; the third was the same with the first (that (...) have
bin) (...) only in color of flowers, and that which (...) have been in the
third place was in the fourth,
1 (...) album. Whitc Archangell.
2 Lamium luteum. Yellow Archangell.


The Description.
1 WHite Archangell has four square stalks, a cubit high, leaning this way
and that way, by reason of the great weight of his ponderous leaves, which are
in shape like those of Nettles, nicked round about the edges, yet not stinging
at all, but soft, and as it were downy. The flowers compass the stalks round
about at certain distances, even as those of Horehound do, whereof doubtless
this is a kind, and not of Nettles; as has been generally holden: which
flowers are white of color, fashioned like to little gaping hoods (...)
helmets. The root is very threddy. There is also a variety of this having red
or purple flowers.

2 Yellow Archangell has square stalks rising from a threddy root, set with
leaves by couples, very mnch cut or backed about the edges, and sharp pointed.
The uppermost whereof are oftentimes of a fair purple color. The flowers grow
among the same leaves, of a gold yellow color, fashioned like those of the
white Archangell, but greater, and more wider gaping open.

3 Red Archangell being called (...) non mordax, (...) (...) Nettle, has many
leaves spread upon the ground, among which rise up stalks hollow, and square,
whereupon do grow rough leaves of an over worn color, among which come forth
purple flowers, set about in round wharles, or (...). The root is small, and
perishes at the first approach of winter.

The (...) (...) that was formerly in this Chapter, was of the (...) (...). of
(...) being a kind of dead Nettle that has the leaves (...) (...) (...), and
somewhat (...) than the ordinary one: the (...) that (...) have been here was
in the last Chapter; the third was the same with the first (that (...) have
bin) (...) only in color of flowers, and that which (...) have been in the
third place was in the fourth,
3 Lamium rubrum. Red Archangell.
4 Lamium Pannonicum, sieve (...). Hungary dead Nettle.


4 Dead Nettle of Hungary has many large rough leaves very much curled or
crumpled like those of the stinging nettle, of a dark green color, snipt
about the edges like the (...) of a saw, ser upon a four square stalk by
couples; from the bosom of which leaves come forth the flowers close to the
stalks, of a perfect purple color, in shape like those of the white (...),
gaping like a dragons mouth, the lower chap whereof is of a bright purple
spotted with white, which being past, there does follow seed enclosed in rough
husks, with fine sharp points sticking out. The root is thick, tough,
consisting of many threads and long strings.

5 To this of Clusius, we may sitly refer 2. other plants: the first of which
Tragus and others call Vrtica Heraclea, or Herculea, and Clusius judges it to
be the true Galeopsis of Dioscorides, as Tragus also thought before him. The
root hereof is fibrous and creeping, sending sorth many four square stalks,
upon which at each joint grow two leaves upon (...) stalks very like those of
Nettles, but more soft and hairy, not stinging: the (...) of the branches end
(...) it were in a spikemade of several roundles of flowers like those of
(...) but less, and of a purple color spotted with white on their insides;
the seeds are (...) (...) in a vessel, and are black when they come to be
ripe; It grows about hedges in very many (...) and (...) in June and July.

6 This has roots like those of the last described, sending up also square
stalks a foot high, set at each joint with leaves growing upon long stalks
like those of the small dead Nettle, or rather like those of Alehoofe: out of
the bosoms of those come three or four stalks carrying flowers like those of
Alehoof, gaping, but without a hood, but with a lip turned up, which is
variegated with blew, white, and purple. This history Clusius (who did not see
the plant, but an exact figure thereof in colors) gives us, and he names it as
you find expressed in the title.

5 Galeopsis vera. Hedge Nettle.
6 Lamium Pannonicum 3. Clusij. Hungary Nettle with the variegated flower.


The Place.
These plants are found under hedges, old walls, common ways, among rubbish, in
the borders of fields, and in earable grounds, oftentimes in gardens ill
husbanded.

That with the yellow flower grows not so common as the others. I have found
it under the hedge on the left hand as you go from the village of Hampsted
near London to the Church, and in the wood thereby, as also in many other
copses about Lee in Essex, near Watsord and Bushie in Middlesex, and in the
woods belonging to the Lord Cobham in Kent.

The Time.
They flower for the most part all Summer long, but chiefly in the beginning
of May.

The Names.
Archangell is called of some Vrtica iners, and Mortua: of some, Lamium: in
English, Archangell, blind Nettle, and dead Nettle.

The Temperature.
They are hotter and drier than Nettle, approaching to the temperature of
Horehound.

The Virtues.
Archangel [or rather the hedge Nettle] stamped with vinegar, and applied in
manner of a pultis

It is good to bathe those parts with the decoction of it, as Dioscorides and
Pliny say.

The later Physicians think that the white flowers of Archangell do stay the
whites, and for

The flowers are baked with sugar as roses are, which is called sugar Roset: as
also the distilled

CHAP. 236. Of Mother woort.
Cardiaca. Mother-woort.


The Description.
MOther woortbringeth forth stalks four square, thick, hard, two cubits high,
of an obscure or ouerworn red color: the leaves are somewhat black, like those
of Nettles, but greater and broader than the leaves of Horehound, deeply
indented or cut on the edges. The husks are hard and pricking, which do
compass the stalks about like wharles, or little crownets, out of which do
grow purplish flowers, not unlike to those of dead Nettle, but lesser: The
root is compact of many small strings, the whole plant is of a very rank smell
and bitter taste.

The Place.
It ioieth among rubbish, in stony and other barren and rough places,
especially about Oxford; it profits well in gardens.

The Time.
It flourishes, floureth, and seedeth from June to September: the leaves and
stalks perish in winter, but the root indureth.

The Names.
It is called in our age Cardiaca: in High Dutch, Nertzgesport: in Low Dutch,
Nertegespan: in French, Agripauline: in English, Motherwoort. Some there be
that make it a kind of Bawme, it seems that it may be also referred to (...)
is Herculana, or Hercules Ironwoort.

The Temperature.
Motherwoort is hot and dry in the second degree, by reason of the clensing and
binding quality that it has.

The Virtues.
Diverse commend it against the infirmities of the heart: it is judged to be so
forceable, that it Cardiaca of the effect.

It is also reported to cure convulsions and cramps, and likewise the palsy:
to open the obstructions

The powder of the herb given in wine, provoke not only urine, or the
monthly course, but

Moreover, the same is commended for green wounds: it is also a remedy
against certain diseases

CHAP. 237. Of stinging Nettle.
The Description.
1 THe stalks of the first be now and then half a yard high, round, and
hollow within: the leaves are broad, sharp pointed, cut round about like a saw,
they be rough on both sides, and covered with a stinging down, which with a
light touch only causes a great burning, and raises hard knots in the skin
like blisters, and sometimes makes it red. The seed comes from the roots of
the leaves in round pellets bigger than Pease; it is slippery, glittering like
Line-seed, but yet lesser and rounder. The root is set with strings.

1 Vrtica Romana. Roman Nettle.
2 Vrtica vrens. Common stinging Nettle.


2 The second Nettle being our common Nettle is like to the former in leaves
and stalks, but yet now and then higher and more full of branches: it is also
covered with a down that stingeth and burns as well as the other: the seed
hereof is small, and grows not in round bullets, but on long slender strings,
as it were in clusters, as those of the female Mercury, which grow along the
stalks and branches above the leaves, very many. The root is full of strings;
of color something yellow, and creeps all about. This has the stalks and
roots sometimes a little reddish, whence Tabernamontanus and our Author gave
another figure thereof by the name of Vrtica rubra, Red Nettle.

3 The third is like to the second in stalks, leaves and seed, that grows by
clusters, but lesser, and commonly more full of branches; of a light green,
more burning and stinging; the root is small and not without strings.

3 Vrtica minor. Small Nettle.


The Place.
Nettles grow in untilled places, and the first in thick woods, and is a
stranger in England, notwithstanding it grows in my garden.

The second is more common, and grows of it self near unto hedges, bushes,
brambles, and old walls, almost every where.

The third also comes up in the same places, which notwithstanding grows in
gardens and moist earable grounds.

The Time.
They all flourish in Summer: the second suffers the winters cold: the seed
is ripe, and may be gathered in July and August.

The Names.
It is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Vrtica, ab vrendo, of his burning and
stinging quality: whereupon Macer says,

-- nec (...) nomen (...) videtur,
Tacta quod exurat digitos vrtica tenentis.
Neither without desert his name he seems to
As that which quickly burns the fingers tou
And of diverse also (...), because it stingeth with hurtful down: in
High Dutch, Nessel: in Italian, Ortica: in Spanish, Hortiga: in French, Ortie:
in English, Nettle. The first is called in low Dutch Roomsche Netelen, that is,
(...) vrtica, or Roman Nettle: and likewise in High Dutch (...) Nesselen, that
is, Italica vrtica, Italian Nettle, because it is rare, and grows but in few
places, and the seed is sent from other countries, and sown in gardens for his
virtues: it is also called of diverse Vrticamas: and of Dioscorides, Vrtica
syluestris, or wild Nettle, which he says is more rough, with broader and
longer leaves, and with the seed of Flax, but lesser. Pliny makes the wild
Nettle the male, and in his 21 book, chap. 15. says that it is milder and
gentler: it is called in English Roman Nettle, Greek Nettle, Male Nettle. The
second is called Vrtica foemina, and oftentimes Vrtica mayor, that it may
differ from the third Nettle: in English, Female Nettle, Great Nettle, or
common Nettle. The third is named in High Dutch Heyter Nessel: in the
Brabanders speech, Heijte Netelen, so called of the stinging quality: in
English, Small Nettle, Small burning Nettle: but whether this be that or no
which Pliny calls Cania, or rather the first, let the Students consider.
There is in the wild Nettle a more stinging quality, which, says he, is
called Cania, with a stalk more stinging, having nicked leaves.

The Temperature.
Nettle is of temperature dry, a little hot, scarce in the first degree: it is
of thin and subtle parts; for it does not therefore burn and sting by reason
it is extreme hot, but because the down of it is stiff and hard, piercing
like fine little prickles or stings, and entering into the skin: for if it be
withered or boiled it stingeth not at all, by reason that the stiffenesse of
the down is fallen away.

The Virtues.
Being eaten, as Dioscorides says, boiled with Perywinkles, it makes the body
soluble, doing it

Being stamped, and the juice put up into the nosthrils, it stops the
bleeding of the nose: the

The seed of Nettle stirs up lust, especially drunk with Cute: for (as
Galen says) it has in it

It concocteth and draws out of the chest raw humors.

It is good for them that cannot breathe unless they hold their necks upright,
and for those that

Nicander affirms that it is a remedy against the venomous quality of
Hemlocke, Mushroms,

And Apollodoris says that it is a counterpoyson for Henbane, Serpents, and
Scorpions.

As Pliny witnesses, the same Author writes, that the oil of it takes away
the stinging which

The same grossly powned, and drunk in white wine, is a most singular
medicine against the

It expels gravel, and causes to make water.

The leaves of any kind of Nettle, or the seeds, do work the like effect, but
not with that good

CHAP. 238. Of Hemp.
1 Cannabis mas. Male or Steel Hemp.
2 Cannabis foemina. Femeline, or Female Hemp.


The Description.
1 Hemp brings forth round stalks, straight, hollow, five or six foot high,
full of branches when it grows wild of it self; but when it is sown in
fields it has very few or no branches at all. The leaves thereof be hard,
tough, somewhat black, and if they be bruised they be of a rank smell, made
up of diverse little leaves joined together, every particular leaf whereof is
narrow, long, sharp pointed, and nicked in the edges: the seeds come forth
from the bottomes of the wings and leaves, being round, somewhat hard, full of
white substance. The roots have many strings.

2 There is another, being the female Hemp, yet barren and without seed,
contrary unto the nature of that sex; which is very like to the other being
the male, and one must be gathered before the other be ripe, else it will
wither away, and come to no good purpose.

The Place.
Hemp, as Columella writes, delights to grow in a fat dunged and waterie
soil, or plain and moist, and deeply dug.

The Time.
Hemp is sown in March and April; the first is ripe in the end of August,
the other in July.

The Names.
This is named of the Grecians (...): also of the Latins Cannabis: the
Apothecaries keep that name: in High Dutch, (...) hanff: of the Italians
Canape: of the Spaniards, Canamo: in French, Chanure: of the Brabanders, Kemp:
in English, Hemp. The male is called Charle Hemp, and Winter Hemp: the
female, Barren Hemp, and Summer Hemp.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The seed of Hemp, as Galen writes in his books of the faculties of simple
medicines, is hard cum alijs tragematis, with other junkets.

It consumes wind, as the said Author says in his book of the faculties of
medicines, and is

Dioscorides says, That the juice of the herb dropped into the ears
asswageth the pain thereof Galen adds.

The inner substance or pulpe of the seed pressed out in some kind of liquor,
is given to those

Matthiolus says, that the seed given to hens causes them to lay eggs more
plentifully.

CHAP. 239. Of wild Hemp.
1 Cannabis Spuria. Wild Hemp.
2 Cannabis Spuria altera. Bastard Hemp.


3 Cannabis Spuria tertia. Small Bastard Hemp.


The Description.
1 THis wild Hemp, called Cannabis Spuria; (...) Bastard Hemp, has small
slender hoary and hairie stalks a foot high, beset at every joint with two
leaves, smally indented about the edges somewhat like a Nettle. The flowers
grow in rundles about the stalks, of a purple color, and sometimes also
white: the root is little and threddy.

2 There is likewise another kind of wild Hemp which has (...) stalks and
leaves like the former, but the flowers are greater, gaping wide open like the
flowers of Lamium, or dead Nettle, whereof this has been taken for a kind:
but he that knows any thing may easily discern the savor of hemp from the
smell of dead Nettle. The flowers are of a clear and light carnation color,
declining to purple.

3 There is also another kind of wild Hemp like unto the last before
mentioned, saving that it is smaller in each respect, and not so hairy. The
lease is somewhat rounder: the root small and threddy: the (...) is larger,
being purple or white, with a yellow spot in the inside.

The Place.
These kinds of wild or bastard Hemp do grow upon hills and mountains, and
barren hilly grounds, especially in earable land, as I have often seen in the
corn fields of Kent, as about Grauesend, (...), and in all the tract from
thence to Canturbury, and in many places about London.

The Time.
These herbs do flower from July to the end of August.

The Names.
It shall suffice what has been set down in the titles (...) the Latin
names: in English, Wild Hemp, Nettle Hemp, and Bastard Hemp.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The temperature and faculties are referred to the (...) Hemp, notwithstanding
they are not used in physic where the other may be had.

CHAP. 240. Of Water-Hempe.
The Description.
1 WAter-Hempe or Water-Agrimony is seldom found in (...) regions, for which
cause it is called Eupatorium Cannabinum foemina Septentrionalium, and grows
in the cold Northern countries in moist places, and in the midst of ponds,
slow running rivers, and ditches. The root continues long, having many long
and slender strings, after the nature of water herbs: the stalks grow a cubit
and a half high, of a dark purple color, with many branches standing by
distances one from another. The leaves are more indented and less hairy than
the male kind: the flowers grow at the top, of a brown yellow color, (...)
with black spots like Aster atticus; which consists of such a substance as
is in the midst of the Daisie, or the Tansie flower, and is set about with
small and sharp leaves, such as are about the Rose, which causes the whole
flower to resemble (...) (...), and it sauoreth like gum Elemni, Rosine, or
Cedar wood when it is burned. The seed is long (...) Pyrethrum, closely thrust
together, and lightly cleaves to any woollen garment, that it touches by
reason of his roughness. This is found with the leaves whole, and also with
them parted into three parts: the first variety was expressed by our Authors
figure; and the second is expressed by this we give you in the place thereof.

2 There is another wild Hemp growing in the water, whereof there be two
sorts more, delighting to grow in the like ground, in show differing very
little. This springs up with long round stalks, and somewhat reddish, about
two cubits high, or something higher: they are beset with long green leaves
indented about the edges, whereof you shall see commonly five or seven of those
leaves hanging upon one stem like the leaves of Hemp, but yet softer. The
flowers are little, of a pale reddish color, consisting of soft round tufts,
and stand perting upon the top of the sprigges, which at length vanish away
into down: the root underneath is full of threddy strings of a mean bigness.

1 Eupatorium Cannabinum foemina. Water Hemp, or Water Agrimony.
2 Eupatorium Cannabinum mas. Common Dutch (...).


The Place.
They grow about the brinks of ditches, running waters, and standing pooles,
and in watery places almost every where.

The Time.
They flower and flourish in July and August: the root continues, but the
stalks and leaves wither away in Winter.

The Names.
The bastard or wild Hempes, especially those of the water, are commonly
called Hepatorium Cannabinum: of diverse also Eupatorium, Leonhar. Fuchsius
names it Eupatorium Adulterinum: of most, Cannabina, of the likeness it has
with the leaves of Cannabis, Hemp, and Eupatorium Auicennae. It is thought
also to be that which Baptista Sardus does term Terzola in High Dutch, S.
(...) kraut; that is to say in Latin, Sanctae Cunigundae herba, S. Cunigunds
herb: in LowDutch, Boelkens kruit: in English, Water Hemp, Bastard and water
Agrimonie. It is called Hepatorium, of the (...), being good for Hepar, the
liver. I have named the second Common Dutch Agrimonie, because it is commonly
used for Agrimonie in the shops of that country.

The Temperature.
The leaves and roots of these herbs are bitter, also hot and dry in the
second degree: they have virtue to scour and open, to attenuate or make thin
thick and gross humors, and to expel or drive them forth by urine: they
cleanse and purify the blood.

The Virtues, which chiefly belong to the last described.
The decoction hereof is profitably given to those that be scabbed and have
filthy skins; and

The herb boiled in wine or water is singular good against tertian Fevers.

The decoction drunk, and the leaves outwardly applied, do heal all wounds
both inward and

Fuchsius says that the second is very effectual against poison. And Gesner
in his Epistles pugil of the fibers of the root of this plant in wine, and
drunk it, which an hour after gave him one stool, and afterward twelve
vomits, whereby he cast up much phlegm: so that it works (says he) like white
Hellebor, but much more easily and safely, and it did me very much good.

CHAP. 241. Of Egrimonie.
Agrimonia. Agrimonie.


The Description.
THe leaves of Agrimonie are long and hairie, green above, and somewhat
grayish underneath, parted into diverse other small leaves snipt round about the
edges, almost like the leaves of hemp: the stalk is two foot and a half
long, rough and hairy, whereupon grow many small yellow flowers one above
another upwards toward the top: after the flowers come the seeds somewhat long
and rough, like to small burs hanging downwards; which when they be ripe do
catch hold upon peoples garments that pass by it. The root is great, long, and
black.

The Place.
It grows in barren places by highwayes, enclosures of meadows, and of corn
fields, and oftentimes in woods and copses, and almost (...) where.

The Time.
It floureth in June and somewhat later, and seedeth (...) that a great part of
Summer.

The Names.
The Grecians call it (...): and the Latins also Eupatorium: Pliny, Eupatoria:
yet there is another Eupatorium in Apuleius, and that is Marrubium, Horehound.
In like manner the Apothecaries of Germany have another Hepatorium that is there
commonly used, being described in the last chapter, and may be named Hepatorium
adulterinum. Agrimonie is named Lappa inuersa: and it is so called, because the
seeds which are rough like burres do hang downwards: of some, Philanthropos, of
the cleaving quality of the seeds hanging to men's garments: the Italians and
Spaniards call it Agramonia: in high Dutch, (...), Bruckwurtz: in Low Dutch, in
French, and in English, Agrimonie, and Egrimonie: Eupatorium takes the name of
Eupator, the finder of it out: and (says Pliny) it has a royal and princely
authority.

The Temperature.
It is hot, and does moderately bind, and is of a temperate dryness. Galen
says that Agrimonie is of fine and subtle parts, that it cutteth and
scoureth; therefore, says he, it remoues obstructions or stoppings out of the
liver, and does likewise strengthen it by reason of the binding quality that is
in it.

The Virtues.
The decoction of the leaves of Egrimony is good for them that have naughty
livers; and for

The seed being drunk in wine (as Pliny affirms) does help the bloody
flixe.

Dioscorides adds, that it is a remedy for them that have bad livers, and for
such as are bitten

The leaves being stamped with old swines grease, and applied, closes up (...)
that be hardly Dioscorides says.

Agrimony boiled in wine and drunk, helps inueterate hepaticke fluxes in old
people.

CHAP. 242. Of Sawewoort.
1. 2. Serratula purpurea, sieve alba. Saw-woort with purple, or white flowers.


The Description.
1 THe plant which the new writers have called Serratula differs from
Betonica, although the Ancients have so called Betony; It has large leaves
somewhat snipt about the edges like a saw (whereof it took his name) rising
immediately from the root: among which come up stalks of a cubite high, beset
with leaves very deeply cut or jagged even to the middle of the rib, not much
unlike the male Scabious. The stalks toward the top divide themselves into
other small branches, at the top (...) of they bear flowers somewhat scaly,
like the Knapweed, but not so great nor hard: at the top of the knap comes
forth a bushie or thrummy flower, of a purple color. The root is threddy, and
thereby increases and becomes of a great quantity.

2 Sawewoort with white flowers differs not from the precedent, but in the
color of the flowers: for as the other brings forth a bush of purple
flowers; in a manner this plant brings forth flowers of the same fashion, but
of a snow white color, wherein consists the difference.

Our Author out of (...) us gave three figures, with as many descriptions of
this plant, yet made it only to vary in the color of the flowers, being
either purple, white, or red; but he did not touch the difference which
Tabernamontanus by his figures expressed, which was, the first had all the leaves
whole, being only snipt about the edges; the lower leaves of the second were
most of them whole, and those upon the stalks deeply cut in, or divided, and
the third had the leaves both below and above all cut in or deeply divided.
The figure which we here give you expresses the first and third varieties, and
if you please, the one may be with white, and the other with red or purple
flowers.

The Place.
Sawe-woort grows in woods and shadowie places, and sometimes in meadows.
They grow in Hampsted wood: likewise I have seen it growing in great abundance
in the wood adjoining to Islington, within half a mile from the further end of
the town, and in sundry places of Essex and Suffolk.

The Time.
They flower in July and August.

The Names.
The later age do call them Serratula, and Serratula tinctoria, it differs
as we have said from Betony, which is also called Serratula: other names if it
have any we know not: it is called in English Sawewoort. Coesalpinus calls it
Cerretta and Serretta; and Thalius, (...), or Centaurium maius sylvestre
Germanicum.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Serratula is wonderfully commended to be most singular for wounds, ruptures,
burstings, and

CHAP. 243. Of Betony.
The Description.
1 BEtony grows up with long leaves and broad, of a dark green color,
slightly indented about the edges like a saw. The stalk is flender, four
square, somewhat rough, a foot high more or less. It bears eared flowers,
of a purplish color, and (...) reddish; after the flowers, comes in place
long cornered seed. The root consists of many strings.

1 Betonica. Betony.


2 Betony with white flowers is like the precedent in each respect, saving that
the flours of this plant are white, and of greater beauty, and the others
purple or red, as aforesaid.

The Place.
Betony loves shadowie woods, hedge-rowes, and copses, the borders of pastures,
and such like places.

Betony with white flowers is seldom seen. I found it in a wood by a village
called Hampstead, near unto a worshipful Gentleman's house, one of the Clerks
of the Queens counsel called Mr. Wade, from whence I brought plants for my
garden, where they flourish as in their natural place of growing.

The Time.
They flower and flourish for the most part in June and July.

The Names.
Betony is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Betonica: of diverse Vetonica: but
improperly. There is likewise another Betonica, which Paulus Aegineta
described; and Galen in his first book of the government of health shows
that it is called (...), that is to say, Betonica, Betonie, and also
Sarxiphagon: Dioscorides notwithstanding does describe another Sarxiphagon.

The Temperature.
Betony is hot and dry in the second degree: it has force to cut, as Galen
says.

The Virtues.
Betony is good for them that be subject to the falling sickness, and for
those also that have

It cleanses the lungs and chest, it takes away obstructions or stoppings of
the liver, milt, and

It makes a man to have a good stomach and appetite to his meat: it
prevails against sower belchings: it makes a man to piss well: it
mitigateth pain in the kidneys and bladder: it breaks stones in the kidneys,
and drives them forth.

It is also good for ruptures, cramps, and convulsions: it is a remedy against
the bitings of mad

It is commended against the pain of the Sciatica, or ache of the huckle bone.

There is a Conserve made of the flowers and sugar good for many things, and
especially for the

The powder of the dried leaves drunk in wine is good for them that spit or
piss blood, and cures

The powder taken with meat loses the belly very gently, and helps them
that have the falling

It is singular against all pains of the head: it kills worms in the belly;
helps the Ague:

CHAP. 244. Of Water-Betony.
The Description.
WAter Betony has great square hollow and brown stalks, whereon are set very
broad leaves notched about the edges like unto those of Nettles, of a swart
green color, growing for the most part by two and two as it were from one
joint, opposite, or standing one right against an other. The flowers grow at
the top of the branches, of a dark purple color, in shape like to little
helmets. The seed is small, contained in round bullets or buttons. The root is
compact of many and infinite strings.

Betonica aquatica. Water Betony.


The Place.
It grows by brooks and running waters, by ditch sides, and by the brinks of
rivers, and is seldom found in dry places.

The Time.
It floureth in July and August, and from that time the seed waxes ripe.

The Names.
Water Betonie is called in Latin Betonica aquatica: some have thought it
Dioscorides his Clymenum: others, his Galeopsis: it is Scrophularia altera of
Dodonoeus: of Turner, Clymenon: of some, Sesamoides minus, but not properly: of
others, Serpentaria: in Dutch, S. Antonies cruyd: in English, Water Betonie:
and by some, Browne-wort: in Yorke-shire, Bishops leaves.

The Temperature.
Water Betony is hot and dry.

The Virtues.
The leaves of Water Betony are of a scouring

It is reported, if the face be washed with

CHAP. 245. Of Great Figge-wort, or Brownewort.
The Description.
1 THe great Fig-wort springs up with stalks four square, two cubits high,
of a dark purple color, and hollow within: the leaves grow always by
couples, as it were from one joint, opposite, or standing one right against
another, broad, sharp pointed, snipped round about the edges like the leaves
of the greater Nettle, but bigger, blacker, and nothing at all stinging when
they be touched: the flowers in the tops of the (...) are of a dark purple
color, very like in form to little helmets: then comes up little small seed
in pretty round buttons, but sharp at the end: the root is whitish, beset with
little knobs and bunches as it were knots and kernels.

2 There is another Figge-wort called Scrophularia Indica, that has many and
great branches trailing here and there upon the ground, full of leaves, in
fashion like the wild or common Thistle, but altogether without pricks: among
the leaves appear the flowers in fashion like a hood, on the out side of a
feint color, and within intermixed with purple; which being fallen and
withered, there come in place small knops very hard to break, and sharp at
the point as a bodkin: which contains a small seed like unto Time. The whole
plant perishes at the first approach of Winter, and must be sown again in
April, in good and fertile ground. This is the Scrophularia Cretica 1. of
Clusius.

1 Scrophularia mayor. Great Fig-wort.
2 Scrophularia Indica. Indian Fig-wort.


3 The stalk of this is also square, and some yard high, set with leaves like
those of the hedge Nettle, but somewhat larger and thicker, and a little deeper
cut in: out of the besomes of these leaves come little rough foot-stalkes some
inch or two long, carrying some four or five hollow round flowers of a
greenish yellow color, with some threads in them, being open at the top, and
cut in with five little gashes: the seeds are black, and contained in vessels
like those of the first described: the root is like that of the Nettle, and
lives many years: it flowers in May, and the seeds are ripe in June. I have
not found nor heard of this wild with us, but seen it flourishing in the
garden of my kind friend Mr. John Parkinson. Clusius calls it Lamium 2.
Pannonicum exoticum: and Bauhine has set it forth by the name of Scrophularia
slore luteo: whom in this I follow.

3 Scrophularia flore luteo. Yellow floured Fig-wort.


The Place.
The great Scrophularia grows plentifully in shadowie Woods, and sometimes in
moist meadows, especially in greatest abundance in a wood as you go from
London to Harnesey, and also in Stow wood and Shotouer near Oxford.

The strange Indian figure was sent me from Paris by John Robin the Kings
Herbarist, and it now grows in my garden.

The Time.
They flower in June and July.

The Names.
Fig-wort or Kernel-wort is called in Latin Scrophularia mayor, that it might
differ from the lesser Celandine, which is likewise called Scrophularia, with
this addition minor, the lesser: it is called of some Millemorbia, and
Castrangula: in English, great Fig-wort, or Kernel-wort, but (...) usually
Brown-wort.

The Virtues.
Fig-wort is good against the hard kernells Strumas, and commonly Scrophulas,
that is, the Kings Evil: and it is reported to be a remedy against those
diseases whereof it took his name, as also the painful piles and swelling of
the haemorrhoides.

Diverse do rashly teach, that if it be hanged

Some do stamp the root with butter, and set it in a moist shadowie place
fifteen days together:

CHAP. 246. Of Veruaine.
The Description.
1 THe stalk of upright Veruaine rises from the root single, cornered, a foot
high, seldom above a cubite, and afterward divided into many branches. The
leaves are long, greater than those of the Oak, but with bigger cuts and
deeper: the flowers along the sprigs are little, blew, or white, orderly
placed: the root is long, with strings growing on it.

2 Creeping Veruaine sends forth stalks like unto the former, now and then a
cubit long, cornered, more slender, for the most part lying upon the ground.
The leaves are like the former, but with deeper cuts, and more in number. The
flowers at the tops of the sprigs are blew, and purple withal, very small as
those of the last described, and placed after the same manner and order. The
root grows straight down, being slender and long, as is also the root of the
former.

1 Verbena communis. Common Veruaine.
2 Verbena sacra. Common Veruaine.


The Place.
Both of them grow in untilled places near unto hedges, highways, and
commonly by ditches almost every where. I have not seen the second, and doubt
it is not to be found wild in England.

The Time.
The Veruaines flower in July and August.

The Names.
Veruaine is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Verbena, and Verbenaca,
Herculania, Ferraria, and Exupera: of some, Matricalis, and Hiera botane: of
others, Veruena, and Sacra herba: Verbenae are herbs that were taken from the
Altar, or from some holy place, which because the Consul or Praetor did cut up,
they were likewise called Sagmind, which oftentiwes are mentioned in Liuy to be
grassie herbs cut up in the Capitol. Pliny also in his two and twentieth
book, and eleventh Chapter witnesses, That Verbenae and Sagmina be all one:
and this is manifest by that which we read in Andraea in Terence: Ex ara
verbenas hinc sum; Take herbs here from the Altar: in which place Terence did
not mean Veruaine to be taken from the Altar, but some certain herbs: for in
Menander, out of whom this Comedy was translated, is read (...) or Myrtle, as
Donatus says. In Spanish it is called Vrgebaom: in Italian, Verminacula: in
Dutch, Jser cruijt: in French, Veruaine: in English, Juno's tears, Mercuries
moist blood, Holy-herbe; and of some, Pigeons grass, or Columbine, because
Pigeons are delighted to be amongst it, as also to eat thereof, as Apuleius
writes.

The Temperature.
Both the Veruaines are of temperature very dry, and do meanly bind and cool.

The Virtues.
The leaves of Veruaine pownd with oil of Roses or hogs grease, does mitigate
and appease the

The leaves of Veruaine and Roses stamped with a little new hogs grease, and
emplaistered after

It is reported to be of singular force against the Tertian and Quartane
Fevers: but you must observe mother Bombies rules, to take just so many (...)
or sprigs, and no more, lest it fall out so that it do you no good, if you
catch no harm by it. Many odd old wives fables are written of (...) tending to
witchcraft and sorcerie, which you may read elsewhere, for I am not willing to
trouble your ears with reporting such trifles, as honest ears abhor to
hear.

Archigenes makes a garland of Veruaine for the headache, when the cause of
the infirmity

The herb stamped with oil of roses and Vinegar, or the decoction of it made
in oil of roses,

It is a remedy against putrified ulcers, it heals up wounds, and perfectly
cures Fistulaes, it

The decoction of the roots and leaves swageth the toothache, and fasteneth
them, and heals

They report says Pliny, that if the dining room be sprinkled with water in
which the herb Dioscorides mentions.

Most of the latter Physicians do give the juice or decoction hereof to them
that has the plague

CHAP. 247. Of Scabious.
(...) the 1. 2. 3. (...). figures were all nothing else than the varieties of
one Plant, being of the 1. 2. 3. 4. (...) (...) of (...). they (...) only in
the more or less (...) or dividing of the leaves: I have of these only
reserved the third, and in other places put such figures as are agreeable to
the titles. The figure that was in the sixth place was of the ordinary first
(...) Scabious; and the figure that should (...) been there was in the eighth
place; and that which was in the (...) (...) (...) to the plant (...) by me in
the (...) place.
1 Scabiosa mayor vulgaris. Common Scabious.
(...) the 1. 2. 3. (...). figures were all nothing else than the varieties of
one Plant, being of the 1. 2. 3. 4. (...) (...) of (...). they (...) only in
the more or less (...) or dividing of the leaves: I have of these only
reserved the third, and in other places put such figures as are agreeable to
the titles. The figure that was in the sixth place was of the ordinary first
(...) Scabious; and the figure that should (...) been there was in the eighth
place; and that which was in the (...) (...) (...) to the plant (...) by me in
the (...) place.
2 Scabiosa minor, sieve Columbaria. The small common Scabious.


The Description.
1 THe first kind of Scabious being the most common and best known, has
leaves long and broad, of a grayish, hoary, and hairy color, spread abroad upon
the ground, among which rise up round and rough stems, beset with hairy iagged
leaves, in fashion like great Valerian, which we call Setwall. At the top of
the stalks grow blew flowers in thick (...) or buttons. The root is white and
single.

2 The second is like unto the former, saving that his leaves are much cut or
iagged, and the whole plant is altogether lesser, scarcely growing to the
height of a foot.

3 The third kind of Scabious is in all things like unto the second, saving
that the knap or head does not dilate it self so abroad, and is not so thick
or closely thrust together, and the lowest leaves are not so deeply cut or
iagged, but the upper are much smaller, and also the more divided.

4 The fourth grows with large stalks, having two leaves one set right
against another, very much iagged, almost like unto common Fern, or rather
Ash: and at the top of the stalks there grow larger flowers, like unto the
first, but greater, and the root is also like it, and it differs no way from
the first described, but only by reason of the soil.

5 Purple floured Scabious has a rough hairie stalk, whereon do grow broad
leaves deeply cut in the edges, in form like those of Sowthistle, rough
likewise and hairie; the flowers grow at the top of the stalks, composed of an
innumerable sort of purple thrums: after which come scaly knaps like those of
Iacea, or Knapweed, wherein is the seed. The root is small and threddie.

6 The sixth sort of Scabious has stalks some cubite high, round, and set with
leaves not cut and iagged almost to the middle rib; as in the former, yet
somewhat rough and hairie, snipt about the edges, and of a light green color;
amongst which rise up rough stalks, on the top whereof do grow fair red
flowers consisting of a bundle of thrummes. The root is long, tough, and
fibrous.

7 The seventh kind of Scabious has sundry great, rough and round stemmes,
as high as a tall man, beset with leaves like the first Scabious, but far
greater. The flowers grow at the top of the stalks like unto the others, but
of a faint yellow color, which fall as soon as it is touched with the hand,
whereby it mightily increases, notwithstanding the root endures for many
years, and grows to be wonderful great: and in my garden it did grow to the
bigness of a man's body.

(...) the 1. 2. 3. (...). figures were all nothing else than the varieties of
one Plant, being of the 1. 2. 3. 4. (...) (...) of (...). they (...) only in
the more or less (...) or dividing of the leaves: I have of these only
reserved the third, and in other places put such figures as are agreeable to
the titles. The figure that was in the sixth place was of the ordinary first
(...) Scabious; and the figure that should (...) been there was in the eighth
place; and that which was in the (...) (...) (...) to the plant (...) by me in
the (...) place.
3 Scabiosa media. Middle Scabious.
4 Scabiosa campestris, sive (...). Corn Scabious.


5 Scabiosa flore purpurco. Purple floured Scabious.
(...) the 1. 2. 3. (...). figures were all nothing else than the varieties of
one Plant, being of the 1. 2. 3. 4. (...) (...) of (...). they (...) only in
the more or less (...) or dividing of the leaves: I have of these only
reserved the third, and in other places put such figures as are agreeable to
the titles. The figure that was in the sixth place was of the ordinary first
(...) Scabious; and the figure that should (...) been there was in the eighth
place; and that which was in the (...) (...) (...) to the plant (...) by me in
the (...) place.
6 Scabiosa rubra Austriaca. Red Scabious of Austrich.
(...) the 1. 2. 3. (...). figures were all nothing else than the varieties of
one Plant, being of the 1. 2. 3. 4. (...) (...) of (...). they (...) only in
the more or less (...) or dividing of the leaves: I have of these only
reserved the third, and in other places put such figures as are agreeable to
the titles. The figure that was in the sixth place was of the ordinary first
(...) Scabious; and the figure that should (...) been there was in the eighth
place; and that which was in the (...) (...) (...) to the plant (...) by me in
the (...) place.
7 Scabiosa montana maxima. Mountain Scabious.
8 Scabiosa mont an a alba. White mountain Scabious.


6 Scabiosamaior Hispanica. Spanish Scabious.
10 Scabiosa peregrina. Strange Scabious.
(...) the 1. 2. 3. (...). figures were all nothing else than the varieties of
one Plant, being of the 1. 2. 3. 4. (...) (...) of (...). they (...) only in
the more or less (...) or dividing of the leaves: I have of these only
reserved the third, and in other places put such figures as are agreeable to
the titles. The figure that was in the sixth place was of the ordinary first
(...) Scabious; and the figure that should (...) been there was in the eighth
place; and that which was in the (...) (...) (...) to the plant (...) by me in
the (...) place.
11 Scabiosa omnium minima. Sheep Scabious.


8 The white mountain Scabious has broad leaves spread upon the ground, like
those of the field Primrose, but greater. Amongst which rises up a great
stiff stalk smooth and plain, garnished with leaves not like those next the
ground, but lesser, much more divided, and of a greener color and harder. The
flowers are like those of the common Scabious, but white of color: the root of
this perishes every year after the perfecting of the seed.

9 The ninth kind of Scabious is like unto the mountain Scabious, but lower
and smaller, having sundry large and broad leaves next the ground, snipt
confusedly and out of order at the edges like the Oken leaf, among which
rises up a stem two cubits high, dividing it self into sundry other branche.
The flowers are set at the top of the naked stalks, of a whitish color; which
being past, the seed appears like a tuft of small bucklers, round, and
somewhat hollow within, and made as it were of parchment, very strange to
behold: and within the bucklers there are sundry small crosses of black
fastened to the bottom, as it were the needle in a dial, running upon the
point of a needle. The plant dies at the beginning of winter, and must be
sown in April in good and fertile ground.

10 The tenth is like unto the last before mentioned, in stalks, root, and
flowers, and differs that this plant has leaves altogether without any cuts
or iagges about the edges, but is smooth and plain like the leaves of
Marigolds, or Devils bit, and the flowers are like unto those of the last
described.

11 Sheeps Scabious has small and tender branches trailing upon the ground,
whereupon do grow small leaves very finely iagged or minced even almost to the
middle ribbe, of an ouerworne color. The flowers grow at the top of a bluish
color, consisting of much thrummie matter, hard thrust together like a button:
the root is small, and creeps in the ground.

12 Scabiosa minima hirsuta. Hairie Sheep Scabious
13 Scabiosa minima Bellidis folio. Daisie leaued Scabious.
14 Scabiosa flore pallido. Yellow Scabious.
15 Scabiosa prolifera. Childing Scabious.


12 The other Sheeps Scabious of our Author (according to the figure) is
greater than the last described, growing some foot or better high, with slender
rough branches set with leaves not so much divided, but only nicked about the
edges: the flowers are in color and shape like those of the last described, or
of the blew daisie; the root is single, and like that of a Rampion, whence
Fabius Columna (the seed and milkie juice inducing him) has referred this to
the Rampions, calling it Rapuntium montanum capitatum leptophyllon. Lobell
calls it Scabiosamedia: and Dodonaeus, Scabiosa minor.

13 To these little plants we may fitly add another small one referred by (...)
to this Classis, and called Scabiosa. 10. sieve repens: yet Bauhine refers it to
the Daisies, and terms it Bellis caerulea montana frutescens; but it matters
not to which we refer it: the description is thus; The root is hard, black,
and creeping, so that it spreds much upon the surface of the ground, sending
sorth many thick, smooth, green leaves, like those of the blew Daisie, not
sharp pointed, but ending as we vulgarly figure an heart, having a certain
grassie but not unpleasant smell, and somewhat a bitter and hot taste: out of
the midst of these leaves grow slender naked stalks some hand high, having
round flowers on their tops, like those of Devils bit, and of the same color,
yet sometimes of a lighter blew. It grows in the mountains of Hungary and
Austria. It flowers in April and May, and ripens the seed in July and August.

16 Scabiosarubra Indica. Red Indian Scabious.
17 Scabiosa aestivalis (...). Summer Scabious.


14 This (which is the seventh Scabious of Clusius, and which he terms (...)
of the whitish yellow color of the flower) has round, slender, stiff, and
green stalks set at each joint with two large and much divided leaves of a
whitish green color: those leaves that come from the root before the stalk
grow up are broader, and less divided; upon the tops of the branches and
stalks grow flowers like those of the common Scabious, being white or rather
(before they be thoroughly open) of a whitish yellow color; which fading, there
follow seeds like as in the ordinary kind. This flowers in June and July, and
grows very plentifully in all the hilly grounds and dry Meades of Austria and
Morauia.

15 There is also a kind of Scabious having the leaves much cut and divided,
and the stalks and flowers like to the common sort, of a bluish purple
color, but differing in this, that at the sides of the flower it puts forth
little stalks, bearing smaller flowers, as is seen in some other plants, as
in Daisies and Marigolds, which therefore are fitly termed in Latin (...) or
Childing. This grows only in Gardens, and flowers at the same time with the
former.

16 The stalks of the red Scabious grow some cubit or more in height, and are
divided into many very slender branches, which at the tops carry flowers
composed after the manner of the other sorts of Scabious, that is, of many
little flowers divided into five parts at the top, and these are of a perfect
red color, and have small threads with pendants at them coming forth of the
middle of each of these little flowers, which are of a whitish color, and make
a pretty show. The leaves are green, and very much divided or cut in. The
starry seeds grow in long round hairy heads hand somely set together. This is
an annual, and perishes as soon as it has perfected the seed. Clusius makes
it his sixth Scabious, and calls it Scabiosa Indica. It flowers in July, and
grows in the Gardens of our prime Herbarists.

17 The same Author has also given us the figure and description of (...)
Scabious, which sends up a stalk some three cubits or more high, set at
certain spaces with leaves large, and snipt about their edges, and a little
(...) in near their stalks. The stalks are divided into others, which at
there tops carry bluish flowers in long scaly heads, which are succeeded by
long whitish seed. The root is whitish and fibrous, and dies every (...). This
is the Scabiosa 9, siuc aestivalis of Clusius.

The Place.
These kinds of Scabious do grow in pastures, meadows, corn fields, and
barren sandy grounds almost every where.

The strange sorts do grow in my garden, yet are they strangers in England.

The Time.
They flower and flourish in the Summer months.

The Names.
Scabious is commonly called Scabiosa; diverse think it is named (...), which
signifies a scabbe, and a certain herb so called by Aetius: I do not know,
says Hermolaus Barbarus, whether it be Scabious which Aetius does call psora,
the smoke of which being burnt does kill cankers or little worms. The Author
of the Pandects does interpret Scabiosa to be Dioscorides his (...) Dioscorides
describes Stoebe by no marks at all, being commonly known in his time; and
Galen in his first book of Antidotes says thus: There is found amongst us a
certain shrubby herb, hot, very sharp and biting, having a little kind of
aromaticall or spicy smell, which the inhabitants do call Colymbade, and Stoebe
singular good to keep and preserve winc: but it seems that this Stoebe does
differ from that of which he has made mention in his book of the faculties of
medicines, which agrees with that of (...): for he writes that this is of a
binding quality without biting; so that it cannot be very sharp.

The Temperature.
Scabious is hot and dry in the later end of the second degree, or near hand
in the third, and of thin and subtle parts: it cuttcth, attenuateth, or makes
thin, and thoroughly concocteth tough and gross humors.

The Virtues.
Scabious scoureth the chest and lungs; it is good against an old cough,
shortness of breath,

The same provoke urine, and purges now and then rotten matter by the
bladder, which happens

It is reported that it cures scabs, if the decoction thereof be drunk
certain daics, and the juice

The later Herbarists do also affirm that it is a remedy against the bitings
of Serpents and

The juice being drunk procures sweat, especially with Treacle; and it
speedily consumes

It is thought to be forceable, and that against all pestilent fevers.

CHAP. 248. Of Devils bit.
Morsus Diaboli. Devils bit.


The Description.
Devils bit has small upright round stalks of a cubite high, beset with long
leaves somewhat broad, very little or nothing snipt about the edges, somewhat
hairie and even. The flowers also are of a dark purple color, fashioned like
the flowers of Scabious, which being ripe are carried away with the wind. The
root is black, thick, hard and short, with many (...) strings fastened
thereto. The great part of the root seems to be bitten away: old (...)
charmers report, that the devil did bite it for envy, because it is an herb
that has so many good virtues, and is so beneficial to mankind.

The Place.
Devils bit grows in dry medows and woods, and about ways sides. I have
found great store of it growing in (...) wood near London at Lee in Essex, and
at (...) in Essex, in a wood called Hammerell, and sundry other places.

The Time.
It floureth in August, and is hard to be known from Scabious, saving when it
floureth.

The Names.
It is commonly called Morsus Diaboli, or Devils bit, of the root (as it
seems) that is bitten off: for the superstitious people hold opinion, that
the devil for envy that he bears to mankind bit it off, because it would
be otherwise good for many uses: it is called of Fuchsius, Succisa: in High
Dutch Teuffels abbisz: in Low Dutch, Duyuelles beet in French Mors du Diable:
in English, Devils bit, and Forebit. Fabius Columna judges it to be the
Pycnocomon of Dioscorides, described by him lib. 4. cap. 176.

The Temperature.
Devils bit is something bitter, and of a hot and dry temperature, and that in
the later end of the second degree.

The Virtues.
There is no better thing against old swellings of the Almonds, and upper parts
of the throat that

It cleanses away slimie phlegm that sticks in the jaws, it digesteth and
consumes it: and it (...) Rosarum, or honey of Roses be put into it.

It is reported to be good for the infirmities that Scabious serves for, and
to be of no less force

And also to mitigate the pains of the matrix or mother, and to drive forth
wind, if the decoction

CHAP. 249. Of Matfellon or Knapweed.
The Description.
1 MAtfellon or black Knapweed is doubtless a kind of Scabious, as all the
others are, entitled with the name of Iacea; yet for distinction I have
thought good to set them down in a several Chapter, beginning with that kind
which is called in English Knapweed and Matfellon, or Matersilon. It has long
and narrow leaves, of a blackish green color, in shape like Devils bit, but
longer, set upon stalks two cubits high, somewhat bluntly cut or snipt about
the edges: the flowers do grow at the top of the stalks, being first small
scaly knops, like to the knops of Corn flower, or blew bottles, but greater;
out of the midst thereof grows a purple thrummie or threddie flower. The root
is thick and short.

2 The great Knapweed is very like unto the former, but that the whole plant is
much greater, the leaves bigger, and more deeply cut, even to the middle rib:
the flowers come forth of such like scaly heads, of an excellent fair purple
color, and much greater.

3 The third kind of Matfellon, or Knapweed is very like unto the former great
Knapweed last before mentioned, saving that the flowers of this plant are of an
excellent fair yellow color, proceeding forth of a scaly head or knop, beset
with most sharppricks, not to be touched without hurt: the flower is of a
pleasing smell, and very sweet; the root is long and lasting, and creeps far
abroad, by means whereof it greatly increases.

1 Iaceanigra. Black Matfellon.
The figure that was formerly in the second place was of the (...) (...) of
(...). which differs from that our Author meant and described, whose figure we
have given you in the place thereof.
2 Iacea mayor. Great Matfellon.


4 The mountain Knapweede of Narbone in France, has a strong stem of two
cubits high, and is very plentiful about Couentrie among the hedges and
bushes: the leaves are very much iagged, in sorme of Lonchitus, or
Spleenewoort; the flowers are like the rest of the Knapweeds, of a purple
color.

3 Iacea mayor lutea. Yellow Knapweed.
4 Iacea montana. Mountain Knapweed.
5 Iacea flore albo. White floured Knapweed.
6 Iacea tuberosa. Knobbed Knapweed.


7 Iacea Austriaca villosa. Rough headed Knapweed.


5 The white floured Knapweed has creeping roots, which send up pretty large
whitish green leaves, much divided or cut in almost to the middle rib; from
the midst of which rises up a stalk some two foot high, set also with the like
divided leaves, but lesser: the flowers are like those of the common sort, but
of a pleasing white color. I first found this growing wild in a field nigh
Martine Abbey in Surrey, and since in the Isle Tenet.

6 The tuberous or knobbie Knapweed being set forth by Tabernam. which and is a
stranger in these parts, has many leaves (...) upon the ground, rough, deeply
gasht or hackt about the edges, like those of Sowthistle: among which rises up
a straight stalk, dividing it self into other branches, whereon do grow the
like leaves, but smaller: the knappie flowers stand on the top of the branches,
of a bright red (...), in shape like the other Knapweeds. The root is great,
thick and tuberous, consisting of many cloggie parcels, like those of the
Asphodill.

7 This (says Clusius) is a comely plant, having broad and long leaves white,
soft, and lightly snipt about the edges: the taste is gummy, and not a little
bitter: it sends up many crested stalks from one root, some cubit high or more:
at the tops of them grow the heads some two or three together, consisting of
many scales, whose ends are hairy, and they are set so orderly, that by this
means the heads seem as they were enclosed in little nets: the flowers are
purple, and like those of the first described; the seed is small and long, and
of an ash color. This Clusius calls Iacea 4. Austriaca villoso capite.

(...) capitulis hirsut is Boelij. 8 This has many small cornered straked
hairie trailing branches growing from the root, and those again divided into
many other branches, trailing or spreading upon the ground three or four foot
long, employing or covering a good plot of ground, whereon grow hairy leaves
divided or iagged into many parts, like the leaves of Iacea mayor, or Rocket,
of a very bitter taste: at the top of each branch grows one scaly head, each
scale ending with five, six, or seven little weak prickles growing orderly
like half the rowell of a spur, but far lesser: the flowers grow forth of
the heads of a light purple color, consisting of many small flowers, like
those of the common Iacea, the bordering flowers, being bigger and larger than
those of the middle of the flower, each small flower being divided into five
small parts or leaves, not much unlike those of Cyanus: the seed is small, and
enclosed in down. The root perishes when the seed is ripe.

This plant has not been hitherto written of that I can find. Seeds of it I
received from Mr. William Coys, with whom also I observed the plant, October
10. 1621. he received it from Boclius a Low country man. John Goodyer.

The Place.
The two first grow commonly in every fertile pasture: the rest grow in my
garden.

The Time.
They flower in June and July.

The Names.
The later age does call it Iacea nigra, putting nigra for a difference
between it and the Heartsease or Pancie, which is likewise called Iacea: it is
called also Materfillon, and Matrefillen: in English, Matfellon, Bulweed, and
Knapweed.

The Temperature and Virtues.
These plants are of the nature of Scabious, whereof they be kinds, therefore
their faculties are

They be commended against the swellings of the Uvula, as is Devils bit, but of
less force and

CHAP. 250. Of Silver Knapweed.
The Description.
1 THe great Silver Knapweed has at his first coming up diverse leaves spread
upon the ground, of a deep green color, cut and iagged as are the other
Knapweeds, (...) here and there with some silver lines down the same, whereof
it took his surname, Argentea: among which leaves rises up a straight stalk,
of the height of two or three cubits, somewhat rough and brittle, dividing it
self toward the top into other twiggie branches: on the tops whereof do grow
flowers set in scaly heads or knaps like the other Matfellons, of a gallant
purple color, consisting of a number of threads or thrums thick thrust
together: after which the seeds appear, slipperie, smooth at one end, and
bear ded with black hairs at the other end, which makes it to leap and skip
away when a man does but lightly touch it. The root is small, single, and
perishes when the seed is ripe. This is not streaked with any lines, as our
Author imagined, nor called Argentea by any but himself, and that very
unfitly.

The figures were (...) transposed.
1 Stoebe argentea mayor. Great Silver Knapweed.
The figures were (...) transposed.
2 Stoebe argentea minor. Little. silver Knapweed.


2 The second agrees with the first in each respect, saving that the leaves
hereofare more iagged, and the silver lines or strakes are greater, and more in
number, wherein consists the difference. 4 Stoebe Rosmarini folio. Narrow
leafed Knapweed.
5 Stoebe ex Codice Caesareo. Thornie Knapweed:
The leaves of this are very much divided and hoarie, the stalks some two
cubits high, set also with much divided leaves, that end in soft harmless
prickles: at the tops of the branches stand the heads composed as it were of
silver scales (whence Lobel and others (...) called this plant Stoebe argentea)
and out of these silver heads come flowers like those of the blew bottles, but
of a light purple color, the seed is small, blackish, and hairy at the tops.

3 There is another like this in each respect, but that the heads have not so
white a shining silver color: and this I have also seen growing with Master
John Tradescant at South Lambeth.

4 To these may be added that plant which Pona has set forth by the name of
Stoebe capitata Rosmarini folio. It has a whitish woody root, from whence
arise diverse branches set with long narrow leaves somewhat like those of
Rosemary, but liker those of the Pine, of a greenish color above, and whitish
below: at the tops of the branches grow such heads as in the first described
Stoebe, with flowers of somewhat a deeper purple color: the seed is like that
of Carthamus, but blackish. The root is not annual, but lasts many years.

5 Though these plants have of late been vulgarly set forth by the name of
Stoebe's, yet are they not judged to be the true Stoebe of Dioscorides and the
Ancients, but rather another, whose figure which we here give was by Dodonaeus
taken forth of a manuscript in the Emperors Library, and he says; Paludanus
brought home some of the same out of Cyprus and Morea, as he returned from his
journey out of Syria: the bottom leaves are said to be much divided; those on
the stalks long, and only snipt about the edges, and white: the flowers
white, and contained in scaly heads like the Blew-bottles, and the tops of the
branches end in sharp prickles.

The Place.
These do grow of themselves in fields near common high ways, and in
untilled places, but they are strangers in England, nevertheless I have them
in my garden.

The Time.
They spring up in April, they flower in August, and the seed is ripe in
September.

The Names.
Silver Knapweed is called of Lobel, Staebe Salamantica: of Dodonaeus,
Aphyllanthes, that is, without leaves, for the flowers consist only of a
number of threads without any leaves at all: in English, Silver Knapweed, or
Silver Scabious, whereof doubtless they be kinds.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The faculties of these Matfellons are not as yet found out, neither are they
used for meat or medicine.

The faculties of Staebe out of Dioscorides.

The seed and leaves are a stringent, wherefore the decoction of them is cast
up in Dysenteries,

CHAP. 251. Of Blew Bottle, or Corn Flower.
1 Cyanus mayor. Great blew Bottle.
2 Cyanus vulgaris. Common blew Bottle.


The Description.
1 THe great blew Bottle has long leaves, smooth, soft, downie, and sharp
pointed: among the leaves rise up crooked, and pretty thick branches,
chamfered, furrowed, and garnished with such leaves as are next the ground: on
the tops whereof stand fair blew flowers tending to purple, consisting of
diverse little flowers, set in a scaly husk or knap like those of the
Knapweeds: the seed is rough or bearded at one end, smooth at the other, and
shining. The root is tough, and long lasting (contrary to the rest of the Corn
flowers) and grows yearly into new shoots and springs, whereby it greatly
increases.

7 Cyanus coeruleus multiflorus. Double Blew-Bottles.
8 Cyanus purpurens multiflorus. Double Purple-Bottles.
9 Cyanus repens latifolius. Broad leafed creeping Blew-Bottle.
10 Cyanus repens angustifolius. Small creeping Blew-Bottle.


2 The common Corne-floure has leaves spread upon the ground, of a whitish
green color, somewhat hackt or cut in the edges like those of Corn Scabious:
among which rises up a stalk divided into diverse small branches, whereon do
grow long leaves of an ouerworne green color, with few cuts or none at all.
The flowers grow at the top of the stalks, of a blew color, consisting of
many small flowers set in a scaly or chaffie head like those of the Knapweeds:
the seed is smooth, bright shining, and wrapped in a woolly or flocky matter.
The root is small and single, and perishes when it has perfected his seed.

3 This Bottle is like the last described in each respect, saving in the color
of the flowers, which are purple, wherein consists the difference.

4 The fourth Bottle is also like the precedent, not differing in any point but
in the flowers; for as the last before mentioned are of a purple color,
contrariwise these are of a milk white color, which sets forth the
difference.

5 The Violet-coloured Bottle or Corne-floure is like the precedent, in
stalks, leaves, seeds, and roots: the only difference is, that this brings
flowers of a violet color, and the others not so.

6 Variable Corne-floure is so like the others in stalks, leaves, and
proportion, that it cannot be distinguished with words; only the flowers
hereof are of two colors mixed together, that is, purple and white, wherein it
differs from the rest.

7 There is no difference to be found in the leaves, stalks, seed, or roots
of this Cornefloure from the other, but only that the flowers hereof are of a
fair blew color, and very double.

8 The eighth Corne-floure is like unto the precedent, without any difference
at all, saving in the color of the flowers, the which are of a bright purple
color, that sets (...) the difference.

9 This from a small root sends up diverse creeping branches some foot long, set
with long hoary narrow leaves: at the tops of the stalks stand the flowers in
scaly heads, like as the other Blew-Bottles, but of a dark purple color. The
whole plant is very bitter and ungrateful to the taste. Lobel calls this
Cyanus repens.

10 This is like the last described, but that the leaves are much smaller or
narrower, also the scaly heads of this are of a finer white silver color: and
this plant is not possessed with such bitterness as the former. Lobel calls
this Cyanus minimus repens.

The Place.
The first grows in my garden, and in the gardens of Herbarists, but not
wild that I know of. The others grow in corn fields among wheat, Rye, Barley,
and other grain: it is sown in gardens, which by cunning looking to does often
times become of other colors, and some also double, which has been touched
in their several descriptions. The two last grow wild about Montpellier in
France.

The Time.
They bring sorth their flowers from the beginning of May unto the end of
harvest.

The Names.
The old Herbarists called it (...) flos, of the blew color which it naturally
has: most of the later sort following the common (...) (...), call it Flos
frumentorum; for the Germans name it (...): in Low Dutch, (...): in French,
Blaueole, and Bluet: in Italian, Fior campese, and Bladiseris, i. Seris (...),
and (...), or (...), as though it should be called Blaptisecula, because it
hinders and annoyeth the Reapers, by dulling and turning the edges of their
sickles in reaping of corn: in English it is called Blew-Bottle, Blew-Blow,
Corne-floure, and hurtSickle. Fabius Columna would have it to be the Papauer
spumeum, or Heracleum of the Ancients.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The faculties of these flowers are not yet sufficiently known. Since there is
no use of them in

CHAP. 252. Of Goats Beard, or Go to bed at noone.
The Description.
1 GOats-beard, or Go to bed at noone hoth hollow stalks, smooth, and of a
whitish green color, whereupon do grow long leaves crested down the middle
with a swelling rib, sharp pointed, yielding a milky juice when it is broken,
in shape like those of Garlic; from the bosom of which leaves thrust forth
small render stalks set with the like leaves but lesser: the flowers grow at
the top of the stalks, consisting of a number of purple leaves, dashed over as
it were with a little yellow dust, set about with nine or ten sharp pointed
green leaves: the whole flower resembles a star when it is spread abroad; for
it shuts it self at twelve of the clock, and shows not his face open
until the next days Sun does make it flower anew, whereupon it was called Go
to bed at noon: when these flowers be come to their full maturitie and
ripeness, they grow into a downy Blow-ball like those of Dandelion, which is
carried away with the wind. The seed is long, having at the end one piece of
that downie matter hanging at it. The root is long and single, with some few
threads thereto anexed, which perishes when it has perfected his seed,
yielding much quantity of a milky (...) when it is cut or broken, as does all
the rest of the plant.

2 The yellow Goats beard has the like leaves, stalks, root, seed, and downie
blow-balls that the other has, and also yields the like quantity of milk,
insomuch that if the pilling while it is green be pulled from the stalks, the
milky juice follows: but when it has there remained a little while it waxes
yellow. The flowers hereof are of a gold yellow color, and have not such long
(...) leaves to garnish it withal, wherein consists the difference.

1 Tragopogon purpureum. Purple Goats-beard.
2 Tragopogon (...). Yellow Goats-beard.


3 There is another small sort of Goats-beard or Go to bed at noone, which has
a thick root full of a milky sap, from which rise up many leaves spread upon
the ground, very long, narrow, thin, and like unto those of grass, but thicker
and grosser: among which rise up tender stalks, on the tops whereof do stand
fair double yellow flowers like the precedent, but lesser. The whole plant
yields a milkie sap or juice as the others do: it perishes like as the other
when it has perfected his seed. This may be called Tragopogon minus
angustifolium, Little narrow leaued Goatsbeard.

The Place.
The first grows not wild in England that I could ever see or hear of, except
in Lancashire upon the banks of the river Chalder, near to my Lady Heskiths
house, two miles from Whawley: it is sown in gardens for the beauty of the
flowers almost every where. The others grow in medows and fertile pastures in
most places of England. It grows plentifully in most of the fields about
London, as at Islington, in the meadows by Redriffe, (...), and Putney, and in
diverse other places.

The Time.
They flower and flourish from the beginning of June to the end of August.

The Names.
Goats-beard is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Barbahirci, and also Coma:
in High Dutch, Bocxbaert: in Low Dutch, Josephes (...): in French, Barbe de
(...), and Sassify: in Italian, Sassefrica: in Spanish, Barba Cabruna: in
English, Goats-(...), Joseph's flower, Star of Jerusalem, Noone-tide, and Go to
bed at noone.

The Temperature.
These herbs are temperate between heat and moisture.

The Virtues.
The roots of Goats-beard boiled in wine and drunk, asswageth the pain and
pricking stitches

The same boiled in water until they be tender, and buttered as parseneps and
carrots, are a most

CHAP. 253. Of Vipers-Grasse.
1 (...), sieve Scorzonera Hispanica. Common Vipers Grass.
2 Viperaria humilis. Dwarf Vipers Grass.


(...) there were six (...) in this chapter, whereof the (...) and fourth were
both of one plant, (...) the fifth which was of (...) (...) (...) of (...) did
(...) much differ from them; if it differ at all. In the (...) and (...) of the
third there should have been put (...) in stead of (...); (...) now (...):
(...).
3 Viperaria Pannonica. Austrian Vipers grass.
4 Viperaria angustifolia (...). Hungary Vipers grass.
5 Viperaria Pannonica angustifolia. Narrow leafed Vipers grass.


The Description.
1 THe first of the Viper grasses has long broad leaves, fat, or full bodied,
uneven about the edges, sharp pointed, with a high swollen ribbe down the
middle, and of an ouerworne color, tending to the color of Woade: among which
rises up a stiff stalk, smooth and plain, of two cubits high, whereon do
grow such leaves as those next the ground. The flours stand on the top of the
stalks, consisting of many small yellow leaves thick thrust together, very
double, as are those of Goats beard, whereof it is a kind, as are all the
rest that (...) follow in this present chapter: the root is long, thick, very
brittle, continuing many years, yielding great increase of roots, black
without, white within, and yielding a milkie juice, as (...) the leaves also,
like unto the Goats beard.

2 The dwarf Vipers grass differs not from the precedent, saving that it is
altogether lesser, wherein especially consists the difference.

3 The broad leafed Austrian Vipers-grasse has broad leaves sharp pointed,
uneven about the edges, of a bluish green color: the stalk rises up to the
height of a foot or better; on the top whereof do stand fair yellow (...),
very double, greater and broader than any of the rest of a reasonable good
smell. The seed follows, long and sharp, like unto those of Goates-beard.
The root is thick, long, and full of a milkie juice, as are the leaves also.

4 The narrow leaued Hungary Vipers-grasse has long leaves like to those of
Goates-beard, but longer and narrower, among which rises up a slender hollow
stalk, stiff and smooth, on the top whereof do stand fair double flowers of
a fair blew color tending to purple, in shape like the other of his kind, of
a pleasant sweet smell, like the smell of sweet balls made of Benzoin. The seed
is contained in small cups like those of Goats beard, wrapped in a downie
matter, that is carried away with the wind. The root is not so thick nor long
as the others, very single, bearded at the top, with certain hairy thrums
yielding a milkie juice of a resinous taste, and somewhat sharp withal. It
endures the winter even as the others do.

5 This (whose figure was by our Author put to the last description) has
leaves like those of Goates-beard, but stiffer and shorter, amongst which there
grows up a short hollow stalk some handful high, set with a few short
leaves, bearing a yellow flower at the top, almost like that of the last save
one, but less, the seed is contained in such cups as the common Vipers-grasse,
and being ripe is carried away with the leastwinde. The root is black, with a
wrinkled bark, and full of milk, having the head hairy, as also the last
described has. This by Clusius is called Scorsonera humilis angustifolia
Pannonica.

The Place and Time.
Most of these are strangers in England. The two first described do grow in my
garden. The rest are touched in their several titles.

They flower and flourish from May to the end of July.

The Names.
Vipers-grasse is called of the Spaniards Scorzonera, which sounds in Latin
Viperaria, or Viperina, or Serpentaria, so called because it is accounted to be
of force and efficacy against the poisons of Vipers and serpents, for Vipera or
a viper is called in Spanish Scurzo: it has no name either in the high or low
Dutch, nor in any other, more than has been said, that I can read: in English
we may call it Scorzoner, after the Spanish name, or Vipers-grasse.

The Temperature.
They are hot and moist as are the Goates-beards.

The Virtues.
It is reported by those of great judgment, that Vipers-grasse is most
excellent against the infections

It helps the infirmities of the heart, and such as use to swoune much: it
cures also them that

The root being eaten, either roasted in embers, sodden, or raw, does make a man
merry, and remoueth

The root condited with sugar, as are the roots of Eringos and such like, work
the like effects:

CHAP. 254. Of Marigolds.
The Description.
1 THe greatest double Marigold has many large, fat, broad leaves, springing
immediately from a fibrous or threddy root; the upper sides of the leaves are
of a deep green, and the lower side of a more light and shining green: among
which rise up stalks somewhat hairie, and also somewhat jointed, and full of a
spungious pith. The flowers in the top are beautiful, round, very large and
double, something sweet, with a certain strong smell, of a light saffron
color, or like pure gold: from the which follow a number of long crooked
seeds, especially the (...), or those that stand about the edges of the flower;
which being sown commonly bring forth single flowers, whereas contrariwise
those seeds in the middle are lesser, and for the most part bring forth such
flowers as that was from whence it was taken.

2 The common double Marigold has many (...), thick, crumpled leaves set upon
a gross and spungious stalk: whereupon do grow fair double (...) flowers,
having for the most part in the middle a bunch of threddes thick thrust
together: which being past there succeed such crooked seeds as the first
described. The root is thick and hard, with some threads annexed thereto.

1. 2. Calendula mayor polyanthos. The greater double Marigold.
4 Calendula multiflora (...). Double globe Marigold.
6 Calendula simplici (...). Single Marigold.
7 Calendula (...). Fruitful Marigold.


3 The smaller or finer leafed double Marigold grows upright, having for the
most part one stem or fat spongeous stalk, garnished with smooth and fat
leaves confusedly. The flowers grow at the top of the small branches, very
double, but lesser than the other, consisting of more fine iaggednesse, and of
a fair yellow gold color. The root is like the precedent.

4 The Globe-flouring Marigold has many large broad leaves rising immediately
forth of the ground; among which rises up a stalk of the height of a cubit,
dividing it self toward the top into other smaller branches, set or garnished
with the like leaves, but confusedly, or without order. The flowers grow at the
top of the stalks, very double; the small leaves whereof are set in comely
order by certain ranks or rows, as sundry lines are in a Globe, traversing
the whole compass of the same; whereupon it took the name Orbiculata.

5 The fifth sort of double Marigold differs not from the last described,
saving in the color of the flowers; for this plant brings forth flowers of a
straw or light yellow color, and the others not so, wherein consists the
difference.

All these five here described, and which formerly had so many figures, differ
nothing but in the bigness and littleness of the plants and flowers, and in
the intensenesse and remissness of their color, which is either orange,
yellow, or of a straw color.

6 The Marigold with single flowers differs not from those with double
flowers, but in that it consists of fewer leaves, which we therefore term
Single, in comparison of the rest, and that makes the difference.

7 This fruitful or much bearing Marigold is likewise called of the vulgar
sort of women, Iacke-an-apes on horseback: it has leaves, stalks, and roots
like the common sort of Marigold, differing in the shape of his flowers, for
this plant does bring forth at the top of the stalk one flower like the other
Marigolds; from the which start forth sundry other small flowers, yellow
likewise, and of the same fashion as the first, which if I be not deceived
comes to pass per accidens, or by chance, as Nature oftentimes likes to
play with other flowers, or as children are borne with two thumbes on one hand,
and such like, which living to be men, do get children like unto others; even
so is the seed of this Marigold, which if it be sown, it brings forth not one
flower in a thousand like the plant from whence it was taken.

8 The other fruitful Marigold is doubtless a degenerate kind, coming by
chance from the seed of the double Marigold, whereas for the most part the
other comes of the seed of the single flowers, wherein consists the
difference. The flower of this (wherein the only difference consists) you
shall find expressed at the bottom of the fourth figure.

9 Calendula Alpina. Mountain Marigold.


9 The Alpish or mountain Marigold, which Lobelius sets down for Nardus
Celtica, or Plantago Alpina, is called by Tabernamontanus, Caltha, or Calendula
Alpina: and because I see it rather resembles a Marigold, than any other plant,
I have not thought it amiss to insert it in this place, leaving the
consideration thereof unto the friendly Reader, or to a further consideration,
because it is a plant that I am not well acquainted withal; yet I do read
that it has a thick root, growing aslope under the upper crust of the earth,
of an aromaticall or spicie taste, and somewhat biting, with many threddy
strings annexed thereto: from which rise up broad thick and rough leaves of an
ouerworn green color, not unlike to those of Plantaine: among which there
rises up a rough and tender stalk set with the like leaves; on the top whereof
comes forth a single yellow flower, paled about the edges with small leaves
of a light yellow, (...) to a straw color; the middle of the flower is
composed of a bundle of threads, thick thrust together, such as is in the
middle of the field Daisie, of a deep yellow color.

This Plant is all one with the two described in the next Chapter: they vary
only thus; the stalks and leaves are sometimes hairy, otherwhiles smooth; the
flower is yellow, or else blew. I having three figures ready cut, think it not
amiss to give you one to express each variety.

10 The wild Marigold is like unto the single garden Marigold, but altogether
lesser, and the whole plant perishes at the first approach of Winter, and
recouereth it self again by falling of the seed.

The Place.
These Marigolds, with double flowers especially, are set and sown in gardens:
the rest, their titles do set forth their natural being.

The Time.
The Marigold floureth from April or May even until Winter, and in Winter
also, if it be warm.

The Names.
The Marigold is called Calendula: it is to be seen in flower in the Calends
almost of every month: it is also called Chrysanthemum, of his golden color:
of some, Caltha, and Caltha Poetarum: whereof Columella and (...) do write,
saying, That Caltha is a flower of a yellow color; whereof Virgil in his
Bucolickes, the second Ecloge, writes thus;

Tum Casia atgue alijs intexens suauibus herbis
Mollia Luteola ping it vaccinia Caltha.
And then (...) Spike and such sweet herbs infold,
And paint the Iacinth with the Marigold.
Columella also in his tenth book of Gardens has these words;

Candida Leucoia and flauentia Lumina Calthae. Stock-Gillofloures exceeding
white, And Marigolds most yellow bright. It is thought to be Gromphena Plinij:
in Low Dutch it is called Goudt bloemen: in High Dutch, Kingleblumen: in
French, Sousij and Goude: in Italian, Fior d'ogni mese: in English, (...), and
Ruddes.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The flower of the Marigold is of temperature hot, almost in the second degree,
especially when Fuchsius has written, That being drunk with wine it brings
down the terms, and that the fume thereof expels the secondine or
afterbirth

But the leaves of the herb are hotter; for there is in them a certain biting,
but by reason of the

Fuchsius writes, That if the mouth be washed with the juice it helps the
toothache.

The flowers and leaves of Marigolds being distilled, and the water dropped
into red and watery

Conserve made of the flowers and sugar taken in the morning fasting, cures
the trembling of

The yellow leaves of the flowers are dried and kept throughout Dutchland
against Winter, to

CHAP. 255. Of Germane Marigolds.
The Description.
1 GOlden Marigold with the broad leaf does forthwith bring from the root long
leaves spread upon the ground, broad, green, something rough in the upper part,
underneath smooth, and of a light green color: among which spring up slender
stalks a cubit high, something hoarie, having three or four joints, out of
every one whereof grow two (...), set one right against another, and oftentimes
little slender stems; on the tops whereof (...) broad round flowers like those
of Ox-(...), or the corn Marigold, having a round ball in the middle (such as
is in the middle of those of (...)) bordered about with a pale of bright yellow
leaves. The whole flower (...) into down that is carried away with the wind;
among which down is found long blackish seed. The root consists of threddy
strings.

2 The lesser sort has four or five leaves spread upon the ground like unto
those of the last described, but altogether lesser and shorter: among which
rises up a slender stalk two hands high; on the top whereof stand such
flowers as the precedent, but not so large, and of a blew color.

These two here described, and that described in the ninth place of the
foregoing Chapter, are all but the varieties of one and the same plant,
differing as I have showed in the foregoing Chapter.

1 Chrysanthemum latifolium. Golden Marigold with the broad leaf.
2 Chrysanthemum latisolium minus. The lesser Dutch Marigold.


The Place.
They be found every where in untilled places of Germany, and in woods, but
are strangers in England.

The Time.
They are to be seen with their flowers in June, in the gardens of the
Low Countries.

The Names.
Golden Marigold is called in High Dutch (...). There are that would have it to
be Alisma Dioscoridis; which is also called Damasonium, but improperly;
therefore we must rather call it Chrysanthemum latifolium, than rashly
attribute unto it the name of Alisma. This plant indeed is a Doronicum; and the
figure in the precedent chapter by Clusius is set forth by the name of
Doronicum 6. Pannonicum: Matthiolus calls this plant Alisma: Gesner, Caltha
Alpina: Dodonaeus, Chrysanthemum latifolium: Pena and (...), Nardus Celtica
altera. Now in the Historia Lugd. it is set forth in in four several places
by three of the former names; and page 1169. by the name of Ptarmicamontana
Daleschampij.

The Temperature.
It is hot and dry in the second degree being green, but in the third being
dry.

The Virtues.
The women that live about the Alps wonderfully (...) the root of this (...)
suffocation of the mother, the stoppings of the courses, and (...) (...) (...)
and (...) like (...) in maids. Histor. Lugd.

CHAP. 256. Of Corne-Marigold.
The Description.
1 Corn Marigold or golden Corn flower has a soft stalk, hollow, and of a
green color, whereupon do grow great leaves, much hackt and cut into diverse
sections, and placed confusedly or out of order: upon the top of the branches
stand fair starlike flowers, yellow in the middle, and such likewise is the
pale or border of leaves that compasses the soft bal in the middle, like that
in the middle of Camomill flowers, of a reasonable pleasant smell. The roots are
full of strings.

The figure that was in the first place was of the Chrysanthemum of (...),
which is a stranger with (...), and the (...) of it are much like those of
(...), or (...), the flower is somewhat like, but larger than that of (...),
and wholly yellow.
1 (...) segetum. Corn Marigold.
2 Chrysanthemum Valentinum. Corn Marigold of Valentia.


2 The (...) flower of Valentia has a thick fat stalk, rough, uneven, and
somewhat (...), whereupon do grow long leaves, consisting of a long middle rib,
with diverse little fetherlike leaves set thereon without order. The flowers
grow at the top of the (...), composed of a yellow thrummie matter, such as in
the middle of the Camomill flowers, and is (...) like the Corn Marygold last
described, saving it does want that border or pale of little (...) that do
(...) the ball or head: the root is thick, tough, and disperseth it (...)
(...) abroad.

3 To these may be added diverse other, as the (...) Alpina, of Clusius, and his
(...) Creticum, and others. The first of these small mountain Marigolds of
Clusius (...) description has leaves like those of white Wormwood, but
greener and thicker: the stalks grow some handful (...), set with few and much
divided leaves; and at the tops, as in an vmbell, they carry some dozen flowers
more or less, not much unlike in shape, color, and smell, to those of the
common Iacobaea, or Ragwoort. The root is somewhat thick, and puts forth many
long white fibers. It flowers in July and August, and grows upon the Alps of
Stiria. Clusius calls it Chrysanthemum Alpinum. 1.

4 The second of his description has many leaves at the root, like to the
leaves of the male Sothernwood, but of a lighter and brighter green, and of no
unpleasant smell, though the taste be bitterish and ungrateful: in the midst
of the leaves grow up stalks some foot high, divided at their tops into sundry
branches, which carry each of them two or three flowers bigger than, yet like
those of the common Cammomill, but without smell, and wholly yellow: the root is
fibrous, blackish, and much spreading. It flowers in August, and grows in the
like places as the former. Bauhine judges this to be the (...) montana
Artemissiae tenuifoliae facie of the (...). and the Ageratum ferulaceum in the
Hist. Lugd. But I cannot be of that opinion; yet I judge the Achillaea montana,
and Ageratum ferulaceum to be but of the same plant. But different from this,
and that chiefly in that it has many more, and those much less flowers than
those of the plant here figured and described.

5 Now should I have given you the history of the Chrysanthemum Creticum of
the same Author, but that my friend Mr. Goodyer has saved me the labor, by
sending an exact description thereof, together with one or two others of this
kind, which I think fit here to give you.

3 Chrysanthemum Alpinum 1. Clus. Small mountain Marigold.
4 Chrysanthemum Alpimum 2. Clus. The other Alpine Marigold.


Chrysanthemum Creticum primum Clusij, page 334. The stalks are round,
straked, branched, hard, of a whitish green, with a very little pith within;
near three foot high: the leaves grow out of order, divided into many parts,
and those again snipt or divided, of the color of the stalks: at the tops of
the stalks and branches grow great flowers, bigger than any of the rest of the
Corne-floures, forth of scaly heads, consisting of twelve or more broad leaves
apeece, notched at the top, of a shining golden color at the first, which
after turn to a pale, whitish, or very light yellow, and grow round about a
large yellow ball, of smell somewhat sweet. The flowers past, there comes
abundance of seed closely compact or thrust together, and it is short, blunt at
both ends, straked, of a salve color, somewhat flat, and of a reasonable
bigness. The 5 Chrysanthemum Creticum. Candy Corn Marigold.
root is whitish, near a fingers bigness, short, with many threads hanging
thereat, and perishes when the seed is ripe; and at the Spring grows up
again by the falling of the seed.

Chrysanthemum Baeticum Boelij, inscriptum. The stalks are round, straked,
reddish brown, divided into branches, containing a spungious white pith within,
a cubite high: the leaves grow out of order, without footstalkes, about three
inches long, and an inch broad, notched about the edges, not at all divided, of
a dark green color: the flowers grow at the tops of the stalks and
branches, forth of great scaly heads, containing twenty leaves a piece or
more, notched at the top, of a shining yellow color, growing about a round
yellow ball, of a reasonable good smell, very like those of the common
Chrysanthemum segetum: the seed grows like the other, and is very small,
long, round, crooked and whitish: the root is small, whitish, threddie, and
perishes also when the seed is ripe.

Chrysanthemum tenuifolium Baeticum Boelij. The stalks are round, small,
straked, reddish, somewhat hairie, branched, a cubit high, or higher: the
leaves are small, much divided, iagged, and very like the leaves of
Cotulafaetida: the flowers are yellow, shining like gold, composed of thirteen
or fourteen leaves a piece, notched at the top, set about a yellow ball, also
like the common Chrysanthemum segetum: the seed grows amongst white flattish
scales, which are closely compacted in a round head together, and are small,
flat, grayish, and broad at the top: the root is small, whitish, with a few
threads, and dies when the seed is ripe. July 28. 1621. John Goodyer.

The Place.
The first grows among corn, and where corn has been growing: it is found
in some places with leaves more iagged, and in others less.

The second is a stranger in England.

The Time.
They flower in July and August.

The Names.
These plants are called by one name in Greek, of the golden glittering
color, (...): in High Dutch, Sant Johans blum: in Low Dutch, Uokelaer: in
English, Corn Marigold, yellow Corn flower, and golden Corn flower.

There be diverse other flowers called Chrysanthemum also, as Batrachion, a
kind of yellow Crowfoot, Heliochryson, but these golden flowers differ from
them.

The Temperature.
They are thought to be of a mean temperature between heat and moisture.

The Virtues.
The stalks and leaves of Corn Marigold, as Dioscorides says, are eaten as
other pot-herbes are.

The flowers mixed with wax, oil, rosine, and frankincense, and made up into a
seare-cloth, wastes

The herb it self drunk, after the coming forth of the bath, of them that
have the yellow

CHAP. 257. Of Oxe-Eie.
The Description.
1 THe plant which we have called Buphthalmum, or Oxe-eie, has slender stalks
growing from the roots, three, four, or more, a foot high, or higher, about
which be green leaves finely iagged like to the leaves of Fenell, but much
lesser: the flowers in the tops of the stalks are great, much like to
Marigolds, of a light yellow color, with yellow threads in the middle, after
which comes up a little head or knap like to that of red Mathes before
described, called Adonis, consisting of many seeds set together. The roots are
slender, and nothing but strings, like to the roots of black Ellebor, whereof
it has been taken to be a kind.

2 The Oxe-eie which is generally holden to be the true Buphthalmum has many
leaves spredvpon the ground, of a light green color, laid far abroad like
wings, consisting of very many fine iags, set upon a tender middle rib: among
which spring up diverse stalks, stiff and brittle, upon the top whereof do grow
fair yellow leaves, set about a head or ball of thrummie matter, such as in
the middle of Cammomill, like a border or pale. The root is tough and thick,
with certain strings fastened thereto.

3 The white Oxe-eie has small upright stalks of a foot high, whereon do grow
long leaves, composed of diverse small leaves, and those snipt about the edges
like the teeth of a saw. The flowers grow on the tops of the stalks, in shape
like those of the other Oxe-eie; the middle part whereof is likewise made of a
yellow substance, but the pale or border of little leaves, are exceeding white,
like those of great Dasie, called Consolida media vulnerariorum. The root is
long, creeping along under the upper crust of the earth, whereby it greatly
increases. This by the common consent of all writers that have delivered the
history thereof, has not the pale or out leaves of the flower white, as our
Author affirms, but of a bright and perfect yellow color. And this is the
Buphthalmum, of Tragus, Matthiolus, Lobel, Clusius and others.

1 Buphthalmum sive Helleborus niger ferulaceus. Oxe-eie.
2 Buphthalmum verum. The right Oxe-eie.


3 (...) vulgar. White Oxe-eie.


The Place.
The two first grow of themselves in Germany, Bohemia, and in the Gardens of
the Low Countries; of the first I have a plant in my garden. The last grows
in barren pastures and fields almost every where.

The last is also a stranger with us, for any thing that I know or can learn;
neither (...) I conjecture what our Author (...) here: first in that he said
the flowers of this were white, and secondly in that it grew in barren pastures
and fields almost every where.

The Time.
They flower in May and June. The last in August.

The Names.
Touching the naming of the first of those plants the late writers are of
diverse opinions: some would have it to be a kind of Veratrum nigrum, black
Hellebor: other some Consiligo, or Bearefoot; and again, others, Sesamoides;
and some, Elleborastrum: But there be found two kinds of black Ellebor among
the old writers, one with a leaf like unto Laurel, with the fruit of Sesamum:
the other with a leaf like that of the Plane tree, with the seed of Carthamus
or Bastard Saffron. But it is most evident, that this (...), in English,
Oxe-eie, which in this Chapter we in the first place have described, does agree
with neither of these: what form Consiligo is of, we find not among the old
writers. Pliny 26 cap. 7. says, That in his time it was found amongst the
Marsi, and was a present remedy for the infirmity of the lungs of swine, and
of all kind of cattle, though it were but drawn through the ear. Columella
in his 6. book, Chap. 5. does also say, that in the mountains called Marsi
there is very great store thereof, and that it is very helpful to all kind of
cattle, and he tells how and in what manner it must be put into the ear; the
roots also of our Oxe-eie are said to cure certain infirmities of cattle, if
they be put into the (...) or bored ear: but it follows not that for the
same reason it should be Consiligo; and it is an ordinary thing to find out
plants that are of a like force and quality: for Pliny does (...) in his 25
book, 5 chapter, That the roots also of black Ellebor can do the same: it
cures (says he) the cough in cattle, if it be drawn through the ear, and
taken out again the next day at the same hour: which is likewise most certain
by experiments of the country men of our age; who do cure the diseases of
their cattle with the roots of common black Ellebor. The roots of white
Ellebor also do the like, as (...), and after him Hierocles does write: who
notwithstanding do not thrust the roots of white Ellebor into the (...), but
under the skin of the breast called the dewlap: after which manner also Vegetius
Renatus does use Consiligo, in his first book of the curing of cattle,
chapter 12. entitled, Of the cure of the infirmities under the skin: although
in his 3. book, 2. Chapter, de Malleo, he writes, that they also must be
fastened (...) the ear: which things do sufficiently declare, that sundry
plants have oftentimes like faculties: and that it does not at all follow by
the same rea son, that our Ox eye is Consiligo, because it does cure diseases
in Cattle as well as Consiligo doih. But if we must conjecture by the faculties,
Consiligo then should be White Ellebor: for (...) uses Consiligo in the very
same manner that Absyrtus and Hierocles do use white Ellebor. This suspicion is
made the greater, because it is thought that Vegetius has taken this manner of
curing (...) the Grecians; for which cause also most do take Consiligo to be
nothing else but white Ellebor: the which if it be so then shall this present
Oxe-eie much differ from Consiligo; for it is nothing at all like to white
Ellebor.

And that the same is not Sesamoides, either the first or the second, it is
better known, than needful to be confuted.

This same also is improperly called Helleborastrum; for that may aptly be
called Helleborastrum which has the form and likeness of Hellebor: and this
Ox eye is nothing at all like to Ellebore. For all which causes it seems
that none of these names agree with this plant, but only the name Buphthalmum,
with whose description which is extant in Dioscorides this plant does most
aptly agree. We take it to be the right Ox eye; for Ox eye brings sorth
slender soft stalks, and has leaves of the likeness or similitude of Fennel
leaves: the (...) is yellow, bigger than that of Cammomill, even such an one is
this present plant, which does so exquisitly (...) that form or likeness of
Fennel leaves, both in slenderness and manifold iaggednesse of the leaves, as
no other little leafed herb can do better; so that without all doubt this plant
seems to be the true and right Ox eye. Ox eye is called Cachla, or rather
Caliha; but Caliha is Calendula, or Marigold, which we said that our Ox eye in
flower did nearest represent. There are some that would have Buphthalmum or Ox
eye to be Chrysanthemum, yellow Cammomil, and say that Dioscorides has in
sundry places, and by diverse names entreated of this herb; but if those men
had somewhat more diligently weighed Dioscorides his words, they would have bin
of another mind: for although descriptions of either of them do in many things
agree, yet there is no property wanting that may show the plants to differ. The
leaves of Chrysanthemum are said to be divided and cut into many fine iags: and
the leaves of Buphthalmum to be like the leaves of Fennel: for all things that
be finely iagged and cut into many parts have not the likeness of the leaves
of Fennel. Moreover, Dioscorides says, that Chrysanthemum does bring forth a
flower much glittering, but (...) tells not that the flower of Buphthalmum,
or Ox eye is much glittering, neither does the flower of that which we have
set down glitter, so that it can or ought not to be said to glitter much. Do
not these things declare a (...) difference (...) Buphthalmum and
Chrysanthemum, and confirm that which we have set down to be the true and
right Ox eye? We are of that mind, let others think as they will: and they
that would have Chrysanthemum to be Buphthalmum, let them seek out another, if
they deny this to be Ox eye: for that which we and others have described for
Chrysanthemum cannot be the true Buphthalmum or Ox eye: for the leaves of it
are not like Fennel, such as those of the true Buphthalmum ought to be.

The Temperature.
But concerning the faculties Matthiolus says, that all the Physicians and
Apothecaries in (...) mia, use the roots of this Ox eye in stead of those of
black Ellebor, namely for diseases in (...). but he does not affirm that the
roots hereof in medicines are substitutes, or quid pro quo; for, (...) he; I do
remember that I once saw the roots hereof in a sufficient big quantity put by
certain Physicians into decoctions which were made to purge by siege, but they
purged no more than if they had not been put in at all: which thing makes it
most plain, that it cannot be any of the Ellebors, although it has been used
to be fastened through the ears of cattle for certain diseases, and does cure
them as Ellebor does. The roots of Gentian do mightily open the orifices of
Fistulaes, which be too narrow, so do the roots of Aristolochia, or Birthwoort,
or Brionie, or pieces of spunges, which notwithstanding do much differ one from
another in other operations: wherefore though the roots of Ox eye can do
something like unto black Ellebor, yet for all that they cannot perform all
those things that the same can. We know that thorns, stings, splinters of
wood, and such like, bring pain, cause inflammations, draw unto them humors
from the parts near adioining, if they be fastened in any part of the body; no
part of the body is hurt without pain; the which is increased if any thing be
thrust through, or put into the wound: peradventure also if any other thing
beside be put into the slit or bored ear, the same effect would follow which
happened by the root of this plant thrust in; notwithstanding we here affirm
nothing, we only make way for curious men to make more diligent search
touching the operations hereof. Clusius affirms that when he came to Vienna
in Austria, this was vulgarly bought, sold, and used for the true black
Ellebor, the ignorance of the Physicians and Apothecaries in the knowledge of
simples was such to make use of this so far diffe rent plant, when as they had
the true black Hellebor growing plentifully wild within seven miles of the
city, the which afterward upon his admonition, they made use of.

The Virtues.
Dioscorides says, that the flowers of Ox eye made up in a seare-cloth do
assuage and waste away cold hard swellings; and it is reported that if they be
drunk by and by after bathing, they make

CHAP. 258. Of French Marigold, or African Marigold.
The Description.
1 THe great double African Marigold has a great long brown reddish stalk,
crested, furrowed and somewhat knobby, dividing it self toward the top into
other branches; whereupon do grow leaves composed of many small leaves set upon
a middle rib by couples, much like unto the leaves of wild Valerian, bearing
at the top very fair and beautiful double yellow flowers, greater and more
double than the greatest Damask Rose, of a strong smell, but not unpleasant.
The flowers being past, there succeeds long black flat seed: the whole plant
perishes at the first approach of winter.

2 There is little difference between this and the precedent, or last
described, saving that this plant is much lesser, and brings forth more store
of flowers, which makes the difference. And we may therefore call it Flos
Aphricanus minor multiflorus; The small double Africane Marigold.

1 Flos Aphricanus mayor Polyanthos. The great African double Marigold.
3 Flos Aphricanus mayor simplici flore. The great single French Marigold.


3 The single great Africane Marigold has a thick root, with some fibers
annexed thereto; from which rises up a thick stalk chamfered and furrowed,
of the height of two cubits, divided into other small branches; whereupon are
set long leaves, compact or composed of many little leaves like those or the
Ash tree, of a strong smell, yet not very unpleasant: on the top of the
branches do grow yellow single flowers, composed in the middle of a bundle of
yellow thrummes hard thrust together, paled about the edges with a border of
yellow leaves. after which (...) long black seed. The whole plant perishes
with the first frost, and must be sown (...) as the other sorts must be.

4 The common Africane or as they vulgarly term it French Marigold has small
weak and tender branches trailing upon the ground, reeling and leaning this
way and that way, beset with leaves consisting of many particular leaves,
indented about the edges, which being held up against the sun, or to the
light, are seen to be full of holes like a sieue, even as those of Saint John's
woort: The flowers stand at the top of the springie branches forth of long cups
or husks, consisting of eight or ten small leaves, yellow underneath, on the
upper side of a deeper yellow tending to the color of a dark crimson velvet,
as also soft in handling: but to describe the color in words, it is not
possible, but this way; lay upon paper with a pensill a yellow color called
Masticot, which being dry, lay the same over with a little saffron steeped in
water or wine, which sets forth most lively the color. The whole plant is
of a most rank and unwholesome smell, and perishes at the first frost.

4 Flos Aphricanus minor simplici flore. The small French Marigold.


The Place.
They are cherished and sown in gardens every year: they grow every where
almost in Afric of themselves, from whence we first had them, and that was
when Charles the fisth Emperor of Rome made a famous conquest of Tunis;
whereupon it was called Flos Aphricanus, or Flos Tunetanus.

The Time.
They are to be sown in the beginning of April, if the season fall out to be
warm, otherwise they must be sown in a bed of dung, as shall be showed in the
chapter of Cucumbers. They bring forth their pleasant flowers very late, and
therefore there is the more diligence to be used to sow them very early,
because they shall not be overtaken with the frost before their seed be ripe.

The Names.
The Africane or French Marigold is called in Dutch, (...) (...): in high
Dutch, (...) (...), that is, the flower or Gillofloure of India: in Latin,
Cariophillus (...); whereupon the French men call it (...) d'Inde. Cordus
calls it Tanacetum (...), of the likeness the leaves have with Tansie, and
of Peru a Province of America, from whence he thought, it may be, it was first
brought into Europe. Gesner calls it Caltha Aphricana, and says that it is
called in the Carthagenian tongue, Pedua: some would have it to be Petilius
flos Plinij, but not properly: for Petilius slos is an Autumn flower growing
among (...) and brambles. Andreas Lacuna calls it Othonna, which is a
certain herb of the Troglodyres, growing in that part of Arabia which lies
toward Egypt, having leaves full of holes as though they were eaten with
mothes. Galen in his first book of the faculties of Simple medicines, makes
mention of an herb called (...), the juice whereof a certain Centurion did
(...) out of Barbary all Egypt over with so rank a smell, and so loathsome,
as Galen himself durst not so much as taste of it, but conjectured it to be
deadly; yet that Centurion did use it against the extreme pains of the joints,
and it seems to the patients themselves, to be of a very cold temperature;
but doubtless of a poisonsome quality, very near to that of hemlockes.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The unpleasant smell, especial that common sort with single flowers (that
stuffeth the head Lycopersium had) does show that is of a poisonsome and
cooling quality; and also the same is manifested by diverse experiments: for I
remember, says (...), that I did see a boy whose lips and mouth when he
began to chew the flowers did swell extremely; as it has often happened unto
them, that playing or piping with quils or kexes of Hemlockes, do hold them a
while between their lips: likewise he says, we gave to a cat the flowers
with their cups, tempered with fresh cheese, she forthwith mightily swelled,
and a little while after died: also mice that have eaten of the seed thereof
have been found dead. All which things do declare that this herb is of a
venomous and poisonsome faculty, and that they are not to be hearkened unto,
that suppose this herb to be an harmles plant: so to conclude, these plants
are most venomous and full of poison, and therefore not to be touched or
smelled unto, much less used in meat or medicine.

CHAP. 259. Of the flower of the Sun, or the Marigold of Peru.
The Description.
1 THe Indian Sun or the golden flower of Peru is a plant of such stature and
tallness that in one Summer being sown of a seed in April, it has risen up
to the height of fourteen soot in my garden, where one flower was in (...)
three pound and two ounces, and cross overthwart the flower by measure
sixteen inches broad. The stalks are upright and straight, of the bigness of
a strong man's arm, beset with large leaves even to the top, like unto the
great Clot Bur: at the top of the stalk comes (...) for the most part one
flower yet many times there spring out sucking buds, which come to no
perfection: this great flower is in shape like to the Cammomil flower, beset
round about with a pale or border of goodly yellow leaves, in shape like the
leaves of the flowers of white Lillies: the middle part whereof is made as it
were of vnshorn velvet, or some curious cloth wrought with the needle, which
brave work; if you do thoroughly view and mark well, it seems to be an
innumerable sort of small flowers, resembling the nose or nozell of a
candlestick, broken from the foot thereof: from which small nozell sweateth
forth excellent fine and clear Turpentine, in sight, substance, savor and
taste. The whole plant in like manner being broken, smells of Turpentine:
when the plant grows to maturitie, the flowers fall away, in place whereof
appears the seed, black, and large, much like the seed of Gourds, set as
though a cunning workman had of purpose placed them in very good order, much
like the honiecombes of Bees: the root is white, compact of many strings, which
perish at the first approach of winter, and must be set in most perfect dunged
ground: the manner how, shall be showed when upon the like occasion I shall
speak of Cucumbers and Melons.

1 Flos Solis mayor. The greater Sun flower.
2 Flos Solis minor. The lesser Sun flower.


2 The other golden flower of Peru is like the former, saving that it is
altogether lower, and the leaves more iagged, and very few in number.

3 The male flower of the Sun of the smaller sort has a thick root, hard, and
of a woody substance, with many threddie strings annexed thereto, from which
rises up a gray or russet stalk, to the height of five or six cubits, of the
bigness of ones arm, whereupon are set great broad leaves with long
foot-stalkes, very fragill or easy to break, of an ouerworne green color,
sharp pointed, and somewhat cut or hackt about the edges like a saw: the flower
grows at the top of the stalks, bordered about with a pale of yellow leaves:
the thrummed middle part is blacker than that of the last described. The whole
flower is compassed about likewise with diverse such russet leaves as those are
that do grow lower upon the stalks, but lesser and narrower. The plant and
every part thereof does smell of Turpentine, and the flower yields forth most
clear Turpentine, as my self have noted diverse years. The seed is also long
and black, with certain lines or strakes of white running along the same.
The root and every part thereof perishes when it has perfected his seed.

4 The female or Marigold Sun flower has a thick and wooddie root, from which
rises up a straight stem, dividing it self into one or more branches, set
with smooth leaves sharp pointed, slightly indented about the edges. The
flowers grow at the top of the branches, of a faint yellow color, the middle
part is of a deeper yellow tending to blackness, of the form and shape of a
single Marigold, whereupon I have named it the Sun Marigold. The seed as yet
I have not observed.

The Place.
These plants do grow of themselves without setting or sowing, in Peru, and in
diverse other provinces of America, from whence the seeds have been brought
into these parts of Europe. There has been seen in Spain and other hot
regions a plant sown and nourished up from seed, to attain to the height of
24. foot in one year.

The Time.
The seed must be set or sown in the beginning of April if the weather be
temperate, in the most fertile ground that may be, and where the Sun has most
power the whole day.

The Names.
The flower of the Sun is called in Latin Flos Solis, taking that name from
those that have reported it to turn with the Sun, the which I could never
observe, although I have endeavored to find out the truth of it; but I rather
think it was so called because it does resemble the radiant beams of the Sun,
whereupon some have called it Corona Solis, and Sol Indianus, the Indian Sun
flower: others have called it Chrysanthemum (...), or the golden flower of
Peru: in English, the flower of the Sun, or the Sun flower.

The Temperature.
They are thought to be hot and dry of complexion.

The Virtues.
There has not any thing been set down either of the ancient or later writers
concerning the

The same buds with the stalks near unto the top (the hairinesse being taken
away) broiled upon

CHAP. 260. Of Jerusalem Artichoke.
ONe may well by the English name of this plant perceive that those that
vulgarly impose names upon plants have little either judgment or knowledge of
them. For this plant has no similitude in leaf, stalk, root or manner of
growing with an Artichoke, but only a little similitude of taste in the
dressed root; neither came it from Jerusalem or out of Afia, but out of
America, whence Fabius Columna one of the first setters of it forth fitly uames
it Aster Peruuianus tuberosus, and Flos solis Farnesianus, because it so much
resembles the Flos solis, and for that he first observed it growing in the
garden of Cardinal Farnesius, who had procured roots thereof from the West
Indies. Pelliterius calls this (...) Indicum tuberosum; and (...) in his
Prodromus sets this forth by the name of (...) latifolium Brasilianum; but in
his Pinax he has it by the name of Helianthemum Indicum tuberosum. Also our
Countreyman Mr. Parkinson has exactly delivered the history of this by the
name of Battatas de Canada, Englishing it Potatoes of Canada: now all these
that have written and mentioned it, bring it from America, but from far
different places, as from Peru, Brasil, and Canada: but this is not much
material, seeing it now grows so well and plentifully in so many places of
England. I will now deliver you the History, as I have received it from my often
mentioned friend Mr. Goodyer, who, as you may see by the date, took it
presently upon the first (...) into England.

Flos Solis Pyramidalis. Jerusalem Artichoke.


The Description.
Flos solis Pyramidalis, parvo flore, tuberosa radice. (...) Indicum quorundam.

1 THis wonderful increasing plant has growing up from one root, one,
sometimes two, three or more round green rough hairy straked stalks, commonly
about twelve foot high, sometimes sixteen foot high or higher, as big as a
child's arm, full of white spungious pith within. The leaves grow all along
the stalks out of order, of a light green color, rough, sharp pointed, about
eight inches broad, and ten oreleuen inches long, deeply notched or indented
about the edges, very like the leaves of the common flos solis Peruanus, but
nothing crompled, and not so broad. The stalks divide themselves into many
long branches even from the roots to their very tops, bearing leaves smaller
and smaller toward the tops, making the herb appear like a little tree,
narrower and slenderer toward the top, in fashion of a steeple or Pyramide. The
flowers with us grow only at the tops of the stalks and branches, like
those of the said flos solis, but no bigger than our common single Marigold,
consisting of twelve or thirteen straked sharp pointed bright yellow
bordering leaves, growing forth of a scaly small hairie head, with a small
yellow thrummie matter within. These flowers by reason of their late (...),
which is commonly two or three weeks after Michaelmas, never bring their seed
to perfection, and it makes show of abundance of small heads near the tops of
the stalks and branches forth of the bosoms of the leaves, which never open
and flower with us, by reason they are destroyed with the frosts, which
otherwise it seems would be a goodly spectacle. The stalk sendes forth many
small creeping roots, whereby it is fed or nourished, full of hairie threddes
even from the upper part of the earth, spreading far abroad: amongst which
from the maine root grow forth many tuberous roots, clustering together,
sometimes fastened to the great root it self, sometimes growing on long
strings a foot or more from the root, raising or heauing up the earth above
them, and sometimes appearing above the earth, producing from the increase of
one root, thirty, forty, or fifty in number, or more, making in all usually
above a pecke, many times near half a bushel, if the soil be good. These
tuberous roots are of a reddish color without, of a soft white substance
within, bunched or bumped out many ways, sometimes as big as a man's fist, or
not so big, with white noses or peaks where they will sprout or grow the next
year. The stalks bowed down, and some part of them covered over with earth,
send forth small creeping threddie roots, and also tuberous roots like the
(...), which I have found by experience. These tuberous roots will abide (...)
in the earth all winter, though the stalks and roots by the which they were
nourished utterly rot and perish away, and will begin to spring up again at
the beginning of May, seldom sooner.

The Place.
Where this plant grows naturally I know not, in Anno 1617 I received two
small roots thereof from Master Franqueuill of London, no bigger than hens
eggs: the one I planted, and the other I gave to a friend, mine brought me a
pecke of roots, wherewith I stored Hampshire.

The Virtues.
These roots are dressed diverse ways; some boil them in water, and after
stew them with sack John Goodyer.

CHAP. 261. Of Cammomill.
1 Chamaemelum. Cammomill.
2 Chamaemelum nudum odoratum. Sweet naked Cammomill.


The Description.
1 TO distinguish the kinds of Cammomils with sundry descriptions would be but
to enlarge the volume, and small profit would thereby redound to the Reader,
considering they are so well known to all: notwithstanding it shall not be
amiss to say something of them, to keep the order and method of the book,
hitherto observed. The common Cammomill has many weak and feeble branches
trailing upon the ground, taking hold upon the top of the earth, as it runs,
whereby it greatly increases. The leaves are very sine, and much iagged or
deeply cut, of a strong sweet smell: among which come forth the flowers like
unto the field Daisie, bordered about the edge with a pale of white leaves: the
middle part is yellow, composed of such thrums close thrust together, as is
that of the Daisie. The root is very small and threddy.

2 The second kind of Cammomill has leaves, roots, stalks, and creeping
branches like the precedent: the flowers grow at the tops of small tender
stems, which are nothing else but such yellow thrummie matter as is in the
midst of the rest of the Cammomils, without any pale or border of white
flowers, as the others have: the whole plant is of a pleasing sweet smell;
whereupon some have given it this addition, Odoratum.

3 This third Cammomil differs not from the former, saving that the leaves
hereof are very much doubled with white leaves, insomuch that the yellow thrum
in the middle is but little seen, and the other very single, wherein consists
the difference.

3 Chamaemelum Anglicum flore multiplici. Double floured Cammomill.
4 Chamaemelum Romanum. Roman Cammomil.


4 Roman Cammomill has many slender stalks, yet stiffer and stronger than
any of the others, by reason whereof it stands more upright, and does not
creep upon the earth as the others do. The leaves are of a more whitish
color, tending to the color of the leaves of Woad. The flowers be likewise
yellow in the middle, and paled about with a border of small white flowers.

The Place.
These plants are set in gardens both for pleasure and also profit.

The Time.
They flower most part of all the Summer.

The Names.
Cammomill is called (...): of some, Anthemis, and (...), and also
Leucanthemon, especially that double floured Cammomill: which Greek name is
taken from the whitenes of his flower: in English, Cammomill: it is called
Cammomil, because the flowers have the smell of (...), an apple, which is
plainly perceived in common Cammomill.

The Temperature.
Cammomill, says Galen, is hot and dry in the first degree, and is of thin
parts: it is of force to digest, slacken, and rarifie; also it is thought to be
like the Rose in thinness of parts, coming to the operation of oil in heat,
which are to man familiar and temperate: wherefore it is a special help
against wearisomenesse; it eases and mitigateth pain, it mollifieth and
suppleth, and all these operations are in our vulgar Cammomill, as common
experience teaches, for it (...) moderately, and dries little.

The Virtues.
Cammomill is good against the collicke and stone; it provoke urine, and is
most singular in

Oil of Cammomill is exceeding good against all manner of ache and pain,
bruisings, shrinking

The decoction of Cammomill made in wine and drunk, is good against coldness
in the stomach,

The Egyptians have used it for a remedy against all cold agues; and they did
therefore consecrate Galen says) to their Deities.

The decoction made in white wine and drunk, expels the dead child, and
secondine or afterbirth,

The herb boiled in posset Ale, and given to drink, eases the pain of the
chest coming

The herb used in baths provoke sweat, rarifieth the skin, and opens the
pores: briefly,

The oil compounded of the flowers performs the same, and is a remedy
against all wearisomenesse,

CHAP. 262. Of May-weed, or wild Cammomill.
The Kinds.
THere be three kinds of wild Cammomill, which are generally called in Latin
Cotulae; one stinking, and two other not stinking: the one has his flower all
white throughout the compass, and also in the middle; and the other yellow.
Besides these there is another with very fair double flowers void of smell,
which a Kentish Gentleman called Mr. Bartholmew Lane found growing wild in a
field in the Isle of Thanet, near unto a house called Queakes, sometime the
house of Sir Henry Crispe. Likewise Mr. Hesketh, before remembered, found it in
the garden of his Inn at Barnet, if my memory fail me not, at the sign of
the red Lion, or near unto it, and in a poor woman's garden as he was riding
into Lancashire.

The double floured May-weed, the last year, being 1632. I (being in company
with Mr. William Broad, Mr. James Clarke, and some other London Apothecaries in
the Isle of Thanet) found it growing wild upon the cliffe side, close by the
town of Margate, and in some other places of the Island.

The Description.
1 MAy-weed brings forth round stalks, green, brittle, and full of juice,
parted into many branches thicker and higher than those of Cammomil; the leaves
in like manner are broader, and of a blackish green color. The flowers are
like in form and color, yet commonly larger, and of a rank and naughty
smell: the root is woody, and perishes when the seed is ripe. The whole plant
stinketh, and gives a rank smell.

This herb varies, in that it is found sometimes with narrower, and
otherwhiles with broader leaves; as also with a strong unpleasant smell, or
without any smell at all: the flowers also are single, or else (which is
seldom found) very double.

2 The yellow May-weed has a small and tender root, from which rises up a
feeble stalk dividing it (...) into many other branches, whereupon do grow
leaves not unlike to Cammomill, but thinner, and fewer in number. The flowers
grow at the top of the stalks, of a gold yellow color, This I take to be no
other than the Buphthalmum verum of our Author, formerly described in the
second place of the 257. chapter.

3 This mountain Cammomill has leaves somewhat deeply cut in almost to the
middle rib, thick also and iuycie, of a bitterish taste, and of no pleasant
smell: the stalks are weak, and some foot high, carrying at their tops single
flowers, bigger, yet like those of Cammomill, yellow in the middle, with a
border of twenty or more long white leaves, encompassing it. It increases
much, as Cammomill does, and has creeping roots. It is found upon the Stirian
Alps, and floureth in July and August. Clusius has set this forth by the name
of Leucanthemum Alpinum.

1 (...) (...). May-weed.
3 Leucanthemum Alpinum Clusij. Wild Mountain Cammomill.


The Place.
They grow in Corn fields near unto path ways, and in the borders of fields.

The Time.
Thee flower in July and August.

The Names.
May-weed is called in shops Cotula foetida: of Leonhartus Fuchsius,
Parthenium, and Virginea, but not truly: of others, (...): in High Dutch,
(...): in Low Dutch, (...): in French, Espargoutte: in English, May-weed, wild
Cammomill, and stinking Mathes.

The Temperature and Virtues.
May-weed is not used for meat nor medicine, and therefore the faculties are
unknown; yet all

It is an unprofitable weed among corn, and raises blisters upon the hands of
the weeders and reapers.

CHAP. 263. Of Pellitorie of Spain.
The Description.
1 PYrethrum, in English, Pellitorie of Spain (by the name whereof some do
improperly call another plant, which is indeed the true Imperatoria, or
Master-wort, and not Pellitorie) has great and fat leaves like unto Fennel,
trailing upon the ground: amongst which, immediately from the root rises up a
fat great stem, bearing at the top a goodly flower, fashioned like the great
single white Daisie, whose bunch or knob in the midst is yellow like that of
the Daisie, and bordered about with a pale of small leaves, exceeding white on
the upper side, and under of a (...) purple color: the root is long, of the
bigness of a finger, very hot, and of a burning taste.

2 The wild Pellitorie grows up like unto wild Cheruile, resembling the
leaves of Caucalis, of a quick and nipping taste, like the leaves of
Dittander, or Pepper-wort: the flowers grow at the top of slender stalks, in
small tufts or spoky vmbels, of a white color: the root is tough, and of the
bigness of a little finger, with some threads thereto belonging, and of a
quick biting taste.

1 Pyrethrum officinarum. Pellitorie of Spain.
2 Pyrethrum syluestre. Wild Pellitorie.


The Place.
It grows in my garden very plentifully.

The Time.
It floureth and seedeth in July and August.

The Names.
Pellitorie of Spain is called in Greek (...), by reason of his hot and
fiery taste: in shops also Pyrethrum: in Latin, Saliuaris: in Italian,
Pyrethro: in Spanish, Pelitre: in French, Pied d' Alexandre, that is to say,
Pes Alexandrinus, or Alexanders foot: in high and low Dutch, (...): in English,
Pellitorie of Spain; and of some, Bertram, after the Dutch name: and this is
the right (...), or Pellitorie of Spain; for that which diverse here in England
take to be the right, is not so, as I have before noted.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The root of Pellitorie of Spain is very hot and burning, by reason whereof it
takes away the Dioscorides writes.

The same is with good success mixed with Antidotes or counterpoysons which
serve against (...), the apoplexy, the falling sickness, the trembling of the
sinews, and palsies, for it is a singular good and effectual remedy for all
cold and continual infirmities of the head and sinews.

(...) taken with honey is good against all cold diseases of the brain.

The root chewed in the mouth draws forth great store of rheum, slime, and
filthy waterish

If it be boiled in Vinegar, and kept warm in the mouth it has the same
effect.

The oil wherein Pellitorie has been boiled is good to anoint the body to
procure sweating,

It is most singular for the Surgeons of the Hospitals to put into their
unctions contra (...) morbum, and such other diseases that be cousin germans
thereunto.

CHAP. 264. Of Leopards bane.
Formerly the figure that was in the first place should have been in the
second, and the first and second were confounded in the description.
1 Doronicum minus officinarum. Small Leopards bane.
Formerly the figure that was in the first place should have been in the
second, and the first and second were confounded in the description.
2 Doronicum maius Officinarum. Great Leopards bane.


The Description.
1 OF this Plant Doronicum there be sundry kinds, whereof I will only touch
four: Dodonaeus improperly calls it Aconitum pardalianches, which has
happened through the negligence of Dioscorides and Theophrastus, who in
describing Doronicum, have not only omitted the flowers thereof, but have
committed that negligence in many and diverse other plants, leaving out in many
plants which they have described, the special accidents; which has not a
little troubled the study and determination of the best herbarists of late
years, not knowing certainly what to determine and set down in so ambiguous
a matter, some taking it one way, and some another, and some esteeming it to be
Aconitum. But for the better understanding hereof, know that this word
Aconitum, as it is a name attributed to diverse plants, so it is to be
considered, that all plants called by this name are malignant and venomous, as
with the juice and root whereof such as hunted after wild and noisome beasts
were wont to embrue and dip their arrows, the sooner and more surely to
dispatch and slay the beast in chase. But for the proof of the goodness of
this Doronicum and the rest of his kind, know also, That Lobel writes of one
called John de Vroede, who ate very many of the roots at sundry times, and
found them very pleasant in taste, and very comfortable. But to leave
controversies, circumstances, and objections which here might be brought in and
alleged, assure your selves that this plant Doronicum minus Officinarum (whose
roots Pena reports to have found plentifully growing upon the Pede-mountaine
hills and certain high places in France) has many leaves spread upon the
ground, somewhat like Plantaine: among which rise up many tender hairy stalks
some handful and an half high, bearing at the top certain single yellow
flowers, which when they fade change into down, and are carried away with the
wind. The roots are thick and many, very crookedly crossing and tangling one
within another, resembling a Scorpion, and in some years do grow in our
English gardens into infinite numbers.

3 Doronicum radice repent. Cray-fish Wolfes bane.
4 Doronicum brachiata radice. Winged Wolfes bane.


2 The second kind of Dorouicum has larger leaves than the former, but round,
and broader, almost like the small leaves of the Clot or Burre; among which
rises up a stalk scarce a cubit high: the flowers are like the former: the
root is longer and bigger than the former, barred over with many scaly barks,
in color white, and shining like white marble, having on each side one arm or
finne, not unlike to the sea Shrimpe called Squilla marina, or rather like the
ribs or scales of a Scorpions body, and is sweet in taste.

3 The third kind of Doronicum, growing naturally in great abundance in the
mountains of France, is also brought into and acquainted with our English
grounds, bearing very large leaves of a light yellowish green, and hairy like
Pilosella, or Cucumis agrestis. The stalks are a cubit high, having at the top
yellow flowers like Buphthalmum, or Consolida media vulnerariorum: all the root
is barred and welted over with scales like the tail of a Scorpion, white of
color, and in (...) sweet, with some bitterness, yielding forth much
clamminesse, which is very astringent.

4 The fourth kind hereof is found in the woody mountains about Turin and
Sauoy, very like unto the former, saving that the leaves are somewhat rougher,
the flowers greater, and the stalks higher. But to be short, each of these
kinds are so like one another, that in show, taste, smell, and manner of
growing they seem to be as it were all one: therefore it were superfluous to
stand upon their variety of names, Pardalianches, Myoctonum, Thelyphonum,
(...), and such like, of Theophrastus, Dioscorides, Pliny, or any of the new
Writers, which names they have given unto Doronicum; for by the opinion of the
most skillful in plants, they are but Synonimies of one kind of plant. And
though these old writers speak of the hurtful qualities of these plants; yet
experience teaches us that they have written what they have heard and read,
and not what they have known and proved; for it is apparent, that Doronicum
(by the consent of the old and new writers) is used as an antidote or certain
treacle, as well in the confections de Gemmis Mesuae, as in Electuario
Aromatum. And though Matthiolus disclaimeth against the use thereof, and
calls it Pardalianches, that is, Wolfes bane; yet let the Learned know, that
quantitas, non (...) as, nocet: for though Saffron be comfortable to the heart,
yet if you give thereof, or of musk, or any such cordial thing, too great a
quantity, it kills the party which receives it.

5 Doronicum angustifolium Austriacum. Narrow leaued Wolfes bane.
6 Doronicum Stiriacum flore amplo; Large floured Wolfes bane.


5 To these four formerly intended by our Author, may we fitly add some
others out of Clusius. The first of these has a stalk some foot high, soft,
rough, and crested: the (...) are few, thick, narrow, long, very green and
shining, yet hairy on their upper sides, but smooth on the lower sides, and of
a lighter green; yet those that adorn the stalk are narrower: there grows
commonly at the top of the stalk one single flower of the shape and bigness
of the common Doronicum described in the second place, but of a brighter
yellow: the seed is little and blackish, and is carried away with the wind:
the root is small, blackish, and ioynted, having somewhat thick white fibers,
and an aromaticke taste. This (...) in July and August, and grows in rockie
places upon the highest Alps. Clusius (the first and only describer thereof)
calls it Doronicum 2. sieve Austriacum 1.

6 This grows somewhat higher than the last described, and has much broader
and rounder leaves, and those full of veins, and snipt about the edges. The
knots and osf-sets of the roots descend not down, but run on the (...) of the
ground, and so send forth fibers on each side, to (...) then and attract
nourishment. The flower is like that of the former, but much larger. This
grows in the high mountainous places of Stiria, and flowers at the same time
as the former. Clusius calls this Doronicum 4. Stiriacum.

7 This is the largest of all the rest, and has a stalk two cubits or more
high, of the thickness of ones little finger, crested, rough, and toward the
top divided into sundry branches. The leaves next to the root are round,
wrinkled, hairy, and fastened to a long stalk: those toward the top of the
stalk are longer and narrower, and ingirt the stalk at their setting on. The
flowers are large and yellow, like to the other plants of this kind: the seed
also is carried away with the wind, and is longish, and of a greenish color:
the root is knotty or ioynted like to a little Shrimpe, and of a whitish green
color. This flowers in June or July, and grows upon the like places as the
former. Clusius calls this Doronicum 7. Austriacum 3.

7 Doronicum maximum. The greatest Wolfe-bane.


The Place.
The place is sufficiently set forth in the description; yet you shall
understand, that I have the two first in my (...); the second has been found
(...) gathered in the cold mountains of Northumberland, by Dr. Penny lately of
London deceased, a man of much experience and knowledge in Simples, whose death
my self and many others do greatly bewail.

The Time.
They flower in the months of June and July.

The Names.
Concerning their names I have already spoken; yet since I would be glad that
our English (...) may know how to call it, they may term Doronicum by this
name, Cray-fish Pisse-a-bed, because the flower is like Dandelion, which is
called Pisse-a-bed.

Our Author certainly at the beginning of this chapter did not well understand
what he said, when he affirms, That the reason of the not well knowing the
Doronicum of the Ancients was, [through the negligence of Dioscorides and
Theophrastus, who in describing Doronicum, etc.] Now it is manifest, that
neither of these Authors, nor any of the ancient Greeks ever so much as named
Doronicum: but that which he should have said, was, That the want of exact
describing the Aconitum thelyphonon in Theophrastus, and Aconitum Pardalianches
in Dioscorides, (which are judged to be the same plant and all one with our
Doronicum) has been the cause, that the controversy which Matthiolus and
others have of late raised cannot be fully determined; which is, Whether that
the vulgar Doronicum, used in shops, and described in this chapter, be the
Aconitum (...)? Matthiolus affirms it is, and much and vehemently exclaimes
against the use thereof in cordial Electuaries, as that which is of a most
pernicious and deadly quality, because that (as he affirms) it will kill
dogs: now Dodonaeus also seems to incline to his opinion: but others (and not
without good reason) deny it; as Gesner in his Epistles, who made often (...)
of it upon himself: part of his words are set down hereafter by our Author
(being translated out of Dodonaeus) and some part also (...) shall find added
in the end of the virtues: and these are other some; Plura alia nunc omitto,
quibus ostendere liquido possem, nec Doronicum nostrum, (...) Aconitum vllo
modo esse venenatum homini. Canibus autem letiferum essescio, non solum si
drachmarum 4. sed (...) si vnius pondere sumant. And before he said, quasi non
(...) multa canibus sint venena, quae homini (...) sunt; vt de asparago fertur.
Of the same opinion with Gesner is Pena and Lobel, who, (...). p. 290, and 291.
do largely handle this matter, and exceedingly deride and scoff at Matthiolus,
(...) his vehement declaiming against the use thereof. Now briefly my opinion
is this, That the Doronicum here mentioned is not that mentioned and written of
by (...) and the Arabians; neither is it the Aconitum Pardalianches of (...),
nor of so malignant a quality as (...) would have it; for I my self also have
often eaten of it, and that in a pretty quantity, without the (...) offense.

The Nature and Virtues.
I have sufficiently spoken of that for which I have warrant to write, both
touching their natures

These herbs are mixed with compound medicines that mitigate the pain of the
eyes, and by

It is reported and asfirmed, that it kills Panthers, Swine, Wolves, and all
kinds of wild Theophrastus says, That it kills Cattle, Sheep, Oxen, and
all foure-footed beasts, within the compass of one day, not by taking it
inwardly only, but if the herb or root be tied unto their privy parts. Yet he
writes further, That the root being drunk is a remedy against the stinging
of Scorpions; which shows, that this herb or the root thereof is not deadly
to man, but to diverse beasts only: which thing also is found out by trial and
manifest experience; for Conrade Gesner (a man in our time singularly learned,
and a most diligent searcher of many things) in a certain Epistle written to
Adolphus Occo, shows, That he himself has oftentimes inwardly taken the
root hereof green, dry, whole, preserved with honey, and also beaten to
powder; and that even the very same day in which he wrote these things, he
had drunk with warm water two drams of the roots made into fine powder,
neither felt he any hurt thereby: and that he oftentimes also had given the
same to his sick Patients, both by it self, and also mixed with other things,
and that very luckily. Moreover, the (...) in stead of Doronicum do use
(though amiss) the roots thereof without any manifest danger.

That this (...) kills dogs, it is very certain, and found out by trial:
which thing Matthiolus

I have (says Gesner) often with very good success prescribed it to my
Patients, both alone, as Vertigo and falling sickness: sometimes also I mix
therewith Gentian, the powder of Misle-toe, and (...): thus it works admirable
effects in the Epilepsie, if the use thereof be continued for some time.

CHAP. 265. Of Sage.
The Description.
1 THe great Sage is very full of stalks, four square, of a woody substance,
parted into branches, about the which grow broad leaves, long, wrinckled,
rough, whitish, very like to the leaves of wild Mullein, but rougher, and not
so white, like in roughness to woollen cloth threadbare: the flowers stand
forked in the tops of the branches like those of dead Nettle, or of Clarie, of
a purple blew color; in the place of which does grow little blackish seeds, in
small husks. The root is hard and woody sending forth a number of little
strings.

2 The lesser Sage is also a shrubby plant, spread into branches like to the
former, but lesser: the stalks hereof are tenderer: the leaves be long,
lesser, narrower, but not less rough; to which there do grow in the place
wherein they are fixed to the stalk, two little leaves standing on either side
one right against another, somewhat after the manner of (...) or little (...):
the flowers are eared blew like those of the former: the root also is woody:
both of them are of a certain strong smell, but nothing at all offensive; and
that which is the lesser is the better.

3 This Indian Sage has diverse branches of a woody substance, whereon do
grow small leaves, long, rough, and narrow, of an ouerworne color, and of a
most sweet and fragrant smell. The flowers grow along the top of the
branches, of a white color, in form like the precedent. The root is tough and
woody.

1 Saluia mayor. Great Sage.
2 Saluia minor. Small Sage.


4 The Mountain Sage has an upright stalk smooth and plain, whereupon do
grow (...) rough and rugged leaves, slightly nicked, and unevenly indented
about the edges, (...) an (...) color, sharp pointed, and of a rank smell:
the flowers grow along the top of the stalk, (...) shape like those of
Rosemarie, of a whitish red color. The root is likewise woody.

5 We have in our gardens a kind of Sage, the leaves whereof are reddish; part
of those red leaves are striped with white, others mixed with white, green,
and red, even as Nature list to play with such plants. This is an elegant
variety, and is called Saluia variegata elegans, Variegated or painted Sage.

6 We have also another, the leaves whereof are for the most part white,
somewhat mixed with green, often one leaf white, and another green, even as
Nature list, as we have said. This is not so rare as the former, nor near so
beautiful, wherefore it may be termed Saluia variegata vulgaris, Common
painted Sage.

7 There is kept in some of our chief gardens a fine Sage, which in shape and
manner of growing resembles the smaller Sage, but in smell and taste has some
affinity with Wormwood; whence it may be termed Saluia Absint hites, or
Wormwood Sage. Bauhine only has mentioned this, and that in the fourth place
in his Pinax, page 237. by the name of Saluiaminor altera: and he adds, Haec
odore and sapore est (...), floreque rubente: That is, This has the smell and
taste of Wormwood, and a red flower: but ours (if my memory fail me not)
has a whitish flower; it is a tender plant, and must be carefully preserved
from the extremity of Winter. I first saw this Sage with Mr. Cannon, and by
him it was communicated to some others.

3 Saluia Indica. Indian Sage.
4 Saluia Alpina. Mountain Sage.
8 Saluia Cretica (...). Apple-bearing Sage of Candy.
8 Saluia Cretica non (...). Candy Sage without Apples.


8 This which we here give you has pretty large leaves, and those also very
hairy on the under side, but rough on the upper side like as the ordinary
Sage. The stalks are rough and hairie, four square below, and round at their
tops. The flowers in their growing and shape are like those of the ordinary,
but of a whitish purple color; and fading, they are each of them succeeded by
three or (...) seeds, which are larger than in other Sages, and so fill their
seed-vessels, that they show like berries. The smell of the whole plant is
somewhat more vehement than that of the ordinary: the Jeaues also have
sometimes little ears or appendices, as in the smaller or Pig-Sage: and in
Candy (the natural place of the growth) it bears excrescences, or Apples (if
we may so term them) of the bigness of large (...), or Oke-Apples: whence
Clusius has given you two figures by the same titles as I here present the
same to your view. Matthiolus, Dodonaeus, and others also have made mention
hereof.

The Place.
These kinds of Sage grow not wild in England: I have them all in my garden:
most of them are very common.

The fine or elegant painted Sage was first found in a country garden, by Mr.
John Tradescant, and by him imparted to other lovers of plants.

The Time.
These Sages flower in June and July, or later: they are fitly removed and
planted in March.

The Names.
Sage is called in Greek (...): the Apothecaries, the Italians, and the
Spaniards keep the Latin name Saluia: in High Dutch, Salben: in French,
Sauge: in Low Dutch, Sauie: in English, Sage.

The Temperature.
Sage is manifestly hot and dry in the beginning (...) the third degree, or in
the later end of the second; it has adjoined no little astriction or binding.

The Virtues.
Agrippa and likewise Aetius have called it the Holy-herbe, because women with
child if they Agrippa.

Sage is singular good for the head and brain; it quickneth the senses and
memory, strengthens

It is likewise commended against the spitting of blood, the cough, and pains
of the sides, and

The juice of Sage drunk with honey is good for those that spit and vomit
blood, and stops

The leaves sodden in water, with Wood-binde leaves, Plantaine, Rosemary,
Honey, Allome,

No man needs to doubt of the wholesomnesse of Sage Ale, being brewed as it
should be, with

The leaves of red Sage put into a wooden dish, wherein is put very quick
coals, with some

CHAP. 266. Of French Sage or wooddie Mullein.
1 Verbascum Matthioli. French Sage.
2 Verbascum angustis Saluiae folijs, The lesser French Sage.
3 Phlomos Lychnites Syriaca. Syrian Sage-leaued Mullein.


The Description.
1 WIld Mullein, wooddie Mullein, Matthiolus his Mullein, or French Sage
grows up like a small wooddie shrub, having many wooddie branches of a
woollie and hoarie color, soft and downie: whereupon are placed thick hoarie
leaves, of a strong ponticke (...), in shape like the leaves of Sage, whereupon
the vulgar people call it French Sage: toward the top of the branches are
placed roundles or crownets of yellow gaping flowers like those of dead Nettle,
but much greater. The root is thick, tough, and of a wooddie substance, as is
all the rest of the plant.

2 There is another sort hereof that is very like the other, saving that the
leaves and every other part of this plant, has a most sweet and pleasant
smell, and the other more strong and offensive: the leaves also are much lesser
and narrower, somewhat resembling those of the lesser Sage.

3 I think it not amiss here to insert this no less rare than beautiful
plant, which differs from the last described in the manner of growing and shape
of the flowers, which resemble those of the (...) Chalcedonica, or Nonesuch,
but are of a yellow color. The leaves are hairy, narrow, and sharp pointed;
the stalks square, and root wooddie. Lobel (to whom we are beholden for this
figure and description) calls this, Phlomos (...) altera Syriaca.

The Place.
These wild Mulleins do grow wild in diverse Provinces of Spain, and also in
(...), upon dry banks, and stony places: I have them both in my garden, and
many others likewise.

The Time.
They flower in June and July.

The Names.
They are called of the learned men of our time, Verbasca Syluestria: the first
is called of the Grecians (...), or (...): in Latin, Elychnium, or after
others, Elychinium, because of the Cottonie substance thereof, matches, or
weeks were made to keep light in lamps: Verbascum Lychnitis, as Dioscorides
himself testifies, is named also Thryallis or Rose Campion; but the flower of
Thryallis is red of color, as Nicander in his Counterpoisons does show, but
the flowers of these are yellow: therefore they are neither Thryallis nor
Lychnitis, but Syluestre Verbascum, or wild Mullein, as we have already taught
in the Chapter of Rose Campion, that Thryallis is Lychnitis satiua, or Rose
Campion. There is nothing to the contrary, but that there may be many plants
with soft downie leaves fit to make Candle week of: in English it is generally
called French Sage: we may call it Sage Mulleine.

The Temperature.
As these be like in virtues to the others going before, so they be likewise
dric in temperature.

The Virtues.
Dioscorides says, that the leaves are stamped and laid in manner of a pultis
upon burnings and

CHAP. 267. Of Clarie.
1 Gallitricum, (...) Horminum. Common Clarie.
2 Gallitricum alterum. Small Clarie.


3 Horminum syluestre, Fuchsij. Fuchsius his wild Clarie.


The Description.
1 THe first kind of Clarie which is the right, brings forth thick stalks
four square, two foot long, divided into branches: it has many leaves growing
both from the roots, and along the stalks and branches by distances, one
against another by two and two, great, a handful broad or broader, somewhat
rough, unequal, whitish and hairie, as be also the stalks. The flowers are
like those of Sage, or of dead Nettle, of color white, out of a light blew:
after which grow up long toothed husks in stead of cods, in which is black
seed. The root is full of strings: the whole herb yields forth a rank and
strong smell that stuffeth the head: it perishes after the seed is ripe, which
is in the second year after it is sown.

2 The second kind of Clarie has likewise stalks four square, a foot and a
half high: the leaves also be rough and rugged, lesser, and not so white. The
flowers be alike, of color purple or blew: the roots be as those of the
former are. This has not so strong a sent by a great deal.

3 There is a kind of Clarie which Fuchsius pictureth for wild Clarie, that
has shorter stalks, hairie, and also four square: the leaves lesser, long,
deeper indented: the flowers blew of color, sweet of smell, but not so sweet
as those of

The figure which formerly was under the title of (...) (...), was of the (...)
(...) of (...), which is described immediately before it.
4 Colus Iouis. Jupiters (...). the right Clarie: the husks or cods when they
are ripe bend downwards: the seed is blackish; the roots in like manner are
black and full of strings.

4 The fourth kind of Horminum, called Iovis Colus, represents in the highest
top of the stalk a distaffe, wrapped about with yellow flax, whereof it took
his name, having knobbie roots, with certain strings annexed thereto like
Galcopsis, or like unto the roots of Clarie, which do yield forth sundry four
square rough stalks, two cubits high; whereon do grow leaves like tl ose of the
Nettle, rough, sharp pointed, and of an ouerworne green color: the flowers
do grow along the top of the stalks, by certain spaces, set round about in
small coronets, or wharles, like those of Sage in form, but of a yellow color.

The Place.
These do grow wild in some places, notwithstanding they are manured and
planted in Gardens, almost every where, except Jupiters distaffe, being a
kind thereof, which I have in my Garden.

The Time.
They flower in June, July, and August.

The Names.
Clarie is called of the Apothecaries Gallitricum; it is likewise named Oruala:
of some, Tota bona, but not properly: of others, Scarlea, Sclarea, Centrum
Galli, and Matrisaluia. in Iralian, Sciaria: in French, Oruale: in High Dutch,
Scharlach: in Low Dutch, Scharleye: in English, Clarie, or Clear eye.

Jupiters distaffe is called Colus Iovis: of some, Galeopsis lutea, but not
properly: of diverse, Horminum luteum, or yellow Clarie, and Horminum
Tridentinum, or Clarie of Trent.

The Temperature.
Clarie is hot and dry in the third degree.

The Virtues.
The seed of Clarie poudered, finely searced and mixed with honey, takes away
the dimnesse of

The same stamped, infused, or laid to steep in warm water, the mussilag or
slimie substance

The seed poudered and drunk with wine, stirs up bodily lust.

The leaves of Clarie taken any manner of way, helps the weakness of the
back proceeding

CHAP. 268. Of wild Clarie, or Oculus Christi.
The Description.
1 OCulus Christi is also a kind of Clarie, but lesser: the stalks are many,
a cubite high, squared, and somewhat hairie: the leaves be broad, rough, and of
a blackish green color. The flowers grow along the stalks, of a bluish
color. The seed is round and blackish, the root is thick and tough, with some
threads annexed thereto. This is Hormini syluestris 4. quinta species of
Clusius.

2 The purple Clarie has leaves somewhat round, laid over with a hoarie
cottony substance, not much unlike Horehound: among which rise up small hairie
square stalks, set toward the top with little leaves of a purple color, which
appear at the first view to be flowers, and yet are nothing else but leaves,
turned into an excellent purple color: and among these beautiful leaves come
forth small flowers of a bluish or watchet color, in fashion like unto the
flowers of Rosemarie, which being withered, the husks wherein they did grow
contain certain black seed, that falls forth upon the ground very
quickly, because that every such husk does turn and hang down his head
toward the ground. The root dies at the first approach of Winter.

3 Broad leaued Clarie has a square stalk some cubite high, hairy, firm, and
iointed, the leaves are large, rough, and sharp pointed, snipt about the
edges, wrinckled, and standing by couples at each iont: upon the branches in
roundles grow purple flowers, less than those (...) Clarie, and scarce any
bigger than those of Lauander: the seed is small and black: the root is large,
hard, The figure that formerly was in the first place, (...) of that which you
may (...) find (...) and (...) be (...) the (...).
1 Horminum syluestre. Wild Clarie, or Oculus Christi.
2 Horminum syluestre folijs purpurcis. Clarie with purple leaves.
3 Horminum syluestre latifolium. Broad leaued wild Clarie.
4 Horminum syluestre flore albo. White floured wild Clarie.
5 Horminum syluestre flore rub to. Red floured wild Clarie.
black, and lives many years. It flowers in June and July, and grows wild
in many mountainous places of Germany. Clusius calls it Horminum syluestre
tertium.

4 This has long leaves next unto the ground, growing upon pretty long
stalks, broad at their setting on, and so ending by little and little in
sharp points, they are not deeply cut in, but only lightly snipt about the
edges: they are also wrinckled on the upper side, and whitish, but hairie on
the under side. The square (...) are some cubite high, iointed, and set with
two leaves at each joint. The flowers grow along the tops of the branches,
and are of a snow white color. There is a variety of this with the leaves
greener, and the flowers of an elegant deep purple color. This is the
Horminum syluestris quarti species prima of Clusius, and the variety with the
white flowers is his Hormini syluestris quarti (...) prima; and the figure that
our Author gave in the first place was of (...).

5 There is another variety of the last described, which also has square
stalks set with rough snipt leaves, which end in sharp points, but are narrower
at the lower end than the former, and they are green of color: upon the tops
of the stalks grow red hooded flowers, and those not very large: the seed is
small and black, and the root lives many years. This flowers in July. Clusius
makes this his Hormini syluestris quarti (...) quarta.

The Place.
The first grows wild in diverse barren places, almost in every Country,
especially in the fields of Holborne near unto Grayes Inn, in the high way by
the end of a brick wall: at the end of Chelsey next to London, in the high way
as you go from the Queens palace of Richmond to the waters side, and in
diverse other places.

The other is a stranger in England: it grows in my garden.

The Time.
They flower and flourish from June to the end of August.

The Names.
Wild Clarie is called after the Latin name Oculus Christi, of his effect in
helping the diseases of the eyes: in Greek (...) and likewise in Latin,
Horminum: of some, Geminalis: in English, wild Clarie, and Oculus Christi.

The second is thought of some to be the right Clarie, and they have called it
Horminum verum, but with greater error: it may be called in Latin Horminum
syluestre folijs and floribus (...), Clarie with leaves and flowers of a purple
color.

Our Author should have shown his reasons why this is not the Horminum verum,
to have conuincted the error of Anguillara, Matthiolus, Gesner, (...), Lobel
and others, who have accounted it so, as I my self must needs do, until some
reason be shown to the contrary, the which I think cannot be done,

The Temperature and (...).
The temperature and faculties are referred unto the garden Claries: yet Paulus
Aegineta says it

The seed of wild Clarie, as Dioscorides writes, being drunk with wine,
stirs up lust, it cleanses

The seed put whole into the eyes, cleanses and purges them exceedingly from
waterish humors, no more, which is a general medicine in Cheshire and other
Countries thereabout, (...) of all, and used with good success.

The leaves are good to be put into pottage or brothes among other (...), for
(...) (...) congealed blood, warm the stomach, and help the (...) of the
eyes.

CHAP. 269. Of Mullein.
The Description.
1 THe male Mullein or Higtaper has broad leaves, (...) soft, whitish and
downie; in the midst of which rises up a stalk, straight, single, and (...)
same also whitish all over, with a hoarie down, and covered with the like
leaves, but lesser and (...) even to the top: among which taperwise are set a
multitude of yellow flowers, consisting (...) five leaves apeece: in the places
whereof come up little round vessels, in which is contained very small seed.
The root is long, a (...) thick, black without, and full of strings.

1 Tapsus Barbatus. Mullein or Higtaper.
2 Tapsus Barbatus flore albo. White (...) Mullein.


2 The female Mullein has likewise many white woolley leaves, set upon an
hoarie cottonie upright stalk, of the height of four or five cubits: the top
of the stalks resembles a torch decked with infinite white flowers, which is
the special mark to know it from the male kind, being like in every other
respect.

The Place.
These plants do grow of themselves near the borders of pastures, and plowed
fields, or causies, and dry sandy ditch banks, and in other untilled places.
They grow in great plenty near unto a lyme kill upon the end of black Heath
next to London, as also about the (...) house at Eltham near unto Dartford in
Kent: in the high ways about Highgate near London, and in most countries of
England that are of a sandy soil.

The Time.
They are found with their flower from July to September, and bring forth their
seed the second year after the seed is sown.

The Names.
Mullein is called in Greek (...) in shops, Tapsus Barbatus: of diverse,
Candela Regia, Candelaria, and Lanaria: Dioscorides, Pliny, and Galen, do call
it Verbascum: in Italian, Verbasco, and Tasso Barbasso: in Spanish, (...): in
High Dutch, (...): in French, Bouillon: in English, Mullein, or rather Woollen,
Higtaper, Torches, Long-woort, and Bullockes Long-woort; and of some Haresbeard.

The Temperature.
Mullein is of temperature dry: the leaves have also a digesting and clensing
quality, as Galen affirms.

The Virtues.
The leaves of Mullein being boiled in water, and laid upon hard swellings and
inflammations

The root boiled in red wine and drunk, stops the laske and bloody flix:

The same boiled in water and drunk, is good for them that are broken and hurt
inwardly, and

A little fine treacle spread upon a leaf of (...), and laid to the piles or
Hemorhoides, cures

The leaves worn under the feet day and night, in manner of a shoe sole or
sock, brings down

The Country people, especially the husbandmen in Kent, do give their cattle
the leaves to

Frankensence and Masticke burned in a (...) dish of coals, and set within a
close stool; and

There be some who think that this herb being but carried about one, does
help the falling

The later Physicians commend the yellow flowers, being steeped in Oil and
(...) in warm

The report goes, says Pliny, that figs do not putrify at all that are
wrapped in the leaves of Dioscorides also makes mention of.

CHAP. 270. Of base Mullein.
The Description.
1 THe base white Mullein has a thick wooddie root, from which rises up a
stiff and hairie stalk, of the height of four cubits, garnished with fair
grayish leaves like those of Elecampane, but lesser: the flowers grow round
about the stalks taper or torch fashion, of a white color, with certain
golden thrums in the middle: the seed follows, small, and of the color of
dust.

2 Black Mullein has long leaves, not downie at all, large and sharp pointed,
of an ouerworne blackish green color, somewhat rough, and strongly smelling:
the flowers grow at the top of the stalks, of a golden yellow color, with
certain threads in the middle thereof. The root differs not from the
precedent.

3 Candle week Mullein has large, broad, and woollie leaves, like unto those
of the common Mullein: among which rises up a stalk covered with the like
leaves, even to the branches whereon the flowers do grow, but lesser and lesser
by degrees. The stalk divides it self toward the top into diverse branches,
whereon is set round about many yellow flowers, which oftentimes do change
into white, varying according unto the soil and clymate. The root is thick and
woody.

1 Verbascum album. Base white Mullein.
2 Verbascum nigrum. Base black Mullein.
3 Verbascum Lychnite Matthioli. Candle-weeke Mullein.
4 Verbascum Lychnite minus. Small Candle-weeke Mullein.


4 The small Candle-weeke Mullein differs little from the last rehearsed,
saving that the whole plant of this is of a better (...), wherein especially
consists the difference. The flower also is much larger, and of a straw, or
pale yellow color.

The Place.
These plants do grow where the other Mulleins do, and in the like soil.

The Time.
The time likewise answers their flouring and seeding.

The Names.
Their capital names expressed in the titles shall serve for these base
Mulleins, considering they are all and every of them kinds of Mulleins.

The Temperature.
These Mulleins are dry without any manifest heat, yet doubtless hotter and
drier than the common Mullein or Hygtaper.

The Virtues.
The black Mullein, with his pleasant yellow flowers, boiled in water or wine
and drunken, is

The leaves boiled in water, stamped and applied pultis wise upon cold
swellings (called Oedemata)

The flowers of black Mullein are put into lie, which causes the hair of the
head to wax yellow,

The leaves are put into cold ointments with good success, against scaldings
and burnings with

Apuleius reports a tale of Ulysses, Mercury, and the inchantresse Circe,
and theirvse of (...)

CHAP. 271. Of Moth Mullein.
1 Blattaria Plinij. Plinies Moth Mullein.
2 Blattaria flore purpureo. Purple Moth Mullein.


The Description.
1 Pliny has set forth a kind of Blattaria, which has long and smooth
leaves, somewhat iagged or snipt about the edges: the stalk rises up tothe
height of three cubits; dividing it self toward the top into sundry arms or
branches, beset with yellow flowers like unto black Mullein.

2 Blattaria with purple flowers has broad black leaves, without any manifest
snips or notches by the sides, growing flat upon the ground: among which rises
up a stalk two cubits high, garnished with flowers like unto the common
Blattaria, but that they are of a purple color, and those few threads or chiues
in the middle of a golden color: the root is as thick as a man's thumb, with
some threads hanging thereat, and it indureth from year to year.

3 There is another kind like unto the black Mullein, in stalks, roots, and
leaves, and other respects, saving that his small flowers are of a green
color.

4 There is another like unto the last before written, saving that his leaves
are not so deeply cut about the edges, and that the small flowers have some
purple color mixed with the greenness.

3 Blattaria flore viridi. Green Moth Mullein.
4 Blattaria flore ex viridi purpurascente. Moth Mullein with the greenish
purple colored flower.


5 This is somewhat like the first described in leaves and stalks, but much
less, the flowers also are of a whitish or grayish color, and therein
consists the chiefest difference.

6 There is also another variety of this kind, which has very fair and
large flowers, and these either of a bright yellow, or else of a purple color.

7 This has long narrow leaves like those of the second, snipt about the
edges, and of a dark green color: the stalks grow some two cubits high, and
seldom send forth any branches; the flowers are large and yellow, with rough
threddes in their middles (...) with red, and these grow in such an order that
they somewhat resemble a fly: the seed is small, and contained in round
buttons. This is an annual, and perishes when the seed is ripe.

5 Blattaria flore albo. White floured Moth Mullein.
6 Blattaria flore amplo. Moth Mullein with the great flower.
7 Blattaria flore Luteo. Yellow Moth Mullein.


The Place.
The first and fifth of these grow wild in sundry places, and the rest only
in gardens with us.

The Time.
They flower in July and August.

The Names.
The later Herbarists call Moth Mullein by the name of Blattaria, and do truly
take it to be that which Pliny describes in his 22. book, cap. 9. in these
words. [There is an herb like Mullein, or Verbascum nigrum, which oftentimes
deceives, being taken for the same, with leaves not so white, more stalks, and
with yellow flowers (as we have written) which do agree with black Mullein,
but we have not as yet learned by observation that they do gather mothes and
flies unto them, as we have said.] Valerius Cordus names it Verbascum
Leptophyllon, or narrow leafed Mullein: their several titles sufficiently set
forth their English names.

The Nature and Virtues.
Concerning the plants comprehended under the Blattaria, or Moth Mulleins, I
find nothing written of them, saving that moths, butterflies, and all manner of
small flies and bats do resort to the place where these herbs are laid or
strewed.

The decoction of the flowers or leaves of the first Camerar. affirms.

CHAP. 272. Of Mullein of Aethiopia.
(...). Ethiopian Mullein.


The Description.
MVllein of Aethiopia has many very broad hoary leaves spread upon the ground,
very soft and downy, or rather woolly, like to those of Hygtaper, but far
whiter, softer, thicker, and fuller of woollinesse; which wool is so long,
that one may with his fingers pull the same from the leaves, even as wool is
pulled from a Sheeps skin: among which leaves rises up a four square downy
stalk, set with the like leaves, but smaller; which stalk is divided at the
top into other branches, set about and orderly placed by certain distances,
having many flowers like those of Archangell, of a white color tending to
blewnesse: which being past, there succeeds a three square brown seed: the
root is black, hard, and of a woody substance.

The Place.
It grows naturally in Ethiopia, and in Ida, a hill hard by Troy, and in
Messenia a province of Morea, as Pliny shows in his twenty seventh book,
chap. 4. it also grows in Meroe, an Island in the river Nilus: it likewise
grows in my garden.

The Time.
It floureth and flourishes in June, and perfecteth his seed toward the end of
August.

The Names.
It is called in Greek (...): and in Latin Aethiopis, of the country; and for
that cause it is likewise called Meroides, of Meroe, as Pliny writes: of some
because the Greek word (...), signisieth in Latin Fauilla adusta, or Cinere
aspersa, or covered with ashes: in English we may call it Mullein of Aethiopia,
or woolly Mullein.

The Nature.
Aethiopis is dry without any manifest heat.

The Virtues.
Aethiopis is good for those that have the Pleurisy, and for those that have
their breasts charged

For the diseases of the breast and lungs it is good to lick oftentimes of a
confection made with

CHAP. 273. Of Cowslips.
The Description.
1 THose herbs which at this day are called Primroses, Cowslips, and Oxlips,
are reckoned among the kinds of Mulleins; notwithstanding for distinctions
sake I have marshalled them in a chapter, coming in the rereward as next
neighbors to the Mullens, for that the Ancients have named them Verbasculi,
that is to say, Small Mullens. The first, which is called in English the field
Cowslip, is as common as the rest, therefore I shall not need to spend much
time about the description.

2 The second is likewise well known by the name of Oxlip, and differs not
from the other, save that the flowers are not so thick thrust together as the
former, and they are fairer, and fewer in number, and do not smell so
pleasantly as the other: of which kind we have one lately come into our
gardens, whose flowers are curled and wrinkled after a most strange manner,
which our women have named Iack-an-apes on horseback.

1 Primula veris mayor. Field Cowslips.
2 Primula pratensis inodor a lutea. Field Oxlips.


3 Double Paigle, called of Pena, Primula hortensis Anglica omnium maxima, and
serotina floribus plenis; that is, The greatest English garden Cowslip with
double yellow flowers, is so commonly known that it needs no description.

4 The fourth is likewise known by the name of double Cowslips, having but one
flower within another, which makes the same once double, where the other is
many times double, called by Pena, Geminata; for the likeness of the flowers,
which are brought forth as things against nature, or twins.

5 The fifth being the common white field Primrose, needs no description.

6 The sixth, which is our garden double Primrose, of all the rest is of
greatest beauty, the description whereof I refer unto your own consideration.

7 The seventh kind is also very well known, being a Primrose with greenish
flowers somewhat welted about the edges: for which cause Pena has called it
Siluarum primula, floribus obscure virentibus fimbriatis.

8 There is a strange Primrose found in a wood in Yorkshire growing wild, by
the travel and industry of a learned gentleman of Lancashire called Mr.
Thomas Hesketh, a diligent searcher of Simples, who has not only brought to
light this amiable and pleasant kind of Primrose, but many others likewise,
never before his time remembered or found out. This kind of Primrose has
leaves and roots like the wild field Primrose in each respect: it brings
forth amongst the leaves a naked stalk of a grayish or ouerworne greenish
color: at the top whereof does grow in the Winter time one flower and no more,
like unto that single one of the field: but in the Summer time it brings
forth a soft russet husk or hose, wherein are contained many small flowers,
sometimes four or five, and oftentimes more, very thick thrust together,
which makes one entire flower, seeming to be one of the common double
Primroses, whereas indeed it is one double flower made of a number of small
single flowers, never ceasing to bear flowers Winter nor Summer, as before is
specified.

3 Primula hortensis Anglica. Double Paigles.
4 Primula veris flore geminato. Cowslips two in a hose.
5 Primula veris minor. Field Primrose.
6 Primula veris slore pleno. Double white Primrose.


Besides these, there are kept in our gardens, and set forth by Mr. Parkinson
(to whose Work I refer the curious Reader) two or three more varieties; one
a double Cowslip hose in hose, naked, without any husk: the other two bear
many green leaves on the tops of the stalks, the one of them having yellowish
flowers amongst the leaves, and the other only longish narrow green leaves.
The first of these he calls Paralysis inodora flore geminato, Double Oxlips
hose in hose. The second, Paralysis fatua, The foolish Cowslip. And the last,
Paralysis flore viridi roseo calamistrato, The double green feathered Cowslip.

7 Primula flore viridi. Green Primrose.
8 Primula veris Heskethi. Mr. Heskeths Primrose.


The Place.
Cowslips and Primroses joy in moist and dankish places, but not altogether
covered with water; they are found in woods and the borders of fields: the
Primrose found by Mr. Hesketh grows in a wood called Clap-dale, three miles
from a town in Yorkshire called Settle.

The Time.
They flourish from April to the end of May, and some one or other of them do
flower all the Winter long.

The Names.
They are commonly called Primula veris, because they are the first among those
plants that do flower in the Spring, or because they do flower with the first.
They are also named Arthriticae, and Herbae paralysis, for they are thought to
be good against the pains of the joints and sinews. They are called in
Italian, Brache cuculi: in English, Petty Mulleins, or Palsie-worts: of most,
Cowslips.

The greater sort, called for the most part Oxlips or Paigles, are named of
diverse Herba S. Petri. In English, Oxlip, and Paigle.

The common Primrose is usually called Primula veris: most Herbarists do refer
the Primroses to the (...), called in Latin Verbascula, or Petty Mulleins; but
seeing the leaves be neither woollie nor round, they are hardly drawn unto
them: for Phlomides are described by leaves, as Pliny has interpreted it,
Hirsutis and Rotundis, Hairy and round; which Pliny, lib. 25. cap. 10.
translateth thus: Sunt and Phlomides duae Hirsutae, rotundis folijs, (...):
which is as much to say in English as, There be also two pretty Mulleins,
hairy, round leafed, low, or short. Fabius Columna refers these to the Alisma
of Dioscor and calls the Cowslip Alisma pratorum: and the Primrose, Alisma
syluarum.

The Temperature.
The Cowslips and Primroses are in temperature dry, and a little hot.

The Virtues.
The Cowslips are commended against the pain of the joints called the Gout,
and slackenesse

A dram and a half of the powder of the dried roots of field Primrose
gathered in Autumn, given to drink in Ale or Wine purges by vomit very
forcibly (but safely) waterish humors, choler, and phlegm, in such manner as
Azarum does, experimented by a learned and skillful Apothecarie of Colchester
Mr. Thomas Buckstone, a man singular in the knowledge of Simples.

A conserve made with the flowers of Cowslips and sugar prevails wonderfully
against the

Cowslips or Paigles do greatly restrain or stop the belly in the time of a
great laske or bloody

A practitioner in London, who was famous for curing the frenzy, after that
he had performed

The roots of Primrose stamped and strained, and the juice sniffed into the
nose with a quill or

An (...) made with the juice of Cowslips and oil of Linseed cures all
scaldings or burnings

The flowers of Primroses sodden in vinegar and applied, do heal the Kings
Evil, as also the

The leaves and flowers of Primroses boiled in wine and drunk, is good against
all diseases of

CHAP. 274. Of Birds-eine.
1 Primulaveris flore rubro. Red Bird-eyne.
2 Primula veris flore albo. White Bird-eyne.


The Description.
1 SOme Herbarists call this plant by the name of Sanicula angustifolia, making
thereof two kinds, and distinguishing them by these terms, mayor and minor,
sieve media: others call them Paralytica alpina, which without controversy are
kinds of Cowslips, agreeing with them as well in shape, as in their nature and
virtues, having leaves much like unto Cowslips, but smaller, growing flat upon
the ground, of a faint greenish color on the upper side, and underneath of a
white or (...) color: among which rise up small and tender stalks of a foot
high, having at the top of every stalk a bush (...) small flowers in shape
like the common Oxlip, saving that they are of a fair stammell color tending
to purple: in the middle of every small flower appears a little yellow spot,
resembling the eye of a bird; which has moved the people of the North parts
(where it abounds) to call it Birds eyne. The seed is small like dust, and
the root white and threddy.

2 The second is like the first, saving that the whole plant is greater in each
respect, and that the flowers are of a whitish color.

The Place.
These plants grow very plentifully in moist and squally grounds in the North
parts of England, as in Harwood near to Blackburne in Lancashire, and ten
miles from Preston in Aundernesse; also at Crosby, Rauenswaith, and Crag-Close
in Westmerland.

They likewise grow in the meadows belonging to a village in Lancashire near
Maudsley, called Harwood, and at Hesketh not far from thence, and in many other
places of Lancashire, but not on this side Trent, that I could ever have any
certain knowledge of. Lobel reports, That doctor Penny (a famous Physician
of our London College) did find them in these Southern parts.

The Time.
They flower and flourish from April to the end of May.

The Names.
The first is called Primrose with the red flower: the second, Primrose with
the white flower, and Birds eyne.

The Nature and Virtues.
The nature and virtues of these red and white Primroses must be sought out
amongst those above named.

CHAP: 275. Of Bears ears, or Mountain Cowslips.
1 Auricula vrsiflore luteo. Yellow Beares-eare.
2 Auricula vrsiflore purpurco. Purple Beares-eare.


The Kinds.
THere be diverse sorts of Mountain Cowslips, or Beares-eares, differing
especially in the color of their flowers, as shall be declared,
notwithstanding it may appear to the curious, that there is great difference
in the roots also, considering some of them have knobby roots, and others
threddy: notwithstanding there is no difference in the roots at all.

There are diverse (...) of these (...), and the chief differences arise,
either from the leaves or flowers; from their leaves, which are either smooth
and green, or else gray and hoary, again they are smooth about the edges, or
snipt more or less; The flowers some are fairer then othersome, and their
colors are so various, that it is hard to find words to express them, but
they may be referred to whites, reds, yellowes, and purples; for of all the
varieties and mixtures of these they chiefly consist. The gardens of Mr.
Tradescant and Mr. (...) are at this present furnished with very great
varieties of these flowers.

3 Auricula Vrsi ij. Clusij: Red Bears ear.
4 Auricula Vrsi iiij. Clusij. Scarlet Bears ear.


The Description.
1 AVricula Vrsi was called of Matthiolus, Pena, and other Herbarists, Sanicula
Alpina, by reason of his singular faculty in healing of wounds, both inward
and outward. They do all call it Paralityca, because of his virtues in curing
the palsies, cramps, and convulsions, and is numbered among the kinds of
Cowslips, whereof no doubt they are kinds, as others are which do hereafter
follow under the same title, although there be some difference in the color of
the flowers. This beautiful and brave plant has thick, green, and fat
leaves, somewhat finely snipt about the edges, not altogether unlike those of
Cowslips, but smoother, greener, and nothing rough or crumpled: among which
rises up a slender round stem a handful high, bearing a tuft of flowers at
the top, of a fair yellow color, not much unlike to the flowers of Oxe-lips,
but more open and consisting of one only leaf like Cotiledon: the root is very
threddy, and like unto the Oxe-lip.

2 The leaves of this kind which bears the purple flowers are not so much
sinipt about the edges: these said purple flowers have also some yellowness in
the middle, but the flowers are not so much laid open as the former, otherwise
in all respects they are like.

3 Carolus Clusius sets forth in the book of his Pannonicke travels two
kinds more, which he has found in his travel over the Alps and other
mountains of Germany and Heluetia, being the third in number, according to my
computation: it has leaves like the former, but longer, smaller, and narrower
toward the bottom, green above, and of a pale color underneath. The flowers
are in fashion like to the former, but of a most shining red color within, and
on the outside of the color of a mulberry: the middle or eye of the flower is
of a whitish pale color: the root is like the former.

4 The fourth is a smaller plant than any of the foresaid, whose leaves are
thick and fat, nothing at all snipt about the edges, green above, and grayish
underneath. The flowers are like the former, shining about the edges, of an
ouerworne color toward the middle, and in the (...) comes a forke covered
with an hairinesse: the root is black and threddy.

5 Auricula Vrsierubescens. Blush colored Bears ear.
6 Auricula Vrsi suane rubens. Bright red Bears ear.
7 Auricula Vrsi minima. Stamell Bears ear.


5 The blush-coloured Bears (...) has (...) thick fat leaves spread upon the
ground, of a whitish green color, slightly or not at all indented in the
edges: among which rises up a naked stalk likewise hairy or whitish, on the
top whereof stand very fair flowers, in shape like those of the common
Cowslip, but of a whitish color tending to purple, which we term
blush-colour. The root is tough and threddy, as are all the rest.

6 The bright shining red Bears ear of Matthiolus description seems to late
Herbarists to be rather a figure made by conceit or imagination, than by the
sight of the plant it self; for doubtless we are persuaded that there is no
such plant, but only a figure foisted for ostentations sake, the description
whereof we leave to a further consideration, because we have not seen any such
plant, neither do we believe there is any such. Our Author is here without
cause injurious to Matthiolus; for he figures and describes only the common
first described yellow Bears ear: yet if he had said the flowers were of a
light shining red, he had not erred; for I have seen these flowers of all the
reds both bright and dark that one may imagine.

7 Pena sets forth a kind of Bears ear under the name of Sanicula Alpina,
having his uppermost leaves an inch long, somewhat iagged and hemmed at the
ends, and broad before like a shouel; the lower leaves next the ground are
somewhat shorter, but of the same form; among which rises a small slender
foot-stalke of an inch long, whereon does stand a small flower, consisting of
five little leaves of a bright red or stammell color.

8 The snow white Bears ear differs not from the last described but in the
color of the flower, for as the others are red; contrary these are very
white, and the whole plant is lesser, wherein consists the difference. The
root is long, tough, with some fibers thereto belonging. Neither of these two
last described will be content to grow in gardens.

The Place.
They grow naturally upon the Alpish and Heluetian mountains: most of them do
grow in our London gardens.

The Time.
These herbs do flower in April and May.

The Names.
Either the ancient writers knew not these plants, or else the names of them
were not by them or their successors diligently committed unto posterity.
Matthiolus and other later writers have given names according to the
similitude, or of the shape that they bear unto other plants, according to the
likeness of the qualities and operations: you may call it in English, Bears
ear: they that dwell about the Alps do call it Orastkrawt, and
Schwindlekrawt, by reason of the effects thereof; for the root is amongst them
in great request for the strengthening of the head, that when they are on the
tops of places that are high, giddiness and (...) swimming of the brain may
not afflict them: it is there called the Rocke-rose, for that it grows upon
the rocks, and resembles the brave color of the Rose. Fabius Columna proves
this to be the Alisma or Damasonium of (...) and the Ancients.

The Nature.
These herbs are dry and very astringent.

The Virtues.
It heals all outward and inward wounds of the breast, and the enterocele
also, if for some reasonable

These plants are of the nature and temperature of Primula veris, and are (...)
amongst the

Those that hunt in the Alps and high mountains after Goats and Bucks, do as
highly esteem Doronicum, by reason of the singular effects that it has, but
(as I said before) one especially, even in that it preuenteth the loss of
their best joints (I mean their necks) if they take the roots hereof before
they ascend the rocks or other high places.

The root of Damasonium (according to Dioscorides) taken in the weight of one
or two drams, (...) marinus or sea Hare, or have been bitten by a Toad, or
taken too great a quantity of Opium.

It is also profitably drunk, either by it self, or with the like quantity
of Daucus seeds, against

Also it is good against convulsions and the affects of the womb.

The herb stays the fluxes of the belly, moves the courses, and applied in
form of a pultis asswageth

CHAP. 276. Of Mountain Sanicle.
The Kinds.
THere be sundry sorts of herbs contained under the name of Sanicle, and yet
not one of them agreeing with our common Sanicle, called Diapensia, in any one
respect, except in the virtues, whereof no doubt they took that name; which
number does daily increase, by reason that the later writers have put down
more new plants, not written of before by the Ancients, which shall be
distinguished in this chapter by several titles.

The Description.
1 SPotted Sanicle of the mountain has small (...) and round leaves, bluntly
indented about the edges, and fashioned like unto the leaves of Saxifragia
aurea, or rather Cyclamen folio hederae, of a dark green color, and somewhat
hairy underneath: amongst which rise 1 Sanicula guttata. Spotted Sanicle.
2 Pinguicula sieve Sanicula (...). Butterwort, or Yorkshire Sanicle.
3 Sanicula Alpina Clusij, sieve Cortusa Matthioli. Bears ear Sanicle.
up sundry stalks, beset with like leaves, but smaller, and of a cubit high,
dividing themselves into many small arms or branches, bearing diverse little
white flowers, spotted most curiously with bloody specks or pricks, insomuch
that if you mark the admirable workmanship of the same wrought in such
glorious manner, it must needs put every creature in mind of his Creator: the
flowers are in smell like the May flowers or Hawthorne: the seed is small and
black, contained in small pointals like unto white (...): the root is scaly an
d full of strings.

2 The second kind of Sanicle, which Clusius calls Pinguicula, not before his
time remembered, has small thick leaves, fat and full of juice, being broad
toward the root, and (...) toward the point, of a faint green color, and
bitter in taste: out of the midst whereof sprouteth or shoots up a naked
slender stalk, nine inches long, every stalk bearing one flower and no more,
sometimes white, and commonly of a bluish purple color, fashioned like unto
the common Consolida regalis, having the like spur or Larks heel anexed
thereto.

3 The third kind of mountain. Sanicle some Herbarists have called Sanicula
alpina store (...): the leaves shoot forth in the beginning of the Spring, very
thick and fat, and are like a purse or round lump at their first coming out
of the ground; and when it is spread abroad, the upper part thereof is full of
veins or sinews, and houen up or curled like Ranunculus Lusitanicus, or like
the crumpling of a cabbage leaf; and are not only indented about the edges,
but each leaf is divided into six or more (...) or cuts, deeply hacked,
greenish above, and of an ouerworne (...) color (...), hot in taste; from the
middle whereof shoots forth a bar or naked stalk, six inches long, somewhat
purple in color, bearing at the top a (...) of small hollow flowers, looking
or (...) downwards like little bells, not unlike in form to the common
Cowslips, but of a sine deep red color (...) to purple, having in the middle
a certain ring or circle of white, and also certain pointals or strings,
which turn into an head wherein is contained seed. The whole plant is covered
as it were with a rough woollinesse: the root is fibrous and threddy.

The Place.
These plants are strangers in England; their natural country is the Alpish
mountains of Heluetia: they grow in my garden, where they flourish exceedingly,
except Butterwort, which grows in our English squally wet grounds, and will
not yield to any culturing or transplanting: it grows especially in a field
called Crag-Close, and at Crosby, Rauenswaith, in Westmerland, upon Ingleborow
fels twelve miles from Lancaster, and in Harwood in the same county near to
Blackburne, ten miles from Preston in Aundernesse upon the bogs and marish
grounds, and in the boggie meadows about Bishops Hatfield; and also in the fens
in the way to Wittles meare from London, in Huntingdonshire. It grows also in
Hampshire, and abundantly in many places of Wales.

The Time.
They floureand flourish from May to the end of July.

The Names.
The first is called Sanicula guttata, taken from the spots wherewith the
flowers are marked: of Lobel, Geum Alpinum, (...) it a kind of Auens: in
English, spotted Sanicle: of our London dames, Prattling Parnell.

The second is called Pinguicula, of the fatness or (...) of the leaf, or of
fatning: in Yorkshire, where it does especially grow, and in greatest
abundance, it is called Butterworts, Butterroot, and whiteroot; but the last
name belongs more properly to Solomon's Seal.

The Temperature and Virtues.
They are hot and dry in the third degree.

The husbandmens wives of Yorkshire do use to anoint the dugs of their kine
with the fat and

They say it rots their sheep, when for want of other food they eat (...).

CHAP. 277. Of Fox-Gloues.
The Description.
1 FOx-gloue with the purple flower is most common; the leaves whereof are
long, nicked in the edges, of a light green, in manner like those of Mullein,
but lesser, and not so downie: the stalk is straight, from the middle whereof
to the top stand the flowers, set in a course one by another upon one side of
the stalk, hanging downwards with the bottom upward, in form long, like
almost to finger stalks, whereof it took his name Digitalis, of a red purple
color, with certain white spots dashed within the flower; after which come up
round heads, in which lies the seed, somewhat brown, and as small as that of
Time. The roots are many slender strings.

2 The Fox-gloue with white flowers differs not from the precedent but in the
color of the flowers; for as the others were purple, these contrariwise are of
a milke-white color.

3 We have in our gardens another sort hereof, which brings forth most
pleasant yellow flowers and somewhat less than the common kind, wherein they
differ. This also differs from the common kind in that the leaves are much
smoother, narrower, and greener, having the nerves or vrines running along
it, neither are the nerves snipt, nor sinuated on their edges.

4 We have also another sort, which we call Digitalis ferruginea, whose flowers
are of the color of rusty iron; whereof it took his name, and likewise makes
the difference. Of this sort there is a bigger and a lesser; the bigger has
the lower leaves some foot long, of a dark green color, with veins running
along them; the stalks are some yard and half high: the flowers large;

1 Digitalis purpurea. (...) Fox-gloues.
2 (...) alba. White Fox-gloues.
3 Digitalis lutea. Yellow Fox-gloues.
4 Digitalis (...). Dusky Fox-gloues.
and ending in a sharp turned up end as you see in the figure, and they are of
a rustie color, mixed of a yellow and red.

5 The lesser duskie Fox-gloue has much less leaves and those narrow, smooth,
and exceeding green: amongst which comes up a stalk some foot high, having
small flowers of the color of the last described. This I observed the last
year 1632, in flower with Mr. John Tradescant in the middle of July. It may
fitly be called Digitalis ferruginea minor, Small duskie Fox-gloues.

The Place.
Fox-gloue grows in barren sandy grounds, and under hedges almost every
where.

Those with white flowers do grow naturally in Landesdale, and Crauen, in a
field called Cragge close, in the North of England: likewise by Colchester in
Essex; near Excester in the West parts, and in some few other places. The
other two are strangers in England, (...) thelesse they do grow with the others
in my garden.

The Time.
They flower and flourish in June and July.

The Names.
Fox-gloues some call in Greek (...), and make it to be Verbasci speciem, or a
kind of Mullein: in Latin, Digitalis: in High Dutch, (...), and fingher
(...): in Low Dutch, (...): in French, Gantes nostre dame: in English,
Fox-gloues. Fabius Columna thinks it to be that Ephemerum of Dioscorides
described in his fourth book, and cap. 75.

The Temperature.
The Fox-gloues in that they are bitter, are hot and dry, with a certain
kind of clensing quality joined therewith; yet are they of no use, neither
have they any place amongst medicines, according to the Ancients.

The Virtues.
Fox-gloue boiled in water or wine, and drunken, does cut and consume the
thick toughness of

The same taken in like manner, or boiled with honied water or sugar, does
scour and cleanse the

They serve for the same purposes whereunto Gentian does tend, and has been
used in stead Galen says.

Where or by what name Galen either mentions, or (...) this which our Author
cites Fuchsius: for I only find him to have these words set down by our
Author, in the end of his Chapter of Digitalis.

CHAP. 278. Of Baccharis out of Dioscorides.
The Description.
1 ABout this plant Baccharis there has been great contention amongst the old
and new writers; Matthioius and Dodonaeus have mistaken this plant, for
Conizamaior, or Coniza Helenitis Cordi; Virgil and Athenaeus have confounded
Baccharis, and Azarum together: but following the ancient writers, it has many
blackish rough leaves, somewhat bigger than the leaves of Primrose: amongst
which rises up a stalk two cubits high, bearing at the top little chasfie or
scaly flowers in small bunches, of a dark yellowish or purple color, which
turn into down, and are carried away with the wind, like unto the kinds of
thistles: the root is thick, gross, and fat, spteading about in the earth,
full of strings: the fragrant smell that the root of this plant yields, may
well be compared unto the savor of Cinnamon, Helenium, or Enula Campana,
being a plant known unto very many or most sorts of people, I mean in most
parts of England.

The Place.
Baccharis delights to grow in rough and craggy places, and in a lean soil
where no moisture Baccharis (...) sium. Plowmans Spikenard.
is: it grows very plentifully about Montpellier in France, and diverse places
in the West parts of England.

The Time.
It springs up in April, it floureth in June, and perfecteth his seed in
August.

The Names.
The learned Herbarists of Montpellier have called this plant Baccharis: the
Grecians, (...), or after others, (...), by reason of that sweet and
aromaticall savor which his root contains and yields: in English it may be
called the Cinamom root, or Plowmans Spiknard: Virgill in his (...) Ecloge of
his Bucolicks makes mention of Baccharis, and does not only show that it is a
Garland plant, but also such a one as prevails against enchantments, saying,

-- Bacchare frontem
Cingite, ne (...) malalingua futuro.
With Plowmans Nard my forehead girt,
Lest evil tongue thy Poet hurt.
Baccharis is likewise an ointment in Athenaeus, in his 15 book, which may
take his name of the sweet herb Baccharis: for as Pliny writes, Aristophanes
of old, being an ancient comical Poet witnesses, that ointments were wont to
be made of the root thereof: to be brief, Crateuas his Asarum is the same
that Dioscorides his Baccharis is. This plant here described is the Conizamaior
of Matthiolus, Tragus, and others.

The Temperature.
Baccharis cr Plowmans Spiknard is of temperature very astringent or binding.

The Virtues.
Baccharis, or the decoction of the root, as Paulus Aegineta briefly sets
down, does open the

Baccharis is a singular remedy to heal inflammations and Saint Anthonies
fire, called Ignis sacer;

The decoction of the roots of Baccharis helps ruptures and convulsions,
those also that have

It helps also the old cough, and difficulty to make water.

When it is boiled in wine it is given with great profit against the bitings of
Scorpions, or any

A bath made thereof and put into a close stool, and received hot, mightily
voideth the birth,

CHAP. 279: Of Elecampane.
The Description.
ELecampane brings forth presently from the root great white leaves, sharp
pointed, almost like those of great Comfrey, but soft, and covered with a
hairie down, of a whitish green color, (...): Elecampane.
and are more white underneath, slightly nicked in the edges: the stalk is a
yard and a half long, about a finger thick, not without down, divided at the
top into diverse branches, upon the top of every sprig stand great flowers broad
and round, of which not only the long small leaves that compass round about are
yellow, but also the middle ball or circle, which is filled up with an infinite
number of threads, and at length is turned into fine down; under which is
slender and long seed: the root is uneven, thick, and as much as a man may
gripe, not long, oftentimes blackish without, white within, and full of
substance, sweet of smell, and bitter of taste.

The Place.
It grows in meadows that are fat and fruitful: it is also oftentimes found
upon mountains, shadowie places, that be not altogether dry: it grows
plentifully in the fields on the left hand as you go from Dunstable to Puddle
hill: also in an orchard as you go from Colbrook to Ditton ferry, which is the
way to Windsor, and in sundry other places, as at Lidde, and Folkestone, near
to Dover by the sea fide.

The Time.
The flowers are in their bravery in June and July: the roots be gathered in
Autumn, and oftentimes in April and May.

The Names.
That which the Graecians name (...), the Latins call Inula and Enula: in
shops Enula campana: in high Dutch, (...): in low Dutch, (...) (...): in
Italian, Enoa, and Enola: in Spanish, Raiz del alla: in French, Enula Campane:
in English, Elecampane, and Scab-woort, and Horse-heale: some report that this
plant took the name Helenium of (...) wise to Menelaus, who had her hands full
of it when Paris stole her away into Phrygia.

The Temperature.
The root of this Elecampane, is marvelous good for many things, being of
nature hot and dry in the third degree, especially when it is dry: for being
green and as yet full of juice, it is full of superfluous moisture, which
somewhat abateth the hot and dry quality thereof.

The Virtues.
It is good for shortness of breath, and an old cough, and for such as cannot
breathe unless they

It is of great virtue both given in a looch, which is a medicine to be licked
on, and likewise preserved,

The root preserved is good and wholesome for the stomach: being taken after
supper it does not

The juice of the same boiled, drives forth all kind of worms of the belly,
as Pliny teaches: who also writes in his twenty book, and fifth chapter, the
same being chewed fasting, does (...) the teeth.

The root of Elecampane is with good success mixed with counterpoisons: it is
a remedy against

Some also affirm, that the decoction thereof, and likewise the same beaten
into powder and

Galen says, that herewith the parts are to be made red, which be vexed with
long and cold griefs:

The decoction of Enula drunken, provoke urine, and is good for them that are
grieved with inward

The root taken with honey or sugar, made in an electuarie, cleanses the breast,
ripeneth tough

The roots condited after the manner of Eringos serves for the purposes
aforesaid.

The root of Enula boiled very soft, and mixed in a mortar with fresh butter
and the powder of

The roots are to be gathered in the end of September, and kept for sundry
uses, but it is especially

CHAP. 280. Of Sauce alone, or (...) by the hedge.
Alliaria. Sauce alone.


The Description.
SAuce alone has affinity with Garlic in name, not because it is like it in
form, but in smell: for if it be bruised or stamped it smells altogether
like Garlic: the leaves hereof are broad, of a light green color, nicked
round about, and sharp pointed: the stalk is slender, about a cubit high,
about the branches whereof grow little white flowers; after which come up
slender small and long cods, and in these black seed: the root is long, slender,
and something hard.

The Place.
It grows of it self by garden hedges, by old walls, by highwaies sides, or
oftentimes in the borders of fields.

The Time.
It floureth chiefly in June and July, the seed waxes ripe in the mean
season. The leaves are used for a sauce in March or April.

The Names.
The later writers call it Alliaria, and Alliaris: of some, Rima Maria: it is
not Scordium, or water Germander, which the apothecaries in times past mistook
for this herb: neither is it (...) species, or a kind of water Germander,
whereof we have written: it is named of some, Pes Asininus: it is called in
High Dutch, (...) (...) (...), and (...): and in Low Dutch, (...) (...) (...):
you may name it in Latin, (...) non bulbosum: in French, Alliayre: in English,
Sauce alone, and Jack of the hedge.

The Temperature.
Jack of the hedge is hot and dry, but much less than Garlic, that is to
say, in the end of the second degree, or in the beginning of the third.

The Virtues.
We know not what use it has in medicine: diverse eat the stamped leaves hereof
with Salt-fish,

Some also boil the leaves in clisters which are used against the pain of the
collicke and stone,

CHAP. 281. Of Dittany.
The Description.
1 DIttanie of Crete now called Candie (as Dioscorides says) is a hot and
sharp herb, much like unto Penni-roiall, saving that his leaves be greater
and somewhat hoary, covered over with a soft down or white woollie cotton: at
the top of the branches grow small spikie ears or scaly aglets, hanging by
little small stemmes, resembling the spiky tufts of Marierome, of a white
color: amongst which scales there do come forth small flowers like the
flouring of wheat, of a red purple color; which being past, the knop is found
full of small seed, contrary to the saying of Dioscorides, who says, it
neither bears flower nor seed, but my self have seen it bear both in my
Garden: the whole plant perished in the next VVinter following.

1 Dictamnum Creticum. Dittanie of Candie.
2 Pseudodictamnum. Bastard Dittanie.


2 The second kind called Pseudodictamnum, that is, Bastard Dittanie, is much
like unto the first saving that it is not sweet of smell, neither does it bite
the tongue, having round soft woolly stalks with knots and ioints, and at every
knot two leaves somewhat round, soft, woolly, and somewhat bitter: the flowers
be of a light purple color, compassing the stalks by certain spaces like
garlands or wharles, and like the flowers of Peni-roiall. The root is of a
wooddie substance: the whole plant grows to the height of a cubite and an
half, and lasts long.

The Place.
The first Dittanie comes from Crete, an Island which we call Candie, where it
grows naturally: I have sown it in my garden, where it has floured and borne
seed; but it perished by reason of the injury of our extraordinary cold
winter that then happened: nevertheless Dioscorides writes against all truth,
that it neither bears flowers nor seed: after Theophrastus, Virgil witnesses
that it does bear flowers in the twelfth of his Aeneidos.

Dictamnum genitrix Cretaea carpit ab Ida, Puberibus caulem (...), and flore
comantem (...). -- In English thus:

His mother from the Cretaean Ida crops Dictamnus having soft and tender
leaves, And purple flowers upon the bending tops, etc. The Time.
They flower and flourish in the Summer months, their seed is ripe in
September.

The Names.
It is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Dictamnus and Dictamnum: of some,
Pulegium syluestre, or wild Pennie-roiall: the Apothecaries of Germany for
Dictamnum with c, in the first syllable, do read Diptamnum with p: but (says
Dodonaeus) this error might have been of small importance, if in stead of the
leaves of Dittanie, they did not use the roots of Fraxinella for Dittany,
which they falsely call Dictamnum: in English, Dittanie, and Dittanie of Candie.

The other is called Pseudodictamnum, or bastard Dittanie, of the likeness it
has with Dittanie, it skilleth not, though the shoppes know it not: the reason
why let the Reader guess.

The Temperature.
These plants are hot and dry of nature.

The Virtues.
Dittanie being taken in drink, or put up in a pessarie, or used in a fume,
brings away

The juice taken with wine is a remedy against the stinging of serpents.

The same is thought to be of so strong an operation, that with the very smell
also it drives (...)

It is reported likewise that the wild Goats and Dear in Candie when they be
wounded with

It prevails much against all wounds, and especially those made with
invenomed weapons, arrows

The bastard Dittanie, or Pseudodictamnum, is somewhat like in virtues to the
first, but not of so

CHAP. 282. Of Borage.
The Description.
1 BOrage has broad leaves, rough, lying flat upon the ground, of a black or
swart green color: among which rises up a stalk two cubits high, divided
into diverse branches, whereupon do grow gallant blew flowers, composed of five
leaves apiece; out of the middle of which grow forth black threads joined in
the top, and pointed like a broch or pyramide: the root is threddie, and cannot
away with the cold of winter.

2 Borage with white flowers is like unto the precedent, but differs in the
flowers, for those of this plant are white, and the others of a perfect blew
color, wherein is the difference.

3 Never dying Borage has many very broad leaves, rough and hairie, of a
black dark green color: among which rise up stiff hairie stalks,
whereupon do grow fair (...) flowers, somewhat rounder pointed than the
former: the root is black and lasting, having leaves both winter and Summer,
and hereupon it was called Semper virens, and that very properly, to
distinguish it from the rest of this kind, which are but annual.

1 Borago hortensis. Garden Borage.
2 Borago flore albo. White floured Borage.
3 Borago semper virens. Never dying Borage.


4 There is a fourth sort of Borage that has leaves like the precedent, but
thinner and lesser, rough and hairy, dividing it self into branches at the
bottom of the plant, whereupon are placed fair red flowers, wherein is the
chiefest difference between this and the last described. The figure which
belonged to this description was put hereafter for Lycopsis Anglica.

The Place.
These grow in my garden, and in others also.

The Time.
Borage flowers and flourishes most part of all Summer, and till Autumn be far
spent.

The Names.
Borage is called in shops Borago: of the old Writers, (...), which is called
in Latin Lingua Bubula: Pliny calls it Euphrosinum, because it makes a man
merry and joyful: which thing also the old verse concerning Borage
dothtestifie:

Ego Borago gaudia semper ago. I Borage bring always courage. It is called in
high Dutch (...): in Italian, Boragine: in Spanish, Boraces: in low Dutch,
(...): in English, Borage.

The Temperature.
It is evidently moist, and not in like sort hot, but seems to be in a mean
betwixt hot and cold.

The Virtues.
Those of our time do use the flowers in sallads, to exhilerate and make the
mind glad. There be

The leaves boiled among other pot-herbes do much prevail in making the belly
soluble, they Galen teaches.

The leaves and flowers of Borage put into Wine make men and women glad and
merry, and Dioscorides and Pliny affirm.

Syrrup made of the flowers of Borage comfort the heart, purges melancholy,
and quieteth

The flowers of Borage made up with sugar do all the aforesaid with greater
force and effect.

Syrrup made of the juice of Borage with sugar, adding thereto powder of the
bone of a Stags

The root is not used in medicine: the leaves eaten raw engender good blood,
especially in those

CHAP. 283. Of Buglosse.
The Kinds.
LIke as there be diverse sorts of Borage, so are there sundry of the Buglosses;
notwithstanding after Dioscorides, Borage is the true Buglosse: many are of
opinion, and that rightly, that they may be both referred to one kind; yet
will we divide them according to the custom of our time, and their usual
denominations.

1 Buglossa vulgaris. Common Buglosse, or Garden Buglosse.
2 Buglossum luteum. Lang de beef.


The Description.
1 THat which the Apothecaries call Buglosse brings forth leaves longer than
those of Borage, sharp pointed, longer than the leaves of Beets, rough and
hairy. The stalk grows up to the height of two cubits, parted above into
sundry branches, whereon are orderly placed bluish flowers, tending to a
purple color before they be opened, and afterward more blew. The root is long,
thick, and gross, and of long continuance.

3 Buglossa syluestris minor. Small wild Buglosse.


2 Lang de Beef is a kind hereof, altogether lesser, but the leaves hereof
are rougher, like the rough tongue of an ox or cow, whereof it took his name.
The leaves of Lang-de-(...) are very rough, the stalk some cubit and half
high, commonly red of color: the tops of the branches (...) (...) in scaly
rough heads: these flowers are composed of many small yellow leaves in manner
of those of Dandelion, and fly away in down like as they do: the flowers are
of a very bitter taste, whence Lobel calls it Buglossum (...) luteum Hieracio
cognatum. Tabernamontanus (...) fitly called it Hieracium echioides.

3 There is another wild Buglosse which Dodonaeus has by the name of Buglossa
(...): it has a small white root, from which arises a slender stalk some foot
and half high set with small rough leaves sinuated or cut in on the edges: the
stalks at the top are divided into three or four small branches, bearing
small blew flowers in rough husks.

The Place.
These do grow in gardens every where. The Lang-de-Beefe grows wild in many
places; as between Redriffe and Deptsord by the waterie ditch sides. The
little wild Buglosse grows upon the dry ditch banks about Pickadilla, and
almost every where.

The Time.
They flower from May, or June, even to the end of Summer. The leaves perish in
Winter, and new come up in the Spring.

The Names.
Garden Buglosse is called of the later Herbarists Buglossa, and Buglossa
Domestica: or garden Buglosse.

Lang-de Beef is called in Latin Lingua bouis, and Buglossum Luteum Hieracio
cognatum, and also Buglossa syluestris, or wild Buglosse.

Small wild Buglosse is called Borago syluestris by Tragus; Echium Germanicum
Spinosum by Fuchsius; and Buglossa syluestris by Dodonaeus.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The root, says Dioscorides, mixed with oil, cures green wounds, and adding
thereto a little

It causes sweat in agues, as Pliny says, if the juice be mixed with a
little Aquavitae, and the body

The Physicians of the later time use the leaves, flowers, and roots in stead
of Borage, and put Lang-de-Beefe, and also to keep the belly soluble.

CHAP. 284. Of Alkanet or wild Buglosse.
The Description.
THese herbs comprehended under the name of Anchusa, were so called of the
Greek word (...): (i) Illinere succo, vel pigmentis, that is, to color or
paint any thing: whereupon these The two figures that were formerly here were
both of the ordinary (...), whereof the (...) might well enough (...), but the
2. was much different from that it should have been.
1 Anchusa Alcibiadion. Red Alkanet.
The two figures that were formerly here were both of the ordinary (...),
whereof the (...) might well enough (...), but the 2. was much different from
that it should have been.
2 Anchusa lutea. Yellow Alkanet.
3 Anchusa minor. Small Alkanet.
plants were called Anchusa of that flourishing and bright red color which is
in the root, even as red as pure and clear blood: for that is the only mark
or note whereby to distinguish these herbs from those which be called Echum,
Lycopsis, and Buglossa, whereto they have a great resemblance: I have therefore
expressed four differences of this plant Anchusa or Alkanet from the other
kinds, by the leaves, flowers, and bigness.

1 The first kind of Alkanet has many leaves like Echium, or small Buglosse,
covered over with a prickie hoarinesse, having commonly but one stalk, which
is round, rough, and a cubite high. The cups of the flowers are of a sky
color tending to purple, not unlike the flowers of Echium; the seed is small,
somewhat long, and of a pale color: the root is a finger thick, the (...) or
inner part thereof is of a wooddie substance, dying the hands or whatsoever
touches the same, of a bloody color, or of the color of saunders.

2 The second kind of Anchusa or Alkanet is of greater beauty and estimation
than the first; the branches are less and more bushie in the top: it has
also greater plenty of leaves, and those more woollie or hairie: the stalk
grows to the height of two cubits: at the top grow flowers of a yellow
color, far different from the other: the root is more shining, of an excellent
delicate purplish color, and more full of juice than the first.

3 There is a small kind of Alkanet, whose root is greater and more full of
juice and substance than the roots of the other kinds: in all other respects
it is less, for the leaves are narrower, smaller, tenderer, and in number
more, very green like unto Borage, yielding forth many little tender stalks:
the flowers are less than of the small Buglosse, and red of color: the seed
is of an ash color, somewhat long and slender, having the taste of Buglosse.

4 There is also another kind of Alkanet, (...) is as the others before
mentioned, a kind of wild Buglosse, notwithstanding for distinctions sake I
have separated and severed them. This last Anchusa has narrow leaves, much
like unto our common Summer Sauorie. The stalks are two handfuls high, bearing
very small flowers, and of a bluish or sky color: the root is of a dark
brownish red color, dying the hands little or nothing at all, and of a wooddie
substance.

The Time.
These plants do grow in the fields of Narbone, and about Montpellier and many
other parts of France: I found these plants growing in the Isle of Thanet near
unto the sea, betwixt the house sometime belonging to Sir Henry Crispe, and
Margate; where I found some in their natural ripeness, yet scarcely any that
were come to that beautiful color of Alkanet: but such as is sold for very
good in our Apothecaries shops I found there in great plenty.

I doubt whether our Author found any of these in the place here set down,
for I have sought it but failed of finding; yet if he found any it was only
the first described, for I think the other three are strangers.

The Time.
The Alkanets flower and flourish in the Summer months: the roots do yield
their bloody juice in harvest time, as Dioscorides writes.

The Names.
Alkanet is called in Greek (...) in Latin also (...): of diverse, Fucus
(...), and Onocleia, Buglossa Hispanica, or Spanish Buglosse: in Spanish,
(...): in French, Orchanet: and in English likewise Orchanet and Alkanet.

The Temperature.
The roots of Alkanet are cold and dry, as Galen writes, and binding, and
because it is bitter it cleanses away choleric humors: the leaves be not so
forceable, yet do they likewise bind and dry.

The Virtues.
Dioscorides says, that the root being made up in a cerote, or searecloth with
oil, is very good for

That being used as a pessarie it brings forth the dead birth.

The decoction being inwardly taken with Mead or honied water, cures the
yellow iaundise,

It is used in ointments for women's paintings: and the leaves drunk in wine is
good against the

Diverse of the later Physicians do boil with the root of Alkanet and wine,
sweet butter, such as

The roots of these are used to color sirrups, waters, gellies, and such like
confections as Turnsole is.

John of Ardern has set down a composition called Sanguis Veneris, which is
most singular in deep

The Gentlewomen of France do paint their faces with these roots, as it is
said.

CHAP. 285. Of Walland Vipers Buglosse.
The Description.
1 LYcopis Anglica, or wild Buglosse, so called for that it does not grow so
commonly elsewhere, has rough and hairie leaves, somewhat lesser than the
garden Buglosse: the flowers grow for the most part upon the side of the
slender stalk, in fashion hollow like a little bell, whereof some be blew, and
others of a purple color.

2 There is another kind of Echium that has rough and hairy leaves likewise,
much like unto the former; the stalk is rough, charged full of little
branches, which are laden on every side with diverse small narrow leaves, sharp
pointed, and of a brown color: among which leaves grow flowers, each flower
being composed of one leaf divided into five (...) at the top, less, and not
so wide open as that of Lycopsis; (...) of a sad blew or purple color at the
first, but when they are open they show to be of an azure color, long and
hollow, having certain small blew threads in the middle: the seed is small and
black; fashioned like the head of a snake or viper: the root is long, and red
without.

That (...) which (...) stood in the second place, under the title of (...),
and whereof there was no more mention made by our Author, neither in (...),
name, nor (...), I take to be nothing else than the (...) which (...) with long
leaves spread upon the ground before it comes to send up the (...); as you may
see it expressed apart by it self in the figure we give you; which is the true
figure of that plant our Author described and meant: for the figure which (...)
gave was (...) but of the common Borage with (...) leaves, which he described
in the fourth place of the (...) of Borage, as I have (...) (...).
1 Lycopsis Anglica. Wall Buglosse.
2 Echium (...). Vipers Buglosse.
3 Echium pullo flore. Rough Vipers Buglosse.
4 Echium rubro (...). Red floured Vipers Buglosse.


3 This has a crested very rough and hairy stalk some foot high; the leaves
are like those of Vipers (...), and covered over with a soft downinesse, and
grow disorderly upon the (...), which toward the top is parted into sundry
branches, which are divided into diverse foot-stalkes carrying small hollow
flowers divided by five little gashes at their tops; and they are of a dark
purple color, and contained in rough cups lying hid under the leaves. The
seed, as in other (...) of this kind, resembles a Vipers head: the root is
long, as thick as ones little finger, of a dusky color on the outside, and it
lives diverse years. This flowers in May, and grows in the dry meadows and
hilly grounds of Austria. Clusius calls it Echium pullo (...).

4 This other being also of Clusius his description has long and narrow leaves
like those of the common Vipers Buglosse, yet a little broader: the stalks
rise up some cubit high, firm, crested, and hairy; upon which grow abundance
of leaves, shorter and narrower than those below; and amongst these toward the
top grow many flowers upon short footstalk, which twine themselves round like
a Scorpions tail: these flowers are of an elegant red color, and in shape
somewhat like those of the common kind; and such also is the seed, but somewhat
less: the root is lasting, long also, hard, woody, and black on the outside,
and it sometimes sends up many, but most usually but one stalk. It flowers in
May, and was found in Hungary by Clusius, who first set it forth by the name of
Echium rubro flore.

The Place.
Lycopsis grows upon stone walls, and upon dry barren stony grounds.

Echium grows where Alkanet does grow, in great abundance.

The Time.
They flourish when the other kinds of Buglosses do flower.

The Names.
It is called in Greek Echium, and (...), of Alcibiades the finder of the
virtues thereof: of (...) it is thought to be Anchusae species, or a kind of
Alkanet: in High Dutch, wild (...): in Spanish, Yerua de la Biuora, or
Chupamel: in Italian, Buglossa saluatica: in French, Buglosse sauuage: in
English, Vipers Buglosse, Snakes Buglosse; and of some, Vipers herb, and wild
Buglosse the lesser.

The Temperature.
These herbs are cold and dry of complexion.

The Virtues.
The root drunk with wine is good for those that be bitten with Serpents, and
it keeps such Dioscorides writes. (...) in his book of Treacles makes Vipers
Buglosse to be one of those plants which cure the biting of serpents, and
especially of the Viper, and that drive serpents away.

If it be drunk in wine or otherwise it causes plenty of milk in women's
breasts.

The herb chewed, and the juice swallowed down, is a most singular remedy
against poison

CHAP. 286. Of Hounds-tongue.
The Description.
1 THe common Hounds tongue has long leaves much like the garden Buglosse, but
broader, and not rough at all, yet having some fine hoarinesse or softness
like velvet. These leaves stink very filthily, much like to the piss of dogs;
wherefore the Dutch men have called it Hounds piss, and not Hounds tongue. The
stalks are rough, hard, two cubits high, and of a brown color, bearing at
the top many flowers of a dark purple color: the seed is rough, cleaving to
garments like Agrimonie seed: the root is black and thick. These plants for
one year after they come up of seed bring forth only leaves, and those pretty
large; and the second year they send up their stalks, bearing both flowers and
seed, and then usually the root perishes. I have therefore presented you with
the figures of it, both when it flowers, and when it sends forth only
leaves.

1 Cynoglossum (...) vulgar sine (...). Hounds-tongue without the flower.
1 Cynoglossum maius cum flore and (...). Hounds-tongue with the flower and
seed.
2 Cynoglossum Creticum 1. The first Candy Dogs-tongue.
3 Cynoglossum Creticum alterum. The other Candy Dogs-tongue.


2 We have received another sort hereof from the parts of Italy, having leaves
like Woade; somewhat rough, and without any manifest smell, wherein it
differs from the common kind; the seed hereof came under the title
Cynoglossum Creticum, Hounds-tongue of Candy. The flowers are lesser and of a
lighter color than those of the former; the seeds also are rough, and grow
four together, with a point coming out of the middle of them as in the common
kind, but yet lesser; the root is long and withish. Clusius has this by the
name of Cynoglossum Creticum 1.

3 This second Cynoglossum Creticum of Clusius has leaves some handful long,
and some inch and better broad: among which, the next year after the sowing,
comes up a stalk some cubit or more high, crested, stiff, and straight, and
somewhat downy as are also the leaves, which grow upon the same, being somewhat
broad at their setting on, and of a yellowish green color. The top of the
stalk is divided into sundry branches, which twine or turn in their tops like
as the Scorpion grass, and carry shorter yet larger flowers than the ordinary
kind, and those of a whitish color at the first, with many small purplish
veins, which after a few days become blew. The seeds are like the former in
their growing, shape, and roughness.

4 We have another sort of Hounds-tongue like unto the common kind, saving it
is altogether lesser: the leaves are of a shining green color.

4 Cynoglossum minus folio virente. Small green leaued Hounds-tongue.


The Place.
The great Hounds-tongue grows almost every where by highways and vntoiled
ground: the small Hounds-tongue grows very plentifully by the ways side as
you ride Colchester highway from Londonward, between Esterford and Wittam in
Essex.

The Time.
They flower in June and July.

The Names.
Hounds-tongue is called in Greek, (...): in Latin, Lingua canis: of Pliny,
Cynoglossos; and he shows two kinds thereof: in English, Hounds-tongue, or
Dogstongue, but rather Hounds-pisse, for in the world there is not any thing
smells so like unto Dogs-pisse as the leaves of this Plant do.

The Nature.
Hounds-tongue, but especially his root, is cold and dry.

The Virtues.
The roots of Hounds-tongue roasted in the Ignis sacer, or wilde-fire.

The juice boiled with honey of roses and

Dioscorides says, That the leaves boiled

Likewise they are a remedy against scaldings or burnings, and against the
biting of dogs, as the

CHAP. 287. Of Comfrey, or great Consound.
The Description.
1 THe stalk of this Comfrey is cornered, thick, and hollow like that of
Sow-thistle: it grows two cubits or a yard high: the leaves that spring from
the root, and those that 1 (...) mayor flore purpureo. Comfrey with purple
flowers.
3 Symphytum tuberosum. Comfrey with the knobby root.
4 Simphytum parvum Boraginis facie. Borage-floured Comfrey.
grow upon the stalks are long, broad, rough, and pricking withal, something
hairie, and being handled make the hands itch; very like in color and roughnes
to those of Borage, but longer, and sharp pointed, as be the leaves of
Elecampane: from out the wings of the stalks appear the flowers orderly
placed, long, hollow within, of a light red color: after them grows the
seed, which is black. The root is long and thick, black without, white
within, having in it a clammy juice, in which root consists the virtue.

2 The great Comfrey has rough hairy stalks, and long rough leaves much like
the garden Buglosse, but greater and blacker: the flowers be round and hollow
like little bells, of a white color: the root is black without, and white
within, and very slimy. This differs no way from the former but only in the
color of the flower, which is yellowish or white, when as the other is reddish
or purple.

3 There is another kind of Comfrey which has leaves like the former, saving
that they be lesser: the stalks are rough and tender: the flowers be like the
former, but that they be of an ouerworn yellow color: the roots are thick,
short, black without, and tuberous, which in the figure are not expressed so
large and knobby as they ought to have been.

4 This pretty plant has fibrous and blackish roots, from which rise up many
leaves like those of Borage, or Comfrey, but much smaller and greener, the
stalks are some eight inches high, and on their tops carry pretty flowers like
those of Borage, but not so sharp pointed, but of a more pleasing blew color.
This flowers in the spring and is kept in some choice Gardens. Lobell calls it
Symphytum pumilum repens Borraginis facie, sieve Borrago minima Herbariorum.

The Place.
Comfrey joyeth in watery ditches, in fat and fruitful meadows; they grow all
in my Garden.

The Time.
They flower in June and July.

The Names.
It is called in Greek (...): in Latin Symphytum, and Solidago: in shops,
Consolida mayor, and Symphytum maius: of Scribonius Largus, Inula rustica, and
Alus Gallica: of others, Osteocollon: in high Dutch, Walwurtz: in low Dutch,
(...): in Italian, Consolida maggiore: in Spanish, Suelda maiore, and Consuelda
mayor: in French, Consire, and Oreille d'asne: in English, Comfrey, (...)
Consound; of some, Knit back, and Blackewoort.

The Temperature.
The root of Comfrey has a cold quality, but yet not much: it is also of a
clammie and gluing moisture, it causes no itch at all, neither is it of a
sharp or biting taste, unsavory, and without any quality that may be tasted;
so far is the tough and gluing moisture from the sharp clamminesse of the sea
Onion, as that there is no comparison between them. The leaves may cause
itching not through heat or sharpness, but through their ruggedness, as we
have already written, yet less than those of the Nettle.

The Virtues.
The roots of Comfrey stamped, and the juice drunk with wine, helps those
that spit blood,

The same bruised and laid to in manner of a plaster, does heal all fresh and
green wounds,

The roots boiled and drunk, do cleanse the breast from phlegm, and cure the
griefs of the

The slimie substance of the root made in a posset of ale, and given to drink
against the pain in

The roots of Comfrey in number four, Knotgrasse and the leaves of Clarie of
each an handful,

There is likewise a syrrup made hereof to be used in this case, which staieth
voiding of blood:

The same syrrup cures the ulcers of the kidneys, though they have been of
long continuance;

Moreover, it staieth the overmuch flowing of the monthly sickness, taken
every day for certain

It is highly commended for wounds or hurts of all the rest also of the
intrailes and inward

The root stamped and applied unto them, takes away the inflammation of the
fundament,

CHAP. 288. Of Cowslips of Jerusalem.
1 Pulmonaria maculosa. Spotted Cowslips of Jerusalem.
2 Pulmonaria folijs Echij. Buglosse Cowslips.
3 Pulmoria angustifolia ij. Clusij. Narrow leafed Cowslips of Jerusalem.


The Description.
1 COwslips of Jerusalem, or the true and right Lungwort, has rough, hairy,
and large leaves of a brown green color, confusedly spotted with diverse spots,
or drops of white: amongst which spring up certain stalks, a span long,
bearing at the top many fine flowers, growing together in bunches like the
flowers of cowslips, saving that they be at the first red, or purple, and
sometimes blew, and oftentimes al these colors at once. The flowers being
fallen, there come small buttons full of seed. The root is black and threddy.
This is sometimes found with white flowers.

2 The second kind of Lungwort is like unto the former, but greater in each
respect: the leaves bigger than the former, resembling wild Buglosse, yet
spotted with white spots like the former: the flowers are like the other, but
of an exceeding shining red color.

3 Carolus Clusius sets forth a third kind of Lungwoort, which has rough
and hairie leaves, like unto wild Buglosse, but narrower: among which rises up
a stalk a foot high, bearing at the top a bundle of blew flowers, in fashion
like unto those of Buglosse or the last described.

The Place.
These plants do grow in moist shadowie woods, and are planted almost every
where in gardens. Mr. Goodyer found the Pulmonaria folijs Echij, being the
second, May 25. Anno 1620. flouring in a wood by Holbury house in the New
Forest in Hampshire.

The Time.
They flower for the most part in March and April.

The Names.
Cowslips of Jerusalem, or Sage of Jerusalem, is called of the Herbarists of
our time, Pulmonaria, and Pulmonalis; of Cordus, Symphitum syluestre, or wild
Comfrey: but seeing the other is also of nature wild, it may aptly be called
Symphytum maculosum, or Maculatum: in high Dutch, Lungenkraut: in low Dutch,
Onser (...) melcruiit: in English, spotted Comfrey, Sage of Jerusalem, Cowslip
of Jerusalem, Sage of Bethlem, and of some Lungwort; notwithstanding there is
another Lungwort, of which we will entreat among the kinds of Mosses.

The Temperature.
Pulmonaria should be of like temperature with the great Comfrey, if the root
of this were clammie: but seeing that it is hard and woody, it is of a more
drying quality, and more binding.

The Virtues.
The leaves are used among pot-herbes. The roots are also thought to be good
against the infirmities and ulcers of the lungs, and to be of like force with
the great Comfrey. The figure which formerly was in the fourth place of this
Chapter, was only of he first described with white flowers. But the Title
(...) (...), and the description fitted to it (though little to the purpose, and
therefore omitted) were intended for the Pulmonaria Gallorum (...) (...),
whereof I have in the due place largely treated, as you may see in this book,
page 304. chap, 36.


CHAP. 289. Of Clote Burre, or Burre Docke.
1 Bardana mayor. The great Burre Docke.
2 Bardana minor. The less Burre Docke.


The Description.
1 CLot Burre brings forth broad leaves and hairie, far bigger than the
leaves of Gourds, and of greater compass, thicker also, and blacker, which on
the upper side are of a dark green color, and on the nether side somewhat
white: the stalk is cornered, thick, beset with like leaves, but far less,
divided into very many wings and branches, bringing forth great Burres round
like bullets or balls, which are rough all over, and full of sharp crooking
prickles, taking hold on men's garments as they pass by; out of the tops
whereof grows a flower thrummed, or all of threads, of color purple: the seed
is perfected within the round ball (...) bullet, and this seed when the burres
open, and the wind blows, is carried away with the wind: the root is long,
white within, and black without.

There is another kind hereof which has lesser and softer heads, with weaker
prickles; these heads are also hairy or downy, and the leaves and whole plant
somewhat less, yet otherwise like the fore described; Lobell calls this
Arction montanum, and Lappa minor Galeni: it is also the Lappa minor altera of
Matthiolus. Lobell found this growing in Somersetshire three miles from Bath,
near the house of one (...). John (...).

2 The lesser Burre has leaves far smaller than the former, of a grayish
ouerworne (...) like to those of Orach, nicked round about the edges: the
stalk is a foot and a half high, (...) little black spots, dividing it self
into many branches: the flowers before the Burres come (...) do compass the
small stalks round about; they are but little, and quickly vade away: then
(...) the Burres or the fruit out of the bosom of the leaves, in form long,
on the tops of the (...) as big as an Olive or a Cornell berry, rough like the
balls of the Plane tree, and being (...) cleave fast unto men's garments: they
do not open at all, but being kept close shut bring forth (...) (...). The root
is fastened with very many strings, and grows not deep.

The Place.
The first grows every where: the second I found in the high way leading from
Draiton to Iuer, two miles from Colbrooke, since which time I have found it in
the high way (...) Stanes and Egham It also grows plentifully in Southwick
sheet in Hampshire, as I have been informed by Mr. Goodyer.

The Time.
Their season is in July and August.

The Names.
The great Burre is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Personata, personatia,
and Arcium: in shops, Bardana, and Lappa mayor: in high Dutch, Grosskletten: in
low Dutch, Groote clissen: (...) rench, Glouteron: in English, Great Burre,
Burre Docke, or Clot Burre: Apuleius besides these does also set down certain
other names belonging to Clot Burre, as Dardana, Bacchion, Elephantosis,
Nephelion, Manifolium.

The lesser Burre Docke is called of the Graecians (...): in Latin, Xanthium:
in shops, Lappa minor, Lappa (...), and of diverse, Strumaria: Galen says it is
also called, Phasganion, and Phasganon, or herb victory, being but bastard
names, and therefore not properly so called: in English, Louse Burre, Ditch
Burre, and lesser Burre Docke: it seems to be called Xanthium of the effect,
for the Burre or fruit before it be fully withered, being stamped and put into
an earthen vessel, and afterward when need requires the weight of two ounces
thereof and somewhat more, being steeped in warm water and rubbed on, makes
the hairs of the head red; yet the head is first to be dressed or rubbed with
niter, as Dioscorides writes.

The Temperature.
The leaves of Clot Burre are of temperature moderately dry and wasting; the
root is something hot.

The seed of the lesser Burre, as Galen says, has power to digest, therefore
it is hot and dry.

The Virtues.
The roots being taken with the kernels of Pine Apples; as Dioscorides
witnesses, are good for

Apeleius says that the same being stamped with a little salt, and applied to
the biting of a mad

He also teaches that the juice of the leaves given to drink with honey,
procures urine, and takes

Columella declares, that the herb beaten with salt and laid upon the
scarifying, which is made

The stalk of Clot-burre before the burres come forth, the rind pilled off,
being eaten raw with

Also it is a good nourishment, especially boiled: if the kernel of the Pine
Apple be likewise

The root stamped and strained with a good draught of (...) is a most approved
medicine for a

Treacle of Andromachus, and the whites of eggs, of each a like quantity,
labored in a leaden

Dioscorides commends the decoction of the root of (...), together with the
seed, against the

Dioscorides reports that the fruit is very good to be laid unto hard
swellings.

The root (...) picked, washed, stamped and strained with Malmesey, helps the
running of

CHAP. 290. Of Coltsfoot, or Horse-foot.
1 Tussilago florens. Coltsfoot in flower.
1 Tussilaginis folia. The leaves of Coltsfoot.


The Description.
1 TVssilago or Fole-foot has many white and long creeping roots, somewhat
fat; from which rise up naked stalks (in the beginning of March and April)
about a spanne long, bearing at the top yellow flowers, which change into down,
and are carried away with the wind: when the stalk and seed is perished, there
appear springing (...) of the earth many broad leaves, green above, and next
the ground of a white hoarie or grayish color, fashioned like an horse foot;
for which cause it was called Fole-foot, and Horse-hoofe: seldom or never
shall you find leaves and flowers at once, but the flowers are past before the
leaves come out of the ground; as may appear by the first picture, which
sets forth the naked stalks and flowers; and by the second, which
pourtraiteth the leaves only.

2 Besides the commonly growing and described Coltsfoot, there are other two
(...) mountain Colts-feet described by Clusius; the first whereof I will here
present you with, but the second you shall find hereafter in the chapter of
Asarum, by the name of Asarina (...). This here delineated has five or six
leaves not much unlike those of Alehoofe, of a dark shining green color
above, and very white and downy below: the stalk is naked some handful high,
hollow and downy, bearing one flower at the top composed of purplish threads,
and flying away in down: (...) which the stalk falls away, and so the leaves
only remain during the rest of the year: the (...) is small and creeping. It
grows on the tops of the Austrian and Stirian mountains, where it flowers in
June or August. Brought into gardens it flowers in April. Clusius calls it
Tussilago Alpina 1. and he has given two figures thereof, both which I here
give you by the same titles as he has them.

2 Tussilago Alpina flore aperto. Mountain Coltsfoot full in flower.
2 Tussilago Alpina flore evanido. Mountain Coltsfoot with the flower fading.


The Place.
This grows of it self near unto Springs, and on the brinkes of brooks and
rivers, in wet (...), by ditches sides, and in other moist and watery places
near unto the sea, almost every where.

The Time.
The flowers, which quickly fade, are to be seen in the end of March, and
about the Calends of April, which speedily wither together with the stems:
after them grow forth the leaves, which remain green all Summer long: and
hereupon it came that Coltsfoot was thought to be without flowers; which thing
also Pliny has mentioned in his six and twentieth book, cap. 6.

The Names.
Folefoot is called in Greek (...): of the Latins likewise (...), and
Tussilago: in shops, Farfara, and Vngula Caballana: of diverse, Pata equina: in
Italian, Vnghia di Cauallo: in Spanish, vnha d' asno: in French, Pas d' asne:
in English, Fole-foot, Coltsfoot, Horse-hoofe, and Bull-foot. The same is also
(...), which Pliny in his twenty eighth book, and fifteenth chapter reports
to be likewise called Farfugium, and Farranum, if there be not an error in the
copy: which thing also (...) in his first book affirms, pretermitting the
name of Bechium, and attributing unto it all the virtues and faculties of
Bechium or Coltsfoot. Whose opinion Orabasius (...) to be of, in his fifteenth
book of his medicinable Collections, making mention of Chamaeleuce: only Pliny
also agrees with them; showing that some think that Bechium is called by
another name Chamaeleuce, in his twenty sixth book, cap. 6. and it may be that
Dioscorides has written of one and the self same herb in sundry places, and
by diverse names. Bechium and Tussilago, which may also be Englished Coughwort,
so called of the effect, and Farfara, of the white Poplar tree, to whose (...)
it is like; which was named of the Ancients Farfarus, as (...) writes in his
Comedy called (...):

-- viscum legioni dedi. fundasque eos prosternebam vt folia Farfari. To the
company I gave both lime bush and sling. That to the ground as Poplar leaves I
might them sling. Dodonaeus (from whom our Author took this) sets down this
place in Plautus as you (...) it here, but not well; for the last verse should
be Fundasque, (...) praesternebant folia Farfari. Thus it is in most editions
of Plautus, and that rightly, as the ensuing words in that place declare.

The white Poplar tree is called in Greek (...), and hereupon Bechion or
Coltsfoot was also (...) Chamaeleuce.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The leaves of Coltsfoot being fresh and green are something cold, and have
withal a (...) quality; they are good for ulcers and inflammations: but the
dried leaves are hot and dry, (...) somewhat biting.

A decoction made of the green leaves and roots, or else a syrrup thereof, is
good for the cough

The green leaves of Fole-foot pound with honey, do cure and heal the hot
inflammation called

The fume of the dried leaves taken through a funnell or tunnell, burned upon
coals, effectually

Being taken in manner as they take Tobaco, it mightily prevails against the
diseases aforesaid.

CHAP. 291. Of Butter-Burre.
The Description.
1 BVtter-Burre does in like manner bring forth flowers before the leaves, as
does Coltsfoot, but they are small, mossie, tending to a purple color; which
being made up into a big ear as it were, do quickly (together with the stem,
which is thick, (...) of substance, and brittle) wither and fall away: the
leaves are very great like to a round cap or hat, called in Latin Petasus, of
such a wideness, as that of it self it is big and large enough to keep a
man's head from rain, and from the heat of the Sun: and therefore they be
greater than the leaves of the Clot-burre, of color somewhat white, yet whiter
underneath: every stem bears his leaf; the stem is oftentimes a cubit long,
thick, full of substance; upon which stands the leaf in the center or
middlemost part of the circumference, or very near, like to one of the
greatest Mushroms, but that it has a cleft that stands about the stem,
especially when they are in perishing and withering away: at the first the
upper superficial or outside of the Mushroms stands (...) and when they are
in withering stands more in; and even so the leaf of Butter-bur has on the
outside a certain shallow hollownesse: the root is thick, long, black
without, white within, (...) taste somewhat bitter, and is oftentimes
worme-eaten.

The Place.
This grows in moist places near unto rivers sides, and upon the brinks and
banks of lakes and ponds, almost every where.

The Time.
The ear with the flowers flourish in April or sooner: then come up the
leaves, which continue till Winter, with new ones still growing up.

1 Petasites florens. Butter-Burre in flower.
(...) Petasit is folia. The leaves of Butter-(...).


The Names.
Butter-bur is called in (...) (...), of the (...) of the lease that is like to
(...) or a hat: the Latins call it Petasites: in high- Dutch, (...): in
Low Dutch, (...): in English it is named Butter-Burre: it is very manifest that
this is like to Colts-soot, and of the same kind.

The Temperature.
Butter-Burre is hot and dry in the second degree, and of thin parts.

The Virtues.
The roots of Butter-burre stamped with ale, and given to drink in pestilent
and burning Fevers,

The (...) dried and (...) to powder, and drunk in wine, is a sovereign
medicine against the

The same cures all naughty filthy (...), if the powder be strewed therein.

The same kills worms in the belly: it prouokes urine, and brings down the
monthly terms.

CHAP. 292. Of Mountain Horse-foot.
The (...).
1 THis plant (which the modern Writers hane referred to the Cacalia of the
Ancients, and to the kinds of Colts-soot) I have thought good to name in
English, Horsefoot, for that the leaves exceed Coltsfoot in bigness, yet are
like them in shape: and of this plant Clusius (whom I here chiefly follow)
has described two (...): the first of these has many leaves almost like unto
(...) of Colts-(...), but larger, very round, and snipt about the edges, of a
(...) green (...) above, and hoarie underneath, having (...) many (...) or
nerves running up and down them, and these leaves are of an ungrateful (...),
and grow upon long purplish crested stalks: The stem is some two cubits
high, crested likewise, and of a purplish color, set also at certain (...)
with leaves very like unto the other, but lesser than those 1 Cacalia incano
folio. Hoarie leaued Horse-foot.
2 Cacalia folio (...). Smooth leaued Horse-(...).
next the ground, and more cornered and sharper pointed; the tops of the
stalks and branches carry bunches of purple flowers, as in an vmbell: and
commonly in (...) bunch there are three little flowers consisting of (...)
leaves a piece, and a (...) pestell, and these are of a purple color, and a
weak, but not unpleasant smell, and they at length turn into down, amongst
which lies hid a (...) seed: the root, if old, sends sorth diverse (...), as
also store of long whitish (...).

2 The leaves of this are more thin, tough and (...), and of a deeper green on
the upper sides, neither are they whitish below, nor come so round or close
whereas they are fastened to their stalks (which are not crested as those of
the (...), but round and (...)) they are also full of veins, and nickt about
the edges, and of somewhat an (...) hot and bitter taste. The stalks are also
smoother, and the flowers of a lighter (...).

The Place.
Both these grow in the Austrian and Stirian Alps under the sides of woods,
among bushes and such shadowie places: but not in England, that I have yet
heard of.

The Time.
I find it not set down when these flower and seed, but judge it about the
same time that Coltsfoot does.

The Names.
This by Clusius, Lob l and others, has been called (...), and referred to
that (...) by (...), lib. 4. cap. 123. which is thought to be that set forth by
(...) by the name of (...). In the Historia Lugd. page 1052. The later of these
two here described is (...) by the name of (...) Alpina sive montana, and the
former is there, page 1; 08, by the name of Cacalia, but the flowers are not
rightly expressed: and ifmy judgment fail me not, the figure which is in the
seventeenth page of the Appendix of the same Author, by the title of Aconitum
Pardalianches (...), is of no other than this very plant. But because I have
not as yet seen the plant, I will not (...) affirm it: but refer this my
opinion to those that are judicious and curious, to know the plant that raised
such controversy between (...) and Gesner, and whereof neither (...) nor
(...), who have set forth (...) his Commentaries, have given us any certain or
probable knowledge.

The Temperature and Virtues, out of the Ancients.
The root of Cacalia is void of any biting quality, and moderately dries, and
it is of a gross and Tragacanth: neither if you chew it and swallow down the
juice does it less avail against those effects than the juice of Liquorice.

CHAP. 293. Of small Celandine or Pile-woort.
The Kinds.
THere be two kinds of Celandine, according to the old writers, much differing
in (...) and figure: the one greater, the other lesser, which I intend to
divide into two distinct chapters, marshalling them as (...) as may be with
their like, in form and figure, and first of the small Celandine.

(...) minus. Pile-woort.


The Description.
THe lesser Celandine has green round leaves, smooth, slipperie, and shining,
less than the leaves of the Iuie: the stalks are slender, short, and sor the
most part creeping upon the ground: they bring forth little yellow flours like
those of Crow-foot; and after the flowers there springs up a little fine knop
or head full of seed: the root consists of slender strings, on which do
hang as it were certain grains, of the bigness of wheat corns, or bigger.

The Place.
It grows in medows, by common ways, by ditches and trenches, and it is
common every where, in moist and dankish places.

The Time.
It comes forth about the Calends of March, and floureth a little after: it
begins to fade away in April, it is quite gone in May, afterward it is
hard to be found, yea scarcely the root.

The Names.
It is called in Greek (...) of the Latins Chelidonium minus, and
Hirundinaria minor: of diverse, Scrophularia minor, Ficaria minor: of Serapio,
Memiren: in Italian, Fauoscello: in High Dutch, (...): in French, Esclerc, and
Petit Bassinet: in English, little Celandine, Fig-woort, and Pile-woort.

The Temperature.
It is hot (...) dry, also more biting and hotter than the greater: it comes
nearest in (...) to the Crowfoot.

This which is here, and by most Authors set forth for Chelidonium minus, has
no such great heat and Acrimonie as Dioscorides and Galen (...) to be in
theirs; making it hot in the fourth degree, when as this of ours scarce
exceedes the first, as far as we may conjecture by the taste.

The Virtues.
It presently, as Galen and Dioscorides affirm, exulcerateth or blistereth the
skin: it makes rough

The juice of the roots mixed with honey, and drawn up into the nosthrils,
purges the head of

The later age use the roots and grains for the piles, which being often
bathed with the juice

There be also who think, that if the herb be but carried about one that has
the piles, the pain

CHAP. 294. Of Marsh Marigold.
The Description.
1 MArsh Marigold has great broad leaves somewhat round, smooth, of a gallant
green color, slightly indented or purld about the edges: among which (...)
up thick fat stalks, likewise green; whereupon do grow goodly yellow
flowers, glittering like gold, and like to those of Crow-foot, but greater: the
root is small, composed of very many strings.

1 Calthapalustris mayor. The great Marsh Marigold.
2 Calthapalustris minor. The small Marsh Marigold.


2 The smaller Marsh Marigold has many round leaves spread upon the ground, of
a dark green color: amongst which rise up diverse branches, charged with the
like leaves: the flowers grow at the tops of the branches, of a most shining
yellow color: the root is also like the former.

3 The great Marsh Marigold with double flowers is a stranger in England, his
native Country should seem to be in the furthest part of Germany by the
relation of a man of those Countries that I have had conference withal the
which he thus described: it has (says he) leaves, roots, and stalks like
those of our common sort, and has double flowers like those of the garden
Marigold, wherein consists the difference.

Camerarius writes just contrary to that which our Author here affirms; for
he says, In Anglia sua sponte non solum plenis, sed oderatis etiam floribus
(...) offert. But I fear that both our 3 Calthapalustris multiplex. Double
floured Marsh Marigold.
Author and Camerarius were deceived by trusting the report of some lying, or
else ignorant persons, for I could never find it growing wild with double
flowers here, nor Camerarius there: yet I do not deny but by chance some one
with double flowers may be found both here and there, but this is not every
where.

The Place.
They joy in moist and marish grounds, and in watery meadows. I have not sound
the double one wild, but seen it preserved in diverse gardens for the beauty
of the flower.

The Time.
They flower in the Spring when the Crowfoots do, and oftentimes in Summer:
the leaves keep their greenenesse all the Winter long.

The Names.
Marsh Marigold is called of Valerius Cordus, Caltha palustris: of
Tabernamontanus, Populago: but not properly: in English, Marsh Marigolds: in
Cheshire and those parts it is called Boots.

The Temperature and (...).
Touching the faculties of these plants, we have nothing to say, either out of
other men's writings, or our own experiences

CHAP. 295. Of Frogge-bit.
Morsus Rana. Frogge-bit.


. The Description.
THere floteth or swimmeth upon the upper parts of the water a small plant,
which we usually call Frog-bit, having little round leaves, thick and full of
juice, very like to the leaves of wall Peniwoort: the flowers grow upon long
stems among the leaves, of a white color, with a certain yellow thrum in the
middle, consisting of three leaves: in stead of roots it has slender strings,
which grow out of a short and small head, as it were, from whence the leaves
spring, in the bottom of the water: from which head also come forth slopewise
certain strings, by which growing forth it multiplieth it self.

The Place.
It is found swimming or floting almost in every ditch, pond, poole, or
standing water, in all the ditches about Saint George his fields, and in the
ditches by the Thames side near to Lambeth Marsh, where any that is disposed
may see it.

The Time.
It flourishes and floureth most part of all the year.

The Names.
It is called of some Ranae morsus, and Morsus Ranae, and Nymphaeaparua.

The Temperature and Virtues.
It is thought to be a kind of Pond-weed (or rather of Water Lilly) and to
have the same faculties

CHAP. 296. Of Water Lilly.
The Description.
1 THe white water Lilly or Nenuphar has great round leaves, in shape of a
Buckler, thick, fat, and full of juice, standing upon long round and smooth
foot-stalkes, full of a spungious substance; which leaves do swim or flote upon
the top of the water: upon the end of each stalk grows one flower only, of
color white, consisting of many little long sharp pointed leaves, in the
midst whereof be many yellow threads: after the flower it brings forth a
round head, in which lies blackish glittering seed. The roots be thick, full
of knots, black without, white and spungie within, out of which grows a
multitude of strings, by which it is fastened in the (...).

1 Nymphaea alba. White Water Lilly.
2 Nymphaealutea. Yellow Water Lilly.


2 The leaves of the yellow water Lilly be like to the other, yet are they a
little longer. The stalks of the flowers and leaves be like: the flowers be
yellow, consisting only of five little short leaves something round; in the
midst of which grows a small round head, or button, sharp toward the point,
compassed about with many yellow threads, in which, when it is ripe, lie also
glittering seeds, greater than those of the other, and lesser than wheat
corns. The roots be thick, long, set with certain dents, as it were white
both within and without, of a spungious substance.

3 The small white water Lilly floreth likewise upon the water, having a single
root, with some few fibers fastened thereto: from which rises up many long,
round, smooth, and soft foot-stalkes, some of which do bring forth at the end
fair broad round buckler leaves like unto the precedent, but lesser: on the
other foot-stalkes stand pretty white flowers, consisting of five small leaves
apeece, having a little yellow in the middle thereof.

3 Nymphaea alba minor. The small white Water Lilly.
5 Nymphaea lutea minima. Dwarf Water Lilly.


4 The small yellow water Lilly has a little threddie root, creeping in the
bottom of the water, and dispersing it self far abroad: from which rise small
tender stalks, smooth and soft, whereon do grow little buckler leaves like the
last described: likewise on the other small stalk stands a tuft of many
flowers likewise floting upon the water as the others do. This has the flowers
larger than those of the next described, wherefore it may be fitly named
Nymphaea lutea minor flore amplo.

5 This dwarf water Lilly differs not from the other small yellow water
Lilly, saving that, that this kind has sharper pointed leaves, and the whole
plant is altogether lesser, wherein lies the difference. This has the flowers
much less than those of the last described, wherefore it is fitly for
distinction sake named Nymphaea (...) minor flore paruo.

The Place.
These herbs do grow in fennes, standing waters, broad ditches, and in brooks
that run slowly, and sometimes in great rivers.

The Time.
They flower and flourish most of the Summer months.

The Names.
Water Lilly is called in Greek (...): and in Latin also Nymphaea, so named
because it loves to grow in waterie places, as Dioscorides says: the
Apothecaries call it Nenuphar: of Apuleius, Matter Herculania, Alga palustris,
Papauer palustre, Clavus veneris, and Digitus veneris: Marcellus a very old
writer reports, that it is called in Latin Claua Herculis: in French,
Badittin: in high Dutch, (...) (...): in low Dutch, (...): in English, Water
Lilly, water Rose.

The Temperature.
Both the root and seed of water Lilly have a drying force without biting.

The Virtues.
Water Lilly with yellow flowers stops laskes, the ouerflowing of seed
which comes away

But water Lilly which has the white flowers is of greater force, insomuch as
it staieth the

Theoprastus says, that being stamped and laid upon the wound, it is reported
to stay the bleeding.

The Physicians of our age do commend the flowers of white Nymphaea against the
insirmities

The root and seed of the great water Lilly is very good against venery or
fleshly desire, if one

The conserve of the flowers is good for the diseases aforesaid, and is good
also against hot burning

The flowers being made into oil, as ye do make oil of roses, does cool and
refrigerate, causing

The green leaves of the great water Lilly, either the white or the yellow
laid upon the region Gonorrhaea, or running of the raines, being two or three
times a day removed, and fresh applied thereto.

CHAP. 297. Of Pond-weed, or water Spike.
1 Potamogeiton latifolium. Broad leafed Pondweed.
2 Potamogeiton angustifolium. Narrow leafed Pondweed.


The Description.
1 POnd-weed has little stalks, slender, spreading like those of the vine,
and jointed: the leaves be long, smaller than the leaves of Plantaine, and
harder, with manifest veins runniug along them as in Plantains, which
standing upon slender and long stems or footstalkes, show themselves above the
water, and lie flat along upon the superficial or upper part thereof, as do
the leaves of the water Lilly: the flowers grow in short ears, and are of a
light red purple color, like those of Red-shankes or Bistort: the seed is hard.

2 This (whose figure was formerly unfitly put by our Author to the following
description) has longer, narrower, and sharper pointed leaves than those of
the last described, having the veins running from the middle rib to the sides
of the leaves, as in a willow leaf, which they somewhat resemble; at the tops
of the stalks grow reddish spikes or ears like those of the last described:
the root is long, jointed, and fibrous.

3 Potamogeiton 3 Dodonaei. Small Pondweed.
4 Potamogeiton longis acutis folijs. Long sharp leaued Pondweed.


3 There is another Pondweed described thus; it shoots forth into many
slender and round stems, which are distributed into sundry branches: his leaves
are broad, long, and sharp pointed, yet much less than the first kind: out
of the bosoms of the branches and leaves there spring certain little stalks
which bear sundry small white mossie flowers, which do turn into plain and
round seeds, like the common Tare or Vetch: his root is fibrous, thoroughly
fastened in the ground.

4 There is also another Pondweed, which has whitish and jointed roots
creeping in the bottom of the water, and sending down some fibers, but
sending up slender jointed and long stalks, small below, and bigger above,
having long narrow and very stiff shrape pointed leaves. The flowers grow in a
reddish spike like those of the first described. This is the Potamogeiton (...)
of Dodonaeus.

The Place.
These herbs do grow in standing waters, pooles, ponds, and ditches, almost
every where.

The Time.
They do flower in June and July.

The Names.
It is called of the (...), (...) in Latin, (...), and Spicata: in high Dutch,
(...): in low Dutch, (...): in French, Espi d'caue: in English, Pondweed, and
water Spike.

The Temperature.
Pondweed, says Galen, does bind and cool, like as does Knot-grasse, but his
(...) is thicker than that of Knot-grasse.

The Virtues.
It is good against the itch, and consuming or eating Ulcers, as Dioscorides
writes.

Also it is good being applied to the inflammation of the legs, wherein Ignis
sacer has gotten

CHAP. 298. Of Water Saligot, water Caltrops, or water Nuts.
The Description.
1 WAter Caltrops have long slender stalks, growing up, and rising from the
bottom of the water, and mounting above the same: the root is long, having
here and there under the water certain tassels full of small strings and
threddie hairs: the stem toward the top of the water, is very great in
respect of that which is lower, the leaves are large and somewhat round, not
unlike those of the Poplar or Elm tree leaves, a little creuised or notched
about the edges: amongst and under the leaves grows the fruit, which is
triangled, hard, sharp pointed, and prickly: in shape like those hurtful
engines in the wars, cast in the passage of the enemy to annoy the feet of
their horses, called Caltrops, whereof this took its name: within these heads
or Nuts is contained a white kernel, in taste almost like the (...)-nut, which
is reported to be eaten green, and being dried and ground to serve in stead of
bread.

There are two other plants which are found growing in many ponds and ditches
of this kingdom, both about London and elsewhere, and I will here give you
the figures out of Lobel and Clusius, and their descriptions as they were sent
me by Mr. Goodyer, who has saved me the labor of describing them.

Tribulus aquaticus minor quercus floribus, Clus. p. 252. Pusillum (...)
pathum, Lobelij. 2 This water herb brings forth from the root, thin, flat,
knottie stalks, of a reddish color, two or three cubits long, or longer,
according to the depth of the water (which when they are dire, are pliant and
bowing) divided toward the top into many parts or branches, bearing but one
leaf at every joint, sometimes two inches long, and half an inch broad, thin,
and as it were shining, so wrinckled and crompled by the sides that it seems
to be torn, of a reddish green color: the foot-stalkes are something long
and thick, and rise up from amongst those leaves, which always grow two one
opposite against another, in a contrary manner to those that grow below on the
stalk: near the top of which foot-stalke grows small grape-like husks, out
of which spring very small reddish flowers, like those of the Oak, every flower
having four very small round topped leaves: after every flower comes
commonly four sharp pointed grains growing together, containing within them
a little white kernel. The lower part of the stalk has at every joint small
white threddie roots, somewhat long, whereby it takes hold in the mudde, and
draws nourishment unto it. The whole plant is commonly covered over with
water. It floureth in June and the beginning of July. I found it in the
standing pooles or fish ponds adjoining to a dissolved Abbey called Durford,
which ponds divide Hampshire and Suffex, and in other standing waters elsewhere.
This description was made upon sight of the plant the 2. of June, 1622.

Tribulus aquaticus minor, muscat (...) floribus. 3 This has not flat stalks
like the other, but round, kneed, and always bearing two leaves at every
joint, one opposite against another, greener, shorter and lesser than the
other, sharp pointed, not much wrinckled and crumpled by the edges. Clusius
says, that they are not at all crumpled. I never observed any without crumples
and wrinckles: the flowers grow on short small footstalkes, of a whitish green
color, like those of Muscatella Cordi, called by Gerard, Radix caua minima
(...) flore: viz. two flowers at the top of every foot-stalke, one opposite
against another, every flower containing four small leaves: which two flowers
being past there come up eight small 1 Tribulus aquaticus. Water Caltrops.
2 Tribulus aquaticus minor quercus floribus. Small water Caltrops, or
Frogs-lettuce.
3 Tribulus aquaticus minor, Muscatellae floribus. Small Frogs-Lettuce.
husks making six several ways a square of flours. The roots are like the
former. This grows abundantly in the river by Droxford in Hampshire. It
floureth in June and July when the other does, and continues covered over with
water, green, both winter and Summer. John Goodyer.

The Place.
Cordus says that it grows in Germany in myrie lakes, and in city ditches
that have mud in them: in Brabant and in other places of the Low Countries, it
is found oftentimes in standing waters, and springs: Matthiolus writes, that
it grows not only in lakes of sweet water, but also in certain ditches by
the sea near unto Venice.

The Time.
It flourishes in June, July, and August.

The Names.
The Grecians call it (...): the Latins, Tribulus aquatilis, and aquaticus, and
Tribulus lacustris: the Apothecaries, Tribulus marinus: in High Dutch, (...)
(...): the Brabanders, (...) (...): and of the likeness of iron nails, (...):
the French men, Macres: in English it is named water Caltrops, Saligot, and
Water nuts: most do call the fruit of this Caltrops, Castaneae aquatiles, or
water (...)-nuts.

The Temperature.
Water Caltrop is of a cold nature, it consists of a moist essence, which in
this is (...) waterie than in the land Caltrops, wherein an earthie cold is
predominant, as Galen says.

The Virtues.
The herb used in manner of a pultis, as Dioscorides teaches, is good against
all inflammations

The Thracians, says Pliny, that dwell in Strymona, do fatten their horses
with the leaves of Saligot,

The green nuts or fruit of Tribulus aquaticus, or Saligot, being drunk in
wine, is good for them

The same drunk in like manner, or laid outwardly to the place, helps those
that are bitten

The leaves of Saligot be given against all inflammations and ulcers of the
mouth, the (...)

A powder made of the nuts is given to such as piss blood, and are troubled
with gravel, and

The two lesser water Caltrops here described are in my opinion much agreeable
in temper Succidanea for it then Aron, which some in the composition of
Vnguentum Agrippae have appointed for it.

CHAP. 299. Of water Sengreene, or fresh water Soldier.
Militaris Aizoides. Fresh water Soldier.


The Description.
FResh water Soldier or water Housleeke, has leaves like those of the herb
Aloe, or Semper vivum, but shorter and lesser, setround about the edges with
certain stiff and short prickles: amongst which comes forth diverse cases or
husks, very like unto crabbes claws: out of which when they open grow white
flowers, consisting of three leaves, altogether like those of Frogs-bit, having
in the middle little yellowish threads: in stead of roots there be long strings,
round, white, vetic like to great Harp-strings, or to long worms, which
falling down from a short head that brought sorth the leaves, go to the bottom
of the water, and yet be they seldom there fastened: there also grow from the
same other strings aslope, by which the plant is multiplied after the manner of
Frogs-bit.

The Place.
I found this growing plentifully in the ditches about Rotsey a small village in
Holdernesse. And my friend Mr. William Broad observed it in the Fennes in
Lincolne-shire. The leaves and flowers grow upon the top of the water, and the
roots are sent down through the water to the mud.

The Time.
It flowers in June, and sometimes in August.

The Names.
It may be called Sedum aquatile, or water Sengreen, that is to say, of the
likeness of herb Aloe, which is also called in Latin Sedum: of some, Cancri
chela, or Cancri forficula: in English, Water Housleeke, Knights Pondwoort;
and of some, Knights water Sengreene, fresh water Soldier, or wading Pondweed:
it seems to be Stratiotes aquatilis, or Stratiotes potamios, or Knights water
Woundwoort, which may also be named in Latin Militaris aquatica, and Militaris
(...), or Soldiers Yarrow; for it grows in the water, and floteth upon it,
and if those strings which it sends to the bottom of the wat er be no roots,
it also lives without roots.

The Temperature.
This herb is of a cooling nature and temperament.

The Virtues.
This Housleeke staieth the blood which comes from the kidneies, it keeps
green wounds

CHAP. 300. Of Water Yarrow, and water Gillofloure.
1 Viola palustris. Water Violet.
Viola Palustris tenuifolia. The smaller leaued water violet.


The Description.
1 WAter Violet has long and great iagged leaves, very finely cut or rent like
Yarrow, but smaller: among which come up small stalks a cubit and a half
high, bearing at the top small white flowers like unto stock Gillofloures,
with some yellownes in the middle. The roots are long and small like black
threads, and at the end whereby they are fastened to the ground they are white,
and shining like Crystal.

There is another variety of this plant, which differs from it only in that
the leaves are much smaller, as you may see them expressed in the figure.

2 Water Milfoile, or water Yarrow has long and large leaves deeply cut with
many divisions like (...), but finelier iagged, swimming upon the water. The
root is single, long, and round, which brings up a right straight and slender
stalk, set in sundry places with the like leaves, but smaller. The flowers
grow at the top of the stalk tuft fashion, and like unto the land Yarrow.

3 This water Milfoile differs from all the kinds aforesaid, having a root
in the bottom of the water, made of many hairy strings, which yields up a
naked slender stalk within the water, and the rest of the stalk which floteth
upon the water divides it self into sundry other branches and wings, which
are bedasht with fine small iagged leaves like unto (...), or rather resembling
hairy tassels or fringe, than leaves. From the bosoms whereof come forth small
and tender branches, every branch bearing one flower like unto water Crow-foot,
white of color, with a little yellow in the midst: the whole plant resembles
water Crow-foot in all things save in the broad leaves.

4 There is another kind of water violet very like the former, saving that his
leaves are much longer, somewhat resembling the leaves of Fennel, fashioned
like unto wings, and the flowers are somewhat smaller, yet white, with
yellowness in their middles, and shaped like those of the last described. And
the seed also grows like unto that of the Water (...), last described.

5 There is also another kind of water Milfoile, which has leaves very like
unto water Violet, smaller, and not so many in number: the stalk is small and
tender, bearing yellow gaping flowers fashioned like a hood or the small
Snapdragon; which caused Pena to put unto his (...) this additament
Galericulatum, that is, hooded. The roots are small and threddy, with some few
knobs hanging thereat like the sounds of fish.

2 Millesolium aquaticum. Water Yarrow.
3 Millesolium, sieve (...), flore and (...) (...) aquatici, (...) facie.
Crow-foot, or water Milsoile.


6 To these may we add a small water Milfoile, set sorth by Clusius. It has
round green stalks set with many joints, whereout come at their lower ends
many hairy fibers, whereby it takes hold of the mud: the tops of these stems
stand some handful above the water, and at each joint stand five long finely
winged leaves, very green, and some inch long; which wax less and less, as
they stand higher or nearer the top of the stalk: and at each of these leaves
about the top of the stem grows one small white flower consisting of six
little leaves joined together, and not opening themselves: and these at length
turn into little knobs, with four little pointals standing out of them.
Clusius calls this Myriophyllon aquaticum minus.

4 Millefolium tenuifolium. Fennel leaued water Milfoile.
5 Millefolium palustre galericulatum. Hooded water Milfoile.


The Place.
They be found in lakes and standing waters, or in waters that run slowly: I
have not found such plenty of it in any one place, as in the water ditches
adjoining to Saint George his field near London.

The Time.
They flower for the most part in May and June.

The Names.
The first is called in Dutch water Uiolerian, that is to say, Viola aquatilis:
in English, Water Gillofloure, or water Violet: in French, Gyroflees d'eaue:
Matthiolus makes this to be also Myrophylli (...), or a kind of Yarrow,
although it does not agree with the description thereof; for neither has it
one stalk only, nor one single root, as Myriophyllon or Yarrow is described
to have; for the roots are full of strings, and it brings forth many stalks.

The second is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Millefolium, and
Myriophyllon, and also Supercilium Veneris: in shops it is unknown. This
Yarrow differs from that of the land: the rest are sufficiently spoken of in
their titles.

The Nature and Virtues.
Water Yarrow, as Dioscorides says, is of a dry faculty; and by reason that
it takes away hot Dioscorides affirms, that water Yarrow is a remedy
against inflammations in green wounds, if with vinegar it be applied green or
dry: and it is given inwardly with vinegar and salt, to those that have fallen
from a high place.

Water Gillofloure or water Violet is thought to be cold and dry, yet has it
no use in physic

CHAP. 301. Of Ducks meat.
Lens palustris. Ducks meat.


The Description.
DVckes meat is as it were a certain green moss, with very little round
leaves of the bigness of Lentils: out of the midst whereof on the nether side
grow down very fine threads like hairs, which are to them in stead of roots:
it has neither stalk, flower, nor fruit.

The Place.
It is found in pounds, lakes, city ditches, and in other standing waters every
where.

The Time.
The time of Ducks meat is known to all.

The Names.
Duckes meat is called in Latin Lens lacustris, Lens aquatilis, and Lens
palustris: of the Apothecaries it is (...) Aquae Lenticula: in High Dutch,
Meerlinsen: in Low Dutch, (...), and more usually Enden gruen, that is to say,
Anatum herba, Ducks herb, because Ducks do feed thereon; whereupon also in
English it is called Ducks meat: some term it after the Greek water Lentils;
and of others it is named Grains. The Italians call it Lent (...): in French,
Lentille d eaue: in Spanish, Lenteias de agua.

The Temperature.
Galen shows that it is cold and moist after a sort in the second degree.

The Virtues.
Dioscorides says that it is a remedy against all

Ducks meat mingled with fine wheaten flower and applied, prevails much
against hot swellings,

The same does help the fundament fallen down in young children.

CHAP. 302. Of Water Crow-foot.
1 Ranunculus aquatilis. Water Crow-foot.


The Description.
1 WAter Crow-foot has slender branches trailing far abroad, whereupon grow
leaves under the water most finely cut and iagged like those of Cammomill.
Those above the water are somewhat round, indented about the edges, in form not
unlike the small tender leaves of the mallow, but lesser: among which do grow
the flowers, small, and white of color, made of fine little leaves, with some
yellowness in the middle like the flowers of the Straw-berry, and of a sweet
smell: after which there come round rough and prickly knaps like those of the
field Crowfoot. The roots be very small hairy strings.

There is sometimes to be found a variety of this, with the leaves less, and
divided into three parts after the manner of an Iuy leaf; and the flowers are
also much lesser, but white of color, with a yellow bottom. I question
whether this be not the Ranunculus hederaceus Daleschampij, page 1031. of the
hist. Lugd.

2 There is another plant growing in the water, of small moment, yet not amiss
to be remembered, called Hederula aquatica, or water Iuie: the which is very
rare to find; nevertheless I found it once in a ditch by Bermondsey house
near to London, and never elsewhere: it has small threddy strings in stead of
roots and stalks, rising from the bottom of the water to the top; whereunto
are fastened small leaves swimming or floting upon the water, triangled or three
cornered like to those of barren Iuie, or rather noble Liuerwort: barren of
flowers and seeds.

2 Hederula aquatica. Water Iuie.
3 Stellaria aquatica. Water Starwort.


3 There is likewise another herb of small reckoning that floteth upon the
water, called Stellaria aquatica, or water Star-wort, which has many small
grassie stems like threads, coming from the bottom of the water unto the upper
face of the same: whereupon do grow small double flowers of a greenish or herby
color. I take this Stellaria to be nothing else but a water Chickeweed, which
grows almost in every ditch, with two long narrow leaves at each joint, and
half a dozen or more lying close together at the top of the water, in fashion
of a star: it may be seen in this shape in the end of April and beginning
of May: I have not yet observed either the flower or seed thereof.

The Place.
Water Crow-foot grows by ditches and shallow Springs, and in other moist and
plashie places.

The Time.
It floureth in April and May, and sometimes in June.

The Names.
Water Crow-foot is called in Latin Ranunculus aquatilis, and Polyanthemum
aquatile: in English, Water Crow-foot, and white water Crow-foot: most
Apothecaries and Herbarists do erroneously name it Hepatica aquatica and
Hepatica alba; and with greater error they mix it in medicines in stead of
Hepatica alba, or grass of Parnassus. I know none that commit this great error
here mentioned, neither have I known either the one or the other ever used or
appointed in medicine with us in England, though Dodonaeus (from whom our
Author had this and most else) do blame his countrymen for this mistake and
error.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Water Crow-foot is hot, and like to common Crow-foot.

CHAP. 303. Of Dragons.
1 Dracontium maius. Great Dragons.
2 (...) minus. Small Dragons.


The Description.
1 THe great Dragon rises up with a straight stalk a cubit and a half high
or higher, thick, round, smooth, sprinkled with spots of diverse colors, like
those of the adder or snake: the leaves are great and wide, consisting of seven
or more joined together in order; every one of which is long and narrow, much
like to the leaves of Docke, smooth and slipperie: out of the top of the stalk
grows a long hose or husk greater than that of the Cuckoo pintle, of a
greenish color without, and within crimson, with his pestell which is
blackish, long, thick, and pointed like a horn; the skin or filme whereof
when the seed waxes big, being 1 Dracunculus aquatious. Water Dragons.
stretched or broken asunder, there appears the fruit, like to a bunch or
cluster of grapes: the berries whereof at the first be green, afterward red
and full of juice; in which is contained seed that is somewhat hard: The root
continues fresh, thick, like to a knob, white, covered with a thin pilling,
oftentimes of the bigness of a mean apple, full of white little threads
appendant thereunto.

2 The lesser Dragon is like Aron or wake Robin, in leaves, hose, or husk,
pestell, and berries, yet are not the leaves sprinkled with black but with
whitish spots, which perish not so soon as those of wake-Robin, but endure
together with the berries even until winter: these berries also be not of a
deep red, but of a color enclining to Saffron. The root is not unlike to the
Cuckow-pint, having the form of a bulbe, full of strings, with diverse rude
shapes of new plants, whereby it greatly increases.

The figure which our Author here gave by the title of Dracuntium minus, was
no other than of Aron, which is described in the first place of the next
chapter: neither is the description of any other plant, than of that sort
thereof which has leaves spotted either with white or black spots, though our
Author say only with white. I have given you Clusius his figure of Arum
Byzantinum, in stead of that which our Author gave.

3 The root of water Dragon is not round like a bulbe, but very long, creeping,
and ioynted, and of mean bigness; out of the joints whereof arise the stalks
of the leaves, which are round, smooth, and spongie within, and there grow
downwards certain white and slender strings. The fruit springs forth at the
top upon a short stalk, together with one of the leaves, being at the
beginning covered with little white threads, which are in stead of the flowers:
after that it grows into a bunch or cluster, at the first green, and when it
is ripe, red, lesser than that of Cuckow-pint, but not less biting: the leaves
are broad, greenish, glib, and smooth, in fashion like those of Iuy, yet lesser
than those of Cuckow-pint; and that thing whereunto the clustered fruit grows
is also lesser, and in that part which is toward the fruit (that is to say the
upper part) is white.

4 The great Dragon of Matthiolus his description is a stranger not only in
England, but elsewhere for any thing that we can learn: my self have
diligently enquired of most strangers skillful in plants, that have resorted
unto me for conference sake, but no man can give me any certainty thereof; and
therefore I think it amiss to give you his figure or any description, for
that I take it for a feigned picture.

The Place.
The greater and the lesser Dragons are planted in gardens. The water Dragons
grow in (...) and marish places, for the most part in fenny and standing waters.

The Time.
The berries of these plants are ripe in Autumn.

The Names.
The Dragon is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Dracunculus. The greater is
named Serpentariamaior: of some, Bisaria, and Colubrina: Cordus calls it
Dracunculus Polyphyllos, and Luph Crispum: in High Dutch, Schlangenkraut: in
Low Dutch, Speerwortele: in French, Serpentaire: in Italian, Dragontea: in
Spanish, Taragontia: in English, Dragons, and Dragon-wort. Apuleius calls
Dragon Dracontea, and sets down many strange names thereof, which whether
they agree with the greater or the lesser, or both of them, he does not
expound; as Pythonion, Anchomanes, Sauchromaton, Therion, Schoenos, Dorcadion,
Typhonion, Theriophonon, and Eminion, Athenaeus shows, that Dragon is called
Aronia, because it is like to Aron.

The Temperature.
Dragon, as Galen says, has a certain likeness with Aron or wake-Robin,
both in leaves, and also in root, yet more biting and more bitter than it, and
therefore hotter, and of thinner parts: it is also something binding, which by
reason that it is adjoined with the two former qualities, that is to say,
biting and bitter, is is made in like manner a singular medicine of very great
efficacy.

The Virtues.
The root of Dragons does cleanse and scour all the entrails, making thin,
especially thick

It scoureth and cleanses mightily, as well such things as have need of
scouring, as also white

The leaves also by reason that they are of like quality are good for ulcers
and green wounds: and the less dry they are, the fitter they be to heal; for
the dryer ones are of a more sharp or biting quality than is convenient for
wounds.

The fruit is of greater operation than either the leaves or the root: and
therefore it is thought Polypus: also the juice does cleanse away webs and spots
in the eyes.

Furthermore, Dioscorides writes, that it is reported that they who have
rubbed the leaves or

Pliny says, that serpents will not come near unto him that bears Dragons
about him, and Dioscorides.

Galen also has made mention of Dragon in his book of the faculties of
nourishments; where

And Dioscorides writes, that the root of the lesser Dragon being both sodde
and roast with

The juice of the garden Dragons, as says Dioscorides, being dropped into the
eyes, does cleanse

The distilled water has virtue against the pestilence or any pestilentiall
fever or poison, being

The smell of the flowers is hurtful to women newly conceived with child.

CHAP. 304. Of Cockow pint, or wake-Robin.
The Description.
1 Arum or Cockow pint has great, large, smooth, shining, sharp pointed
leaves, bespotted here and there with blackish spots, mixed with some
blewnesse: among which rises up a stalk nine inches long, bespeckled in many
places with certain purple spots. It bears also a certain long hose or
hood, in proportion like the ear of an hare: in the middle of which hood
comes forth a pestle or clapper of a dark murrie or pale purple color:
which being past, there succeeds in place thereof a bunch or cluster of
berries in manner of a bunch of grapes, green at the first, but after they be
ripe of a yellowish red like coral, and full of pith, with some threddy
additaments annexed thereto.

2 There is in Egypt a kind of Arum which also is to be seen in Africa, and
in certain places of Lusitania, about rivers and floods, which differs from
that which grows in England and other parts of Europe. This plant is large
and great, and the leaves thereof are greater than those of the water Lilly:
the root is thick and tuberous, and toward the lower end thicker and broader,
and may be eaten. It is reported to be without flower and seed, but the (...)
that it has is by the fibers which run and spread from the roots. This plant
has also pestells and clusters, of berryes as the common Aron, but somewhat
different, the leaves are not cut into the stalk, but joined before the
setting thereto: the root also is very large. Those that desire to see more of
this plant, and the question which some have moved, whither this be the (...),
or Faba Aegyptia of the Ancients? let them have recourse to the first chapter
of Fabius Columna his Minus cognitarum stripium pars altera, and there they
shall find satisfaction.

1 Arum vulgar. Cockow pint.
2 Arum Aegyptiacum. Egyptian Cockow pint.


The Place.
Cockow pint grows in woods near unto ditches under hedges, every where in
shadowie places.

The Time.
The leaves appear presently after winter: the pestell shows it self out of
his husk or sheath in June, whilst the leaves are in withering: and when they
are gone, the bunch on cluster of berries becomes ripe, which is in July and
August.

The Names.
There grows in Egypt a kind of Aron or Cuckoo pint which is found also in
Africa, and likewise in certain places of Portingale near unto rivers and
streams, that differs from those of our countries growing, which the people
of Castile call Manta de nuestra senora: most would have it to be called
Colocasia; but Dioscorides says that Colocasia is the root of Faba Aegyptia,
or the Bean of Egypt. Fabius Columna (in the place formerly alleged) proves
this not to be the true (...), and yet Prosper Alpinus since in his second
book de plantis exoticis, cap. 17. and 18. labors to prove the contrary: let
the curious have recourse to these, for it is too tedious for me in this place
to insist upon it, being so large a point of controversy, which has so much
troubled all the late writers.

The common Cuckoo pint is called in Latin, Arum: in Greek, (...): in shops,
Iarus, and BarbaAron: of others, Pes vituli: of the Syrians, Lupha: of the men
of Cyprus, Colocasia, as we find among the bastard names. Pliny in his 24.
book, 16. chapter, does witness, that there is great difference between Aron
and Dracontium, although there has been some controversy about the same among
the old writers, affirming them to be all one: in high Dutch it is called,
Passen pint: in Italian, Gigora: in Spanish, Taro: in low Dutch, Calfsuoet: in
French, Pied (...): in English, Cuckoo pint, and Cuckoo pintle, wake-Robin,
Priests pintle, Aron; Calfes foot, and Rampe; (...) of some Stratchwoort.

The Temperature.
The faculties of Cuckoo pint do differ according to the variety of
countries: for the root hereof (...) Galen in his book of the faculties of
nourishments does affirm, is sharper and more (...) (...) (...) (...) than in
others, almost as much as Dragons; contrariwise in Cyren a city in Afric, it
is (...) in all places hot and dry, at the least in the first degree.

The Virtues.
If any man would have thick and tough humors which are gathered in the chest
and lungs to be cleansed and voided out by coughing, then that Cuckowpint is
best that biteth most.

It is eaten being sodden in two or three waters, and fresh put to, whereby it
may lose his acrimonie; and being so eaten, they cut thick humors meanly, but
Dragons is better for the same purpose.

Dioscorides shows, that the leaves also are preserved to be eaten; and that
they must be eaten after they be dried and boiled; and writes also, that the
root has a peculiar virtue against the gout, being laid on stamped with Cowes
dung.

Bears after they have lien in their dens forty days without any manner of
sustenance, but what they get with licking and sucking their own feet, do as
soon as they come forth (...) the herb Cuckowpint, through the (...) nature
whereof the hungry gut is opened (...) (...) fit (...) to receive sustenance:
for by abstaining from food so long a time, the (...) (...) (...) or (...)
(...) close together, that in a manner it is quite shut up, as Aristotle,
Aelianus, Plutarch, (...), (...) (...) do write.

The most pure and white starch is made of the roots of Cuckowpint; but most
hurtful to the hands of the Laundresse that has the handling of it, for it
choppeth, blistereth, and makes (...) hands rough and rugged, and withal
(...).

CHAP. 305. Of Friars Cowle, or hooded Cuckowpint.
1 Arisarum latifolium. Broad (...) Friars Cowle.
2 Arisarum angustifolium. Narrow leaued Friars Cowle.


The Description.
1 BRoad leaued Friars hood has a leaf like Iuy, broad and sharp pointed,
but far less, approaching near to the form of those of Cuckoo pint: the
stalk thereof is small and slender: the (...) or hose is little; the pestel
small, and of a black purplish color; the cluster when it is ripe is red; the
kernels small; the root white, having the form of Aron or Cuckowpint, but
lesser, whereof doubtless it is a kind.

2 The second Friars hood has many leaves, long and narrow, smooth and
glittering: The husk or hose is narrow and long; the pestell that comes
forth of it is slender, in form like a great earth worm, of a blackish purple
color, as has also the inside of the hose, upon which, hard to the ground,
and sometimes a little within the ground, grows a certain bunch or cluster
of berries, green at the first, and afterward red: the root is round and
white like the others.

The Place.
These plants are strangers in England, but common in Italy, and especially in
Tuscane about Rome, and in Dalmatia, as Aloisius Anguillara witnesses:
notwithstanding I have them in my Garden.

The Time.
The flowers and fruit of these come to perfection with those of Cuckowpint and
Dragons.

The Names.
Friars hood is called of Dioscorides, (...): in Latin, Arisarum: but Pliny
calls it (...), or Aris; for in his twenty fourth book, cap. 16. he says,
That Aris which grows in Egypt is like Aron or Cuckowpint: it may be called
in English after the Latin name Arisarum; but in my opinion it may be more
fitly called Friars hood, or Friars cowle, to which the flowers seem to be
like; whereupon the Spaniards name it Frailillos, as Daleschampius notes.

The (...).
Friers-Cowle is like in power and faculty to the Cuckow-pint, yet is it more
biting, as Galen says.

The Virtues.
There is no great use of these plants in physic; but it is reported that
they stay running or eating Collyria, good against fistula's: and being put
into the secret part of any living thing, it rotteth the same, as Dioscorides
writes. That which was (...) figured and described in the third place, under
the title of (...) (...) (...), was the same with that described by the name of
(...) (...), in the precedent chapter, (...) therefore here omitted.


CHAP. 306. Of Astrabacca.
1 Asarum. Asarabacca.
2 Asarina Matthioli. Italian Asarabacca.


The Description.
1 THe leaves of Asarabacca are smooth, of a deep green color, rounder,
broader, and tenderer than those of Iuy, and not cornered at all, not unlike to
those of Sow-bread: the flowers lie close to the roots, hid under the leaves,
standing upon slender footstalkes, of an ill favored purple color, like to
the flowers and husks of Henbane, but less, wherein are contained small seeds,
cornered, and somewhat rough: the roots are many, small and slender, growing
aslope under the upper crust of the earth, one folded within another, of an
unpleasant taste, but of a most sweet and pleasing smell, having withal a
kind of biting quality.

2 This strange kind of Asarabacca, which Matthiolus has set forth creeping
on the ground, in manner of our common Astrabacca, has leaves somewhat rounder
and rougher, slightly indented about the edges, and set upon long slender
foot-stalkes: the flowers grow hard unto the ground like unto those of
Cammomill, but much lesser, of a mealy or dusty color, and not without smell.
The roots are long and slender, creeping under the upper crust of the earth, of
a sharp taste, and bitter withal. This Asarina of Matthiolus, Clusius (whose
opinion I here follow) has judged to be the Tussilago Alpina 2. of his
description; wherefore I give you his figure in stead of that of our Author,
which had the flowers expressed, which this wants.

The Place.
It delights to grow in shadowie places, and is very common in most gardens.

The Time.
The herb is always green; yet does it in the Spring bring forth new leaves
and flowers.

The Names.
It is called in Greek (...), Asarum: in Latin, Nardus rustica: and of
diverse, Perpensa: Perpensa is also Baccharis in Pliny, lib. 21. cap. 21. Macer
says, That Asarum is called Vulgago, in these words:

Est Asaron Graece, Vulgago (...) Latin. This herb, Asaron do the Grecians
name; Whereas the Latins Vulgago clepe the same. It is found also amongst the
bastard names, that it was called of the great learned Philosophers (...): that
is, Martis sanguis, or the blood of Mars: and of the French men Baccar; and
thereupon it seems that the word Asarabacca came, which the Apothecaries use,
and likewise the common people: but there is another Baccharis differing from
Asarum, yet notwithstanding Crateuas does also call Baccharis, Asarum.

This confusion of both the names has been the cause, that most could not
sufficiently expound themselves concerning Asarum and Baccharis; and that many
things have been written amiss in many copies of Dioscorides, in the chapter
of Asarum: for when it is set down in the Greek copies a sweet smelling garden
herb, it belongs not to the description of this Asarum, but to that of
Baccharis: for Asarum (as Pliny says) is so called, because it is not put into
garlands: and so by that means it came to pass, that oftentimes the
descriptions of the old Writers were found corrupted and confused: which thing,
as it is in this place manifest, so oftentimes it cannot so easily be marked in
other places. Furthermore, Asarum is called in French Cabaret: in High Dutch,
Hazelwurtz: in Low Dutch, Mansooren: in English, Asarabacca, Fole-foot, and
Hazel-wort.

The Temperature.
The leaves of Asarabacca are hot and dry, with a purging quality adjoined
thereunto, yet not without a certain kind of astriction or binding. The roots
are also hot and dry, yet more than the leaves; they are of thin and subtle
parts: they procure urine, bring down the desired sickness, and are like in
faculty, as Galen says, to the roots of Acorus, but yet more forceable; and
the roots of Acorus are also of a thin essence, heating, attenuating, drying,
and provoking urine, as he (...): which things are happily performed by taking
the roots of Asarabacca, either by themselves, or mixed with other things.

The Virtues.
The leaves draw forth by vomit, thick phlegmatic and choleric humors,
and withal

They are thought to keep in hard swelling cankers that they increase not, or
come to exulceration,

The roots are good against the stoppings of the liver, gall, and spleen,
against wens and hard Galen say no) by vomit especially, and also by siege.

One dram of the powder of the roots given to drink in ale or wine, grossly
beaten, provoke

But if the roots be infused or boiled, then must two, three, or four drams be
put to the infusion; Mesues teaches.

The same is good for them that are tormented with the Sciatica or gout in the
huckle bones,

CHAP. 307. Of Sea Binde-weed.
1 Soldanella marina. Sea Binde-weed.
2 Soldanella Alpina mayor. Mountain Binde-weed.


The Description.
1 Soldanella or Sea Binde-weed has many small branches, somewhat red, trailing
upon the ground, beset with small and round leaves, not much unlike Asarabacca,
or the leaves of Aristolochia, but smaller; betwixt which leaves and the
stalks come forth flowers formed like a bell, of a bright red incarnate
color, in every respect answering the small Bindeweed, whereof it is a kind,
albeit I have here placed the same, for the reasons rendered in my Proeme. The
seed is black, and grows in round husks: the root is long and small,
thrusting it self far abroad, and into the earth like the other Binde-weeds.

2 Soldanella or mountain Binde-weed has many round leaves spread upon the
ground, not much unlike the former, but rounder, and more full of veins,
greener, of a bitter taste like sea Bindeweed: among which comes forth a
small and tender stalk a handful high, bearing at the top little flowers like
the small Bell-floure, of a sky color. The root is small and threddy.

3 Soldanella Alpina minor. Small Mountain Bindweed.


3 There is of this kind another having all the parts smaller, and the leaves
redder and rounder: the flowers also blew, and composed of one leaf divided
into five parts, and succeeded by a longish cod, round and sharp pointed.

The Place.
The first grows plentifully by the Sea shore in most places of England,
especially near to Lee in Essex, at Mersey in the same county, in most places
of the Isle of Thanet, and Shepey, and in many places along the Northern coast.

The second grows upon the mountains of Germany, and the Alps; it grows
upon the mountains of Wales, not far from Cowmers Meare in North Wales.

The Time.
These herbs do flower in June, and are gathered in August to be kept for
medicine.

The Names.
The first called Soldanella is of the Apothecaries and the Ancients called
Marina Brassica, that is to say, Sea Co'ewoort: but what reason has moved them
so to do I cannot conceive, unless it be penury and scarsitie of names, and
because they know not otherwise how to term it: of this I am sure, that this
plant and Brassica are no more like than things which are most unlike; for
Brassica Marina is the Sea Colewoort, which does much resemble the garden
Cabbage or Cole, both in shape and in nature, as I have in his due place
expressed. A great fault and oversight therefore it has been of the old
writers and their successors which have continued the custom of this error,
not taking the pains to distinguish a Bindeweed from a Cole-woort. But to
avoid controversies, the truth is, as I have before showed, that this
Soldanella is a Bindeweed, and cannot be esteemed for a Brassica, that is a
Colewoort. The later Herbarists call it Soldana, and Soldanella: in Dutch,
Zeewind, that is to say, Convoluulus Marinus: of Dioscorides (...), (i)
Brassica Marina: in English, Sea VVithwinde, Sea Bindweed, Sea-bels, Sea-coale,
of some, Sea Fole-foot, and Scottish Scuruie-grasse.

The second is called Soldanella montana: in English, Mountain Bindweed.

The Nature.
Sea Bindeweed is hot and dry in the second degree: the second is bitter and
very astringent.

The Virtues.
Soldanella purges down mightily all kind of watrish humors, and opens
the stoppings of

Soldanella hurts the stomach, and troubles the weak and delicate bodies
which do receive it

Practitioners about Auspurge and Rauispurge (cities of Germany) do greatly
boast that they Soldanella montana; saying, that the leaves taken and
emplaistred upon the navel and somewhat lower, draw forth water from their
bellies that are hydroptike, that is, troubled with water or the dropsy: this
effect it works in other parts without heating.

It does also wonderfully bring flesh in wounds, and heals them.

Dioscorides witnesses, that the whole herb is an enemy to the stomach,
biting and extremely

My friend Mr. Goodyer has told me, that in Hampshire at Chichester and (...)
they

CHAP. 308. Of the Grass of Parnassus.
The figure that was formerly in the first place of this Chapter was of
Vnifolium, described before, (...). 90. (...). 409. that which was in the
second place belonged to the first description.
1 Gramen Parnassi. Grass of Parnassus.
2 Gramen Parnassi flore duplici. Grass of Parnassus with double flowers.


The Description.
1 THe Grass of Parnassus has small round leaves, very much differing from
any kind of Grass, much resembling the leaves of Iuie, or Asarabacca, but
smaller, and not of so dark a color: among these leaves spring up small
stalks a foot high, bearing little white flowers consisting of five round
pointed leaves; which being fallen and past, there come up round knops or
heads, wherein is contained a reddish seed. The root is somewhat thick, with
many strings annexed thereto.

2 The second kind of Gramen Parnassi does answer the former in each respect,
saving that the leaves are somewhat larger, and the flowers double, otherwise
very like.

The Place.
The first grows very plentifully in Lansdall and Crauen, in the North parts
of England; at Doncaster, and in Thornton fields in the same country: moreover
in the Moore near to Linton, by Cambridge, at Hesset also in Suffolk, at a
place named Drinkstone, in the meadow called Butchers mead. Mr. Goodyer found it
in the boggy ground below the red well of Wellingborough in Northampton shire:
and Mr. William Broad observed it to grow plentifully in the Castle fields of
Berwicke upon Tweed.

The second is a stranger in England.

The Time.
These herbs do flower in the end of July, and their seed is ripe in the end
of August.

The Names.
Valerius Cordus has among many that have written of these herbs said
something of them to good purpose, calling them by the name of Hepatica alba
(whereof without controversy they are kinds) in English, white Liuerwoort:
although there is another plant called Hepatica alba, which for distinction
sake I have thought good to English, Noble white Liu erwoort.

The second may be called Noble white Liuerwoort with the double flower.

The Nature.
The seed of Parnassus Grass, or white Liuer-woort, is dry, and of subtle
parts.

The Virtues.
The decoction of the leaves of Parnassus Grass drunken, does dry and
strengthen the feeble

The same boiled in wine or water, and drunken, especially the seed thereof,
provoke urine, breaks

CHAP. 309. Of white Saxifrage, or Golden Saxifrage.
The Description.
1 THe white Saxifrage has round leaves spread upon the ground, and somewhat
iagged about the edges, not much unlike the leaves of ground Iuie, but softer
and smaller, and of a more faint yellowish green: among which rises up a
round hairie stalk a cubit high, bearing at the top small white flowers,
almost like Stockgillofloures: the root is compact of a number of black
strings, whereunto are fastened very many small reddish grains or round roots
as big as pepper corns, which are used in medicine, and are called Semen
Saxifragae albae; that is, the seed of white Saxifrage, or Stone-breake,
although (beside these foresaid round knobbes) it has also small seed
contained in little husks, following his flower as other herbs have.

1 Saxifraga alba. White Saxifrage.
2 Saxifraga aurea. Golden Saxifrage.


3 Saxifraga albapetraea. White Rock Saxifrage.


2 Golden Saxifrage has round compassed leaves, bluntly indented about the
borders like the former, among which rise up stalks a handful high, at the
top whereof grow two or three little leaves together: out of the middle of them
spring small flowers of a golden color, after which come little husks, wherein
is contained the red seed, not unlike the former: the root is tender, creeping
in the ground (...) long threads or hairs.

3 Pona has set forth this plant by the name of Saxifraga alba petraea, and
therefore I have placed it here; though I think I might more fitly have ranked
him with (...) rutaceo folio formerly described. It has a small single root
from which arise diverse fat longish leaves, somewhat hairy, and divided into
three parts: amongst those rises up a round knottie stalk, roughish, and of a
purplish color, some half foot high, divided into sundry branches, which
carry white flowers, consisting of five leaves apiece, with some yellowish
threads in their middles: these falling, there remains a cup containing a very
small seed. It flowers at the end of June in the shadowie places of the Alps,
whereas Pona first observed it.

The Place.
The white Saxifrage grows plentifully in sundry places of England, and
especially in a field on the left hand of the high way, as you go from the
place of execution called Saint Thomas Waterings unto Dedford by London. It
grows also in the great field by Islington called the Mantles: also in the
green places by the sea side at Lee in Essex, among the rushes, and in sundry
other places thereabout, and else where. It also grows in Saint Georges fields
behind Southwarke.

The golden Saxifrage grows in the moist and marish grounds about Bathe and
Wels, also in the Moors by Boston and Wisbich in Lincolnshire: and Mr. George
Bowls has found it growing in diverse woods at Chisselhurst in Kent: Mr.
Goodyer also has observed it abundantly on the shadowie moist rocks by
Mapledurham in Hampshire: and I have found it in the like places in Yorkshire.

The Time.
The white Saxifrage floureth in May and June: the herb with his flower are no
more seen until the next year.

The golden Saxifrage floureth in March and April.

The Names.
The first is called in (...) (...) Alba: in English, white (...), or white
Stone-breake.

The second is called Golden Saxifrage, or golden Stone-breake.

The Nature.
The first of these, especially the root and seed thereof, is of a warm or hot
complexion.

Golden Saxifrage is of a cold nature, as the taste does manifestly declare.

The Virtues.
The root of white Saxifrage boiled in wine and drunken, provoke urine,
cleanses the kidneis

The virtues of golden Saxifrage are yet unto us unknown, notwitstanding I am
of this mind, that it is a singular wound herb, equal with Sanicle.

CHAP. 310 Of Sow-bread.
The Description.
1 THe first being the common kind of Sowbread, called in shops Panis
porcinus, and Arthanita, has many green and round leaves like unto
Asarabacca, saving that the upper part of the leaves are mixed here and there
confusedly with white spots, and under the leaves next the ground of a purple
color: among which rise up little stemmes like unto the stalks of violets,
bearing at the top small purple flowers, which turn themselves backward
(being full blown) like a Turks cap, or Tulepan, of a small sent or (...), or
none at all: which being past there succeed little round knops or heads which
contain slender brown seeds: these knoppes

1 Cyclamen orbiculato folio. Round Sowbread.
2 Cyclamen folio Heder.. Iuie Sowbread.
3 Cyclamen Vernum. Spring Sowbread.
are wrapped after a few days in the small stalks, as thread about a bottom,
where it remains so defended from the injury of Winter close upon the
ground, covered also with the green leaves aforesaid, by which means it is
kept from the frost, even from the time of his seeding, which is in September
until June: at which time the leaves do fade away, the stalks and seed
remaining bare and naked, whereby it inioyeth the Sun (whereof it was long
deprived) the sooner to bring them unto maturitie: the root is round like a
Turnep, black without and white within, with many small strings annexed thereto.

4 Cyclamen Vernum album. White floured Sowbread.
5 An Cyclaminos altera, hederaceis folijs planta?


2 The second kind of Sowbread, has broad leaves spread upon the ground,
sharp pointed somewhat indented about the edges, of a dark green color,
with some little lines or strakes of white on the upper side, and of a dark
reddish color on that side next the ground: among which rise up slender
footstalk of two or three inches long: at the tops whereof stand such flowers
as the precedent, but of a sweeter smell, and more pleasant color. The seed is
also wrapped up in the stalk for his further defense against the injury of
winter. The root is somewhat greater, and of more virtue, as shall be declared.

3 There is a third kind of Sowbread that has round leaves without peaked
corners, as the last before mentioned, yet somewhat snipt about the edges, and
speckled with white about the brims of the leaves, and of a blackish color in
the middle: the flowers are like to the rest, but of a deeper purple: the root
also like, but smaller, and this commonly flowers in the Spring.

4 This in leaves and roots is much like the last described, but the flowers
are smaller, snow white, and sweet smelling. There are diverse other varieties
of these plants, which I think it not necessary for me to insist upon:
wherefore I refer the curious to the Garden of flowers set forth by Mr. John
Parkinson, where they shall find satisfaction.

5 There is a plant which I have set forth in this place that may very well be
called into question, and his place also, considering that there has been
great contention about the same, and not fully determined on either part, which
has moved me to place him with those plants that most do resemble one another,
both in shape and name: this plant has green cornered leaves like to Iuie,
long and small gaping flowers like the small Snapdragon: more has not been
said of this plant, either of stalk or root, but is left unto the
consideration of the learned.

The plant which our Author here would acquaint you with, is that which Lobel
figures with this title which I here give, and says it was gathered amongst
other plants on the hills of Italy, but in what part or place, or how growing he
knew not; and he only questions whether it may not be the Cyclaminos altera of
Dioscorides, lib. 2. cap. 195.

The Place.
Sow bread grows plentifully about Artoies and Vermandois in France, and in
the Forest of Arden, and in Brabant: but the second grows plentifully in many
places of Italy.

It is reported unto me by men of good credit, that Cyclamen or Sow-bread
grows upon the mountains of Wales; on the hills of Lincolnshire, and in
Somersetshire by the house of a gentleman called Mr. Hales; upon a Fox-borough
also not far from Mr. Bamfields, near to a town called Hardington. The first
two kinds do grow in my garden, where they prosper well. I cannot learn that
this grows wild in England.

The Time.
Sow-bread floureth in September when the plant is without leaf, which does
afterward spring up, continuing green all the Winter, covering and keeping
warm the seed until Midsommer next, at what time the seed is ripe as
aforesaid. The third floureth in the spring, for which cause it was called
Cyclamen (...): and so does also the fourth.

The Names.
Sow bread is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Tuber terrae, and Terrae
rapum: of Marcellus, Orbicularis: of Apuleius, Palalia, Rapum Porcinum, and
Terrae malum: in shops, Cyclamen, Panis porcinus, and Arthanita: in Italian,
Pan Porcino: in Spanish, Mazan de Puerco: in High Dutch, Schweinbrot: in Low
Dutch, Uetckins broot: in French, Pain de Porceau: in English, Sow-bread. Pliny
calls the color of this flower in Latin, Colossinus color: in English,
Murrey color.

The Nature.
Sow-bread is hot and dry in the third degree.

The Virtues.
The root of Sow-bread dried into powder and taken inwardly in the quantity of
a dram and a

The same taken in wine as aforesaid, is very profitable against all poison,
and the bitings of venomous

The powder taken as aforesaid, cures the iaundise and the stoppings of the
liver, takes away

The leaves stamped with honey, and the juice put into the eyes, cleereth the
sight, takes away al Vnguentum Arthanitae.

The root hanged about women in their extreme travel with child, causes
them to be delivered

The leaves put into the place has the like effect, as my wife has proved
sundry times upon

The juice of Sow-bread does open the Hemorrhoids, and causes them to flow
being applied

It is mixed with medicines that consume or waste away knots, the Kings evil,
and other (...)

It scoureth the skin, and takes away Sun-burning, and all blemishes of the
face, pilling of the

The decoction thereof serves as a good and effectual bath for members out of
joint, the gout,

The root being made hollow and filled with oil, closed with a little wax, and
roasted in the hot

Being beaten and made up into trochisches, or little flat cakes, it is
reported to be a good amorous

The Danger.
It is not good for women with child to touch or take this herb, or to come
near unto it, or stride over the same where it grows; for the natural
attractiue virtue therein contained is such, that without controversy they
that attempt it in manner abouesaid, shall be delivered before their time: which
danger and inconvenience to avoid, I have (about the place where it grows in
my garden) fastened sticks in the ground, and some other sticks I have
fastened also crosse-waies over them, lest any woman should by lamentable
experiment find my words to be true, by their stepping over the same.

I judge our Author something too womanish in this, that is, led more by vain
opinion than by any reason or experience, to confirm this his assertion, which
frequent experience shows to be vain and frivolous, especially for the
touching, striding over, or coming near to this herb.

CHAP. 311. Of Birthwoorts.
The Kinds.
BIrthwoort, as Dioscorides writes, is of three sorts, long, round, and
winding: Pliny has added a fourth kind called Pistolochia, or little
Birthwoort. The later writers have joined unto them a fifth, named Saracens
Birthwoort.

1 Aristolochia longa. Long Birthwoort.
2 Aristolochiarotunda. Round Birthwoort.


The Description.
1 LOng Birthwoort has many small long slender stalks creeping upon the
ground, tangling one with another very intricately, beset with round leaves not
much unlike Sowbread or Iuie, but larger, of a light or ouerworne green
color, and of a grievous or loathsome smell and savor: among which come forth
long hollow flowers, not much unlike the flowers of Aron, but without any
pestell or clapper in the same; of a dark purple color: after which do follow
small fruit like unto little pears, containing triangled seeds of a blackish
color. The root is long, thick, of the color of box, of a strong savor and
bitter taste.

2 The round Birthwoort in stalks and leaves is like the first, but his leaves
are rounder: the flowers differ only in this, that they be somewhat longer and
narrower, and of a faint yellowish color, but the small flap or point of the
flower that turns back again, is of a dark or black purple color. The
fruit is formed like a pear, sharp toward the top, more ribbed and fuller
than the former: the root is round like unto Sow-bread, in taste and savor
like the former.

3 Aristolochia clematitis. Climing Birthwoort.
4 Aristolochia Saracenica. Saracens Birthwoort,
5 Pistolochia. Small Birthwoort.


3 Climing Birthwoort takes hold of any thing that is next unto it, with his
long and clasping stalks, which be oftentimes branched, and windeth it self
like Bindweed: the stalks of the leaves are longer, whose leaves be smooth,
broad, sharp pointed, as be those of the others: the flowers likewise hollow,
long, yellow, or of a blackish purple color: the fruit differs not from that
of the others: but the roots be slender and very long, sometimes creeping on
the top of the earth, and sometimes growing deeper, being of like color with
the former ones.

4 There is a fourth kind of Birthwoort resembling the rest in leaves and
branched stalks, yet higher, and longer than either the long or the round: the
leaves thereof be greater than those of Asarabacca; the flowers hollow, long,
and in one side hanging over, of a yellowish color: the fruit is long and
round like a pear, in which the seeds lie severed, of form three square, of
an ill favored blackish color: the root is somewhat long, oftentimes of a mean
thickness, yellow like to the color of Box, not inferior in bitterness
either to the long or to the round Birthwoort: and sometimes these are found to
be small and slender, and that is when they were but lately dug up and
gathered: for by the little parcels of the roots which are left, the young
plants bring (...) at the beginning tender and branched roots.

5 Small Birthwoort is like to the long and round Birthwoort both in stalks
and leaves, yet is it lesser and tenderer: the leaves thereof are broad, and
like those of Iuie: the flower is long, hollow in the upper part, and on the
outside blackish: the fruit something round like the fruit of round Birthwoort:
in stead of roots there grow forth a multitude of slender strings.

6 Pistolochia Cretica sieve Virginiana. Virginian Snake-root.


6 Clusius figures and describes another small Pistolochia by the name of
Pistolochia Cretica, to which I thought good to add the Epithet Virginia
also, for that the much admired Snakeweed of Virginia seems no otherwise to
differ from it than an inhabitant of Candy from one of the Virginians, which
none I think will say to differ in specie. I will first give Clusius his
description, and then express the little variety that I have observed in the
plants that were brought from Virginia, and grew here with us: it sends forth
many slender stalks a foot long, more or less, and these are cornered or
indented, crested, branched, tough, and bending toward the ground, or spread
thereon, and of a dark green color: upon which without order grow leaves,
neruous, and like those of the last described, yet much sharper pointed, and
after a sort resembling the shape of those of Smilax aspera; but less, and of
a dark and lasting green color, fastened to longish stalks: out of whose
bosoms grow long and hollow crooked flowers, in shape like those of the long
Birthwoort, but of a darker red on the outside, but somewhat yellowish within:
and these are also fastened to pretty long stalks; and they are succeeded by
fruit, not-vnlike, yet less than that of the long BirthwortThis has abundance
of roots, like as the former, but much smaller, and more fibrous, and of a
stronger smell. It flowers in July and August. Thus Clusius describes his, to
which that Snakeweed that was brought from Virginia, and grew with Mr. John
Tradescant at South-Lambeth, An. 1632. was agreeable in all points, but here
and there one of the lower leaves were somewhat broader and rounder pointed than
the rest: the flower was long, red, crooked, and a little hairie, and it did
not open the top, or show the inner side, which I judge was by reason of the
coldness and unseasonableness of the later part of the Summer when it
floured: the stalks in the figure should have been expressed more crooking or
indenting, for they commonly grow so. How hard it is to judge of plants by one
particle or faculty may very well appear by this herb I now treat of: for
some by the similitude the root had with Asarum, and a vomiting quality which
they attributed to it (which certainly is no other than accidental) would
forthwith pronounce and maintain it an Asarum: some also refer it to other
things, as to Primroses, Vincitoxicum, etc. Others morewarily named it
Serpentaria Virginiana, and Radix Virginiana, names as it were offering
themselves and easily to be fitted and imposed upon sundry things, but yet too
general, and therefore not fit any more to be used, seeing the true and
specific denomination is found.

The Place.
Pliny shows, that the Birthwoorts grow in fat and champion places, the
fields of Spain are full of these three long and round Birthwoorts: they are
also found in Italy and Narbone or Languedock, a country in France. Petrus
Bellonius writes, that he found branched Birthwoort upon Ida, a mountain in
Candie: Carolus Clusius faith, that he found this same about Hispalis, and in
many other places of Granado in Spain; among bushes and brambles: they grow all
in my garden.

The Time.
They flower in May, June, and July.

The Names.
Birthwoort is called in Greek (...): in Latin likewise Aristolochia, because
it is (...) that is to say, good for women newly brought a bed, or delivered
with child: in English, Birthwort, Hartwoort, and of some, Aristolochia.

The first is called Aristolochia longa, or long Birthwoort, of the form of
his root, and likewise Aristolochiamas, or male Birthwoort: the second is
thought to be Foemina or female Birthwoort, and it is called Rotunda
Aristolochia, or round Birthwoort: of diverse also Terrae malum, the Apple of
the earth: yet Cyclaminus is also called Terrae malum, or the Apple of the
earth:

The Temperature.
All these Birthwoorts are of temperature hot and dry, and that in the third
degree, having besides a power to cleanse.

The Virtues.
Dioscorides writes, that a dram weight of long Birthwoort drunk with wine
and also applied, is

Round Birthwoort serves for all these things, and also for the rest of the
other poisons: it is

It plucketh out thorns, splinters, and shiuers, and being mixed in plasters,
or pultesses, it draws

Galen says, that branched Birthwoort is of a more sweet and pleasant smell:
and therefore is used

Birthwoort, as Pliny writes, being drunk with water is a most excellent
remedy for cramps and

It is good for them that are short-winded, and are troubled with the falling
sickness.

The round Aristolochia does beautify, cleanse, and fasten the teeth, if they
be often fretted or rubbed

The root of the Virginian Pistolochia, which is of a strong and aromaticke
sent, is a singular and

CHAP. 312. Of Violets.
The Kinds.
THere might be described many kinds of (...) under this name of violets, if
their differences should be more curiously looked into than is necessary: for
we might join hereunto the stock Gillofloures, the Wall flowers, Dames
Gillofloures, (...) violets, and likewise some of the bulbed flowers, because
some of them by Theophrastus are termed Violets. But this was not our charge,
holding it sufficient to distinguish and divide them as near as may be in
kindred and neighborhood; addressing my self unto the Violets called the
black or purple violets, or March Violets of the Garden, which have a great
prerogative above others, not only because the mind conceiueth a certain
pleasure and recreation by smelling and handling of those most odoriferous
flours, but also for that very many by these Violets receive ornament and
comely grace: for there be made of them Galands for the head, Nose-gaies, and
poesies, which are delightful to look on, and pleasant to smell to, speaking
nothing of their appropriate virtues; yea Gardens themselves receive by these
the greatest ornament of all, chiefest beauty and most gallant grace; and the
recreation of the mind which is taken hereby, cannot be but very good and
honest: for they admonish and stir up a man to that which is comely and honest;
for flowers through their beauty, variety of color, and exquisite form, do
bring to a liberal and gentle manly mind, the remembrance of honesty,
comeliness, and all kinds of virtues. For it would be an unseemly and
filthy thing (as a certain wise man says) for him that does look upon and
handle fair and beautiful things, and who frequenteth and is conversant in
fair and beautiful places, to have his mind not fair, but filthy and
deformed.

The Description.
1 THe black or purple Violet does forthwith bring from the root many leaves,
broad, slightly indented in the edges, rounder than the leaves of Iuie: among
the midst whereof spring up fine slender stems, and upon every one a beautiful
flower sweetly smelling, of a blew darkish purple, consisting of five little
leaves, the lowest whereof is the greatest; and after them do appear little
hanging cups or knaps, which, when they be ripe, do open and divide themselves
into three parts. The seed is small, long, and somewhat round withal. The root
consists of many threddie strings.

1 Viola nigra sive purpurea. The purple Garden Violet.
2 Violaflore albo. The white Garden Violet.


2 The white garden Violet has many milk white flowers, in form and figure
like the precedent: the color of whose flowers especially sets forth the
difference.

3 The double garden violet has leaves, creeping branches, and roots like the
garden single violet; differing in that, that this sort of Violet brings
forth most beautiful sweet double flowers, and the other single.

4 The white double Violet likewise agrees with the other of his kind, and
only differs in the color. For as the last described brings double blew or
purple flowers: contrariwise this plant bears double white flowers, which
makes the difference.

5 The yellow Violet is by nature one of the wild Violets, for it grows
seldom any where but upon most high and craggie mountains, from whence it has
bin diverse times brought into the garden, but it can hardly be brought to
culture, or grow in the garden without great industry. And by the relation of
a Gentleman often remembered, called Mr. Thomas Hesketh, who found it

3 Violamartia purpurea multiplex. The double garden purple Violet.
5 Viola martia lutea. Yellow Violets.
6 Viola canina syluestris. Dogs Violets, or wild Violets.
growing upon the hills in Lancashire, near unto a village called Latham; and
though he brought them into his garden, yet they withered and (...). The whole
plant is described to be like unto the field Violet, and differs from it, in
that this plant brings forth yellow flowers, yet like in form and figure,
but without smell.

6 The wild field Violet with round leaves rises forth of the ground (...) a
fibrous root, with long slender branches, whereupon do grow round smooth
leaves. The flowers grow at the top of the stalks, of a light blew color: and
this grows commonly in Woods and such like places; and flowers in July and
August. There is another variety of this wild Violet, which has the leaves
longer, narrower, and sharper pointed. And this was formerly figured and
described in this place by our Author.

7 There is found in Germany, about Noremberg and Strasborough, a kind of
Violet which is altogether a stranger in these parts. It has (says my Author)
a thick and tough root of a woody substance, from which rises up a stalk
dividing it self into diverse branches, of a woody substance; whereupon grow
long iagged leaves like those of the Pansey. The flowers grow at the top,
compact of five leaves apiece, of a watchet color.

The Place.
The Violet grows in gardens almost every where: the others which are
strangers have been touched in their descriptions.

The Time.
The flowers for the most part appear in March, at the farthest in April.

The Names.
The Violet is called in Greek (...): of Theophrastus, both (...), and (...):
in Latin, Nigraviola, or black Violet, of the blackish purple color of the
flowers. The Apothecharies keep the Latin name Viola; but they call it Herba
Violaria, and Matter Violarum: in High Dutch, (...) (...): in Low Dutch, (...):
in French, Violette de Mars: in Italian, Violamammola: in Spanish, Violeta: in
English, Violet. Nicander in his Geoponickes believes, (as Hermolaus shows)
that the Grecians did call it (...), because certain Nymphs of Ionia gave that
flower first to Jupiter. Others say it was called (...), because when Jupiter
had turned the young Damsel Io, whom he tenderly loved, into a Cow, the earth
brought forth this flower for her food: which being made for her sake, received
the name from her; and thereupon it is thought that the Latins also called it
Viola, as though they should say Vitula, by blotting out the letter t. Seruius
reports, That for the same cause the Latins also name it Vaccinium,
alleging the place of Virgil in his Bucolicks:

Alba ligustra cadunt, vaccinia nigra leguntur.

Notwithstanding Virgil in his tenth Eclog shows, that Vaccinium and Viola do
differ.

Ei nigrae violae sunt, and vaccinia nigra.

Vitruvius also in his seventh book of Architecture or Building does
distinguish Viola from Vaccinium: for he shows that the color called Sile
Atticum, or the Azure of Athens, is made ex Viola; and the gallant purple, ex
Vaccinio. The Dyers, says he, when they would counterfeit Sile, or Azure of
Athens, put the dried Violets into a fat, kettle, or caldron, and boil them
with water; afterward when it is tempered they pour it into a linen
strainer, and wringing it with their hands, receive into a mortar the liquor
colored with the Violets; and steeping earth of Erethria in it, and grinding
the same, they make the Azure color of Athens. After the same manner they
temper Vaccinium, and putting milk unto it, do make a gallant purple color.
But what Vaccinia are we will elsewhere declare.

The Temperature.
The flowers and leaves of the Violets are cold and moist.

The Virtues.
The flowers are good for all inflammations, especially of the sides and lungs;
they take away

There is an oil made of Violets, which is likewise cold and moist. The same
being anointed

But let the oil in which the Violets be steeped be either of unripe olives,
called Omphacinum, Mesues says, and the Violets themselves must be fresh and
moist: For being dry, and having lost their moisture, they do not cool, but
seem to have gotten a kind of heat.

The later Physicians do think it good to mix dry Violets with medicines that
are to comfort

The leaves of Violets inwardly taken do cool, moisten, and make the belly
soluble. Being outwardly Galen witnesses. Dioscorides writes, that they be
moreover applied to the fundament that is fallen out.

They may help the fundament that is fallen out, not as a binder keeping back
the fundament, Pliny says that Violets are as well used in garlands, as smelt
unto; and are good against surfeting, heaviness of the head and being dried in
water and drunk, they remove the Squinancie or inward swellings of the throat.
They cure the falling sickness, especially in young children, and the seed is
good against the stinging of Scorpions.

There is a syrrup made of Violets and Sugar, whereof three or four ounces
being taken at one

First make of clarified sugar by boiling a simple syrrup of a good consistence
or mean thickenesse, nipped away, a quantity according to the quantity of
the syrrup, to your own discretion, wherein let them infuse or steep sour
and twenty hours, and set upon a few warm embers; then strain it, and put
more Violets into the same syrrup: thus do three or four times, the oftener the
better; then set them upon a gentle fire to simper, but not to boil in any
wise: so have you it simply made of a most perfect purple color, and of the
smell of the flowers themselves. Some do add thereto a little of the juice of
the flowers in the boiling, which makes it of better force and virtue.
Likewise some do put a little quantity of the juice of Lymons in the boiling,
which does greatly increase the beauty thereof, but nothing at all the virtue.

There is likewise made of Violets and sugar certain plates called Sugar
Violet, or Violet tables,

The decoction of Violets is good against hot fevers, and the inflammation of
the liver and all

Syrrup of Violets is good against the inflammation of the lungs and breast,
against the pleurisy

The same given in manner aforesaid is of great efficacy in burning fevers and
pestilent diseases,

The same taken as aforesaid cures all inflammations of the throat, mouth,
uvula, squinancie,

Sugar-Violet has power to cease inflammations, roughness of the throat, and
comfort the

The leaves of Violets are used in cooling plasters, oils, and comfortable
cataplasmes or pultesses;

CHAP. 313. Of Hearts-ease, or Pansies.
The Description.
1 THe Hearts-ease or Paunsie has many round leaves at the first coming up;
afterward they grow somewhat longer, slightly cut about the edges, trailing or
creeping upon the ground. The stalks are weak and tender, whereupon do grow
flowers in form and figure like the Violet, and for the most part of the same
bigness, of three sundry colors; whereof it took the syrname Tricolor, that
is to say, purple, yellow, and white or blew: by reason of the beauty and
bravery of which colors they are very pleasing to the eye; for smell they
have little or none at all. The seed is contained in little knaps, of the
bigness of a Tare, which come forth after the flowers be fallen, and do open
of themselves when the seed is ripe. The root is nothing else but as it were a
bundle of threddy strings.

2 The upright Paunsie brings forth long leaves deeply cut in the edges,
sharp pointed, of a bleake or pale green color, set upon slender upright
stalks, cornered, ioynted, or kneed a foot high or higher; whereupon do grow
very fair flowers of three colors, viz. of purple, blew, and yellow, in shape
like the common Hearts-ease, but greater and fairer: which colors are so
excellently and orderly placed, that they bring great delectation to the
beholders, though they have little or no smell at all. For oftentimes it
happens, that the uppermost flowers are differing from those that grow upon the
middle of the plant, and those vary from the lowermost, as Nature list to
dally with things of such beauty. The seed is like the precedent.

3 The wild Paunsie differs from that of the garden, in leaves, roots, and
tender branches: the flowers of this wild one are of a bleake and pale color,
far inferior in beauty to that of the garden, wherein consists the
difference.

4 Stony Hearts-ease is a base and low plant: The leaves are rounder, and not
so much cut about the edges as the others: The branches are weak and feeble,
trailing upon the ground: The flowers are likewise of three colors, that is to
say, white, blew, and yellow, void of smell. The root perishes when it has
perfected his seed.

5 There is found in sundry places of England a wild kind hereof, bringing
flowers of a faint yellow color, without mixture of any other color, yet
having a deeper yellow spot in the lowest

1 Violatricolor. Hearts-ease.
2 Viola assurgens tricolor. Upright Hearts-ease.
3 Violatricolor syluestris. Wild Paunsies.
4 Violatricolor petraea. Stony Hearts-ease.
leaf with four or five blackish purple lines, wherein it differs from the
other wild kind: and this has been taken of some young Herbarists to be the
yellow Violet.

The Place.
The Hearts-ease grows in fields in many places, and in gardens also, and
that oftentimes of it self: it is more gallant and beautiful than any of the
wild ones.

Matthiolus reports, that the upright Paunsie is found on mount Baldus in
Italy. Lobel says that it grows in Languedocke in France, and on the tops of
some hills in England; but as yet I have not seen the same.

Those with yellow flowers have been found by a village in Lancashire called
Latham, four miles from (...), by Mr. Thomas (...) before remembered.

The Time.
They sloure not only in the Spring, but for the most part all Summer through,
even until Autumn.

The Names.
Hearts-ease is named in Latin Viola tricolor, or the three colored Violet;
and of diverse, Iacea; (yet there is another Iacea syrnamed Nigra: in English,
Knap-weed, Bull-weed, and Matfellon) of others, Herba (...), or herb Trinity,
by reason of the triple color of the flowers: of some others, Herba (...): in
French, Pensees: by which name they became known to the Brabanders and others
of the Low Countries that are next adjoining. It seems to be Viola slammea,
which Theophrastus calls (...), which is also called (...): in English,
Hearts-ease, Paunsies, Live in idleness, Cull me to you, and Three faces in a
hood.

The upright Pansie is called not improperly Viola assurgens, or Surrecta, and
withal Tricolor, that is to say, straight or upright Violet three colored: of
some, Viola arborescens, or Tree Violet, for that in the multitude of branches
and manner of growing it resembles a little tree.

The Temperature.
It is of temperature obscurely cold, but more evidently moist, of a tough and
(...) juice, like that of the Mallow; for which cause it moistneth and
suppleth, but not so much as the Mallow does.

The Virtues.
It is good, as the later Physicians write, for such as are sick of an ague,
especially children and

It is commended against inflammations of the lungs and chest, and against
scabs and itchings

The distilled water of the herb or flowers given to drink for ten or more
days together, three Costaeus reports, in his book denatura (...) stirp.

CHAP. 314. Of Ground-Juy, or Ale-hoofe.
The Description.
1 GRound Iuy is a low or base herb; it creeps and spreads upon the ground
hither and thither all about, with many stalks of an uncertain length,
slender, and like those of the Vine, something cornered, and sometimes reddish:
whereupon grow leaves something broad and round, wrinkled, hairy, nicked in the
edges, for the most part two out of every joint: amongst which come sorth the
flowers gaping like little hoods, not unlike to those of Germander, of a
purplish blew color: the roots are very threddy: the whole plant is of a
strong smell and bitter taste.

2 Upon the rockie and mountainous places of Province and Daulphine grows this
other kind of Ale-hoofe, which has leaves, stalks, flowers, and roots like
in shape to those of the former, but the flowers and leaves are of a light
purple color, and also larger and longer. This by Lobel is called Asarina,
sieve Saxatilis hedera.

The Place.
It is found as well in tilled as in untilled places, but most commonly in
obscure and dark places, upon banks under hedges, and by the sides of houses.

The Time.
It remains green not only in Summer, but also in Winter at any time of the
year: it floureth from April till Summer be far spent.

1 Hedera terrestris. Ale-hoofe.
2 Hedera saxatilis. Rock Ale-hoofe.


The Names.
It is commonly called Hedera terrestris: in Greek, (...): also Corona terrae:
in High Dutch, Gundelreb: in Low Dutch, Onderhaue: in French, Lierre terrestre:
Hedera humilis of some, and Chamaecissum: in English, Ground-Iuy, Ale-hoofe,
Gill go by ground, Tune-hoofe, and Catsfoot. Many question whether this be the
Chamaecissus of the Ancients: which controversy (...) has largely handled,
Pempt. 3. lib. 3. cap. 4.

The Temperature.
Ground-Iuie is hot and dry, and because it is bitter it scoureth, and remoueth
stoppings out of the intrals.

The Virtues.
Ground-Iuy is commended against the humming noise and ringing sound of the
ears, being

Matthiolus writes, That the juice being tempered with Verdugrease, is good
against fistulaes

Dioscorides teaches, That half a dram of the leaves being drunk in four
ounces and a half

The same taken in like sort six or seven days does also cure the yellow
jaundice. Galen has attributed

Ground-Iuy, (...), and Daisies, of each a like quantity, stamped and
strained, and a little

The herbs stamped as aforesaid, and mixed with a little ale and honey, and
strained, takes away

The women of our Northern parts, especially about Wales and Cheshire, do
tun the herb it is most singular against the griefs aforesaid: being tunned
up in ale and drunk, it also purges the head from rhumaticke humors flowing
from the brain.

Hedera terrestris boiled in water stays the terms; and boiled in mutton
broth it helps weak

They have used to put it into ointments against burning with fire, gunpouder,
and such like.

Hedera terrestris being bound in a bundle, or chopped as herbs for the pot, and
eaten or drunk as

CHAP. 315. Of Juy.
The Kinds.
THere be two kinds of Iuy, as Theophrastus witnesses, reckoned among the
number of those plants which have need to be propped up; for they stand not of
themselves; but are fastened to stone walls, trees, and such like, and yet
notwithstanding both of a woody substance, and yet not to be placed among the
trees, shrubs, or bushes, because of the affinity they have with climbing
herbs; as also agreeing in form and figure with many other plants that
climb, and are indeed simply to be reckoned among the herbs that clamber up.
But if any will cavil, or charge me with my promise made in the beginning of
this history, where we made our division, namely, to place each plant as near
as may be in kindred and neighborhood; this promise I have fulfilled, if the
curious (...) can be content to read without rashness those (...) following
in order, and not only this climbing Iuy that lifts her self to the tops of
trees, but also the other Iuy that creeps upon the ground.

Of the greater or the climing Iuy there are also many sorts; but especially
three, the white, the black, and that which is called Hedera Helix, or Hedera
sterilis.

The Description.
1 THe greater Iuy climbeth on trees, old buildings, and walls: the stalks
thereof are woody, and now and then so great as it seems to become a tree;
from which it sends a multitude of little boughs or branches every way,
whereby as it were with arms it creeps and wandereth far about: it also
brings forth continually fine little roots, by which it fastneth it self and
cleaves wonderful hard upon trees, and upon the smoothest stone walls: the
leanes are smooth, shining especially on the upper side, cornered with sharp
pointed corners. The flowers are very small and mossie; after which succeed
bundles of black berries, every one having a small sharp pointall.

There is another sort of great Iuy that brings forth white fruit, which some
call Acharnicam irriguam; and also another lesser, the which has black
berries. This Pliny calls Selinitium.

We also find mentioned another sort hereof spread abroad, with a fruit of a
yellow Saffron color, called of diverse Dionysias, as Dioscorides writes:
others Bacchica, of which the Poets used to make garlands, as Pliny testisieth,
lib. 16. cap. 34.

2 Barren Iuy is not much unlike unto the common Iuy aforesaid, saving that his
branches are both smaller and tenderer, not lifting or bearing it self upward,
but creeping along by the ground under moist and shadowie ditch banks. The
leaves are most commonly three square, cornered, of a blackish green color,
which at the end of Summer become brownish red upon the lower side. The whole
plant bears neither flowers nor fruit, but is altogether barren and
fruitless.

3 There is kept for novelties sake in diverse gardens a Virginian, by some
(though unfitly) termed a Vine, being indeed an Iuy. The stalks of this grow
to a great height, if they be planted nigh any thing that may sustain or
bear them up: and they take first hold by certain small tendrels, upon what
body soever they grow, whether stone, boords, brick, yea glass, and that so
firmly, that oftentimes they will bring pieces with them if you pluck them
off. The leaves are large, consisting of four, five, or more particular
leaves, each of them being long, and deeply notched about the edges, so that
they somewhat resemble the leaves of the Chestnut tree: the flowers grow
clustering together after the manner of Iuy, but never with us show themselves
open, so that we cannot justly say any thing of their color, or the fruit that
succeeds them. It puts forth his leaves in April, and the stalks with the
rudiments of the flowers are to be seen in August. It may as I said be fitly
called Hedera Virginiana.

The Place.
Iuy grows commonly about walls and trees; the white Iuy grows in Greece,
and the barren Iuy grows upon the ground in ditch banks and shadowie woods.

1 Hedera corymbosa. Clymbing or berried Iuy.
2 Hedera Helix. Barren or creeping Iuy.


The Time.
Iuy flourishes in Autumn: the berries are ripe after the Winter Solstice.

The Names.
Iuy is called in Latin Hedera: in Greek, (...), and (...) in High Dutch,
(...): in Low Dutch, (...): in Spanish, Yedra: in French, Liarre.

The greater Iuy is called of Theophrastus (...): in Latin, (...) attollens,
or Hedera assurgens: Gaza interprets it Hedera excelsa. The later Herbarists
would have it to be Hedera arborea, or tree Iuy, because it grows upon trees,
and Hedera muralis, which hangs upon walls.

Creeping or barren Iuy is called in Greek (...): in English, Ground-Iuy: yet
does it much differ from Hedera (...), or Ground-Iuy before described: of some
it is called Clauicula, Hedera Helix, and Hedera (...); and is that herb
wherein the Bore delights, according to Johannes Khuenius.

The Temperature.
Iuy, as Galen says, is compounded of contrary faculties; for it has a
certain binding earthy and cold substance, and also a substance somewhat
biting, which even the very taste does show to be hot. Neither is it without a
third faculty, as being of a certain warm waterie substance, and that is if
it be green: for whilst it is in drying, this watery substance being earthy,
cold, and binding consumes away, and that which is hot and biting remains.

The Virtues.
The leaves of Iuy fresh and green boiled in wine, do heal old ulcers, and
perfectly cure those

Moreover, the leaves boiled with vinegar are good for such as have bad
spleens; but the flowers

The juice drawn or snift up into the nose does effectually purge the head,
stays the running

The gum that is found upon the trunk or body of the old stock of Iuy,
kills nits and lice, certain waterish liquor congealed of those gummie
drops. Thus far Galen.

The very same almost has Dioscorides, but yet also somewhat more: for over
and besides he

Iuy in our time is very seldom used, save that the leaves are laid upon
little ulcers made in the

Some likewise affirm that the berries are effectual to procure urine; and
are given unto those

The leaves laid in steep in water for a day and a nights space, help sore
and smarting waterish

CHAP. 316. Of rough Binde-weed.
1 Smilax Peruviana, Salsa parilla. Rough Binde-weed of Peru.
2 Smilax aspera. Common rough Binde-weed.


The Description.
1 ALthough we have great plenty of the roots of this Binde-weed of Peru, which
we usually cally Zarza, or Sarsa Parilla, wherewith diverse griefs and maladies
are cured, and that these roots are very well known to all; yet such has
been the carelessness and small providence of such as have traveled into the
Indies, that hitherto not any have given us instruction sufficient, either
concerning the leaves, flowers, or fruit: only Monardus says, that it has
long roots deep thrust into the ground: which is as much as if a great learned
man should tell the simple, that our common carrion Crow were of a black
color. For who is so blind that sees the root it self, but can easily
affirm the roots to be very long? Notwithstanding, there is in the reports of
such as say they have seen the plant it self growing, some contradiction or
contrariety: some report that it is a kind of Bind-weed, and especially one of
these rough Bindweeds: 3 Smilax aspera Lusitanica. Rough Binde-weed of
Portugal.
others, as one Mr. White an excellent painter, who carried very many people
into Virginia (or after some Norembega) there to inhabit, at which time he did
see thereof great plenty, as he himself reported unto me, with this bare
description; It is (says he) the root of a small shrubbie tree, or hedge tree,
such as are those of our country called Haw-thorns, having leaves resembling
those of Iuy, but the flowers or fruit he remembers not. It is most certain,
that Sarsa parilla is the root of the Americane Smilax aspera, both by consent
of most Writers, and by the relation of such as have seen it growing there.

2 The common rough Binde-weed has many branches set full of little sharp
prickles, with certain clasping tendrels, wherewith it takes hold upon
hedges, shrubs, and whatsoever stands next unto it, winding and clasping it
self about from the bottom to the top; whereon are placed at every joint one
leaf like that of Iuy, without corners, sharp pointed, lesser and harder than
those of smooth Binde-weed, oftentimes marked with little white spots, and
guarded or bordered about the edges with crooked prickles. The flowers grow at
the top of crooked stalks of a white color, and sweet of smell. (...) comes
the fruit like those of the wild Vine, green at the first, and red when they
be ripe, and of a biting taste; wherein is contained a blackish seed in shape
like that of hemp. The root is long, somewhat hard, and parted into very many
branches.

3 This rough Binde-weed, found for the most part in the barren mountains of
Portugal, differs not from the precedent in stalks and flowers, but in the
leaves and fruit; for the leaves are softer, and less prickly, and sometimes
have no prickles at all, and they are also oftentimes much narrower: the fruit
or berry is not red but black when as it comes to be ripe. The root hereof
is one single root of a woody substance, with some fibers annexed thereto,
wherein consists the difference.

The Place.
Zarza parilla, or the prickly Binde-weed of America, grows in Peru a
province of America, in Virginia, and in diverse other places both in the East
and West Indies.

The others grow in rough and untilled places, about the hedges and borders of
fields, on mountains and valleys, in Italy, Languedock in France, Spain, and
Germany.

The Time.
They flower and flourish in the Spring: their fruit is ripe in Autumn, or a
little before.

The Names.
It is named in Greek (...). Gaza ( Theophrastus his Translator) names it
Hedera Cilicia; as likewise Pliny, who lib. 24. cap. (...) writes, that it is
also syrnamed Nicophoron. Of the Hetrurians, Hedera spinosa, and Rubus
ceruinus: of the Castilians in Spain, as Lacuna says, Zarza parilla, as
though they should say Rubus viticula, or Bramble little Vine. Parra, as
Matthiolus interprets it, does signify a Vine; and Parilla, a small or
little Vine.

Diverse affirm that the root (brought out of Peru a province in America) which
the later Herbarists do call Zarza, is the root of this Bindeweed. Garcias
Lopius (...) grants it to be like thereunto, but yet he does not affirm that
it is the same. Plants are (...) found to be like one another, which
notwithstanding are proved not to be the same by some little difference; the
diverse constitution of the weather and of the soil making the difference.

Zarzaparilla of Peru is a strange plant, and is brought unto us from the
Countries of the new world called America; and such things as are brought from
thence, although they also seem and are like to those that grow in Europe,
notwithstanding they do often differ in virtue and operation: for the
diversity of the soil and of the weather does not only breed an alteration in
the form, but does most of all prevail in making the virtues and qualities
greater or lesser. Such things as grow in hot places be of more force, and
greater smell; and in cold, of lesser. Some things that are deadly and
pernicious, being removed wax mild, and are made wholesome: so in like manner,
although Zarza parilla of Peru be like to rough Binde-weed, or to Spanish Zarza
parilla, notwithstanding by reason of the temperature of the weather, and also
through the nature of the soil, it is of a great deal more force than that
which grows either in Spain or in Afric.

The roots of Zarza parilla of Peru, which are brought alone without the plant,
be long and slender, like to the lesser roots of common liquorice, very many
oftentimes hanging from one head, in which roots the middle string is hardest.
They have little taste, and so small a smell that it is not to be perceived.
These are reported to grow in Honduras a province of Peru. They had their name
of the likeness of rough Binde-weed, which among the inhabitants it keeps;
signifying in Spanish, a rough or prickly vine, as Garcias Lopius witnesses.

The Temperature.
The roots are of temperature hot and dry, and of thin and subtle parts,
insomuch as their decoction does very easily procure sweat.

The Virtues.
The roots are a remedy against long continual pain of the joints and head,
and against cold

The cure is perfected in few days, if the disease be not old or great; but if
it be, it requires a (...) parilla, whereof this Smilax aspera or rough
Binde-weed is holden for a kind: notwithstanding this of Spain and the other
parts of Europe, though it be counted less worth, yet is it commended of
Dioscorides and Pliny against poisons. The leaves hereof, says Dioscorides,
are a counterpoyson against deadly medicines, whether they be drunk before or
after. The second and (...) were both (...) of one plant, I mean the (...);
for the figure in the fourth place should have been in the third, and the
figure in the third was the same (...) the second, and should have been in the
fourth place.


CHAP. 317. Of smooth or gentle Binde-weed.
1 Smilax lenis sieve laeuis mayor. Great smooth Binde-weed.
2 Smilax lenis minor. Small Binde-weed.


The Description.
1 IT is a strange thing unto me, that the name of Smilax should be so largely
extended, as that it should be assigned to those plants that come nothing near
the nature, and scarsly unto any part of the form of Smilax indeed. But we
will leave controversies to the further consideration of such as love to dance
in quag-mires, and come to this our common smooth Smilax, called and known by
that name among us, or rather more truly by the name of Convolvulus mayor, or
Volubilis mayor: It bears the long branches of a Vine, but tenderer, and for
the length and great spreading thereof it is very fit to make shadows in arbors:
the leaves are smooth like Iuie, but somewhat bigger, and being broken are full
of milk: amongst which come forth great white and hollow flowers like bells.
The seed is three cornered, growing in small husks covered with a thin skin.
The root is small, white and long, like the great Dogs grass.

2 Smilax (...) minor is much like unto the former in stalks, leaves, flowers,
seed, and roots, saving that in all respects it is much smaller, and creeps
upon the ground. The branches are small and smooth: the little leaves tender
and soft: the flowers like unto little bells, of a purple color: the seed
three cornered like unto the others.

3 Convolvulus minimus spicae-folius. Lauander leafed Binde-weed.
The description which our Author intended in the first place for (...), and
took out of the 274. page of the (...), but so (...) and imperfectly, neither
agreeing with that he intended, I have omitted as (...), and made his later,
though also vnpersect description, somewhat more complete and agreeable to the
plant figured and intended.
4 Convolvulus argenteus (...). Silver leafed Binde-weed.


3 This Bindweed Pena says he never saw but in the brinks of quicke-sets and
Oliuets in Prouence, Sauoy, and Narbone; notwithstanding I found it growing in
the corn fields about great Dunmow in Essex, in such abundance, that it does
much hurt unto their corn. This kind of Bindweed or Volubilis is like unto the
small Bindweed before mentioned, but it has a finer flower, plaited or folded
in the compass of the bell very orderly, especially before the Sun rise (for
after it opens it self the welts are not so much perceived) and it is of a
dark purple color: the seed is not unlike the rest, cornered and flat,
growing out of slender branches which stand upright and thick together,
proceeding out of a woody white root. The leaves are long and narrow,
resembling Linaria both in color and hairinesse, in taste drying, and somewhat
heating.

5 Volubilis nigra. Black Bindweed.


4 The stalks and branches of this are some cubite long, slender, weak and
hairy, so that they lie upon the ground, if they have nothing to sustain them:
upon these without any order grow leaves, shaped like those of luy, or the
marsh Mallow, but less, and covered over with a siluer-like down or
hairinesse, and divided somewhat deep on the edges, sometimes also curled, and
otherwhiles only snipt about. The flower grows upon long stalks like as in
other plants of this kind, and consists of one folding lease, like as that of
the last mentioned, and it is either of a whitish purple, or else absolute
purple color: The root is small and creeping. It grows in many places of
Spain, and there flowers in March and April. Clusius calls this Convoluulus
Altheae folio, and says that the Portugals name it Verdezilla, and commend it
as a thing most effectual to heal wounds. Our Author gave the figure hereof
(how fitly let the Reader judge) by the name of Papauer cornutum luteum minus,
making it a horned Poppy, as you may see in the former Edition, Page 294.

5 This kind of Bindweed has a (...) root full of threddie strings, from
which rise up immediately diverse trailing branches, whereupon grow leaves like
the common field Bindweed, or like those of Orach, of a black green color,
whereof it took his name: the flowers are small, and like those of Orach: the
seed is black, three square, like, but less than that of Buck-wheat. The whole
plant is not only a hurtful weed, but of an evil smell also, and too
frequently found amongst corn. Dodonaeus calls this Convolvulum (...): and
Helxine, Cissampelos: Tabernamontanus, Volubilis nigra: and Lobel, Helxine
Cissampelos altera Atriplicis effigy.

The Place.
All these kinds of Bindweeds do grow very plentifully in most parts of
England, The third and fourth excepted.

The Time.
They do flower from May to the end of August.

The Names.
The great Bindweed is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Smilax Laeuis: of
Galen and Paulus Aegineta, (...) it is surnamed Laeuis or smooth, because the
stalks and branches thereof have no prickles at all. Dolichus called also
Smilax hortensis, or Kidney bean, does differ from this: and likewise Smilax
the tree, which the Latins call Taxus: in English, the Yew tree. The later
Herbarists do call this Bindweed Volubilis mayor, Campanella, Funis arborum,
Convoluulus albus and Smilax laeuis mayor: in like manner Pliny in his 21.
book, 5. chapt. does also name it Conuoluulus. It is thought to be Ligustrum,
not the shrub priuet, but that which Martial in his first book of Epigrams
speaks of, writing against Procillus.

The small Bindweed is called Convoluulus minor, and Smilax laeuis minor,
Volubilis minor: in high Dutch, Windkraut: in Low Dutch, Wrange: in French,
Liseron: in Italian, Vilucchio: in Spanish, Campanilla Yerua: in English,
Withwinde, Bindeweed, and Hedge-bels.

The Nature.
These herbs are of an hot and dry temperature.

The Virtues.
The leaves of black Bindweed called Helxine Cissampelos, stamped and
strained, and the juice

The leaves pound and laid to the grieved place, dissolueth, wastes, and
consumes hard lumps Galen says.

The rest of the Bindweeds are not fit for medicine, but unprofitable weeds,
and hurtful unto each

CHAP. 318. Of Blew Bindweed.
The Description.
1 BLew Bindweed brings forth long, tender, and winding branches, by which it
climeth upon things that stand near unto it, and foldeth it self about them
with many turnings and windings, wrapping it self against the Sun, contrary to
all other things whatsoever, that with their clasping tendrels do embrace
things that stand near unto them; whereupon do grow broad cornered leaves
very like unto those of Iuie, something rough and hairy, of an ouerworne russet
green color: among which come forth most pleasant flowers bell fashion,
something cornered as are those of the common Bindweed, of a most shining azure
color tending to purple: which being past, there succeed round knobbed seed
vessels, wherein is contained long blackish seed of the bigness of a Tare, and
like unto those of the great hedge Bindweed. The root is threddy, and perishes
at the first approchof Winter.

1 Convolvulus Caeruleus. Blew Binde-weed.
2 Convolvulus caeruleus folio rotundo. Round leaued blew Bindweed.


2 There are also kept in our gardens two other blew floured Bindweeds. The one
a large and great plant, the other a lesser. The great sends up many large and
long winding branches, like those of the last described, and a little hairie:
the leaves are large and roundish, ending in a sharp point: the flowers are as
large as those of the great Bindweed, and in shape like them, but blew of
color, with five broad purplish veins equally distant each from other: and
these flowers commonly grow three near together upon three several stalks
some inch long, fastened to another

3 Convolvulus caeruleus minor, folio oblongo. Small blew Bindweed.
stalk some handful long: the cup which holds the flowers, and afterward
becomes the seed vessel, is rough and hairie: the seed is black, and of the
bigness of a Tare: the root is stringie, and lasts no longer than to the
perfecting of the seed. I have only given the figure of the leaf and flower
largely expressed, because for the root and manner of growing it resembles the
last described.

3 This small blew Bindweed sends forth diverse long slender creeping hairie
branches, lying flat upon the ground, unless there be something for it to rest
upon: the leaves be longish and hairy, and out of their bosoms (almost from
the bottom to the tops of the stalks) come small foot-stalkes carrying
beautiful flowers of the bigness and shape of the common small Bindweed; but
commonly of three colors; that is, white in the very bottom, yellow in the
middle, and a perfect azure at the top; and these twine themselves up, open and
shut in five plaits like as most other flowers of this kind do. The seed is
contained in round knaps or heads, and is black and cornered: the root is
small, and perishes every year. Bauhine was the first that set this forth, and
that by the name of Convolvulus peregrinus caeruleus folio oblongo.

The Place.
The seed of this rare plant was first brought from Syria and other remote
places of the world, and is a stranger in these Northern parts; yet have I
brought up and nourished it in my garden unto flouring, but the whole plant
perished before it could perfect his seed.

The Time.
The seed must be sown as Melons and Cucumbers are, and at the same time: it
floured with me at the end of August.

The Names.
It is called Campana Lazula, and Lazura: of the later Herbarists Campana
Caerulea, and also Convolvulum Caeruleum: it is thought to be the Ligustrum
nigrum; of which Columella in his tenth book has made mention.

Fer calathis violam, and nigropermista ligustro
Balsamacum Cassia nectens, etc.
In baskets bring thou Violets, and blew Bindweed withal,
But mixed with pleasant Baulme, and Cassia medicinal.
For if the greater smooth Withwinde, or Bindweed be Ligustrum, then may this
be not improperly called Ligustrum nigrum: for a blew purple color is
oftentimes called black, as has been said in the black Violet. But there be
some that would have this Bindweed to be Granum nil Auicennae, of which he
writes in the 306. chapter; the which differs from that Nil that is
described in the 512. chapter. For this is Isatis Graecorum, or the Grecian
Woad: but that is a strange plant, and is brought from India, as both Auicen
and Serapio do testify: Auicen in this manner: what is Granum Nil? It is
Cartamum Indum: and Serapio thus; Habal Nil, is Granum Indicum, in cap. 283.
where the same is described in these words: [The plant thereof is like to the
plant of (...), that is to say of Convolvulus, or Bindweed, taking hold of
trees with his tender stalks: it has both green branches and leaves, and there
comes out by every leaf a purple flower, in fashion of the Belfloures: and
when the flower does fall away, it yields a seed in small cods (I read little
heads) in which are three grains, lesser than the seeds of Stauesaker] to
which description this blew Bindweed is answerable.

There be also other sorts of Bindweeds, which be referred to Nil Auicenna;
which no doubt may be kinds of Nil; for nothing gainsaith it why they should
not be so. Therefore to conclude, this beautiful Bindeweed, which we call
Convolvulus Caeruleus, is called of the Arabians Nil: of Serapio, Hab al Nil:
about Alepo and Tripolis in Syria the inhabitants call it Hasmisen: the
Italians, Campana azurea: of the beautiful azured flowers, and also Fior de
notte, because his beauty appears most in the night.

The Temperature.
(...) (...), or Nil, as Auicen says, is hot and dry in the first degree: but
Serapio makes it to be hot and dry in the third degree.

The Virtues.
It purges and voideth forth raw, thick, flegmaticke, and melancholicke
humors: it drives out Auicen says: it works slowly, as Serapio writes; in
whom more hereof may be found, but to little purpose, wherefore we think good
to pass it over.

CHAP. 319. Of Scammonie, or purging Bindweed.
1 Scammonium Syriacum Syrian Scammonie.
The titles of the second and (...) were (...) transposed and both the figures
belonged to the second description, which was of the (...) (...) of the (...).
being the same (...) the (...) Valentina of Clusius.
2 Scamonea Valentina. Scammonie of Valentia.


The Description.
1 SCammonie of Syria has many stalks rising from one root, which are long,
slender, and like the clasping tendrels of the vine, by which it climeth and
takes hold of such things as are next unto it. The leaves be broad, sharp
pointed like those of the smooth or hedge Bindweed: among which come forth very
fair white flowers tending to a bush color, bell fashion. The root is long,
thick, and white within: out of which is gathered a juice that being hardened,
is greatly used in Physic: for which consideration, there is not any plant
growing upon the earth, the knowledge whereof more concerns a Physician, both
for his shape and properties, than this Scammonie, which Pena calls Lactaria
scansoriaque volvula, that is, milkie and climbing Windweed, whereof it is a
kind; although for distinction sake I have placed them as two several kinds.
And although this herb be suspected, and half condemned of some learned men,
yet there is not any other herb to be found, whereof so small a quantity will
do so much good: neither could those which have carped at it, and reproved this
herb, find any simple in respect of his virtues to be put in his room: and
hereof insueth great blame to all practitioners, who have not endeavored to be
better acquainted with this herb, chiefly to avoid the deceit of the crafty
Drug-seller and Medicine maker of this confected Scammonie, brought us from
far places, rather to be called I fear infected Scammonie, or poisoned
Scammonie, than confected. But to avoid the inconveniences hereof, by reason of
the counterfeiting and ill mixing thereof: I have therefore thought good to set
down what I have taken out of the diligent, and no less learned observations
of Pena, concerning this plant, Anno 1561, or 1562. Vid. adver s. page 272.

3 Scammonium (...). French Scammonie.


(...) Martinellus an Apothecarie of Venice, being a most diligent searcher of
Simples, that he might have the right Scammony of Antioch, traveled into
Syria, where from the city of Alepo he sent an 100. weight of the juice of
Scammonie of Antioch, prepared and hardened into a lump, at the making whereof
he was present himself. This man sent also of the seeds thereof, which in all
points answered the cornered seed of Volubilis; which being sown in the
beginning of the Spring at Padua and Venice, grew up to the form of a brave and
goodly Convolvulus, in leaves, flowers, and show so like unto our Cissampelos,
that a man would have taken it for the same without controversy, saving that
the root was great, and in bigness equal to the great Brionie, as also in
tenderness. The outward bark of the root was of a dusky color, and white
within: the inner pith being taken forth seems in all men's judgments to be
the same and the best allowed Turbith officinarum: and yet it differs from
Turbith, in that, that it is more brittle, and will more easily be broken,
though the pith in Scammonie be no less gummie and full of milkie juice, than
Turbith. Further Pena reports, that afterward he sent of this seed unto
Antwerpe, where it grew very bravely, the climing strings and branches growing
up to the height of five or six cubits, not differing from that which was
sown in Italy. Also William Dries of Antwerp, a most excellent Apothecary,
did cut off the branches of his Antwerpian Scammonie from the root, and dried
them, planted the seeds in his garden, and conferred the superfluous branched
roots with the Turbith of Alexandria, and could not find them to differ or
disagree the one from the other in any point. But he that will know more
concerning the making, difference, choice and use of Scammony, let him read
Pena in his chapter of Scammonie, in the place formerly cited, where he shall
find many excellent secrets worthy the noting of those which would know how to
use such rare and excellent medicines.

2 Scammony of Valentia (whereof I have plenty inmy garden) is also a kind of
Bindweed, growing naturally by the sea side upon the grauelly shore, by the
mouth of the river Rhodanus, at the waters called Aquas Marianas, where the
Apothecaries of Montpellier gather of it great plenty, who have attempted to
harden the milkie juice thereof, to use it in stead of Scammonie of Antioch.
This plant brings forth many slender branches, which will climb and very
well run upon a pole; as being supported therewith, and mounteth to the height
of five or six cubits, climbing and ramping like the first kind of Scammonie.
The leaves are green, smooth, plain, and sharp pointed, which being broken
do yield abundance of milk: the flowers are white, small, and starrefashion:
the roots white and many, shooting forth sundry other roots, whereby it
mightily increases.

3 This strange kind of Scammonie, which Clusius makes rightly to be
Periplocae species, has very many long branches ramping and taking hold of
such things as do grow near unto them, of a darkish ash color: whereupon do
grow leaves sharp pointed, crooked at the setting on of the stalk like those
of the black Bryonie, and likewise of an ash color, set together by couples:
from the bosom whereof thrust forth small tender foot-stalkes, whereon are
placed small white flowers starre-fashion: the seeds are contained in long
coddes, and are wrapped up in down, like as those of Swallow-wort. The root is
very long, slender, and creeping, like that of the small Bindweed, so that if
it once take in any ground, it can hardly be destroyed.

The Place.
It does grow in hot regions, in a fat soil, as in Misia, Syria, and other
like countries of Asia; it is likewise found in the Islland of Candia, as
(...). witnesses; from whence I had some seeds, of which seed I received two
plants that prospered exceeding well; the one whereof I bestowed upon a learned
Apothecarie of Colchester, which continues to this day, bearing both flowers
and ripe seed. But an ignorant weeder of my garden plucked mine up, and cast it
away in my absence, in stead of a weed: by which mischance I am not able to
write hereof so absolutely as I determined: it likewise grows near unto the
sea side about Tripolis in Syria, where the inhabitants do call it Meudheudi.

The Time.
It floured in my garden about S. James tide, as I remember, for when I went to
Bristow Fair, I left it in flower; but at my return it was destroyed as
aforesaid.

The Names.
The Greeks call it (...): the Latins, Scammonium, so naming not only the
plant it self, but also the hard and condensed juice: of the Apothecaries,
Scammonea; and when it is prepared, Diagridium: as though they should say,
(...): which signifies a little tear: both the herb and juice are named
Scamony: of Rhasis, Coriziola.

The Temperature.
The juice does mightily purge by the stool, and is the strongest purge
whatsoever; for as Oribasius says, it is in no part overcome by those things
which stir and move the body. It works the same not vehemently by any hot
quality, but by some other hid and secret property of the whole substance;
for there is no extremity of heat perceived in it by taste: for with what
liquor or thing soever it is mixed, it gives unto it no bitterness, biting,
or other unpleasant taste at all, and therefore it is not to be accounted among
the extreme hot medicines, but among those that are moderately hot and dry.

The Virtues.
It cleanses and draws forth especially choler: also thin and waterish
humors, and oftentimes Paulus teaches more hurtful to the stomach than any
other medicine.

Mesues thinks that it is not only troublesome and hurtful to the stomach,
but also that it

These mischiefs are prevented if the Scammonie (...) boiled in a Quince and
mixed with the Psillium, called Fleawoort, the pap or pulp of Prunes, or other
things that have a slimie juice, with a little Masticke added, or some other
easy binding thing.

Pliny asfirmeth that the hurt thereof is taken away if Aloes be tempered with
it: [Scammonie Oribasius (...) of in the first book of his Synopses, and the
seventh book of his medicinal Collections.

The old Physicians were also wont to boil Scammonie in a Quince, and to give
the Quince to Galen in his first book of the Faculties of Nourishments does
set down, and likewise in his third book of the (...) of simple Medicines.

The Apothecaries do use Scammonie prepared in a Quince, which as we have said
they name Diagridium, and do mix it in diverse compositions.

They keep usually in their shops two compositions, or electuaries, the one of
Psillium or Flea (...): the other of Prunes fathered upon Nicolaus, which were
devised for the tempering and correction of Scammony, and be commended for hot
burning agues, and tertians, and for what diseases soever that proceed of
choler.

Galen has taken Masticke and Bdellium out of the pills called Cochiae, which
also contain in

The quantity of Scammony, or of (...) it self, as (...) writes, is from
five grains to (...) judges it to be after two years little worth: it is to
be used, says he, when it is two years old, and it is not good before, nor
after. The mixing or otherwise the use thereof, more than is set down, I
think it not expedient to set forth in the Physical virtues of Scammony, upon
the receipt whereof many times death insueth: my reasons are diverse, for that
the same is very dangerous, either if too great a quantity thereof be taken,
or if it be given without correction; or taken at the hands of some runnagate
(...)-monger quacksaluer, old women-leaches, and such like abusers of Physic,
and deceivers of people. The use of Scammony I commit to the learned, unto
whom it especially and only belongs, who can very carefully and curiously
use the same.

CHAP. 320. Of Briony, or the white Vine.
The Kinds.
There be two kinds of Bryony, the one white, the other black: of the white
Briony as follows.

Bryonia alba. White Bryonie.


The Description.
WHite Briony brings forth diverse long and slender stalks with many clasping
tendrels like the Vine, wherewith it catches hold of those things that are
next unto it. The leaves are broad, five cornered, and indented like those of
the Vine; but rougher, more hairie, and whiter of color. The flowers be small
and white, growing many together. The fruit consists in little clusters, the
berries whereof are at the first green, and red when they be ripe. The root
is very great, long, and thick, growing deep in the earth, of a white
yellowish color, extreme bitter, and altogether of an unpleasant taste. The
Queens chief Surgion Mr. William Godorous, a very curious and learned
gentleman showed me a root hereof, that waied half an hundred weight, and of
the bigness of a child, of a year old.

The Place.
Briony grows almost every where among pot-herbes, hedge-bushes, and such
like places.

The Time.
It floureth in May, and brings forth his grapes in Autumn.

The Names.
Bryony is called in Greek, (...) in Latin, Vitis alba, or white Vine, and it
is named, (...), because it is not only like the Vine in leaves, but also for
that it brings forth his fruit made up after the likeness of a little
cluster, although the berries stand not close together: it is called of Pliny,
Bryonia, and Madon: of the Arabians, Alphesera: of Matthaeus Sylvaticus,
Viticella: in the poor man's Treasure, Rorastrum: of Apuleius, Apiastellum,
vitis Taminia, Vitis alga, and Vitalba: in high Dutch, Suchwurtz: in low Dutch,
Brionie: in English, Bryony, white Bryony, and tetter Berrie: in French,
Couleuree: in Italian, Zuccasylvatica: in Spanish, Nuezablanca.

The Temperature.
White Briony is in all parts hot and dry, exceeding the third degree,
especially of heat, with an exceeding great force of clensing and scouring, by
reason whereof it purges and draws forth, not only choleric and
flegmaticke humors, but also watrie.

The Virtues.
Dioscorides writes that the first springs or sproutings being boiled and
eaten, do purge by siege Galen says, that all men use accustomably to eat of
it in the spring time, and that it is a nourishment wholesome, by reason of the
binding quality that it has; which is to be understood of those of the wild
Vine, called in Latin, Tamus; and not of the sproutings of this plant; for the
sproutings of the first springs of white Bryony are nothing binding at all, but
do mightily purge the belly, and torment the stomach.

Dioscorides also affirms, that the juice of the root being pressed out in
the spring, and drunk

This kind of strong purgation is good for those that have the dropsy, the
falling sickness, Dioscorides admonishes) to them that have the falling
sickness, for it will be troublesome enough to take it now and then: and it
is (as we have said) an exceeding strong medicine, purging with violence, and
very forceable for man's nature.

The root put up in manner of a pessary brings forth the dead child and
afterbirth: being boiled

It scoureth the skin, and takes away wrinckles, freckles, sun burning,
black marks, spots, and

The same is also fitly mixed with eating medicines, as Dioscorides writes.

The fruit is good against scabs and the leprie, if it be applied and anointed
on, as the same Author

Galen writes, that it is profitable for Tanners to thicken their leather
hides with.

Furthermore, an electuary made of the roots and honey or sugar, is singular
good for them that

The root stamped with salt is good to be laid upon filthy ulcers and scabbed
legs. The fruit

The root of Bryony and of wake-Robin stamped with some sulphur or brimstone,
and made up

CHAP. 321. Of black Brionie, or the wild Vine.
The Description.
1 THe black Bryony has long flexible branches of a woodie substance, covered
with a gaping or cloven bark growing very far abroad, winding it self with
his small tendrels about trees, hedges, and what else is next unto it, like
unto the branches of the Vine. The leaves are like unto those of Iuie or garden
Nightshade, sharp pointed, and of a shining green color: the flowers are
white, small, and mossie; which being past, there succeed little clusters of
red 1 Bryonia nigra. Black Bryonie.
berries, somewhat bigger than those of the small Raisons, or Ribes, which we
call Currants, or small Raisins. The root is very great and thick, oftentimes as
big as a man's leg, blackish without, and very clammie or slimie within;
which being but scraped with a knife, or any other thing fit for that purpose,
it seems to be a matter fit to spread upon cloth or leather in manner of a
plaster or Seare-cloth: which being so spread and used, it scrueth to lay upon
many infirmities, and unto very excellent purposes, as shall be declared in
the proper place.

2 The wild Black Bryonie resembles the former, as well in slender Vinie
stalks as leaves; but clasping tendrels has it none, nevertheless by reason
of the infinite branches, and the tenderness of the same, it takes hold of
those things that stand next unto it, although easy to be loosed, contrary
unto the other of his kind. The berries hereof are black of color when they
be ripe. The root also is black without, and within of a pale yellow color
like box. This which is here described is the Bryonia nigra of Dodonaeus; But
Bauhine calls it Bryonia Alba, and says it differs from the common white
Bryonie, only in that the root is of a yellowish box color on the inside,
and the fruit or berries are black when as they come to ripeness.

Bryonianigra slorens non fructum ferens.

3 This is altogether like the first described in roots, branches, and leaves;
only the footstalk whereon the flowers grow are about eight or nine inches
long: the flowers are something greater, having neither before or after their
flouring any berries or show thereof; but the flowers and footstalks do soon
wither and fall away: this I have heretofore, and now this Summer, 1621,
diligently observed, because it has not been mentioned or observed by any
that I know. John Goodyer.

The Place.
The first of these plants does grow in hedges and bushes almost every where.

The second grows in Hessia, Saxony, Westphalia, Pomerland, and Misnia where
white Bryonie does not grow, as Valerius Cordus has written, who says that it
grows under Hasell-trees, near unto a city of Germany called Argentine, or
Strawsborough.

The Time.
They spring in March, bring forth their flowers in May, and their ripe fruit
in September.

The Names.
Black Bryonie is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Bryonia nigra: and Vitis
syluestris, or wild Vine; notwithstanding it does not a little differ from
Labrusca, or (...) Vinefera syluestris, that is to say, from the wild vine,
which brings forth wine, which is likewise called Ampelos agria: Why both
these were called by one name, Pliny was the cause, who could not sufficiently
expound them in his 23. book, first chapter; but confounded them, and made
them all one, in which error are also the Arabians.

This wild Vine also is called in Latin, Tamus, and the fruit thereof Vua
Taminia. Pliny names it also Salicastrum. (...) says that in certain shops
it is called Sigillum B. Mariae; it is also called Cyclaminus alt era but not
properly: in English, Black Bryonie, wild Vine, and our Ladies-seale.

The Temperature.
The roots of the wild Vine are hot and dry in the third degree: the fruit is
of like (...), but yet nor so forceable: both of them scour and waste away.

The Virtues.
Dioscorides says, that the roots do purge waterish humors, and are good for
such as have the

The berries do not only cleanse and remove such kind of spots, but do also
very quickly waste

The young and tender sproutings are kept in pickle, and reserved to be eaten
with meat as Dioscorides Matthiolus writes that they are served at men's tables
also in our age in Tuscanie: others report the like also to be done in
Andalosia, one of the kingdoms of Granado.

It is said that swine (...) after the roots hereof, which they dig up and eat
with no less delight Cyclaminus, or Panis porcinus, whereupon it was called
Cyclaminus altera; or Sow-bread; if this reason stand for good, then may we in
like manner iome hereunto many other roots, and likewise call them Cyclaminus
altera, or Sow-bread: for swine do not seek after the roots of this only,
dig them up and greedily devour them, but the roots of diverse other plants
also, of which none are of the kinds of Sow-bread. It would therefore be a
point of rashness to affirm Tamus or our Ladies-seale to be a kind of
Sowbread, because the roots thereof are pleasant meat to swine.

The root spread upon a piece of sheep leather, in manner of a plaster
whilst it is yet fresh and The figure that was formerly in the (...) (...) of
this chapter did no ways agree with the (...), for it was of the (...) or
Trauellors joy (hereafter to be mentioned; which (...), (whose figures our
Author made use of) calls (...) (...).


CHAP. 322. Of Bryonie of Mexico.
The Description.
1 THat plant which is now called Mechoacan, or Bryonie of Mexico, comes
very near the kinds of Bindweeds, in leaves and trailing branches, but in
roots like the Brionies; for there shoots from the root thereof many long
slender tendrels, which do infinitely graspe and claspe about such things as
grow or stand next unto them: whereupon grow great broad leaves sharp pointed,
of a dark green color, in shape like those of our Ladies-seale, somewhat
rough and hairie, and a little biting the tongue: among the leaves come forth
the flowers (as Nicolaus Monardus writes) not unlike those of the Orange tree,
but rather of the golden Apple of love, consisting of five small leaves: out of
the midst whereof comes forth a little clapper or pestell in manner of a
round lump, as big as a Hasell nut; which being divided with a thin skin, or
membrane, that comes through it, opens into two parts, in each whereof are
contained two seeds, as big as Pease, in color black and shining. The root
is thick and long, very like unto the root of white Bryonie, whereof we (...)
this a kind, although in the taste of the roots there is some difference: for
the root of white Bryonie has a bitter taste, and this has little or no taste
at all.

2 The Bryony, or (...) of Peru grows up with many long trailing flexible
branches, interlaced with diverse Vinie tendrels, which take hold of such things
as are next or near unto them, even in such manner of clasping and climing as
does the black Bryonie, or wine Vine, whereunto it is very like almost in each
respect, saving that his mossie flowers do smell very sweetly. The fruit as yet
I have not observed, by reason that the plant which does grow in my garden did
not perfect the same, by occasion of the great rain and intemperate weather
that happened in An. 1596. but I am in good hope to see it in his perfection, and
then we shall easily judge whether it be that right Mochoacan that has been
brought from Mexico and other places of the West Indies or no? The root by the
figure should seem to answer that of the wild Vine, but as yet thereof I
cannot write certainly.

3 There is brought to us and into use of late time the root of another plant,
which seems 1 Mechoacan. Bryonie of Mexico.
2 (...) Peruvi ana. Bryonie of Peru.
have much affinity with Mechoacan, and therefore Bauhine has called it
Bryonia Mechoacan nigricans, and thus delivers the history thereof. [It is a
root like Mechoacan, but covered with a blackish bark, and reddish (or rather
grayish) on the inside: and cut into slices, it was brought some years agone
out of India by the name of Chelapa, or Gelapa. It is called by those of
Alexandria and Marscilles Ialapium or Gelapum: and of those of Marseilles it is
thought the black or male Mechoacan: The taste is not ungrateful, but gummy,
and by reason of the much gumminesse, put to the fire it quickly flames: it in
faculty exceeds the common Mechoacan; for by reason of the great gumminesse it
more powerfully purges serous humors with a little griping, also it
principally strengthens the liver and stomach; wherefore it is safely given in
the weight of 3j. and performs the operation without nauseousnesse. It is
usually given in Succorie water, or some thin broth three hours before meat.]
Thus much Bauhine, who says it was first brought to these parts eleven years
before he set forth his Prodromus, so that was about 1611. It has been little
used here till within this ten years.

The Place.
Some write that Mechoacan was first found in the Province of New Spain, (...)
unto the city of Mexico or Mexican, whereof it took his name. It grows
likewise in a province of the West Indies called Nicaragua and (...), where it
is thought the best does grow.

The Names.
It bears his name as is said, of the province in which it is found. Some
take it to be Bryoniae species, or to be a kind of Bryonie: but seeing the
root is nothing bitter, but rather without taste, it has little agreement with
Bryonie; for the root of Bryonie is very bitter. Diverse name it Rha (...), or
white Rubarbe, but improperly, being nothing like. It comes near unto (...),
and if I might yield my censure, it seems to be Scammonium (...) Americanum,
or a certain Scammonie of America. (...) creeps, as we have said, after the
manner of Bindweed. The root is both white and thick: the juice has but
little taste, as also has this of Mechoacan: it is called in English, Mechoca
and Mechocan, and may be called Indian (...).

The Temperature.
The root is of a mean temperature between hot and cold, but yet dry.

The Virtues.
It purges by siege, especially phlegm, and then waterish humors. It is given
from one full dram

It is to be given with good effect to all, whose diseases proceed of phlegm
and cold humors. It is

CHAP. 323. Of the Manured Vine.
The Kinds.
THe Vine may be accounted among those plants that have need of stays and
props, and cannot stand by themselves; it is held up with poles and frames of
wood, and by that means it spreads all about and climbeth aloft: it joins
it self unto trees, or whatsoever stands next unto it.

Of Vines that bring forth wine, some be tame and husbanded; and others that be
wild: of tame Vines there are many that are greater, and likewise another sort
that be lesser.

The Description.
THe trunk or body of the Vine is great and thick, very hard, covered with
many barks, and those full of cliffes or chinkes; from which grow forth
branches, as it were arms, many ways spreading; out of which come forth
iointed shoots and springs: and from the bosom of those ioints, leaves, and
clasping tendrels; and likewise bunches or clusters filled full of grapes: the
leaves be broad, something round, five cornered, and somewhat indented about
the edges; amongst which come forth many clasping tendrels, that take hold of
such props or stays as do stand next unto it. The grapes do differ both in
color and greatness, and also in many other things, the which to distinguish
severally were impossible, considering the infinite sorts or kinds, and also
those which are transplanted from one region or climate to another, do likewise
alter both from the form and taste they had before, in consideration whereof
it shall be sufficient to set sorth the figure of the manured grape, and speak
somewhat of the rest.

There is found in Graecia and the parts of Morea, as Pantalarea, Zante,
Cephalonia, and (...) (whereof some are Islands, and the other of the continent)
a certain Vine that has a trunk or body of a wooddie substance, with a
scaly or rugged bark, of a grayish color, whereupon do grow fair broad
leaves, slightly indented about the edges, not unlike unto those of the
Marsh-mallow: from the bosom whereof come forth many small clasping tendrels,
and also tough and pliant foot-stalkes, whereon do grow very fair bunches of
grapes, of a watchet bluish color: from the which fruit comes forth long
tender laces or strings, such as is found among Sauorie; whereupon we call
that plant which has it laced Sauorie, not unlike that that grows among, and
upon Flax, which we call Dodder, or Podagra lini, (...) is made a black wine,
which is called Greek wine, yet of the taste of Sack. The laced fruit of this
Vine may be fitly termed Vuabarbata, Laced or bearded grapes.

The plant that bears those small Raisins which are commonly called Corans or
Currants, or rather Raisins of Corinth, is not that plant which among the vulgar
people is taken for Currants, being a shrubbe or bush that brings forth small
clusters of berries, differing as much as may be from Corans, having no
affinity with the Vine or any kind thereof. The Vine that bears small
Raisins or Corans has a body or stock as other Vines have, branches and
tendrels likewise. The leaves are larger than any of the others, snipt about
the edges like the teeth of a saw: among which come forth clusters of grapes,
in form like the other, but smaller, of a bluish color; which being ripe are
gathered and laid upon hurdles, carpets, mats, and such like, in the Sun to
dry: then are they carried to some house and laid upon heaps, as we lay
apples and corn in a garner, until the merchants do buy them: then do they
put them into large Buts or other wooden vessels, and tread them down with
their bare feet, which they call Stiuing, and so are they brought into these
parts for our use. And they are commonly termed in Latin, (...) Corinthiacae,
and (...) minores.

Vitis Vinifera. The manured Vine.


There is also another which bears exceeding fair grapes, whereof they make
Raisins, whiter colored, and much exceeding the bigness of the common Raisin
of the Sun: yet that Grape whereof the Raisin of the Sun is made is a large
one, and thought to be the Vua Zibibi of the Arabians; and it is that which
Tabernamontanus figured under that name, who therein was followed by our
Author: but the figures being little to the purpose, I have thought good to
omit them.

There is another kind of Vine, which has great leaves very broad, of an
ouerworne color; whereupon do grow great bunches of Grapes of a bluish
color: the pulpe or meat whereof (...) or cleaves so hard to the grains or
little stones, that the one is not easily divided from the other; resembling
some starued or withered berrie that has been blasted, whereof it was named
(...).

There be some vines that bring forth grapes of a whitish or reddish yellow
color: others of a deep red; both in the outward skin, pulpe, and juice
within.

There be others whose grapes are of a blew color, or something red, yet is
the juice like those of the former. These grapes do yield forth a white wine
before they are put into the press, and a reddish or paller Wine when they are
trodden with the husks, and so left to macerate or ferment, with which if they
remain too long they yield forth a wine of a higher color.

There be others which make a black and obscure red wine, whereof some bring
bigger clusters, and consist of greater grapes; others of lesser: some grow
more clustred and closer together, others looser: some have but one stone,
others more: some make a more austere or harsh wine; others a more sweet: of
some the old wine is best; of diverse, the first years wine is most excellent:
some bring forth fruit (...) square, of which sorts or kinds we have great
plenty.

The Place.
A fit soil for Vines, says Florentinus, is every black earth, which is not
very close nor clammy, having some moisture; notwithstanding Columella says
that great regard is to be had what kind or sort of Vine you would nourish,
according to the nature of the country and soil.

A wise husbandman will commit to a fat and fruitful soil a lean Vine, and
of his own nature not too fruitful: to a lean ground a fruitful vine: to a
close and compact earth a spreading vine, and that is full of matter to make
branches of: to a loose and fruitful soil a Vine of few branches. The same
Columella says, that the Vine delights not in dung, of what kind soever it
be; but fresh mould mixed with some shauings of horn is the best to be
disposed about the roots, to cause fertility.

The Time.
Columella says, that the Vines must be pruned before the young branches bud
forth. Palladius writes, in February: if they be pruned later they lose their
nourishment with weeping.

The Names.
The Vine is called in Greek (...) (...): as much to say in Latin as, Vitis
Vinifera, or the Vine which (...) wine; and (...): that is, Vitis (...), sieve
cultiua, Tame or manured Vine. And it is called (...), that it may differ (...)
both the Bryonies, the white and the black, and from Tamus, or our Ladies
(...), which be likewise named (...). It is called Vitis, because inuitatur
aduvas pariendas. It is cherished to the intent to bring forth full clusters,
as Varro says.

(...) makes Vua (...), (...) vitis, or Vine of Alexandria, in his fourteenth
book, and third chapter, describing the same by those verv words that
Theophrastus does. Dioscorides sets it down to be altera species Vitis
(...), or a second kind of wild Vine; but we had rather retain it among the
(...) (...). We (...) name it in English, Raisin Vine. The fruits hereof are
called in shops by the name of Passularum de Corintho: in English, Currants, or
small Raisins.

Syluestris Vitis or wild Vine is called in Greek (...): and in Latin
Labrusca; as in Virgils (...):

-- Adspice vt antrum
Syluestris raris sparsit labrusca racemis.
-- See how the wild Vine
Bedecks the cave with sparsed clusters fine.
To this wild Vine does belong those which Pliny in his sixteenth book,
chapter 27. reports to be called Triferae, or that bring three sundry fruits
in one year, as Insanae and mad bearing Vines, because in those some clusters
are ripe and full grown, some in swelling, and others but flouring.

The fruit of the Vine is called in Greek (...), and (...): in Latin,
Racemus, and Vua: in English, a bunch or cluster of Grapes.

The cluster of Grapes that has been withered or dried in the Sun is named in
Greek (...): in Latin, Vua passa: in shops, Passula: in English, Raisins of
the Sun.

The berry or Grape it self is called in Latin Acinus, and also Granum, as
Democritus says, speaking of the berry.

The seeds or stones contained within the berries are called in Latin,
Vinacea, and sometimes Nuclei: in shops, Arilli, as though they should say
Ariduli, because they are dry, and yield no juice; notwithstanding Vinacea are
also taken in Columella for the dross or remnant of the Grapes after they be
pressed.

The stalk, which is in the middle of the clusters, and upon which the grapes
do hang, is called of Galen, (...): of Varro, Scapus uvarum.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The tender and clasping branches of the Vine and the leaves do cool, and
mightily bind. They

Of the same faculty be also the clusters gathered before they be ripe; and
likewise the bunches

Dioscorides says, That the liquor which falls from the body and branches
being (...), and that

The stones and other things remaining after the pressing are good against the
bloody flix, the

The ashes made of the sticks and dross that remain after the pressing,
being laid upon the

The later age do use to make a lie of the ashes of Vine sticks, in
compositions of causticke and

Of Grapes.
OF Grapes, those that are eaten raw do trouble the belly, and fill the
stomach full of wind,

Sweet grapes and such as are through ripe, are less hurtful; their juice is
hotter, and is easilier Galen says.

The substance of the stones, although it be drier, and of a binding quality,
does descend through all the bowels, and is nothing changed: as also the skins,
which are nothing at all altered in the body, or very little.

Those grapes which have a strong taste of wine are in a mean between sour
and sweet.

Such grapes as have little juice do nourish more, and those less that have
more juice: but

Grapes have the pre-eminence among the Autumn sruits, and nourish more than
they all, but

Grapes may be kept the whole year, being ordered after that manner as
Ioachimus Camerarius

Of Raisins.
OF Raisins most are sweet; some have an austere or harsh taste. Sweet Raisins
are hotter; austere

Raisins do yield good nourishment to the body, they have in them no ill juice
at all, but do

There comes of sweet and fat Raisins most plenty of nourishment: of which
they are the

There is in the sweet ones a temperate and smoothing quality, with a power to
cleanse moderately.

Moreover, Raisins are good for the liver, as Galen writes in his seventh
book of medicines, Galen affirms.

The old Physicians have taught us to take forth the stones, as we may see in
diverse compositions Galen, Arteriaca Mithridatis, which has the seeds of the
Raisins taken forth: for seeing that Raisins contain in them a thick
substance, they cannot easily pass through the veins, but are apt to breed
obstructions and stoppings of the intrals: which things happen the rather by
reason of the seeds; for they so much the harder pass through the body, and do
quicklier and more easily cause obstructions, in that they are more astringent
or binding. Wherefore the seeds are to be taken out, for so shall the juice of
the Raisins more easily pass, and the sooner be distributed through the
intrals.

Dioscorides reports, That Raisins chewed with pepper draw phlegm and water
out of the head.

Of Raisins is made a pultesse good for the gout, rottings about the joints,
gangrens, and mortified ulcers: being stamped with the herb All-heale it
quickly takes away the nails that are loose in the fingers or toes, being laid
thereon.

Of Must.
MVst, called in Latin Mustum, that is to say, the liquor newly issuing out of
the grapes when hurtful. It has only this one good thing in it (as Galen
says) that it makes the body soluble.

That which is sweetest and pressed out of ripe Grapes does soonest pass
through; but that

That first part of the wine that comes forth of it self before the Grapes
be hard pressed, is

Of Cute.
OF Cute that is made of Must, which the Latins call Sapa, and Defrutum, is
that liquor which Columella writes.

Pliny affirms, That Sapa and Defrutum do differ in the manner of the
boiling; and that Sapa is Defrutum till half be boiled.

Siraeum, (says he in his fourteenth book, cap. 17.) which others call (...),
and we Sapa, a work Defrutum.

Palladius joins to these Caroenum, which as he says is made when a third
part is boiled away,

(...) in his Geoponicks shows, that Hepsema must be made of eight parts of
new wine, and

Galen testifies, that (...) is new wine very much boiled. The later
Physicians do call Hepsemae Sapa boiled wine.

Cute or boiled wine is hot, yet not so hot as wine, but it is thicker; yet not
so easily distributed

It nourishes more, and fills the body quickly; yet does it by reason of his
thickness stick

The (...) of the Low Countries (I will not say of London) do make of Cute and
Wine

Pliny lib. 14. cap. 9. says, that Cute was first devised for a bastard honey.

Of Wine.
TO speak of Wine, the (...) of Grapes, which being newly pressed forth is
called as we have Mustum or new wine: after the dregs and dross are settled,
and now it appears pure and clear, it is called in Greek (...): in Latin
Vinum: in English, Wine, and that not improperly. For certain other (...), as
of Apples, Pomegranats, Pears, Medlars, or Services, or such as otherwise made
(for examples sake) of barley and Grain, be not at all simply called wines,
but with the name of the thing added whereof they do consist. Hereupon is the
wine which is pressed forth of the pomegranat berries named Rhoites, or wine of
pomegranats: out of Quinces, Cydonites, or wine of Quinces: out of Pears,
(...), or Perry: and that which is compounded of barley is called Zythum, or
Barley wine: in English, Ale or Beer.

And other certain wines have borrowed syrnames of the plants that have been
steeped or infused

That is properly and simply called wine which is pressed out of the grapes of
the vine, and is

The kinds of wines are not of one nature, nor of one faculty or power, but
of many differing Galen adds that which is found in the smell, which belongs
to the virtue and strength of the wine.

That may also be joined unto them which respects the age: for by age wines
become hotter

Wine is of color either white or reddish, or of a blackish deep red, which
is called black, or

Some wine is of substance altogether thin; other some thick and fat; and many
also of a middle

One wine is of great strength, and another is weak, which is called a
waterish wine: a full wine Vinosum. There be also among these very many that be
of a middle strength.

There is in all wines, be they never so weak, a certain winie substance thin
and hot. There be Galen testifies in his fourth book of the faculties of
medicines) consists of parts that have diverse faculties.

Of the sundry mixture and proportion of these substances one with another
there rise diverse and

That is the best and fullest wine in which the hot and winie parts do most of
all abound: and

The earthy substance abounding in the mixture causes the wine to be austere
or something

All wines have their heat, partly from the proper nature and inward or
original heat of the Galen testifies; the one is proper and natural to
every thing; the other is borrowed of the Sun: which if it be perceived in any
thing, it is undoubtedly best and especially in the ripening of grapes.

For the heat which proceeds from the Sun concocteth the grapes and the juice
of the grapes,

For unless wine had in it a proper and original heat, the grapes could not
be so concocted by

Wherefore seeing that wine through the heat of the Sun is for the most part
brought to his

The stronger and fuller wine grows in hot countries and places that lie to
the Sun; the rawer

The hotter the Summer is the stronger is the wine; the less hot or the
moister it is, the less ripe

Wine (as Galen writes) is hot in the second degree, and that which is very
old in the third; but Horna, that is as I take it of one year old) are for the
most part hot in the second degree. The weakest and the most waterish wines,
although they be old, do seldom exceed the second degree.

The dryness is answerable to the heat in proportion, as Galen says in his
book of Simples: but

For the faculties of wine are of one sort as it is a medicine, and of another
as it is a nourishment; Galen in his book of the faculties of nourishments
does plainly show, affirming that those qualities of the wine which Hippocrates
writes of in his book of the manner of diet, be not as a nourishment, but
rather as of a medicine. For wine as it is a medicine does dry, especially
being outwardly applied; in which case, for that it does not nourish the body
at all, the drines does more plainly appear, and is more manifestly perceived.

Wine is a special good medicine for an ulcer, by reason of his heat and
moderate drying, as Galen teaches in his fourth book of the method of healing.

Hippocrates writes, That ulcers, what manner of ones soever they are, must
not be moistened unless Galen adds) comes nearer to that which is whole,
and the thing that is moist, to that which is not whole.

It is manifest that Wine is in power or faculty dry, and not in act; for Wine
actually is moist

That wine which is neither sharp by long lying, nor made medicinable, does
nourish and moisten,

Wine does refresh the inward and natural heat, comfort the stomach,
causes it to have

It is good for such as are in a consumption by reason of some disease, and
that have need to Galen says in his seventh book of the Method of curing. It
restores strength most of all other things, and that speedily: It makes a man
merry and joyful: It puts away fear, care, troubles of mind, and sorrow:
It moves pleasure and lust of the body, and brings sleep gently.

And these things proceed of the moderate use of wine: for immoderate drinking
of wine does

Moreover, wine is a remedy against taking of Hemlocke or green Coriander, the
juice of black

Wine also is a remedy against the ouer-fulnesse and stretching out of the
sides, windy swellings,

But Wine which is of color and substance like water, through shining bright,
pure, of a Hippocrates calls it (...), that is to say, bearing little water
to delay it withal.

This troubbleth the head and hurts the sinews less than others do, and is
not unpleasant to Galen, lib. 8. of his Method says, it helps concoction,
digesteth humors that be half raw, procures (...) and sweat, and is good for
those that cannot sleep, and that be full of care and sorrow, and for such as
are ouerwearied.

Black wine, that is to say wine of a deep red color, is thick, and hardly
dispersed, and does

That which is of a light crimson red color is for the most part more
delightful to the taste, also make the belly costiue, if so be that it be not
ripe. For such crude and rough wines do oftentimes molest weak stomachs, and
are troublesome to the belly.

Reddish yellow wine seems to be in a mean between a thin and thick
substance: otherwise (...) writes.

The old vine of this kind, being of a thin substance and good smell, is a
singular medicine for Galen testifies in the (...). book of his method.

Sweet wine the less hot it is, the less does it trouble the head, and
offend the mind; and it

Again, the thicker it is of substance, the harder and slowlier it (...)
through: it is good for

Austere wine, or that which is somewhat harsh in taste, nourishes not much;
and if so be that it Galen says in his 12. book of his method.

That wine which is altogether harsh or rough in taste, the less ripe it is,
the nearer it commerh

Old wine which is also made sharp by reason of age, is not only troublesome
to the brain,

New wine, and wine of the first year, does easily make the body to swell, and
ingendreth wind,

Wine is fittest for those that be of nature cold and dry; and also for old
men, as Galen (...)

The best wines are those that be of a fat substance: for those both increase
blood, and nourish

As wine is best for old men, so it is worst for children: by reason that being
drunk, it both moisteneth Galen in his book of the government of health does
persuade, that they should not so much as taste of wine for a very long time:
for neither is it good for them to have their heads filled, nor to be made
moist and hot, more than is sufficient, because they are already of such a
heat and moisture, as if you should but little increase either quality, they
would forthwith fall into the extreme.

And seeing that every excess is to be (...), it is (...) most of all to shun
this, by which

Wherefore we think, that wine is not fit for men that be already of full age,
unless it be moderately

Of the delaying, or tempering of Wine.
IT was an ancient custom, and of long continuance in old time, for wines to
be mixed with water, Hippocrates, but also by other old men's writings. Wine
first began to be mixed with water for health and wholesomenesse sake: for as
Hippocrates writes in his book of ancient Physic; being simply and of it
self much drunk, it makes a man in some sort weak and feeble: which thing
Ovid, seems also to allow of writing thus:

Vt Venus eneruat vires, sic copia vini
Et tent at gressus, debilitatque pedes.
As Venery the vigor spends, so store of wine
Makes man to stagger, makes his strength decline.
Moreover, wine is the sweeter, having water poured into it, as Athenaeus
says. Homer likewise Philocor us writes (as Athenaeus reports) that
Amphictyon king of Athens was the first that allaied wine, as having learned
the same of Dionysius: wherefore he says, that those who in that manner drunk
it remained in health, that before had their bodies feebled and ouerweakened
with pure and unmixed wine.

The manner of mingling or tempering of wine was diverse: for sometimes to one
part of wine,

The old Comedians did think that this lesser mixture was sufficient to make
men mad, among Mnesitheus, whose words be extant in Athenaeus.

Hippocrates in the seventh book of his Aphorisms says, that this manner of
tempering of wine

Such kind of wines they might be which in times past the Scythians were
reported of the old (...), or do as the Scythians do; as we may read in the
tenth book of Athenaeus.

The Scythians, as Hippocrates and diverse other of the old writers affirm, be
people of Germany Cyrus having passed over Ister is reported to have come into
the borders of the Scythians.

And in this our age all the people of Germany do drink unmixed wine, which
grows in their

Of the liquor which is destilled out of wine, commonly called, Aqua vitae.
THere is drawn out of Wine a liquor, which in Latin is commonly called Aqua
vitae, or water Aqua ardens, or burning water, which as distilled waters are
drawn out of herbs and other things, is after the same manner distilled out
of strong wine, that is to say, by certain instruments made for this purpose,
which are commonly called Limbeckes.

This kind of liquor is in color and substance like unto waters distilled out
of herbs, and also

It bears the syrname of life, because that it serves to preserve and
prolong the life of

It is called Ardens, burning, for that it is easily turned into a burning
flame: for seeing it is not

This liquor is very hot, and of most subtle and thin parts; hot and dry in
the later end of the

This water distilled out of wine is good for all those that are made cold
either by a long disease,

It is fit for those that are taken with the Catalepsie (which is a disease in
the brain proceeding

It has such force and power, in strengthening of the heart, and stirs up
the instruments of the senses, that it is most effectual, not only inwardly
taken to the quantity of a little spoonefull, but also outwardly applied: that
is to say, set to the nosthrils, or laid upon the temples of the head, and to
the wrests of the arms; and also to foment and bath sundry hurts and griefs.

Being held in the mouth it helps the toothache: is is also good against
cold cramps and convulsions,

Some are bold to give it in quartaines before the fit, especially after the
height or prim of the

This water is to be given in wine with great judgment and discretion; for
seeing it is extreme

Therefore it may be given to such as have the apoplexy and falling sickness,
the megrim, the

This water is hurtful to all that be of nature and complexion hot, and most
of all to choleric

If I should take in hand to write of every mixture, of each infusion, of the
sundry colors, and every other circumstance that the vulgar people do give
unto this water, and their diverse use, I should spend much time but to small
purpose.

Of Argall, Tartar, or wine Lees.
The Lees of wine which is become hard like a crust, and sticks to the sides
of the vessel, and (...): in English, Argall, and Tartar.

These Lees are used for many things; the siluer-Smiths polish their silver
herewith: the Diers

It does greatly dry and wast away, as Paulus Aegineta says: it has withal a
binding faculty,

The same serves for moist diseases of the body: it is good for them that have
the green sickness Leucophlagmatica: being taken every day fasting half a
penny weight or a full penny weight (which is a dram and nine grains after the
Romans computation) does not only dry up the waterish excrements, and voideth
them by urine, but it prevails much to cleanse the belly by siege.

It would work more effectually, if it were mixed either with hot spices, or
with other things

The same of it self, or tempered with oil of Myrtles, is a remedy against
soft swellings, as Dioscorides

These Lees are oftentimes burnt: if it become all white it is a sign of right
and perfect burning, Aegineta says: the Apothecaries call it, Tartarum vstum,
and Tartarum calcinatum: that it to say, burnt or calcined Tartar.

It has a very great causticke or burning quality: it cleanses and thoroughly
heateth, binds, Dioscorides does write: being mixed with Rosin, it makes
rough and ill nails to fall away: Paulus says, that it is mixed with
causticks or burning medicines to increase their burning quality: it must be
used whilst it is new made, because it quickly vanishes: for the Lees of wine
burned, do soon relent or wax moist, and are speedily resolved into liquor:
therefore he that would use it dry, must have it put in a glass, or glassed
vessel well stopped, and set in a hot and dry place. It melts and is turned
into liquor if it be hanged in a linen bag in some place in a celler under the
ground.

The Apothecaries call this liquor that droppeth away from it, oil of Tartar.
It retains a causticke added, and as much Ceruse as is sufficient for a
liniment, wherewith the blemished or spotted parts must be anointed over night.

The brief sum of that has been said of the Vine.
THe juice of the green leaves, branches, and tendrels of the Vine drunken, is
good for those

Wine moderately drunk profits much, and makes good digestion, but it
hurts and distempereth

White wine is good to be drunk before meat; it preserves the body, and
pierces quickly

Claret wine does greatly nourish and warm the body, and is wholesome with
meat, especially Galen says, because it heateth above nature, and hurts the
head.

Red wine stops the belly, corrupts the blood, breeds the stone, is
hurtful to old people, and

Sack or Spanish wine has been used of a long time to be drunk after meat,
to cause the

Likewise Malmsey, Muskadell, Bastard, and such like sweet wines have been used
before meat,

Almighty God for the comfort of mankind ordained Wine; but decreed withal,
That it

CHAP. 324. Of Hops.
The Kinds.
THere be two sorts of Hops: one the manured or the Garden Hop; the other wild
or of the hedge.

The Description.
1 THe Hop does live and flourish by embracing and taking hold of poles,
pearches, and other things upon which it climeth. It brings forth very long
stalks, rough, and hairie; also rugged leaves broad like those of the Vine, or
rather of Bryonie, but yet blacker, and with fewer dented divisions: the
flowers hang down by clusters from the tops of the branches, puffed up, set as
it were with scales like little canes, or scaled Pine apples, of a whitish
color tending to yellowness, strong of smell: the roots are slender, and
diversely folded one within another.

2 The wild Hop differs not from the manured Hop in form or fashion, but is
altogether lesser, as well in the clusters of flowers, as also in the frank
shoots, and does not bring forth such store of flowers, wherein especially
consists the difference.

The Place.
The Hop ioyeth in a fat and fruitful ground: it prospers the better by
manuring: also it grows among briers and thorns about the borders of fields,
I mean the wild kind.

1 Lupus salictarius. Hops.


The Time.
The flowers of hops are gathered in August and September, and reserved to be
used in beer: in the Spring time come forth new shoots or buds: in the Winter
only the roots remain alive.

The Names.
It is called in shops and in all other places Lupulus: of some, Lupus
salictarius, or Lupulus salictarius: in High Dutch, Hoppe: in Low Dutch, Hoppe:
in Spanish, Hombrezillos: in French, Houblon: in English, Hops.

Pliny, lib. (...). cap. 15. makes mention of Hops among the prickly plants.

The Temperature.
The flowers of the hop are hot and dry in the second degree: they fill and
stuff the head, and hurt the same with their strong smell. Of the same
temperature also are the leaves themselves, which do likewise open and cleanse.

The Virtues.
The buds or first sprouts which come forth in Pliny says, more toothsome than
nourishing, for they yield but very small nourishment: notwithstanding they be
good for the intrals, both in opening and procuring of urine, and likewise in
keeping the body soluble.

Theleaues and little tender stalks, and also the

The juice is of more force, and does not only remove obstructions out of the
intrals, but it is

The flowers are used to season Beer or Ale with, and too many do cause
bitterness thereof, and

The flowers make bread light, and the lump to be sooner and easilier
leauened, if the meal be

The decoction of hops drunk opens the stoppings of the liver, the spleen,
and kidneyes, and

The juice of Hops opens the belly, and drives forth yellow and choleric
humors, and

The manifold virtues of Hops do manifestly argue the wholsomenesse of beer
above ale; for

CHAP. 325. Of Trauellers-Joy.
The Description.
1 THe plant which Lobel sets forth under the title of Viorna, Dodonaeus
makes Vitis (...), but not properly; whose long woody and viny branches extend
themselves very far, and into infinite numbers, decking with his clasping
tendrels and white starre-like flowers (being very sweet) all the bushes,
hedges, and shrubs that are near unto it. It sends forth many branched
stalks, thick, tough, full of shoots and clasping tendrels, wherewith it
foldeth it self upon the hedges, and takes hold and climeth upon every thing
that stands near unto it. The leaves are fastened for the most part by fiues
upon one rib or stem, two on either side, and one in the midst or point
standing alone; which leaves are broad like those of Iuy, but not cornered at
all: among which come forth clusters of white flowers, and after them great
tusts of flat seeds, each seed having a fine white plume like a feather fastened
to it, which makes in the winter a goodly show, covering the hedges white all
over with his feather-like tops. The root is long, tough, and thick, with many
strings fastened thereto.

2 Clusius has set forth a kind of Clematis, calling it Clematis Baetica,
having a marvelous long small branch full of joints, with many leaves indented
about the edges like those of the pear tree, but stiffer and smaller, coming
from every joint; from whence also at each joint proceed two small clasping
tendrels, as also the small foot-stalkes whereon the seeds do stand, growing in
great tufted plumes or feathers, like unto the precedent, whereof it is a
kind. The flowers are not expressed in the figure, nor seen by the Author,
and therefore what has been said shall suffice.

1 Viorns. The Travelers Joy.
2 Clemat is Baetica. The Spanish Travelers Joy.


The Place.
The Travelers Joy is found in the borders of fields among thorns and (...),
almost in every hedge as you go from Grauesend to Canturbury in Kent; in many
places of Essex, and in most of these Southerly parts about London, but not in
the North of England that I can hear of.

The second is a stranger in these parts: yet have I found it in the Isle of
Wight, and in a wood by Waltham abbey.

The Time.
The flowers come forth in July: the beauty thereof appears in November and
December.

The Names.
The first is called commonly Viorna, quasi vias ornans, of decking and
adorning ways and hedges, where people travel; and thereupon I have named it
the Travelers Joy: of Fuchsius it is called Vitis nigra: of Dodonaeus, Vit
alba: of Matthiolus, Clemat is altera: of Cordus, Vit is alba: of Dioscorides,
Vit is syluestris: of (...), Atragene: in Dutch, (...): in French, as Ruellius
writes, Viorne.

The Temperature and Virtues.
These plants have no use in physic as yet found out, but are esteemed only
for pleasure, by reason of the goodly shadow which they make with their thick
bushing and clyming, as also for the beauty of the flowers, and the pleasant
sent or savor of the same.

CHAP. 326. Of Ladies Bower, or Virgins Bower.
The Description.
1 THat which Lobel describes by the name Clemat is peregrina, has very long
and slender stalks like the Vine, which are iointed, of a dark color; it
climeth aloft, and takes hold with his crooked claspers upon every thing that
stands near unto it: it has many leaves divided into diverse parts; among
which come the flowers that hang upon slender foot-stalkes, something like to
those of Peruinckle, consisting only of four leaves, of a blew color, and
sometimes purple, with certain threads in the middle: the seeds be flat,
plain, and sharp pointed. The roots are slender, and spreading all about.

1 2 Clemat is peregrina Caerulea, sive rubra. Blew or red floured Ladies-bower.
3 Clemat is (...) slore pleno. Double floured Virgins-bower.


2 The second differs not from the other, in leaves, stalks, hranches nor
seed. The only difference consists in that, that this plant brings forth
red flowers, and the other blew.

3 There is preserved also in some Gardens another sort of this Clematis, which
in roots, leaves, branches, and manner of growing differs not from the former:
but the flower is much different, being composed of abundance of longish narrow
leaves, growing thick together, with four broader or larger leaves lying
under, or bearing them up, and these leaves are of a dark bluish purple
color. Clusius calls this Clemat is altera flore pleno.

The Place.
These plants delight to grow in Sunnie places: they prosper better in a
fruitful soil than in barren. They grow in my garden, where they flourish
exceedingly.

The Time.
They flower in July and August, and perfect their seed in September.

The Names.
Ladies Bower is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Ambuxum: in English you may
call it Ladies bower, which I take from his aptness in making of Arbors,
Bowers, and shadie couertures in gardens.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The faculty and the use of these in Physic is not yet known.

CHAP. 327. Of purging Peruinckle.
The Description.
1 AMong these plants which are called Clematides these be also to be numbered,
as having certain affinity, because of the spreading, branching, and
semblance of the Vine; and this is called Flammula vrens, by reason of his
fiery and burning heat, because that being laid upon the skin, it burns the
place, and makes an eschar, even as our common caustic or corrasiue medicines
do. The leaves hereof answer both in color and smoothness, Vinca, Peruinca,
or Peruinckle, growing upon long clambring tender branches, like the other
kinds of climbing plants. The flowers are very white, star-fashion, and of an
exceeding sweet smell, much like unto the smell of Hawthorne flowers, but more
pleasant, and less offensive to the head: having in the middle of the flowers
certain small chiues or threads. The root is tender, and disperseth it self
far under the ground.

1 Clemat is vrens. Virgins Bower.
2 Flammula Iovis surrecta. Upright Virgins Bower.


2 Upright Clamberer or Virgins Bower is also a kind of Clematis, having long
tough roots not unlike to those of Licorice; from which rises up a straight
upright stalk, of the height of three or four cubits, set about with winged
leaves, composed of diverse small leaves, set upon a middle (...) as are those
of the ash tree, or Valerian, but fewer in number: at the top of the stalks
come forth small white flowers, very like the precedent, but not of so pleasant
a sweet smell; after which come the seeds, flat and sharp pointed.

3 There is another Clematis of the kind of the (...) Clemat is or burning
Clemat is, which I have recovered from seed, that has been sent me from a
curious and learned citizen of Strawsborough, which is like unto the others in
each respect, saving that, that the flowers hereof are very double, wherein
consists the ospeciall difference.

4 Amongst the kinds of climbing or clambering plants, Carolus Clusius, and
likewise Lobel have numbered these two, which approach near unto them in leaves
and flowers, but are far different in clasping tendrels, or climbing otherwise,
being low and base plants in respect of the others of their kind. The first
has for his roots a bundle of tough tangling threddes, in number infinite, and
thick thrust together; from which rise up many small stalks, of a brownish
color, (...) square, and of a wooddie substance: whereupon do grow long
leaves, of a biting taste, set together by couples, in shape like those of
Asclepias, or silken Swallow-woort. The flowers grow at the top of the
stalks, of a fair blew or sky color, consisting of four parts in manner of
a cross, having in the middle a bunched pointell, like unto the head of field
Poppie when it is young, of a whitish yellow color, having little or no smell
at all. The flowers being past, then comes the seed, such as is to be seen
in the other kinds of Clemat is. The whole plant dies at the approach of
Winter, and recouereth it self again from the root, which indureth, whereby
it greatly increases.

4 Clemat is Pannonica. Bush Bower.
5 Clemat is mayor Pannonica. Great Bush Bower.


5 The great Bush Bower differs not from the former last described, but in
greatness: which name of greatness sets forth the difference.

6 Of these there is another, whose bending crested stalks are some three
cubits high, which send forth sundry small branches, set with leaves growing
together by threes upon short foot-stalkes, and they are like myrtle leaves,
but bigger, more wrinckled, dark colored, and (...) about the edges: the
flower resembles a cross, with four sharp pointed rough leaves of a whitish
blew color, which contain diverse small loose little leaves in their middles.
The root is long and lasting. It grows upon the rocky places of mount Baldus
in Italy, where Pona found it, and he calls it Clemat is cruciata Alpina.

6 Clematis cruciata Alpina. Virgins Bower of the Alps.


The Place.
These plants do not grow wild in England, that I can as yet learn;
notwithstanding I have them all in my garden, where they flourish exceedingly.

The Time.
These plants do flower from August to the end of September.

The Names.
There is not much more found of their names than is expressed in their
several titles, notwithstanding there has been somewhat said, as I think,
by hearesay, but nothing of certainty: wherefore let that which is set down
suffice. We may in English call the first, Biting Clematis, or white Clematis,
Biting Peruinkle or purging Peruinkle, Ladies Bower, and Virgins Bower.

The Temperature.
The leaf hereof is biting, and does mightily blister, being, as Galen says,
of a causticke or burning quality: it is hot in the beginning of the fourth
degree.

The Virtues.
Dioscorides writes, that the leaves being applied

CHAP. 328. Of Wood-binde, or Hony-suckle.
The Kinds.
THere be diverse sorts of Wood-bindes, some of them shrubs with winding stalks,
that wrappe themselves unto such things as are near about them. Likewise there
be other sorts or kinds found out by the later Herbarists, that clime not at
all, but stand upright, the which shall be set forth among the shrubbie
plants. And first of the common Woodbinde.

The Description.
1 WOodbinde or Honisuckle climeth up aloft, having long slender wooddie
stalks, parted into diverse branches: about which stand by certain distances
smooth leaves, set together by couples one right against another; of a light
green color above, underneath of a whitish green. The flowers show
themselves in the topps of the branches many in number, long, white, sweet of
smell, hollow within; in one part standing more out, with certain threddes
growing out of the middle. The fruit is like to little bunches of grapes, red
when they be ripe, wherein is contained small hard seed. The root is wooddie,
and not without strings.

2 This strange kind of Woodbind has leaves, stalks, and roots like unto the
common Woodbinde or Honisuckle, saving that near unto the place where the
flowers come forth, the stalks (...) grow through the leaves, like unto the
herb Thorow-wax, called Perfoliata; which leaves do resemble little saucers:
out of which broad round leaves proceed fair, beautiful, and well smelling
flowers, shining with a whitish purple color, and somewhat dashed with yellow,
by little and little stretched out like the nose of an Elephant, garnished
within with small yellow chiues or threddes: and when the flowers are in their
flourishing, the leaves and flowers do resemble saucers filled with the flowers
of Woodbinde: many times it falls out, that there is to be found three or
four saucers one above another, filled with flowers, as the (...), which has
caused it to be called double Hony-suckle, or Woodbinde.

1 Periclymenum. Woodbinde or Honisuckles.
2 Periclymenum perfoliatum. Italian Woodbinde.


The Place.
The VVoodbinde grows in woods and hedges, and upon shrubbes and bushes,
oftentimes winding it self so straight and hard about, that it leaves his
print upon those things so wrapped.

The double Honisuckle (...) now in my garden, and many others likewise in
great plenty, although not long since, very rare and hard to be found, except
in the garden of some diligent Herbarists.

The Time.
The leaves come forth betimes in the spring: the flowers bud forth in May and
June: the fruit is ripe in Autumn.

The Names.
It is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Volucrum maius: of Scribonius Largus,
Syluaemater: in shops, Caprifolium, and Matrisylua: of some, Lilium inter
spinas: in Italian, vincibosco: in High Dutch, Geysbladt: in Low Dutch,
Gheytenbladt, and Mammekens Cruit: in French, Cheurefueille: in Spanish, (...):
in English, VVoodbinde, Honisuckle, and Caprifoly.

The Temperature.
There has an error in times past grown amongst a few, and now almost past
recovery to be called again, being grown an error universal, which error
is, how the decoction of the leaves of Honisuckles, or the distilled water of
the flowers, are rashly given for the inflammations of the mouth and (...), as
though they were binding and cooling. But contrariwise Honisuckle is neither
cold nor binding; but hot, and attenuating or making thin. For as Galen
says, both the fruit of VVoodbinde, and also the leaves, do so much attenuate
and heat, as (...) somewhat too much of them be drunk, they will cause the
urine to be as red as blood, yet do they at the first only provoke urine.

The Virtues.
Dioscorides writes that the ripe seed gathered and dried in the shadow, and
drunk unto the

The leaves be of the same force: which being drunk thirty days together, are
reported to make

The flowers steeped in oil and set in the Sun, is good to anoint the body
that is benumbed,

The distilled water of the flowers are given to be drunk with good success
against the pissing

A syrrup made of the flowers is good to be drunk against the diseases of the
lungs and spleen

Notwithstanding the words of Galen (or rather of (...)) it is certainly found
by experience,

CHAP. 329. Of Jasmine, or Gelsemine.
1 Iasminum album. White Gessemine.
2 Iasminum Candiflorum maius. Great white Gessemine.


The Description.
IAsmine, or Gelsemine, is of the number of those plants which have need to be
supported or propped up, and yet notwithstanding of it self claspeth not or
windeth his stalks about 3 Iasminum luteum. Yellow Iasmine.
such things as stand near unto it, (...) only leans and lies upon those
things that are prepared to sustain it about arbors and (...) houses in
gardens, by which it is held up. The stalks thereof are long, round, branched,
iointed or kneed, and of a green color, having within a white spungeous pith.
The leaves stand upon a middle ribbe, set together by couples like those of the
ash tree, but much smaller; of a deep green color. The flowers grow at the
uppermost part of the branches, standing in a small tuft, far set one from
another, sweet in smell, of color white. The seed is flat and broad like those
of Lupines, which seldom come to ripeness. The root is tough and threddie.

2 Lobel reports that he saw in a garden at Bruxels, belonging to a reverend
person called Mr. John Boisot, a kind of (...), very much differing from our
Iasmine, which he nourished in an earthen pot: it grew not above, says he, to
the height of a cubit, divided into diuets branches, whereupon did grow leaves
like those of the common white Iasmine, but blacker and rounder. The flowers to
the show were most beautiful, in shape like those of the common Iasmine, but
four times bigger, gaping wide open, white on the upper side, and of a bright
red on the under side.

3 There is a kind hereof with yellow flowers: but some do describe for the
yellow Iasmine, the shrubbie Trefoile, called of some Trifolium (...): and of
others, (...). But this yellow Iasmine is one, and that is another plant,
differing from the kinds of Iasmine, as shall be declared in his proper place.
The yellow Iasmine differs not from the common white Gesmine, in leaves,
stalks, nor fashion of the flowers: the only difference is, that this plant
brings forth yellow flowers, and the other white.

4 There is likewise another sort that differs not from the former in any
respect, but in the color of the flower; for this plant has flowers of a blew
color, and the others not so, wherein consists the difference.

The Place.
Gelsemine is fostered in gardens, and is used for arbors, and to cover
banqueting houses in gardens: it grows not wild in England that I can
understand of though Mr. Lyte be of another opinion: the white Iasmine is
common in most places of England: the rest are strangers, and not seen in
these parts as yet.

The Time.
They bring forth their pleasant (...) in July and August.

The Names.
Among the Arabians Serapio was the first that named Gessemine, Zambach: it is
called Iasminum, and Ieseminum, and also (...): in English, Iasmine, Gessemine,
and Iesse.

There is in Dioscorides a composition of oil of Iasmine, which he says is
made in Persia of the white flowers of Violets, which Violets seem to be none
other than the flowers of this Gessemine: for Dioscorides oftentimes has
reckoned fair and elegant flowers amongst the Violets; (...) that it must not
seem strange that he calls the flowers of Gessemine Violets, especially
seeing that the plant it self was unknown unto him, as it is evident.

The Temperature.
Gessemine, and especially the flowers thereof be hot in the beginning of the
second degree, as Scrapio reports out of (...).

The Virtues.
The oil which is made of the flowers hereof, wastes away raw humors, and is
good against cold Dioscorides writes, and after him (...)) of the Persians in
their banquets for pleasure sake: it is good to be (...) after bathes, in those
bodies that have need to be suppled and warmed, but by reason of (...) it is
not much used.

The leaves boiled in wine until they be soft, and made up to the form of a
pultis, and applied, dissolve cold swellings, wens, hard lumps, and such like
outgoings.

CHAP. 330. Of Peruinkle.
The Description.
1 PEruinkle has slender and long branches trailing upon the ground, taking
hold here and there as it runs; small like to rushes, with naked or bare
spaces between joint and joint. The leaves are smooth, not unlike to the Bay
leaf, but lesser. The flowers grow hard by the leaves, spreading wide open,
composed of five small blew leaves.

We have in our London gardens a kind hereof bearing white flowers, which
makes it to differ from the former.

1 Vinca Peruinca minor. Peruinkle.
2 Clematis Daphnoides, sive Peruinca mayor. Great Peruinkle.


There is another with purple flowers, doubling it self somewhat in the
middle, with smaller leaves, wherein is the difference.

2 There is another sort, greater than any of the rest, which is called of some
Clematis (...), of the similitude the leaves have with those of the Bay. The
leaves and flowers are like those of the precedent, but altogether greater;
wherein consists the difference.

The Place.
They grow in most of our London gardens; they love a moist and shadowie place:
the branches remain always green.

The Time.
The flowers of them do flourish in March, April, and May, and oftentimes
later.

The Names.
Peruinkle is called in Greek (...): because it brings forth stalks, which
creep like those of the Vine, and Daphnoides by reason that the leaves are
like those of the Bay, as aforesaid. Pliny calls it Vinca Peruinca, and
Chamaedaphne: notwithstanding there is another (...), of which in his place.
The same Author likewise calls it Centunculus: in High Dutch, (...): in Low
Dutch, Uincoorte, maegden cruyt: in French, Pucellage, Vauche and Peruauche: in
Italian, Prouenca: in Spanish, (...): in shoppes, Clematis peruinca: in
English, Peruinkle, Peruinkle, and Periwinkle.

The Temperature.
Peruinkle is something hot, but within the second degree, something dry and
astringent.

The Virtues.
The leaves boiled in wine and drunken, stop the laske and bloody flix.

An handful of the leaves stamped, and the juice given to drink in red wine,
stops the laske

CHAP. 331. Of Capers.
The Kinds.
THere be two sorts of Capers especially, one with broad leaves sharp pointed:
the other with rounder leaves. The Brabanders have also another sort, called
Capparis fabago, or Bean Capers,

1 Capparis folio acuto. Sharp leafed Capers.
2 Capparis rotundiore folio. Round leafed Capers.


The Description.
1 THe Caper is a prickly shrub, the shoots or branches whereof be full of
sharp prickly thorns, trailing upon the ground if they be not supported or
propped up: whereupon do grow leaves like those of the Quince tree, but
rounder: amongst the which come forth long slender foot-stalkes, whereon do
grow round knoppes, which do open or spread abroad into fair flowers, after
which comes in place long fruit, like to an olive, and of the same color,
wherein is contained flat rough-seeds, of a duskie color. The root is wooddie,
and covered with a thick bark or rind, which is much used in Physic.

2 The second kind of Caper is likewise a prickly plant, much like the bramble
bush, having many slender branches set full of sharp prickles. The whole plant
traileth upon the place where it grows, beset with round blackish leaves
disorderly placed, in shape like those of Astrabacca, but greater, approaching
to the form of Fole-foot: among which comes forth a small and tender naked
twig, charged at the end with a small knap or bud, which opens it self to a
small starlike flower, of a pleasant sweet smell; in place whereof comes a
small fruit, long and round like the Cornell berrie, of a brown color. The
root is long and wooddie, and covered with a thick bark or rind, which is
likewise used in medicine.

The Place.
The Caper grows in Italy, Spain, and other hot Regions without manuring, in
a lean soil, in rough places amongst rubbish, and upon old walls, as
Dioscorides reports.

Theophrastus writes, that it is by nature wild, and refuses to be husbanded,
yet in these our days diverse use to cherish the same, and to set it in dry and
stony places: my self at the impression hereof, planted some seeds in the
brick walls of my garden, which as yet do spring and grow green, the success
I expect.

The Time.
The Caper floureth in Summer, even until Autumn. The knoppes of the flowers
before they open are those Capers or sauce that we eat, which are gathered and
preserved in pickle or Salt.

The Names.
It is called in Greek (...): and in Latin also Capparis: but properly
Cynosbatos, or Canirub us: which is also taken for the wild Rose; it is
generally called Cappers in most languages: in English, Cappers, Caper, and
Capers.

The Temperature.
Capers, or the flowers not yet fully grown, be of temperature hot, and of
thin parts; if they be eaten green, they yield very little nourishment, and
much less if they be salted. And therefore they be rather a sauce and
medicine, than a meat.

The Virtues.
They stir up an appetiteto meat; they be good for a moist stomach, and stay
the watering thereof,

The rind or bark of the root consists of diverse faculties, it heateth,
cleanses, purges, cutteth

This bark is of a singular remedy for hard spleenes, being outwardly
applied, and also inwardly Galen writes.

The same bark (as Dioscorides teaches) does cleanse old filthy sores, and
scoureth away (...)

Being stamped with vinegar, it seoureth away tetters or Ring-wormes, hard
swellings, and cures

The bark of the roots of Capers is good against the hardness and stopping of
the spleen, and

CHAP. 332. Of Bean Capers.
Capparis fabago. Bean Capers.


The Description.
THis plant which the Germans call Fabago, and Dodonaeus savoring of Dutch,
calls it in his last Edition Capparis Fabago, and properly: Lobel calls it
Capparis Leguminosa: between which there is no great difference, who labor to
refer this plant unto the kinds of Capers, which is but a low and base herb,
and not a shrubbie bush, as are the true Capers. It brings forth smooth
stalks tender and branched, whereupon do grow long thick leaves, lesser than
those of the true Capers, and not unlike to the leaves of Purslane, coming out
of the branches by couples, of a light green color. The flowers before they
be opened are like to those of the precedent, but when they be come to
maturitie and full ripeness they wax white, with some yellow chiues in the
midst: which being past, there appear long cods, wherein is contained small
flat seed. The root is tender, branching hither and thither.

The Place.
It grows of it self in corn fields of the low Countries, from whence I
have received seeds for my garden, where they flourish.

The Time.
It floureth when the Caper does.

The Names.
It is called in Latin of the later Herbarists Capparis fabago: of most,
Capparis Leguminosa: it is thought to be that herb which Auicen describes in
his 28. chapter, by the name of Ardifrigi: we may content our selves that
Capparis fabago retain that name still, and seek for none other, unless it
be for an English name, by which it may be called after the Latin, Bean Caper.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Touching the faculties thereof we have nothing left in writing worth the
remembrance.

CHAP. 333. Of Swallow-wort.
The Description.
1 SWallow-wort with white flowers has diverse upright branches of a brownish
color, of the height of two cubits, beset with leaves not unlike to those of
Dulcamara or wooddie Nightshade, somewhat long, broad, sharpe-pointed, of a
blackish green color, and strong savor: among which come forth very many
small white flowers star-fashion, hanging upon little slender foot-stalkes:
after which come in place thereof long sharp pointed cods, stuffed full of a
most perfect white cotton resembling silk, as well in show as handling; (our
London Gentlewomen have named it Silken Cislie) among which is wrapped soft
brownish seed. The roots are very many, white, threddie, and of a strong savor.

2 The second kind is oftentimes found with stalks much longer, climing upon
props or such things as stand near unto it, attaining to the height of five or
six cubits, wrapping it self upon them with many and sundry foldings: the
flowers hereof are black: the leaves, cods, and roots be like those of the
former.

1 Asclepias flore albo. White Swallow-woort.
2 Asclepias flore nigro. Black Swallow-woort.


The Place.
Both these kinds do grow in my garden, but not wild in England; yet have I
heard it reported that it grows in the fields about Northampton, but as yet I
am not certain of it.

The Time.
They flower about June, in Autumn the down hangs out of the cods, and the
seed falls to the ground.

The Names.
It is called of the later Herbarists (...): of Ruellius, Hederalis: in High
Dutch, (...) (...), that is to say in Latin Hirundinaria: in English,
Swallow-woort: of our Gentlewomen it is called Silken Cislie; Aesculapius (who
is said to be the first inuenter of Physic, whom therefore the Greeks and
Gentiles honored as a God) called it after his own name Asclepias, or (...)
herb, for that he was the first that wrote thereof, and now it is called in
shoppes Hirundinaria.

The Temperature.
The roots of Swallow-woort are hot and dry; they are thought to be good
against poison.

The Virtues.
Dioscorides writes, that the roots of Asclepias or Swallow-woort boiled in
wine, and the decoction

The leaves boiled and applied in form of a pultis, cure the evil sores of
the paps or dugs, and

CHAP. 334. Of Indian Swallow-woort.
The Description
THere grows in that part of Virginia, or Norembega, where our English men
dwelled (intending there to erect a certain Colonie) a kind of Asclepias, or
Swallow-woort, which the Savages call Wisanck: there rises up from a single
crooked root one upright stalk a foot high, slender, and of a greenish color:
whereupon do grow fair broad leaves sharp pointed, with many ribs or nerves
running through the same like those of Ribwort or Plantaine, set together by
couples at certain distances. The flowers come forth at the top of the stalks,
which as yot are not observed, by reason the man that brought the seeds and
plants hereof did not regard them. After which, there come in place two cods
(seldom more) sharp pointed like those of our Swallowwort, but greater,
stuffed full of a most pure silk of a shining white color: among which silk
appears a small long tongue (which is the seed) resembling the tongue of a
bird, or that of the herb called Adders tongue. The cods are not only full of
silk, but every nerve or sinew wherewith the leaves be ribbed are likewise
most pure silk; and also the pilling of the stemmes, even as flax is torn
from his stalks. This considered, behold the justice of God, that as he has
shut up those people and nations in infidelity and nakedness, so has he not
as yet given them understanding to cover their nakedness, nor matter wherewith
to do the same; notwithstanding the earth is covered over with this silk,
which daily they tread under their feet, which were sufficient to apparel many
kingdoms, if they were carefullly manured and cherished.

Wisanck, sieve Vincctoxicum Indianum. Indian Swallow-wort.
Apocynum Syriacum Clusij.


This Plant, which is kept in some gardens by the name of Virginia Silk
Grass, I take to be the same, or very like the Beidelsar of Alpinus; and the
Apocynum Syriacum of Clusius: at Padua they call it Esula Indica, by reason of
the hot milky juice. Bauhinus has very unfitly named it Lapathum Aegyptiacum
lactescens siliqua Asclepiadis. But he is to be pardoned; for Johannes Carolus
Rosenbergus, cap. 16. p. 46. of his Animad. and Exerc. Medicae, or Rosanobilis
iatrica, has taken upon him the credit and invention of this absurd
denomination: I may call it absurd, for that neither any way in shape or
quality it resembles or participates any thing with a Docke. I have given you
the figure of our Author with his title, and that of Clusius with his: in the
former the cods are only well expressed; in the later the leaves and flowers
reasonably well, but that they are too few in number, and set too far asunder.
Upon the sight of the growing and flouring plant I took this description: The
root is long and creeping; the stalks two or three cubits high, square,
hollow, a finger thick, and of a light green color, sending out toward the
top some few branches: upon this at certain spaces grow by couples leaves some
half foot long, and three inches broad, dark green on their upper sides,
more whitish below, and full of large and eminent veins: at the top of the
stalk and branches it carries most commonly an hundred or more flowers,
growing upon footstalkes some inch long, all close thrust together after the
manner of the Hyacinth of Peru at the first flouring: each flower is thus
composed; first it has five small green leaves bending back, which serve for
the cup: then has it other five leaves four times larger than the former,
which bend back and cover them; and these are green on the under side, and of
a pale color with some redness above: then are there five little grains (as
I may so term them) of a pleasant red color, and on their outside like corns
of Millet, but hollow on their insides, with a little thread or chiue coming
forth of each of them: these five ingirt a small head like a button, greenish
underneath, and whitish above. I have given you the figure of one flower by the
side of our Authors figure. The leaves and stalks of this plant are very full
of a milky juice.

The Place.
It grows, as before is rehearsed, in the countries of Norembega, now called
Virginia by the honorable Knight Sir Walter Raleigh, who has bestowed great
sums of money in the discovery thereof; where are dwelling at this present
English men.

The Time.
It springs up, floureth, and flourishes both Winter and Summer, as do many
or most of the plants of that country. It dies down with us every Winter and
comes up in the Spring, and flowers in August, but never brings forth the
cods with us, by reason of the coldness of our Climate.

The Names.
The silk is used of the people of Pomeioc and other of the provinces
adjoining, being parts of Virginia, to cover the secret parts of maidens that
never tasted man; as in other places they use a white kind of moss Wisanck:
we have thought Asclepias Virginiana, or Vincetoxicum Indianum sit and proper
names for it: in English, Virginia Swallow-wort, or the Silke-wort of Norembega.

The Nature and Virtues.
We find nothing by report, or otherwise of our own knowledge, of his
physical virtues, but

The leaves beaten either crude, or boiled in water, and applied as a pultesse,
are good against

The milky juice, which is very hot, purges violently; and outwardly applied is
good against Alpinus.

CHAP. 335. Of the Bombaste or Cotton-Plant.
The Description.
THe Cotton bush is a low and base Plant, having small stalks of a cubit high,
and sometimes higher; divided from the lowest part to the top into sundry small
branches, whereupon are set confusedly or without order a few broad leaves, cut
for the most part into three sections, and sometimes more, as Nature list to
bestow, somewhat indented about the edges, not unlike to the leaf of the Vine,
or rather the Veruaine Mallow, but lesser, softer, and of a grayish color:
among which come forth the flowers, standing upon slender foot-stalkes, the
brimmes or edges whereof are of a yellow color, the middle part purple: after
which appears the fruit, round, and of the bigness of a Tennise ball,
wherein is thrust together a great quantity of fine white Cotton wool; among
which is wrapped up black seed of the bigness of peasen, in shape like the
trettles or dung of a cony. The fruit being come to maturitie or ripeness, the
husk or cod opens it self into four parts or divisions, and casts forth
his wool and seed upon the ground, if it be not gathered in his time and
season. The root is small and single, with few threads anexed thereto, and of a
woody substance, as is all the rest of the plant.

The Place.
It grows in India, in Arabia, Egypt, and in certain Islands of the
Mediterranean sea, as Cyprus, Candy, Malta, Sicilia, and in other provinces of
the continent adjacent. It grows about Tripolis and Aleppo in Syria, from
whence the Factor of a worshipful merchant in London, Master Nicholas (...)
before remembered, did send unto his said master diverse pounds weight of the
seed; whereof some were committed to the earth at the impression hereof, the
success we leave to Gossipium, sieve Xylon. The Cotton bush.
the Lord. Notwithstanding my self 3 years past did sow of the seed, which
did grow very frankly, but perished before it came to perfection, by reason of
the cold frosts that ouertooke it in the time of flouring.

The Time.
Cotton seed is sown in plowed fields in the Spring of the year, and reaped
and cut down in harvest, even as corn with us; and the ground must be tilled
and sown new again the next year, and used in such sort at we do the tillage
for corn and grain: for it is a plant of one year, and perishes when it has
perfected his fruit, as many other plants do.

The Names.
Cotton is called in Greek (...), and (...): in Latin, Xylum, and (...) after
the Greek: in shops, Lanugo, Bombax, and Cotum: in Italian, Bombagia: in
Spanish, Algodon: in High Dutch, (...): in English and French, Cotton, Bombaste
and Bombace.

Theophrastus has made mention hereof in his fourth book, cap. 9. but without
a name; and he says it is a tree in Tylus which bears wool. Neither is it any
marvel if he took an unknown shrub or plant, and that grows in Countries
far off, for a tree: seeing also in this age (in which very many things come
to be better knownethan in times past) the cotton or wool hereof is called of
the Germans (as we have said) (...) (...), that is, Wool of a tree, (...)
(...) it is rather an herb or small shrub, and not to be numbered among trees.

Of this Theophrastus writes thus; It is reported that the same Island ( viz.
Tylus) does bring forth many trees that bear wool, which have leaves like
those of the Vine, etc.

Pliny writing of the same, lib. 19. cap. 1. says thus: The upper part of
Egypt toward Arabia brings forth a shrub which is called Gossipion, or Xylon,
and therefore the linen that is made of it is called Xylina. It is (says he)
the plant that bears that wool wherewith the garments are made which the
Priests of Egypt do wear.

The Temperature.
The seed of Cotton (according to the opinion of Scrapio) is hot and moist: the
wool it self is hot and dry.

The Virtues.
The seed of Cotton is good against the cough, and for them that are short
winded: it also stirs

The oil pressed out of the seed takes away freckles, spots, and other
blemishes of the skin.

The ashes of the wool burned stancheth the bleeding of wounds, used in
restrictiue medicines,

To speak of the commodities of the wool of this plant were superfluous,
common experience

CHAP. 336. Of Dogs-bane.
The Kinds.
THere be two kinds of Dogs-banes: the one a clymbing or clambering plant; the
other an upright shrub.

The Description.
1 DOgs-bane rises up like unto a small hedge bush, upright and straight,
until it have attained to a certain height; then does it claspe and clime
with his tender branches as do the Bindeweeds, taking hold upon props or poles,
or whatsoever stands next unto it: whereupon do grow fair broad leaves,
sharp pointed like those of the Bay tree, of a deep green color. The
flowers come forth at the top of the stalks, consisting of five small white
leaves: which being past, there succeed long cods, set upon a slender
foot-stalke by couples, joining themselves together at the extreme point, and
likewise at the stalk, making of two pieces knit together one entire cod;
which cod is full of such downy matter and seed as that of Asclepias, but more
in quantity by reason the cods are greater; which being dry and ripe, the
silken cotton hangs forth, and by little and little sheddeth, until the
whole be fallen upon the ground. The whole plant yields that yellow stinking
milky juice that the other does, and sometimes it is of a white color,
according to the climate where it grows; for the more cold the country is,
the whiter is the juice; and the more hot, the yellower. The root is long and
single, with some threads anexed thereto.

1 (...) angustifolia. Climing Dogs-bane.
2 Periplocalatifolia. Broad leafed Dogs-bane.


2 There is another Dogs-bane that has long and slender stalks like those of
the Vine, but of a brown reddish color, wherewith it windeth it self about
such things as stand near unto it, in manner of a Bindweed: whereupon are set
leaves not unlike to those of the Iuy, but not so much cornered, of a dark
green color, and of a rank smell being bruised between the fingers,
yielding forth a stinking yellow milky juice when it is so broken: amongst
which come forth little white flowers, standing scatteringly upon little
husks: after the flowers come long cods, very like unto Asclepias or
Swallow-wort, but greater, stuffed with the like soft downy silk; among which
down is wrapped up flat black seed. The roots are many and threddy, creeping
all about within the ground, budding forth new shoots in sundry places, whereby
it greatly increases.

The Place.
They grow naturally in Syria, and also in Italy, as Matthiolus reports: my
loving friend John Robin Herbarist in Paris did send me plants of both the
kinds for my garden, where they flower and flourish; but whether they grow in
France, or that he procured them from some other region, as yet I have no
certain knowledge.

The Time.
They begin to bud forth their leaves in the beginning of May, and show their
flowers in September.

The Names.
Dogs-bane is called by the learned of ourage Periploca: it is evident that
they are to be referred to the Apocynum of Dioscorides. The former of the two
has been likewise called (...), and Brassica Canina, or Dogs-Cole:
notwithstanding there is another Dogs Cole, which is a kind of wild Mercury.
We may call the first Creeping Dogs-bane; and the other, Upright or Syrian
Dogsbane.

The Temperature.
These plants are of the nature of that pestilent or poisonous herb Thora,
which being eaten of Dogs or any other living creature does certainly kill
them, except there be in readiness an Antidote or preservative against poison,
and given, which by probability is the herb described in the former chapter,
called (...); even as Anthora is the Antidote and remedy against the poison of
Thora; and Herba Paris against Pardalianches.

The Virtues.
Dogs-bane is a deadly and dangerous plant, especially to four footed beasts;
for as Dioscorides

CHAP. 337. Of Solomon's Seal.
1 Polygonatum. Solomon's Seal.
2 Polygonatum minus. Small Solomon's Seal.


The Description.
1 THe first kind of Solomon's Seal has long round stalks, set for the most
part with long leaves somewhat furrowed and ribbed, not much unlike Plantaine,
but (...), which for the most part stand all upon one side of the stalk, and
has small white flowers resembling the flowers of Lilly conuall: on the other
side when the flowers be vaded there come sorth (...) berries, which at the
first are green, and of a black color tending to blewnesse; and when (...)
be ripe be of the bigness of Iuy berries, of a very sweet and pleasant taste.
The root is white and thick, full of knobs or joints, which in some places
resemble the mark of a seal, whereof I think it took the name Sigillum
Solomonis; and is sweet at the first, but afterward of a bitter taste, with
some sharpness.

2 The second kind of Polygonatum does not much vary from the former, saving
in the leaves, which be narrower, and grow round about the stalk like a spur,
in fashion like unto (...) or red Madder: among the leaves come forth flowers
like the former, but of a greener white color: which being past, there succeed
berries like the former, but of a reddish color: which being past, there
succeed berries like the former, but of a reddish color: the roots are thick
and knobby like the former, with some fibers anexed thereto.

3 Polygonatum latifolium 2. Clusij. Sweet smelling Solomon's Seal.
4 Polygonatum ramosum. Branched Solomon's Seal.


3 The third kind of Solomon's Seal, which Carolus Clusius found in the woody
mountains of Leitenberg, above Manderstorf, and in many other mountains
beyond the river Danubius, especially among the stones, he sent to London to
Mr. Garth a worshipful Gentleman, and one that greatly delights in strange
plants, who very lovingly imparted the same unto me. This plant has stalks
very like unto the common Solomon's Seal, a foot high, beset with leaves upon
one side of the stalk like the first and common kind, but larger, and more
approaching to the bigness of the broad leafed Plantaine, the taste whereof is
not very pleasant: from the bosom of which leaves come forth small well
smelling greenish white flowers not much unlike the first: which being past,
there follow seeds or berries that are at the first green, but afterward
black, containing within the same berries a small seed as big as a Vetch, and
as hard as a stone. The roots are like unto the other of his kind, yet not so
thick as the first.

4 The fourth kind according to my account, but the third of Clusius (which he
found also in the mountains aforesaid) grows a foot high, but seldom a
cubit, differing from all the others of his kind; for his stalks divide
themselves into sundry other branches, which are garnished with goodly leaves,
larger and sharper pointed than any of the rest, which do embrace the stalks
about after the manner of Perfoliata or Thorow-wax, yet very like unto the
kinds of Solomon's Seal in show, save that they are somewhat hoarie underneath
the leaves; which at the first are sweet in taste, but somewhat acride or
biting toward the later end. From the back part of the (...) (...) forth
small long tender and crooked stems, bearing at the end little gaping white
flowers not much unlike Lilium conuallium, sauouring like Hawthorne flowers,
spotted on the inner side with black spots: which being past, there come forth
three cornered berries like the narrow leafed (...) seal, green at the first,
and red when they be ripe, containing many white hard grains. The roots differ
from all the other kinds, and are like unto the crambling roots of (...),
which the grauer has omitted in the picture.

5 Polygonatum angustifolium ramosum. Narrow leaued Solomon's (...).


5 This rare sort of Solomon's Seal rises up from his tuberous or knobby root,
with a straight upright stalk ioynted at certain distances, leaving between
each joint a bare and naked stalk, smooth, and of a greenish color tending to
yellownes; from the which joints thrust forth diverse small branches, with four
narrow leaves set about like a star or the herb Woodroofe: upon which tender
branches are set about the stalks by certain spaces long narrow leaves
enclosing the same round about: among which leaves come forth small whitish
flowers of little regard. The fruit is small, and of a red color, full of
pulpe or meat; among which is contained a hard stony seed like that of the
first Solomon's seal.

6 There is kept in our gardens, and said to be brought from some part of
America another Polygonatum, which sends up a stalk some foot and more high,
and it has leaves long, neruous, and very green and shining, growing one by
another without any order upon the stalk, which is somewhat crested, crooked,
and very green; bearing at the very top thereof, above the highest leaf, upon
little footstalk, some eight or nine little white flowers, consisting of six
leaves a piece, which are succeeded by berries, as in the former. This flowers
in May, and is vulgarly named Polygonatum Virginianum, or Virginian Solomon's
seal.

The Place.
The first sort of Solomon's seal grows naturally wild in Somersetshire,
upon the North side of a place called Mendip, in the parish of Shepton Mallet:
also in Kent by a village called Crayford, upon Rough or Row hill: also in
Odiam park in Hampshire; in Bradfords wood, near to a town in Wiltshire four
miles from Bathe; in a wood near to a village called Horsley, five miles from
Gilford in Surrey, and in diverse other places.

That sort of Solomon's seal with broad leaves grows in certain woods in
Yorkshire called Clapdale woods, three miles from a village named Settle.

The Time.
They spring up in March, and show their (...) in May: the fruit is ripe in
September.

The Names.
Solomon's seal is called in Greek (...): in Latin likewise Polygonatum, of
many, Knees, for so the Greek word does import: in shops, Sigillum Salomonis,
and Scala coeli: in English likewise Scala coeli, Solomon's seal, and
White-wort, or white root: in High Dutch, (...): in French, Seau de Solomon: of
the Hetrurians, Frasinella, and Fraxinella.

The Temperature.
The roots of Solomon's (...), as Galen says, have both a mixed faculty and
quality also: For they have (says he) a certain kind of astriction or
binding, and biting withal, and likewise a certain loathsome bitterness, as
the same Author affirms: which is not to be (...) in those that do grow in
our climate.

The Virtues.
Dioscorides writes, That the roots are excellent good for to seal or close
up green wounds, being Sigillum (...), of the singular virtue that it has in
sealing or healing up wounds, broken bones, and such like. Some have thought it
took the name Sigillum of the marks upon the roots: but the first reason
(...) to me more probable.

The root of Solomon's seal stamped while it is fresh and green, and applied,
takes away in

Galen says, that neither herb nor root hereof is to be given inwardly: but
note what experience Galen, (...), or any other that have written of plants
have not so much as dreamed of; which is, That if any of what sex or age soever
chance to have any bones broken, in what part of their bodies soever; their
refuge is to stamp the roots hereof, and give it unto the patient in ale to
drink: which sodoreth and glues together the bones in very short space, and
very strangely, yea although the bones be but slenderly and unhandsomely placed
and wrapped up. Moreover, the said people do give it in like manner unto their
cattle, if they chance to have any bones broken, with good success; which
they do also stamp and apply outwardly in manner of a pultesse, as well unto
themselves as their cattle.

The root stamped and applied in manner of a pultesse, and laid upon members
that have been

The same stamped, and the juice given to drink with ale or white wine, as
aforesaid, or the decoction

That which might be written of this herb as touching the knitting of bones,
and that truly,

It must be given in the same manner to knit broken bones, against bruises,
black or blew marks

Matthiolus teaches, That a water is drawn out of the roots, wherewith the
women of Italy That which our (...) formerly figured and described in the (...)
place of (...) chapter, by the (...) of (...) (...) (...), was that described
by him in the fourth place; (...): (...) was not so well expressed.


CHAP. 338. Of Knee-holme, or Butchers broom.
The Description.
KNee-holme is a low woody plant, having diverse small branches, or rather
stems, rising immediately from the ground, of the height of a foot; whereupon
are set many leaves like unto those of the Box tree, or rather of the Myrtle,
but sharp and pricking at the point. The (...) grows upon the middle rib of
the leaf, green at the first, and red as Coral when it is ripe, like those
of Asparagus, but bigger. The roots are white, branched, of a mean thickness,
and full of tough sprouting shoots thrusting forth in other places, whereby it
greatly increases.

The Place.
It grows plentifully in most places in England in rough and barren grounds,
especially upon Hampsted heath four miles from London; in diverse places of
Kent, Essex, and Barkshire, almost in every copse and low wood.

The Time.
The young and tender (...) come forth at the first of the Spring, which are
(...) in soms places, as the young tender stalks of Asparagus and such like
herbs. The berries are ripe in August.

Ruscus, (...) Bruscus. Knee-holme, or Butchers broom.


The Names.
It is called in Greek (...), as though they should say Acuta Myrtus, or
pricking Myrtle; and Myrtus syluestris, or wild Myrtle: in Latin, Ruscum, or
Ruscus: in shops, Bruscus: of diverse, Scopa regia, as testifies Marcellus
Empericus an old Writer: in High Dutch, (...): in Low Dutch, (...) (...): in
Italian, Rusco, and Pontogopi: in Spanish, Gilbarbeyra: in English, Knee-holme,
Knee-huluer, Butchers broom, and Petigree

There be some (says Pliny, lib. (...). cap. (...).) that call it Oxymyrsine.

Serapio, cap. 288. supposes that (...) gria, or wild Myrtle, is the same
that (...) are: he alleges a reason, because Galen has not described Myrtus
Agria, or Knee-holme; neither Dioscorides Cubebae. Which as it is a reason of
no account, so is it also without truth: for Galen does no where make mention
of Cubebae; and be it that he had, it should not therefore follow that
Knee-holme is Cubebae. Galen speaks of Carpesium, which Auicen in his 137
chapter makes to be Cubebae: and that Carpesium does much differ from (...)
(...), those things do (...) (...) which Galen has left written hereof in his
first book of of Counterpoysons. Carpesium (says he) is an herb like in
kind to that which is called Phu, or Setwall, but of greater (...), and more
aromaticall or spicie. This grows very plentifully in Sida a city of
Pamphilia. Also he says further, that some of the sticks of Carpesium are
like to those of Cinnamon: (...) be two kinds thereof, one which is named
(...); and another that is called Ponticum. They both take their names of the
mountains on which they grow: but Ponticum is the better, (...) is put into
medicines in which the herb Phu ought to be put. For Carpesium, as I have
(...), is like unto Phu, or Setwall, yet is it stronger, and yields a (...)
aromaticall (...) both in taste and smell. Thus far Galen. By which it plainly
(...), that Knee-holme is not Carpesium, that is to say, Auicenna his Cubebae,
as shall be further (...) in the chapter of Cubebae.

Herein Serapio was likewise deceived, who suspected it to be such a like
thing; saying, There be certain fruits or grains called (...), not sticks:
yet do they neither agree with Knee-holm, neither yet were they known unto
(...).

Isaac in the second book of his (...) does number it among the grains: and
likewise Haliabbas in the second book of his (...) also, number. 162. The later
Grecians, among whom is Nicolaus Myrepsus, call them (...)

The Temperature.
The roots of Knee-holme, which be chiefly used, are of temperature hot, and
meanly dry, with a thinness of essence.

The Virtues.
The decoction of the roots of Knee-holme made in wine and drunken, provoke
urine, breaks

Dioscorides writes the same things of the leaves and berries, which moreover
(says he) bring

CHAP. 339. Of Horse-tongue or Double-tongue.
The Description.
1 HOrse-tongue sends forth round stalks of a span long; whereupon are set
long broad and sharp pointed leaves, but not pricking as are those of
Knee-holme, not unlike to the leaves of the Bay tree, but lesser; greater than
those of Knee-holm: out of the middle rib whereof comes forth another leaf,
sharp pointed also, but small, and of the bigness of the leaf of Knee-holme,
resembling a little tongue. From the (...) of which two leaves comes forth a
berry of the bigness of a pease, of color red when it is ripe, which is
sometimes in a manner all hid under the leaf. The root is white, long, and
tough, and of a sweet and pleasant smell.

1 Hippoglossum mas. The male Horse-tongue.
2 Hippoglossum (...). The female Horse-tongue.


2 The female Horse-tongue differs not from the (...) but in stature and
color of the fruit: it rises up (says my Author) four or five handfulls
(...): the berries come forth of the middle part of the greater leaf, and the
setting on of the lesser, (...) a feint yellowish red color, wherein
consists the difference. This is all one with the (...).

3 There is likewise another sort of Double-tongue set forth by (...), which
seems unto some not to differ from the first described or best known Horse
tongue, being in truth the self same plant without any difference:
notwithstanding I have set forth the figure, that it may appear to be the
same, or very little different, and that not to be distinguished: but (...) may
not escape without reprehension, who knowing the untrue translation of (...),
(...) set forth so false a picture in his Commentaries.

Our Author here, as in many other places, mistakes himself; for Matthiolus
did not set forth that figure that our Author gives in this place, for
Hippoglossum, but by the title of Laurus Alexandrina altera: and it thus
differs from the common Horse-tongue; it has shorter and (...) leaves, yet
sharp pointed, and the berries are not covered with little leaves as in the
other, neither have they any apparent stalks at all, but grow close to the
leaves, as you may see them expressed in the figure.

3 Hippoglossum Matthioli. Italian Horse-tongue.


The Place.
They are found on the Alps of Liguria, and on the mountains of Austria.
Bellonius writes, that they do grow very plentifully about the hill Athos.

The first of the Horse-tongues grows in my garden very plentifully.

The Time.
That which grows in my garden floured in the beginning of May: the fruit is
ripe in the fall of the leaf.

The Names.
Horse-tongue is called in Greek (...): of the later Herbarists, Bonifacia,
(...), Bislingua, Lingua Pagana, and (...). The same is also named (...), of
Ida a mountain of Troy, which is called Alexanders Troy: of (...), Laurus
Alexandrina, or the Bay of Alexandria, and Laurus Idaea.

This Hippoglossum Bonifacia is called in highDutch, (...): in Low Dutch,
(...): in Spanish, Lengua de Cauallo: in English, Horse-tongue, Tongne-blade,
Doubletongue, and Laurel of Alexandria.

The Temperature.
Horse-tongue is evidently hot in the second degree, and dry in the first.

The Virtues.
The roots of Double-tongue boiled in wine, Dioscorides teaches. The like
writes Pliny also: adding further, That it causes women to have speedy
deliverance, especially if half an ounce of the powder of the root be given to
drink in a draught of sweet wine.

Baptista Sardus does notably commend this (...) for the diseases of the
mother; by giving, says

CHAP. 340. Of Cucumbers.
The Kinds.
THere be diverse (...) of Cucumber; some greater, others lesser; some of the
Garden, some wild; some of one fashion, and some of another, as shall be
declared in the following chapters.

The Description.
1 THe Cucumber creepes along upon the ground all about, with long rough
branches; whereupon do grow broad rough leaves uneven about the edges: from the
bosom whereof come forth crooked clasping tendrels like those of the Vine. The
flowers shoot forth between the stalks and the leaves, set upon tender
footstalk composed of five small yellow leaves: which being past, the fruit
succeeds, long, cornered, rough, and set with certain bumpes or risings,
green at the first, and yellow when they be ripe, wherein is contained a firm
and sollid pulpe or substance transparent or thorow-shining, which together
with the seed is eaten a little before they be fully ripe. The seeds be white,
long, and flat.

1 Cucumis vulgaris. Common Cucumber.
2 Cucumis Anguina. Adders Cucumber.
4 Cucumis ex Hispanica semine (...). Spanish Cucumber.


2 There be also certain long cucumbers, which were first made (as is said) by
art and manuring, which Nature afterward did preserve: for at the first, when
as the fruit is very little, it is put into some hollow cane, or other thing
made of purpose, in which the cucumber grows very long, by reason of that
narrow hollownesse, which being filled up, the cucumber increases in length.
The seeds of this kind of cucumber being sown brings forth not such as were
before, but such as art has framed; which of their own growth are found long,
and oftentimes very crookedly turned: and thereupon they have been called
Anguini, or long Cucumbers.

3 The pear fashioned Cucumber has many trailing branches lying flat upon the
ground, rough and prickly; whereon do stand at each joint one rough leaf,
sharp pointed, and of an ouerworn green color; among which come forth
clasping tendrels, and also slender footstalk, whereon do grow yellow
starre-like flowers. The fruit succeeds, shaped like a pear, as big as a great
Warden. The root is threddy.

4 There has bin not (...) since sent out of Spain some seeds of a rare and
beautiful cucumber, into Strausburg a city in Germany, which there brought
forth long trailing branches, rough and hairy, set with very large rough leaves
sharp pointed, fashioned like unto the leaves of the great Bur-docke, but more
cut in or divided: amongst which come forth fair yellow flowers growing
nakedly upon their tender footstalk: the which being past, the fruit comes
in place, of a foot in length, green on the side toward the ground, yellow to
the Sun ward, straked with many spots and lines of diverse colors. The pulpe or
meat is hard and fast like that of our Pompion.

The Place.
These kinds of Cucumbers are planted in gardens in most countries of the
world.

The Time.
According to my promise heretofore made, I have thought it good and convenient
in this place to set down not only the time of sowing and setting of
Cucumbers, Muske-melons, (...), Pompions, Gourds, and such like, but also how
to set or sow all manner and kinds of other cold seeds, as also whatsoever
strange seeds are brought unto us from the Indies, or other hot Regions: videl.

First of all in the midst of April or somewhat sooner (if the weather be
any thing temperate) you shall cause to be made a bed or bank of (...) and new
horse dung taken forth of the stable (and not from the dunghill) of an ell in
breadth, and the like in depth or thickness, of what length you please,
according to the quantity of your seed: the which bank you shall cover with
hoops or poles, that you may the more conveniently cover the whole bed or bank
with Mats, old painted cloth, straw or such like, to keep it from the injury
of the cold frostie nights, and not hurt the things planted in the bed: then
shall you cover the bed all over with the most fertilest earth finely (...),
half a foot thick, wherein you shall set or sow your seeds: that being done,
cast your straw or other couerture over the same; and so let it rest without
looking upon it, or taking away of your covering for the space of seven or
eight days at the most, for commonly in that space they will thrust themselves
up nakedly forth of the ground: then must you cast upon them in the hottest
time of the day some water that has stood in the house or in the Sun a day
before, because the water so cast upon them newly taken forth of a well or
pumpe, will so chill and cool them being brought and nourished up in such a
hot place, that presently in one day you have lost all your labor; I mean not
only your seed, but your bank also; for in this space the great heat of the
dung is lost and spent, keeping in memory that every night they must be
covered and opened when the day is warmed with the Sun beams: this must be
done from time to time until that the plants have four or six leaves a piece,
and that the danger of the cold nights is past: then must they be replanted
very curiouily, with the earth sticking to the plant, as near as may be unto
the most fruitful place, and where the Sun has most force in the garden;
provided that upon the removing of them you must cover them with some Docke
leaves or wispes of straw, propped up with forked sticks, (...) well to keep
them from the cold of the night, as also the heat of the Sun: for they cannot
whilst they be young and newly planted, endure neither overmuch cold nor
overmuch heat, until they are well rooted in their new place or dwelling.

Oftentimes it falls out that some seeds are more franker and forwarder than
the rest, which commonly do rise up very nakedly with long necks not unlike to
the stalk of a small mushrome, of a night old. This naked stalk must you
cover with the like fine earth even to the green leaves, having regard to
place your bank so that it may be desended from the North-windes.

Observe these instructions diligently, and then you shall not have cause to
complain that your seeds were not good, nor of the intemperancie of the climat
(by reason whereof you can get no fruit) although it were in the furthest parts
of the North of Scotland.

The Names.
The Cucumber is named generally Cucumis: in shops, Cucumer: and is taken for
that which the Grecians call (...): in Latin, Cucumis sativus, or garden
Cucumber: in High Dutch, Cucumen: in Italian, Concomero: in Spanish, Cogombro:
in French, Concombre: in Low Dutch, Concommeren: in English, Cowcumbers and
Cucumbers.

The Temperature and Virtues.
All the Cucumbers are of temperature cold and moist in the second degree. They
putrify soon

Those Cucumbers must be chosen which are green and not yet ripe: for when they
are ripe and

The seed is cold, but nothing so much as the fruit. It opens and cleanses,
provoke urine, o

Cucumber (says my Author) taken in meats, is good for the stomach and other
parts troubled

The seed stamped and made into milk like as they dowith Almonds, or strained
with milk or sweet wine and drunk, loses the belly gently, and is excellent
against the exulceration of the bladder.

The fruit cut in pieces or chopped as herbs to the pot and boiled in a small
pipkin with a piece

Provided always that during the time of curing you do use to wash or bathe
the face with this

Take a pint of strong white wine vinegar, powder of the roots of Ireos or
Orrice three dragmes, searced or bolted into most fine dust, Brimmestone in
fine powder half an ounce, Camphire two dragmes, stamped with two blanched
Almondes, four Oak Apples cut through the middle, and the juice of four
Limons: put them all together in a strong double glass, shake them together
very strongly, setting the same in the Sun for the space of ten days: with
which let the face be washed and bathed daily, suffering it to dry of it self
without wiping it away. This does not only help fiery faces, but also takes
away lentils, spots, morphew, Sun-burne, and all other deformities of the face.
That which formerly was in the (...) place by the name of (...) (...), was the
same with the fifth of the former Edition (now the fourth) and is therefore
omitted.


CHAP. 341. Of Wild Cucumber.
Cucumis Asininus. Wild Cucumber.


The Description.
THe wild Cucumber has many fat hairie branches, very rough and full of
juice, creeping or trailing upon the ground, whereupon are set very rough
leaves, hairy, sharp pointed, and of an ouerworne grayish green color: from
the bosom of which come forth long tender footstalkes: on the ends whereof do
grow small flowers composed of five small leaves of a pale yellow color: after
which comes forth the fruit, of the bigness of the smallest pullets egg, but
somewhat longer, very rough and hairy on the outside, and of the color and
substance of the stalks, wherein is contained very much water and smalhard
blackish seeds also, of the bigness of tares; which being come to maturitie
and ripeness, it casts or squirteth forth his water with the seeds, either
of it own accord, or being touched with the most tender or delicate hand never
so gently, and oftentimes strikes so hard against those that touch it
(especially if it chance to hit against the face) that the place smarteth long
after: whereupon of some it has been called Noli me tangere, Touch me not. The
root is thick, white and long lasting.

The Place.
It is found in most of the hot countries among rubbish, gravel, and other
untilled places: it is planted in gardens in the Low Countries, and being once
planted, says Dodonaeus, it easily comes up again many years after (which
is true:) and yet says he further, that it does not spring again of the root,
but of the seeds spirted or cast about: which may likewise be true where he
has observed it, but in my garden it is otherwise, for as I said before, the
root is long lasting, and continues from year to year.

The Time.
It springs up in May, it floureth and is ripe in Autumn, and is to be
gathered at the same time, to make that excellent composition called Elaterium.

The Names.
It is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Agrestis, and Erraticus Cucumis: in
shoppes, Cucumer asininus: in Italian, Cocomero saluatico: in Spanish,
Cogumbrillo amargo: in English, wild Cucumber, spirting Cucumbers, and touch
me not: in French, Concombres sauvages.

The Temperature.
The leaves of wild Cucumbers, roots and their rindes as they are bitter in
taste, so they be likewise hot and clensing. The juice is hot in the second
degree, as Galen witnesses, and of thin parts. It cleanses and wastes away.

The Virtues.
The juice called (...) does purge forth choler, phlegm, and waterie humors,
and that with

The quantity that is to be taken at one time is from five grains to ten,
according to the strength

The juice dried or hardened, and the quantity of half a scruple taken,
drives forth by siege

The same drawn up into the nosthrils mixed with a little milk, takes away
the redness of the

The juice of the root does also purge phlegm, choleric and waterish humors,
and is good for Elaterium, which is made of the juice of the fruit: the making
whereof I commend to the learned and curious Apothecaries: among which number
(...)r. William Wright in (...) Bury my loving friend has taken more pains
in curious composing of it, and has more exactly performed the same than any
other whatsoever that I have had knowledge of.

CHAP. 342. Of Citrull Cucumbers.
1 Citrullus officinarum. Citrull Cucumber.
2 Citrullus minor. Small Citrull.


The Description.
1 THe Citrull Cucumber has many long, flexible, and tender stalks trailing
upon the ground, branched like unto the Vine, set with certain great leaves
deeply cut, and very much iagged: among which come forth long clasping
tendrels, and also tender footstalkes, on the ends whereof do grow flowers of a
gold yellow color: the fruit is somewhat round, straked or ribbed with
certain deep furrows along the same, of a green color above, and
underneath on that side that lies upon the ground something white: the outward
skin whereof is very smooth; the meat within is indifferent hard, more like to
that of the Pompion than of the Cucumber or Musk melon: the pulpe wherein the
seed lies, is spungie, and of a slimie substance: the seed is long, flat, and
greater than those of the Cucumbers: the shell or outward bark is blackish,
sometimes of an ouerworne reddish color. The fruit of the Citrull does not so
easily rot or putrify as does the Melon, which being gathered in a fair dry
day may be kept a long time, especially being covered in a heap of wheat, as
Matthiolus says; but according to my practice you may keep them much longer
and better in a heap of dry sand.

2 The second kind of Citrull differs not from the former, saving that it is
altogether lesser, and the leaves are not so deeply cut or iagged, wherein
consists the difference.

The Place and Time.
The Citrull prospers best in hot Regions, as in Sicilia, Apulia, Calabria,
and Syria, about Alepo and Tripolis. We have many times sown the seeds, and
diligently observed the order prescribed in planting of Cucumbers.

The Names.
The later Herbarists do call it Anguria: in shoppes, Citrullus, and Cucumus
Citrullus: in English, Citruls, and Cucumber Citruls, and the seed is known by
the name of Semen Citrulli: or Citrull seed. But is Cucumis Citrullus, be so
called of the yellow color of the Citron, then is the common Cucumber properly
Cucumis Citrullus: which is known unto all to be contrary.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The meat or pulpe of Cucumer Citrull which is next unto the bark is eaten raw,
but more commonly

The seeds are of the like faculty with those of Cucumbers.

CHAP. 343. Of the wild Citrull called Colocynthis.
The Description.
1 COloquintida has been taken of many to be a kind of the wild Gourd, it
lies along creeping on the ground as do the Cucumbers and Melons, coming
nearest of all to that which in those days of some Herbarists is called
Citrull Cucumber: it brings forth upon his long branches small crooked
tendrels like the Vine, and also very great broad leaves deeply cut or iagged:
among which come forth small flowers of a pale yellow color; then comes the
fruit round as a bowl, covered with a thin rind, of a yellow color when it
is ripe, which when it is pilled or pared off, the white pulpe or spungie
substance appears full of seeds, of a white or else an ouerworne brown
color; the fruit so pared or pilled, is dried for medicine; the which is most
extreme bitter, and likewise the seed, and the whole plant it self in all
his parts.

2 The second kind of Coloquintida has likewise many long branches and
clasping tendrels, wherewith it takes hold of such things as are near unto
it. It brings forth the like leaves, but not so much iagged. The flowers are
small and yellow: the fruit is fashioned like a pear, and the other sort
round, wherein the especial difference consists.

The Place.
Coloquintida is sown and comes to perfection in hot regions, but seldom or
never in these Northerly and cold countries.

1 Colocynthis. The wild Citrull or Coloquintida.
2 Colocynthis (...). Pear fashioned Coloquintida.


The Time.
It is sown in the Spring, and brings his fruit to perfection in August.

It has been diverse times delivered unto me for a truth, that they do grow
in the sands of the Mediterranean sea shore, or very near unto it, wild, for
every man to gather that list, especially on the coast of Barbary, as also
without the mouth of the Streights near to Sancta Crux and other places
adjacent; from whence diverse Surgions of London that have traveled thither for
the curing of sick and hurt men in the ship have brought great quantities
thereof at their return.

The Names.
It is vulgarly called Coloquintida: in Greek (...): the Latin translators
for Colocynthis do oftentimes set down Cucurbita (...): notwithstanding there
is a Cucurbita syluestris that differs from Colocynthis, or Coloquintida: for
Cucurbita syluestris is called in Greek (...): or wild Coloquintida, whereof
shall be set sorth a peculiar chapter next after the Cucurbita or Gourd: in
English it is called Coloquintida, or Apple of Coloquintida.

The Temperature.
Coloquintida as it is in his whole nature and in all his parts bitter, so is
it likewise hot and dry in the later end of the second degree; and therefore
it purges, cleanses, opens and performs all those things that most bitter
things do: but that the strong quality which it has to purge by the stool,
is, as Galen says, of more force than the rest of his operations.

The Virtues.
Which operation of purging it works so violently, that it does not only
draw forth phlegm

So that therefore the same is not to be used either rashly, or without some
dangerous and extreme M. sues teaches to mix with it either Mastich, or gum
Tragacanth.

There be (...) of it (...), or little flat cakes, with Mastich, (...) (...),
(...) (...) Bdellium, of these, Mastich has a manifest binding quality: but
tough and clammie (...) (...) much better, which have no astriction at all in
them, or very little.

For by such binding or astringent things, violent medicines being restrained
and (...), do afterward (...) in his ninth book of Almanzor calls Illiacae:
which are compounded of Coloquintida and Scamony, two of the strongest
medicines that are; and of a third called gum Sagapene, which through his
clamminesse does as it were daube the intrails and guts, and defend them from
the harm that might have come of either of them.

The which composition, although it be wonderful strong, and not to be used
without very great

And for this cause it is very like that Galen in his first book of Medicines,
according to the places (...) the which notwithstanding his Schoolmaster
Quintus was also wont before to add unto the same.

But Coloquintida is not only good for purgations, in which it is a remedy
for the dissinesse or

Common oil wherein the same is boiled, is good against the singing in the
ears, and deafenes

Being boiled in vinegar, and the teeth washed therewith, it is a remedy for
the toothache, as Mesues teaches.

The seed is very profitable to keep and preserve dead bodies with; especially
if Aloes and

The white pulpe or spungious pith taken in the weight of a scruple opens the
belly mightily,

It has the like force if it be boiled and laid to infuse in wine or ale, and
given to drink.

Being taken after the same manner it profits the diseases before remembered,
that is, the Apoplexy,

For the same purposes it may be used in clisters.

The same boiled in oil, and applied with cotton or wool, takes away the
pain of the (...).

The decoction made in wine, and used as a fomentation or bathe, brings down
the desired

CHAP. 344. Of Muske-Melon, or Million.
The Kinds.
THere be diverse sorts of Melons found at this day, differing very notably in
shape and proportion, as also in taste, according to the climate and country
where they grow: but of the Ancients there was only one and no more, which is
that Melopepo called of Galen, Cucumis, or Galens Cucumber: notwithstanding
some have comprehended the Muske-Melons under the kinds of Citruls, where in
they have greatly erred: for doubtless the Muske-Melon is a kind of Cucumber
according to the best approved Authors.

The Description.
1 THat which the later Herbarists do call Muske-Melons is like to the common
Cucumber in stalks, lying flat upon the ground, long, branched, and rough. The
leaves be much alike, yet are they lesser, rounder, and not so cornered: the
flowers in like manner be yellow: the fruit is bigger, at the first somewhat
hairy, something long, now and then somewhat round; oftentimes greater, and many
times lesser: the bark or rind is of an ouerworne russet green 1 Melo. The
Musk Melon.
2 Melo Saccharinus. Sugar melon.
4 Melo Hispanicus. Spanish Melons.
color, ribbed and furrowed very deeply, having often chappes or chinkes, and
a confused roughness: the pulpe or inner substance which is to be eaten, is of
a faint yellow color. The middle part whereof is full of a slimie moisture,
among which is contained the seed, like unto those of the Cucumber, but lesser,
and of a browner color.

2 The sugar Melon has long trailing stalks lying upon the ground, whereon
are set small clasping tendrels like those of the Vine, and also leaves like
unto the common Cucumber, but of a greener color: the fruit comes forth
among those leaves, standing upon slender footstalkes, round as the fruit of
Coloquintida, and of the same bigness, of a most pleasant taste like Sugar,
whereof it took the surname Saccharatus.

3 The Pear fashioned Melon has many long vinie branches, whereupon do grow
cornered leaves like those of the Vine, and likewise great store of long
tendrels, clasping and taking hold of each thing that it touches: the fruit
grows upon slender footstalkes, fashioned like unto a Pear, of the bigness of
a great Quince.

4 The Spanish Melon brings forth long trailing branches, whereon are set
broad leaves slightly indented about the edges, not divided at all, as are all
the rest of the Melons. The fruit grows near unto the stalk, like unto the
common Pompion, very long, not crested or furrowed at all, but spotted with
very many such marks as are on the backeside of the Hart's-tongue leaf. The
pulpe or meat is not so pleasing in taste as the other.

The Place.
They delight in hot regions, notwithstanding I have seen at the Queens house
at Saint James very many of the first sort ripe, through the diligent and
curious nourishing of them by a skillful Gentleman the keeper of the said
house, called Mr. Foul, and in other places near unto the right Honorable the
Lord of (...) house, of Bermondsey by London, where from year to year there
is very great plenty, especially if the weather be any thing temperate.

The Time.
They are set or sown in April as I have already shown in the chapter of
Cucumbers: their fruit is ripe in the end of August, and sometimes sooner.

The Names.
The Musk Melon is called in Latin, Melo: in Italian, Mellone: in Spanish,
Melon: in French, (...): in High Dutch, Melaun: in low Dutch, Meloenen: in
Greek, (...), which does signify an apple; and therefore this kind of
Cucumber is more truly called (...) or (...): by reason that Pepo has the
smell of an apple, whereto the smell of this fruit is like; having withal the
smell as it were of Musk: which for that (...) are also named Melones (...),
or Musk Melons.

The Temperature.
The meat of the Musk Melon, is very cold and moist.

The Virtues.
It is harder of digestion than is any of the rest of Cucumbers: and if it
remain long in the stomach is putrifieth, and is occasion of pestilent
fevers: which thing also Aetius witnesses in the first book of his
Tetrabibles, writing that the use of Cucumeres, or Cucumbers, breeds
pestilent feauers; for he also takes Cucumis to be that which is commonly
called a Melon: which is usually eaten of the Italians and Spaniards rather to
repress the rage of (...), than for any other Physical virtue.

The seed is of like operation with that of the former Cucumber.

CHAP. 345. Of Melons, or Pompions.
The Kinds.
THere be found diverse kinds of Pompions which differ either in bigness (...)
(...): it shall be therefore sufficient to describe some one or two of them,
and refer the rest unto the view of the figures, which most lively do
express their differences; especially because this volume waxes great, the
description of no moment, and I hasten to an end.

The Description.
1 TThe great Pompion brings forth thick and rough prickly stalks, which
with their clasping tendrells take hold upon such things as are near unto
them, as poles, (...), pales, and ledges, which unless they were near unto
them would creep along upon the ground; the leaves be wild, and great, very
rough, and cut with certain deep gashes, nicked also on the edges like a saw;
the flowers be very great like unto a bell cup, of a yellow color like gold,
having five corners standing out like teeth: (...) fruit is great, thick,
round, set with thick ribs, like edges sticking forth. The pulpe or meat
whereof which is next under the rind is white, and of a mean hardness: the
pith or substance in the middle is spungie, and slimie: the seed is great,
broad, flat, something white, much greater than that of the Cucumber, otherwise
not differing at all in form. The color of the bark or rind is oftentimes
of an obscure green, sometimes gray. The rind of the green Pompion is
harder, and as it were of a woody substance: the rind of the gray is softer
and tenderer.

2 The second kind of Melons or Pompions is like unto the former in stalks
and leaves, and also in clasping tendrels: but the gashes of the leaves are not
so deep, and the stalks be tenderer: the flowers are in like manner yellow,
gaping, and cornered at the top, as be those of the (...): but the fruit is
somewhat rounder; sometimes greater, and many times lesser: and oftentimes of a
green color with an harder bark; now and then softer and whiter. The meat
within is like the former: the seeds have also the same form, but they be
somewhat lesser.

1 Pepo maximus oblongus. The great long Pompion.
2 Pepo maximus rotundus. The great round Pompion.


3 Of this kind there is also another Pompion like unto the former in rough
stalks, and in gashed and nicked leaves: the flower is also great and yellow,
like those of the others: the fruit is of a great bigness, whose bark is full
of little bunnies or hilly welts, as is the rind of the Citron, which is in
like manner yellow when it is ripe.

4 The fourth Pompion does very much differ from the others in form: the
stalks, leaves, and flowers are like those of the rest: but the fruit is not
long or round, but altogether broad, and in a manner flat like unto a shield or
buckler; thicker in the middle, thinner in the compass, and curled or (...) in
certain places about the edges, like the rugged or uneven bark of the
Pomecitron; the which rind is very soft, thin, and white: the meat within is
meetely hard and dureable. The seed is greater than that of the common
Cucumber, in form and color all one.

Macocks Virginiani, sive Pepo Virginianus. The Virginian Macocke, or Pompion.

This has rough cornered straked trailing branches proceeding from the roor,
eight or nine foot long, or longer, and those again divided into other
branches of a blackish green color, trailing, (...), or running along the
earth, covering a great deal of ground, sending forth broad (...) rough
leaves, on great gross, long, rough, hairy footstalk, like and fully as big
as the leaves of the common Pompion, with clasping tendrels and great broad
shriueled yellow flowers also like those of the common Pompion: the fruit
succeeds, growing a longst the stalks, commonly not near the root, but
toward the upper part or tops of the branches, somewhat round, not extending
in length, but flat like a bowl, but not so big as an ordinary bowl,
being seldom four inches broad, and three inches long, of a blackish green
color when it is ripe. The substance or eatable part is of a yellowish white
color, containing in the midst a great deal of pulpe or soft matter,
wherein the seed lies in certain rows also, like the common Pompion, but
smaller. The root is made of many whitish branches, creeping far abroad in the
earth, and perish at the first approach of Winter.

3 Pepo maximus compressus. The great flat bottommed Pompion.
4 Pepo maximus clypeatus. The great buckler Pompion.
5 Pepo Indicus minor rotundus. The small round Indian Pompion.
6 Pepo Indicus angulosus. The cornered Indian Pompion.


Melones aquatici edules Virginiani. The Virginian Water-Melon.
This Melon or Pompion is like and fully as big as the common Pompion, in
spreading, running, creeping branches, leaves, flowers, and clasping tendrels:
the fruit is of a very blackish green color, and extends it self in length
near four inches long, and three inches broad, no bigger nor longer than a
great apple, and grow along the branches forth of the bosoms of the leaves,
not far from the root even to the tops of the branches, containing a
substance, pulpe, and flat seed, like the ordinary Pompion: the root is
whitish, and disperseth it self very far abroad in the earth, and perishes
about the beginning of VVinter. October the tenth, 1621. John (...).

The Place.
All these Melons or Pompions be garden plants: they joy best in a fruitful
soil, and are common in England; except the last described, which is as yet a
stranger.

The Time.
They are planted at the beginning of April: they flower in August: the fruit
is ripe in September.

The Names.
The great Melon or Pompion is named in Greek (...): in Latin likewise Pepo:
The fruits of them all when they be ripe are called by a common name in Greek,
(...): in English, Millions or Pompion. Whereupon certain Physicians, says
Galen, have contended, that this fruit ought to be called (...), that is to say
in Latin, Pepo Cucumeralis, or Cucumber Pompion. Pliny in his ninth book the
fifth Chapter writes, that Cucumeres when they exceed in greatness are named
(...): it is called in High Dutch, (...): in Low Dutch, Pepoenen: in French,
Pompons.

The Temperature and Virtues.
All the Melons are of a cold nature, with plenty of moisture: they have a
certain clensing quality, Galen has written

The pulpe of the Pompion is never (...) raw, but boiled. For so it does more
easily descend, Galen) and that especially when it is not well digested: by
reason whereof it makes a man apt and ready to fall into the disease called
the Choleric Passion, and of some the (...).

The seed cleanses more than the meat, it provoke urine, and is good for
those that are troubled

The fruit boiled in milk and buttered, is not only a good wholesome meat for
man's body, but

The flesh or pulpe of the same sliced and fried in a pan with butter, is also
a good and wholesome

CHAP. 346. Of Wild Pompions.
The Description.
1 AS there is a wild sort of (...), of Melons, Citruls and Gourds, so
likewise there be certain wild Pompions, that be so of their own nature.
These bring forth rough stalks, set with sharp thorny prickles. The leaves be
likewise rough: the flowers yellow as be thoseof the garden Melon, but every
part is lesser. The fruit is thick, round, and sharp pointed, having a hard
green rind. The (...) or meat whereof, and the middle pith, with the seed are
like those of the garden Pompion, but very bitter in taste.

2 The second is like unto the (...), but it is altogether lesser, wherein
consists the difference.

1 Pepomaior syluestris. The great wild Pompion.
2 Pepo minor syluestris. The small wild Pompion.


The Place.
These Melons do grow wild in Barbary, Africa, and most parts of the East and
West Indies. They grow not in these parts except they be sown.

The Time.
Their time of flouring and flourishing answers that of the garden Pompion.

The Names.
Although the Ancient Physicians have made no mention of these plants, yet the
thing it self does show, that there be such, and ought to be called in Greek
(...): in Latin, (...) syluesters: in English, wild Melons or Pompions.

The Temperature.
Like as these wild Melons be altogether of their own nature very bitter, so
be they also of temperature hot and dry, and that in the later end of the
second degree. They have likewise a clensing faculty, not inferior to the
wild Cucumbers.

The Virtues.
The wine, which when the pith and seed is taken forth, is powered into the
rind, and has remained Elaterium, which is the dried juice of the wild
Cucumber.

CHAP. 347. Of Gourds.
The Kinds.
THere be diverse sorts of Gourds, some wild, and others tame of the garden;
some bringing forth fruit like unto a bottle; others long, bigger at the end,
keeping no certain form or fashion; some greater, others lesser. I will only
figure and describe two or three of the chiefest, and so pass over the rest,
because each one upon the first sight of them knows to what kind to refer
them.

The Description.
1 THe Gourd brings forth very long stalks as be those of the Vine, cornered
and parted into diverse branches, which with his clasping tendrels takes hold
and (...) upon such things as stand near unto it: the leaves be very great,
broad, and (...) pointed, almost as great as those of the Clot-Burre, (...)
softer, and somewhat covered as it were with a white freese, as be also the
stalks and branches, like those of the marish Mallow: the flowers be white,
and grow forth from the bosom of the leaves: in their places come up the
fruit, which are not all of one fashion, for oftentimes they have the form of
flagons or bottles, with a great large belly and a small neck. The Gourd
(says Pliny, lib. 19. cap. (...).) grows into any form or fashion that you
would have it, either like unto a wreathed Dragon, the leg of a man, or any
other shape, according to the mould wherein it is put whilst it is young:
being suffered to clime upon any Arbor where the fruit may hang, it has been
seen to be nine foot long, by reason of his great weight which has stretched
it out to the length. The rind when it is ripe is very hard, woody, and of a
yellow color: the meat or inward pulpe is white, the seed long, flat, pointed
at the top, broad below, with two peakes standing out like horns, (...)
within, and sweet in taste.

2 The second differs not from the precedent in stalks, (...), or flowers:
the fruit hereof is for the most part fashioned like a bottle or flagon,
wherein especially consists the difference.

1 Cucurbita anguina. Snakes Gourd.
2 Cucurbita lagenaria. Bottle Gourds.


The Place.
The Gourds are cherished in the gardens of these cold regions rather for
pleasure than for profit: in the hot countries where they come to ripeness
there are sometimes eaten, but with small delight; especially they are kept for
the rindes, wherein they put Turpentine, Oil, Honey, and also serve them for
pales to fetch water in, and many other the like uses.

The Time.
They are planted in a bed of horse-dung in April, even as we have taught in
the planting of cucumbers: they flourish in June and July; the fruit is ripe in
the end of August.

The Names.
The Gourd is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Cucurbita edulis, (...) (...):
of Pliny, Cucurbita Cameraria, because it climeth up, and is a covering for
arbours and walking places, and banqueting houses in gardens: he calls the
other which climeth not up, but lies crawling on the ground, Cucurbita (...):
in Italian, Zucca: in Spanish, (...): in French, Courge: in high Dutch, (...):
in Low Dutch, (...): in English, Gourds.

The Temperature.
The meat or inner pulpe of the Gourd is of temperature cold and moist, and
that in the second degree.

The Virtues.
The juice being dropped into the ears with oil of roses is good for the
pain thereof proceeding

The pulpe or meat mitigateth all hot swellings, if it be laid thereon in
manner of a pultis, and

The same Author affirms, that a long Gourd or else a Cucumber being laid in
the cradle or

The pulpe also is eaten sodden, but because it has in it a waterish and
thin juice, it yields

But being baked in an oven or fried in a pan it loses the most part of his
natural moisture, and

The seed allayeth the sharpness of urine, and brings down the same.

CHAP. 348. Of the wild Gourd.
1 Cucurbita lagenaria syluestris. Wild Bottle Gourd.
2 Cucurbita syluestris fungiformis. Mushrome wild Gourd.


The Description
1 THere is besides the former ones a certain wild Gourd: this is like the
garden Gourd in clymbing stalks, clasping tendrels, and soft leaves, and as it
were downy; all and (...) one of which things being far less: this also
clymbeth upon Arbours and banqueting houses: the fruit does represent the
great bellied Gourd, and those that be like unto bottles in form, but in
bigness it is very far inferior; for it is small, and scarce so great as an
(...) Quince, and may be held within the compass of a man's hand: the outward
rind at the first is green, afterward it is as hard as wood, and of the
color thereof: the inner pulpe is moist, and very full of juice, in which
lies the seed. The whole is as bitter as Coloquintida, which has made so many
errors, one especially, in taking the fruit Coloquintida for the wild Gourd.

2 The second wild Gourd has likewise many trailing branches and clasping
tendrels, wherewith it takes hold of such things as be near unto it: the
leaves be broad, deeply cut into diverse sections, like those of the Vine, soft
and very downy, whereby it is especially known to be one of the Gourds: the
flowers are very white, as are also those of the Gourds. The fruit succeeds,
growing to a round form, flat on the top like the head of a Mushrome, whereof
it took his syrname.

The Place.
They grow of themselves wild in hot regions; they never come to perfection of
ripeness in these cold countries.

The Time.
The time answers those of the garden.

The Names.
The wild Gourd is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Cucurbita syluestris, or
wild Gourd. Pliny, lib. 20. cap. 3. affirms, that the wild Gourd is named
of the Grecians, (...), which is hollow, an inch thick, not growing but among
stones, the juice whereof being taken is very good for the stomach. But the
wild Gourd is not that which is so described; for it is above an inch thick,
neither is it hollow, but full of juice, and by reason of the extreme
bitterness offensive to the stomach.

Some also there be that take this for Coloquintida, but they are far deceived;
for Colocynthis is the wild (...) Cucumber, whereof we have treated in the
chapter of (...).

The Temperature.
The wild Gourd is as hot and dry as Coloquintida, that is to say, in the
second degree.

The Virtues.
The wild Gourd is extreme bitter, for which cause it opens and scoureth the
stopped passages

Moreover, the wine which has continued all night in this Gourd likewise
purges the belly

CHAP. 349. Of Potato's.
Sisarum Peruvianum, (...) Batata Hispanorum Potatus, or Potato's.


The Description.
THis Plant (which is called of some Sisarum Peruvianum, or Skyrrets of Peru)
is generally of us called Potatus, or Potatoes. It has long rough flexible
branches trailing upon the ground like unto Pompions; whereupon are set green
three cornered leaves, very like unto those of the wild Cucumber. There is not
any that have written of this planthaue said any thing of the flowers:
therefore I refer their description unto those that shall hereafter have
further knowledge of the same. Yet have I had in my garden diverse roots that
have flourished unto the first approach of Winter, and have grown unto a great
length of branches, but they brought not forth any flowers at all; whether
because the Winter caused them to perish before their time of flouring, or that
they be of nature barren of flowers, I am not certain. The roots are many,
thick, and knobbie, like unto the roots of Peionies, or rather of the white
Asphodill, joined together at the top into one head, in manner of the Skyrrit,
which being divided into diverse parts and planted, do make a great increase,
especially if the greatest roots be cut into diverse goblets, and planted in
good and fertile ground.

The Place.
The Potatoes grow in India, Barbary, Spain, and other hot regions; of which
I planted diverse roots (that I bought at the Exchange in London) in my garden,
where they flourished until Winter, at which time they perished and rotted.

The Time.
It flourishes unto the end of September: at the first approach of great frosts
the leaves together with the roots and stalks do perish.

The Names.
Clusius calls it Battata, Camotes, Amotes, and Ignames: in English,
Potatoes, Potatus, and Potades.

The Temperature.
The leaves of Potatoes are hot and dry, as may evidently appear by the taste.
The roots are of a temperate (...).

The Virtues.
The Potato roots are among the Spaniards, Italians, Indians, and many other
nations common

Of these roots may be made conserues no less toothsome, wholesome, and dainty
than of the (...), Placentulae, and diverse other such like.

These Roots may serve as a ground or foundation whereon the cunning
Confectioner or Sugar-Baker

They are used to be eaten roasted in the ashes. Some when they be so roasted
infuse them and sop

CHAP. 350. Of Potatoes of Virginia.
The Description.
VIrginia Potato has many hollow flexible branches trailing upon the ground,
three square, uneven, knotted or kneed in sundry places at certain distances:
from the which knots comes forth one great leaf made of diverse leaves, some
smaller, and others greater, set together upon a fat middle rib by couples, of
a swart green color tending to redness; the whole leaf resembling those of
the Winter-Cresses, but much larger; in taste at the first like grass, but
afterward sharp and nipping the tongue. From the bosom of which leaves come
forth long round slender foot-stalkes, whereon do grow very fair and pleasant
flowers, made of one entire (...) leaf, which is folded or plaited in such
strange sort, that it seems to be a sloure made of (...) sundry small leaves,
which cannot easily be perceived except the same be pulled open. The whole
flower is of a light purple color, striped down the middle of every fold or
welt with a light show of yellowness, as if purple and yellow were mixed
together. in the middle of the flower (...) forth a thick flat pointall yellow
as gold, with a small sharp green prick or point in the midst thereof. The
fruit succeeds the flowers, round as a ball, of the bigness of a little
Bullesse or wild plum, green at the first, and black when it is ripe;
wherein is contained small white seed lesser than those of Mustard. The root is
thick, fat, and tuberous, not much differing either in shape, color, or taste
from the common Potatoes, saving that the roots hereof are not so (...) nor
long; some of them are as round as a ball, some ouall or egge-fashion; some
longer, and others shorter: the which knobby roots are fastened unto the
stalks with an infinite number of threddie strings.

Battata Virginiana, sieve Virginianorum, and Pappus: Virginian Potatoes.


The Place.
It grows natnrally in America, where it was first discovered, as reports C.
Clusius, since which time I have received roots hereof from Virginia, otherwise
called Norembega, which grow and prosper in my garden as in their own native
country.

The Time.
The leaves thrust forth of the ground in the beginning of May: the flowers bud
forth in August. The fruit is ripe in September.

The Names.
The Indians do call this plant Pappus, meaning the roots: by which name also
the common Potatoes are called in those Indian countries. We have the name
proper unto it mentioned in the title. Because it has not only the shape and
proportion of Potatoes, but also the pleasant taste and virtues of the same, we
may call it in English, Potatoes of America or Virginia.

Clusius questions whether it be not the Arachidna of Theophrastus. Bauhine
has referred it to the Nightshades, and calls it Solanum tuberosum (...),
and largely figures and describes it in his Prodromus, page 89.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The temperature and virtues be referred unto the common Potatoes, being
likewise a food, as

Bauhine says, That he heard that the use of these toots was forbidden in
Bourgondy (where

CHAP. 351. Of the Garden Mallow called Hollihocke.
The Kinds.
THere be diverse sorts or kinds of Mallows; some of the garden: there be also
some of the Marish or sea shore; others of the field, and both wild. And first
of the Garden Mallow or Hollihocke.

1 Malua hortensis. Single Garden Hollihocke.
2 Malua rosea simplex peregrina. Iagged strange Hollihoeke.


The Description.
1 THe tame or garden Mallow brings forth broad round leaves of a whitish
green color, rough, and greater than those of the wild Mallow. The stalk is
straight, of the height of four or six cubits; whereon do grow upon slender
footstalk single flowers not much unlike to the wild Mallow, but greater,
consisting only of five leaves, sometimes white or red, now and then of a deep
purple color, varying diversely, as Nature list to play with it: in their
places grows up a round knop like a little cake, compact or made up of a
multitude of flat seeds like little cheeses. The root is long, white, tough,
easily bowed, and grows deep in the ground.

3 Malua purpurea multiplex. Double purple Hollihocke.


2 The second being a strange kind of Hollihocke has likewise broad leaves,
rough and hoarie, or of an ouerworne russet color, cut into diverse sections
even to the middle ribbe, like those of Palma Christi. The flowers are very
single, but of a perfect red color, wherein consists the greatest
difference. And this may be called Malua rosea simplex peregrina folio Ficus.
Iagged strange Hollihocke.

3 The double Hollihocke with purple flowers has great broad leaves,
confusedly indented about the edges, and likewise toothed like a saw. The
stalk grows to the height of four or five cubits. The flowers are double,
and of a bright purple color.

4 The Garden Hollihocke with double flowers of the color of scarlet, grows
to the height of five or six cubits, having many broad leaves cut about the
edges. The stalk and root is like the precedent. This may be called Multea
bortensis rubra multiplex, Double red Hollihockes, or Rose mallow.

5 The tree mallow is likewise one of the Hollihockes; it brings forth a
great stalk of the height of ten or twelve foot, growing to the form of a
small tree, whereon are placed diverse great broad leaves of a russet green
color, not unlike to those of the great Clot Burre Docke, deeply indented
about the edges. The flowers are very great and double as the greatest Rose, or
double Peiony, of a deep red color tending to blackness. The root is great,
thick, and of a woody substance, as is the rest of the plant. This may be
called Malua hortensis atrorubente multiplici flore.

The Place.
These Hollihockes are sown in gardens, almost every where, and are in vain
sought else where.

The Time.
The second year after they are sown they bring forth their flowers in July
and August, when the seed is ripe the stalk withers, the root remains and
sends forth new stalks, leaves and flowers, many years after.

The Names.
The Hollihocke is called in Greek, (...): of diverse, Rosa vltramarina, or
outlandish Rose, and Rosa hyemalis, or winter Rose. And this is that Rose which
(...) in his 21. book, 4. chapter writes to have the stalk of a mallow, and
the leaves of a pot-herbe, which they call Mosceuton: in high Dutch, (...)
(...): in low Dutch, (...) (...): in French, Rose d'outre mer: in English,
Hollihocke, and Hockes.

The Temperature.
The Hollihocke is meetely hot, and also moist, but not so much as the wild
Mallow: it has likewise a clammie substance, which is more manifest in the
seed and root, than in any other part.

The Virtues.
The decoction of the flowers, especially those of the red, does stop the
overmuch flowing of the

The roots, leaves, and seeds serve for all those things forwhich the wild
Mallows do, which

CHAP. 352. Of the wild Mallows.
The Description.
1 THe wild Mallow has broad leaves somewhat round and cornered, nickt about
the edges, smooth, and green of color: among which rise up many slender tough
stalks, clad with the like leaves, but smaller. The flowers grow upon little
footstalkes of a reddish color mixed with purple strakes, consisting of five
leaves, fashioned like a bell: after which comes up a knap or round button,
like unto a flat cake, compact of many small seeds. The root is white, tough,
and full of a slimie juice, as is all the rest of the plant.

2 The dwarf wild Mallow creeps upon the ground: the stalks are slender
and weak, yet tough and flexible. The leaves be rounder, and more hoary than
the other. The flowers are small and of a white color.

3 The crispe or curled Mallow, called of the vulgar sort French Mallows, has
many small upright stalks, growing to the height of a cubit, and sometimes
higher; whereon do grow broad leaves somewhat round and smooth, of a light
green color, plaited or curled about the brims like a ruff. The flowers be
small and white. The root perishes when it has perfected his seed.

1 Malua syluestris. The field Mallow.
2 Malua syluestris pumila. The wild dwarf Mallow.


4 The Veruaine Mallow has many straight stalks, whereon do grow diverse
leaves deeply cut and jagged even to the middle rib, not unlike to the leaves
of Veruaine, whereof it took (...) name: among which come forth fair and
pleasant flowers like unto those of the common Mallow in form, but of a more
bright red color, mixed with stripes of purple, which sets forth the
beauty. The root is thick, and continues many years. This is sometimes
though more rarely found with white flowers.

5 This annual Mallow, called by Clusius, Maluatrimestris, is very like our
common Mallow sending up slender branched stalks some three foot high; the
bottom leaves are round, those on the stalks more sharp pointed, green
above, and whiter underneath, the flowers consist of five leaves of a light
carnation color, the seed is like that of the ordinary mallow, but smaller;
and such also is the root which perishes every year as soon as the seed is
ripe: it is sown in some gardens, and grows wild in Spain.

The Place.
The two first mallows grow in vntoiled places among pot-herbes, by high
ways, and the (...) of (...).

The French mallow is an excellent pot-herbe, for the which cause it is sown
in gardens, and is not to be found wild that I know of.

3 Malua crispa. The French curled Mallow.
4 Malua verbenaca. Veruaine Mallow.
5 Malua aestiua Hispanica. The Spanish Mallow.


The Veruaine Mallow grows not every where: it grows on the ditch sides on
the left hand of the place of execution by London, called Tyborn: also in a
field near unto a village fourteen miles from London called Bushey, on the
backe-side of a Gentleman's house named Mr. Robert Wylbraham: likewise amongst
the bushes and hedges as you go from London to a bathing place called the Old
Foord; and in the bushes as you go to Hackny a village by London, in the closes
next the town, and in diverse other places, as at Bassingburne in Hartfordshire,
three miles from Roiston.

Mr. Goodyer found the Veruain Mallow with white flowers growing plentifully in
a close near Maple-durham in Hampshire, called Aldercrofts.

The Time.
These wild Mallows do flower from June till Summer be well spent: in the
mean time their seed also waxes ripe.

The Names.
The wild Mallow is called in Latin Maluasyluestris: in Greek, (...), or
(...) and (...), as though they should-say a mitigator of pain: of some,
Osiriaca: in High Dutch, (...): in Low Dutch, (...), and (...) (...): in
English, Mallow.

The Veruaine Mallow is called of Dioscorides, Alcea: in Greek, (...): of
some, Herba Hungarica, and Herba Simeonis, or Simons Mallow: in English,
Veruaine Mallow, and iagged Mallow.

The name of this herb Malua seems to come from the Hebrews, who call it in
their tongue (...) Malluach, of the saltness, because the Mallow grows in
saltish and old ruinous places, as in dung-hills and such like, which in most
abundant manner yields forth Saltpeter and such like matter: for (...)
Melach signifies salt, as the Learned know. I am persuaded that the Latin
word Malua comes from the Chaldee name Mallucha, the gutturall (...), Ch,
being left out for good sounds sake: so that it were better in this word Maliia
to read u as a vowell, than as a consonant: which words are uttered by the
learned Doctor Rabbi David Kimhi, and seem to carry a great show of truth: in
English it is called Mallow; which name comes as near as may be to the
Hebrew word.

The Temperature.
The wild Mallows have a certain moderate and middle heat, and moistness
withal: the juice thereof is slimie, clammie, or gluing, the which are to be
preferred before the garden Mallow or Hollihocke, as Diphilus Siphinus in
Athenaeus does rightly think; who plainly shows, that the wild Mallow is
better than that of the garden: although some do prefer the Hollihocke,
whereunto we may not consent, neither yet yield unto Galen, who is partly of
that mind, yet stands he doubtful: for the wild Mallow without
controversy is fitter to be eaten, and more pleasant than those of the garden,
except the French Mallow, which is generally holden the wholsommest, and
amongst the pot-herbes not the least commended by Hesiod: of whose opinion was
Horace, writing in his second Ode of his Epodon,

-- and graui Maluae salubres corpori. The Mallow (says Galen) does nourish
moderately, ingendreth gross blood, keeps the body soluble, and loses the
belly that is bound. It easily descends, not only because it is moist, but
also by reason it is (...).

The Virtues.
The leaves of Mallows are good against the stinging of Scorpions, Bees,
Wasps, and such like: Dioscorides says.

The decoction of Mallows with their roots drunken are good against all venom
and poison,

The leaves of Mallows boiled till they be soft and applied, do mollify
tumors and hard swellings

The decoction used in clisters is good against the roughness and fretting of
the guts, bladde and fundament.

The roots of the Veruaine Mallow do heal the bloody flix and inward
burstings, being drunk Dioscorides and Paulus Aegineta testify.

CHAP. 353. Of Marsh Mallow.
The Description.
1 MArsh Mallow is also a certain kind of wild Mallow: it has broad leaves,
small toward the point, soft, white, and (...) or cottoned, and slightly
nicked about the edges: the stalks be round and straight, three or four foot
high, of a whitish gray color; whereon do grow flowers like unto those of the
wild Mallows, yet not red as they are, but commonly white, or of a very light
purple color out of the white: the knop or round button wherein the seeds lie
is like that of the first wild Mallow. The root is thick, tough, white
within, and contains in it a clammy and slimy juice.

2 This strange kind of Mallow is holden amongst the best writers to be a
kind of marsh Mallow: some excellent Herbarists have set it down for Sida
Theophrasti, whereto it does not fully answer: it has stalks two cubits high,
whereon are set without order many broad leaves hoarie and whitish, not unlike
those of the other marsh Mallow: the flowers consist of five leaves, and are
larger than those of the marsh Mallow, and of a purple color tending to
redness: after which there come round bladders of a pale color, in shape like
the fruit or seeds of round Aristochia, or Birthwort, wherein is contained
round black seed. The root is thick and tough, much like that of the common
Mallow.

1 Althaea Ibiscus. Marsh Mallow.
2 Althaeapalustris. Water Mallow.
3 Althaea (...): Tree Mallow.
4 Althaea frutex Clusij. Shrubbed Mallow.


5 Alcea fruticosa cannabina. Hempe-leaued Mallow.


3 This wild Mallow is likewise referred unto the kinds of marsh Mallow,
called generally by the name of (...), which grows to the form of a small
hedge tree, approaching (...) to the substance or nature of wood than any of the
other; wherewith the people of Olbia and Narbone in France do make hedges, to
sever or divide their gardens and vineyards (even as we do with quicke-sets of
priuet or thorn) which continues long: the stalk whereof grows upright,
very high, coming near to the Willow in wooddinesse and substance. The
flowers grow along the same, in fashion and color of the common wild mallow.

4 The shrubby mallow rises up like unto a hedge bush, and of a woody
substance, dividing it self into diverse tough and limber branches, covered
with a bark of the color of ashes; whereupon do grow round pointed leaves,
somewhat nickt about the edges, very soft, not unlike to those of the common
marsh mallow, and of an ouerworne hoary color. The flowers grow at the top of
the stalks, of a purple color, consisting of sieve leaves, very like to the
common wild mallow, and the seed of the marsh mallow.

5 We have another sort of mallow, called of Pena, Alcea fruticosior
pentaphylla: it brings forth in my garden many twiggy branches, set upon
stiff stalks of the bigness of a man's thumb, growing to the height of ten
or twelve foot: whereupon are set very many leaves deeply cut even to the
middle rib, like unto the leaves of hemp: the flowers and seeds are like unto
the common mallow: the root is exceeding great, thick, and of a woody
substance. Clusius calls this Alcea fruticosa cannabino folio: and it is with
good reason thought to be the Cannabis syluestris described by Dioscorides,
lib. 3. cap. 166.

The Place.
The common marsh mallow grows very plentifully in the marshes both on the
Kentish and Essex shore along the river of Thames, about Woolwych, Erith,
Greenhyth, Grauesend, Tilburie, Lee, Colchester, Harwich, and in most salt
marshes about London: being planted in gardens it prospers well, and
continues long.

The second grows in the moist and fenny places of Ferraria, between Padua
in Italy, and the river Eridanus.

The others are strangers likewise in England: notwithstanding at the
impression hereof I have sown some seeds of them in my garden, expecting the
success.

The Time.
They flower and flourish in July and August: the root springs forth afresh
every year in the beginning of March, which are then to be gathered, or in
September.

The Names.
The common marsh mallow is called in Greek (...), and (...): the Latins
retain the names Althaea and Ibiscus: in shops, Bismalua, and Maluauiscus; as
though they should say Malua Ibiscus: in High Dutch, (...): in Low Dutch, (...)
(...), and (...) (...): in Italian and Spanish, (...): in French, Guimaulue: in
English, marsh mallow, moorish mallow, and white mallow.

The rest of the mallows retain the names expressed in their several titles.

The Temperature.
Marsh mallow is moderately hot, but drier than the other mallows: the roots
and seeds hereof are more dry, and of thinner parts, as Galen writes; and
likewise of a digesting, softning, or mollifying nature.

The Virtues.
The leaves of Marsh Mallow are of the power to digest, mitigate pain, and to
(...).

They be with good effect mixed with fomentations and pultesses against pains
of the sides, of

The decoction of the leaves drunk does the same, which does not only assuage
pain which

The roots and seeds are profitable for the same purpose: moreover the
decoction of the roots (...) otherwise thought, but they cure the bloody flix,
by having things added unto them, as the roots of Bistort, Tormentill, the
(...) and rindes of Pomegranates and such like.

The mucilage or slimie juice of the roots, is mixed very effectually with all
oils, ointments, and

The roots boiled in wine, and the decoction given to drink, expel the stone
and gravel, help

The roots of Marsh Mallows, the leaves of common Mallows, and the leaves of
Violets, boiled

The seeds dried and beaten into powder and given to drink, stops the
bloody flix and laske,

CHAP. 354. Of the yellow Lilly.
Althaea Lutea. Yellow Mallow.


The Description.
THe yellow Mallow rises up with a round stalk, something hard or wooddie,
three or four cubits high, covered with broad leaves something round, but
sharp pointed, white, soft, set with very fine hairs like to the leaves of
gourds, hanging upon long tender footstalks: from the bosom of which leaves
come forth yellow flowers, not unlike to those of the common Mallow in form:
the knops or seed vessels are black, crooked, or wrinckled, made up of (...)
small cods, in which is black seed: the root is small, and dies when it has
perfected his seed.

The Place.
The seed hereof is brought unto us from Spain and Italy: we do yearly sow
it in our gardens, the which seldom or never does bring his seed to ripeness:
by reason whereof, we are to seek for seeds against the next year.

The Time.
It is sown in the midst of April, it brings forth his flowers in September.

The Names.
Some think this to be Abutilon: (...) on that agrees which Auicen writes,
that it is like to the Gourd, that is to sav in leaf, and to be named (...),
and (...): (...) take it to be that Althaea or Marsh Mallow, unto which
Theophrastus in his ninth book of the History of Plants does attribute Florem
(...), or a yellow flower: for the flower of the common Marsh Mallow is not
yellow, but white; yet may Theophrastus his copy, which in diverse places is
faulty, and has many empty and unwritten places, be also faulty in this
place; therefore it is hard to say, that this is Theophrastus marsh Mallow,
especially seeing that Theophrastus seems also to attribute unto the root of
Marsh Mallow so much slime, as that water may be thickened therewith, which
the roots of common Marsh Mallow can very well do: but the root of Abutilon or
yellow Mallow not at all: it may be called in English, yellow Mallow, and
Auicen his Mallow.

The Temperature.
The temperature of this Mallow is referred unto the Tree-mallow.

The Virtues.
Auicen says, that Abutilon or yellow Mallow, is held to be good for green
wounds, and does presently

The seed drunk in wine prevails mightily against the stone.

Bernardus Paludanus of Anchusen reports, that the Turks do drink the seed
to provoke sleep

CHAP. 355. Of Venice Mallow, or Goodnight at Noone.
1 Alcea Peregrina. Venice Mallow.
2 Sabdarifa. Thornie Mallow.


The Description.
1 THe Venice mallow rises up with long, round, seeble stalks, whereon are
set upon long slender foot-stalkes, broad iagged leaves, deeply cut even to
the middle rib: amongst which come forth very pleasant and beautiful flowers,
in shape like those of the common mallow, 3 Alcea Aegyptia. The Egyptian
Codded Mallow.
something white about theedges, but in the middle of a fine purple: in the
midst of this flower stands forth a knap or pestel, as yellow as gold: it
opens it self about eight of the clock, and shuts up again at noone,
about twelve a clock when it has received the beams of the Sun, for two or
three hours, whereon it should seem to rejoice to look, and for whose
departure, being then upon the point of declension, it seems to grieve, and so
shuts up the flowers that were open, and never opens them again; whereupon it
might more properly be called Malva horaria, or the Mallow of an hour: and
this Columella seems to call Moloche, in this verse;

-- Et Moloche, Prono sequitur quae vertice solemn. The seed is contained in
thick rough bladders, whereupon Dodonaeus calls it Alcea Vesicaria: within
these bladders or seed vessels are contained black seed, not unlike to those
of Nigella Romana. The root is small and tender, and perishes when the seed is
ripe, and must be increased by new and yearly sowing of the seed, carefully
reserved.

2 Thorn Mallow rises up with one upright stalk of two cubits high, dividing
it self into diverse branches, whereupon are placed leaves deeply cut to the
middle rib, and likewise snipt about the edges like a saw, in taste like Sorrel
the flowers forth most part thrust forth of the trunk or body of the small
stalk, compact of five small leaves, of a yellowish color, the middle part
whereof is of a purple tending to redness: the husk or cod wherein the flower
does stand is set or armed with sharp thorns: the root is small, single, and
most impatient of our cold clymate, insomuch that when I had with great
industry nourished up some plants from the seed, and kept them unto the midst
of May; notwithstanding one cold night chancing among many, has destroyed them
all.

3 This also is a stranger cut leaued Mallow, which Clusius has set forth by
the name of Alcea Aegyptia: and Prosper Alpinus by the title of Bammia: the
stalk is round, straight, green, some cubit and half high: upon which without
order grow leaves at the bottom of the stalk, like those of Mallow, cornered
and snipt about the edges; but from the middle of the stalk to the top they
are cut in with five deep gashes like as the leaves of the last described: the
flowers grow forth by the sides of the stalk, in form and color like those
of the last mentioned, to wit, with five yellowish leaves: after these follow
long thick five cornered hairy and sharp pointed seed vessels, containing a
seed like Orobus, covered with a little downinesse: this grows in Egypt, where
they eat the fruit thereof as we do Pease and Beans: Alpinus attributes diverse
virtues to this plant, agreeable to those of the common Marsh-mallow.

The Place.
The seeds hereof have been brought out of Spain and other hot countries. The
first prospers well in my garden from year to year.

The Time.
They are to be sown in the most fertile ground and sunnie places of the
garden, in the beginning of May, or in the end of April.

The Names.
Their names have been sufficiently touched in their several descriptions. The
first may be called in English, Venice-mallow, Goodnight at noone, or the
Mallow flouring but an hour: of Matthiolus it is called Hypecoon, or Rue
Poppie, but improperly.

The Temperature and Virtues.
There is a certain clammie juice in the leaves of the Venice Mallow,
whereupon it is thought to come near unto the temperature of the common
Mallow, and to be of a mollifying faculty: but his use in Physic is not yet
known, and therefore can there be no certainty affirmed.

CHAP. 356. Of Cranes-bill.
The Kinds.
THere be many kinds of Cranes-bil, whereof two were known to Dioscorides, one
with the knobby root, the other with the Mallow leaf.

Geranium Columbinum. Doves foot, or Cranes-bill.


The Description.
DOues-foot has many hairy stalks, trailing or leaning toward the ground, of a
brownish color, somewhat kneed or iointed; whereupon do grow rough leaves of an
ouerworne green color, round, cut about the edges, and like unto those of the
common Mallow: amongst which come forth the flowers of a bright purple color:
after which is the seed, set together like the head and bil of a bird; whereupon
it was called Cranesbill, or Storks-bill, as are also all the other of his
kind. The root is slender, with some fibers annexed thereto.

2 There is another kind of this with larger stalks and leaves, also the
leaves are more deeply cut in and divided, and the flowers are either of the
same color as those of the common kind, or else somewhat more whitish. This
may be called (...) columbinum maius (...) foliis, Great Doves foot.

3 To this kind may also fitly be referred the Geranium Saxatile of (...): the
root is small and threddy, the leaves are smoother, redder, more bluntly cut
about the edges, and transparent than those of the first described, yet round,
and otherwise like them: the flowers are small and red, and the bills like
those of the former. Master Goodyer found it growing plentifully on the banks
by the high way leading from Gilford toward London, near unto the Towns end.

The Place.
It is found near to common high ways, desert places, untilled grounds, and
specially upon mud walls almost every where.

The Time.
It springs up in March and April: floureth in May, and brings his seed
to ripeness in June.

The Names.
It is commonly called in Latin, Pes Columbinus: in High Dutch, Scarter kraut:
in Low Dutch, Duyuen voet: in French, Pied de Pigeon: hereupon it may be called
Geranium Columbinum: in English, Doues-foot, and Pigeons-foot: of Dioscorides,
Geranium alterum: of some, Pulmonia, and Gruina.

The Temperature.
Doves foot is cold and somewhat dry, with some astriction or binding, having
power to soder or join together.

The Virtues.
It seems, says my Author, to be good for green and bleeding wounds, and
asswageth inflammations

The herb and roots dried, beaten into most fine powder, and given half a
spoonful fasting, and

CHAP. 357. Of Herb Robert.
Geranium Robertianum. Herb Robert.


The Description.
Herb Robert brings forth slender weak and brittle stalks, somewhat hairie,
and of a reddish color, as are oftentimes the leaves also, which are iagged
and deeply cut, like unto those of Cheruile, of a most loathsome stinking
smell. The flowers are of a most bright purple color; which being past, there
(...) certain small heads, with sharp beaks or bills like those of birds: the
root is small and threddie.

The Place.
Herb Robert grows upon old walls, as well those made of brick and stone, as
those of mud or earth: it grows likewise among rubbish, in the bodies of
trees that are cut down, and in moist and shadowie ditch banks.

The Time.
It floureth from April till Summer be almost spent. the herb is green in
winter also, and is hardly hurt with cold.

The Names.
It is called in high Dutch, Ruprechts kraut: in low Dutch, Robrechts kruit:
and thereupon it is named in Latin, Ruberta, and Roberti herba: Ruellius
calls it Robertiana; and we, Robertianum: of Tabernamontanus, Rupertianum: in
English, Herb Robert. He that conferreth this Cranes bill with Dioscorides
his third Sideritis shall plainly perceive, that they are both one, and that
this is most apparently Sideritis 3. Dioscoridis; for Dioscorides sets down
three Sideritides, one with the leaf of Horehound; the next with the leaf of
Fearne; and the third grows in walls and Vineyards: the native soil of Herb
Robert agree thereunto, and likewise the leaves, being like unto Cheruile, and
not unlike to those of Corianders, according to Dioscorides description.

The Temperature.
Herb Robert is of temperature somewhat cold: and yet both scouring and
somewhat binding, participating of mixed faculties.

The Virtues.
It is good for wounds and ulcers of the dugs and secret parts; it is thought
to stanch blood, which Dioscorides does attribute to his third Sideritis: the
virtue of this, says he, is applied to heal up bloody wounds.

CHAP. 358. Of knobbed Cranes-bill.
Geranium tuberosum. Knobbie Cranes-bill.


The Description.
THis kind of Cranes-bill has many flexible branches, weak and tender, fat,
and full of moisture, whereon are placed very great leaves cut into diverse small
sections or divisions, resembling the leaves of the tuberous Anemone, or
Wind-floure, but somewhat greater, of an ouerworn greenish color: among which
come forth long footstalk, whereon do grow fair flowers, of a bright purple
color, and like unto the smallest brier Rose in form: which being past, there
succeed such heads and beaks as the rest of the Cranes-bill have: the root is
thick, bumped or knobbed, which we call tuberous.

The Place.
This kind of Cranes-bill is a stranger in England, notwithstanding I have it
growing in my garden.

The Time.
The time answers the rest of the Cranesbills.

The Names.
Cranes bill is called in Greek (...) in Latin, Gruinalis, commonly Roftrum
Gruis, or Rostrum Ciconiae: of the likeness of a Cranes-bill, or storkes-bill:
of some, Acus moscata: but that name does rather belong to another of this
kind: it is also called Acus Pastoris: in Italian, Rostro di grua: in French,
Bec de Grue: in Spanish, Pico di (...), pico del grou: in High Dutch
Storckenschuable: in Low Dutch, Oiieuoers beck: in English, Storks-bill,
Cranes-bill, Herons-bill, and Pincke-needle: this is also called for
distinctions sake, Geranium tuberosum, and Geranium bulbosum: it is likewise
Geranium primum Dioscoridis or Dioscorides his first Cranes-bill.

The Temperature.
The roots of this Cranes-bill have a little kind of heat in them.

The Virtues.
Dioscorides says that the roots may be eaten, and that a dram weight of them
drunk in wine does

Also Pliny (...), that the root hereof is singular good for such as after
weakness crave to

The same Author affirms that the weight of a dram of it drunk in wine three
times in a day,

CHAP. 359. Of Musked Cranes-bill.
The Description.
MVsked Cranes-bil has many weak and feeble branches trailing upon the
ground, whereon do grow long leaves, made of many smaller leaves, set upon a
middle rib, snipt or cut about the edges, of a pleasant sweet smell, not
unlike to that of Musk: among which come forth the flowers set upon tender
foote-stalkes, of a red color, compact of five small leaves apiece: after
which appear small heads and pointed beakes or bills like the other kinds of
Cranes bills: the root is small and threddy.

Geranium moschatum. Musked Cranes bill.


The Place.
It is planted in Gardens for the sweet smell that the whole plant is possessed
with, but if you rub the leaves and then smell to them, you shall find them to
have a sent quite contrary to the former.

The Time.
It floureth and flourishes all the summer long.

The Names.
It is called Myrrhida Plinij Rostrum Ciconiae, Arcus moschata, in shops, and
Acus pastoris, and likewise Geranium moschatum: in English, Musked Storkes
bill, and Cranes bill, (...), and of the vulgar sort Muschata, and also
Pickneedle.

The Temperature.
This Cranes bill has not any of his faculties found out or known: yet it
seems to be cold and a little dry, with some astriction or binding.

The Virtues.
The virtues are referred unto those of Doves Dioscorides to be good for green
and bloody wounds, and hot swellings that are newly begun.

CHAP. 360. Of Crow-foot Cranes-bill, or Gratia Dei.
The Description.
1 CRow foot Cranes bill has many long and tender branches tending to
redness, set with great leaves deeply cut or jagged, in form like those of
the field Crow foot, whereof it took his name; the flowers are pretty large,
and grow at the top of the stalks upon tender footstalkes, of a perfect blew
color: which being past, there succeed such heads, beakes, and bills as the
other Cranes bills.

I have in my garden another sort of this Cranes bill, bringing forth very
fair white flowers, which makes it to differ from the precedent; in other
respects there is no difference at all.

2 This which is the Geranium 2. Batrachiodes minus of Clusius has large
stalks and leaves, and those very much divided or cut in; the stalks also are
divided into sundry branches, which upon long footstalkes carry flowers like in
shape, but less than those of the formerly described, and not blew, but of a
reddish purple color, having ten threads and a pointall coming forth of the
middle of the flower; the beakes or bills which are the seed stand upright, and
hang not down their points as most others do. The root is large and lives many
years.

3 The stalks of this are stiff, green, and hairy, divided at their tops
into sundry branches which end in long footstalkes, upon which grow flowers
commonly by couples, and they consist of five leaves apiece, and these of a
dark red color. The leaves are large, soft, and hairy, divided into six or
seven parts, and snipt about the edges; the roots are large and lasting. It is
kept with us in gardens, and flowers in May. Clusius calls it Geranium 1. (...)
flore.

4 This also has stalks and leaves much like those of the last described, but
somewhat less: the florues are as large as those of the last described, but of
a more light red, and they are contained in thicker and shorter cups, and
succeeded by shorter seeds or bills, and are commonly of a sweet muske-like
smell: The root is very long, red, and lasting. It flowers in the midst of
May, and is

1 Geranium Batrachioides. Crow-foot Cranes-bill.
2 Geranium (...) alterum. Small Crow-foot Cranes-bill.
3 Geranium (...) pullo flore. Duskie Cranes-bill.
4 Geranium Batrachioides longius radicatum. Long rooted Cranes-bill.
called by Gesner, Geranium montanum: by Dodonaeus, Geranium batrachioides
alterum: and by Lobell, Geranium (...) longius radicatum.

The Place.
These Cranes bills are wild of their own nature, and grow in barren places,
and in valleys rather than in mountains; both of them do grow in my garden.

The Time.
They flower, flourish, and grow green most part of the Summer.

The Names.
It is called in Greek, (...), and Geranium batrachioides, which name it
takes from the likeness of Crowfoot: of some it is called Ranunculus
caeruleus, or blew Crowfoot: Fuchsius calls it Gottes gnad, that is in
Latin, Gratia Dei: in English also Gratia dei, blew Cranes bill, or Cranes
bill with the blew flowers, or blew Crowfoot Cranes bill.

The Temperature.
The Temperature is referred to the other Cranes bills.

The Virtues.
None of these plants are now in use in Physic; yet Fuchsius says, that
Cranes bill with the blew flower is an excellent thing to heal wounds.

CHAP. 361. Of Candy Cranes bill.
1 Geranium Creticum. Candy Cranes bill.
2 Geranium Malacoides. Bastard Candy Cranes bill.


The Description.
1 THe Cranes bill of Candie has many long tender stalks, soft, and full of
juice: dividing it self into diverse branches, whereon are set great broad
leaves, cut, or jagged in diverse sections or cuts: among which come forth
flowers composed of five leaves apicce, of a (...) or watchet color, in the
middle part whereof come forth a (...) chiues, and a small pointell of a
purplish color: the head and beak is like to the rest of the Cranes bills,
but greater: the (...) dies when it has perfected his seed.

2 This Cranes-bill, being a bastard kind of the former, has lorg (...)
branches growing to the height of two or three cubits, set about with very
great leaves, not unlike to those of Hollihocks, but somewhat lesser, of an
ouerworne green color: among which rise up little (...)-stalks, on the ends
whereof do grow small flowers, lesser than those of the precedent, (...) of a
murrey color: the head and seeds are like also, but much lesser: the (...) do
likewise die at the first approach of Winter.

The Place.
These are strangers in England, except in the gardens of some Herbarists: they
grow in my garden very plentifully.

The Time.
The time answers the rest of the Cranes-bils, yet does that of Candie flower
sor the most part with me in May.

The Names.
There is not more to be said of the names than has been remembered in their
several titles: they may be called in English, Cranes-bils, or Storkes-bils.

The Temperature.
Their temperature answers that of Doues-foot.

The Virtues.
Their faculties in working are equal to those of Doues-foot, and used for the
same purposes,

CHAP. 362. Of diverse wild Cranes-bills.
The Kinds.
THere be diverse sorts or kinds of Cranes-bils which have not been remembered
of the ancient, nor much spoken of by the later writers, all which I mean to
comprehend under this chapter, making as it were of them a Chapter of wild
Cranes-bils, although some of them have place in our London gardens, and that
worthily, especially for the beauty of the flowers: their names shall be
expressed in their several titles, their natures and faculties are referred to
the other Cranes-bils, or if you please to a further consideration.

The Description.
1 SPotted Cranes-bill, or Storkes-bill, the which Lobel describes in the
title thus, Geranium Fuscum flore liuido purpurante, and medio Candicante,
whose leaves are like unto Crowfoot (being a kind doubtless of Cranes bill,
called Gratia Dei) of an ouerworne dustie color, and of a strong savor, yet
not altogether unpleasant: the stalks are dry and brittle, at the tops
whereof do grow pleasant flowers of a dark purple color, the middle part of
them tending to whiteness: from the style or pointel thereof, comes forth a
tuft of small purple hairy threads. The root is thick and very brittle, lifting
it self forth of the ground, insomuch that many of the said roots lie above
the ground naked without earth, even as the roots of Floure-de-luces do.

2 Of these wild ones I have another sort in my garden, which Clusius in his
Pannonicke observations has called Geranium Haematoides, or sanguine Cranes
bill: and Lobel, Geranium Gruinum, or Gruinale: it has many flexible branches
creeping upon the ground: the leaves are much like unto Doves foot in form,
but cut even to the middle rib: the flowers are like those of the small wild
mallow, and of the same bigness, of a perfect bright red color, which if they
be suffered to

1 Geranium maculatum sieve fuscum. Spotted Cranes bill.
2 Geranium sanguin arium. Bloody Cranes bill.
3 Geranium Cicutae folio inodorum. Unsavory field Cranes-bill.
5 Geranium Violaceum. Violet Storkes-bill.
grow and stand until the next day, will be a murry color; and if they stand
unto the third day, they will turn into a deep purple tending to blewnesse,
their changing is such, that you shall find at one time upon one branch
flowers like in form, but of diverse colors. The root is thick, and of a
wooddie substance.

3 This wild kind of musked Cranes bill, being altogether without savor or
smell, is called Myrrhida inodorum, or Geranium arvense inodorum, which has
many leaves spread flat upon the ground, every leaf made of diverse smaller
leases, and those cut or iagged about the edges, of no smell at all: amongst
which rise up slender branches, whereon do grow small flowers of a light
purple color: the root is long and fibrous.

4 This is also one of the wild kinds of Cranes-bills, agreeing with the last
described in each respect, except the flowers, for as the other has purple
flowers, so this plant brings forth white flowers, other difference there is
none at all.

5 The Cranes-bill with violet colored flowers, has a thick wooddie root,
with some, few strings annexed thereto: from which rise immediately forth of the
ground diverse stiff stalks, which divide themselves into other small branches,
whereupon are set confusedly broad leaves, made of three leaves apiece, and
those iagged or cut about the edges: the flowers grow at the top of the
branches of a perfect Violet color, whereof it took his name: after which
come such beakes or bills as the other of his kind.

The figure that was put unto this Description is the same with Geranium
Robertianum, and therefore I thought it not much amiss to put it here again.

6 I have likewise another sort that was sent me from Robinus of Paris, whose
figure was never set forth, neither described of any: it brings from a thick
tough root, with many branches of a brownish color: whereupon do grow leaves
not unlike to those of Gratia Dei, but not so deeply cut, somewhat cornered,
and of a shining green color: the flowers grow at the top of the tender
branches, composed of six small leaves, of a bright scarlet color.

The Place.
The third and fourth of these Cranes bills grow of themselves about old
VValls, and about the borders of fields, VVoods and copses; and most of the
rest we have growing in our gardens.

The Time.
Their time of flouring and seeding answers the rest of the Cranes bills.

The Names.
Their several titles shall serve for their names, referring what might have
been said more to a further consideration.

The Nature and Virtues.
There has not as yet any thing been found either of their temperature or
(...), but may

CHAP. 363. Of certain other Cranes-bills.
The Description.
1 THis which Clusius received from Doctor Thomas Penny of London, and sets
forth by the same title as you find it here expressed, has a root consisting
offundry long and small bulbes, and which is fibrous toward the top: the
stalk is a cubit high, ioynted, and red near unto the root, and about the
ioints: out of each of these joints come two leaves which are fastened unto
somewhat long foot-stalkes, and divided into five parts, which also are snipt
about theedges: out of each of which ioints by the setting on the 1 Geranium
bulbosum Pennaei. Pennies bulbous Cranes bill.
2 Geranium nodosum, Plateau, Knotty Cranes bill.
3 Geranium argenteum Alpinum. Silver leaued Mountain Cranes bill.
foot-stalkes come forth five little sharp pointed leaves: the flowers grow by
couples upon the tops of the stalks, and are of a reddish purple color. It
grows wild in Denmark; whence Dr. Turner brought it, and bestowed it upon Dr.
Penny before mentioned.

2 This has stalks some foot high, iointed, and of a purplish color: upon
which grow leaves divided into three parts; but those below are cut into five,
and both the one and the other are snipt about the edges: the flowers are
composed of five reddish purple leaves of a pretty largeness, with a reddish
pointall in the middle; and falling, the seed follows, as in other plants of
this kind: the root is knotty, and ioynted, with some fibers: it flowers in
May, and so continues a great part of the Summer after. Clusius calls this
Geranium 5. nodosum, Plateau. This sometimes is found to carry tuberous
excrescences upon the stalks, toward the later end of Summer; whence Plateau
distinguished it from the other, but afterward found it to be the same: and
Clusius also figures and describes this later variet ie by the name of
Geranium 6. tuberiferum Plateau.

3 The root of this is some two handfuls long, black without, and white
within, and toward the top divided into sundry parts; whence put forth leaves
covered over with a fine silver down; and they are divided into five parts,
each of which again is divided into three others, and they are fastened to long
slender and round footstalkes: the flowers grow upon foot-stalkes shorter than
those of the leaves; the flowers in color and shape are like those of the
Veruaine Mallow, but much less; and after it is vaded there follows a short
bill, as in the other plants of this kind. It flowers in (...), and grows
upon the Alps, where Pona found it, and first set it forth by the name of
Geranium Alpinum longius radicatum.

4 The stalks of this pretty Cranes bill are some foot or better high, whereon
grow leaves parted into five or six parts like those of the Geranium (...), but
of a lighter green color: the flowers are large, composed of five thin and
soon fading leaves of a whitish color, all over intermixed with fine veins of
a reddish color, which add a great deal of beauty to the flower: for these
veins are very small, and curiously dispersed over the leaves of the flower.
It flowers in June, and is preserved in diverse of our gardens; some call it
Geran. Romanum striatum: in the Hortus (...) it is set forth by the name of
Geranium Anglicum variegatum. Baubine calls it Geranium batrachiodes flore
variegato. We may call it Variegated or striped Cranes bill.

5 There is of late brought into this kingdom, and to our knowledge, by the
industry of Mr. John Tradescant, another more rare and no less beautiful than
any of the former; and he had it by the name of Geranium Indicum (...)
odoratum: this has not as yet been written of by any that I know; therefore I
will give you the description thereof, but cannot as yet give you the figure,
because I omitted the taking thereof the last year, and it is not as yet come
to his perfection. The leaves are larger, being almost a foot long, composed of
sundry little leaves of an unequal bigness, set upon a thick and stiff middle
rib; and these leaves are much divided and cut in, so that the whole leaf
somewhat resembles that of Tanacetum inodorum: and they are thick, green, and
somewhat hairy: the stalk is thick, and some cubit high; at the top of each
branch, upon foot-stalkes some inch long grow some (...) or twelve flowers, and
each of these flowers consists of (...) round pointed leaves of a yellowish
color, with a large (...) purple spot in the middle of each leaf, as if it
were painted, which gives the flower a great deal of beauty, and it also has
a good smell. I did see it in flower about the end of July, 1632. being the
first time that it floured with the owner thereof. We may fitly call it Sweet
Indian Storks bill, or painted Storks bill: and in Latin, Geranium Indicum
odoratum flore maculato.

CHAP. 364. Of Sanicle.
Sanicula, sieve Diapensia. Sanicle.


The Description.
SAnicle has leaves of a blackish green color, smooth and shining, somewhat
round, divided into five parts like those of the Vine, or rather those of the
maple: among which rise up slender stalks of a brown color, on the tops
whereof stand white mossie flowers: in their places come up round seed, rough,
cleaving to men's garments as they pass by, in manner of little burs: the root
is black, and full of threddie strings.

The Place.
It grows in shadowie woods and copses almost every where: it ioyeth in a
fat and fruitful moist soil.

The Time.
It floureth in May and June: the seed is ripe in August: the leaves of the
herb are green all the year, and are not hurt with the cold of Winter.

The Names.
It is commonly called Sanicula; of diverse, Diapensia: in high and low Dutch,
Sanikel: in French, Sanicle: in English, Sanickle, or Sanikel: it is so called,
a sanandis vulneribus, or of healing of wounds, as Ruellius says: there be
also other Sanicles, so named of most Herbarists, as that which is described by
the name of (...), or Coral-wort, and likewise Auricula vrsi, or Bears care,
which is a kind of Cowslip; and likewise another set forth by the name of
Saniculaguttata, whereof we have entreated among the kinds of Bears ears.

The Temperature.
Sanicle as it is in taste bitter, with a certain binding quality; so besides
that it cleanses, and by the binding faculty strengthens, it is hot and dry,
and that in the second degree, and after some Authors, hot in the third degree,
and astringent.

The Virtues.
The juice being inwardly taken is good to heal wounds.

The decoction of it also made in wine or water is given against spitting of
blood, and the bloody

CHAP. 365. Of Ladies Mantle, or great Sanicle.
Alchimilla. Lions foot, or Ladies mantle.


The Description.
LAdies mantle has many round leaves, with five or six corners finely indented
about the edges, which before they be opened are plaited and folded (...), not
unlike to the leaves of Mallows, but whiter, and more curled: among which rise
up tender stalks set with the like leaves but much lesser: on the tops whereof
grow small mossie flowers clustering thick together, of a yellowish green
color. The seed is small and yellow, enclosed in green husks. The root is
thick, and full of threddy strings.

The Place.
It grows of it self wild in diverse places, as in the town pastures of
Andouer, and in many other places in Barkshire and Hampshire, in their pastures
and copses, or low woods, and also upon the bank of a mote that incloseth a
house in Bushey called Bourn hall, fourteen miles from London, and in the
highway from thence to Watford, a small mile distant from it.

The Time.
It floureth in May and June: it flourishes in Winter as well as in Summer.

The Names.
It is called of the later Herbarists Alchimilla: and of most, Stellaria, Pes
Leonis, Pata Leonis, and Sanicula mayor: in High Dutch, Synnauw, and (...)
(...) mantel: in French, Pied de Lion: in English, Ladies mantle, great
Sanicle, Lions foot, Lions paw; and of some, Padelyon.

The Temperature.
Ladies (...) is like in temperature to little Sanicle, yet is it more drying
and more binding.

The Virtues.
It is applied to wounds after the same manner that the (...) Sanicle is, being
of like efficacy:

CHAP. 366. Of Neese-wort Sanicle.
(...) Alpina. Neesewort Sanicle.


The Description.
WHen I made mention of Helleborus albus, I did also set down my censure
concerning Elleborine, or Epipactis: but this Elleborine of the Alps I put in
this place, because it approaches nearer unto Sanicle and Ranunculus, as
participating of both: it grows in the mountains and highest parts of the
Alpish hills, and is a stranger as yet in our English gardens. The root is
compact of many small twisted strings like black Hellebor: from thence arise
small tender stalks, smooth, and easy to bend; in whose tops grow leaves with
five divisions, somewhat nickt about the edges like unto Sanicle: the sloures
consist of six leaves somewhat shining, in taste sharp, yet not unpleasant.
This is the plant which (...) found in the forest of Esens, not sarre from
Jupiters mount, and sets forth by the name of Alpina Elleborine Saniculae and
Ellebori nigri facie.

The Nature and Virtues.
I have not as yet sound any thing of his nature or virtues.

CHAP. 367. Of Crow-feet.
The Kinds.
THere be diverse sorts or kinds of these pernicious herbs comprehended under
the name of Ranunculus, or Crowfoot, whereof most are very dangerous to be
taken into the body, and therefore they require a very exquisite moderation,
with a most exact and due manner of tempering, not any of them are to be taken
alone by themselves, because they are of most violent force, and therefore have
the greater need of correction.

The knowledge of these plants is as necessary to the Physician as of other
herbs, to the end they may shun the same, as Scribonius Largus says, and not
take them ignorantly: or also, if necessity at any time require, that they may
use them, and that with some deliberation and special choice, and with their
proper correctiues. For these dangerous Simples are likewise many times of
themselves beneficial, and oftentimes profitable: for some of them are not so
dangerous, but that they may in some sort, and oftentimes in fit and due season
profit and do good, if temperature and moderation be used: of which there be
four kinds, as Dioscorides writes; one with broad leaves, another that is
downy, the third very small, and the fourth with a white flower: the later
herbarists have observed also many more: all these may be brought into two
principal kinds, so that one be a garden or (...) one, and the other wild;
and of these some are common, and others rare, or foreign. Moreover, there is
a difference both in the roots and in the leaves; for one has a bumped or
knobby root, another a long leaf as Speare-wort: and first of the wild or
field Crowseet, (...) the Reader unto the end of the stock and kindred of the
same, for the temperature and virtues.

1 Ranunculus pratensis, etiamque hortensis. Common Crow-foot.
2 Ranunculus surrectis cauliculis. Right Crow-foot.
3 Ranunculus aruorum. Crow foot of the fallowed field.
4 Ranunculus Alpinus albus. White mountain Crow-foot.


The Description.
1 THe common Crow-foot has leaves divided into many parts, commonly three,
sometimes five, cut here and there in the edges, of a deep green color, in
which stand diverse white spots: the stalks be round, something hairie, some of
them bow down toward the ground, and put forth many little roots, whereby it
takes hold of the ground as it traileth along: some of them stand upright, a
foot high or higher; on the tops whereof grow small flowers with five leaves
apiece, of a yellow glittering color like gold: in the middle part of these
flowers stand certain small threads of like color: which being past, the seeds
follow, made up in a rough ball: the roots are white and threddy.

2 The second kind of Crow-foot is like unto the precedent, saving that his
leaves are fatter, thicker, and greener, and his small twiggy stalks stand
upright, otherwise it is like: of which kind it chanced, that walking in the
field next to the Theater by London, in the company of a worshipful merchant
named Mr. Nicolas Let, I found one of this kind there with double flowers,
which before that time I had not seen.

The Place.
They grow of themselves in pastures and meadows almost every where.

The Time.
They flower in May and many months after.

The Names.
Crow-foot is called of Lobel, Ranunculus pratensis: of Dodonaeus, Ranunculus
hortensis, but improperly: of Pliny, Polyanthemum, which he says diverse name
Batrachion: in High Dutch, (...): in low Dutch, (...) (...): in English, King
Kob, Gold cups, Gold knobs, Crowfoot, and Butter-floures.

The Description.
3 The third kind of Crow-foot, called in Latin Ranunculus aruorum, because
it grows commonly in fallow fields where corn has been lately sown, and
may be called Corn Crow-foot, has for the most part an upright stalk of a
foot high, which diuides it self into other branches: whereon do grow fat
thick leaves very much cut or iagged, resembling the leaves of Sampire, but
nothing so green, but rather of an ouerworne color. The flowers grow at the
top of the branches, compact of five small leaves of a faint yellow color:
after which come in place clusters of rough and sharp pointed seeds. The root
is small and threddy.

4 The fourth Crow-foot, which is called Ranunculus Alpinus, because those that
have first written thereof have not found it elsewhere but upon the Alpish
mountains (notwithstanding it grows in England plentifully wild, especially
in a wood called Hampsted Wood, and is planted in gardens) has diverse great
fat branches two cub its high, set with large leaves like the common Crow-foot,
but greater, of a deep green color, much like to those of the yellow
Aconite, called Aconitum luteum Ponticum. The flowers consist of five white
leaves, with small yellow chiues in the middle, smelling like the flowers of
May or Haw-thorne, but more pleasant. The roots are greater than any of the
stock of Crow-feet.

The Place and Time.
Their place of growing is touched in their description: their time of flouring
and seeding answers the other of their kinds.

The Names.
The white Crow-foot of the Alps and French mountains is the fourth of
Dioscorides his description; for he describes his fourth to have a white
flower: more has not bin said touching the names, yet Tabern. calls it
Batrachium album: in English, white Crow-foot.

The Description.
5 Among the wild Crow-feet there is one that is syrnamed Illyricus, which
brings forth slender stalks, round, and of a mean length: whereupon do grow
long narrow leaves cut into many long gashes, something white, and covered with
a certain downinesse: the flowers be of a pale yellow color: the root
consists of many small bumpes as it were grains of corn, or little long
bulbes growing close together like those of Pilewort. It is reported, that it
was first brought out of Illyria into Italy, and from thence into the
Low Countries: notwithstanding we have it growing very common in England. But
only in gardens that I have seen.

6 The sixth kind of Crow-foot, called Ranunculus bulbosus, or Onion rooted
Crow-foot, and round rooted Crow-foot, has a round knobby or onion-fashioned
root, like unto a small Turnep, and of the bigness of a great Olive: from the
which rises up many leaves spread upon the ground, like those of the field
Crow-foot, but smaller, and of an ouerworne green color: amongst which rise
up slender stalks of the height of a foot: whereupon do grow flowers of a
feint yellow color. This grows wild in most places, and flowers at the
beginning of May.

The Place.
It is also reported to be found not only in Illyria and Sclauonia, but also in
the Island Sardinia, standing in the Midland, or Mediteranian sea.

The Names.
This Illyrian Crow foot is named in Greek (...), that is, Apium syluestre, or
wild Smallage: also Herba Sardoa: it may be, says my Author, that kind of
Crowfoot called (...) risus, and (...); and this is thought to be that
Golotophillis, of which Pliny makes mention in his 24. book, 17. chap. which
being drunk, says he, with wine and myrrh, causes a man to see diverse (...)
sights, and not to cease laughing till he has drunk Pine apple kernells with
Pepper in (...) of the Date tree, (I think he would have said until he be
dead) because the nature of laughing Crowfoot is thought to kill laughing, but
without doubt the thing is clean contrary; for it (...) such convulsions,
cramps and wringings of the mouth and jaws, that it has seemed to some that
the parties have dyed laughing, whereas in truth they have died in great
torment.

5 (...) Illyricus. Crowfoot of Illyria.
6 (...) (...). Roundrooted Crowfoot.


The Description.
7 The seventh kind of Crowfoot, called Auricomus of the golden locks
wherewith the (...) is thrummed, has for his root a great bush of (...) hairy
strings; from which shoot sorth small jagged leaves, not much unlike to
Sanicle, but divided only into three parts, yet sometimes into five; among
which rise up branched stalks of a foot high, whereon are placed the like
leaves but smaller, set about the top of the stalks, whereon do grow yellow
flowers, sweet smelling, of which it has been called Ranunculus (...), Tragi,
or Tragus his sweet Crowsoot. It grows in meadows and about the sides of
woods, and flowers in April.

8 Frogge Crowfoot, called of Pena, Aconitum Batrachioides: of Dodonaeus,
Batrachion Apulei, is that formerly described in the fourth place, whereto this
is much alike, but that the stalks and leaves are larger, as also the flowers,
which are white: the root is tough and threddy.

9 The ninth Crowfoote has many grassie leaves, of a deep green tending to
blewnesse, somewhat long, narrow and smooth, very like unto those of the small
Bistort, or Snakeweed:

7 Ranunculus auricomus. Golden-haired Crow-foot.
8 Ranunculus Aconiti folio. Frog Crow-foot.
9 Ranunculus (...) (...). Grassie Crow-(...).
10 Ranunculus Autumnalis (...). Winter Crow-foot.
among which rise up slender stalks, bearing at the top small yellow flowers
like the other Crowfeet: the root is small and threddy. There is a variety of
this having double flowers; and I have given you the figure thereof in stead of
the single that was formerly in this place.

10 The Autumn or Winter Crow-foot has diverse broad leaves spread (...) the
ground, snipt about the edges, of a bright shining green color on the upper
side, and hoary underneath, full of ribs or sinews as are those of Plantaine,
of an unpleasant taste at the first, afterward nipping the tongue: among which
leaves rise up sundry tender foot-stalkes, on the tops whereof stand yellow
flowers consisting of six small leaves apiece: after which succeed little knaps
of seed like to a dry or withered straw-berry. The root is compact of a number
of limber roots, rudely thrust together in manner of the Asphodill.

11 The Portugal Crow-foot has many thick clogged roots fastened unto one
head, very like those of the yellow Asphodill: from which rise up three leaves,
seldom more, broad, thick, and pusfed up in diverse places, as if it were a
thing that were blistered, by means whereof it is very uneven. From the middle
of which leaves rises up a naked stalk, thick, fat, very tender, but yet
fragile, or easy to break: on the end whereof stands a fair single yellow
flower, having in the middle a naked rundle of a gold yellow tending to a (...)
color.

11 Ranunculus Lusitanicus Clusij. Portugal Crow-foot.
12 Ranunculus globosus. Locker Gowlons, or Globe Crow foot.


12 The Globe Crow-foot has very many leaves deeply cut and iagged, of a
bright green color like those of the field Crow-foot: among which rises up a
stalk, divided toward the top into other branches, furnished with the like
leaves of those next the ground, but smaller: on the tops of which branches
grow very fair yellow flowers, consisting of a few leaves folded or rolled up
together like a round ball or globe: whereupon it was called Ranunculus
globosus, or the Globe Crow-foot, or Globe flower: which being past, there
succeed round knaps, wherein is blackish seed. The root is small and threddy.

13 This has large leaves like those of the last described, but rough and
hairy: the stalk is some foot high: the flowers are pretty large, composed of
(...) white sharpish pointed leaves. It flowers in July, and grows in the
Alps: it is the Ranunculi montani 2. species altera of Clusius.

14 This other has leaves not unlike those of the precedent, and such stalks
also; but the flowers consist of 5 round leaves, purplish beneath; the edges of
the upper side are of a whitish purple, and the residue wholly white, with many
yellow threads in the middle: it grows in the mountain 13 Ranunculus hirsutus
Alpinus flo. albo. Rough white floured mountain Crow-foot.
14 Ranunculus montanus hirsutus purpureus. Rough purple floured mountain
Crowfoot.
Iura, against the city of Geneua, whereas it flowers in June, and ripens the
seed in August. Clusius had the figure and description hereof from Dr. Penny,
and he calls it Ranunculus montanus 3.

The Place.
The twelfth kind of Crowfoot grows in most places of Yorkshire and
Lancashire, and other bordering shires of the North country, almost in every
meadow, but not found wild in these Southerly or Westerly parts of England that
I could ever understand of.

The Time.
It floureth in May and June: the seed is ripe in August.

The Names.
The Globe flower is called generally Ranunculus globosus: of some, Flos
Trollius, and (...) Alpinus: in English, Globe Crow-foot, Troll flowers, and
Lockron gowlons.

CHAP. 368. Of Double yellow and white Batchelors Buttons.
The Description.
1 THe great double Crow-foot or Batchelors button has many iagged leaves of a
deep green color: among which rise up stalks, whereon do grow fair yellow
flowers exceeding double, of a shining yellow color, oftentimes thrusting
forth of the midst of the said flowers one other smaller flower: the root is
round, or fashioned like a Turnep; the form whereof has caused it to be called
of some S. Anthonies Turnep, or Rape Crow-foot. The (...) is wrapped in a
cluster of rough knobs, as are most of the Crow-feet.

2 The double yellow Crow-foot has leaves of a bright green color, with many
weak branches trailing upon the ground; whereon do grow very double yellow
flowers like unto the precedent, but altogether lesser. The whole plant is
likewise without any manifest difference, saving that these flowers do never
bring forth any smaller flower out of the middle of the greater, as the other
does, and also has no Turnep or knobby root at all, wherein consists the
greatest difference.

The figure that formerly was in the first (...) of this chapter was the double
one mentioned in the second description of the foregoing chapter, (...) you may
find a double flower expressed by the side of the figure.
Ranunculus maximus Anglicus. Double Crow-foot, or Batchelors buttons.
2 Ranunculus dulcis multiplex. Double wild Crow-foot.
3 Ranunculus albus multiflorus. Double white Crow-foot.


3 The (...) double Crow-foot has many great leaves deeply cut with great
gashes, and those snipt about the edges. The stalks divide themselves into
diverse brittle branches, on the tops whereof do grow very double flowers as
white as snow, and of the bigness of our yellow Batchelors button. The root is
tough, limber, and disperseth it self far abroad, whereby it greatly
increases.

The Place.
The first and third are planted in gardens for the beauty of the flowers, and
likewise the second, which has of late been brought out of Lancashire unto
our London gardens, by a curious gentleman in the searching forth of Simples,
Mr. Thomas Hesketh, who found it growing wild in the town fields of a small
village called Hesketh, not far from (...) in Lancashire.

The Time.
They flower from the beginning of May to the end of June.

The Names.
(...) has made no mention hereof; but (...) has separated the first of these
from the others, entreating of it apart, and naming it by a peculiar name
Batrachion; whereupon it is also called (...) Batrachion, or Apuleius Crow-foot.

It is commonly called (...) D. (...), or Saint Anthonies Rape: it may be
called in English, Rape Crow-foot: it is called generally about London,
Batchelors buttons, and double Crow-foot: in Dutch, S. Anthony Rapkin. These
names and faculties properly belong to the (...) bulbosus, described in the
sixth place of the last chapter; and also to the first double one (...)
described; for they vary little but in color, and the singleness and
doubleness of their flowers.

The third is called of Lobel, Ranunculus niueus polyanthos: of Tabern.
Ranunculus albus (...): in English, Double white Crow-foot, or Batchelors
buttons.

The Temperature.
These plants do bite as the other Crow-feet do.

The Virtues.
The chiefest virtue is in the root, which being stamped with salt is good for
those that have a

Apuleius says further, That if it be hanged in a linen cloth about the
neck of him that is lunaticke, I (...) or Scorpio, that then he shall
forthwith be cured. Moreover, the herb Batrachion stamped with vinegar, root
and all, is used for them that have black skars or such like marks on their
skins, it eats them out, and leaves a color like that of the body.

CHAP. 369. Of Turkey or Asian Crow-feet.
1 Ranunculus sanguineus multiplex. The double red Crow-foot.
2 Ranunculus Asiaticus flo. pleno miniato. The double Asian skarlet Crow-foot.


3 (...) Asiaticus flore pleno prolifero. The double buttoned scarlet Asian
Crow-foot.
4 Ranunculus Tripolitanus. Crow-foot of Tripolie.
5 Ranunculus (...) radice ramosus. Branched red Asian Crow-foot.
6 Ranunculus Asiaticus (...) radice flo. albo. White floured Asian Crow-foot.


7 Ranunculus Asiaticus grumosa radice flore flavo (...). Asian Crow-foot with
yellow striped flowers.


The Description.
1 THe double red Crow-foot has a few leaves rising immediately forth of the
ground, cut in the edges with deep gashes, somewhat hollow, and of a bright
shining green color. The stalk rises up to the height of a foot, smooth and
very brittle, dividing it self into other branches, sometimes two, seldom
three: whereon do grow leaves confusedly, set without order: the flowers grow
at the tops of the stalks, very double, and of great beauty, of a perfect
scarlet color. tending to redness. The root is compact of many long tough
roots, like those of the yellow Asphodill.

2 Of this kind there is also another, or other the same better expressed; for
Clusius the author of these never see the former, but makes it only to differ,
in that the flowers are of a sanguine color, and those of this of a kind of
scarlet, or red lead color.

3 This differs nothing from the former, but that it sends up another flower
somewhat lesser, out of the middle of the first flower, which happens by the
strength of the root, and goodness of the soil where it is planted.

4 The Crow-foot of Tripolis or the single red Ranunculus has leaves at the
first coming up like unto those of Groundswell: among which rises up a stalk
of the height of half a cubit, somewhat hairy, whereon grow broad leaves deeply
cut, even to the middle rib, like those of the common Crow-foot, but greener:
the flower grows at the top of the stalk, consisting of five leaves, on the
outside of a dark ouerworne red color, on the inside of a red lead color,
(...) and shining, in shape like the wild corn Poppie: the knop or style in
the middle which contains the seed is garnished or bedeckt with very many
small purple thrummes tending to blackness: the root is as it were a roundell
of little bulbes or grains like those of the small Celandine or Pilewoort.

5 There be diverse other Asian Crow-feet which Clusius has set forth, and
which (...) (...) the most part in the gardens of our prime Florists, and they
differ little in their roots, stalks, or leaves, but chiefly in the flowers;
wherefore I will only briefly note their differences, not thinking it
pertinent to stand upon whole descriptions, unless they were more necessary:
this fist differs from the fourth in that the stalks are divided into sundry
branches, which bear like, but less flowers than those which stand upon the
main stalk: the color of these differs not from that of the last described.

6 This is like the last described, but the flowers are of a pure white color,
and sometimes have a few streaks of red about their edges.

7 This in stalks and manner of growing is like the precedent: the stalk
seldom parting it self into branches; but on the top thereof it carries a
fair flower consisting commonly of round topped leaves of a greenish yellow
color, with diverse red veins here and there dispersed and running along the
leaves, with some purple thrums, and a head standing up in the middle as in the
former.

The Place.
The first grows naturally in and about Constantinople, and in Asia on the
further side of Bosphorus, from whence there has been brought plants at diverse
times, and by diverse persons, but they have perished by reason of their long
journey, and want of skill of those bringers, that have suffered them to lie in
a box or such like so long, that when we have received them they have been as
dry as ginger; not with standing Clusius says he received a plant fresh and
green, the which a domestical thief stole forth of his garden. My Lord and
Master the right Honorable the Lord Treasurer had diverse plants sent him from
thence which were dry before they came, as aforesaid. The other grows in
Aleppo and Tripolis in Syria naturally, from whence we have received plants for
our gardens, where they flourish as in their own country.

The Time.
They (...) forth their pleasant flowers in May and June, the seed is ripe in
August.

The Names.
The first is called Ranunculus Constantinopolitanus: Of Lobel, Ranunculus
sanguincus multiplex, Ranunculus Bizantinus, sive Asiaticus: in the Turkish
tongue, Torobolos, Catamer (...): in English, the double red Ranunculus, or
Crow-foot.

The fourth is called Ranunculus Tripolitanus, of the place from whence it was
first brought into these parts: of the Turks, Tarobolos Catamer, without that
addition (...): which is a proper word to all flowers that are double.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Their temperature and virtues are referred to the other Crow-feet, whereof
they are thought to be kinds.

CHAP. 370. Of Speare-woort, or Bane-woort.
The Description.
1 SPeare-woort has an hollow stalk full of knees or joints, whereon do grow
long leaves, a little hairy, not unlike those of the willow, of a shining green
color: the flowers are very large, and grow at the tops of the stalks,
consisting of five leaves of a fair yellow color, very like to the field
gold cup, or wild Crow-foot: after which come round knops or seed vessels,
wherein is the seed: the root is contract of diverse bulbes or long clogs, mixed
with an infinite number of hairy threads.

1 Ranunculus flammeus mayor. Great Speare-woort.
2 Ranunculus flammeus minor. The lesser Speare-woort.


2 The common Spearewoort being that which we have called the lesser, has
leaves, flowers, and stalks like the precedent, but altogether lesser: the
root consists of an infinite number of threddie strings.

3 Ranunculus flammeus serratus. Iagged Speare-woort.
4 Ranunculus palustris rotundifolius. Marish Crow-foot, or Speare-worts.


3 Iagged Speare-woort has a thick fat hollow stalk, dividing it self into
diverse branches, whereon are set sometimes by couples two long leaves, sharp
pointed, and cut about the edges like the teeth of a saw. The flowers grow at
the top of the branches, of a yellow color, in form like those of the field
Crowfoot: the root consists of a number of hairy strings.

4 Marsh Crow-foot, or Speare-woort (whereof it is a kind, taken of the best
approved authors to be the true Apium risus, though diverse think that
Pulsatilla is the same: of some it is called Apium (...)) rises forth of the
mud or waterish mire from a threddie root, to the height of a cubit, sometimes
higher. The stalk divides it self into diverse branches, whereupon do grow
leaves deeply cut round about like those of Doues-foot, and not unlike to the
cut Mallow, but somewhat greater, and of a most bright shining green color:
the flowers grow at the top of the branches, of a yellow color, like unto the
other water Crow-feet.

The Place.
They grow in moist and dankish places, in brinkes or water courses, and such
like places almost every where.

The Time.
They flower in May when other Crow-feet do.

The Names.
Speare-woort is called of the later Herbarists Flammula, and Ranunculus
Flammeus; of Cordus, Ranunculus (...), or broad leaued Crow-foot: of others,
Ranunculus longifolius, or long leafed Crow foot: in Low Dutch, (...): in
English, Speare-Crowfoot, Speare-woort, and Banewoort, because it is dangerous
and deadly for sheep; and that if they feed of the same it inflameth their
livers, fretteth and blistereth their guts and intrails.

The Temperature of all the Crowfeet.
Speare-woort is like to the other Crow-feet in faculty, it is hot in the
mouth or biting, it exulcerateth and raises blisters, and being taken inwardly
it kills remediless. Generally all the Crow-feet, as Galen says, are of a
very sharp or biting quality, insomuch as they raise blisters with pain: and
they are hot and dry in the fourth degree.

The Virtues of all the Crowfeet.
The leaves or roots of Crowfeet stamped and applied unto any part of the body,
causes the

The leaves stamped and applied unto any pestilentiall or plague sore, or
carbuncle, staieth the

It prevails much to draw a plague sore from the inward parts, being of
danger, unto other remote

Many do use to tie a little of the herb stamped with salt unto any of the
fingers, against the pain

Cunning beggars do use to stamp the leaves, and lay it unto their legs and
arms, which causes

The kind of Crowfoot of Illyria, being taken to be Apium risus of some, yet
others think Aconitum Batrachioides to be it. This plant spoileth the senses
and understanding, and draws together the sinews and muscles of the face in
such strange manner, that those who beholding such as died by the taking
hereof, have supposed that they died laughing; so forceably has it drawn and
contracted the nerves and sinews, that their faces have been drawn awry, as
though they laughed, whereas contrariwise they have died with great torment.

CHAP. 371. Of diverse other Crowfeet.
1 Ranunculus Creticus latifolius. Broad leaued Candy Crowfoot.
2 Ranunculus folio Plantaginis. Plantaine leaued Crowfoot.


The Description.
1 THe roots of this are somewhat like those of the Asian Ranunculus: the leaves
are very large and roundish, of a light green color, cut about the edges, and
here and there deeply divided: the stalk is thick, round, and stiff, divided
into two or three branches; at the setting on of which grow longish leaves a
little nickt about the end: the flowers are of an indifferent bigness, and
consist of five longish round pointed leaves, standing a little each from
other, so (...) the green points of the cups show themselves between them:
there are yellow threads in the middle of these flowers, which commonly show
themselves in February, or March. It is found only in some gardens, and (...)
only has set it forth by the name we here give you.

2 This also that came from the Pyrenaean hills is made a Denizen in our
gardens: it has a stalk some foot high, set with neruous leaves, like those
of Plantaine, but thinner, and of the color of Woad, and they are something
broad at their setting on, and end in a sharp point: at the top of the stalk
grow the flowers; each consisting of five round slender pure white leaves, of a
reasonable bigness, with yellowish threads and a little head in the middle: the
root is white and fibrous. It flowers about the beginning of May. Clusius also
set forth this by the title of (...) (...) albo flore.

3 The same Author has also given us the knowledge of diverse other plants of
this kind, and this he calls (...) montanus 1. It has many round leaves,
here and there deeply cut in, and snipt about the edges, of a dark green
color, and shining, pretty thick, and of a very hot (...): amongst which
rises up a slender, single, and short stalk, bearing a white flower made of
five little leaves with a yellowish thrum in the middle: which falling, the
seeds grow clustering together as in other plants of this kind: the root is
white and fibrous.

3 Ranunculus montanus flo. minore. Mountain Crowfoot with the lesser flower.
4 Ranunculus (...) flore maiore. Mountain Crowfoot with the bigger flower.


4 This also is nothing else but a variety of the last described, and differs
from it in that the flowers are larger, and it is sometimes sound with them
double. Both these grow on the tops of the Alps, and there they flower as
soon as the snow is melted away, which is usually in June: but brought into
gardens they flower very early, to wit, in April.

5 The leaves of this are cut or divided into many parts, like those of Rue,
but softer, and greener (whence Clusius names it Ranunculus-(...) folio) or not
much unlike those of Coriander (whereupon 5 Ranunculus praecox (...) folio. Rue
leaued Crowfoot.
6 Ranunculus Praecox (...) (...). Columbine Crowfoot.
7 Ranunculus parvus echinatus. Small rough headed Crowfoot.
Pona calls it Ranunculus Coriandri folio:) amongst or rather before these
comes up a stalk some hand full high, bearing at the top thereof one flower of
a reasonable bigness: on the outside before it be thoroughly open of a pleasing
red color, but white within, composed of twelve or more leaves.

6 This has a stalk some foot high, small and reddish, whereon grow sundry
leaves like those of the greater Thalictrum, or those of Columbines, but much
less, and of a bitter taste: out of the bosoms of these leaves come the
flowers at each space one, white, and consisting of five leaves apiece: which
falling, there succeed two or three little horns containing a round reddish
seed: the root is fibrous, white, very bitter, and creepes here and there,
putting up new shoots. It grows in diverse woods of Austria, and flowers in
April, and the seed is ripe in May, or June. Clusius calls it Ranunculus
praecox 2. Thalietri folio. It is the Aquilegiaminor Daleschampij in the Hist.
Lugd.

7 This which (as Clusius says) some call the Ranunculus of Apuleius, has
also a fibrous root, with small leaves divided into three parts, and cut about
the edges, and they grow upon short footstalkes; the stalks are some two
handfulls-high, commonly leaning on the ground, and on them grow such leaves as
the former: and out of their bosoms come little footstalk carrying flowers
of a pale yellow color, made of five leaves apiece, which follow there succed
five or six sharp pointed rough cods, containing seed almost like that of the
former.

CHAP. 372. Of Woolfes-bane.
The kinds.
There be diverse sorts of Wolfes-bane: whereof some bring forth flowers of a
yellow color; others of a blew, or tending to purple: among the yellow ones
there are some greater, others lesser; some with broader leaves, and others
with narrower.

1 Thora Valdensis. Broad leafed VVolfes-bane.
2 Thoramontis Baldi, sive Sabaudica. Mountain VVolfes-bane.


The Description.
1 THe first kind of Aconite, of some called Thora, others add thereto the
place where it grows in great abundance, which is the Alps, and call it Thora
Valdensium. This plant took his name of the Greek word (...), signifying
corruption, poison, or death, which are the certain effects of this pernicious
plant: for this they use very much in poisons, and when they mean to infect
their arrow heads, the more speedily and deadly to dispatch the wild beasts,
which greatly annoy those mountains of the Alps: to which purpose also it is
brought into the Mart-townes near unto those places to be sold unto the
hunters, the juice thereof being prepared by pressing forth, and so kept in
horns and hoofes of beasts, for the most speedy poison of all the Aconites,
for an arrow touched therewith, leaves the wound incurable (if it but only
fetch blood where it enters in) except that round about the wound the flesh
be speedily cut away in great argues also that Matthiolus has improperly
called it Pseudoaconitum, that is, false or bastard Aconite; for without
question there is no worse or more speedy venom in the world, nor no Aconite
or toxicall plant comparable hereunto. And yet let us consider the fatherly
care and providence of God, who has provided a conqueror and triumpher over
this plant so venomous, namely his Antigonist, (...), or to speak in shorter
and fewer syllables, Anthora, which is the very antidote or remedy against
this kind of Aconite. The stalk of this plant is small and rushie, very
smooth, two or three handfulls high: whereupon do grow two, three, or four
leaves, seldom more, which be something hard, round, smooth, of a light green
color tending to blewnesse, like the color of the leaves of (...), nicked in
the edges. The flowers grow at the top of the stalks, of a yellow color,
lesser than those of the field Crowfoot, otherwise alike: in the place thereof
grows a knop or round head, wherein is the seed: the root consists of nine
or ten slender clogs, with some small fibers also, and they are (...) together
with little strings unto one head, like those of the white Asphodill.

2 Wolfes-bane of the mount Baldus has one stalk, smooth and plain, in the
middle whereof come sorth two leaves and no more, wherein it differs from the
other of the Valdens, having likewise three or four sharp pointed leaves,
narrow and somewhat iagged at the place where the stalk divides it self into
smaller branches; whereon do grow small yellow flowers like the precedent, but
much lesser.

The Place.
These venomous plants do grow on the Alps, and the mountains of (...) and
Switzer land: the first grow plentifully in the country of the Valdens, who
inhabit part of those moun taines toward Italy. The other is found on
Baldus, a mountain of Italy. They are strangers in England.

The Time.
They flower in March and April, their seed is ripe in June.

The Names.
This kind of Aconite or Wolfes-bane is called Thora, Taura, and (...), it is
surnamed Valdensis, that it may differ from Napellus, or Monks hood, which is
likewise named Thora.

Auicen makes mention of a certain deadly herb in his fourth book, sixth
Fen. called Farsiun; it is hard to affirm this same to be Thora Valdensis.

Gesaer judges this to be the Aconitum pardalianches of Dioscorides, and herein
is followed by (...).

The Temperature and Virtues.
The sorce of these Wolfes-banes; is most pernicious and poison some, and (as
it is reported) (...), or any of the other Wolfes-banes, as we have said.

They say that it is of such force, that if a man especially, and then next any
four footed beast (...) were formerly (...) figures in this chapter, with as
many (...), though the plants figured and described were but two, to which
number they are now reduced. The two (...), which were by the (...) of (...)
(...) (...) and (...), (...), (...), (...) male had (...) two (...) round
(...), and the (...) (...). The other two being also of one plant are more
deeply cut in upon the top of the (...), which are (...) and (...) (...) (...)
of the (...).


CHAP. 373. Of Winter Wolfes-bane.
The Description.
THis kind of Aconite is called Aconitum hyemale Belgarum; of Dodonoeus,
Aconitum luteum minus: in English, VVolfes-bane, or small yellow wolfes-bane,
whose leaves come forth of the ground in the dead time of winter, many times
bearing the snow upon their heads of his leaves and flowers; yea the colder the
weather is, and the deeper that the snow is, the fairer and larger is the
flower; and the warmer that the weather is, the lesser is the flower, and worse
colored: these leaves I say come forth of the ground immediately from the root,
with a naked, soft, and slender stem, deeply cut or (...) ged on the leaves, of
an exceeding fair green color, in the midst of which comes forth a yellow
(...), in show or fashion like unto the (...) field Crow-foot: after which
follow sundry cods full of brown seeds like the other kinds of Aconites: the
root is thick, tuberous, and knottie, like to the kinds of (...).

Aconitum hyemale. Winter Woolfes-bane.


The Place.
It grows upon the mountains of Germany: we have great quantity of it in
our (...) gardens.

The Time.
It floureth in January; the seed is ripe in the end of March.

The Names.
It is called Aconitum hyemale, or (...), or winter Aconite: that it is a kind
of Aconite or Woolfs-bane, both the form of the leaves and cods, and also the
dangerous faculties of the herb it self do declare.

It is much like to Aconitum Theophrasti: which he describes in his ninth
book, saying, it is a short herb having no (...), or superfluous thing
growing on it, and is without branches as this plant is: the root, says he, is
like to (...) or to a nur, or else to (...), a dry fig, only the lease seems
to (...) it, which is nothing at all like to that of Succorie, which he
compares it unto.

The Temperature and Virtues.
This herb is counted to be very dangerous and deadly, hot and dry in the
sourth degree, as Thcoph. in plain words does testify concerning his own
Aconite; for which he says that there was (...) found his Antidote or remedy:
whereof Athenaeus and Theopompus write, that this plant is the most poisonous
herb of all others, which moved Ovid to say Quae quia nascuntur dura vivacia
caute: notwithstanding it is not without his peculiar virtues. (...) Camerarius
now living in Noremberg says, the water dropped into the eyes cease the pain
and burning: it is reported to prevail mightily against the bitings of
scorpions, and is of such force, that if the scorpion pass by where it grows
and touch the same, presently (...) becomes dull, heavy, and senseless, and
if the same scorpion by chance touch the white Hellebor, he is presently
delivered from his drowsinesse.

CHAP. 374. Of Mithridate Woolfes-bane.
The Description.
This plant called Anthora, being the antidote against the poison of Thora,
Aconite or wolses bane, has slender hollow stalks, very brittle, a cubit
high, garnished with (...) cut or iagged leaves, very like to Nigella Romana,
or the common Larkes spur, called (...) Regalis: at the top of the stalks
do grow fair flowers, fashioned like a little helmet, of an ouerworne yellow
color; after which come small blackish cods, wherein is contained black
shining seed like those of Onions: the root consists of diverse knobs or
tuberous lumpes, of the bigness of a man's thumb.

The Place.
This plant which in Greek we may term (...): grows abundantly in the Alps,
called Rhetici, in Sauoy, and in Liguria. The Ligurians of Turin, and those
that dwell near the lake Lemane, have found this herb to be a present remedy
against the deadly poison of the herb Thora and the rest of the Aconites,
provided that when it is brought into the garden there to be kept for (...)
use, it must not be planted near to any of the Aconites: for through his
attractiue quality, it will Anthorasive Aconitum salutiferum. Wholesome Wolfes
bane.
draw unto it self the malign and (...) poison of the Aconite, whereby it will
become of the like quality, that is, to become poisonous likewise: but being
kept far off, it retains his own natural quality still.

The Time.
It floureth in August, the seed is ripe in the end of September.

The Names.
The inhabitants of the lake of Geneua, and the Piemontoise do call it Anthora,
and the common people Anthoro. Auicen calls a certain herb which is like to
Monks hood, as a remedy against the poison thereof, by the name of Napellus
Moysis, in the 500 chap. of his second book, and in the 745. chap. he says,
that Zedoaria does grow with Napellus or Monks hood, and that by reason of the
neerenesse of the same, the force and strength thereof is dulled and made
weaker, and that it is a treacle, that is, a counterpoison against the Viper,
Monks hood, and all other poisons: and hereupon it follows, that it is not
only Napellus Moysis, but also Zedoaria Auicennae: notwithstanding the
Apothecaries do sell another Zedoaria differing from Anthora, which is a root
of a longer form, which not without cause is thought to be Auicens and
Scrapio's Zerumbeth, or Zurumbeth.

It is called Anthora, as though they should say (...), because it is an enemy
to Thora, and a counterpoison to the same. (...) and Anthora, or Tura and
Antura, seem to be new words, but yet they are used in Marcellus Empericus, an
old writer, who teaches a medicine to be made of Tura and Antura against the
pin and web in the eyes: in English, yellow Monks-hood, yellow Helmet flower,
and Aconites Mithridate.

The Virtues.
The root of Anthora is wonderful bitter, it is an enemy to all poisons: it
is good for purgations;

Hugo Solerius says, that the roots of Anthora do largely purge, not only by
the stool, but also (...) (which is commonly called a bean) in broth or wine,
and is given to strong bodies.

Antonius Guanerius does show in his treaty of the plague, the second
difference, the (...) chapter, Anthora is of great force, yea and that against
the plague: and the root is of like virtues, given with Dittanie, which I have
seen, says he, by experience: and he further says, it is an herb that
grows hard by that herb Thora, of which there is made a poison, wherewith
they of Sauoy and those parts adjacent do enuenome their arrows, the more
speedily to kill the wild Goats, and other wild beasts of the Alpish
mountains. And this root Anthora is the Bezoar or counterpoison to that Thora,
which is of so great a venom, as that it kills all living creatures with his
poisonsome quality: and thus much Guanerius.

Simon Ianuensis has also made mention of Anthora, and Arnoldus Villanovanus
in his treaty of Anthora.

CHAP. 375. Of yellow Wolfes-bane.
The Description.
THe yellow kind of Wolfes-bane called Aconitum (...) Ponticum, or according
to Dodonaeus Aconitum Lycoctonon luteum maius: in English, yellow Wolfes-bane,
whereof this our age has found out sundry sorts not known to Diosco ides,
although some of the sorts seem to stand Aconitum (...) Ponticum. Yellow
Woolfes bane.
indifferent between the kinds of (...), Helleborus, and Napellus:) this
yellow kind (...) say has large shining green leaves fashioned like a vine,
and of the same bigness, deeply indented or cut, not much unlike the leaves
of Geranium Fuscum, or black Cranes-bill: the stalks are bare or naked, not
bearing his leaves upon the same stalks, one opposite against another, as in
the other of his kind: his stalks grow up to the height of three cubits,
bearing very fine yellow flowers, fantastically fashioned, and in such manner
shaped, that I can very hardly describe them unto you. They are somewhat like
unto the helmet Monks hood, open and hollow at one end, firm and shut up at
the other: his roots are many, compact of a number of threddy or black
strings, of an ouerworne yellow color, spreading far abroad every way, folding
themselves one within another very confusedly. This plant grows naturally in
the dark hilly forests, and shadowie woods, which are not traveled nor
haunted, but by wild and savage beasts, and is thought to be the strongest and
next unto Thora in his poisoning quality, of all the rest of the Aconites, or
Woolfes banes; insomuch that if a few of the flowers be chewed in the mouth,
and spit forth again presently, yet forthwith it burns the jaws and tongue,
causing them to swell, and making a certain swimming or giddiness in the
head. This calls to my remembrance an history of a certain Gentleman
dwelling in Lincolneshire, called Mahewe, the true report whereof my very good
friend Mr. Nicholas Belson, sometimes fellow of Kings College in Cambridge,
has delivered unto me: Mr. Mahewe dwelling in Boston, a student in Physic,
having occasion to ride through the Fennes of Lincolneshire, found a root that
the hogs had turned up, which seemed unto him very strange and unknown, for
that it was in the spring before the leaves were out,: this he tasted, and it
so inflamed his mouth, tongue, and lips, that it caused them to swell very
extremely, so that before he could get to the town of Boston he could not
speak, and no doubt had lost his life if that the Lord God had not blessed
those good remedies which presently he procured and used. I have here thought
good to express this history, for two especial causes; the first is, that
some industrious and diligent obseruer of nature may be provoked to seek forth
that venomous plant, or some of his kinds: for I am certainly persuaded that
it is either the Thora Valdensium, or Aconitum luteum, whereof this gentleman
tasted, which two plants have not at any time been thought to grow naturally in
England: the other cause is, for that I would warn others to beware by that
gentleman's harm. I am of opinion that this root which Mr. Mahewe tasted was of
the (...) flammeus mayor, described in the first place of the 370. chapter
aforegoing; for that grows plentifully in such places, and is of a very hot
taste and hurtful quality.

The Place.
The yellow Woolfes (...) grows in my garden, but not wild in England, or in
any other of these Northerly regions.

The Time.
It floureth in the end of June, somewhat after the other Aconites.

The Names.
This yellow Woolfes-bane is called of Lobel, Aconitum luteum Ponticum, or
Ponticke Woolfesbane. There is mention made in Dioscorides his copies of three
Woolfes-banes, of which the hunters use one, and Physicians the other two.
Marcellus Virgilius holds opinion that the use of this plant is utterly to be
refused in medicine.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The faculty of this Aconite, as also of the other Woolfes-banes, is deadly to
man, and likewise

It is used among the hunters which seek after wolves, the juice whereof they
put into raw flesh,

CHAP. 376. Of other Wolfes-banes and Monkes-hoods.
The Description.
1 THis kind of Wolfes-bane (called Aconitum Lycoctonum: and of Dodonaeus,
Aconitum (...) flore Delphinij, by reason of the shape and likeness that the
flower has with Delphinium, or Larkes-spur: and in English it is called black
Wolfes-bane) has many large leaves of a very deep green or ouerworne color,
very deeply cut or iagged: among which rises up a stalk two cubits high;
whereupon do grow flowers fashioned like a hood, of a very ill favored bluish
color, and the thrums or threads within the hood are black: the seed is also
black and three cornered, growing in small husks: the root is thick and
knobby.

1 Aconitum lycoctonon flore Delphinij. Larks-heele Wolfes-bane.
2 Aconitum lycoctonon caeruleum parvum. Small blew Wolfes-bane.


2 This kind of Wolfes-bane, called (...) coeruleum parvum, facie Napelli: in
Englishsmall Wolfes-bane, or round Wolfes-bane, has many slender brittle
stalks two cubits high, beset with leaves very much iagged, and like unto
Napellus, called in English, Helmet-floure. The flowers do grow at the top of
the stalks, of a bluish color, fashioned also like a hood, but wider open
than any of the rest: the cods and seed are like unto the other: the root is
round and small, fashioned like a Pear or small (...) or Turnep: which moved
the Germans to call the same (...) bloemen, which is in Latin, Flos rapaceus:
in English, Rape-floure.

3 This kind of Wolfes-bane, called Napellus verus, in English, Helmet-floure,
or the great Monkes-hood, bears very fair and goodly blew flowers in shape
like an helmet; which are so beautiful, that a man would think they were of
some excellent virtue, but non est semper sides habenda fronti. This plant is
universally known in our London gardens and elsewhere; but naturally it
grows in the mountains of Rhetia, and in sundry places of the Alps, where
you shall find the grass that grows round it eaten up with cattle, but no
part of the herb it self touched, except by certain flies, who in such
abundant measure swarm about the same that they cover the whole plant: and
(which is very strange) although these flies do with great delight feed
hereupon, yet of them there is confected an Antidote or most auailable medicine
against the deadly bite of the spider called (...), or any other venomous beast
whatsoever, yea, an excellent remedy not only against the Aconites, but all
other poisons whatsoever. The medicine of the foresaid flies is thus made: Take
of the flies which have fed themselves as is above mentioned, in number
twenty, of Aristolochia rotunda, and bole Armoniack, of each a dram.

4 There is a kind of Wolfes-bane which Dodonaeus reports he found in an old
written Greek book in the Emperors Library at Vienna, under the the title of
Aconitum lycoctonum, that answers in all points unto Dioscorides his
description, except in the leaves. It has leaves (says he) like unto the
Plane tree, but lesser, and more full of iags or divisions; a slender stalk as
Fern, of a cubit high, bearing his seed in long cods: it has black roots in
shape like Creauises. Hereunto agrees the Emperors picture in all things
saving in the leaves, which are not so large, nor so much divided, but notched
or toothed like the teeth of a saw.

3 Napellus verus coeruleus. Blew Helmet-floure, or Monks-hood.
4 Aconitum lycoctonum ex Cod. Caesareo.


5 Besides these mentioned by our Author there are sundry other plants
belonging to this pernicious Tribe, whose history I will briefly run over:
The first of these is that which Clusius has set forth by the name of Aconitum
lycoctonum flo. Delphinij Silesiacum: it has stalks some two or three cubits
high, smooth and hollow, of a greenish purple color, and covered with a
certain mealinesse: the leaves grow upon long stalks, being rough, and
fashioned like those of the yellow Wolfes bane, but of a blacker color: the
top of the stalk ends in a long spike of spurre-floures, which before they be
open resemble locusts or little Lyzards, with their long and crooking tails;
but opening they show five leaves, two on the sides, two below, and one above,
which ends in a crooked (...) or horn: all these leaves are wrinckled, and
purple on their outsides, but smooth, and of an elegant blew within. After the
flowers are past succeed three square cods, as in other Aconites, wherein is
contained an unequal brownish wrinckled seed: the root is thick, black, and
tuberous. This grows naturally in some mountains of Silesia, and flowers in
July and August. (...)

5 Aconitum lycoct. hirsutum flo. Delphinij. Rough Larks-heele Wolfes-bane.
6 Aconitum (...). Violet colored Monks hood.
7 Aconitum purpureum (...). Purple Monks-hood of Newburg.
8 Aconitum. maximum Iudenbergense. Large floured Monks-hood.


6 The leaves of this are somewhat like, yet less than those of our common
Monks-hood, blackish on the upper side and shining. The stalk is some cubit
and half high, firm, (...) of (...), smooth, and shining; divided toward the
top into some branches carrying (...) (...), like (...) form to those of the
vulgar Monks-hood, of a most elegant and deep (...) color: the seeds are like
the former, and roots round, thick, and short, with many fibers. It grows
upon the (...) (...) Saltsburg, where it flowers in July: but brought into
gardens it flowers sooner than the rest of (...) kind, to wit in May. Clusius
calls this Aconitum (...) 4. Tauricum.

7 This has leaves broader than those of our ordinary Monks-hood, yet like
them: the stalk is round, straight, and firm, and of some three cubits
height, and often times toward the top divided into many branches, which carry
their flowers spike-fashion, of a purple color, absolutely like those of the
common sort, but that the thrummie matter in the midst of the flowers is of
(...) duskier color. The root and rest of the parts are like those of the
common kind: it grows naturally upon the Styrian Alps, whereas it flowers
somewhat after the common kind, to wit, in July. Clusius has it by the name
of Aconitum lycoctonum 5. (...).

9 Aconitum maximum nutante coma. Monkes-hood with the bending (...) nodding
head.


8 The leaves of this are also divided into five parts, and snipt about the
edges, and do very much resemble those of the small (...) described in the
second place, but that the leaves of that shine, when as these do not: the
stalk is two cubits high, not very thick, yet firm and straight, of a
greenish purple color; and at the top carries five or six flowers, the largest
of all the (...)-hoods, consisting of four leaves, as in the rest of this
kind, with a very large helmet over them, being sometimes an inch long, of an
elegant bluish purple color: the seed-vessels, seeds, and roots are like the
rest of this kind. This grows on Iudenberg, the highest hill of all Stiria,
and flowers in August; in gardens about the end of July. Clusius names it
Aconitum Lycoct. 9. Iudenbergense.

9 This rises up to the height of three cubits, with a slender round stalk
which is divided into sundry branches, and commonly hangs down the head;
whence Clusius calls it Aconitum lycoctonum 8. (...) nutante. The flowers are
like those of the common Monkshood, but of somewhat a lighter purple color.
The leaves are larger and long, and much more cut in or divided than any of the
rest. The roots, seeds, and other particles are not unlike those of the rest of
this kind.

The Place.
Diverse of these Wolfs-banes grow in some gardens, except Aconitum lycoctonon,
taken forth of the Emperors book.

The Time.
These plants do flower from May unto the end of August.

The Names.
The first is Lycoctoni specics, or a kind of Wolfes-bane, and is as hurtful
as any of the rest, and called of Lobel, Aconitum flore Delphinij, or
Larke-spur Wolses-bare. Auicen speaks hereof in his second book, and
afterward in his fourth book, Fen. 6. the first Treatise: having his reasons
why and wherefore he has separated this from Canach adip, that is to say, the
Wolses strangler, or the Wolfes-bane.

The later and barbarous Herbarists call the third Wolfes bane in Latin
Napellus, of the figure and shape of the roots of Napus, or Nauet, or Nauew
gentle: it is likewise (...) (...) (...), (...) a kind of Wolfes-bane: also it
may be called Toxicum; sor Toxicum is a deadly medicine wherewith the Hunters
poison their spears, darts, and arrows, that bring present death: so named
(...) arrows which the Barbarians call Toxcumata, and Toxa. (...) setting
down the (...) (...) or accidents caused by Toxicum, together with the
remedies, reckons up almost the very same that Auicen does concerning
Napellus: notwithstanding Auicen writes of Napellus and Toxicum severally; but
not knowing what Toxicum is, as he himself confesses: so that it is not to be
marvelled, that having written of Napellus, he should afterward entreat again
of Toxicum.

The Nature and Virtues.
All these plants are hot and dry in the fourth degree, and of a most venomous
quality.

The force and faculty of Wolfes-bane is deadly to man and all kinds of
beasts: the same was

The symptoms that follow those that do eat of these deadly herbs are these;
their lips and Auicen writes in his fourth book. The force of this poison is
such, that if the points of darts or arrows be touched with the same, it
brings deadly hurt to those that are wounded therewith.

Against so deadly a poison Auicen reckons up certain remedies, which help
after the poison Napellus, which is altogether an enemy to the poysonsome
nature thereof, and delivers him that has taken it from all peril and
danger.

Antonius Guancrius of Pauia, a famous physician in his age, in his treaty of
poisons is of opinion, Auicen speaks of, but a fly: for he tells of a
certain Philosopher that did very carefully and diligently make search after
this Mouse, and neither could find at any time either Mouse, or the root of
Wolfes-bane gnawne or bitten, as he had read; but in searching he found many
flies feeding on the leaves, which the same Philosopher took, and made of them
an Antidote or counterpoyson, which he found to be good and effectual against
other poisons, but especially the poison of Wolfes-bane.

This composition consists of two ounces of Terra lemnia, as many of the
berries of the Bay

The same opinion that Guanerius is of, Petrus Pena and Matthias de Lobel do
also hold; who affirm,

The Danger.
There has (...) little heretofore set down concerning the virtues of the
Aconites, but much might be said of the hurts that have come hereby, as the
woeful experience of the lamentable example at Antwerpe, yet fresh in memory,
does declare, as we have said. The figure that was in the first place formerly
was of the (...) (...) (...); and that in the second place was of a (...).


CHAP. 377. Of black Hellebore.
The Description.
1 THe first kind of black Hellebor Dodonaeus sets forth under this title
Veratrum nigrum; and it may properly be called in English, black Hellebor,
which is a name most fitly agreeing unto the true and undoubted black (...);
for the kinds and other sorts hereof which hereafter follow are false and
bastard kinds thereof. This plant has thick and fat leaves of a deep green
color, the upper part whereof is somewhat bluntly nicked or toothed, having
sundry divisions or cuts; in some leaves many, in others fewer, like unto the
female (...), or Smyrnium Creticum. It bears Rose fashioned flowers upon
slender stems, growing immediately out of the ground an handful high, sometimes
very white, and oftentimes mixed with a little show of purple: which being
vaded, there succeed small husks full of black seeds: the roots are many,
with long black strings coming from one head.

2 The second kind of black Hellebor, called of Pena, Helleborastrum; and of
Dodonaeus, Veratrum secundum (in English, bastard Hellebor) has leaves muh
like the former, but narrower and blacker, each leaf being much iagged or
toothed about the edges like a saw. The stalks grow to the height of a foot or
more, dividing themselves into other branches toward the top; whereon do grow
flowers not much unlike to the former in show, save that they are of a greenish
herby color. The roots are small and threddy, but not so black as the former.

1 Helleborus niger verus. The true black Hellebor.
2 Helleborastrum. Wild black Hellebor.
3 Helleboraster maximus. The great Ox-heele.
4 Consiligo Ruellij, and Sesamoides magnum Cordi. Setter-wort, or Beare-foot.


3 The third kind of black Hellebor, called of Pena, Helleboraster maximus,
with this addition, slore and semine praegnans, that is, full both of flowers
and seed, has leaves somewhat like the former wild (...), save that they be
greater, more iagged, and deeply cut. The stalks grow up to the height of two
cubits, dividing themselves at the top into sundry small branches, whereupon
grow little round and bottle-like hollow green flowers; after which come forth
seeds which come to perfect maturitie and ripeness. The root consists of
many small black strings, inuolued or wrapped one within another very
intricately.

4 The fourth kind of black Hellebor (called of Pena and Lobel, according to
the description of Cordus and (...), Sesamoides magnum, and Consiligo: in
English, Ox-heele, or Settter-woort; which names are taken from his virtues in
curing Oxen and such like cattle, as shall be showed afterward in the names
thereof) is so well known unto the most sort of people by the name of
Bearefoot, that I shall not have cause to spend much time about the
description. Indeed is was not much needful for our Author to describe it, for
it was the last thing he did; for both these two last are of one plant, both
figures and descriptions; the former of these figures expressing it in flower,
and the later in seed: but the former of our Author was with somewhat broader
leaves, and the laterwith narrower.

The Place.
These Hellebors grow upon rough and craggy mountains: the last grows wild in
many woods and shadowie places in England: we have them all in our London
gardens.

The Time.
The first floureth about Christmasse, if the Winter be mild and warm: the
others later:

The Names.
It is agreed among the later writers, that these plants are Veratranigra: in
English, black Hellebor: in Greek, (...): in Italian, Elleboro nero: in
Spanish, Verde gambre negro: of diverse, Melampodium, because it was first found
by Melampos, who was first thought to purge therewith Praetus his mad
daughters, and to restore them to health. Dioscorides writes, that this man
was a shepherd: others, a Sooth-sayer. In high Dutch it is called Christwurtz,
that is, Christ's herb, or Christmasse herb: in low Dutch, Heylich Kerst
cruyt, and that because it floureth about the birth of our Lord Jesus Christ.

The third kind was called of Fuchsius, Pseudohelleborus, and Veratrum nigrum
adulterinum, which is in English, false or bastard black Hellebor. Most name
it Consiligo, because the husbandmen of our time do herewith cure their
cattle, no otherwise than the old Farriers or horse-leeches were wont to do,
that is, they cut a slit or hole in the dew-lap, as they term it (which is an
empty skin under the throat of the beast) wherein they put a piece of the root
of Setterwort or Beare-foot, suffering it there to remain for certain days
together: which manner of curing they do call Settering of their cattle, and
is a manner of rowelling, as the said Horse-leeches do their horses with horse
hair twisted, or such like, and as in Surgerie we do use with silk, which in
stead of the word Seton; a certain Physician called it by the name Rowell; a
word very improperly spoken of a learned man, because there would be some
difference betwixt men and beasts. This manner of settering of cattle helps
the disease of the lungs, the cough, and wheesing. Moreover, in the time os
pestilence or murraine, or any other diseases affecting cattle, they put the
root into the place aforesaid, which draws unto it all the venomous matter,
and voideth it forth at the wound. The which Absyrtus and Hierocles the Greek
Horse-leeches have at large set down. And it is called in English, Beare-foot,
Setter-wort, and Setter-grasse.

The second is named in the German tongue, Lowszkraut, that is, Pedicularis, or
Lousy grass: for it is thought to destroy and kill lice, and not only lice
but sheep and other cattle: and may be reckoned among the Beare-feet, as
kinds thereof.

The Temperature.
Black Hellebor, as Galen holds opinion, is hotter in taste than the white
Hellebor: in like manner hot and dry in the third degree.

The Virtues.
Black Hellebor purges downwards phlegm, choler, and also melancholy
especially, and all melancholy Mesues teaches. A purgation of Hellebor is good
formad and furious men, for melancholy, dull, and heavy persons, for those that
are troubled with the falling sickness, for lepers, for them that are sick of a
quartane Ague, and briefly for all those that are troubled with black choler,
and molested with melancholy.

The manner of giving it (meaning the first black Hellebor) says Actuarius in
his first book, is

It is given with wine of raisins or oxymel, but for pleasantnes sake some
sweet and odoriferous seeds must be put unto it: but if you would have it
stronger, add thereunto a grain or two of Scamonie. Thus much Actuarius.

The first of these kinds is best, then the second; the rest are of less
force.

The roots take away the morphew and black spots in the skin, tetters,
ring-wormes, leprosies,

The root sodden in pottage with flesh, opens the bellies of such as have the
dropsy.

The root of bastard Hellebor, called among our English women Beare-foot,
steeped in wine

It does his operation with more force and might, if it be made into powder,
and a dram thereof

The same boiled in water with Rue and Agrimony, cures the jaundice, and
purges yellow superfluities

The leaves of bastard Hellebor dried in an oven, after the bread is drawn
out, and the powder

CHAP. 378. Of Dioscorides his black Hellebor.
Astrantianigra, sieve (...) nigrum Dioscoridis, Dod. Black Master-worts, or
Dioscorides his black Hellebor.


The Description.
THis kind of black Hellebor, set forth by Lobel under the name of
Astrantianigra, agrees very well in shape with the true Astrantia, which is
called Imperatoria: nevertheless by the consent of Dioscorides and other
Authors, who have expressed this plant for a kind of Veratrum nigrum, or
black Hellebor, it has many blackish green leaves parted or cut into four or
five deep cuts, after the manner of the vine leaf very like unto those of
Sanicle, both in greennes of color, and also in proportion. The stalk is
even, smooth, and plain: at the top whereof grow flowers it little tufts or
vmbels, set together like those of Scabious, of a whitish light green color,
dashed over as it were with a little dark purple: after which come the seed
like unto Carthamus or bastard Saffron. The roots are many blackish threads knit
to one head or master root.

The Place.
Black Hellebor is found in the mountains of Germany, and in other untilled
and rough places: it prospers in gardens.

Dioscorides writes, That black Hellebor grows likewise in rough and dry
places: and that is the best which is taken from such like places; as that
(says he) which is brought out of Anticyra a city in Greece. It grows in my
garden.

The Time.
This black Hellebor flowreth not in Winter, but in the Summer months. The
herb is green all the year through.

The Names.
It is called of the later Herbarists, Astrantia nigra: of others, Sanicula
foemina: notwithstanding it differs much from Astrantia, an herb which is
also named Imperatoria, or Master-wort. The vulgar people call it Pellitorie of
Spain, but untruly: it may be called black Master-wort, yet (...) a kind of
Hellebor, as the purging faculty does show: for it is certain, that diverse
experienced physicians can witness, that the roots hereof do purge melancholy
and other humors, and that they themselves have perfectly cured mad melancholy
people being purged herewith. And that it has a purging quality, Conradus
Gesnerus does likewise testify in a certain Epistle written to Adolphus Occo,
in which he shows, that Astrantianigra is almost as strong as white Hellebor,
and that he himself was the first that had experience of the purging faculty
thereof by siege: which things confirm that it is (...) his black Hellebor.

Dioscorides has also attributed to this plant all those names that are
ascribed to the other black Hellebors. He says further, that the seed thereof
in Anticyra is called Sesamoides, the which is used to purge with, if so be
that the Text be true, and not corrupted. But it seems not to be altogether
perfect; for if Sesamoides, as Pliny says; and the word it self does show,
has his name of the likeness of Sesamum, the seed of this black Hellebor
shall improperly be called Sesamoides; being not like that of Sesamum, but of
Cnicus or bastard Saffron. By these proofs we may suspect, that these words
are brought into Dioscorides from some other Author.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The faculties of this plant we have already written to be by trial found like
to those of the This whole Chapter (as most besides) was out of (...), who,
Pempt. 3. lib. 2. cap. 30. labors to prove this plant to be the true black
Hellebor of (...). There was also another description thrust by our Author into
this chapter, being of the (...) (...) or (...) me (...) formerly (...) in the
(...) place of the 114. Chap. (...). 446.


CHAP. 379. Of Herb Christopher.
(...). Herb Christopher.


The Description.
ALthough Herb Christopher be none of the Binde-weeds, or of those plants that
have need of supporting or underpropping, wherewith it may clime or rampe, yet
because it bears grapes, or clusters of berries, it might have been numbered
among the (...), or those that grow like Vines. It brings forth little tender
stalks a foot long, or not much longer; whereupon do grow sundry leaves set
upon a tender foot-stalke, which do make one leaf somewhat iagged or cut about
the edges, of a light green color: the flowers grow at the top of the stalks,
in spokie tufts consisting of four little white leaves apiece: which being
past, the fruit succeeds, round, somewhat long, and black when it is ripe,
having upon one side a streaked (...) or hollownesse growing near together as
do the clusters of grapes. The root is thick, black without, and yellow
within like Box, with many trailing strings anexed thereto, creeping far abroad
in the earth, whereby it does greatly increase, and lasts long.

The Place.
Herb Christopher grows in the North parts of England, near unto the house
of the right worshipful Sir William Bows. I have received plants thereof from
Robinus of Paris, for my garden, where they flourish.

The Time.
It floureth and flourishes in May and June, and the fruit is ripe in the end
of Summer.

The Names.
It is called in our age Christophoriana, and S. Christophori herba: in
English, Herb Christopher: some there be that name it Costus niger: others had
rather have it Aconitum bacciferum: it has no likeness at all nor affinity
with Costus, as the simplest may perceive that do know both. But doubtless it
is of the number of the Aconites, or Wolfs-banes, by reason of the deadly and
pernicious quality that it has, like unto Wolfes-bane, or Leopards-bane.

The Temperature.
The temperature of Herb Christopher answers those of the Aconites, as we
have said.

The Virtues.
I find little or nothing extant in the ancient or later writers, of any one
good property wherewith any part of this plant is possessed: therefore I wish
those that love new medicines to take heed that this be none of them, because
it is thought to be of a venomous and deadly quality.

CHAP. 380. Of Peionie.
The Kinds.
THere be three Peionies, one male, and two females, described by the Ancients:
the later writers have found out four more; one of the female kind, called
(...) (...), or dwarf Peonie; and another called Paeonia promiscua sieve
neutra, Bastard, Mis-begotten, or neither of both, but as it were a plant
participating of the male and female; one double Peionie with white flowers,
and a fourth kind bearing single white flowers.

1 Poeoniamas. Male (...).
Poeonia mas cum semine. Male Peionie in (...).


The Description.
1 THe first kind of Peionie (being the male, called Paeonia mas: in English,
Male Peiony) has thick red stalks a cubit long: the leaves be great and
large, consisting of diverse (...) growing or joined together upon one slender
stem or rib, not much unlike the leaves of the Wall-nut tree both in fashion
and greatness: at the top of the stalks grow fair large red flowers very
like roses, having also in the midst yellow threads or thrums like them in the
rose called Anthera: which being vaded and fallen away, there come in place
three or four great cods or husks, which do open when they are ripe; the
inner part of which cods is of a (...) red color, wherein is contained black
shining and polished seeds as big as a pease, and between every black seed is
couched a red or crimson seed, which is barren and empty. The root is thick,
great, and tuberous, like unto the common Peionie.

2 There is another kind of Peionie, called of Dodonaeus, Paeonia foemina
prior: of (...), (...) foemina: in English, female Peonie, which is so well
known unto all that it needs not any description.

3 The third kind of Peionie (which Pena sets forth under the name (...)
foemina polyanthos: Dodonaeus, Paeonia foemina multiplex: in English, Double
Peionie) has leaves, roots, and flowers like the common female Peionie, save
that his leaves are not so much iagged, and are of a lighter green color:
(...) roots are thicker and more tuberous, and the flowers much greater,
exceeding double, of a very deep red color, in fashion very like the great
double rose of Province, but greater and more double.

2 Paeonia foemina. Female Peionie.
3 Paeonia foemina multiplex. Double red Peionie.


4 There is found another sort of the double (...), not differing from the
precedent in (...), leaves, or roots: this plant brings forth white flowers,
wherein consists the difference.

5 There is another kind of Peionie (called of Dodonaeus, Paeonia foemina
altera: but of Pena, Paeonia promiscua, (...) neutra: in English, Maiden or
Virgin Peiony) that is like to the common Peiony, saving that his leaves and
flowers (...) much less, and the stalks shorter: it bears red flowers and
seed also like the former.

6 We have likewise in our London gardens another sort bearing flowers of a
pale whitish color, very single, resembling the female wild (...), in other
respects like the double white Peiony, but lesser in all the parts thereof.

7 Clusius by seed sent him from Constantinople had two other varieties of
single Peionies; the one had the leaves red when they came out of the ground;
and the flower ofthis was (...) a deep red color: the other had (...) of a
whitish green, and the flowers of this were somewhat larger, and of a lighter
color. In the leaves and (...) parts they resembled the (...) double (...).

4 Poeonia foemina polyanthos flore albo. The double white Peionie.
5 Poeonia promiscua. Maiden Peionie.
6 Poeonia foemina pumila. Dwarf female Peionie.
7 Poeonia Byzantina. Turkish Peionie.


The Place.
All the sorts of Peionies do grow in our London gardens, except that double
Peiony with white flowers, which we do expect from the Low countries of
Flanders.

The male Peionie grows wild upon a cony berry in Betsome, being in the
parish of Southfleet in Kent, two miles from Grauel-end, and in the ground
sometimes belonging to a farmer there called John Bradley.

I have been told that our Author himself planted that Peionie there, and
afterward seemed to find it there by accident: and I do believe it was so,
because none before or since have ever seen or heard of it growing wild since
in any part of this Kingdom.

The Time.
They flower in May: the seed is ripe in July.

The Names.
The Peionie is called in Greek (...): in Latin also Poeonia, and Dulcifida:
in shops, Pionia: in high Dutch, (...) (...): in low Dutch, (...) (...): in
French, Pinoine: in Spanish, Rosa del monte: in English, Peionie: it has also
many bastard names, as Rosa fatuina, Herba (...): of some, Lunaris, or Lunaria
Poeonia: because it cures those that have the falling sickness, whom some men
call Lunaticos, or Lunaticke. It is called (...) Dactylus: which agrees with
the female Peionie; the knobbie roots of which be like to Dactyli Idaei, and
Dactyli Idaei are certain precious stones of the form of a man's finger,
growing in the Island of Candie: it is called of diverse Aglaophotis, or
brightly shining, taking his name of the shining and glittering grains, which
are of the color of scarlet.

There be found two Aglaophotides, described by Aelianus in his 14. book; one
of the sea, in the 24. Chapter: the other of the earth, in the 27. chapter.
That of the sea is a kind of Fucus, or sea moss, which grows upon high
rocks, of the bigness of Tamarisk, with the head of Poppy; which opening in
the Summer Solstice does yield in the night time a certain (...), and as it
were sparkling brightness or light.

That of the earth, says he, which by another name is called Cynospastus,
lies hid in the day time among other herbs, and is not known at all, and in
the night time it is easily seen: for it shines like a star, and glittereth
with a fiery brightness.

And this Aglaophotis of the earth, or Cynospastus, is Paeonia; for Apuleius
says, that the seeds or grains of Peionie shine in the night time like a
candle, and that plenty of it is in the night season found out and gathered by
the shepherds. Theophrastus and Pliny do show that Peionie is gathered in the
night; which Aelianus also affirms concerning Aglaophotis.

This Aglaophotis of the earth, or Cynospastus, is called of Josephus the
writer of the Jews war, in his seventh book, 25. chapter, Baaras, of the
place wherein it is found; which thing is plain to him that conferreth those
things which Aelianus has written of Aglaophotis of the earth, or Cynospastus;
with those which Josephus has set down of Baaras: for Aelianus says, that
Cynospastus is not plucked up without danger; and that it is reported how he
that first touched it, not knowing the nature thereof, perished. Therefore a
string must be fastened to it in the night, and a (...) dog tied thereto, who
being allured by the smell of roasted flesh set toward him, may pluck it up by
the roots. Josephus also writes, that Baara does shine in the evening like
the day star, and that they who come near, and would pluck it up, can hardly
do it, except that either a woman's urine, or her menses be poured upon it, and
that so it may be plucked up at the length.

Moreover, it is set down by the said Author, as also by Pliny and
Theophrastus, that of necessity it must (...) gathered in the night; for if
any man shall pluck off the fruit in the day time, being seen of the
VVood-pecker, he is in danger to loose his eyes; and if he cut the root, it is
a chance if his fundament fall not out. The like fabulous tale has been set
(...) of Mandrake, the which I have (...) touched in the same chapter. But all
these things be most vain and frivolous: for the root of Peionie, as also the
Mandrake, may be removed at any time of the year, day or hour whatsoever.

But it is no marvel, that such kinds of (...), and most (...) and wicked
ceremonies are found in the books of the most ancient writers; for there were
many things in their time very vainly feined and cogged in for (...) sake, as
by the Egyptians and other counterfeit mates, as Pliny does truly testisie: an
(...) of whom in times past, was (...) Andreas a Physician, who, as Galen
says, conveyed into the art of Physic, lies and subtle (...). For which
cause Galen commanded his Scholars to refrain (...) the reading of him, and
of all such like lying and deceitful (...). It is reported that these herbs
took the (...) of (...), (...) (...), of that excellent Physician of the same
name, who (...) (...) (...) (...) and taught the knowledge of this herb unto
posterity.

The Temperature.
The root of Peionie, as Galen says does gently bind with a kind of
sweetness: and has also joined with it a certain bitterish sharpness: it is
in temperature not very hot, little more than meanly hot; but it is dry, and
of subtle parts.

The Virtues.
Dioscorides writes, that the root of the Male Peionie being dried, is given
to women that be not

Galen adds, that it is good for those that have the yellow iaundise, and
pain in the kidneys and

It is found by sure and (...) experience made by Galen, that the fresh root
tied about the necks

It is also given, says Pliny, against the disease of the mind. The root of
the male Peionie is preferred

Ten or twelve of the red berries or seeds drunk in wine that is something
harsh or sower, and

The black grains (that is the seed) to the number of fifteen taken in wine
or mead, helps the Ephialtes or night Mare, which is as though a heavy burden
were laid upon them, and they oppressed therewith, as if they were overcome by
their enemies, or ouerprest with some great weight or burden; and they are
also good against melancholicke dreams.

Syrrup made of the flowers of Peionie helps greatly the falling sickness:
likewise the extraction

CHAP. 381. Of toothed Violets or Coral woorts.
1 Dentaria Bulbifera. Toothed Violet.
2 Dentaria Coralloideradice, sive Dent. Enneaphyllos. The Coral toothed
Violet.


3 Dentaria Heptaphyllos (...). The seven leafed toothed Violet.
4 Dentaria Pentaphyllos (...). Five leafed toothed Violet.
5 Dentaria Pentaphyllos altera. The other five leaued Corall-wort.


The Description.
1 THe first kind of Dentaria (called in Latin Dentaria baccifera: of
Dodonaeus, Dentaria prior: in English, Dogs tooth violet) has a tuberous and
knobbie root, toothed, or as it were kneed like unto the crags of Coral, of an
unpleasant savor, and somewhat sharp in taste: from which spring forth certain
small and slender stalks a foot high, which have leaves very much cut or
iagged, like unto those of Hemp, of the form and fashion of Ashen leaves: at
the top of the stalks do grow small white flowers, in shape like (...), that
is, Queens Gillofloures, or rather like stocke-Gillofloures, of a white yellow
color, laid over with a light sprinkling of purple: among which come forth
small knobs growing upon the stalks among the leaves, such as are to be seen
upon the Chimists Martagon, which being ripe, do fall upon the ground, whereof
many other plants are engendered.

2 The second kind of Dogs-tooth violet brings forth small round stalks,
firm and stiff, a foot high, beset with leaves much broader, rounder, and
greener than the former, bearing at the top many little flowers consisting of
four small leaves, of a pale herbie color; which being past, there succeed
long and slender coddes somewhat like the cods of Queens Gillofloures, wherein
is contained small blackish seed: the root is like the former, but not in every
respect much resembling Coral, yet white and tuberous notwithstanding.

3 The third kind of Dogs-tooth Violet is called of Clusius, Dentaria
heptaphyllos, that is, consisting of seven leaves fastened upon one rib, sinew,
or small stem: of Lobel with this title, Alabastrites altera, or Dentaria
altera: but Cordus calls it Coralloides altera: in English, Coral violet; it
has stalks, flowers, and roots like unto the first of his kind, saving that
the flowers are much fairer, and white of color, and the roots have a greater
resemblance of Coral than the other.

4 The fourth kind of Dogs-tooth violet, called in English Codded violet
(which Clusius sets forth under the title Dentaria Matthioli Pentaphyllos;
which Pena does also express under the title of Nemoralis alpina Herbarioruus
Alabastrites; Cordus calls it Coralloides, and may very well be called in
English Cinkfoile violet) has leaves so like the greater Cinkfoile, that it is
hard to know one from another; therefore it might very well have been reckoned
among the herbs called Pentaphylla, that is, five leaued herbs. This plant
grows in the shadowie forest about Turin, and the mountain Sauena called
Calcaris, and by the Rhene not far from Basil. The stalks grow to the height
of a cubit, beset with a tuft of flowers at the top like to that of the first,
but of a deeper purple color: which being vaded, there succeed long and flat
cods like unto Rocket, or the great Celandine, wherein is contained a small
seed. All the whole plant is of a hot and bitter taste. The roots are like unto
Coral, of a pale whitish color: the leaves are rough and harsh in handling,
and of a deep green color.

5 Clusius gives us another variety of Dentaria pentaphyllos, whose roots are
more uneven and knobby than the last described: the stalk is some foot high:
the leaves five upon a stalk, but not so rough, nor of so deep a green as
those of the former; yet the flowers are of a deep purple color, like those of
the last described.

The Place.
They grow on diverse shadowie and dark hills. Valerius Cordus writes, that
they are found about the forest Hercinia, not far from Northusium, most
plentifully, in a fat soil that has quaries of stone in it. The first I have
in my garden.

The Time.
They flower especially in April and May: the seed comes to perfection in
the end of August.

The Names.
The toothed Violet, or after some, Dogs-tooth violet, is commonly called
Dentaria: of Cordus, Coralloides, of the root that is in form like to Coral.
Matthiolus places it inter Solidagines and Symphyta, among the Consounds and
Comfries. We had rather call them (...) (...), of the likeness the flowers
have with Stocke-gillofloures. They may be called in English, Toothed Violets,
or Corall-woorts.

The Temperature and Virtues.
I have read of few or no virtues contained in these herbs, saving those which
some women Matthiolus ascribes unto Pentaphylla dentaria the fourth kind, in
the fourth book of his Commentaries upon (...), and in the chap. conterning
Symphytum, where he says that the root is used in drinks which are made
against Enterocele and inward wounds, but especially those wounds and hurts
which have entered into the hollownesse of the breast.

CHAP. 382. Of Cinkefoile, or five finger Grass.
The Description.
1 THe first kind of Cinkfoile is so common and so universally known, that I
think it a needless travel to stand about the description. It has manylong
long slender stalks, lying spread upon the ground, out whereof grow leaves made
of five longish snipt leaves fastened to one long foot-stalke: the flowers also
grow upon the like footstalk, and are composed of five yellow leaves. The
root is pretty large, of a reddish color, and round; but dried, it becomes
square.

2 The second kind of Cinkfoile or Quinquefoile has round and small stalks of
a cubit high; the leaves are large, and very much iagged about the edges, very
like the common Cinkfoile: the flowers grow at the top of the stalks, in
fashion like the common kind, but much greater, and of a pale or bleake yellow
or elsewhitish color: the root is black without, and full of strings annexed
thereto, and of a wooddie substance.

Quinquefolium vulgar. Common Cinkfoile.
Our Author formerly in his description, title, and place of growing (...) that
plant which he figured, and (...) yet kept in the second place; and in the
first place he figured the common Cinke-foile, and made mention of it, yet
without description in the second. That which (...) was in the (...) place, by
the name of (...) (...) (...). was the same with that in the (...) place.
2 Quinquefolium maius rectum. Great upright Cinkfoile.
3 Pentaphyllum purpureum. Purple Cinkfoile.
4 Pentaphyllum rubrum (...). Marsh Cinkfoile.


5 Pentaphyllum petrosum, Heptaphyllum Clusy. Stone Cinkfoile.
Our Author formerly in his description, title, and place of growing (...) that
plant which he figured, and (...) yet kept in the second place; and in the
first place he figured the common Cinke-foile, and made mention of it, yet
without description in the second. That which (...) was in the (...) place, by
the name of (...) (...) (...). was the same with that in the (...) place.
6 Pentaphyllon supinum Potentillae facie. Siluerweed Cinkfoile.
7 Quinquesolium Tormentillae facie. Wall Cinkfoile.
8 Pentaphyllum Incanum. Hoarie Cinkfoile.


Our Author formerly in his description, title, and place of growing (...) that
plant which he figured, and (...) yet kept in the second place; and in the
first place he figured the common Cinke-foile, and made mention of it, yet
without description in the second. That which (...) was in the (...) place, by
the name of (...) (...) (...). was the same with that in the (...) place.
3 The third kind of Cinkefoile has leaves like those of the last described,
and his flowers are of a purple color; which being past, there succeeds a
round knop of seed like a Strawberry before it be ripe: the stalks are
creeping upon the ground: the root is of a woody substance, full of black
strings appendant thereto. This differs not from the last described, but in the
color of the flowers.

4 The fourth kind of Cinkefoile is very like unto the other, especially the
great kind: the stalks are a cubit high, and of a reddish color: the leaves
consist of five parts, somewhat snipt about the edges: the flowers grow at the
tops of the stalks like unto the other Cinkefoiles, saving that they be of a
dark red color: the root is of a woody substance, with some fibers or
threddy strings hanging thereat.

9 Pentaphyllum incanum minus repens. Small hoary creeping Cinkefoile.
10 Quinquefolium syluaticum majus flo. albo: Wood Cinkefoile, with white
flowers.


5 The fifth kinke of Cinkefoile grows upon the cold mountains of Sauoy, and
in the vallie of Austensie, and in Narbone in France, and (if my memory fail
not) I have seen the same growing upon Beeston castle in Cheshire: the leaves
hereof are few, and thin set, consisting of sieve parts like the other
Cinkefoiles, oftentimes six or seven set upon one foot-stalke, not snipt about
the edges as the other, but plain and smooth; the leaf is of a shining white
silver color, very soft and shining: the flowers grow like stars, upon
slender stalks by tufts and bunches, of a white color, and sometimes purple,
in fashion like the flowers of Alchimilla, or Ladies mantle: the root is thick
and full of strings, and of a brown purple color.

6 This plant, whose figure our Author formerly gave for Fragaria sterilis, and
in his description confounded with it, to avoid confusion, I think fit to give
you here amongst the Cinkefoiles, and in that place the Fragaria sterilis, as
most agreeable thereto. This seems to challenge kindred of three several
plants, that is, Cinkefoile, Tormentill, and Siluer-weed, for it has the upper
leaves, the yellow flowers, creeping branches, and root of Cinkefoile, but the
lower leaves are of a dark green, and grow many upon one middle rib like
those of Siluer-weed; the fruit is like an unripe Strawberry. Lobel calls this
Pentaphyllum supinum Tormentilae facie: and Tabernamontanus, Quinquefolium
fragifcrum repens.

7 The seventh kind of Cinkefoile, Pena that diligent searcher of Simples
found in the Alps of Rhetia, nere Clauena, and at the first sight supposed it
to be a kind of Tormentilla, or Pentaphyllum; save that it had a more threddy
root, rather like Geranium; it is of a dark color outwardly, having some
sweet smell, representing Garyophyllata in the savor of his roots: in leaves
and flowers it resembles Cinkefoile and Tormentill, and in shape of his stalks
and roots Auens or Garyophyllata, participating of them all: notwithstanding it
approaches nearest unto the Cinkefoiles, having stalks a foot high, whereupon
grow leaves divided into five parts, and jagged round about the edges like the
teeth of a saw, having the pale yellow flowers of Pentaphyllum or Tormentilla;
within which are little mossie or downy threddes, of the color of saffron, but
lesser than the common Auens.

8 The eighth kind of Cinkefoile (according to the opinion of diverse learned
men, who have had the view thereof, and have judged it to be the true Leucas of
Dioscorides, agreeable to Dioscorides his description) is all hoary, whereupon
it took the addition Incanum. The stalks are thick, woody, and somewhat
red, wrinckled also, and of a brown color; which rise unequal from the root,
spreading themselves into many branches, shadowing the place where it grows,
beset with thick and notched leaves like Scordium, or water Germander, which
according to the judgment of the learned is thought to be of no less force
against poison than Pentaphyllon, or Tormentilla, being of an astringent and
drying quality. Hereupon it may be that some trying the force hereof, have
yielded it up for Leucas Dioscoridis. This rare plant I never found growing
naturally, but (...) the hollownesse of the peakish mountains, and dry
grauelly valleys.

11 Quinquefolium syluaticum minus flo. albo: Small white floured wood
Cinkefoile.
12 Quinquefolium minus flo. aureo. Small golden floured Cinkefoile.


9 This has the like creeping purple branches as the last described: the
leaves are narrower, more hairy and deeper cut in: the flowers are also of a
(...) golden color, in other respects they are alike.

Our Author formerly in his description, title, and place of growing (...) that
plant which he figured, and (...) yet kept in the second place; and in the
first place he figured the common Cinke-foile, and made mention of it, yet
without description in the second. That which (...) was in the (...) place, by
the name of (...) (...) (...). was the same with that in the (...) place.
10 The wood Cinkefoile has many leaves spread upon the ground, consisting of
five parts; among which rise up other leaves, set upon very tall foot-stalkes,
and long in respect of those that did grow by the ground, and somewhat snipt
about the ends, and not all along the edges. The flowers grow upon slender
stalks, consisting of five white leaves. The root is thick with diverse sibres
coming from it.

11 This also from such a root as the last described sends forth many slender
branches not (...), but standing upright, and set with little hoary leaves,
snipt only at the ends, like as 13 Pentaphyllum fragiferum. Strawberry
Cinkfoile.
those of the last described: the tops of the branches carry pretty white
flowers like those of the last described, whereof it seems to be a kind, yet
less in each respect.

12 This from a black and fibrous root sends forth creeping branches, set with
leaves like the common Cinkfoile, but less, somewhat hoary and shining; the
stalks are some handful high, and on their tops carry large flowers in respect
of the smalnesse of the plant, and these of a fair golden color, with saffron
colored threads in their middle: the seeds grow after the manner of other
Cinkfoiles: this flowers in June, and it is Clusius his Quinquefolium 3. aureo
flore.

13 There is one of the mountain Cinkfoiles that has diverse slender brittle
stalks, rising immediately out of the ground; whereupon are set by equal
distances certain iagged leaves, not unlike to the smallest leaves of Auens:
the flowers are white and grow at the top, having in them threads yellow of
color, and like to the other Cinkfoiles, but altogether lesser. The root is
thick, tough, and of a wooddie substance. The seeds grow clustering together
like little Strawberries, whence Clusius calls it Quinquefolium fragiferum.

The Place.
They grow in low and moist meadows, upon banks and by high ways sides: the
second is only to be found in gardens.

The third grows in the woods of Sauena and Narbon, but not in England: The
fourth grows in a marsh ground adioining to the land called Bourne ponds,
half a mile from Colchester; from whence I brought some plants for my garden,
where they flourish and prosper well.

The fifth grows upon Beestone castle in Cheshire: the sixth upon brick and
stone walls about London, especially upon the brick wall in Liuer-lane.

The place of the seventh and eight is set forth in their descriptions.

The Time.
These plants do flower from the beginning of May to the end of June.

The Names.
Cinkfoile is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Quinquefolium: the
Apothecaries use the Greek name Pentaphyllon: and sometime the Latin name.
There be very many bastard names, wherewith I will not trouble your ears: in
High Dutch, (...), (...): in Low Dutch, (...) (...) (...): in Italian,
Cinquefoglio: in French, Quinte fueille: in Spanish, Cinco en rama: in English,
Cinkfoile, Five finger Grass, Five leaued grass, and Sinkfield.

The Temperature.
The roots of Cinkfoile, especially of the first, do vehemently dry, and that
in the third degree, but without biting: for they have very little apparent
heat or sharpness.

The Virtues.
The decoction of the roots of Cinkfoile drunk, cures the bloody flixe, and
all other fluxes of

The juice of the roots while they be young and tender, is given to be drunk
against the diseases

The same drunk in Mead or honied water, or wine wherein some pepper has been
mingled, cures

The leaves used among herbs appropriate for the same purpose, cures ruptures
and burstings

The juice of the leaves drunken does cure the Iaundice, and (...) the stomach
and

The decoction of the roots held in the mouth does mitigate the pain of the
teeth, staieth putrefaction,

The root boiled in vinegar is good against the shingles, appeaseth the rage of
fretting sores, and

It is reported, that four branches hereof cures quartaine agues, three
tertians, and one branch Dioscorides, but also in other Authors, which we
willingly withstand.

Ortolpho Morolto a learned Physician, commended the leaves being boiled with
water, and some Lignum vitae added thereto, against the falling sickness, if
the patient be caused to sweat upon the taking thereof. He likewise commends
the extraction of the roots against the bloody flix.

CHAP. 383. Of Setfoile, or Tormentill.
Tormentilla. Setfoile.


The Description.
THis herb Tormentill or Setfoile is one of the Cinkfoiles, it brings forth
many stalks slender, weak, scarce able to lift it self up, but rather lies
down upon the ground: the leaves be lesser than Cinkefoile, but more in number,
sometimes five, but commonly seven, whereupon it took his name Setfoile, which
is seven leaves, and those somewhat snipt about the edges: the flowers grow on
the tops of slender stalks, of a yellow color, like those of the
Cinkfoiles. The root is black without, reddish within, thick, tuberous, or
knobbie.

The Place.
This plant loves woods and shadowie places, and is likewise found in pastures
lying open to the Sun almost every where.

The Names.
(...) (...) (...) May, unto the end of (...)

The Names.
It is called of the later Herbarists Tormentilla: some (...) it after the
number of the leaves (...), and Septifolium: in English, Setfoile and
Tormentill: in High Dutch, (...): most take it to be Chrysogonon; whereof
Dioscorides has made a brief description.

The Temperature.
The root of Tormentill does mightily dry, and that in the third degree, and is
of thin parts: it has in it very little heat, and is of a binding quality.

The Virtues.
Tormentill is not only of like virtue with Cinkefoile, but also of greater
efficacy: it is much

The leaves and roots boiled in wine, or the juice thereof drunken provoke
sweat, and by that

The roots dried made into powder and drunk in wine does the same.

The same powder taken as aforesaid, or in the water of a Smiths forge, or
rather the water wherein

It stops the spitting of blood, pissing of blood, and all other issues of
blood, as well in men as

The decoction of the leaves and roots, or the juice thereof drunk, is
excellent good for all

The root beaten into powder, tempered or kneaded with the white of an egg and
eaten, staieth

CHAP. 384. Of wild Tansie or Siluer-weed.
Argentina. Siluerweed, or wild Tansie.


The Description.
Wild Tansie creeps along upon the ground with fine slender stalks and
clasping tendrels: the leaves are long made up of many small leaves, like unto
those of the garden Tansie, but lesser; on the upper side green, and under
very white. The flowers be yellow, and stand upon slender stems, as do those
of Cinkfoile,

The Place.
It grows in moist places near unto high ways and running brooks every
where.

The Time.
It floureth in June and July.

The Names.
The later Herbarists do call it Argentina, of the silver drops that are to be
seen in the distilled water thereof when it is put into a glass, which you
shall easily see rolling and tumbling up and down in the bottom; I judge it
rather so called of the fine shining Silver colored leaves. It is likewise
called Potentilla: of diverse, Agrimonia syluestris, Anserina, and Tanacetum
syluestre: in High Dutch, (...): in Low Dutch, (...): in French, Argentine: in
English, Wild Tansie, and Siluerweed.

The Temperature.
It is of temperature moderatly cold, and dry almost in the third degree,
having withal a binding faculty.

The Virtues.
Wild Tansie boiled in wine and drunk, stops the laske and bloody flix, and
all other flux of

The same boiled in water and salt and drunk, dissolueth clotted and congealed
blood in such

The decoction hereof made in water, cures the ulcers and cankers of the
mouth, if some honey

Wild Tansie has many other good virtues, especially against the stone,
inward wounds, and

The distilled water takes away freckles, spots, pimples in the face and
Sun-burning; but the

CHAP. 385. Of Auens, or Herb Bennet.
1 Caryophyllata. Auens or herb Bennet.
2 Caryophyllata montana. Mountain Auens.


The Description.
1 THe common Auens has leaves not unlike to Agrimony, rough, blackish, and
much cloven or deeply cut into diverse gashes: the stalk is round and hairy, a
soot high, dividing it self at the top into diverse branches, whereupon do grow
yellow flowers like those of Cinkefoile or wild Tansie: which being past,
there follow round rough reddish hairy heads or knops full of seed, which being
ripe will hang upon garments as the Burs do. The root is thick, reddish
within, with certain yellow strings fastened thereunto, smelling like unto
Cloves or like unto the roots of Cyperus.

2 The Mountain Auens has greater and thicker leaves than the precedent,
rougher, and more hairie, not parted into three, but rather round, nicked on
the edges: among which rises up slender stalks, whereon do grow little
longish sharp pointed leaves: on the top of each stalk does

3 Caryophyllata Alpina pentaphyllaea. Five leaued Auens.
4 Caryophyllata montana purpurea. Red floured mountain Auens.
5 Caryophyllata Alpina minima. Dwarf mountain Auens.
grow one flower greater than that of the former, which consists of five
little leaves as yellow as gold: after which grows up the seeds among long
hairy threads. The root is long, growing (...), somewhat thick, with strings
anexed thereto.

3 Five finger Auens has many small leaves spread upon the ground, divided into
sieve parts, somewhat snipt about the edges like Cinkefoile, whereof it took
his name. Among which rise up slender stalks divided at the top into diverse
branches, whereon do grow small yellow flowers like those of Cinkefoile: the
root is composed of many tough strings of the smell (...) Cloves, which makes
it a kind of Auens; otherwise doubtless it must of necessity be one of the
Cinksoiles

4 This has ioynted stringy roots some finger thick, from whence rise up many
large and hairy leaves, composed of diverse little leaves, with larger at the
top, and these snipt about the edges like as the common Auens: amongst these
leaves grow up sundry stalks some foot or better high, whereon grow flowers
hanging down their heads, and the tops of the stalks and cups of the flowers
are commonly of a purplish color: the flowers themselves are of a pretty red
color, and are of diverse shapes, and grow diverse ways; which has been the
reason that Clusius and others have judged them several plants, as may be
seen is Clusius his Works, where he gives you the flowers, which you here
find expressed, for a different kind. Now some of these flowers, even the
greater part of them grow with five red round pointed leaves, which never lie
fair open, but only stand straight out, the middle part being filled with a
hairy matter and yellowish threads: other-some consist of seven, eight, nine, or
more leaves; and some again lie wholly open, with green leaves growing close
under the cup of the flower, as you may see them represented in the figure; and
some few now and then may be found composed of a great many little leaves thick
thrust together, making a very double flower. After the flowers are fallen come
such hairy heads as in other plants of this kind, amongst which lies the seed.
Gesner calls this Geum rivale: Thalius, Caryophyllata mayor purpurea:
Camerarius, Caryophyllata aquatica: Clusius, Caryophyllata mont ana prima, and
tertia.

5 The root of this is also thick, fibrous, and whitish; from which arise many
leaves three fingers high, resembling those of Agrimonie, the little leaves
standing directly opposite each against other, snipt about the edges, hairy, a
little curld, and of a deep green color: out of the midst of those, upon a
short stalk grows commonly on single flower of a gold-yellow color, much like
the mountain Auens described in the second place. It flowers at the beginning
of July, and grows upon the Alps. Pona was the first that described it, and
that by the name of Caryophyllata Alpina omnium minima.

The Place.
These kinds of Auens are found in high mountains and thick woods of the
North parts of England: we have them in our London gardens, where they flourish
and increase infinitely.

The red floured mountain Auens was found growing in Wales by my much honored
friend Mr. Thomas Glynn, who sent some plants thereof to our Herbarists, in
whose gardens it thriueth exceedingly.

The Time.
They flower from the beginning of May to the end of July.

The Names.
Auens is called Caryophyllata, so named of the smell of Cloves which is in the
roots, and diverse call it Sanamunda, Herba benedicta, and Nardus rustica: in
High Dutch, Benedicten (...): in French, Galiot: of the Wallons, Gloriafilia:
in English, Auens, and herb Benet: it is thought to be Geum Plinij, which most
do suspect, by reason he is so brief. Geum, says Pliny, lib. 26. cap. 7. has
little slender roots, black, and of a good smell.

The other kind of Auens is called of the later Herbarists, Caryophyllata
montana, Mountain Auens: it might (...) with the description of Baccharis, if
the flowers were purple tending to whiteness; which as we have said are
yellow, and likewise differ in that, that the roots of Auens smell of Cloves,
and those of Baccharis have the smell of Cinnamon.

The Temperature.
The roots and leaves of Auens are manifestly dry, and something hot, with a
kind of scouring quality.

The Virtues.
The decoction of Auens made in wine is commended against cruditie or rawnesse
of the stomach,

The same is likewise a remedy (...) stitches and grief in the side, (...)
stopping of the liver; it

The leaves and roots taken in this manner dissolve and consume clottered blood
in any inward part of the body; and therefore they are mixed with potions which
are drunk of those that are bruised, that are inwardly broken, or that have
fallen from some high place.

The roots taken up in Autumn and dried, do keep garments from being eaten
with moths, and

CHAP. 386. Of Straw-berries.
The Kinds.
THere be diverse sorts of Strawberries; one red, another white, a third sort
green, and likewise a wild Straw-berrie, which is altogether barren of fruit.

1 Fragaria and Fraga. Red Straw-berries.
2 Fragaria and Fraga subalba. White Straw-berries.


The Description.
1 THe Straw-berry has leaves spread upon the ground, somewhat snipt about the
edges, three set together upon one slender foot-stalke like the Trefoile,
green on the upper side, and on the nether side more white: among which rise
up slender stems, whereon do grow small flowers, consisting of five little
white leaves, the middle part somewhat yellow, after which comes the fruit,
not unlike to the Mulberrie, or rather the Raspis, red of color, having the
taste of wine, the inner pulpe or substance whereof is moist and white, in
which is contained little seeds: the root is threddy, (...) long continuance,
sending forth many strings, which disperse themselves far abroad, whereby it
greatly increases.

2 Of these there is also a second kind, which is like to the former in stems,
strings, leaves, and flowers. The fruit is something greater, and of a whitish
color, wherein is the difference.

There is another sort, which brings forth leaves, flowers, and strings like
the other of his kind. The fruit is green when it is ripe, tending to redness
upon that side that lies to the Sun, cleaving That figure which formerly was
in this place, and some part of the description were (as I have (...) noted) of
the (...) (...) (...), (...) you may find described amongst the (...) in the
sixth place.
3 Fragariaminime vesca, sieve sterilis. Wild or barren Straw-berry.
faster to the stemmes, and is of a sweeter taste, wherein only consists the
difference.

There is also kept in our gardens (only for variety) another Strawberrie
which in leaves and growing is like the common kind; but the flower is
greenish, and the fruit is harsh, rough, and prickely, being of a greenish
color, with some show of redness. Mr. John Trade scant has told me that he
was the first that took notice of this Straw-berry, and that in a woman's
garden at Plymouth, whose daughter had gathered and set the roots in her garden
in stead of the common Straw-berry: but she finding the fruit not to answer her
expectation, intended to throw it away: which labor he spared her, in taking it
and bestowing it among the lovers of such varieties, in whose gardens it is yet
preserved. This may be called in Latin, Fragaria fructu hispido, The prickly
Straw-berry.

That figure which formerly was in this place, and some part of the description
were (as I have (...) noted) of the (...) (...) (...), (...) you may find
described amongst the (...) in the sixth place.
3 This wild Strawberry has leaves like the other Straw-berry, but somewhat
less, and softer, slightly indented about the edges, and (...) a light
greenecolour: among which rise up (...) stems bearing such flowers as the
common Straw-berries do, but lesser, which do wither away, leaving behind a
barren or chaffie head, in shape like a Straw-berrie, but of no worth or value:
the root is like the others.

The Place.
Straw-berries do grow upon hills and valleys, likewise in woods and other such
places that be somewhat shadowie: they prosper well in Gardens, the first every
where, the other two more rare, and are not to be found save only in gardens.

The barren one grows in diverse places, as upon Black heath, in Greenwich
park, etc.

The Time.
The leaves continue green all the year: in the Spring they spread further
with their strings, and flower afterward: the berries are ripe in June and
July. The barren one flowers in April and May, but never carries any berries.

The Names.
The fruit or berries are called in Latin by Virgil and Ovid, Fraga: neither
have they any other name commonly known: they are called in High Dutch
Erdbeeren: in Low Dutch, (...): in French, Fraises: in English, Strawberries.

The Temperature.
The leaves and roots do cool and dry, with an astriction or binding quality:
but the berries be cold and moist.

The Virtues.
The leaves boiled and applied in manner of a pultis takes away the burning
heatc in wounds:

The berries quench thirst, and do allay the inflammation or heat of the
stomach: the nourishment

The distilled water drunk with white Wine is good against the passion of the
heart, reviving

The distilled water is reported to scour the face, to take away spots, and to
make the face fair

The leaves are good to be put into Lotions or washing waters, for the mouth
and the privy

The ripe Straw-berries quench thirst, cool heat of the stomach, and
inflammation of the liver,

CHAP. 387. Of Angelica.
The Kinds.
THere be diverse kinds of Angelica's; the garden Angelica, that of the water,
and a third sort wild growing upon the land.

1 Angelica satina. Garden Angelica.
2 Angelica syluestris. Wild Angelica.


The Description.
1 Concerning this plant Angelica there has bin heretofore some contention and
controversy; Cordus calling it Smyrnium: some later writers, Costus niger: but
to avoid cavil, the controversy is soon decided, since it and no other does
assuredly retain the name Angelica. It has great broad leaves, divided again
into other leaves, which are indented or snipt about much like to the uppermost
leaves of Sphondylium, but lower, tenderer, greener, and of a stronger savor:
among which leaves spring up the stalks, very great, thick, and hollow, six
or seven soot high, ioynted or kneed: from which joints proceed other arms or
branches, at the top whereof grow tufts of whitish flowers like Fennel or
Dill: the root is thick, great, and oilous, out of which issues, if it be cut
or broken, an oily liquor: the whole plant, as well leaves, stalks, as roots,
are of a reasonable pleasant savor, not much unlike Petroleum.

There is another kind of true Angelica found in our English gardens (which I
have observed) being like unto the former, saving that the roots of this kind
are more fragrant, and of a more aromaticke savor, and the leaves next the
ground of a purplish red color and the whole plant lesser.

3 Archangelica. Great wild Angelica.


2 The wild Angelica, which seldom grows in gardens, but is found to grow
plentifully in water soken grounds and cold moist meadows, is like to that of
the garden, save that his leaves are not so deeply cut or iagged; they be also
blacker and narrower: The stalks are much slenderer and shorter, and the
flowers whiter: the root much smaller, and has more threddy strings appendant
thereunto, and is not so strong of savor by a great deal.

3 Matthiolus and Gesner have made mention of another kind of Angelica, but we
are very slenderly instructed by their insufficient descriptions:
notwithstanding for our better knowledge and more certain assurance I must
needs record that which my friend Mr. Bredwell related to me concerning his
sight thereof, who found this plant growing by the (...) which compasses the
house of Mr. Munke of the parish of Iuer, two miles from Colbrook; and since
that I have seen the same in low fenny and marshy places of Essex, about
Harwich. This plant has leaves like unto the garden Angelica, but smaller, and
fewer in number, set upon one rib a great stalk, gross and thick, whose
joints and that small rib whereon the leaf grows are of a reddish color,
having many long branches coming forth of an husk or case, such as is in the
common garden Parsnep: the flowers do grow at the top of the branches, and are
of a white color, and (...) fashion: which being past, there succeed broad
long and thick seeds, longer and thicker than garden Angelica: the root is
great, thick, white, of little savor, with some strings appendant thereto.

This of our Authors description seems to agree with the Archangelica of
Lobel, Dodonaeus, and Clusius; wherefore I have put their figure to it.

The Place.
The first is very common in our English gardens: in other places it grows
wild without planting; as in Norway, and in an Island of the North called
Island, where it grows very high. It is eaten of the inhabitants, the bark
being pilled off, as we understand by some that have traveled into Island, who
were sometimes compelled to eat hereof for want of other food; and they report
that it has a good and pleasant taste to them that are hungry. It grows
likewise in diverse mountains of Germany, and especially of Bohemia.

The Time.
They flower in July and August, whose roots for the most part do perish after
the seed is ripe: yet have I with often cutting the plant kept it from seeding,
by which means the root and plant have continued sundry years together.

The Names.
It is called of the later age Angelica: in High Dutch, (...), Brustwurtz, or
des (...) (...) (...), that is, Spiritus sancti radix, the root of the holy
Ghost, as witnesses Leonhartus Fuchsius: in Low Dutch, Angeliika: in French,
Angelic: in English also Angelica.

It seems to be a kind of Laserpitium; for if it be compared with those
things which Theophrastus at large has written concerning Silphium or
Laserpitium, in his sixth book of the history of plants, it shall appear to
be answerable thereunto. But whether wild Angelica be that which Theophrastus
calls Magydaris, that is to say, another kind of Laserpitium, we leave to be
examined and considered of by the learned Physicians of our London College.

The Temperature.
Angelica, especially that of the garden, is hot and dry in the third degree;
therefore it opens, attenuateth or makes thin, (...), and procures sweat.

The Virtues.
The roots of garden Angelica is a singular remedy against poison, and against
the plague, and Antipharmaca do.

Angelica is an enemy to poisons: it cures pestilent diseases if it by used in
season: a dram (...) benedictus, or of Tormentill; and with a little vinegar,
and by it self also, or with Treacle of Vipers added.

It opens the liver and spleen: draws down the terms, drives out or
expels the secondine.

The (...) of the root made in wine, is good against the cold shiuering of
agues.

It is reported that the root is available against witchcraft and
enchantments, if a man carry the Fuchsius says.

It attenuateth and makes thin, gross and tough phlegm: the root being used
green, and while

It is a most singular medicine against surfeting and loathsomenesse to meat:
it helps concoction

The wild kinds are not of such force in working, albe it they have the same
virtues attributed

CHAP. 388. Of Masterworts and herb Gerard.
1 Imperatoria. Masterwoorts.
2 Herba Gerardi. Herb Gerard, or Aish-weed.


The Description.
1 IMperatoria or Masterwoort has great broad leaves not much unlike wild
Angelica, but smaller, and of a deeper green color, in savor like Angelica,
and every leaf divided into sundry other little leaves: the tender knotted
stalks are of a reddish color, bearing at the top round spokie tufts with
white flowers: the seed is like the seed of Dill: the root is thick, knotty
and tuberous, of a good savor, and hot or biting upon the tongue, which has
moved the unskillful to call it Pellitory of Spain, but very unfitly and
untruly.

2 Herba Gerardi, which Pena does also call Imperatoria and Ostrutium: the
Germans Podagraria, that is, Gout-woort: in English, herb Gerard, or wild
Masterwoot, and in some places after Lyte, Ashweed; is very like the other in
leaves, flowers, and roots, saving that they be smaller, growing upon long
stems: the roots tenderer, whiter, and not so thick or tuberous. The whole
plant is of a reasonable good savor, but not so strong as Masterwoort.

The Place.
Imperatoria grows in dark woods and deserts; in my Garden and sundry others
very plentifully.

Herb Gerard grows of it self in gardens without setting or sowing, and is
so fruitful in his increase, that where it has once taken root, it will
hardly be gotten out again, spoiling and getting every year more ground, to
the annoying of better herbs.

The Time.
They flower from the beginning of June to the beginning of August.

The Names.
Imperatoria, or Astrantia, is called in English, Masterwoort, or bastard
Pellitory of Spain.

Herba Gerardi is called in English, Herb Gerard, Aishweed, and Goutwoort: in
Latin also Podagraria Germanica.

The Nature.
Imperatoria, especially the root, is hot and dry in the third degree. The
wild Imperatoria, or herb Gerard, is almost of the same nature and quality,
but not so strong.

The Virtues.
Imperatoria is not only good against all poison, but also singular against
all corrupt and naughty

The roots and leaves stamped, dissolve and cure pestilentiall carbuncles and
botches, and such

The root drunk in wine cures the extreme and rigorous cold fits of agues,
and is good against

The same taken in manner aforesaid, comfort and strengthens the stomach,
helps digestion,

It greatly helps such as have taken great squats, bruses, or falls from some
high place, dissoluing

Herb Gerard with his roots stamped, and laid upon members that are troubled
or vexed with Podagraria, because of his virtues in curing the gout.

It cures also the Hemorrhoids, if the fundament be bathed with the decoction
of the leaves

False Pellitory of Spain attenuateth or makes thin, digesteth, provoke
sweat and urine,

One dram of the root in powder given certain days together, is a remedy for
them that have

Being given with wine before the fit come, it cures the quartaine ague, and
is a remedy against

The same boiled in sharp or sower wine, eases the toothache, if the mouth be
washed therewith

Being chewed it draws forth water and phlegm out of the mouth (which kind
of remedies Apophlegmatismi) and disburdeneth the brain of phlegmatic
humors, and are likewise used with good success in apoplexies, drowsy
sleeps, and other like infirmities.

CHAP. 389. Of Hercules Wound-wort, or All-heale.
The Kinds.
PAnax is of sundry kinds, as witnesses Theophrastus in his ninth book; one
grows in Syria, and likewise other three, that is to say, Chironium,
Heraclium, and Aesculapium; or Chirons Allheale, Hercules All-heale, and
Aesculapius All-heale. Besides these there is one (...), or broad (...); so
that in Theophrastus there are six kinds of Panax: but Dioscorides describes
only three, Horacleum, Asclepium, and Chironium: whereunto we have added
another sort, whose virtues we found out by means of a husbandman, and for
that cause have named it Panax Coloni, or Clownes wort.

1 Panax Heracleum. Hercules All-heale.
2 Panax (...) maius. Hercules great Wound-wort.


The Description.
1 HErcules All-heale or Wound-wort has many broad leaves spread upon the
ground, very rough and hairy, of an ouerworne green color, and deeply cut
into diverse sections like those of the Cow Parsenep, and not unlike to the fig
leaves: among the which rises up a very strong stalk covered over with a
rough hairinesse, of the height of (...) or five cubits. Being wounded it
yields forth a yellow gummie juice, as does every part of the plant, which is
that precious gum called Opopanax: at the top of which stalks stand great tufts
or vmbels of yellowish flowers, set together in spoky rundles like those of
Dill, which turn into seed of a straw color, sharp and hot in taste, and of a
pleasing (...): the root is very thick, fat; and full of juice, and of a white
color.

2 The great Wound-wort, which the Venetians nourish in their gardens, has
great large leaves somewhat rough or hairie, consisting of diverse small leaves
set together upon a middle rib, which make one entire lease joined together in
one, whereof each collateral or side leaf is long, and sharp pointed: among
which rises up a knotty stalk three (...) four cubits high, dividing it
self into diverse branches; on the tops whereof do grow spokie tufts or rundles
like the precedent, but the flowers are commonly white: the seed is flat and
plain: the root long, thick, and white, which being broken or wounded,
yields forth liquor like that of the former, of a hot and biting taste.

The Place.
These plants grow in Syria; the first of them also in my garden: but what
Panax of Syria is, Theophrastus does not express. Pliny in his (...) book,
Chap. 26. says, that the leaves are round, and of a great compass: but it is
suspected that these are drawn from the description of Hercules Panax.

Broad leafed Panax is thought to be the great Centory: for Pliny witnesses,
that Panax which Chiron found out is syrnamed Centaurium, Centorie.

Matthiolus says it grows of it self in the tops of the hills Apennini, in
the Cape Argentaria, in the sea coasts of Siena, and it is cherished in the
gardens of Italy: but he cannot affirm, That the liquor hereof is gathered in
Italy; for the liquor Opopanax which is sold in Venice is brought, says he,
out of Alexandria a city in Egypt: it grows also in Syria, Booetia, and in
Phocide, cities of Arcadia.

The Time.
They flower and flourish from the first of May unto the end of September.

The Names.
That which is is called (...) in Greek, is likewise named Panax in Latin:
and that Panax Heraclium which Dioscorides sets down is called in Latin,
Panax Heraculanum, or Herculeum, or Hercules Panax: it may be called in
English, Hercules his Wound-wort or All-heale, or Opopanax wort, of the Greek
name.

The Temperature.
The bark of the root of Hercules Wound-wort is hot and dry, yet less than
the juice, as Galen teaches.

The Virtues.
The seed beat to powder and drunk in Wormwood wine is good against poison,
the biting of

The leaf or root stamped with honey, and brought to the form of an Unguent
or Salve, (...)

CHAP. 390. Of Clownes Wound-wortor All-heale.
The Description.
CLownes All-heale, or the Husbandmans Wound-wort, has long slender square
stalks of the height of two cubits, furrowed or chamfered along the same as it
were with small gutters, and somewhat rough or hairy: whereupon are set by
couples one opposite to another, long rough leaves somewhat narrow, bluntly
indented about the edges like the teeth of a saw, of the form of the leaves of
Speare-mint, and of an ouerworne green color: at the top of the stalks grow
the flowers spike fashion, of a purple color mixed with some few spots of
white, in form like to little hoods. The root consists of many small threddy
strings, whereunto are annexed or tied diverse knobby or tuberous lumpes, of a
white color tending to yellowness: all the whole plant is of an unpleasant
savor like Stachys or stinking Hore-hound. The root in the Winter time and the
beginning of the Spring is somewhat knobby tuberous, and ioynted, which after
the stalks grow up become flaccide and hollow, and so the old ones decay, and
then it puts forth new ones.

The Place.
It grows in moist meadows by the sides of ditches, and likewise in fertile
fields that are somewhat moist, almost every where; especially in Kent about
South-fleet, near to Grauesend, and likewise in the meadows by Lambeth near
London.

The Time.
It floureth in August, and brings his seed to perfection in the end of
September.

The Names.
That which has bin said iu the description shall suffice touching the names,
as well in Latin as English.

Panax Coloni. Clownes All-heale.


This plant by Gesner was called Stachys palustris, and Betonica faetida, and
thought to be of the kind of Herba (...), or Sideritis; to which indeed I
should, and Thaltus has referred it, calling it Sideritis 1. grauis odoris:
Caesalpinus calls it Tertiola; and gives this reason, quod Tertianas sanet,
because it cures Tertians. Tabernamontan. called it Stachys aquatica, whose
figure with a description our Author in the former edition gave, page 565. by
the name of Marrubium aquaticum acutum; yet (as it (...)) either not knowing,
or forgetting what he had formerly done, he here again sets it forth as a
new thing, under another title: but the former figure of Tabern. being in my
judgment the better, I have here given you, with addition of the iointed
tuberous roots as they are in Winter: yet by the Caruers fault they are not
altogether so exquisitely expressed as I intended.

The Temperature.
This plant is hot in the second degree, and dry in the first.

The Virtues.
The leaves hereof stamped with Axungia or Edmund Cartwright, who was thrust
into the lungs, the wound entering in at the lower part of the Thorax, or the
brest-blade, even through that cartilaginous substance called Mucronata
Cartilago, insomuch that from day to day the frothing and puffing of the lungs
did spew forth of the wound such excrements as it was possessed of, besides the
Gentleman was most dangerously vexed with a double quotidian fever; whom by
Gods permission I perfectly cured in very short time, and with this Clownes
experiment, and some of my foreknowne helps, which were as follows.

First I framed a slight unguent hereof thus: I took four handfulls of the
herb stamped, and

The which I warmed in a sawcer, dipping therein small soft tents, which I put
into the wound, Calcitheos, relented with oil of roses: which manner of
dressing and preserving I used even until the wound was perfectly whole:
notwithstanding once in a day. I gave him two spoonfulls of this decoction
following.

I took a quart of good Claret Wine, wherein I boiled an handful of the
leaves of Solidago Saracenica, and Saracens Consound, or four ounces of honey,
whereof I gave him in the morning two spoonfulls to drink in a small draught
of wine tempered with a little Sugar.

In like manner I cured a Shoo-makers servant in Holburne, who intended to
destroy himself Abdomine or the nether belly, so that the Zirbus or (...),
commonly called the caul, issued forth, with the guts likewise: the which
mortal wounds, by Gods permission, and the virtues of this herb, I perfectly
cured within twenty days: for the which the name of God be praised.

CHAP. 391. Of Magydare, or Laser-wort.
That figure which formerly was in this place, was of the (...) Lovage
described in the following chapter.
Laserpitium. Laser-wort.


The Description.
IT seems that neither Dioscorides nor yet Theophrastus have ever seen
Laserpitium, Sagapenum, or any other of the gummiferous roots, but have barely
and nakedly set down their judgments upon the same, either by hearsay, or by
reading of other men's Works. Now then seeing the old Writers be imperfect
herein, it behooves us in this case to search with more diligence the truth
hereof; and the rather, for that very few have set forth the true description
of that Plant which is called Laserpitium, that is indeed the true Laserpitium,
from the roots whereof flow that sap or liquor called Laser. This plant, as
Pena and Lobel themselves say, was found out not far from the Isles which
Dioscorides calls Stoechades, over against Massilia, among sundry other rare
plants. His stalk is great and thick like Ferula, or Fennel giant: The
leaves are like unto the common Smallage, and of an unpleasant savor. The
flowers grow at the top of the stalks, tuft-fashion like Ferula or Fennel:
which being past, there succeed broad and flat seeds like Angelica, of a good
savor, and of the color of Box. The roots are many, coming from one head or
chief root, and are covered ouerwith a thick and fat bark. These roots and
stalks being scarified or cut, there flows out of them a strong liquor,
which being dried is very medicinable, and is called Laser.

The Place.
There be sundry sorts of Laser, flowing from the roots and stalks of
Laserpitium, the goodness or quality whereof varieth according to the
country or clymate wherein the plant grows. For the best grows upon the
high mountains of Cyrene and Africa, and is of a pleasant smell: in Syria
also, Media, Armenia, and Lybia; the liquour of which plant growing in these
places is of a most strong and detestable savor. Lobel reports, that Iacobus
Rainaudus an Apothecarie of Massilia was the first that made it known, or
brought the plants thereof to Montpellier in France, unto the learned
Rondeletius, who right well beholding the same, concluded, that of all the
kinds of Ferula that he had ever seen, there was not any so answerable unto
the true Laserpitium as this only plant.

The Time.
This Plant floureth in Montpellier about Midsommer.

The Names.
It is called in Latin Laserpitium: in English, Laserwoort, and Magydare: the
gum or liquour that issues out of the same is called Laser, but that which is
gathered from those plants that do grow in Media and Syria, is called (...).

The Nature.
Laserpitium especially the root, is hot and dry in the third degree: Laser is
also hot and dry in the third (...), but it exceeds much the heat of the
leaves, stalks, and roots of Laserpitium.

The Virtues.
The root of Laserpitium well pounded, or stamped with oil, scatters clotted
blood, takes away

The same root made into a plaster with the oil of Ireos and wax, does both
assuage and cure

The same holden in the mouth and chewed, does assuage the toothache; for they
are such roots

The liquour or gum of Laserpitium, especially the Laser of Cyrene broken and
dissolved in water

Laser cures the iaundies and dropsy, taken with dried figs: also being taken
in the quantity of

The same taken with honey and vinegar, or the syrrup of vinegar, is very good
against the falling

It is good against the flux of the belly coming of the debilitie and
weakness of the stomach Coeliacus morbus) if it be taken with raisons of the
Sun.

It drives away the shakings and shiuerings of agues, being drunk with wine,
pepper, and white Antidotus (...) (...), which is a singular medicine against
fever quartaines.

It is excellent against the bitings of all venomous beasts, and venomous shot
of darts or arrows,

It brings to maturation, and breaks all pestilentiall imposthumes, botches
and carbuncles,

Being laid to with Copperas and Verdigrease, it takes away all superfluous
outgrowings of

If it be applied with vinegar, pepper and win, it cures the naughty scurfe
of the head, and falling

The gum or liquour of Laserpitium which grows in Armenia, Lybia, and sundry
other places, is Asa and Assa, as also with us in shoppes Asafoetida: but the
Laserpitium growing in Cyrene is the best, and of a reasonable pleasant smell,
and is called Laser to distinguish and make difference between the two juices;
though Asa foetida be good for all purposes aforesaid, yet is it not so good as
Laser of Cyrene: it is good also to smell unto, and to be applied unto the
nauels of women vexed with the choking, or rising of the mother.

CHAP. 392. Of common Louage.
The Description.
Ancient writers have added unto this common kind of Louage, a second sort,
yet knowing that the plant so supposed is the true Siler montanum, and not
Leuisticum, though others have also deemed it Laserpitium. These two
suppositions are easily answered, since they be sundry kinds of plants,
though they be very near in shape and faculties one unto another. This plant
The figure which was here was of the (...) (...), or (...) (...).
Leuisticum vulgar. Common Louage.
being our common garden Louage, has large and broad leaves, almost like to
smallage. The stalks are round, hollow and knottie, 3. cubits high, having
spoky (...), or bushy rundles; and at the top of the stalks of a yellow color,
a round, flat, and brown seed, like the seed of Angelica: the root is long
and thick, and brings forth every year new stems.

The Place.
The right Leuisticum or Louage grows in sundry gardens, and not wild (as far
as I know) in England.

The Time.
Louage floureth most commonly in July and August.

The Names.
It is called in Latin (...): and by some, Ligusticum: of other some, Siler
montanum, but not truly: in High Dutch, (...): in French, Liuische: in Low
Dutch, Lauetse: in English, Louage.

The Nature.
This plant is hot and dry in the third degree.

The Virtues.
The roots of Louage are very good for all

The seed thereof warmeth the stomach, helps Ant. Musa.

The distilled water of Louage clears the sight, and puts away all spots,
lentils, freckles, and

CHAP. 393. Of Cow Parsnep.
The Description.
THis plant Sphondylium grows in all Countries, and is known by the name of
wild Parsnep or Sphondylium, whereunto it effectually answers, both in his
grievous and rank savor, as also in the likeness of the root, wereupon it
was called Sphondylium; and of the Germans, Acanthus, but untruly: the leaves
of this plant are long and large, not much unlike the leaves of wild Parsnep,
or Panax (...); deeply notched or cut about the edges like the teeth of a saw,
and of an ouerworne green color. The flowers grow in tusts or rundles, like
unto wild Parsneps: the root is like to Henbane: this herb in each part
thereof has an evil savor, and differs from the right Acanthium, not only
in faculties, but even in all other things.

The Place.
This plant grows in fertile moist meadows, and feeding pastures, very
commonly in all parts of England, or elsewhere, in such places as I have
traveled.

The Time.
Sphondylium floureth in June and July.

The Names.
It is called in Greek (...): in Latin likewise Sphondylium: the in shops of
High and Low Germany The figure (...) was of the (...) (...), or (...) of
(...), and the figure that should have been here was (...), under the title of
(...).
Sphondylium. Cow Parsnep.
Branca vrsina, who unadvisedly in times past have used it in clysters, in
stead of Brancke Vrsine, and thereupon have named it Bernclaw: in English, Cow
Parsnep, meadow Parsnep, and Madnep.

The Nature.
Cow Parsnep is of a manifest warm complexion.

The Virtues.
The leaves of this plant do consume and

The people of Polonia and Lituania use

The seed of Cow parsnep drunken, scoureth

Also if a man be fallen into a dead sleep,

If a pihrenticke or (...) (...)

CHAP. 394. Of Herb Frankincense.
The Description.
1 THere has been from the beginning diverse plants of sundry kinds, which
men have termed by this glorious name Libanot is, only in respect of the
excellent and (...) smell which they have yielded unto the senses of man,
somewhat resembling (...). The sent and smell Dioscorides does ascribe to the
root of this first kind, which brings forth a long stalk with ioints like
Fennel, whereon grow leaves almost like Cheruill or Hemlocks, saving that they
be greater, broader, and thicker: at the top of the stalks grow spokie tassels
bearing whitish flowers, which do turn into sweet smelling seed, somewhat
flat, and almost like the seed of Angelica. The root is black without, and
white within, hairie above, at the parting of the root and stalk like unto
Meum or Peucedanum, and sauoreth like unto Rosine, or Frankincense.

2 The second kind of Libanot is has also a straight stalk, full of knots
and ioints: the leaves are like unto Smallage: the flowers grow in tassels like
unto the former, and bring forth great, long and uneven seed, of a sharp
taste: the root is like the former, and so is the whole plant very like, but
lesser.

3 The third kind of Libanot is differs somewhat from the others in form
and shape, yet it agrees with them in smell, which in some sort is like
Frankincense: the leaves are whiter, longer, and rougher than the leaves of
Smallage: the stalks do grow to the height of two cubits, bearing at the top
the spokie tufts of Dill, somewhat yellow: the root is like the former, but
thicker, neither wants it hairie tassels at the top of the root; which the
others also have, before rehearsed.

1 Libanotis Theophrasti mayor. Great herb Frankincense.
2 Libanotis Theophrasti minor. Small herb Frankincense.
(...) Libanotis Theophrasti nigra. Black herb Frankincense.
4 Libanotis Galeni, Cachrys verior. Rosemarie Frankincense.


4 I cannot (...) among all the plants called Libanotides, any one more
agreeable to the true and right Libanotis of Dioscorides than this herb, which
arises up to the height of five or six cubits with the clear shining stalks
of Ferula; dividing it self from his knottie ioints into sundry arms or
branches, set full of leaves like Fennel, but thicker and bigger, and fatter
than the leaves of Cotulafoetida, of a grayish green color, bearing at the
top of the stalks the tufts of (...), or rather of Carrots, full of yellow
flowers: which being past there succeeds long flat seed like the seed of the
Ash tree, smelling like (...), or Frankincense, which being chewed fills the
mouth with the taste of Frankincense, but sharper: all the rest of the plant is
tender, and somewhat hot, but not unpleasant: the plant is like unto Ferula,
and abounds with milk as Ferula does, (...) a reasonable good (...).

The Place.
I have the two last kinds growing in my garden; the first and second grow
upon the high Deserts and mountains of Germany.

The Time.
These herbs do flower in July and August.

The Names.
This herb is called in Greek (...), because their roots do smell like
incense, which is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Rosmarinus; the first may
be Englished great Frankincense Rosemarie; the second small Frankincense
Rosemarie; Mr. Lite calls the third in English, black Hart-root, the fourth
white Hart-root: the seed is called Cachrys or Canchrys.

The Nature.
These herbs with their seeds and roots are hot and dry in the second degree,
and are of a digesting, dissoluing, and mundifying quality.

The Virtues.
The leaves of Libanotis pounded, stop the flux of the Hemorrhoides or
piles, and supple the Condilomata, concoct the swellings of the throat called
Strum, and ripen botches that will hardly be brought to suppuration or to
ripeness.

The juice of the leaves and roots mixed with honey, and put into the eyes,
does quicken the sight,

The seed mingled with honey, does scour and cleanse rotten ulcers, and being
applied unto cold

The leaves and roots boiled until they be soft, and mingled with the meal of
Darnell and vinegar,

Moreover being received in wine and pepper, it helps the iaundice, and
provoke sweat, and

It purges the disease called in Greek (...): in Latin, Vitiligo, or
Impetigo, that is, the white spottines

When the seed of Libanotis is put into receipts, you must understand, that it
is not meant of the

CHAP. 395. Of Corianders.
The Description.
1 THe first or common kind of Coriander is a very stinking herb, smelling
like the stinking worm called in Latin Cimex: it has a round stalk full of
branches, two foot long. The leaves are of a faint green color, very much cut
or iagged: the leaves that grow lowest, and spring first, are almost like the
leaves of Cheruill or Parsley, but those which come forth afterward, and grow
upon the stalks, are more iagged, almost like the leaves of Fumitorie, though a
great deal smaller, tenderer, and more iagged. The flowers are white, and do
grow in round tassels like unto Dill. The seed is round, hollow within, and of
a pleasant sent and savor when it is dry. The root is hard, and of a wooddie
substance, which dies when the fruit is ripe, and sows it self (...) year
to year, whereby it mightily increases.

1 Coriandrum. Coriander.
2 Coriandrum alterum minus odorum. Bastard Coriander.


2 There is a second kind of Coriander very like unto the former, saving that
the bottom leaves and stalks are smaller: the fruit thereof is greater, and
growing together by couples, it is not so pleasant of savor nor taste, being a
wild kind thereof, unfit either, for meat or medicine.

The Place.
Coriander is sown in fertile fields and gardens, and the first does come of
it self from time to time in my garden, though I never sowed the same but once.

The Time.
They flower in June and July, and deliver their seed in the end of August.

The Names.
The first is called in Latin Coriandrum: in English, Corianders. The second,
Coriandrum alterum, wild Corianders.

The Temperature.
The green and stinking leaves of Corianders are of complexion cold and dry,
and very naught, unwholesome and hurtful to the body.

The dry and pleasant well sauouring seed is warm, and very convenient to
sundry purposes.

The Virtues.
Coriander seed prepared and covered with sugar, as comfits, taken after meat
closes up the

The same parched or roasted, or dried in an oven, and drunk with wine, kills
and brings forth

The manner how to prepare Coriander, both for meat and medicine. Take the seed
well and sufficiently dried, whereupon pour some wine and vinegar, and so
leave

The green leaves of Coriander boiled with the crumbs of bread or barley meal,
consumes all hot swellings and inflammations: and with Bean meal dissolueth
the Kings evil, wens, and hard lumpes.

The juice of the leaves mixed and (...) in a leaden mortar, with Ceruse,
Litharge of (...), vinegar,

The juice of the green Coriander leaves, taken in the quantity of four
dragmes, kills and

The seeds of Coriander prepared with sugar, prevail much against the gout,
(...) in some

Also (...) it be taken with meat fasting, it causes good digestion, and
shuts up the stomach,

CHAP. 396. Of Parsley.
(...) (...). Garden Parsley.


The Description.
1 THe leaves of garden Parsley are of a (...) green, consisting of many
little ones fastened together, divided most commonly into three parts, and also
snipt round about the edges: the stalk is above one cubit high, slender,
something chamfered, on the top whereof stand spoked rundles, bringing forth
very fine little flowers, and afterward small seeds somewhat of a fiery taste:
the root is long and white, and good to be eaten.

2 There is another garden Parsley in taste and virtue like unto the precedent:
the only difference is, that this plant brings forth leaves very admirably
crisped or curled like fannes of curled feathers, whence it is called Apium
crispum, sieve multifidum; Curled Parsley.

3 There is also kept in some gardens another Parsley called Apium sieve
Petroselinum Virginianum, or Virginian Parsley; it has leaves like the
ordinary, but rounder, and of a yellowish green color, the stalks are some
three foot high, divided into sundry branches whereon grow vmbels of whitish
flowers: the seeds are like, but larger than those of the common Parsley, and
when they are ripe they commonly sow themselves, and the old roots die, and the
young ones bear seed the second year after there sowing.

The Place.
It is sown in beds in gardens; it grows both in hot and cold places, so
that the ground be either by nature moist, or be oftentimes watered: for it
prospers in moist places, and is delighted with water, and therefore it
naturally comes up near to fountains or springs: Fuchsius writes that it
is found growing of it self in diverse fenny grounds in Germany.

The Time.
It may be sown betime, but it slowly comes up: it may oftentimes be cut and
cropped: it brings forth his (...) the (...) (...): the (...) be ripe in July
or August.

The (...).
Every one of the (...) is called in Greek (...): but this (...) named, (...),
that is to say, Apium hortense: the Apothecaries and (...) (...) name it
Petroselinum: in high (...), (...): in low Dutch, (...), (...): in French, du
Persil: in Spanish, (...) (...), and Salsa: in Italian, (...): in English,
Persele, Parsely, common Parsley, and garden Parsley. Yet is it not the true
and right Petroselinum which grows among rocks and (...), whereupon it took
his name, and whereof the best is in Macedonia: therefore they are (...) who
think that garden Parsley does not differ from stone Parsley, and that the
only difference is, for that Garden Parsley is of less force than the wild;
for wild herbs are more strong (...) operation than those of the garden.

The Temperature.
Garden Parsley is hot and dry, but the seed is more hot and dry, which is hot
in the second degree, and dry almost in the third: the root is also of a
moderate heat.

The Virtues.
The leaves are pleasant in sauces and broth, in which besides that they give a
(...) taste, they

The seeds are more profitable for medicine; they make thin, open, provoke
urine, dissolve the

The roots or the seeds of any of them boiled in ale and drunken, cast forth
strong venom or

They are also good to be put into clysters against the stone or torments of
the guts.

CHAP. 367: Of water Parsley, or Smallage.
Eleoselinum, sieve Paludapium. Smallage.


The Description.
SMallage has green smooth and glittering leaves, cut into very many parcels,
yet greater and broader than those of common Parsley: the stalks be chamfered
and divided into branches, on the tops whereof stand little white flowers;
after which do grow seeds something lesser than those of common Parsley: the
root is fastened with many strings.

The Place.
This kind of Parsley delights to grow in moist places, and is brought from
thence into gardens. It grows wild abundantly upon the banks in the salt
marshes of Kent and Essex.

The Time.
It flourishes when the garden Parsley does, and the stalk likewise comes up
the next year after it is sown, and then also it brings forth seeds which
are ripe in July and August.

The Names.
It is called in Greek (...): of Gaza, Paludaplum: in shops, Apium, absolutely
without any addition: in Latin, Palustre Apium, and Apium rusticum: in high
Dutch, (...): in low Dutch, (...), and of diverse (...): in Spanish and Italian,
Apio: in French, de (...): in English, Smallage, Marsh Parsley, or water
Parsley.

The Temperature.
This Parsley is like in temperature and virtues to that of the garden, but it
is both hotter and drier, and of more force in most things: this is seldom
eaten, neither is it (...) good for (...), but it is very profitable for
medicine.

The Virtues.
The juice thereof is good for many things, it cleanses, opens, attenuateth
or makes thin; it Syrupus (...), open the stoppings of the liver and spleen,
and are a remedy for long lasting agues, whether they be tertians or quartains,
and all other which proceed both of a cold cause and also of obstructions or
stoppings, and are very good against the yellow jaundise.

The same juice does perfectly cure the malicious and venomous ulcers of the
mouth, and of the Mel Rosarum, or honey of Roses added, if the parts be washed
therewith: it likewise helps all outward ulcers and foul wounds: with honey
it is profitable also for cankers exulcerated, for although it cannot cure
them, yet it does keep them from putrefaction, and preserves them from
stinking: the seed is good for those things for which that of the Garden
Parsley is: yet is not the use thereof so safe, for it hurts those that are
troubled with the falling sickness, as by evident proofs it is very well
known.

Smallage, as Pliny writes, has a peculiar virtue against the biting of
venomous spiders.

The juice of Smallage mixed with honey and bean flower, does make an excellent
mundificatiue

The leaves boiled in hogs grease, and made into the form of a pultis, take
away the pain of

CHAP. 398. Of Mountain Parsley.
This whole chapter was wholly taken from (...) Tempt. 5. lib. 4 cap. 3.
wherefore I have given his figure, which was (...) to the history, for the
figure our Author here gave, was of the (...) (...) (...), far different from
this, as I shall here: (...) show you in the (...). of (...).
Oreoselinum. Mountain Parsley.


The Description.
THe stalk of mountain Parsley, as Dioscorides writes, is a span high,
growing from a slender root; upon which are branches and little heads like
those of Hemlock, yet much slenderer: on which stalks do grow the seed, which
is long, of a sharp or biting taste, slender, and of a strong smell, like unto
Cumin: but we can not find that this kind of Mountain Parsley is known in
our age: the leaves of this we here give are like those of common parsley, but
greater and broader, consisting of many slender footstalkes fastened unto them;
the stalk is short, the flowers on the spoked tufts be white; the seed small:
the root is white, and of a mean length or bigness, in taste somewhat biting
and bitterish, and of a sweet smell.

The Place.
This whole chapter was wholly taken from (...) Tempt. 5. lib. 4 cap. 3.
wherefore I have given his figure, which was (...) to the history, for the
figure our Author here gave, was of the (...) (...) (...), far different from
this, as I shall here: (...) show you in the (...). of (...).
Dioscorides writes, that mountain Parsley grows upon rocks and
mountains. And Dodonaeus affirms that this herb described grows on the
hills which divide Silesia from Morauia, called in times past the counntrey of
the Marcomans: also it is said to be found on other mountains and hills in the
North parts of England.

The Names.
The Grecians do name it of the mountains (...), which the Latins also for
that cause do call Apium Montanum, and Montapium: in English, mountain
Parsley: in Latin, Apium: but Dioscorides makes Petroselinum or stone Parsley
to differ from mountain Parsley; for says he, we must not be deceived, taking
mountain Parsley to be that which grows on (...): (...) rock Parsley is
another plant, of some it is called, (...): in Latin, (...), (in English, much
good:) for it is so named because it is good, and profitable (...) many things:
and this is not altogether improperly termed Orcoselinum, or mountain Parsley;
for it grows as we have said on mountains, and is not unlike to stone
Parsley: the seed is not like to that of Cumin, (...) if it were so: who would
deny it to be Oreoselinum, or Dioscorides, his mountain Parsley.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Oreoselinum, or mountain Parsley is, as Galen says, like in faculty unto
Smallage, but more effectual; Dioscorides writes that the seed and root being
drunk in wine provoke urine, (...) down the menses, and that they are mixed
with counterpoisons, diureticke medicines, and medicines that are hot.

The root of (...), or much good, is also hot and dry, and that in the later
end of the second

CHAP. 399. Of stone Parsley of Macedonie.
The first figure that was formerly in this chapter should have been in the
second place, and that in the second place was of Alexanders, and should have
been put in the following chapter.
1 Petroselinum (...), (...). Bastard stone Parsley.
The first figure that was formerly in this chapter should have been in the
second place, and that in the second place was of Alexanders, and should have
been put in the following chapter.
2 Petroselinum Macedonicum (...). The true Parsley of Macedonia.


The Description.
OF stone Parsley very little is written of the old writers, Dioscorides only
says that this has seed like to that of Ameos, but of a more pleasant smell,
sharp, aromaticall, or spiced: touching the form of the leaves, the color of
the flowers, and fashion of the (...) he writes nothing at all: and Pliny is
more brief; as for Theophrastus he does not so much as name it, making mention
only of Parsley, Alexander, Smallage, and mountain Parsley.

1 For stone Parsley Leonhartus Fuchsius has set down a plant, having leaves
not (...) and cut after the manner of garden Parsley, but long, and snipped
round about, made up and fastened to a (...) or stem in the midst, something
like, but yet not altogether, to the first leaves of the lesser Saxifrage; the
stalk is slender, and a cubit and a half high; the flowers on the spokie
tufts are white: the seed something black, like to that of Ameos, and garden
Parsley, very sweet of smell, something sharp or biting: the root is slender
and full of strings.

2 Lobel also in stead of the right stone Parsley describes another, which the
Venetians call stone Parsley of Macedonia: this has leaves like those of
garden Parsley, or rather of the Venetian Saxifrage which is the black herb
Frankincense formerly described: the stalk is a cubit high; the spokie tufts
something white: the seed small, quickly vading (as he says) inferior to
that of garden Parsley in temperature and virtues: but whether this be the true
and right stone Parsley, he adds, he is ignorant.

The Place.
It grows on craggy rocks, and among stones: but the best in Macedonia,
whereupon it bears the surname Macedonicum, of Macedonia.

The Time.
It floureth in the summer months.

The Names.
It is called in Greek, (...), of the stony places where it grows: in
Latin, Petrapium, and Petroselinum Macedonicum: in English, stone Parsley: the
Apothecaries know it not: they are far deceived that would have the herb
which Fuchsius pictureth to be Amomum: for Amomum differs from this, as it is
very plain by the description thereof in Dioscorides: but we hold this for the
true stone Parsley, till such time as we may learn some other more like in
leaves to the Parslies, and in seed, such as that of stone Parsley ought to be:
and the very seed it self may cause us to hold this opinion, being so agreeing
to the description as no herb more; for it is sharp and biting, and of a
sweeter smell than is that of Ameos, and of a more spicy sent; yet do not the
leaves gainesay it, which though they have not the perfect form of other
Parsleyes, yet notwithstanding are not altogether unlike. The first of these is
thought by Anguillara, Turner, Gesner, Cordus, and others, to be the Sison of
Dioscorides, and Tragus calls it, Amomum Germanicum, and the seeds in shops
retain the name of Sem. Amomi. The second is thought by Columna to be the
second Daucus of Dioscorides.

The Temperature.
The seed of stone Parsley which is most commonly used, is hot and dry, having
withal a cutting quality.

The Virtues.
It provoke urine, and brings down the flowers: it is profitable against
wind in the stomach, and collicke gut, and gripings in the belly: for it is,
as Galen says, (...), that is to say, a waster Dioscorides.

CHAP. 400. Of Corn Parsley, or Hone-wort.
The Description.
THis herb comes up at the first from seed like Parsley, with two small long
narrow leaves, the next that spring are two small round smooth leaves nickt
about the edges, and so for two or three couples of leaves of the next growth
there are such round leaves growing on a middle rib by couples, and one round
one, also at the top; after as more leaves spring up, so the fashion of them
also change, that is to say, every leaf has about eight or nine small smooth
green leaves, growing on each side of a middle rib one opposite against
another, and one growing by it self at the top, and are finely snipt or
indented about the edges, in form resembling those of Sium odoratum Tragi, but
not so big, long, or at all brownish; amongst which rise up many small round
straked stalks or branches, about two foot long, now and then above twenty
from one root, sometimes growing upright, sometimes creeping not far from the
ground, joynted or kneed, Selinum Sij folijs. Honewoort.
and dividing themselves into very many branches, at every joint grows one
lease smaller than the former, which together with the lowermost-perish, so
that there is seldom one green leaf to be seen on this herb when the seed
is ripe, the flowers are white, and grow most commonly at the tops of the
branches, sometimes at most of the joints even from the earth, in uneven or
unorderly vmbells, every flower having five exceeding small leaves, flat, and
broad at the top, and in the middle very small cheiues with purple tops, the
whole flower not much exceeding the bigness of a small pins head, which being
past there comes up in the place of every flower two small gray crooked
straked seeds, like Parsley seeds, but bigger, in taste hot and aromaticall.
The root is small and whitish, with many threads not so big as Parsley roots. It
begins to (...) about the beginning of July, and so continues flouring a
long time; part of the seed is ripe in August, and some scarce in the beginning
of October, mean while some falls whereby it renueth it self, and grows
with flourishing green leaves all the winter.

I took the (...) on of this herb the year, (...). but observed it long
before, not knowing any name for it: first I refered it to (...), calling it,
Sium terrestre, and Sium segetum and agrorum; afterward upon sight of Selinum
peregrinum primum Clusii, which in some respects resembles this herb, I named
it Selinum Sij folijs; yet wanting an English name, at length about the (...)
1625. I saw Mistress Vrsula Leigh (then servant to Mistress Bilson of Mapledurham
in Hampshire, and now (5. Marcij 1632. wife to Master William Mooring
Schoolmaster of Petersfield, a Town near the said Mapledurham) gather it in
the wheat ershes about Mapledurham aforesaid (where in such like grounds it
still grows, especially in clay grounds) who told me it was called Honewort,
and that her Mother mistress Charity Leigh late of Brading in the Isle of Wight
deceased, taught her to use it after the manner here expressed, (...) a
swelling which she had in her left cheek, which for many years would once a
year at the least arise there, and swell with great heat, redness, and
itching, until by the use of this herb it was perfectly cured, and rose no
more nor swelled, being now (5. Martij 1632) about twenty years since, only
the scar remains to this day. This swelling her mother called by the name of
a Hone, but asking whether such tumors werein the said Isle usually called
Hones she could not tell, by reason she was brought from Brading aforesaid
young, and not being above twelve years old when (...) used this medicine.

The Virtues.
Take one handful of the green leaves of this Honewort, and stamp them, put
to it about John Goodyer:

CHAP. 401. Of Alexander.
The Description.
THe leaves of Alexander are cu t into many parcells like those of Smallage,
but they be much greater and broader, smooth also, and of a deep green
color: the stalk is thick, oftentimes a cubit high: the flowers be white,
and grow upon spokie tufts: the seed is thick, long, black something bitter,
and of an aromaticall or spicy smell: the root is thick, black without, white
within, like to a little Radish, and is good to be eaten out of which being
broken or cut, there issues forth a juice that quickly waxes thick, having
in it a sharp bitterness, like in taste unto Myrrh: which thing also
Theophrastus has noted, there issues out of it, says he, a juice like Myrrh.

The figure formerly here was of (...), and that belonging to this place was
put in the (...) chapter.
Hipposclinum. Alexanders.


The Place.
Alexanders or great Parsley grows in most places of England.

The Time.
The seed waxes ripe the second year, in the Month of August.

The Names.
It is called in Greek, of the greatness wherein, it excels the other
Parsleyes (...), or Horse Parsley; of Gaza, Equapium: it is also named Olus
alrum, or the black potherbe; and of diverse (...) Apium, or wild Parsley; of
Galen and certain others, (...), by reason of the juice that issues forth
thereof, that is, as we have said, like unto Myrrh, which is called in Greek
(...): there is also another Smyrnium of mount A man, of which we do write in
the 404. chapter: the Apothecaries call it Petroselinum Macedonicum: others,
Petroselinum Alexandrinum: the Germans, (...) (...): the Low-Country-men,
(...) (...) (...): in Spanish, Perexil Macedonico: the French, and Englishmen,
Alexandre, Alexanders.

The Temperature.
The seed and root of Alexanders, are no less hot and dry than are those of
the Garden Parsley, they cleanse and make thin, being hot and dry in the third
degree.

The Virtues.
Dioscorides says, that the leaves and stalks are boiled and eaten, and
dressed alone by themselves,

The seeds bring down the flowers, expel the secondine, break and consume
wind, provoke

CHAP. 402. Of wild Parsley.
The Description.
THis is like to the kinds of Parsleyes in the sundry cuts of the leaves, and
also in the bigness; for they be broad and cut into diverse parcels: the
stalks are round, chamfered, set with certain joints, hollow within, a cubit
high or higher, two or three coming forth together out of one root, and in the
nether part many times of a darke-reddish color. The flowers be white, and
grow upon spokie tufts: the seed is round, flat, like that of Dill: the root is
white within, and divided into many branches and strings. This plant in what
part soever it be cut or broken, yields forth a milky juice.

The figure formerly put in this place was of the (...) (...) of (...), whose
history I intend hereafter to give you.
Apium syluestre sieve Thisselium. Wild Parsley.


The Place.
It is found by ponds sides in moist and dankish places, in ditches also,
having in them standing waters, and oftentimes by old stocks of Alder trees.

I have not as yet observed this plant growing wild with us.

The Time.
It floureth and brings forth seed in June and July.

The Nature.
The shops of the Low countries have miscalled it in times past by the name of
Meum, and used it for the right Mew, or Spiknel wort. The Germans name it
(...): Valerius Cordus, Olsenichium: diverse in the Low Countries call it (...)
(...): that is to say in Latin, Apium syluestre, or wild Parsley: and some,
(...) (...): that is, Hydroselinon, or Apium aquatile, water Parsley: and
oftentimes is it named, as we have already written, Eleoselinum, and Sium. It
may be more rightly termed in Latin, Apium sylucstre, and in English, wild
Parsley.

Dioscorides has made mention of wild Parsley in the chapter of Daucus or
wild Carrot: and (...) in his seventh book, where he makes the Parsleyes to
differ both in leaves and stalks, and shows that some have white stalks,
others purple, or else of sundry colors, and that there is also a certain
wild Parsley; for he says that those which have the purple stalks, and the
stalks of diverse colors, come nearest of all to the wild Parsley. And
therefore seeing that Olsenichium, or wild Parsley, has the lower part of the
stalk of a purplish color, and like in leaves to Parsley, which in times past
we thought good rather to call Apium syluestre, or wild Parsley, than to err
with the Apothecaries, and to take it for Mew. And after when we now know that
it was held to be Thysselium Plinij, and that we could allege nothing to the
contrary, we also settled our selves to be of their opinion; and the rather,
because the faculties are agreeable. Thysselium, says Pliny, lib. 25. chapter
11. is not unlike to Parsley: the root hereof purges phlegm out of the head;
which thing also the root of Olsenichium does effectually perform, as we will
forthwith declare. The name also is agreeable, for it seems to be called
(...), because it extends it self, in Greek, (...), through (...), or marish
places.

The Temperature.
The root hereof is hot and dry in the third degree.

The Virtues.
The root being chewed, brings by the mouth phlegm out of the head, and is a
remedy for the

CHAP. 403. Of bastard Parsley.
The Description.
1 THe first kind of bastard Parsley is a rough hairy herb, not much unlike
to Carrots: the leaves are like to those of Corianders, but parted into many
small jagges: at the top of the branches do grow shadowie vmbels, or spokie
rundles, consisting of many small white

1 Caucalis albis floribus. Bastard Parsley with white flowers.
2 Caucalis Apij folijs (...) (...). Bastard Parsley with red (...).
3 Caucalis Peucedanij folio. Hogs Parsley
4 Caucalis mayor Clus. Great rough Parsley.
flowers: the seed is long and rough, like (...) seed of (...), but (...): the
(...) is (...) (...) single, growing deep into the ground, of a white color,
and in taste like the (...).

2 There is another sort like unto the former, saving that the leaves (...)
(...) are broader and the flowers are of a reddish color: there has great
controversy risen (...) out the true determination of Caucalis, because the
Latin interpretation of Dioscorides is greatly (...), (...) in it self much
superfluous matter, not pertinent to the history: but we deem that this plant
is the true Caucalis, the notes set down declare it so to be: the flowers,
says he, are reddish: the seeds (...) with a rough husk set about with
prickles, which cleave unto garments that it touches, as do Burs; which
roughness being pilled (...), the seed appears like unto hulled Otes, not
unpleasant in taste, all which do show it to be the same.

3 There is likewise another sort that has a long single root, thrummed about
the upper (...) with many thrummy threads of a brown color: from which rises
up diverse stalks full of joints or knees, covered with a sheath or skinnie
silme, like unto that of (...): the leaves are finely cut or jagged, resembling
the leaves of our English Saxisrage: the flowers grow at the top of the stalks
in spoky rundles like Fennel: the seed is small like that of Parsley.

5 Caucalis minor flosculis rubentibus. Hedge Parsley.
6 Caucalis nodosa echinoto semine. Knotted Parsley.


4 Clusius under the name of Caucalis mayor has described and figured this,
which has many crested straight stalks some two cubits high or more, which
are divided into sundry branches, and at each joint send forth large and winged
leaves somewhat like those of Angelica, but rougher, and of a darker green; at
the tops of the branches grow vmbels of whitish flowers, being of somewhat a
purplish or flesh color underneath; and these are succeeded by broad seed
almost like those of the Cow-Parsnep, but that they are rougher, and sorked at
the top, and prickly: the root is white, hard and woody. It flowers in June,
ripens the seed in July and August, and then the root dies, and the seed must
be sown in September, and so it will come up and continue green all the
winter.

5 Besides these formerly described there are two others growing wild with us;
the first of these, which I have thought good to call Hedge, or field Parsley,
(because it grows about hedges, and in plowed fields very plentifully every
where) has crested hollow stalks growing up to some cubit and (...) high,
whereon stand winged leaves made of sundry little longish ones, set one against
another, snipt about the edges, and ending in a long and sharp pointed leaf:
these leaves as also the stalks are somewhat rough and harsh, and of a dark
green color; the flowers are small and reddish, and grow in little vmbels, and
are succeeded by longish little rough seed of somewhat a strong and aromaticke
taste and smell. It is an annual plant, and flowers commonly in July, and the
seeds are ripe in August. Cordus and Thalius call it Daucoides minus; and
Bauhine, Caucalis semine aspeo flosoulis subrubentibus. There is a bigger and
lesser variety or sort of this plant, for you shall find it growing to the
height of two cubits, with leaves and all the upper parts answerable, and you
may again observe it not to exceed the height of (...) a foot.

6 This other, which (...) has first set forth in writing by the name of
Caucalis nodosa echinato semine, has a white and long root, from which it
sends up sundry small crested and rough branches which commonly lie along upon
the ground, and they are commonly of an unequal length, some a cubit long,
other-some scarce two handfulls: the leaves are small, rough, winged, and
deeply jagged, and at the setting on of each leaf close to the stalks usually
upon very short foot-stalkes grow small little flowers of color white, or
reddish, and made of five little leaves apeece: after these follow the seed,
round, small and rough, and they grow close to the stalks. It flowers in June
and July, and grows wild in sundry places, as in the fields, and upon the
banks about S. James, and Pickadilla. Fabius Columna judges it to be the true
Scandix of the Ancients.

There is likewise one of these found in Spain, called Caucalis Hispanica,
like the first: but it is an annual plant, which perishes at the first
approach of winter, the which I have sown in my garden, but it perished before
the seed was perfected.

The Place.
These plants do grow naturally upon rocks and stony grounds: we have the
first and the third in our pastures in most places of England: that with red
flowers is a stranger in England.

I have not heard that the third grows wild with us, but the second was found
growing in the corn fields on the hills about Bathe, by Mr. Bowls.

The Time.
They flower and flourish from May to the end of August.

The Names.
Bastard Parsley is called in Greek (...) in Latin also Caucalis: of some,
Daucus (...): among the bastard names of Democritus, (...): in Latin, Pes
Gallinaceus, Pes (...): the Egyptians name it Seselis: the countrymen of
Hetruria, (...) saluatico; in English, bastard Parsley, and Hens foot.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Dioscorides says, that bastard Parsley is a pot-herbe which is eaten either
raw or boiled, and provoke

Pliny does reckon it up also among the pot-herbes: Galen adds, that it is
preserved in pickle

The seed of bastard Parsley is evidently hot and dry, and that in the second
degree: it provoke

It takes away the stoppings of the liver, spleen, and kidneys: it cutteth
and concocteth raw

Matthiolus in his Commentaries upon Dioscorides, the second book, attributes
unto it many The figure which belonged to the third description in this chapter
was formerly put for English Saxifrage.


CHAP. 404. Of Candy Alexanders.
The Description.
DIoscorides and Pliny have reckoned Smyrnium among the kinds of Parsley,
whose judgments while this plant is young, and not grown up to a stalk, may
stand with very good reason, for that the young leaves next the ground are like
to Parsley, but somewhat thicker and larger: among which rises up a stalk a
cubit high, and somewhat more, garnished with round leaves, far different
from those next the ground, enclosing the stalk about like Through wax, or
Perfoliata; which leaves are of a yellow color, and do rather resemble the
leaves of Fole-foot than Parsley: Smyrnium Creticum. Candy Alexander.
at the top of the stalks (...) grow round spokie tufts of a yellow color,
after which comes round and black seed like Coleworts, of a sharp and
bitter taste like Myrrh: the root is white and thick, contrary to the opinion
of Dodonaeus, who says it is black without, but I speak that which I have
seen and proved.

The Place.
Smyrnium grows naturally upon the hills and mountains of Candy, and in my
garden also in great plenty: also upon the mountain Amanus in Cilicia.

The Time.
Smyrnium floureth in June, and the seed is ripe in August.

The Names.
This plant is called in Latin, Smyrnium in Greek, (...) in Cilicia,
Petroselinum, and as Galen testifies, some have called it, Hipposelinum
agreste in English, Candy Alexanders, or Through bored Parsley.

The Nature.
Smyrnium is hot and dry in the third degree.

The Virtues.
The leaves of Smyrnium dissolve wens

The seeds are good against the stoppings of the spleen, kidneys, and bladder.

Candy Alexanders has force to digest and wast away hard swellings, in other
things it is like Galen writes.

The root is hot, so is the herb and seed, which is good to be drunk against
the biting of serpents: Dioscorides writes.

CHAP. 405. Of Parsneps.
The Description.
1 THe leaves of the tame or Garden Parsneps are broad, consisting of many
small leaves fastened to one middle rib like those of the ash tree: the stalk
is upright, of the height of a man: the flowers stand upon spokie tufts, of
color yellow; after which comes the seed flat and round, greater than those
of Dil: the root is white, long, sweet, and good to be eaten.

2 The wild Parsnep is like to that of the Garden, in leaves, stalk, tuft,
yellow flowers, flat and round seed, but altogether lesser: the root is small,
hard, woody, and not fit to be eaten.

The Place.
The garden Parfnep requires a fat and loose earth, and that that is dug up
deep.

The wild Parsnep grows in vntoiled places, especially in the salt marshes,
upon the banks and borders of the same: the seed whereof being gathered and
brought into the garden, and sowed 1 Pastinaca latifoliasativa: Garden Parsneps.
2 Pastinaca latifolia syluestris. Wild Parsneps.
in fertile ground, do prove better roots, sweeter and greater than they that
are sown of seeds gathered from those of the garden.

They flower in July and August, and seed the second year after they be sown.

The Names.
The Herbarists of our time do call the garden Parsneps (...) and Pastinaca,
and therefore we have surnamed it Latifolia, or broad leafed, that it may
differ from the other garden Parsnep with narrow leaves, which is truly and
properly called Staphylinus, that is, the garden Carrot. Some Physicians
doubting, and not knowing to what herb of the Ancients it should be referred,
have fained the wild kind hereof to be Panacis species, or a kind of Alheale:
diverse have named it Baucia; others, Branca Leonina, but if you diligently
mark and confer it with Elaphoboscum of Dioscorides, you shall hardly find any
difference at all: but the plant called at Montpelier Pabulum Ceruinum: in
English, Hearts fodder, supposed there to be the true Elaphoboscum, differs
much from the true notes thereof. Now Baucia, as Iacobus Manlius reports in
Luminari maiore, is Dioscorides, and the old Writers Pastinaca, that is to say,
Tenuifolia, or Carrot: but the old writers, and especially Dioscorides have
called this wild Parsnep by the name of Elaphoboscum: and we do call them
Parsneps and Mypes.

The Temperature.
The Parsnep root is moderately hot, and more dry than moist.

The Virtues.
The Parsneps nourish more than do the Turnips or the Carrots, and the
nourishment is somewhat

There is a good and pleasant food or bread made of the roots of Parsneps, as
my friend Mr. Plat

The seed is hotter and drier even unto the second degree, it moves urine,
and consumes

It is reported, says (...), that Dear are preserved from bitings of
Serpents, by eating of Elaphoboscum, or wild Parsnep, whereupon the seed is
given with wine against the bitings and stingings of Serpents. (...) the
figures that formerly were in this chapter were of the (...) Parsnep; the first
being that of Lebel, and the second that of (...): that hich should have been
in the second place was (...) put for (...).


CHAP. 406. Of Skirrets.
Sisarum. Skirrets.


The Description.
THe leaves of the Skirret do likewise confist of many small leaves sastened to
one rib, every particular one whereof is something (...) in the edges, but
they are lesser, greener, and smoother than those of the Parsnep. The stalks be
short, and seldom a cubit high; the (...) in the spoked tufts are white, the
roots be many in number, growing out of one head an hand breadth long, most
commonly not a finger thick, they are sweet, white, good to be eaten, and most
pleasant in taste.

The Place and Time.
This Skirret is planted in Gardens, and especially by the root, for the
greater and thicker ones being taken away, the lesser are put into the earth
again: which thing is best to be done in March or April, before the stalks
come up, and at this time the roots which be gathered are eaten raw, or boiled.

The Names.
This herb is called in Latin Sisarum, and also in Greek (...); the Latins
do likewise call it Siser; and diverse of the later Herbarists, (...) or (...),
or Seruilla. the Germans name it (...): Tragus, Zam garren Rapunkelen: in the
Low Countries, Suycker wortelen, that is to say, Sugar roots, and oftentimes
(...): in Spanish, Cherinia: in Italian, Sisaro: in French, Cheruy: in English,
Skirret and Skirwort. And this is that Siser or Skirret which Tiberius the
Emperor commanded to be conveyed unto him from Gelduba a castle about the
river of Rhene, as Pliny reports in lib. 19. cap: 5. The Skirret is a
medicinable herb, and is the same that the foresaid Emperor did so much
commend, insomuch that he desired the same to be brought unto him every year
out of Germany. It is not, as diverse suppose, Serapio his Secacul, of which he
has written in his 89. chapter: for Secacul is described by the leaf of
Iulben, that is to say, of the pease, as Matthiolus (...) expounds it: and it
brings forth a black fruit of the bigness of a Cichpease, full of moisture,
and of a sweet taste, which is called Granum Culcul: But the Skirret has not
the lease of the pease, neither does it bring forth fruit like to the Ciche
pease; whereupon it is manifest, that the Skirret does very much differ from
Serapio his Secacul: so far is it from being the same.

The Nature and Virtues.
The roots of the Skirret be moderately hot and moist; they be easily
concocted; they nourish

They be eaten boiled, with vinegar, salt, and a little oil, after the manner
of a sallad, and oftentimes

The women in Sueuia, says Hieronymus Heroldus, prepare the roots hereof for
their husbands, and

The juice of the roots drunk with goats milk stops the laske. The same
drunk with wine

CHAP. 407. Of Carrots.
The Description.
1 THe leaves of the garden Carrots are of a deep green color, composed of
many fine Fennell-like leaves, very notably cut or iagged; among which rises
up a stalk straight and round, four cubits high, somewhat hairie and hollow,
having at the top round spoked tufts, in which do grow little white flowers: in
their places comes the seed, rough and hairie, of a sweet smell when it is
rubbed. The root is long, thick and single, of a fair yellow color, pleasant
to be eaten, and very sweet in taste.

1 Pastinaca sativa tenuifolia. Yellow Carrot.
2 Pastinaca satiua airo-rubens. Red Carrot.


2 There is another kind hereof like to the former in all parts, and differs
from it only in the color of the root, which in this is not yellow, but of a
blackish red color.

The Place.
These Carrots are sown in the fields, and in gardens where other pot herbs
are: they require a loose and well manured soil.

The Time.
They are to be sown in April; they bring forth their flowers and seed the
year after they be sown.

The Names.
The Carrot is properly called in Greek (...), for that which we have termed
in Latin by the name of Pastinaca latioris folij, or the Garden Parsnep, is
described of the old writers by another name: this Carrot is called in Latin
likewise, Pastinaca sativa, but with this addition tenuifolia, that it may
differ from the garden Parsnep with broad leaves, and white roots. Theophrastus
in the ninth book of his history of plants names this Staphylinus, or
Carrot, (...), and writes that it grows in Arcadia, and says that the best
is found in Spartensi Achaia, but doubtless he meant that Daucus which we call
(...), that may be numbered among the Carrots: Galen in his book of the
faculties of Simple medicines does also make it to be Daucus, but yet not
simply Dancus; for he adds also Staphilinus or Pastinaca: in High Dutch it is
called Geel ruben: in Low Dutch, Geel Peen, Geel Pooten, and Geel (...): in
French, Carrotte, and Racine iaulne: in Italian, Pastinaca: in Spanish,
Canahoria: in English, Yellow Carrots: the other is called red Carrot, and
black Carrot.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The root of the yellow Carrot is most commonly boiled with fat flesh and
eaten: it is temperately

The red Carrot is of like faculty with the yellow. The seed of them both is
hot and dry, it breaks

CHAP. 408. Of Wild Carrot.
Pastinaca syluestris t enuifolia. Wild Carrot, or Bees-nest.


The Description.
THe leaves of the wild Carrot are cut into diverse slender narrow parcels,
very like unto those of the garden Carrots, but they be somewhat whiter, and
more hairie: the stalks be likewise hairie and somewhat rough: the flowers are
little, and stand upon broad spoked tuftes, of a white color, of which tuft of
flowers the middlemost part is of a deep purple: the whole tuft is drawn
together when the seedis ripe, resembling a birds nest; whereupon it has been
named of some Birds-nest: the root slender, and of a mean length:

The Place.
It grows of it self in vntoyled places, in fields, and in the borders
thereof, almost every where.

The Time.
It flowers and flourishes in June and July, the seed is ripe in August.

The Names.
The wild Carrot is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Pastinaca syluestris
tenuifolia: in shops, Daucus: and it is used in stead of the true Daucus, and
not amiss, nor unprofitably: for Galen also in his time does testify that it
was taken for Daucus, or bastard Parsley, and is without doubt Dauci sylucstris
genus, or a wild kind of bastard Parsley, so called of Theophrastus: in high
Dutch it is named Wild Pastenen, Uogol nest: in Low Dutch, Uogels nest, and
Wild (...) Crookens cruyt: in French, Pastena de Sauvage: in English, wild
Carrot, and after the Dutch, Birds-nest, and in some places Bees-nest.

Athenaeus citing Diphilus for his Author, says, that the Carrot is called
(...), because it serves for loue-matters; and Orpheus, as Pliny writes,
said, that the use hereof wins love: which things be written of wild
Carrot, the root whereof is more effectual than that of the garden, and
contains in it, as Galen says, a certain force to procure lust.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The seed of this wild Carrot, and likewise the root is hot and dry in the
second degree, and does

The root boiled and eaten, or boiled with wine, and the decoction drunk,
provoke urine, expels

The seed drunk brings down the desired sickness, it is good for them that
can hardly make

It is also good for the passions of the mother, and helps conception: it is
good against the bitings Dioscorides, that such as have first taken of it are
not hurt by them.

CHAP. 409. Of Candie Carrots.
Daucus Cret ensis verus. Candie Carrots.


The Description.
THis Daucus Cretensis, being the true Daucus of Dioscorides, does not grow in
Candy only, but is found upon the mountains of Germany, and upon the hills and
rocks of Iura about Geneua, from whence it has been sent and conuied by one
friendly Herbarist unto another, into sundry regions: it bears leaves which
are small, and very finely iagged, resembling either Fennel or wild Carrot:
among which rises up a stalk of a cubit high, having at the top white spokie
tufts, and the flowers of Dill: which being past, there come great plenty of
long seed, well smelling, not unlike the seed of Cumin, save that it is
whitish, with a certain mossinesse, and a sharp taste, and is in greater use
than any part of the plant. The root also is right good in medicine, being
lesser than the root of a Parsnep, but hotter in taste, and of a fragrant smell.

The Time.
This flowers in June and July, his seed is ripe in August.

The Names.
There is sufficient spoken in the description as (...) the name.

The Nature.
These plants are hot and dry, especially the seed of Daucus Creticus, which
is hot and dry in the third degree: but the seed of the wild Carrot is hot
and dry in the second degree.

The Virtues.
The seed of Daucus drunken is good against the strangurie, and painful making
of water, it prevails

Itasswageth the torments and gripings of the belly, dissolueth windines,
cures the colic, and

The same being taken in Wine, is very good against the bitings of beasts,
and expels

The seed of Daucus Creticus is of great efficacy and virtue being put into
(...), Mithridate,

The root thereof drunk in wine stops the laske, and is also a sovereign
remedy against venom

CHAP. 410. Of stinking and deadly Carrots.
The Description.
1 THe great stinking Carrot has very great leaves, spread abroad like wings,
resembling those of Fennel giant (whereof some have taken it to be a kind,
but improperly) of a bright green color, somewhat hairie: among which (...)
up a stalk of the height of two cubits, and of the bigness of a man's finger;
hollow, and full of a spungious pith, whereupon are set at certain ioints,
leaves like those next the ground, but smaller. The flowers are yellow,
standing at the top of the stalks in spokie rundles, like those of Dill: after
which comes the seed, flat and broad like those of the Parsnep, but much
greater and broader. The root is thick, garnished at the top with certain
capillaments or hairy threads, black without, white within, full of milkie
juice, of a most bitter, sharp, and loathsome taste and smell, insomuch that if
a man do stand where the wind does blow from the plant, the air does
exulcerate and blister the face, and every other bare or naked place that may
be subject to his venomous blast, and poisonous quality.

1 Thapsia (...) Clusij. Stinking Carrots.
2 Thapsia tenuifolia. Small leafed stinking Carrot.


2 This small kind of stinking or deadly Carrot is like to the last described
in each respect, saving that the leaves are thinner and more finely minced or
iagged, wherein consists the difference.

3 The common deadly Carrot is like unto the precedent, saving that he does
more nearly resemble the stalks and leaves of the garden carrot, and is not
garnished with the like bush of hair about the top of the stalks: otherwise in
seed, root, and evil smell, taste and quality like.

The Place.
These (...) plants delight in stony hills and mountains: they are strangers
in England.

3 Thapsia vulgaris. Deadly (...).


The Time.
They flower in August, or somewhat after.

The Names.
The French Physicians have accepted the root of Thapsia for a kind of
Turbith, calling it (...) Cineritium; notwithstanding upon better consideration
they have left the use thereof, especially in purging, for it mightily hurts
the principal parts, and does often cause cruel gripings in the guts and
belly, with (...) and cramps: nevertheless the venomous quality may be taken
away with those correctiues which are used in mitigating the extreme heat and
virulent quality of Sarcocolla, Hammoniacum, and Turpetum: but where there be
so many wholesome Simples, and likewise compounds, they are not to be used.

Of some it is called Turpetum Griseum: it is called Thapsia, as some think,
of the Island Thapsus, where it was first found; or as we deem, of the
likeness it has with Carrots.

Of the people of Sicilia and Apulia it is called (...), where it does grow in
great abundance.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The temperature and faculties in working have been touched in the description,
and likewise in the names.

CHAP. 411. Of Fennel.
The Description.
1 THe first kind of Fennel, called in Latin Foeniculum: in Greek, (...),
is so well known amongst us, that it were but lost labor to describe the same.

2 The second kind of Fennel is likewise well known by the name of Sweet
Fennel, so called because the seeds thereof are in taste sweet like unto
Annise seeds, resembling the common Fennel, saving that the leaves are larger
and fatter, or more oleous: the seed greater and whiter, and the whole plant in
each respect greater.

Foeniculum vulgar. Common Fennel.


The Place.
These herbs are set and sown in gardens; but the second does not prosper well
in this (...): for being sown of good and perfect seed, yet in the second
year after his sowing it will degenerate from the right kind, and become
common Fennel.

The Time.
They flower in June and July, and the seed is ripe in the end of August.

The Names.
Fennel is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Marathrum, and Foeniculum in
high Dutch, Fenckell: in Low Dutch, (...): in Italian, Finocchio: in Spanish,
Hinoio: in French, Fenoil: in English, Fennel, and Fenckell.

The Nature.
The seed of Fennel is hot and dry in the third degree.

The Virtues.
The powder of the seed of Fennel drunk for certain days together fasting
preserves the eyesight: whereof was written this Distichon following:

Foeniculus, Rosa, Verbena, Chelidonia, Ruta, Ex his fit aqua quae lumina
reddit acuta. Of Fennel, Roses, Veruain, Rue, and Celandine, Is made a water
good to clear the sight of (...). The green leaves of Fenneil eaten, or the
seed drunken made into a Ptisan, do fill women's

The (...) of Fennel drunk eases the pains of the kidneys, causes one to
avoid the

The roots are as effectual, and not only good for the intents aforesaid, but
against the dropsy

Fennel seed drunk asswageth the pain of the stomach, and wambling of the
same, or desire

The herb, seed, and root of Fennel are very good for the Iungs, the liver,
and the kidneyes, for

The seed and herb of sweet Fennel is equal in virtues with Annise seed.

CHAP. 412. Of Dill.
The Description.
DIll has a little stalk of a cubit high, round and ioynted; whereupon do
grow leaves very finely cut, like to those of Fennel, but much smaller: the
flowers be little and yellow, standing in a spokie (...) or rundle: the seed is
round, flat and thin: the whole plant is of a strong smell: the root is threddy.

The Place.
It is sown in gardens, and is also sometimes found wild.

(...). Dill.


The Time.
It brings forth flowers and seed in August.

The Names.
Dil is called in Greek (...): in Latin likewise Anethum, and Anetum: in
High Dutch, Dyllen: in Low Dutch, Dille: in Italian, Anetho: in Spanish,
Eneldo: in French, Anet: in English, Dill, and Anet.

The Temperature.
Dill, as Galen says, is hot in the end of the second degree, and dry in the
beginning of the same, or in the end of the first degree.

The Virtues.
The decoction of the tops of dried Dil, and Dioscorides teaches.

The seed likewise if it be smelled unto stays

Galen says, that being burnt and laid upon sub Praeputio, though they be old
and of long continuance.

Common oil, in which Dill is boiled or sunned, as we do oil of Roses, does
digest, mitigate

Dill is of great force or efficacy against the suffocation or strangling of
the mother, if the woman

CHAP. 413. Of Caruwaies.
The Description.
CAruwaies have an hollow stalk four square, of two cubits high, full of
knots or joints; from which proceed sundry other small branches, set full of
leaves very finely cut or iagged, like unto those of Carrots or Dill: at the
top of the stalks grow spokie white tufts like those of Dill: after which
comes the seed, sharp in eating, yet of a pleasant taste: the root is like
that of Parsley, often white, seldom yellow, and in taste like unto the Carrot.

The Place.
It grows almost every where in Germany and in Bohemia, in fat and fruitful
fields, and in meadows that are now and then ouer-run with water: it grows
also in Caria, as Dioscorides shows, from whence it took his name.

The Time.
It floureth and seedeth from May to the end of August.

Carum, sieve Careum. Caruwaies.


The Names.
It is called in Greek (...) in Latin, Carum and Careum: in shops, Carui.
Simeon Zethy calls it Carnabadion: in High Dutch, Kym, and Kymmel: in
Low Dutch, Caruy saet: in French, du Caruy: in Italian, Caro: in Spanish,
Carauea, and an article being joined unto it, Alkarauea: in English, Caruwaie,
and the seed is called Caruwaie seed.

The Temperature.
The seed of Caruwaies, as Galen says, is hot and dry in the third degree, and
has a moderate biting quality.

The Virtues.
It consumes wind, it is delightful to the

The seeds confected, or made with sugar

CHAP. 414. Of Annise.
The Description.
1 THe stalk of Annise is round and hollow, divided into diverse small
branches, set with leaves next the ground somewhat broad and round: those that
grow higher are more iagged, like those of young Parsley, but whiter: on the top
of the stalks do stand spokie rundles or tufts of white flowers, and afterward
seed, which has a pleasant taste as every one does know.

2 This other Annise (whose vmbels Clusius had out of England from Master
Morgan the Queens Apothecarie, and James Garret; and which were brought from
the Philippines by Mr. Tho. Candish in his voyage when he encompassed the
world) is thus described by Clusius: The vmbels were large, no less than those
of the Archangelica, made of diverse thick stiff footstalk, each whereof
carried not double seed as the common Annise, but more, in a round head some
inch over, made of cods set star-fashion, six, 8, or more, of a dusky color,
wrinkled, divided into two equal parts, and open above: most of these husks
were empty, yet some of them contained one smooth shining ash-colored seed, of
the bigness of that of Orobus; the taste and smell was the same with our
common Anise seed, wherefore they which sent it to Clusius called it Anise: yet
in the place where it grew it was called Damor; for Mr. Candish had the name so
written in the China characters, after their manner of writing.

The Place.
It grows plentifully in Candy, Syria, Egypt, and other countries of the
East. I have often sown it in my garden, where it has brought forth his ripe
seed when the year has fallen out to be temperate.

1 Anisum. Anise.
2 Anisum Indicum (...). Starry headed Anise..


The Time.
It is to be sown in these cold regions in the month of May: the seed is ripe
in August.

The Names.
It is called in Latin Anisum: in Greek, (...): in High Dutch, Anisz: in
Low Dutch, Anissaet: in Italian, Aniso: in Spanish, (...): in French, Anis: in
English, Anise, and Annise seed.

The Temperature.
Galen writes, That the seed of Anise is hot and dry in the third degree:
after others, it is hot in the second degree, and much less than dry in the
second degree; for it ingendreth milk, which it could not do if it were very
dry, as Galen in his chapter of Fennel does whether he will or no declare and
testify; in that it does engender milk, his opinion is that it is not hot
above the first degree: which thing also may be in Anise seed, both by this
reason, and also because it is sweet. Therefore to conclude, Anise seed is dry
in the first degree, and hot in the second.

The Virtues.
The seed wastes and consumes wind, and is good against belchings and
vpbraidings of the

Being chewed it makes the breath sweet, and is good for them that are short
winded, and quenches

The same being dried by the fire and taken with honey cleanses the breast very
much from flegmaticke

It is to be given to young children and infants to eat which are like to have
the falling sickness,

It takes away the Squinancie or Quincie (that is, a swelling in the throat)
being gargled with

CHAP. 414. Of Bishops Weed, Herbe-William, or Ameos.
The Description.
1 THe common Ameos, especially with us here in England, has round green
stalks, with diverse boughs and branches, and large long leaves, divided into
diverse other narrow long and small leaves, dented or snipt about the edges,
having at the top of the stalk white flowers in great spoky tufts, which bring
forth a little sharp and bitter seed: the root thereof is white and threddie.

2 This excellent and aromaticall Ameos of Candy has tufts and leaves like
Daucus Creticus, and a root like unto the garden Carrot, of a yellow color,
and hot seed like Origanum, of an excellent spicie savor or smell, growing in
spoky tufts or roundles like Carum: it has been brought from Candy and Syria
into Venice, and from Venice into France, Flanders, and England, where we have
often sown it; but without doubt we have been beguiled therein by the
deceitful drugmasters, who have first boiled it, or used some other false and
deceitful device, to bring greater admiration unto the Venice treacle, for the
confection whereof this seed is a chief and most principal ingredient.

Ammi vulgar. Common Bishops-weed.
The (...) which was formerly in the second place was of the (...) album of
(...).
2 Ammi Creticum. Candy Bishops-weed.


3 There is another kind of Ameos, which is an herb very small and tender,
having stalks a foot and a half high, very small and tender, beset with
leaves like unto Dill, finely iagged, and somewhat slender; and at the top of
the stalks grow little tufts or spokie white rundles, which afterward do
turn into small gray seed, hot and sharp in taste. The root is small and
slender.

The Place.
These plants do all grow in my garden, except Ammi Creticum, whereof has
been sufficiently spoken in the description.

3 Ammi perpusillum. Small Bishops-weed.


The Time.
They flower in June and July, and yield their seed in the end of August.

The Names.
The Grecians call it (...) the Latins also Ammi: diverse call it Cuminum
Aethiopicum: others, Cuminum Regium, or Comin Royal: in shops, Ammios, or
Ameos in the Genitive case: the Germans, Amey: in English, Ameos, or Ammi: of
some, Herbe-William, Bull-wort, and Bishops-weed.

The Temperature.
The seed of Ameos is hot and dry in the later end of the third degree.

The Virtues.
It avails against gripings of the belly in Sison does also the like, for it
is hot and dry, and that in the third degree; likewise of thin (...), provoking
urine, and bringing down the desired sickness.

The seed of Ameos is good to be drunken

Ameos brayed and wingled with honey scatters congealed blood, and puts
away black

CHAP. 416. Of Cheruill.
The Description.
1 THe leaves of Cheruill are slender, and diversely cut, something hairy, of a
whitish green: the stalks be short, slender, round, and hollow within, which at
the first together with the leaves are of a whitish green, but tending to a red
when the seeds are ripe: the flowers be white, and grow upon scattered tufts.
The seed is long, narrow, slender, sharp pointed: the root is full of strings.

2 There is found in June and July, almost in every hedge, a certain plant
which Tabernamont. and Bauhine fitly call Chaerophyllum, or Cerefolium
syluestre, and the figure was vnsitly given by our Author for Thysselinum: It
has a whitish woody root, from which arise round red and hairy stalks some
two cubits high, sometimes more, and often times somewhat big and swollen about
the joints, and they are not hollow but full of pith: toward the top it is
divided into sundry branches, which on their tops carry vmbels of small pure
white little flowers, which are succeeded by longish seeds. The leaves are
usually parted into three chief parts, and these again subdivided into five,
and they are snipt about the edges, soft and hairy, of a dark green or else
reddish color. It floureth in June and July, and then ripens the seed.

3 Great Cheruill has large leaves deeply cut or iagged, in show very like
unto Hemlocks, of a very good and pleasant smell and taste like unto Cheruill,
and something hairy, which has caused us to call it sweet Cheruill. Among
these leaves rises up a stalk somewhat crested or furrowed, of the height of
two cubits, at the top whereof grow spoky tufts or rundles with white flowers,
which do turn into long brown crested and shining seed, one (...) being as
(...) (...) (...) Fennel seeds, which being green do taste like Anise seed.
The root is great, thick, (...) (...) big as Enula (...), exceeding sweet in
smell, and tasting like unto (...) seeds.

1 Cerefolium vulgar (...). Common Cheruill.
2 (...) (...). Hedge Cheruill.


4 There is found in some parts of the Alps, as about (...) and in other
places, (...) (...), which in the leaves and vmbels is like that of the last
described, but the (...) (...) (...) less; the seed is long, small, smooth,
and shaped like an Oat, and in (...) somewhat like that (...) the (...)
Creticus. Lobel has this by the same name as we here give it you.

5 About mud walls, highways, and such places, here about London, and in
diverse other places, is found growing a small plant, which in all things but
the smell and height agrees with that reserred to this kind by Fabius (...),
and called Myrrhis Aequicolorum noua. The root hereof is small and white,
perishing every year when it has perfected his seed: the stalks are slender,
(...), smooth, and not hairy, seldom exceeding the height of a cubit, or cubit
and (...); it is divided into sundry branches, upon the sides whereof against
the setting on of the leaves, or out of their bosoms, grow forth the stalks,
which carry vmbels of small white flowers: after which follow the seeds,
growing two together, and these longish, rough, round, and hairy, about the
(...) of Anise seeds. The leaves are small, and finely cut or divided like
those of (...), (...) of a whitish color, and hairy: it comes up in March,
flowers in May, and ripens his seed in June. In Italy they (...) the young
leaves in sallads, and call it wild Cheruile: we may in English for
distinctions sake call it small (...) Cheruill.

6 To these we may fitly add that plant which in the hist. Lugd. is called
cicutaria (...), and by (...), (...) (...); for it flowers at the same time
with the last mentioned, and is (...) in flower and seed in May and June very
frequently almost in all places; but afterward his stalks die down, yet his
roots live, and the leaves are green all the year. The root of this is very
large, and divided into sundry parts, white also and spungie, of a pleasing
strong smell, with a hot and biting taste: the stalks grow up in good ground to
be some three cubits high, and they (...) hollow, ioynted, prerty thick,
green, and much crested, sending forth of the bosoms of the leaves (...)
branches, which upon their tops carry vmbels composed of many white flowers,
each flower consisting of sieve little leaves, whereof the lowest is twice as
big as the rest, the two side-ones less, (...) the uppermost the least of all.
The leaves are large like those of Myrrhis, but of a dark green color and
those that grow about the tops of the stalks are commonly divided into into
three parts, and these subdivided into sundry long sharp pointed and snipt
leaves like as in Myrrhis. The seeds grow two together, being longish, round,
sharp pointed, black, and shining. We may fitly term this plant, wild
Cicely, for that it so much resembles the Myrrhis or garden Cicely, not only
in shape, but (if (...) be not deceived) in virtues also.

3 Ceresolium magnum, sieve Myrrhis. Great Cheruill or Myrrh.
4 Myrrhis altera (...). Small sweet Cheruill.


The Place.
The common Cheruill grows in gardens with other pot-herbes: it prospers in a
ground that is dunged and somewhat moist. The great sweet Cheruill grows in
my garden, and in the gardens of other men who have been diligent in these
matters.

The Time.
These herbs do flower in May, and their seed is ripe in July.

The Names.
Cheruill is commonly called in Latin Cerefolium, and as diverse affirm,
Chaerofolium, with o in the second syllable. (...) names it Chaerephyllum, and
it is thought to be so called because it delights to grow with many leaves,
or rather in that it causes joy and gladness: in High Dutch, Korffelkraut: in
Low Dutch, Keruell: in Italian, (...): in French, Du Cerfueil: in English,
Cheruell, and Cheruill.

Myrrhis is also called Myrrha, taken from his pleasant savor of Myrrh: of
some, Conila, as it is found noted among the bastard names. It is also, by
reason of the (...) it has with Hemlocke, called by most late writers,
Cicutaria. Of this, Pliny makes mention, lib. 24. cap. 16. where he reports
that it is called Smyrrhiza: in English it is called Cheruill, sweet Cheruill,
or sweet Cicely.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Cheruill is held to be one of the pot herbs, it is pleasant to the stomach
and (...): it is of a

It provoke urine, especially being bovled in wine, and applied hot to the
share or nethermost

It has in it a (...) (...), by means whereof it procures lust.

It is used very much among the Dutch people in a kind of (...) or kotch-pot
which they

The leaves of sweet Cheruill are exceeding good, wholesome, and pleasant,
among other sallad

The root, says Galen, is hot in the second degree, having a thinness of
substance joined with it.

Dioscorides teaches, that the root drunk in wine is a remedy against the
bitings of the venomous Phalangia; and that it brings down the menses and
secondines; and being boiled and drunk it is good for such as have the ptysick
or consumption of the lungs.

The seeds eaten as a sallad whilst they are yet green, with oil, vinegar,
and pepper, exceed all

The roots are likewise most excellent in a sallad, if they be boiled and after
dressed as the cunning

CHAP. 417. Of Shepherds needle or wild Cheruill.
The Description.
1 SCandix, or Pecten Veneris, does not much differ in the quantity of the
stalks, leaves, and flowers, from Cheruill; but Scandix has no such pleasant
smell as Cheruill has: the leaves be lesser, more finely cut, and of a brown
green color: the flowers grow at the top of the stalks in small white tufts;
after which come up long seeds very like unto pack-needdles, orderly set one by
another like the great teeth of a comb, whereof it took the name (...)
Veneris, or Venus comb, or Venus needle: the root is white, a finger long.

1 Pecten Veneris, five Scandix. Shepherds needle, or Venus comb.
2 Scandix minor, sieve Anthriscus. Small Shepherds needle.


2 This from a slender long and whitish (...) sends up many small leaves like
those of the last described, but of a pleasing smell and taste something like
that of the common Cheruill; amongst these leaves grow up flender stalks a
little hairy, divided into short green and slender branches carrying little
vmbels, consisting of five, six, seven, or eight small white flowers, composed
of five leaves apiece, with a dark purplish chiue in the middle: the flowers
are succeeded by, or rather grow upon long slender cods, which become some inch
long, and resemble those of the last described. It flowers in June, as Clusius
affirms, who gives us the history of it; and he received it from Honorius
Bellus out of Candy; who writes, that in the Spring time it is much used in
sallads, and desired, for that it much excites to Venery. He also thinks this
plant to be the Anthriscus of Pliny, and by the same name Clusius sets it
forth. Columna has called it Aniso-marathrum, because the smell and taste is
between that of Anise and Fennel.

The Place.
It grows in most corn fields in England, especially among wheat and barley.

The Time.
It floureth in May: the seed is ripe in August with corn.

The Names.
The Latins call it Scandix, having borrowed that name of the Grecians, who
call it (...): we find among the bastard words, that the Romans did call it
Scanaria, and Acula, of the seed that is like unto a needle. Ruellius
describes it under the name Pecten (...) is: of others, Acus Veneris, and Acus
Pastoris, or Shepherds Needle, wild Cheruill, and Ladies comb: in
High Dutch, Naelde Karnel: This is that herb (says Pliny, lib. 22. cap. 22.)
which Aristophanes objected in sport to the Poet Euripides, that his mother was
wont to sell no right pot-herbe but Scandix, or Shepherds needle; meaning, as
I take it, Visnaga, wherewith the Spaniards do pick their teeth when they
have eaten no meat at all except a few oranges or such a like trifle, called
also Scandix.

The Temperature.
Shepherds needle, says Galen, is an herb somewhat binding, and bitter in
taste, insomuch that it is hot and dry either in the later end of the second
degree, or in the beginning of the third.

The Virtues.
Dioscorides says it is eaten both raw and boiled, and that it is an wholesome
pot-herbe among Aristophanes taunting of Euripides, as aforesaid.

The decoction thereof is good for the bladder, kidneyes, and liver; but as I
deem he meant

CHAP. 418. Of Tooth-picke Cheruill.
The Description.
1 THe first of these Tooth-picke Cheruils bears leaves like wild Turnips, a
round stalk furrowed, ioynted, blackish, and hairy, divided into many
branches, on the tops whereof grow spokie tufts, beset round about with many
small leaves. The flowers thereof are whitish: after comes the the seed,
which being once ripe do cluster and are drawn together, in a round thick
tuft like a small birds nest, as be those of the wild Carrot; whose seeds
whosoever touches, they will cleave and stick to his fingers, by reason of the
glutinous or slimie matter they are possessed with. The root is small and
whitish, bitter in taste, as is all the rest of the plant.

2 The Spanish Tooth-picke has leaves, flowers, and knobby stalks like unto
wild carrots, saving that the leaves are somewhat finer, cut or iagged
thicker, and tenderer, but not rough or hairy at all as is the former, of a
bitter taste, and a reasonable good smell: among which rise up bushie rundles
or spokie tufts like those of the wild Carrot or Birds nest, closely drawn
together when the seed is ripe; at what time also the sharp needles are
hardened, fit to make Tooth-pickes and such like, for which purpose they do very
fitly serve.

The Place.
Both of them grow in Syria, and most commonly in Cilicia: the later is to be
found likewise in Spain almost every where; and I have it likewise in my
garden in great plenty.

The Time.
They flower in my garden about August, and deliver their seed in October.

The Names.
That which the Grecians call (...), the Latins do likewise name Gingidium:
and it is called in Syria Lepidium: yet is there another Lepidium. It is
reported among the bastard names to be called by the Romans, Bisacutum: of
which name some show remains among the Syrians, who commonly call the later,
(...), (...): this is named in English, Tooth-picke Cheruill.

1 Gingidium latifolium. Broad Tooth-picke Cheruill.
2 Gingidium Hispanicum. Spanish Tooth-picke Cheruill.


The Temperature and Virtues.
There is, says Galen, great increase of Gingidium in Syria, and it is eaten
no otherwise than Scandex

Dioscorides does also write the same: This pot-herbe (says he) is eaten raw,
sodden, and preserved

The hard quills whereon the seeds do grow are good to cleanse the teeth and
gums, and do easily

CHAP. 419. Of Mede-sweet, or Queen of the Meadows.
The Description.
1 THis herb has leaves like those of Agrimonie, consisting of diverse leaves
set upon a middle (...) like those of the Ash tree, every small leaf slightly
snipt about the edges, white (...) the inner side, and on the upper side
crumpled or wrinkled like unto those of the Elm Tree; whereof it took the
name Vlmaria, of the similitude or likeness that the leaves have with the Elm
leaves. The stalk is three or four foot high, rough, and very fragile or
easy to be broken, of a reddish purple color: on the top whereof are very
many little flowers (...) and growing together, of a white color tending to
yellowness, and of a pleasant sweet 1 Regina (...). Queen of the Meadow.
smell, as are the leaves likewise: after which come the seeds, small, crookedly
turning or winding one with another, made into a fine little head. The root
has a sweet smell, spreding far abroad, black without, and of a darkish red
color within.

2 There is also another which by (...), Tragus, Lonicerus, Gesner, and others,
is called Barba Capri: it has large wooddie roots, leaves of the bigness,
and growing somewhat after the manner of the wild Angelica: the stalks are
crested, and divided into sundry branches, which carry long bending spikes or
ears of white flowers and seeds some what like those of the common kind. This
flowers at the same time as the former, and I have not yet heard of it wild
with us, but only seen it growing with Mr. Tradescant.

The Place.
It grows in the brinkes of waterie ditches and rivers sides, and also in
medowesit likes waterie and moist places, and grows almost every where.

The Time.
It floureth and flourishes in June, July, and August.

The Names.
It is called of the later age Regina prati, and Barba Capri: of some, Vlmaria,
a foliorum Vlmi similitudine, from the likeness it has with the Elm tree
leaf: in high Dutch, (...). It is called Barba (...), which name belongs to
the plant which the Grecians do call Tragopogon: of Anguillara,
Potentillamaior. It has some likeness with Rhodora Plinij, but yet we cannot
affirm it to be the same. It is called in low Dutch Rejjnette: in French,
Barbe de Cheure, Reine des Praiz: in English, Meades-sweet, Medow-sweet, and
Queen of the meadows, Camerarius of Noremberg says it is called of the
Germans his countrymen, (...) (...): because the roots, says he, seem to be
eaten with worms. I rather suppose they call it so, because the ancient hackny
men and horsleaches do give the decoction thereof to their horses and asses,
against the bots and worms, for (...) which it is greatly commended.

The Temperature.
Mede-sweet is cold and dry, with an evident binding quality adioined.

The Virtues.
The root boiled, or made into powder and drunk, helps the bloody flix,
staieth the laske, and

It is reported, that the flowers boiled in wine and drunk, do take away the
fits of a quartaine ague,

The leaves and flowers far excel all other strowing herbs, for to deck up
houses, to straw in

The distilled water of the flowers dropped into the eyes, takes away the
burning and itching

CHAP. 420. Of Burnet Saxifrage.
The Description.
1 THis great kind of Pimpinell, or rather Saxifrage, has great and long
roots, fashioned like a (...), of an hot and biting taste like Ginger: from
which rises up an hollow stalk with ioints and knees two cubits high, beset
with large leaves, which do more nearly represent Smallage than Pimpernell, or
rather the garden Parsnep. This plant consists of many small leaves growing
upon one stem, snipt or dented about the edges like a saw: the flowers do grow
at the top of the stalks in white round tufts: the seed is like the common
Parsley, saving that it is hotter and biting upon the tongue.

There is a bigger and lesser of this kind, which differ little, but that the
stalks and veins of the leaves of the lesser are of a purplish color, and the
root is hotter. Our Author formerly gave the figure of the lesser in the
second place, in stead of that of Bipinella.

1 Pimpinella Saxifraga. Burnet Saxifrage.
2 Bipinella, sieve Saxifragaminor. Small Burnet Saxifrage.


2 (...) is likewise a kind of Burnet or Pimpinell, upon which Pena has
bestowed this addition Saxifragaminor: under which name Saxifraga are
comprehended diverse herbs of diverse kinds, and the one very unlike to the
other: but that kind of Saxifrage which is called Hircina, which is rough or
hairie Saxifrage, of others Bipinella, is best known, and the best of all the
rest, like unto the small Burnet, or common Parsley, saving that it is void of
hairs, as may (...) by the old Latin verse,

Pimpinella habet pilos, Saxifraga non habet vllos. Pimpinell has hairs some,
but Saxifrage has none. Notwithstanding, I have found a kind hereof growing
in our pastures adioining to London, the leaves whereof if you take and
tenderly break with your hands, you may draw forth small threads, like the web
of a spider, such as you may draw from the leaves of Scabious. The stalk is
hollow, dividing it self from the ioints or knees, into sundry other small
branches; at the top whereof do grow small tufts or spokie rundles, of a white
color: after which comes the seed like to Carui, or Caruwaies, of a sharp
taste: the root is also sharp and hot in taste.

The Place.
These plants do grow in dry pastures and meadows in this country very
plentifully.

The Time.
They flower from June to the end of August.

The Names.
That which (...) calls (...) mayor, Dodonaeus terms Saxifragia (...),
which kind of Saxifrage does more absolutely answer the true Phellandrium of
Pliny, than any other plant whatsoever: wherein the Physicians of Paris have
been (...), calling or supposing the meadow Rue to be the right (...), whereunto
it is not like either in shape or faculty: for it is nothing so effectual in
breaking the stone, or provoking of (...) as (...) of these plants, especially
(...) Hircina, which is not so called, because it has any rammish smell of a
goat, but because practitioners have used to feed (...) with it, whose flesh
and blood is singular good against the stone; (...) we rather take it to be
named Hircina, of (...), where it does grow in great abundance, the savor of
the herb not being unpleasant, somewhat resembling the smell and taste of
(...), Ligustrum, and Pastinaca: so to (...), both (...) are called (...): the
smaller is called of some (...), (...), and Bipenula: of Baptista Sardus, and
also of Leonardus Fuchsius, (...) mayor: wherefore diverse call it (...) (...):
for there is also another Pimpinella, called Pimpinella (...): notwithstanding
the (...) before rehearsed shows a difference between Pimpinella and
Saxifraga: in high Dutch, it is called (...): in Low Dutch, Bauenaert: in
English the greater may be called great Saxifrage, and the other small
Saxifrage.

Bipinella is called Saxifragia minor: in English, Small Saxifrage, as
Pimpinella is called great Saxifrage. Columna judges it to be the Tragium of
(...).

The Nature.
Saxifrage of both kinds, with their seed, leaves, and roots, are hot and dry
in the third degree, and of thin and subtle parts.

The (...).
The seed and root of Saxifrage drunken with wine, or the deco ction thereof
made with wine, (...), or break stone.

The juice of the leaves of Saxifrage does cleanse and take away all spots and
freckles of the face,

The distilled water thereof mingled with some vinegar in the distillation,
clears the sight, and

CHAP. 421. Of Burnet.
1 (...) (...). Garden Burnet.
2 Pimpinella syluestris. Wild Burnet.


The Kinds.
Bvrnet of which we will entreat, does differ from Pimpinella, which is also
called (...). (...) of the Burnets is lesser, for the most part (...) in
gardens, notwithstanding it grows in barren fields, where it is much
smaller: the other greater is (...) wild.

The Description.
1 GArden Bumet has long leaves made up together of a great many upon one
stem, every one whereof is something round, nicked on the edges, somewhat (...):
among these rises a stalk that is not altogether without leaves, something
chamsered: upon the tops whereof grow little round heads or knaps, which bring
sorth small flowers of a (...) purple color, and after them cornered seeds,
which are thrust up together. The root is long: the whole plant does smell
something like a Melon, or Cucumber.

2 Wild Burnet is greater in all parts, it has wider and bigger leaves than
those of the sormer: the stalk is longer, sometimes two cubits high: the knaps
are greater, of a dark purple color, and the seed is likewise cornered and
greater: the root longer, but this Burnet has no pleasant smell at all.

3 There is kept in some gardens another of this kind, with very large leaves,
stalks, and heads, for the heads are some inch and half long, yet but slender
considering the (...), and the flowers (as I remember) are of a whitish color:
in other respects it differs not from the precedent it may fitly be called
Pimpinella sanguisorba hortensis maxima, Great Garden (...).

The Place.
The small Pimpinell is commonly planted in gardens, notwithstanding it does
grow wild upon many barren heaths and pastures.

The great wild Burnet grows (as Mr. Lyte says) in dry meadows about
Viluord, and my self have found it growing upon the side of a causey which
crosses the one half of a field, whereof the one part is carable ground, and
the other part meadow; lying between Paddington and Lysson (...) near unto
London, upon the high way.

The Time.
They flower (...) June, unto the end of August.

The Names.
The later herbarists do call Burnet Pimpinella sanguisorba, that it may
differ from the other, and yet it is called by several names, (...), and
(...): Gesner had rather it should be called (...) of the smell of Melons or
Pompious, to which it is like, as we have said: of others it is named
Pimpinella, or Bipennyla: of most men, Solbastrella: in High Dutch, (...),
(...) (...) (...), (...) (...): in French, Pimpennelle, (...): in English,
Burnet. It agrees (...) (...) (...) (...), that is to say, with Dioscorides
his second Iron-woort: the leaf (and especially that of the lesser sort) which
we have written to consist of many nicks in the edges of the leaves; and this
may be the very same which Pliny in his 24 book, chapter 17. (...) to be named
in Persia, Sissitiepteris, because it made them merry; he also calls the same
Protomedia, and Casigneta, and likewise (...), for that it does (...) agree
with wine; to which also this Pimpinella (as we have said) does give (...)
pleasant sent: neither is that repugnant, that Pliny in another place has
written, De Sideritibus, of the Iron-woorts; for it osten falls out that he
entreats of one and the self same plant in diverse places, under diverse
names: which thing then (...) sooner when the writers themselves do not well
know the plant, as that Pliny did not well know Sideritis or Iron-woort, it is
even thereby manisest, because he sets not down his own opinion hereof,
but other men's.

The Temperature.
Burnet, besides the drying and binding faculty that it has, does likewise
meanly cool: and the lesser Burnet has likewise with all a certain
superficial, slight, and temperate sent, which when it is put into the wine
it does leave behind it: this is not in the dry herb, in the juice, nor in the
decoction.

The Virtues.
Burnet is a singular good herb for wounds (which thing Dioscorides does
attribute to his second Sanguisorba, as well inwardly taken, as outwardly
applied.

Either the juice is given, or the decoction of the powder of the dry leaves
of the herb, being

It staieth the laske and bloody flix: it is also most effectual to stop the
monthly course.

The lesser (...) is pleasant to be eaten in sallads, in which it is thought to
make the heart (...)

The decoction of Pimpinell drunken, cures the bloody flix, the spitting of
blood, and all other

The herb and seed made into powder, and drunk with wine, or water wherein
iron has been

The leaves of Pimpinell are very good to heal wounds, and are received in
drinks that are made

The leaves of Burnet steeped in winc and drunken, comfort the heart, and make
it merry, and are

CHAP. 422. Of English Saxifrage.
The Description.
1 THis kind of Saxifrage our English women Physicians have in great use, and
is familiarly known unto them, vouchsafing that name unto it of his virtues
against the stone: it has the leaves of Fennel, but thicker and broader, very
like unto Seseli pratense, Monspeliensium (which addition Pena has bestowed
upon this our English Saxifrage) among which rises up a stalk, of a cubit
high or more, bearing at the top spokie rundles beset with whitish yellow
flowers: the root (...) thick, black without, and white within, and of a good
savor.

I have formerly Chap. 188. delivered the history of the Saxifraga (...) of
(...), and Saxifraga (...) of (...); (...) think (...) our (...) put their
descriptions here amongst the (...), for if I had, I should have spared my
labor there bestowed, and have given their figures here to the (...) (...) of
our Author, which are now omitted. The figure formerly here was of the (...),
described in the third place of the 403 Chapter.
1 Saxifraga Anglicana facie Seseli pratensis. English Saxifrage.
2 Saxifraga Pannonica Clusq. Austrian Saxifrage.


2 Clusius has set forth another plant not much different from this our common
Saxifrage, and called it Saxifraga Pannonica, which I have thought fit here to
insert: the leaus, says he, are much (...) than those of Hogs-Fennell, and
somewhat like those of Fumitorie: the stalks are some soot high, slender,
having some few small leaves, and at the top carrying an vmbel of white
flowers: the root is not much unlike that of Hogs-Fennel, but shorter and more
acride; it is (...) at the top thereof, whence the stalks and leaves come
forth: it grows upon some hills in Hungary and Au stria, and flowers in July.

The Place.
Saxifrage grows in most fields and meadows every where through out this our
kingdom of England.

The Time.
It floureth from the beginning of May to the end of August.

The Names.
Saxifraga Anglicana is called in our mother tongue Stone-breake or English
Saxifrage: (...) and Lobel call it by this name Saxifraga Anglicana: for that
it grows more plentifully in England than in any other country.

The Nature.
Stone-breake is hot and dry in the third degree.

The Virtues.
A decoction made with the seeds and roots of (...), breaks the stone in the
bladder and

The root of Stone-breake boiled in wine, and the decoction drunken, brings
down women's

The root dried and made into powder, and taken with sugar, comfort and
warmeth the stomach,

It helps the collicke, and drives away ventosities or windiness.

Our English women use to put it in their running or rennet for cheese,
especially in (...)

CHAP. 423. Of Siler Mountain or bastard Louage.
The figure (...) (...) (...) here was of the (...) (...) described in the next
chapter in the fourth place; and that which belonged to this place was put for
our common (...). Also that figure which belonged to the second description was
formerly under the title of (...) (...).
1 Siler montanum Officinarum. Bastard Louage.
The figure (...) (...) (...) here was of the (...) (...) described in the next
chapter in the fourth place; and that which belonged to this place was put for
our common (...). Also that figure which belonged to the second description was
formerly under the title of (...) (...).
2 Seseli pratense (...). Horse Fennel.


The Description.
1 THe natural plants of Seseli, being now better known than in times past,
especially among our Apothecaries, is called by them Siler montanum, and
Sescleos: this plant they have retained to very good purpose and consideration;
but the error of the name has caused diverse of our late writers to err, and
to suppose that Siler (...), called in shops, Seselcos, was no other than (...)
(...) of Dioscorides. But this plant contains in his substance much more
acrimony, sharpness, and efficacy in working, than any of the plants called
Seselios. It has stalks like Ferula, two cubits high. The root smells like
Liguslicum: the leaves are very much cut or divided, like the leaves of Fennel
or Seseli (...), and broader than the leaves of Peucedanum. At the top of the
stalks grow spoky tufts like Angelica, which bring forth a long and lcafie
seed like Cumine, of a pale color; in taste seeming as though it were condited
with sugar, but withal somewhat sharp, and sharper than Seseli pratense.

2 There is a second kind of Siler which Pena and Lobel set forth under the
title of Seseli pratense Monspeliensiam, which Dodonaeus in his last edition
calls Siler pratense alterum, that is in show very like the sormer. the
stalks thereof grow to the height of two cubits, but his leaves are somewhat
broader and blacker: there are not so many leaves growing upon the stalk, and
they are less divided than the former, and are of little savor. The seed is
smaller than the former, and sauouring very little or nothing. The root is
black without, and white within, dividing it self into sundry divisions.

The Place.
It grows of it self in Liguria, not far from Genua in the craggy
mountains, and in the gardens of diligent Herbarists.

The Time.
These plants do flower from June to the end of August.

The Names.
It is called commonly Siler Montanum: in French and Dutch by a corrupt name
Ser-Montain: in diverse shops, Seseleos, but untruly: for it is not Seseli, nor
a kind thereof: in English, Siler mountain, after the Latin name, and
bastard Louage. The first is thought to be the Ligusticum of the Ancients, and
it is so called by Matthiolus and others.

The Nature.
This plant with his seed is hot and dry in the third degree.

The Virtues.
The seeds of Siler drunk with Wormwood wine, or wine wherein Wormwood has
been

The root stamped with honey, and applied or put into old sores, does cure them,
and cover bare

Being drunk it provoke urine, eases the pains of the guts or entrails
proceeding of cruditie

The root has the same virtue or operation, but not so effectual, as not
being so hot and dry.

CHAP. 224. Of Seselios, or Harte-worts of Candy.
The Description.
1 THis plant being the Seseli of Candy, and in times past not elsewhere found,
took his surname of that place where it was first found, but now adays it is
to be seen in the corn fields about Narbon in France, from whence I had seeds,
which prosper well in mv garden. This is but an annual plant, and increases
from year to year by his own sowing. The leaves grow at the first even with
the ground, somewhat hairy, of an ouerworne green color, in shape much like
unto Cheruill, but thicker: among which rises up an hairy rough stalk, of the
height of a cubit, bearing at the top spokie tufts with white flowers: which
being vaded, there follows round and flat seed, compassed and cunningly
wreathed about the edges like a ring. The seed is flat like the other, joined
two together in one, as you may see in the seed of Ferula or Angelica, in shape
like a round target, in taste like Myrrhis. Matthiolus did greatly mistake this
plant.

2 There is a kind of Seseli Creticum, called also Tordylion: and is very like
unto the former, saving that his leaves are more like unto common Parsneps than
Cheruil, and the whole plant is biggerthan the former.

1 Seseli Creticum minus: Small Seseleos of Candie.
2 Seseli Creticum maius. Great Seselios of Candie.


3 There is likewise a kind of Seseli that has a root as big as a man's arm,
especially if the plant be old; but the new and young plants bear roots an
inch thick, with some knobs and tuberous sprouts, about the lower part, the
root is thick, rough, and covered over with a thick bark, the substance
whereof is first gummie, afterward sharp, and as it were full of spattle; from
the upper part of the root proceed many knobs or thick swelling roots, out of
which there issues great and large wings or branches of leaves, some whereof
are notched and dented round about, growing unto one side or rib of the leaf,
standing also one opposite unto another, of a dark and delaid green color,
and somewhat shining above, but underneath of a grayish or ash color: from
amongst these leaves there arises a straked or guttered stalk, a cubit and a
half high, sometimes an inch thick, having many ioints or knees, and many
branches growing about them, and upon each joint lesser branches of leaves. At
the top of the stalks, and upper ends of the branches grow little cups or
vmbels of white flowers; which being vaded, there comes in place a seed,
which is very like Siler montanum. I take this here described to be the Seseli
montanum 1. of Clusius, or Ligusticum alterum Belgarum of (...): and therefore
I have given you Clusius his figure in this place.

There is also a kind of Seseli, which Pena sets forth for the first kind
of Daucus, whereof I take it to be a kind, growing every where in the pastures
about London, that has large leaves, growing for a time even with the earth,
and spread thereupon, and divided into many parts, in manner almost like to the
former for the most part in all things, in the round spokie tufts or vmbels,
bearing stiff and fair white flowers in shape like them of Cinkefoile; in
smell like Sambucus or Elder. (...) the flower is (...), there comes in place
a yellow guttered seed, of a spicie and very hot taste. The root is thick, and
black without, which rotteth and perishes in the ground (as we may see in
many gummie or Ferulous plants) after it has seeded, neither will it flower
before the second or third year after it is sown. I am ignorant what our
Author means by this description.

3 Seseli Creticum maius. Mountain (...).
4 Seseli (...). Seselios of (...).


4 There is likewise a kind of Seseli called (...) Massiliense, which has
leaves very much cloven or cut, and finely iagged, very much like (...) the
leaves of sweet Fennel, greater and thicker than the common Fennel. The (...)
(...) the height of three cubits, having knotty ioints, as it were knees;
bearing at the top (...) (...) like unto Dill, and seed somewhat long and
cornered, of a sharp and biting taste. The root is long and thick like unto
great Saxifrage, of a pleasant smell, and sharp in taste.

There is another (...) of (...), which has large and great leaves like unto
Ferula, and not much unlike Siler Montanum: among which rise up stalks four
cubits high, bearing at the tops spokie tufts like unto the last before (...)
hearsed, of a good savor. The root is like unto the sormer in shape,
substance, and savor, but that it is greater.

The Place.
These plants are strangers in England, notwithstanding I have them in my
garden.

The Time.
They flower and flourish in September.

The Names.
Their names have been touched in their several descriptions.

The Temperature and Virtues.
It provoke urine and helps the strangurie, brings down the sickness
and dead birth: it

The seed drunk with wine (...) raw humors, takes away the griping and
torments of Dioscorides says.

The juice of the leaves is given to Goats and other cattle to drink, that
they may the sooner

CHAP. 425. Of Spignell, Spicknell, or Mewe.
The Description.
1 SPignell has stalks rising up to the height of a cubit and a half, beset
with leaves (...) Fennel or Dill, but thicker, more bushie, and more finely
iagged; and at the top of the stalks do grow spokie tufts like unto Dil. The
roots are thick, and full of an oleous substance, smelling well, and chasing or
heating the tongue, of a reasonable good savor.

1 Meum. Spignell.
2 Meum alterum Italicum. Italian Spignell.


2 There is a bastard kind of Spignell like unto the former, saving that the
leaves are not so finely cut or iagged: the flowers are tufted more thicker
than the former: the roots are many, thick, and full of sap.

The Place.
Mew, or Meon grows in Westmerland, at a place called Round-twhat betwixt
(...) and Kendall, in the parish of Orton.

(...) Mewe, or Meum, grows in the waste mountains of Italy, and the Alps,
and (as it has (...) told me) upon Saint Vincents rock by Bristow, where I
spent two days to seek it, but it was not my hap to find it, (...) I make
some doubt of the truth thereof.

The Time.
These herbs do flower in June and July, and yield their seed in August.

The Names.
It is called of the Grecians (...) or (...): likewise of the Latins, Meum: of
the Italians, Meo: in (...), (...) (...) declares, it is called Imperatrix: in
diverse places of Spain, Sistra: in (...), (...): in High Dutch (...): in
French, Sistre: Ruellius says that it is named in France (...) (...) (...) and
(...), or writhed Dil, and wild Dill: also it is called in English, Spignel,
or Spicknell, of (...) Mew, and Bearewoort.

The second may be called bastard Spicknell.

The Temperature.
These herbs, especially the roots of right Meon, is hot in the third degree,
and dry in the second.

The Virtues.
The roots of Meon, boiled in water and drunk, mightily open the stoppings of
the kidneys

The same taken with honey does appease the grief of the belly, and is
exceeding good against

If the same be laid plaisterwise upon the bellies of children, it makes them
to piss well.

They cleanse the entrails, and deliver them of obstructions or stoppings: they
provoke urine, Galen says.

CHAP. 426. Of Horestrange, or Sulphurwoort.
The Description.
1 SVlphurwoort or Hogs-fennell has a stiff and hard stalk full of knees or
knots, beset with leaves like unto Fennel, but greater, coming nearer unto
Ferula, or rather like the leaves of wild Pine Tree, and at the top of the
stalks round spokie tufts full of little yellow flowers, which do turn into
broad brown seed. The root is thick and long: I have dug up roots thereof
as big as a man's thigh, black without, and white within, of a strong and
grievous smell, and full of yellow sap or liquour, which quickly waxes hard or
dry, smelling not much unlike brimstone, called Sulphur; which has induced
some to call it Sulphurwoort; having also at the top toward the upper face of
the earth, a certain bush of hair, of a brown color, among which the leaves
and stalks do spring forth.

2 The second kind of Peucedanum or Hogs-fennell is very like unto the former,
(...) that the leaves be like Ferula: the roots are nothing so great as the
former, but all the rest of the plant does far exceed the other in greatness.

3 There is another kind of Peucedanum or Hogs (...), which Pena found upon
Saint Vincents rock by Bristow, whose picture he has set forth in his
Aduersaria, which that famous English Physician of late memory, D. Turner
found there also, supposing it to be the right and true Peucedanum, whereof no
doubt it is a kind: it grows not above a soot high, and is in shape and
leaves like the right Peuccdanum, but they be shorter and lesser, growing
somewhat like the writhed Fennel of Massilia, but the branches are more largely
writhed, and the leaves are of the color of the branches, which are of a pale
green color. At the top of the branches grow small white tufts, having seed
like Dill, but shorter and slenderer, of a good taste, somewhat sharp. The
root is thicker than the smalnesse of the herb will well bear. Among the
people about Bristow, and the rock asoresaid, this has been thought good to
eat.

The figure of this our Author formerly gave (yet unfitly, it not agreeing
with that description) for Oreoselinum: it may be he thought it the same with
that of (...). his description, because he sound it under the same title in
(...). This is the Selinum montanum pumilum of Clusius; and the Peucedani facie
pusilla planta of Pena and Lobel; whersore (...) was mistaken in his Pinax,
whereas he refers that of Lobel to his third Peucedanum: the root of this is
black without, and white within, but short, yet at the top about the thickness
of ones (...): the leaves are small and green, commonly divided into sieve
parts; and these again subdivided by threes: the (...) is some six inches or
half a foot high, divided into sundry branches, crested, (...), and at the
tops of the branches, even when they first shoot up, appear little vmbels of
white flowers very small, and consisting of five leaves apiece. The seed is
black, shining and round, two being joined together, as in most vmbelliferous
plants. It flowers in May, and ripens the (...) in July: I received in July
(...), some plants of this from Bristow, by the means of my (...) mentioned
friend (...) George (...), who gathered it (...) Saint (...) Rock, whereas the
Authors of the Aduersaria report it to grow.

1 Peucedanum. Sulphurwoort.
2 Peucedanum maius. Great Sulphurwoort.
3 Peucedanum pumilum. Dwarf Hogs-Fennell.


The Place.
The first kind of Peucedanum or Hogs Fennel grows very plentifully on the
South side of a wood belonging to Waltham, at the Nase in Essex by the highway
side; also at Whitstable in Kent, in a meadow near to the sea side, sometime
belonging to Sir Henry Crispe, and adjoining to his house there. It grows
also in great plenty at Feuersham in Kent, near unto the haven upon the banks
thereof, and in the meadows adjoining.

The second kind grows upon the sea coasts of Montpellier in France, and in
the coasts of Italy.

The Time.
These plants do flower in June, July, and August.

The Names.
The Grecians call it (...): the Latins in like manner Peucedanos, or
Peucedanum, and also Pinastellum: most of the shops, and likewise the common
people name it Foeniculum Porcinum: of diverse, Stataria: of the Prophets,
(...): that is to say, a good Angel or Ghost: in High Dutch, Harstrang,
Schweffel wurkel, Sewfenckel: in Italian and French, Peucedano: in Spanish,
(...): in English, Hore-strange, and Hore-strong, Sow-Fennell, or Hogs Fennel,
Sulphur-wort, or Brimstone-wort. It is called Peucedanum and Pinastellum, of
the Greek and Latin words, (...) and Pinus.

The Temperature.
These herbs, especially the yellow sap of the root, is hot in the second
degree, and dry in the beginning of the third.

The Virtues.
The yellow sap of the root of Hogs Fennel, or as they call it in some places
of England, Horestrange,

The same taken in manner aforesaid provoke urine, eases the pain of the
kidneyes and bladder,

The sap or juice of the root mixed with oil of Roses, or Vinegar, and
applied, eases the palsy,

It is used with good success against the rupture or burstings in young
children, and is very good

The decoction of the root drunk is of like virtue unto the juice, but not
altogether so effectual

The root dried and made into powder does mundifie and cleanse old stinking and
corrupt sores

The said powder or juice of the root mixed with oil of Roses, causes one to
sweat, if the body

The congealed liquor tempered with oil of Roses, and applied to the head
after the manner of Dioscorides teaches.

The same being smelt unto reuiueth and calls them again that be strangled
with the mother,

Being taken in a rear egg it helps the cough and difficulty of breathing,
gripings and windiness, Galen adds, proceeds from the grossness and
clamminesse of humors.

It purges gently, it diminishes the spleen, by cutting, digesting, and
making thin humors

A small piece of the root holden in the mouth is a present remedy against the
suffocation of

CHAP. 427. Of Herb Ferula, or Fennel Giant.
The Kinds.
DIoscorides makes mention of a Ferula, out of which is gathered the Gum
Sagapene; and (...) he declares, that the Gums Galbanum and Ammoniacum are
liquors of this herb (...): but what difference there is in the liquors,
according to the clymat or country where it grows, he does not set down;
for it may be that out of one kind of Ferula sundry iuyces may be gathered,
that is to say, according to the diversity of the countries where they grow,
as we have said: for as in Laser, the juice of Laserwort that grows in Cyrene
does differ from that liquor which grows in Media and Syria; so it is likely
that the herb Ferula does bring sorth in Media Sagapenum, in Cyrene
Ammoniacum, and in Syria Galbanum. Theophrastus says that the herb Ferula is
divided into mo kinds, and he calls one great, by the name of Ferula; and
another little, by the name Ferulago.

1 Ferula. Fennel Giant.
2 Ferulago. Small Fennell-Gyant.


The Description.
1 FErula, or Fennel Giant, has very great and large leaves of a deep green
color, cut and iagged like those of Fennel, spreading themselves abroad like
wings: amongst which rises up a great hollow stalk, somewhat reddish on that
side which is next unto the Sun, divided into certain spaces, with joints or
knees like those of Hemlocks or Kexes, of the bigness of a man's arm in the
wrest, of the height of four or five cubits where it grows naturally, as in
Italy, Greece, and other hot countries; notwithstanding it has attained to the
height of fourteen or fifteen foot in my garden, and likewise grows fairer
and greater than from whence it came, as it (...) with other plants that come
hither from hot regions: as for example our great Artichoke, which first was
brought out of Italy into England, is become (by reason of the great moisture
which our country is subject unto) greater and better than those of Italy;
insomuch that diverse Italians have sent for some plants of our Artichokes,
(...) (...) to be of another kind; nevertheless in Italy they are small and
dry as they were before. (...) (...) it happens to this Ferula, as we have
said. This foresaid stalk divides it self toward the top into diverse other
smaller branches, whereon are set the like leaves that grow next the ground,
out much lesser. At the top of the branches at the first budding of the flowers
appear certain bundles enclosed in thin skins, like the yolke of an egg,
which diverse call Corculum Ferulae, or the (...) (...) of Ferula; which being
brought to maturitie, open themselves into a tuft or vmbel like that of (...),
of a yellowish color: after which come the seed, in color and fashion like
those of the (...), but longer and greater, always growing two together, so
closely joined, that it cannot be discerned to be more than one seed until
they be divided: the root is very thick and great, full of a certain gummie
juice, that flows forth, the root being bruised, broken, or cut; which being
dried or hardened, is that gum which is called Sagapenum, and in some shops
Serapinum.

3 Panax Asclepium Ferulaefacie. Aesculapius his All-heale.


2 There is likewise another smaller (...) like (...) the former in each
respect, saving that it is altogether less: the root likewise being wounded
yields forth a sap or juice, which when it is hardened is called Galbanum: of
the Assyrians, Metopium.

I have likewise another sort sent me from Paris, with this title Ferulanigra;
which prospers exceeding well in my garden, but difference I cannot find any
from the former, sathat the leaves are of a more black or swart color.

3 I know not where more fitly than in this place to give you the history of
that Ferula or Ferulaceous plant that Dodonaeus, Lobel, and others have set
down under the name of Panax Asclepium. The stalk hereof is slender, a cubit
high, crested and ioynted, and from these joints proceed leaves bigger than
those of Fennel, and also rougher, and of a strong smell: at the tops of the
branches grow vmbels of yellow flowers: the seed is flatrish, like that of the
other Ferula: the root long, white, and of a strong smell. This grows
naturally in Istria.

The Place.
These plants are not growing wild in England; I have them all in my garden.

The Time.
They flower in June and July; they perfect their seed in September; not long
after, the stalk with his leaves perish: the root remains fresh and green
all Winter.

The Names.
The first is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Ferula: in Italian, Ferola: in
Spanish, (...): in English, Herb Ferula, and Fennel Giant.

The Temperature.
These plants with their Gums are hot in the third degree, and dry in the
second.

The Virtues.
The pith or marrow, called Corculum Ferulae, as Galen teaches, is of an
astringent or binding

Dioscorides says, that being put into the nosthrils it stays bleeding, and
is given in Wine to

It is reported to be eaten in Apulia roasted in the embers, first wrapped in
leaves or in old clouts,

The seed does heat, and attenuate or make thin: it is a remedy against
cold fits of an Ague,

A dram of the juice of (...) which bears Sagapenum, purges by siege tough
and slimie humors, and all gross phlegm and choler, and is also good against
all old and cold diseases which are hard to be cured; it purges the brain, and
is very good against all diseases of the head, against the Apoplexy and
Epilepsie.

Being taken in the same manner, it is good against crampes, palsies,
shrinkings and pains of the sinews.

It is good against the shortness of breath, the cold and long cough, the
pain in the side and breast, for it mundifieth and cleanses the breast from all
cold phlegm and rheumaticke humors.

Sagapenum infused or steeped in vinegar all night, and spread upon leather or
cloth, scatters, dissolueth, and drives away all hard and cold swellings,
tumors, botches, and hard lumpes growing about the joints or elsewhere, and is
excellent good to be put into or mingled with all ointments or complaisters
which are made to mollify or soften.

The juice of Ferula Galbanifera, called Galbanum, drunk in wine with a little
myrrh, is good against all venom or poison that has been taken inwardly, or
shot into the body with venomous darts, quarrels, or arrows.

It helps women's paineful travel, if they do take thereof in a cup of wine the
quantity of a bean.

The perfume of Galbanum helps women that are grieved with the rising of the
mother, and is

Galbanum softneth, mollifieth, and draws forth thorns, splinters, or broken
bones, and (...) Sagapenum.

CHAP. 428. Of Drop-wort, or Filipendula.
1 Filipendula. Drop-wort.
2 Filipendula montana. Mountain Drop-wort.


The Kinds.
THere be diverse sorts of Drop-worts, some of the champion or fertile pastures,
some of more moist and dankish grounds, and some of the mountain.

The Description.
1 THe first kind of Filipendula has leaves growing and spread abroad like
feathers, each leaf consisting of sundry small leaves dented or snipt round
about the edges, growing to the stalk by a small and slender stem: these
leaves resemble wild Tansie or Burnet, but that they be longer and thicker,
set like feathers, as is aforesaid: among these rise up stalks a cubit and a
half high, at the top whereof grow many fair white flowers, each small flower
consisting of six slender leaves, like a little star, bushing together in a
tuft like the flowers of Medesweet, of a soft sweet smell: the seed is small,
and grows together like a button: the roots are small and black, whereupon
depend many little knops (...) black pellets, much like the roots of the
female Peonie, saving that they be a great deal smaller.

2 The second kind of Filipendula, called of Pena in his Observations,
Oenanthe, sieve Philipendula alter a montana, is neither at this day very well
known, neither did the old writers heretofore once write or speak of it: but
Pena that painful Herbarist found it growing naturally in Narbone in France,
(...) unto Veganium, on the top of the high hills called Paradisus Dei, and
near unto the mountain Calcaris: this rare plant has many knobby long roots,
in shape like to Ashodelus luteus, or rather like the roots of Corruda, or
wild Asparagus; from which rises up a stalk a foot high, and more, which is
thick, round, and chanelled, beset full of leaves like those of common
Filipendula, but they be not so thick set or winged, but more like unto the
leaves of a Thistle, consisting of sundry small leaves, in fashion like to
Coronopus Ruellij, that is, Ruellius his Bucks horn: round about the top of
the stalk there grows a very fair tuft of white flowers, resembling fine
small hoods, growing close and thick together like the flowers of Pedicularis,
that is, Red Rattle, called of Carolus Clusius, Alectorolophos; whereof he
makes this plant a kind, but in my judgment and opinion it is rather like
Cynosorchis, a kind of Satyrion.

3 Filipendula angustifolia. Narrow leafed Drop-wort.
4 Filipendula Cicutaefacie. Hemlocke Drop-wort.


3 There is another kind of Filipendula set forth under the name of Oenanthe,
that has many tuberous and thick roots like those of Drop-wort, but white of
color, and every one of those knobs has a certain string or fiber annexed
thereto; from whence arises a crested stalk two foos 5 Filipendula aquatica.
Water Drop-wort.
high, dividing it self toward the top into sundry arms or branches: from the
hollow place or bosom of every joint (out of which do grow those branches)
the leaves do also proceed, very much cut or iagged like Fennel: at the top
of those branches come forth spokie rundles of white flowers fashioned like
stars.

4 The fourth kind of Filipendula is as strange a plant as the former,
especially with us here in England, except in the waterie places and rilles in
the North, where Paludapium or water Smallage grows; whereunto in leaves it
is not unlike, but more like Ruta pratensis: it has many large branches, a
naughty savor, and in color and shape like Cicuta, that is, Hemlocke. The
stalks are more than two cubits high, coming from a root which exceedingly
multiplies it selse into bulbes, like Asphodelus albus. The smell of this plant
is strong and grievous; the taste hot and biting, it being full of a juice, at
first milky, but afterward turning yellow. The spoky tusts or rundles growing
at the top are like Cicuta, yea, it much resembles Hemlocke in property and
qualities, and so do they affirm that have proved and seen the experience of
it: (...) being eaten in sallads it did well nigh poison those which ate of it,
making them giddie in their heads, waxing very pale, staggering and reeling
like drunken men. Beware and take good heed of this and such like Simples; for
there is no Physician that will give it, because there be many other excellent
good Simples which God has bestowed upon us from the preventing and curing of
diseases. Pernicious and not excusable is the ignorance of some of our time,
that have bought and (as one may probably conjecture) used the roots of this
plant in stead of those of Peionie; and I know they are daily by the ignorant
women in Cheape-side sold to people more ignorant than themselves, by the name
of water Louage; Caveat Emptor. The danger that may ensue by using them may be
gathered by that which our Author has here set down, being taken out of the
Aduersaria, page 326.

5 The fifth and last kind of Filipendula, which is the fourth according to
Matthiolus his account, has leaves like water Smallage, which Pliny calls
Sylaus, the leaves very much resembling those of Lauer Cratcuae: among which
rises up a small stalk deeply furrowed or crested, bearing at the top
thereof spokie or bushy rundles of white flowers thick thrust together. The
roots are compact of very many filaments or threads,; among which come forth a
few tuberous or knobbie roots like unto the second.

The Place and Time.
The first grows plentifully upon stony rocks or mountains, and rough
places, and in fertile pastures. I found great plenty thereof growing in a
field adjoining to Sion house, sometime a Nunnerie, near London, on the side of
a meadow called Sion Meadow.

The second has been sufficiently spoken of in the description. The third
grows near unto brooks and rivers sides. The (...) grows between the
plowed lands in the moist and wet furrows of a field belonging to Battersey by
London. It also grows in great abundance in many places by the Thames side;
as amongst the oysiers against York house, a little above the Horse-ferrey,
against Lambeth, etc. The fifth grows near the sides of rivers and
waterstreames, especially near the river of Thames or Tems, as in S. Georges
fields, and about the Bishop of Londons house at Fulham, and such like places.

They flower from May to the end of June.

The Names.
They are commonly called Filipendulae. The first is called of Nicolaus
Myrepsus, Philipendula: of some, Saxisragrarubra, and Millefolium syluestre: of
Pliny, Molon: in Italian and Spanish, Filipendula: in English, Filipendula and
Drop-wort. Water Filipendula is called Filipendula aquatica; Oenanthe aquatica,
and Silaus Plinij.

The fourth, whose leaves are like to Homlocks, is as some think called of
Cordus, Oisenichium: in English Homlocke Filipendula.

The Nature.
These kinds of Filipendula are hot and dry in the third degree, opening and
clensing, and yet with a little astriction or binding. All the kinds of
Oenanthes have the same faculty, except the fourth, whose pernicious faculty
we have formerly touched.

The Virtues.
The root of common Filipendula boiled in wine and drunken, is good against all
pains of Dioscorides has written of Oenanthe; the root, says he, is good for
them that piss by drops.

The powder of the roots of Filipendula often used in meat, will preserve a
man from the falling The figures that were formerly in the (...) and fifth
places, were both of the plant described in the fifth place. I (...) (...) you
in the fourth place the figure which Lobel and others have given for the plant
there described, but it is not well (...) for the (...) are large like those of
Smallage, the stalk, branches and (...) very large, and like those of (...),
but rather bigger.


CHAP. 429. Of Homlocks, or herb Bennet.
The Description.
1 THe first kind of Hemlocke has a long stalk, five or six foot high, great
and hollow, full of joints like the stalks of Fennel, of an herby color;
poudered with small red spots, almost like the stems of Dragons. The leaves are
great, thick, and small cut or jagged like the leaves of Cheruill, but much
greater, and of a very strong and unpleasant savor. The flowers are white,
growing by tufts or spokie tops, which do change and turn into a white flat
seed: the root isshort, and somewhat hollow within.

1 Cicuta. Hemlocks.


2 The Apothecaries in times past not knowing the right Seseli Peloponnense,
have erroniously taken this Cicuta latifolia for the same. The leaves whereof
are broad, thick, and like unto Cicutaria, yet not the same; they called it
Seseli Peloponnense cum folio Cicutae, the faculties whereof deny and refute
that assertion and opinion, yea and the plant it self, which being touched,
yields or breaths out a most virulent or loathsome smell: these things
sufficiciently argue, that it is not a kind of Seseli, besides the reasons
following: Seseli has a reasonable good savor in the whole plant, the root is
bare and single, without fibers, like a Carrot; but Cicuta has not only a
loathsome smell, but his roots are great, thick, and knobby, like the roots of
Myrrhis: the whole plant does in a manner resemble the leaves, stalks and
flowers of Myrrhis odorata, whose small white flowers do turn into long and
crooked seeds, growing at the top of the branches three cubits high.

3 This in leaves, stalks, and roots is larger than the last described, the
stalks equalling or exceeding the height of a man; the smell is strange and
greiuous, and in all the parts thereof it is like to the other plants of this
kind. Lobel figures it by the name of Cicutaria maxima Brancionis, and
questions whither it be not Thapsia tertia Salamanticensium of Clusius; but
Clusius denies it so to be.

2 Cicuta latifolia faetidissima. Broad leafed stinking Hemlocks.
3 Cicuta latifolia altera. Giant Hemlocke.


The Place.
Common Hemlocke grows plentifully about town walls and villages in (...)
places, and fat soiles near ditches.

The second grows upon mountains and desert places, and is a stranger in
England; yet I have plants thereof in my garden.

The Time.
They flourish and seed in September.

The Names.
Homlocke is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Cicuta: in high Dutch, (...):
in low Dutch, (...): in Spanish, (...) Canaheia: in French, Cigue: in English,
Hemlocke, Homlocke, Kexe, and herb Bennet.

The second is called Cicuta latifolia, and Cicutaria latifolia, and (...)
Peloponnense quorundam in English, great Hemlockes, and garden Homlocke.

The Temperature.
(...) says, that Homlocke is extreme cold in operation, even in the fourth
degree of coldness.

The Virtues.
It is therefore a very (...) part to lay the leaves of Hemlocke to the stones
of young boys or virgin Dioscorides writes, saying, Hemlocke is a very evil,
dangerous, hurtful, and poisonous herb, insomuch that whosoever takes of it
into his body dies remediless, except the party drink some wine that is
naturally hot, before the venom have taken the heart, as Pliny says: but
being drunk with wine the poison is with greater speed carry to the heart, by
reason whereof it kills presently; theresore not to be applied outwardly,
much less taken inwardly into the body.

The great Hemlocke doubtless is not possessed with any one good faculty, as
appears by his

CHAP. 430. Of wild and water Hemlockes.
The Description.
The figure formerly in the first place was of (...); the description I think
was intended, yet not thoroughly agreeing with this I here give you, wherefore I
have a little altered it.
1 THis wild kind of Hemlocke has a small tough white root, from which arise
up diuets stiff stalks, hollow, somewhat reddish toward the Sun, ioynted or
kneed at certain distances: from which joints spring forth long leaves very
green, and finely minced or iagged like the common. Cheruill or Parsley: the
flowers stand at the tops of the stalks in small spokie vmbels, with little
longish green leaves about them: the seed solloweth, like those of Hemlocke,
or as they grow together on the tops of the stalks they resemble Coriander
seeds, but lesser: the whole plant is of a naughty smell.

The figure formerly in the first place was of (...); the description I think
was intended, yet not thoroughly agreeing with this I here give you, wherefore I
have a little altered it.
1 Cicutaria tenuifolia. Thin leafed wild Hemlocke.
2 Cicutaria (...). Wild water Hemlocke.


2 Water Hemlock, which Lobel calls Cieutariapalustris: Clusius and (...),
Phellandrium, rises up with a thick fat and empty hollow stalk, full of
knees or joints, (...), chamfered, or furrowed, of a yellowish green color:
the leaves shoot forth of the joints and branches, like unto wild Hemlocke,
but much thicker, fatter, and oileous, very finely cut or iagged, almost like
those of the smallest Visnaga, or Spanish Tooth-pickes: the flowers stand at
the top of the stalks in small whitish tusts: the seed follows, blackish, of
the bigness of Anise seed, and of a sweet savor: the root is thick and long,
within the water, very soft and tender, with very many strings fastened thereto.

The Place.
1 This grows among stones and rubbish, by the walls of cities and towns
almost every where. The other grows in the midst of water ditches and
standing pooles and ponds, in most places of England: it grows very
plentifully in the ditches by a causey, as you go from Redriffe to Detford
near London, and in many other places.

The Time.
They flower and flourish in July and August.

The Names.
1 This is Petroselini vitium of Tragus; and Dauci inutilis genus of Gesner:
Thalius calls it Apium cicutarium: Lobel, Cicutaria fatua: Tabernamontanus,
Petroselinum caninum; which name we may fitly make English, and call it
Dogs-parsley.

2 This is Ligusticum syl. and Foeniculum syl. of Tragus: Cicutaria palustris
of Lobel and others: Dodonaeus thinks it Plinies Phellandrion; and Caesalpinus
judges it his Silaus.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Their temperature and faculties are answerable to the common Hemlocke, which
have no use in physic, as we have said.

CHAP. 431. Of Earth-nut, Earth Chest-nut, or Kipper-nut.
1 Bulbocastanon minus. Small Earth-nut.
2 Bulbocastanon (...). Great Earth-nut.


The Description.
1 EArth-nut or Kipper-nut, called after Lobelius, Nucula terrestris, has
small even crested stalks a foot or somewhat more high: whereon do grow next
the ground leaves like those of Parsley, and those that do grow higher like
unto those of Dill; the white flowers do stand on the top of the stalks in
spokie rundles, like the tops of Dill, which turn into small seed, growing
together by couples, of a very good smell, not unlike to those of Fennel, but
much smaller: the root is round, knobbed, with certain eminences or bunchings
out; brown without, white within, of a firm and sollid substance, and of a
taste like the Chesse-nut or Chestnut, whereof it took his name.

2 There is also another Earth-nut that has stalks a foot high, whereon do
grow iagged leaves like those of English Saxifrage, of a bright green color:
the flowers grow at the top of the branches, in small spokie tufts consisting
of little white flowers: the root is like the other, bulbous fashion, with some
few strings hanging at the bottom, of a good and pleasant taste. This differs
from the former, in that the leaves are larger and greener: the root also is
not so far within the ground, and it also sends forth some leaves from the
bulbe it self; whereas our common kind has only the end of a small root that
carries the stem and leaves upon it, fastened unto it as you see it expressed in
the former figure.

The Place.
These herbs do grow in pastures and corn fields almost every where: there is
a field adioining to High-gate, on the right side of the middle of the village,
covered over with the same; and likewise in the next field unto the conduit
heads by Maribone, near the way that leads to Paddington by London, and in
diverse other places. I have not yet observed the second to grow wild with us.

The Time.
They flower in June and July: the seed comes to perfection afterward.

The Names.
Alexander Trallianus has made mention of (...), Lib. 7. reckoning it up among
th ose kinds of meat or sustenances which be good for such as have rotten
lungs: of some it is called Agriocastanon.

Guinterius thought the word was corrupted, and that Balanocastanon should be
read: but this is as strange a word as Bolbocastanon, which was derived of the
form of a bulbe, and the taste of a Chestnut: of some, Nuculaterrestris, or the
little Earth-nut: it is thought to be Bunium Dioscoridis of some; but we think
not so: of Dr. Turner, Apios; yet there is another Apios, being a kind of
Tithymale: of Matthiolus, Oenant he, making it a kind of Filipendula: in
High Dutch, (...): in Low Dutch, Certnoten: the people of Sauoy call it
Fauerottes: in English, Earth-nuts, Kippernuts, and Earth Chest-nuts.

The Temperature.
The roots of Earth-nuts are moderately hot and dry, and also binding: but the
seed is both hotter and drier.

The Virtues.
The seed opens and provoke urine, and so does the root likewise.

The root is good for those that spit and piss blood, if the root be eaten
raw, or roasted in the embers.

The Dutch people do use to eat them boiled and buttered, as we do Parseneps
and Carrots,

There is a plaster made of the seeds hereof, whereof to write in this place
were impertinent to

CHAP. 432. Of Cumin.
The Description.
THis garden Cumin is a low or base herb of a foot high: the stalk divides
it self into diverse small branches, whereon do grow little iagged leaves very
finely cut into small parcels, like those of Fennel, but more finely cut,
shorter and lesser: the spoky tufts grow at the top of the branches and
stalks, of a red or purplish color: after which come the seed, of a strong or
rank smell, and a biting taste: the root is slender, which perishes when it
has ripened his seed.

Cuminum sativum Dioscoridis. Garden Cumin.


The Place.
Cumin is husbanded and sown in Italy and Spain, and is very common in other
hot countries, as in Aethiopia, Egypt, Cilicia, and all the lesser Asia.

It delights to grow especially in putrified and hot soiles: I have proved the
seeds in my garden, where they have brought forth ripe seed much fairer and
greater than any that comes from beyond the seas.

The Time.
It is to be sown in the middle of the spring; a shewre of rain presently
following does much hinder the growth thereof, as Ruellius says.

My self did sow it in the midst of May, which sprung up in six days after:
and the seed was ripe in the end of July.

The Names.
It is called in Greek (...), that is, tame or garden Cumin, that it may
differ from the wild ones: it is named in Latin Cuminum: in shops, Cyminum:
in High Dutch, (...) (...): in Italian, Comino: in Spanish, Cominchos: in
French, Comin: in English, Cumin.

The Temperature.
The seed of garden Cumin, as Galen says, is hot and dry in the third degree:
Dioscorides says that it has in it also a binding quality.

The Virtues.
The seed of Cumin scatters and breaks all the windiness of the stomach,
belly, guts, and

Being handled according to art, either in a cataplasme, pultis, or plaster,
or boiled in wine and

Being taken in supping broth it is good for the chest and for cold lungs, and
such as are oppressed

It stancheth bleeding at the nose, being tempered with vinegar and smelt unto.

Being quilted in a little bag with some small quantity of Bay salt, and made
hot upon a bedpan

CHAP. 433. Of wild Cumin.
The Kinds.
THere be diverse plants differing very notably one from another in shape, and
yet all comprehended under the title of wild Cumin.

The Description.
1 THe wild Cumin has small white roots with some fibers thereto appendant;
from the which arise sundry little iagged leaves, consisting of many lesser
leaves, finely dented about the edges, in fashion like the smallest leaves of
wild Parsnep: among which springs up a slender bending stalk a foot high,
like unto (...) (...), bearing at the top thereof white

1 Cuminum syluestre. Wild Cumin.
2 Cuminum (...). Codded wild Cumin.
3 Cuminum Corniculatum sive Hypecoum Clusy. Horned wild Cumin.


round and hairle buttons or knops, like Arction, as Dioscorides has right
well observed: within which knoppes is contained a tender downie substance,
among which is the seed, like the seed of Dens Leonis, but much lesser.

2 The second kind of Cumin is very like unto the foresaid wild Cumin, save
that it bears a number of horned or crooked cods, after the manner of
Scorpioides, but thicker, and less crooked, and the seeds within the cods are
seucrally distinct and separated one from another by equal partitions, in
small crosses, yellow of color, and somewhat long: the stalks are little and
tender, beset with leaves much like unto the small leaves of Carui, or Pecten
Vencris: and at the top of the stalks there do grow pretty yellow flowers, like
those of great Celandine or Rocket, saving that they be somewhat lesser.

3 The third kind of Cumin is very like unto the last before mentioned, but
the leaves are much greater, more slender, and more finely cut or iagged, like
the leaves of Seseli of (...): among which rises up a stalk a cubit high or
somewhat more, very smooth and whitish: at the top whereof spring forth fine
yellow flowers, not like the former, but consisting of six leaves apiece;
whereof two are large, and edged with green on the outside: the other four
are small ones, and grow two on a side between the two larger leaves: these
flowers being vaded, there succeed crooked cods, greater, and more full of
knots or divisions than the former, wherein is contained a small and flat
yellow seed like Galega: the root is long, thick, and single.

The Place.
These wild Cumins do grow in Lycia, and Galatia, a province of Asia, and in
Carthage a city of Spain; seldom seen in these Northern parts:
notwithstanding at the impression hereof, the last did flower and flourish in
my garden. These grow in Province in France, and in diverse parts of Spain.

The Time.
They flower in August, and perfect their seed in September.

The Names.
Their names have been touched in their titles in as ample manner as has been
set down by any Author.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Their temperature and virtues are referred to the garden Cumin;
notwithstanding I cannot read in any Author of their use in Physic.

CHAP. 434. Of Flixweed.
1 Sophia Chirurgorum. Flixweed.


The Description.
1 FLixweed has round and hard stalks, a cubit and a half high, whereon do
grow leaves most finely cut and divided into in numerable fine iags, like those
of the sea Wormwood called Seriphium, or Absinthium tenuisolium, but much
finer and smaller, drawing near unto the smallest leaves of Corianders, of an
ouerworne green color: the flowers grow along the tops of the spriggie
branches, of a dark yellow color: after which come long cods full of small red
seeds: the root is long, straight, and of a wooddie substance:

2 The second sort differs not from the precedent, saving that the leaves of
this plant are broader, wherein especially consists the difference;
notwithstanding in mine opinion Tabernamontanus found this second fort growing
in some fertile place, whereby the leaves did grow broader and greater, which
moved him to make of this a second sort, whereas in truth they are both but one
and the self same plant.

The Place.
This Flixeweede grows in most places of England, almost every where in the
ruins of old buildings, by high ways, and in filthy obscure base places.

The Time.
It floureth and seedeth from June to the end of September.

The Names.
Flixweed is called Thalietrum; and of some, Thalictrum, but improperly; for
Thalictrum belongs to English Rubarbe: the Paracelsians do vaunt and brag
very much of an herb called Sophia, adding thereto the surname Paracelsi,
wherewith they imagine to do wonders, whether this be the same plant it is
disputable, the controversy not as yet decided; nevertheless we must be
content to accept of this for the true Sophia, until some disciple or other of
his do thew or set (...) (...) (...) wherewith their master Paracelsus, did
such great matters: in English we call it (...), of his faculty against the
flix.

The Temperature.
Sophia dries without any manifest sharpness or heat.

The Virtues.
The seed of Sophia or Flixweed drunk with wine, or Smithes water, stops
the bloody flix, the

The herb bruised or put into unguents, closes and heals ulcers, or old
sores and wounds, as Paracelsus says, and that because it dries without (...)
or sharpness.

CHAP. 435. Of the great Celandine, or Swallow-woort.
The Description.
1 THe great Celandine has a tender brittle stalk, round, hairie, and full of
branches, each whereof has diverse knees or knottie ioints, set with leaves not
unlike to those of Columbine, but tenderer and deeper cut or iagged, of a
grayish green under, and green on the other side tending to blewnesse: the
flowers do grow at the top of the stalks, of a gold yellow color, in shape
like those of the Wall-floure: after which come long cods, full of bleake or
pale seeds: the whole plant is of a strong smell, nothing pleasant, and
yields a thick juice of a milkie substance, of the color of Saffron: the
root is thick and knobbie, with some threads annexed thereto, which being
broken or bruised, yields a sap or juice of the color of gold.

1 Chelidoniummaius. Great Celandine.
2 Chelidonium majus folio magis dissecto. Great Celandine with more cut leaves.


2 This other does not in form and magnitude differ from the former, but in
the leaves, which are finelier cut and iagged, and somewhat in their shape
resemble an Oken lease: the flowers also are a little iagged or cut about the
edges: and in these two particulars (...) (...) (...) difference. Clusius calls
it (...) maius lacintato flore; and (...), (...). (...). (...). (...) (...)
quernis.

The Place.
It grows in untilled places, by common way sides, among briers and brambles,
about old walls, and in the shade, rather than in the Sun.

The Time.
It is green all the year, it floureth from April to a good part of Summer,
the coddes are perfected in the mean time.

The Names.
It is called in Greek (...): in Latin, (...) maius, and Hirundinaria mayor:
amongst the Apothecaries, (...): diverse miscall it by the name Celidonium: it
is named in Italian, (...): in Spanish Celiduhenha, (...) de las golundrinhas:
in high Dutch, Grosz (...): in low Dutch (...) Gouwe: in French, Esclere, or
Esclayre, and (...): in English, Celandine, or great Celandine, Swallow-woort,
and Tetterwoort.

It is called Celandine, not because it then first springs at the coming in
of the Swallows, or dies when they go away: for as we have said, it may be
found all the year, but (...) (...) hold opinion, that with this herb the
dammes restore sight to their young ones when their (...) (...) out: the which
things are vain and false; for Cornelius (...) in his sixth book does
witness, that when the sight of the eyes of diverse young birds be put forth by
some outward means, it will (...) a time be restored of it self, and soonest
of all the sight of the Swallow, whereupon (as the same Author says) that the
tale or fable grew, how through an herb the dams restore that thing, which
(...) of it self: the very same does Aristotle allege in the sixth book of
the (...) of Living creatures: [The eyes of Swallows (says he) that are not
fledge, if a man do prick them out, do grow again, and afterward do
perfectly recover their sight.]

The Temperature.
The great Celandine is manifestly hot and dry, and that in the third (...),
and withal (...) and cleanses effectually.

The Virtues.
The juice of the herb is good to sharpen the sight, for it cleanses and
consumes away slimie Dioscorides teaches.

The root cures the yellow iaundise, which comes of the stopping of the
gall, especially

The root being chewed, is reported to be good against the toothache.

The juice must be drawn forth in the beginning of Summer and dried in the
Sun, says (...).

The root of Celandine boiled with Annise-seed in white wine, opens the
stoppings of the liver,

The root cut in small pieces is good to be given unto Hawks against sundry
diseases, whereunto

I have by experience found (says Clusius) that the juice of the great
Celandine dropped into

CHAP. 436. Of Coxcombe, or Yellow Rattle.
The Description.
CRista Galli, or Crista Gallinacea, has a straight upright stalk, set about
with narrow (...), snipt round about the edges: the flowers grow at the top of
the stems, of a yellow color; after which come up little flat pouches or
purses, covered over or contained within a little bladder or flat skin, open
before like the mouth of a fish, wherein is contained flat yellowish seed,
which being ripe and dry, will make a noise or rattling when it is shaken or
moved, of which property it took the name yellow Rattle.

Crista Galli. Yellow Rattle, or Coxcombe.


The Place.
It grows in dry (...) and pastures, and (...) to them a great (...).

The Time.
It floureth most part of the Summer.

The Names.
It is called in low Dutch Ratelen, and Geele Ratelen: commonly in Larine,
(...) Galli, and Gallinacca Crista: in English, Coxcombe, Penie grass, yellow
or white Rattle: in High Dutch it is called geel Rodel: in French Creste de
Coc: diverse (...) it to be the old writers Alectorolophos. Some think it to be
the Mimmulus: or as others (and that more fitly) read it, Nummulus, mentioned
by Pliny, lib. 18. cap. 28.

The Temperature and Virtues.
But what temperature or virtue this herb

CHAP. 437. Of red Rattle, or Lousewoort.
The Description.
Pedicularis. Lousewoort, or red Rattle.


REd Rattle (of Dodonaeus called Fistularia, and according to the opinion and
censure of Carolus Clusius, Pena and others, the true Alectorolophos) has very
small, rent, or iagged leaves, of a brown red color, and weak, small and
tender stalks, whereof some lie along trailing upon the ground; within very
moorish meadows they grow a cubit high and more, but in moist and wet heathes,
and such like barren grounds not above an handful high: the flowers grow round
about the stalk, from the midst thereof even to the top, and are of a brown
red color, in shape like the flowers of dead Nettle: which being past, there
succeed little flat pouches, wherein is contained flat and blackish (...), in
show very like unto the former: the root is small, white, and tender.

The Place.
It grows in moist and moorish meadows, the herb is not only unprofitable,
but also hurtful, and an infirmity of the meadows.

The Time.
It is found with his flowers and stalks in May and June.

The Names.
It is called in Greek (...): in High Dutch, Braun Rodel: in Latin,
Pedicularis, of the effect, because it fills sheep and other cattle that
(...) in meadows where this grows full of lice: diverse of the later (...)
call it (...) of (...), Crista Galli: and diverse take it to be Mimmulus herba:
in English, Rattle-grasse, Red Rattle grass, and Louse-woort.

The Temperature.
It is cold and dry and astringent.

The Virtues.
It is held to be good for Fistulaes and hollow ulcers, and to stay the
overmuch flowing of the

CHAP. 438. Of Yarrow, or Nose-bleed.
The Description.
1 COmmon Yarrow has very many stalks coming up a cubit high, round, and
somewhat hard: about which stand long leaves, cut in the sides sundry wise, and
as it were made up of many small iagged leaves, every one of which seem to
come near to the slender leaves of Coriander: there stand at the top tufts or
spoked rundles: the flowers whereof are (...) white or purple, which being
rubbed do yield a strong smell, but unpleasant; the root sends down many
strings.

1 Millefolium terrestre vulgar. Common Yarrow.
2 Millefolium flore (...). Red floured Yarrow.


2 The second kind of Milsoile or Yarrow has stalks, leaves and roots like
unto the former, saving that his spokie tufts are of an excellent fair red or
crimson color, and being a little rubbed in the hand, of a reasonable good
savor.

The Place.
The first grows every where in dry pastures and meadows: red Milfoile
grows in a field by Sutton in Kent called Holly-Deane, from whence I brought
those plants that do grow in my Garden; but it is not common every where as the
other is.

The Time.
They flower from May to the end of October.

The Names.
Yarrow is called of the Latin Herbarists Millefolium: it is Dioscorides his
(...) in Latin, (...), and Achillea siderit is; which thing he may very
plainly see that will compare with that (...) which Dioscorides has set
down: (...) was found out, says Pliny in his 25. book, chap. (...). by
Achilles, Chirons disciple, which for that cause is named (...): of others,
(...) among us, (...): yet be there other Sideritides, and also another Panaces
(...), whereof we will (...) in another place: Apuleius sets down diverse
names hereof, some of which are also (...) among the bastard names in
Dioscorides: in Latin it is called (...), Supercilium (...), (...), or Acorum
syluaticum: of the Frenchmen, Millefucille: in high Dutch, Garben, (...): in
low Dutch, Geruwe: in Italian, Millefoglio: in Spanish, Milhoyas yerua: in
English, Yarrow, Nosebleed, common Yarrow, red Yarrow, and Milfoile.

The Temperature.
Yarrow, as Galen says, is not unlike in temperature to the Sideritides, or
Iron worts, that is to say, clensing, and meanly cold, but it most of all
binds.

The Virtues.
The leaves of Yarrow do close up wounds, and keep them from inflammation, or
fiery swelling:

Most men say that the leaves chewed, and especially green, are a remedy for
the toothache.

The leaves being put into the nose, do cause it to bleed, and ease the pain
of the megrim.

It cures the inward excorations of the yard of a man, coming by reason of
pollutions or extreme

One dram in powder of the herb given in wine, presently takes away the
pains of the colicke.

CHAP. 439. Of yellow Yarrow, or Milfoile.
1 Millefolium luteum. Yellow Yarrow.
The plant here figured and described in the second place, was also figured and
described formerly in the fifth (...) of the 209. chapter of this book, by the
title of (...) (...) (...), but the figure of (...) which (...) put there being
somewhat imperfect, I thought it not (...) (...) to give that of (...) which is
somewhat more exquisite, otherwise both the figure and history might in this
place have been (...).
2 Achillea, sieve Milsefo lium nobile. Achilles Yarrow.


The Description.
1 YEllow Yarrow is a small plant seldom above a span high: the stalks
whereof are covered with long leaves, very finely cut in the edges like
feathers in the wings of little birds: the tufts or spokie (...) bring forth
yellow flowers, of the same shape and form of the common Yarrow: the root
consists of threddy strings.

2 Achilles Yarrow, or noble Milfoile, has a thick and tough root, with
strings fastened thereto: from which immediately rise up diverse stalks, very
green and crested, whereupon do grow long leaves composed of many small
jagges, cut even to the middle rib: the flowers stand on the top of the stalks
with spokie vmbels or tufts, of a whitish color, and pleasant smell.

The Place.
These kinds of Yarrow are seldom found: they grow in a fat and fruitful
soil, and sometimes in meadows, and are strangers in England.

The Time.
They flower from May until August.

The Names.
Dioscorides description does sufficiently declare, that this herb is
Stratiotes Millefolium: in Greek, (...): the height of the herb shows it,
the (...) of the leaves agree; there is some ambiguity or doubt in the color
of the flowers, which Dioscorides describes to be white, as the vulgar copies
have; but Andreas Lacuna adds out of the old book, of a yellow color: it is
named of the later age, Millefolium minus, or little Yarrow, and Millefolium
luteum, yellow Yarrow, or Nose-bleede: the Apothecaries and common people know
it not.

The Temperature.
Yarrow is meanly cold and somewhat binding.

The Virtues.
It is a principal herb for all kind of bleedings, and to heal up new and
old ulcers and green Galen, that use it for fistulaes.

This plant (...) is thought to be the very same wherewith Achilles cured the
wounds of his

CHAP. 440. Of Valerian, or Setwall.
The Description.
1 THe tame or garden Valerian has his first leaves long, broad, smooth,
green, and undivided; and the leaves upon the stalks greater, longer, and
deeply gashed on either side, like the leaves of the greater Parsnep, but yet
lesser: the stalk is above a cubit high, smooth, and hollow, with certain
joints far distant one from another: out of which joints grow forth a couple
of leaves, and in the tops of the stalks upon spokie rundles stand flowers
heaped together, which are small, opening themselves out of a long little
narrow neck, of color whitish, and sometimes withal of a light red: the root
is an inch thick, growing a slope, (...) on the upper part of the earth by a
multitude of strings, the most part of it standing out of the ground, of a
pleasant sweet smell when it is broken.

2 The greater wild Valerian has leaves divided and jagged, as those of the
former; those about the stalk hereof are also smooth, hollow, and jointed, and
above a cubit high: the flowers stand on spokie rundles like to those of the
former, but of a light purple color: the roots are slender, and full of
strings and small threads, not altogether without smell.

3 The other wild one is much like in form to the garden Valerian, but far
lesser: the first leaves thereof be undivided, the other are parted and cut in
sunder: the stalks a span long: the flowers which stand on spokie rundles are
like to those of the others, of a light whitish purple color: the roots be
slender, growing aslope, creeping, and full of fine small threads, of little
smell.

4 There is a small Valerian growing upon rocks and stony places, that is like
unto the last described, saving it is altogether less. The stalk is some half
foot high, and strait, dividing it self into branches toward the top, and that
always by couples: the bottom leaves are whole, the top

1 Valeriana hortensis. Garden Valerian, or Setwall.
2 Valeriana mayor syluestris. Great wild Valerian.
3 Valeriana minor. Small Valerian.
4 Valeriana Petraea. Stone Valerian.
leaves much divided, the flowers are small, of a whitish purple color, parted
into five, and standing upon round rough heads, which when the flowers are
fallen, become star-fashioned, divided into six parts: it flowers in June, and
is an annual plant.

5 Valeriana Graeca. Greekish Valerian.
6 Valeriana Mexicana. Indian Valerian.


5 The fisth sort of Valerian has diverse small hollow stalks, a foot high and
somewhat (...) garnished with leaves like unto those that do grow on the upper
part of the stalks of (...) (...), but smaller, cut or iagged almost to the
middle rib: at the top of the stalks do grow the flowers clustering together,
of a blew color, consisting of five leaves a piece, having in the middle
thereof small white threads tipped with yellow: the seed is small, growing in
little (...) or (...) vessels: the root is nothing else but as it were all of
threads.

6 I have another sort of Valerian (the seed whereof was sent me from that
reverend Physician (...) (...), (...) the title of Valeriana Mexicana:) having
small tender stalks trailing upon the ground, very weak and brittle:
whereupon do grow smooth greenish leaves like those of Corn Sallade (which
we have set forth amongst the Lettuce, under the title Lactuca (...), or Lambs
(...):) among the leaves come forth the flowers clustering together, like unto
the great Valerian in sorme, but of a (...) purple color: the root is very
small and threddie, which perishes with the rest of the plant, when it has
brought his seed to maturitie or (...), and must be (...) anew the next year
in May, and not before.

7 There is also another sort or kind of Valerian called by the name Phyteumn,
of the learned Physicians of Montpelier and others (set forth under the stock
or kindred of the Valerians, resembling, the aforesaid Corn-sallad, which is
called of some Prolifera, from the Greek title (...); as if you should (...),
good to make conception, and to procure love:) the lowest leaves are like those
of the small Valerian, of a yellowish color: the upper leaves become more
iagged: the stalks are (...) (...) (...): on the (...) whereof do stand small
round spokie tusts of white flowers; which (...) (...), the seeds appear like
small round pearls, which being ripe, grow to be somewhat flat, (...) in the
(...) of each seed the print of an hole, as it were graven or bored therein.
The root is (...) (...) (...) (...) some fibers annexed thereto.

8 (...) (...) (...) (...) a white and wooddie root many leaves spread upon the
ground; (...), 8 Valeriana annua, Clus. Annual Valerian.
9 Valeriana (...) (...). Broad leaued Setwail (...) the Alps
10 Valeriana Alpina angustifolia. Small Alpine Setwall.
and not unlike those of the Star-(...) among these rise up some round hollow
branched stalks two cubits high: at each joint grow forth two leaves lesser,
yet like the lower: at the tops of the branches grow the flowers as it were in
little vmbels, consisting of five leaves (...); and these of a light red, or
flesh color: and then these as it were vmbels grow into longish branches
bearing seed almost like, yet less than the red Valerian: it flowers in July,
and (...) when it has ripened the seed. (...) has set this forth by the name
of Valeriana annua altera.

9 The same Author has also given us the history of some other Plants of this
kind; and this he calls Valeriana syl. Alpina (...) latifol. the stalk hereof is
some foot high, round, green, and crested: upon which stand leaves longish,
sharp pointed, and cut in with two or three deep gashes: but the bottom
leaves are more round and larger, coming near to these of (...), yet lesser,
slenderer, and bitter of taste: the flowers which are white of color, and the
seed, are like those of the other Valerians: the root is small, creeping,
fibrous, white and aromatic: it grows upon the Alps, and flowers in June and
July.

10 This sendes forth leaves like those of the mountain Daisie: out of the
midst of which rises up a stalk some foot high, iointed, and at the top
divided into little branches, carrying white flowers like the other Valerians:
the root is as aromaticke as that of the last mentioned; and grows in the
chinkes of the Alpine rocks, where it flowers in June and July. Clusius has
it by the name of Valeriana syluestris Alpin. 2. Saxatilis.

The Place.
The first and likewise the Greek Valerian are planted in gardens; the wild
ones are found in moist places hard to rivers sides, ditches, and waterie pits;
yet the greater of these is brought into gardens where it flourishes, but the
lesser hardly prospers.

The Time.
These flower in May, June, and July, and most of the Summer months.

The Names.
Generally the Valerians are called by one name, in Latin, Valeriana: in
Greek, (...): in shoppes also Phu, which for the most part is meant by the
garden Valerian, that is called of Diosc. (...) in Latin, (...), or Rustica
Nardus: of Pliny, Nardus Cretica: which names are rather referred to those of
the next chapter, although these be reckoned as wild kinds thereof: of
certain in our age, Marinella, Amantilla, Valentiana, Genicularis, Herba
Benedicta, and Theriacaria: in most shops, Valeriana Domestica: of Theophrastus
Paracelsus, Terdina: in high Dutch, Grosz baldrian: in low Dutch, Speercruyt,
S. Ioris cruyt, and Ualeriane: in English, Valerian, Capons tail, and Setwall;
but improperly, for that name belongs to Zedoaria, which is not Valerian:
what has been set down in the titles shall serve for the distinctions of the
other kinds.

The Temperature.
The garden Valerian is hot, as Dioscorides says, but not much, neither the
green root, but the dried ones; for the green is easily perceived to have very
little heat, and the dried to be hotter, which is found by the taste and smell.

The Virtues.
The dry root, as Dioscorides teaches, provoke urine, brings down the
desired sickness, helps

They that will have their heal,
Must put Setwall in their keale.
It is used generally in slight cuts, wounds, and small hurts.

The extraction of the roots given, is a most singular medicine against the
difficulty of making

Wild Valerian is thought of the later Herbarists to be good for them that are
bursten, for such

The leaves of these and also those of the garden, are good against ulcers and
sorenes of the mouth

Some hold opinion that the roots of wild Valerian dried and poudered, and a
dram weight

CHAP. 441. Of Mountain Setwall, or Nardus.
The Description.
1 THe Nardus named Celtica, but now by some, Ligustica Nardus, flourishes in
high mountains. The Vallesians in their mother tongue call it Selliga; whence
Gesner thought it to be Saliunca; neither do I doubt, but that it is the same
which Virgil speaks of in these verses:

Puniceis humilis quantum Saliunca (...),
Iudicio nostro tantum tibi cedit Amyntas.
For it is a very little herb creeping on the ground, and afterward lifting up
it self with a stalk of a handful high; whereupon from the lower part grow
small thin leaves, first green, but afterward somewhat yellowish: upon the
roughness of the root there are many scales, platted one upon another; but
under the root there are many brown strings and hairy threads, in smell like
the roots of Astrabacca, or rather the wild mountain Valerian, whereof it
seems to be a kind, in taste sharp and bitter. The flowers grow along the
upper branches, white or yellowish, and very small.

1 Nardus Celtica. Celticke Spikenard.
3 Hirculus. Vrine-wort.
4 Nardus montana germinans: Mountain Nard at the first springing up.
4 Nardus (...). Mountain Spikenard.


2 The second sort of Spikenard has many threddy roots, from the which rise up
many scaly rough and thick stalks, having at the top certain flat hoary
leaves growing upon small and tender footstalkes. The whole plant is of a
pleasant sweet smell.

3 Hirculus is a plant very rare, which as yet I never saw, notwithstanding we
are greatly beholding to Carolus Clusius the father of foreign Simples, who
finding this plant among many bunches or handfulls of mountain Spikenard, has
made it known unto posterity, as he has done many other rare plants, in
translating of Garcias the Lusitanian Physician, he sets it forth with a
light description, saying, It is a base and low herb two handfulls high,
bringing forth leaves without any stalks at all, very hairy about the root,
and blackish, having no pleasant sent at all. The leaves chewed yield no
aromaticke taste, but are clammie, or viscide; whereas the leaves of Celticke
Narde are hot, with a little astriction, and of a pleasant smell and taste.

4 Mountain Spikenard has a great thick knobbed root, set here and there
with some tender fibers, of a pleasant sweet smell; from the which come forth
three or four smooth broad leaves, and likewise iagged leaves deeply cut even
to the middle rib: among which rise up naked stalks, garnished in the middle
with a tuft of iagged leaves. The flowers grow at the top of the stalks, in an
vmbel or tuft like those of the wild Valerian in shape and color, and such
also is the seed. I have given you the figure of the root and whole leaves as
they show themselves when they first appear, as it was taken by Clusius.

5 Nardus Indica. Indian Spikenard.
6 Nardus Narbonensis. French Spikenard.


5 The Spikenard of India is a low plant, growing close unto the ground,
composed of many rough brown hairy cloves, of a strong, yet not unpleasant
smell. The root is small and threddie. It has certainly stalks, flowers, and
seeds; but none of our Indian Writers or Travelers have as yet described them.
I have seen little pieces of slender hollow stalks some two inches long
fastened to the roots that are brought to us.

6 This French Spikenard, being a bastard kind, grows close upon the ground
like the precedent, compact of scaly rough leaves: in the middle whereof
comes forth a great bush of round green stiff and rushy leaves: among the
which shoot up diverse round stalks a cubit high, set from the middle to the
top with greenish little cods, standing in chaffie husks like those of
Schoenanth. The root is small and threddy: the whole plant is altogether
without smell, which shows it to be a bastard kind of Spikenard.

The Place.
These plants [the first foure] are strangers in England, growing in great
plenty upon the mountains of Iudenberg and Heluetia, on the rocks among the
moss, and in the mountains of Tiroll and Saltzburg.

The first and second, if my memory fail me not, do grow in a field in the
North part of England, called Crag close, and in the foot of the mountain
called Ingleborow Fels. The sourth may be found in some gardens with us. The
fifth grows in the East Indies, in the (...) of Mandou and Chito in the
kingdom of Bengala and Decan. The last grows in Province in France, near a
little city called Gange.

The Time.
The leaves grow to withering in September, at which time they smell more
pleasantly than when they flourished and were green.

The Names.
Nardus is called in Pannonia or Hungary, of the country people, Speick: of
some, Bechi (...); that is, the herb of Vienna, because it does grow there in
great abundance, from whence it is brought into other countries: of Gesner,
Saliunca: in English, Celticke Spikenard: of the Valletians, (...), and Nardus
Celtica.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Celticke Narde mightily prouokes urine, as records Rondeletius; who
traveling through the (...).

The true Spikenard or Indian Nard has a heating and drying faculty, being
(according to Galen) hot in the first degree [yet the Greek copy has the
third] and dry in the second. It is composed of a sufficiently astringent
substance, and not much acride heat, and a certain light bitterness.
Consisting of these faculties, according to reason, both inwardly and outwardly
used it is convenient for the liver and stomach.

It provoke urine, helps the gnawing pains of the stomach, dries up the
defluxions that trouble

It stays the fluxes of the belly, and those of the womb, being used in a
pessarie, and in a bath

Drunk in cold water, it helps the nauseousnesse, gnawings, and windiness of
the stomach,

It is good to cause hair to grow on the eye lids of such as want it, and is
good to be strewed upon

The Celticke-Nard is good for all the forementioned uses, but of less
esficacie, unless in the

The mountain Nard has also the same faculties, but is much weaker than the
former, and not in use at this day that I know of.

CHAP. 442. Of Larkes heel or Larkes claw.
The Description.
1 THe garden Larks spur has a round stem full of branches, set with tender
iagged leaves very like unto the small Sothernwood: the flowers grow along
the stalks toward the tops of the branches, of a blew color, consisting of
five little leaves which grow together and make one hollow flower, having a
tail or spur at the end turning in like the spur of Tode-flax. After come
the seed, very black, like those of Leekes: the root perishes at the sirst
approach of Winter.

2 The second Larks spur is like the precedent, but somewhat smaller in stalks
and leaves: the flowers are also like in form, but of a white color, wherein
especially is the difference. These flowers are sometimes of a purple color,
sometimes white, murrey, carnation, and of sundry other colors, varying
infinitely, according to the soil or country wherein they live.

3 Larks spur with double flowers has leaves, stalks, roots, and seeds like
the other single kind, but the flowers of this are double; and hereof there
are as many several varieties as there be of the single kind, to wit, white,
red, blew, purple, blush, etc.

4 There is also another variety of this plant, which has taller stalks and
larger leaves than the common kind: the flowers also are more double and
larger, with a lesser heel: this kind also yceldeth usually less seed than
the former. The color of the flower is as various as that of the former, being
either blew, purple, white, red, or blush, and sometimes mixed of some of
these.

5 The wild Larks spur has most sine iagged leaves, cut and hackt into diverse
parts, consusedly set upon a small middle tendrell: among which grow the
flowers, in shape like the others, but

1 Consolida regalis satiua. Garden Larks heel.
2 Crnsoliaa (...) (...) (...) vel (...). White or red Larks spur.
3 Consolida regalis flore duplict. Double Larks spur.
4 Consolida reg. elatior (...). (...). Great double Larks spur.
a great deal lesser, sometimes purple, otherwhiles white, and often of a mixed
color. The root is small and threddy.

5 Consolidaregalis syluestris. Wild Larkes heel.


The Place.
These plants are set and sown in gardens: the last grows wild in corn
fields, and where corn has grown, but not with us, that I have yet observed;
though it be frequently found in such places in many parts of Germany.

The Time.
They flower for the most part all Sommet long, from June to the end of August,
and ofttimes after.

The Names.
Larks heel is called Flos Regius: of diverse, Consolida regalis; who make it
one of the Consounds or Comfreyes. It is also thought to be the Delphinium
which Dioscorides describes in his third book; wherewith it may agree. It is
reported by Gerardus of Veltwijcke, who remained Lieger with the great Turk
from the Emperor Charles the fifth, That the said Gerard saw at Constantinople
a copy which had in the chap. of Delphinium, not leaves but flowers like
Dolphines: for the flowers, and especially before they be perfected, have a
certain show and likeness of those Dolphines, which old pictures and arms of
certain ancient families have expressed with a crooked and bending figure or
shape; by which sign also the heavenly Dolphine is set forth. And it skilleth
not, though the chapter of Delphinium be thought to be falsified and
counterfeited; for although it be some other man's, and not of Dioscorides, it
is notwithstanding some one of the old Writers, out of whom it is taken, and
foisted into Dioscorides his books: of some it is called Bucinus, or Bucinum:
in English, Larks spur, Larks heel, Larks toes, and Larks claw: in High Dutch,
(...) spooren; that is, Equitis calcar, Knights spur: in Italian, Sperone: in
French, Pied d' alouette.

The Temperature.
These herbs are temperate and warm of nature.

The Virtues.
We find little extant of the virtues of Larks heel, either in the ancient or
later writers, worth the noting, or to be credited; for it is set down, that
the seed of Larks spur drunken is good against

CHAP. 443. Of Gith, or Nigella.
The Kinds.
THere be diverse sorts of Gith or Nigella, differing some in the color of the
flowers, others in the doubleness thereof, and in smell of the seed.

The Description.
1 THe first kind of Nigella has weak and brittle stalks of the height of a
foot, full of branches, beset with leaves very much cut or iagged, resembling
the leaves of Fumiterie, but much greener: the flowers grow at the top of the
branches, of a whitish blew color, each flower

1 Melanthium. Garden Nigella.
2 (...) (...). Wild Nigella.
3 Melanthium Damascenum. Damask Nigella.
4 Melanthium Damascenum slo. pleno. Double floured Damask Nigella.
being parted into five small leaves, star fashion: the flowers being vaded,
there come up small knobs or heads, having at the end thereof five or six
little sharp horns or pointalls, and every knob or head is divided into
sundry small cells or partitions, wherein the seed is contained, which is of a
blackish color, very like unto Onion seed, in taste sharp, and of an
excellent sweet savor.

2 The wild Nigella has a streaked stalk a foot or more high, beset full of
grayish leaves, very finely (...), almost like the leaves of Dil: the flowers
are like the former, save that they are blewer: the cods or knops are like the
heads or husks of Columbines, wherein is contained the sweet and pleasant
seed, like the former.

5 Nigella flore albo multiplici: Damask Nigella.
6 Nigella Hispanica flore amplo. Great Spanish Nigella.


3 The third kind of Nigella, which is both fair and pleasant, called Damask
Nigella, is very like unto the wild Nigella in his small cut and jagged
leaves, but his stalk is longer: the flowers are like the former, but greater,
and every flower has five small green leaves under him, as it were to support
and bear him up: which flowers being gone, there succeed and follow knops and
seed like the former, but without smell or savor.

4 This in the smalnesse, and shape of the leaves and the manner of growing is
like to the last described having small leaves growing under the flower, which
is not single, as in the last described, but double, consisting of five or more
ranks of little bluish leaves, which are succeeded by such cornered heads as
those of the former, having in them a black seed without any manifest smell.

5 The fifth kind of Nigella has many small and slender stalks, set full of
slender and thin leaves deeply cut or jagged, of a faint yellowish green
color: the flowers grow at the top of the stalks, of a whitish color, and
exceeding double: which being vaded, there succeed bowls or knobs, full of
sweet black seed like the former: ths root is small and tender.

6 The root of this is slender, and yellowish; the stalk some cubit high,
round, green, (...), and toward the top divided into sundry branches, the
leaves toward the bottom are somewhat small cut, but somewhat larger upon the
stalks. The flower is much larger than any of the former, composed of five
leaves, of a light blew above, and somewhat whitish underneath, with large
veins running about them: in the middle stands up the head, encompassed with
blackish threads, and some 7. or 8. little gaping bluish flowers at the (...)
of them; the leaves of the flowers decaying the head becomes bigger, having at
the tops thereof 6. 7. or 8. longish twined horns growing, in a star fashion;
the inside is parted into cells containing a yellowish green, or else blackish
seed. It is set forth in the Hortus Eystettensis by the name of Melanthium
Hispanicum maius; by Mr. Parkinson it is called Nigella Hispanica flore
simplici; and Bauhine in his Prodromus has it by the name of Nigella latifolia
flore maiore simplici caeruleo. It is an annual plant, and flowers in July; it
is sometimes to be found in the gardens of our Florists.

The Place.
The tame are sown in gardens: the wild ones do grow of themselves among
(...) and other grain, in diverse countries beyond the seas.

The Time.
The seed must be sown in April: it floureth in July and August.

The Names.
Gith is called in Greek (...) in Latin also Melanthium: in shops, Nigella,
and Nigella Romana: of diverse, Gith, and Salusandria, and some among the former
bastard names, (...) nigrum: in high Dutch, Swartzkymmich: in low Dutch, Narvus
seat: in Italian, Nigella: in Spanish, Axenuz, Alipiure: in French, Nielle
odorante: in English, Gith, and Nigella Romana, in Cambridgeshire, Bishops
woort: and also Diuae Catharinae flos, Saint Katharines flower.

The Temperature.
The seed of the garden Nigella is hot and dry in the third degree, and of thin
parts.

The Virtues.
The seed of Nigella Romana drunk with wine, is a remedy against the shortness
of breath, dissolueth

The seed kills and drives forth worms, whether it be taken with wine or
water, or laid to

The oil that is drawn forth thereof has the same property.

The seed parched or dried at the fire, brought into powder, and wrapped in a
piece of fine lawne

It takes away freckles, scurfs, and hard swellings, being laid on mixed with
vinegar. To be brief, Galen says, it is a most excellent remedy where there
is need of clensing, drying, and heating.

It serves well among other sweets to put into sweet waters, bags, and
odoriferous powders. The figures of the third and fourth of the (...) edition
were transposed.


CHAP. 444. Of Cockle.
The Description.
COckle is a common and hurtful weed in our Corn, and very well known by the
name of Cockle, which Pena calls Pseudomelanthium, and Nigellastrum, by which
names Dodonaeus and Fuchsius do also term it; Mutonus calls it Lolium; and
Tragus calls it Lychnoiaes segetum. This plant has straight, slender, and
hairy stems, garnished with long hairy and grayish leaves, which grow together
by couples, enclosing the stalk round about: the flowers are of a purple
color, declining to redness, consisting of five small leaves, in proportion
very like to wild Campions; when the flowers be vaded there follow round knobs
or heads full of blackish seed, like unto the seed of Nigella, but without any
smell or savor at all.

The Place and Time.
The place of his growing, and time of his flouring, are better known then
desired.

The Names.
Cockle is called Pseudomelanthium, and Nigellastrum, wild or bastard Nigella;
of (...), Lolium: of Mouton, Lychnoides segetum: of Tragus, Githago: in high
Dutch, (...): in low Dutch, (...): in French, Nielle des Bledz: in English,
Cockle, field Nigella, or wild Nigella: in Italian, Githone; whereupon most
Herbarists being moved with the likeness of the word, have thought it to be
the true Gith or (...); but how far they are deceived it is better known,
than needful to be confuted: for it does not only differ in leaves from the
true Gith, but also in other properties, and yet it is called Gith or
Melanthium, and that is of the blackenes of the seed, yet not properly, but
with a certain addition, that it may differ from the true Melanthium: for
Pseudomelanthium. Bastard Nigella, or Cockle.
Hippocrates calls it Melanthium ex Tritico, of wheat: Octauius Horatianus
calls that Gith which grows among Corn: and for the same cause it is named
of the learned of this our time Nigellastrum, Gigatho, and Pseudomelanthium:
Ruellius says it is called in French Niele, and Flos Micancalus.

The Temperature.
The seed of Cockle is hot and dry in the later end of the second degree.

The Virtues.
The seed made in a pessarie or mother Hippocrates in his book of women's
diseases does witness.

Octauius Horatianus gives the seed parched

Some ignorant people have used the

CHAP. 445. Of Fumitorie.
The Kinds.
THere be diverse herbs comprehended under the title of Fumitorie; some wild,
and others of the garden; some with bulbous or tuberous roots, and others with
fibrous or threddy roots: and first of those whose roots are nothing but
strings.

The Description.
1 FVmitorie is a very tender little herb: the stalks thereof are slender,
having as it were little knots or joints full of branches, that scarce grow up
from the ground without proppings, but for the most part they grow sidelong:
the leaves round about are small, cut on the edges as those of Coriander; which
as well as the stalks are of a whitish green: the flowers be made up in
clusters at the tops of the small branches, of a red purple color: then rise
(...) husks, round and little, in which lies the small seed: the root is
slender, and grows straight down. This is also found with flowers of a
purple violet color, and also sometimes with them white.

2 The second kind of Fumitorie has many small long and tender branches,
whereupon grow little leaves, commonly set together by threes or fiues, in
color and taste like unto the former; having at the top of the branches many
small clasping tendrels, with which it takes hold upon hedges, bushes, and
whatsoever grows next unto it: the flowers are small, and clustering together
of a white color, with a little spot in their middles; after which succeed
cods containing the seed: the root is single, and of a fingers length.

3 The third kind of Fumitorie has a very small root, consisting of diverse
little strings; from which arise small and tender branches trailing here and
there upon the ground, beset with many small and tender leaves most finely cut
and iagged, like the little leaves of Dill, of a deep green color tending to
blewnesse: the flowers stand on the tops of the branches, in bunches or
clusters thick thrust together, like those of the meadow Clauer, or three
leafed grass, of a most bright red color, and very beautiful to behold: the
root is very small and threddy.

1 Fumaria purpurea. Common or purple Fumitory.
There were formerly six figures and (...) in this chapter; whereof the two
first figures were of the common Fumitorie, the one with purple, the other
(...) white (...); and the two later (...) of the (...) (...), differing only
in the largeness and smallness of the leaf. The description in the second
place belonged to the (...) (...), which also (...) again (...) in the (...)
and sixth places, yet not to much purpose; wherefore I have put the figure to
the second, and omitted the other (...) (...).
2 Fumaria alba latifolia clauiculata. White broad leafed Fumitorie.
3 Fumaria (...). Fine leafed Fumitorie.
4 Fumaria lutea. Yellow Fumitorie.


4 The yellow Fumitorie has many crambling threddy roots, somewhat thick,
gross, and fat, like those of Asparagus: from which rise diverse upright
stalks a cubit high, dividing themselves toward the top into other smaller
branches; whereon are confusedly placed leaves like those of Thalictrum, or
English Rubarb, but lesser and thinner: along the tops of the branches grow
yellow flowers, resembling those of Sage: which being past, there follows
small seed like unto dust.

The Place.
The Fumitories grow in corn fields among Barley and other grain; in
vineyards; gardens, and such like manured (...). I found the second and third
growing in a corn field between a small village called Charleton and
Greenwich.

The Time.
Fumitorie is found with his flower in the beginning of May, and so continues
to the end of summer. When it is in flower is the best time to gather it to
keep dry, or to distill.

The Names.
Fumitorie is called in Greek (...), and (...), and often (...): in Latin,
Fumaria: of Pliny, Capnos: in shops, Fumus terrae: in high Dutch, Erdtrauch: in
Low Dutch, (...), Duyuen kernel: in Spanish, Palomilha: in French and English,
Fumiterre.

The Temperature.
Fumitorie is not hot, as some have thought it to be, but cold and something
dry; it opens and cleanses by urine.

The Virtues.
It is good for all them that have either scabs or any other filth growing on
the skin, and for

It remoueth stoppings from the liver and spleen: it purifieth the blood, and
is often times good

The (...) of the herb is used to be given, or else the syrrup that is made of
the juice: the

It is oftentimes boiled in whay, and in this manner it helps in the end of
the Spring and in

Paulus Aegineta says that it plentifully provoke urine, and takes away the
stoppings of the

Dioscorides affirms, that the juice of Fumitorie, of that which grows
among Barley, as Aegineta

The decoction of Fumitorie drunken drives forth by urine and siege all hot
choleric burnt

CHAP. 446. Of bulbous Fumitorie, or Hollow-root.
The Description.
1 THe leaves of great Hollow root are iagged and cut in sunder, as be those of
Coriander, of a light greenish color, that is to say, like the gray color of
the leaves of Columbine, whereunto they be also in form like, but lesser: the
stalks be smooth, round, and slender, an handful long; about which, on the
upper part stand little flowers orderly placed, long, with a little horn at
the end like the flowers of Tode-flax, of a light red tending to a purple
color: the seed lies in flat cods, very soft and greenish when it is ready to
yield up his black shining ripe seed: the root is bumped or bulbous, hollow
within, and on the upper part pressed down somewhat flat, covered over with a
dark yellow skin or bark, with certain strings fastened thereto, and of a
bitter and austere taste.

2 The second is like unto the first in each respect, saving that it brings
flowers of a white color, and the other not so.

3 The small purple Hollow-root has roots, leaves, stalks, flowers, and seeds
like the precedent, the especial difference is, that this plant is somewhat
less.

4 The small white Hollow-root likewise agrees with the former in each
respect, (...) that this plant brings white flowers, and the other not so.

1 (...) caua mayor purpurea. Great purple Hollow-root.
2 Radix caua mayor alba. Great white Hollow-root.


5 This kind of Hollow-root is also like the last described, saving that the
flowers hereof are mixed with purple and white, which makes it to differ from
the others.

6 There is no difference in this, that can possibly be distinguished, from the
last described, saving that the flowers hereof are of a mixed color, white and
purple, with some yellow in the hollownesse of the same, wherein consists the
difference from the precedent.

7 This thin leafed Hollow-root has likewise an hollow root, covered over with
a yellow pilling, of the bigness of a tennise ball: from which shoot up leaves
spread upon the ground, very like unto the leaves of Columbines, as well in
form as color, but much thinner, more iagged, and altogether lesser: among
which rise up small tender stalks, weak and feeble, of an handful high,
bearing from the middle thereof to the top very fine flowers, fashioned unto
one piece of the Columbine flower, which resembles a little bird of a purple
color.

8 This other thin leafed Hollow-root is like the precedent, saving that this
plant brings (...) white flowers tending to yellowness, or as it were of the
color of the field Primrose.

9 (...) (...), as the Dutch men do call it, has many small iagged (...)
growing immediately from the ground; among which rise up very slender stalks,
whereon do grow such leaves as those next the ground: on the top of the
branches stand fair purple flowers like unto the others of his kind, saving
that the flowers hereof are as it were small birds, the bellies or lower parts
whereof are of a white color, wherein it differs from all the rest of the
Hollow-roots.

10 The last and small hollow-root is like the last described, saving that it
is altogether less, and the flowers hereof are of a green color, not unlike
in shape to the flowers of Cinkefoile. This plant, whose figure our Author here
gave with this small description, is that which from the smell of musk is
called Moschatella, by Cordus and others: it is the Denticulata of
Daleschampius: the Fumaria bulbosa tuberosaminima of Tabernamont anus: and the
Ranunculus minimus septentrionalium (...) muscoso store of Lobel. The root
hereof is small and toothed, or made of little bulbes resembling teeth, and
ending in white hairy fibers: it sends up diverse little branches some two or
three inches high: the leaves are somewhat like those of the yellow Fumitorie,
or Radix cava, but much less: the flowers grow clustering on the top of the
stalk, commonly five or seven together, each of them made of four yellowish
green leaves with some threads in them; it flowers in April, and is to be found
in diverse places amongst bushes at that time, as in Kent about Chislehurst,
especially in Pits his wood, and at the further end of Cray heath, on the left
hand under a hedge among briars and brambles, which is his proper seat.

9 Radix caua minor. Bunnikens Holwoort.
10 Radix caua (...) viridi flore. Small Bunnikens Holwoort.


The Place.
These plants do grow about hedges, brambles, and in the borders of fields and
vineyards, in low and fertile grounds, in Germany and the Low Countries,
nevertheless the two first, and also the two last described do grow in my
garden.

The Time.
These do flower in March, and their seed is ripe in April: the leaves and
stalks are gone in May, and nothing remaining save only the roots, so little a
while do they continue.

The Names.
Hollow root is called in high Dutch Holwurtz: in low Dutch, Hoolewortele, that
is, Radix cava: in English, Hollow root, and Holewoort: it is used in shops in
steed of Aristolochia, or round Birthwoort; which error is better known than
needful to be confuted: and likewise their error is apparent, who rashly
judge it to be Pistolochia, or little Birthwoort. It should seem the old
Writers knew it not; wherefore some of our later Authors have made it
Leontopetali species, or a kind of Lions Turnep: others, Eriphium: and
othersome, Thesium: most men, Capnos Chelidonia: it seems to agree with
Leontopetalon in bulbed roots, and somewhat in leaves, but in no other
respects, as may be perceived by Dioscorides and Plinies description of
Leontopetalon. And if Eriphium have his name (...), that is to say of the
Spring, then this root may be not improperly Eriphium, and Veris Planta: or the
Plant of the Spring: for it is evident that it appears and is green in the
Spring only: some think it has been called Eriphium, ab Hoedo, or of the
Goat: but this Eriphion is quite another plant, as both Apuleius writes, and
that book also mentions which is attributed to Galen, and dedicated to
Paternianus. In the book which is dedicated to Paternianus, there be read
these words; [ Eriphion is an herb which is found upon high mountains, it
has leaves like (...), a fine flower like the Violet, and a root as great as
an Onion: it has likewise other roots which send forth roots after roots.
Whereby it is evident that this root whereof we entreat is not this kind of
Eriphium. Concerning Thesium the old Writers have written but little: Theophra
(...) says, that the root thereof is bitter, and being stamped purges the
belly. Pliny in his 21. book, chap. 17. shows, that the root which is called
Thesium is like the bulbed plants, and is rough in taste: Athenaeus citing
Timachida for an Author, says, that Thesium is called a flower, of which
(...) garland was made. These things seem well to agree with Hollow root; for
it is bumped or bulbous, of taste bitter and austere, or something rough, which
is also thought to purge: but what certainty can be affirmed, seeing the old
writers are so brief? what manner of herb Capnos Chelidonia is, which grows
by hedges, and hereupon is surnamed (...), Aetius does not expound, only the
name thereof is found in his second Tetrab, the third book, chap. 110. in
(...) his Collyrium, and in his Tetrab. 3. book, 2. chap. among such things as
strengthen the liver. But if Capnos Chelidonia be that which Pliny in his 25.
book, chap. 13. does call Prima Capnos, or the first Capnos, and commends it
for the dimnesse of the sight, it is plain enough that Radix caua, or the
Hollow root, is not Capnos Chelidonia: for Plinies first Capnos is branched,
and foldeth it self upon hedges: but Hollow root has no such branches growing
on it, and is a low herb, and is not held up with props, nor needs them. But
if Aetius his Capnos Chelidonia be another herb differing from that of (...)
(which thing perchance was the cause why it should be surnamed Chelidonia)
there is some reason why it should be called Capnos Chelidonia; for it is
somewhat like Fumitorie in leaves, though greater, and comes up at the first
spring, which is about the time when the Swallows do come in; nevertheless it
does not follow, that it is true and right Capnos Chelidonia, for there be also
other herbs coming up at the same season, and perish in short time after,
which notwithstanding are not called Chelidonia.

The Temperature.
Hollow root is hot and dry, yet more dry than hot, that is to say, dry in
the third degree, and hot in the second; it binds, cleanses, and somewhat
wastes.

The Virtues.
Hollow root is good against old and long lasting swellings of the Almonds in
the throat, and Vng. Populeon.

It is reported that a dram weight hereof being taken inwardly, does purge by
siege, and draws I have reduced the eight figures which were formerly here
put to the first 8. descriptions, being all of one and the same plant, to
(...), yet (...) (...) left the descriptions, which in my opinion might have
been as well spared (...) the figures, for excepting the various color of the
(...) there are but two (...) (...) of the (...) (...) a (...), the one having
a hollownesse in the bottom of the root, and the other (...) it; and (...)
which has the sollid root (...) also the green leaves between the flowers
(...) in or divided, the (...) also are less, more in number, and of (...)
elegant (...) purple color; and (...) (...) (...) other color, whereas the
other varies much in the color of the flowers.


CHAP. 447. Of Columbine.
The Description.
1 THe blew Columbine has leaves like the great Celandine, but somewhat
rounder, indented on the edges, parted into diverse sections, of a bluish
green color, which being broken yield forth little juice or none at all: the
stalk is a cubit and a half high, slender, reddish, and slightly haired: the
slender sprigs whereof bring forth every one one flower with five little
hollow horns, as it were hanging forth, with small leaves standing upright, of
the shape of little birds: these flowers are of color sometimes blew, at other
times of a red or purple, often white, or of mixed colors, which to distinguish
severally would be to small purpose, being things so familiarly known to all:
after the flowers grow up cods, in which is contained little black and
glittering seed: the roots are thick, with some strings thereto belonging,
which continue many years.

2 The second does not differ saving in the color of the flowers; for like as
the others are described to be blew, so these are of a purple red, or
horseflesh color, which makes the difference.

3 The double Columbine has stalks, leaves, and roots, like the former: the
flowers hereof are very double, that is to say, many of those little flowers
(having the form of birds) are thrust one into the belly of another, sometimes
blew, often white, and other whiles of mixed colors, as nature list to play
with her little ones, differing so infinitely, that to distinguish them apart
would require

1 Aquilegia caerulea. Blew Columbines.
2 Aquileia rubra. Red Columbines.
3 Aquilina multiplex. Double Columbines.
4 Aquilegia variegata. Variegated Columbine.


5 Aquilegia flo. inversorubro. Columbine with the inuerted red flower.
6 Aquilegia flo. inverso albo. Inuerted Columbine with the white flower.
7 Aquilegia flore roseo. Rose Columbine.
8 Aquilegia degener. Degenerate Columbine.
more time than were requisite to leese: and therefore it shall suffice what
has been said for their descriptions.

4 There are also other varieties of this double kind, which have the flowers
of diverse or party colors, as blew and white, and white and red variously
marked or spotted.

5 This kind has the flowers with their heels or spurs turned outward or
in the middle of the flower, whence it is called Aquilina inversa: the flowers
of this are commonly reddish, or of a light or dark purple color, and double.

6 This differs from the last in the color of the flowers which are white, yet
double, and inuerted as the former.

7 The roots, leaves, and stalks of this are not unlike those of the precedent,
but the flower is much different in shape; for it has no heels or spurs, but
is made of sundry long leaves lying flat open, being sometimes more single,
and otherwhiles more double. The color of the flower is either red, white,
blew, or variously mixed of these as the former.

8 This though it be termed degenerate, is a kind of it self, and it differs
from the last described in that the utmost leaves are the largest, and the
color thereof is commonly green, or green somewhat inclining to a purple.

The Place.
They are set and sown in gardens for the beauty and variable colors of the
flowers.

The Time.
They flower in May, June, and July.

The Names.
Columbine is called of the later Herbarists Aquileia, Aquilina, and Aquilegia:
of Costeus, Pothos: of Gesner, Leontostomum: of Daleschampius, Iouis flos: of
some, Herba Leonis, or the herb wherein the Lion does delight: in High Dutch,
Agley: in Low Dutch, Akeleyen: in French, Ancoiles: in English, Columbine.
Fabius Columna judges it to be the Isopyrum described by Dioscorides.

The Temperature.
Columbines are thought to be temperate between heat and moisture.

The Virtues.
Notwithstanding what temperature or virtues Columbines have is not yet
sufficiently known; Tragus writes, that a dram weight of the seed, with half
a seruple or ten grains of Saffron given in wine, is a good and effectual
medicine for the stopping of the liver, and the yellow iaundise; but says he,
that who so has taken it must be well covered with clothes, and then sweat.

Most in these days following others by tradition, do use to (...) the leaves
in milk against the Ruellius reports, that the flowers of Columbines are not
used in medicine: yet some there be that do affirm they are good against the
stopping of the liver, which effect the leaves do also perform.

Clusius says, that Dr. Francis Rapard a Physician of Bruges in Flanders, told
him that the

CHAP. 448. Of Wormwood.
The Description.
1 THe first kind being our common and best known Wormwood, has leaves of a
grayish color, very much cut or iagged, and very bitter: the stalks are of a
wooddie substance, two cubits high, and full of branches, along which do
grow little yellowish buttons, wherein is found small seed like the seed of
Tansey, but smaller: the root is likewise of awooddie substance, and full of
fibers.

2 The second kind of Wormwood brings forth slender stalks about a foot
high or somewhat more, garnished with leaves like the former, but whiter, much
lesser, and cut or iagged into most fine and small cuts or divisions: the
flowers are like the former, hanging upon small stemmes with their heads
downward: the roots are whitish, small and many, crawling and crambling one
over another, and thereby infinitely do increase, of savor less pleasant than
the common Wormwood. Some have termed this plant Absinthium santonicum, but
they had slender reason so to do: sor if it was so called because it was
imagined to grow in the Province of (...); it may very well appear to the
contrary; for in the Alps of Galatia, a country in Asia minor, it grows in
great plenty, and therefore may rather be called Galatium Sardonicum, and not
Santonicum: but leaving controversies impertinent to the History, it is the
Ponticke Wormwood of Galens description, and so holden of the learned Paludane
(who for his singular knowledge in plants is worthy triple honor) and likewise
many others.

1 Absinthium latifolium sive Ponticum. Broad leased Wormwood.
The figure which formerly (...) in the second place, (...) of a small (...)
not different from the common kind, but only in the (...), and more (...)
(...); it (...) on (...) (...), (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...),
(...) Alpirum: now our (...) description was (...) (...), whose figure we (...)
(...) you, for it (...) the (...) (...), of some, as (...) and (...); and the
(...) (...) of (...) and (...).
2 Absinthium tenuifolium Ponticum Galent. Small Ponticke Wormwood.


The Place.
This broad leafed Wormwood delights to grow on rocks and mountains, and in
vntlled places; it grows much upon dry banks, it is common every where in
all countries: the best, says Dioscorides, is sound in Pontus, Cappadocia, and
on mount Taurus: Pliny writes, that Ponticke Wormwood is better than that of
Italy: Ovid in these words does declare that Ponticke Wormwood is extreme
bitter.

Turpia deformes gignunt Absinthiacampi,
Terraque defructu, quam sit amaradocet.
Untilled barren ground the loathsome Wormwood yields,
And known it is by the fruit how bitter are the fields.
And Bellonius in his first book of Singularities, chap. 76. does show, that
there is also a broad leafed Wormwood like unto ours, growing in the Provinces
of Pontus, and is used in Constantinople by the Physicians there, it is
likewise found in certain cold places of Switzerland, which by reason of the
chillness of the air rises not up, but creeps upon the ground, whereupon
diverse call it creeping Wormwood.

The Time.
The little flours and seeds are perfected in July and August, then may
Wormwood be gathered and laid up for profitable uses.

The Names.
It is called in Greek (...) it is named of Apuleius, Absinthium rusticum,
country Wormwood, or pesants Wormwood: we have named it Absinthium
latifolium, broad leafed Wormwood, that it may differ from the rest: the
Interpretors of the Arabians call the better sort, which Dioscorides names
Ponticke Wormwood, Romanum Absinthium, Roman Wormwood: and after these, the
barbarous Physicians of the later age: the Italians name Wormwood Assenso: the
Spaniards, Axenxios, Assensios, most of them Donzell: the Portingales, Alosna:
in high Dutch, (...), (...): in French, Aluyne: in English, common Wormwood.

Victor (...), a singular Physician, in his practice took it for Absinthium
(...).

2 This is commonly called Absinthium Romanum: and in low Dutch, (...) (...):
by which name it is known to very many Physicians and Apothecaries, who use
this in stead of (...) wormwood: furthermore it has a leaf and flower far
less than the other wormwoods: likewise the smell of this is not only
pleasant, but it yields also a spicie sent, whereas all the rest have a strong
and loathsome smell: and this Ponticke Wormwood does differ from that which
Dioscorides commends: for Dioscorides his Pontick wormwood is accounted among
them of the first kind, or of broad leased wormwood, which thing also Galen
affirms in his sixth book of the Faculties of medicines, in the chapter of
Sothernwood. There be three kinds of Wormwood (says he) whereof they use to
call one by the general name, and that is especially Pontick: whereby it is
manifest that Galen in this place has referred Ponticke to no other than to
the first wormwood; and therefore many not without cause marvel, that Galen
has written in his book of the Method of curing, how Pontick wormwood is
less in flower and leaf: many excuse him, and lay the fault upon the
corruption of the book, and in his 9. book of Method, the lesser they would
have the longer: theresore this wormwood with the lesser leaf is not the right
Pontick wormwood, neither again the Arabians Roman wormwood, who have no
other Roman than Ponticke of the Grecians. Also many believe that this is
called Santonicum, but this is not to be sought for in Mysia, Thracia, or other
countries Eastward, but in France beyond the Alps, if we may believe
Dioscorides his (...) there be that would have it grow not beyond the Alps of
Italy, but in Galatia a country in Asia, and in the region of the Sardines,
which is in the lesser Asia; whereupon it was called in Greek (...) which was
changed into the name Santonicum through the error of the translators:
Dioscorides his copies keep the word Sardonium, and Galens copies Santonicum,
which came to posterity as it seems. iscalled in English, Roman Wormwood,
garden or Cypres Wormwood, and French Wormwood.

The Temperature.
Wormwood is of temperature hot and dry, hot in the second degree, and dry
in the third: it is bitter and clensing, and likewise has power to bind or
strengthen.

The Virtues.
It is very profitable to a weak stomach that is troubled with choler, for it
cleanses it through Galen adds.

If it be taken before a surfeit it keeps it off, and remoueth lothsomenesse,
says Dioscorides, and

It is oftentimes a good remedy against long and lingering agues, especially
(...): for it does

Furthermore, Wormwood is excellent good for them that vomit blood from the
spleen, the

Again, Wormwood voideth away the worms of the guts, not only taken
inwardly, but applied

Likewise it is singular good in pultesses and fomentations to bind and to
dry.

Besides all this Dioscorides declares, that it is good also against
windiness and griping pains of

It helps them that are strangled with eating of Mushroms, or toad stoois, if
it be drunk with

And being taken with wine, it is good against the poison of Ixia (being a
viscous matter proceeding (...)) and of Hemlock, and against the biting of the
shrew mouse, and of the Sea Dragon: it is applied to the (...) or inflammations
of the throat with honey and niter, and with water to night wheales, and with
honey to swartish marks that come upon bruses.

It is applied after the same manner to dim eyes, and to mattering ears.

(...) Camerarius of (...) commends it greatly against the iaundice, giving
of the

CHAP. 449. Of Small leafed Wormwood.
Absinthium (...) (...). Austrian Wormwood.


The Description.
SMall leafed Wormwood brings forth very many little branches, slender, a
span or a foot high, full of leaves, less by a great deal, and tenderer than
the former, most finely and nicely minced: the flowers like those of the
former, hang upon the little branches and sprigs: the roots are small, creeping
ouertwhart, (...) whence do rise a great number of young sprouts: this Wormwood
also is somewhat white, and no less bitter than the broad leafed one, and has
not so rank, or so unpleasant a smell, but rather delightful.

The Place.
It grows plentifully in Mysia, Thracia, Hungary, and Austria, and in other
regions near adioining: it is also found in Bohemia, and in many untilled
places of Germany; it is a garden plant in the low Countries, and in (...).

The Time.
It brings forth flowers and seed in Autumn: a little while after when
winter comes, the herb withers away, but the root remains alive, from
which leaves and stalks do come again in the spring.

The Names.
This Lobel calls Absinthium Ponticum Tridentinum Herbariorum: Clusius,
Absinthium tenuifolium Austriacum: Tabernamontanus, Absinthium Nabathaeum
(...): we may call it in English, small leaued Wormwood.

The Temperature.
Small leafed Wormwood is of faculty hot and dry, it is as bitter also as
the broad leafed one, and of like faculty.

The Virtues.
The faculties are referred unto the common Wormwood.

CHAP. 450. Of Sea Wormwood.
The Description.
1 THe white or common Sea Wormwood has many leaves cut and divided into
infinite fine iags, like those of Sothernwood, of a white hoaric color and
strong smell, but not unpleasant: among which rise up tough hoarie stalks set
with the like leaves, on the top whereof do grow small yellowish flowers: the
root is tough, and creeps far abroad, by means whereof it greatly increases.

1 Absinthium marinum album. White Sea Wormwood.
2 Absinthium marinum repens. Creeping Sea (...),


2 The broad (...) Sea Wormwood has very many soft leaves, growing close by
the ground, of a dark swart color, nothing so (...) cut or iagged as the
other of his kind: the flowers grow upon the tops of the stalks, of a
yellowish color: the root is tough and creeping. This has many weak slender
branches commonly two foot long at their full growth, red of color, and
creeping upon the ground: the leaves are small, narrow, long and iagged, or
parted toward their ends into sundry parcels: they are green above, and
grayish underneath: the tops of the branches are set with many little
stalks, some inch long: which upon short foot-stalkes coming out of the
bosoms of little longish narrow leaves carry small round knops, like as in
other plants of this kind: the taste is a little bitterish, and the smell not
unpleasant: this grows with Mr. Parkinson and others, and (as I remember) it
was first sent over from the Isle of Rees by Mr. John Tradescant. Lobel in his
Observations mentions it by the name of Absinth. (...) supinum Herbariorum; and
(...): sets it forth by the title of Absinthium repens.

The Place.
Thse VVormwoods do grow upon the raised grounds in the salt marshes near unto
the sea, in most places of England; which being brought into gardens does there
flourish as in his natural place, and retains his smell, taste, and natural
quality, as has been often proved. I have not heard that the later grows
wild in any place with us in England.

The Time.
These bring forth flowers and seeds when the other Wormwoods (...). The later
scarce seeds with us, it flowers so late in the year.

The Names.
Sea Wormwood is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Absinthium marinum, and
likewise (...): in Dutch, (...) (...): of diverse, Santonicum, as witnesses
Dioscorides: nevertheless there is another Santonicum differing from sea
Wormwood: in English of some women of the country, Garden Cypress.

The Temperature.
Sea Wormwood is of nature hot and dry, but not so much as the common.

The Virtues.
Dioscorides affirms, that being taken of it self, or boiled with Rice, and
eaten with honey, it kills Pliny does also affirm.

The juice of sea Wormwood drunk with wine resists poison, especially the
poison of Hemlockes.

The leaves stamped with figs, saltpeter, and the meal of (...), and applied
to the belly, sides,

The same is singular against all inflammations, and heat of the stomach and
liver, exceeding

It is reported by such as dwell near the sea side, that the cattle which do
feed where it grows

The herb with his stalks laid in chests, presses, and ward-robes, keeps
clothes from moths and

CHAP. 451. Of Holy Wormwood.
Sementina. Holy VVormewood.


The Description.
THis Wormwood called Sementina, and Semen sanctum, which we have Englished,
Holy, is that kind of Wormwood which bears that seed which we have invse,
called VVormeseed: in shops, Semen Santolinum: about which there has been
great controversy amongst writers: some holding that the seed of Santonicum
Galatium to be the true VVormseed: others deeming it to be that of Romanum
Absinthium: it does much resemble the first of the sea VVormwoods in shape and
proportion: it rises up with a wooddie stalk, of the height of a cubite,
divided into diverse branches and wings; whereupon are set very small leaves:
among which are placed clusters of seeds in such abundance, that to the first
view it seems to be a plant consisting all of seed.

The Place.
It is a foreign plant: the seeds being sown in the gardens of hot regions
do prosper well; in these cold countries it will not grow at all. Nevertheless
there is one or two companions about London, who have reported unto me that
they had great store of it growing in their gardens yearly, which they sold at
a great price unto our London Apothecaries, and gained much money thereby; one
of the men dwells by the Bag and Bottle near London, whose name is
Cornwall; into whose garden I was brought to see the thing that I would not
believe; for being often (...) that there it did grow, I still persisted it was
not true: but when I did behold this (...) quantity of Wormwood, it was
nothing else but common Amcos. How many (...), have (...) deceived, how many
they have robbed of their money, and how many children have (...) (...) the
better for taking it, (...) refer it to the (...) of the simplest, considering
their (...) (...), (...) have sold many hundredth pounds weight of it; the more
to their shame be it spoken, and (...) (...) wit or skill in the Apothecaries:
therefore have I set down this as a (...) (...) those that buy of these seeds,
first to taste and try the same before they give it to their children, or
commit it to any other use. Certainly our Author was either misinformed, or
the people of these times were very simple, for I dare boldly say there is not
any Apothecary, or scarce any other so simple as to be thus deceived now.

The Time.
It floureth and brings forth his seed in July and August.

The Names.
The French men call it (...); the Italians, Semen Zena: whereupon also the
(...) name (...) came: the seed is called every where (...) (...). Holy-seed;
and (...) (...) (...): in English, VVormseed; the herb it self is also called
(...), or wormseed wort: some name it (...) (...), Zedoarie seed, because it
has a smeil somewhat resembling that of Zedoarie.

The Temperature.
The seed is very bitter, and for that cause of nature hot and dry.

The Virtues.
It is good against worms of the belly and entrails, taken any way, and
better also if a little

The seed mixed with a little (...) (...), and brought to the form of a
plaster, and applied

CHAP. 452. (...) and Bastard Wormewoods.
1 (...) album. White wormwood.
2 (...) Aegyptium. Wormwood of Egypt.


The Description.
The (...) (...) (...) here (...) in the (...) place, by the name of (...)
(...), is the first of the next chapter save one, where you (...) see more
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) the (...), but no where (...) in the Chapter, is
either the same (...), or (...) very like our Sea (...). Let (...) (...) (...)
(...): (...) (...) (...) (...). Med. in the title of (...) (...): and in (...),
(...). 1. lib. 2. cap. 5. where the (...) (...) is of (...) Wormwood.
1 ABsinthium album has straight and upright stalks, a foot high, (...) with
broad leaves, but very deeply cut or cloven, in show like unto (...) of the
great (...), but white of color: at the top of the stalks, out of (...)
(...), as in an vmbell grow flowers, compact of six small white leaves: the
(...) is long, with some fibers annexed unto it.

2 This kind of Wormwood (...) and that learned (...) Valerandus Donraz,
called Absinthium Egyptium: the leaves of this plant are very like to the
leaves of Trichomanes, which is our common Maiden hair, of a white color,
every small leaf standing one opposite against another, and of a strong savor.

3 This Wormwood, which Dodonaens calls Absinthium inodorum; and Insipidum,
is very like unto the sea Wormwood, in his small and tender leaves: the stalk
bears flowers also like unto the foresaid Sea-(...), but it is of a sad or
deep (...), having neither bitter taste, nor any favor at all; whereupon it
was called, and that very fitly, Absinthium inodorum, or Absinthium insipidum:
in English, foolish, or unsavory wormwood. (...) says not that his Absinthium
insipidum is like the sea wormwood, but that it is very like our common broad
leaued Wormwood, and so indeed it is, and that so like, that it is hard to be
discerned therefrom, but only by the want of bitterness and smell.

3 Absinthium inodorum. Unsavory Wormwood.
4 Absinthium marinum, Abrotani (...) facie. Small Lauander Cotton.


4 This kind of Sea-wormwood is a shrubby and wooddie plant, in face and show
like to Lauander Cotton, of a strong smell; having flowers like those of the
common wormwood, at the first show like those of Lauander Cotton: the root is
tough and wooddie.

The Place.
These plants are strangers in England, yet we have a few of them in Herbarists
gardens.

The Time.
The time of their flouring and seeding is referred to the other wormwoods.

The Names.
The white wormwood Conradus Gesnerus names Seriphium foemina, and says, that
it is commonly called Herba alba, or white (...): another had rather name it
(...); for as Dioscorides says, Santonicum is found in France beyond the
Alps, and bears his name of the same country where it grows: but that
part of Swisserland which belongs to France is accounted of the Romans to be
beyond the Alps; and the province of Santon is far from it: for this is a part
of Guines, situate upon the coast of the Ocean, beneath the flood Gerond
Northward: therefore Santon Wormwood, if it have his name from the Santons,
grows (...) from the Alps: but if it grow near adjoining to the Alps, then
has it not his name from the Santons.

The Temperature and Virtues.
White Wormwood is hot and somewhat dry.

Unsavory Wormwood, as it is without smell and taste, so is it (...) of any
hot quality, much

CHAP. 453. Of Mugwort.
1 (...), matter Herbarum. Common Mugwort.


The Description.
1 THe first kind of Mug (...) has broad leaves, very much cut or cloven like
the leaves of common Wormwood, but larger, of a dark green color above, and
hoarie underneath: the stalks are long and straight, and full of branches,
whereon do grow small round buttons, which are the flowers, smelling like
Marierome when they wax ripe: the root is great, and of a wooddie substance.

2 The second kind of Mugwort has a great thick and woody root, from whence
arise sundry branches of a reddish color, beset full of small and fine iagged
leaves, very like unto sea Sothernwood: the seed grows along the small
twiggy branches, like unto little berries, which fall not from their branches
in a long time after they be ripe. I know not how this differs from the
former, but only in the color of the stalk and flowers, which are red or
purplish; whereas the former is more whitish.

3 There is also another Mugwort, which has many branches rising from a
wooddie root, standing upright in distances one from another, of an ashie
color, beset with leaves not much unlike sea (...); about the lower part of
the stalks, and toward the top of the branches they are narrower and lesser,
and cut with great and deep iagges, thick in substance, and of a whitish
color, as all the rest of the plant is: it yields a pleasant smell like
Abrotanum marinum, and in taste is somewhat (...): the flowers are many, and
yellow: which being vaded, there follows mossie seed like unto that of the
common Wormwood. The leaves of this plant are of two sorts; for some of them
(...) long and narrow, like those of Lauander (whence Clusius has called it
(...) folio (...)) other some are cut in or divided almost to the middle rib;
as you may see it expressed apart in a (...) by it (...), which shows both the
whole, as also the divided leaves.

3 Artemisia marina. Sea Mugwort.
(...) (...) ramulus, folia integra and dissecta exprimens. A branch showing
the cut and uncut leaves.


The Place.
The common Mugwort grows wild in sundry places about the borders of fields,
about high ways, brook sides, and such like places.

Sea Mugwort grows about Rye and Winchelsea castle, and at Portsmouth by the
Isle of Wight.

The Time.
They flower in July and August.

The Names.
Mugwort is called in Greek (...): and also in Latin Artemisia, which name it
had of Artemisia Queen of Halicarnassus, and wife of noble Mausolus King of
Caria, who adopted it for her own herb: before that it was called (...),
Parthenis, as Pliny writes. Apuleius (...) that it was likewise called
Parthenion; who has very many names for it, and many of them are placed in
Dioscorides among the bastard names: most of these agree with the right
Artemisia, and diverse of them with other herbs, which now and then are numbered
among the Mugworts: it is also called Matter (...): in High Dutch, Beifusz, and
Sant Iohanus Gurtell: in Spanish and Italian, Artemisia: in French, Armoisa: in
Low Dutch, (...), (...) Ians krupt: in English, (...), and common Mugwort.

The Temperature.
Mugwort is hot and dry in the second degree, and somewhat astringent.

The Virtues.
Pliny says that Mugwort does properly cure women's diseases.

(...) (...), that it brings down the terms, the birth, and the
afterbirth.

And that (...) (...) manner it helps (...) mother, and the pain of the
matrix, to be boiled as

(...) (...) that (...) (...) or way faring man that has the herb tied about
him feels no (...) at all; and that he who has it about him can be hurt by
no poysonsome medicines, nor by any wild (...), neither yet by the Sun it
self; and also that it is drunk against Opium, or the juice of black Poppy.
Many other fantastical devices invented by Poets are to be seen in the Works
of the ancient Writers, tending to witchcraft and sorcerie, and the great
dishonor of God; wherefore I do of purpose omit them, as things unworthy of
my recording, or your reviewing.

Mugwort pound with oil of sweet almonds, and laid to the stomach as a
plaster, cures all

It cures the shakings of the joints, inclining to the (...), and helps the
contraction or drawing There were formerly two descriptions of the (...);
wherefore I omitted the former, being the more (...).


CHAP. 454. Of Sothernwood.
The Kinds.
DIoscorides affirms that Sothernwood is of two kinds, the female and the
male, which are (...) where known by the names of the greater and of the
lesser: besides these there is a third kind, which is of a sweeter smell, and
lesser than the others, and also others of a bastard kind.

The description here in the (...) place is that of the (...) (...) (...) of
(...), being the very (...) in his (...). The figure which our (...) put (...)
was of the (...) (...), which should have been in the next chapter save one:
Now the figure that he should have put here was put two chapters (...), by the
(...) of (...) (...), by which name (...) also calls it: but I have thought it
(...) to put it here, because here was the better (...), and the plant is the
better referred to this kind.
1 Abrotanum foemina arborescens. Female Sothernwood.
2 Abrotanum mas. Male Sothernwood.


The Description.
1 THe greater Sothernwood by careful manuring does oftentimes grow up in
manner of a shrub, and comes to be as high as a man, bringing forth stalks
an inch thick, or more; out of which spring very many sprigs or branches, set
about with leaves diversely iagged and finely indented, somewhat white, and of a
certain strong smell: in stead of flowers, little small clusters of buttons do
hang on the sprigs, from the middle to the very top, of color yellow, and at
the length turn into seed. The root has diverse strings.

3 Abrotanum humile. Dwarf Sothernwood.
4 Abrotanum inodorum. Unsavory Sothernwood.
5 Abrotanum campestre. Wild Sothernwood.


2 The lesser Sothernwood grows low, full of little sprigs of a woody
substance: the leaves are long, and smaller than those of the former, not so
white: it bears clustering buttons upon the tops of the stalks: the root is
made of many strings.

3 The third kind is also shorter: the leaves hereof are iagged and deeply cut
after the manner of the greater Sothernwood, but they are not so white, yet more
sweet, wherein they are like unto Lauander cotton. This kind is very full of
seed: the buttons stand along on the sprigs, even to the very top, and be of
a glittering yellow. The root is like to the rest.

4 The unsavory Sothernwood grows flat upon the ground, with broad leaves
deeply cut or iagged in the edges like those of the common Mugwort: among
which rise up weak and feeble stalks trailing likewise upon the ground, set
confusedly here and there with the like leaves that grow next the ground, of a
grayish or hoary color, altogether without smell. The flowers grow along the
stalks, of a yellowish color, small and chaffie: the root is tough and
woody, with some strings (...) thereto.

5 This wild Sothernwood has a great long thick root, tough and woody,
covered over with a scaly bark like the scaly back of an adder, and of the
same color: from which rise very many leaves like those of Fennel, of an
ouerworne green color: among which grow small twiggy branches on the tops,
and along the stalks do grow small clustering flowers of a yellow color:
the whole plant is of a dark color, as well leaves as stalks, and of a
strong (...) smell.

The Place.
Theophrastus says that Sothernwood delights to grow in places open to the
Sun: Dioscorides affirms that it grows in Cappadocia, and Galatia a
country in Asia, and in Hierapolis a city in Syria: it is planted in gardens
almost every where: that of Sicilia and Galatia is most commended of Pliny.

The Time.
The buttons of Sothernwood do flourish and be in their prime in August, and
now and then in September.

The Names.
It is called in Greek (...): the Latins and Apothecaries keep the same name
Abrotanum: the Italians and (...) Spaniards call it Abrotano: and other
Spaniards, (...) lombriguera: in high Dutch, (...): in Low Dutch, (...), and
(...): the French, (...), and Auroesme: the English men, Sothernwood: it has
diverse bastard names in Dioscorides; the greater kind is Dioscorides his
Faemina, or female Sothernwood; and Pliny his Montanum, or mountain
Sothernewood: the mountain Sothernwood we take for the female, and the
champion for the male. There be notwithstanding some that take Lauander Cotton
to be the female Sothernwood; grounding thereupon, because it brings forth
yellow flowers in the top of the sprigs like cluster buttons: but if they had
more diligently pondered Dioscorides his words, they would not have been of
this opinion: the lesser Sothernwood is Mas, the male, and is also Plinies
champion Sothernwood; in Latin, Campestre. The third, as we have said, is
likewise the female, and is commonly called sweet Sothernwood, because it is of
a sweeter sent than the rest. Dioscorides seems to call this kind Siculum,
Sicilian Sothernwood.

The Temperature.
Sothernwood is hot and dry in the end of the third degree: it has also sorce
to distribute and to rarifie.

The Virtues.
The tops, flowers, or seed boiled, and stamped raw with water and drunk,
helps them that

It (...) worms, and drives them out: if it be drunk with wine it is a
remedy against deadly

Also it helps against the stinging of scorpions and field spiders, but it
hurts the stomach.

Stamped and mixed with oil it takes away the shiuering cold that comes by
the ague fits,

If it be pouned with barley (...) and laid to pushes it takes them away.

It is good for (...) of the eyes, with the pulpe of a roasted (...), or with
crummes of

The ashes of burnt Sothernwood, with some kind of oil that is of thin parts,
as of Palma Christi,

The seed of Sothernwood made into powder, or boiled in wine and drunk, is
good against the

Sothernwood drunk in wine is good against all venom and poison.

The leaves of Sothernwood boiled in water until they be soft, and stamped
with barley meal

CHAP. 455. Of Oak of Jerusalem, and Oak of Cappadocia.
1 Botrys. Oak of Jerusalem.
2 Ambrosia. Oak of Cappadocia.


The Description.
1 Oak of Jerusalem, or Botrys, has sundry small stems a foot and a half
high, dividing themselves into many small branches, beset with small leaves
deeply cut or iagged, very much resembling the leaf of an Oak, which has
caused our English women to call it Oak of Jerusalem; the upper side of the
leaf is of a deep green, and somewhat rough and hairy, but underneath it is
of a dark reddish or purple color: the seedie flowers grow clustering about
the branches, like the young clusters or blowings of the Vine: the root is small
and threddy: the whole herb is of a pleasant smell and savor, and of a feint
yellowish color, and the whole plant dies when the seed is ripe.

2 The fragrant smell that this kind of Ambrosia or Oak of Cappadocia yields,
has moved the Poets to suppose that this herb was meat and food for the
gods: Dioscorides says it grows three (...) high: in my garden it grows to
the height of two cubits, yielding many weak crooked and streaked branches,
dividing themselves into sundry other small branches, having from the midst
to the top thereof many mossie yellowish flowers not much unlike common
Wormwood, standing one before another in good order; and the whole plant is as
it were covered over with bran or a mealy dust: the flowers do change into
small prickly cornered buttons, much like unto Tribulus terrestris; wherein is
contained black round seed, not unpleasant in taste and smell: the leaves are
in shape like the leaves of Mugwort, but thinner and more tender: all the whole
plant is hoary, and yields a pleasant savor: the whole plant perished with me
at the first approach of Winter.

The Place.
These plants are brought unto us from beyond the seas, especially from Spain
and Italy.

The Time.
They flower in August, and the seed is ripe in September.

The Names.
Oak of Jerusalem is called in Greek (...): in Latin Botrys: In Italian,
Botri: in Spanish, (...) granada: in High Dutch, (...), and (...): in French
and Low Dutch, Pyment, in English, Oak of Jerusalem; and of some, Oak of
Paradise.

Oak of Cappadocia is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Ambrofia; neither has
it any other known name. Pliny says that Ambrosia is a wandering name, and is
given unto other herbs: for Botrys (Oak of Jerusalem, as we have written) is
of diverse also called Ambrosia: In English it is called Oak of Cappadocia.

The Temperature.
These plants are hot and dry in the second degree, and consist of subtle
parts.

The Virtues.
These plants be good to be boiled in wine, and ministered unto such as have
their breasts stopped,

It gives a pleasant taste to flesh that is sodden with it, and eaten with the
broth.

It is dried and laid among garments, not only to make them smell sweet, but
also to preserve There were formerly two more descriptions in this chapter,
(...) which were made by looking upon the figures in Lobels (...); the former
being of his (...) (...), which is nothing else but the (...) (...), or (...)
Cresses. The later was of his Ambrosia (...), which our (...) in (...) (...)
(...) set forth by the name of (...) (...).


CHAP. 456. Of Lauander Cotton.
The figure which formerly was in this place was of kind of Moss, which (...)
set forth by the name of (...) (...): (...) and (...) (...) it (...). See more
(...) in the Mofses.
Chamaecyparissus. Lauander Cotton.


The Description.
LAuander Cotton brings forth clustred buttons of a golden color, and of a
sweet smell, and is often used in garlands, and decking up of gardens and
houses. It has a woody stock, out of which grow forth branches like little
boughs, slender, very many, a cubit long, set about with little leaves, long,
narrow, purled, or crumpled; on the tops of the branches stand up flowers, one
alone on every branch, made up with short threads thrust close together, like to
the flowers of Tansie, and to the middle buttons of the flowers of Cammomill,
but yet something broader, of color yellow, which be changed into seed of an
obseure color. The root is of a woody substance. The shrub it self is white
both in branches and leaves, and has a strong sweet smell.

There are some varieties of this plant, which Matthiolus, Lobel, and others
refer to Abrotanum foemina, and so call it; and by the same name our Author
gave the figure thereof in the last chapter save one, though the description
did not belong thereto, as I have formerly noted. Another sort thereof our
Author, following Tabernamontanus and Lobel, set forth a little before by the
name of Absinthium (...) Abrotani foeminae facie, that (...) calls Santolina
prima; and this here figured, Santolina altera. He also mentions three other
differences thereof, which chiefly consist in the leaves; for his third has
very short and small leaves like those of Heath; whence Bauhine calls it
Abrotanum foemina folijs Erica. The fourth has the leaves less toothed, and
more like to Cypress, hence it is called in the Aducrs. Abrotanum peregrinum
cupressi folijs. The fifth has not the stalks growing upright, but creeping:
the leaves are toothed, more thick and hoary than the rest; in other respects
alike. Bauhine calls it (...) foemina repens canescens.

The Place.
Lauander Cotton grows in gardens almost every where.

The Time.
They flower in July and August.

The Names.
They are called by one name Santolina, or Lauander Cotton: of most,
Chamaecyparissus. But (...) concerning Chamaecyparissus is so short and brief,
that by him their opinions can neither be rejected nor received.

They are doubtless much (...) that would have Lauander Cotton to be Abrotanum
foemina, or the female Sothernwood: and likewise they are in the wrong who take
it to be Seriphium, sea Wormwood; and they who first set it abroch to be a
kind of Sothernwood we leave to their errors; because it is not absolutely to
be referred to one, but a plant participating of Wormwood and Sothernwood.

The Temperature.
The seed of Lauander Cotton has a bitter taste, being hot and dry in the
third degree.

The Virtues.
Pliny says, That the herb Chamaecyparissus being drunk in wine is a good
medicine against the

It kills worms either given green or dry, and the seed has the same
virtue against worms,

CHAP. 457. Of Sperage, or Asparagus.
1 Asparagus sativus. Garden Sperage.
2 Asparagus (...). Stone or mountain Sperage.


The Description.
1 THe first being the manured or garden Sperage, has at his first rising out
of the ground thick tender shoots very soft and brittle, of the thickness of
the greatest swans quil, in taste like unto the green bean, having at the top
a certain scaly soft bud, which in time grows to a branch of the height of
two cubits, divided into diverse other smaller branches, whereon are set many
little leaves like hairs, more fine than the leaves of Dill: among which come
sorth small mossie yellowish flowers, which yield forth the fruit, green at
the first, afterward red as Coral, of the bigness of a small pease; wherein
is contained gross blackish seed exceeding hard, which is the cause that it
lies so long in the ground after the sowing, before it do spring up. The roots
are many thick soft and spongie strings hanging down from one head, and spread
themselves all about, whereby it greatly increases.

2 We have in our marish and low grounds near unto the sea, a Sperage of this
kind, which differs a little from that of the garden, and yet in kind there
is no difference at all, but only in manuring, by which all things or most
things are made more beautiful, and larger. This may be called Asparagus
palustris, marish Sperage.

4 Asparagus syluestris aculeatus. Wild prickly Sperage.
5 Asparagus syluestris Spinosas Clusij. Wild thornie Sperage.


3 Stone or mountain Sperage is one of the wild ones, set forth under the
title of Corruda; which Lobel calls Asparagus petraeus; and Galen,
Myacanthinus, that does very well resemble those of the garden, in stalks,
roots, and branches, saving that those fine hairy leaves which are in the
garden Sperage be soft, blunt, and tender; and in this wild Sperage, sharp
hard and pricking thorns, though they be small and slender: the root hereof is
round, of the bigness of a pease, and of a black color: the roots are long,
thick, fat, and very many.

4 This sourth kind differs from the last described, being a wild Sperage
of Spain and Hungary: the plant is altogether set with sharp thorns (three
or four coming forth together) as are the branches of Whinnes, Gose, or
Fursen: the fruit is black when it is ripe, and full of a greenish pulpe,
wherein lie hard and black seeds, sometimes one, otherwhiles two in a berry:
the roots are like the others, but greater and tougher.

6 Drypis. (...) Thistle.


5 Carolus Clusius describes also a certain wild Sperage with sharp prickles
all along the stalks, orderly placed at every joint one, hard, stiff, and
whitish, the points of the thorns pointing downward: from the which joints
also do grow out a few long green leaves fastened together, as also a little
yellow flower, and one berry three cornered, and of a black color, wherein is
contained one black seed, seldom more: the roots are like the other.

6 Drypis being likewise a kind hereof, has long and small roots, creeping in
the ground like Couch grass; from which spring up branches a cubit high, full
of knotty ioints: the leaves are small like unto Juniper, not much differing
from Corruda or Nepa: the flowers grow at the top of the stalk in spokie tufts
or rundles, of a white color, closely thrust together: the seed besore it be
taken out of the husk is like unto Rice; being taken out, like that of
Melilot, of a saffron color.

The Place.
The first being our garden Asparagus grows wild in Essex, in a meadow
adioining to a mill, beyond a village called Thorp; and also at Singleton not
far from Carbie, and in the medows (...) Moulton in Lincolnshire. Likewise it
grows in great plenty near unto Harwich, at a place called Bandamar lading,
and at North Moulton in Holland, a part of Lincolnshire.

The wild Sperages grow in Portugal and Biscay among stones, one of the which
Petrus Bellonius does make mention to grow in Candie, in his first book of
Singularities, cap. 18.

The Time.
The bare naked tender shoots of Sperage spring up in April, at what time they
are eaten in sallads; they flower in June and July; the fruit is ripe in
September.

The Names.
The garden Sperage is called in Greek (...): in Latin likewise Asparagus: in
shops, Sparagus, and Speragus: in High Dutch, Spargen: in Low Dutch, (...), and
Coralcruijt; that is to say, Herba Coralli, or Corall-wort, of the red berries,
which bear the color of Coral: in Spanish, Asparragos: in Italian, Asparago:
in English, Sperage, and likewise Asparagus, after the Latin name: in French,
Asperges. It is named Asparagus of the excellency, because asparagi, or the
springs hereof are preferred before those of other plants whatsoever; for this
Latin word Asparagus does properly signify the first spring or sprout of
eueric plant, especially when it is render, and before it do grow into a hard
stalk, as are the buds, tendrels, or young springs of wild Vine or hops, nnd
such like.

Wild Sperage is properly called in Greek (...), which is as much to say as
Mouse prickle, and (...), that is to say, (...) Asparagus, or Stone Sperage: it
is also named in Latin, Asparagus syluestris, and Corruda.

The Temperature.
The roots of the garden Sperage, and also of the wild, do cleanse without
manifest heat and dryness.

The Virtues.
The first sprouts or naked tender shoots hereof be oftentimes sodden in flesh
broth and eaten,

They (...) provoke urine, are good for the kidneys and bladder, but they yield
unto the (...) (...) (...) (...) in this (...), but now omitted, was again set
(...) by out Author amongst the (...), where you (...) (...) it.


CHAP. 458. Of Horse-taile, or Shaue-grasse.
The Description.
1 GReat Horse-taile rises up with a round stalk, hollow within like a Reed,
a cubit high, compact as it were of many small pieces, one put into the end of
another, sometimes of a reddish color, very rough, and set at every joint with
many stiff rush-like leaves or rough bristles, which makes the whole plant to
resemble the tail of a horse, whereof it took his name: on the top of the
stalk do stand in stead of flowers clustered and thick Catkins, (...) unlike
to the first shoots of Sperage, which is called Myacantha: the root is ioynted,
and creeps (...) the ground.

2 This small or naked Shaue-grasse, wherewith Fletchers and Combe-makers do
rub and polish their work, (...) out of the ground like the first shoots of
Asparagus, iointed or kneed by certain distances like the precedent, but
altogether without such bristly leaves, yet exceeding rough and cutting: the
root grows aslope in the earth, like those of the Couch-grasse.

1 Equisetum maius. Great Horse-taile.
2 Equisetum nudum. Naked Horse-taile.


3 Horse-taile which for the most part grows among corn, and where corn
has been, has a very slender root, and single; from which rise up diverse
iointed stalks, whereon do grow very long rough narrow iointed leaves, like
unto the first described, but thicker and rougher, as is the rest of the plant.

4 Water Horse-taile, that grows by the brinks of rivers and running streams,
and often in the midst of the water, has a very long root, according to the
depth of the water, gross, thick, and iointed, with some threads anexed
thereto: from which rises up a great thick iointed stalk, whereon do grow
long rough rushy leaves, pyramide or steeple fashion. The whole plant is also
tough, hard, and fit to shave and rub wooden things as the other.

5 This kind of Horse-taile that grows in woods and shadowie places, has a
small root, and single, from which rises up a rough chamfered stalk ioynted
by certain spaces, having at each joint two bushes of rough bristly leaves set
one against another like the other of his kind.

3 Equisetum segetale. Corn Horse-taile.
4 Equisetum palustre. Water Horse-taile.
5 Equisetum (...). Wood Horse-taile.
6 Cauda equina foemina. Female Horse-taile.


9 (...) (...). Italian rushie (...)-tail.


6 The female Horse tail (...) for the most part in waterish places, and by
the brinks of small rills and pirling brooks; it has a long root like that of
Couch grass, from which rise up diverse hollow stalks, set about at certain
distances with small leaves in rundles like those of Woodroofe, altogether
barren of seed and flower, whereof it was called by Lobel, Polygonon foemina
semine (...). This is sometimes found with ten or more seeds at each joint;
whence Bauhine has called it (...) palustre breuioribus folijs poly spermon.

7 In some boggie places of this kingdom is found a rare and pretty Hippuris
or Horse tail, which grows up with many little branches, some two or three
inches high, putting forth at each joint many little leaves, clustering close
about the stalk, and set after the (...) of other Horse-tailes: toward the
tops of the branches the joints are very thick: the color of the whole plant
is gray, a little inclining to green, very brittle, and as it were stony or
grauelly like Coralline, and will crash under your feet, as if it were frozen;
and if you chew it, you shall find it all stony or grauelly. My friend Mr.
Leonard Buckner was the first that found this plant, and brought it to me; he
had it three miles beyond Oxford, a little on this side Euansham-ferry, in a
bog upon a common by the Beacon hill near Cumner-wood, in the end of August,
1632. Mr. Bowls has since found it growing upon a bog not far from
Chisselhurst in Kent. I question whether this be not the Hippuris lacustris
quaedam folijs (...) arenosis of Gesner: but if Gesners be that which Bauhine
in his (...), page 24. sets forth by the name of Equisetum nudum minus
variegatum, then I judge it not to be this of my description: for Bauhines
differs from this in that it is without leaves, and ofttimes bigger: the stalks
of his are hollow, these not so: this may be called Hippuris Coralloides,
Horse-taile Coralline.

8 Toward the later end of the year, in diverse ditches, as in Saint James his
Park, in the ditches on the back of Southwarke toward Saint Georges fields,
etc. you may find covered ouerwith water a kind of stinking Horse-taile: it
grows sometimes a yard long, with many ioints and branches, and each joint set
with leaves, as in the other Horse-tailes, but they are somewhat iagged or
divided toward the tops. I take this to be the Equisetum faetiduni sub aqua
repens, described in the fist place of Bauhinus his (...): we may call it in
English, Stinking water Horse-taile.

9 Clusius has set forth a plant, that he refers unto the stock of
Horse-tailes, which he thus describes: it has many twiggie or rushie stalks,
whereupon it was called Iuncaria: and may be Englished, Rush-weed: the leaves
grow upon the branches like those of Flax: on the tops of the stalks grow
small chassie flowers of a whitish color. The seed is small, and black of
color. The root is little and white: the whole plant is sweetish in taste.

10 Dodonaeus sets forth another Horse-taile, which he called climing
Horse-taile, or horstaile of Olympus. There is (says he) another plant like
Horse-taile, but greater and higher. It rises up oftentimes with a stalk as
big as a man's arm, divided into many branches: out of which there grow long
slender sprigs very full of ioints, like to the first Horse-taile. The flowers
stand about the ioints, of a mossie substance, small as are those of the
Cornell tree; in places whereof grow up red fruit full of sour juice, not
unlike to little Mulberries, in which is the seed. The root is hard and
wooddie. This grows now and then to a great height, and sometimes lower.
Bellonius writes in his Singularities, that it has been seen to be equal in
height with the Plane (...): it (...) up lower, near to shorter and lesser
trees or shrubs, yet does it not fasten it self to the trees with any (...) or
clasping aglets; much less does it wind it self about (...), yet does it
delight to stand near and close unto them.

The Place.
The titles and descriptions show the place of their growing: the last
Bellonius reports to grow in diverse valleys of the mountain Olympus, and not
far from Ragusa a city in Sclauonia.

The Time.
They flower from April to the end of Summer.

The Names.
Horse-taile is called in Greek (...), Hippuris: in Latin, (...) and
Equinalis: of Pliny in his 15. book, 28 chap. Equisetis, of the likeness of
a horse hair: of some, Salix equina: in shoppes, Cauda equina: in high Dutch,
Schaffthew: in low Dutch, Peertsteert: in Italian, Coda di Cauallo: in Spanish,
Coda de mula: in French, (...) de cheual: and Caquene: in English, Horse-taile,
and Shaue-grasse.

Shaue-grasse is not without cause named Asprella, of his ruggedness, which is
not unknown to women, who scour their pewter and wooden things of the
kitchen therewith: which the German women call (...): and therefore some of our
huswiues do call it Pewterwoort. Of some the tenth is called Ephedra, Anobasis,
and Caucon.

The Temperature.
Horse-taile, as Galen says, has a binding faculty, with some bitterness,
and therefore it does mightily dry, and that without biting.

The Virtues.
Dioscorides says, that Horse-taile being stamped and laid to, does perfectly
cure wounds, yea Galen adds. It is of so great and so singular a virtue in
healing of wounds, as that it is thought and reported for truth, to cure the
wounds of the bladder, and other bowels, and helps ruptures or burstings.

The herb drunk either with water or wine, is an excellent remedy against
bleeding at the nose,

The juice of the herb taken in the same manner can do the like, and more
effectually.

Horse-taile with his roots boiled in wine, is very profitable for the ulcers
of the kidneys and bladder,

CHAP. 459. Of Sea-Cluster, or Sea Raison.
Our Author as you see gave the history of the lesser in the first place, but
formerly the figure was in the third place, and another figure of the same in
the (...) place, and the figure of the greater was in the first place.
1 Vuamarina minor. Small Sea Grape.


The Description.
1 SMall Sea Grape is not unlike to horstaile: it brings forth slender
stalks, almost like rushes, set with many little ioints, such as those are of
the Horse-taile, and divided into many wings and branches; the tops whereof are
sharp pointed, somewhat hard and pricking: it is without leaves: the
floursgrow in clusters out of the ioints, with little stems, they are small and
of a whitish green color: the fruit consists of many little pearls, like to
the unripe berries of Raspis, or Hind-berry: when it is ripe it is red with a
saffron color, in taste sweet and pleasant: the seed or kernel is hard,
three square, sharp on every side, in taste binding: the root is iointed,
long, and creeps aslope: the plant it self also does rather lie on the ground
than stand up: it grows all full of small stalks and branches, casting
themselves all abroad.

2 Carolus Clusius has set forth another sort of sea Grape, far different from
the precedent; it rises up to the height of a man, having many branches of a
wooddie substance, in form like to Spanish Broom, without any leaves at all:
whereupon do grow clusters of flowers upon slender footstalk, of a yellowish
mossie or herby color, like those of the Cornell tree: after which come the
fruit like unto the mulberrie, of a reddish color and sower taste, wherein
lies hid one or two seeds like those of Millet, black without, and white
within: the root is hard, tough, and wooddie.

2 Vuamarina mayor. Great shrubbie sea Grape.
3 Tragos Matthioli. Bastard Sea Grape.


3 Tragon Matthioli, or rather Tragos improbus, (...), which he unadvisedly
called Tragon, is without controversy nothing else but a kind of Kali: this
plant rises up out of the ground with stalks seldom a cubite high, divided
into sundry other gross, thick, and writhen branches, set, or armed with many
pricking leaves, of the color and shape of (...), and somewhat thick and
fleshie: among which come forth such prickley burres, as are to be seen in
Tribulus (...), as that it is hard for a man to touch any part thereof without
pricking of the hands: the flowers are of an herbie color, bringing forth flat
seed like unto Kali: the (...) is slender, and (...) under the turfe of the
earth: the whole plant is full of clammie juice, not any thing astringent, but
somewhat saltish, and of no singular virtue that is yet known: wherefore I may
conclude, that this cannot be Tragos Dioscoridis, and the rather, for that this
Tragon of Matthiolus is an herb, and not a shrub, as I have before spoken in
Vuamarina, neither bears it any berries or grains like wheat neither is it
pleasant in taste and smell, or any thing astringent, all which are to be found
in the right Tragos before expressed; which (as Dioscorides says) is without
leaves, neither is it thorney as Tragus improbus Matthioli is: this plant I
have found growing in the Isle of Shepey, in the tract leading to the housc of
Sir Edward (...), called Sherland.

The Place.
It loves to grow upon dry banks and sandy places near to the sea: it is
found in Languedocke, not far from Montpelier, and in other places by the sea
side, and is a stranger in England.

The Time.
When it grows of it self the fruit is ripe in Autumn, the plant it self
remains long green, for all the cold in Winter.

The Names.
It is called of the later Herbarists, Vuamarina: in French, Raisin de Mer, of
the pearled fruit, and the likeness that it has with the Raspis berrie, which
is as it were a Raison or Grape, consisting of many little ones: it is named in
Greek (...) but it is not called Tragus, or Traganos, of a Goat (for so
signifies the Greek word) or of his rank and rammish smell, but because it
brings forth. fruit fit to be eaten, of the Verb (...), which signifies to
eat: it may be called Scorpion, because the sprigs thereof are sharp pointed
like to the Scorpions tail.

The Temperature.
The berries or Raisons, and especially the seed that is in them have a binding
quality, as we have said, and they are dry in the later end of the second
degree.

The Virtues.
Dioscorides writes, that the Raisons of sea Grape do stay the flix, and also
the whites in women,

CHAP. 460. Of Madder.
The Kinds.
THere is but one kind of Madder only which is manured or set for use, but if
all those that (...) like unto it in leaves and manner of growing were referred
thereto, there should be many (...) as Goose-grasse, soft (...), our Ladies
Bedstraw, Woodroofe, and Crosse-woort, all which are like to Madder in leaves,
and therefore they be thought to be wild kinds thereof.

1 Rubia tinctorum. Red Madder.
2 Rubia (...). Wild Madder.


The Description.
1 THe garden or manured Madder has long stalks or trailing branches dispersed
far abroad upon the ground, square, rough, and full of ioints; at every joint
set round with green rough leaves, in manner of a star, or as those of
Woodroofe: the flowers grow at the top of the branches, of a faint yellow
color: after which come the seed, round, green at the first, afterward red,
and lastly of a black color: the root long, fat, full of substance, creeps
far abroad within the upper crust of the earth, and is of a reddish color when
it is green and fresh.

2 Wild Madder is like in form unto that of the garden, but altogether
smaller, and the leaves are not so rough, but smooth and shining: the flowers
are white: the root is very small and tender, and oftentimes of a reddish
color.

3 Rubia marina. Sea Madder.
4 Rubia spicata Cretica. Small Candie Madder.


3 Sea Madder has a root two foot long, with many dry threads (...) thereat, of
a reddish color like Alkanet, on the outside of the same form and bigness,
but within it of the (...) of the scrapings of Juniper, or Cedar wood, sending
forth diverse slender stalks round and full of ioints: from which come forth
small thin leaves, stiff and sharp pointed, (...) hairie, in number commonly
four, standing like a Burgonion cross; from the bosom of which come forth
certain tufts of smaller leaves thrust together upon a heap: the flowers grow
at the top of the stalks of a pale yellowish color.

Rubia spicata Cretica (...).

4 This has proceeding from the root many knottie four square rough little
stalks, a foothigh, divided immediately from the root into many branches,
having but one side branch growing forth of one joint: about which ioints grow
spread abroad four or five, sometimes six narrow, short, sharp pointed
leaves, somewhat rough: the tops of the stalks and branches are nothing but
long small four square spikes or ears, made of three leafed green husks:
out of the top of each husk grows a very small greenish yellow flower,
having four exceeding small leaves scarce to be seen: after which follows in
each husk one small blackish seed, somewhat long, round on the one side, with
a dent or hollownesse on the other. The root is small, hard, wooddie, crooked
or scragged, with many little branches or threads, red without, and white within
and perishes when the seeds are ripe. July, 19. 1621.

Synanchica Lug. p. 1185.

5 The root is crooked, blackish without, yellow underneath the skin, white
within that and wooddie; about five or six inches long, with many hairy
strings: from the root arise many fouresquare branches trailing upon the
ground, sometimes reddish toward the root: the leaves are small and sharp
pointed, like those of Gallium, and grow along the stalk, on certain knees or
ioints, four or five together, sometimes fewer: from those ioints the stalk
divides it self toward the top into many parts, whereon grow many flowers,
each flower having four leaves, sometimes white, sometimes of a flesh color,
and every leaf of these flesh colored leaves is artificially straked in the
middle, and near the sides with three lines of a deeper red, of no pleasant
smell: after which comes the seed something round, growing two together like
stones. It floureth all the Summer long, and grows in dry Chalkie grounds
abundantly. August 13. 1619. John Goodyer.

6 Rubia minima. Dwarf Madder.


6 Lobel thus describes this Dwarf Madder: there is another (says he) which
I gathered, growing upon Saint Vincents rocks not far from Bristow: the
leaves are of the bigness of those of Rupture-woort, sharp pointed, and
growing after the manner of those of Madder, upon little creeping stalks, some
inch and half high, whereon grow yellowish small flowers. The root is small,
and of the color of Coral.

The Place.
Madder is planted in gardens, and is very common in most places of England.
Master George Bowls found it growing wild on Saint Vincents rock; and out of
the Cliffes of the rocks at Aberdovie in Merioneth shire.

The second grows in moist meadows, in moorish grounds, and under bushes
almost every where.

3 This grows by the sea side in most places.

The fourth grows only in some few gardens with us, but the fifth may be
found wild in many places: I found it in great plenty on the hill beyond
Chattam in the way to Canturburie.

The Time.
They flourish from May unto the end of August: the roots are gathered and
dried in Autumn, and sold to the use of Diets and Medicine.

The Names.
Madder is called in Greek (...), Erythrodanum: in Latin, Rubia, and Rubeia:
in shops, Rubia tinctorum: Paulus Aegineta shows that it is named Thapson
which the Diers use, and the Romans call it Herba Rubia: in Italian Rubbia,
and Robbia: in Spanish, Ruvia, Roya, and Granza: in French, Garance: in high
Dutch, (...): in low Dutch, (...), and (...) (...): in English, Madder, and red
Madder.

The Temperature.
Of the temperature of Madder, it has been disputed among the learned, and as
yet not censured, whether it do bind or open; some say both; diverse diversely
deem: a great Physician (I do not say the great learned) called me to account
as touching the faculties hereof, although he had no commission so to do,
notwithstanding I was content to be examined upon the point, what the nature of
Madder was, because I have written that it performs contrary effects, as
shall be showed: the roots of Madder, which both the Physicians and diers do
use, as they have an obscure binding power and force; so be they likewise of
nature and temperature cold and dry: they are withal of diverse thin parts, by
reason whereof there color does easily pierce: yet have they at the first a
certain little sweetness, with an harsh binding quality presently following it;
which not only we our selves have observed, but also Auicen the prince of
Physicians, who in his 58. Chapter has written, that the root of Madder has a
rough and harsh taste: now (...). Doctor, whether it bind or open I have
answered, attending your censure: but if I have (...), it is not with the
multitude, but with those of the best and best learned.

The Virtues.
The decoction of the roots of Madder is every where commended for those that
are bursten,

It stencheth bleeding, mitigateth inflammations, and helps those parts that
be hurt and

For these causes they be mixed with potions, which the later Physicians call
wound drinks: in Matthiolus also reports, that there is likewise great hope
of curing of deadly wounds in the chest and intrails.

Our opinion and judgment is confirmed by that most expert man, sometimes
Physician of Johannes Spiringus, who in his Rapsodes has noted, that the
decoction of Madder given with Triphera, that great composition is singular
good to stay the reds, the hemorrhoides and bloody flixe, and the same
approved by diverse experiments: which confirms Madder to be of an astringent
and binding quality.

Of the same opinion as it seems is also Eros Iulia her freed man (commonly
called Trotula) Dioscorides writes it to be of, he would not in any wise have
added it to those medicines which are good against an untimely birth.

For Dioscorides reports, that the root of Madder does plentifully provoke
urine, and that

For the root hereof taken any manner of way does by and by make the urine
extreme red: no otherwise Dioscorides has rashly attributed unto it this kind
of quality, and after him Galen and the rest that followed, standing stiffely
to his opinion.

Pliny says, that the stalks with the leaves of Madder, are used against
serpents.

The root of Madder boiled in Meade or honied water, and drunken, opens the
(...) of the

The same taken in like manner provoke urine vehemently, insomuch that the
often use thereof

Langius and other excellent Physicians have experimented the same to amend the
loathsome

5 The fifth being the Synanchica of Daleschampius, dries without biting, and
it is excellent Synanchica, Hist. Lugd.

CHAP. 461. Of Goose-grasse, or Cliuers.
The Description.
1 A Parine, Cliuers or Goose-grasse, has many small square branches, rough
and sharp, full of joints, beset at every joint with small leaves star
fashion, and like unto small Madder: the flowers are very little and white,
pearking on the tops of the sprigs: the seeds are small, (...), a little hollow
in the midst in manner of a navel, set for the most part by couples: the
roots slender and full of strings: the whole plant is rough, and his
ruggedness takes hold of men's vestures and woollen garments as they pass by:
being drawn along the tongue it fetches blood: Dioscorides reports, that the
sheepheards in stead of a Cullender do use it to take hairs out of milk, if
any remain therein.

2 The great Goose-grasse of Pliny is one of the Moone-worts of Lobel, it has
a very rough tender stalk, whereupon are set broad leaves somewhat long, like
those of Scorpion grass, or Alysson Galeni, Galens Moone-woort, very rough and
hairy, which grow not about the joints, but three or sour together on one side
of the stalk: the flowers grow at the top of the branches, of a blew color:
after which comes rough cleaving seeds, that do stick to men's garments which
touch it: the root is small and single.

1 Aparine. Goose-grasse or Cleuers.
2 Aparine mayor Plinij. Great Goose-grasse.


The Place.
Goose-grasse grows near the borders of fields, and oftentimes in the fields
themselves mixed with the corn also by common ways, ditches, hedges, and
among thorns: Theophrastus and (...) write, that it grows among Lentles, and
with hard embracing it does choke it, and by that means is burdensome and
troublesome unto it.

The Time.
It is found plentifully every where in summer time.

The Names.
It is named in Greek (...): Apparine: in Latin, Lappaminor, but not
properly: Pliny affirms it to be Lappaginis speciem: of some, Philanthropos,
as though he should say, a man's friend, because it takes hold of men's
garments; of diverse also for the same cause, Philadelphos: in Italian,
Speronella: in Spanish, (...), or amor di Hortalano: in high Dutch, (...)
(...): in French, Reble, ou Grateron: in low Dutch, (...): in English,
Goose-share, Goose-grasse, Cleuer, or Clauer.

The Temperature.
It is, as Galen says, moderately hot and dry, and somewhat of thin parts.

The Virtues.
The juice which is pressed out of the seeds, stalks, and leaves, as
Dioscorides writes, is a remedy Phalangia, and of vipers if it be drunk with
wine.

And the herb stamped with swines grease wastes away the kernels by the
throat.

Pliny teaches that the leaves being applied do also stay the abundance of
blood issuing out

Women do usually make pottage of Cleuers with a little mutton and Otemeale, to
cause lanknesse,

CHAP. 462. Of Crosse-woort.
The Description.
1 CRosse-woort is a low and base herb, of a pale green color, having many
square feeble rough stalks full of ioints or knees, covered over with a soft
down: the leaves are little, short, and small, always four growing together,
and standing crossewise one right against another, making a right Burgunion
cross: toward the top of the stalk, and from the bosom of those leaves come
forth very many small yellow flowers, of a reasonable good favor, each of
which is also shaped like a Burgunion cross: the roots are nothing else but a
few small threads or fibers.

1 Cruciata. Crosse-woort.
2 Rubia Cruciata laevis. Crosse-woort Madder.


2 This in mine opinion may be placed here as fitly as any where else; for it
has the leaves standing crosse-waies four at a joint, somewhat like those of
the largest Chickweed: the stalks are between a foot and a half and two
cubits high. The white Starre-fashioned flowers stand in roundles about the
tops of the stalks. It grows plentifully in Piemont, on the hills not far
from Turine. Lobel sets it forth by the name of Rubia Laevis Taurinensium.

The Place.
Cruciata, or Crosse-woort, grows in moist and fertile meadows; I sound the
same growing in the Churchyard of Hampstead near London, and in a pasture
adioining thereto, by the mill: also it grows in the Lane or high way beyond
Charlton, a small village by Greenwich, and in sundry other places.

The Time.
It floureth for the most part all Summer long.

The Names.
It is called Cruciata, and Cruciatis, of the placing of the leaves in manner
of a Cross: in English, Crosse-woort, or Golden Mugweet.

The Temperature.
Crossewoort seems to be of a binding and dry quality.

The Virtues.
Crossewoort has an excellent property to heal, join, and close wounds
together, yea it is very

The decoction thereof is also ministered with good success to those that are
bursten: and so is

CHAP. 463. Of Woodrooffe.
1 Asperula. Woodrooffe.
2 Asperula slore caeruleo. Blew Woodrooffe.


The Description.
1 WOodrooffe has many square stalks full of ioints, and at every knot or
joint seven or eight long narrow leaves, set round about like a star, or the
rowell of a spur: the flowers grow at the top of the stems, of a white
color, and of a very sweet smell, as is the rest of the herb, which being
made up into garlands or bundles, and hanged up in houses in the heat of
Summer, does very well attemper the air, cool and make fresh the place, to the
delight and comfort of such as are therein.

3 (...) Spergula. Spurrye.


2 There is another sort of Woodrooffe called Asperula (...), or blew
Woodrooffe; it is an herb of a foot high, soft, hairy, and something branched,
with leaves and stalks like those of white Woodrooffe: the flowers thereof are
blew, standing upon short stems on the tops of the stalks: the seed is small,
round, and placed together by couples: the root is long, and of a red color.

3 There is another herb called (...) spergula, or Spurry, which is sown in
(...), Holland, and Flanders, of purpose to fatten cattle, and to cause them to
give much milk, and there called Spurrey, and Frank Spurrey: it is a base and
low herb, very tender, having many iointed stalks, whereupon do grow (...) set
in round circles like those of Woodrooffe, but lesser and smoother, in form
like the rowell of a spur: at the top of the stalks do grow small white
flowers; after which come round seed like those of Turnips: the root is small
and threddie.

4 There are one or two plants more, which may fitly be here mentioned: the
(...) of them is the (...) of (...), which from a pretty large woody and (...)
root sends up iointed stalks some foot (...): at each joint come forth two long
thick round leaves, and out of their bosoms other lesser leaves: the top of
the stalks is divided into sundry branches, bearing flowers of a (...) reddish
color, composed of five little leaves, with yellowish threads in the middle:
after which follow cups or seed vessels, which open into sour parts, and
contain a little flat reddish seed: it grows in the salt marshes about
Dartford, and other such places; flowers in July and August, and in the mean
space ripens the seed. We may call this in English, Sea Spurrie.

5 This other has a large root, considering the smalnesse of the plant: from
which arise many weak slender branches some three or four inches long, (...)
more, lying (...) flat on the ground, having many knots or ioints: at each
whereof usually grow a couple of white (...) leaves, and out of their bosoms
other small sharp pointed little green leaves: at the tops of the branches
grow little red flowers, succeeded by such, yet lesser heads than those of the
former: it flowers in July and August, and grows in sandy grounds, as in
Tuthill-fields nigh Westminster: the figure set forth in Hist. Lugd. p. 2179,
by the title of Chamaepeuce (...); Camphor at a minor Daleschampij, seems to be
of this plant, but without the flower: (...) in his Prodromus describes it by
the name of Alsine Spergulae facie. This may be called Chickweed Spurrey, or
small red Spurrey.

The Place.
White Woodroose (...) under hedges, and in woods almost every where: the
second grows in many places of Essex, and diverse other parts in sandy
grounds. The third in Corn fields.

The Time.
They flower in June and July.

The Names.
Most have taken Woodrooffe to be Pliny his Alyssos, which as he says, does
differ from Erythrodanum, or Garden Madder, in leaves only, and lesser stalks:
but such a one is not only this, but also that with blew flowers: for Galen
does attribute to Alyssos, a blew flower: notwithstanding Galens and Plinies
Alyssos are thought to differ by Galens own words, writing of Alyssos in his
second book of Counterpoisons, in (...) his composition, in this manner:
Alyssos is an herb very like unto Horehound, but rougher and fuller of prickles
about the circles: it bears a flower tending to blew.

Woodrooffe is named of diverse in (...) (...) odorata, and of most men
Aspergula odorata: of others, Cordialis, and (...): in high (...) (...): in low
Dutch, (...): that is to say Iecoraria, or Hepatica, Liuerwoort: in French,
Muguet: in English, Woodrooffe, Woodrowe, and Woodrowell.

The Temperature.
Woodrooffe is of temperature something like unto our Ladies Bedstraw, but not
so strong, being in a mean between heat and dryness.

The Virtues.
It is reported to be put into wine, to make a man merry, and to be good for
the heart and liver: it Cruciata, and other vulnerarie herbs do.

CHAP. 464. Of Ladies Bedstraw.
The Kinds.
THere be diverse of the herbs called Ladies Bedstraw, or Cheese-renning; some
greater, others less; some with white flowers, and some with yellow.

The Description.
1 LAdies Bedstraw has small round even stalks, weak and tender, creeping
hither and thither upon the ground: whereon do grow very fine leaves, cut into
small iags, finer than those of Dill, set at certain spaces, as those of
Woodrooffe: among which come forth flowers of a yellow color, in clusters or
bunches thick thrust together, of a strong sweet smell but not unpleasant: the
root is small and threddie.

1 Gallium luteum. Yellow Ladies Bedstraw.
2 Gallium album. Ladies Bedstraw with white flowers.


2 Ladies Bedstraw with white flowers is like unto Cleauers or Goose-grasse, in
leaves, stalks, and manner of growing, yet nothing at all rough, but smooth
and soft: the flowers be white, the seed round: the roots slender, creeping
within the ground: the whole plant rampeth upon bushes, shrubs and all other
such things as stand near unto it: otherwise it cannot stand, but must reele
and fall to the ground.

3 This small Gallium, or Ladies little red bed-strow, has been taken for a
kind of wild Madder; nevertheless it is a kind of Ladies bed-strow, or
cheese-renning, as appears both by his virtues in turning milk to cheese, as
also by his form, being in each respect like unto yellow Gallium, and differs
in the color of the flowers, which are of a dark red color, with a yellow
pointal in the middle, consisting of four small leaves: the seed hereof was
sent me from a Citisen of Strausburg in Germany, and it has not been seen in
these parts before this time.

4 There is likewise another sort of Gallium for distinctions sake called
Mollugo, which has stalks that need not to be propped up, but of it self
stands upright, and is like unto the common white Gallium, but that it has a
smoother leaf. The flowers thereof be also white, and very small. The root is
blackish.

The figure that was formerly in the third place was of the Gallium album (...)
of (...). which commonly has but two leaves at a joint, yet sometimes it is
found with three.
3 Gallium rubrum. Ladies Bed-strow with red flowers.
4 Gallium, sieve Mollugo montana. Great bastard Madder.


The Place.
The first grows upon sunnie banks near the borders of fields, in fruitful
soiles almost every where.

The second grows in marish grounds and other moist places.

The third grows upon mountains and hilly places, and is not yet found in
England.

The fourth and last grows in hedges among bushes in most places.

The Time.
They flower most of the Summer months.

The Names.
The first is called in Greek (...): it has that name of milk, called in
Greek (...), into which it is put as cheese-renning: in Latin likewise
Gallium: in High Dutch, Magerkraut, (...): in Low Dutch, (...): in French,
(...) Muguet: in Italian, Galio: in Spanish, Coaia leche yerua: in English, our
Ladies Bed-strow, Cheese-renning, Maids hair, and pety Mugwet.

The others are Species Lappaginis, or kinds of small Burres, so taken of the
Ancients: The last, of the softness and smoothness of the leaves, is commonly
called Mollugo: diverse take it (...) a kind of wild Madder, naming it Rubia
syluestris, or wild Madder.

The Temperature.
These herbs, especially that with yellow flowers, is dry and something
binding, as Galen says.

The Virtues.
The flowers of yellow Maids hair, as Dioscorides writes, is used in
ointments against burnings,

The herb thereof is used for Rennet to make cheese, as Matthiolus reports,
saying, That the

The people in Cheshire, especially about Namptwich, where the best cheese is
made, do use it

We find nothing extant in the ancient writers, of the virtues and faculties
of the white (...)

CHAP. 465. Of Fern.
The Kinds.
THere be diverse sorts of Fern, differing as well in form as place of
growing; whereof there be two sorts according to the old writers, the male and
the female; and these be properly called Fern: the others have their proper
names, as shall be declared.

1 Filix mas. Male Fern.
2 Filix foemina. Female Fern, or Brakes.


The Description.
1 THe male Fern brings forth presently from the root broad leaves and
rough, somewhat hard, easy to be broken, of a light green color, and strong
smell, more than a cubit long, spread abroad like wings, compounded as it were
of a great number standing upon a middle rib, every one whereof is like a
feather, nicked in the edges, and on the backeside are sprinkled as it were
with a very fine earthy-coloured dust or spots, which many rashly have taken
for seed: the root consists of a number of tufts or threads, and is thick and
black, and is without stalk and seed, and altogether barren.

Filicis (vulgo) maris varietates and differentiae. Differences of the male
Fern.

I have observed four sorts of Fern, by most writers esteemed to be the male
Fern of Dioscorides: by Anguillara, Gesner, Caesalpinus, and Clusius,
accounted to be the famale, and so indeed do I think them to be, though I
call them the male, with the multitude. If you look on these Fernes according
to their several growths and ages, you may make many more sorts of them than I
have done; which I am afraid has been the occasion of describing more sorts
than indeed there are in nature. These descriptions I made by them when they
were in their perfect growths.

1 Filix mas ramosa pinnulis dentatis.

The roots are nothing but an abundance of small black hairy strings, growing
from the lower parts of the maine stalks (for stalks I will call them) where
those stalks are joined together. At the beginning of the Spring you may
perceive the leaves to grow forth of their folding clusters, covered with
brownish scales at the superficies of the earth, very (...) joined together: a
young plant has but a few leaves; an old one, ten, twelve, or more: each
stalk at his lower end near the joining to his fellows, at his first
appearing, before he is an inch long having some of those black fibrous roots
for his sustenance. The leaves being at their full growth has each of them a
threefold division, as has that Fern which is commonly called the female:
the maine stalk, the side branches growing from him, and the nerves growing on
those side branches bearing the leaves: the maine stalk of that plant I
describe was fully four foot long (but there are usually from one foot to
sour in length) full of those brownish scales, especially toward the root,
firm, one side flat, the rest round, naked fully one and twenty inches, to the
first pair of side branches. The side branches, the longest being the third
pair from the root, were nine inches long, and shorter and shorter toward the
top, in number about twenty pair; for the most part toward the root they grow
by couples, almost opposite, the nearer the top the further from opposition:
the nerves bearing the leaves, the longest were two inches and a quarter long,
and so shorter and shorter toward the tops of the side branches; about twenty
in number on each side of the longest side branch. The leaves grow for the most
part by couples on the nerve, eight or nine pair on a nerve; each leaf being
gashed by the sides, the gashes ending with sharp points, of a deep green on
the upper side, on the under side paler, and each leaf having two rows of
dusty red scales, of a brown or blackish color: toward the top of the maine
stalk those side branches change into nerves, bearing only the leaves. When
the leaves are at their full growth, you may see in the midst of them at
their roots the said scaly folding cluster; and as the old leaves with their
black threddy roots wholly perish, they spring up; most years you may find
many of the old leaves green all the Winter, especially in warm places. This
grows plentifully in the boggy shadowie moors near Durford Abbey in Sussex,
and also on the moist shadowie rocks by Mapledurham in Hampshire, near
Peters-field; and I have found it often on the dead putrified bodies and stems
of old rotten oaks, in the said moors; near the old plants I have observed
very many small young plants growing, which came by the falling of the seed
from those dusty scales: for I believe all herbs have seeds in themselves to
produce their kinds, Genesis 1. 11. and 12.

The three other have but a twofold division, the many stalks and the nerves
bearing the leaves. The roots of them all are black fibrous threads like the
first, their maine stalks grow many thick and close together at the root, as
the first does: the difference is in the fashion of their leaves, and manner of
growing, and for distinctions sake I have thus called them:

2 Filix mas non ramosa pinnulis latis densis minutim dentatis.

The leaves are of a yellowish green color on both sides, set very thick and
close together on the nerve, that you cannot see between them, with marvelous
small nickes by their sides, and on their round tops: each leaf has also two
rows of dusty seed scales; the figures set forth by Lobel, Tabern. and Gerard,
under the title of Filix mas, do well resemble this Fern. This grows
plentifully in most places in shadowie woods and copses.

3 Filix mas non ramosa pinnulis angustis, raris, profunde dentatis.

The leaves are of a deep green, not closely set together on the the nerve,
but you may far off see betwixt them, deeply indented by the sides, ending with
a point not altogether sharp: each leaf has also two rows of dusty seed
scales. I have not seen any figure well resembling this plant. This grows
also in many places in the shade.

4 Filix mas non ramosa pinnulis latis auriculatis spinosis.

The leaves are of a deeper green than either of the two last described,
placed-on the nerve not very close together, but that you may plainly see
between them; each leaf (especially those next the stalk) having on that side
farthest off the stalk a large ear or outgrowing ending, with a sharp prick
like a hair, as does also the top of the leaf: some of the sides of the
leaves are also nicked, ending with the like prick or hair. Each leaf has
two rows of dusty seed scales. This I take to be Filix mas aculeat a mayor
Bauhini. Neither have I seen any figure resembling this plant. It grows
abundantly on the shadowie moist rocks by Maple-durham near Peters-field in
Hampshire. John Goodyer. July 4. 1633.

2 The female Fern has neither flowers nor seed, but one only stalk,
chamfered, something edged, having a pith within of diverse colors, the which
being cut aslope, there appears a certain form of a spred-Eagle: about this
stand very many leaves which are winged, and like to the leaves of the male
Fern, but lesser: the root is long and black, and creeps in the ground,
being now and then an inch thick, or somewhat thinner. This is also of a
strong smell, as is the male.

The Place.
Both the Fernes are delighted to grow in barren dry and desert places: and as
Horace testifies,

Neglectis vrenda Filix innascitur agris. It comes not up in manured and dunged
places, for if it be dunged (as Theophrastus, lib. 8. cap. 8. reports) it
withers away.

The male ioyeth in open and champion places, on mountains and stony grounds,
as Dioscorides says. It grows commonly in shadowie places under hedges.

The female is often found about the borders of fields under thorns and in
shadowie woods.

The Time.
Both these Fernes wither away in winter: in the spring there grow forth new
leaves, which continue green all Summer long.

The Names.
The former is called in Greek (...): Nicander in his discourse of Treacle
names it (...): in Latin Filix mas: in Italian, Felce: in Spanish, Helecho,
Falguero, and Feyto: in High Dutch, (...) Farne: in French, Fougere, or
Feuchiere masle: in Low Dutch, Uaren Manneken: in English, male Fern.

The second kind is called in Greek (...), that is, Filix foemina, or female
Fern: in Latin, as Dioscorides notes among the bastard names, Lingna
ceruina: in High Dutch, (...) (...) weiblin, and Grosz Farnkraut: in Low Dutch,
Uaren (...): in French, Fougere femelle: in English, Brake, common Fern, and
female Fern.

The Temperature.
Both the Fernes are hot, bitter, and dry, and something binding.

The Virtues.
The roots of the male Fern being taken to the weight of half an ounce,
drives forth long flat Dioscorides writes, being drunk in Mede or honied
water; and more effectually, if it be given with two scruples or two third
parts of a dram of Scamonie, or of black Hellebor: they that will use it,
says he, must first eat Garlic. After the same manner, as Galen adds, it
kills the child in the mothers womb. The root hereof is reported to be good
for them that have ill spleenes: and being stamped with swines grease and
applied, it is a remedy against the pricking of the reed: for proof hereof,
Dioscorides says the (...) dies if the Reed be planted about it; and
contrariwise, that the Reed dies if it be compassed with Fern: which is vain
to think, that it happens by any antipathie or natural hatred, and not by
reason this Fern prospers not in moist places, nor the Reed in dry.

The female Fern is of like operation with the former, as Galen says.
Dioscorides reports, That the galled necks of oxen and other cattle: it is
also reported, that the root of Fern cast into an hogshead of wine keeps it
from souring.

The root of the male Fern sodden in Wine is good against the hardness and
stopping of the

CHAP. 466. Of Water-Ferne, or Osmund the water-man.
The Description.
WAter Fern has a great triangled stalk two cubits high, beset upon each
side with large leaves spread abroad like wings, and dented or cut like
Polypodie: these leaves are like the large leaves of the Ash tree; for
doubtless when I first saw them a far off it caused me to wonder thereat,
thinking that I had seen young Ashes growing upon a bog; but beholding it a
little nearer, I might easily distinguish it from the Ash, by the brown rough
and round grains that grew on the top of the branches, which yet are not the
seed thereof, but are very like unto the seed. The root is great and thick,
folded and covered over with many scales and interlacing roots, having in the
middle of the great and hard woody part thereof some small whiteness, which
has been called the heart of Osmund the water-man.

Filix florida, sieve Osmunda Regalis. Water Fern, or Osmund Royal.


The Place.
It grows in the midst of a bog at the further end of Hampsted heath from
London, at the bottom of a hill adjoining to a small cottage, and in diverse
other places, as also upon diverse bogges on a heath or common near unto
Bruntwood in Essex, especially near unto a place there that some have dug,
to the end to find a nest or mine of gold; but the birds were over fledge, and
flowne away before their wings could be clipped. It did grow plentifully in
both these places, but of late it is all destroyed in the former.

The Time.
It flourishes in Summer, as the former Fernes: the leaves decay in Winter:
the root continues fresh and long lasting; which being brought into the garden
prospers as in his native soil, as my self have proved.

The Names.
It is called in Latin Osmunda: it is more truly named Filix palustris, or
aquatilis: some term it by the name of Filicastrum: most of the Alchimists
call it Lunaria (...): Valerius Cordus names it Filix latifolia: it is named
in High Dutch, Grosz Farn: in Low Dutch, Groot Uaren, (...) Uaren: in English,
Water-Ferne, Osmund the Water-man: of some, Saint Christophers herb, and
Osmund.

The Temperature.
The root of this also is hot and dry, but less than they of the former ones.

The Virtues.
The root, and especially the heart or middle part thereof, boiled or else
stamped, and taken with

The tender sprigs thereof at their first coming forth are excellent good unto
the purposes aforesaid,

CHAP. 467. Of Polypodie or wall-Ferne.
1 Polypodium. Wall Fern, or Polypodie of the wall.
2 Polypodium quercinum. Polypodie of the Oak.


3 Polypodium Indicum. Indian Polypody.


The Description.
1 THe leaves of Polypodie might be thought to be like those of male Fern, but
that they are far lesser, and not nicked at all in the edges: these do
presently spring up from the roots, being cut on both the edges with many deep
gashes, even hard to the middle rib; on the upper side they are smooth, on the
nether side they are lightly powdered as it were with dusty marks: the root is
long, not a finger thick, creeping aslope, on which are seen certain little
buttons like to those pits and dents that appear in the tails of cuttle
fishes: this has in it a certain sweetness, with a taste something harsh:
this kind of Fern likewise wants not only flowers and seed, but stalks
also.

2 Polypodie of the Oak is much like unto that of the wall, yet the leaves of
it are more finely cut, smooth on the upper side, of a pale green color,
together with the stalks and middle ribs; on the nether side rough like those
of Fern: this Fern also lives without a stalk: it grows without seed: the
root has many strings fastened to it, one folded within another, of a mean
bigness, and sweet in taste: it sends forth here and there new dodkins or
springs, whereby it increases.

3 Clusius in his Exotickes, lib. 4. cap. 17. gives us the History of an Indian
Fern or Polypody found amongst the papers of one Dr. Nicholas Colie a Dutch
Physician, who died in his return from the East Indies. The root of it was six
inches long, and almost one thick, of the same shape and color as the
ordinary one is: from this came up three leaves, of which the third was lesser
than the other two; the two larger were eleven inches long, and their breadth
from the middle rib (which was very large) was on each side almost five inches;
the edges were divided almost like an Oken case: from the middle rib came other
veins that ran to the ends of the divisions, and between these be smaller
veins variously diuaricated and netted, which made the leaf show prettily.
The color of it was like that of a dry oken leaf. Where Dr. Colie gathered
this it was uncertain, for he had left nothing in writing.

The Place.
It grows on the bodies of old rotten trees, and also upon old walls, and the
tops of houses: it is likewise found among rubbish near the borders of fields,
especially under trees and thorns, and now and then in woods: and in some
places it grows rank and with a broader leaf, in others not so rank, and
with a narrower leaf.

That which grows on the bodies of old Oaks is preferred before the rest; in
stead of this most do use that which is found under the Oaks, which for all
that is not to be termed Quercinum, or Polypodie of the Oak.

The Time.
Polypody is green all the year long, and may be gathered at any time; it
brings forth new leaves in the first spring.

The Names.
The Grecians call it (...), of the holes of the fishes Polypi, appearing in
the roots: it is called in Latin, Polypodium, after the Greek name, and many
times Filicula, as though they should say (...) Filix, or little Fern: the
Italians name it Polipodio: the Spaniards, Filipodio, and Polypodio: in high
Dutch, Engelfusz, Baumfarn, Dropffoourtz: in low Dutch, Boom varen: in French,
Polypode: and we of England, Polypodie: that which grows upon the wall we
call Polypodie of the wall, and that on the Oak, Polypodie of the Oak.

The Temperature.
Polypodie does dry, but yet without biting as Galen writes.

The Virtues.
Dioscorides writes, that it is of power to purge and to draw forth choler and
phlegm. Actuarius Johannes Monardus, who thinks it purges very gently; which
thing is confirmed by Experience, the mistress of things. For in very deed
Polypody of it self does not purge at all, but only serves a little to make
the belly soluble, being boiled in the broth of an old cock, with Beetes or
Mallows, or other like things that move to the stool by their slipperines.
Ioannes Mesue reckons up Polypodie among those things that do especially dry
and make thin: peradventure he had respect to a certain kind of (...), or
ache in the joints: in which not one only part of the body, but many together
most commonly are touched: for which it is very much commended by the
Brabanders and other inhabitants about the river Rhene, and the Maze. In this
kind of disease the hands, the feet, and the joints of the knees and elbowes
do swell. There is joined withal a feeblenesin moving, through the extremity
of the pain: sometimes the upper parts are less grieved, and the lower more.
The humors do also easily run from one place to another, and then settle.
Against this disease the Geldres and Cleuelanders do use the decoction of
Polypodie, whereby they hope that the superfluous humors may be wasted and
dried up, and that not by and by, but in continuance of time: for they appoint
that this decoction should be taken for certain days together.

But this kind of gout is sooner taken away either by blood letting, or by
purgations, or by

Therefore the body must out of hand be purged, and then that which remains
is to be wasted

Furthermore, Dioscorides says, that the root of Polypody is very good for
members out of

The root of Polypodie boiled with a little honey, water, and pepper, and the
quantity of an

CHAP. 468. Of Oke-Ferne.
Our Author here (as in many other places) knit knots, somewhat intricate to
loose, for first he confounds in the names and nature the Polypody of the Oak,
or lesser Polypodie with the Dryopteris, or Oke-Ferne; but that I have (...)
put back to the former chapter, his fit place; then in the second place did he
give the Description of the Dryopteris of the Aduers. taken from thence, page
(...). Then were the place, times, names, etc. taken out of the chapter of
Dryopteris Candiaa of Dodonaeus, being, Pempt 3. lib. 5. cap. 4. But the figure
was of the Filicula foemina petroea 4. of Tabernamontanus. Now I will in this
chapter give you the Dryopteris of the Aduersaria, then that of Dodonaeus, and
thirdly that of Tragus; for I take them to be different; and this last to be
that figured by our Author, out of Tabernamontanus.

The Description.
1 THis kind of Fern called Dryopteris, or Filix querna, has leaves like
unto the female Fern before spoken of, but much lesser, smaller, and more
finely cut or jagged, and is not above a foot high, being a very slender and
delicate tender herb. The leaves are so finely jagged that in show they
resemble feathers, set round about a small rib or sinew; the back side being
sprinkled, not with russet or brown marks or specks, as the other Fernes
are, but as it were painted with white spots or marks, not standing out of the
leaves in scales, as the spots in the male Fern, but they are double in each
leaf close unto the middle rib or sinew. The root is long, brown, and
somewhat hairy, very like unto Polypody, but much slenderer, of a sharp and
causticke taste. Rondeletius affirmed that he found the use of this deadly,
being put into medicines in stead of Polypody by the ignorance of some
Apothecaries in Dauphenye in France. Mr. Goodyer has sent me an acurate
description together with a plant of this Fern which I have thought good here
also to set forth.

Dryopteris Aduers. True Oak Fern.
2 Dryopteris alba (...). White Oke-Ferne.
3 Dryopteris Tragi. Tree Fern.


Dryopteris Penae and Lobelij.

The roots creep in the ground or mire, near the turfe or upper part thereof,
and fold amongst themselves, as the roots of Polypodium do, almost as big as a
wheat straw, and about five, six, or seven inches long, cole black without,
and white within, of a binding taste inclining to sweetness, with an
innumerable company of small black fibers like hairs growing thereunto. The
stalks spring from the roots in several places, in number variable, according
to the length and increase of the root; I have seen small plants have but one
or two, and some bigger plants have fourteen or fifteen: they have but a
twofold division, the stalk growing from the root, and the nerve bearing the
leaves: the stalk is about five, six, or seven inches long, no bigger that a
bennet or small grass stalk, one side flat, as are the (...) Fernes, the rest
round, smooth, and green. The first pair of nerves grow about three inches
from the root, and so do all the rest grow by couples, almost exactly one
against another, in number about eight, nine, or ten couples, the longest
seldom exceeding an inch in length. The leaves grow on those nerves also by
(...), eight or nine couples on a nerve, without any nickes or indentures, of a
(...) green color. This Fern (...) be said to be like Polypodium in his
creeping root, like the male Fern in his stalk, and like the female Fern in
his nerves and leaves. I could find no seed-scales on the backesides of any of
the leaves of this Fern. Many years past I found this same in a very wet
moore or bog, being the land of Rlchard Austen, called Whitrow Moore, where
Peate is now dug, a mile from Peters-field in Hampshire; and this sixth of
July, 1633, I dug up there many plants, and by them made this description. I
never found it growing in any other place: the leaves perish at Winter, and
grow up again very late in the Spring. John Goodyer. July 6. 1633.

2 Dodonaeus thus describes his: Dryopteris (says he) does well resemble the
male Fern, but the leaves are much smaller, and more finely cut, smooth on the
foresaid, and of a yellowish green together with the stalks and middle nerves;
on the back it is rough as other Fernes, and also lives without stalk or
seed. The root consists of fibers intricately folded together, of an
indifferent thickness, here and there putting up new buds. This is the
Adianthum of the Aduers. who affirm the use thereof to be safe, and not
pernicious and deleterie, as that of Dryopteris. It thus differs from the
former; the leaves of this are not set directly one opposite to another, the
divisions of the leaves are larger and more divided. The root is more threddy,
and creepes not so much as that of the former.

3 This (which is Clusius his Filix pumila saxatilis prima, and which I take to
be the Dryopteris or Filix arborea of Tragus) has black slender long creeping
roots, with few small hard hairy fibers fastened to them, of a very astringent
taste: from these rise up sundry stalks a foot high, divided into certain
branches of winged leaves, like to those of the female Fern, but much less,
tenderer and finer cut, and having many blackish spots on their lower sides.
This differs from the two former, in that the leaves are branched, which is a
chief difference; and Bauhinus did very well observe it, if he had as well
followed it, when he divided Filix into ramosa and non ramosa.

The Place.
It is oftentimes found in sunny places, in the valleys of mountains and little
hills, and in the tops of the trunks of trees in thick woods.

The Time.
The leaves hereof perish in Winter; in the Spring new come forth.

The Names.
This is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Querna Filix: Oribasius in his
eleventh book of physical Collections calls it Bryopteris, of the moss with
which it is found; for, as Dioscorides writoth, it grows in the moss of
Oaks. The Apothecaries in times past miscalled it by the name of Adiantum: but
they did worse in putting it in compound medicines in stead of Adiantum.
Valerius Cordus calls it Pteridion: in Low Dutch, Cijcken baren: the
Spaniards, Helecho de Roble: it is named in English, Oke-Ferne, Petty-Ferne;
and it may most fitly be called MosseFerne.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Oke-Ferne has many tastes, it is sweet, biting, and bitter, it has in the
root a harsh or choking Dioscorides says further, that Oke-Ferne stamped roots
and all is a remedy to root up hairs, if it be applied to the body after
sweating, the sweat being wiped away.

CHAP. 469. Of black Oke-Ferne.
The Description.
1 THere is also a certain other kind of Fern like to the former Oke-Ferne
of (...) his description, but the stalks and ribs of the leaves are blackish,
and the leaves of a deeper green color: this grows out also immediately
from the root, and is likewise diversely, but not so finely indented: the root
is made up of many strings, not unlike to the male Fern, but much lesser.

2 The female black Fern is like unto the male, saving his leaves are not so
sharp at the points, more white and broad than the male, wherein consists
the difference.

The Place.
They grow likewise upon trees in shadowie woods, and now and then in shadowie
sandy banks, and under hedges.

1 Onopteris mas. The male black Fern.


The Time.
They remain green all the year long, otherwise than Polypodie and Maidens
hair do; yet do they not cease to bring forth new leaves in Summer: they are
destitute of flowers and seed, as is the former.

The Names.
This is called of diverse of the later Herbarists, Dryopteris nigra, or black
Oke-Ferne, of the likeness that it has with Dryopteris; which we have called
in English, Oke-Ferne, or moss Fern: of others, Adiantum nigrum, or black
Maidens hair, that it may differ from the former, which is falsely called
Adiantum. There are of the later Herbarists who would have it to be Lonchitis
aspera, or rough Spleen-wort; but what likeness has it with the leaves of
Scolopendrium? none at all: therefore it is not Lonchitis aspera, much less
Adiantum Plinij, which differs not from Adiantum Theophrasti; for what he
has of Adiantum, the same he takes out of Theophrastus: the right Adiantum we
will describe hereafter. Notwithstanding black OkeFerne was used of diverse
unlearned Apothecaries of France and Germany for Adiantum, or Maiden-haire of
Lumbardy: but these men did err in doing so; yet not so much as they who take
Polypodie of the Oak for the true Maiden-haire.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The black Oke-Ferne has no stipticke quality at all, but is like in
faculty to Trichomanes, or English Maiden-haire.

CHAP. 470. Of Hart's-tongue.
The Description.
1 THe common kind of Hart's-tongue, called (...), that is to say, a plant
consisting only of leaves, bearing neither stalk, flower, nor seed, resembling
in show a long tongue, whereof it has been and is called in shops Lingua
ceruina, that is, Hearts tongue: these leaves are a foot long, smooth and plain
upon one side, but upon that side next the ground straked overthwart with
certain long rough marks like small worms, hanging on the backside thereof.
The root is black, hairy, and twisted, or so growing as though it were wound
together.

2 The other kind of Fern, called Phyllit is multisida, or Laciniata, that is,
iagged Hearts tongue, is very like unto the former, saving that the leaves
thereof are cut or iagged like a man's hand, or the palm and browantles of a
Dear, bearing neither stalk, flower, nor seed.

3 There is another kind of Hart's-tongue called Hemionitis, which has bred
some controversy among writers: for some have took it for a kind of
Hart's-tongue, as it is indeed; others describe it as a proper plant by it
self, called Hemionitis, of (...), that is, Mulus, a Mule, because Mules do
delight to feed thereon: it is barren in seeds, stalks, and flowers, and in
shape it agrees very well with our Hart's-tongue: the roots are compact of many
blackish hairs: the leaves are spotted on the backside like the common
Hart's-tongue, and differ in that, that this Hemionitis in the base or lowest
parts of the leaves is arched after the manner of a new Moon, or a forked
arrow, the youngest and smallest leaves being like unto the great Binde-weed,
called Volubilis.

4 There is a kind of Fern called likewise Hemionitis sterilis, which is a
very small and basc herb not above a finger high, having fourc or five small
leaves of the same substance and color, spotted on the back part, and in
taste like Hart's-tongue; but the leaves bear the shape of them of Totabona, or
good Henry, which many of our Apothecaries do abusiuely take for Mercury: The
roots are very many, smooth, black, and threddie, bearing neither stalk,
flower, nor seed: this plant 1 Phyllitis. Hart's-tongue.
2 Phylliiis (...). Finger Hart's-tongue.
3 Hemionitis mayor. Mules Fern, or Moone-Ferne.
4 Hemionitis minor. Small Moone-Ferne.
5 Hemionitis perigrina. Handed Moone-Ferne.
my very good friend Mr. Nicholas (...) found in a grauelly lane in the way
leading to Oxey park near unto Watford, fifteen miles from London: it grows
likewise on the stone walls of Hampton Court, in the garden of Mr. Huggens,
keeper of the said house or palace.

5 There is a kind of Fern called also Hemionitis, but with this addition
Peregrina, that is very seldom found, and has leaves very like to
Hart's-tongue, but that it is palmed or branched in the part next the ground,
almost in manner of the second Phyllitis, at the top of the leaves; otherwise
they resemble one another in nature and form.

The Place.
The common Hart's-tongue grows by the ways sides as you travel from London
to Exceter in great plenty, in shadowie (...), and moist stony valleys and
wels, and is much planted in gardens.

The second I found in the garden of Master Cranwich a Surgeon dwelling at
Much-dunmow in Essex, who gave me a plant for my garden.

Mr. Goodyer found it wild in the banks of a lane near Swaneling, not many
miles from Southampton.

It grows upon Ingleborough hills, and diverse other mountains of the North of
England.

The Time.
It is green all the year long, yet less green in winter: in Summer it now
and then brings forth new leaves.

The Names.
It is called in Greek (...): in Latin also Phyllitis: in shops, Lingua
ceruina: and falsely Scolopendria, for it differs much from the right
Scolopendria, or Stone Fern: it is called in high Dutch, Hirszong: in low
Dutch, Herstonge: in Spanish, Lengua ceruina: in French, Langue de Cerf: in
English, Hart's-tongue: of some, Stone Hart's-tongue: Apuleius in his 83. Chapter
names it Radiolus.

The Temperature.
It is of a binding and drying faculty.

The Virtues.
This common Hart's-tongue is commended against the laske and bloody flix:
Dioscorides teaches,

It does open the hardness and stopping of the spleen and liver, and all other
griefs proceeding

CHAP. 471. Of Spleene-woort, or Milt-waste.
The Description.
1 SPleene-woort being that kind of Fern called Asplenium, or (...), and the
true Scolopendria, has leaves a span long, iagged or cut upon both sides, even
hard to the middle ribbe; every cut or incisure being as it were cut half
round (whereby it is known from the rough Spleene-woort) not one cut right
against another, but one besides the other, set in several order, being
slipperie and green on the upper side, soft and downie underneath; which when
they be withered are folded up together like a scrole, and hairie without, much
like to the rough Beareworme wherewith men bait their hooks to catch fish: the
root is small, black, and rough, much platted or interlaced, having neither
stalk, flower, nor seeds.

1 Asplenium sive Ceterach. Spleenewoort or Miltwaste.
2 Lonchitis aspera. Rough Spleenewoort.
Formerly under the title of (...) (...) (...) put the (...) now in the third
place, (...) the figure which should have been there, (...) (...) the third
(...) of the next chapter, under the title of Filicula (...) (...).
3 Lonchitis aspera mayor. Great rough Spleene-woort.
Formerly under the title of (...) (...) (...) put the (...) now in the third
place, (...) the figure which should have been there, (...) (...) the third
(...) of the next chapter, under the title of Filicula (...) (...).
4 Lonchitis (...). Bastard Spleene-woort.


2 Rough Spleenewoort is partly like the other Fernes in show, and bears
neither stalk nor seed, having narrow leaves a foot long, and somewhat longer,
slashed on the edges even to the middle rib, smooth on the upper side, and of a
swart green color; underneath rough, as is the leaves of Polypodie: the root
is black, and set with a number of slender strings.

3 This greater Spleenwoort has leaves like Ceterach, of a spanne long,
somewhat resembling those of Polypodie, but that they are more divided, snipt
about the edges, and sharp pointed: the root is fibrous and stringie. This
grows on the rocks and mountainous places of Italy, and is the Lonchitis
asperamaior of (...) and others.

4 This kind of Spleenewoort is not only barren of stalks and (...), but also
of those spots and marks wherewith the others are spotted: the leaves are few
in number, growing pyramidis or steeplewise, great and broad below, and sharper
toward the top by degrees: the root is thick, black, and bushie, as it were a
Crows nest.

The Place.
Ceterach grows upon old stone walls and rocks, in dark and shadowie places
throughout the West part of England; especially upon the stone walls by
Bristow, as you go to Saint Vincents Rock, and likewise about Bathe, Wells,
and Salisburie, where I have (...) great plenty thereof.

The rough Spleenwoort grows upon barren heaths, dry sandy banks, and
shadowie places in most parts of England, but especially on a heath by London
called Hampstead heath, where it grows in great abundance.

The Names.
Spleene-woort or Milt-waste is called in Greek, (...): in Latin likewise,
Asplenium, and also Scolopendria: of Gaza, Mula herba: in shops, Ceterach: in
high Dutch, Steynfarn: in low Dutch, Steynuaren, and (...): in English,
Spleenwoort, Miltwaste, Scaleferne, and Stoneferne: it is called Asplenion,
because it is special good against the infirmities of the (...) or Milt, and
Scolopendria, of the likeness that it has with the Beare-worme, before
remembered.

Rough Miltwaste is called of diverse of the later writers Asplenium syluestre,
or wild Spleenwoort: of some, Asplenium magnum, or great Spleene-woort:
Valerius Cordus calls it (...): and Dioscorides, Lonchitis aspera, or rough
Spleene-woort: in Latin according to the same Author, Longina, and Calabrina:
in English, rough Spleen-wort, or Miltwaste.

The Temperature.
These plants are of thin parts, as Galen witnesses, yet are they not hot, but
in a mean.

The Virtues.
Dioscorides teaches, that the leaves boiled in wine and drunk by the space of
forty days, do take Pliny, Spleenewoort is not to be given to women, because
it brings barrenness.

There be Empericks or blind practitioners of this age, who teach, that with
this herb not only

But this is to be reckoned among the old wives fables, and that also which
Dioscorides tells of,

CHAP. 472. Of diverse small Fernes.
The Description.
1 THis small or dwarf Fern, which is seldom found except in the banks of
stony fountains, wells, and rocks bordering upon rivers, is very like unto
the common Brakes in leaves, but altogether lesser: the root is composed of a
bundle of black threddie strings.

2 The female, which is found likewise by running streams, wells, and
fountains, upon rocks, and stony places, is like the precedent, but is a
great deal smaller, blacker of color, fewer roots, and shorter.

1 Filicula fontanamas. The male (...) Fern.
It is hard to say what our Author in this chapter meant, by his figures and
descriptions, wherefore I have left his descriptions as I found them: (...)
(...) (...) which was very like the first I (...) omited: for the third, which
was of the (...) (...), mentioned (...) the (...) chapter, I (...) (...) (...)
(...)-(...) of his (...) (...) 2. which grows in such places, and (...) well
(...) our Authors description: in the fourth place I have put Lobbells (...)
(...) Anglica, and his description, whch our Author (...) (...) I judge,
intended in that place to have given us.
3 Filicula petraeamas. The male dwarf stone Fern.


3 The male dwarf Fern that grows upon the stony mountains of the North
and West parts of England, especially toward the sea, and also in the ioints of
stone walls among the mortar, has small leaves deeply cut on both sides, like
unto Ceterach or Spleene-woort, barren both of seeds and stalks, as also of
those spots or marks that are to be seen upon the back part of the other
Fernes: the root creeps along, set with some few hairie strings, resembling
those of the Oak Fern, called Dryopteris.

4 The female stone Fern has diverse long leaves rising from a threddy root,
contrary to that of the male, composed of many small leaves finely minced or
cut like the teeth of a saw, of a whitish green color, without any spots or
marks at all, seeds or stalks, which grows under shadowie rocks, and craggie
mountains in most places. From a small root composed of many black, hairie,
and intricately folding strings, come up many leaves two or three inches high,
stiff, thick, dark green, and shining: in the division, growth, position,
shape and taste, it resembles the male Fern, and has also rustie spots on the
back: the middle ribbe and stalk is of a shining brownish 4 Filicula
petraeafoemina, sive Chamaefilix marina Anglica. The female dwarf stone Fern.
silken color: it grows in the chinkes of the rocks by the Sea side in
Cornwall.

The Place.
The place is sufficiently touched in the description.

The Time.
They flourish both Winter and Summer, for when the leaves wither by reason of
age, there arise young to supply the place, so that they are not to be seen
without green and withered leaves both at once.

The Names.
It suffices what has bin said of the names in their several titles:
notwithstanding the last described we have called Chamaefilix marina Anglica:
which grows upon the rockie cliffe near Harwich, as also at Dover, among the
Sampire that there grows.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Their temperature and faculties in working Dryopteris, and Onopteris.

CHAP. 473. Of true Maiden-haire.
The Kinds.
THeophrastus and Pliny have set down two Maiden-haires, the black and the
white, whereunto, may be added another called Ruta muraria, or wall Rue, equal
to the others in faculty, whereof we will entreat.

1 Capillus Veneris verus. True Maiden-haire.


The Description.
1 Whosoever will follow the variable opinions of writers concerning the Fern
called (...) verum, or Cipillus Veneris verus, must of necessity be brought
into a labyrinth of doubts, considering the diverse opinions thereof: but this I
know that Venus-haire, or Maidenhaire, is a low herb growing an hand high,
smooth, of a dark crimson color, and glittering withal: the leaves be small,
cut in sunder; and nicked in the edges something like those of Coriander,
confusedly or without order placed, the middle rib whereof is of a black
shining color: the root consists of many small threddie strings.

2 This Assyrian Maiden-haire is likewise a base or low herb, having leaves,
flat, smooth, and plain, set upon a blackish middle rib, like unto that of the
other Maiden-haire, cut or notched in the edges, nature keeping no certain
form, but making one leaf of this fashion, and another far different from it:
the root is tough and threddie.

3 This plant which we have inserted among the Adianthes as a kind thereof,
may without error so pass, which is in great request in Flanders and
Germany, where the practitioners in Physic do use the same in stead of
Capillus Veneris, and with better success than any of the Capillare herbs,
although Matthiolus and Dioscorides himself has made this wall Rue to be a
kind of Paronychia, or Nailewoort: notwithstanding the Germans will not leave
the use thereof, but receive it as the true Adianth, esteeming it equal, if not
far better, than either Ceterach, Capillus Veneris verus, or Tricomanes, called
also Polytrichon: it brings forth very many leaves, round and slender, cut
into two or three parts, very hard in handling, smooth and green on the
outside of an ill (...) dead color underneath, set with little fine spots,
which evidently shows it to be a kind of Fern: the root is black and full
of strings.

2 Capillus Veneris Syriaca. Assyrian Maiden-haire.
3 Ruta muraria, sive Saluia vitae. Wall Rue, or Rue Maiden-haire.


The Place.
The right Maiden-haire grows upon walls, in stony, shadowie, and moist
places, near unto fountains, and where water droppeth: it is a stranger in
England: notwithstanding I have heard it reported by some of good credit, that
it grows in diverse places of the West country of England.

The Assyrian Maiden-haire takes his surname of his native country Assyria,
it is a stranger in Europe.

Stone Rue grows upon old walls near unto waters, wells, and fountains: I
found it upon the wall of the churchyard of Dartford in Kent, hard by the river
side where people ride through, and also upon the walls of the Churchyard of
Sittingburne in the same County, in the middle of the town hard by a great
lake of water, and also upon the Church walls of Railey in Essex, and diverse
other places.

The Time.
These plants are green both winter and summer, and yet have neither flowers
nor seed.

The Names.
Maiden-haire is called in Greek (...): Theophrastus and Pliny name it Adiantum
nigrum, or black Maiden-haire: for they set down two Maiden-haires, the black
and the white, making this the black, and the Rue of the wall the white: it is
called in Latin Polytrichum, Callitrichum, Cincinalis, Terrae Capillus,
Supercilium terrae: of Apuleius, Capillus Veneris, Capillaris, Crinita: and of
diverse, Coriandrum putei: the Italians keep the name Capillus Veneris: in
English, black Maiden hair, and Venus hair, and it may be called our Ladies
hair.

It is called Adianton because the leaf, as Theophrastus says, is never wet,
for it casts off water that falls thereon, or being drowned or covered in
water, it remains still as if it (...) dry, as Pliny likewise writes; and is
termed Callitricon and Polytricon, of the effect it has in dying hair, and
makes it to grow thick.

Wall Rue is commonly called in Latin, Ruta muraria, or Ruta muralis: of
some, Saluia vitae, but wherefore I know not, neither themselves, if they were
living: of the Apothecaries of the LowCountries Capillus Veneris, or Maiden
hair, and they have used it a long time for the right Maiden hair; it is that
kind of Adiantum which Theophrastus termed Adiantum (...), or white Maiden
hair, for he makes two, one black, and the other white, as we have said.
Pliny does likewise (...) down two kinds, one he calls Polytricon; the
other, Tricomanes, or English Maiden-haire, whereof we will entreat in the
chapter following, which he has falsely set down for a kind of (...), for
Tricomanes does differ from Adiantum.

Some there (...) that think, Wall-Rue is Paronychia Dioscoridis, or
Dioscorides his Whitlow-wort, wherein they have been greatly deceived: it is
called in high Dutch, (...): (...) (...) Dutch, Steencruyt: in French, Rue de
maraeille: in English, Wall-Rue, and white Maiden-haire.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The true Maiden-haire, as Galen testisieth, does dry, make thin, waste away,
and is in a mean between Mesues shows that it consists of unlike or
disagreeing (...), and that some are watery and earthy, and the same binding,
and another superficially (...) and (...): And that by this it takes away
obstructions or stoppings, makes things thin that are thick, looseneth the
belly, especially when it is fresh and green: for as this part is thin, so is
it quickly resolved, and that by reason of his binding and earthy parts: it
stops the belly, and stays the laske and other fluxes.

Being drunk it breaks the stone, and expels not only the stones in the
kidneys, but also

It raises up gross and slimie humors out of the chest and lungs, and also
those which stick in

Moreover, it consumes and wastes away the Kings-euill, and other hard
swellings, as the

Dioscorides reckons up many virtues and operations of this Maiden-haire,
which do not only

He adds also in the end, that it is sown about sheepe-folds for the benefit
of the sheep, but

Besides, that it cannot be sown, by reason it is without seed, it is evident,
neither can it fitly be Cytisus, or Milk Trefoile, whereof here to write were
to small purpose.

Wall-Rue is not much unlike to black Maiden-haire in temperature and
faculty.

Wall-Rue is (...) for them that have a cough, that are short winded, and that
be troubled with

Being boiled, it causes concoction of raw humors which stick in the lungs;
it takes away

It is commended against ruptures in voung children, and some affirm it to be
excellent good,

CHAP. 474. Of English, or common Maiden-haire.
The Description:
1 ENglish Maiden-haire has long leaves of a dark green color, consisting of
very many small round leaves set upon a middle rib, of a shining black color,
dashed on the nether side with small rough marks or speckes, of an ouerworne
color: the roots are small and threddy.

1 Trichomanes mas. The Male English Maiden-haire.


2 The female English Maiden hair is like unto the precedent, saving that it
is lesser, and wants those spots or marks that are in the other, wherein
consists the difference. Our Authors figure was of the Trochomanes foemina of
Tabernamontanus, which expresses a variety with branched leaves, and therein
only was the difference.

The Place.
It grows for the most part nere unto springs and brooks, and other (...)
places, upon old stone walls and rocks: I found it growing in a shadowie
sandy lane in Betsome, in the parish of South fleet in Kent, upon the ground
whereas there was no stones or stony ground near unto it, which before that
time I did never see; it grows likewise upon stone walls at her Majesty's
palace of Richmond, and in most stone walls of the West and North parts of
England. Mr. Goodyer says, that in January, 1624. he saw enough to lade an
horse growing (...) the bancks in a lane, as he rode between Rake and Headly
in Hampshire near Wollmer Forest.

The Time.
It continues a long time, the coldness of winter does it no harm, it is
barren as the other Fernes are, whereof it is a kind.

The Names.
It is called in Greek, (...) in Latin, Filicula, as though we should say,
Parua Filex, or little Fern; also Capillaris: in shops, Capillus Veneris.
Apuleius in his 51 chapter makes it all one with Callitrichon: of some it is
called Polytrichon: in English, common (...)-hair.

The Temperature and Virtues..
These, as Dioscorides and Galen do write, have all the faculties belonging to
Adiantum, or black

The decoction made in wine and drunk, helps them that are short winded, it
helps the

The lie wherein it has been sodden, or laid to infuse, is good to wash the
head, causing the

CHAP. 475. Of Thistles.
The Kinds:
THe matter of the Thistles is diverse, some Thistles serve for nourishment, as
the (...) without prickles, and the Artichoke with prickles; other for
medicine, as the root of Carline which is good for many things; the blessed
thistle also, otherwise called (...) (...); Sea Huluer, and diverse others: some
are poisonsome, as Chamaelcon niger; one smooth, plain, and without prickles,
as the Thistle called Bears Breech, or Acanthus satiuus, whereof there is
another with prickles, which we make the wild, of the which two we intend to
write in this chapter.

The Description.
1 Bears breech of the garden has broad leaves, smooth, somewhat black,
gashed on both the edges, and set with many cuts and fine nickes: between
which rises up in the midst a big stalk bravely decked with flowers, set in
order from the middle upward, of color white, of form long, which are armed
as it were with two catkins, one higher, another lower: after them grow forth
the husks, in which is found broad seed: the roots be black without, and
white within, andfull of clammie juice, and are divided into many offsprings,
which as they creep far, so do they now and then bud forth and grow afresh:
these roots are so full of life, that how little (...) of them remain, it
oftentimes also brings forth the whole plant.

1 Acanthus sativus. Garden Beares-breech.
2 Acanthus syl. aculeatus. Prickley Beares-breech.


2 Wild Beares-breech, called Acanthus syluestris, Pena sets forth for
Chamelcont a (...), and reports that he found it growing amongst the grauelly
and moist places near to the walls of Montpellier, and at the gate of Aegidia,
between the fountain and the brook near to the wall: this thistle is in
stalk, flowers, color of leaves and seed like the first kind, but shorter
and lower, having large leaves, dented or iagged with many cuts and incisions,
not only in some few parts of the leaves, as some other Thistles, but very
thickly dented or cloven, and having many sharp, large, white and hard
prickles about the sides of the divisions and cuts, not very easy to be
handled or touched without danger to the hand and fingers.

The Place.
Dioscorides writes, that garden Branke Vrsine grows in moist and stony
places, and also in gardens: it were unadvisedly done to seek it in either of
the Germans any where, but in gardens only; in my garden it does grow very
plentifully.

The wild was found in certain places of Italy near to the sea, by that
notable learned man (...) Pancius, Physician to the Duke of Ferrara, and
professor of simples and Physic, and is a stranger in England. I have seen it
growing in the garden of Mr. John Parkinson.

The Time.
Both the Branke Vrsines do flower in the summer season, the seed is ripe in
Autumn: the root remains fresh; yet now and then it perishes in winter in
both the Germans, if the weather be too cold: but in England the former
seldom or never dies.

The Names.
It is called in Greek (...): the Latins keep the same name Acanthus: yet
does Acanthus signify generally all kind of Thistles, and that is called
Acanthus by the figure Antonomasia: the English name is Branke Vrsine, and
Bears breech.

The tame or garden Branke Vrsine is named in Latin Sativus, or Hortensis
Acanthus: in Greek, (...): and of Galen, (...), and Pliny, (...): Pliny also
calls this Acanthus laeuis, or smooth Branke Vrsine, and reports it to be a
city herb, and to serve for arbors: some name it Branca Vrsina (others use to
call Cow-parsnep by the name of Branca Vrsina, but with the addition Germanica:)
the Italians call it Acantho, and Branca Orsina: the Spaniards, Yerua Giguante:
the Ingrauers of old time were wont to carue the leaves of this Branke Vrsine
in pillars, and other works, and also upon the ears of pots; as among others
Virgill testifies in the third Eclog of his Bucolicks:

Et (...) idem Alcimedon duo pocula (...), Et molli circum est ansas (...)
Acantha. I take Virgils Acanthus to be that which we now commonly call (...),
as I shall hereafter show when I come to treat thereof.

The other Branke Vrsine is named in Greek (...): and in Latin, Syluestris
Acanthus, or wild Branke Vrsine, and they may be called properly Acantha, or
Spina, a prickle; by which name it is found called of most Herbarists,
Acanthus: yet there is also another Acanthus a thornie shrub: the liquour which
issues forth of it, as Herodotus and (...) asfirme, is a gum: for difference
whereof peradventure this kind of Acanthus is named Herbacantha: There is
likewise found among the bastard names of Acanthus the word Mamolaria, and also
Crepula, but it is not expressed to which of them, whether to the wild or tame
it ought to be referred.

The Temperature.
Theleaues of the garden Branke Vrsine consist in a mean as it were between
hot and cold, being somewhat moist, with a mollifying and gentle digesting
faculty, as are those of the Mallow, and therefore they are profitably boiled
in clysters, as well as Mallow leaves. The root, as Galen teaches, is of a
more drying quality.

The Virtues.
Dioscorides says, that the roots are a remedy for lims that are burnt with
fire, and that have been

They are good for such as have the ptisicke and spet blood withal; for those
that have fallen from

Of the same root is made an excellent plaster against the ache and numnesse
of the hands and

It is put into clysters with good success against sundry maladies.

CHAP. 476. Of the Cotton Thistle.
The Description.
1 THe common Thistle, whereof the greatest quantity of down is gathered for
diverse (...), as well by the poor to stop pillowes, cushions, and beds for
want of feathers, as also bought of the rich Vpholsters to mix with the
feathers and down they do sell, which deceit would be looked unto: this
Thistle has great leaves, long and broad, gashed about the edges, and set with
sharp and stiff prickles all along the edges, covered all over with a soft
cotton or down: out from the midst whereof rises up a long stalk above two
cubits high, cornered, and set with filmes, and also full of prickles: the
heads are likewise cornered with prickles, and bring forth flowers consisting
of many whitish threads: the seed which succeeds them is wrapped up in down;
it is long, of a light crimson color, and lesser than the seed of bastard
saffron: the root grows deep in the ground, being white, hard, wooddie, and
not without strings.

2 The Illyrian cotton thistle has a long naked root, beset about the top with
a fringe of many small threads or iags: from which arises a very large and tall
stalk, higher than any man, rather like a tree than an annual herb or plant:
this stalk is garnished with scroles of thin leaves, from the bottom to the
top, set full of most horrible sharp pricks, and so is the stalk and every
part of the plant, (...) that it is impossible for man or beast to touch the
same without great hurt or danger: his leaves are very great, far broader and
longer than any other thistle whatsoever, covered with an (...) cotton or down
like the former: the flowers do grow at the top of the stalks, which is
divided into sundry branches, and are of a purple color, set or armed round
about with the like, or rather sharper thorns than the aforesaid.

1 Acanthium album. The white Cotton Thistle.
2 Acanthium Illyricum (...). The purple Cotton Thistle.


The Place.
These Thistles grow by high ways sides, and in ditches almost every where.

The Time
They flower from June until August, the second year after they be sown: and
in the mean time the seed waxes ripe, which being through ripe the herb
perishes, as do likewise most of the other Thistles, which live no longer
than till the seed be fully come to matutitie.

The Names.
This Thistle is taken for that which is called in Greek (...), which
Dioscorides describes to have leaves set with prickles round about the edges,
and to be covered with a thin down like a copweb, that may be gathered and
spun to make garments of, like those of silk: in high Dutch it is called (...)
(...): in Low Dutch, (...) (...) (...): in French, Chardon argentin: in
English, Cotton-Thistle, white Cotton-Thistle, wild white Thistle, Argentine
or the Silver Thistle.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Dioscorides says, that the leaves and roots hereof are a remedy for those
that have their bodies Galen supposes that these are of temperature hot.

CHAP. 477. Of our Ladies-Thistle.
The Description.
THe leaves of our Ladies Thistle are as big as those of white Cotton.
Thistle: for the leaves thereof be great, broad, large, gashed in the edges,
armed with a multitude of (...) and sharp prickles, as are those of
Ote-Thistle, but they are without down, altogether slippery, of a light Carduus
Marioe. Ladies Thistle.
green and speckled, with white and milky (...) and lines drawn diverse ways:
the stalk is high, and as big as a man's finger: the flowers grow forth of heads
full of prickles, being threads of a purple color: the seed is wrapped in down
like that of Cotton Thistle: the root is long, thick, and white.

The Place.
It grows upon waste and common places by high ways, and by dung-hils almost
every where.

The Time.
It floureth and seedeth when Cotton (...) does.

The Names.
It is called in Latin, (...) (...) (...), and Carduus-Martoe; in high Dutch,
(...) (...) Distell: in French, (...) (...) (...) (...): in English, our Ladies
Thistle: it may properly be called (...), of the white spots and lines that are
on the leaves: Pliny in his 27. book, chap. 11. makes mentionof an herb
called (...), but what manner of one it is he has not expressed; therefore it
would be hard to (...) this to be the same that his Leucographis is; and this
is thought to be Spina alba, called in Greek (...), or white Thistle, Milk
Thistle, and Carduus Ramptarius: of the Arabians, (...), or Bedeguar, as
Matthoeus Syluaticus testifies.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The tender leaves of Carduus (...), the prickles taken off, are sometimes used
to be eaten with other herbs.

Galen writes, that the roots of Spina alba do dry and moderately bind, that
therefore it is good

The seed thereof is of a thin essence and hot faculty, therefore he says
that it is good for those

Dioscorides affirms that the seeds being drunk are a remedy for infants
that have their (...)

CHAP. 478. Of the Globe Thistle.
The Description.
GLobe Thistle has a very long stalk, and leaves iagged, great, long, and
broad, deeply gashed, strong of smell, somewhat green on the upper side, and
on the nether side whiter and downy: the flowers grow forth of a round head
like a globe, which stands on the tops of the (...); they are white and
small, with blew threads in the midst: the seed is long, with hairs of a mean
length: the root is thick and branched.

2 There is another Globe Thistle that has lesser leaves, but more full of
prickles, with round heads also: but there grows out of them besides the
flowers, certain long and stiff prickles.

3 There is likewise another kind resembling the first in (...) and figure,
but much lesser, and the flowers thereof tend more to a blew.

4 There is also another Globe Thistle, which is the least, and has the
sharpest prickles of all the rest: the head is small; the flowers whereof are
white, like to those of the first.

1 Cardnus globosus. The Globe-Thistle.
2 Carduus (...) (...). Prickly headed Globe-Thistle.
3 Carduus globosus minor. Small Globe-Thistle.
5 Carduus globosus capitulo latiore. Flat headed Globe-Thistle.


5 There is a certain other kind hereof, yet the head is not so (...), that
is to say, flatter and broader above; out of which spring blew flowers: the
stalk hereof is slender, and covered with a white thin down: the leaves are
long, gashed likewise on both sides, and armed in every corner with sharp
prickles.

6 There is another called the Down-Thistle, which rises up with thick and
long (...). The leaves thereof are iagged, set with prickles, white on the
nether side: the heads be round and many in number, and are covered with a soft
down, and sharp prickles standing forth on (...) (...), being on the upper
part fraughted with purple flowers all of strings: the seed is long, and (...),
as does the seed of many of the Thistles.

6 Carduus eriocephalus. Woolly headed Thistle.


The Place.
They are sown in gardens, and do not grow in these countries that we can find.

I have found the sixth by Pocklington and in other places of the Woldes in
Yorkshire. Mr. Goodyer also found it in Hampshire.

The Names.
They flower and flourish when the other Thistles do.

The Names.
Fuchsius did at the first take it to be Chamoeleon niger; but afterward being
better advised, he named it Spina peregrina, and (...) duus globosus. Valerius
Cordus does fitly call it Sphoerocephalus: the same name does also agree with
the rest, for they have a round head like a ball or globe. Most would have the
first to be that which Matthiolus sets down (...) Spina alba: this Thistle
is called in English, Globe Thistle, and Ball-Thistle.

The down or woolly headed Thistle is called in Latin, being destitute of
another name, Eriocephalus, of the woolly head: in English, Down Thistle, or
woolly headed Thistle. It is thought of diverse to be that which Bartholomoeus
(...) and (...) Palea, Franciscan Friars, report to be called Corona Fratrum,
or Friars Crown: but this Thistle does far differ from that, as is evident by
those things which they have written concerning Corona Fratrum; which is thus:
In the borders of the kingdom of Aragon toward the kingdom of Castile we
find another kind of Thistle, which grows plentifully there, by common
(...), and in wheat fields, etc. Vide Dod. Pempt. 5. lib. 5. cap. 5.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Concerning the temperature and virtues of these Thistles we can allege
nothing at all.

CHAP. 479. Of the Artichoke.
The Kinds.
THere be three sorts of Artichokes, two tame or of the garden; and one wild,
which the Italian esteems greatly of, as the best to be eaten raw, which he
calls Cardune.

The Description.
1 THe leaves of the great Artichoke, called in Latin Cinara, are broad,
great, long, setwith (...) gashes in the edges, with a deep channel or gutter
along the middle, having no prickles at all, or very few, and they be of a
green ash color: the (...) is above a cubit high, and brings forth on the
top a fruit like a globe, resembling at the first a cone or Pine apple, that is
to (...), made up of many scales; which is when the fruit is great or loosed of
a greenish red color within, and in the lower part full of substance and
white; but when it opens it self there grows 1 Cinara maxima Anglica. The
great red Artichoke.
2 Cinara maxima alba. The great white Artichoke.
3 Cinara syluestris. Wild Artichoke.
also upon the cone a flower all of threads, of a gallant purple tending to a
blew (...). The seed is long, greater and thicker than that of our Ladies
thistle, lying under soft and downy hairs which are contained within the
fruit. The root is thick, and of a mean length.

2 The second great Artichoke differs from the former in the color of the
fruit, otherwise there is little difference, except the fruit hereof dilateth
it self further abroad, and is not so closely compact together, which makes
the difference.

3 The prickly Artichoke, called in Latin Carduus, or Spinosa Cinara,
differs not from the former, save that all the corners of the leaves hereof,
and the stalks of the cone or fruit, are armed with stiff and sharp prickles,
whereupon it bears well the name of Carduus, or Thistle.

The Place.
The Artichoke is to be planted in a (...) and fruitful soil: they do love
water and moist ground. They commit great error who cut away the side or
superfluous leaves that grow by the sides, thinking thereby to increase the
greatness of the fruit, when as in truth they deprive the root from much water
by that means, which should nourish it to the feeding of the fruit; for if you
mark the trough or hollow channel that is in every leaf, it shall appear
very evidently, that the Creator in his secret wisdom did ordain those
furrows, even from the extreme point of the leaf to the ground where it is
fastened to the root, for no other purpose but to guide and lead that water
which falls far off, unto the root; knowing that without such store of water
the whole plant would wither, and the fruit pine away and come to nothing.

The Time.
They are planted for the most part about the Kalends of November, or somewhat
sooner. The plant must be set and dunged with good store of ashes, for that
kind of dung is thought best for planting thereof. Every year the slips must
be torn or slipped off from the body of the root, and these are to be set in
April, which will bear fruit about August following, as Columella, Palladius,
and common experience teaches.

The Names.
The Artichoke is called in Latin Cinara, of Cinis, Ashes, wherewith it loves
to be dunged. Galen calls it in Greek (...), but with k and v in the first
syllable: of some it is called Cactos: it is named in Italian, (...),
Archiocchi: in Spanish, Alcarrhofa: in English, Artichoke: in French,
Artichaux: in Low Dutch, Artichoken: whereupon diverse call it in Latin
Articocalus, and Articoca: in High Dutch, Strobidorn.

The other is named in Latin commonly not only Spinosa cinara, or prickly
Artichoke, but also of Palladius, Carduus: of the Italians, Cardo, and Cardino:
of the Spaniards, Cardos: of the French men, Chardons: Leonhartus Fuchsius and
most writers take it to be Scolymus Dioscoridis; but (...) Dioscoridis has the
leaf of Chameleon or Spina alba, with a stalk full of leaves, and a prickly
head: but neither is Cinara the Artichoke which is without prickles, nor the
Artichok with prickles any such kind of herb; for though the head has
prickles, yet the stalk is not full of leaves, but is many times without
leaves, or else has not past a leaf or two. Cinara does better agree with
that which Theophrastus and Pliny call (...), Cactus, and yet it does not bring
forth stalks from the root creeping along the ground: it has broad leaves
set with prickles; the middle ribs of the leaves, the skin pilled off, are good
to be eaten, and likewise the fruit, the seed and down taken away; and that
which is under is as tender as the brain of the Date tree: which things
Theophrastus and Pliny report of Cactus. That which they write of the stalks,
sent forth immediately from the root upon the ground, which are good to be
eaten, is peradventure the ribs of the leaves: every side taken away (as they
be served up at the table) may be like a stalk, except even in Sicilia, where
they grew only in (...) time. It brings forth both certain stalks that lie
on the ground, and another also standing straight up; but afterward being
removed and brought into Italy or England, it brings forth no more but one
upright: for the soil and clyme do much prevail in altering of plants, as not
only Theophrastus teaches, but also even experience it self declares: and
of Cactus, Theophrastus writes thus; (...) (Cactus) grows only in Sicilia:
it brings forth presently from the root stalks lying along upon the ground,
with a broad and prickly leaf: the stalks being pilled are fit to be eaten,
being somewhat bitter, which may be preserved in brine: it brings forth also
another stalk, which is likewise good to be eaten.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The nails, that is, the white and thick parts which are in the bottom of
the outward scales or Galen teaches in his book of the Faculties of
nourishments. But it is best to eat the Artichoke boiled: the ribs of the
leaves are altogether of an hard substance: they yield to the body a raw and
melancholy juice, and contain in them great store of wind.

It stays the inuoluntarie course of the natural seed either in man or
woman.

Some write that if the buds of young Artichokes be first steeped in wine, and
eaten, they provoke

I find moreover, that the root is good against the rank smell of the
arme-holes, if when the

CHAP. 480. Of Golden Thistles.
The Description.
1 THe stalks of Golden Thistle rise up forthwith from the root, being many,
round, and branched. The leaves are long, of a beautiful green, with deep
gashes on the edges, and set with most sharp prickles: the flowers come (...)
the (...) of the leaves, set in a (...) chaffie knap, very like to Succorie
flowers, but of color as yellow as gold: in their places come up broad flat
and thin seeds, not great, nor wrapped in down: the root is long, a finger
thick, (...), soft, and good to be eaten, wherewith swine are much delighted:
there issues forth of this thistle in what part soever it is cut or broken, a
juice as white as milk.

There is some variety of this Thistle; for it is found much larger about
Montpelier than it is in Spain, with longer branches, but fewer flowers: the
leaves also are spotted or (...) with white like as the milk Thistle: whence
Clusius, whom I here follow, has given two figures thereof; the former by the
name of Scolymus Theophrasti H spanicus; and the other by the title of (...)
Theophrasti Narbonensis. This with white spots (...) saw growing this year with
Mr. (...) at South Lambeth.

1 Carduus Chrysanthemus Hispanicus. The Spanish golden Thistle.
Carduus Chrysanthemus (...). The French golden Thistle.


2 The golden Thistle of Peru, called in the West Indies, (...) del Inferno, a
friend of mine brought it unto me from an Island there called Saint John's
Island, among other seeds. What reason the inhabitants there have to call it
so, it is unto me unknown, unless it be because of his fruit, which does much
resemble a fig in shape and bigness, but so full of sharp and venomous
prickles, that whosoever had one of them in his throat, doubtless it would
send him packing either to heaven or to hell. This plant has a single woody
root as big as a man's thumb, but somewhat long: from which arises a brittle
stalk full of joints or knees, dividing it self into sundry other small
branches, set full of leaves like unto the milk Thistle, but much smaller, and
straked with many white lines or streakes: and at the top of the stalks come
(...) fair and goodly yellow flowers, very like unto the sea Poppy, but more
elegant, and of greater beauty, having in the midst thereof a small knop or
boll, such as is in the middle of our wild Poppy, but full of sharp thorns,
and at the end thereof a stainc or spot of a deep purple: after the yellow
flowers be fallen, this foresaid knop grows by degrees greater and greater,
until it come to full maturitie, which opens it self at the upper end,
showing his seed, which is very black and round like the seeds of mustard. The
whole plant and each part thereof does yield very great abundance of milkie
juice, which is of a golden color, falling and (...) from any part thereof, if
it be cut or bruised the whole plant perishes at the approach of Winter. The
virtues hereof are yet unknown unto me, wherefore I purpose not to set down
any thing thereof by way of conjecture, but shall, God willing, be ready to
declare that which certain knowledge and experience either of mine own or
others, shall make manifest unto me.

The Place.
The golden Thistle is sown in gardens of the Low Countries. Petrus Bellonius
writes, That it grows plentifully in Candy, and also in most places of (...):
Clusius reports that he found it in the fields of Spain, and of the kingdom
of Castile, and about Montpelier, with fewer branches, and of a higher growth.

The Indian Thistle grows in Saint John's Island in the West Indies, and
prospers very well in my garden.

The Time.
They flower from June to the end of August: the seed of the Indian golden
Thistle must be sown when it is ripe, but it (...) not grow up until May next
after.

The Names.
This Thistle is called in Latin Carduus Chrysanthemus: in Greek of
Theophrastus, (...); for those things which he writes of Scolymus in his sixth
and seventh books do wholly agree with this Thistle Chrysanthemus: which are
these; Scolymus, does flower in the Summer solstice, bravely and a long time
together; it has a root that may be eaten both sod and raw, and when it is
broken it yields a milky juice: Gaza names it Carduus. Of this Pliny also
makes mention, lib. 21. ca. 16. Scolymus, says he, differs from those kinds
of Thistles, viz. Acarna, and Atractilis, because the root thereof may be eaten
boiled. Again, (...). 22. Cap. 22. The East Countries use it as a meat: and
he calls it by another name (...) Which thing also Theophrastus seems to
affirm, in his sixth book; for when he reckons up herbs whose leaves are
set with prickles, he adds Scolymus, or Limonia.

Notwithstanding, Pliny makes mention likewise of another Scolymus, which he
affirms to bring sorth a purple (...), and between the middle of the pricks
to wax white quickly, and to fall off with the wind; in his twentieth book,
cap. 23. Which Thistle doubtless does not agree with Carduus Chrysanthemus,
that is, with Theophraslus his Scolymus, and with that which we mentioned
before: so that there be in Pliny two Scolymi; one with a root that may be
eaten, and another with a purple (...), turning into down, and that speedily
waxes white. Scolymus is likewise described by Dioscorides; but this differs
from Scolymus Theophrasti, and it is one of those which Pliny reckons up, as
we will more at large declare hereaster. But let us come again to
Chrysanthemus: This the inhabitants of Candy, keeping the marks of the old
name, do call Ascolymbros: the Italians name it Anconitani Rinci: the Romans,
Spinaborda: the Spaniards, Cardon lechar: and of diverse it is also named
Glycyrrhizon, that is to say, dulcis Radix, or sweet Root: it is called in
English, (...) Thistle: some would have it to be that which (...) in Art
Veterinaria calls Eryngium: but they are deceived; for that Eryngium whereof
Vegetius writes is Eryngium marinum, or sea Huluer, of which we will entreat.

The golden Thistle of India may be called Carduus Chrysanthemus, of his golden
color, adding thereto his native country Indianus, or Peruanus, or the golden
Indian Thistle, or the golden Thistle of Peru: the seed came to my hands by the
name Fique del Inferno: in Latin, Ficus infernalis, the infernal fig, or fig
of hell.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The root and tender leaves of this Scolymus, which are sometimes eaten, are
good for the stomach, Galen teaches.

Pliny says, that the root hereof was commended by Eratosthenes, in the poor
man's supper, and Hefiod and Alcaeus testify; and to take away the stench of
the arme-holes, if an ounce of the root, the pith picked out, be (...) in three
parts of wine, till one part be wasted, and a good draught taken fasting after
a bath, and likewise after meat: which later words Dioscorides likewise (...)
concerning his Scolymus: out of whom Pliny is thought to have borrowed these
things. The plant our Author here describes in the second place, is (...) which
I described and figured (...), pig. 401. by the name of (...) (...). I must
(...), I there should have omitted it, because it is here (...) forth (...) by
our Author, (...) (...) I had a (...) remembrance, and therefore (...) that
time sought his Index by all the names I could remember, but not making it a
(...), I at that time missed thereof; but here (...) it, I have (...) the
history stand as it was, and only omitted the (...) which you may find
before, and something also in the (...) not here delivered.


CHAP. 481. Of white Carline Thistle of Dioscorides.
The Description.
1 THe leaves of Carline are very full of prickles, cut on both edges with a
multitude of deep gashes, and set along the corners with stiff and very
sharp prickles; the middle ribs whereof are sometimes red: the stalk is a
span high or higher, bringing forth for the most part only one head or knap
being full of prickles, on the outward circumference or compass like the
Vrchin husk of a chestnut: and when this opens at the top, there grows
forth a broad flower, made up in the middle like a flat (...), of a great
number of threads, which is compassed about with little long leaves, oftentimes
somewhat white, very seldom red: the seed (...) is slender and narrow, the
root is long; a finger thick, something black, so chinked as (...) it were
split in sunder, sweet of smell, and in taste somewhat bitter.

1 Carlina caulescens magno flore. Tall Carline Thistle.
2 Carlina, seu (...) albus Dioscoridis. The white Carline Thistle of (...)
with the red flower.


2 There is also another hereof without a stalk, with leaves also very full of
prickles, like almost to those of the other, lying flat on the ground on every
side: among which (...) grows forth in the middle a round head or knap, set
with prickles without after the same manner, but greater: the flower whereof in
the middle is of strings, and paled round about with red leaves, and sometimes
with white, in fair and calm weather the flowers both of this and also of the
other lay 3 Carlina (...) minor flore purp. Dwarf Carline Thistle.
themselves wide open, and when the weather is foul and misty, are drawn
close together: the root hereof is long, and sweet of smell, white, sound, not
nicked or splitted as the other.

3 This small purple Carline Thistle has a pretty large root divided often times
at the top into diverse branches, from which rise many green leaves lying spread
upon the ground, deeply cut and set with sharp prickles; in the midst of these
leaves come up sometimes one, but otherwhiles more scaly heads, which carry a
pretty large flower composed of many purple threads, like that of the (...), but
larger, and of a brighter color; these heads grow usually close to the leaves,
yet sometimes they stand upon stalks three or four inches high: when the
flower is past they turn into down, and are carried away with the wind: the
seed is small and grayish. This grows upon Blacke-Heath, upon the chalky hills
about Dartford, and in many such places. It flowers in July and August. Tragus
calls it Chamaeleon albus, vel exiguus; Lobel, Carduus acaulis,
Septentrionalium, and (...) albus, Cordi; Clusius, Carlina minor (...) flore,
and he says in the opinion of some, it seems not unlike to the Chamaeleon
whereof (...) makes mention, lib. 6. cap. 3. Hist. plant.

The Place.
They both grow upon high mountains in desert places, and oftentimes by high
way sides: but that which brings forth a stalk grows every where in
Germany, and is a stranger in England.

The Time.
They flower and seed in July and August, and many times later.

The Names.
The former is called in Latin, Carlina, and Cardopatium; and of diverse,
Carolina, of (...) the first Roman Emperor of that name, whose army (as it is
reported) was in times past through the benefit of this root delivered and
preserved from the plague: it is called in high Dutch, Eberwurtz: in low Dutch,
French, and other languages, as likewise in English, Carline, and Carline
Thistle: it is Dioscorides his Leucacantha the strong and bitter roots show the
same; the faculties also are answerable, as forthwith we will declare:
Leucacantha has also the other names, but they are counterfeit, as among the
Romans Gniacardus; and among the Thuscans, Spina alba, or white Thistle, yet
does it differ from that Thistle which Dioscorides calls Spina alba, of which
he also writting apart, does likewise attribute to both of them their own
proper faculties and operations, and the same differing.

The later writers do also call the other Carlina altera, and Carlina humilis,
or minor, low or little Carline: but they are much deceived who go about to
refer them both to the Chamaeleons; for in Italy, Germany, or France,
Chamaeleones, the Chamaeleons do never grow, as there is one witness for many,
Petrus Bellonius, in his fifth book of Singularities, who sufficiently
declares what difference there is between the Carlines and the Chamaeleons;
which thing shall be made manifest by the description of the Chamaeleons.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The root of Carline, which is chiefly used, is hot in the later end of the
second degree, and dry

Being chewed it helps the toothache; it opens the stoppings of the liver
and spleen.

It provoke urine, brings down the menses, and cures the dropsy.

And it is given to those that have been dry beaten, and fallen from some high
place.

The like operations Dioscorides has concerning Leucacantha: Leucacantha
(says he) has a root

The juice also being drunk is of like virtues.

CHAP. 482. Of wild Carline Thistle.
The Description.
1 THe great wild Carline Thistle rises up with a stalk of a cubit high or
higher, divided into certain branches: the leaves are long, and very full of
prickles in the edges, like those of Carline: the flowers grow also upon a
prickely head, being set with threads in the midst, and paled round about with
a little yellowish leaves: the root is slender, and has a twinging taste.

2 Carolus Clusius describes a certain other also of this kind, with one
only stalk, slender, short, and not above a handful high, with prickly
leaves like those of the other, but lesser, both of them covered with a
certain hoary down: the heads or knaps are for the most part two, they have a
pale down in the midst, and leaves standing round about, being somewhat stiff
and yellow: the root is slender, and of a reddish yellow.

1 Carlina syluestris mayor. The great wild Carline Thistle.
2 Carlina syluestris minor. The little wild Carline Thistle.


The Place.
The great Carline is found in vntoiled and desert places, and oftentimes upon
hills. It grows upon Black Heath, and in many other places of Kent.

The lesser Carline Carolus Clusius writes that he found growing in dry stony
and desert places, about (...) a city of Spain.

The Time.
They flower and flourish in June and July.

The Names.
It is commonly called in Latin, and that not unfitly, Carlina syluestris; for
it is like to Carline in flowers, and is not very unlike in leaves. And that
this is (...), it is so much the harder to affirm, by how much the briefer
Theophrastus has written hereof; for he says that this is like bastard
saffron, of a yellow color and fat juice: and Acorna differs from Acarna; for
Acarna, as Hesychius says, is the Bay tree; but Acorna is a prickly plant.

The Temperature and Virtues.
It is hot, especially in the root, the twinging taste thereof does declare;
but seeing it is of no use, the other faculties be unsearched out.

CHAP. 483. Of Chamaeleon Thistle.
The Kinds.
THere be two Chamaeleons, and both black: the virtues of their roots to
differ, and the roots themselves do differ in kind, as Theophrastus declares.

The figure which was sormerly in the first place did not agree with the
history (which was taken out of (...)) though (...). gave it for ( (...) (...)
ger; for it is the (...) (...), etc. of Lobel. You shall find it hereafter
with the (...) (...).
1 Chamaeleon niger. The black Chamaeleon Thistle.
2 Chamaeleon niger Salmanticensis. The Spanish black Chamaeleon.


The Description.
1 THe leaves of black Chamaeleon are lesser and slenderer than those of the
prickely Artichoke, and sprinkled with red spots: the stalk is a cubit high,
a finger thick, and somewhat red: it bears a tufted rundle, in which are
slender prickely flowers of a blew color like the Hyacinth. The root is
thick, black without, of a close substance, sometimes eaten away, which being
cut is of a yellowish color within, and being chewed it bites the tongue.

2 This black Chamaeleon has many leaves, long and narrow, very full of
prickles, of a light green, in a manner white: the stalk is chamfered, a foot
high, and divided into branches, on the tops whereof stand purple flowers
growing forth of prickly heads: the root is black, and sweet in taste. This is
described by Clusius in his Spanish Observations, by the name of Chamaeleon
Salmanticensis, of the place wherein he found it: for he says that this
grows plentifully in the territory of Salmantica a city in Spain: but it is
very manifest that this is not black Chamaeleon, neither does Clusius affirm
it.

The Place.
It is very common, says Bellonius, in Lemnos, where it bears a flower of so
gallant a blew, as that it seems to contend with the sky in beauty; and
that the flower of Blew-Bottle being of this color, seems in comparison of it
to be but pale. It grows also in the fields near Abydum, and hard by the
rivers of Hellespont, and in Heraclea in Thracia.

Chamaeleon Salmanticensis grows plentifully in the territory of Salmantica
a city in Spain.

The Time.
They flower and flourish when the other Thistles do.

The Names.
The black Chamaeleon is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Chamaeleon niger:
of the Romans, Carduus niger, and Vernilago: of some, Crocodilion: in English,
the Chamaeleon Thistle, or the Thistle that changes it self into many shapes
and colors.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The root hereof, as Galen says, contains in it a deadly quality: it is
also by Nicander numbered Dioscorides, lib. 6. and by Paulus Aegineta: and
therefore it is used only outwardly, as for scabs, morphewes, tetters, and to
be brief, for all such things as stand in need of clensing: moreover, it is
mixed with such things as do dissolve and mollific, as Galen says.

CHAP. 484. Of Sea Holly.
The Kinds.
DIoscorides makes mention only of one sea Holly: Pliny, lib. 22. cap. 7.
seems to acknowledge two, one growing in rough places, another by the fea
side. The Physicians after them have observed more.

The Description.
1 SEa Holly has broad leaves almost like to Mallow leaves, but cornered in
the edges, and set round about with hard prickles, fat, of a bluish white, and
of an aromaticall or spicie taste: the stalk is thick, above a cubit high,
now and then somewhat red below: it breaks forth on the tops into prickly or
round heads or knops, of the bigness of a Wall-nut, held in for the most part
with six prickely leaves, compassing the top of the stalk round about: which
leaves as well as the heads are of a glistring blew: the flowers forth of the
heads are likewise blew, with white threads in the midst: the root is of the
bigness of a man's finger, very long, and so long, as that it cannot be all
plucked up, unless very seldom; set here and therewith knots, and of taste
sweet and pleasant.

2 The leaves of the second sea Holly are diversely cut into sundry parcels,
being all full of prickles along the edges: the stalk is divided into many
branches, and brings sorth prickly heads, but lesser than those of the other:
from which there also grow forth blew flowers, seldom yellow: there stand
likewise under every one of these, six rough and prickly leaves like those of
the other, but thinner and smaller: the root hereof is also long, black
without, white within, a finger thick, of taste and smell like that of the
other, as be also the leaves, which are likewise of an aromaticall or spicie
taste, which being new sprung up, and as yet tender, be also good to be eaten.

1 Eryngium marinum. Sea Holly.
2 Eryngium mediterraneum. Leuant sea Holly.


The Place.
Eryngium marinum grows by the sea side upon the baich and stony ground: I
found it growing plentifully at Whitstable in Kent, at Rye and Winchelsea in
Sussex, and in Essex at Landamer lading, at Harwich, and upon Langtree point,
on the other side of the water, from whence I have brought plants for my garden.

Eryngium Campestre grows upon the shores of the Mediterranean sea, and in my
garden likewise.

The Time.
Both of them do flower after the Summer solstice, and in July.

The Names.
This Thistle is called in Greek (...): and likewise in Latin Eryngium: and
of Pliny also Erynge: in shops, Eringus; in English, Sea Holly, sea Holme, or
sea Huluer.

The first is called in Latin Eryngium marinum: in Low Dutch every where,
Cryus distill, Eindeloos, Meerwortele: in English, sea Holly.

The second is named of Pliny, lib. 22. cap. 8. Centum capita, or hundred
headed Thistle: in highDutch, (...), Branchendistell, Radendistel: in Spanish,
Cardo corredor: in Italian, Eringio, and Iringo: this is syrnamed Campestre, or
Champion sea Holly, that it may differ from the other.

The Temperature.
The roots of them both are hot, and that in a mean; and a little dry also,
with a thinness of substance, as Galen testifies.

The Virtues.
The roots of sea Holly boiled in wine and drunken are good for them that are
troubled with

The roots themselves have the same property if they be eaten, and are good
for those that be (...)-sick,

The roots condited or preserved with sugar, as hereafter follows, are
exceeding good to be given

The manner to condite Eryngos:

Refine sugar fit for the purpose, and take a pound of it, the white of an
egg, and a pint of clear

These your roots being washed and picked, must be boiled in fair water by the
space of four

A certain man affirms, says Aetius, that by the continual use of Sea
Holly, he never afterward

It is drunk, says Dioscorides, with Carrot seed against very many
infirmities, in the weight of a

The juice of the leaves pressed forth with wine is a remedy for those that
are troubled with the

They report that the herb Sea Holly, if one Goat take it into her mouth, it
causes her first to Plutarch writes.

CHAP. 485. Of bastard Sea Hollies.
The Description.
THis Eryngium which Dodonaeus in his last edition calls Eryngium planum; and
Pena more fitly and truly, Eryngium Alpinum caeruleum, has stalks a cubite
and a half high, having spaces (...) every joint: the lower leaves are greater
and broader, and notched about the edges, but those above are lesser,
compassing or enuironing each joint star-fashion, beset with prickles which are
soft and tender, not much hurtful to the hands of such as touch them; the knobs
or heads are also prickley, and in color blew. The root is bunchie or knottie,
like that of Helenium, that is, Elecampane, black without, and white within,
and like the Eringes in sweetness and taste.

2 The second bastard Sea Holly, whose picture is set forth in Dodonaeus his
last Edition veric gallantly, being also a kind of Thistle, has leaves like
unto the former Erynges, but broader next the roots than those which grow next
the stalks, somewhat long, greenish, soft, and not prickley, but lightly
creuised or notched about the edges, greater than Quince leaves. The stalks
grow more than a cubit high; on the tops whereof there hang downwards five or
six knobs or heads, in color and flowers like the other; having three or four
whitish roots of a foot long.

3 The third kind of bastard Eryngium has his first leaves (which grow next
the ground) great, broad, and soft, growing as it were in a rundle about the
root. The stalk is (...) and slender, divided into some branches, which bear
many little leaves, turning or standing many ways, which 1 Eryngium caeruleum.
Blew Sea Holly.
2 Eryngium spurium (...) (...). Bastard Sea Holly.
3 Eryngium (...) Clusij. Dwarf Sea Holly.
4 Eryngium Montanum. Mountain Sea Holly.
5 Eryngium pusillum planum. Small smooth Sea Holly.
be also slender, prickly, and set about the stalks star-fashion. The knops or
heads growing at the tops of the branches are round and prickly, (...) little
blew flowers and leaves, which compass them about: the root is slender, and
(...) but one year.

4 The fourth kind of bastard Sea Holly, which (...) calls Eryngium (...)
(...), and is the fourth according to (...) his account, is like to the
Erynges, not in (...) but in taste: this bears a very small and slender
stalk, of a mean height, whereupon do grow three or four leaves, and seldom
five, made of (...) leaves set upon a midd'e rib, narrow, long, hard, and of a
dark green (...), dented on both edges of the leaf like a saw: the (...) is
a cubit high, iointed or kneed, and dividing it self into many branches, on
the tops whereof are round tufts or vmbels, wherein are contained the flowers,
and after they be vaded, the seeds, which are small, somewhat long, well
smelling, and sharp in taste: the (...) is white and long, not a finger
thick, in taste sweet, but afterward somewhat (...), and in sent and (...)
not unpleasant: when the root is dried, (...) may be crumbled in pieces, and
therefore quickly (...).

5 This is a low plant presently from the root divided into sundry branches,
slender, round and lying on the ground: at each joint grow leaves without any
certain order, broad toward their ends, and narrower at their setting (...),
(...) about their edges: those next the root were some inch broad, and two or
more long, of a yellowish green color: the stalks are parted into sundry
branches, and at each joint have little leaves, and rough and green heads,
with (...) flowers in them: the roots creep, and are somewhat like those of
Asparagus. This neither Clusius nor Lobel found wild; but it grew in the
garden of John (...) of Tourney, a learned Apothecarie, very skillful in the
knowledge of plants: whereupon they both called it Eryngium pusillum planum
Moutoni.

The Place.
These kinds of sea Holly are strangers in England: we have the first and
second in our London gardens.

The Time.
They flower and flourish when the Thistles do.

The Names.
These plants be Eryngia spuria, or bastard Sea Hollies, and are lately
observed: and therefore they have no old names.

The first may be called in Latin Eryngium Borussicum, or Non spinosum: Sea
Hollie without prickles.

The second is called by Matthiolus, Eryngium planum, or flat Sea Holly: others
had rather name it Alpinum Eryngium, or Sea Holly of the Alps.

The third is rightly called Eryngium pumilum, little Sea Huluer.

(...) makes the fourth to be Crithmum quartum, or the fourth kind of
Sampier: and others, as Dodonaeus and Lobel, have made it a kind of Sea Huluer.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Touching the faculties hereof we have nothing to set down, seeeing they have
as yet no use in medicine, nor used to be eaten. But yet that they be hot, the
very taste does declare.

CHAP. 486. Of Star-Thistle.
The Description.
1 THe Star-Thistle, called Carduus stellatus, has many soft frizled leaves,
deeply cut or gasht, altogether without prickles: among which rises up a
stalk, dividing it self into many other branches, growing two foot high; on
the tops whereof are small knops or heads like the other Thistles, armed round
about with many sharp prickles, fashioned like a blasing star, which at the
beginning are of a purple color, but afterward of a pale bleak or whitish
color: the seed is small, flat, and round; the root is long, and brown
without.

1 Carduus stellatus. The Star-Thistle.
There were (...) three figure: and descriptions in this chapter, and all of
them out of the 14 and 15. (...). of the (...) book, and (...) (...) (...)
(...); but the first and second (...) (...) both of the first described, the
third (...) was of the (...) (...) of (...) (...) (...) not what to (...) of,
but I think it was drawn for, and (if the (...) (...) of the roots were
somewhat large) (...) (...) well (...) for the (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) I
drew it from the plant I will hereafter give you: the third description was of
(...) (...) (...), described in the (...) (...) (...) the 249. Chap. page 727.
2 Carduus Solstitialis. Saint Barnabies Thistle.


2 Saint Barnabies Thistle is another kind of Star-Thistle; notwithstanding it
has prickles no where faue in the head only, and the prickles of it stand
forth in manner of a star: the stalks are two cubits high, parted into diverse
branches softer than are those of star-Thistle, which stalks have velmes or
thin skins cleaving unto them all in length, by which they seem to be
foure-square: the leaves are somewhat long, set with deep gashes on the edges:
the flowers are yellow, and consist of threads: the seed is little; the root
long and slender.

The Place.
The two first do grow upon barren places near unto cities and towns, almost
every where.

The Time.
They flower and flourish especially in July and August.

The Names.
The first is called in Latin, Stellaria; as also Carduus Stellatus, and
likewise Carduus Calcitrapa; but they are deceived, who take it to be Eryngium,
or Sea-(...), or any kind thereof. Matthiolus says that it is called in
Italian Calcatrippa: in high Dutch, Dallen distel: in low Dutch, Sterre
distell: in French, (...): in English, Star-Thistle.

S. Barnabies Thistle is called in Latin (...) spina, because it floureth in
the Summer Solstice, as Gesner says, or rather because after the Solstice the
prickles thereof be sharpest: of Guillandinus, Eryngium, but not properly, and
Stellaria (...) Augerij, who with good success gave it against the stone,
dropsies, green sickness, and quotidian fevers. It is called in English as
above said, Saint Barnabies Thistle.

The Temperature.
The Star-Thistle is of a hot nature.

The Virtues.
The seed is commended against the strangurie: it is reported to drive forth
the stone, if it be

Baptista Sardus (...), that the distilled water of this Thistle is a remedy
for those that are infected

That it cleanses the blood from corrupt and putrified humors.

That it is given with good success against intermitting fevers; whether they
be quotidian or

As touching the faculties of Saint Barnabies Thistle, which are as yet not
found out, we have

CHAP. 487 Of Teasels.
The Kinds.
OVrage has set down two kinds of Teasels: the tame, and the wild. These
differ not save only in the husbanding; sor all things that are planted and
manured do more (...), and become for the most part fitter for man's use.

1 Dipsacus (...). Garden Teasell.
2 Dipsacus syluestris. Wild Teasell.


3 Dipsacus minor, sive Virga pastoris. Sheepheards-rod.


The Description.
1 GArden Teasel is also of the number of the Thistles, it brings (...) a
stalk that is (...), very long, iointed, and full of prickles: the leaves grow
sorth of the ioints by couples, not only opposite (...) set one right against
another, but also compassing the stalk about, and fastened together; and so
fastened, that they hold dew and rain water in manner of a little basin: these
be long, of a light green color, and like to those of Lettice, but full of
prickles in the edges, and have on the outside all along the ridge stiffer
prickles: on the tops of the stalks stand heads with sharp prickles like
those of the Hedgehog, and crooking backward at the point like hooks: out of
which heads grow little flowers: The seed is like Fennel seed, and in taste
bitter: the heads wax white when they grow old, and there are found in the
midst of them when they are cut, certain little magots: the root is white, and
of a (...) length.

2 The second kind of Teasell which is also a kind of Thistle, is very like
unto the sormer, but his leaves are smaller and narrower: his sloures of a
purple color, and the hooks of the Teasell nothing so hard or sharp as the
other, nor good for any use in dressing of cloth.

3 There is another kind of Teasell, being a wild kind thereof, and accounted
among these Thistles, growing higher than the rest of his kinds; but his
knobbed heads are no bigger than a Nutmeg, in all other things else they are
like to the other wild kinds. This has the lower leaves deeply cut in with
one gash on each side at the bottom of the leaf, which little ears are
omitted in the figure: the leaves also are less than the former, and narrower
at the setting on, and hold no water as the two former do: the whole plant is
also much less.

The Place.
The first called the tame Teasell is sown in this country in gardens, to
serve the use of Fullers and Clothworkers.

The second kind grows in moist places by brooks, rivers, and such like
places.

The third I found growing in moist places in the high way leading from
Braintree to Henningham castle in Essex, and not in any other place except here
and there a plant upon the high way from Much-Dunmow to London. I sound it
growing in great plenty at Edgecombe by Croyden, close by the gate of the
house of my much honored friend Sir John Tunstall.

The Time.
These flower for the most part in June and July.

The Names.
Teasell is called in Greek (...), and likewise in Latin, Dipsacus, Labrum
Veneris, and Carduus Veneris: it is termed Labrum Veneris, and Lauer Lauacrum,
of the form of the leaves made up in fashion of a basin, which is never
without water: they commonly call it Virga pastoris minor, and Carduus
fullonum: in high Dutch, Karden Distell: in low Dutch, Caerden: in Spanish,
Cardencha and Cardo (...): in Italian, Dissaco, and Cardo: in French, Chardon
de foullon, Verge a bergier: in English, Teasell, Card Teasell, and Venus
basin.

The third is thought to be Galedragon Plinij: of which he has written in his
27. book the tenth Chapter.

The Temperature.
The roots of these plants are dry in the second degree, and have a certain
clensing faculty.

The Virtues.
There is small use of Teasell in medicines: the heads (as we have said) are
used to dress woollen

Dioscorides writes, that the root being boiled in wine, and stamped till it
is come to the substance

It is needless here to allege those things that are added touching the
little worms or magots Pliny reports of Galedragon: for they are nothing
else but most vain and trifling toies, as my self have proved a little besore
the impression hereof, having a most (...) ague, and of long continuance:
notwithstanding Physic charms, these worms hanged about my neck, spiders put
into a walnut shell, and diverse such foolish toies that I was constrained to
take by fantastic peoples procurement; notwithstanding I say, my help came
from God himselse, for these medicines and all other such things did me no good
at all. The (...) which formerly was put into the second place, was of the
(...) secundus of (...), which (...) from (...) common one, in (...) the (...)
are deeply divided, or cut in on their edges.


CHAP. 488. Of Bastard Saffron.
1 Carthamus sieve Cnicus. Bastard Saffron.
The figure formerly was of the (...) (...).
2 Cnicus alter caeruleus. Blew floured Bastard Saffron.


The Description.
1 CNicus, called also bastard Saffron, which may very well be reckoned among
the Thistles, rises up with a stalk of a cubite and a (...) high, straight,
smooth, round, hard, and woody, and branched at the top: it is defended with
long leaves, something broad, sharp pointed; and with prickles in the edges:
from the tops of the stalks stand out little heads or knops of the bigness of
an Olive or bigger, set with many sharp pointed and prickly scales: out of
which come forth flowers like threads, closely compact, of a deep yellow
shining color, drawing near to the color of Saffron: under them are long
seeds, smooth, white, somewhat cornered, bigger than a Barley corn, the husk
whereof is something hard, the inner pulpe or substance is fat, white, sweet in
taste: the root slender and unprofitable.

2 There is also another kind of Bastard Saffron, that may very well be
numbered amongst the kinds of Thistles, and is very like unto the former,
saving that his flockie or threddie flowers, are of a blew color: the root is
thicker, and the whole plant is altogether more sharp in prickles: the stalks
also are more crested and hairie.

The Place.
It is sown in diverse places of Italy, Spain, and France, both in gardens and
in fields: Pliny, lib. 25. cap. 15. says, that in the reign of Vespasian this
was not known in Italy; being in Egypt only of good account, and that they
used to make oil of it, and not meat.

The Time.
The flowers are perfected in July and August: the root after the seed is ripe,
the same year it is sown withers away.

The Names.
It is called in Greek (...): in Latin also Cnicus, or Cnecus: in shops,
Cartamus, or Carthamum: of diverse, Crocus hortensis, and Crocus Saracenicus: in
Italian, Zaffarano Saracinesco, and Zaffarano saluatico: in Spanish, Alasor,
and Semente de papagaios: in high Dutch, Widen Zaffran: in French, Safran
(...): in English, Bastard Saffron: of some, Mock Saffron, and Saffron D'orte,
as though you should say Saffron de horte, or of the garden. Theophrastus and
Pliny call it Cnecus vrbana, and (...), or tame and garden bastard Saffron,
that it may differ from Atractilis, which they make to be a kind of Cnicus
syluestris, or wild Bastard Saffron, but rather a (...) of the Holy Thistle.

The Temperature.
We use says Galen, the seed only for purgations: it is hot, and that in the
first degree, as Mesues writes.

The Virtues.
The juice of the seed of bastard Saffron bruised and strained into honied
water or the broth of a

The seed used as aforesaid, and strained into milk, causes it to curdle and
yield much cruds, and

The flowers drunk with honied water open the liver, and are good against the
iaundice: and the

The seed is very hurtful to the stomach, causing desire to vomit, and is of
hard slow digestion,

Put to the same seed things comfortable to the stomach, as Annise seed,
Galingale, or Mastick, (...), and it shall not hurt the stomach at all, and
the operation thereof shall be the more quick and speedy.

Of the inward pulpe or substance hereof is made a most famous and excellent
composition to Diachartamon, a most singular and effectual purgation for those
t hat have the dropsy.

The perfect description hereof is extant in Guido the Surgion, in his first
Doctrine, and the sixth

We have not read, or had in use that Bastard Saffron with the blew flower, and
therefore can say

CHAP. 489. Of Wild Bastard Saffron.
The Description.
1 ATractylis, otherwise called wild Bastard Saffron, brings forth a
straight and firm stalk, very fragile or brittle, divided at the top into
certain branches: it has long iagged leaves set with prickles: the heads on
the tops of the branchesare very full of sharp prickles: out of which grow
flowers all of threads, like those of bastard Saffron, but they are of a light
yellow color, and sometimes purple: the seed is somewhat great, brown, and
bitter, otherwise like that of bastard Saffron: the root is of a mean bigness.

1 (...). Wild Bastard Thistle.
2 Carduus Benedictus. The blessed Thistle.


2 The stalks of Carduus Benedictus, or Blessed Thistle, are round, rough, and
pliable, and being parted into diverse branches, do lic flat on the ground: the
leaves are iagged round about, and full of harmless prickles in the edges: the
heads on the tops of the stalks are set with prickles, and (...) with sharp
prickling leaves, out of which stands a yellow flower: the seed is long, and
set with hairs at the top like a beard, the root is white, and parted into
strings: the whole herb, leaves and stalks, and also the heads, are covered
with a soft and thin down.

The Place.
Atractylis grows in Candie, and in diverse provinces and Islands of Greece,
and also in Languedocke: and is an herb growing in our English gardens.

(...) (...) is found every where in Lemnos, an Island of the Midland Sea, in
Champion grounds, as (...) Bellonius testifies: it is diligently cherished in
Gardens in these Northern parts.

The Time.
Atractylis is very late before it floureth and seedeth.

Carduus (...) floureth in July and August, at which time it is especially to
be gathered for Physic matters.

The Names.
(...) is called in Greek (...) of the Latins likewise, (...), and Cnicus
sylue stris; and because women in the old time were wont to use the stiff
stalk thereof pro fuso aut colo, for a spindle or a distaffe, it is named Fusus
agrestis, and Colus Rustica; which thing Petrus Bellonius reports the women
in Greece do also even at this day; who call Atrastylis by a corrupt name
Ardactyla: diverse of the later herbarists name it Syluestris Carthamus: that is
to say in low Dutch, Wilden Carthamus: and in English, wild Bastard Saffron:
or Spindle Thistle.

Blessed Thistle is called in Latin every where Carduus Benedictus, and in
shops by a compound word, Cardo-benedictus: it is most plain, that it is
Species (...), or a kind of will de (...) Saffron: it is called Atractylis
hirsutior, hairie wild bastard Saffron: (...) (...) names it (...) supinus:
it is called in high Dutch, Beseegnete distell, Kardo Benedict: the later (...)
whereos is known to the low Country men: in Spanish it is called Cardo
Sancto: in French, Chardon (...), or (...): in the Isle Lemnos, Garderacantha:
in English, Blessed Thistle, but more commonly by the Latin name Carduus
Benedictus.

The Temperature.
Wild bastard Saffron does dry and moderately digest, as Galen witnesses.

As Carduus Benedictus is bitter, so is it also hot and dry in the second
degree, and withal ciensing and opening.

The Virtues.
The tops, seed, and leaves of Atractylis, says Dioscorides, being beaten and
drunk with pepper and

Blessed Thistle taken in meat or drink, is good for the swimming and
giddiness of the head, it

The same boiled in wine and drunk hot, heals the griping pains of the
belly, kills and (...)

The juice of the said Carduus is singular good against all poison, as Hierome
Bocke witnesses, in (...) Camerarius of Noremberg.

The powder of the leaves ministered in the quantity of half a dram, is very
good against the pestilence,

The green herb pounded and laid to, is good against all hot swellings, as
Erysipelas, plague sores,

The distilled water thereof is of less virtue.

It is reported that it likewise cures stubborn and rebellious ulcers, if the
decoction be taken Arnoldus de Villanoua reports, that if it be stamped with
Barrows grease to the form of an unguent, adding thereto a little wheat flower,
it does the same, being applied twice a day.

The herb also is good being stamped and applied, and so is the juice thereof.

The extraction of the leaves drawn according to Art, is excellent good
against the French disease, Camerarius.

The same Author reports, that the distilled water taken with the water of
Louage, and Dodder,

CHAP. 490. Of Thistle upon Thistle, and diverse other Wild Thistles.
The Description.
1 AMong all the Thorns and Thistles, this is most full of prickles; the
stalks thereof are very long, and seem to be cornered by reason of certain
thin skins growing to them, being sent down forth of the leaves: the leaves
are set round about with many deep gashes, being very full of prickles as well
as the stalks: the heads are very thick set in every place with stiff
prickles, and consist of a multitude of scales; out of which grow purple
flowers, as they do out of other Thistles, seldom white: the root is almost
straight, but it grows not deep.

2 To this also may be referred that which Lobel writes to be named of the
Italians Leo, and Carduus ferox, sor it is so called of the wonderful sharp
and stiff prickles, wherewith the whole plant abounds. the stalk thereof is
short, scarce a handful high: the flower grows forth of a prickly head, and
is of a pale yellow color, like that of wild bastard Saffron, and it is also
environed and set round about on every side with long hard thorns and prickles.

3 The third grows seldom above a cubite or two foot high: it brings forth
many round stalks, (...) into diverse branches; the leaves are like those of
white Cotton Thistle, but lesser, and blacker, and not covered with down or
Cotton: upon the tops of the stalks grow little heads

1 Polyacanthos. Thistle upon Thistle.
2 Carduus ferox. The cruel Thistle.
3 Carduus Asininus sive Onopyxes. The Asses Thistle, or Asses box.
4 Carduus (...) viarum. The Way Thistle.
like Hedge-hogs; out of which spring gallant purple flowers, that at length
are turned into down, leaving seeds behind them like those of the other
Thistles: the root consists of many small strings.

4 The fourth rises up with an higher stalk, now and then a yard long, round,
and not so full of branches nor leaves, which are sharp and full of prickles,
but lesser and narrower: the heads be also lesser, longer, and not so full of
stiff prickles: the flowers are of a white color, and vanish into down: the
root is black, and of a foot long.

5 This wild Thistle which grows in the fields about Cambridge, has an
upright stalk, whereon do grow broad prickley leaves: the flowers grow on the
tops of the branches, consisting of a flockie down, of a white color tending
to purple, of a most pleasant sweet smell, (...) with the savor of musk: the
root is small, and perishes at the approach of Winter. I had no figure directly
fitting this; wherefore I put that of Dodonaeus his Onopordon, which may well
serve for it, if the leaves were narrower, and more divided.

5 Carduus Muscatus. The musked Thistle.
6 Carduus lanceatus. The Spear Thistle.


6 The Spear Thistle has an upright stalk, garnished with a skinnie
membrane, full of most sharp prickles: whereon do grow very long leaves,
divided into diverse parts with sharp prickles; the point of the leaves are as
the point of a spear, whereof it took his name: the flowers growon the tops
of the branches, set in a scaly prickly head, like unto the heads of Knapweed
in form, consisting of many threads of a purple color: the root consists of
many tough strings.

7 Theophrastus his fish Thistle called Acarna, which was brought from Illyria
to Venice, by the learned Valerandus Donrez, described by Theophrastus, has
horrible sharp yellow prickles, set upon his green indented leaves, which are
covered on the back side with an hoarie down (as all the rest of the plant)
having a stalk of a cubit and a half high, and at the top certain scaly
knops containing yellow thrummie flowers, armed or fenced with horrible sharp
prickles: the root is long and threddie.

8 The other kind of fish Thistle, being also another Acarna of Valerandus
description, has long and large leaves, set full of sharp prickles, as though
it were set full of pins: all the whole plant is covered with a certain
hoarinesse, like the former: there arises up a stalk nine inches long, yea in
some fertile grounds a cubite high, bearing the flower of Carduus benedictus,
standing thick together, but lesser.

7 Acarna Theophrasti. Theophrastus his fish Thistle.
8 Acarna Valerandi Donrez, Donrez his fish Thistle.
9 Picnomos. The thick or bush headed Thistle.


9 This Thistle in the opinion of (...), whereto I much incline, is the same
with the former. The root is small, the leaves long, welting the stalks at
their setting on, and armed on the edges with sharp prickles: the stalks lie
trailing on the ground like those of the starThistle, so set with prickles,
that one knows not where to take hold thereof: it has many closely compact
vmbels, consisting of pale yellowish little flowers like those of Groundswell:
the seed is like that of Carthamus, small and chaffie. Pena and Lobel call this
Picnomos Cretae Salonensis, of a place in Province where they first found it,
called the Crau. being not far from the city Salon. Tabernamontanus set it
forth for Chamaeleon niger, and our Author formerly gave the figure hereof by
the same title, though his history belonged to another, as I have formerly
noted.

The Time.
The two first grow on diverse banks not far from mount Apennine, and
sometimes in Italy, but yet seldom.

The way Thistles grow every where by highwaies sides and common paths in great
plenty.

The places of the rest baue been sufficiently spoken of in their descriptions.

The Time.
These kinds of Thistles do flower from the beginning of June until the end
of September.

The Names.
These Thistles comprehended in this present chapter are by one general name
called in Latin Cardui syluestres, or wild Thistles; and that which is the
second in order is named (...): but not that Scolymus which Theophr. declares
to yield a milky juice (of which we have written before) but one of those
which Pliny in his twentieth book, cap. 23. describes: of some they are taken
for kinds of Chamaeleon: their several titles do set forth their several
Latin names, and also the English.

There was formerly much confusion in this chapter, both in the figures and
history, which I will here endeavor to amend, and give as much light as I
can, to the obscurity of our Author and some others; to which end I have made
choice of the names as the fittest place.

1 This description was taken out of Dodonaeus, and the title also of Onopordon
which was formerly put over the figure, and they belong to the Thistle our
Author before described by the name of Acanthium purp. Illyricum, cap. 476. I
have therefore changed the title, yet let the description stand, for it
reasonable well agrees with the figure which is of the Carduus (...) vulgaris
(...) Lobel, and Polyacantha Theophrasti of Tabern. Of this Thistle I observe
three kinds: the first is a Thistle some two cubits and a half high, with
many slender stalks and branches exceeding (...), having commonly five prickly
welts running a ongst the stalks: the leaves on the upper (...) as also the
stalks are of a reasonable fresh green color, but the vnderside of the leaf
is somewhat whitish: the heads consist of sundry hairy green threads which look
like prickles, but they (...) weak, and not prickly: the flower is of the
bigness, and of the like color and shape as the common Knapweed, yet somewhat
(...): it grows on ditch sides, and flowers in July. This I take to be the
(...) Gasae (...) the (...) page 3 4. but not that which Lobel figures for it
in his (...). This is that which Tabernamontanus figures for Polyacantha, and
our Author gave his figure in this place. The second of these I take to be that
which Lobel has figured for Polyacantha, and (...) for Carduus syl. 3. (which
figure we here give you) and in the Hist. Lugd. page 1473. it is both figured
and described by the name of Polyacanthos Theophrasti. In the figure there is
little difference: in the things themselves this; the stalks of this are as
high as those of the last, but slenderer, with fewer and straighter branches,
and commonly edged with four large welts, which have fewer, yet longer
prickles than those of the former: the leaves and stalks of this are of a
grayish or whitish color: the heads are longish, but much smaller than those
of the former, and they seldom open or spread abroad their flowers, but only
show the tops of diverse reddish threads of a feint color. This grows as
frequently as the former, and commonly in the same places. The third, which I
think may fitly be referred unto these, grows on wet heaths and such like
places, having a stalk sometimes four or five cubits high, growing straight
up, with few branches, and those short ones: the flowers are of an indifferent
bigness, and commonly purple, yet sometimes white. I think this may be the
Onopyxos alter Lugdunens. or the Carduus palustris described in Bauhinus his
(...), page 156.

2 The second, which is a stranger with us, is the Phoenix, Leo and Carduus
ferox of Lobel and Dod. Bauhine hoth referred it to Acarna, calling it Acarna
minor caul non folioso.

3 The third description was also out of Dodonaeus, being of his Carduus
syluestris primus, or the Onopyxos Dodonaei of the Hist. Lugd. The figures
formerly both in the third and fourth place of this chapter were of the
Acanthium Illyricum of Lobel; or the Onopordon of Dodonaeus, formerly mentioned.

4 This description also was out of Dodonaeus, being of his Carduus syluestris
alter, agreeing in all things but the color of the flowers, which should be
purple. Lobel in his Observations describes the same Thistle by the name of
Carduus vulgatissimus viarum: but both he and Dodon. give the figure of Carlina
syluestris for it: but neither the flowers nor the heads of that agree with
that description. I judge this to be the Thistle that Fabius Columna has set
forth for the Ceanothos of Theophrastus; and Tabern. for Carduus arvensis: and
our Author, though unfitly, gave it in the next place for Carduus muscatus.

5 The Muske-Thistle I have seen growing about Deptford, and (as far as my
memory serves me) it is very like to the third here described: it grows better
than a cubit high, with reasonable large leaves, and also heads which are a
little soft or downy, large, with purple flowers: the heads before the flowers
open smell strong of musk. I have found no mention of this but only in (...),
de Collectione in part, where he has these words; Carduus arvensis mayor
purpureo flore (qui flore (...) nato Moschum olebat) floret Iulio. Our Author
formerly gave an unfit figure for this, as I formerly noted.

There is sufficient of the rest in their titles and descriptions.

The Temperature and Virtues.
These wild Thistles (according to Galen) are hot and dry in the second degree,
and that through

Dioscorides says, that the root of the common Thistle applied plaisterwise
corrects the silthy

And that it works the same effect if it be boiled in wine and drunk, and
that it expels plenty

The same Author affirms also, that the herb being as yet green and tender
is used to be eaten

This being stamped before the flower appears, says Pliny, and the juice
pressed forth, causes

The root of any of the wild Thistles being boiled in water and drunk, is
reported to make

It strengthens the stomach; and it is reported (if we believe it) that the
same is also good for Chereas of Athens has written, and (...), who is thought
to write most diligently of Thistles.

This Thistle being chewed is good against stinking breath. Thus far Pliny,
in his twentieth cap. 23.

CHAP. 491. Of the Melon or Hedgehog Thistle.
Melocarduus Echinatus Penae and Lob. The Hedgehog Thistle.


The Description.
WHo can but marvel at the rare and singular workmanship which the Lord God
almighty has showed in this Thistle, called by the name Echino-Melocactos, or
Melo-carduus Echinatus? This knobby or bunchy mass or lump is strangely
compact and context together, containing in it sundry shapes and forms,
participating of a Pepon or Melon, and a Thistle, both being incorporate in one
body; which is made after the form of a cock of hay, broad and flat below, but
sharp toward the top, as big as a man's body from the belly upward: on the
outside hereof are fourteen hard ribs, descending from the crown to the
lowest part, like the bunchy or out swelling rib of a Melon standing out, and
chanelled between: at the top or crown of the plant issues forth a fine
silken cotton, wherewith it is full fraught; within which cotton or flocks lie
hid certain small sheaths or cods, sharp at the point, and of a deep sanguine
color, answering the cods of Capsicum or Indian Pepper, not in show only, but
in color, but the cods are somewhat smaller. The furrowed or chanelled ribs on
the outside are garnished or rather armed with many prickly stars, standing in
a compass like sharp crooked horns or hooks, each star consisting of ten or
twelve pricks, wherewith the outward bark or pilling is guarded, so that
without hurt to the fingers it cannot be touched: this rind is hard, thick,
and like unto Aloes, of the color of the Cucumber: the flesh or inner pulpe is
white, fat, waterish, of taste sour, unsavory, and cooling, much like unto the
meat of a raw Melon or Pompion. This plant grows without leaf or stalk, as
our Northern Thistle does, called Carduus Acaulos, and is bigger than the
largest Pompion: the roots are small, spreading far abroad in the ground, and
consisting of black and tough twigs, which cannot endure the injury of our
cold clymate.

The Place.
This admirable Thistle grows upon the cliffes and grauelly grounds near
unto the sea side, in the Islands of the West Indies, called S. Margarets and
S. John's Isle, near unto Puerto rico, or Porto rico, and other places in those
countries, by the relation of diverse travelers that have iournied into those
parts, who have brought me the plant it self with his seed; the which would
not grow in my garden by reason of the coldness of the clymate.

The Time.
It grows, floureth, and flourishes all the year long, as do many other
plants of those Countries.

The Names.
It is called Carduus Echinatus, Melocarduus Echinatus, and Echino Melocactos:
In English, the Hedgehog Thistle, or prickly Melon Thistle. Such as are
curious may see more hereof in Clusius his Exoticks, lib. 4. cap. 24.

The Temperature and Virtues.
There is not any thing extant set forth of the ancient or of the later
writers, neither by any that have traveled from the Indies themselves:
therefore we leave it to a further consideration.

CHAP. 492. Of the gummie Thistle, called Euphorbium.
1 Euphorbium. The poisonous gum Thistle.
2 Anteuphorbinm. The Antidote against the poisonous Thistle.


The Description.
1 EVphorbium (whereout that liquor or gum called in shops Euphorbium is
extracted) has very great thick gross and spreading roots, dispersed far
abroad in the ground: from which arise long and round leaves, almost like the
fruit of a great Cucumber, a foot and a half long, ribbed, walled, and
furrowed like unto the Melon: these branched ribs are set or armed for the most
part with certain prickles standing by couples, the point or sharp end of one
garding one way, and the point of another looking directly a clean contrary
way: these pricks (...) often found in the gum it self, which is brought
unto us from Libya and other parts: the (...) hereof being planted in the
ground will take root well, and bring forth great increase, which thing I have
proved true in my garden: it has perished again at the first approach of
winter. The sap or liquor that is extracted out of this plant is of the color
and substance of the Cream of Milk; it burns the mouth extremely, and the
dust or powder does very much annoy the head and the parts thereabout, causing
great and vehement sneesing, and stuffing of all the pores.

2 This rare plant called Anteuphorbium has a very thick gross and far
spreading root, very like unto Euphorbium; from which rises up many round
green and fleshie stalks, whereupon do grow thick leaves like Purslane, but
longer, thicker, and fatter: the whole plant is full of cold and clammie
moisture, which represseth the scortching force of Euphorbium; and it wholly
seems at the first view to be a branch of green Coral.

3 Cereus Peruvianus spinosus Lobelij. The Torch-Thistle or thorny Euphorbium.
4 Calamus Peruvianus spinosus Lobelij. The thorny Reed of Peru.


3 There is not among the strange and admirable plants of the world any one
that gives more cause of marvel, or more moves the mind to honor and laud
the Creator, than this plant, which is called of the Indians in their mother
tongue Vragua, which is as much to say, a torch, taper, or wax candle;
whereupon it has been called in Latin by those that understood the Indian
tongue, Cereus, or a Torch. This admirable plant rises up to the height of a
spear of twenty foot long, although the figure express not the same; the
reason is, the plant when the figure was drawn came to our view broken: it has
diverse bunches and valleys, even as is to be seen in the sides of the
Cucumber, that is, furrowed, guttered, or chamfered along the same, and as it
were laid by a direct line, with a welt from one end unto the other: upon which
welt or line do stand small star-like Thistles, sharp as needles, and of the
color of those of the Melon Thistle, that is to say, of a brown color: the
trunk or body is of the bigness of a man's arm, or a cable rope; from the
middle whereof thrust forth diverse knobby elbowes of the same substance, and
armed with the like prickles that the body of the trunk is set withal: the
whole plant is thick, fat, and full of a fleshie substance, having much juice
like that of (...), when it is hardened, and of a bitter taste: the flowers grow
at the top or extreme point of the plant: after which follow fruit in shape
like a fig, full of a red juice, which being touched staineth the hands of the
color of red lead: the taste is not unpleasant.

4 There has been brought from the Indies a prickly reed of the bigness of a
good big staf, of the length of six or eight foot, chamfered and furrowed,
having upon two sides growing unto it an uneven membrane or skinny substance,
as it were a iag or welt set upon the wing of a garment, and upon the very
point of every cut or iagge armed with most sharp prickles: the whole trunk
is filled full of a spongeous substance, such as is in the hollownes of the
brier or bramble; amongst the which is to be seen as it were the pillings of
Onions, wherein are often found living things, that at the first seem to be
dead. The plant is strange, and brought dry from the Indies, therefore we
cannot write so absolutely hereof as we desire; referring what more might be
said to a further consideration or second edition.

The Place.
These plants grow upon Mount Atlas, in Libya, in most of the Islands of the
Mediterranean sea, in all the coast of Barbary, especially in S. Crux near
unto the sea side, in a barren place there called by the English men Half
Hanneken; which place is appointed for Merchants to (...) of their business,
even as the Exchange in London is: from which place my friend Mr. William
Martin, a right expert Surgeon, did procure me the plants of them for my
garden, by his servant that he sent thither as Surgeon of a ship. Since which
time I have received plants of diverse others that have traveled into other of
those parts and coasts: notwithstanding they have not endured the cold of our
extreme Winter.

The Time.
They put forth their leaves in the Spring time, and wither away at the approach
of Winter.

The Names.
It is called both in Greek and Latin (...), Euphorbium: Pliny in one place
puts the herb in the feminine gender, naming it Euphorbia: the juice is
called also Euphorbion, and so it is likewise in shops: we are feign in English
to use the Latin word, and to call both the herb and juice by the name of
Euphorbium, (...) other name we hauenone: it may be called in English, the Gum
Thistle.

The Temperature.
Euphorbium (that is to say, the congealed iuvce which we use) is of a very
hot, and, as Galen testifies, causticke or burning faculty, and of thin
parts: it is also hot and dry in the fourth degree.

The Virtues.
An emplaister made with the gum Euphorbium, and twelve times so much oil,
and a little Galen, lib. 4. de (...) (...) genera, declares at large, which to
recite at this present would but trouble you overmuch.

Euphorbium mingled with oil of Bay and Bears grease cures the scurfe and
scalds of the

The same mingled with oil, and applied to the temples of such are very
sleepie, and troubled

If it be applied to the nuque or nape of the neck, it brings their speech
again that have lost

Euphorbium mingled with vinegar and applied takes away all foul and ill
favored spots, in

Being mixed with oil of (...)-flowers, as Mesues says, and with any other
oil or ointments, it

It is likewise a remedy against (...) pains in the huckle bones, called the
Sciatica.

(...), Paulus, (...), and (...) do report, That if it be inwardly taken it
purges by

For that cause it must not be beaten small, and it is to be tempered with such
things as allay the

But it is a hard thing so to cover and fold it up, or to mix it, as that it
will not burn or scortch.

It is troublesome to beat it, unless the nostrils of him that beats it be
carefully stopped and

But against the hot sharpness of Euphorbium, it is reported that the
inhabitants are remedied Anteuphorbium. (...) plant likewise is full of juice,
which is nothing at all hot and sharp but cool and (...), allaying the heat
and sharpness of Euphorbium. We have not yet learned that the old writers have
set down any thing touching this herb; notwithstanding it seems to be a
kind of Orpine, which is the antidote or counterpoyson against the poison and
venom of Euphorbium.

CHAP. 493. Of soft Thistles, and Thistle gentle.
THere are certain other plants by most writers referred to the Thistles;
which being omitted by our Author, I have thought fit here to give you.

Cirsium maximum Asphodeli radice. Great soft bulbed Thistle.
2 Cirsium maius alterum. Great soft Thistle.


The Description.
1 THe first and largest of these has roots consisting of great longish bulbes
like those of the Asphodill: from whence arise many large stalks three or
four cubits high, crested and downy: the leaves are very long and large,
iuycie, greenish, and cut about the edges, and set with soft prickles. At the
tops of the stalks and branches grow heads round and large, out whereof come
flowers consisting of abundance of threads, of a purple color, which fly away
in down. This grows wild in the mountainous meadows and in some wet places
of Austria. I have seen it growing in the garden of Mr. John Parkinson, and
with Mr. Tuggye. It flowers in July. Clusius has called it Cirsium maximum
mont. incano folio, bulbosa radice. But he gave no figure thereof, nor any
else, unless the Acanthium peregrinum in Tabernamont. (which our Author
formerly, as I before noted, gave by the name of (...) lutea (...)) were
intended for this plant, as (...) verily think it was. I have given you a
figure which I drew some years (...) (...) the plant it self.

2 The root of this is long, yet sending forth of the sides creeping fibers,
but not (...): the leaves are like those of the last mentioned, but less, and
armed with sharp prickles of a (...) color, with the middle rib white: the
heads sometimes stand upright, and (...) long down; they are very prickly, and
send (...) flowers consisting of many (...) purple threads. The stalks are
thick, crested and welted with the setting on of the leaves. This grows wild
(...) (...) sea (...) of Zeeland, Flanders, and Holland: it flowers in June and
July: it is the (...) (...) of (...); and Cirsium maius of Lobel.

3 This whose root is fibrous and living, sends forth lesser, narrower, and
(...) leaves than those of the former, not iagged or cut about their edges, nor
hoary, yet set about with prickles: the stalks are crested: the heads are
smaller, and grow three or four together, carrying such purple flowers as the
former. This is that which Matthiolus, (...), and others have set forth (...)
(...): (...), for Cirsium 2. and Clusius has it for his (...) quartum, or
Montanum secundum.

3 Cirsium folijs non hirsut is. Soft smooth leaued Thistle.
4 Cirsium montanum capitulis paruis. Small Burre Thistle.


4 The leaves of this are somewhat like those of the last described, but
larger, and welting the stalks further at their setting on: they are also set
with prickles about the edges: the stalks are some two cubits high divided into
sundry long slender branches: on whose tops grow little rough prickly heads,
which after the flowers come to perfection do hang downwards, and at the
length turn into down; amongst which lies hid a smooth shining seed. This
grows wild in diverse woody places of Hungary and Austria. It is the
Cirsium of (...); the (...) 2. or Montanum 1. of Clusius; and Cirsium alterum
of Lobel. It flowers in June: the root is about the thickness of ones little
finger, fibrous also, and living.

5 This sends up long narrow leaves, hairy, and set about the edges with
slender prickles: out of the midst of these leaves grows up a stalk
sometimes a foot, otherwhiles a cubit high, slender, stiff, and downy: upon
which grow leaves somewhat broad at their setting on, and there also a little
nicked or cut in: this stalk sometimes has no branches, otherwhiles two or
three long slender ones, at the tops whereof grow out of (...) heads such
flowers as the common Knap-weed,

5 Cirsium montanum Anglicum. Single headed Thistle.
Cirsij Anglici alia Icon (...). Pennies figure of the same.
Cirsij Anglici Icon Lobelij. Lobels figure of the same.
6 (...) mollis folijs dissectis. (...) leaued Thistle gentle.
which at length turn into down; among which lies hid a small shining seed
like the other plants of this kind. The root is made of diverse thick fibers,
which run in the ground, and here and there put up new heads. This plant wants
no setting forth; for Clusius gives us the figure and (...) thereof, first by
the name of Cirsium Pannonicum 1. pratense; then he gives another history
thereof, with a worser figure, (which he received of Dr. Thomas Penny of
London) by the name of (...) Anglicum 2. Lobel also described it, and set it
forth with a figure expressing the flower already saded, by the name of
Cirsium Anglicum. Bauhine in his Pinax, deceived by these several expressions,
has made three several plants of this one; a fault frequent in many Writers
of plants. (...) found it growing in the mountainous meadows along the side
of the Danow in Austria: Penny, (...) the meadows at the foot of Ingleborow
hill in Yorke-shire: Lobel, in the meadows at a place (...) (...) Acton in
Gloucestershire. I found this only once, and that was in a meadow on this side
Highgate, having been abroad with the Company of Apothecaries, and returning
that way home, in the company of Mr. James Walsall, William Broad, and some
others. I have given you both the (...) of Clusius his own in the first place,
and that of Dr. Penny in the second, but the former is (...) better: I have
also given you that of Lobel.

7 Carduus mollis folijs Lapathi. Docke leaued Thistle-gentle.


6 These also Clusius (whom I herein (...)) adds to the kinds of Thistles.
This iagged leafed one, which he calls Carduus mollior primus, has many
leaves at the root, both spread upon the ground, and also standing upright; and
they are covered with a white and soft downinesse, yet green on the upper
side: they are also much divided or cut in even to the middle rib, like to the
(...) or tenderer leaves of the Star Thistle: they have no prickles at all
upon them: (...) of the midst of these leaves grow up one or two stalks,
round, crested, purplish, hoarie, and some cubit or better high. The leaves
that grow upon the lower part of the stalk are divided, those above not so;
the tops of the stalks sometimes, yet very seldom, are parted into branches,
which carry scaly heads containing elegant flowers made of many purple strings.
The flower decaying, there succeeds a cornered seed: the root sometimes equals
the thickenesse of ones (...), brownish, long, and somewhat fibrous. It flowers
in May, and grows upon the hilly places of Hungary.

7 The stalk of this is some foot or (...) high, thick, crested, and somewhat
hairy: the leaves about the root are somewhat large, and in shape like those of
Bonus Henricus, (abusiuely called in English, Mercury) somewhat sinuated about
the edges, and set with harmless prickles, green above, and very hoarie
underneath, like the leaves of the white Poplar: those that grow upon the
stalk are lesser and narrower: out of whose bosoms toward the tops of the
stalk grow out little branches which carry three, four, or more little scaly
heads like those of the Blew-Bottle, or Knapweed, whereout grow threddy bluish
purple flowers: the seed is wrapped in down, and not unlike that of
Blew-Bottle: the root is black, hard, and living, sending forth shoots on the
sides. It grows upon the highest Austrian Alps, and flowers in July. Clusius
calls this (...) mollior Lapathi folio.

The Temperature and Virtues.
These plants seem by their taste to be of a moderately heating and drying
faculty, but (...) of them are used in medicine, nor have their virtues set
down by any Author.

CHAP. 494. Of three leafed Grass, or Meadow Trefoile.
The Kinds.
THere be diverse sorts of three leafed Grasses, some greater, others lesser;
some bear flowers of one color, some of another: some of the water, and
others of the land: some of a sweet smell, others stinking: and first of the
common meadow Trefoiles, called in Irish Shamrockes.

1 Trifolium pratense. Meadow Trefoile.
3 Trifolinm maius flore albo. Great white Trefoile.


The Description.
1 Meadow Trefoile brings forth stalks a cubit long, round, and something
hairy, the greater part of which creeps upon the ground; whereon do grow
leaves consisting of three joined together, one standing a little from another,
of which those that are next the ground and roots are rounder, and they that
grow on the upper part longer, having for the most part in the midst a white
spot like a half moon. The flowers grow on the tops of the stalks in a tuft
or small Fox-taile care, of a purple color, and sweet of taste. The seed
grows in little husks, round and blackish: the root is long, woody, and
grows deep.

2 There is another of the field Trefoiles, differing from the precedent
especially in the color of the flowers; for as those are of a bright purple,
contrariwise these are very white, which makes the difference. The leaves,
flowers, and all the whole plant is less than the former.

3. 4. There is also a Trefoile of this kind which is sown in fields of the
Low Countries, in (...) and diverse other places beyond the seas, that comes
up ranker and higher than that which grows in meadows, and is an excellent
food (...) cattle, both to fatten them, and cause them to (...) great store of
milk.

(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) with white flowers, which has stalks some foot
high, and narrow (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) of ones little finger. This is
Clusius his Trifolium (...) (...) 4 Trifolium maius flo. purpureo. Great purple
Trefoile.
5 Trifolium luteum Lupulinum. Hop Trefoile.
6 Trifolium luteum minimum. Little yellow Trefoile.
primum. The other has stalks some cubit high, with larger joints and leaves:
the flower or head of flowers is also larger, of an elegant red color. This
Clusius calls Trifolium maius tertium.

5. 6. Likewise we have in our fields a smaller Trefoile that brings forth
yellow flowers, a greater and a lesser, and diverse others also, differing from
these in diverse notable points, the which to distinguish apart would greatly
enlarge our volume, and yet to small purpose: therefore we leave them to be
distinguished by the curious, who may at the first view easily perceive the
difference, and also that they be of one stock or kindred.

The greater of these yellow Trefoiles has pretty large yellow heads, which
afterward become of a brownish color, and somewhat resemble a Hop: whence
Thalius called it Lupulus syluaticus, or Trifolium luteum alterum lupulinum:
Dodonaeus calls it Trifolium agrarium. The leaves are small, and lightly nickt
about the edges. The lesser has smaller and far lesser yellow heads, which are
succeeded by many little crooked clustring seeds: the leaves of this are small,
and also snipt about the edges: both this and the other have two little leaves
close by the fastening of the foot-stalkes of the leaves to the main stalks;
wherefore I refer them to the Medicks, and usually call this later, Medica sem.
(...). It is the Trifol. luteum minimum of (...) and Lobel; and Trifolium
arvense of Tabern.

The Place.
Common Meadow Trefoile grows in meadows, fertile (...), and waterish grounds.
The others love the like soil.

The Time.
They flower from May to the end of Summer.

The Names.
Meadow Trefoile is called in Latin Trifolium pratense: in High Dutch, (...):
in low Dutch, Claueren: in French, Treffle and Trainiere, and Visumarus, as
Marcellus an old writer testifies: in English, Common Trefoile, Three-leafed
grass: of some, Suckles, and Honi-suckles, Cocksheads; and in Irish, Shamrocks.

The Temperature.
The leaves and flowers of Meadow Trefoiles are cold and dry.

The Virtues.
The decoction of three leaued Grass made with honey, and used in a clyster,
is good against the

The leaves boiled with a little barrowes grease, and used as a pultis, take
away hot swellings and

Oxen and other cattle do feed of the herb, and also calves and young lambs.
The flowers are

Pliny writes, and sets it down for certain, that the leaves hereof do
tremble, and stand right

The meadow Trefoile (especially that with the black half Moon upon the leaf)
stamped with

CHAP. 495. Of stinking Trefoile, or Treacle Clauer.
Trifolium bituminosum, Treacle Clauer.


The Description.
TReacle Clauer grows upright like a shrubbie plant, with stalks of a cubit
and a half high, whereupon do grow next the ground broad leaves, 3 joined
together, those upon the stalks are longer and narrower. The stalks are
covered over with a rough evil colored hairinesse: the leaves are of a dark
black green color, and of a loath some smell, like the pitch called Bitumen
Iudaicum, whereof it took his name: the flowers grow at the top of the
stalks, of a dark purplish color tending unto blewnesse, in shape like those
of Scabious: the seed is broad, rough, long, and sharp pointed: the root is
small and tender, and cannot endure the coldness of our winter, but perishes
at the first approach thereof.

The Place.
It grows naturally, says Hippocrates Hippiatros, not Cous, in rough places,
as Ruellius translateth it: in Germany, France and England it never comes up
of it self, but must be sown in gardens, as my self have proved diverse times,
and was constrained to sow it yearly, or else it would not come up, neither of
his own sowing or otherwise.

The Time.
It floureth not in my garden until the end of August.

The Names.
Nicander calls this Trefoile (...): in (...), Trifolium acutum, or sharp
pointed (...) (...) Pliny, (...) odoratum, but not properly; of others,
Trifolium Asphaltaeum, sive (...), (...) Stone Pitch (...).

(...) calls it Tarsilon, and not Handacocha: Auicen does comprehend
Dioscorides his (...), (...) is to say, Lotus vrbana (...), and Aegyptia; which
Dioscorides confounds one with another in (...) (...): in English it is
called Clauer gentle, Pitch Trefoile, stinking Trefoile, and (...) (...).

The Temperature.
This Trefoile, called (...), as Galen says, is hot and dry, as (...) is, and
that in the third degree.

The Virtues.
Being drunk, it takes away the pain of the sides, which comes by
obstructions or stoppings,

Hippocrates writes, that it does not only bring them down, but likewise the
birth, not only

Dioscorides says, that the seeds and leaves being drunk in water, are a
remedy for the (...),

The leaves drunk in Oxymel, or a syrrup of vinegar made with honey, is good
for those that (...)

Some affirm that the decoction of the whole plant, root and leaves, takes
away pain from

Some also give with wine three leaves, or a small quantity of the seeds in
(...) agues, and in

The root also is put into antidotes or counterpoisons, says (...): but other
ancient (...) Galen, by a great (...) compositions in his 2. book of
Antidotes; that is to say, in the Treacles of Aelius (...), (...) Laudoceus,
Claudius Apollonius, Eudemus, (...), Dorothaeus, and Heras.

The herb stamped and applied upon any enuenomed wound, or made with poisoned
weapon, it

CHAP. 496. Of diverse other Trefoiles.
The Description.
1 THree leaued grass of America has diverse crooked round stalks, leaning
this way and that way, and divided into diverse branches: whereon do grow leaves
like those of the meadow Trefoile, of a black green color, and of the smell of
Pitch Trefoile, or Treacle Clauer: the flowers grow at the top of the branches,
made up in a long spiked chassie care, of a white color: after which comes
the (...), somewhat flat, almost like to those of Tares: the roots are long
strings of a wooddie substance.

2 This three leafed grass (which Dodonaeus in his last Edition calls
Trifolium cochleatum (...): and (...), Fanum (...)) has diverse round upright
stalks, of a wooddie rough substance, yet not able of it self to stand without
a prop or stay: which stalks are divided into diverse small branches, whereupon
do grow leaves joined three together like the other Trefoiles, but osa dark
(...) green color: the flowers grow at the top of the stalks in shape like
those of the codded Trefoile, but of a dark purple color: the seed
follows, contained in small wrinckled 1 Trifolium Americum. Trefoile of
America.
The figure (...) put in the second place was of the (...) yellow (...)
described in the (...) chapter (...) one.
2 Trifolium Burgundiacum. Burgundy Trefoile.
3 Trifolium Salmanticum. Portingale Trefoile.
husks turned round, after the manner of a water snaile: the root is thick,
composed of diverse tough threddie strings, and lasts long in my garden with
great increase.

3 This three leaued grass of Salmanca, a city as I take it of Portingale,
differs not much from our field Trefoile: it has many branches weak and
tender, trailing upon the ground, of two cubits and a half high: whereupon
do grow leaves (...) together by three upon a stem, from the bosom whereof
thrust forth tender foot-stalkes, whereon do stand most fine flowers of a
bright red tending unto purple: after which come the seed wrapped in small
skins, of a red color.

4 The Heart Trefoile has very many flexible branches, set upon a slender
stalk, of the length of two or three foot, trailing hither and thither:
whereupon do grow leaves joined together by 4 Trifolium cordatum. Heart
Trefoile.
5 Trifolium siliquosum minus. Small codded Trefoile.
6 (...) ex Codice Caesareo. (...) Trefoile.
three on little slender footstalk, every little leaf of the fashion of a
heart, whereof it took his name: among which come forth scaly, or chaffie
yellow flowers: the root is thick and threddie. I take the plant which our
Author here figured and intended to describe unto us, to be of that Medica
which Camerarius calls Arabica, which grows wild in many places with us,
having the leaves a little dented in at the ends, so that they resemble the
vulgar figure of a heart; and each (...) is marked with a blackish, or red
spot: the flowers be small and yellow: the seeds are contained in rough
buttons, wound up like the other Snaile Trefoiles, whereof it is a kind. I
have given you the figure a little more exquisite, by the addition of the spots
and cods.

5 This kind of three leaued grass is a low herb, creeping upon the ground:
the leaves are like those of the common Trefoile, but lesser, and of a grayish
green color: the flowers are fair and yellow, fashioned like those of
broom, but lesser: after come three or sour cods, wherein is contained round
seed: the root is long and reddish. This is the Trifolium (...), or Melilotus
Coronata of Lobel: Lotus pentaphyllos of Gesner.

This codded Tresoile is like unto the last described in every respect, saving
that this plant is altogether larger, having stalks a cubite and a half high:
the leaves are also sour times as large, two roundish leaves (...) by the
stalk, and three (...) ones growing upon a short foot-stalke coming forth
between the two roundish leaves: both the stalk and leaves have a little soft
downinesse or hairinesse on (...): the flowers grow clustering together on the
tops of the stalks, in shape, bigness, and color like (...) of the last
described, but commonly more in number: they are also succeeded by such (...)
as those of the former.

6 The figure which (...) has set forth (...) of an old Manuscript in the
Emperors Library, being there figured for Coronopus, seems to be of the last
described, or some plant very like thereto, though the five leaves at each
joint be not (...) in such order as they should be, yet (...) the parts are
well expressed, (...) to the drawing of those times, for you (...) find (...)
ancient expressions come so near as this does.

7 There is a kind of Clauer growing about (...) in France, that has many
twiggie tough branches coming from a woody root, whereon are set leaves three
together, (...) the manner of the other Trefoiles, so new hat long, (...), and
of a hoarie or ouerworne (...) color. The flowers are yellow, and grow at the
tops of the branches like those of Broom.

7 Lotus (...), sive (...) Scribonij Largi. Hoarie Clauer.
8 (...) (...) siliqua cornuta. Yellow horned (...).


This sends up many branches from one root, some (...) or more long, commonly
lying along upon the ground, round, flexable, and divided into sundry
branches: the leaves stand together by threes, and are like those of the true
Medica, or Burgundy Trefoile, but much less: the flowers grow clustering
together on the tops of the branches, like in shape to those of the (...); of a
yellow color, and not without smell: they are succeeded by such, yet narrower
crooked coddes, as the Burgundy (...) has (but the Painter has not well
expressed them:) in these cods are contained seeds like those also of that
Trefoile, and such also is the root, which lives long, and much increases. It
grows in Hungary, Austria, and Morauia: it flowers in June and (...): Clusius
calls it Medica flore flavo: (...), Lens mayor repens and Tragus, Meliloti
maioris species (...): (...) says that about Nimes in Narbone it is found with
flowers either yellow white, green, blew, purple, black, or mixed of blew and
green; and he calls it Trifolium syluestre (...) (...); or (...).

The Place.
The several titles of most of these plants set (...) their natural place of
growing: the rest grow in most fertile fields of England.

The Time.
They flower and flourish most of the summer months.

The Names.
There is not much to be said as touching their names, more than has been set
down.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The temperature and faculties of these Trefoiles are (...) unto the common
(...) Trefoiles.

CHAP. 497. Of the great Trefoiles, or winged Clauers.
The Description.
Our Author in the first place formerly gave the figure of (...). his (...)
flore albo, being only a variety of that plant: you shall hereafter find it
described by the name of (...) (...); now he made the description somewhat in
the leaves to agree with the (...), (...) nothing (...) with the (...) (...)
(...) he (...) to describe, for (as it is evident by the names) he (...) to
describe both the first and second (which are here now described) in the first
place, for he has (...) them both together in the names.
1 THe great Hares foot being a kind of (...), has a hard and wooddie root,
(...) of black threddie strings: from (...) (...) diverse tough and feeble
(...), whereupon do grow leaves, set together by threes, making the whole plant
to resemble those of the Meadow Trefoile: the flowers grow at the top of the
stalks, composed of a bunch of gray (...): among the which soft matter comes
forth small flowers of a most bright purple color, (...) resembling the
flowers of the common meadow Trefoile, but far greater. Lobel calls this Lagopus
maximus folio, and facie Trifolij pratensis: Dodonaeus, Lagopus mayor folio
Trifolij.

1 Lagopus maximus. The great Hares foot Trefoile.
2 Lagopus mayor spica (...). Great large headed Hares foot.


2 This elegant plant (which Tragus has set forth for Cytisus, Lobel by the
(...) of (...) altera folio prinnato, and Clusius for his Trifolij maioris 3.
altera species) has stalks some (...) and better high, whereon grow leaves
set together by threes, long, (...) and lightly (...) about the edges, with
elegant nerves or veins, running from the middle rib to the sides of the
leaves, which are most conspicuous in hot Countries, and chiefly then when the
leaf begins to decay. At the tops of the branches, in long and large heads
grow the flowers, of an elegant sanguine color. This flowers in May and June,
and grows wild upon some mountains of Hungary and Austria; I have seen
them, both this and the former, growing in the gardens of some of our Florists.

3 This other great kind of Hares-foot sends forth one slender, yet stiff
stalk, whereon grow leaves whose foot-stalkes are large at the setting on,
encompassing the stalks: the leaves themselves grow by threes, long, narrow,
and (...) pointed, of a grayish color like those of the common Hares-foot; the
spike at the top is soft and downy, with little reddish flowers amongst the
whitish hairinesse. This grows wild in Spain: Clusius calls it Lagopus
angustifolius Hispanicus mayor.

There is another sort of this descrbed by Lobel and Pena in the Aduers. whose
leaves are longer and narrower than this, the whole plant also is often times
lesser: they call it Lagopus altera (...) folia.

3 Lagopus angustifoiius Hispanicus. Narrow leafed Spanish Hare-(...).
4 Lagopodium, Pes leporis. (...) Hares-foot Trefoile.


4 The small Hares-foot has a round rough and hairy stalk, dividing it self
into diverse other branches; whereupon do grow small leaves, three joined
together, like those of the small yellow Trefoile: the flowers grow at the very
point of the stalks, consisting of a rough knap or bush of hairs or down,
like that of Alopecuros, or Fox-taile, of a whitish color tending to a light
blush, with little white flowers amongst the downinesse: the root is small and
hard.

The Place.
The first grows in the fields of France and Spain, and is a stranger in
England; yet it grows in my garden.

The small Hare-foot grows among corn, especially among Barley, and likewise
in barren pastures almost every where.

The Time.
They (...) and flourish in June, July, and August.

The Names.
The great Hare-foot Trefoile is called of Tragus, Cytisus: of Cordus,
Trifolium magnum: of Lobclius, (...) maximum, and Lagopodium: in Greek, (...):
in English, the great Hares-soot.

The last, being the smallest of these kinds of Trefoiles, is called Lagopus,
and (...) Leporis: in Dutch, Hasen pootkens: in high Dutch, Hasen fusz: in
French, (...) de lieure: in English Harefoot.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The temperature and faculties are referred unto the other Trefoiles, whereof
these are kinds: Dioscorides says, that the small Hares-foot does bind and
dry. It stops, says he, the laske, if it be drunk with red wine. But it
must be given to such as are feuerish with water.

CHAP. 498. Of Water Trefoile, or Bucks Beans.
Trifolium paludosum. Marsh Trefoile.


The Description.
1 THe great Marsh Trefoile has thick fat stalks, weak and tender, full of
a spungious pith, very smooth, and of a cubit long: whereon do grow leaves like
to those of the garden Bean, set upon the stalks three joined together like
the other Trefoiles, smooth, shining, and of a deep green color: among which
toward the top of the stalks stands a bush of feather like flowers of a
white color, dashed over slightly with a wash of light carnation: after which
the seed follows, contained in small buttons, or knobby husks, of a brown
yellowish color like unto Millet, and of a bitter taste: the roots creep
diverse ways in the middle marish ground, being full of joints, white within,
and full of pores, and spungie, bringing forth diverse by-shoots, stalks, and
leaves, by which means it is easily increased, and largely multiplied.

2 The second differs not from the precedent, saving it is altogether lesser,
wherein consists the difference, if there be any: for doubtless I think it
is the self same in each respect, and is made greater and lesser, according to
his place of growing, clymate, and country.

The Place.
These grow in marish and Fenny places, and upon boggie grounds almost every
where.

The Time.
They flower and flourish from June to the end of August.

The Names.
Marish Trefoile is called in high Dutch, (...), that is to say, Castoris
Trifolium, or Trifolium fibrinum: in low Dutch, of the likeness that the
leaves have with the garden Beans, (...), that is to say, (...) Hircinus, or
Boona Hircina: the later Herbarists call it Trifolium palustre, and Paludosum:
of some, (...): in English, marsh-Clauer, marsh-Trefoile, and Buckes-Beanes.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The seed of Isopyrum, says Dioscorides, if it be taken with meade or honied
water, is good against

It is also a remedy for those that have weak (...) and spet blood, for as
Galen says it cleanses

CHAP. 499 Of sweet Trefoile, or garden Clauer.
Trifolium odoratum. Sweet Trefoile.


The Description.
SWeet Trefoile has an upright stalk, hollow, and of the height of two cubirs,
dividing it self into diverse branches: whereon do grow leaves by three and
three like to the other Trefoiles, slightly and superficiously nicked in the
edges: from the bosom whereof come the flowers, every one standing on his own
single foot-stalk; consisting of little (...) husks, of a light or pale bluish
color: after which (...) up little heads or knops, in which lies the seed, of
a whitish yellow color, and lesser than that of Fenu-greeke: the root has
diverse strings: the whole plant is not only of a whitish green color, but
also of a sweet smell, and of a strong (...) or spicie sent, and more sweet
when it is dried: which smell in the gathered and dried plant does likewise
continue long: and in moist and rainie weather, it smells more than in hot
and dry weather: and also when it is yet fresh and green it loses and
recouereth again his smell seven times a day; whereupon the old wives in
Germany do call it Sieuen gezeiten kraut, that is, the herb that changes
seven times a day.

The Place.
It is sown in gardens not only beyond the seas, but in diverse gardens in
England.

The Time.
It is sown in May, it floureth in June and July, and perfecteth his seed in
the end of August, the same year it is sown.

The Names.
It is commonly called in Latin Trifolium odoratum: in high Dutch as we have
said Sieuen gezeiten: in low Dutch, Seuenghetijcruijt, that is to say, an herb
of seven times: it is called in Spanish, Trcbol real: in French, Treffle
oderiferant: in English, Sweet Trefoile, and garden Clauer: it seems to be
Lotus Vrbana, or satiua, of which Dioscorides writes in his fourth book:
nevertheless diverse Authors set down Melilot, for Lotus vrbana, and Trifolium
odoratum, but not properly. The Gardiners and herb women in Cheapside commonly
call it, and know it by the name of Balsam, or garden Balsam.

The Temperature.
Galen says, that sweet Trefoile does in a mean concoct and dry, and is in a
mean and temperate faculty between hot and cold: the which faculties
undoubtedly are plainly perceived in this sweet Trefoile.

The Virtues.
The juice pressed forth, says Dioscorides, with honey added thereto, cleanses
the ulcers of the eyes, (...), and takes away spots in the same, called
Albugines; and remooueth such things as do hinder the sight.

The oil whrein the flowers are infused or steeped, does perfectly cure green
wounds in very

The juice given in white wine cures those that have fallen from some high
place, auoideth he did not only piss blood, but also it most wonderfully
gushed forth, both at his nose and mouth.

The dried herb laid among garments keeps them from Mothes and other
vermin.

CHAP. 500. Of Fenugreeke.
The Description.
1 FEnugreeke has a long slender trailing stalk, green, hollow within, and
divided into diverse small branches: whereon do grow leaves like those of the
meadow Trefoile, but rounder and (...), green on the upper side, on the lower
side tending to an ash color: among which come small white flowers, after them
likewise long slender narrow cods, in which do lie small uneven seeds, of a
yellowish color: which being dried, have a strong smell, yet not unpleasant:
the root is small, and perishes when it has perfected his seed.

1 Foenumgraecum. Fenugreeke.
2 Foenumgraecum syluestre. Wild Fenugreeke.


2 There is a wild kind hereof serving to little use, that has small round
branches, full of knees or ioints: from each joint proceeds a small tender
footstalk, whereon do grow three leaves and no more, somewhat snipt about the
edges, like unto those of Burgundy Haie: from the bosoms whereof come forth
small yellow flowers, which turn into little cods: the root is thick, tough,
and pliant.

The Place.
Fenugreeke is sown in fields beyond the seas: in England we sow a small
quantity thereof in our gardens.

The Time.
It has two seasons of sowing, according to Columella, of which one is in
September, at what time it is sown that it may serve for fodder against
winter; the other is in the end of January, or the beginning of February,
notwithstanding we may not sow it until April in England.

The Names.
It is called in Greek (...), or as it is found in Pliny his copies Carphos:
in Latin, (...) Graecum: Columella says that it is called Siliqua: in Pliny
we read Silicia: in Varro, Silicula: in high Dutch, (...): in Italian,
Fiengreco: in Spanish, Alfornas: in French, Fenegrec: and in English, (...).

The Temperature and Virtues.
It is thought according to Galen in his book of the Faculties of
nourishments, that it is one of

The juice of boiled Fenegreeke taken with honey is good to purge by the stool
all manner of

And because it has in it a clensing or scouring faculty, it raises humors
out of the chest: but

In old diseases of the chest without a fever, fat dates are to be boiled with
it, but when you have

In his book of the Faculties of simple medicines he says, that Fenegreek is
hot in the second

The meal of Fenegreeke, as Dioscorides says, is of force to mollify and
waste away: being boiled

The same being tempered or kneaded with niter and vinegar, does soften and
waste away the

It is good for women that have either imposthume, ulcer, or stopping of the
matrix, to bathe and

The juice of the decoction pressed forth does cleanse the hair, takes away
dandraffe, scoureth

Green Fenegreeke bruised and pounded with vinegar, is a remedy for weak and
feeble parts, and

The decoction thereof is good against ulcers in the low gut, and foul
stinking excrements of

The oil which is pressed out thereof scoureth hairs and scars in the privy
parts.

The decoction of Fenegreeke seed, made in wine, and drunk with a little
vinegar, expels all

The seed boiled in wine with dates and honey, unto the form of a syrrup, does
mundifie and cleanse

The meal of Fenegreek boiled in mead or honied water, consumes and
dissolueth all cold hard

It is very good for women that have any grief or swelling in the matrix, or
other lower parts, if

It is good to wash the head with the decoction of the seed, for it takes away
the scurfe, scailes,

CHAP. 501. Of Horned Clauer, and black Clauer.
The Description.
1 THe horned Clauer, or codded Trefoile, grows up with many weak and
slender stalks lying upon the ground: about which are set white leaves,
somewhat long, lesser, and narrower than any of the other Trefoiles: the
flowers grow at the tops, of the fashion of those of Peason, of a shining
yellow color: after which come certain straight cods, bigger than those of
Fenegreek, but blunter at their ends, in which are contained little round seed;
the root is hard and wooddie, and sends forth young springs every year.

1 Lotus trifolia corniculata. Horned or codded Clauer.
2 Lotus quadrifolia. Four leafed grass.


2 This kind of three leafed grass, or rather four leafed Tree foil, has
leaves like unto the common Trefoile, saving that they be lesser, and of a
brown purplish color, known by the name of Purple-wort, or Purple-grasse;
whose flowers are in shape like the meadow Trefoile, but of a dustie ouerworn
color tending to whiteness; the which does oftentimes degenerate, sometime
into three leaves, sometimes in five, and also into seven, and yet the plant of
his nature hathbut four leaves and no more. I do not think this to be the
purple leaued Trefoile with the white flower, which is commonly called
Purple-grasse; for I could never observe it to have more leaves than three upon
a stalk.

3 The root of this is small and white, from which arise many weak hairie
branches some cubit long: whereon grow soft hairy leaves three on one
foot-stalke, with two little leaves at the root thereof, and out of the bosoms
of these upon like footstalkes grow three lesser leaves, as also flowers of the
bigness and shape of those of a Vetch, but of a brave deep crimson velvet
color: after these are past come cods set with four thin welts or skins
which make them seem four square; whence Camerarius called it Lotus
pulcherrima tetragonolobus: the seed is of an ash color, somewhat less than a
pease. It flowers most of the Summer months, and is for the prettiness of the
flower preserved in many Gardens by yearly sowing the seed, for it is an
annual plant. Clusius has it by the name of Lotus siliquosus rubello flore:
and he says the seeds were diverse times sent out of Italy by the name of
Sandalida. It is also commonly called in Latin (...) quadratum.

The Place.
The first grows wild in barren ditch banks, pastures, and dry Mountains.

3 Lotus siliqua qaudrata. Square crimson velvet pease.


The second grows likewise in pastures and fields, but not so common as the
other; and is planted in gardens.

The Time.
They flower in July and August.

The Names.
The second is called Lotus Trifolia: in English, horned Clauer, or codded
Trefoile.

The other is called Lotus quadrifolia, or four leafed Grass, or Purple-wort:
of Pena and Lobel, Quadrifolium phaeum fuscum hortorum.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Their faculties in working are referred unto the meadow Trefoiles:
notwithstanding it is reported,

CHAP. 502. Of Medicke Fodder, or snaile Clauer.
The Description.
1 THis kind of Trefoile, called Medica, has many small and slender ramping
branches, crawling and creeping along upon the ground, set full of broad leaves
slightly indented about the edges: the flowers are very small, and of a pale
yellow color, which turn into round wrinkled knobs, like the water Snaile, or
the fish called Periwinckle: wherein is contained flat seed fashioned like a
little kidney, in color yellow, in taste like a Vetch or pease: the (...) is
small, and dies when the seed is ripe: it grows in my garden, and is good to
feed cartell fat.

1 Trifolium Cochleatum. Medicke Fodder.
2 Medicafructu cochleato spinoso. Prickly Snaile Trefoile.


There are many varieties of these plants, and they chiefly consist in the
fruit; for some are smooth and flat, as this first described: other some are
rough and prickely, some with lesser, and other some with bigger prickles; as
also with them standing diverse ways, some are only rough, and of those some
are as big as a small nut, other some no bigger than a pease. I give you here
the descriptions of three rough ones, (as I received them from Mr. Goodyer)
whereof the last is of the sea, which, as you may see, our Author did but
superficially describe.

2 Medicae maioris Baeticae species prima, spinulis intortis.

This has four square reddish streaked hairy trailing branches, like the
small English Medica, greater and longer, four or five foot long: the leaves
are also smooth, growing three together, neither sharp pointed, nor yet so
broad at the top as the said English Medica, but blunt topped, with a small
black spot in the midst, not crooked: the flowers are also yellow, three,
four, or five on a foot-stalke: after comes a round writhed fruit fully as
big as a hasell nut, with small prickles not standing fore-right, but lying
flat on the fruit, finely wrapped, plaited, folded, or interlaced together,
wherein lies wrapped the seed in fashion of a kidney, very like a kidney
bean, but four times smaller, and flatter, of a shining black color
without, like polished Ieat; containing a white kernel within: the root is
like the former, and perishes also at Winter.

Medicae maioris Baeticae spinosae species altera.

The branches also creep on the ground, and are straked smooth four square,
reddish here and there, three or four foot long: the leaves are smooth, finely
notched about the edges, sharp pointed, without black spots, very like Medica
pericarpio plano: the flowers are small and yellow like the other: the fruit is
round, writhed or twined in also, fully as big as a hasell nut, somewhat
cottonie or woolly, with short sharp prickles: wherein lies also wrapped a
shining black kidney-like seed, so like the last described, that they are not
to be discerned apart: the root is also alike, and perishes at Winter.

Medicae marinae spinosae species.

The branches of this are the least and shortest of all the rest, little
exceeding a foot or two in length, and are four square, green, somewhat
hairie, and trailing on the ground: the leaves are like to those of Medica
pericarpio plano, not fully so sharp pointed, without black spots, soft,
hairy, three on a foot-stalke: the flowers grow along the branches, on very
small foot-stalkes, forth of the bosoms of the leaves, (not altogether on or
near the tops of the branches) and are very small and yellow, but one on a
foot-stalke: after comes small round writhed fruit, no bigger than a pease,
with very short sharp prickles, wherein is contained yellowish seed of the
fashion of a kidney like the former, and is the hardest to be plucked forth of
any of the rest: the root is also whitish like the roots of the other, and also
perishes at Winter. Aug. 2. 1621. John Goodyer.

3 Trifolium Cochleatum marinum. Medick Fodder of the sea.


3 This kind also of Trefoile, (called Medica marina: in English, sea
Trefoile, growing naturally by the sea side about Westchester, and upon the
Mediterranean sea coast, and about Venice) has leaves very like unto the
common meadow Trefoile, but thicker, and covered over with a flockie hoarinesse
like Gnaphalium, after the manner of most of the sea herbs: the flowers are
yellow: the seeds wrinkled like the former, but in quantity they be lesser.

The Place.
The first is sown in the fields of Germany, Italy, and other countries, to
feed their cattle, as we in England do Bucke-wheat: we have a small quantity
thereof in our gardens, for pleasures sake

The third grows near unto the sea side in diverse places.

The Time.
Medica must be sown in April; it floureth in June and July: the sruit is
ripe in the end of August.

The Names.
Medick fodder is called of some Trifolium Cochleatum, and Medica: in French,
L'herbe a Limasson: in Greek, (...) in Spanish, (...): of the Valentians and
Catalons, Alfafa, by a word either barbarous or Arabicke: for the chief of the
Arabian writers, Auicen, does call Medica, Cot, Alaseleti, and Alfasfasa.

The other is called Sea Clauer, and Medick fodder of the sea.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Medick fodder is of temperature cold, for which cause it is applied green to
such inflammations

CHAP. 503. Of Wood Sorrel, or Stubwort.
1 Oxys alba. Whitewood Sorrel.


The Description.
1 OXys (...), or Trifolium acetosum, being a kind of three leafed grass, is a
low and base herb without stalk; the leaves immediately rising from the root
upon short stems at their first coming forth folded together, but afterward
they do spread abroad, and are of a fair light green color, in number three,
like the rest of the Trefoiles, but that each lease, has a deep cleft or rift
in the middle: amongst these leaves come up small and weak tender stems, such
as the leaves do grow upon, which bear small star-like flowers of a white
color, with some brightness of carnation dashed over the same: the flower
consists of five small leaves; after which come little round knaps or husks
full of yellowish seed: the root is very threddy, and of a reddish color: the
whole herb is in taste like Sorrel, but much sharper and quicker, and makes
better green sauce than any other herb or Sorrel whatsoever.

My often mentioned friend Mr. George Bowls sent me some plants of this with
very fair red flowers, which he gathered in April last, in a wood of Sir
Thomas Walsinghams at Chisselhurst in Kent, called Stockwell wood, and in a
little round wood thereto adjoining.

2 The second kind of Oxys or wood Sorrel is very like the former, saving
that the flowers are 2 Oxys lutea. Yellow wood Sorrel.
of a yellow color, and yield for their seed vessels small and long horned
cods; in other respects alike.

The Place.
These plants grow in woods and under bushes, in sandy and shadowie places in
every country, I have not as yet found any of the yellow growing with us.

The Time.
They flower from the beginning of April unto the end of May and midst of June.

The Names.
Wood Sorrel or Cuckoo Sorrel is called in Latin Trifolium acetosum: the
Apothecaries and Herbarists call it Alleluya, and Panis Cuculi, or Cuckowes
meat, because either the Cuckoo feeds thereon, or by reason when it
springs forth and floureth the Cuckoo sings most, at which time also
Alleluya was wont to be sung in Churches. Hieronymus Fracastorius names it
Lujula. Alexander Benedictus says that it is called Alimonia: in High Dutch,
(...): in Low Dutch, (...): in French, Pain de Cocu: in English, wood Sorrel,
wood Sower, Sower Trefoile, Stubwort, Alleluia, and Sorrel du Bois.

It is thought to be that which Pliny, lib. 27. cap. 12. calls Oxys; writing
thus: Oxys is three leafed, it is good for a feeble stomach, and is also eaten
of those that are bursten. But Galen in his fourth book of Simples says, that
Oxys is the same which Oxalis or Sorrel is: and Oxys is found in Pliny to be
also Iunci species, or a kind of Rush.

The Nature.
These herbs are cold and dry like Sorrel.

The Virtues.
Sorrel du Bois or wood Sorrel stamped and used for green sauce, is good for
them that have

It is a remedy against putrified and stinking ulcers of the mouth, it
quenches thirst, and cools

CHAP. 504. Of noble Liuer-wort, or golden Trefoile.
The Description.
1 NOble Liuerwort has many leaves spread upon the ground, three cornered,
resembling the three leaued grass, of a perfect grass green color on the
upper side, but grayish underneath: among which rise up diverse small tender
foot-stalkes of three inches long; on the ends whereof stands one small single
blew flower, consisting of six little leaves, having in the middle a few white
chiues: the seed is enclosed in little round knaps, of a whitish color; which
being ripe do start (...) of themselves: the root is slender, composed of an
infinite number of black strings.

2 The second is like unto the precedent in leaves, roots, and seeds: the
flowers hereof are of a shining red color, wherein consists the difference.

This strange three leaued Liuerwort differs not from the former, saving that
this brings forth double blew flowers tending to purple, and the others not so.

There is another in my garden with white flowers, which in stalks and every
other respect is like the others.

1 Hepaticum trifolium. Noble Liuerwort.
2 Hepatica trifolia rubra. Noble red Liuerwort.
3 Hepatica multiflora Lobelij. Noble Liuerwort with double flowers.


The Place.
These pretty flowers are found in most places of Germany in shadowie woods
among shrubs, and also by highwaies sides: in Italy likewise, and that not
only with the blew flowers, but the same with double flowers also, by the
report of Alphonsus Pancius Dr. of Physic in the University of Ferrara, a man
excellently well seen in the knowledge of Simples. They do all grow likewise in
my garden, except that with double flowers, which as yet is a stranger in
England: it is now plentiful in many gardens.

The Time.
They flower in March and April, and perfect their seed in May.

The Names.
Noble Liuerwort is called Hepatica trifolia, Hepatica aurea, Trifolium (...):
of Baptista Sardus, Herba Trinitatis: in High Dutch, (...) (...) (...): in
Low Dutch, (...) (...) (...): in French, Hepatique: in English, Golden
Trefoile, three leaued Liuerwort, noble Liuerwort, and herb Trinity.

The Temperature.
These herbs are cold and dry, with an astringent or binding quality.

The Virtues.
It is reported to be good against the weakness of the liver which proceeds
of an hot cause;

Baptista Sardus commends it, and writes that the chief virtue is in the
root; if a spoonful of Enterocele.

CHAP. 505. Of Melilot, or plaster Clauer.
The Description.
1 THe first kind of Melilot has great plenty of small tough and twiggy
branches, and stalks full of joints or knees, in height two cubits, set full
of leaves (...) together, like unto Burgondie hay. The flowers grow at the top
of the stalk, of a pale yellow color, standing thickly set and compact
together, in order or rows, very like the flowers of Securidaca (...): which
being vaded, there follow certain crooked cods bending or turning upward with
a sharp point, in fashion not much unlike a Parrets bill, wherein is contained
seed like Fenugreeke, but flatter and slenderer: the whole plant is of a
reasonable good smell, much like unto honey, and very full of juice: the root
is very tough and pliant.

1 Melilotus Syriaca odora. Assyrian Clauer.
2 Melilotus Italica and Patauina. Italian Clauer.


2 The second kind of Melilot has small and tender upright stalks, a cubit
high, and somewhat more, of a reddish color, set full of round leaves three
together, not snipt about the edges like the other Trefoiles; and they are of a
very deep green color, thick, fat, and full of juice. The flowers grow
along the tops of the stalks, of a yellow color, which turn into rough
round seeds as big as a (...), and of a pale color. The whole plant has also
the savor of honey, and perishes when it has borne his seed.

3 The third kind of Melilot has round stalks and iagged leaves set round
about, not much unlike the leaves of Fenugreeke, always three growing together
like the Trefoiles, and (...) covered over with an hoarinesse, as though meal
had been strewed upon them. The flowers be yellow and small, growing thick
together in a tuft, which turn into little cods, wherein the seed is
contained: the root is small, tough, and pliant.

4 The fourth kind of Melilot grows to the height of three cubits, set full
of leaves like the common Melilot, and of the same savor: the flowers grow
along the top of the stalks, of a white color, which turn into small soft
husks, wherein is contained little blackish seed: the root is also tough and
pliant.

3 Melilotus Coronata. Kings Clauer.
4 Melilotus Germanica. Germane Clauer.


Although our Author intended this last description for our ordinary Melilot,
yet he made it of another which is three times larger, growing in some gardens
(where it is only sown) above two yards high, with white flowers and many
branches: the whole shape thereof is like the common kind, as far as I
remember. The common Melilot has weak cornered green stalks some two foot
and better high; whereon grow longish leaves snipt and oftentimes eaten about
the edges, of a fresh green color: out of the bosoms of the leaves come
little stalks some handful long, set thick on their tops with little yellow
flowers hanging down and turning up again, each flower being composed of two
little yellow leaves, whereof the uppermost turns up again, and the undermost
seems to be parted into three. The flowers past, there succeed little cods
wherein is the seed.

The Place.
These plants grow in my garden: the common English Melilot Pena sets sorth
for Melilotus Germanica: but for certainty no part of the world does enjoy so
great part thereof as England, and especially Essex; for I have feene between
Sudbury in Suffolk, and Clare in Essex, and from Clare to Heningham, and from
thence to Ouendon, Bulmare, and (...), very many acres of earable pasture
overgrowne with the same; insomuch that it does not only spoil their land,
but the corn also, as Cockle or Darnel, and as a weed that generally spreads
over that corner of the Shire.

The Time.
These herbs do flower in July and August.

The Names.
Plaster Clauer is called by the general name, Melilotus, of some, Trifolium
odor at (...); yet there is (...) sweet Trefoile, as has been declared. Some
call it Trifolium Equinum, and (...), or (...). Trefoile, by reason it is good
sodder for horses, who do greedily seed thereon: likewise (...) (...), or
Bears Trefoile: of Fuchsius, Saxifraga (...), and (...) Campana: of Cato,
(...) (...), which most do name Corona Regia: in high Dutch, (...) (...): of
the Romans and Hetrurians, Tribolo, as Matthiolus writes: in English,
Melilot, and Plaister-Clauer: in Yorkshire, Harts-Clauer.

The Temperature.
Melilote, says Galen, has more plenty of hot substance than cold (that is to
say (...) and dry in the first degree) it has also a certain binding quality
besides a wasting and (...) (...). (...) shows, that Melilote is of a binding
and mollifying quality, but the mollifying quality is not proper unto it, but
in as much as it (...) away, and digesteth humors (...) in hot swellings, or
otherwise: for so far does it mollify or supple that thing which is hard,
which is not properly called mollifying, but digesting and wasting away by
vapors: which kind of quality the Grecians call (...).

The Virtues.
Melilote boiled in sweet wine until it be soft, if you add thereto the yolke
of a roasted egg, the

With the juice hereof, oil, wax, rosen and turpentine, is made a most
sovereign healing (...)

The herb boiled in wine and drunk provoke urine, breaks the stone, and
(...) the

The juice thereof dropped into the eyes cleereth the sight, consumes,
dissolueth, and (...)

Melilote alone with water heals (...) melicerides, a kind of wens or rather
apostems containing

It likewise (...) the pain of the ears, if the juice be dropped therein
mixed with a little wine, and takes away the pain of the head, which the
Greeks call (...), especially if the head be bathed therewith, and a little
vinegar and oil of Roses mixed amongst it.

CHAP. 506. Of certain other Trefoiles.
THose Tresoiles being omitted by our Author, I have thought good to put into a
chapter by themselves, though they have little (...) with one another, the two
last excepted.

The Description.
1 THe first of those in roots, stalks, and manner of growing is like the
Medicke or (...) Trefoiles formerly described: the leaves are hairie; the
flowers yellow and small: after which sollow crooked flat cods, of an
indifferent breadth, wherein is contained seeds made after the fashion of little
kidneys; this the Italians, according to Lobel, call Lunaria radiata; in the
Hist. Ludg. it is called Medica (...). altera lunata.

2 The root of this is long and thick, covered with a yellowish rind, and
having a white sweet (...) in the inside, covered with a hairinesse on the top,
and sending forth sundry fibers: from this rise up many weak long
foot-stalkes, whereon grow leaves set together by threes, long, narrow, smooth,
lightly nickt on the edges: amongst these rises up commonly one stalk (yet
sometimes two) smooth and naked, three or four inches long; on the top thereof
grow spike fashion, 8. or ten pretty large light purple flowers, each of them
being set in a cup divided into 5. parts. This grows upon diverse parts of the
Alps: and Pena in his Mons Baldus set it forth by the name of (...)
angustifolium Alpinum. Bauhinus says, the root hereof tastes like Liquorice,
wherefore it may be called Glycyrhiza Astragaloides, or Astragalus (...): and
he received it out of Spain by the name of Glycyrhiza. He calls it in his
(...), Trifolium Alpinum flore magno radice dulci.

1 Trifolium siliqua lunata. Moon Trefoile.
2 Trisol. angustifol. Alpinum. Liquorice Trefoile.
3 Trifolium spinosum Creticum. Prickly Trefoile.


3 This thornie Trefoile has a long threddy root, from which arise many short
branched stalks some two handfulls high, cornered, and spread upon the ground;
the joints, which are many, are commonly red, and armed with four sharp
prickles, and out of each of them, upon short footstalkes grow two trifoile
leaves, green, longish, and ending in a little prickle: out of these joints
also grow little foot-stalkes, which carry single flowers made of five little
leaves, of the shape and color of the little blew Bell-floure, with ten chiues
in the middle tipped with yellow: after these follow five cornered sharp pointed
heads, containing a single flat red seed in each corner. Clusius set forth this
by the name of Trifolium spinosum (...): the seed was sent out of Candy by the
name of (...): he questions whether it may not be the true Tribulus terrestris
of Dioscorides.

4 The roots, stalks, and leaves of this pretty Trefoile do not much differ
from the common 4 Trifolium fragiferum. Straw-berry (...).
white Trefoile, but there is some difference in the flowers and seed; for the
flowers of this are small, grow thick together, and are of a whitish blush
color: after which follow heads made of little bladders or thin skins, after
such a manner as they resemble a Strawberrie or Raspas, and they are of a
grayish color, here and there marked with red: the stalks seldom grow above
three inches high. It grows in most salt marshes, as in Dartford salt marish,
in those below Purfleet, and such like: it flowers in July and August. Clusius
has set it forth by the name of Trifolium fragiferum Frisicum: some had rather
call it Trifolium vesicarium, Bladder Trefoile.

5 There are two other Trefoiles with which I think good to acquaint you, and
those by the similitude of the cups, which contain the flowers, and become the
seed vessels, may be fitly called Stellata; and thus Bauhine calls the first
Trifolium stellatum; whereto for distinctions sake I add hirsutum, calling it
Trifol. stellatum hirsutum, Rough starrie headed Trefoile: it has a small long
white root, from which arise stalks some foot high, round, slender, hairie,
and reddish, having few leaves or branches: the leaves stand three on a stalk,
as in other Trefoiles, smooth on the upper side, and hairy below: the flowers
are small and red, like in shape to those of the common red Trefoile, but
lesser; and they stand each of them in a cup reddish and rough below, and on
the upper part cut into five long sharp leaves standing open as they commonly
figure a star: the flowers fallen, these cups dilate themselves, and have in
the middle a longish transuerse whitish spot. I saw this flouring in May in the
garden of Mr. Tradescant, who did first bring plants hereof from Fermentera a
small Island in the Mediterranean sea.

6 This other (which for any thing that I know is not figured nor described by
any) has stalks sometimes a foot, otherwhiles little above an inch high,
hairy, and divided but into few branches: the leaves, which stand by threes,
are fastened to long foot-stalkes, and they themselves are somewhat longish,
having two little sharp pointed leaves growing at the setting on of the
footstalkes to the stalks: they are green of color, and not snipt about the
edges. The heads that grow on the tops of the stalks are round, short, and
green, with small purple or else whitish flowers like those of the common
Trefoile, but lesser, standing in cups divided into five parts, which when the
flowers are fallen become somewhat bigger, harsher, and more prickly, but open
not themselves so much as those of the former: the seed is like that of Millet,
but somewhat rounder. This flowers in June, and the seed is ripe in July. I
first observed it in Dartford salt marish, the tenth of June, 1633. I have
named this Trifolium stellatum glabrum, Smooth starrie headed Trefoile.

The Temperature and Virtues.
These, especially the three last, seem to be of the same temper and virtue as
the common Meadow Trefoiles, but none of them are at this day used in Physic,
or known, unless to some few.

CHAP. 597. Of Pulse.
The Kinds.
THere be diverse sorts of Pulse, as Beans, Peason, Tares, Chiches, and such
like, comprehended under this title Pulse: and first of the great Bean, or
garden Bean.

The Description.
1 THe great Bean rises up with a four square stalk, smooth, hollow,
without joints, long and upright, which when it is thick sown has no need of
propping, but when it is sown alone by it self it soon falls down to the
ground: it brings forth long leaves one standing from another, consisting of
many growing upon one rib or stem, every one whereof is somewhat fat, set with
veins, slipperie, more long than round. The flowers are (...), in form long,
in color either white with black spots, or of a blackish purple: after them
come up long cods, thick, full of substance, slenderer below, frized on the
inside with a certain whitewooll as it were, or soft flocks; which before
they be ripe are green, and afterward being dry they are black and somewhat
hard, as be also the cods of broom, yet they be longer than those, and
greater: in which are contained three, four, or five Beans, seldom more,
long, broad, flat, like almost to a man's nail, great, and oftentimes to the
weight of half a dram; for the most part white, now and then of a red purplish
color; which in their upper part have a long black navel as it were, which is
covered with a nail, the color whereof is a light green: the skin of the
(...) or bean is closely compacted, the inner part being dry is hard and
sound, and easily cleft in sunder; and it has on the one side an evident
beginning of sprouting, as have also the little pease, great Pease, Ciches, and
many other Pulses. The roots hereof are long, and fastened with many strings.

1 Fabamaior hortensis. The great garden Bean.
2 Fabasyluestris. The wild Bean.


2 The second kind of Bean (which Pena sets forth under the title of
Syluestris Graecorum Faba, and Dodonaeus, Bonasyluestris; which may be called
in English Greek Beans) has square hollow stalks like the garden Beans,
but smaller. The leaves be also like the common Bean, saving that the ends of
the rib whereon those leaves do grow have at the very end small tendrels (...)
claspers, such as the pease leaves have. The (...) are in fashion like the
former, but of a dark red color: which being vaded, there succeed long cods
which are black when they be ripe, within which is enclosed black seed as big
as a Pease, of an unpleasant taste and savor.

3 The common Bean in stalks, leaves, flowers, and cods is like the former
great garden Bean, but lesser in them all; yet the leaves are more, and grow
thicker, and out of the bosoms of the leaves upon little foot-stalkes grow the
flowers, commonly six in number, upon one stalk, which are succeeded by so many
cods, lesser and rounder than those of the former: the beans themselves are
also less, and not so flat, but rounder, and somewhat longish: their color
are either whitish, yellowish, or else black. This is sown in most places of
this kingdom, in corn fields, and known both to man and beast. I much wonder
our Author forgot to mention so common and vulgarly known a Pulse. It is the
(...) or Faselus minor of Dodonaeus; and the Faba minor of Pena and Lobel.

The Place.
The first Bean is sown in fields and gardens every where about London.

This black Bean is sown in a few men's gardens who be delighted in variety
and study of herbs, whereof I have great plenty in my garden.

The Time.
They flower in April and May, and that by parcels, and they be long in
flouring: the fruit is ripe in July and August.

The Names.
The garden Bean is called in Latin Faba: in English, the garden Bean: the
field Bean is of the same kind and name, although the fertility of the soil
has amended and altered the fruit into a greater form. The difference
between the garden and field Bean is a specificke difference, and not an
accidental one caused by the soil, as every one that knows them may well
perceive.

The black Bean, whose figure we have set forth in the second place, is
called Faba (...): of some thought to be the true physic Bean of the
Ancients; whereupon they have named it Faba Veterum, and also Faba Graecorum,
or the Greek Bean. Some would have the garden Bean to be the true Phaseolus,
or Kidney Bean; of which number Dodonaeus is chief, who has so wrangled and
ruffled among his relatiues, that all his antecedents must be cast out of
doors: for his long and tedious tale of a tub we have thought meet to commit to
oblivion. It is called in Greek (...). whereupon the Athenians feast days
dedicated to Apollo were named (...), in which Beans and Pulses were sodden: in
Latin it is also called Faba fresa or fracta, broken or bruised Bean.

Dodonaeus knew well what he did, as any that are either judicious or learned
may see, if they look into the first chapter of the second book of his fourth
Pemptas. But our Authors words are too injurious, especially being without
cause, and against him, from whom he borrowed all that was good in this his
book, except the figures of Tabernamontanus. It may be Dr. Priest did not fit
his translation in this place to our Authors capacity; for Dodonaeus did not
affirm it to be the Phaseolus, but (...), distinguishing between them.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The Bean before it be ripe is cold and moist: being dry it has power to bind
and restrain, according Galen.

The Bean (as Galen says in his book of the Faculties of nourishments) is
windy meat, although

Beans have not a close and heavy substance, but a spongie and light, and this
substance has a

And seeing the meal of Beans is windy, the Beans themselves if they be
boiled whole and

If they be parched they lose their windiness, but they are harder of
digestion, and do slowly

The pulpe or meat thereof does somewhat cleanse, the skin does a little bind.

Therefore diverse Physicians have given the whole Bean boiled with vinegar and
salt to those

It raises phlegm out of the chest and lungs: being outwardly applied it
dries without hurt the

We have laid the meal thereof with Oxymel, or syrrup of vinegar, both upon
bruised and wounded

It also makes a good plaster and pultis for men's stones and women's paps: for
these parts when

Also milk is dried up with that pultis.

The meal thereof (as Dioscorides further adds) being tempered with the
meal of Fenugreek

With Rose leaves, Frankincense, and the white of an egg, it keeps back the
watering of the

Being tempered with wine it heals suffusions, and stripes of the eyes.

The Bean being chewed without the skin, is applied to the forehead against
rheumes and falling

Being boiled in wine it takes away the inflammation of the stones.

The skins of Beans applied to the place where the hairs were first plucked up,
will not suffer them

Being applied with Barley meal parched and old oil, they waste away the Kings
evil.

The decoction of them serves to die woollen cloth withal.

This Bean being divided into two parts (the skin taken off) by which it was
naturally joined

The black Bean is not used with us at all, seeing, as we have said, it is
rare, and sown only in a

CHAP. 508. Of Kidney Bean.
The Kinds.
THe stock or kindred of the Kidney Bean are wonderfully many; the difference
especially consists in the color of the fruit: there be other differences,
whereof to write particularly would greatly stuff our volume with superfluous
matter, considering that the simplest is able to distinguish apart the white
Kidney Bean from the black, the red from the purple, and likewise those of
mixed colors from those that are only of one color: as also great ones from
little ones. Wherefore it may please you to be content with the description of
some few, and the figures of the rest, with their several titles in Latin and
English, referring their descriptions unto a further consideration, which
otherwise would be an endless labor, or at the least needless.

The Description.
1 THe first kind of Phaseolus or garden Smilax has long and small branches
growing very high, taking hold with his clasping tendrels upon poles and
sticks, and whatsoever stands near unto him, as does the hop (...) vine,
which are so weak and tender, that without such props or supporters they are
not able to sustain themselves, but will run ramping on the ground fruitless:
upon the branches do grow broad leaves almost like Iuie, growing together by
three, as in the common Trefoile or three leaued Grass: among which come the
flowers, that do vary and differ in their colors, according to the soil where
they grow, sometimes white, sometimes red, and oftentimes of a pale color:
afterward there come out long cods, whereof some are crooked, and some are
straight, and in those the fruit is contained, smaller than the common Bean,
somewhat flat, and fashioned like a Kidney, which are of diverse colors, like
unto the flowers: whereto for the most part these are like.

2 There is also another Dolichus or Kidney Bean, lesser, shorter, and with
smaller cods, whose flowers and fruit are like in form to the former Kidney
Beans, but much lesser, and of a black color.

3 There is likewise another strange Kidney Bean, which does also wind it
(...) about poles and props near adioining, that has likewise three leaves
hanging upon one stem, as have the other Kidney Beans, but every one is much
narrower and also blacker: the cods be shorter, plainer, and flatter, and
contain fewer seeds.

1 Phaseolus albus. White Kidney Bean.
2 Phascolus niger. Black Kidney Bean.
3 Smilax hortensis rubra. Red Kidney Bean.
4 Smilax hortensis (...). Pale yellow Kidney Bean.


5 Phaseolus peregrinus (...) minore albo. Indian Kidney Bean with a small
white fruit.
6 Phaseolus peregrinus fructa minore frutescens. Indian Kidney Bean with a
small red fruit.
7 Phaseolus peregrinus (...). Narrow leafed Kidney Bean.


4 This Kidney Bean differs not from the others, but only in the color of
the fruit, which are of a pale yellow color, wherein consists the difference.

Besides the varieties of these Kidney Beans mentioned by our Author, there are
diverse other (...) up by (...), which have been brought out of the East and
West Indies, and from some parts of Africa; I will only give you the figures of
two or three of them outof Clusius, with the colors of their flowers and fruit.

5 The stalk of this is low and stiff, the flowers of a whitish yellow on the
outside, and of a violet color within: the fruit is snow white, with a black
spot in the eye: This is Phaseolus peregrinus 4. of Clusius.

6 This has leaves like the Marsh Trefoile, flowers growing many together, in
shape and magnitude like those of common Pease: the cods were narrow, and
contained three or four seeds, which were small, no bigger than the seeds of
Laburnum; the Painter expressed two of them in the leaf next under the
uppermost tuft of flowers: this is Clusius his Phaseolus peregrinus. 5.

7 This grows high, winding about poles or other supporters: the leaves are
narrower than the former: the fruit lesser and flatter, of a reddish color.
This is the Phaseolus percgrinus 6. of Clusius.

8 This winds about poles, and grows to a 8 (...) Brasilianus. Kidney Bean
of Brasile.
8 Phascoli (...) ad vivum. The Brasile Kidney Bean in his full bigness.
9 Phaseolus Aegyptiacus. The party colored Bean of Egypt.
10 (...) Americi (...). Purging Kidney Bean of America:
(...) paruiex (...).
(...) paruipallido albiex America delati.
(...) magnilati (...).
(...) rubri.
(...) Indiani (...).
(...) (...).
great height, with soft hairy leaves and large cods, wherein are contained
seeds of diverse colors, sometimes they are red, otherwhiles of a whitish ash
color, sometimes wholly black, and otherwhiles spotted.

9 The Egyptian Bean is somewhat like the other Kidney Beans in his growing:
his fruit is of the bigness of a small Hasell nut, black on one side, and of
a golden yellow or Orange color on the other.

Besides these you find here figured, and diverse others described by Clusius,
I think it not amiss to mention two more. The first of these, which was
procured by Mr. (...) (...); and groves in our Gardens, is a large plant, not
differing in (...) of growth (...) the former Indian Kidney Beans, but his
flowers are large, many, and of an elegant (...) color: whence it is vulgarly
termed by our Flourists, the Scarlet Bean. The other I have seen grow to a
little height, but it would not endure; but the cods of it which were brought
to us were some three inches long, and covered with a hairie down of a reddish
color, which put upon the hands or skin in (...) part of the body would sting
like a Nettle, and this was called the Stinging Bean: I think it came from
some part of the East Indies.

The Place.
Kidney Beans do easily and soon spring up, and grow into a very great
length, being (...) near to long poles fastened hard by them, or hard by arbors
or banqueting places, otherwise they he (...) on the ground, slowly come up,
hardly bring forth fruit, and become faulty and smitted, as (...) writes.

The Time.
It is sown in the Spring, especially in the midst of April, but not before:
the fruit is ripe about the end of Summer.

The Names.
Hippocrates, Diocles, Theophrastus, and most of the other old Writers do call
it (...): diverse of the (...) of the seed do name it(...) and (...) in Latin,
(...) (...) calls it (...), because it climeth up as Smilax does, and takes
hold of props, stays, and shrubbes standing near unto it: others name it
(...), a Diminitiue derived from (...) for (...) and (...) are not one and the
self same pulse called by diverse names, as some suppose, but sundry fruits one
differing from the other, as (...) in his first book of the Faculties of
Nourishments does sufficiently declare, where he entreats of them both. For
first he disputes of Phaseli and (...), Beans, and Pease; then afterward
others coming between, he writes of Dolichus, which also is named Phascolus:
and though (...) may be thought to doubt what manner of pulse that is which
(...) calls (...): lotwith standing he gathers and concludes that it is a
fruit of a garden plant in Italy, and in Caria, growing in the fields, which is
in form longer than the Cichlings, and was commonly called in his time (...).
Of his opinion is Paulus (...), writing of (...), which he names (...), in
the 79. chap. of his first book. Moreover, Faselus was in times past a common
pulse in Italy and Rome, and (...) a strange pulse; for (...) and Palladius,
writers of husbandry, have made mention of the sowing of Phaselus: and Virgil
calls it Vilis in the first of his Georgicks: but concerning the sowing of
Dolichus or Kidney Bean, none of the Latins have written, by reason that the
same was rare in Italy, and sown only in gardens, as Galen has (...), naming
it ostentimes a garden plant, and showing that the same, as we have said, is
sown in Caria; and likewise (...) names it (...) that is to say, Smilax
hortensis, or garden Smilax, because it grows in gardens: who also writing of
this in another (...) chapter, (...) plainly, that Smilax hortensis, or
Dolichus is another plant differing from Faselus, which he names (...).

For which causes it is not to be doubted, but that (...) with three syllables,
differs from Faseolus with four syllables, no otherwise than Cicer,
Cicercula, and Cicera differ, which notwithstanding be near one to another in
names: and it is not to be doubted but that they are deceived, who think it to
be one and the self same Pulse called by sundry names.

This plant is named in English, Kidney Bean, Sperage Beans: of some, (...),
or long Peason, French Beans, garden Smilax, and Roman Beans: in French,
Feues de Romme: in Dutch, (...).

The Temperature.
Kidney Beans, as (...) teaches, do more loose the belly than Peason; they
are less windy, and nourish well, and no less than Peason, as Diocles faith:
they be also without ingendring (...) at all: the Arabian Physicians say that
they are hot and moist of nature.

The Virtues.
The fruit and cods of Kidney Beans boiled together before they be ripe, and
(...), and so

They do also gently loose the belly, provoke urine, and engender good blood
reasonably well;

CHAP. 509. Of the flat Bean called Lupine.
The Description.
1 THe tame or garden Lupine has round hard stems, which of themselves do
stand upright without any succor, help or stay: the leaves consist of five,
six, or seven joined together.

1 Lupinus sativus. Garden Lupines.
2 Lupinus flore luteo. Yellow Lupines.
3 Lupinus flore (...). Blew Lupine.
4 Lupinus mayor (...) (...); The great blew Lupine.
like those of the Chaste tree, green on the upper side, and on the nether side
white and downy; and in the evening about the setting of the Sun they hang
flagging downwards as though they were withered: among these there comes up a
tuft of flowers of a pale or light blush color, which turn into great rough
cods, wherein is the fruit, which is flat and round like a cake, of a white
color, and bitter in taste: and where they cleave unto the cod, in that part
they have a certain dent like a little navel. This Lupine has but one root,
which is slender and wooddie, having hanging on it a few small threads like
hairs.

2 The yellow Lupine is like to the garden one in stalk and leaves, yet both
of these lesser and shorter. It has beautiful flowers of an exceeding fair
gold yellow color, sweet of smell, made up into an ear, of the color of the
yellow violet, and somewhat of the smell: the coddes are small, hard, somew hat
hairy: the seeds be little, flat, (...), in taste ex treme bitter, of sundry
colors, ill favored, far lesser than the (...) one.

3 The blew Lupines are longer than the yellow, and divided into more wings and
branches: the leaves be lesser and thinner: the flowers small, and lesser than
the yellow, of a blew color: the seeds be also of diverse colors, bitter, and
lesser than any of them all.

4 There is also another blew Lupine, whose leaves, stalks, flowers, and cods
are like, but larger than those of the first described: the flowers are of
color blew, with some whiteness here and there intermixed.

The Place and Time.
They require (says (...)) a sandy and bad soil: they hardly come up in
tilled places, being of their own nature wild: they grow in my garden, and in
other men's gardens about London. They are planted in April, and bring sorth
their fruit at two or three sundry times, as though it did flower often, and
bring forth many crops: the first in May, the second in July, the last in
September, but it seldom comes to ripeness.

The Names.
This pulse is named in Greek (...): in Latin, Lupinus, and Lupinus (...): in
high Dutch, Feigbonen: in Italian, Lupino domestico: in Spanish, Entramocos: in
the Brabanders language, (...) boonen, and Lupinen: in French, Lupins: in
English, Garden Lupine, tame Lupine, and of some after the German name
Fig-beane.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The seed of the garden Lupine is (...), that is to say, much and often used,
as Galen says in his Galen writes in his books of the Faculties of simple
medicines, one of the emplaistickes or clammers.

But whilst the natural bitterness does as yet remain, it has power to
cleanse and to consume

Moreover, the decoction thereof inwardly taken, voideth the worms; and
likewise if it be sundry

It brings down the menses, and expels the dead child if it be laid to
with (...) and

Moreover, the meal of Lupines does waste or consume away without any biting
quality, for it (...), and Phymata: but then it is to be boiled either in
vinegar or oxymell, or else in water and vinegar, and that according to the
temperature of the grieved parties, and the diversities of the diseases, Quod
ex vsu est (...): and it also takes away blew marks, and what thing soever
else we have said the decoction could do, all the same does the meal likewise
perform.

These Lupines, (...) Dioscorides does furthermore write, being boiled in rain
water till they yield

They cure the (...) in sheep with the root of black Chameleon Thistle, if
they be washed

The (...) boiled with water and drunk, provoke urine.

The Lupines being made sweet and pleasant, mixed with vinegar and drunk, take
away the lothsomnesse

Lupines boiled in that strong leigh which Barbars do use, and some Wormwood,
Centorie, and Gangroena, and those parts that are deprived of their nourishment
and begin to mortify, and staieth the ambulatiue nature of running and
spreading ulcers, being applied thereto very hot, with stuphes of cloth or tow.

CHAP. 510. Of Peason.
The Kinds.
THere be diverse sorts of Peason, differing very notably in many respects; some
of the garden, and others of the field, and yet both counted tame: some with
tough skins or membranes in the cods, and others have none at all, whose cods
are to be eaten with the Pease when they be young as those of the young Kidney
(...): others carrying their fruit in the tops of the branches, are esteemed
and taken for Scottish Peason, which is not very common. There be diverse sorts
growing wild, as shall be declared.

1 (...) (...). (...) Pease.
2 Pisum minus. Garden and field Pease.


The Description.
1 THe great Pease has long (...), hollow, brickle, of a whitish green color,
branched, and spread upon the ground, unless they be held up with proppes set
near unto them: the leaf thereof is wide and long, made up of many little
leaves which be smooth, white, growing upon one little stalk or stem, and set
one right against another: it has also in the upper part long clasping
tendrels, wherewith it foldeth it self upon props and stays standing next unto

3 Pisum vmbellatum. Tufted or Scottish Pease.
4 Pisum excorticatum. Pease without skins in the cod.
5 Pisum syluestre. Wild Pease.
6 Pisum perenne syluestre. Everlasting wild Pease.
it: the flower is white and has about the middle of it a purple spot: the
cods be long, round (...): in which are contained seeds greater than Ochri, or
little Peason; which being dry are cornered, and that unequal, of color
sometimes white and sometimes gray: the roots are small.

2 The field Pease is so very well known to all, that it were a needless
labor to spend time about the description.

3 Tufted Pease are like unto those of the field, or of the garden in each
respect; the difference consists only in that, that this plant carries his
flowers and fruit in the tops of the branches in a round (...) or vmbel,
contrary to all other of his kind, which bring forth their fruit in the midst,
and along the stalks: the root is thick and fibrous.

4 Pease without skins, in the cods differ not from the precedent, saving that
the cods hereof want that tough skinny membrane in the same, which the hogs
cannot eat by reason of the toughness; whereas the other may be eaten cods and
all the rest, even as Kidney beans are: which being so dressed are exceeding
delicate meat.

5 The wild Pease differs not from the common field Pease in stalk and
leaves, saving that this wild kind is somewhat lesser: the (...) are of a
yellow color, and the fruit is much lesser.

6 The Pease whose root never dies, (...) not from the wild Pease, only his
continuing without sowing, being once sown or planted, sets forth the
difference.

The Place.
Pease are set and sown in gardens, as also in the (...) in all (...) of
England. The tufted Pease are in reasonable plenty in the West part of (...)
about Sennocke or Seuenock; in other places not so (...).

The wild Pease do grow in pastures and (...) fields in diverse places,
specially about the field belonging unto Bishops Hatfield in (...).

The Time.
They be sown in the Spring time, like as be also other pulses, which are ripe
in Summer: they prosper best in warm weather, and easily take harm by cold,
especially when they flower.

The Names.
The great Pease is called in Latin (...) Romanum, or (...) maius: in English,
Roman Pease, or the greater Pease, also garden Pease: of some, Branch Pease,
French Pease, and (...). (...) and other old Writers do call it in Greek
(...): in Latin also Pisum: in low Dutch, Roomsche (...): in French, (...)
Pois. The little Pease is called of the Apothecaries every where Pisum, and
(...): it is called in English, little Pease, or the common Pease:

The Temperature and Vertnes.
The Pease, as Hippocrates says, is less windy than Beans, but it passes
sooner through the belly. Galen writes, that Peason are in their whole
substance like unto Beans, and be eaten after the same manner that Beans are,
notwithstanding they differ from them in these two things, both because they
are not so windy as be the beans, and also for that they have not a clensing
faculty, and therefore they do more slowly descend through the belly. They have
no effectual quality manifest, and are in a mean between those things which
are of (...) and bad juice, that nourish much and little, that be windy and
without wind, as Galen in his book of the Faculties of Nourishments has
written of these and of beans.

CHAP. 511. Of the (...) or Garden Ciche.
The Description.
GArden Ciche brings forth round stalks, branched and somewhat hairy, leaning
on the one side: the leaves are made of many little ones growing upon one stem
or rib, and set one right against another: of which every one is small, broad,
and nicked on the edges, lesser than the leaves of wild Germander: the flowers
be small, of color either white, or of a reddish purple: after which come up
little short cods, puffed up as it were with wind like little bladders, in
which do lie two or at the most three seeds cornered, small toward the end,
with one sharp corner, not much unlike to a Rams head, of color either white,
or of a reddish black purple; in which is plainly seen the place where they
begin first to sprout. The root is slender, white and long: For as Theophrastus
says, the Ciche takes deepest root of all the Pu ses.

The Place.
It is sown in Italy, Spain and France, every where in the fields. It is
sown in our London (...), but not common.

Cicer sativum. Garden Ciche.


The Time.
It is sown in April, being first steeped in water a day before: the fruit is
ripe in August.

The Names.
It is called in Greek (...) in Latin, Cicer (...), or Rams Ciches, and of
the blackish purple color, Cicer nigrum, vel (...), black or red Ciche: and
the other is named Cand, dum (...) album (...): orwhite Ciche: in English,
Common Cich, or Ciches, red (...), of (...), Sheep Ciche Pease, or Sheep
Ciche Peason.

The Temperature and (...).
The Ciche, as Galen writes in his book of

Some give the same to stalion borses. Moreover, Arutina, or (...) Ciches, but
it is better to drink the broth of them sodden in water.

Both the Rams Ciches, as Dioscorides says,

CHAP. 512. Of wild Ciches.
The Kinds.
THe wild Ciche is like to the tame (says Dioscorid (...)) but it differs
in seed: the later writers have set down two kinds hereof, as shall be
declared.

The Description.
1 THe first wild Cich brings forth a great number of stalks branched, lying
flat on the ground: about which be the leaves, consisting of many upon one rib
as do those of the garden Ciche, but not nicked in the edges, more like to the
leaves of (...): the fioures come forth fastened on small stems, which grow
close to the stalks, of a pale yellow color, and like unto ears: in their
places come up little cods, in form and bigness of the fruit of garden
Ciches, black and something hairie, in which lies the seed, that is small,
hard, flat, and glittering, in taste like that of Kidney Bean: the root
grows deep, fastened with many strings.

2 There is another kind of wild Cich that has also a great number of stalks
lying upon the ground, about which stand soft leaves, something hairy and
white, consisting of (...) (...) standing upon a middle rib, the least of which
stand nearest to the stem, and the greatest at the very too: the flowers come
forth at the bottom of the leaves many together, of color (...); after which
grow small long husks, soft and hairy, in cuery one whereof is a little cod,
in which lie two seeds like little Cichlings.

1 Cicer syluestre. The wild Cich.
2 Cicer syluestre (...). Broad leafed wild Cich.


The Place.
These plants are sown in the parts beyond the seas for to feed their cattle
with in winter, as we do tares, vetches, and such other base pulse.

The Time.
The time answers the Vetch or tare.

The Names.
Thewild Cich has no other name in Latin but Cicer syluestre: the later
writers have not found any name at all.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Their temperature and virtues are referred to the garden Cich, as Theophrastus
(...); and Galen says that the wild Cich is in all things like unto that of
the garden, but in Physics use more effectual, by reason it is more hotter
and drier, and also more biting and bitter.

CHAP. 513. Of Lentils.
The Description.
1 THe first Lentil grows up with slender stalks, and leaves which be somewhat
hard, growing aslope from both sides of the rib or middle stalk, narrow and
many in number like those of Tares, but narrower and lesser: the flowers be
small, tending somewhat toward a purple: the cods are little and broad: the
seeds in these are in number three or four, little, round, plain, and flat:
the roots are small and threddy.

2 The second kind of Lentill has small tender and pliant branches a cubit
high, whereon (...) grow leaves divided or (...) of sundry other small leaves,
like the wild Vetch, ending at the (...) rib with some clasping tendrels,
wherewith it takes (...) of such things as are near (...) it: among these
come sorth little brownish flowers mixed with white, which turn into small
(...) (...), (...), little brown slat seed, and sometimes white.

1 Lens mayor. Great Lentils.
2 Lens minor. Little Lentils.


The Place.
These Pulses do grow in my garden; and it is reported unto me by those of good
credit, that about Watford in Middlesex and other places of England the
husbandmen do sow them for their cattle, even as others do Tares.

The Time.
They both flower and wax ripe in July and August.

The Names.
They are called in Greek (...), or (...): in Latin, Lens, and Lenticula: in
High Dutch, (...): in French, Lentille: in Italian, Lentichia: in Spanish,
Lenteia: in English, Lentils.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Lentils, as Galen says, are in a mean between hot and cold, yet are they
dry in the second degree: aut cum ipsis oleo condiens, and then take it, the
same drink does loose the belly.

The first decoction of Lentils does loose the belly; but if they be boiled
again, and the first

They do their operation more effectually in stopping or binding, if all or any
of these following

The meal of Lentils mixed with honey does mundifie and cleanse corrupt ulcers
and rotten

The Lentil having the skin or coat taken off, as it loses that strong binding
quality, and those

It in gendreth thick and naughty juice, and slowly passes through the belly,
yet does it not thereof do necessarily become Lepers, and are much subject to
cankers, for thick and dry nourishments are apt to breed melancholy.

Therefore the Lentill is good food for them that through waterish humors be
apt to fall into

It is not good for those that want their terms; for it breeds thick blood,
and such as slowly

But it is singular good to stay the menses, as Galen in his book of the
faculties of nourishments

It causes (...) dreams (as Dioscorides does moreover write) it hurts the
head, sinews,

It is good to swallow down thirty grains of Lentils shelled or taken from
their husks, against

Being boiled with parched barley meal and laid to, it asswageth the pain and
ach of the gout.

With honey it fills up hollow sores, it breaks aschares, cleanses ulcers:
being boiled in

With a (...), and Melilot, and oil of Roses it helps the inflammation of
the eyes and fundament;

And after the same manner against (...) sores that are mortified, if sea water
be added; it is also

CHAP. 514. Of Cich or true Orobus.
Orobus receptus Herbariorum. The true Orobus.


The Description.
THis Pulse, which of most Herbarists is taken for the true Orobus, and called
of some, bitter Fitch, is one of the Pulses whose tender branches traile upon
the ground, as (...) says, and whose long tender branches spread far abroad,
whereon do grow leaves like those of the field Vetch: among which grow white
flowers: after which come long cods, that appear bunched on the outside
against the place where the seeds do lie, which are small, round, russet of
color, and of a bitter taste: the root is small and single.

The Place.
It prospers best in a lean (...), according to Columella: it grows in
woods and copses in sundry places of Spain and Italy, but here only in gardens.

The Time.
This is sown early and late, but if it be sown in the spring it easily
comes up, and is pleasant, and unpleasant if it be sown in the fall of the
leaf.

The Names.
This is called in Greek (...) the shops of Germany have kept the name
Orobus: the Italians call it Macho: the Spaniards, Yeruo, and Yeruos: in English
it is called bitter Vetch, or bitter Fitch, and Orobus, after the Latin name.
Of some Ers, after the French name.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Galen in his first book of the Faculties of nourishments says, That men do
altogether abstain Hippocrates also has written, do oftentimes feed thereof;
and we also dressing them (...) the manner of Lupines, use the bitter Vetches
with honey, as a medicine that purges thick and gross humors out of the
chest and lungs.

Moreover, among the bitter Vetches the white are not so medicinable, but those
which are

And in his book of the Faculties of simple medicines he-saith, That bitter
Vetch is dry in the

Dioscorides writes, that bitter Vetch causes headache and heavy dullness,
that it troubles the

There is made of the seed a meal fit to be used in medicine, after this
manner: the full and white

This loses the belly, provoke urine, makes one well colored: being
overmuch eaten or

With honey it cleanses ulcers, takes away freckles, sun-burnes, black spots
in the skin, and

It stays running ulcers or hard swellings, and gangrens or mortified sores;
it sosteneth the

With vinegar it is good against the strangurie, and mitigateth pain that
comes thereof.

It is good for them that are not nourished after their meat, being parched and
taken with honey

The decoction of the same helps the itch in the whole body, and takes away
kibes, if they

Cicer boiled in fountain water with some (...) does assuage the swelling of
the yard and privy

It is also used for bathing and washing of ulcers and running sores, and is
applied unto the (...)

CHAP. 515. Of the Vetch or Fetch.
The Description.
1 THe Vetch has slender and four squared stalks almost three foot long: the
leaves be long, with clasping tendrels at the end made up of many little leaves
growing upon one rib or middle stem; every one whereof is greater, broader, and
thicker than that of the Lentil: the flowers are like to the flowers of the
garden bean, but of a black purple color: the cods be broad, small, and in
every one are contained five or six grains, not round, but flat like those of
the Lentil, of color black, and of an unpleasant taste.

2 There is another of this kind which has a creeping and living root, from
which it (...) death forth crested stalks some cubit and half high: the leaves
are winged, commonly a dozen growing upon one rib, which ends in a winding
tendrel: each peculiar leaf is broader toward the bottom, and sharper toward
the top, which ends not flat, but somewhat round. Out of the (...) of the
leaves toward the tops of the stalks, on short foot-stalkes grow two, three
or more pretty large pease-fashioned bluish purple flowers, which are
succeeded by such cods as the former, but somewhat lesser; which when they grow
ripe become black, and fly open of themselves,

1 Vicia. Tare, Vetch, or Fetch.
The figure of the common (...) was formerly wanting, and in the (...) thereof
was put that of the other, described here in the second place:
2 Vicia maxima (...). Bush Vetch.
3 Vicia syl. flo. albo. White floured Vetch.
4 Vicia sylue stris, sieve Cracca mayor. Strangle Tare, Tine, or wild Fetch.
and so seatter their seed. This grows in many places wild among bushes, both
here and in (...), as appears by that name Bauhine thence gives it, calling it
Vicia maxima dumetorum. Tragus (...) it his (...). altera; and judges it to be
the Aphace of Dioscorides; and he says the Latins call it (...): the
High Dutch, S. Cristoffels kraut, and Schwarts Linsen. Tabern. calls it (...)
mayor.

5 (...). sieve Cracca minima. Small wild Tare.


3 This also has a lasting root, which sends up round crested branches, a
foot and sometimes a cubit high, whereon grow such leaves as those of the
former, but more white and downie: the flowers, which grow on short
footstalkes, out of the bosoms of the leaves, toward the top of the stalks,
are of a whitish color, with veins of a dusky color, diuaricated over the
upper leaf: the cods are like those of the common Fetch. Clusius found this in
some wild places of Hungary; it floured in May (...) he calls it Vicia
syluestris albo flore.

4 Strangle Tare, called in some countries Tine, and of others wild Vetch, is
a ramping herb like unto the common Tare, (...) and clymbing among corn where
it chances, that it plucketh it down to the ground, and ouergroweth the same
in such sort, that it spoileth and kills not only wheat, but all other grain
whatsoever: the herb is better known than desired, therefore these few lines
shall suffice for the description. This grows pretty long, with many slender
weak branches: the leaves are much smaller than the former, and end in
clasping tendrels: the flowers are of a purple color, and commonly grow but
one at a joint, and they are succeeded by flat sharp pointed cods which
contain some nine or ten seeds apiece.

5 This also grows a good height, with slenderer stalks than the former, which
is divided into sundry branches: the leaves grow four or six upon
foot-stalkes, ending also in clasping tendrels: the flowers grow upon pretty
long but very slender foot-stalkes, sometimes two or three, otherwhiles more,
very small, and of a whitish color inclining to blewnesse: which are succeeded
by little short flat cods, containing commonly four or five little seeds of a
blackish color: this is the Arachus, sieve Cracca minima of Lobel; but I
question whether it be that which Bauhine in his Pinax has made the same with
it, calling it Vicia segetum cum siliquis plurimis hirsutis: for that which I
have described, and which exactly agrees with this figure of Lobel and that
description in the Aduers. has cods very smooth without any hairinesse at all.
This flowers most part of Summer, and grows in most places both in corn
fields and meadows.

The Place.
The Tare is sown in any ground or soil whatsoever.

The Time.
It floureth in May, and perfecteth his seed toward September.

The Names.
It is called in Latin Vicia, a vinciendo, of binding or wrapping, as Varro
notes, because, says he, it has likewise clasping tendrels such as the vine
has, by which it crawles upward upon the stalks of the weeds which are next
unto it: of some, Cracca, and Arachus, and also Aphaca: it is called in
High Dutch, (...): in Low Dutch, Uitsen: in French, Vesce: in most shops it is
falsely termed (...), and Fruum; for Eruum does much differ from Vicia: it is
called in English, Vetch, or Fetch. The country men lay up this Vetch with the
seeds and whole plant, that it may be a fodder for their cattle.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Notwithstanding I have known, says Galen, some, who in time of famine have
fed hereof, especially

Therefore seeing it is of this kind of nature, it is manifest that the
nourishment which comes thereof has in it no good juice at all, but ingendreth
a thick blood, and apt to become melancholy.

CHAP. 516. Of Chichlings, Pease, and Tare everlasting.
The Description.
1 THere is a Pulse growing in our high and thick woods, having a very thick
tough and woody root; from which rise up diverse long weak and feeble
branches, consisting of a tough middle rib, edged on both sides with a thin
skinny membrane, smooth, and of a grass green color; whereon do grow at
certain distances small flat stems, upon which stand two broad leaves joining
together at the bottom: from betwixt those leaves come forth tough clasping
tendrels which take hold of such things as grow next unto them: from the bosom
of the stem, whereon the leaves do grow, shoots forth a naked smooth
foot-stalke, on which do grow most beautiful flowers like those of the Pease,
the middle part whereof is of a light red, tending to a red Purple in grain;
the outward leaves are somewhat lighter, inclining to a blush color: which
being past, there succeed long round cods, wherein is contained seed of the
bigness of a Tare, but rounder, blackish without, and yellowish within, and of
a bitter taste.

5 Lathyrus mayor latifolius. Pease everlasting.
2 Lathyrus angustifolius flore albo. White floured Chichelings.


2 Ofwhich kind there is likewise another like unto the precedent in each
respect, saving that the leaves hereof are narrower and longer, and therefore
called of most which set forth the description, Lathyrus angustifolia: the
flowers of this are white, and such also is the color of the fruit: the root
is small, and not lasting like that of the former.

3 The stalks, leaves, and flowers of this are like those of the precedent, but
the flowers (...) of a reddish purple color: the cods are lesser than those of
the former, and in them are contained lesser, harder, and rounder seeds, of a
dark or blackish color. This grows not wild with us, but is sometimes sown
in gardens, where it flowers in June and July.

4 This Egyptian differs not in shape from the rest of his kind, but the
flowers are of an elegant blew on the inside, but of an ash color inclining to
purple on the outside: the cods grow upon long foot-stalkes, and are a little
winged or welted, and contain but two or three little cornered seeds spotted
with black spots. This flowers in June and July; and the seed thereof was sent
to Clusius from Constantinople, having been brought thither out of Egypt.

3 Lathyrus angustifol. flo. purp. Purple floured Chichelings.
4 Lathyrus Aegyptiacus. Egyptian Chichelings.


5 The stalks of this are some two or three foot long, winged, weak, and
lying on the ground unless they have somewhat to support them Upon these at
certain distances grow winged leaves with two little ears at their setting on
to the stalk: these leaves consist of six long and narrow green leaves like
those of the other plants of this kind; and these six leaves commonly stand
upright, by couples one against another; otherwhiles alternately: the
footstalke whereon these stand ends in clasping tendrels: the flowers are in
shape like the former, but the outer leaf is of a fair red or crimson color,
and the inner (...) white: after the flowers come the cods, containing some
four or five pretty large flat seeds, which swell out of the cods where they
lie, which in the spaces between each seed are deprest, like that of Orobus.
This is only a garden plant with us, and flowers in June and July, the seed is
ripe in August. I have for this given you Lobels figure of his Lathyris
angustiore gramineo folio; which may serve, if you but make the leaves and cods
to agree with this description.

6 The yellow wild (...) or Fetch has diverse very small ramping stalks,
tough, and leaning this way and that way, not able to stand of it self without
the help of props or things that stand by it: the leaves are very thin and
sharp pointed: the flowers grow along the leaves in fashion of the pease
flowers, of a bright yellow color: the roots are very small, long, tough, and
in number infinite, insomuch that it is impossible to root it forth, being once
gotten into the ground, unless the earth be dug up with the roots, and both
cast into the river, or burned. Doubtless it is the most pernicious and
hurtful weed of all others, unto all manner of green wholesome herbs or any
wood whatsoever.

5 Lathyrus annuus (...) Orobi. Party colored Cicheling.
6 (...) syluestris (...). (...). Tare everlasting.


The Place.
The first grows in shadowie woods, and among bushes: there grows great
store thereof in Swainscombe wood, a mile and a half from Greenhithe in Kent,
as you go to a village thereby called Betsome, and in diverse other places.

The sixth grows in most grassie pastures, borders of fields, and among
grain almost every where.

The Time.
The time answers the other Pulses.

The Names.
The first is called Lathyrus, to make a difference between it and Lathyris,
or Spurge: of Matthiolus, Clymenum: of Cordus, Eruum sativum: of Tragus, Pisum
Graecorum: in English, Pease everlasting, great wild Tare, and Cichling.

The second is the Evum album sativum of Fuchsius: Lathyrus or Cicercula of
Dodonaeus: Lathyrus angustiore (...) folio of Lobel.

The third is the Aracus sieve Cicera of Dodonaeus: the Lathyrus slore purpurco
of Camerarius.

The fourth by Clusius is called Cicercula Aegyptiaca: by Camerarius, Aracus
Hispanicus, sieve Lathyrus Aegyptiacus.

The (...) is not mentioned by any (that I remember) but Mr. Parkinson, in his
garden of flowers, and that by the name I give you it.

The sixth is the Lathyrus syluestris slo. luteis of Thalius: Legumenterrae
glandibus (...) of (...): Vicia of Tabernamontanus: and it may be, the Aracus
(...) luteo of the Aduers. Howeuer, I have put (...) figure of Aracus for it,
which well enough agrees with it. I use for some resemblance it has to Aphaca
to call it Aphacoides.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The temperature and virtues are referred to the manured Tare or Vetch;
notwithstanding they are not used (...) meat or medicine.

CHAP. 517. Of the oily Pulse called Sesamum.
Sesamum, sieve Sisamum. The Oily Grain.


The Description.
SEsamum has a thick and fat upright stalk a cubit and a half high,
garnished with leaves much like the Peach or Almond, but (...), and cut in with
somewhat deep gashes on their sides: amongst these leaves come forth large
white or else red flowers, somewhat shaped like those of Foxgloues, which turn
into round long crested cods, containing white flat oileous seed. Theophrastus
affirms that there is a kind thereof which is white, bearing only one root.
No kind of beast will eat this plant while it is green, because of his
bitterness; but being withered and dried, the seed thereof becomes sweet,
and the cattle will feed on the whole plant.

The Place.
It grows both in Egypt and in India: Sesama, says Pliny, came from the
Indies; they make an oil of it. It is a stranger in England.

The Time.
It is one of the Summer grains, and is sown before the rising of the seven
stars, as Pliny writes; yet Columella says, that (...) must be sown after
the Autumn Aequinoctial, against the Ides of October: they require for the
most part a rotten soil, which the husbandmen of Campania do call a black
mold.

The Names.
The Grecians call this grain (...): the Latins also Sesamum, and Sisamum, and
often in the (...) gender Sesama: we are constrained for want of an English
name to use the Latin: it is unknown to the Apothecaries, especially the
plant it self; but the seed and oil thereof is to be found among them in
other countries: we may call it Turkey Millet.

The Temperature and Virtues.
According to some it is hot and dry in the first degree: the seed thereof, as
Galen says, is fat, and Sesamum is not a little clammy and fat, and therefore
it is an emplasticke, and a softner, and is moderately hot: the oil which
comes thereof is of like temperature, and so is the decoction of the herb
also.

Dioscorides writes, That Sesamum is an enemy to the stomach, it causes a
stinking breath, ifit

It wastes away grossenes of the sinews; it is a remedy against bruises of
the ears, inflammations, Cerastes. Being mixed with oil of Roses it takes
away the headache which comes of heat.

Of the same force is the herb boiled in wine, but it is especially good for
the heat and (...)

Of the herb is made an oil used of the Egyptians, which as Pliny says is
good for the ears.

CHAP. 518. Of Hatchet Fetch.
The Description.
1 THe first kind of Hatchet Fetch has many small branches trailing here and
there upon the ground: upon which grow small leaves spread abroad like the
leaves of the wild Fetch; among which come forth clusters of small yellow
flowers, which (...) away, and turn into little flat thin and brown cods,
wherein is contained small reddish seed of a bitter taste.

2 The second kind of hatchet Fetch has many round tough and flexible
branches, trailing upon the ground: whereupon do grow leaves like the former,
but more like the leaves of Liquorice, and having the taste of the Liquorice
root; which has given occasion to some to deem it a kind of Liquorice: among
these leaves come forth pale yellow flowers, after which there succeed small
crooked cods, turning their points inwardly, one answering another like little
horns, containing small flat seeds sour cornered, and fashioned like a little
wedge: the root is tough, of a woody (...), and does continue fruitful a very
long time.

The figure which formerly (...) in the first place, (...) with the third
description that which was in the second place was of the (...) (...), of (...)
(...), being a kind of (...) (...), which (...) the cods many together on the
tops of the branches, and (...) in Germany: (...) (...) (...), it (...) (...)
(...) (...) in (...).
1 Hedysarum maius. Hatchet Fetch.
2 Hedysarum Glycyrhizatum. Liquorice hatchet Fetch.


3 There is another kind of (...) or hatchet (...), which has branches,
leaves, and roots like the last before remembered, and differs in that, that
the flowers of this plant are mixed, and do vary into sundry colors, being on
the upper part of a flesh color, and on the lower of a white or snowie color,
with a purple Storks bill in the middle: the leaves are in taste bitter: the
cods are small like those of Birds foot, and not much unlike the cods of Orobus.

4 There is likewise another kind of Securidaca or hatchet Fetch, which is
dedicated unto Carolus Clusius by the aforenamed Dr. Penny, who found it in the
North parts of England, having leaves, roots, and branches like unto the
former: but the flowers of this are white, and mixed with some purple, and
bitter also in taste (...) the cods are like the claw of a (...), or (as
Clusius says) like the knife which shoo-makers do use in Flanders; in which
cods are contained small reddish seed: this root also is of long continuance.
Clusius does not say that Dr. Penny found this in the North of England, but in
the territory of Geneua not far from Pontetremile, amongst the bushes, and no
where else.

3 Hedysarum maius siliquis (...). Hatchet Fetch with ioynted cods.
4 Securidaca minor pallide caerulea. Small blew floured hatchet Fetch.
5 Securidaca minor lutea. Small yellow hatchet Fetch.
6 Securidaca siliquis planis (...). Indented hatchet Fetch.


5 This in the stalks, leaves, color, and shape of the flowers is like, yet
less than the first described; the cods are also smaller, lesser, and more
crooked: and herein only consists the chief (...), it is an annual plant,
and grows only in some gardens. Matthiolus, Lobel, Dodonaeus, and other, make
this their (...), or Securidaca minor.

6 This has many crested branches, whereon great winged leaves, that is, some
twenty or more (...) to one rib: the flowers are like those of the other
plants of this kind; but the cods are of an inch long (...), or indented or
toothed on their sides. But of what color the flowers and seeds are of it is
not expressed by Clusius, who only set this forth by a picture, and some pieces
of a dried plant thereof, which he received from Cortusus, by the name of
Scolopendria leguminosa, or (...) (...): (...) had it from Honorius Bellus, who
observed it growing upon the Rocks at (...), a city of Illyria.

7 There is also another sort of Hatchet Fetch, which has very long and tough
branches trailing upon the ground beset with leaves like the former, but much
greater: the flowers do grow at the top of the branches, of a pale color, and
turn into rough round and flat cods, fashioned like little bucklers: the root
of this (as of the first) dies at the first approach of winter, as soon as the
seed is ripe: (...) The stalks of this are stiff and crested, growing to the
height of two cubits, with leaves as large as those of Liquorice: the flowers
are of a fair bright red color: the cods are made as it were of many rough
buckler-like seeds, or rather seed vessels wherein are contained small brown
seeds.

7 (...) (...). French Honysuckle.
8 Ferrum Equinum. Horse-shoo.


8 Horse-shoo has many stalks slender and lying upon the ground: the leaves be
thin, and lesser than those of Axseed: the flowers along the stalks are
little: after which come up long (...) something broad, and a little bowing;
which have upon the one side deep round and indented cuts, like after a sort
to an Horse-shoo: the root is somewhat long.

The Place.
These plants do grow (...) my garden: the second kind I found growing in
Suffolk, in the highway on the right hand, as you go from Sudbury to Corner
Church, about an hundred paces from the end of the town, as also in sundry
other places of the same country; and in Essex about Dunmow, and in the towns
called Clare and Hennyngham. Also it grows by Purfleet, about the foot of the
hill whereon the Windmill stands; and in diverse parts of Kent.

Horse-shooe comes up in certain untilled and sunnie places of Italy and
Languedocke: it grows likewise in my garden.

The Time.
These plants do flower in June, and their seed is ripe in August:

The Names.
The Grecians name this, whether it be a pulse or an infirmity among corn,
(...): the (...), of the form of the seed, Securidaca, and Hedysarum: in
English, Axseed, Axwoort, Ax-fitch, and Hatchet Fitch: it is unknown to the
Apothecaries.

The second is the Faenugraecum Syluestre of Tragus and Dodonaeus: the
Glycyrhiza syluestris of Gesner; and the Glaux vulgaris of Lobel.

Horse-shooe is commonly called in Italian Sferro de cauallo: you may name it
in Latin Ferrum equinum: in English, Horse-shooe.

The Temperature.
The seeds of these plants are hot and dry of complexion.

The Virtues.
Being drunk it is acceptable to the stomach, and remoueth stoppings out of
the intrailes, and

Dioscorides shows that it is also good for the stomach being taken in
drink, and is mixed with

And it is thought to hinder conception, if it be applied with honey before the
act.

The seed of Axwoort opens the stoppings of the liver, the obstruction of the
spleen, and of all

Horse-shooe is bitter and like in nature to Axseed.

CHAP. 519. Of Pease Earth-Nut.
The Description.
1 THe Pease Earth nut comes up with slender and weak stalks: the leaves be
thin, and little, growing upon slender stems, with clasping tendrels at the
ends, with which it imbraceth and takes hold of such things as stand near
unto it: the flowers on the tops of the stalks are like to those of Pease, but
lesser, of a red purple color, in smell not unpleasant: in their places come
up long cods, in which are three or four round seeds: the roots be thick,
long, like after a sort to acorns, but much greater, black without, gray
within, in taste like to the Chesse-nut: out of which beneath does hang a long
slender string: there grow out of the same also other strings, hard to the
setting on of the stalk, unto which creeping a slope do grow other kernelled
roots whilst the plant does thus multiply it self.

2 This with Thalius in his Sylua Harcynia, set forth by the name of Astragalus
syluaticus, was by our Author (...) for, and confounded with the Terraeglandes,
and therefore I have put it with it, that the difference might the better
appear, which is not a little to such as heedfully observe it: But our Author
in this is to be pardoned, seeing Dr. Turner, a man more exquisite in the
knowledge of plants, and who had seen the true Terraeglandes in Germany,
mistook this for it, as may appear by that little Tract of his of the names
of plants in Latin and English, set sorth Anno, 1548; for there he says, [I
have seen this herb of late in Come park more astringent than it of
Germany:] and indeed this grows there, and is much more astringent and wooddie
than that of Germany, and no wise fit to be eaten. The root consists of many
black tuberous particles, here and there sending forth fibers: from hence
arise cornered stalks some foot high, small below, and somewhat larger above: the
leaves grow forth of the stalks, consisting sometimes of two, and otherwhiles
of 4. longish narrow leaves fastened to one sootstalk, which at the setting on
has two little leaves or ears: forth of the bosoms of these leaves grow
stalks some two inches long, each of which usually carry a couple of
Pease-fashioned flowers of a purple color: which fading, usually become blew:
after these follow cods, straight, (...) and, black; and in each of them are
commonly contained nine or ten (...) round seeds: it flowers most part of
Summer, and perfects the seed in July and August.

1 Terraglandes. Pease Earth-nut.
2 Astragalus syluaticus. Wood Pease, or Heath Pease.


The Place.
1 This grows in (...) fields, both with the corn it self, and also about
the borders of fields among briers and brambles: it is found in diverse places
of Germany, but not with us that I can yet learn.

2 This is found in the woods and pastures of England, especially in Hampstead
wood near London: it grows in Richmond Heath, and in Come park likewise.

The Time.
Itfloureth in June and July, the nuts after harvest be dug up and gathered.

The Names.
It is called in high Dutch, (...): in low Dutch, (...), (...), and Muysen
(...), that is to say, tailed Mise, of the similitude or likeness of
domestical mise, which the black, round, and long nuts, with a piece of the
slender string hanging out behind, do represent: the later writers do call it
in Latin Terrae glandes or Terrestres glandes: and in Greek, (...), (...)
balani: in English, Pease Earth nut.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The Nuts of this Pease being boiled and eaten, are hardlier digested than be
either Turnips or

They be of temperature meanly hot, and somewhat dry, being withal not a
little binding: whereupon

The root of Pease Earth-nut stops the belly, and the inordinate course of
women's sickness.

CHAP. 520. Of Milk Vetch.
The Kinds.
THere be diverse sorts of herbs contained under the title of Astragalus;
whether I may, (...) breach of promise made in the beginning, insert them among
the (...), pulses, or (...) plants, it is doubtful: but seeing the matter is
disputable, I think it not amiss to suffer them thus to pass, until some
other shall find a place more convenient and agreeing unto them in
neighborhood.

The Description.
1 THe first kind of Astragalus has reddish stalks, a cubit high, a finger
thick, (...) (...) or surrowed, and covered over with an hairy mossines; which
divide (...) into sundry small branches, (...) with leaves consisting of sundry
little leaves (...) upon a middle rib, like the wild Vetch placed on the small
pliant branches like feathers, which are (...) covered over with a woollie
(...); in taste astringent at the first, but afterward burning hot: among
these leaves come forth many small white flowers, in fashion like the flowers
of (...), which before their opening seem to be somewhat yellow: the root is
marvelous great and large, considering the smalnesse (...) the plant; for
sometimes it grows to the bigness of a man's arm, keeping the same bigness
for the space of a span in length, and after divides it self into two or more
forks or branches, black without, and wrinckled; white within, hard and
wooddie, and in taste unpleasant, which being dried becomes harder than an
horn.

1 Astragalus Lusitanicus Clusij. Portingale milk Vetch.
2 Astragalus Syriacus. Assyrian milk Vetch.


2 The second kind of Astragalus is a rare and gallant plant, and may well be
termed Planta (...) guminosa, by reason that it is accounted for a kind of
Astragalus, resembling the same in the (...) of his stalks and leaves, as also
in the thickness of his roots, and the creeping and folding thereof; and is
garnished with a most thick and pleasant comeliness of his delectable red
flowers, growing up together in great tufts, which are very seemly to behold.

3 There has been some controversy about this third kind, which I am not
willing to prosecute or enter into: it may very well be Astragalus of
Matthiolus his description, or else his Polygala, which does exceeding well
resemble the true Astragalus: his small stalks grow a foot high, (...) with
leaves like Cicer or Galega, but that they are somewhat lesser: among which
come forth small Pease like flowers, of an Orange color, very pleasant in
sight: the root is tough and flexible, of a finger thick.

3 Astragalus Matthioli. Matthiolus his milk Vetch.
4 Astragaloides. Bastard Milk Vetch.


4 The fourth is called of (...) and other learned Herbarists, Astragaloides,
for that it resembles the true Astragalus, which grows a cubit high, and in
show resembles Liquorice: the flowers grow at the tops of the stalks, in shape
like the Pease bloome, of a fair purple color, which turn into small black
cods when they be ripe: the root is tough and very long, creeping upon the
upper part of the earth, and of a woody substance.

The Place.
They grow amongst stones, in open places, or as (...) writes, in places
subject to winds, and covered with snow: Dioscorides copies do add, in
shadowie places: it grows plentifully in Phenea a city in Arcadia, as Galen
and Pliny report: in Dioscorides his copies there is read, in Memphis a city
of Arcadia; but Memphis is a city of Egypt, and in Arcadia there is none of
that name: some of them grow in my garden, and in sundry other places in
England wild; they grow in the meadows near Cambridge, where the scholars
use to sport themselves: they grow also in sundry places of Essex, as about
Dunmow and Clare, and many other places of that country.

I should be glad to know which or how many of these our Author here affirms
to grow wild in England; for as yet I have not heard of, nor seen any of them
wild, nor in gardens with us, except the last (...), which grows in some few
gardens.

The Time.
They flower in June and July, and their seed is ripe in September.

The Names.
Milk Vetch is called of Matthiolus, Polygala, but not properly: of most it is
called Astragalus; in Spanish, Garauancillos: in the Portingales tongue,
Alphabeca: in Dutch, Cleyne Ciceren.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Astragalus, as Galen says, has astringent or binding roots, and therefore it
is of the number of those simples that are not a little drying; for it glueth
and heals up old ulcers, and staieth the flux of the belly, if they be boiled
in wine and drunk: the same things also touching the virtues of Astragalus
Dioscorides has mentioned: the root, says he, being drunk in wine staieth
the laske, and provoke urine, being dried and cast upon old ulcers it cures
them: it likewise procures great store of milk in cattle that do eat
thereof, whence it took his name.

It stops bleeding, but it is with much ado beaten, by reason of his
hardness.

CHAP. 521. Of Kidney Vetch.
The Description.
1 KIdney Vetch has a stalk of the height of a cubit, dividing it self into
other branches; whereon do grow long leaves, made of diverse leaves, like those
of the Lentill, covered as it were with a softwhite downinesse: the flowers on
the tops of the stalks of a yellow color, very many joined together, as it
were in a spokie rundle: after which grow up little cods, in which is contained
small seed: the root is slender, and of a wooddie substance. This is sometimes
found with white flowers: whereupon (...) gave two figures, calling the one
Lagopodium flore luteo, and the other Lagopodium flo. albo. Our Author unfitly
gave this later mentioned figure in the chapter of Lagopus, by the name of
Lagopum maximum.

1 Anthyllis Leguminosa. Kidney Vetch.
2 Stella leguminosa. (...) Kidney Vetch.


2 The Starry Kidney Vetch, called Stella leguminosa, or according to Cortusus,
Arcturo has many small flexible tough branches, full of small knots or knees,
from each of which springs forth one long small winged leaf, like birds
foot, but bigger: from the bosom of those leaves come forth little tender
stems, on the ends whereof do grow small whitish yellow flowers, which are very
slender, and soon vaded, like unto them of Birds-foot: these flowers turn
into small sharp pointed cods, standing one distant from another, like the
divisions of a (...), or as though it consisted of little horns; wherein is
contained small yellowish seeds: the root is tough, and deeply growing in the
ground.

3 There is another sort of Kidney Vetch called Birds-foot, or Ornithopodium,
which has very many small and tender branches, trailing here and there close
upon the ground, set full of small and (...) leaves, of a whitish green, in
shape like the leaves of the wild Vetch, but a great deal lesser, and siner,
almost like small feathers: amongst which the flowers do grow, that are very
small, yellowish, and sometimes whitish; which being vaded there come in place
thereof little crooked (...), five or six growing together, which in show and
shape are like (...) a small birds foot, and each and every cod resembling a
claw; in which are inclosedsmall seed like that of Turnips.

3 (...) (...). The great Birds-foot.
4 Ornithopodium minus. Small Birds-foot.
5 Scorpoides Leguminosa. Small Horned pulse.


4 There is also another kind of Ornithopodium, or Birds-foot, called small
Birds-foot, which is very like unto the first, but that it is much smaller: the
branches or sprigs grow not above a hand or half an hand in length, spreading
themselves upon the ground with his small leaves and branches, in manner of the
lesser Arachus: the flowers are like unto those of the former, but very small,
and of a red color.

5 This small horned pulse may fitly here take place: The root thereof consists
of many little fibers, from which arise two or three little slender straight
stalks some handful and half or foot high: at the tops of these grow little
sharp pointed crooked horns, rounder and slenderer than those of (...),
turning their ends inwards like the tails of Scorpions and so jointed; the
flowers are small and yellow; the leaves little, and winged like those of Birds
foot. Pena and (...) found this amongst the corn in the fields in Narbon in
France, and they set it forth by the (...) as I have here given you it.

The Place.
(...) 4. These plants I found growing upon Hampstead Heath near London, right
against the Beacon, upon the right hand as you go from London, near unto a
gravel pit: they grow also upon black Heath, in the high way leading from
Greenwich to Charleton, within half a mile of the town.

The Time.
They flower from June to the middle of September.

The Names.
1 This Gesner calls Vulneraria rustica: Dodonaeus, Lobel, and Clusius, call it
Anthyllis, and (...) leguminosa.

3. 4. I cannot find any other name for these plants, but Ornithopodium: the
(...) is called in English, great Birds-foot; the second small Birds-foot.

The Nature and Virtues.
These herbs are not used either in meat or medicine, that I know of as yet;
but they are very good food for cattle, and procure good store of milk,
whereupon some have taken them (...) kinds of Polygala.

CHAP. 522. Of Black milk Tare.
Glaux Dioscoridis. Dioscorides his milk Tare.


The Description.
THe true Glaux of Dioscorides has very many tough and woody branches
trailing upon the ground, set full of small winged leaves, in shape like the
common Glaux, but a great deal smaller, resembling the leaves of Tares, but
rather like Birds-foot, of a very gray color: amongst which come forth knobby
and scaly, or chaffie heads, very like the Meadow Trefoile, of a fair purple
color: the root is exceeding long and woody, which the figure does not
express and set forth.

The Place.
The true Glaux grows upon Barton hill, four miles from Lewton in
Bedfordshire, upon both the sides of the declination of the hill.

The Time.
These plants do flower and flourish about Midsommer.

The Names.
These plants have in times past been called Glaux, i. folia habens glauca,
sieve pallentia; that is, having sky colored, or pale leaves.

Since that in times past, some have counted Glaux among the kinds of
Polygala, or Milkewoorts, we may therefore call this kind of Glaux, black
Milke-woort.

The Nature.
These herbs are dry in the second degree.

The Virtues.
The seeds of the common Glaux are in virtue like the Lentils, but not so much
astringent: they Our Author either not knowing, or (...) what he had done,
again in this chapter, described the Glaux (...), whose history he gave us but
(...) chapter (...) before, by the name of (...) (...); (...) I have omitted it
here as not necessary.


CHAP. 523. Of red Fitchling, Medick Fitch, and Cockes-head.
The Description.
1 THe first kind of Onobrychis has many small and twiggie pliant branches,
ramping and creeping through and about bushes, or whatsoever it grows near
unto: the leaves and all the rest of the pulfe or plant is very like to the
wild Vetch or Tare: the flowers grow at the top of small naked stalks, in
shape like the pease bloome, but of a purple color laid (...) with blew,
which turn into small round prickly husks, that are nothing else but the seed.

1 Onobrychis, sive Caput Gallinaceum. Medick Fitchling, or Cockes-head.
2 Onobrychis flore purpureo. Purple Cockes-head.


2 The second kind of Fitchling or Cocks-head, of Clusius his description, has
very many stalks, especially when it is grown to an old plant, round, hard,
and leaning to the ground like the other pulses; and leaves very like Galega,
or the wild Vetch, of a bitter taste and loathsome savor: among which come
forth small round stems, at the ends whereof do grow flowers spike fashion,
three inches long, in shape like those of the great Lagopus, or meadow Trefoile,
but longer, of an excellent shining purple color, but without smell: after
which there follow small coddes, containing little hard and black seed, in
taste like the Vetch. The root is great and long, hard, and of a woody
substance, spreading it self far abroad, and growing very deep into the ground.

3 The third kind of Fitchling or Cocks-head has from a tough small and
wooddie root, many twiggie branches growing a cubit high, full of knots,
ramping and creeping on the ground. The leaves are like the former, but smaller
and shorter: among which come forth small tender stemmes, whereupon do grow
little flowers like those of the Tare, but of a blew color tending to purple:
the flowers being vaded, there come the small cods, which contain little
black seed like a Kidney, of a black color.

4 The fourth kind of Fitchling has firm green hard stalks a cubit and a
half high, whereupon grow leaves like to the wild Tare or Galega, but smaller
and somewhat hairie, bitter and unpleasant in taste, and in the end somewhat
sharp. At the top of the stalks come forth long spiked 3 Onobrychis 2. Clusij.
Blew Medicke Fitch.
4 Onobrychis 3. Clusij flore pallido. Pale colored Medicke Fitch.
5 Onobrychis montana 4. Clusij. Mountain Medick Fetch.
flowers, of a pale color, and in shape like those of the second kind; which
being vaded, there follow small bottle cods, wherein is contained little black
seed like the seed of Fenegreek, but smaller. The root is thick and hard, and
of a wooddie substance, and lasting very long.

5 The fifth kind of Onobrychis has many gross and wooddie stalks,
proceeding immediately from a thick, fat, and fleshie tough root: the upper part
of which are small, round, and pliant, garnished with little leaves like those
of Lentils, or rather Tragacantha, somewhat soft, and covered over with a
woollie hairinesse: amongst which come forth little long and naked stems, eight
or nine inches long, whereon do grow many small flowers of the fashion of the
Vetch or Lentill, but of a blew color tending to purple, and after them come
small cods, wherein the seed is contained.

The Place.
The first and second grow upon Barton hill, four miles from Lewton in
Bedfordshire, upon both the sides of the hill: and likewise upon the grassie
balks between the lands of corn two miles from Cambridge, near to a water mill
toward London; and diverse other places by the way from London to Cambridge:
the rest are strangers in England.

The Time.
These plants do flower in July, and their seed is ripe shortly after.

The Names.
It is (...), or without a name among the later writers: the old and ancient
Physicians do call it (...): for all those things that are found written in
Dioscorides or Pliny concerning (...), do especially agree hereunto.
Dioscorides writes thus; Onobrychis has leaves like a Lentill, but longer; a
stalk a span high; a crimson flower; a little root: it grows in moist and
untilled places: and Pliny in like manner; Onobrychis has the leaves of a
Lentill, somewhat longer, a red flower, a small and slender root: it grows
about springs or fountains of water.

All which things and every (...) are in this (...), or namelesse herb, as it
is manifest: and therefore it is not to be doubted at all, but that the same is
the Onobrychis of the old Writers: it may be called in English red Fetchling,
or as some suppose Medick Fitch, or Cockes-head.

The Temperature.
These herbs as Galen has written in his books of the Faculties of simple
Medicines, do (...) or make thin and waste away.

The Virtues.
Therefore the leaves thereof when it is green, being but as yet laid upon
hard swellings, waxen

Which things also concerning Onobrychis, Dioscorides has in these words set
down: the herb

CHAP. 524. Of Bastard Dittanie.
Fraxinella. Bastard Dittanie.


The Description.
BAstard Dittanie is a very rare and gallant plant, having many brown stalks,
somewhat rough, divided into sundry small branches, garnished with leaves like
Liquorice, or rather like the leaves of the Ash tree, but blacker, thicker, and
more full of juice, of an unpleasant savor: among which grow flowers, consisting
of five whitish leaves stripped with red, whereof one which grows undermost
hangs down low; but the four which grow uppermost grow more stiff and
upright: out of the midst of this flower comes forth a tassell, which is like
a beard, hanging also downwards, and somewhat turning up at the lower end:
which being vaded, there come in place four husks joined together, much like
the husks or coddes of Columbines, somewhat rough without, slimie to handle,
and of a loathsome savor, almost like the smell of a goat; whereupon some
Herbarists have called it Tragium: in the cods are contained small black
shining seeds like Peonie seeds in color: the roots are white a finger thick,
one twisting or knotting within another, in taste somewhat bitter.

There is another kind hereof growing in my garden, not very much differing:
the leaves of the one are greater, greener, harder, and sharper pointed: of the
other (...), not so hard, nor so sharp pointed: the flowers also hereof be
something more bright colored, and of the other a little redder.

The Place.
Bastard Dittany grows wild in the monntaines of Italy and Germany, and I
have it growing in my garden.

The Time.
It floureth in June and July: the seed is ripe in the end of August.

The Names.
The later Herbarists name it Fraxinella: most, (...), as though they should
say Humilis Fraxinus or a low Ash: in English, bastard, or false Dittanie: the
shops call it (...), and (...), but not truly, and use oftentimes the roots
hereof in stead of the right Dittanie. That it is not the right Dittanie it is
better known than needful at all to be confuted; and it is as evident that
the same is not Dioscorides his Pseudodictamnum, or bastard Dittanie: but it is
plain to be a kind of Tragium of the old Writers wherewith it seems to
agree in show, but not in substance.

The root of this is only used in shops, and there known by the name of Radix
Diptamni, (...) Dictamni.

The Temperature.
The root of bastard Dittanie is hot and dry in the second degreee, it is of a
wasting, attenuating and opening faculty.

The Virtues.
It brings down the menses, it also brings away the birth and after birth;
it helps cold diseases

They also say, that it is profitable against the stingings and bitings of
venomous serpents; against

The seed of Bastard Dittanie taken in the quantity of a dram is good against
the strangury, provoke

The like virtue has the leaves and juice taken after the same sort; and being
applied outwardly,

The root taken with a little Rubarb kills and drives forth worms.

Dioscorides reports, that the wild Goats being stricken with darts or
arrows, will eat Dictam, Dictam, though Dodonaeus reports that this plant
will do the like (which I do not believe) nor (...) affirm.

CHAP. 525. Of Land Caltrops.
Tribulus terrestris. Land Caltrops.


The Description.
LAnd Caltrops has long branches full (...) ioints, spread abroad upon the
ground, garnished with many leaves set upon a middle rib, after the manner of
Fetches; (...) which grow little yellow branches, consisting of five small
leaves, like unto the flowers of Tormentill: I never saw the plant bear
yellow, but white flowers, agreeing with the description of (...) in each
respect, save in the color of the flowers, which (...) turn into small square
fruit, rough, and full of prickles, wherein is a small kernel or seed: the
root is white, and full of strings.

The Place.
It grows plentifully in Spain in the fields: it is hurtful to corn, but yet
as Pliny says, it is rather to be accounted among the diseases of corn, than
among the plagues of the earth: it is also found in most places of Italy and
France; I found it growing in a moist meadow adjoining to the wood or Park of
Sir Francis Carew, (...) Croidon, not far from London, and not elsewhere; from
whence I brought plants sor my garden.

The Time.
It floureth in June and July: the fruit is ripe in August.

The Names.
It is called in Greek (...) and in Latin Tribulus: and that it may differ
from the other which grows in the water, it is named (...), or Tribulus
terrestris: it may be called in English, land Caltrops, of the likeness which
the fruit has with Caltrops, that are instruments of (...) cast in the way to
annoy the feet of the Enemies horses, as is before remembered in the Water
Saligot.

The Temperature and Virtues.
In this land Caltrop there is an earthy and cold quality abounding, which is
also binding, as Galen says.

The fruit thereof being drunk wastes away stones in the kidneyes, by reason
that it is of thin

Land Caltrops, says Dioscorides, being (...) to the quantity of a French
crown weight, and

And if it be drunk in wine it is a remedy against poisons: the (...) thereof
sprinkled

CHAP. 526. Of Spring or mountain (...) or Vetches.
1 Orobus Venetus. Venice Pease.
2 Orobus syluaticus vernus. Spring Pease.


The Description.
1 THis, which Clusius calls Orobus Venetus, has many cornered stalks some
foot long whereon grow winged leaves, four or six fastened to one rib, standing
by couples one against another, without any odd leaf at the end: these leaves
are of an indifferent largeness, and of a light green color: the flowers
grow upon long footstalk coming (...) of the (...) of the leaves, many
together, hanging down, small, yet shaped like those of other Pulses, and of a
purple color: after these follow cods almost like those of Fetches, but (...),
(...) when they be ripe, and containing in them a longish white seed: the root
is hard and woody, running (...) ways with many fibers, and (...) sundry
years: this varies sometimes with yellower (...) leaves and white flowers. It
flowers in May, and grows only in some few gardens with us.

2 The stalks of this also are a foot or more high, stiff, (...), and (...);
on these do grow winged leaves six or eight on a rib, after the manner of those
of the last (...): each of these leaves has three veins running along it:
the flowers in shape and manner of growing are like those of the former, but of
a most elegant purple color: which fading, they become blew. The flowers are
succeeded by such cods as the former, wherein are contained longish small (...)
seed: which ripe, the cods fly open, and twine themselves round, as in most
plants of this kind: the root is black, hard, tuberous and woody, sending
forth each year new shouts. This flowers in April and May, and ripeneth the
seed in June. This was found by Clusius in diverse (...) wooddie places of
Hungary: he calls it Orobus Pannonicus 1.

3 Orobus montanus (...). albo. White mountain Pease.
4 Orobus montanus (...). Narrow leafed mountain Pease.


3 This has stalks some cubit high, stiff, straight, and crested; whereon by
turns are fastened winged leaves, consisting of four sufficiently large and
sharp pointed leaves, whereto sometimes at the very end grows a fifth: the
veins in these run from the middle rib toward their edges: their taste is
first somewhat sourish, afterward bitterish. The flowers grow upon short
stalks coming forth of the bosoms of the leaves, five or six together, like
those of the Fetch, but of color white, with some little yellowness on the
two little leaves that turn upwards. The cods are like those of the last
described, and contain in them a brownish seed, larger than in any of the
other kinds. This is an annual plant, and perishes as soon as it has
perfected the seed. (...) gives us this by the name of Orobus Pannonicus 4.
(...) gives the same figure for his Arachus latifolius: and Bauhine affirms
this to be the Galegamontana, in the Hist. Lugd. page 1139. But these seem to
be of two several plants; for Dodonaeus affirms his to have a living root,
and such seems also that in the Hist. Lugd. to be: yet Clusius says
expressly that his is an annual, and floureth in April and May, and grows
in some woody mountainous places of the kingdom of (...).

4 This fourth has straight firm cornered stalks some foot or more high,
whereupon grow leaves usually four on a foot-stalke, standing two against two,
upright, being commonly almost three inches long, at first of a sourish taste,
but afterward bitter: it has no clauicles, because the stalks need no
supporters: the flowers grow upon long foot-stalkes, spike-fashion like those
of Pease, but less, and white of color: after these follow long blackish
cods, full of a black or else spotted seed: the roots are about the length of
ones little finger, fashioned like those of the Asphodill or lesser female
(...), but lesser, black without, and white within. Clusius found this on the
mountainous places (...) the baths of Baden, and in the like places in
Hungary: he calls it Orobus Pannonicus 3.

The Temperature and Virtues.
These are not known nor used in physic; yet if the third be the Galega
montana of the Historia Lugd. then it is there said to be effectual against
poison, the worms, the falling sickness, and the Plague.

CHAP. 527. Of some other Pulses.
1 (...), (...) Ervilia. Birds Pease.
2 Ervum (...). Crimson grass Fetch.


The Description.
1 THe first of these has cornered broad stalks like those of everlasting
Pease, and they are weak, and commonly lie upon the ground, unless they have
something to support them: the lower leaves are broad, and commonly welt the
stalk at their setting on, and at the end of the first leaf do usually grow
out after an unusual manner, two, three, or more other pretty large leaves more
long than broad, and the middle rib of the first leaf runs out beyond the
setting on of the highest of the out-growing leaves, and then it ends in two or
three clasping tendrels. Those leaves that grow the lowest upon the stalks
have commonly the fewest coming out of them. The flowers are like those of
other Pulses, of color white: the cods are some inch and half long,
containing some half dozen dark yellow or blackish small Pease: these cods
grow one at a joint, on short foot-stalkes coming forth of the bosoms of the
leaves, and are welted on their broader side, which stands toward the maine
stalk. This grows with us only in gardens. Dodonaeus, Pena, and Lobel call it
Ochrus syluestris, sieve Ervilia.

2 The stalks of this grow up sometimes a cubit high, being very slender,
divided into branches, and set unorderly with many grasse-like long narrow
leaves: on the tops of the stalks and branches, upon pretty long foot-stalkes
grow pretty pease-fashioned flowers of a fair and pleasant crimson color:
which fallen, there follow cods, long, small, and round, wherein are nine, ten,
or more round hard black shining grains: the root is small, with diverse
fibers, but whether it die when the seed is perfected, or no, as yet I have not
observed. This grows wild in many places with us, as in the pasture and meadow
grounds about Pancridge Church. Lobel and Dodon. call this Ervum sylucstre; and
they both partly judge it to be the first Catanance of Dioscorides, and by that
name it is usually called. It flowers in June and July, and the seed is ripe in
August.

3 This also, though it be not frequently found, is no stranger with us; for I
have found it in the corn fields about Dartsord in Kent and some other places.
It has long slender ioynted creeping stalks, divided into sundry branches,
whereon stand pretty green three cornered leaves two at a joint, in shape and
bigness like those of the lesser Binde-weed. Out of the bosoms of these
leaves at each joint comes a clasping tendrel, and commonly together with it a
foot-stalke some inch or more long, bearing a pretty little pease-fashioned
yellow flower; which is succeeded by a short flattish cod containing six or
seven little seeds. This flowers in June, July, and August, and so ripens the
seed. It is by Lobel and others thought to be the Aphace of Dioscorides, Galen,
and Pliny: and the Pitine of Theophrastus, by Anguillara.

3 Aphaca. Small yellow Fetch.


I find mention in Stowes Chronicle, in Anno 1555, of a certain Pulse or
Pease, as they term it, wherewith the poor people at that time, there being a
great dearth, were miraculously helped: he thus mentions it; In the month of
August (says he) in Suffolk, at a place by the sea side all of hard stone and
pibble, called in those parts a shelfe, lying between the towns of Orford and
Aldborough, where neither grew grass, nor any earth was ever seen; it chanced
in this barren place suddenly to spring up without any tillage or sowing, great
abundance of Peason, whereof the poor gathered (as men judged) above an
hundred quarters, yet remained some ripe and some blossoming, as many as ever
there were before: to the which place rode the Bishop of Norwich and the Lord
Willoughby, with others in great number, who found nothing but hard rockie
stone the space of three yards under the roots of these Peason: which roots
were great and long, and very sweet.

Gesner also, de Aquatilibus, lib. 4. page 256. making mention, out of Dr.
Cajus his letters, of the spotted English Whale, taken about that time at Lin
in Norfolk, also thus mentions those pease: Pisa (says he) in littore nostro
Britannico quod Orientem spectat, certo quodam in loco Suffolciae, inter
Alburnum and Ortfordium oppida, saxis insidentia (mirabile dictu) nulla terra
circumfusa, autumnali tempore Anno 1555, sponte (...) (...), (...) magna copia,
vt sufficerent vel millibus hominum. These Pease, which by their great increase
did such good to the poor that year, without doubt grew there for many years
before, but were not observed till [ Magister artis, ingenique largitor Venter]
-- hunger made them take notice of them, and quickened their invention, which
commonly in our people is very dull, especially in finding out food of this
nature.

My Worshipful friend Dr. Argent has told me, that many years ago he was in
this place, and caused his man to pull away the beach with his hands, and
follow the roots so long, until he got some equal in length unto his height,
yet could come to no ends of them: he brought these up with him to London, and
gave them to Dr. Lobel, who was then living; and he caused them to be drawn,
purposing to set them forth in that Work which he intended to have published,
if God had spared him longer life. Now whether these Pease be truly so (...),
and be the same with the Pisum (...) Perenne, or different; or whether they be
rather of the stock of the Lathyrus mayor, or of some other Pulse here
formerly described, I can affirm nothing of certainty, because I have seen
no part of them, nor could gather by any that had, any certainty of their
shape or figure: yet would I not pass them over in silence, for that I hope
this may come to be read by some who live thereabout, that may by sending me
the things themselves, give me certain knowledge of them; that so I may be
made able, as I am always willing, to impart it to others.

The Temperature and Virtues.
I have not have not sound any thing written of the faculties of the two first;
but of Aphace, Galen Dodonaeus) by certain experience, that the Aphace here
described has this astringent force and faculty.

CHAP. 528. Of bastard Rubarb.
1 Thalietrum, sieve Thalictrum maius. Great bastard Rubarb.
2 Thalictrum minus. Small bastard Rubarb.


The Description.
1 THe great Thalietrum or bastard Rubarb has large leaves parted or divided
into diverse other small leaves, somewhat snipt about the edges, of a black or
dark green color: the stalks are crested or streaked, of a purple color,
growing to the height of two cubits: at the top whereof grow many small and
hairy white flowers, and after them come small narrow husks like little cods,
sour or five growing together: the root is yellow, long, round, and knotty,
dispersing it self far abroad on the upper crust of the earth.

2 The small bastard Rubarb is very like unto the precedent, but that it is
altogether lesser: his stalks are a span or a foot long: his leaves be thin
and tender; the root fine and slender: the little flowers grow together in
small bundles or tufts, of a light yellow color, almost white, and are of a
grievous savor.

3 There is kept in some gardens a plant of this kind growing up with large
stalks to the height of three cubits: the leaves are very like those of
Columbines: the flowers are made of many white threads: it flowers in June, and
is called Thalictrum maius Hispanicum, Great Spanish Bastard Rubarb.

The Place.
These Plants do grow along the Ditch sides leading from Kentish street unto
Saint Thomas a-Waterings (the place of Execution) on the right hand. They grow
also upon the banks of the Thames, leading from Blacke-wall to Woolwich, near
London, and in sundry other places also.

The Time.
The flower for the most part in July and August.

The Names.
Diverse of the later Herbarists do call it Pigamum, as though it were (...),
that is, Rue; whereupon most call it Rut a palustris, or Fen Rue: others,
Pseudo-Rhabarbarum, and Rbabarbarum Monachorum, by reason of the yellow color
of the root. But neither of their judgments is greatly to be esteemed of: they
judge better that would have it to be Thalietrum, which Dioscorides describes
to have leaves something flatter than those of Coriander; and the stalk like
that of Rue, upon which the leaves do grow. Pena calls it Thalietrum,
Thalictrum, and Rutapratensis: in English, bastard Rubarb, or English Rubarb:
which names are taken of the color, and taste of the roots.

The Temperature.
These herbs are hot and dry of complexion.

The Virtues.
The leaves of bastard Rubarb with other pot-herbes do somewhat move the belly.

The decoction of the root does more effectually.

Dioscorides says, that the leaves being stamped do perfectly cure old ulcers.
Galen adds, that

CHAP. 529. Of Goats Rue.
The Description.
GAlega or Goats Rue has round hard (...) two cubits or more high, set full of
leaves displayed or winged abroad; every leaf consisting of sundry small
leaves set upon a slender rib, resembling the leaves of the field Vetch or
Tare, but greater and longer. The flowers grow at the top of the stalk,
clustering together after the manner of the wild Vetch, of a light (...)
color, which turn into long cods small and round, wherein the seed is
contained. The root is great, thick, and of a white color.

The Place.
It grows plentifully in Italy every where in fat grounds and by rivers
sides: it grows likewise in my garden.

The Time.
It floureth in July and August.

The Names.
The Italians call it (...), and Ruta Capraria: diverse name it corruptly
Gralega: Hieronymus Galega. Goats Rue.
Fracastorius calls it Herba Gallcca: the Hetruscians, Lauanese; and it is
also called by diverse other names in sundry places of Italy, as Gesner says,
as are Castracane, Lauanna, Thorina, or Taurina, Martanica, Sarracena,
Capragina, Herbanesa, Foenum graecum syluestre, and as (...) witnesses,
Giarga. It is named in English, Italian Fitch, and Goats Rue.

Some judge that the old Physicians were wont to call it Onobrychis: others,
Glauce: diverse would have it to be Polemonium, but not so much Petr. And (...)
in his commentaries, as every one of the descriptions mentioned by Dioscorides
do gainsay them; as also those, who think that Galega, is Polygalon, and that
the name of Galega came of Polygalon, the very description also of Polygalon is
against them: for Galega is higher and greater than that it may be called a
little shrub only of an hand breadth high.

The Temperature.
This plant is ina mean temperature between hot and cold.

The Virtues.
Goats Rue is a singular herb against all

It is of like virtue if it be fried with

It is ministered unto children which are possessed with the falling evil, a
spoonefull every morning

Being boiled in vinegar, and drunk with a little Treacle, it is very good
against the (...)

The herb it self is eaten, being boiled with flesh, as we use to eat
Cabbage and otherwoorts,

It also helps the bitings and stingings of venomous beasts, if either the
juice or the herb

Half an ounce of the juice inwardly taken is reported to help those that are
troubled with

The seeds do feed pullen exceedingly, and cause them to yield greater store
of eggs than ordinary.

The juice of the leaves, or the leaves themselves bruised and applied to any
part swollen Cannon a lover of Plants, and frind of mine, has assured me he
has seen by frequent experience.

CHAP. 530. Of Pliny his Leadwoot.
The Description.
DEntaria or Dentillaria has offended in the superlatiue degree, in that
hehath hid himself like a runnagate soldier, when the assault should have
been given to the plant Lepidium, whereof doubtless it is a kind. But if the
fault be mine, as without question it is, I crave pardon for the oversight, and
do entreat thee gentle reader to censure me with favor, whereby I may more
boldly insert it in this place, rather than to leave it untouched. The learned
of Narbone (especially Rondeletius) have not without good cause accounted this
goodly plant for a kind Plumbago Plinij. Leadwoort.
thereof, because the whole plant is of a biting taste, and a burning faculty,
and that in such extremity, that it will raise blisters upon a man's hand: for
which cause some of the learned sort have accounted it Plinies Molybdaena, or
Aegineta his Lepidium: but the new Herbarists call it Dentaria, or Dentillaria
Rondeletij, who made the like use hereof, as he did of Pyrethrum, and such
burning plants, to appease the immoderate pain of the toothache and such like.
This plant has great thick tough roots, of a woody substance, from whence
spring up long and tough stalks two cubits high, confusedly garnished and
beset with long leaves, in color like Woad, of a sharp and biting taste. The
flowers grow at the top of the stalks of a purple color; which being past,
there succeed close glistering and hairy husks, wherein is contained small
blackish seed.

The Place.
Pena reports that Dentillaria grows about Rome, nigh the hedges and corn
fields: it likewise grows in my Garden in great plenty.

The Time.
It floureth in July and August.

The Names.
Leadwoort is called Molybdaena, (...) Plinij, and Dentillaria Rondeletij: in
Italian, Crepanella, the Romans, Herba S. Antonij: in Illyria, Cucurida: in
English, Leadwoort.

The Temperature.
Dentillaria is of a causticke quality.

The Virtues.
It helps the toothache, and that as some say if it be holden in the hand
some small while.

CHAP. 531. Of Rue, or herb Grace.
The Description.
1 GArden Rue or planted Rue, is a shrub full of branches, now and then a yard
high, or higher: the stalks whereof are covered with a whitish bark, the
branches are more green: the leaves hereof consist of diverse parts, and be
divided into wings, about which are certain little ones, of an odd number,
something broad, more long than round, smooth and somewhat fat, of a gray
color, or greenish blew: the flowers in the top of the branches are of a pale
yellow, consisting of four little leaves, something hollow: in the middle of
which stands up a little head or button four square, seldom five square,
containing as many little coffers as it has corners, being compassed about
with diverse little yellow threads: out of which hang pretty fine tips of one
color; the seed grows in the little coffers: the root is woody, and fastened
with many strings: this Rue has a very strong and rank smell, and a biting
taste.

2 The second being the wild or mountain Rue, called Ruta syluestris, is very
like to garden Rue, in stalks, leaves, flowers, seed, color, taste, and
savor, saving that every little leaf has smaller cuts, and is much narrower:
the whole plant dies at the approach of winter, being an annual plant, and
must either stand till it do sow himself, or else must be sown of others.
This second is a variety of the garden Rue differing from the former only in
smallness.

3 This plant is likewise a wild kind of Rue, and of all the rest the
smallest, and yet more virulent, biting, and stinking than any of the rest: the
whole plant is of a whitish pale green, agreeing with the last before
mentioned in each respect, save in greatness, and in that the venomous fumes
or vapors that come from this small wild Rue are more noisome and hurtful
than the (...). The leaves lie spread upon the ground, and are very finely cut
and divided: the whole plant is of 1 (...) hortensis. Garden Rue.
3 Ruta syluestris minima. The smallest wild Rue.
4 Ruta (...). Mountain Rue.
5 Harmala. Wild Rue with white flowers.
6 Ruta Canina. Dogs Rue.
such acrimonie, that Clusius says the has oftener than once observed it to
pierce through three pair of gloves to the hand of the gatherer; and if any
one rub his face with his hand that has newly gathered it, forthwith it will
mightily inflame his face. He tells a history of a Dutch Student of Mompelier
that went with him a simpling, who putting some of it between his hat and his
head to keep him the cooler, had by that means all his face presently
inflamed and blistred wheresoever the sweat ran down.

4 There is another wild Rue growing upon the mountains of Sauoy and other
places adjoining, having a great thick root, from which do arise great shoots
or stalks; (...) do grow leaves very thick and fat, parted into diverse
longish sections, otherwise resembling the leaves of the first described, of a
strong and stinking smell: the flowers grow on the tops of the stalks,
consisting of four small yellow leaves: the seeds are like the other.

5 Harmel is one of the wild Rues: it brings forth immediately from the root
diverse little stalks of a cubit high; whereupon do grow green leaves diversely
cut into long pieces, longer and narrower than those of the wild strong
smelling Rue: the flowers be white, composed of five white leaves: the fruit is
three square, bigger than that of the planted Rue, in which the seed lies: the
root is thick, long, and blaekish: this Rue in hot countries has a marvelous
strong smell; in cold Countries not so.

6 This, which Matthiolus gave for (...) 3. and Lobel, Clusius, and others for
Ruta canina, has many twiggy branches some cubit and half high; whereon grow
leaves resembling those of the Papauer Rhaeas or Argemone, lesser, thicker, and
of a blackish green: the flowers are of a whitish purple color, fashioned
somewhat like those of Antirrhinum: the seed is small, and contained in such
vessels as those of Rue, or rather those of Blattaria. The whole plant is of a
strong and ungrateful smell: it grows in the hot and dry places about Narbon
in France, Rauenna and Rome in Italy.

The Place.
Garden Rue ioyeth in sunny and open places: it prospers in rough and brickie
ground, and among ashes: it cannot in no wise away with dung.

The wild are found on mountains in hot countries, as in Cappadocia, Galatia,
and in diverse provinces of Italy and Spain, and on the hills of Lancashire and
York.

Pliny says that there is such friendship between it and the fig tree, that
it prospers no where so well as under the fig tree. The best for physics use
is that which grows under the fig tree, as Dioscorides says: the cause is
alleged by Plutarch in the first book of his Symposiacks or Feasts, for he
says it becomes more sweet and mild in taste, by reason it takes as it
were some part of the sweetness of the fig tree, whereby the over rank quality
of the Rue is allayd; unless it be that the fig tree whilst it draws
nourishment unto it self, it likewise draws away the rancknesse of the Rue.

The Time.
They flower in these cold countries in July and August; in other countries
sooner.

The Names.
The first, which is Hortensis Ruta, garden Rue: in High Dutch, Rauten: in
Low Dutch, (...): the Italians and Apothecaries keep the Latin name: in
Spanish, Aruda: in French, Rue de (...): in English, Rue, and Herbe-Grace.

Wild Rue is called in Greek (...), Peganon: in Latin, Ruta syluestris, or
wild Rue: in Galatia and Cappadocia, (...) of diverse, Harmala: of the
Arabians, Harmel: of the Syrians, Besara.

The Temperature.
Rue is hot and dry in the later end of the third degree, and wild Rue in the
fourth: it is of (...) and subtle parts: it wastes and consumes wind, it
cutteth and digesteth gross and tough humors.

The Virtues.
Rue or Herbe-Grace prouokes urine, brings down the sickness, expels the dead
child and afterbirth,

Plin. lib. 20. ca. 13. says it opens the matrix, and brings it into the right
place, if the belly all over

It takes away crudity and rawnesse of humors, and also windines and old pains
of the stomach.

Boiled with vinegar it eases pains, is good against the stitch of the side
and chest, and shortness

The oil of it serves for the purposes last recited: it takes away the
collicke and pangs in the

It is used with good success against the dropsy called in Greek (...) being
applied to the

The herb a little boiled or scalded, and kept in pickle as Sampier, and eaten,
quickens the sight

The same applied with honey and the juice of Fennel is a remedy against dim
eyes.

The juice of Rue made hot in the rind of a pomegranat and dropped into the
ears, takes away

S. Anthonies (...) is quenched therewith: it kills the shingles, and running
ulcers and sores in (...) or Triapharmacon.

Dioscorides says, that Rue put up in the nosthrils stays bleeding.

Of whose opinion Pliny also is; when notwithstanding it is of power rather to
procure bleeding

The leaves of Rue beaten and drunk with wine, are an antidote against
poisons, as Pliny says.

Dioscorides writes, that a twelve penny weight of the seed drunk in wine is
a counterpoyson against Ixia, Mushroms, or Tode-stooles, the biting of
Serpents, stinging of Scorpions, spiders, bees, hornets, and wasps; and it is
reported, that if a man be anointed with the juice of Rue these will not hurt
him; and that the Serpent is driven away at the smell thereof when it is
burned, insomuch that when the Weesell is to fight with the Serpent, she armeth
her self by eating Rue against the might of the Serpent.

The leaves of Rue eaten with the kernels of wallnuts or figs stamped together
and made into a

Rue boiled with Dil, Fennel seed, and some Sugar, in a sufficient quantity
of wine, swageth the

The juice taken with Dill, as aforesaid, helps the cold fits of agues, and
alters their course: it Rectum intestinum.

The juice of Rue drunk with wine purges women after their deliverance,
driving forth the

Ruevsed very often either in meat or drink, quenches and dries up the
natural seed of generation,

The oil wherein Rue has been boiled, and infused many days together in the
Sun warmeth

If it be ministered in clisters it expells windiness, and the torsion or
gnawing pains of the guts.

The leaves of garden (...) boiled in water and drunk, causes one to make
water, provoke the

Rutasyluestris or wild Rue is much more vehement both in smell and operation,
and therefore

The end of the second Book.
THE THIRD BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF PLANTS.
Containing the Description, Place, Time, Names, Nature, and Virtues, of Trees,
Shrubs, Bushes, Fruit-bearing Plants, Rosins, Gums, Roses, Heath, Mosses: some
Indian Plants, and other rare Plants not remembered in the Proeme to the first
Book. Also Mushroms, Coral, and their several kinds, etc.

The Proeme.
Having finished the Treatise of Herbs and Plants in general, used for meat,
medicine, or sweet smelling use, only some few omitted for want of perfect
instruction, and also being hindered by the slackenesse of the Cutters or
Grauers of the those; which wants we intend to supply in this third and last
part. The Tables as well general as particular shall be set forth in the end
of this present Volume.

CHAP. 1. Of Roses.
The Kinds.
THe Plant of Roses, though it be a shrub full of prickles, yet it had been
more fit and convenient to have placed it with the most glorious flowers of the
world, than to insert the same here among base and thornie shrubs: for the Rose
does deserve the chiefest and most principal place among all flowers
whatsoever; being not only esteemed for his beauty, virtues, and his
fragrant and odoriferous smell; but also because it is the honor and ornament
of our English Scepter, as by the conjunction appears in the uniting of those
two most royal houses of Lancaster and York. Which pleasant flowers deserve
the chiefest place in Crowns and garlands, as Anacreon Thius a most ancient
Greek Poet (whom Henricus Stephanus has translated in a gallant Latin verse)
affirms in those verses of a Rose, beginning thus

(...)
Rosahonos, decusque florum,
Rosa, cura, amorque Veris.
Rosa, caelitum voluptas,
Rose is puer Cytheres.
Caput implicat Corollis,
Charitum Choros (...).
The Rose is the honor and beauty of flowers,
The Rose is the care and love of the Spring,
The Rose is the pleasure of th'heauenly powers:
The Boy of fair Venus, Cytheras darling,
Does wrap in his head round with garlands of Rose,
When to the dances of the Graces he goes.
Augerius (...) speaking of the estimation and honor of the Rose, reports
that the Turks can by no means endure to see the leaves of Roses fall to the
ground, because that some of them have dreamed, that the first or most ancient
Rose did spring of the blood of Venus; and others of the Mahumetans say, that
it sprang of the sweat of (...).

But there are many kinds of Roses differing either in the bigness of the
flowers, or the plant it self, roughness or smoothness, or in the multitude
of the flowers, or in the (...), or else in color and smell: for diverse of
them are high and tall, others short and low; some have five leaves, others
very many. (...) tells of a certain Rose growing about Philippi, with an
hundred leaves, which the inhabitants brought sorth of Pangaeum, and planted it
in Campania, as Pliny says; which we hold to be the Holland Rose, that diverse
call the Province Rose, but not properly.

Moreover, some be red, others white, and most of them or all, sweetly
smelling, especially those of the garden.

1 Rosa (...). The White Rose.


The (...).
1 IF the (...) could so be content, one general description might serve to
distinguish the whole stock or kindred of the Roses, being things so well
known: notwithstanding I think it not amiss to say something of them
severally, in hope to satisfy all. The white Rose has very long stalks of a
wooddle substance, set or armed with diverse sharp prickles: the branches
whereof are likewise full of prickles, whereon do grow leaves consisting of
five leaves for the most part, set upon a middle rib by couples; the old leaf
standing at the point of the same, and every one of those small leaves somewhat
snipt about the edges, somewhat rough, and of an ouerworne green color: from
the bosom whereof shoot forth long footstalk, whereon do grow very fair
double flowers, of a white color, and very sweet smell, having in the middle a
few yellow threads or chiues; which being past there succeeds a long fruit,
green at the first, but red when it is ripe, and stuffed with a downie
choking matter, wherein is contained seed as hard as stones. The root is long,
tough, and of a wooddie substance.

2 The Red Rose grows very low in respect of the former: the stalks are
shorter, smoother, and (...) of color: the leaves are like, yet of a worse
dustie color: the flowers grow on the (...) of the branches, consisting of
many leaves, of a perfect red color: the fruit is likewise red when it is
ripe: the root also wooddie.

3 The common Damask Rose in stature, prickley branches, and in other respects
is like the 2 Rosa rubra. The red Rose.
3 Rosa Prouincialis, sive (...). The Province, or Damask Rose.
5 Rosa sine spinis. The Rose without prickles.
white Rose; the especial difference consists in the color and smell of the
flowers; for these are of a pale red color, and of a more pleasant smell, and
fitter for meat or medicine:

4 The Rosa Provincialis minor, or (...) (...) Rose differs not from the
former, but is altogether lesser: the flowers and fruit are like: the use in
physic also agrees with the precedent.

5 The Rose without prickles has many young shootes coming from the root,
dividing themselves into diverse branches, (...), and of a woody substance as
are all the rest of the Roses, of the hight of two or three (...), smooth and
plain without any roughness or prickles at all; whereon do grow leaves like
those of the Holland Rose, of a shining deep green color on the up. per
side, underneath somewhat (...) and hairy. The flowers grow at the tops of
the branches, consisting of an infinite number of leaves, greater than those of
the (...) Rose, more double, and of a color between the Red and Damask
Roses, of a most sweet smell. The fruit is round, red when it is ripe, and
stuffed with the like flocks and seeds of those of the Damask Rose. The root
is great, wooddie, and far spreading.

6 The Holland or Province Rose has diverse shoots proceeding from a wooddie
root, full (...) sharp prickles, dividing it self into diverse branches,
whereon do grow leaves consisting of (...) leaves set upon a rough middle rib,
and those snipt about the edges: the flowers grow on the tops of the branches,
in shape and color like the Damask Rose, but greater and more double,
insomuch that the yellow chiues in the middle are hard to be seen; of a
reasonable good smell, but not full so sweet as the common Damask Rose: the
fruit is like the other of his kind.

6 Rosa Hollandica, sive Bataua. The great Holland Rose, commonly called the
great Province Rose.


We have in our London gardens one of the red Roses, whose flowers are in
quantity and beauty equal with the former, but of greater estimation, of a
perfect red color, wherein especially it differs from the Province Rose; in
stalks, stature, and manner of growing it agrees with our common red Rose.

Te Place.
All these sorts of Roses we have in our London gardens, except that Rose
without prickles, which as yet is a stranger in England. The double white Rose
does grow wild in many (...) of Lancashire in great abundance, even as Briers
do with us in these Southerly parts, (...) in a place of the country called
Leyland, and in a place called Roughford, not far (...) Latham. (...), in the
said Leyland fields does grow our garden Rose wild, in the plowed fields among
the (...) in such abundance, that there may be gathered daily, during the time,
many (...) else of Roses, equal with the best garden Rose in each respect: the
thing that gives great cause of worder is, that in a field in the place
aforesaid, called Glouers field, every year that the field is (...) (...)
corn, that year the field will be spread over with Roses; and when it lies as
they call it ley, and not (...), then shall there be but few Roses to be
gathered, by the relation of a curious Gentleman there dwelling, so often
remembered in our History.

I have heard that the Roses which grow in such plenty in Glouers field every
year the field is plowed, are no other than corn Rose, that is, red Poppies,
howeuer our Author was informed.

The Time.
These flower from the end of May to the end of August, and diverse times after,
by reason (...) tops and superfluous branches are cut away in the end of their
flouring: and then do they sometimes flower even until October, and after.

The Names.
The Rose is called in Latin Rosa: in Greek (...): and the plant it self
(...): (which in Latin keeps the same name that the flower has) and it is
called Rodon (as Plutarch says) because it sends forth plenty of smell.

The middle part of the Roses, that is, the yellow chiues, or seeds and typs,
is called Anthos, and Flos Rosae, the flower of the Rose: in shops, Anthera, or
the blowing of the rose.

The white parts of the leaves of the flower it self, by which they are
fastened to the cups, be named Vngues or (...). That is called Calix, or the
cup, which contains and holds in together the yellow part and leaves of the
flower.

Alabastri, are those parts of the cup which are deeply cut, and that compass
the flower close about before it be opened, which be in number five, two have
beards and two have none, and the fifth has but half one: most do call them
Cortices Rosarum, or the husks of the roses: the shoots of the plant of roses,
Strabo Gallus in his little garden does call Viburna.

The white Rose is called Rosa alba: in English, the white Rose: in high Dutch,
Weisz Roosen: in low Dutch, Ditte Roosen: in French, Rose Blanch: of Pliny,
Spincola Rosa, or Rosa Campana.

The red Rose is called in Latin, Rosa rubra: the Frenchmen, Rose Franche,
Rose de Prouins, a town in Campaigne: of Pliny, Trachinia, or Praenestina.

The Damask Rose is called of the Italians Rosa incarnata: in high Dutch,
Leibfarbige Roosen: in low Dutch, Prouenice Roose: of some, Rosa Provincialis,
or Rose of Prouence: in French of some, Melesia: the Rose of Melaxo, a city in
Asia, from whence some have thought it was first brought into those parts of
Europe.

The great Rose, which is generally called the great Prouence rose, which the
Dutch men cannot endure; for say they, it came first out of Holland, and
therefore to be called the Holland Rose: (...) by all likelihood it came from
the Damask rose, as a kind thereof, made better and fairer by art, which
seems to agree with truth.

The rose without prickles is called in Latin, Rosa sine spinis, and may be
called in English, the rose without thorns, or the rose of Austrich, because
it was first brought from Vienna, the Metropolitan city of Austrich, and give
nto that famous Herbarist Carolus Clusius.

The Temperature.
The leaves of the flowers of roses, because they do consist of diverse parts,
have also diverse and sundry faculties: for there be in them certain that are
earthy and binding, others moist and watery, and sundry that are spiritual
and airie parts, which notwithstanding are not all after one sort, for in one
kind these excel, in another those, all of them have a predominant or
ouerruling cold tempe rature, which is nearest to a mean, that is to say, of
such as are cold in the first degree, moist, airie, and spiritual parts are
predominant in the White roses, Damask and Musk.

The Virtues.
The distilled water of roses is good for the strengthening of the heart, and
refreshing of the spirits,

The same being put into iunketting dishes, cakes, sauces, and many other
pleasant things, gives

It mitigateth the pain of the cies proceeding of a hot cause, brings sleep,
which also the fresh

The (...) of these roses, especially of Damask, does move to the stool, and
makes the belly (...):

The infusion of them does the same, and also the syrrup made thereof, called
in Latin (...), Serapium: the Apothecaries call it Syrrup of roses solutiue,
which must be made of the infusion in which a great number of the leaves of
these fresh roses are diverse and sundry times steeped.

It is profitable to make the belly loose and soluble, when as either there is
no need of other stronger

This syrrup does moisten and cool, and therefore it alayeth the extremity of
heart in hot burning

Of (...) virtue also are the leaves of these preserved in Sugar, especially if
they be only bruised

The Temperature of Red Roses.
There is in the red Roses, which are common every where, and in the other that
be of a deep purple, without certain moisture joined, being in them when they
are as yet fresh, which they lose when they be dried: for this cause their
juice and infusion does also make the body soluble, yet not so much as of the
others aforesaid. These roses being dried and their moisture (...), do bind and
dry; and likewise cool, but lesser than when they are fresh.

The Virtues.
They strengthen the heart, and help the trembling and beating thereof.

They give strength to the liver, kidneies, and other weak intrails; they dry
and comfort a weak

And they are put into all manner of counterpoisons and other like medicines,
whether they be

Honey of Roses, or Mel Rosarum, called in Greek (...), which is made of them,
is most excellent

The oil does mitigate all kinds of heat, and will not suffer inflammations
or hot swellings to

The Temperature and Virtues of the parts.
The flowers or bloomings of Roses, that is to say, the yellow hairs and tips,
do in like manner dry

The same yellow called Anthera, staieth not only those lasks and bloody
fluxes which do happen at the sea, but those at the land also, and likewise the
white flux and red in women, if they be dried, beaten to powder, and two
scruples thereof given in red wine, with a little powder of Ginger added
thereto: and being at the sea, for want of red wine you may use such liquour as
you can get in such extremity.

The little heads or buttons of the Roses, as Pliny writes, do also stanch
bleeding, and stop the

The nails or white ends of the leaves of the flowers are good for watering
eyes.

The juice, infusion, or decoction of Roses, are to be reckoned among those
medicines which are

The syrrup made of the infusion of Roses, is a most singular and gentle
loosing medicine, carrying

Take two pound of Roses, the white ends cut away, put them to steep or infuse
in six pintes of

Syrrup of the juice of Roses is very profitable for the grieses aforesaid,
made in this manner:

Take Roses, the white nails cut away, what quantity you please, stamp them,
and strain our

Unto these syrrups you may add a few drops of oil of Vitriol, which gives
it a most beautiful

The conserve of Roses as well that which is crude and raw, as that which is
made by ebullition

Take the leaves of Roses, the nails cut off, one pound, put them into a clean
pan; then put thereto to macerate, close covered some two or three hours;
(...) set them to the fire slowly to boil, adding thereto three pounds of
sugar in powder, letting them to simper together according to discretion, some
hour or more; then keep it for your use.

The same made another way, but better by many degrees: take Roses at your
pleasure, put them

The making of the crude or raw conserve is very well known, as also Sugar
roset, and diverse

CHAP. 2. Of the Musk Roses.
The Kinds.
THere be diverse sorts of Roses planted in gardens, besides those written of in
the former chapter, which are of most writers reckoned among the wild roses,
notwithstanding we think it convenient to put them into a chapter between
those of the garden and the brier roses, as indifferent whether to make them of
the wild roses, or of the tame, seeing we have made them denizons in our
gardens for diverse respects, and that worthily.

1 Rosa Moschata simplici flore. The single Musk rose.
2 Rosa Moschata multiplex. The double Musk rose.


The Description.
1 THe single Musk Rose has diverse long shoots of a greenish color and
wooddie substance, armed with very sharp prickles, dividing it self into
diverse branches: whereon do grow long leaves, smooth and shining, made of
diverse leaves set upon (...) middle rib, like the other roses: the flowers grow
on the tops of the branches, of a white color, and pleasant sweet smell, like
that of Musk, whereof it took his name; having certain yellow seeds in the
middle, as the rest of the roses have: the fruit is red when it is ripe, and
filled with such (...) flocks and seeds as those of the other roses: the root
is tough and wooddie.

2 The double Musk rose differs not from the precedent in leaves, stalks,
and roots, nor in the color of the flowers, or sweetness thereof, but only
in the doubleness of the flowers, wherein consists the difference.

3 Of these roses we have another in our London gardens, which of most is
called the blush rose; it floureth when the Damask rose does: the flowers
hereof are very single, greater than the other Musk roses, and of a white
color, dashed over with a light wash of carnation, which makes that color
which we call a blush color: the proportion of the whole plant, as also the
smell of the flowers, are like the precedent.

3 Rosae Moschatae species mayor. The great Musk rose.
4 Rosa Holosericea. The velvet rose.


4 The Velvet rose grows always very low, like unto the red rose, having his
branches covered with a certain hairie or prickley matter, as fine as hairs,
yet not so sharp or stiff that it will harm the most tender skin that is:
the leaves are like the leaves of the white rose: the flowers grow at the top
of the stalks, doubled with some yellow thrums in the midst, of a deep and
black red color, resembling red crimson velvet, whereupon some have called it
the (...) rose: when the flowers be vaded, there follow red berries full of
hard seeds, wrapped in a down or woollinesse like the others.

5 The yellow rose which (as diverse do report) was by Art so colored, and
altered from his (...) estate, by graffing a wild rose upon a Broom stalk;
whereby (say they) it does not only change his color, but his smell and
force. But for my part I having found the contrary by mine (...) (...), cannot
be induced to believe the report: for the roots and offsprings of this (...)
(...) brought forth yellow roses, such as the maine stock or mother brings
out, which event is not to be seen in all other plants that have been graffed.
Moreover, the seeds of yellow roses have brought forth yellow roses, such as
the flower was from whence they were taken; which they would not do by any
coniecturall reason, if that of themselves they were not a natural kind of
rose. Lastly, it were contrary to that true principle,

Naturae sequitur semina quodque suae: that is to say; Every seed and plant
brings forth fruit like unto it self, both in shape and nature: but leaving
that error, I will proceed to the description: the yellow rose has brown and
prickly stalks or shoots, five or six cubits high, garnished with many leaves,
like unto the Musk rose, of an excellent sweet smell, and more pleasant than
the leaves of the (...): the flowers come forth among the leaves, and at the
top of the branches of a fair gold yellow color: the thrums in the middle,
are also yellow: which being gone, there follow such knops or heads as the
other roses do bear.

5 Rosa lutea. The yellow rose.
6 Rosa Lutea multiplex. The double yellow rose.


6 Of this kind there is another more rare and set by, which in stalks,
leaves, and other parts is not much different from the last described, only
the flower is very double, and it seldom fairly shows it self about London,
where it is kept in our chief gardens as a prime raritie.

7 The Canell or Cinnamon rose, or the rose smelling like Cinnamon, has shoots
of a brown color, four cubits high, beset with thorny prickles, and leaves
like unto those of Eglantine, but smaller and greener, of the savor or smell
of Cinnamon, whereof it took his name, and not of the smell of his flowers (as
some have deemed) which have little or no savor at all: the flowers be
exceeding double, and yellow in the middle, of a pale red color, and sometimes
of a carnation: the root is of a wooddie substance.

8 We have in our London gardens another Cinnamon or (...) rose, not differing
from the last described in any respect, but only in the flowers; for as the
other has very double flowers, contrariwise these of this plant are very
single, wherein is the difference.

7 Rosa Cinnamomea pleno flore. The double Cinnamon Rose.
8 Rosa Cinnamomea flore (...). The single Cinnamon Rose.


The Place.
These Roses are planted in our London gardens, and elsewhere, but not found
wild in England.

The Time.
The Musk Rose floureth in Autumn, or the fall of the leaf: the rest flower
when the Damask and red Rose do.

The Names.
The first is called Rosa Moschata, of the smell of Musk, as we have said: in
Italian, Rosa Moschetta: in French, Roses Musquees, or Muscadelles: in Low
Dutch, (...) (...): in English, Musk Rose: the Latin and English titles may
serve for the rest.

The Temperature.
The Musk rose is cold in the first degree, wherein airie and spiritual parts
are predominant: the rest are referred to the Brier rose and Eglantine.

The Virtues.
Conserve or syrrup made of the Musk rose, in manner as before told in the
Damask and red

The leaves of the flowers eaten in the morning, in manner of a sallad, with
oil, vinegar and pepper,

The white leaves stamped in a wooden dish with apeece of Alum and the juice
strained forth into some glased vessel, dried in the shadow, and kept, is the
most fine and pleasant yellow color that may be divised, not only to limne or
wash pictures and Imagerie in books, but also to color meats and sauces,
which notwithstanding the Alum is very wholesome.

There is not any thing extant of the others, but are thought to be equal with
the white Musk Rose, whereof they are taken and holden to be kinds.

CHAP. 3. Of the wild Roses.
The Description.
1 THe sweet Brier does oftentimes grow higher than all the kinds of Roses;
the shoots of it are hard, thick, and wooddie; the leaves are glittering, and
of a beautiful green color, of smell most pleasant: the Roses are little,
five leaued, most commonly whitish, seldom tending to purple, of little or no
smell at all: the fruit is long, of color somewhat red, like a little olive
stone, and like the little heads or berries of the others, but lesser than
those of the garden: in which is contained rough cotton, or hairie down and
seed, folded and wrapped up in the same, which is small and hard: there be
likewise found about the slender shoots hereof, round, soft, and hairie
spunges, which we call Brier Balls, such as grow about the prickles of the
Dog-rose.

1 Rosasyluestris odora. The Eglantine, or (...) Brier.


2 We have in our London gardens another sweet Brier, having greater leaves,
and much sweeter: the flowers likewise are greater, and somewhat doubled,
exceeding sweet of smell, wherein it differs from the former.

3 The Brier Bush or Hep tree, is also called Rosa canina, which is a plant so
common and well known, that it were to small purpose to use many words in the
description thereof: for even children with great delight eat the berries
thereof when they be ripe, make chains and other pretty gewgawes of the
fruit: cooks and gentlewomen make Tarts and such like dishes for pleasure
thereof, and therefore this shall suffice for the description.

4 The Pimpinell rose is likewise one of the wild ones, whose stalks shoot
forth of the ground in many places, of the height of one or two cubits, of a
brown color, and armed with sharp prickles, 2 Rosa syl. odora flore duplici.
The double Eglantine.
3 Rosa Canina inodora. The Brier Rose, or Hep tree.
4 Rosa Pimpinellae folio. The Pimpinell Rose.
which divide themselves toward the tops into diverse branches, whereon do grow
leaves consisting of diverse small ones, set upon a middle rib like those of
Burnet, which is called in Latin Pimpinella, whereupon it was called Rosa
Pimpinella, the Burnet Rose. The flowers grow at the tops of the branches, of a
white color, very single, and like unto those of the Brier or Hep tree: after
which come the fruit, black, contrary to all the rest of the roses, round as
an apple; whereupon some have called it Rosa Pomifera, or the Rose bearing
apples: wherein is contained seed, wrapped in chaffie or flockie matter, like
that of the Brier: the root is tough and wooddie.

The Place.
These wild Roses do grow in the borders of fields and woods, in most parts of
England. The last (...) very plentifully in a field as you go from a village in
Essex, called Graies (upon the brinke of the river Thames) unto Horndon on the
hill, insomuch that the field is full (...) therewith all over.

It grows likewise in a pasture as you go from a village hard by London
called Knights bridge, unto Fulham, a village thereby, and in many other places.

We have them all except the Brier Bush in our London gardens, which we think
unworthy the place.

The Time.
They flower and flourish with the other Roses.

The Names.
The Englantine Rose, which is Cynorrhodi, or Caninae Rosae species, a kind of
Dogs Rose: and (...) syluestris, the wild Rose: in Low Dutch, Eglantier: in
French, Esglentine; and as Ruellius testifies, Eglenterium: who also suspects
it to be Cynosbaton, or Canirubus: of which Dioscorides has written in these
words; Cynosbatus, or Canirubus, which some call Oxycantha, is a shrub growing
like a tree, full of prickles, with a white flower, long fruit like an olive
stone, red when it is ripe, and downie within: in English we call it Eglantine,
or sweet Brier.

The spongie balls which are found upon the branches are most aptly and
properly called Spongiolaesyluestris Rosae, the little sponges of the wild
Rose. The shops mistake it by the name of Bedeguar; for Bedeguar among the
Arabians is a kind of Thistle, which is called in Greek (...): that is to
say, Spina alba the white Thistle, not the white Thorn, though the word do
import so much.

The Brier or Hep tree is called Syluestris Rosa, the wild Rose: in
High Dutch, (...) (...): in French, Roses (...): Pliny, lib. 8. cap. 25. says
that it is Rosa Canina, Dogs Rose: of diverse, Caninasentis, or Dogs Thorn: in
English, Brier bush, and Hep tree: the last has been touched in the
description.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The faculties of these wild Roses are referred to the manured Rose, but not
used in physic Pliny (...), that the root of the Brier bush is a singular
remedy found out by oracle, against the biting of a mad dog, which he sets
down in his eighth book, chap. 41.

The same Author, lib. 25. cap. 2. affirms, that the little spongie Brier
ball stamped with honey (...), or the Foxes evil, in plain terms the French
pocks.

Fuchsius affirms, that the spongie excrescence or ball growing upon the Brier
are good against

They are good not as they be diuretics or prouokers of urine, or as they are
wearers away of the Galen. lib. 5. of the faculties of simple medicines
reports.

The fruit when it is ripe makes most pleasant meats and banqueting dishes, as
tarts and such

CHAP. 4. Of the Bramble or black-Berry bush.
The Description.
1 THe common Bramble brings forth slender branches, long, tough, easily
bowed, tamping among hedges and whatsoever stands near unto it; armed with
hard and sharp prickles, whereon do grow leaves consisting of many set upon a
rough middle rib, green on the upper side, and underneath somewhat white: on
the tops of the stalks stand certain flowers, in shape like those of the Brier
Rose, but lesser, of color white, and sometimes washed over with a little
purple: the fruit or berry is like that of the Mulberry, first red, black when
it is ripe, in taste between sweet and sour, very soft, and full of grains:
the root creeps, and sends forth here and there young springs.

Rubus repens fructu caesio.

2 This has a round stalk set full of small crooked and very sharp pricking
thorns, and creeps on hedges and low bushes of a great length, on the upper
side of a light red color, and underneath green, and takes rootwith the tops
of the trailing branches, whereby it does mightily increase: the leaves grow
without order, composed of three leaves, and sometimes of five, or else the two
lower leaves are divided into two parts, as Hop leaves are now and then, of a
light green color both above and underneath. The flowers grow on the tops of
the branches, racematim, many together, sometimes white, sometimes of a very
light purple color, every flower containing five leaves, which are crompled or
wrinkled, and do not grow plain: the fruit follows, first green, and
afterward blew, every berry composed of one or two grains, seldom oboue
four or five growing together, about the bigness of corans; wherein is
contained a stony hard kernel or seed, and a juice of the color of Claret
wine, contrary to the common Rubus or Bramble, whose leaves are white
underneath: the berries being ripe are of a shining black color, and every
berry contains usually above forty grains closely compacted and thrust
together. The root is woody and lasting. This grows common enough in most
places, and too common in ploughed fields. Sept. 6. 1619. John Goodyer.

3 The Raspis or Framboise bush has leaves and branches not much unlike the
common Bramble, but not so rough nor prickly, and sometimes without any
prickles at all, having only a rough hairinesse about the stalks: the fruit
in shape and proportion is like those of the Bramble, red when they be ripe,
and covered over with a little downinesse; in taste not very pleasant. The root
creeps far abroad, whereby it greatly increases. This grows either with
prickles upon the stalks, or else without them: the fruit is usually red, but
sometimes white of color.

1 Rubus. The Bramblebush.
2 Rubus Idaeus. The Raspis bush or Hinde-berry.


4 Stone Bramble seldom grows above a foot high, having many small flexible
branches without prickles, trailing upon the ground, covered with a reddish
bark, and somewhat hairy: the leaves grow three together, set upon tender naked
foot-stalkes somewhat snipt about the edges: the flowers grow at the end of the
branches, consisting of four small white leaves like those of the Cherry tree:
after which come small Grape-like fruit, consisting of one, two, or three large
transparent berries, set together as those of the common Bramble, of a red
color when they be ripe, and of a pleasant taste, but somewhat astringent. The
roots creep along in the ground very far abroad, whereby it greatly
increases.

4 Chamaemorus (called in the North part of England, where they especially do
grow, Knotberries, and Knought-berries) is likewise one of the Brambles, though
without prickles: it brings forth small weak branches or tender stems of a
foot high; whereon do grow at certain distances rough leaves in shape like
those of the Mallow, not unlike to the leaves of the Gooseberrie bush: on the
top of each branch stands one flower and no more, consisting of five small
leaves of a dark purple color: which being fallen, the fruit succeeds, like
unto that of the Mulberrie, whereof it was called Chamaemorus, dwarf Mulberry;
at the first white and bitter, after red and somewhat pleasant: the root is
long, something knotty; from which knots or joints thrust forth a few threddie
strings. I take that plant to which our Author hereafter has allotted a whole
chapter, and called Vaccinia nubis, or Cloud-berries, to be the same with this,
as I shall show you more largely in that place.

4 Rubus Saxatilis. Stone black Berry bush.
5 Chamaemorus. Knot berry bush.


The Place.
The Bramble grows for the most part in every hedge and bush.

The Raspis is planted in gardens: it grows not wild that I know of, except
in the field by a village in Lancashire called Harwood, not far from Blackburne.

I found it among the bushes of a causey, near unto a village called
Wisterson, where I went to school, two miles from the Nantwich in Cheshire.

The stone Bramble I have found in diverse fields in the Isle of Thanet, hard by
a village called (...), near Queakes house, sometimes Sir Henry Crispes
dwelling place. I fear our Author mistook that which is here added in the
second place, for that which he figured and described in the third (now the
fourth) which I know not yet to grow wild with us.

Knot-berries do love open snowie hills and mountains; they grow plentifully
upon (...) hills among the heath and ling, twelve miles from Lancashire, being
thought to be the highest hill in England.

They grow upon Stane-more between Yorkshire and Westmerland, and upon other
wet Fells and mountains.

The Time.
These flower in May and June with the Roses: their fruit is ripe in the end of
August and September.

The Names.
The Bramble is called in Greek (...): in French, Ronges, Loi Duyts Brelmers:
in Latin, Rubus, and Sentis, and Vepres, as Ovid writes in his first book of
Metamorpho sis.

Aut Leporiqui vepre latens hostilia cernit
Oracanum. --
Or to th'Hare, that under Bramble closely lying, spies
The hostile mouths of Dogs. --
Of diverse it is called Cynosbatus, but not properly; for Cynoslatus is the
wild Rose, as we have written: in High Dutch, Bremen: in Low Dutch, Breemen: in
French, Rouce: in Italian, Garza: in English, Bramble bush, and Black-berry
bush.

The fruit is named in Latin Morum rubi; and as Fuchsius thinks, Vacinium,
but not properly: in shops, Mora Bati: and in such shops as are more barbarous,
Mora Bassi: in English, Blackeberries.

The Raspis is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Rubus Idaeus, of the
mountain Ida on which it grows: in English, Raspis, Framboise, and
Hinde-berry.

The Temperature and (...).
The young buds or tender tops of the Bramble (...) the flowers, the leaves, and
the unripe fruit,

They heal the eyes that hang out, hard knots in the fundament, and stay the
hemorrhoids, if

The juice which is pressed out of the stalks, leaves, and unripe berries, and
made hard in the Sun,

The ripe fruit is sweet, and contains in it much juice of a temperate heat,
therefore it is not

It has also a certain kind of astriction or binding quality.

It is likewise for that cause wholesome for the stomach, and if a man eat too
largely thereof, says Galen, he shall have the headache: but being dried
whilst it is yet unripe it binds and dries more than the ripe fruit.

The root besides that it is binding contains in it much thin substance, by
reason whereof it Galen.

Pliny writes, that the berries and flowers do provoke urine, and that the
decoction of them in

The leaves of the Bramble boiled in water, with honey, alum, and a little
white wine added

The Raspis is thought to be like the Bramble in temperature and virtues, but
not so much (...) Dioscorides, performs those things which the Bramble does.
The fruit is good to be given to those that have weak and queasie stomachs.

CHAP. 5. Of Holly Roses, or Cistus.
The Kinds.
(...) has been taken of diverse to be a kind of Rose: the old Writers have
made two sorts thereof, male and female; and likewise a third sort, which is
called Ledum: the later Herbarists have discovered diverse more, as shall be
declared.

A general Description, wherein all the sorts of Cistus are comprised.
CIstus and his kinds are woody shrubs full of branches, of the height of two
or three cubits: some have broad leaves, others rough, uneven, wrinkled,
somewhat downy, and most like the leaves of Sage; although some have the leaves
of Rosemary, others the form of those of the Poplar tree: the flowers grow on
the tops of the branches, like unto the wild Rose, yet such as very quickly
fade, perish, and fall away: those of the male are most of a reddish blew or
purple color; and of the female white: in their places come up little heads or
knops somewhat round, in which is contained small seed: the roots of them all
are woody.

There grows up sometimes under the shrub hard to the roots, a certain (...)
(...) hypocist, which is thick, fat, gross, full of juice, without leaves,
wholly consisting of many little cases or boxes, as do those of Henbane or of
the Pomegranat tree; of a yellowish red (...) in one kind, and in another
white, and in certain other green or grassie, as Dioscorides says.

The Description.
1 THe first kind of Cistus grows up like a small bush or shrub, of a woody
substance, three or four cubits high, garnished with many small and brittle
branches, set full of crumpled or rugged leaves very like unto Sage leaves: at
the top of the branches come flowers of a purple color, in shape like unto a
single Brier Rose, having leaves somewhat wrinkled like a cloth new dried
before it be smoothed, and in the midst a few yellow chiues or thrums: the
flowers for the most part do perish and fall away before noone, and never cease
flouring in such manner from the month of May unto the beginning of September,
at which time the seed is ripe, being of a reddish color, and is contained in
an hard hairie husk not much unlike the husk of Henbane.

1 Cistus mas angustifolius. The male Holly Rose.
2 Cistus mas cum Hypocistide. The male Holly Rose with his excrescence.


2 The second sort of Cistus, being another kind of the male Cistus, which Pena
calls Cistus mas cum Hypocistide, is like unto the former, but that from the
root of this kind there comes a certain excrescence or out-growing, which
is sometimes yellow, sometimes green, and sometimes white; from which is
drawn by an artificial extraction a certain juice called in shops (...).

3 This kind of Cistus has many woody stalks divided into diverse brittle
branches of a russet color; whereon do grow rough leaves somewhat cut or
toothed on the edges, and of an ouerworne color: the flowers grow on the tops
of the branches, in form of a Musk Rose, but of an excellent bright purple
color: after which come round knops, wherein is contained small reddish seed:
the root is tough and woody,

4 This fourth sort of Cistus has diverse woody branches, whereon are set,
thick thrust together, diverse small leaves narrow like those of Winter Sauorie,
but of an ouerworne russet color: the root and flowers are like the precedent.

3 Cistus mas dentatus. Toothed or snipt male Cistus.
4 Cistus mas tenuifolius. Thin leafed Cistus.
5 Cistus foemina. The female Cistus.
7 Cistus folio Halimi. Cistus with leaves like Sea Purslane.


5 The first of the females is like unto the male Cistus in each respect,
saving that the flowers hereof are of a white color, with diverse yellow
thrummes in the middle, and the others purple, wherein consists the
difference.

6 The second female of Matthiolus description has many hard and wooddie
stalks, branched with diverse arms or wings: whereon are set by couples rough
hoary and hairy leaves, of a dark russet color: among which come forth small
white flowers like unto those of the (...) root is tough and woody. This I
judge all one with the former, and therefore have omitted the figure as
impertinent, although our Author followed it, making the flower so little in
his description.

7 The seventh sort of Cistus grows up to the height of a small hedge bush,
having diverse brittle branches full of pith: whereon are set leaves by couples,
like those of sea Purslane, that is to say, soft, hoary, and as it were covered
over with a kind of mealinesse: the flowers are yellow, and less than those
of the former.

8 Cistus folio Lauandulae. Lauander leaued Cistus,
9 Cistus folio Thymi. Cistus with the leaves of Time.


8 The eighth Cistus has likewise shrubbie stalks in manner of a hedge tree,
whereon do grow at certain distances diverse leaves close joined together at
the stalk, like those of the former, but somewhat lower and narrower: the
flowers we have not expressed in the figure, by reason we have no certain
knowledge of them.

9 This ninth Cistus is likewise a woody shrub some foot high: the stalks are
very brittle, as are all the rest of his kind, whereon do grow very small
leaves like those of Time: the flowers are white, which makes it one of the
females.

10 The low or base Cistus with broad leaves, grows like a small shrub, of a
woody substance: the leaves are many, of a dark green color: the flowers
are in form like the other, but of a yellow color: the roots are likewise
woody.

11 This narrow leafed low Cistus has diverse tough branches leaning to the
ground, whereon do grow without order many small narrow leaves somewhat long,
of a gummy taste at the first, afterward bitter: the flowers grow on the tops
of the branches, of a yellow color, consisting of five leaves, with certain
chiues in the middle; after which follow three square cods or seed-vessels: the
root is tough and woody.

10 Cistus humilis latifolius. Low Cistus with broad leaves.
11 Cistus humilis angustifolius. Low Cistus with narrow leaves.
12 Cistus humilis Austriaca Clusij. Low Cistus of Austria.
13 Cistus (...) serpilli folio. Low Cistus with leaves like wild Time.


12 The low or base Cistus of Austria grows likewise leaning to the ground,
having many woody branches very firm and tough, covered with a blackish
bark; whereon do grow very many rough and hairy leaves in shape like those of
the small myrtle, of a shining green on the vpperside, and of an astringent
taste: on every branch stands one flower, seldom two, in form like the
other, but consisting of one leaf deeply divided into five parts, and of a
white color tending to a flesh color.

13 This low sort of Cistus has many long tough branches trailing upon the
ground, of a reddish color, whereon do grow small leaves like those of wild
Time, of a dark green color, very thick and fat, and somewhat hairy: the
flowers grow at the top of the branches, of a yellow gold color, consisting of
five small leaves of a very sweet smell. The root is thick, hard, and wooddie.

14 This strange and rare plant of Lobels observation I have thought meet to be
inserted amongst the kinds of Cistus, as a friend of theirs, if not one of the
kind: it has leaves like unto the male Cistus (the first in this chapter
described) but more hairy, bearing at the top of his branches a small knop in
shape like a rotten Strawberry, but not of the same substance; for it is
compact of a scaly or chaffie matter such as is in the midst of the Camomill
flowers, and of a russet color.

14 Cistus exoticus (...). Lobels strange Cistus.
16 Myrtocistus Tho. Pennei Angli. Dr. Penny his Cistus.


15 This adulterine or counterfeit or forged Cistus grows to the height of a
(...) bush: the branches are long or brittle, whereon do grow long leaves like
those of the Willow, of an ouerworne russet color: the flowers are small,
consisting of five little yellow leaves: the whole plant being well viewed
seems to be a Willow, but at the first sight one of the Cistus; so that it is
a plant participating of both: the root is woody. (...) judges this (which our
Author out of Tabern. figured and named Cistus adulterinus) to (...) the Cistus
set forth in the eighth place of the next chapter save one: but I rather judge
it to be of the Ledum Silesiacum set forth in the eleventh place of that
chapter, and again in the twelfth, where you may find more thereof.

16 This kind of Cistus, which Dr. Penny (a famous Physician of London
deceased) did gather upon the Islands of Majorica or Majorca, and called it by
the name (...), in Latin, Myrtocistus Balearica, is a shrub growing to the
height of three cubits, having a very rough bark, beset round about with rough
and scabbed warts; which bark will of it self easily fall away from the old
branches or boughs of the tree. The leaves of this tree are almost like them
of Myrtus, very rough underneath like the branches aforesaid; but the leaves
that grow higher, and toward the top of the branches, are smooth, growing about
the branches very thick together, as in the other kinds of Cistus. The
flowers are yellow, growing on the top of the twigs, consisting of five long
leaves full of many very long chiues within. When the flowers be vaded, there
follows a very long and five square head or husk full of seed. The whole
tree is very sweet, out of which issues a gum or rosine, or rather a thick
clammy and fat juice, such as comes forth of the kinds of Ledum.

17 This annual Cistus grows up from seed with one upright stalk to the
height of a cubit, often times divided into other small branches; whereon grow
rough leaves somewhat long, of a dark green color. The flowers grow at the top
of the stalks, consisting of 5 small yellow leaves: which being past, there
follows a three square seed vessel full of small reddish seed. The root is
small and woody, and perishes when the seed is perfected.

17 Cistus annuus. Cistus lasting one year.
18 Cistus annuus longifolius Lobelij. Long leafed yearly Cistus.


18 This other Cistus that lasts but one year has long stalks divided into
other branches of the height of two cubits; whereon do grow long rough leaves,
set three together at certain distances, the middlemost whereof is longer than
the other two: the flowers grow on the sides of the branches, like the female
Cistus, of a white color: the root is of a woody substance, as are all the
rest of his kind.

19 This grows some foot high, with a square rough greenish stalk, whereon by
couples at certain spaces stand little longish rough leaves, yet toward the
top of the stalk they stand sometimes three together: upon the top of the little
branches grow flowers like those of the other Cistus, of color yellow, with a
fine sanguine spot upon each leaf of the flower. It grows in some parts of
France, as also on the Alps in Italy. Clusius describes it by the name of
Cistus annuus 2. Pona in his Mons Baldus calls it Cistus annuus flore guttato.

20 This has many slender branches whereon grow small roundish leaves, hoarie,
and somewhat like those of (...), somewhat less, with the middle rib standing
out. The flowers (...) upon the tops of the branches, and consist of five white
leaves, with a dark purple spot in the middle of each leaf: the threads in the
middle of the flower are of a yellow color: their seed-vessels are of the
bigness of those of flax, but three square, containing a seed of the bigness
of that of Henbane. Clusius found this in diverse parts of Spain, and sets it
forth by the (...) of Cistus folio Sampsuchi.

19 Cistus annuus flore (...). Spotted annual Cistus.
20 Cistus folio Sampsuchi. Marjerome leaued Cistus.


The Place.
Holly Roses grow in Italy, Spain, and Languedoc, and in the countries
bordering upon the river Padus, in all Hetruria and Massiles, and in many other
of the hotter provinces of Europe, in dry and stony places, varying infinitely
according to the (...) of the regions where they do grow; of which I have two
sorts in my garden, the first, and the Cistus annuus.

The Time.
They flower from May to September.

The Names.
The Holly Rose is called in Greek (...), or (...): in Latin also Cistus, and
Rosa syluatica: of diverse, Rosa Canina, as Scribontus Largus writes, but not
properly: in Spanish, Estepa: of the Portugals, Rosella: in English, Holly
Rose, and Cistus, after the Greek name. The fungous excrescence growing at the
root of Cistus, is called in Greek (...), because it grows under the shrub
Cistus: it is also called Limodoron: some call it (...): among whom is (...)
Aegineta, who also does not call that (...) which grows under the shrub
Cistus, but the juice hereof; whereupon might grow the word Hypocistis, by
which name the Apothecaries call this juice when it is hardened: of some (...)
is called Erithanon, Citinus, and Hypoquistidos.

The Temperature.
Cistus, as Galen says, does greatly dry, near hand in the second degree, and
it is of that coldness, that it has withal a temperate heat: the leaves and
the first buds being bearen do only dry and bind, in such sort as they may
close up ulcers, and join together green wounds.

The Virtues.
The flowers are of most force, which being drunk with wine are good against
the bloody flix,

They cure (...) ulcers being applied in manner of a pultis: Dioscorides
teaches that they

Hypocistis is much more binding: it is a sure remedy for all infirmities that
come of fluxes, (...)

It is excellent to be mixed with somentations that serve for the stomach and
liver.

It is put into the Treacle of Vipers, to the end it should comfort and
strengthen weak (...), Galen writes.

CHAP. 6. Of other Plants reckoned for dwarf kinds of Cistus.
1. 2. Helianthemum Anglicum luteum vel album. English yellow or white dwarf
Cistus.


The Description.
1 THe English dwarf Cistus, called of Lobel, (...) Chironium ((...) there is
another Panax of (...) description, which I hold to be the true and right
Panax, notwithstanding he has inserted it amongst the kinds of Cistus, as
being indifferent to join with us and others for the insertion) is a low and
base plant creeping upon the ground, having many small tough branches, of a
brown color; whereupon do grow little leaves set together by couples, thick,
fat, and full of substance, and covered ouerwith a soft down: from the bosom
whereof come forth other lesser leaves: the flowers (...) they be open are
small knops or buttons, of a brown color mixed with yellow; and being open
and spread abroad are like those of the wild Tansie, and of a yellow color,
withsome yellower chiues in the middle: the root is thick, and of a woody
substance.

2 The second is very like unto the precedent, saving that the leaves are long,
and do not grow so thick thrust together, and are more woolly: the flowers
are greater, and of a white color, wherein the especial difference
consists. The root is like the former.

3 Helianthemum luteum Germanicum. The yellow dwarf Cistus of (...)


3 There is found in Germany, a certain plant like to Cistus, and Ledon, but
much lesser, creeping upon the ground, unless it be propped up, having a
multitude of twiggie branches, slender, and sine: whereupon do grow leaves
lesser than those of Ledon or Cistus, very like to that of our English white
dwarf Cistus, of a full substance, fleightly haired, wherein is contained a
tough juice: the flowers are small like little Roses, or the wild Tansie, of a
yellow color: the roots be slender: wooddie, and something red.

4 Helianthemum album Germanicum. The white dwarse Cistus of Germany.
5 Helianthemum (...). The dwarf Cistus of Sauoy.
6 Helianthemum angustifolium. Narrow leafed dwarf Cistus.


4 This differs not from the last described, saving that the flowers hereof
are very white, and the others yellow, wherein they especially differ.

5 The Dwarf Cistus of Sauoy has diverse tough branches, of a reddish color,
very tough and woody, divided into diverse other branches: whereon are set
small leaves, four together, by certain spaces; the flowers grow at the top of
the branches like those of our yellow Dwarf Cistus, of a yellow color: the
root is very wooddie.

6 This dwarf Cistus with narrow leaves, has very many (...) flexible
branches, of a (...) color, very smooth, and ramping upon the ground; whereon
do grow small, long, narrow leaves, like those of Time of Candie, from the
bosom whereof come forth diverse (...) smaller leaves: the flowers grow on the
tops of the branches, of a bleak yellow color: the root is (...) woody.

7 To these I may fitly add two more: the first of these has creeping stalks,
some foot (...) two long, blackish, and divided into sundry smaller branches:
the leaves grow thick and many together, set by couples (though the figure do
not well express so much:) these leaves are small, of (...) bigness of those of
Time, thick, green above, and whitish underneath, and of a bitter taste: at
(...) ends of the branches grow two or four flowers near together, very
small, composed of five little leaves, of a kind of flesh color: to these
succeed heads opening themselves when they come to (...) into five parts, and
containing a very small seed: the root is hard and wooddie, sending out
certain fibers: also the branches here and there put forth some fibers. This
plant dried has a pretty pleasing smell. This grows upon the highest Austrian
and Styrian alps, and is set forth by Clusius by the name of Chamaeciftus
septimus.

7 Chamaecistus serpillifolius. Time leaued dwarf Cistus.
8 Chamaecistus (...). Frisian Dwarf Cistus.


8 The same Author also in his Curae posteriores gives us the history of this,
which he received with some other rare plants from John Dortman, a famous and
learned Apothecarie of Groeningen: This little plant is in leaf and root
almost like and near of the same bigness with the Celticke Nard, yet the
stalks are unlike, which are small, set with a few longish leaves, and at the
tops they carry five or six pretty flowers like those of Crow feet, consisting
of six leaves apiece, of a yellow color, yet with some few spots of another
color, and these set in a double ring about the middle; after these follow
heads or seed vessels with forked tops, filled with a chaffie seed: the whole
plant smells somewhat strong. It grows together with Gramen Pernassi in rotten
moorish places about a village in the county of Drent. Dortman called this
Hirculus Frisicus: Clusius adds, qui Chamaecisti genus.

The Place.
Their (...) titles have touched their natural countries: they grow in rough,
dry, and sunnie places, in plain fields and upon mountains.

Those of our English growing, I have found in very many places, especially in
Kent, upon the chalkie banks about Graues-end, Southfleet, and for the most
part all the way from thence unto Canturburie and Dover.

The Time.
They flower from July to the end of August.

The Names.
Tragus calls dwarf Cistus in the high Dutch tongue, (...) (...): in Latin,
Gratia Dei; but there is another herb called also of the later Herbarists
Gratia Dei, which is Gratiola: Valerius Cordus names it Helianthemum, and
(...) flos, or Sun flower: of Clusius, Chamaecistus, or Dwarf (...).

Pliny writes, that Helianthe grows in the champion country Temiscyra in
Pontus, and in the mountains of Cilicia near to the sea: and he says
further, that the wise men of those countries, and the kings of Persia do
anoint their bodies herewith, boiled with Lions fat, a little Saffron, and
wine of Dates, that they may seem fair and beautiful; and therefore have they
called it (...), or the beauty of the Sun: Matthiolus says, that Helianthemum
is taken of some to be Panaces Chironium, or Chirons All-heale: but it is
nothing likely, as we have said.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The faculties and temperature are referred to the kinds of Cistus, for it
heals wounds, stancheth

The same boiled in wine heals ulcers in the mouth and privy parts, if they
be washed therewith:

CHAP. 7. Of Cistus Ledon, and Ladanum.
The Kinds.
THere be diverse sorts of Cistus, whereof that gummy matter is gathered, called
in shops Ladanum, and Labdanum, but improperly.

The Description.
1 CIstus Ledon is a shrub, growing to the height of a man, and sometimes
higher; having many hard wooddie branches, covered with a blackish bark:
whereupon do grow leaves set together by couples, one right against another like
unto wings, of an inch broad, of a black swart green on the vppersides, and
whitish underneath: whereon is gathered a certain clammie transparent or
through shining liquour, of a very hot sweet smell, which being gathered and
hardened, is that which in shops is called Labdanum: the flowers grow at the
ends of the branches like little roses, consisting of five white leaves, every
one decked or beautified toward the bottom with pretty dark purplish spots
tending to blackness, having in the middle very many yellow chiues, such as
are in the middle of the Rose: after come the knaps or seed vessels, full of
most small reddish seed; the whole plant being dried, grows somewhat whitish,
and of a pleasant smell, the which it retains many years.

2 The second grows likewise to the height of an hedge bush; the branches are
long, and very sragile or easy to break, whereon do grow leaves greener than
any other of his kind, yet underneath of a hoarie color; growing toward
winter to be somewhat reddish, of a sower and binding taste: the flowers are
like the precedent: the form whereof the Grauer has omitted, in other
respects like the former.

3 The third sort of Cistus Ledon grows up to the height of a small hedge
bush, having many twiggie branches; whereon do grow leaves like those of the
Poplar tree, sharp at the point, covered over with that clammie dew that the
others are: the flowers grow at the tops of the branches, of a white color
like the precedent.

1 Cistus Ledon 1. Clusij. The first Cistus bringing (...).
2 Cistus ledon 2. Clusij. The second gum Cistus.
3 Cistus ledon populea fronde. Cistus ledon with leaves like the Poplar.
4 Cistus ledon 4. Clusij. Cistus ledon, the 4. of (...).


5 Cistus Ledon 5. Clusij. The fist Cistus Ledon.
6 Cistus Ledon 6. Clusij. The sixth (...) Ledon.
7 Cistus Ledon 7. Clusij. The 7. Cistus Ledon.
8 Cistus Ledon cum Hypocistide Lobelij. The 8. Cistus Ledon, with his
excrescence.


9 (...) Ledon 10. Clusij. The 10. Cistus Ledon.
10 Cistus Ledon Myrtifolium. Cistus Ledon with leaves like Myrtle.
11 Cistus Ledum Silesiacum. The Polonian Cistus Ledon.


4 The fourth of Clusius description grows likewise to the height of a
shrubby bush, having many branches, flexible, hoarie, and hairie: the leaves
are like the rest of his kind, but softer, more hairy, of a swart green color,
dashed over with that dewie fatness, not only in the spring time, but in the
heat of (...) likewise: the flowers are white, with yellow thrums in the
middle: the rest answers the last described.

5 The fifth grows up like a hedge (...) with many tough branches, whereon are
set long rough leaves, hoarie underneath, somewhat dashed over with that fattie
dew or (...) mour that the rest are possessed of: the flowers are likewise of a
white color, with (...) yellow chiues in the middle: the root is wooddie.

6 The sixth has diverse small branches covered with a blackish bark: the
flowers are set together at the tops of the branches by certain spaces: they
are yellow, and like the former in each respect.

7 The seventh is a low shrub growing to the height of two cub its, having many
branches covered with a bark of the color of ashes; whereon are confusedly
set diverse leaves at certain distances, small, narrow, like those of winter
Sauory, of an ouerworne russet color, very thick, fat, and glutinous: the
flowers are white, and differ not, nor the seed from the rest.

8 The eighth (...) up like a little hedge bush, having leaves like the common
(...) (...), (...) that those of this plant are sprinkled over with that
clammy moisture, and the other not so: the (...) and seed are also like. From
the root of this plant comes such like excrescence called (...), (...), or
Hypocistis, as there does from the first male Cistus, wherein it differs from
all the rest under the name Ledon.

9 The ninth has diverse brittle stalks of an ash color tending to a russet;
whereon are set very many leaves like those of Thyme, of an ouerworne color:
the flowers are white, with certain yellow chiues in the middle, which the
grauer has omitted in the figure.

10 The tenth grows up like a small shrub, having brittle stalks, covered
with a blackish bark, and divided into diverse branches; whereon are set upon
short truncheons or fat footstalkes, four or five like those the Myrtle tree,
of a strong smell: the flowers are likewise of a white color.

12 Cistus Ledum Rorismarini folio. Cistus Ledon with leaves like Rosemarie.
13 Cistus Ledum Matthioli. Cistus Ledon of Matthiolus description.


11. 12. The twelfth kind of Cistus Ledon grows upright with a straight body
or stock, brings at the top many small twigs or rods of a cubit long,
covered with a bark os the color of ashes, which divide themselves into other
branches, of a purplish color, beset with long and narrow leaves, not much
unlike to Rosemary, but longer; of a green color above, but underneath having
as it were a long rib, made or compact of wool or down; of a sweet and
pleasant smell, and somewhat sharp in taste: on the tops of the branches grow
knops or heads, compact as it were of many scales, of an iron or rustie color:
out of which comes and proceeds a certain round and long mane, or hairy
panickled tuft of flowers, with many long, tender, green, and somewhat woolly
stalks or twigs growing unto them, of a sweet sent and smell: the flowers
consist of five little white leaves, within which are contained ten white
chiues with a long style or pointal in (...) midst of the flower: when the
flowers be vaded, there succeed long knops or heads which are (...) cornered,
in shape and bigness like unto the fruit and berries of Cornus; which being
(...), (...) bespeckled with many silver spots, but being ripe, are of a red
color; containing within (...) (...) long yellow seed, which is so small and
slender, that it is like to the dust or powder that (...) (...) (...) worm
holes. This is the Ledum Silesiacum of Clusius; and the Ledum Rorismarini folio
of (...) (...): it is also the (...) (...) of Matthiolus; and (...) of Cordus:
and I (...) deceived if the figure which Tabernamont anus and our Author out of
him gave by the name of Cistus adulterinus, were not of this.

13 Among the shrubby bushes comprehended under the title of Cistus Ledum,
Matthiolus has set forth one, whereof to write at large were impossible,
considering the Author is so brief, and of our selves we have not any
acquaintance with the plant it self: Dioscorides to help what may be, says,
that it is a shrub growing like unto the stock or kindred of the Cisti: from
whose leaves is gathered a clammy dew which makes that gummie matter that is
in shops called Lapdanum: it grows, says he, in hot regions (but not with
us:) the Mauritanians call the juice or clammy matter, Leden, and Laden: of
some, Ladano, and Odano: in Spanish, Xara and surther says, it grows in
Arabia, where the bush is called Chasus thus much for the description. Our
Author here seems to make Dioscorides to comment upon Matthiolus, which shows
his learning, and how well he was exercised in reading or understanding any
thing written of Plants. But of this (...); The plant here figured which
Matthiolus judges to be the true Ledon, or Cistus Ladanifera of Dioscorides,
has (...) stalks and branches, whereon grow very thick leaves, broad also
and long, with the (...) running along the leaves, the flower of this
consists of five white leaves, and the seed is contained in a three cornered
seed vessel.

14 Cistus Ledum Alpinum Clusij. The Mountain Cistus.
15 Cistus Ledon folijs Rorismarini. Rosemary leaued Cistus Ledon.


14 The foureteenth Cistus, being one of those that do grow upon the Alpish
mountains, which Lobel sets down to be Balsamum alpinum of Gesner:
notwithstanding I think it not amiss to insert it in this place, having for
my warrant that famous Herbarist Carolus Clusius: this plant is one of
beautifullest, differing in very notable points, and yet resembles them in the
woody branches and leaves: it rises up having many weak branches leaning to
the ground, yet of a woody substance, covered over with an ash colored bark:
the leaves are broad, and very rough, of a shining green color, and a binding
taste: the flowers grow at the tops of the branches like little bells, hanging
down their heads, divided at the lips or brims into five divisions, of a deep
red color on the out side, and dashed over here and there with some silver
spots; on the inside of a bright shining red color, with certain chiues in
the middle, and of a very sweet smell, as is all the rest of the plant; after
which come small heads or knaps, full of seed like dust, of a very strong
smell, making the head of them to ache that smell thereto: the root is long,
hard, and very woody: oftentimes there is found upon the trunk or naked part
of the stalks certain excrescences, or out-(...) in manner of galls, of a
fungous substance, like those of Touchwood, white within, and red without, of
an astringent or binding (...)

15 This grows some cubite and better high, and has long narrow glutinous
leaves like in shape to those of Rosemarie, set by couples, but not very thick:
the branches whereon the flowers do grow are slender, and the seed vessels are
divided into five parts as in other plants of this kind. This Clusius found in
Spain, and sets forth for his Ledum nonum.

The Place.
Cistus Ledon grows in the Island of Candie, as Bellonius does testify, in
untilled places every where: it is also found in Cyprus, as Pliny shows, and
likewise in many places of Spain that lie open to the Sun: moreover both the
form and bignesle of the leaves, and also of the plants themselves, as well of
those that bring sorth Ladanum, as the other Cistus, do vary in this wonderful
manner, according to the (...) of the places and countries where they grow: they
are strangers in these Northerly parts, being very impatient of our cold
clymate.

The Time.
They flower for the most part from May to the end of August: the clammie
matter which falls upon the leaves, which is a liquid kind of Rosen of a
sweet smell, is gathered in the Spring time as Dioscorides says: but as Petrus
Bellonius asfirmeth (being an eye witness of the gathering) in the midst of
summer, and in the extreme heat of the Dog-daies, the which in our time not
without great care and diligence, and as great labor, is gathered from the
whole plant (with certain instruments made in manner of tooth pickes, or ear
pickes, which in their tongue they call Ergastiri) and not gathered from the
beards of Goats, as it is reported in the old fables of the lying Monks
themselves, called Calohieros, that is to say Greekish Monks, who of very
mockery have foisted that fable among others extant in their works.

I think it not amiss for the better explanation of the matter here treated
of, as also to show you after what manner our Author in diverse places gave the
testimonies of sundry Writers, and how well he understood them, here to set
down in English the words of Bellonius concerning the gathering of Ladanum,
which are these. [The Greeks (says he) for the gathering of Ladanum, provide
a peculiar instrument which in their vulgar tongue they term Ergastiri: This
is an instrument like to a Rake without teeth, to this are fastened sundry
thongs cut out of a raw and vntanned hide; they gently rub these upon the
Ladanum bearing shrubs, that so the liquid moisture concrete about the leaves
may stick to them, which afterward with knives they shave off these thongs in
the heat of the day. Wherefore the labor of gathering Ladanum is exceeding
great, yea intolerable, seeing they must of necessity stay in the mountains
all the day long in the greatest heat of the Dogdaies: neither usually shall
you find any other who will take the pains to gather it, besides, the
Calohieroi, that is the Greek Monks. It is gathered no where in the whole
Island of Candy in greater plenty, than at the foot of the mountain Ida at a
village called Cogualino, and at Milopotamo. ]

The Names.
The shrub it self is called in Greek (...), or (...): the Latins keep the
name Ledon or Ladon, and is a kind of Cistus or Hollie Roses: the fat or
clammie matter which is gathered from the leaves, is named Ladanon and Ledanon,
according to the Greek: the Apothecaries corruptly call it Lapdanum:
Dioscorides counts that to be the best which is sweet of smell, and somewhat
green, that easily waxes soft, is fat, without sand, and is not easily
broken, but very full of Rosine or Gum.

The Temperature.
Ladanum, says Galen, is hot in the later end of the first degree, having also
a little astrictiueor binding quality; it is likewise of a thin substance, and
therefore it softeneth, and withal does moderately digest, and also concoct.

The Virtues.
Ladanum has a peculiar property against the infirmities of the mother, it
keeps hairs from

Dioscorides says, that Ladanum does bind, heat, souple, and open, being
tempered with wine, Myrrh,

It takes away the pain in the ears if it be powered or dropped therein,
mixed with honied water,

A fume made thereof draws forth the afterbirth, and takes away the
hardness of the matrix.

It is with good success mixed with mollifying plasters that mitigate pain.

Being drunk with wine, it stops the laske, and provoke urine.

There is made hereof diverse sorts of Pomanders, chains, and bracelets, with
other sweets mixed

CHAP. 8. Of Rosemarie.
The Description.
1 ROsemarie is a wooddie (...), growing oftentimes to the height of three or
four cubits, especially when it is set by a wall: it consists of slender
brittle branches, whereon do grow very many long leaves, narrow, somewhat hard,
of a quick spicy taste, whitish underneath, and of a full green color above,
or in the upper side, with a pleasant sweet strong smell; among which come
forth little flowers of a whitish blew color: the seed is blackish: the roots
are tough and woody.

1 Rosmarinum Coronarium. Garden Rosemarie.
2 Rosmarinum syluestre. Wild Rosemarie.


2 The wild Rosemarie Clusius has referred unto the kinds of Cistus Ledon;
we have as a poor kinsman thereof inserted it in the next place, in kindred or
neighborhood at the least. This wild Rosemarie is a small wooddie shrub,
growing seldom above a foot high, having hard branches of a reddish color,
dividing themselves into other smaller branches of a whitish color: whereon are
placed without order diverse long leaves, green above, and hoarie underneath,
not unlike to those of the dwarf Willow, or the common Rosemarie, of a dry
and astringent taste, of little smell or none at all: the flowers stand on the
tops of the branches, set upon bare or naked footstalks, consisting of five
small leaves of a reddish color, somewhat shining; after which appear little
knaps full of small seed: the root is tough and wooddie.

3 This plant grows up like an hedge shrub of a wooddie substance, to the
height of two or three 3 Casia Poetica, Lobelij. The Poets Rosemarie or
Gardrobe.
cubits; having many twiggie branches of a green color: whereupon do grow
narrow leaves like unto Linaria or Toad-flax, of a bitter taste; among which
come forth small mossie flowers, of a greenish yellow color like those of the
Cornell tree, and of the smell of Rosemarie: which has mouedme to placeit with
the Rosemaries as a kind thereof, not finding any other plant so near unto it
in kind and neighborhood: after the flowers be past, there succeed fruit like
those of the Myrtle tree, green at the first, and of a shining red color when
they be ripe, like Coral, or the berries of Asparagus, soft and sweet in
taste, leaving a certain acrimonie or sharp taste in the end: the stone
within is hard as is the nut, wherein is contained a small white kernel, sweet
in taste; the root is of a wooddie substance: it floureth in the Summer; the
fruit is ripe in the end of October: the people of Granade, Montpelier, and of
the kingdom of Valentia, do use it in their presses and Wardrobes, whereupon
they call it Guardalobo. This in Clusius his time when he lived about
Montpelier was called Osyris; but afterward they called it Casia, thinking it
that mentioned by the Poet Virgil; the which it cannot be, for it has no sweet
smell. Pena and Lobel judge it to be the Casia of (...), wherewith also it
dothnot well agree.

The Place.
Rosemarie grows in France, Spain, and in other hot countries; in woods, and
in untilled places: there is such plenty thereof in Languedocke, that the
inhabitants burn scarce any other fuel: they make hedges of it in the gardens
of Italy and England, being a great ornament unto the same: it grows neither
in the fields nor gardens of the Eastern cold countries; but is carefully and
curiously kept in pots, set into the stoues and sellers, against the injuries
of their cold Winters.

Wild Rosemarie grows in Lancashire in diverse places, especially in a field
called Little Reed, amongst the Hurtleberries, near unto a small village
called Maudsley; there found by a learned Gentleman often remembered in our
history (and that worthily) Mr. Thomas Heskcth.

The Time.
Rosemarie floureth twice a year, in the Spring, and after in August.

The wild Rosemarie floureth in June and July.

The Names.
Rosemarie is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Rosmarinus Coronaria: it is
surnamed Coronaria, for difference sake between it and the other Libanotides,
which are reckoned for kinds of Rosemarie, and also because women have been
accustomed to make crowns and garlands thereof: in Italian, Rosmarino
coronario: in Spanish, Romero: in French and Dutch Rosmarin.

Wild Rosemarie is called Rosmarinus syluestris: of Cordus, (...).

The Temperature.
Rosemarie is hot and dry in the second degree, and also of an a stringent or
binding quality, as being compounded of diverse parts, and taking more of the
mixture of the earthy substance.

The Virtues.
Rosemarie is given against all fluxes of blood; it is also good, especially
the flowers thereof, for

(...) witnesses, that Rosemarie is a remedy against the stuffing of the
head, that comes (...) Mesuai gives testimony.

Dioscorides teaches that it cures him that has the yellow iaundice, if it
be boiled in water and

The distilled water of the flowers of Rosemarie being drunk at morning and
evening first and

The Arabians and other Physicians succeeding, do write, that Rosemarie
comfort the brain

The Arabians, as Serapio witnesses, give these properties to Rosemarie: it
heateth, say they, is

Tragus writes, that Rosemarie is spice in the Germane Kitchins, and other
cold countries. Further,

The flowers made up into plates with sugar after the manner of Sugar Roset and
eaten, comfort

The oil of Rosemaire chimically drawn, comfort the cold, weak and feeble
brain in most

The people of Thuringia do use the wild Rosemarie to provoke the desired
sickness.

Those of Marchia use to put it into their drink the sooner to make their
clients drunk, and also The virtues in the two last places (...) belong to the
(...) (...) of (...), (...) is the (...) of Cordus, and is described in the
(...). (...) of the foregoing Chapter, by the name of (...) (...) (...).


CHAP. 9. Of Upright Wood-binde.
1 Periclymenum rectum Sabaudicum. Sauoy Honisuckles.
2 Periclymenum rectum Germanicum. Germane Honisuckles.


The Description.
1 THis strange kind of Hony-suckle, found in the woods of Sauoy, represents
unto us that shrub or hedge-bush called Cornus foemina, the Dog-berry tree, or
Pricke-timber tree, having leaves and branches like the common Wood-binde,
saving that this does not clamber or clymbe as the others do, but contrariwise
grows upright, without leaning to one side or other, like a small tree or
hedge-bush: the flowers grow upon the tender sprayes or twiggie branches. by
couples, not unlike in shape and color to the common Wood-binde, but
altogether lesser, and of a white color, having within the same many hairy
chiues like the other of his kind: after which come red berries joined
together by couples: the root is tough and (...).

2 The stalks of the second be oftentimes of a mean thickness, the woody
substance somewhat whitish and soft: the branches be round, and covered with a
whitish bark, notwithstanding in the beginning when the sprayes be young they
are somewhat reddish. The leaves be long, like those of the common Hony-suckle,
soft, and of a white green: on the lower side they be whiter, and a little
hairy: the flowers be lesser than any of the Wood-bindes, but yet of the (...)
fashion, and of a whitish color, joined together by couples upon several
slender foot-stalkes, like little wild Cherries, of a red color, the one
lesser oftentimes than the other.

3 Periclymenum rectum fructu (...). Upright Wood-binde with blew berries.
4 Periclymenum rectum fructu rubro. Cherry Wood-binde.


3 This strange kind of Wood-binde, which Carolus Clusius has set forth in
his Pannonicke Observations, rises up oftentimes to the height of a man, even
as the former does; which diuides it self into many branches, covered with a
rough black bark, that choppeth and gapeth in sundry clefts as the bark of
the Oak. The tender branches are of a whitish green color, covered with a
woolly hairinesse, or an ouerworne color, whereupon do grow leaves set by
couples one against the other, like unto the common Wood-binde, of a drying
bitter taste: the flowers grow by couples likewise, of a whitish color. The
fruit succeeds, growing like little Cherries, each one on his own
foot-stalke, of a bright and shining blew color; which being bruised, do die
the hands of a reddish color, and they are of a sharp winie taste, and
contain in them many small flat seeds. The root is woody, dispersing it self
far abroad.

4 This kind of upright Wood-bind grows up likewise to the height of a man,
and oftentimes more high, like to the last described, but altogether greater.
The berries hereof are very black, wherein especially is the difference. The
leaves of this are as large as Bay leaves, sharp pointed, green above, and
whitish underneath, but not hairy, nor snipt about the edges: the flowers grow
by couples, of a whitish purple, or wholly purple: to these paires of flowers
there commonly succeeds but one berry, larger than any of the former, of the
bigness of a little cherry, and of the same color, having two marks upon the
top thereof, where the flowers stood.

Periclymeni 3. and 4. flores. The flowers of the third and fourth.
5 Chamaepericlymenum. Dwarf Hony-suckle.


5 To the kinds of Wood-bindes this plant may likewise be referred, whose
picture with this description was sent unto Clusius long since by that learned
Doctor in physic Thomas Penny (of our London college of famous memory:) it
rises up with a stalk of a foot high; whereupon are set by couples fair
broad leaves one right against another, ribbed with certain nerves like those
of Plantaine, sharp pointed, and somewhat hollowed in the middle like
Spoon-wort: from the bosom of which leaves come forth small flowers, not seen
or described by the Author: after which comes forth a cluster of red berries,
thrust hard together as those of Aaron or priests pint. The root is tough and
very slender, creeping far abroad under the upper crust of the earth, whereby
it occupies much ground.

The Place.
These plants are strangers in England: they grow in the woods and mountains
of Switzerland, Germany, Sauoy, and other those parts tending to the East, East
North-East, and East and by South.

I have a plant of the (...) kind in my garden: the rest as yet I have not
(...), and therefore cannot write so liberally thereof as I could wish.

The dwarf Hony-suckle grows in the maritime parts of Norway and Sweden, and
the countries thereabout.

The Time.
They flower for the most part when the others do, that is to say in May and
June, and their fruit is ripe in September.

The Names.
Upright Wood-binde or Hony-suckle is called Periclymenum stans, and
Periclymenum rectum, (...) upright Wood-binde: of Dodonaeus, Xylosteum: in
High Dutch, Honds kirsen, that is to say, Canum Cerasa, or Dog Cherries. The
English names are expressed in their several titles. It has bin called
Chamaecerasus, but not truly.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Touching the temperature and virtues of these upright Wood-bindes, we have no
experience at all our selves, neither have we learned any thing of others.

CHAP. 10. Of Seen.
Sena folijs obtusis. Italian Seen.


The Description.
Seen brings forth stalks a cubit high, set with diverse branches: the leaves
are long, winged, consisting of many small leaves like those of Liquorice, or
of bastard Seen: the flowers come forth of the bottom of the wings, of color
yellow, standing upon slender footstalks; from which after the flowers be gone
hang forked cods, the same bowing inward like a halfe-moone, plain and flat, in
(...) are contained seeds like to the seeds or kernells of grapes, of a
blackish color. The root is slender, long, and unprofitable, which perishes
when the leaves are gathered for medicine, and the seeds be ripe, and must be
sown again the next year, even as we do corn.

There is another kind of Seen growing in Italy, like the other in each
respect, saving that it is greater, and has not that force in purging that the
other has.

The Place and Time.
This is planted in Syria and Egypt, also in Italy, in Province in France, in
Languedoc. It hardly grows in high and low Germany, neither in England: it
prospers in hot Regions, and cannot away with cold; for that cause it is in
Italy sown in May, and continues no longer than Autumn: the best is brought
from Alexandria and Egypt. The Arabians were the first that found it out.

The Names.
The Persians call it Abalzemer, as Mesue his copy teaches: the Apothecaries
(...), by which name it was known to Actuarius the Grecian, and to the later
Latins: it is called in English, Seen.

The Temperature.
Seen is of a mean temperature, neither hot nor cold, yet inclining to heat,
and dry almost in the third degree: it is of a purging faculty, and that by
the stool, in such sort as it is not much troublesome to man's nature, having
withal a certain binding quality, which it leaves after the purging.

The Virtues.
It voideth forth (...) and choleric humors, also gross and melancholic, if
it be helped with something tending to that end.

It is a singular purging medicine in many diseases, fit for all ages and
kinds.

It purges without violence or hurt, especially if it be tempered with Anise
seed or other like

The quantity of the powder is a dram weight, and in the infusion, four,
five, or more. It may be

It is in the decoction or in the infusion tempered with cold things in burning
agues and other

Most of the Arabians commend the cods, but our Physicians the leaves rather;
for unless the

Some also think that Seen is hurtful to the stomach, and weakneth the same,
for which cause Mesue notes that it is slow in operation, and therefore Salgem
is to be mixed with it. Moreover, Seen purges not so speedily as stronger
medicines do.

Notwithstanding it may be helped not only by Salgem, but also by other purging
things mixed Catholicon, or the Electuarie Diaphoenicon, or that which is made
of the juice of Roses, or some other, according as the condition or quality of
the disease and of the sick man requires.

The leaves of Seen are a familiar purger to all people, but they are windy,
and do bind the body

Seen does better purge when it is infused or steeped, than when it is boiled:
for doubtless the

Take Borage, Buglosse, Balm, Fumitorie, of each three drams, Seen of
Alexandria very well prepared

The powder of Seen after it is well prepared two ounces, of the powder of the
root of Mechoacan Salgemmae: this has been proved a very fit and familiar
medicine for all ages and sexes. The patient may take one spoonful or two
thereof fasting, either in pottage, some supping in drink, or white wine. This
is right profitable to draw both phlegm and melancholy from the breast and other
parts.

The leaves of Seen and Cammomil are put in baths to wash the head.

Seen opens the inward parts of the body which are stopped, and is profitable
against all griefs

Take Seen prepared according to art one ounce, Ginger half a quarter of an
ounce, twelve cloves,

Handle Seen in manner above specified, then take half an ounce thereof, which
don, add thereto

Seen and Fumitorie (as Rasis affirms) do purge adust humors, and are
excellent good against

If Seen be infused in whey, and then boiled a little, it becomes good
physic against melancholy, There were formerly two figures in this chapter,
which differed only in that the first, which was the Sexa (...), (...),
narrower, and sharper (...) (...) than the (...) (...), which was the second.


CHAP. 11. Of bastard Seen.
The Description.
1 Colutea and Seen be so near the one unto the other in shape and show, that
the (...) Herbarists have deemed Colutea to be the right Seen. This bastard
Seen is a shrubby plant growing to the form of a hedge bush or shrubby tree:
his branches are straight, brittle, and woody; which being carelessly broken
off, and as negligently pricked or stuck in the ground, will take root and
prosper at what time of the year soever it be done; but slipped or cut, or
planted in any curious sort whatsoever, among an hundred one will (...) grow:
these boughs or branches are beset with leaves like Sena or Securidaca, not
much unlike Liquorice: among which come forth fair broome-like yellow flowers,
which turn into small cods like the sownd of a fish or a little bladder, which
will make a crack being broken between the fingers: wherein are contained
many black flat seeds of the bigness of Tares, growing upon a small rib or
sinew within the cod: the root is hard, and of a woody substance.

1 Colutea. Bastard Seen.
2 Colutea Scorpioides. Bastard Seen with Scorpion cods.


2 Bastard Seen with Scorpion cods is a small woody shrub or bush, having
leaves, branches, and flowers like unto the former bastard Seen, but less in
each respect: when his small yellow flowers are fallen there succeed little
long crooked cods like the long cods or husks of (...) his Scorpioides, whereof
it took his name: the root is like the root of the Box tree, or rather
resembling the roots of Dulcamara or Bitter-sweet, growing naturally in the
shadowie woods of Valena in Narbone; whereof I have a small plant in my garden,
which may be called Scorpion Seen.

3 The low or dwarf Colutea of (...) description, has a thick woody root
covered with a yellowish bark, with many fibers anexed thereto, which brings
forth yearly new shoots, whereby it greatly increases, of a cubit and a half
high, smooth, and of a green color; whereon do grow leaves composed of six
or seven leaves, and sometimes nine, set upon a middle rib like those of the
common kind, of a stipticke taste, with some sharpness or biting: the flowers
grow upon 3 Colutea scorpioides humilis. Dwarf bastard Seen.
4 Colutea scorpioides montana (...). Mountain bastard Seen.
5 Colutea minima, sieve Coronilla. The smallest bastard Seen.
slender foot-stalkes, long and naked like those of the Pease, and of a yellow
color, of little or no smell at all, and yet that little nothing pleasant:
after which come forth long cods, wherein is contained small seed like those of
the Strangle Tare.

4 This mountain bastard Seen has stalks, leaves, and roots like the last
described. The flowers grow on the tops of the branches in manner of a crown;
whereupon some have called it Coronilla: in shape like those of the pease, and
of a yellow color: the cods as yet we have not seen, and therefore not
expressed in the figure.

5 This small bastard Seen grows like a small shrub creeping upon the ground,
half a cubit high, bringing forth many twiggie branches, in manner of those of
the Spanish broom; whereupon do grow leaves like those of Lentils or the
Strangle Tare, with many small leaves set upon a middle rib, somewhat fat or
full of juice, of the color of the leaves of Rue or Herbegrace, of an
astringent and unpleasant taste: the flowers grow at the tops of the branches,
of a yellow color, in shape likethose of the smallest broom: after which come
little crooked cods like the claws or toes of a bird, wherein is contained
seed somewhat long, black, and of an (...) taste: the root is long, hard,
tough, and of a woody substance.

6 There is also found another sort hereof, not much differing from the former,
saving that this plant is greater in each respect, wherein especially
consists the difference.

The Place.
Colutea or bastard Seen grows in diverse gardens, and comes up of seed; it
quickly comes to perfection, insomuch that if a stick thereof be broken off
and thrust into the ground, it quickly takes root, yea although it be done in
the middle of summer, or at any other time, even as the sticks of Willow or
Elder, as my self have often proved; the which bring forth flowers and fruit
the next year after.

The second with Scorpion cods grows likewise in my garden: the last does
grow in diverse barren chalky grounds of Kent toward Sittinbourne, Canturbury,
and about Southfleet; I have not seen them elsewhere: the rest are strangers
in England.

The Time.
They flower from May till summer be well spent, in the mean season the cods
bring forth ripe seed.

The Names.
This shrub is called of Theophrastus in Greek (...) with the diphthong (...)
in the second syllable: in Latin, as Gaza expounds it, Coloutea or Colutea:
in high Dutch, (...) (...): in French, Baguenaudier: they are deceived that
think it to be Sena, or any kind thereof, although we have followed others in
giving it to name Bastard Seen, which name is very improper to it: in low Dutch
it is called (...) (...): and we may use the same name Seen tree, in English.

This Calutea, or bastard Seen, does differ from that plant (...) with v in the
second syllable, of which Colytea, Theophrastus writes in his third book. The
fifth is the Polygala (...) of (...).

The Nature and Virtues.
Theophrastus, neither any other has made mention of the temperature or
faculties in working There were (...) (...) the fifth and (...) places here two
(...) no (...) different, but that which was in the (...) place was a little
larger, and (...) title which (...) (...) in (...) (...), (...) this (...)
divided (...) them: for as (...) (...), (...) (...), (...) (...), was over in
the fifth; and (...), (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) the sixth.


CHAP. 12. Of (...)
The Description.
1 THe first kind of Liquorice has many (...) (...), rising up to the height
of two or three cubits, beset with leaves of an (...) (...) color, consisting
of many small leaves set upon a middle rib, like the leaves (...) Colutea, or
the (...) tree, somewhat glutinous in handling: among which come small knops
growing upon short stems betwixt the leaves and the branches, clustering
together, and making a round form and shape: out of which grow small blew
flowers, of the color of an English Hyacinth; after which succeed round,
rough, prickly heads, consisting of diverse rough or (...) husks closely and
thick compact together; in which is contained a flat seed: the root is
straight, yellow within, and brown without: of a sweet and pleasant taste.

2 The common and usual Liquorice has stalks and leaves very like the
former, saving that his leaves are greener and greater, and the flowers of a
light shining blew color: but the flowers of this are succeeded by longish
cods that grow not so thick clustring together in round heads as the former,
but spike fashion, or rather like the wild Vetch called (...), or Galega: the
cods are small and flat like unto the Tare: the roots are of a brownish color
without, and yellow within like Box, and sweeter in taste than the former.

The Place.
These plants do grow in sundry places of Germany wild, and in France and
Spain, but they are planted in gardens in England, whereof I have plenty in my
garden: the poor people of the North parts of England do manure it with great
diligence, whereby they obtain great plenty thereof, replanting the same once in
three or four years.

The Time.
Liquorice floureth in July, and the seed is ripe in September.

1 Glycyrrhiza Echinata Dioscoridis. Hedge-hogge Licorice.
2 (...) vulgaris. Common Licorice.


The Names.
The first is called in Greek, (...): in Latin, Dulc is radix, or sweet Root:
this Licorice is (...) known either to the Apothecaries or to the vulgar
people: we call it in English, Dioscorides his Licorice.

It is most evident that the other is (...), or Licorice: the Apothecaries call
it by a corrupt word, Liquiritia: the Italians, Regalitia: the Spaniards,
Regeliza and Regalitia: in high Dutch, Suszhotz, Suszwurtzel: in French,
Rigolisse, Raigalisse, and Reglisse: in low Dutch, (...), suethout: in English,
common Licorice: Pliny calls it Scythica herba: it is named Scythice of the
country Scythia, where it grows.

The Temperature.
The Nature of Dioscorides his Licorice, as Galen says, is familiar to the
temperature of our bodies, and seeing it has a certain binding quality
adioined, the temperature thereof so much as is hot and binding, is specially
of a warm buality, coming nearest of all to a mean temperature; besides, for
that it is also sweet, it is likewise meanly moist.

For as much as the root of the common Licorice is sweet, it is also
temperately hot and moist; notwithstanding the bark thereof is something
bitter and hot, but this must be scraped away; the fresh root when it is full
of juice does moisten more than the dry.

The Virtues.
The root of Licorice is good against the rough harshnesse of the throat and
breast; it opens

The juice of Licorice made according to Art, and hardened into a lump, which
is called (...) Liquiritiae, serves well for the purposes aforesaid, being
holden under the tongue, and there suffered to melt.

Moreover, with the juice of Licorice, Ginger, and other spices, there is made
a certain bread or

The juice of Licorice is profitable against the heat of the stomach, and of
the mouth.

The same is drunk (...) wine of Raisons against the infirmities of the liver
and chest, scabs or

Being melted under the tongue it quenches thirst: it is good for green
wounds being laid

The decoction of the fresh roots serves for the same purposes.

But the dried root most finely poudered is a singular remedy for a pin and a
web in the eye, if it

Dioscorides and Pliny also report, that Liquorice is good for the stomach and
ulcers of the mouth,

It is good against hoarsenesse, difficulty of breathing, inflammation of the
lungs, the pleurisy,

It takes away inflammations, mitigateth and tempereth the sharpness and
saltnes of humors,

The decoction is good for the kidneys and bladder that are exulcerated.

It cures the strangurie, and generally all infirmities that proceed of
sharp, salt, and biting humors.

These things concerning Liquorice has also Theophrastus: viz. that with this
and with cheese

The Scythian root is good for shortness of breath, for a dry cough, and
generally for all infirmities

Moreover, with honey it heals ulcers, it also quenches thirst if it be held
in the mouth: for Hippace, which is cheese made of Mares milk, as Hippocrates
witnesses.

Pliny in his twenty fifth book, chap. 8. has thought otherwise than truth,
that Hippace is an Both the figures formerly were of the first described.


CHAP. 13. Of Milk Trefoile or Shrub Trefoile.
The Kinds.
THere be diverse kinds or sorts of the shrubby Trefoile, the which might very
well have passed among the three leaued Grasses, had it not been for my
promise in the proeme of our first part, That in the last book of our History
the shrubbie or woody plants should be set forth, every one as near as might
be in kindred and neighborhood.

The Description.
1 THe sirst kind of Cytisus or shrubby Trefoile grows to the form of a
small shrub or woody bush two or three cubits high, branching into sundry
small boughs or arms, set full of leaves like the small Tresoile, dark
green, and not hairie, three growing always together: among these come forth
small yellow flowers like them of French Broom, which do turn into long and
flat cods, containing small seed of a blackish color.

2 The second kind of Cytisus is likewise a small shrub, in shape after the
manner of the former, but that the whole plant is altogether smaller, and the
leaves rounder, set together by couples, and the small cods hairy at the ends,
which sets forth the difference. The leaves of this are almost round, and grow
three together close to the stalk: they are smooth, of a fresh green, and the
middlemost leaf of the three is the largest, and ends in a sharp point: the
flowers are of the bigness and color of the Trifolium corniculatum: it
flowers in May.

3 The root of this third kind is single, from whence spring up many smooth
brittle stalks divided into many wings and branches, whereon grow green leaves
smaller than those of meadow Trefoile: the flowers are yellow, lesser than
Broom flowers, otherwise very like, growing about the tops of the twiggie
branches, divided into spoky tufts: which being vaded, there follow thin long
narrow cods, lesser than those of the Broom, wherein is contained small black
seed. The root is long, deeply growing into the ground, and sometimes waxes
crooked in the earth. This also has smooth green leaves, and differs little
(if any thing at all) from the first described, wherefore I thought it
needless to give a figure. Our Author called it Cytisus siliquosus, Codded
shrub Trefoile, because one of the branches was fairly in the figure expressed
with cods; I know no other reason, for all the Cytisi are codded as well as
this.

1 Cytisus. The first shrub Trefoile.
2 Cytisus. The second shrub Trefoile.
4 Cytisus hirsutus. Ilairy shrub Trefoile.
5 Cytisus incanus. Hoary shrub Trefoile.


4 The fourth kind of Cytisus has a great number of small branches and
stalks like the former, but it is a lower plant, and more woolly; whose stalks
and branches grow not very high, but yet very plentifully spread about the sides
of the plant: the leaves are greater than the former, but lesser than those of
meadow Trefoile: the flowers grow close together, as though they were bound up
or compact into one head or spokie tuft somewhat greater than the former: the
cods are also greater, and more hairy: the root grows very deep into the
ground, whereunto are adjoined a few fibers: it falls out to be more hairy or
woolly in one place than in another, and the more hairie and woolly that it is,
the whiter it waxes; for the roughness brings it a certain whitish color.
The branches of this often times lie along upon the ground: the leaves are smooth
and green above, and hoarie underneath: the flowers yellow, which fading
sometimes become orange colored: the cods are round, and seeds brownish.

5 The fifth kind of (...) grows to the height of a cubit or more, having
many slender twiggy branches like Broom, streaked and very hard: whereupon
grow leaves very like (...), yet all hoary, three together: from the bosom of
which, or between the leaves and the stalks, (...) sorth yellow (...) very
like Broom, Spartum, or Pease, but smaller: the cods be like unto Broom cods,
of an ash color, but slenderer, rougher, and flatter; in the several cells or
divisions whereof are contained bright shining seeds like the black seeds of
Broom: all the whole plant is hoarie like (...) or (...).

6 Cytisus (...). Winged shrub Trefoile.
7 Cytisus 7. Cornutus. The Horned shrub Trefoile.


6 The sixth kind of Cytisus or bush Tresoile grows to the height of a tall
man, with long stalks covered over with a blackish bark, and a few boughs or
branches, beset or garnished with leaves like the common Trefoile, but smaller,
growing also three together, whereof the middlemost (...) the three leaves is
twice as long as the two side leaves; the upper side whereof is green, and the
lower side somewhat reddish and hairie: the flowers grow along the stalks almost
from the bottom to the top, of a golden yellow color, fashioned like the
Broom flower, but greater than any of the rest of his kind, and of a
reasonable good savor: the seed has the pulsie taste of Cicer.

7 The seventh kind of Cytisus has many tough and hairy branches rising from
a wooddie root, four or five cubits high, which are divided into sundry
smaller branches beset with leaves like the meadow (...); among which come (...)
yellow flowers like Broom, that turn into crooked flat cods like a sickle;
wherein is contained the seed tasting like Cicer or Legumen. The whole plant is
hoarie like Rhamnus, and being broken or bruised smells like Rocket.

8 This eighth kind of Cytisus, which Pena sets forth, is doubtless
another kind of (...), resembling the former in leaves, flowers, and cods,
saving that the small leaves (which are always three together) area little
snipt about the edges: the whole plant is slenderer, softer, and greener,
rather resembling an herb than a shrub: the root is small and single.

9 This bastard or mis-begotten shrub Trefoile, or bastard Cytisus, grows up
like a shrub, but not of a woody substance, having tender stalks smooth and
plain: whereon do grow hairy leaves like the other, diverse set upon one
foot-stalke, contrary to all the rest: the flowers grow along the stems like
those of the stock Gillofloures, of a yellow color: the root is tough and
woody.

8 Cytisus 8. The eighth shrub Trefoile.
9 Cytisus adulterinus, (...) Alysson fruticans. Bastard shrub Trefoile.


The Place.
These plants were first brought into Italy and Greece from one of the (...) of
Cyclades, called Cyntho or Cynthusa, and since found in many places of France,
as about Montpelier, Veganium, and other places: they are strangers in England,
though they grow very plentifully in Scotland, as it is reported; whereof I
have two sorts in my garden, that is to say, Cytisus Maranthae, or the horned
Cytisus, and likewise one of the smallest, that is to say, the third in number.
The second grows in the garden of Mr. John (...).

The Time.
These plants flower for the most part in May, June, and July, and some after:
the seed is (...) (...) September.

The Names.
The Grecians and Latins do call this shrub (...), of Cynthusa an Island
before mentioned, in which place they are in great estimation for that they do
so wonderfully feed cattle, and increase milk in their dugs, nourish sheep
and goats, which bring young ones good for store and increase. One Author does
call these plants in Greek (...), that is to say in Latin (...) foenum,
fertile or fruitful Hay, for that the kinds hereof cause milk to increase,
makes good blood and juice, augmenteth strength, and multiplieth the natural
seed of generation: they may be called in English, milk Trefoile, of the store
of milk which they increase.

The Temperature.
The leaves of milk Trefoile do cool, as Dioscorides writes; they assuage
swellings in the beginning, if they be stamped and laid unto them with bread:
the decoction thereof drunk provoke urine: Galen teaches, that the leaves
of Milk Trefoile have a digesting or wasting quality mixed with a waterie and
temperate faculty, as have those of the Mallow.

The Virtues.
Women, says Columella, if they want milk must steep dry milk Trefoile in
fairewater, and

Hippocrates reckons up Milk-Trefoile among those things that increase milk,
in his book of

Also Aristomachus of Athens in Pliny, commands to give with wine the dry
plant, and the same

Democritus and Aristomachus do promise that you shall want no Bees, if you
have milk Trefoile Galen says) that (...) (...) gather of the flowers of
Milk Trefoile very great store of honey.

Columella teaches, that Milk Trefoile is notable good for hens, Bees,
Goats, Kine, and all

The people of Betica and Valentia (where there is great store of Cytisus) do
use it very much

Milk Trefoile is likewise a marvelous remedy against the Sciatica, and all
other kinds of The description that formerly was in the first place belonged
to that described and figured in the (...).


CHAP. 12. Of Bastard Milke-Trefoiles.
The Description.
1 THis rises up with little stalks from the root, brittle, very many in
number, parted into wings and branches, about which grow many leaves lesser
than those of the meadow Trefoile, of color green: the flowers about the tops
of the twigs be orderly placed in manner like ears, of color yellow, lesser
than those of broom, otherwise all alike: in their places grow up slender cods
long, narrow, and lesser than the cods of Broom: rough also and hairy; in
which do lie little blackish seeds: the root is long, and grows deep, and
oftentimes creeps aslope.

2 The second kind of bastard Milke-Tresoile is like unto the former in
plentiful stalks and twigges, but (...) it is lower and more downie; neither
do the stalks thereof stand upright, but rather incline to the one side: the
leaves also are somewhat greater, but yet lesser than those of the meadow
Trefoile, wholly white, and they (...) open themselves out, but keep always
folded with the middle rib standing out: the flowers likewise be closelier
joined together, and compacted as it were into a little head, and be also
something greater: the cods in like manner are a little bigger and hairy, and
of a blackish purple or murrey: the root grows deep in the ground, being
divided into a few sprigs; it oftentimes happens to grow in one place more
hairie or downie than in another: the more hairie and downie it is, the more
white and (...) it is; for the hairinesse does also bring with it a certain
whitish color.

3 The third kind of bastard Milk Trefoile brings forth a company of young
shoots that are somewhat writhed and crooked, long leaves of a fair green
color: the flowers are closed together, long, white, or else galbineous,
sweetly smelling, that is to say, having the smell of honey: the shrub it self
is always green both Summer and Winter. This grows some foot or better high,
with slender hoarie branches, set with leaves three standing together upon a
very short stalk, and the middle leaf is as long again as the other two;
they are very white and (...), and the yellow flowers grow out of the bosoms
of the leaves all along the stalks. This is that mentioned in the virtues of
the former chapter at F for the Silk worms to work upon.

4 The fourth shrub is likewise one of the wild kind, though in face and
stature like the manured

1 Pseudocytisus 1. The first bastard shrub Trefoile.
2 Pseudocytisus 2. The 2. bastard shrub Trefoile.
3 Cytisus semper (...). The euer-greene shrub Trefoile.
4 Pseudocytisus hirsutus. The hairie bastard tree Trefoile.
Cytisus: It grows up like a small shrub or hedge bush to the height of two
or three yards; on whose branches do grow three rough or hairie leaves, set
upon a slender foot-stalke, of a grass green color above, with a reddish
hairinesse below: the flowers grow along the stalks from the middle to the
top, of a bright shining yellow color: the root is likewise wooddie.

The Place.
These kinds of Milk Trefoiles are found in Morauia, so called in our age,
which in times past was named Marcomannorum prouincia, and in the upper
Pannonia, otherwise called Austria, near to high ways, and in the borders of
fields; for they seem after a sort to joy in the shade. These grow (according
to Clusius) in sundry parts of Spain.

The Time.
They flower especially in June and July.

The Names.
It is evident enough that they are bastard kinds of Milk Trefoiles, and
therefore they may be called and plainly termed (...), or bastard Milk
Trefoiles, or (...) syluestres, that is to say, wild Milk Trefoiles.

The Temperature and Virtues.
What temperature these shrubs are of, or what virtues they have we know not,
neither have we as yet found out by our own experience any thing, and
therefore they may be referred to the other Milke-Trefoiles.

CHAP. 15. Of the venomous Tree Trefoile.
The figures were formerly (...).
1 Dorycnium Monspeliensium. The venomous Trefoile of Montpelier.
2 Dorycnium Hispanicum. The venomous Trefoile of Spain.


The Description.
1 THe venomous tree Trefoile of Montpelier has many tough and pliant stalks,
two or three cubits high, divided into sundry small twiggie branches, beset
with leaves three together, placed from joint to joint by spaces, somewhat
hoarie, very like unto the leaves of Cytisus, or Rue: among which come forth
many small mossie white flowers, tuft fashion, in small bundles like
Nose-gaies, and very like the flowers of the Olive or Oak tree, which turn
into small roundish bladders, as it were made of parchment: wherein is
contained black seed like wild Lotus, but in taste like the wild tare: the
whole plant is of an (...) smell; the root is thick, and of a wooddie
substance.

2 The Spanish venomous Trefoile has a wooddie stalk, rough and hoary,
divided into other small branches, whereon do grow leaves like the precedent:
the flowers grow on the tops of the branches, whereon do grow leaves like those
of the Pease, and of a yellow, or rather greenish color, wherein it differs
from the precedent.

The Place.
These venomous Trefoiles grow in Narbone, on the barren and stony craggie
mountains, at Frontignana, and about the sea coasts, and are strangers in
England.

The Time.
They flourish from May to the end of June.

The Names.
Dorycnium, or (...), is that poisonous or venomous plant wherewith in times
past they used to poison their arrow heads, or rather weapons, thereby to do
the greater hurt unto those whom they did assail or pursue, whereupon it took
his name: great controversy has been among Herbarists, what manner of plant
Dorycnium should be; some saying one thing, and some another: which
controversies and sundry opinions are very well confuted by the true censure of
Rondeletius, who has for a definitive sentence set down the plant described
for the true Dorycnium, and none other, which may be called in English,
Venomous tree Trefoile. These plants do not sufficiently answer to the
description of Dioscorides, neither can any one say certainly, that they are
poisonous.

The Temperature.
Dorycnium is very cold, without moistning.

The Virtues.
Venomous Trefoile has not one good quality that I can read of, but it is a
pestilent venomous

CHAP. 16. Of the shrub Trefoile called also Makebate.
Polemonium sive Trifolium fruticans. Shrubby Trefoile, or yellow Iasmine.


The Description.
THis shrubby plant called (...), has many wooddie twigges, growing unto the
height of four or five cubits, having small twiggie branches, of a dark green
color, garnished with small leaves of a deep green color, always three
joined together upon little footstalks, like the Cytisus bush, or the field
Trefoile, but smaller: the flowers be yellow, and round, divided into five or
six parts, not much unlike the yellow Iasmine, which has caused many to call
it yellow Iasmine, even unto this day: when the flowers be vaded, there succeed
small round berries as big as a Pease, of a black purplish color when they be
ripe, which being broken will die or color the fingers like Elder Berries:
within these berries are contained a small flat seed, like unto Lentils: the
root is long and small, creeping hither and thither under the earth, putting
forth new springs or shoots in sundry places, whereby it wonderfully increases.

The Place.
It grows plentifully in the country of Montpellier at New Castle upon the
dry hills, and hot banks of the Olive fields, and in the stony fields and wood
of Gramuntium: it grows in my garden, and in other Herbarists gardens in
England.

The Time.
It floureth in Summer: the seed is ripe in Autumn; the shrub it self is
(...) green, and has a lasting root.

The Names.
Most do call it Cytisus, but we had rather name it Trifolium fruticans: for it
does not agree with Cytisus or Milk-Trefoile, as in the chapter before it is
plain enough by his description, unless it be Cytisus Marcelli, or Marcellus
his Milke-Trefoile, with which peradventure it might be thought to have some
likeness, (...) the flowers which are yellow were white, or galbineous, that
is to say, blew.

There be diverse also that take this Trefoile to be Polemonium, forasmuch as
the leaves hereof seem to be somewhat like those of common Rue, but Polemonium
has not the leaf of common Rue, otherwise called Herb-grace, but of the
other, that is to say, of S. John's Rue: it is called in English, shrubby
Trefoile, or Make-bait.

The Temperature.
Polemonium is of temperature dry in the second degree, with some Acrimonie or
sharpness.

The Virtues.
This shrubby plant has so many singular and excellent virtues contained in
it, that some have Chiliodunamis, that is, having an hundred properties.

It is very (...) against the stinging of Scorpions, and (as some write) if a
man hold it in his

Being taken in vinegar it is very good for those that are spleneticke, and
whose spleen or Milt is

If the root be taken in wine it helps against the bloody flix, it provoke
urine being drunk

CHAP. 17. Of Broom, and Broom Rape.
1 Genista. Broom.
2 (...) (...), (...) Orobanche. Broom Rape, or Orobanch.


Orobanche (...) flo. oblongis. Long floured Broom Rape.
Orobanche flore maiore. Great floured Broom Rape.
(...) (...). Branched Broom Rape.


The Description.
1 Broom is a bush or shrubby (...), it has stalks or rather wooddie
branches: from which do spring slender twigs, cornered, green, tough, and that
be (...) bowed, many times divided into small branches: about which do grow
little leaves of an obscure green color, and brave yellow flowers; and at the
length flat cods, which being ripe are black, as be those of the common Vetch,
in which do lie flat seeds, hard, something brownish, and lesser than Lentils:
the root is hard and wooddie, sending forth diverse times another plant of the
color of an Oken leaf, in shape like unto the bastard Orchis, called Birds
nest, having a root like a Turnep or Rape, whereupon it is called Rapum (...),
or Broom Rape.

2 This is a certain bulbed plant growing unto the roots of broom, big below,
and (...) above, covered with blackish scales, and of a yelowish pulpe within:
from which does rise a stalk a span long, having whitish flowers about the
top, like almost to those of Dead Nettle: after which grow forth long, thick,
and round husks, in which are contained very many seeds, and good for nothing:
the whole plant is of the color of the Oken leaf.

3 Genista Hispanica. Spanish Broom.
5 Chamaegenista Anglica. English Dwarf Broom.
6 (...) Pannonica. Dwarf broom of Hungary.


Of this Orobanche or Broom Rape there are some varieties observed and set
forth by Lobel and Clusius: the first of these varieties has longer and
smaller flowers than the ordinary. The second has larger flowers, and those
of a bluish color, and is sometimes found among corn. The third is parted
toward the top into sundry branches; the flowers of this are either blew,
purplish, or else white, and it willingly grows among hemp.

3 The Spanish Broom has likewise woody stems, from whence grow up slender
pliant twigs, which be bare and naked without leaves, or at the least having
but few small leaves, set here and there far distant one from another, with
yellow flowers not much unlike the flowers of common Broom, but greater, which
turn into small long cods, wherein is contained brown and flat seed: the
root is tough and woody.

4 Small leafed or thin leafed Broom has many tough pliant shoots rising out
of the ground, which grow into hard and tough stalks, which are divided into
diverse twiggy branches whereon do grow very small thin leaves, of a whitish
color; whereupon some have called it Genista alba, white Broom: the flowers
grow at the top of the stalks, in shape like those of the common Broom, but of
a white color, wherein it specially differs from the other Broomes.

5 English Dwarf Broom (...) many twiggy branches, very (...), (...), (...)
at (...) or cornered, leaning toward the ground: (...) do grow leaves set
without (...), (...) two together, and (...) (...) or four growing fast
together, like (...) (...) common (...), green on the (...) (...), (...)
(...), (...) (...) a (...) taste: among which (...) come forth yellow flowers
like (...) (...) (...) (...), (...) (...), of little or no smell at all: after
which appear small (...) (...) at (...), (...) is contained small seed: the
root is tough and woody. Bauhine judges these two last (...) to be only
varieties of the common Broom; to (...) opinion I do much (...), (...) I have
let our Authrs description stand, (...) with the figure (...) this later, which
(...) (...) the greatest difference.

6 The Dw arfe Broom of Hungary has stalks and yellow flowers like those of
the last described: the leaves hereof are different, they are longer, and more
in number: the whole plant is altogether greater, wherein especially consists
the difference.

The Place.
The common Broom grows almost every where in dry pastures and low woods.

The Broom Rape is not to be found but where Broom does grow; it grows in a
Broom field at the foot of Shooters hill next to London; upon Hampstead Heath,
and in diverse (...) places.

Spanish Broom grows in diverse kingdoms of Spain and Italy; we have it in
our London gardens.

The White Broom grows likewise in Spain and other hot regions; it is a
stranger in England; of this Titus Calphurnius makes mention in his second
Eclog of his Bucolicks, writing thus:

Cernis vt, eccepater, quas tradidit Ornite vaccae
Molle sub hirsuta latus explicuere genista.
See father, how the Kine stretch out their tender side
Under the hairy broom, that grows in fields so wide.
The Time.
Broom floureth in the end of April or May, and then the young buds of the
flowers are to be gathered, and laid in pickle or salt, which afterward being
washed or boiled, are used (...) (...), as Capers be, and be eaten with no
less delight: the cods and seeds be ripe in August; the Rape appears and is
seen especially in the month of June.

The Spanish Broom does flower sooner, and is longer in flouring.

The Names.
This shrub is called in Latin, Genista, oras some would have it Genesta: in
Italian, Genestra: in Spanish likewise (...), or (...): in high Dutch,
Pfrimmen: in low Dutch, Brem: in French, Genest: in English, Broom. The
Spanish Broom by most writers is judged to be the Spartum of Dioscorides.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The twigs, flowers, and seeds of Broom are hot and dry in the second degree:
they are also of a

The decoction of the twigs and tops of Broom does cleanse and open the liver,
milt, and kidneys.

It drives away by the stool watery humors, and therefore it is wholesome
for them that have

The seed also is commended for the same purposes.

There is also made of the ashes of the stalks and branches dried and burnt, a
lie with thin white

Mesue says, that there is in the flowers and branches a cutting moisture, but
full of excrements,

But these things are not written of Broom, but of Spartum, which purges by
vomit, after the Dioscorides and Pliny do testify.

Mesue also adds, that Broom does break the stone of the kidneys and
bladder, and (...)

The young buds or little flowers preferued in pickle, and eaten as a sallad,
stir up an appetite to

The same being fully blown, stamped and mixed with swines grease, do ease the
pain of the

And Mesue writes, that this tempered with honey of Roses, or with an egg,
does consume away

The Rape of the Broom or Broom Rape, being boiled in wine, is commended
against the pains

The juice pressed forth of Broom rape heals green wounds, and cleanses old
and filthy ulcers:

That worthy Prince of famous (...) Henry 8. King of England, was wont to
drink the distilled

Sir Thomas Fitzherbert Knight, was wont to cure the black iaundice with this
drink only.

Take as many handfuls (as you think good) of the dried leaves of Broom
gathered and brayed

Orobanch or Broom rape sliced and put into oil Olive, to insuse or (...) in
(...) same, as ye

Dioscorides writes, that Orobanch may be (...) either raw (...) boiled, in
manner as we use to eat Asparagus.

The flowers and seeds of Spanish Broom are good to be drunk with Mead or
honied water in

If it be taken alone, it looseneth the belly, drives forth great quantity of
waterie and filthy

CHAP. 18. Of base Broom or greening weed.
The Description.
1 THis base kind of Broom called Green weed or Diers weed, has many tough
branches proceeding from a wooddie root: whereon do grow great store of leaves,
of a deep green color, somewhat long like those of Flax: the flowers grow at
the top of the branches not much unlike the leaves of Broom, but smaller; of
an exceeding fair yellow color, which turn into small flat cods, wherein is
contained a little flat seed.

2 Carolius Clusius sets forth another kind of Broom, which Dodonaeus
calls Genistatinctoria, being another sort of Diers weed: it grows like the
Spanish Broom: upon whose branches do grow long and small leaves like Flax,
green on the upper side, and of an hoarie shining color on the other. The
flowers grow at the top of the stalks, spike fashion, in form and color like
the former: the roots are thick and wooddie.

3 Carolus Clusius sets forth two kinds of Broom. The first is a low and
base plant, creeping and lying flat upon the ground, whose long branches are
nothing else, but as it were stalks consisting of leaves thick in the
midst, and thin about the edges, and as it were divided with small nicks;
at which place it begins to continue the same leaf to the end, and so from
leaf to leaf, until it have increased a great sort, all which do as it were
make one stalk; and has none other leaves, saving that in some of the nicks
or divisions there comes forth a small leaf like a little ear. At the end
of those flat and leafed stalks come forth the (...), much like the flowers of
the common Greening weed, but lesser, and of a yellow color, which turn into
small cods. The roots are very long, tough, and wooddie, full of fibers, closing
at the top of the root, from whence they proceed as from one body.

4 This kind of Greenweed called of some Chamaesparium, has a thick wooddie
root: from which rise up diverse long leaves, consisting as it were of many
pieces set together like a pair of Beads (as may better be perceived by the
figure, than expressed by words) green on the upper side, and whitish
underneath, very tough, and as it were of a rushie substance: among which rise
up very small naked rushie stalks; on the top whereof grows an ear or spike
of a chaffie matter, having here and there in the said care diverse yellow
flowers like Broom, but very small or little.

1 Genistella tinctoria. Greeneweed or Diers weed.
2 Genistella infectoria. Wooddie Diers weed.
3 Genistella pinnata. Winged Greeneweed.
4 Genistella globulata. Globe Green weed.


5 The fist Greeneweed has a wooddie tough root, with certain strings annexed
thereto: from which rise up diverse long, flat leaves, tough, and very hard,
consisting as it were of many little leaves, set one at the end of another,
making of many one entire leaf, of a green color: amongst which come forth
diverse naked hard stalks, very small and stiff, on the tops whereof stand
spikie (...) of yellow flowers, like those of Broom, in shape like that great
three leafed grass, called Lagopus, (...) like the Fox-taile grass: after
which come flat cods, wherein is enclosed small seed like to Tares both in
taste and form.

5 Genistella Lagopoides mayor. Hares foot Greeneweed.
6 Genistella Lagopoides minor. Small Greenweed with Hares foot flower.


6 This differs not from the precedent in stalks, roots and leaves: the
flowers consist of a flockie soft matter, not unlike to the grassie tuft of
Foxtaile, resembling the flower of Lagopus, or Haresfoot, but having small
yellow flowers lesser than the former, wherein it chiefly differs from the
other of his kind.

The Place.
The first being (...) common Diers-weed, grows in most fertile pastures and
fields almost every where. The rest are strangers in England.

The Time.
They flower from the beginning of July to the end of August.

The Names.
The first of these Greenweeds is named of most Herbarists Flos Tinctorius, but
more rightly, Genista Tinctoria, of this Pliny has made mention [The
Greenweeds, says he, do grow to dye cloths with] in his 18. book 16. Chapter.
It is called in high Dutch, Ferblumen, and Ackerbrem: in Italian, Cerretta, and
Cosaria, as Matthiolus writes in his chapter of Lysimachia, or Loose-strifie:
in (...), Diers Greening weed, base Broom, and Woodwaxen.

The rest we refer to their several titles.

The Temperature and Virtues.
These plants are like unto common Broom in bitterness, and therefore are hot
and dry in the

CHAP. 19. Of Spanish base Broomes.
The Description.
1 THis grows to the height of a cubit, and is covered with a crested and
rough (...) and divided into many longish branches crested and green, which at
their first springing up have some leaves upon them, which fall away as soon as
the plant comes to flower: from the sides of the branches come forth long
footstalk whereon hang some small yellow flowers, which are succeeded by
short round yellowish red cods which commonly contain but one seed, (...) two,
and these hard and black, and like a little Kidney, which when it is ripe will
rattle in the cod being shaken.

1 Pseudospartum Hispanicum Aphyllum: Spanish Broom without leaves.
2 Pseudospartum album Aphyllum. The white leafe-lesse Spanish broom.


2 This naked broom grows up to the height of a man: the stalk is rough, and
void of leaves very green and pliant, which divides it self into diverse
twiggie branches, green, and tough, like rushes: the flowers grow all along
the stalks like those of broom, but of a white color, wherein it differs
from all the rest of his kind.

The Place.
These grow in the provinces of Spain, and are in one place higher and more
bushie, and in an other lower.

The Time.
The first flowers in May, and the second in February.

The Names.
These base Spanish broomes may be referred to the true, which is called in
Greek (...): the Latins use the same name, calling it sometimes Spartum, and
Spartium: in Spanish, Retama: in English, Spanish broom, and bastard Spanish
broom.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Both the seeds and juice of the branches of these base broomes, wherewith they
in Spain and Galen writes.

Diosoorides says, that the seeds and flowers being drunk in the quantity of
a dram, with Mede

The juice which is drawn from out of the branches steeped in water, being
first bruised, is a remedy In this chapter formerly in the first place was
again (...). (...) the time (...) or Spanish (...): which I have (...)
omitted, because it was (...) and described in the last (...): save one before.
In the (...) place (...) (...) that figured in the third: and in the third
place was a description to no purpose, which I therefore omitted, and as you
see described (...) and put in the first place that which formerly held the
second.


CHAP. 20. Of Furzes, Gorsse, Whin, or prickley Broom.
The Kinds.
THere be diverse sorts of prickly Broom, called in our English tongue by
sundry names, according to the speech of the country people where they do
grow: in some places, Furzes; in others, Whins, Gorsse, and of some, Prickly
Broom.

This chapter has undergone a great alteration: as thus; the first, third, and
fourth descriptions belonged to the third figure: the second and fifth
description, to the fifth figure: and the first, second, and (...) figures had
no descriptions belonging to them. The figure that was in the first place is
now in the third; the second still holds his place: the third is in the first,
belonging thereto of right: and for handsomnesse sake I have made the fourth
and fifth change places. (...) (...) also in the sixth place was formerly
mentioned by our Author (but now omitted) in the chapter of (...).
Genista spinosa vulgaris. Great Furze bush.
2 Genista spinosa minor. The small Furze bush.


The Description.
1 THe Furze bush is a plant altogether a Thorn, fully armed with most sharp
prickles, without any leaves at all except in the spring, and those very few
and little, and quickly falling away: it is a bushy shrub, often rising up with
many woody branches to the height of four or five cubits, or higher,
according to the nature and soil where they grow: the greatest and highest
that I did ever see do grow about Excester in the West parts of England, where
the great stalks are dearly bought for the better sort of people, and the
small thorny spraies for the poorer sort. From these thorny branches grow
little flowers like those of Broom, and of a yellow color, which in hot
Regions under the extreme heat of the Sun are of a very perfect red color:
in the colder countries of the East, as Danzicke, Brunswicke, and Poland, there
is not any branch hereof growing, except some few plants and seeds which my
self have sent to Elbing, otherwise called Meluin, where they are most
curiously kept in their fairest gardens, as also our common Broom, the which I
have sent thither likewise, being first desired by diverse earnest letters: the
cods follow the flowers, which the Grauer has omitted, as a German who had
never seen the plant it self, but framed the figure by hearsay: the root is
strong, tough, and woody.

We have in our barren grounds of the North parts of England another sort of
Furze, bringing forth the like prickley thorns that the others have: the only
difference consists in the color of the flowers; for the others bring forth
yellow flowers, and those of this plant are as white as snow.

This chapter has undergone a great alteration: as thus; the first, third, and
fourth descriptions belonged to the third figure: the second and fifth
description, to the fifth figure: and the first, second, and (...) figures had
no descriptions belonging to them. The figure that was in the first place is
now in the third; the second still holds his place: the third is in the first,
belonging thereto of right: and for handsomnesse sake I have made the fourth
and fifth change places. (...) (...) also in the sixth place was formerly
mentioned by our Author (but now omitted) in the chapter of (...).
2 To this may be joined another kind of Furze which brings forth certain
branches that be some cubit high, stiff, and set round about at the first with
small winged Lentill-like leaves and little harmless prickles, which after
they have been a year old, and the leaves gone, be armed only with most hard
sharp prickles, crooking or bending their points downwards. The flowers hereof
are of a pale yellow color, lesser than those of Broom, yet of the same
form: the cods are small, in which do lie little round reddish seeds: the root
is tough and woody.

This chapter has undergone a great alteration: as thus; the first, third, and
fourth descriptions belonged to the third figure: the second and fifth
description, to the fifth figure: and the first, second, and (...) figures had
no descriptions belonging to them. The figure that was in the first place is
now in the third; the second still holds his place: the third is in the first,
belonging thereto of right: and for handsomnesse sake I have made the fourth
and fifth change places. (...) (...) also in the sixth place was formerly
mentioned by our Author (but now omitted) in the chapter of (...).
3 Genista Spinosa minor siliqua rotunda. Small round codded Furze.
4 Genistella aculeata. Needle Furze or petty Whin.


Of this Clusius reckons up three varieties: the first growing some cubit high,
with deep yellow flowers: the second grows higher, and has paler colored
flowers: the third grows to the height of the first, the flowers also are
yellow, the branches more prickly, and the leaves hairy; and the figure I give
you is of this third variety.

3 This seldom exceeds a foot in height, and it is on every side armed with
sharp prickles, which grow not confusedly, as in the common sort, but keep a
certain order, and still grow forth by couples: they are of a lighter green
than those of the common Furze: on the tops of each of the branches grow two or
three yellow flowers like those of the former; which are succeeded by little
round rough hairy cods of the bigness of Tares. This flowers in March, and
grows in the way between Bordeaux and Bayone in France, and upon the Pyrenean
mountains. Clusius makes it his Scorpius 2. or second sort of Furze: Lobel
calls it Genista spartium spinosum alterum.

4 This small kind of Furze (growing upon Hampstead heath near London, and in
diverse other barren grounds, where in manner nothing else will grow) has many
weak and flexible branches of a woody substance: whereon do grow little
leaves like those of Time: among which are set in number infinite most sharp
prickles, hurting like needles, whereof it took his name. The flowers grow on
the tops of the branches like those of Broom, and of a pale yellow color. The
root is tough and woody.

5 This plant (says Clusius) is wholly new and elegant, some span high,
divided into many branches, some spread upon the ground, others standing
upright, having plentiful store of green prickles: the flowers in shape are
like those of Broom, but less, and of a bluish purple color, standing in
rough hairy whitish cups, two or three flowers commonly growing near together:
sometimes whilst it flowers it sends forth little leaves, but not very
often, and they are few, and like those of the second described, and quickly
fall away, so that the whole plant seems nothing but prickles, or like a
hedgehog when she folds up her self: the root is woody, and large for the
proportion of the plant. It grows in the kingdom of Valentia in Spain, where
the Spaniards call it Erizo, that is, the Hedgehog; and thence Clusius also
termed it Erinacea. It floureth in April.

5 Genista spinosa humilis. Dwarf or low Furze.
6 Genista (...) minor, sieve Nepa Theophr. Scorpion Furzes.


6 The smallest of all the Furzes is that of the Ancients called Nepa, or
Scorpion Furze, as the word Nepa seems to import: it is a stranger in
England: it has been touched of the Ancients in name only: which fault they
have been all and every of them to be complained of, being so brief that
nothing can be gathered from their description: and therefore I refer what
might hereof be said to a further consideration. This has a thick woody
black root some half foot long, from whence arise many slender branches some
foot high, which are set with many stiff and sharp prickles, growing somewhat
after the manner of the wild prickly Sperage: the young plants have little
leaves like those of Tragacanth; the old ones none: the flowers are small, and
come forth at the bottom of the prickles, and they are succeeded by broad cods
wherein the seed is contained. It grows in diverse places of France and Spain,
and is thought to be the Scorpius of Theophrastus, which (...) translates Nepa.

The Place.
The common sort hereof are very well known to grow in pastures and fields in
most places of England. The rest are likewise well known to those that
curiously observe the difference.

The Time.
They flower from the beginning of May to the end of September.

The Names.
Furze is commonly called Genista spinosa: in High Dutch, (...): in English,
Furze, Furzen bushes, Whinne, Gorsse, and Thorne-Broome.

This thorny Broom is taken for Theophrastus his Scorpius, which Gaza names
Nepa: the name Scorpius in Pliny is (...), that is to say, signifying many
things, and common to certain Plants: for besides this Scorpius of which he
has made mention, lib. 25. cap. 5. setting down Theophrastus his words, where
he makes Aconitum Thelyphonon to be Scorpius, lib. 23. cap. 10. and likewise
other plants under the same title, but improperly.

The Temperature and Virtues.
There is nothing written in Theophrastus concerning the faculties of Scorpius
spinosus, or Furze: Pliny seems to attribute unto it the same virtues that
(...) has: notwithstanding the later Writers do agree that it is hot and dry
of complexion: the seeds are used in medicines against the stone, and staying
of the laske.

CHAP. 21. Of Cammocke Furze, Rest-Harrow, or Petty Whinne.
The Kinds.
THere be diverse sorts of Rest-Harrow, which some have inserted among the
smooth Broomes; others, among those with prickles, whereof some have purple
flowers and likewise full of prickles; others, white flowers, and sharp
thorns: some also purple flowers, others white, and also yellow, and every of
them void of prickles.

1 Anonis, sieve Resta Bouis. Cammocke, or Rest-Harrow.
3 Anonis non (...). Purple Rest-Harrow without prickles.


The Description.
1 CAmmocke or ground Furze rises up with stalks a cubit high, and often
higher, set with diverse ioynted branches, tough, pliable, and full of hard
sharp thorns: among which do grow leaves in form like those of S. John's
wort, or rather of the Lentill, of a deep green color: from the bosom of
which thorns and leaves come forth the (...), like those of Peason, of a purple
color: after which do come the cods, in which do lie flat seed: the root is
long, and runs far abroad, very tough, and hard to be torn in pieces with
the plough, (...) that the oxen can hardly pass forward, but are constrained
to stand still; whereupon it was called Rest-Plough, or Rest-Harrow.

4 Anonis, sieve Spinalutea. Yellow Rest-Yarrow.


2 We have in our London pastures, and likewise in other places, one of the
Rest-Harrowes, not differing from the precedent in stalks, leaves, or
prickles: the only difference is, that this plant brings forth white
flowers, and the others not so: whence we may call it Anonis flore albo,
Cammocke with white flowers.

3 Rest-Harrow without thorns has a tough hoary rough stalk, divided into
other rough branches, whereon are set without order, long leaves sharp
pointed, slightly cut about the edges, of an hoary color, and somewhat hairy:
from the bosom whereof comes forth purple Pease-like flowers of a reasonable
good smell: the root is very tough, long, and woody.

4 The yellow floured Cammock is a (...) in these parts, it is only found in
the cold Eastern countries, for ought that I can learn; it differs not from
the last described, saving that the flowers hereof are of a dark yellow
color, wherein it differs from all the other of his kind.

The Place.
These grow in (...) grounds in fertile pastures, and in the borders of fields,
in a fat, fruitful, and long lasting soil: it is sooner found than desired of
husbandmen, because the tough and wooddie roots are combersome unto them, for
that they stay the plough, and make the oxen stand.

The Time.
They send forth new shoots in May: they be full grown in Autumn, and then
those that of nature are prickly be fullest of sharp thorns: they flower in
July and August.

The Names.
Cammocke is called in Greek (...), or (...): and likewise in Latin Anonis,
and Ononis: Of Herbarists commonly Aresta Bouis, and Remora aratri, because it
makes the Oxen whilst they be in plowing to rest or stand still: it is also
called Acutella, of the stiff and sharp thorns which prick those that pass
by: in French, Areste beuf, and Boucrande.

Crateuas names it Aegipyrus: in High Dutch, Stalkraut: in Low Dutch,
Prangwortele: in Italian, Bonaga: in Spanish, Gattilhos: in French, Arreste
beuf, Beuf and Bouerande: in (...), Cammocke, Rest-Harrow, Petty Whinne, and
ground Furze.

The Temperature.
The root of Cammocke is hot in the third degree, as Galen says: it cutteth
also and makes thin.

The Virtues.
The bark of the root drunk with Wine provoke urine, breaks the stone,
and drives it

The root boiled in water and vinegar allayeth the pain of the teeth, if the
mouth be often washed

Pliny reports, that being boiled in Oxymel (or the syrrup made with honey
and vinegar) till (...) reports, that he knew a man cured of a rupture, by
taking of the powder of this root for many months together.

The tender sprigs or crops of this shrub before the thorns come forth, are
preserved in pickle, Dioscorides teaches.

CHAP. 22. Of Goose-berrie, or Fea-berry Bush.
The Kinds.
THere be diverse sorts of the Goose-berries; some greater, others less: some
round, others long, and some of a red color: the figure of one shall serve for
the rest.

I will not much insist upon diversities of fruits, because my kind friend Mr.
John Parkinson has sufficiently in his late Work discoursed upon that
subject; only because I judge many will be desirous to know their names, and
where to get them, I will briefly name the chief varieties our Kingdom
affords; and such as are desirous of them may find them with Mr. John (...)
living in Old-street.

The sorts of Goose-berries are these: the long green, the great yellowish,
the blew, the great round red, the long red, and the prickly Goose-berrie.

Vua Crispa. Goose-berries.


The Description.
THe Goose-berry bush is a shrub of three or four cubits high, set thick with
(...) sharp prickles: it is likewise full of branches, slender, woody, and
prickly: whereon do grow round leaves cut with deep gashes into diverse parts
like those of the Vine, of a very green color: the flowers be very small, of a
whitish green, with some little purple dashed here and there: the fruit is
round, growing scatteringly upon the branches, green at the first, but waxing
a little yellow through maturitie, full of a winie juice somewhat sweet in
taste when they be ripe; in which is contained hard seed of a whitish color:
the root is woodie, and not without strings anexed thereto.

There is another whose fruit is almost as big as a small Chery, and very round
in form: as also another of the like bigness, of an inch in length, in taste
and substance agreeing with the common sort.

We have also in our London gardens another sort altogether without prickles:
whose fruit is very small, lesser by much than the common kind, but of a
perfect red color, wherein it differs from the rest of his kind.

The Place.
These plants do grow in our London (...) and elsewhere in great abundance.

The Time.
The leaves come forth in the beginning of April or sooner: the fruit is ripe
in June and July.

The Names.
This shrub had no name among the old Writers, who as we deem knew it not, or
else esteemed it not: the later writers call it in Latin Crossularia: and
oftentimes of the berries, Vua Crispa, (...) spina, Vua spinella, and Vua
Crispina: in High Dutch, (...): in Low Dutch, Stekelbesien: in Spanish, Vua
Crispa, or Espina: in Italian, Vua spina: in French, Groiselles: in English,
Goose-berry, Goose-berry bush, and Fea-berry bush in Cheshire, my native
country.

The Temperature.
The berries of this bush before they be ripe are cold and dry, and that in the
later end of the second degree, and also binding.

The Virtues.
The fruit is used in diverse sauces for meat, as those that are skillful in
cookerie can (...) tell than my self.

They are used in broths in stead of Veriuice, which makes the broth not
onely-pleasant to the

They are diversely eaten, but how soever they be eaten they always engender
raw and cold blood:

(...) stop the menses, or monthly sickness, except they happen to be taken
into a cold stomach,

The ripe berries, as they are sweeter, so do they also little or nothing
bind, and are something

The juice of the green Gooseberties cools all inflammations, Erysipelas,
and Saint Anthonies

They provoke appetite, and cool the vehement heat of the stomach and liver.

The young and tender leaves eaten raw in a sallad, provoke urine, and drive
forth the stone

CHAP. 23. Of Barberries.
The Kinds:
There de diverse sorts of Barberries, some greater, others lesser, and some
without stones.

Spina acida, sieve Oxyacantha. The Barberry bush.


The Description.
THe Barberry plant is an high shrub or bush, having many young straight
shootes and branches, very full of white and prickly thorns, the rind whereof
is smooth and thin, the wood it self yellow: the leaves are long, very green,
slightly nicked about the edges, and of a sour taste: the flowers be yellow,
standing in clusters upon long stemmes: in their places come up long berries,
slender, red when they be ripe, with a little hard kernel or stone within; of
a sour and sharp taste: the root is yellow, disperseth it self far abroad,
and is of a woody substance.

We have in our London gardens another sort, whose fruit is like in form and
substance, but one berry is as big as three of the common kind, wherein
consists the difference.

We have likewise another without any stone, the fruit is like the rest of the
Barber ries, both in substance and taste.

The Place.
The Barberrie bush grows of it self in vntoiled places and desert grounds,
in woods, and the borders of fields, especially about a Gentleman's house called
Mr. Monk, dwelling in a village called Iuer, two miles from Colebrooke, where
most of the hedges are nothing else but Barberry bushes.

They are planred in gardens in most places of England.

The Time.
The leaves spring forth in April: the flowers and fruit in September.

The Names.
Galen calls this thorn in Greek, (...) who makes it to differ from (...)
in his book of the Faculties of simple medicines: but more plainly in his
book of the Faculties of Nourishments; where he (...) up the tender springs of
Barberries among the tender shoots that are to be eaten, such as Oxyacanthus or
the Hawthorne brings not sorth, wherein he plainly (...) a difference,
Oxyacantha the Barbery bush, and (...) the Hawthorne tree.

Dioscorides has not made mention of this Thorn; for that which he calls
Oxyacantha in the Foeminine gender, is Galens Oxyacanthus in the Masculine
gender.

Auicen seems to contain both these shrubs under the name of Amyrberis, but
we know they are neither of affinity or neighborhood, although they be both
prickly.

The shrub it self is called in shops Barbaries, of the corrupted name (...),
of the later writers Crespinus: in Italian, Crespino in Spanish, Espino de
maiuelas: in high Dutch, Paisselbeer: in low Dutch, Sauseboom: in French,
Espine vinette: and thereupon by a Latin name, (...) Spina acida, and
Oxyacantha Galeni. In English, a Barbery bush, or Piprige Tree, according to
(...) Turner.

The Temperature.
The leaves and berries of this thorn are cold and dry in the second degree:
and as (...) affirms, they are of thin parts, and have a certain cutting
quality.

The Virtues.
The leaves are used of diverse to season meat with, and in stead of a (...),
as be those of (...).

The decoction thereof is good against hot burnings and choleric agues: it
allaieth the (...)

The fruit or berries are good for the same things, and be also profitable for
hot laskes, and (...)

The green leaves of the Barbery bush stamped, and made into sauce, as that
made of Sorrel,

The conserve made of the fruit and sugar performs all those things bescre
remembered, (...)

The roots of the tree steeped for certain days together in strong lie, made
with ashes of the

The bark of the roots is also used in medicines for the iaundise, and that
with good success.

CHAP. 24. Of the white Thorn, or Hawthorne Tree.
The Kinds.
THere be two sorts of the white Thorn Trees described of the later writers,
one very common in most parts of England: there is another very rare, and not
found in Europe, except in some few rare gardens of Germany; which differs
not from our common Haw thorn, saving that the fruit here of is as yellow as
Saffron: we have in the West of England one growing at a place called
Glastenburie, which brings forth his flowers about Christmas, by the report
of diverse of good credit, who have seen the same; but my self have not seen
it; and therefore leave it to be better examined.

The Description.
1 THe white Thorn is a great shrub growing oftentimes to the height of the
Peare-tree the trunk or body is great: the boughs and branches hard and
woody, set full of long sharp thorns: the leaves be broad, cut with deep
gashes into diverse sections, smooth, and of a glistering green color: the
flowers grow upon spokie rundles, of a pleasant sweet smell, sometimes white,
and often dashed over with a light wash of purple; which has moved some to
think some difference in the plants: after which come the fruit, being round
berries, green at the first, and red when they be ripe; wherein is found a soft
sweet pulpe, and certain whitish seed: the root grows deep in the ground,
of a hard woody substance.

2 The second and third have been touched in the first title, notwithstanding I
have (...) it not unfit to insert in this place a plant perticipating with the
Hawthorne in flowers and fruit and with the Service tree in leaves, and not
unlike in fruit also.

Theophrastus has set forth this tree under the name of Aria, which grows
unto the (...) of a small tree, delighting to grow in our shadowie woods of
Cumberland and Westmerland, and many other places of the North country, where
it is to be found in great quantity: but seldom in Spain, Italy, or any hot
Region. This tree is garnished with many large branches beset with leaves like
the Pear tree, or rather like the Aller leaf, of a dark green color above,
and of a white color underneath: among these leaves come forth tufts of white
flowers, very like unto the Hawthorne flowers, but bigger: after which succeed
small red berries, like the berries of the Hawthorne, and in taste like the
Neapolitan Medlar: the temperature and faculties whereof are not yet known.

1 Oxyacanthus. The Haw-thorne tree.
2 Aria Theophrasti. Cumberland Haw-thorne.


(...) (...)
The Haw-thorne grows in woods and in (...) (...) highways almost every
where. The second is a stranger in England. The last (...) (...) (...) Abbey,
as it is credibly reported unto me. The Aria grows upon (...) (...), and in
many places of the West of England.

The Time.
The first and second flower in May; whereupon many do call the tree it self
the May-bush, as a chief token of the coming in of May: the leaves come forth
a little sooner: the fruit is ripe in the beginning of September, and is a food
for birds in Winter.

The Names.
Dioscorides describes this shrub, and names it (...), in the foeminine
gender: and Galen in his book of the Faculties of simple medicines, (...), in
the masculine gender: Oxyacanthus, says he, is a tree, and is like to the
wild Pear tree in form, and the virtues not unlike, etc. Of Oxyacantha,
Dioscorides writes thus: It is a tree like to the wild Pear tree, very full
of thorns, etc. Serapio calls it Amyrberis: and some, says Dioscorides,
would have it called (...), but the name Pyrina seems to belong to the yellow
Haw-thorne: it is called in High Dutch, Haogdoren: in Low Dutch, Hagedoren: in
Italian, Bagaia: in Spanish, Pirlitero: in French, Aub-espine: in English,
White-thorne, Haw-thorne tree; and of some Londoners, May-bush. This is not the
Oxyacantha of the Greeks, but that which is called Pyracantha, as shall be
showed hereafter.

The second is thought to be the Aria of Theophrastus, and so Lobel and
Tabernamontanus call it. Some, as Bellonius, Gesner, and Clusius, refer it to
the Sorbus, and that not unfitly: in some places of this kingdom they call it
a white Beam tree.

The Temperature.
The fruit of the Haw-thorne tree is very astringent.

The Virtues.
The Hawes or berries of the Haw-thorne tree, as Dioscorides writes, do both
stay the laske, the

CHAP. 25. Of Goats Thorn.
The Description.
1 THe first Tragagantha or Goats-thorne has many branchie boughs and twigs,
slender and pliant, so spread abroad upon every side, that one plant does
sometimes occupy a great space or room in compass: the leaves are small, and
in shape like Lentill leaves, whitish, and somewhat mossie or hairy, set in
rows one opposite against another: the flower is like the blossom of the
Lentill, but much lesser, and of a whitish color, and sometimes marked with
purple lines or streaks: the seed is enclosed in small cods or husks, (...)
like unto the wild Lotus or horned Trefoile: the whole plant on every side is
set full of sharp prickely thorns, hard, white, and strong: the roots run
under the ground like Liquorice roots, yellow within, and black without,
tough, limmer, and hard to break; which being wounded in sundry places with
some iron tool, and laid in the Sun at the highest and hottest time of Summer,
issues forth a certain liquor, which being hardened by the Sun, is that gum
which is called in shops Tragacantha: and of some, (...) barbarously Dragagant.

1 Tragacantha, sieve spina Hirci. Goats Thorn.
2 Spina (...) minor. Small Goats Thorn.


2 The second kind of Tragacantha is a low and thick shrub, having many
shoots growing from one turfe: of a white or grayish color, about a cubit
high, stiff and woody: the leaves are like the former, and guarded with most
stiff pricks not very safely to be touched: among the (...) leaves come forth
many flowers in small tufts like Genistella, but that they are white: the cods
are many, straight and thorny like Genistella, wherein are many small white and
three cornered seeds as big as mustard seed. This differs from the former in
that it is smaller, and loses the leaves every Winter, when as the former
keeps on the leaves until new ones come in the Spring. The middle rib of the
winged leaves ends in a prick, which by the falling of the leaves becomes a
long and naked thorn. I have given you a more accurate figure hereof out of
Clusius, wherein the leaves, flowers, cods, and seeds are all expressed apart.

3 The Grecians have called this plant (...), because it is good for the
sinews: it should seem it took the name Potcrion, of Potrix, because it
loves a watery or fenny soil: it has small branches, and leaves of (...),
growing naturally in the tract of Piedmont in Italy: it spreads abroad like a
shrub: the bark or rind is blackish, and dry without great moisture, very
much writhed or wrinkled in and out as that of Nepa or Corruda: the sharp
pricks stand not in order as Tragacantha, but confusedly, and are finer and
three times lesser than those of Tragacantha, growing much after the manner of
(...): but the particular leaves are green above, and white below, shaped
somewhat like Burnet: the seed is small and red, like unto Sumach, but lesser.

(...) minoris icon accuratior. A better figure of the Goats-thorne.
The figure which was in the third place was of the plant described in the
second which (...) and (...) made their (...), (...) it (...) not with the
description which was taken out of the (...).
3 Poterion Lob. sieve Pimpinella spinosa Camer. Burnet Goats-thorne.


The Place.
Petrus Bellonius in his first book of Singularities reports, that there is
great plenty hereof growing in Candy upon the tops of the mountains.
Theophrastus says that it was thought to grow no where but in Candy; but now
it is certain that it is found in Achaia, Peloponessus, and in Asia: it does
also grow in Arcadia, which is thought not to be inferior to that of Candy. It
is thought by Lobel to grow in Languedock in France, whereof Theophr. has
written in his ninth book, that the liquor or gum issues out of it self, and
that it is not needful to have the root broken or cut. The best is that, says
Dioscorides, which is through-shining, thin, smooth, unmixed, and sweet of smell
and taste.

The Time.
They flower and flourish in the Summer month: I have sown the seed of
Poterion in April, which I received from Ioachimus Camerarius of Noremberg,
that grew in my garden two years together, and after perished by some
mischance.

The Names.
Goats-thorne is called in Greek (...): of most Herbarists likewise
Tragacantha: we may call it in Latin Spina Hirci: in French, Barbe Renard: and
in English for want of a better name, GoatsThorne: the liquor or gum that
issues forth of the roots bears the name also of Tragacantha: it is called
in shops Gummi Tragacanthae; and in a barbarous manner Gummi Tragacanthi: in
English, Gum Dragagant.

The Temperature.
This plant in each part thereof is of a drying faculty without biting. It
does consolidate or glue together sinews that be cut: but the roots have that
faculty especially, which are boiled in wine, and the decoction given unto
those that have any grief or hurt in the sinews.

Gum Dragagant has an emplasticke quality, by reason whereof it dulleth or
allayeth the sharpness of humors, and does also something dry.

The Virtues.
The Gum is singular good to be licked in with honey against the cough,
roughness of the

Being drunk with Cute or the decoction of Liquorice it takes away and
allayeth the heat of

The greatest part of those artificial beads, sweet chains, bracelets, and
such like pretty sweet

CHAP. 26. Of the Egyptian Thorn.
1 Acacia Dioscoridis. The Egyptian Thorn.
Oar Author gave but formerly one figure, which was that in the second place,
and he would have (...) us, that it was of the right (...), yet in his (...)
(...) us otherways.
2 Acacia alteratrifolia. Thorny Trefoile.


The Description.
1 DIoscorides makes mention of Acacia, whereof the first is the true and
right Acacia, which is a shrub or hedge tree, but not growing right or straight
up as other small small trees do: his branches are wooddie, beset with many
hard and long Thorns; about which grow the leaves, compact of many small leaves
clustering about one side, as in the Lentill: the flowers are whitish, the
husks or cods be plain and flat, yea very broad like unto Lupines, especially
on that side where the seed grows, which is contained sometimes in one part,
and sometimes in two parts of the husk, growing together in a narrow neck: the
seed is smooth and glistering. There is a black juice taken out of these
husks, if they be dried in the shadow when they be ripe; but if when rhey are
not ripe, then it is somewhat red: some do wring out a juice out of the leaves
and fruit: there flows also a gum out of this tree which is the gum of
Arabia, called Gum Arabicke.

2 Dioscorides having described Spina Acacia, sets down a second kind
thereof, calling it Acacia altera, which has the three leaves of Rue or
Cytisus, and coddes like those of Genistella, but somewhat more blunt at the
end, and thick at the back like a Rasor, and still grows forward narrower
and narrower, until it come to have a sharp edge: in these cods are contained
three or four flat seeds like Genistella, which before they wax ripe are
yellow, but afterward black: the whole plant grows to the height of Genista
spinosa, or Gorsse, both in shape, height, and resemblance, and not to the
height of a tree, as Matthiolus would persuade us, but full of sharp Thorns
like the former.

The Place.
The true Acacia grows in Egypt, Palestina, Lombardie, and Syria, as
Dioscorides writes: among the shrubs and trees that remain always green,
Acacia is noted for one by Petrus Belloninius, in his first book of
Singularities, chap. 44.

The other Acacia grows in Cappadocia and Pontus, as Dioscorides writes: it
is also found in Corsica, and on diverse mountains of Italy, and likewise upon
all the coast of Liguria and Lombardie, and upon the Narbone coast of the
Mediterranean sea.

The Time.
These flower in May, and their fruit is ripe in the end of August.

The Names.
The tree Acacia is named of the Graecians (...), yea even in our time, and
likewise of the Latins Acacia: it is also called Aegyptia spina: this strange
thorn has no English name that I can learn, and therefore it may keep still
the Latin name Acacia; yet I have named it the Egyptian thorn: the juice is
called also Acacia after the name of the plant: the Apothecarics of Germany do
use in stead hereof, the juice that is pressed forth of sloes or snags, which
they (...) call Acacia Germanica: Matthiolus pictureth for Acacia the tree
which the later Herbarists do call Arbor (...), to which he has untruly added
Thorns, that he might belie Acacia, and yet he has not made it agree with
Dioscorides his description.

They call this (...): in Latin Acacia altera, or the other Acacia, and
Pontica Acacia, or Ponticke Acacia.

The Nature.
The juice of Acacia, as Galen says, consists not of one only substance, but
is of substance both cold and earthie, to which also is coupled a certain
waterie essence, and it likewise has thin and hot parts dispersed in it self:
therefore it is dry in the third degree, and cold in the first if it be not
washed; and in the second, if it be washed: for by washing it loses his sharp
and biting quality and the hot parts.

The Virtues.
The juice of Acacia stops the laske, the inordinate course of women's
terms, and man's inuoluntarie Gonorrhaea, if it be drunk in red wine.

It heals the blastings and inflammations of the eyes, and makes the skin
and palms of the Serpigo: it heals the blisters and extreme heat in the
mouth, and makes the hairs black that are washed therewith.

It is good, says Dioscorides, against S. Anthonies fire, the shingles,
Chimetla, Pterygia, and whitlowes.

The gum does bind and somewhat cool: it has also joined unto it an
emplaistick quality, by Diosc.

The juice of the other, says Dioscorides, does also bind, but it is not so
effectual nor so good in

CHAP. 27. Of box Thorn, and the juice thereof called Lycium.
The Description.
1 BOx Thorn is a rare plant, in shape not unlike the Box tree, whereof it
has been recko ned for a wild kind, having many great branches set full of
round and thick leaves, very like that of the common Box tree: amongst which
grow forth most sharp pricking thorns: the flowers grow among the leaves,
which yield forth small black berries of a bitter taste, as big as a pepper
corn: the juice whereof is somewhat oilie, and of a reddish color; which
bitter juice being set on fire, does burn with a marvelous cracking and
sparkling; the ashes thereof are of a red color: it has many wooddie roots
growing aslope.

1 Lycium, sive (...). Box Thorn.
2 Lycium Hispanicum. Spanish Box Thorn.


2 The other kind of Pyxacantha or Lycium, grows like unto the common
Priuet, having such like leaves, but somewhat narrower: the tops of the slender
sprigs are furnished with prickles: the root is tough, and of a wooddie
substance.

The Place.
They grow in Cappadocia and Lycia, and in many other countries: it prospers
in rough places, it has likewise been found in Languedoc, and Prouence in
France: Bellonius writes that he found it in Palestina.

Matthiolus pictureth for Box Thorn, a plant with box leaves, with very many
boughs, and certain thorns standing among them: but the notable Herbarist
Anguillara and others, hold opinion, that it is not the right; with whom we
also do agree.

There is drawn out of the leaves and branches of box Thorn, or as Pliny
says, out of the (...) and roots being thoroughly boiled, a juice, which is
named Lycium.

Dioscorides says, that the leaves and branches must be braied, and the
infusion made many days in the decoction thereof, after which the feces or
wooddie stuff must be cast away, and that (...) remains boiled again till
it become as thick as honey: Pliny says, that the roots and branches are very
bitter, and for three days together they must be boiled in a copper vessel,
and the wood and sticks often taken out till the decoction be boiled to the
thickness of honey.

The Time.
They flower in February and March, and their fruit is ripe (...) September.

The Names.
It is named in Greek (...), which a man may call in Latin Buxea spina: and
in English, Box Thorn: of some, Asses Box Tree, and prickley Box: it is also
named Eycium, of the juice which is boiled out of it: the juice is properly
called (...), and retains in Latin the same name Lycium: it is termed in
English Thorn box. But it seems to me, that the original name Lycium is
fitter, being a strange thing, and known to very few: the Apothecaries know it
not, who in stead thereof do use amiss the juice of the fruit of Woodbinde,
and that not without great error, as we have already written. It is unknown
in our shops, neither is there any thing used for it, it being wholly out of
use, wherefore our Author might here well have spared Dodonaeus his words.

Dioscorides teaches to make a (...) of Sumach which is good for those things
that Lycium is, and is used when Lycium is not to be had, and it is fit to be
put in all medicines in stead thereof.

The Temperature.
Lycium, or the juice of Box Thorn, is as Galen teaches, of a drying
quality, and compounded of diverse kinds of substances, one of thin parts
digesting and hot; another earthie and cold, by which it enjoys his binding
faculty: it is hot in a mean, and therefore it is used for several purposes.

The Virtues.
Lycium clears the sight, says Dioscorides, it heals the scuruie festred
sores of the eye lids, the The figure which was in the 2. place, was of the
Lycium Italicum of (...) and others; but the description and title better (...)
this (...) Hispanicum (...) (...), which therefore I put thereto. The figure
also of the Lycium Italicum of (...) our Author (...) again in the next
chapter save two.


CHAP. 28. Of Ram or Hearts Thorn.
The Kinds.
AFter the opinion of Dioscorides there be three sorts of (...), one with long,
flat and soft leaves: the other with white leaves; and the third with round
leaves, which are somewhat blackish (...) (...) and Pliny affirm that there
are but two, the one white, and the other black, both which do bear Thorns:
but by the labor and industry of the new and late writers there are found
sundry sorts more, all which and every one of them are plants of a wooddie
substance, having also many straight twiggie and pliant branches, set with most
sharp pricking thorns.

The Description.
1 THis is a shrubbe growing in the hedges, and bringing forth straight
branches and hard thorns, like to those of the Hawthorne, with little leaves,
long, something fat and soft: and this has that notable learned man Clusius
described more diligently in these words: the (...) is a shrub fit to make
hedges of, with straight branches, (...) it self into many twigs, white, and
set with stiff and strong thorns, having leaves, which for the most part grow
by foures or fiues at the root of every Thorn, long, something fat, like to
those of the Olive tree, somewhat white, but tender and full of juice; which in
Autumn do sometimes fall off, leaving new growing in their places: the
flowers in Autumn are something long, whitish, divided at the brims into five
parts: in their places is left a seed, in show as in Gelsemine: notwithstanding
it was never my chance to see the fruit: the root is thick and diversely parted.

I observed another (says the same Author) almost like to the former, but
lower, and divided into more branches, with lesser leaves, more thick and salt
of taste, and whiter also than the former: the flowers are like, in all things
but their color, those of the former, which in this are (...).

2 This has more flexible stalks and branches, and these also set with
thorns: the leaves are narrow, and not so thick or fleshie as those of the
former, yet remain always green like as they do: the flowers are small and
mossie, of a greenish color, growing thick about the branches, and they are
succeeded by a round fruit, yellowish when it is ripe, and remaining on the
shrubbe all the

1 Rhamnus 1. Clusij flo. albo. White floured Ram-thorne.
2 Rhamnus 2. Clusij. Sallow-Thorne.
Rhamnus alter (...). flore purpureo. Purple floured Ram-thorne.
3 Ramnus tertius Clusij. Ram or Harts-Thorne.
Winter: The whole shrubbe looks as if it were sprinkled over with dust.

3 To these may be added another growing with many branches to the height of
the Sloe-tree or black Thorn, and these are covered with a blackish bark,
and armed with long prickles: the leaves, as in the first, grow forth of
certain knots many together, long, narrow, sleshie, green, and continuing all
the year: their taste is astringent, somewhat like that of Rhabarb: the
flowers show themselves at the beginning of the Spring, of a greenish color,
growing thick together, and near the setting on of the leaves; in Summer it
carries a black fruit almost like a Sloe, round, and harsh of taste.

The Place.
The first of these grows in sundry places of (...), Portugal, and Province:
the other varietic thereof Clusius says he found but only in one place, and
that was near the city Horivela, called by the Ancients Orcellis, by the
river Segura, upon the borders of the kingdom of Valentia: the second grows
in many maritime places of Flanders and Holland, and in some valleys by rivers
sides. The third grows in the untilled places of the kingdom of Granado and
Murcia.

The Time.
This Ram is ever green together with his leaves: the fruit or berries remain
on the shrub, yea even in Winter.

The Names.
The Grecians call this thorn (...): the Latins also Rhamnus and of diverse it
is also named (...), that is Spina alba, or white Thorn, Spina Cerualis, or
Harts-thorne, as we find written among the bastard words. Marcellus names it
Spina salutaris, and Herba salutaris; which has, says he, as it were a grape.
It is called in Italian Marruca and (...): in Spanish, Scambrones: in English,
Ram, or Hearts Thorn.

The Temperature.
The Ram, says Galen, does dry and digest in the second degree, it cools in
the later end of the first degree, and in the beginning of the second.

The Virtues.
The leaves, says Dioscorides, are laid pultis wise upon hot choleric
inflammations, and Saint Galen adds.

The leaves and buds or young shoots of the first, are eaten as sallads with
oil, vinegar, and Clusius. Our Author in this chapter gave only the (...) of
the third, and (...) the second, with the names and faculties in (...).


CHAP. 29. Of (...) Thorn.
The Description.
Christ's (...) or Ram of Lybia, is a very tough and hard shrubby bush, growing
up sometimes unto the height of a little tree, having very long and sharp
pricklie branches: but the thorns that grow about the leaves are lesser, and
not so prickly as the former. The leaves are small, broad, and almost round,
somewhat sharp pointed; first of a dark green color, and then somewhat
(...). The flowers grow in clusters at the top of the stalks, of a yellow
color: the husks wherein the seeds be contained, are flat and broad, very like
unto small bucklers as hard as wood, wherein are contained three or four thin
and flat seeds, like the seed of Line or Flax.

The Place.
This Thorn grows in Lybia; it is better esteemed of in the country of
Cyrene than is their Lote tree, as Pliny (...). Of this shrub Diphilus Siphnius
in (...) in his foureteenth book makes mention, saying, that he did very
often eat of the same in Alexandria that beautiful City.

Petrus Bellonius who traveled over the Holly Land, says, that this shrubbie
thorn Paliurus was Paliurus. Christ's Thorn.
the thorn wherewith they (...) our (...) Christ: his reason for the (...)
(...) is this, that in Iudaea there was not any (...) (...) common, so pliant,
or so fit for to (...) a crown or garland of, nor any so full of cruel (...)
prickles. It grows throughout the whole country in such abundance, that it
is their common fuel to burn; yea so common with them there, as our Gorsse,
Brakes, and broom is here with us. Josephus in his first book of Antiquities,
and 11. chap. says, that this Thorn has the most sharp prickles of any
other; and therefore that Christ might be the more tormented, the Jews rather
took this than any other. Of which I have a small tree growing in my garden,
that I have brought forth by sowing of the seed.

The Time.
The leaves fall away and continue not always green, as do those of the Rams:
it buddeth forth in the Spring, as Pliny testifies.

The Names.
This Thornie shrubbe is called in Greek (...) the Latins and Italians
retaire the same name Paliurus: for want of an English name, it may be termed
Ram of Lybia, or Christ's Thorn: Pliny reports, that the (...) is called
Zura.

The Temperature.
The leaves and root of Christ's (...) do evidently bind and cut.

The Virtues.
(...) virtue of this cutting quality the seed does wear away the stone, and
cause tough and slimy Galen says.

The decoction of the leaves and root of Christ's Thistle, as Dioscorides
writes, stops the belly,

The root does waste and consume away Phymata, and Oedemata if it be stamped
and applied.

The seed is good for the cough, and wears away the stone in the bladder.

CHAP. 30. Of Buck-Thorne, or laxatiue (...).
The Description.
1 BVck-thorne grows in manner of a shrub or hedge tree; his trunk or body
is often as big as a man's thigh; his wood or timber is yellow within, and his
bark is of the color of a Chestnut, almost like the bark of a Cherry tree.
The branches are beset with leaves that are somewhat round, and finely snipt
about the edges like the leaves of the Crab or Wilding tree: among which come
forth Thorns which are hard and prickly: the flowers are white and small, which
being vaded there succeed little round berries, green at the first, but
afterward black, whereof that excellent green color is made, which the
Painters and Limners do call Sap-greene; but these berries before they be ripe
do make a fair yellow color, being steeped in vinegar.

2 Besides the common kind, Clusius mentions two other: the first of which
has branches some two cubits long, subdivided into diverse others, covered with
a smooth bark like that of the former, which, the upper rind being taken off,
is of a yellowish green color, and bitterish taste: the branches have some
few prickles upon them, and commonly end in them: the leaves are almost like
those of the common kind, but smaller, narrower, and somewhat resembling those
of the black Thorn, having somewhat a drying taste: the flower consists of
four leaves of a yellowish 1 Rhamnus solutivus. Buck-thorne.
2 Rhamnus solutivus minor. Middle Buck-thorne.
3 Rhamnus solutivus pumilus. Dwarf Buck-thorne.
green color: the root is wooddie as in other shrubs: Clusius found this
growing in the mountanous places of Austria, and calls it (...) (...) pumila.

3 This other has branches some cubite long, and of the thickness of ones
little finger, or lesser, covered with a black and shriuelled bark: and
toward the top divided into little boughs, which are covered with a thin and
smoother bark, and commonly end in a sharp thorn: the leaves much resemble
those of the Slo-tree yet are they shorter and lesser, green also, and snipt
about the edges; first of an astringent, and afterward of somewhat a bitterish
taste; the flowers which grow amongst the leaves are of an herby color, and
consist of four leaves: the fruit is not much unlike that of the former; but
distinguished with two, and sometimes with three crests or dents, first green,
and then black when it is ripe: the root is thick, wooddie and hard. Clusius
found this on the hill above the Bathes of Baden, he calls it Spina infectoria
pumila 2. This Matthiolus and others call Lycium Italicum: and our Author
formerly gave the figure of Matthiolus and Tabernamontanus, by the name of
Lycium Hispanicum, and here again another for his Rhamnus solutivus, which
made me to keep it in this chapter, and omit it in the former, it being
described in neither.

The Place.
Buck-thorne grows near the borders of fields, in hedges, woods, and in
other vntoiled places: it delights to grow in rivers and in water ditches: it
grows in Kent in sundry places, as at Farningham upon the cony burrowes
belonging sometime to Mr. Sibil, as also upon cony burrowes in Southfleet,
especially in a small and narrow lane leading from the house of Mr. William
(...) unto Longfield downs, also in the hedge upon the right hand at Dartford
towns end toward London, and in many places more upon the chalkie banks and
hedges.

The Time.
It floureth in May, the berries be ripe in the fall of the leaf.

The Names.
The later Herbarists call it in Latin Rhamnus (...), because it is set with
thorns, like as the Ram, and bears purging berrics. Matthiolus namethit
Spina infectoria; Valerius Cordus, Spina (...), and diverse call it Burgispina.
It is termed in high Dutch, (...) weghdorn: in Italian, Spino Merlo, Spino
Zcrlino, Spino Ceruino: in English, Laxatiue Ram, Way-thorne, and Buck-thorne:
in low Dutch they call the fruit or berries Rhijnbesien, that is, as though you
should say in Latin, Baccoe Rhenanoe: in English, Rheinberries: in French,
Nerprun.

The Temperature.
The berries of this Thorn, as they be in taste bitter and binding, so be they
also hot and dry in the second degree.

The Virtues.
The same do purge and void by the stool thick phlegm, and also choleric
humors: they are

There is pressed forth of the ripe berries a juice, which being boiled with a
little Alum is used

The berries which be as yet unripe, being dried and insufed or steeped
inwater, do make a saire

CHAP. 31. Of the Holme, Holly, or Huluer tree.
Agrifolium. The Holly tree.


The Description,
THe Holly is a shrubbie plant, notwithstanding it oftentimes grows to a tree
of a reasonable bigness: the boughs whereof are tough and flexible, covered
with a smooth and green bark. The substance of the wood is hard and sound, and
blackish or yellowish within, which does also sink in the water, as does the
Indianwood which is called Guaiacum: the leaves are of a beautiful green
color, smooth and glib, like almost the bay leaves, but lesser, and cornered
in the edges with sharp (...), which notwithstanding they want or have few when
the tree is old: the flowers be white, and sweet of smell: the berries are
round, of the bigness of a little Pease, or not much greater, of color red,
of taste unpleasant, with a white stone in the midst, which do not easily fall
away, but hang on the boughs a long time: the root is wooddie.

There is made of the smooth bark of this tree or shrub, Birdlime, which the
birders and country men do use to take birds with: they pull off the bark, and
make a ditch in the ground, specially in moist, boggy, or foggy earth, wherinto
they put this bark, covering the ditch with boughs of trees, letting it
remain there till it be rotten and putrified, which will be done in the space
of twelve days or thereabout: which done, they take it forth, and beat in
morters until it be come to the thickness and clamminesse of Lime: lastly,
that they may clear it from pieces of bark and other (...), they do wash it
very often: after which they add unto it a little oil of nuts, and after that
do put it up in earthen vessels.

The Place.
The Holly tree grows plentifully in all countries. It grows green both
winter and summer; the berries are ripe in September, and they do hang upon the
tree a long time after.

The Names.
This tree or shrub is called in Latin Agrifolium: in Italian, Agrifoglio, and
(...): in Spanish, Azebo: in high Dutch, walddistell, and of diverse Stecpalmen:
in low Dutch, (...): in French, House and Housson: in English, Holly, Huluer,
and Holme.

The Temperature.
The berries of Holly are hot and dry, and of thin parts, and waste away wind.

The Virtues.
They are good against the collicke: for ten or twelve being inwardly taken
bring away by the

The Birdlime which is made of the bark hereof is no less hurtful than that
of Misseltoe, for it

Holly beaten to powder and drunk, is an experimented medicine against all the
fluxes of the

CHAP. 32. Of the Oak.
1 Quercus vulgaris cum glande and musco suo. The Oak Tree with his Acornes and
Moss.


The Description.
1 THe common Oak grows to a great tree; the trunk or body whereof is covered
over with a thick rough bark full of chops or rifts: the arms or boughs are
likewise great, dispersing themselves far abroad: the leaves are bluntly
indented about the edges, smooth, and of a shining green color, whereon is
often found a most sweet dew and somewhat clammie, and also a fungous
excrescence, which we call Oak Apples. The fruit is long, covered with a brown
hard and tough pilling, set in a rough scaly cup or husk: there is often found
upon the body of the tree, and also upon the branches, a certain kind of long
white moss hanging down from the same: and sometimes another wooddie plant,
which we call Misseltoe, being either an excrescence or outgrowing from the tree
it self, or of the doung (as it is reported) of a bird that has eaten a
certain berrie. Besides these there are about the roots of old Oaks within the
earth certain other excrescences, which Bauhine and others have called Vuoe
quercinoe, because they commonly grow in clusters together, after the manner of
Grapes and about their bigness, being sometimes round, and otherwhiles cornered,
of a woody substance, hollow within; and sometimes of a purple, otherwhiles of a
whitish color on the outside: their taste is astringent, and use singular in
all (...) and fluxes of blood, as Encelius affirms, Cap. 51. de Lapid. and
Genesis

3 Carolus Clusius reports that he found this base or low Oak not far from
Lisbone, of the height of a cubite, which notwithstanding did also bear an
acorne like that of our Oke-tree, saving that the cup is smoother, and the
Acorne much bitterer, wherein it differs from the rest of his kind.

2 Quercus vulgaris cum excrementis fungosis: The common Oak with his Apple or
green Gall.
3 Quercus humilis. The dwarf Oak.


There is a wild Oak which rises up oftentimes to a marvelous height, and
reaches very (...) with his arms and boughs, the body whereof is now and then
of a mighty thickness, in compass two or three fathoms: it sends forth
great spreading arms, divided into a multitude of boughs, The leaves are
smooth, something, hard, broad, long, gashed in the edges, green on the upper
(...): the Acornes are long, but shorter than those of the tamer Oak; every one
(...) in his own cup, which is rough without: they are covered with a thin
rind or shell: the substance or kernel within is divided into two parts, as
are Beans, Pease, and Almonds: the bark of the young Oaks is smooth, glib, and
good to thicken skins and hides with, but that of the old Oaks is rugged,
thick, hard, and full of chops: the inner substance or heart of the wood is
something yellow, hard and sound, and the older the harder: the white and
outward part next to the bark does easily rot, being subject to the worm,
especially if the tree be not felled in due time: some of the roots grow deep
into the earth, and othersome far abroad, by which it stiffely stands.

The Place.
The Oak does scarcely refuse any ground; for it grows in a dry and barren
soil, yet does it prosper better in a fruitful ground: it grows upon hills
and mountains, and likewise in valleys: it commethyp every where in all parts
of England, but is not so common in other of the South and hot regions.

The Time.
The Oak does cast his leaves for the most part about the end of Autumn: some
keep their leaves on, but dry all winter long, until they be thrust off by
the new spring.

The Names.
The Oak is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Quercus: of some, Placida, as
Gaza translateth it. It may be called (...), Vrbana, or Culta; some also,
Emeros mudion, and Robur: the Macedonians (...) as though you should say
Veriquercus, as Gaza expo undeth it, or Vere Quercus, the true Oak. We may name
it in English, the tamer Oke-tree: in French, Chesne: in Dutch, (...) boom.

The fruit is named in Greek (...): in Lat ine, Glans: in high Dutch, Eichel:
in low Dutch, Eekel: in Spanish, Bellotus: in Italian, Chiande: in English,
Acorne and Mast.

The cup wherein the Acorne stands is named in Greek (...), as Paulus
Aegineta in his third book, 42 chapter testifies, saying, Omphacis is the
hollow thing out of which the Acorne grows: in Latin, Calix glandis: in
shops, Cupula glandis: in English, the Acorne cup.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The leaves, bark, Acorne cups, and the Acornes themselves, do mightily bind
and dry in the

The best of them, says Galen, is the thin skin which is under the bark of
the tree, and that next,

Acornes if they be eaten are hardly concocted, they yield no nourishment to
man's body, but

Swine are fatted herewith, and by feeding hereon have their flesh hard and
sound.

The Acorns provoke (...), and are good against all venom and poison, but they
are not of such

The Oak apples are good against all fluxes of blood and lasks, in what manner
soever they be taken,

The decoction of Oak apples staieth women's diseases, and causes the mother
that is fallen

The same steeped in strong white wine vinegar, with a little powder of
Brimstone, and the root of Ireos mingled together, and set in the Sun by the
space of a month, makes the haireb lack, consumes proud and superfluous
flesh, takes away sun-burning, freckles, spots the morphew, with all
deformities of the face, being washed therewith.

The Oak Apples being broken in sunder about the time of their withering, do
foreshew the sequel Matthiolus writing upon Dioscorides says, that before
(...) have an hole through them, they contain in them either a fly, a spider,
or a worm; if a fly, then war insueth, if a creeping worm, than scarcity of
victuals, if a running spider, then follows great sickness or mortality.

CHAP. 33. Of the Scarlet Oak.
The Kinds.
ALthough Theophrastus has made mention but of one of these Holme Holmeor
Holly Oaks only, yet has the later age set down two kinds thereof; one
bearing the scarlet grain, and the other only the Acorn which thing is not
contrary to Dioscorides his opinion, for he entreats of that which bears
the Acorne, in his first book, among (...) or the Oaks; and the other he
describes in his fourth book, under the title (...) or Coccus Baphice.

The Description.
THe Oak which bears the scarlet grain is a small tree, in manner of a hedge
tree, of a mean bigness, having many fair branches or boughs spread abroad:
whereon are set leaves, green above, white underneath, snipt about the edges,
and at every corner one sharp prickle, in manner of the smoother Holly: among
which comes sometimes, but not often, small Acornes, standing in little cups
or husks, armed with pricks as sharp as thorns, and of a bitter taste.
Besides the Acornes, there is found cleaving unto the wooddie branches, a
certain kind of berries, or rather an excrescence, of the substance of the
Oak Apple, and of the bigness of a Pease, at the first white, and of the
color of ashes when they be ripe, in which are engendered little Maggots, which
seem Ilex (...). The Scarlet Oak.
to be without life until they feels e heat of the sun, and then they creep,
and seek to fly away. But the people of the country (which make a gain of
them) do watch the time of their flying, even as we do Bees, which they then
take and put into a linen bag, wherein they shake and boult them up and down
until they be dead, which they make up into great lumpes oftentimes, and
likewise sell them to diers apart, even as they were taken forth of the bag,
whereof is made the most perfect Scarlet.

The Place.
This Oak grows in Languedocke, and in the countries thereabout, and also in
Spain: but it bears not the scarlet grain in all places, but in those
especially, which lie toward the Midland sea, and which be subject to the
scorching heat of the Sun, as Carolus Clusius witnesses; and not there
always, for when the tree waxes old it grows to be barren. Then do the
people cut and lop it down, that after the young shoots have attained to two
or three years growth, it may become fruitful again.

Petrus Bellonius in his books of Singularities shows, that Coccus Baphicus
or the Scarlet grain does grow in the Holy land, and near to the lake which
is called the Sea of Tiberias, and that upon little trees, whereby the
inhabitants get great store of wealth, who seperat the husks from the pulpe or
Magots, and sell this being made up into balls or lumpes, much dearer than the
empty shells or husks.

Of this grain also (...) has made mention in his tenth book, and shows,
that the tree which brings forth this grain is not great, and also grows
in Phocis, which is a country in Macedonia near to the Boetians, not far from
the mountain Parnassus.

(...) writes, that (...), or the Scarlet Oak, is a great tree, and rises up
to the height of the common Oak: amongst which writers there are some
contrariety. Petrus Bellonius reports it is a little tree, and Theophrastus
a great one, which may chance according to the soil and climate; for that upon
the stony mountains cannot grow to that greatness as those in the fertile
grounds.

The Time.
The little grains or berries which grow about the boughs begin to appear
especially in the Spring, when the Southwest winds do blow: the flowers fall
and are ripe in June, together with the Maggots growing in them, which
receiving life by the heat of the Sun, do forthwith fly away (in manner of a
Moth or Butterfly) unless by the care and diligence of the keepers, they be
killed by much and often shaking them together, as aforesaid.

The tree or shrub has his leaves always green: the Acornes be very late
before they be ripe, seldom before new come up in their place.

The Names.
The Scarlet Oak is called in Greek (...) in Latin Ilex: the later writers,
Ilex Coccigera, or Coccifera; in Spanish, Coscoia: for want of a fit English
name, we have thought good to call it by the name of Scarlet Oak, or Scarlet
Holme Oak: for Ilex is named of some in English, Holme, which signifies Holly
or Huluer. But this Ilex, as well as those that follow, might be called Holm
Oak. Huluer Oak, or Holly Oak, for difference from the shrub or hedge tree
Agrifolium, which is simply called Holme, Holly, and Huluer.

The grain or berrie that serves to die with is properly called in Greek
(...) in Latin, Coccus infectoria, or Coccum infectorium: Pliny also names it
Cusculium: or as most men do read it, (...): the same Author says, that it
is likewise named Scolecion, or Maggot berrie.

The Arabians and the Apothecaries do know it by the name of Chesmes, Chermes,
and (...): They are deceived who think that (...) does differ from Infectorium
Coccum: it is called in Italian, Grano detinctori: in Spanish, Grana
detintoreros: in high Dutch, Scharlachbeer: in French, Vermillon, and Grain
d'escarlate: in English, after the Dutch, Scarlet Berry, or Scarlet grain, and
after the Apothecaries word, Coccus Baphicus: the maggot within is that which
is named Cutchonele, as most do deem.

Theophrastus says the Acorne or fruit hereof is called of diverse, (...)
Acylum.

The Temperature and Virtues.
This grain is astringent and somewhat bitter, and also dry without sharpness
and biting, therefore, Galen, it is good for great wounds and sinews that be
hurt, if it be laid thereon: some temper it with Vinegar; others with Oxymel or
syrrup of vinegar.

It is commended and given by the later Physicians to stay the Menses: it is
also counted among Alkermes, made by the Arabians, has taken his name, which
many do highly commend against the infirmities of the heart: notwithstanding
it was chiefly devised in the beginning for purging of melancholy; which thing
is plainly perceived by the great quantity of Lapis Lazulus added thereto: and
therefore seeing that this stone has in it a venomous quality, and likewise a
property to purge melancholy, it cannot of it self be good for the heart, but
the other things be good, which be therefore added, that they might defend the
heart from the hurts of this stone, and correct the malice thereof.

This composition is commended against the trembling and shaking of the heart,
and for swounings

It is therefore good against melancholy diseases, vain imaginations,
sighings, grief and sorrow Lapis Cyaneus be quite left out.

Therefore he that is purposed to use this composition against beatings and
throbbings of the Cyaneus; for this being taken in a little weight or small
quantity, cannot purge at all, but may in the mean season trouble and torment
the stomach, and withal through his sharp and venomous quality (if it be
oftentimes taken) be very offensive to the guts and intrailes, and by this
means bring more harm than good.

Moreover, it is not necessary, no nor expedient, that the bristle died with
Cochenele, called Chesmes, as the Apothecaries term it, should be added to
this composition, for this bristle is not died without Auripigmentum, called
also Orpiment, and other pernicious things joined therewith, whose poysonsome
qualities are added to the iuyces together with the color, if either the
bristle or died silk be boiled in them.

The berries of the Cochenele must be taken by themselves, which alone are
sufficient to die the

CHAP. 34. Of the great Skarlet Oak.
The Description.
THe great Skarlet Oak, or the great Holme Oak, grows many times to the full
height of a tree, sometimes as big as the Pear tree, with boughs far
spreading like the Acorne or (...) Mast trees: the timber is firm and sound:
the leaves are set with prickles round about the edges, like those of the
former Skarlet Oak: the leaves when the tree waxes old have on them no
prickles at all, but are somewhat bluntly cut or indented about the edges,
green on the upper side, and gray underneath: the Acorne stands in a prickly
cup like our common Oak Acorne, which when it is ripe becomes of a brown
color, with a white kernel within of taste not unpleasant. There is found upon
the branches of this tree a certain kind of long hairy moss of the color of
ashes, not unlike to that of our English Oak. This tree is ever green, and at
the tops of the branches about the end of May, here in England, carries diverse
long catkins of mossie yellow flowers, which fall away, and are not succeeded
by the acornes, for they grow out upon other stalks. Clusius in the year 1581
observed two trees; the one in a garden above the Bridge, and the other in the
private garden at White Hall, having lesser leaves than the former. The later of
these is yet standing, and every year bears small Acornes, which I could
never observe to come to any maturitie.

Ilex mayor Glandifera. The great Skarlet Oak.
Ilicis ramus floridus. The flowers of the great Skarlet Oak.


The Place.
In diverse places there are great woods of these trees, hills also and valleys
are beautified therewith: they grow plentifully in many countries of Spain,
and in Languedocke and Prouence in great plenty. It is likewise found in Italy.
It bears an Acorne greater, and of a larger size than does the tame Oak; in
some countries lesser and shorter: they are strangers in England,
notwithstanding there is here and there a tree thereof, that has been procured
from beyond the seas: one grows in her Majesty's Privy Garden at White Hall,
near to the gate that leads into the street, and in some other places here
and there one.

The Time.
It is green at all times of the year: it is late before the Acornes be ripe.
Clusius reports, that he saw the flowers growing in clusters of a yellow
color in May.

The Names.
This Oak is named in Greek (...): in Latin, Ilex: in Spanish, Enzina: in
Italian, Elize: in French, Chesneuerd: in English, Barren Skarlet Oak, or Holme
Oak, and also of some, French or Spanish Oak.

The Spaniards call the fruit or Acorne Bellota, or Abillota. Theophrastus
seems to call this tree not Prinos, but Smilax; for he makes mention but of
one Ilex only, and that is of Scarlet Oak; and he shows that the Arcadians
do not call the other Ilex, but Smilax: for the name Smilax is of many
significations: there is Smilax among the Pulses, which is also called
Dolichus, and Phaseolus; and Smilax aspera, and Laeuis, amongst the
Binde-weeds: likewise Smilax is taken of Dioscorides to be Taxus, the Yew tree.
Of Smilax, Theophrastus writes thus in his third book: the inhabitants of
Arcadia do call a certain tree Smilax, being like unto the Skarlet Oak: the
leaves thereof be not set with such sharp prickles, but tenderer and softer.

Of this Smilax Pliny also writes, in his sixteenth book, chap. 6. There be
of Ilex, says he, two kinds, Ex ijs in Italia folio non multum ab oleis
distant, called of certain Grecians Smilaces, in the proninces Aquifolia: in
which words, in stead of Olive trees may perchance be more truly placed
Suberis, or the Cork tree; for this kind of Ilex or Smilax is not reported of
any of the old writers to have the leaf of the Olive tree: but Suber in
Greek, called Phellos, or the Cork tree, has a little leaf.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The leaves of this Oak have force to cool and repel or keep back, as have
the leaves of the

The bark of the root boiled in water until it be dissolved, and laid on all
night, makes the Cimolia, as Dioscorides says.

Clusius reports, that the Acorne is esteemed of, eaten, and brought into the
market to be sold, Pliny also has peradventure written, lib, 16. cap. 5. in
these words: Moreover, at this day in Spain the Acorne is served for a second
course.

CHAP. 35. Of the great Holme-Oke.
1 Cerris maiore Glande. The Holme Oak with great Acornes.
2 Cerris minore Glande. The Holme Oak with lesser Acorns.


The Description.
1 AMong the wilder Oaks this is not the least, for his comely proportion,
although unprofitable for timber, to make coals, carts, Wainscot, houses, or
ships of: the fruit is not fit for any man or beast to eat, neither any
property known sor the use of physic or surgerie: it grows up to the
height of a fair tree, the trunk or body is great, and very fair to look
upon: the wood or timber soft and spongie, scarce good to be burned: from which
shoots forth very comely branches dispersing themselves far abroad; whereon
are set for the most part by couples very fair leaves, green above, and of an
ouerworne russet color underneath, cut or snipt about the edges very deep:
the Acorne grows fast unto the boughs, without any foot-stalke at all, being
very like unto our common Acorne, set in a rough and prickly cup like an
Hedgehog or the Chestnut husk, of a harsh taste, and hollow within: this tree
bears or Cerri minoris (...) cum flore. A branch of the smaller Holme Oak
with flowers.
brings forth often times a certain smooth kind of Gall not altogether
unprofitable. This Oak likewise brings forth another kind of excresence,
which the Grauer has omitted in the figure, which is called in Greek (...):
Gaza names it Penis. This Penis or prick is hollow, mossie, hanging down
half a yard long, like a long rag of linen cloth.

2 The second is altogether like the first, saving that this bears smaller
Acornes, and the whole tree is altogether less, wherein consists the
difference.

Both this and the former carry flowers clustering upon long stalks, like as in
the common Oak; but the fruit does not succeed them, but grow forth in other
places.

The Place.
This Oak grows in vntoiled places, it is seldom times found, and that but
in Woods only: it is for the most part unknown in Italy, as Pliny reports.

The Time.
They bring forth their fruit or (...) in the fall of the leaf.

The Names.
This Oak is called in Greek (...) in Latin, Cerrus: yet does Pliny make
mention both of Aegilops, and also of Cerrus: (...) is likewise one of the
diseases of corn, called in Latin Festuca: in English, wild Otes, and far
differing from the tree Aegilops.

That which hangs from the boughs, Pliny, lib. 16. cap. 8. calls Panus
only: that acorne tree named Aegilops brings forth Panos arentes, withered
pricks, covered with white mossie iags hanging down, not only in the bark,
but also from the (...), half a yard in bigness, bearing a sweet smell, as we
have said, among ointments.

The Temperature and Virtues.
We find nothing written of the faculties of this tree among the old Writers,
neither of our own experience.

CHAP. 36. Of the Cork Oak.
The Description.
1 THe Cork tree is of a middle bigness like unto Ilex, or the barren skarlet
Oak, but with a thicker body, and fewer boughs: the leaves be for the most
part greater, broader, rounder, and more nicked in the edges: the bark of the
tree is thick, very rugged, and full of chinkes or crannies that cleaves and
divides it self into pieces, which unless they be taken away in due time do
give place to another bark growing underneath, which when the old is removed
is marvelous red, as though it were painted with some color: the (...)
stands in a cup, which is great, bristled, rough, and full of prickles: this
Acorne is also astringent or binding, more unpleasant than the Holme Acorne,
greater in one place, and less in another.

2 The Cork tree with narrow leaves grows likewise to the height and
bigness of a great tree; the trunk or body whereof is covered with a rough
and scabbed bark of an ouerworn blackish color, which likewise cleaves and
casts his coat when the inner bark grows somewhat thick: the branches are
long, tough, and flexible, easy to be bowed any way, like those of the Oziar;
whereupon do grow leaves like those of the precedent, but longer, and little or
nothing indented about the edges: the fruit grows in small cups as the
Acornes do: they are lesser than those of the other kind, as is the rest of
the tree, wherein is the chiefest difference. This varies in the leaf, (as you
may see in the figure) which in some is snipt about the edge, in other (...)
not at all.

1. 2. Suber latifolium and angustisolium. The Cork tree with broad and narrow
leaves.


The Place.
It grows in the country of Aquitania, near to the mountains called
Pyrenaei: it also grows plentifully in the kingdoms of Spain, differing
somewhat from that of Aquitania, as (...) declares: it is likewise found in
Italy, and that in the territory of Pisa, with a longer leaf, and sharper
pointed; and about Rome with a broader, and cut in the edges like a saw, and
rougher, (...) Matthiolus testifies.

The Time.
The leaves of the first are always green in Spain and Italy, about the
Pyrenaean mountains they fall away in Winter.

The Names.
This tree is called in Greek (...): in Latin Suber: in French, Liege: in
Italian, Sugaro: the same names do also belong to the bark: the Spaniards call
the tree Alcornoque: the Englishmen, Cork tree; and the bark, Corchade
Alcornoque; whereupon the Low Country men and English men also do call it
Cork; and yet it is called in Low Dutch also (...).

The Temperature and Virtues.
This bark does manifestly dry, with a binding faculty.

Being beaten to powder and taken in water it stancheth bleeding in any part of
the body. The Paulus, being burnt, makes ashes which do mightily

Cork is also profitable for many things: it is used (says Pliny) about the
anchors of (...), Fishers

CHAP. 37. Of the Gall tree.
The Kinds.
OF trees that bring forth Galls there be diverse sorts, as may appear by the
diverse forms and sorts of Galls set forth in this present chapter, which may
serve for their several distinctions, whereof some bring forth Acornes
likewise, and some nothing but Galls: the figures of some few of the trees
shall give you sufficient knowledge of the rest: for all the Acorne or Mast
trees bring forth Galls, but those trees whose figures we have set forth do
bear those Galls fit for medicine, and to thicken skins with.

Dioscorides and Galen make but two sorts of Galls; the one little, yellow,
full of holes, and more spongie in the inner part, both of them round, having
the form of a little ball, and the other smooth and even on the out side:
sinee, the later wrirers have found more, some having certain little knobs
sticking forth, like in form to the Gall, which does also cleave and grow
without (...) to the leaf. There is also found a certain excrescence of a
light green color, spongic and waterie, in the middle whereof now and then is
found a little fly or worm: which soft ball in hot countries does oftentimes
become hard, like the little smooth Gall, as Theophrastus says.

1 Galla, sieve Robur maius. The great Gall tree.
2 Robur, sieve Galla mayor altera. Another great Gall tree.


The Description.
1 THe Gall tree grows up to a sufficient height, having a very fair trunk or
body, whereon are placed long twiggy branches bringing forth very fair leaves,
broad, and nicked in the edges like the teeth of a saw: among which come forth
acornes, although the figure express not the same, like those of the Oak, and
likewise a woody excrescence, which we name the Gall, having certain small
eminences or bunches on the out side, growing for the most part upon the
slender branches without stalks, and sometimes they grow at the ends thereof;
which by the heat of the Sun are harder, greater, and more sollid in one
country than another, according to the soil and clymat.

3 Galla minor. The little Gall tree.


2 This grows to the height of a tall man, having leaves deeply divided on
the edges like the Oak, and they are green above, but hairy and hoary below: it
carries a great Gall of the bigness of a little Apple, and that in great
plenty, and without any order. This grows in diverse parts of old Castile in
Spain, and in all the mountainous woods about Vienna in Austria.

3 The lesser Gall tree differs not from the former, saving that it is
altogether lesser: the fruit and Gall is likewise lesser, wherein especially
consists the difference.

The Place.
The Galls are sound in Italy, Spain, and Bohemia, and most of the hot regions.

The Time.
The Gall, says Pliny, appears or comes forth when the Sun comes out of
the sign Gemini, and that generally in one night.

The Names.
The Gall tree is called Quercus, Robur, and Gallae arbor: the Gall is called
in Greek (...): the Apothecaries and Italians keep the name Galla for the
fruit: in High Dutch, (...): in Low Dutch, (...): in Spanish, (...) Galha, and
Bugalha: in French, Noix de Galle: in English, Gauls, and Galls.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The Gall called Omphacitis, as Galen writes, is dry in the third degree, and
cold in the second:

The other Gall does dry and also bind; but so much lesser, by how much the
harsh or choking

Galls are very profitable against the Dysenterie and the Coeliacke passion,
being drunk in wine,

Galls are used in dying and coloring of sundry things, and in making of ink.

Last of all, burnt Galls do receive a further faculty, namely to stanch
blood, and are of thin

Moreover, Galls are good for those that are troubled with the bloody flix and
common laskes,

Oak Apples are much of the nature of Galls, yet are they far inferior to
them, and of lesser Our Author out of (...) gave the figures of (...) (...) of
Galls; some being (...), others small; some round, others longish, and other
(...) (...) cornered.


CHAP. 38. Of Misseltoe or Misteltoe.
1 (...). Misseltoe.


The Description.
1 VIscum or Misseltoe has many (...) branches spread (...) one another, and
wrapped and interlaced (...) within another: the bark (...) is of a light green
or Popinjay color: the leaves of this (...) excrescence be of a brown green
color: the flowers be small and yellow: which being past, there appear small
clusters of white translucent berries, which are so clear that a man may see
through them, and are full of clammy or viscous moisture, whereof the best
Bird-lime is made, far exceeding that which is made of Holme or Holly bark:
and within this berry is a small black (...) or seed: this excresence has not
any root, neither does increase himself of his seed, as some have supposed;
but it rather comes of a certain moisture and substance gathered together
upon the boughs and ioints of the trees, through the bark whereof this
vaporous moisture proceeding, brings forth the Misseltoe. Many have diversely
spoken hereof: some of the Learned have set down that it comes of the dung of
the bird called a Thrush, who having sed of the seeds thereof, as eating his
own bane, has voided and left his dung upon the tree, whereof was engendered
this berry, a most sit matter to make lime of to entrap and catch birds withal.

2 Indian Misseltoe grows likewise upon the branches of trees, running
along the same in manner of Polypodie: the strings of the roots are like
those of Couch-grasse; from which rise up diverse stalks smooth and even, set
with ioints and knees at certain distances: toward the top comes forth one
leaf ribbed like the Plantain lease, whereon are marked certain round eyes
such as are in the haft of a knife; from the bosom whereof comes forth a
chaffie branch, set with small leaves which continue green winter and Summer.

2 Viscum Indicum Lobelij. Indian Misseltoe.
3 Viscum Peruvianum Lobelij. Misseltoe of Peru.


3 There is found also another plant growing upon the boughs or branches of
trees, in manner as our Misseltoe does, and may very well be reckoned as a kind
thereof: the plant cleaves unto the branches, being set thereto as it were
with the pillings of the sea onion, of the breadth of a man's hand toward the
bottom, and somewhat hollow: the tops whereof are very small and rushy, hollow
likewise, and of a purple color: among which comes forth a branch like that of
Haslula Regia, or the Kings Spear, resembling the bush of Otes, covered with a
white silk, such as is to be found in Asclepias, of a salt and nitrous taste,
and very unpleasant.

The Place.
The first kind of Misseltoe grows upon Oaks and diverse other trees almost
every where; as for the other two they are strangers in England.

The Time.
(...) is always green as well in Winter as in Summer: the berries are ripe
in Autumn; they remain all Winter through, and are a food for diverse birds, as
Thrushes, Blacke-birds, and Ring-doues.

The Names.
Misseltoe is called in Greek (...), and (...): in Latin, Viscum: in
High Dutch, Mistell: in LowDutch, Marentacken: in Italian, Vischio: in Spanish,
Liga: in the Portugal language, Visgo: in English, Missel, and Misseltoe.

The glue which is made of the berries of Missel is likewise called Viscum and
Ixia in English, Bird-lime. Ixia is also called (...) albus, by reason of the
glue which is oftentimes found about the root thereof. This word is also
ascribed to Chamaeleon niger, as we read among the bastard names. Ixia is
likewise reckoned up by Dioscorides, lib. 6. and by Paulus Aegineta, lib. 5.
among the poisons: but what this poysonsome and venomous Ixia is it is hard and
doubtful to declare: many would have it to be Chamaeleon niger: others, the
glue or clammy substance which is made of the berries of Missel-toe; who do
truly think that Ixia differs from Chamaeleon niger: for Paulus Aegineta,
lib. 5. cap. 30. in reckoning up of simple poisons has first made mention of
Chamaeleon niger, then a little after of Ixia: and whilst he does particularly
discourse of every one, he entreats of Chamaeleon niger, cap. 32. and of Ixia
(which he also names Vlophonon) cap. 47. and tells of the dangerous and far
differing accidents of them both. And Dioscorides himself, lib. 6. where he
sets down his judgment of simple poisons, entreats first of Chamaeleon
niger, and then a little after of Ixia. These things declare that (...) niger
does differ from Ixia, which is reckoned among the poisons. Moreover, it can no
where be read that (...) niger bears Birdlime, or has so glutinous and
clammy a substance as that it ought to be called Ixia: therefore Ixia, as it is
one of the poisons, is the glue that is made of the berries of Misseltoe, which
because it is sharp and biting, inflameth and sets the tongue on fire, and
with his slimie and clammy substance does so draw together, shut, and glue up
the guts, as that there is no passage for the excrements, which things are
mentioned among the mischiefs that Ixia brings.

I can by no means approve of, or yield to this opinion here delivered out of
Dodonaeus by our Author; which is, That the Bird-lime made of the berries of
Misseltoe is poison; or that Ixia set forth by Dioscorides and Nicander for a
poison is meant of this: for this is manifestly treated of in Dioscorides, lib.
3. cap. 103. by the name of (...): when as the other is mentioned, lib. 6. cap.
21. by the name of (...). Also daily experience shows this plant to have no
malign nor poisonous, but rather a contrary faculty, being frequently used
in medicines against the Epilepsie. Such as would see more concerning Ixia or
Ixias, let them have recourse to the first chapter of the first part of Fabius
Columna, de Stirpib. min. cognitis and rarioribus, where they shall find it
largely treated of.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The leaves and berries of Misseltoe are hot and dry, and of subtle parts: the
Bird-lime is hot Galen, his acrimony overcomes his bitterness; for if it be
used in outward applications it draws humors from the deepest or most secret
parts of the body, spreading and dispersing them abroad, and digesting them.

It ripeneth swellings in the groine, hard swellings behind the ears, and
other impostumes, being

With Frankincense it mollifieth old ulcers and malicious impostumes, being
boiled with unslaked Gagate lapide, or Asio, and applied, it wastes away the
hardness of the spleen.

With Orpment or Sandaraca it takes away foul ill favored nails, being
mixed with unslaked

It has been most credibly reported unto me, that a few of the berries of
Misseltoe bruised and

CHAP. 39. Of the Cedar tree.
The Kinds.
THere be two Cedars, one great bearing Cones, the other small bearing berries
like those of Juniper.

Cedrus Libani. The great Cedar tree of Libanus.


The Description.
THe great Cedar is a very big and high tree, not only exceeding all other
resinous trees, and those which bear fruit like unto it, but in his tallnesse
and largeness far surmounting all other trees: the body or trunk thereof is
commonly of a mighty bigness, insomuch as four men are not able to fathom
it, as Theophrastus writes: the bark of the lower part, which proceeds out
of the earth, to the first young branches or (...), is rough and harsh; the rest
which is among the boughs is smooth and glib: the boughs grow forth almost
from the bottom, and not far from the ground, even to the very top, waxing
by degrees lesser and shorter still as they grow higher, the tree bearing the
form or shape of a Pyramide or sharp pointed sleeple: these compass the body
round about in manner of a circle, and are so orderly placed by degrees, as that
a man may clymbe up by them to the very top as by a ladder: the leaves be small
and round like those of the Pine tree, but shorter, and not so sharp pointed;
all the cones or clogs are far shorter and thicker than those of the Fur
tree, compact of soft, not hard scales, which hang not downwards, but stand
upright upon the boughs, whereunto also they are so strongly fastened, as they
can hardly be plucked off without breaking of some part of the branches, as
Bellonius writes: the timber is extreme hard, and rotteth not, nor waxes old:
there is no worms nor rottenness can hurt or take the hard matter or heart of
this wood, which is very odoriferous, and somewhat red: Solomon King of the
Jews did therefore build Gods Temple in Jerusalem of Cedarwood: the Gentiles
were wont to make their Devils or Images of this kind of wood, that they might
last the longer.

The Place.
The Cedar trees grow upon the snowie mountains, as in Syria upon mount
Libanus, on which there remain some even to this day, says Bellonius, planted
as is thought by Solomon himself: they are likewise found on the mountains
Taurus and Amanus, in cold and stony places: the merchants of the factorie at
Tripolis told me, that the Cedar tree grows upon the declining of the
mountain Libanus, near unto the Hermitage by the city Tripolis in Syria: they
that dwell in Syria use to make boats thereof for want of the Pine tree.

The Time.
The Cedar tree remains always green, as other trees which bear such
manner of fruit: the timber of the Cedar tree, and the images and other works
made thereof, seem to sweat and (...) forth moisture in moist and rainy
weather, as do likewise all that have an oily juice, as (...) witnesses.

The Names.
This huge and mighty tree is called in Greek (...): in Latin likewise
Cedrus: in English, Cedar, and Cedar tree. Pliny, lib. 24. cap. 5. names it
Cedrelate, as though he should say, Cedrus (...), (...) Cedrina abies, Cedar
Fur; both that it may differ from the little Cedar, and also because it is
(...) like to the Fur tree.

The Rosin has no proper name, but it may be syrnamed Cedrina, or Cedar Rosin.

The pitch which is drawn out of this is properly called (...): yet Pliny
writes, that also the liquor of the Torch Pine is named Cedrium. The best,
says Dioscorides, is fat, through shining, and of a strong smell; which being
poured out in drops unites it self together, and does not remain severed.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Cedar is of temperature hot and dry, with such an exquisite tenuitie and
subtlety of parts, that

There issues out of this tree a Rosin like unto that which issues out of the
Fir tree, very sweet

The Egyptians were wont to coffin and embalme their dead in Cedar, and with
Cedar pitch, Herodotus records.

The condited or embalmed body they call in shops (...), but very unfitly; for
Mumia among Pissasphalton, as appears by Auiccn, cap. 474. and out of
Serapio, cap. 393.

I Will that interpreted and translated Serapio was the cause of this error, who
translated and (...) Mumia according to his own fancy, and not after the
sense and meaning of his Author Serapio, saying that this Mumia is a compsition
made of (...) and Myrrh mingled together with the moisture of man's body.

The gum of Cedar is good to be put in medicines for the eyes, for being
anointed therewith it

Cedar infused in vinegar and put into the ears kills the worms therein,
and being mingled

If it be washed or infused in vinegar, and applied unto the teeth, it eases
the toothache.

If it be put into the hollownesse of the teeth it breaks them, and appeaseth
the extreme grief

It prevails against Angina's, and the inflammation of the Tonsils, if a
Gargarisme be made

It is good to kill nits and lice and such like vermin: it cures the biting
of the serpent Cerastes,

It is a remedy against the poison of the sea Hare, if it be drunk with
sweetwine.

It is good also for Lepers: being put up underneath it kills all manner of
worms, and draws Dioscorides writes.

CHAP. 40. Of the Pitch tree.
The Description.
1 PIcea, the tree that droppeth Pitch, called Pitch tree, grows up to be a
tall, fair, and big tree, remaining always green like the Pine tree: the
timber of it is more red than that of the Pine or Fur: it is set full of
boughs not only about the top, but much lower, and also beneath the middle
part of the body, which many times hang down, bending toward the ground: the
leaves be narrow, not like those of the Pine tree, but shorter and narrower,
and sharp pointed like them, yet (...) they blacker, and withal cover the
young and tender twigs in manner of a circle, like those of the Fur tree; but
being many, and thick set, grow forth on all sides, and not only one right
against another, as in the Yew tree: the fruit is scaly, and like unto the Pine
apple, but smaller: the bark of the tree is somewhat black, tough and
flexible, not brittle, as is the bark of the Fur tree: under which next to
the wood is gathered a Rosin, which many times issues (...), and is like to
that of the Larch tree.

2 Of this sort (says Clusius) there is found another that never grows high,
but remains dwarfish, and it carries certain little nugaments or catkins of
the bigness of a small nut, composed of scales lying one upon another, but
ending in a prickly leaf, which in time opening show certain empty cauities
or cells: from the tops of these sometimes grow forth branches set with many
short and pricking little leaves: all the shrub has shorter and paler colored
leaves than the former: I observed neither fruit nor flower on this, (...) know
I whether it carry any. Dalechampius seems to have known this, and to have
called (...) Pinus Tubulus or Tibulus.

1 Piceamaior. The Pitch tree.
2 Picea pumila. The dwarf Pitch tree.


The Place.
The Pitch tree grows in Greece, Italy, France, Germany, and all the cold
regions (...) unto Russia.

The Time.
The fruit of the Pitch tree is ripe in the end of September.

The Names.
The Grecians call this Cone tree (...): the Latins, Picea, and not Pinus; for
Pinus or the Pine tree, is the Grecians (...), as shall be declared: that (...)
is named in Latin Picea, Scribonius Largus testifies, in his 201 Composition,
writing after this manner; Resinae Petuinae, id est, ex Picea arbore, which
signifies in English, of the Rosin of the tree Pitys, that is to say, of the
Pitch tree. With him does (...) agree, lib. 16. cap. 10. where he translating
Theophrastus his words concerning Peuce and Pitys, does translate Pitys, Picea,
although for Pcuce he has written Larix, as shall be declared. Pliny writes
thus; Larix vstis radicibus non repullulat: and the Larch tree does not spring
up again when the roots are burnt: the Pitch tree springs up again, as it
happened in Lesbos, when the wood Pyrthaeus was set on fire. Moreover, the worms
Pityocampae are scarce found in any tree but only in the Pitch tree, as
Bellonius testifies: so that they are not rashly called Pityocampae, or the
worms of the Pitch tree, although most Translators name them (...) crucae, or
the the worms of the Pine trees: and therefore Pitys is surnamed by
Theophrastus, (...), because worms and magots are bred in it. But for so much as
the name Pitys is common both to the tame Pine, and also to the Pitch tree,
diverse of the late writers do for this cause suppose, that the Pitch tree is
named by Thcophrastus, (...) or the wild Pine tree. This Picea is named in
High Dutch, Schwartz Tannebaum, and (...) Tannebaum, and oftentimes also
Jorenholtz; which name notwithstanding does also agree with other plants: in
English, Pitch tree: in Low Dutch, Peck boom.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The leaves, bark, and fruit of the Pitch tree, are all of one nature, virtue,
and operation, and of the same faculty with the Pine trees.

CHAP. 41. Of the Pine Tree.
The Kinds.
THe Pine Tree is of two sorts, according to Theophrastus; the one (...), that
is to say, tame, or of the garden; the other (...), or wild: he says that the
Macedonians do add a third, which is (...) or barren, or without fruit, that
unto us is unknown: the later writers have found more as shall be declared.

Pinus sativa, sive domestica. The tame or manured Pine tree.


The Description.
THe Pine tree grows high, and great in the trunk or body, which below is
naked, but above it is clad with a multitude of boughs, which divide
themselves into diverse branches, whereon are set small leaves, very straight,
narrow, somewhat hard and sharp pointed: the wood or timber is hard, heavy,
about the heart or middle full of an oileous liquor, and of a reddish color:
the fruit or clogs are hard, great, and consist of many sound woody scales,
under which are included certain knobs, without shape, covered with a wooden
shell, like small nuts, wherein are white kernels, long, very sweet, and
covered with a thin skin or membrane, that easily is rubbed offwith the
fingers; which kernel is used in medicine.

The Place.
This tree grows of it self in many places of Italy, and especially in the
territory of Rauenna, and in Languedock, about Marsiles, in Spain, and in
other regions, as in the East countries: it is also cherished in the gardens of
pleasure, as well in the Low Countries as England.

The Time.
The Pine tree grows green both winter and Summer: the fruit it commonly two
years before it be ripe: wherefore it is not to be found without ripe fruit, and
also others as yet very small, and not come to ripeness.

The Names.
It is called in Latin, Pinus, and Pinus (...), Vrbana, or rather Mansueta: in
English, tame and garden Pine: of the Macedonians and other Graecians, (...):
but the Arcadians name it (...) for that which the Macedonians call (...) the
Arcadians name (...), as (...) says, and so does the tame Pine in Arcadia, and
about Elia change her name: and by this alteration of them it happens that the
fruit or Nuts of the Pine tree found in the Cones or Apples, be named in Greek
by Dioscorides, Galen, Paulus, and others, (...), as though they should term
it (...) sructus, or the fruit of the Pine tree.

There is also another (...) in Latin Picca, or the Pitch tree, which
differs much from the Pine tree: but Pytis of Arcadia differs nothing from
the Pine tree, as we have said.

The fruit or apples of these be called in Greek (...) and in Latin Coni.
notwithstanding Conos is a common name to all the fruits of these kind of
trees: they also be named in Latin, Nuces pineae: by (...) in Greek (...), by
Diocles Carystius, (...), which be notwithstanding the fruit or clogges of the
tree that (...) names (...), or the wild Pine tree, as Athenaeus says. It is
thought that the whole fruit is called by Galen in his 4. Commentary upon
Hipocrates Books of Diet in sharp diseases, Strobilos: yet in his 2. book of
the Faculties of Nourishments he does not call Conos or the apple by the name
of Strobilos, but the nuts contained in it. And in like manner in his seventh
book of the Faculties of Simple medicines; the Pine Apple fruit, says he,
which they call Coccalus, and Strobilus, as we have said before, that these are
named in Greek (...). This apple is called in high Dutch, Zyrbel: in low
Dutch, Pijn appel: in English, Pine apple, Clogge, and Cone.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The kernels of these nuts do concoct and moderately heat, being in a mean
between cold and

It cures the Ptisicke, and those that pine and consume away through the
rottenness of their

It yields a thick and good juice, and nourishes much, yet is it not
altogether casie of digestion, and therefore it is mixed with preserues, or
boiled with sugar.

The same is good for the stone in the Kidneies, and against frettings of the
bladder, and scalding

The whole Cone or Apple being boiled with fresh Horehound, says Galen, and
afterward boiled

The like thing has Dioscorides; the whole Cones, says he, which are newly
gathered from the

The scales of the Pine apple, with the bark of the tree, do stop the laske
and the bloody flixe,

CHAP. 42. Of the Wild Pine tree.
1 Pinus syluestris. The wild Pine tree.
2 Pinus syluestris mugo. The low wild Pine tree.


The Description.
1 THe first kind of wild Pine tree grows very great, but not so high as
the former, being the tame or manured Pine tree; the bark thereof is glib: the
branches are spread abroad, beset with long sharp pointed leaves: the fruit is
somewhat like the (...) Pine tree, with some Rosine therein, and sweet of
smell, which does easily open it self, and quickly falls from the tree.

2 The second kind of wild Pine tree grows not so high as the former,
neither is the stem growing straight up, but yet it brings forth many
branches, long, slender, and so easy to be bent or bowed, that hereof they
make Hoops for wine Hogs-heads and Tuns: the fruit of this pine is greater than
the fruit of any of the other wild Pines.

3 The third kind of wild Pine tree grows straight upright, and waxes
great and high, yet not so high as the other wild kinds: the branches do grow
like the pitch tree: the fruit is long and big, almost like the fruit of the
said Pitch tree; wherein are contained small triangled nuts, like the nuts of
the Pine Apple tree, but smaller, and more brittle; in which is contained a
kernel of a good taste, like the kernel of the tame Pine apple: the wood is
beautiful, and sweet of smell, good to make tables and other works of.

4 There is another wild Pine of the mountain, not differing from the
precedent but in stature, growing for the most part like a hedge tree, wherein
is the difference.

3 Pinus syluestris montana. The mountain wild Pine tree.
4 Pinus montana minor. The smaller wild Pine tree.


5 This kind of Pine, called the sea Pine tree, grows not above the height
of two men, having leaves like the tame Pine tree, but shorter: the fruit is of
the same form; but longer somewhat fashioned like a Turnep: this tree yields
very much Rosine. Bauhine judges this all one with the third.

6 The sixth kind of wild Pine being one of the Sea Pines, grows like an
hedge tree or shrub seldome' exceeding the height of a man; with little leaves
like those of the Larch tree, but always continuing with a very little cone,
and fine small kernel.

7 The bastard wild Pine tree grows up to a mean height; the trunk or
body, as also the 5 Pinus maritima mayor. The great Sea Pine tree.
6 Pinus syluestris minor. The little Sea Pine Tree.
7 Taedasive pseudopinus. The bastard wild Pine.
8 Pinaster Austriacus. Dwarf Pine with upright Cones.
9 (...) maritimus minor: Dwarf Sea Pine.
ches and leaves are like unto those of the manured Pine tree: the only
difference is, that some years it resembles the Pine it self; and the other
years as a wild hedge tree, varying often, as nature lists to play and
sport her self amongst her delights, with other plants of less moment: the
timber is soft, and not fit for building, but is of the substance of our Birch
tree: the fruit is like those of the other wild Pines, whereof this is a kind.

8 This dwarf Austrian Pine (...) not the height of a man, but immediately
from the root is divided and spread abroad into tough, bending, pretty thick
branches, covered over with a rough bark: the leaves, as in the former, come
two out of one hose, thicker, shorter, blunter pointed, and more green than
the former: the cones or clogs are but small, yet round, and compact, and hang
not dowewards, but stand upright: the root is tough and wood die like other
plants of this kind: It grows on the Austrian and Styrian Alps. Clusius sets
it forth by the name of Pinaster 4. Austriacus.

9 This other Dwarf is of the same height with the former, with such tough and
bending branches, which are neither so thick nor clad with so rough a bark,
nor so much spread. The leaves also are smaller, and not unlike those of the
Larix tree, but not so soft, nor falling every year as they do. The cones are
little and slender, the kernel small, blackish, and winged as the rest.
Clusius found this only in some few places of the kingdom of Murcia in
Spain, wherefore he calls it, Pinaster 3. Hispanicus. Dodonaeus calls it Pinus
maritima minor.

The Place.
These wild Pines do grow upon the cold mountains of Liuonia, Polonia,
Noruegia, and Russia, especially upon the Island called Holland within the
Sownd, beyond Denmark, and in the woods by Narua, upon the Liefeland shore,
and all the tract of the way, being a thousand Wersts, (each Werst containing
three quarters of an English mile) from Narua unto Moscouia, where I have seen
them grow in infinite numbers.

The Time.
The fruit of these Pine trees is ripe in the end of September: out of all
these issues forth a white and sweet smelling Rosine: they are also changed
into Teda, and out of these is boiled through the force of the fire, a black
Pitch: the Pitch tree and the Larch tree be also sometimes changed into Teda;
yet very seldom, for Teda is a proper and peculiar infirmity of the wild
Pine tree. A tree is said to be changed into Teda, when not only the heart of
it, but also the rest of the substance is turned into fatness.

The Names.
All these are called in Greek (...): and in Latin Syluestres Pini: of Pliny,
Pinastri: Pinaster, says he in his 16. book. 10 chapter, is nothing else but
Pinus sylvestris, or the wild Pine tree, of a lesser height, and full of boughs
from the middle, as the tame Pine tree in the top, (most of the copies have
falsely) of a marvelous height: they are far deceived who think that the Pine
tree is called in Greek (...), besides the tame Pine which notwithstanding is
so called not of all men, but only of the Arcadians (as we have said before)
(...), all men do name the wild (...); and therefore Teda, or the Torch Pine,
hereof is said to be in Latin not Picea, but Pinea, that is, not the
Pitch-tree, but the Pine tree, as Ovid does planly testify in his Heroical
Epistles;

Vt vidi, vt perij, nec not is ignibus arsi, Ardet vt admagnos Pinea Teda
(...). Also in (...) 4.

Illic accendit geminas pro lampade Pinus: Hinc Cereris sacris nunc quoque Teda
datur. The same does Virgill also signify in the seventh of his Aeneid.

Ipsainter medias, flag rantem feruida Pinum Sustinet. -- -- -- -- -- -- Where
in stead of Flagrantem Pinum, (...) admonishes us to understand Teda Pinea.
(...), also consents with them in the marriage song of Iulia and Mallius.

-- (...) Pineam quate tedam. And Prudentius in Hymno Cerei Paschalis.

Seu Pinus piceam fert alimoniam. Moreover, the herb Peucedanos, or
Horestrong, so named of the likeness of (...), is called also in Latin
Pinastellum, of Pinus the Pine tree: all which things do evidently declare that
(...) is called in Latin not Picea, but Pinus.

The first of these wild kinds may be Idaea Theophrasti, or Theophrastus his
Pine tree, growing on mount Ida, if the apple which is shorter were longer: for
he names two kinds of wild Pines, the one of mount Ida, and the other the
Sea Pine with the round fruit: but we hold the contrary, for the fruit or
apple of the wild mountain Pine is shorter, and that of the Sea Pine longer.
This may more truly be Macedonum mas, or the Macedonians male Pine, (...) they
make two sorts of wild Pines, the male and the female, and the male more
writhed and harder to be wrought upon, and the female more easy; but the wood
of this is more writhed, and not so much in request for works, as the other,
and therefore it seems to be the male. This wild Pine tree is called in high
Dutch, Hartzbaum, and (...) Hartzbaum: in Gallia Celtica, Elvo (...): and in
Spanish, Pino Carax.

The second wild Pine tree is named commonly of the Italians Tridentinis, and
Ananiensibus, (...), and Cirmolo; it seems to differ nothing at all from the
Macedonians wild female Pine, for the wood is easy to be wrought on, and
serves for diverse and sundry works.

The third they call Mugo: this may be named not without cause (...), that is
to say, Humilis Pinus, or Dwarf Pine: yet does it differ from (...) the Herb
called in English, Ground Pine.

The fourth wild Pine is named in Greek (...) in Latin, Maritima; and Marina
Pinus: in English, Sea Pine.

That which the Latins call Teda, is named in Greek (...), and (...): in high
Dutch, Kynholtz: it may be termed in English, Torch-pine.

Pliny is deceived, in that he supposes the Torch Pine to be a tree by it
self, and makes it the sixth kind of Cone-tree; as likewise he erreth in
taking Larix, the Larch tree, for (...), the Pine Tree. And as Dioscorides
makes so little difference as scarce any, between (...) and (...) and
supposes them to be both of one kind, so likewise he sets down faculties
common to them both.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The bark of them both, says he, does bind; being beaten and applied it
(...) Merigals, and

With the Cerote of Myrtles it heals ulcers in tender bodies: being beaten
with Copperas it

Galen has almost the same things, but he says, that the bark of the Pine
tree is more temperate

Being stamped and boiled in vinegar, they assuage the pain of the teeth, if
they be washed

Of the same operation is likewise the bark of the pine nuts; but Galen
affirms that the (...) or apple, although it seem to be like these is
notwithstanding of lesser force, insomuch as it cannot effectually perform any
of the aforesaid virtues, but has in it a certain biting quality, which
hurts.

The Torch Pine cut into small pieces and boiled in vinegar, is a remedy
likewise against the

Of this there is made a profitable spather or slice to be used in making of
compound plasters

Of the smoke of this is made a black which serves to make ink of, and for
eating sores in the Dioscorides teaches.

Of Rosins.
The Kinds.
1 OVt of the Pine trees, especially of the wild kinds, there issues forth a
liquid, whitish, and sweet smelling Rosin, and that many times by it self; but
more plentifully either out of the cut and broken boughs, or forth of the body
when the tree comes to be a Torch Pine.

2 there issues also forth of the crackes and chinkes of the bark, or out of
the cut boughs, a certain dry Rosin, and that forth of the Pine Tree or Fur
Tree.

There is likewise found a certain congealed Rosin upon the cones or apples.

It is called in Latin, Resina: in Greek, (...): in high Dutch, Hartz: in low
Dutch, Herst: in Italian, Ragia: in Spanish, Resina: in English, Rosin.

The first is named in Latin, Liquida Resina: in Greek, (...), and of diverse,
(...), that it to say, issues out of it self: of the Lacedaemonians, (...), or
Primislua, the first flowing Rosin: and in Cicilia, (...) as Galen writes in
his third book of medicines according to the kinds: in shops Resina Pini, or
Rosin of the Pine tree, and common Rosin. It happens oftentimes through the
negligent and careless gathering thereof, that certain small pieces of wood,
and little stones be found mixed with it: this kind of Rosin Galen surnameth
(...), as though he should say, confused, which being melted and cleansed from
the dross becomes hard and brittle.

The like happens also to another liquid Rosin, which after it is melted,
boiled, and cooled again, is hard and brittle, and may likewise be beaten,
ground, and searced; and this Rosin is named in Greek (...): in Latin,
Fricta, and many times Colophonia, in Greek, (...): which name is used among
the Apothecaries, and may stand for an English name; for Galen in his third
book of Medicines according to their kinds says, that it is called Fricta,
and of some Colophonia: that, says he, is the driest Rosin of all, which some
call Fricta, others Colophonia: because in times past, as Dioscorides writes,
it was fetched from Colophon, this being yellow or black in comparison of the
rest, is white when it is beaten: Pliny in his 14. book, 20. chapter.

The second Rosin is named in Greek (...), specially that of the Pitch tree
without fatness, and that soon waxes dry, which Galen in his 6. book of
Medicines according to the kinds, calls properly (...): that which in Asia
is made of the Pitch tree being very white, is called Spagas, as Pliny
testifies.

The third is called in Greek (...): the same is also named (...): this is
unknown in shops. Yet there is to be sold a certain dry Rosin, but the same
is compounded of the Rosins of the Pine tree, of the cones or clogs, and of the
Fur tree mixed altogether, which they call Garipot: this is used in perfumes
in stead of Frankincense, from which notwithstanding it far differs.

The Temperature and (...).
All the Rosins are hot and dry, but not all after one manner: for there is a
difference among

The Rosins which are burnt or dried, as Dioscorides testifies, are profitable
in plasters, and compositions

The liquid Rosins are very fitly mixed in ointments, commended for the healing
up of green

Moreover, there is gathered out from the Rosins as from Frankencense, a
congealed smoke, called Fuligo; in Greek (...) and in English, Black, which
serves for medicines that beautify the eye lids, and cure the fretting sores
of the corners of the eyes, and also watering eyes, for it dries without
biting.

There is made hereof says Dioscorides, writing ink, but in our age not that
which we write

Of Pitch and Tar.
The manner of drawing forth of Pitch.

Out of the fattest wood of the Pine tree changed into the Torch Pine, is
drawn Pitch by force of fire. A place must be paued with stone, or some other
hard matter, a little higher in the middle, about which there must also be made
gutters, into which the liquor shall fall; then out from them other gutters are
to be drawn, by which it may be received; being received, it is put into
barrels. The place being thus prepared, the cloven wood of the Torch Pine must
be set upright; then must it be covered with a great number of Fir and Pitch
boughs, and on every part all about with much lome and earth: and great heed
must be taken, least there be any cleft or chinke remaining, only a whole left
in the top of the furnace, through which the fire may be put in, and the flame
and smoke may pass out: when the fire burns the Pitch runs sorth, first
the thin, and then the thicker.

This liquor is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Pix: in English, Pitch, and
the moisture, (...) the same that first runs is named of Pliny in his 16.
book, 11. chapter, (...): There is boiled in Europe, says he, from the Torch
Pine a liquid Pitch used about ships, and serving for many other purposes; the
wood being cloven is burned with fire, and set round about the (...) on every
side, after the manner of making Charcoles: the first liquor runs through the
gutter like water: (this in Syria is called Cedrium, which is of so great
virtue, as in Egypt the bodies of dead men are preserved, being all covered
over with it) the liquor following being now thicker, is made Pitch. But
Dioscorides writes, that Cedria is gathered of the great Cedar tree, and (...)
the liquor drawn out of the Torch tree by force of fire, (...): this is, that
which the Latins call Pix liquida: the Italians, Piece liquida: in high Dutch,
(...) (...): in low Durch, (...): in French, Poix foudire: in Spanish, Pex
liquida: certain Apothecaries, Kitran: and we in English, Tar.

And of this when it is boiled is made a harder Pitch: this is named in Greek
(...): in Latin, Arida, or sicca Pix: of diverse, (...): as though they should
say, Iterata Pix, or Pitch iterated: because it is boiled the second time. A
certain kind hereof being made clammie or (...) is named (...): in shops, Pix
naualis, or Ship Pitch: in high Dutch, Bach: in low Dutch, Steenpeck: in
Italian, Piece secca: in French, Poix seche: in Spanish, Pez seca: in English,
Stone Pitch.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Pitch is hot and dry, Tar is hotter, and stone pitch more drying, as Galen
writes. Tar is good

It is a remedy for mattering ears with oil of Roses: it heals the bitings
of Serpents, if it be

With an equal portion of wax it takes away foul ill-favored nails, it
wastes away swellings

With barley meal and a boys urine it consumes (...), or the Kings evil: it
staieth eating ulcers,

If it be mixed with fine Frankincense, and a cerote made thereof, it heals
chops of the fundament

Stone Pitch does mollify and soften hard swellings: it ripens and makes
matter, and wastes

What virtue Tar has when it is inwardly taken we may read in Dioscorides
and Galen, but

There is also made of Pitch a congealed smoke or black, which serves (...)
the same purposes,

CHAP. 43. Of the Fur or Deal Tree.
The Description.
1 THe Fur tree grows very high and great, having his leaves ever green;
his trunk or body smooth, even and straight, without ioints or knots, until
it has gotten branches; which are many and very fair, beset with leaves, not
much unlike the leaves of the Ewe tree, but smaller: among which come forth
flowers upon the taller trees, growing at the bottomes of the leaves like
little catkins, as you may see them expressed in a branch apart by themselves:
the fruit is like unto the Pine Apple, but smaller and narrower, hanging down
as the Pine Apple: the timber hereof excels all other timber for the masting
of ships, posts, rails, deal boords, and sundry other purposes.

1 Abies. The Fur tree.
2 Abies mas. The male Fur tree.


2 There is another kind of Fur tree, which is likewise a very high and tall
tree, and higher than the Pine: the body of it is straight without knots below,
waxing smaller and smaller even to the very top: about which it sends forth
boughs, four together out of one and the self same part of the body, placed
one against another, in manner of a cross, growing forth of the four sides of
the body, and observing the same order even to the very top: out of these
boughs grow others also, but by two and two, one placed right against another,
out of the sides, which bend downwards when the other bear upwards: the leaves
compass the boughs round about, and the branches thereof: they be long,
round, and blunt pointed, narrower, and much whiter than those of the Pitch
tree, that is to say, of a light green, and in a manner of a white color: the
cones or clogs be long, and longer than any others of the cone trees, they
consist of a multitude of soft scales, they hang down from the end of the
twigs, and do not easily fall down, but remain on the tree a very long time:
the kernels in these are small, not greater than the kernels of the Cherrie
stone, with a thin skin growing on the one side, very like almost to the
wings of Bees, or great Flies: the timber or substance of the wood is white,
and clad with many coats, like the head of an Onion.

Abietis ramus cumjulis. A branch with Catkins or flowers.


The Place.
The Fur trees grow upon high mountains, in many woods of Germany and
Bohemia, in which it continues always green; it is found also on hills in
Italy, France, and other countries; it comes down oftentimes into the
valleys: they are found likewise in Pruse, Pomerania, Liefeland, Russia, and
especially in Norway, where I have seen the good lie trees in the world of
this kind, growing upon the rockie and craggie mountains, almost without any
earth about them, or any other thing, saving a little moss about the roots,
which thrust them selves here and there into the chinkes and cranies of the
rocks, and therefore are easily cast down with any extreme gale of wind. I
have seen these trees growing in Cheshire, Staffordshire, and Lancashire, where
they grew in great plenty, as is reported, before Noah's flood: but then being
ouerturned and overwhelmed have lien since in the mosses and waterie moorish
grounds very fresh and sound until this day, and so full of a resinous
substance, that they burn like a Torch or Link, and the inhabitants of those
countries do call it Fir-wood, and Firewood unto this day: out of this tree
issues the rosin called Thus, in English, Frank insence: but from the young
Fir trees proceeds an excellent clear and liquid Rosin, in taste like to the
peelings or outward rind of the Pomecitron.

The Time.
The time of the Fir tree agrees with the Pine trees.

The Names.
The tree is called in Latin Abies: in Greek, (...): amongst the Graecians of
our time the same name remains whole and vncorrupt: it is called in high
Dutch, (...) (...), and (...) Thannen baum: in Low Dutch, Wit Dennen boom, or
Abel-boom, and Mast-boom: in Italian, Abete: in Spanish, Abeto: in English,
Firre-tree, Mast-tree, and Deale-tree. The first is called in rench, du Sap, or
Sapin: the other is Suiffe.

The liquid rosin which is taken forth of the bark of the young Firre-trees,
is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Lachryma abietis, and Lachryma (...): in
the shops of Germany, as also of England, Terebinthina Veneta, or Venice
Turpentine: in Italian, Lagrimo: diverse do think that Dioscorides calls it
(...), Oleasa Resina, or oil Rosin; but oil Rosin is the same that Pix
liquida, or Tar is.

Arida Abietum Resina, or dry Rosin of the Fir trees, is rightly called in
Greek (...), and in Latin, (...) Resina: it has a sweet smell, and is
oftentimes used among other perfumes in stead of Frankincense.

The Temperature.
Thebarke, fruit, and gums of the Fir tree, are of the nature of the Pitch tree
and his gums.

The Virtues.
The liquid Rosin of the Fir tree called Turpentine, loses the belly, drives
forth hot choleric

The same taken with Sugar and the powder of Nutmegs, cures the strangurie,
staieth the Gonorrhoea

It is very profitable for all green and fresh wounds, especially the wounds of
the head: for it heals Olibanum and Masticke finely searced, adding thereto a
little Saffron.

CHAP. 44. Of the Larch Tree.
The Description.
1 THe Larch is a tree of no small height, with a body growing straight up: the
bark whereof in the nether part beneath the boughs is thick, rugged, and full
of chinks; which being cut in sunder is red within, and in the other part above
smooth, (...), something whitewithout: it brings forth many boughs divided
into other lesser branches, which be tough and pliable. The leaves are small,
and cut into many iags, growing in (...) thick together like tassels, which
fall away at the approach of Winter: the flowers or rather the first shows of
the cones or fruit be round, and grow out of the tenderest boughs, being at
the length of a brave red purple color: the cones be small, and like almost in
bigness to those of the Cypress tree, but longer, and made up of a multitude
of thin scales like leaves: under which lie small seeds, having a thin (...)
growing on them very like to the wings of Bees and wasps: the substance of the
wood is very hard, of color, especially that in the midst, somewhat red, and
very profitable for works of long continuance.

1 Laricis ramulus. A branch of the Larch tree.
2 Larix cum Agarico suo. The Larch tree with his Agarick.


It is not true that the wood of the Larch tree tree cannot be set on fire, as
Vitruvius reports of the castle made of Larch wood, which (...) besieged, for
it burns in chimneies, and is turned into coals, which are very profitable
for Smithes, as Matthiolus writes.

There is also gathered of the Larch tree a liquid Rosin, very like in color
and substance to the whiter honey, as that of Athens or of Spain, which
notwithstanding issues not forth of it self, but runs out of the stock of
the tree, when it has been bored even to the heart with a great and long auger
and wimble.

Galen writes, that there be after a sort two kinds hereof, in his 4. book
of Medicines, according to the kinds, one like unto Turpentine, the other more
sharper than this, hotter, more liquid of a stronger smell, and in taste
bitterer and hotter: but the later is thought not to be the Rosine of the
Larch, but of the Fir Tree, which Galen because it is after a sort like in
substance, might have taken for that of the Larch tree.

There grows also upon the Larch tree a kind of Mushrum or excrescence, not
such as is upon other trees, but whiter, softer, more loose and spungie than
any other of the Mushrums, and good for medicine, which bears the name of
Agaricus, or Agaricke: I find that Pliny supposes all the Masticke trees, and
those that bear Galls, do bring forth this Agaricum: wherein he was somewhat
deceived, and especially in that he took Glandifera for Conifera, that is,
those trees which bear mast or Acornes, for the Pine apple trees: but among
all the trees that bear Agaricus, the Larch is the chief, and brings most
plenty of Agarick.

The Place.
The Larch tree grows not in Greece, or in Macedon, but chiefly upon the
Alps of Italy, not far from Trent, hard by the rivers Benacus and Padus; and
also in other places of the same mountains: it is likewise found on hills in
Morauia, which in times past was called the country of the Marcomans: Fuchsius
writes, that it grows also in Silesia: others, in Lusatia, in the borders of
Poland: it also grows plentifully in the woods of Gallia Cesalpina.

Pliny has said somewhat hereof, contradicting the writings of others, in his
16 book, 8 chapter, where he says, that specially the Acorne trees of France
do bear Agaricke, and not only the acorn trees, but the Cone trees also; among
which, says he, the Larch tree is the chief that brings forth Agaricke, and
that not only in Gallia, which now is called France, but rather in Lumbardy
and Piemont in Italy, where there be whole woods of Larch trees, although they
be found in some small quantity in other countries.

The best Agarick is that which is whitest, very loose and spungie, which may
easily be broken, and is light, and in the first taste sweet, hard, and well
compact: that which is heavy, blackish, and containing in it little threads as
it were of sinews, is counted pernicious and deadly.

The Time.
Of all the Cone trees only the Larch tree is found to be without leaves in
the Winter: in the Spring grow fresh leaves out of the same knobs, from which
the former did fall. The cones are to be gathered before winter, so soon as
the leaves are gone: but after the scales are loosed and opened, the seeds drop
away: the Rosine must be gathered in the Summer months.

The Names.
This tree is called in Greek (...): in Latin also Larix, in Italian and
Spanish, Larice: in high Dutch, Lerchenbaum: in low Dutch Lorkenboom: in
French, Melese: in English, Larch tree, and of some Larix tree.

The liquid Rosin is named by Galen also (...): the Latins call it Resina
Larigna, or Resina Laricea, Larch Rosin: the Italians, Larga: the Apothecaries,
Terebinthina, or Turpentine, and it is sold and also mixed in medicines in
stead thereof: neither is that a thing newly done; for Galen likewise in his
time reports, that the Druggers sold the Larch Rosine in stead of Turpentine:
and this may be done without error; for Galen himself in one place uses
Larch Rosin for Turpentine; and in another, Turpentine for Larch Rosine, in his
book of medicines according to the kinds.

The Agaricke is also called in Greek (...) and (...): in Latin, Agaricum and
Agaricus, and so likewise in shops: the Italians, Spaniards, and other nations
do imitate the Greek word; and (...) English we call it Agaricke.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The leaves, bark, fruit and kernel, are of temperature like unto the Pine,
but not so strong.

The Larch Rosin is of a moister temperature than all the rest of the Rosines,
and is withal without

All Rosins, says Galen, that have this kind of moisture and clamminesse
joined with them, do as Galen. Moreover, Larch Rosin performs all such things
that the Turpentine Rosin does, unto which, as we have said, it is much like in
temperature, which thing likewise Galen himself affirms.

Agaricke is hot in the first degree and dry in the second, according to the
old writers. It cutteth,

Agaricke cures the yellow iaundice proceeding of obstructions, and is a sure
remedy for cold

The same being inwardly taken and outwardly applied, is good for those that
are bit of venomous

It provoke urine, and brings down the menses: it makes the body well co
loured, drives

From a dram weight, or a dram and a half, to two, it is given at once in
substance or in powder:

But it purges slowly, and does somewhat trouble the stomach; and therefore
it is appointed Salfossilis.

Galen, as Mesue reports, gave it with wine wherein Ginger was infused: some
use to give it

Agaricke is good against the pains and swimming in the head, or the falling
Evil, being taken

It is good against the shortness of breath, called Asthma, the inueterate
cough of the lungs, the

CHAP. 45. Of the Cypress tree.
Cupressus satiua and syluestris. The Garden and wild Cypress tree.


The Description.
THe tame or manured Cypress tree has a long thick and straight body;
whereupon many slender branches do grow, which do not spread abroad like the
branches of other trees, but grow up along the body, yet not touching the
top: they grow after the fashion of a steeple, broad below, and narrow toward
the top: the substance of the wood is hard, sound, well compact, sweet of
smell, and somewhat yellow, almost like the yellow Saunders, but not altogether
so yellow, neither does it rot nor wax old, nor cleaves or choppeth itself.
The leaves are long, round like those of Tamariske, but fuller of substance.
The fruit or nuts do hang upon the boughs, being in manner like to those of
the Larch tree, but yet thicker and more closely compact: which being ripe do
of themselves part in sunder, and then falls the seed, which is shaken out
with the wind: the same is small, flat, very thin, of a swart ill favored
color, which is pleasant to Ants or Pismires, and serves them for food.

Of this diverse make two kinds, the female and the male; the female barren,
and the male fruitful. Theophrastus reports, that diverse affirm the male to
come of the female. The Cypress yields forth a certain liquid Rosin, like in
substance to that of the Larch tree, but in taste marvelous sharp and biting.

The wild Cypress, as Theophrastus writes, is an high tree, and always
green, so like to the other Cypress, as it seems to be the same both in
boughs, body, leaves, and fruit, rather than a certain wild Cypress: the
matter or substance of the wood is sound, of a sweet smell, like that of the
Cedar tree, which rotteth not: there is nothing so crisped as the root, and
therefore they use to make precious and costly works thereof.

I know no difference between the wild and tame Cypress of our Author, but
in the handsomnesse of their growth, which is helped somewhat by art.

The Place.
The tame and manured (...) grows in hot countries, as in Candy, Lycia,
Rhodes, and also in the territory of Cyrene: it is reported to be likewise
found on the hills belonging to Mount Ida, and on the hills called Leuci, that
is to say white, the tops whereof be always covered with snow. Bellonius
denies it to be found upon the tops of these hills, but in the bottoms on the
rough parts and ridges of the hills: it grows likewise in diverse places of
England where it has been planted, as at Sion a place near London, sometime
a house of Nuns: it grows also at Greenwich, and at other places, and
likewise at Hampsted in the garden of Mr. Wade, one of the Clerks of her
Majesty's privy Council.

The wild kind of Cypress tree grows hard by Ammons Temple, and in other
parts of the country of Cyrene upon the tops of mountains, and in extreme
cold countries. Bellonius affirms, that there is found a certain wild
Cypress also in Candy, which is not so high as other Cypress trees, nor
grows sharp toward the top, but is lower, and has his boughs spread flat,
round about in compass: he says the body thereof is also thick: but whether
this be Thya, of which Theophrastus and Pliny make mention, we leave it to
consideration.

The Time.
The tame Cypres tree is always green; the fruit may be gathered thrice a
year, in (...) May, and September, and therefore it is syrnamed Trifera.

The wild Cypres tree is late, and very long before it buddeth.

The Names.
The tame Cypres is called in Greek, (...), or (...): in Latin, (...): in
shops, Cypressus: in Italian, Cypresso: in French and Spanish, Cipres: in
High Dutch, Cipressenbaum: in lowDutch, Cypress boom: in English, Cypres, and
Cypres tree.

The fruit is named in Greek, (...): in Latin, Pilulae Cupressi, Nuces
Cupressi, and Galbuli: in shops, Nuces Cypressi: in English, Cypres nuts or
clogs. This tree in times past was dedicated to Pluto, and was said to be
deadly; whereupon it is thought that the shadow thereof is unfortunate.

The wild Cypres tree is called in Greek, (...) or (...), and (...): from
this does differ (...), being a name not of a plant, but of a mortar in which
dry things are beaten: Thya, as Pliny writes, lib. 13. cap. 16. was well
known to Homer: he shows that this is burned among the sweet smells, which
Circe was much delighted withal, whom he would have to be taken for a
goddess, to their blame that call sweet and odoriferous smells, even all of
them, by that name; because he does especially make mention withal in one
verse, of Cedrus and Thya: the copies have falsely Larix, or Larch tree, in
which it is manifest that he spoke only of trees: the verse is extant in the
fifth book of Odysses, where he mentions, that Mercury by Jupiters
commandment went to Calypsus den, and that he did smell the burnt trees Thya
and Cedrus a great way off.

Theophrastus attributes great honor to this tree, showing that the roofs of
old Temples became famous by reason of that wood, and that the timber thereof,
of which the rafters are made is everlasting, and it is not hurt there by
rotting, cobweb, nor any other infirmity or corruption.

The Temperature.
The fruit and leaves of the Cypres are dry in the third degree, and astringent.

The Virtues.
The Cypres nuts being stamped and drunken in wine, as Dioscorides writes,
stops the laske

They glue and heal up great ulcers in hard bodies: they safely and without
harm soke up and

The leaves and nuts are good to cure the rupture, to take away the Polypus,
being an excrescence

Some do use the same against (...) and eating sores, mixing them with parched
Barley

The leaves of Cypres boiled in sweet wine or Mede, helps the strangurie and
difficulty of making

It is reported, that the smoke of the leaves does drive away gnats, and that
the clogs do so likewise.

The shauings of the wood laid among garments preserves them from the moths:
the rosin kills Our Author in this chapter has put together two chapters of
(...); the one of Cypress, the other of (...), out of (...) and others. Vid.
Pempt. 6. (...). (...). cap. 7 and 8.


CHAP. 46. Of the Tree of Life.
Arhor Vitae. The Tree of Life.


The Description.
THe tree Tree of Life grows to the height of a small tree, the bark being
of a dark reddish color: the timber very hard, the branches spreading
themselves abroad, hanging down toward the ground by reason of the weakness
of the twiggie branches surcharged with very oileous and ponderous leaves,
casting, and spreading themselves like the feathers of a wing, resembling those
of the Sauine tree, but thicker, broader, and more full of gummie or oileous
substance: which being (...) in the hands do yield an aromatic, spicie, or
gummie savor, very pleasant, and comfortable; amongst the leaves come forth
small yellowish flowers, which in my garden fall away without any fruit: but as
it has been reported by those that have seen the same, there follows a
fruit in hot regions, much like unto the fruit of the Cypres tree, but smaller,
compact of little and thin scales closely pact one upon another, which my
self have not yet seen. The branches of this tree laid down in the earth will
very easily take root, even like the Woodbinde or some such plant; which I have
often proved, and thereby have greatly multiplied these trees.

The Place.
This tree grows not wild in England, but it grows in my garden very
plentifully.

The Time.
It endures the cold of our Northern clymat, yet does it lose his gallant
greenes in the winter months: it floureth in my garden about May.

The Names.
Theophrastus and Pliny, as some think, have called this sweet and aromatical
tree Thuia, or Thya: some call it (...) Lycia: the new writers do term it
Arbor vitae: in English, the tree of life, I do not mean that whereof mention
is made, Genesis 3. 22.

The Temperature.
Both the leaves and boughs be hot and dry.

The Virtues.
Among the plants of the Newfound land, this Tree, which Theophrastus calls
Thuia, or (...), is the most principal, and best agreeing unto the nature of
man, as an excellent cordial, and of a very pleasant smell.

CHAP. 47. Of the Yew tree.
Taxus. The Yew tree.


The Description.
IN stead of the description and place mentioned by our Author (which were not
amiss) give me leave to present you with one much more accurate, sent me by
Mr. John Goodyer.

Taxus glandifera bacciferaque. The Yew bearing Acornes and berries.

THe Yew tree that bears Acornes and berries is a great high tree remaining
always green, and has usually an huge trunk or body as big as the Oak,
covered over with a scabbed or scaly bark, often pilling or falling off, and a
young smooth bark appearing underneath; the timber hereof is somewhat red,
near as hard as Box, universally covered next the bark with a thickewhite sap
like that of the Oak, and has many big limbs divided into many small spreading
branches: the leaves be about an inch long, narrow like the leaves of Rosemary,
but smooth, and of a darker green color, growing all along the little twigs
or branches close together, seldom one opposite against another, often having
at the ends of the twigs little branches composed of many leaves like the
former, but shorter and broader, closely compact or joined together: amongst
the leaves are to be seen at all times of the year, small slender buds
somewhat long, but never any flowers; which at the very beginning of the Spring
grow bigger and bigger, till they are of the fashion (...) little Acornes, with
a white kernel within: after they are of this form, then grows up from the
bottomes of the Acornes a reddish matter, making beautiful reddish berries more
long than round, smooth on the out side, very clammie within, and of a sweet
taste, covering all the Acorne, only leaving a little hole at the top, where
the top of the Acorne is to be seen: these (...), or devoured by birds, leave
behind them a littlewhitish husk made of a few scales, appearing like a
little flower, which peradventure may deceive some, taking it to be so indeed:
it seems this tree, if it were not hindered by cold weather, would always have
Acornes and berries on him, for he has always little buds, which so soon as
the Spring yields but a reasonable heat, they grow iuto the form of Acornes:
about the beginning of August, seldom before, you shall find them turned into
ripe berries, and from that time till Christmasse, or a little after, you may
see on him both Acornes and red berries.

Taxus tantum florens. The Yew which only flowers.
The Yew which only bears flowers and no berries, is like the other in
trunk, timber, bark, and leaves; but at the beginning of November, or before,
this tree does begin to be very thick set or fraught on the lower side or
part of the twigs or little branches, with small round buds, very near as
big, and of the color of Radish seed, and do so continue all the Winter, till
about the beginning or middle of February, when they open at the top, sending
forth one small sharp pointall, little longer than the husk, divided into
many parts, or garnished toward the top with many small dusty things like
flowers, of the color of the husks; and if you shall beat or throw stones
into this tree about the end of February, or a good space after, there will
proceed and fly from these flowers an abundance of dustie smoke. These dusty
flowers continue on the trees till about harvest, and then some and some fall
away, and shortly after the round buds come up as aforesaid.

The Place.
These trees are both very common in England: in Hampshire there is good
plenty of them growing wild on the chalkie hills, and in Churchyards where
they have been planted.

The Time.
The time is expressed in their descriptions. Dec. 19. 1621. John Goodyer.

The Names.
This tree is named by Dioscorides, (...): by Theophrastus, (...): but Nicander
in his book of Counterpoysons, (...): Galen does also call it (...): it is
named in Latin Taxus: in High Dutch, Eybenbaum: in Low Dutch, Ibenboom: in
Italian, Tasso: in Spanish, Toxo, and Taxo: in French, If: in English, Ewe, or
Yew tree: in the unlearned shops of Germany, if any of them remain, it is
called Tamariscus; where in times past they were wont not without great error,
to mix the bark hereof in compound medicines, in stead of the Tamariske bark.

The Temperature.
The Yew tree, as Galen reports, is of a venomous quality, and against man's
nature. Dioscorides writes, and generally all that heretofore have dealt in
the faculty of Herbarisme, that the Yew tree is very venomous to be taken
inwardly, and that if any do sleep under the shadow thereof it causes
sickness and oftentimes death. Moreover, they say that the fruit thereof being
eaten is not only dangerous and deadly unto man, but if birds do eat thereof,
it causes them to cast their feathers, and many times to die. All which I dare
boldly affirm is altogether untrue: for when I was young and went to school,
diverse of my schoole-fellowes and likewise my self did eat our fills of the
berries of this tree, and have not only slept under the shadow thereof, but
among the branches also, without any hurt at all, and that not one time, but
many times. Theophrastus says, That (...), animalia, Gaza translates them
Iumenta, or laboring beasts, do die, if they do eat of the leaves; but such
cattle as chew their cud receive no hurt at all thereby.

Nicander in his book of Counterpoisons does reckon the Yew tree among the
venomous plants, setting down also a remedy, and that in these words, as
Gorraeus has translated them.

Parce venenata Taxo, quae surgit in Oeta
Abietibus similis, lethoque absumit acerbo
Ni praeter morempleno cratere meraca
Fundere vina pares, cum primum sentiet aeger
Arctari obstructas fauces animaeque canalem.
Shun the poisonous Yew, the which on Oeta grows,
Like to the Fur, it causes bitter death;
Unless besides thy use pure wine that flows
From emptied cups, thou drink, when as thy breath
Begins to fail, and passage of thy life
Grows strait. --
Pena and Lobel also observed that which our Author here affirms, and daily
experience shows it to be true, that the Yew tree in England is not poisonous:
yet diverse affirm, that in Province in France, and in most hot countries, it
has such a malign quality, that it is not safe to sleep or long to rest
under the shadow thereof.

CHAP. 48. Of the Juniper tree.
The Kinds.
AMong the Juniper trees one is lesser, another greater, being a strange and
foreign tree: one of these brings forth a flower and no fruit; the other
fruit and no flowers.

The Description.
1 THe common Juniper tree grows in some parts of Kent unto the stature and
bigness of a fair great tree, but most commonly it grows very low like unto
ground Furs: this 1 Iuniperus. The Juniper tree.
2 Iuniperus maxima. The great Juniper tree.
3 Iuniperus Alpina minor. Small Juniper of the Alps.
tree has a thin bark or rind, which in hot regions will chop and rend it
self into many (...) or pieces: out of which rifts issues a certain gum or
liquour much like unto Frankincense: the leaves are very small, narrow, and
hard, and somewhat prickly, growing ever green along the branches, thick
together: amongst which come forth round and small berries, green at the
first, but afterward black declining to blewnesse, of a good savor, and sweet
in taste, which do wax somewhat bitter after they be dry and withered.

2 The great Juniper tree comes now and then to the height of the Cypres tree,
with a greater and harder lease, and also with a fruit as big as Olive berries,
as Bellonius writes, of an exceeding fair blew color, and of an excellent
sweet savor.

3 This exceeds not the height of a cubit, but grows low, and as it were
creeps upon the ground, and consists of sundry thicker and shorter branches
than the common kind, tough also, writhen, and hard to break; 3 leaves always
growing at equal distances, as in the common, but yet broader, shorter, and
thicker, neither less pricking than they, of a whitish green color on the
inside, and green without, incompasse the tender branches. Clusius, who gives
us this figure and history, observed (...) the flower, but the fruit is like
that of the (...), but yet somewhat longer; It grows upon the Austrian Alps,
and ripens the fruit in August and September.

The Place.
The common Juniper tree is found in very many places, especially in the South
parts of England.

Bellonius reports, that the greater grows upon mount Taurus: Aloisius
Anguillara writes, that it is found on the sea shores of the Ligurian and
Adriaticke sea and in Illyricum, bringing forth great berries: and others say
that it grows in Prouence of France: it comes up for the most part in rough
places and near to the sea, as Dioscorides notes.

The Time.
The Juniper tree floureth in May; the flower whereof is nothing else but as it
were a little yellowish dust or powder strowed upon the boughs. The fruit is
ripe in September, and is seldom found either winter or Summer without ripe
and unripe berries, and all at one time.

The Names.
The Juniper tree is called in Greek (...): the Apothecaries keep the Latin
name Iuniperus: the Arabians call it Archonas and (...): the Italians, Ginepro:
in high Dutch, (...): in Spanish, Enebro, (...), and Zimbro: the French men and
base Almaines (...): in English, Juniper tree.

The lesser is named in Greek (...): in Latin, Iuniperus. The great Juniper
Tree is called as some think in Greek (...): in Latin (by Lobel) Iuniperus
maximus Illyricus (...) bacca, by reason of the color of the berries, and may
be called in English, blew Juniper.

The berries are called Grana Iuniperi: in Greek, (...), although the Tree it
self also is oftentimes called by the same name (...): it is termed in high
Dutch, Krametbeer, (...): in low Dutch, Genevrebesien: in Spanish, Neurinas: in
English, Juniper berries.

The gum of the Juniper tree is usually called of the Apothecaries Vernix: in
Latin, Lachryma (...): Scrapio names it Sandarax and Sandaracha; but there is
another Sandaracha among the Grecians, being a kind of Orpment, which grows
in the same minerals wherein Orpment does, and this does far differ from
Vernix, or the Juniper gum. Pliny in his 11. book, 7. chapter makes mention
also of another Sandaracha, which is called (...) and Cerinthus: this is the
meat of Bees whilst they be about their work.

The Temperature.
Juniper is hot and dry, and that in the third degree, as Galen teaches; the
berries are also hot, but not altogether so dry: the gum is hot and dry in the
first degree, as the Arabians write.

The Virtues.
The fruit of the Juniper tree does cleanse the liver and kidneys, as Galen
testifies: it also makes

Dioscorides reports, that this being drunk is a remedy against the
infirmity of the chest,

It is most certain that the decoction of these berries is singular good
against an old cough, and

Diverse in Bohemia do take in stead of other drink, the water wherein those
berries have been

This is also drunk against poisons and pestilent fevers, and it is not
unpleasant in the drinking:

The smoke of the leaves and wood drives away serpents, and all infection and
corruption of

The ashes of the burned bark, being applied with water, take away scurffe and
filth of the

The powder of the wood being inwardly taken, is pernicious and deadly, as
Dioscorides vulgar

The fume and smoke of the gum does stay flegmaticke humors that distill out of
the head, and

It kills all manner of worms in the belly, it staieth the menses, and
hemorrhodes: it is commended

There is made of this and of oil of Lineseed, mixed together, a liquor called
Vernish, which

CHAP. 49. Of the prickly Cedar, or Cedar Juniper.
The Kinds:
THe prickly Cedar tree is like to Juniper, and is called the small or little
Cedar, for difference from the great and tall Cedar, which brings Cones; and
of this there are two kinds, as Theophrastus and Pliny do testify, that is to
say, one of Lycia, and another crimson.

The Description.
1 THe Crimson or prickly Cedar seems to be very like to the Juniper tree in
body and boughs, which are writhed, knotty, and parted into very many wings:
the substance of the wood is red, and sweet of smell like that of the Cypress;
the tree is covered over with a rugged bark: the leaves be narrow and sharp
pointed, harder than those of Juniper, sharper and more pricking, and standing
thinner upon the branches: the fruit or berry is sometimes as big as a hasell
nut, or, as Theophrastus says, of the bigness of Myrtle berries, and being
ripe it is of a reddish yellow, or crimson color, sweet of smell, and so
pleasant in taste, as even the contrymen now and than do eat of the same
with bread.

1 Oxycedrus Phoenicia. Crimson prickly Cedar.
3 Oxycedrus Lycia. Rough Lycian Cedar.


2 The other low Cedar which grows in Lycia is not so high as the former,
having likewise a writhed body as big as a man's arm, full of boughs; the
bark is rough, yellowish without, and red within: the leaves stand thicker,
like at the first to those of Juniper, but yet somewhat shorter, and in the
third or fourth year thicker, long and round withal, coming near to the
leaves 3 Cedrus Lycia altera. The other Lycian Cedar.
of the Cypres tree, or of the second Sauine, that is, blunt, and not pricking
at all, which being bruised between the fingers do yield a very pleasant smell:
so does one and the self same plant bring forth below sharp and prickly
leaves, and above thick and blunt ones, as that notable learned Herbarist
Clusius has most diligently observed: the fruit or berry is round like that of
Juniper, of color yellow when it is ripe, inclining to a red, in taste somewhat
bitter, but sweet of smell.

3 This also has Cypresse-like leaves, not unlike those of the last described,
yet somewhat thicker and broader: the fruit is also much larger, being as big as
Hasell nuts, and of a red or skarlet color; whence Lobel calls it Cedrus
Phoenicia altera.

The Place.
The prickely Cedar with the crimson color comes up higher and greater in
certain places of Italy, Spain, and Asia, and in other Countries; for that
which grows on mount Garganus in Apulia is much higher and broader than those
that grow elsewhere, and brings forth greater berries, of the bigness of an
hasell nut, and sweeter, as that most diligent writer Bellonius reports.
Carolus Clusius shows, that the prickely Cedar and the Juniper tree be of so
great a growth in diverse places of Spain, as he has observed, as that the
body of them is as thick as a man.

The Lycian Cedar is found in Prouence of France, not far from Massilia, and
grows in a great part of Greece, in Illyricum and Epirum.

The Time.
Both of them are always green, and in Winter also full of fruit, by reason
that they continually bring forth berries, as when the old do fall new (...) in
their places: in the spring grow up new buds and beginnings of berries: in
Autumn they wax ripe the second year, as do the berries of Juniper.

The Names.
They are called in Latin, Minores, and Humiles Cedri, little and low Cedars,
for difference from the tall and great Cedar which bears Cones.

The former is named in Greek, (...), and (...): in Latin, Oxycedrus, and
Cedrus Punica: in English, Prickly Cedar, and Crimson Cedar: Pliny syrnameth it
Phoenicea, of the crimson color of the fruit: the Spaniards call this also
Enebro, as Clusius testifies, (...) by the same name which they give to the
Juniper: wherein likewise they are thought to imitate diverse of the old
Writers, who have not by names distinguished the Juniper from the Cedar, but
have, as (...) notes, called them Cedros, Cedar trees; yet with an addition,
(...), or prickly Cedar.

The other with the blunt leaf is named by Theophrastus, (...): of Pliny also,
Lycia Cedrus: in Province of France, (...): diverse name this Sabina, and use it
in stead of Sauine, which they want; as the Apothecaries of Epidaurus, and in
diverse cities of Greece, and also in Illyricum and Epirum, as Bellonius
testifies. Some would have it to be (...), Thya; but Thya, according to (...),
is like, not only in body, leaves, and boughs, but in fruit also, to the
Cypress tree, but the fruit of this is nothing like to the Cypress Cones.

The fruit of this Cedar is named by Theophrastus, (...), Cedris:
notwithstanding Cedrus, as he himself does also testify ( (...) names it
Credula) is a certain little shrub which never grows to a tree.

The gum or liquor which issues forth of the prickly Cedar is also called
Vernix, and is sold in stead thereof.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The little Cedar, as Galen writes, is hot and dry in a manner in the third
degree: the matter or

The berries or fruit of the low Cedar have the faculties not so strong, as the
same Author testifies, Lycia are biting, hotter and drier also than those of
Juniper, from which they differ especially in the biting quality, they bring
no nourishment at all, and though a man eat never so few of them he shall
feel gnawings in his stomach, and pain in his head.

The Peasants do feed thereon rather to satisfy their (...), than for any
delight they have in

CHAP. 50. Of Sauin.
The Kinds.
THere be two kinds of Sauin; one like in leaf to Tamariske, the other to the
Cypress tree; whereof the one bears berries, the other is barren.

1 Sabina sterilis. Barren Sauin.
2 Sabina baccifera. Sauin bearing berries.


The Description.
1 THe first Sauin, which is the common kind, and best of all known in this
country, grows in manner of a low shrub or tree: the stem or trunk whereof
is sometimes as big as a man's arm, dividing it self into many branches set
full of small leaves like unto Cypres, or (...), but thicker, and more sharp
or prickely, remaining green Winter and Summer, in smell (...) or very strong,
barren both of flowers and fruit.

3 Sabina baccata altera. The lesser berry-bearing Sauin.


2 The other Sauin is an high tree, as (...) says, as tall as the Almond tree,
and much like to the tame Cypress tree: the body is writhed, thick, and
sometimes of so great a compass as that it cannot be fathomed; the substance
of the wood is red within, as is that of the Juniper, and of the prickely
Cedar: the bark is not very thick, and it is of a yellowish red: the leaves
are of a marvelous gallant green color, like to those of the Cypres tree,
yet thicker or more in number; in taste bitter, of a spicie smell, and like
Rosin: the boughs are broader, and thick set as it were with wings, like
those of the Pitch tree and of the Yew tree: on which grow a great number of
berries, very round like those of the little Cedars, which at the first are
green, but when they be ripe they are of a blackish blew. Out of the root
hereof issues oftentimes a rosin, which being hard is like to that of the
Juniper tree, and does also crumble in the chewing.

3 There is another, which differs from the last described only in that the
leaves are smaller and less pricking than those of the former, as also the
branches lesser: Lobel calls this Sauina baccata altera.

The Place.
Both of them grow upon hills in woods, and in other like vntoiled places, as
in Candy, Mysia, and elsewhere. P. Bellonius reports that he found them both
upon the tops of the mountains Taurus, Amanus, and Olympus.

The first is planted in our English gardens almost every where: the second is
planted both by the seed (...) by the slip: the slips must be set in a ground
that is meanly moist and shadowie, till they have taken root: the shrubs which
grow of these decline toward the one side, retaining still the nature of the
bough: but that Sauin which is planted by the seed grows more upright; this
in continuance of time brings forth seeds, and the other for the most part
remains barren: both these grow in my garden.

The Time.
They both continue always green: the one is found to be laden with ripe
fruit commonly in Winter, but it has fruit at all times; for before the old
berries fall, new are come up.

The Names.
Sauine is called in Greek (...), or (...): in Latin, Sabina.

The first is commonly called in the Apothecaries shops by the name Sauina: of
diverse, (...): the Italians and Spaniards keep the Latin name: it is called
in High Dutch, Siben baum: in Low Dutch, Sauel boom: in French, Sauenier: in
English, common Sauine, or garden Sauine.

Some name the other Cupressus Cretica, or Cypres of Candy, as Pliny says,
lib. 12. cap. 17. making mention of a tree called Bruta: some there are that
take this to be altera Sabina, or the second (...), and to be read Bruta for
(...), Brathu, by altering of the vowels. For it is described by Plin. li. 12.
cap. 17. to be like the Cypress tree, in these words; They seek in the
mountain Elimaei the tree Bruta, being like to the broad Cypres tree, having
white boughs, yielding a sweet smell when it is set on fire; whereof mention
is made with a miracle, in the stories of Claudius Caesar. It is reported that
the Parthians do use the leaves in drinks; that the smell is very like to that
of the Cypres tree, and that the smoke thereof is a remedy against other
woods. It grows beyond Pasitigris, near unto the town Sittaca, on mount
Zagrus. Thus far Pliny.

The mountains Elimaei are described by Strabo in the country of the
Assyrians, next after the mountain Sagrus above the Babylonians; by Ptolomaeus
not far from the Persian gulf: therefore it is hard to say that Bruta is
Sabina (...), or the second Sauine, seeing that so great a distance of the
place may undoubtedly cause a difference, and that it is not largely but
briefly described. It (...) that Thya mentioned by Theophrastus is more like
unto Sauine: but yet forasmuch as Thya is like in (...) to the Cypres tree, and
not to the fruit or berries of the little Cedars, it is also very manifest,
that the second Sauine is not Thya, neither Vitae arbor, so called of the later
Herbarists: it is likewise named by Lobel, Sabina genuina baccifera,
atrocaerulea, that is, the true Sauine that bears berries of a blackish blew
color.

The Temperature.
The leaves of Sauine, which are most used in medicine, are hot and dry in the
third degree, and of subtle parts, as Galen says.

The Virtues.
The leaves of Sauin boiled in Wine and drunk provoke urine, bring down the
menses with

The leaves stamped with honey and applied, cure ulcers, stay spreading and
creeping ulcers,

The leaves boiled in oil Olive, and kept therein, kill the worms in
children, if you anoint

The leaves dried and beat into fine powder, and strewed upon those kinds of
excrescences sub praeputio, called Caroles, and such like, gotten by dealing
with unclean women, take them away perfectly, curing and healing them: but if
they be inueterate and old, and have been much tampered withal, it shall be
necessary to add unto the same a small quantity of Auripigmentum in fine
powder, and use it with discretion, because the force of the medicine is
greatly increased thereby and made more corrosiue.

CHAP. 51. Of Tamariske.
1 Tamariscus Narbonensis. French Tamariske.
2 Tamariscus Germanica. Germane Tamariske.


The Description.
1 THe first kind of Tamariske grows like a small hedge tree, covered with a
reddish bark, having many branches set and bedeckt with leaves, much like unto
Heath: among which come forth small mossie white flowers declining to purple,
which turn into a pappous or downie seed, that flies away with the wind, as
that of Willow does: the root is wooddie as the roots of other shrubs be, and
grows diverse ways.

2 The Germane Tamariske has many wooddie branches or shoots rising from the
root, with a white bark, having his leaves thicker and grosser than the former,
and not so finely iagged or cut: The flowers are reddish, and larger than the
former, growing not upon foot-stalkes, many thick clustering together, as those
of the former, but each a (...) distance from another on the tops of the
branches spike fashion, and begin to flower below: which do turn into seed,
that is likewise carried away with the wind.

The Place.
Tamariske grows by running streams, and many times by rivers that break
forth, and not seldom about fenny grounds, commonly in a grauelly soil, for
it best prospers in moist and stony places: it is sound in Germany,
Vindelicia, Italy, Spain, and also in Greece.

The Tamarisks do also grow in Egypt and Syria, as Dioscorides writes, and
likewise in Tylus an Island in Arabia, as Theophrastus notes: the wood whereof,
says he, is not weak as with us in Greece, but strong like (...), or timber,
or any other strong thing: this Tamariske Dioscorides does call (...) that is
to say, tame, or planted; and says that it brings forth fruit very like to
Galls, in taste rough and binding.

Petrus Bellonius in his second book of singularities reports, that he saw
in Egypt very high Tamarisks and great like other trees, and that sometimes in
moist places by rivers sides and many times also in dry and grauelly grounds
where no other trees did grow, which now and then did bear hanging on the
boughs such a multitude of Galls, that the inhabitants call Chermasel, as
being over laden, they were ready to break. Both these grow and prosper well
in gardens with us here in England.

The Time.
These trees or shrubs flower in May, and in the later end of August, their
seed is carried away with the wind.

The Names.
They are called in Greek (...): and in Latin also Myrica, and Tamarix: in
shops, Tamariscus: of Octautus Horatianus, Murica: Dioscorides makes that
which grows in Greece and Italy to be (...) orwilde Tamariske: it is named in
high Dutch Tamarischen holk, and Pork: in low Dutch, (...), Tamarlschboome: in
Italian, Tamarigio: in Spanish, Tamarguira, and Tamariz: in French, Tamaris: in
English, Tamariske.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Tamariske has a clensing and cutting faculty with a manifest drying; it is
also somewhat Galen writes.

Moreover Dioscorides teaches, that the decoction of the leaves made with
wine, does waste the

The ashes of burnt Tamariske has a drying faculty, and greatly scouring
withal, and a little

The flowers and downie seed of the greater Tamariske does greatly bind,
insomuch as it comes Galla Omphacitis, but that the roughness of taste is
more evident in the Gall; the which flowers are of an unequal temperature, for
there is joined to the nature thereof a great thinness of parts, and clensing
faculty, which the Gall has not as Galen writes.

These flowers we fitly use (says Dioscor.) in stead of Gall, in medicines for
the eyes and mouth:

It is good to stanch blood, and to stay the laske and women's whites, it
helps the yellow iaundice, Phalangium; the bark serves for the same
purposes.

The leaves and wood of Tamariske have great power and virtue against the
hardness and stopping

CHAP. 52. Of Heath, Hather, or Linge.
The Kinds.
THere be diverse sorts of Heath, some greater, some lesser; some with broad
leaves, and some narrower: some bringing forth berries, and others nothing but
flowers.

The Description.
1 THe common Heath is a low plant, but yet wooddie and shrubby, scarce a cubit
high: it brings forth many branches, whereupon do grow sundry little leaves
somewhat hard and rough, very like to those of Tamariske, or the Cypress tree:
the flowers are orderly placed along the branches, small, soft, and of a
light red color tending to purple: the root is also wooddie, and creeps
under the upper crust of the earth: and this is the Heath which the Ancients
took to be the right and true Heath.

1 Erica vulgaris, sive Pumila. Common or dwarf Heath.
Erica vulgaris hirsuta. Rough leaued Heath.


There is another Heath which differs not from the precedent, saving that
this plant brings forth flowers as white as snow, wherein consists the
difference: wherefore we may call it Erica pumila alba, Dwarf Heath with white
flowers.

2 The great Heath, (which Carolus Clusius at his being in England found in the
barren grounds about Windsor, which in his Spanish travels he makes the first
kind): grows to the height of two cubits, seldom higher, full of branches,
covered with a blackish bark: whereon are set in very good order by couples,
small, rough, square leaves finer than those of Tamariske or Cypress. The
flowers enclose the little twiggie branches round about at certain distances,
from the lower part to the top fashioned like little bottles, consisting of
four parts, of a shining purple color, very beautiful to behold, and the
rather to be esteemed because it floureth twice in the year: the root is
likewise wooddie.

The (...) which our Author gave in the ninth place by the name of Erica (...)
(...) I take to be the (...) (...), 2. of (...) (which you (...) (...) (...)
his (...) place) and in stead thereof I have given you our ordinary
berry-bearing Heath.
3 Erica mayor flore albo (...). The great Heath with white flowers.
4 Erica mayor flore purpureo. Great Heath with purple flowers.
The (...) which our Author gave in the ninth place by the name of Erica (...)
(...) I take to be the (...) (...), 2. of (...) (which you (...) (...) (...)
his (...) place) and in stead thereof I have given you our ordinary
berry-bearing Heath.
5 Erica cruciata. Crossed Heath.
6 Erica Pyramidalis. Steeple Heath.


3 This, says Clusius, which is the largest that I have seen, sometimes
excceeds the height of a man, very shrubby, having a hard and blackish red
wood: the leaves are small and short, growing about the branches by foures, of
a very a stringent taste: it has plentiful store of flowers growing all
along the branches, so that sometimes the larger branches have flowers for a
foot in length: this flower is hollow and longish, well smelling, white and
beautiful. It grows between Lisbone and the University of Conimbrica in
Portugal where it flowers in November, December, and January.

The (...) which our Author gave in the ninth place by the name of Erica (...)
(...) I take to be the (...) (...), 2. of (...) (which you (...) (...) (...)
his (...) place) and in stead thereof I have given you our ordinary
berry-bearing Heath.
4 Of this kind there is another sort with whitish purple flowers, more
frequently found than the other sort, which flowers are somewhat greater than
the former, but in form like, and flouring at the same time. The leaves also
are hairy, and grow commonly by foures: the hollow flowers grow clustering
together at the very tops of the branches, and are to be found in July and
August; it grows on diverse heathy places of this kingdom.

5 Crossed Heath grows to the height of a cubit and a half, full of
branches, commonly lying along upon the ground, of a swart dark color:
whereon do grow small leaves, set at certain spaces by two upon one side, and
two on the other, opposite, one answering another, even as do the leaves of
Crosse-wort. The flowers in like manner stand along the branches Cross
fashion, of a dark ouerworne greenish color. The root is likewise woody, as
is all the rest of the plant.

6 This Steeple Heath has likewise many woody branches, garnished with small
leaves which easily fall off from the dried stalks; among which come forth
diverse little mossie greenish flowers of small moment. The whole bush for the
most part grows round together like a little cock of hay, broad at the lower
part, and sharp above like a Pyramide or steeple, whereof it took his name.

7 Erica tenuifolia. Small leafed Heath.
8 Erica tenuifolia caliculata. Challice Heath.


7 This small or thin leafed Heath is also a low and base shrub, having many
small and slender shoots coming from the root, of a reddish brown color;
whereupon do grow very many small leaves, not unlike to them of common Time,
but much smaller and tenderer: the flowers grow in tufts at certain spaces, of
a purple color. The root is long and of a wooddie substance. The branches of
this are commonly whitish, the leaves very green: the flowers are smallest at
both ends and biggest in the midst, hollow, and of a fair purple color,
which does not easily decay: it flowers most part of Summer, and grows in many
Heathie grounds.

8 Challice Heath has also many woody branches growing from the roots,
slender, of a reddish brown color, a foot and a half high, garnished with
very little leaves, lesser than those of Time: the flowers grow on the tops and
upper parts of the branches, and be in number, five, six or more, hanging
downwards, in fashion long, hollow within like a little tunnell or open cup or
challice, of a light purplish color: the root creeps and puts forth in
diverse places new springs or shoots.

9 The Heath that brings forth berries has many weak and slender branches
of a reddish color, which trailing upon the ground do take hold (...) in
sundry places, whereby it mightily increases: the leaves are somewhat broad,
of a thick and fleshie substance, in taste something drying at the first, but
afterward somewhat sharp and biting the tongue: among which come forth small
flowers of an herbie color: which being vaded there succeed small round
berries, that at the first are green, and afterward black, being as big as
those of Juniper; wherein is contained purple juice like that of the Mulberry:
within those berries are contained also small three cornered grains: the root
is hard, and of a woody substance. I found this growing in great plenty in
Yorkshire on the tops of the hills by Gisbrough, between it and Rosemary-topin
(a round hill so called) and some of the people thereabouts told me they called
the fruit Crake berries. This is the same that Matthiolus calls Erica
Baccifera: and it is the Erica Coris folio 11. of Clusius..

9 Erica baccifera procumbens. Heath bearing Berries.
10 Erica baccifera tenuifolia. Small leafed Heath with Berries.


10 This which our Author figured as you seee in the tenth place (putting the
description of the former thereto) has brittle branches growing some cubit
high, covered with a bark blacker than the rest: the leaves are like those of
the former, but blacker and smaller, growing about the stalks by threes, of a
hottish taste with some astriction. In September and October it carries a fruit
on the tops of the branches different from the rest, for it is very beautiful,
white, transparent, resembling dusky and uneven pearls in form and color,
succulent also, and of an acide taste, commonly containing three little seeds
in each berry: in November this fruit becomes dry, and falls away of it self.
Clusius only observed this in Portugal, and at the first sight a far off
took the white berries to have been grains of Manna. He calls it Erica Coris
folio. 10.

11 I remember (says Dodonaeus) that I observed another Heath which grew low;
yet sent forth 11 Erica pumila, 3. Dod. Dodonaeus his Dwarf Heath.
12 Erica ternis per intervalla ramis. Heath with three branches at a joint.
13 Erica perigrina Lobelij. Lobels strange Heath.
14 Erica Coris folio 7. Clusij: Creeping Dutch Heath.
15 Erica Coris folio. 9. Clusij. Small Austrian Heath.
many woody and twiggy branches, having upon them little narrow and longish
leaves; on these stalks spike fashion to the tops of them, yet but on one
side, grow elegant read flowers, pointed with black. This grows in that
tract of Germany which leads from Bohemia to Noremberg on dry and untilled
places, and near woods. It flowers in April.

12 This shrubby Heath is commonly some cubit high, having slender branches
which come out of the maine stemmes commonly three together; and the leaves
also grow in the same order; the tops of the branches are adorned with many
flowers of a dark purple color, hollow, round, biggest below, and standing
upon long foot stalks. Clusius found this growing in the untilled places of
Portingale above Lisbone, where it floured in December; he calls it Erica (...)
folio, 5.

13 Besides all these (says Lobel, having first treated of diverse plants of
this kind) there is a certain rarer species growing like the rest after the
manner of a shrub in pots, in the Garden of Mr. John (...): the leaf is long,
and the purple flowers, which as far as I remember consisted of four little
leaves apiece, grow on the tops of the branches. I know not whence it was
brought, and therefore for (...) rarity I call it Erica peregrina, that is,
Strange, or Foreign Heath.

14 This has many round blackish purple branches some foot or cubit high,
lying often times along upon the ground: these are beset with many narrow little
leaves, almost like those of the third described, yet somewhat longer, commonly
growing four, yet sometimes five together, of an astringent taste; the little
flowers grow on the top of the branches, longish, hollow, and of a light purple
color, coming out of four little leaves almost of the same color; when
these are ripe and dried they contain a blackish and small seed; the root is
hard, woody, and runs diverse ways; the weak branches also that lie upon
the ground now and then take root again. Clusius found this growing
plentifully in diverse mountanous places of Germany where it floured in June,
and July.

15 The weak stalks of this are some foot high, which are set with many small
green leaves growing commonly together by threes; the tops of the branches are
decked with little hollow and longish flowers divided at their ends into four
parts, of a flesh color, together (...) the four little leaves out of which
they grow, having eight blackish little threads in them, with a purplish
pointall in the middle. The seed is black and small; the root woody as in
other plants of this kind. Clusius found this in some mountanous woods of
Austria, where it floured in April and May.

The Place.
Heath grows upon dry mountains which are hungry and barren, as upon
Hampsteed Heath near London, where all the sorts do grow, except that with the
white flowers, and that which bears berries. There are not above three or
four sorts that I could ever observe to grow there.

Heath with the white flowers grows upon the downs near unto Grauesend.

Heath which bears berries grows in the North parts of England, namely, at
a place called Crosby Rauenswaith, and in Crag close also in the same country:
from whence I have received the red berries by the gift of a learned Gentleman
called Mr. James Thwaites.

The Time.
These kinds or sorts of Heath do for the most part (...) all the Summer, even
until the last of September.

The Names.
Heath is called in Greek, (...): in Latin also Erica: diverse do falsely name
it Myrica: in high and low Dutch, (...): in Italian, Erica: in Spanish, Breso
Quirro: in French, Bruyre: in English, Heath, Hather, and Linge.

The Temperature.
Heath has, as Galen says, a digesting faculty, consuming by vapors: the
flowers and leaves are to be used.

The Virtues..
The tender tops and flowers, says Dioscorides, are good to be laid upon the
bitings and stingings

The bark and leaves of Heath may be used for, and in the same causes that
Tamariske is used.

CHAP. 53. Of Heath of Ierico.
1 Rosa Hiericontea mayor. The Heath Rose of Ierico.


The Description.
1 THis kind of Heath which of the later writers has been called by the name
Rosa Hiericontea; the coiner spoiled the name in the mint, for of all plants
that have bin written of, there is not any more unlike unto the Rose, or any
kind thereof than this plant: what moved them thereto I know not: but thus
much of my own knowledge, it has neither shape, nature, nor faculty agreeing
with any Rose; the which doubtless is a kind of Heath, as the barren soil,
and that among Heath, does evidently show, as also the Heathie matter wherewith
the whole plant is possessed, agreeing with the kinds of Heath in very notable
points. It rises up out of the ground, of the height of four inches, or an
hand breadth, compact or made of sundry hard sticks, (which are the stalks)
clasping or shutting it self together into a round form, intricately weauing
it self one stick overthwart another, like a little net: upon which woody
sticks do grow leaus not unlike to those of the Olive tree, which makes the
whole plant of a round form, and hollow within; among the leaves on the inside
grow small mossie flowers, of a whitish herbie color, which

2 Rosa Hiericontea siccata. The Heath Rose of Ierico dried.
turn into little seed, like the seed of Rocket, but lesser: the whole plant is
of the substance of heath, and wooddie.

2 The second figure sets forth the dried plant, as it is brought unto us
from beyond the seas; which being set into a dish of warm water, for half an
hour, opens it self in form, as when it did grow, and taken forth until
it be dry, returns shut up again as before.

The Place.
It grows in the barren grounds of France, and other hot regions, among the
Heath and such like plants: it is a stranger in England, yet dried we have them
in great plenty. I have not read nor heard that this grows wild in France; but
Bellonius says it grows in Arabia deserta: (...) says it easily grew and
flourished many years in his garden at Basil.

The Time.
The seed being sown in our cold climate, is sown in April; it perishes
when it is sprung up, and brings neither flowers nor seed.

The Names.
This kind of Heath is called Rosa (...), or de Hiericho, the Rose of Ierico:
of some, the Rose of Jerusalem, and also Rosa (...): in English, the Heath Rose.

The Temperature and Virtues.
There is not any of the ancient nor later writers that have set down any
certainty of this plant

CHAP. 54. Of the Chaste Tree.
1 Vitex, sive Agnus (...). The Chaste tree.
2 Vitex latiore (...) folio. Chaste tree with cut leaves.


The Description.
1 VItex, or the Chaste tree, grows after the manner of a bushie shrub or
hedge tree, having many twiggie branches, very pliant and easy to be bent
without breaking, like to the willow: the leaves are for the most part divided
into five or seven sections or divisions, much like the leaves of Hemp, whereof
each part is long and narrow, very like unto the willow leaf, but smaller: the
flowers do grow at the uppermost parts of the branches, like unto spikie ears,
clustering together about the branches, of a light purple or blew color, and
very sweet smell: the fruit is small and round, like unto the grains or corns
of pepper.

2 Lobel mentions another variety hereof that differs from the former only in
that it has broader leaves, and these also snipt about the edges.

The Place.
Vitex grows naturally in Italy, and other hot regions, by water courses and
running streams: I have it growing in my garden.

The Time.
Vitex begins to recover his last leaves in May, and the flowers come forth
in August.

The Names.
The Grecians call this shrub (...), and (...): Agnos (i.) (...), Chaste:
because, says Pliny in his 24. book, 9. Chapter, the Athenian Matrons in
their feast called Thesmophoria dedicated to the honor of Ceres, desirous to
keep themselves chaste, do lay the leaves in their beds under them: the
Latins name it Vitex, and of diverse it is termed, as we find among the
bastard and counterfeit names, (...): in Latin, Salix marina, or Salix
Amerina, and Piper Agreste: in high Dutch, Schaffmulle, (...): in low Dutch,
and also of the Apothecaries, Agnus Castus: the Italians, Vitice, Agno Casto:
in Spanish, Gattile casto: in English, Chaste tree, Hemp tree, and of diverse
Agnus castus.

The name Agnus Castus comes by confounding the Greek name Agnos with Castus,
the Latin interpretation thereof.

The Temperature.
The leaves and fruit of Agnus castus are hot and dry in the third degree:
they are of very thin parts, and waste or consume wind.

The Virtues.
Agnus Castus is a singular medicine and remedy for such as would willingly
live chaste, for it Castus; that is to say, chaste, clean, and pure.

The seed of Agnus Castus drunken, drives away, and dissolueth all windiness
of the stomach,

The leaves stamped with butter, dissolve and assuage the swellings of the
genitories and cods,

The decoction of the herb and seed is good against pain and inflammations
about the matrix,

The leaves used in a fume, and also strowed, drive away serpents; and being
laid on do cure

The seed laid on with water does heal the clifts or rifts of the fundament;
with the leaves, it is

It is reported that if such as journey or travel do carry with them a branch
or rod of Agnus Castus Diosc.

CHAP. 55. Of the Willow Tree.
The Description.
1 THe common Willow is an high tree, with a body of a mean thickness, and
rises up as high as other trees do if it be not topped in the beginning,
soon after it is planted; the bark thereof is smooth, tough, and flexible:
the wood is white, tough, and hard to be broken: the leaves are long, lesser
and narrower than those of the Peach tree, somewhat green on the upper side
and slipperie, and on the nether side softer and whiter: the boughs be covered
either with a purple, or else with a white bark: the catkins which grow on the
tops of the branches come first of all forth, being long and mossie, and
quickly turn into white and soft down, that is carried away with the wind.

1 Salix. The common Willow.
2 Salix aquatica. The Oziar or water Willow.


2 The lesser brings forth of the head, which stands somewhat out, slender
wands or twigs, with a reddish or green bark, good to make baskets and such
like works of: it is planted by the twigs or rods being thrust into the earth,
the upper part whereof when they are grown up, is cut off, so that which is
called the head increases under them, from whence the slender twigs do grow,
which being oftentimes cut, the head waxes greater: many times also the long
rods or wands of the higher Withy trees be lopped off and thrust into the
ground for plants, but deeper, and above man's height: of which do grow great
rods, profitable for many things, and commonly for bands, wherewith tubs and
casks are bound.

3 The Sallow tree or Goats Willow, grows to a tree of a mean bigness: the
trunk or body is soft and hollow timber, covered with a whitish rough bark:
the branches are set with leaves somewhat rough, green above, and hoarie
underneath: among which come forth round catkins, or aglets that turn into
down, which is carried away with the wind.

4 This other Sallow tree differs not from the precedent, but in this one
point, that is to say, the leaves are greater and longer, and every part of the
tree larger, wherein is the difference. Both those last described have little
roundish leaves like little ears growing at the bottoms of the footstalkes of
the bigger leaves, whereby they may be distinguished from all other Plants of
this kind.

5 The Rose Willow grows up likewise to the height and bigness of a shrubby
tree; the body whereof is covered with a scabbed rough bark: the branches are
many, whereupon do grow very many twigs of a reddish color, garnished with
small long leaves, somewhat whitish: amongst which come forth little flowers,
or rather a multiplication of leaves, joined together in form of a 3 Salix
Caprearotundi folia. The Goat round leafed Willow.
4 Salix Caprea latifolia. The Goat broad leafed Sallow.
5 Salix Rosea Anglica. The English Rose Willow.
Rose, of a greenish white color, which do not only make a gallant show, but
also yield a most cooling air in the heat of Summer, being set up in houses,
for the decking of the same.

6 The low or base Willow grows but low, and leans weakly upon the ground,
having many small and narrow leaves, set upon limber and pliant branches, of a
dark or blackish green color: amongst which comeforth long slender stems
full of mossie flowers, which turn into a light downie substance that flies
away with the wind.

7 The dwarf Willow has very small and slender branches, seldom times above
a foot, but never a cubit high, covered with a duskish bark, with very little
and narrow leaves, of a green color above, and on the upper side, but
underneath of a hory or ouerworne greenish color, in bigness and fashion of
the leaves of garden Flax: among which come forth little duskish flowers, which
do turn into down that is carried away with the wind: the root is small and
threddy, of the bigness of a finger, and of a blackish color.

8 There is another kind of willow like to the former, and differs from it
in that, the leaves of this kind are smaller and narrower, as big as the
leaves of Myrtle, having small knobbie flowers of a duskish color, 6 Salix
humilis. The low Willow.
7 Chamaeitea, sieve Salix pumila. Thedwarfe Willow.
8 Salix humilis repens. Creeping dwarf Willow.
which turn into down that flies away with the wind: the root is small and
limber, not growing deep, but running along upon the upper crust of the earth.

The Place.
These Willowes grow in diverse places of England: the Rose-Willow grows
plentifully in Cambridge shire, by the rivers and ditches there in Cambridge
town they grow abundantly about the places called Paradise and Hell-mouth, in
the way from Cambridge to Grandchester: I found the dwarf Willowes growing
near to a (...) or marish ground at the further end of Hampsted heath upon the
declining of the hill, in the ditch that incloseth a small Cottage there, not
half a furlong from the said house or cottage.

The Time.
The willowes do flower at the beginning of the Spring.

The Names.
The Willow tree is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Salix: in High Dutch,
(...): in low-Durch, (...): in Italian, (...), Salcio: in French, Saux: in
Spanish, Salgueiro, Salzer, and Sauz: in English, Sallow, Withie, and Willow.

The greater is called in Latin Salix perticalis, common Withy, Willow, and
Sallow, especially that which being often lopped sends out from one head many
boughs: the kind hereof with the red bark is called of Theophrastus, black
Withy; and the other, white: Pliny calls the black Graeca, or Greek Withie
(the red, being the Greek Withy, says he, is easy to be cleft) and the
whiter, (...).

Theophrastus writes, that the Arcadians do call the lesser (...) not (...)
Pliny also names this Helice: both of them do make this to be Salicis tertia
species, the third kind of Sallow: the same is likewise called in Latin,
Salix pumila, Salix viminalis, Gallica Salix; and by Columella, Sabina, which
he says that many do term Amerina: in High Dutch, (...) (...): in Low Dutch,
(...): in English, Osier, small Withy, Twig Withy: Petrus Crescentius names it
Vincus.

The Temperature.
The leaves, flowers, seed, and bark of Willowes are cold and dry in the
second degree, and astringent.

The Virtues.
The leaves and bark of Withy or Willowes do stay the spitting of blood, and
all other fluxes

The green boughs with the leaves may very well be brought into chambers and
set about the

The bark has like virtues: Dioscorides writes, that this being burnt to
ashes, and steeped in Galen, do slit the bark whilst the Withy is in
flouring, and gather a certain juice, with which they use to take away things
that hinder the sight, and this is when they are constrained to use a clensing
medicine of thin and subtle parts.

CHAP. 56. Of the Olive Tree.
1 Oleasativa. The manured Olive tree.
2 Oleasyluestris. The wild Olive tree.


The Description.
1 THe tame or manured Olive tree grows high and great with many branches,
full of long narrow leaves not much unlike the leaves of Willowes, but narrower
and smaller: the flowers be white and very small, growing upon clusters or
bunches: the fruit is long and round, wherein is an hard stone: from which
fruit is pressed that liquor which we call oil Olive.

2 The wild Olive is like unto the tame or garden Olive tree, saving that the
leaves are something smaller: among which sometimes do grow many prickely
thorns: the fruit hereof is lesser than of the sormer, and more in number,
which do seldom come to maturitie or ripenes in so much that the oil which is
made of those berries continues ever green, and is called Oil Omphacine, or
oil of unripe Olives.

The Place.
Both the tame and the wild Olive trees grow in very many places of Italy,
France, and Spain, and also in the Islands adjoining: they are reported to
love the sea coasts; for most do think, as Columella writes, that above sixty
miles from the sea they either die, or else bring forth no fruit: but the best,
and they that do yield the most pleasant Oil are those that grow in the Island
called Candy.

The Time.
All the Olive trees flower in the month of June: the fruit is gathered in
November or December: when they be a little dried and begin to wrinckle they
are put into the press, and out of them is sqeezed oil, with water added in
the pressing: the Olives which are to be preserved in salt and pickle must be
gathered before they be ripe, and whilst they are green.

The Names.
The tame or garden Olive tree is called in Greek (...), and (...): in Latin,
Oleasatiua, and Vrbana: in High Dutch, (...): in Low Dutch, (...): in Italian,
Oliuo domestico: in French, Oliuier: in Spanish, Oliuo, and Oliuera: in
English, Olive tree.

The berry is called Oliua: in Greek also (...): in Spanish, Azcytuna: in
French, Dutch, and English, Olive.

Olives preserved in brine or pickle are called Colymbades.

Thewilde Olive tree is named in Greek, (...): in Latin, Oleasyluestris,
Oleaster, Cotinus, Olea Aethiopica: in Dutch, (...) (...): in Italian,
Oliuosaluatico: in Spanish, Azcbuche, Azambulheyro: in French, Oliuier sauuage:
in English, wild Olive tree.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The Olives which be so ripe as that either they fall off themselves, or be
ready to fall, which are

The unripe olives are dry and binding.

Those that are preserved in pickle, called Colymbades, do dry up the overmuch
moisture of the

The branches, leaves, and tender buds of the Olive tree do cool, dry, and
bind, and especially

The same do stay S. Anthonies fire, the shingles, epinyctides, night wheales,
carbuncles, and eating

The juice and decoction also are of the same effect: moreover, the juice does
stay all manner of

The juice is pressed forth of the stamped leaves, with wine added thereto
(which is better) or

The sweat or oil which issues forth of the wood whilst it is in burning
heals tetters, scurfs

The same which is pressed forth of the unripe Olives is as cold as it is
binding.

The old oil which is made of sweet and ripe Olives, being kept long, does
withal become hotter,

The oil of ripe Olives mollifieth and asswageth pain, dissolueth tumors or
swellings, is good Hypericon, Cammomill, Dill, Lillies, Roses, and many others,
which do sortifie and increase his virtues.

The oil of unripe Olives, called Omphacinum Oleum, does stay, repress, and
drive away the beginning

CHAP. 57. Of Priuet or Prim Print.
Ligustrum. Priuet, or Prim Print.


The Description.
PRiuet is a shrub growing like a hedge tree, the branches and twigs wherofbe
straight, and covered with soft glistring leaves of a deep green color, like
those of Peruincle, but yet longer, greater also than the leaves of the Olive
tree: the flowers be white, sweet of smell, very little, growing in clusters;
which being vaded there succeed clusters of berries, at the first green, and
when they be ripe black like a little cluster of grapes, which yield a purple
juice: the root grows every way aslope.

The Place.
The common Priuet grows naturally in enery wood, and in the hedge rows of
our London gardens: it is not found in the country of Polonia and other parts
adjacent.

The Time.
It sloureth in the end of May, or in June: the berries are ripe in Autumn or
about Winter, which now and then continue all the Winter long; but in the mean
time the leaves fall away, and in the Spring new come up in their places.

The Names.
It is called in Latin, Ligustrum: in Italian at this day, Guistrico, by a
corrupt word drawn from Ligustrum: it is the Grecians (...) and in no wise
(...): for Cyprus is a shrub that grows naturally in the East, and Priuet in
the West. They be very like one unto another, as the descriptions do declare,
but yet in this (...) differ, as witnesses Bellonius, because the leaves of
Priuet do fall away in winter, and the leaves of Cyprus are always green:
moreover, the leaves of Cyprus do make the hair red, as (...) says, and (as
Bellonius reports) do give a yellow color: but the leaves of Priuet have no
use at all in dying. And therefore Pliny, lib. 24. cap. 10. was deceived, in
that he judged Priuet to be the self same tree which Cyprus is in the East:
which thing notwithstanding he did not write as he himself thought, but as
other men suppose; for, lib. 12. cap. 14. he writes thus: Some (says he)
affirm this, viz. Cyprus, to be that tree which is called in Italy, Ligustrum;
and that (...) or Priuet is that plant which the Grecians call (...); the
description does declare.

Phillyria, says Dioscorides, is a tree like in bigness to Cyprus, with
leaves blacker and broader than those of the Olive tree: it has fruit like to
that of the Mastick tree, black, something sweet, standing in clusters, and
such a tree for all the world is Priuet, as we have before declared.

Serapio the Arabian, cap. 44. does call Priuet Mahaleb. There is also another
Mahaleh, which is a grain or seed of which Auicen makes mention, cap. 478.
that it does by his warm and comfortable heat dissolve and assuage pain.
Serapio seems to entreat of them both, and to contain diverse of the (...)
under the title of one chapter: it is named in High Dutch, (...), (...), (...)
(...): in Low Dutch, (...), (...): in French, Troesne: in English, Priuet,
Primprint, and Print.

Some there be that would have the berries to be called Vaccinia, and Vaccinium
to be that of which Vitruvius has made mention in his seventh book of
Architecture or the art of building, chap. 14. of purple colors: after the
same manner, says he, they temper Vaccinium, and (...) milk unto it do make a
gallant purple: in such brevity of the old writers what can be certainly
determined.

The Temperature.
The leaves and fruit of Priuet are cold, dry, and astringent.

The Virtues.
The leaves of Priuet do cure the swellings, apostumations, and ulcers of the
mouth or throat,

CHAP. 58. Of Mocke-Priuet.
1 Phillyrea angustifolia. Narrow leaued Mock-Priuet.
2 Phillyrea latiore folio. The broader leaued Mock-Priuet.


The Description.
1 CYprus is a kind of Priuet, and is called Phillyrea, which name all the
sorts or kinds thereof do retain, though for distinctions sake they pass
under sundry titles. This plant grows like an hedge tree, sometimes as big as
a Pomegranat tree, beset with slender twiggy boughs which are garnished with
leaves growing by couples, very like the leaves of the Olive tree, but broader,
softer, and of a green color: from the bosoms of these leaves come forth
great bunches of small white flowers, of a pleasant sweet smell: which being
vaded, there succeed clusters of black berries very like the berries of the
Alder tree.

2 The second Cyprus, called also Phillyrealatifolia, is very like the former
in body, branches, 3 Phillyrea serrata 2. Clusij. The second toothed Priuet of
Clusius.
leaves, flowers, and fruit; and the difference is this, that the leaves of
this plant are broader, but in faculty they are like.

3 This kind of Priuet rises up like an hedge bush, of the height of five or
six cubits: the branches are long, fragile or brittle, covered with a whitish
bark; whereon are set leaves somewhat broad, iagged on the edges like the teeth
of a saw, and of a deep green color: among which come forth the flowers, which
neither my Author nor my self have seen: the berries grow upon small
footstalks, for the most part three together, being round, and of the bigness
of pepper grains, or Myrtle berries, of a black color when they be ripe.

The Place.
These plants do grow in Syria near the city Ascalon, and were found by our
industrious Pena in the mountains near Narbone and Montpelier in France: the
which I planted in the garden at Barn-Elmes near London, belonging to the
right Honorable the Earl of Essex: I have them growing in my garden likewise.

The Time.
The leaves shoot forth in the first of the Spring: the flowers show themselves
in May and June: the fruit is ripe in September.

The Names.
This Priuet is called in Greek, (...), and in Latin also Cyprus; and may be
named in English, Easterlin Priuet, and Mocke-Priuet, for the reason following:
they are deceived who taking Pliny for their Author, do think that it is
Ligustrum, or our Western Priuet, as we have showed in the former chap. it is
the Arabians Alcanna, or Hen: and it is also called of the Turks Hen even
at this present time.

The Temperature.
The leaves of these kinds of Priuet have a binding quality, as Dioscorides
writes.

The Virtues.
Being chewed in the mouth they heal the ulcers thereof, and are a remedy
against inflammations

The decoction thereof is good against burnings and scaldings.

The same being stamped and steeped in the juice of Mullen and laid on, do make
the hair red, Dioscorides notes. Bellonius writes, that not only the hair,
but also the nether parts of man's body and nails likewise are colored and
died herewith, which is counted an ornament among the Turks.

The flowers being moistened in vinegar and applied to the temples asswageth
headache.

There is also made of these an oil called Olcum Cyprinum, sweet of smell, and
good to heat and

CHAP. 59. Of bastard Priuet.
The Description.
1 THis shrubby tree, called Macaleb, or Mahaleb, is also one of the Priuets:
it rises up like unto a small hedge tree, not unlike unto the Damson or
Bullesse tree, having many upright stalks and spreading branches: whereon do
grow leaves not unlike those of the Phillyrea of Clusius description: amongst
which come forth mossie flowers of a white color, and of a perfect sweet
smell, growing in clusters, many hanging upon one (...), which the Grauer has
omitted: after which come the berries, green at the first, and black when
they be ripe, with a little hard stone within, in which lies a kernel.

2 Gesner and Matthiolus have set sorth another Macaleb, being also another
bastard Priuet. It grows to a small hedge tree, having many green branches
set with round leaves like (...) of the Elm tree, somewhat snipt about the
edges: the flowers are like those of the precedent: The fruit, or rather the
kernel thereof, is as hard as a (...) of Coral, somewhat round, and of a
shining black color; which the cunning French Perfumers do bore through,
making thereof bracelets, chains, and such like trifling toys, which they
send into England, smeared over with some odd sweet compound or other, and
they are here sold unto our curious Ladies and Gentlewomen for rare and strange
Pomanders, for great sums of money.

1 Phillyrea arbor, verior Macaleb. Bastard Priuet.
2 Macaleb Gesueri. Coral Priuet.


The Place.
These trees grow in diverse places of France, as about Toulouse, and sundry
other places: they are strangers in England.

The Time.
The flowers bud forth in the Spring: the fruit is ripe in November and
December.

The Names.
This bastard Priuet is that tree which diverse suspect to be that Mahaleb or
Macaleb of which (...) writes, cap. 478. and which also Serapio speaks of
out of Mesue: but it is an hard thing to affirm any certainty thereby, seeing
that Auicen has described it without marks: notwithstanding this is taken to
be the same of most writers, and those of the best: we may call it in English,
bastard Priuet, or Coral, or Pomander Priuet, being without doubt a kind
thereof.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Concerning this bastard Priuet we have learned as yet no (...) thereof in
Physic. The kernels

CHAP. 60. Of the fruitless Priuet.
The Description.
1 THis shrubby bush, called of Pliny and Carolus Clusius, Alaternus, grows
up to a small hedge tree, in form like unto a bastard Priuet; but the leaves
are more like those of Ilex, or the French Oak, yet stiffer and rounder than
those of Macaleb: amongst which come forth tufts of greenish yellow flowers
like those of the Lentiske tree: under and among the leaves come forth the
berries, like those of Laurus Tinus, in which are contained two kernels like to
the Acines or stones of the Grape.

1 Alaternus Plinij. Fruitless Priuet.
2 Alaternus humilior. The lower fruitless Priuet.


2 The second kind of Alaternus is likewise a fruitless kind of Priuet,
having narrow leaves somewhat snipt about the edges: from the bosoms whereof
come forth small herby colored flowers; which being vaded, there succeeds
the fruit, whereof Auicen speaks, calling it by the name Fagaras, being a
fruit in bigness and form like those in shops called Cocculus-indi, and may
be the same for any thing that has been written to the contrary. This fruit
hangs as it were in a dark ash-colored skin or husk, which incloseth a
slender stiff shell like the shell of a nut, covered with a thin or black
filme, whether it be the fruit of this plant it is not censured;
notwithstanding you shall find the figure hereof among the Indian fruits, by
the name Fagaras.

This has shorter branches and rounder leaves than the former: the flowers are
larger and greener; to which succeed fruit clustering together, first green,
then red, and afterward black, and consisting of three kernells: it flowers
in February and the beginning of March, and grows in sundry places of Spain.
The fruit of this is not the Fagaras, neither does the Fagaras mentioned by our
Author any way agree with the Cocculus Indi of the shops, as shall be showed
hereafter in their fitplces.

The Place.
These plants do grow in the shadowie woods of France, and are strangers in
England.

The Time.
The time answers the rest of the Priuets.

The Names.
Alaternus of Pliny is the same Phillyrea which Theophrastus has written of by
the name (...), and Bellonius also, lib. 1. cap. 42. of his Singularities, and
the people of Candy call it Elaeprinon: the Portugals, Casca: in French,
Dalader, and Sangin blanc: in English, barren or fruitless Priuet:
notwithstanding some have thought it to bear fruit, which at this day is
called Fagaras: with us, Cocculus-Indi, as we have said. I can by no means
approve of the English name here given by our Author; but judge the name of
Euer-greene Priuet, (given it by Mr. Parkinson) to be much more fitting to the
thing.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Whether the plant be used (...) medicine I cannot as yet learn: the fishermen
of Portugal do

CHAP. 61. Of the white and blew Pipe-Priuet.
1 Syring a alba. White Pipe.
2 Syring a caerulea. Blew Pipe.


The Description.
1 THe white Pipe grows like an hedge tree, or bushy shrub: from the root
whereof arise many shoots, which in short time grow to be equal with the old
stock, whereby in little time it increases to infinite numbers, like the
common English Prim or Priuet, whereof doubtless it is a kind, if we consider
every circumstance: the branches are covered with a rugged gray bark: the
timber is white, with some pith or spongie matter in the middle like Elder, but
lesser in quantity. These little branches are garnished with small crumpled
leaves of the shape and bigness of Pear tree leaves, and very like in form:
among which come forth 3 Syringa Arabica. Arabian Pipe.
(...) Balanus Myrepsica, sieve Glans vnguentaria. The Oily Acorne.
the flowers, growing in tufts, compact of four small leaves of a white
color, and of a pleasant sweet smell; but in my judgment they are too sweet,
troubling and molesting the head in very strange manner. I once gathered the
flowers and laid them in my Chamber window, which smelled more strongly after
they had lien together a few hours, with such an unacquainted savor, that they
awaked me out of my sleep, so that I could not take any rest till I had cast
them out of my chamber. When the flowers be vaded then follows the fruit,
which is small, curled, and as it were compact of many little folds, broad
toward the upper part, and narrow toward the stalk, and black when it is
ripe, wherein is contained a slender and long seed. The root hereof spreads it
self abroad in the ground, after the manner of the roots of such (...) trees.

2 The blew Pipe grows likewise in manner of a small hedge tree, with many
shoots rising from the root like the former, as our common Priuet does, whereof
it is a kind; The branches have some small quantity of pith in the middle of
the wood, and are covered with a dark black greenish bark or rind. The
leaves are exceeding green, and crumpled or turned up like the brimmes of an
hat, in shape very like unto the leaves of the Poplar tree: among which come
the flowers, of an exceeding fair blew color, compact of many small flowers
in the form of a bunch of grapes: each flower is in show like those of
Valeriana rubra Dodonaei, consisting of four parts like a little star, of an
exceeding sweet savor or smell, but not so strong as the former, When these
flowers be gone, there succeed flat cods, and somewhat long, which being ripe
are of a light color, with a thin membrane or filme in the midst, wherein
are seeds almost four square, narrow and ruddy.

3 This (which Clusius sets forth by the name of Iasminum Arabicum, or
Syringa Arabica) grows some two or three cubits high, divided into many
slender branches, whereon by couples at each joint stand leaves like those of
the first described, but thinner, and not snipt about the edges: on the tops of
the branches grow the flowers, wholly white, consisting of nine, ten, or twelve
leaves set in two ranks: these flowers are very sweet, having a sent as it
were compounded of the Spanish Iasmine, and Orange flowers. It is a tender
plant, and may be graffed upon the common Iasmine, whereon it thriues well, and
flowers most part of the Summer. It grows plentifully in Egypt; and Prosper
Alpinus is thought to mention this by the name of Sambac Arabum, sieve
Gelseminum Arabicum.

4 Glans vnguentaria, or the oily Acorne, is the fruit of a tree like
Tamariske, of the bigness of an Hasell Nut; out of the kernel whereof, no
otherwise than out of bitter Almonds, is pressed an oily juice which is used
in precious Ointments, as Dioscorides (...): neither is it in our time wholly
rejected; for the oil of this fruit mixed with sweet odours serves to persume
gloves and diverse other things; and is vulgarly known by the name of Oil of
Ben.

The Place.
1. 2. These trees grow not wild in England, but I have them growing in my
garden in very great plenty.

The Time.
They flower in April and May, but as yet they have not (...) any fruit in my
garden, though in Italy and Spain their fruit is ripe in September.

The Names.
The later Physicians call the first Syringa, or rather (...): that is to say,
a Pipe, because the stalks and branches thereof, when the pith is taken out,
are hollow like a pipe: it is also many times syrnamed Candida, or white, or
Syringa candido slore, or Pipe with a white flower, because it should differ
from Lillach, which is sometimes named Syringa coerulea, or blew Pipe: in
English, White Pipe.

Blew Pipe the later Physicians, as we have said, do name Lillach, or (...): of
some, Syringa (...), or blew Pipe: most do expound the word Lillach, and call
it Ben: Serapio's and the Arabians (...) is Glans vnguentaria, which the
Grecians name (...), from which Lillach does very much differ: among other
differences it is very apparent, that Lillach brings forth no Nut, howsoever
(...) does falsely picture it with one; for it has only a little cod, the seed
whereof has in it no oil at all. The figure of the Balanus Myrepsica we have
thought good to insert in this chapter, for want of a more convenient room.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Concerning the use and faculties of these shrubs neither we our selves have
found out any thing

The Balanus Myrepsica taken in the quantity of a dram, causes vomit; drunk
with Hydromel

The oil pressed out of this fruit, which is usually termed oil of Ben, as it
has no good or pleasing

The oil smoothes the skin, softens and dissolues hardness, and conduces to
the cure of all cold

CHAP. 62. Of Widow-Waile, or Spurge Olive.
The Description.
WIdow-waile is a small shrub about two cubits high. The stalk is of a woody
substance, branched with many small twigs, full of little leaves like Priuet,
but smaller and blacker, on the ends whereof grow small pale yellow flowers:
which being past, there succeeds a three cornered berrie like the Tithymales,
for which cause it was called Tricoccos, that is, three berried Chamelaea:
these berries are green at the first, red afterward, and brown when they be
withered, and contain in them an oily fatness like that of the Olive, being
of an hot and biting taste, and that do burn the mouth, as do both the leaves
and rind. The root is hard and woody.

The (...).
It is found in most untilled grounds of Italy and Languedoc in France, in
rough and desert places. I have it growing in my garden.

The Time.
It is always green: the seed is ripe in Autumn.

The Names.
The Grecians call it (...) as though they should say, low or short Olive tree:
the Latins, (...), and Oleastellus, and likewise Citocacium: it is also named
of diverse, Oliuella, as Matthiolus (...) says: it is called in English,
Widow-Waile, quia facit viduas.

The fruit is named of diverse, (...): in Latin, Coccus (...): but he is
deceived, says (...), that names the fruit of Spurge-Oliue, Coccus (...):
Auicen and (...) call (...), or Spurge Olive, Mezereon: under which name
notwithstanding they have also contained both the Chamaeleons or Carlines; and
so have they confounded Chamelaea or Spurge Olive with the Carlines, and
likewise (...), or Spurge flax.

Chamelaea Arabum Tricoccos. Widow-Waile.


The Temperature.
Both the leaves and fruit of Spurge-Oliue, as we have said, are of a burning
and extrme hot temperature.

The Virtues.
The leaves, says Dioscorides, purge both

Mesue likewise has a description of pills of the leaves of Mezereon, that is,
(...), or Spurge-Oliue (yet Syluius expounds it Thymelaea, or Spurge-Flax)
but in stead of Wormwood he takes the outward substance of the yellow
Mirobalans and Cepula Mirobalans, and makes them up with Tereniabin, that is
to say, with Manna and sour (...), which they call Tamarinds, dissolved in
Endive water; and appoints the same leaves to be first tempered with very
strong vinegar, and to be dried.

These pills are commended against the Dioscorides adds, that the leaves of
Spurge Olive beaten with honey do cleanse filthy or crusted ulcers.

(...) Germanica, sieve Mezereon. Spurge Flax, or the dwarf Bay.


CHAP. 63. Of Germane Olive Spurge.
The Description.
THe dwarf Bay tree, called of Dutch men Mezereon, is a small shrub two cubits
high: the branches be tough, limber, and easy to bend, very soft to be cut;
whereon grow long leaves like those of Priuet, but thicker and fatter. The
flowers appear before the leaves, often times in January, clustring together
about the stalks at certain distances, of a whitish color tending to purple,
and of a most fragrant and pleasant sweet smell: after come the small berries,
green at the first, but being ripe, of a shining red color, and afterward wax
of a dark black color, of a very hot and burning taste, inflaming the mouth
and throat, being tasted, with danger of choking. The root is woody.

The Place and Time.
This plant grows naturally in the moist and shadowy woods of most of the East
countries, especially about Meluin in Poland, from whence I have had great
plenty thereof for my garden, where they flower in the first of the Spring, and
ripen their fruit in August.

The Names.
It is usually called in High Dutch. Zeilant Zeidelbast, Lenszkraut, and
Kellerhals: (...) Apothecaries of our country name it Mezereon, but we had
rather call it Chamelaea Germanica: in English, Dutch Mezereon, or it may be
called Germane Olive Spurge. We have heard, that diverse Italians do name the
fruit thereof Piper Montanum, Mountain Pepper. Some say that (...) or Spurge
Laurel is this plant, but there is another Laureola, of which we will
hereafter treat: but by what name it is called of the old writers, and whether
they knew it or no, it is hard to tell. It is thought to be Cneoron album
Theophrasti, but by reason of his brevity, we can affirm no certainty.

There is, says he, two kinds of (...), the white and the black, the white
has a leaf, long, like in form to Spurge Olive: the black is full of
substance like Myrtle; the low one is more white, the same is with smell, and
the black without smell. The root of both which grows deep, is great: the
branches be many, thick, wooddie, immediately growing out of the earth, or
little above the earth, tough: wherefore they use these to bind with, as with
Oziars. They bud and flower when the Autumn Equinoctial is past, and a long
time after. Thus much Theophrastus.

The Germane Spurge Olive is not much unlike to the Olive tree in leaf: the
flower is sweet of smell: the buds whereof, as we have written, come forth
after Autumn: the branches are woody and pliable: the root long, growing
deep: all which show that it has great likeness and affinity with Cneoron,
if it be not the very same.

The Temperature.
This plant is likewise in all parts extreme hot: the fruit, the leaves, and
the rind are very sharp and biting: they bite the tongue, and set the throat
on fire.

The Virtues.
The leaves of Mezereon do purge downward, phlegm, choler, and waterish
humors with great

Also if a drunkard do eat one grain or berry of this plant, he cannot be
allured to drink any

This plant is very dangerous to be taken into the body, and in nature like to
the Sea Tithymale,

The shops of Germany and of the Low Countries dowhen need require use the
leaves hereof

CHAP. 64. Of Spurge Flax.
1 Thymelaea. Spurge Flax, or mountain Widow wail.


The Description.
SPurge Flax brings forth many slender branched sprigs above a cubite high,
covered round with long and (...) leaves like those of flax, narrower and
lesser than the leaves of Spurge Olive. The flowers are white, small, standing
on the upper parts of the sprigs: the fruit is round, green at the first, but
red when it is ripe, like almost to the round berries of the Hawthorne, in
which is a white kernel covered with a black skin, very hot and burning the
mouth like Mezereon: the root is hard and wooddie.

The Place.
It grows in rough mountains, and in vntoiled places in hot regions. It
grows in my garden.

The Time.
It is green at any time of the year, but the fruit is perfected in Autumn.

The Names.
The Grecians call it (...) the Syrians, as Dioscorides witnesses, Apolinon:
diverse also Chamelaea, but not properly: but as Dioscorides says, the leaf is
properly called Cneoron, and the fruit Coccos Cnidios; notwithstanding those
which Theophrastus calls Cneora seem to differ from Thymelaea, or Spurge
Flax, unless Nigrum Cneoron be Thymelaea for Theophrastus (...) that there be
two kinds of Cneoron; the one white, the other black: this may be called in
English, Spurge Flax, or mountain Widow Wayle: the seed of Thymelaea is called
in shops, Granum Gnidium.

The Temperature.
Spurge Flax is naturally both in leaves and fruit extreme hot, biting and of a
burning quality.

The Virtues.
The grains or berries, as (...) says, purge by siege choler, slegme and
water, if twenty

The same being stamped with Niter and vinegar, serves to anoint those with,
which can hardly

The leaves must be gathered about harvest, and being dried in the shade, they
are to be laid up

They that would give them must beat them, and take forth the strings: the
quantity of two ounces

The same leaves beaten to powder and made up into (...) or flat cakes, with
the juice of

The herb is an enemy to the stomach, which also destroys the birth (...)
it be applied. Our Author formerly following (...) gave two (...) and
descriptions in this Chapter, but being both of one thing I omitted the (...)
(...) (...).


CHAP. 65. Of Spurge Laurel.
(...) (...). Laurel, or Spurge Laurel flouring.
Laureola cum fructu. Laurel with his fruit.


The Description.
SPurge Laurel is a shrub of a cubit high, of tentimes also of two, and
spreads with many little boughs, which are tough and lithy, and covered with
a thick rind. The leaves be long, broad, gross, smooth, blackish green,
shining, like the leaves of Laurel, but lesser, thicker, and without smell,
very many at the top, clustering together. The flowers be long, hollow, of a
whitish green, hanging beneath and among the leaves: the berries when they be
ripe are black, with a hard kernel within, which is a little longer than the
seed of Hemp: the pulpe or inner substance is white: the root wooddie, tough,
long, and diversely parted, growing deep: the leaves, fruit and bark, as well
of the root as of the little boughs, do with their sharpness and burning
quality bite and set on fire the tongue and throat.

The Place.
It is found on mountains, in untilled, rough, shadowie, and wooddie places,
as by the lake of (...) or Geneua, and in many places near the river of Rhene
and of the Maze. It grows abundantly also in the woods in the most parts of
England.

The Time.
The flowers bud very soon, a little after the Autumn Equinoctial: they are
full blown in Winter, or in the first Spring: the fruit is ripe in May and
June: the plant is always green, and indureth the cold storms of winter.

The Names.
It is called in Greek (...), of the likeness it has with the leaves of the
Laurel or Bay tree: in Latin likewise Daphnoides: the later Latinists for the
same cause name it Laureola, as though they should say Minor Laurus, or little
Laurel. it is called (...), and (...), notwithstanding there is another
Chamaedaphne, and another Peplion. This shrub is commonly called in English,
Spurge Laurel; of diverse, Laurel or Lowry.

So ne say that the Italians name the berries hereof Piper montanum, or
Mountain Pepper, as also the berries of Dutch Mezereon: others affirm them to
be called in High Dutch also, Zeilant.

It may be (...) his (...): for it is much like to a Myrtle in leaf, it is
also a branched plant, tough and pliable, having a deep root, without smell,
with a black fruit.

The Temperature.
It is like in temperature and faculty to the Germane Spurge Olive, throughout
the whole substance biting and extreme hot.

The Virtues.
The dry or green leaves of Spurge Laurel, says Dioscorides, purges by
siege flegmaticke humors;

It likewise causes neezing; moreover, fifteen grains of the seed thereof
drunk, are a purgation.

CHAP. 66. Of Rose Bay, or Oleander.
The Description.
1 ROse Bay is a small shrub of a gallant show like the Bay tree, bearing
leaves, thicker, greater, longer and rougher than the leaves of the Almond
tree: the flowers be of a fair red color, divided into five leaves, not much
unlike a little Rose: the cod or fruit is long, like (...), or Vincetoxicum,
and full of such white down, among which the seed lies hidden: the root is
long, smooth, and wooddie.

2 The second kind of Rose bay, is like the first, and differs in that, that
this plant has white flowers; but in other respects it is very like.

1 Nerium, sive Oleander. The Rose Bay.
2 Nerium flore albo. The Rose Bay with white flowers


The Place.
These grow in Italy and other hot regions, by rivers and the Sea side: I have
them growing in my garden.

The Time.
In my garden they flower in July and August: the cods be ripe afterward.

The Names.
This plant is named in Greek (...), by Nicander, (...): in Latin likewise
Nerion, and also Rhododendron, and Rhododaphne, that is to say, Rosea arbor,
and (...) Laurus: in shops, Oleander: in Italian, Oleandro: in Spanish, Adelfa,
Eloendro, and Alendro: in French, Rosagine: in English, Rose tree, Rose Bay,
Rose Bay tree and Oleander.

The Temperature and Virtues.
This tree being outwardly applied, as Galen says, has a digesting faculty:
but if it be inwardly

The flowers and leaves kill dogs, asses, mules, and very many of other four
footed beasts: but if

The weaker sort of cattle, as sheep and goats, if they drink the water
wherein the leaves have

CHAP. 67. Of dwarf Rose Bay.
The Description.
Dwarf Nerium, or Rose Bay, has leaves which for the most part are always
green, rough, and small, of a pale yellow color like Box, far lesser than
Oleander: the whole plant is of a shrubbie stature, leaning this way and that
way, as not able to stand upright without help; his branches are covered and
set full of small flowers, of a shining scarlet or crimson color; growing upon
1 Chamaerhododendros Alpigena. Dwarf Rose Bay.
the hills as ye go from Trent to Verona, which in June and July are as it were
covered with a scarlet colored carpet, of an odoriferous savor, and delectable
aspect, which being (...) there comes seed and fair berries like Asparagus.

The Place.
The place and time are expressed in the description.

The Names.
This may be called in English, Dwarf Rose Bay of the Alps. I find not any
thing extant of the virtues, so that I am constrained to leave the rest unto
your own discretion. The other plant (...) Author (...) (...) in this chapter
in the (...). place by the name of (...), (...) here (...), (...) (...) he set
it forth before by the (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...), (...) (...) and one
description, in the 11. and 12. (...) (...), he 8 chap. of (...) 3. (...).


CHAP. 68. Of the Bay or Laurel tree.
The Description.
Laurus. The Bay tree.


1 THe Bay or Laurel tree comes oftentimes to the height of a tree of a mean
bigness; it is full of boughs, covered with a green bark: the leaves
thereof are long, broad, hard, of color green, sweetly smelling, and in taste
somewhat bitter: the flowers along the boughs and leaves are of a green
color: the berries are more long than round, and be covered with a black rind
or pill: the kernel within is cloven into two parts, like that of the Peach
and Almond, and other such, of a brown yellowish color, sweet of smell, in
taste somewhat bitter, with a little sharp or biting quality.

2 There is also a certain other kind hereof more like to a shrub, sending
forth out of the roots many offsprings, which notwithstanding grows not so
high as the former, and the barks of the boughs be somewhat red: the leaves
be also tenderer, and not so hard: in other things (...) unlike.

These two Bay trees Dioscorides was not ignorant of; for he says, that the
one is narrow leafed, and the other broader leafed, or rather harder leafed
which is more like.

The Place.
The Laurel or bay tree grows naturally in Spain and such hot regions; we
plant and set it in gardens, defending it from cold at the beginning of March
especially.

I have not seen any one tree thereof growing in Denmark, Sweuia, Poland,
Liuonia, or Russia, or in any of those cold countries where I have traveled.

The Time.
The Bay tree grows green winter and Summer: it floureth in the Spring, and
the black fruit is ripe in October.

The Names.
This tree is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Laurus: in Italian, Lauro: in
high Dutch, (...): in low Dutch, Laurus boome: in French, Laurier: in Spanish,
Laurel, Lorel, and Loureiro: in English, Laurel, or Bay tree.

The fruit is named in Greek (...): in Latin, Lauri baccae: in high Dutch,
Looerbeeren: in low Dutch, Bakeleer: in Spanish, Vayas: in English, Bay berries.

The Poets feign that it took his name of Daphne, Lado his daughter, with whom
Apollo fell in love.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The Berries and leaves of the Bay tree, says Galen, are hot and very dry,
and yet the berries more

The bark is not biting and hot, but more bitter, and it has also a certain
astrictiue or binding

Bay Berries with Honey or Cute, are good in a licking medicine, says
Dioscorides, against the

(...) Berries taken in (...), are good against the bitings and stingings of
any venomous beast, and against all venom and poison: they cleanse away the
morphew: the juice pressed out hereof is a remedy for pain of the ears, and
deafness, if it be dropped in with old wine and oil of Roses: this is also
mixed with ointments that are good against wearisomnesse, and that heat and
discuss (...) waste away humors.

(...) berries are put into Mithridate, Treacle, and such like medicines that
(...) made to refresh

They are good also against cramps and drawing together of sinews.

We in our time do not use the berries for the infirmities of the lungs, or
chest, but minister them

The oil pressed out of these, or drawn forth by decoction, does in short
time take away scabs

It (...) them that are beaten black and blew, and that be bruised by squats
and falls, it remooueth

Dioscorides says, that the leaves are good for the diseases of the mother and
bladder, if a bath be

The Berries of the Bay tree stamped with a little Scammonie and Saffron, and
labored in a

It is reported that common drunkards were accustomed to eat in the morning
fasting two leaves

The later Physicians do oftentimes use to boil the leaves of Laurel with
diverse meats, especially

(...) bark of the root of the Bay tree, as Galen writes, drunken in wine
provoke urine, breaks Dioscorides affirms, who likewise adds that it
kills the child in the mothers womb.

It helps the dropsy and the iaundise, and procures unto women their
desired sickness. (...) Author here also gave the two (...) of (...); the
(...) by the name of (...), or the male Bay (...), and the (...) (...) (...)
name of (...) (...), (...) female Bay: (...) difference in (...) (...) was
(...) or none, wherefore I have (...) one (...).


CHAP. 69. Of the Wild Bay tree.
The Description.
1 LAurus Tinus, or the wild Bay tree, grows like a shrub or hedge bush,
having many tough and pliant branches, set full of leaves very like to the Bay
leaves, but smaller and more crumpled, of a deep and shining green color:
among which come forth tufts of whitish flowers, turning at the edges into a
light purple: after which follow small (...) of a blew color, containing a few
grains or seeds like the stones or seeds of grapes: the leaves and all the
parts of the plant are altogether without smell or savor.

1 Laurus Tinus. The wild Bay tree.
2 Laurus (...) (...). The Portingale wild Bay tree.


2 Tinus Lusitanica grows very like to Cornus Foemina, or the Dog-berry
tree, but the branches be thicker, and more stiff, covered with a reddish
bark mixed with (...): the leaves are like the former, but larger, having many
sinews or veins running through the (...) like as in the leaves of Sage: the
flowers hereof grow in tufts like the precedent, but they are of color (...)
declining to purple: the small branches are likewise of a purple color: the
leaves have no smell (...) all, either good or bad: the berries are smaller
than the former, of a blew color declining to blackness.

The Place.
The wild Bay grows plentifully in every field of Italy, Spain, and other
regions, which differ according to the nature and (...) of those countries:
they grow in my garden and prosper very well.

The Time.
The wild Laurel is ever green, and may oftentimes be seen most part of the
winter, and the beginning of the spring, with the flowers and ripe berries
growing both at one season.

The Names.
It is called in Latin (...), and Laurus syluestris: in Greek, (...): Cato
names it Laurus syluatica: in Italian, Lauro syluatico: in Spanish, Vua de
Perro, otherwise Follado; and of diverse, Durillo: in English wild Bay.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Pliny nor any other of the Ancients have touched the faculties of this wild
Bay, neither have we any understanding thereof by the later writers, or by our
own experience.

CHAP. 70. Of the Box Tree.
Buxus. The Box tree.


The Description.
THe great Box is a fair tree, bearing a great body or trunk: the wood or
timber is yellow and very hard, and fit for sundry works, having many boughs
and hard branches, beset with sundry small hard green leaves, both winter and
Summer like the Bay tree: the flowers are very little, growing among the
leaves, of a green color: which being vaded there succeed small black
shining berries, of the bigness of the seeds of Corianders, which are enclosed
in round greenish husks, having three feet or (...) (...) a brass or boiling
pot: the root is likewise yellow, and harder than the timber, but of greater
beauty, and more fit for dagger hastes, boxes, and such like uses, whereto the
trunk or body serves, than to make medicines; though foolish empericks and
women leaches, do minister it against the Apoplexy and such diseases: Turners
and Cutlers, if I mistake not the matter, do call this wood Dudgeon, wherewith
they make Dudgeon hafted daggers.

There is also a certain other kind hereof, growing low, and not above half
a yard high, but it spreads all abroad: the branches here of are many and
very slender: the leaves be round, and of a light green.

The Place.
Buxus, or the Box tree grows upon sundry waste and barren hills in England,
and in diverse (...) dens.

The Time.
The Box tree grows green winter and Summer: it floureth in February and
March, and the seed is ripe in September.

The Names.
The Grecians call it (...) in Latin, Buxus: in high Dutch, Buchszbaum: in low
Dutch, Burboom: in Italian, (...): in English, Box tree.

The lesser may be called (...) and in Latin, Humi Buxus, or Humilis Buxus: in
English, dwarf Box, or ground Box, and it is commonly called Dutch Box.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The leaves of the Box tree are hot, dry, and astringent, of an evil and
loathsome smell, not used in

CHAP. 71. Of the Myrtle Tree.
The Description.
1 THe first and greatest Myrtus is a small tree, growing to the height of a
man, having many fair and pliant branches, covered with a brown bark, and
set full of leaves much like unto the Laurel or Bay leaf, but thinner and
smaller, somewhat resembling the leaves of Peruincle, which being bruised do
yield forth a most fragrant smell, not much inferior unto the smell of Cloves,
as all the rest of the kinds do: among these leaves come forth small white
flowers, in shape like the flowers of the Cherry tree, but much smaller, and of
a pleasant savor, which do turn into small berries, green at the first, and
afterward black.

1 Myrtus Laurea maxima. The Myrtle tree.
2 Myrtus (...) latifolia. Great Spanish Myrtle.


2 There is also another kind of Myrtus called Myrtus Baetica latifolia,
according to Clusius (...) Laurea, that has leaves also like Bay leaves,
growing by couples upon his pleasant green branches, in a double row on both
sides of the stalks, of a light green color, and somewhat thicker than the
former, in sent and smell sweet: the flowers and fruit are not much differing
from the first kind.

3 There is likewise another kind of Myrtus called Exotica, that is strange
and not common: it grows upright unto the height of a (...) like unto the
last before mentioned, but that it is (...) with greater plenty of leaves,
which do fold in themselves hollow and almost double, broader pointed, and
keeping no order in their growing, but one thrusting within another, and as it
were crossing one another confusedly; in all other points agreeing with the
precedent.

4 There is another sort like unto the former in flowers and branches, but the
leaves are smooth, (...) and plain, and not crumpled or folded at all, they
are also much smaller than any of the former. The fruit is in shape like the
other, but that it is of a white color, whereas the fruit of the other is
black.

5 There is also (...) kind of Myrtle, called Myrtus minor, or noble Myrtle,
as being the

3 Myrtus exotica. Strange Myrtle.
4 Myrtus fructu albo. Myrtle with white berries.
5 Myrtus minor. The little Myrtle.
6 Myrtus Baetica syluestris. Wild Spanish (...).
chief of all the rest (although most common and best known) and it grows
like a (...) (...) or hedge bush, very like unto the former, but much smaller:
the leaves are small and (...), (...) much in shape resembling the leaves of
Masticke Time called Marum, but of a fresher green (...) (...) flowers be
white, nothing differing from the former saving in greatness, and that
sometimes they are more double.

6 This grows not very high, neither is it so shrubby as the former: the
branches are small and brittle: the leaves are of a middle bigness, sharp
pointed, standing by couples in two (...), seldom in four as the former, they
are blackish also and well smelling. the flower is like that of the rest: the
fruit is round, growing upon long stalks out of the bosoms of the leaves,
first green, then whitish, lastly black, of a winy and pleasant taste with
some astriction. This grows wild in diverse places of Portugal, where Clusius
found it flouring in October: he calls it Myrtus Baetica (...).

The Place.
These kinds of Myrtles grow naturally upon the woody hills and fertile
fields of Italy and Spain. The two last are nourished in the garden of
Mistress Tuggy in Westminster, and in some other gardens.

The Time.
Where they joy to grow of themselves they flower when the Roses do: the fruit
is ripe in (...): in England they never bear any fruit.

The Names.
It is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Myrtus: in the Arabicke tongue, Alas:
in Italian, Myrto: in Spanish, Arrayhan: in the Portingale language, Murta, and
Murtella: other Nations do almost keep the Latin name, as in English it is
called Myrtle, or Myrtle tree.

Among the Myrtles that which has the fine little leaf is surnamed of Pliny,
Tarentina; and that which is so thick and full of leaves is Exotica, strange
or foreign. Nigra Myrtus is that which has the black berries: Candida, which
has the white berries, and the leaves of this also are of a lighter green:
Satiua, or the tame planted. One is cherished in gardens and orchards:
Syluestris, or the wild Myrtle is that which grows of it self; the berries
of this are oftentimes lesser, and of the other, greater. Pliny does also set
down other kinds; as Patritia, Plebeia, and (...) alis: but what manner of
ones they are he does not declare: he also places among the Myrtles,
Oxymyrsine, or Kneeholm, which notwithstanding is (...) of the Myrtles, but a
thornie shrub.

Pliny in his 14. book, 16. chap. says, that the wine which is made of the
wild Myrtle tree is called Myrtidanum, if the copy be true. For Dioscorides
and likewise Sotion in his Geoponikes report, that wine is made of Myrtle
berries when they be through ripe, but this is called Vinum Myrteum, or
Myrtites, Myrtle wine.

Moreover, there is also a wine made of the berries and leaves of Myrtle
stamped and steeped in Must, or wine new pressed from the grape, which is
called, as Dioscorides says, (...) (...), or wine of Myrtles.

The Myrtle tree was in times past consecrated to Venus. Pliny in his 15.
book, (...). chapter, says thus, There was an old Alter belonging to Venus,
which they now call Murtia.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The Myrtle consists of contrary substances, a cold earthinesse bearing the
pre-eminence; it Galen says, it dries notably.

The leaves, fruit, buds, and juice do bind, both outwardly applied and
inwardly taken: they stay

They are a remedy for laskes, and for the bloody flix, they quench the fiery
heat of the (...), if

They be also with good success outwardly applied to all inflammations newly
beginning, and

They are wholesome for a moist and watery stomach: the fruit and leaves dried
provoke (...):

It is good with the decoction hereof made with wine, to bathe lims that are out
of joint, and burstings from shedding; withstandeth drunkenness, if it be
taken fasting, and prevails against poison, and the bitings of any venomous
beast.

There is drawn out of the green berries thereof a juice, which is dried and
reserved for the foresaid

There is likewise pressed out of the leaves a juice, by adding unto them
either old wine or rain Dioscorides says, loses his virtues.

CHAP. 72. Of sweet Willow or Gaul.
Myrtus Brabantica, sive Elaeagnus Cordi. Gaul, sweet willow, or Dutch Myrtle
tree.


The Description.
Gaul is a low and little shrub or woody plant having many brown and hard
branches: whereupon do grow leaves somewhat (...), hard, thick, and oileous,
of an hot savor or smell somewhat like Myrtus: among the branches come forth
other little ones, whereupon do grow many spokie ears or tufts, full of small
flowers, and after them succeed great store of square seeds clustering
together, of a strong and bitter taste. The root is hard, and of a wooddie
substance.

The Place.
This Gaul grows plentifully in sundry places of England, as in the I Will of
Ely, and in the Fennie countries thereabouts, whereof there is such store in
that country, that they make fagots of it and sheaues, which they call Gaul
sheaues, to burn and heat their ouens. It grows also by Colebrooke, and in
sundry other places.

The Time.
The Gaul floureth in May and June, and the seed is ripe in August.

The Names.
This tree is called of diverse in Latin, Myrtus Brabantica, and Pseudomyrsine;
and Cordus calls it Elaeagnus, Chamaeleagnus, and Myrtus Brabantica.
Elaeagnus is described by Theophrastus to be a shrubbie plant like unto the
Chaste tree, with a soft and downie leaf, and with the flower of the Poplar
tree; and that which we have described is no such plant. It has no name among
the old writers for ought we know, unless it be Rhus syluestris (...), or
Pliny his wild Sumach, of which he has written in his 24. book, 11 chap.
[There is, says he, a wild herb with short stalks, which is an enemy to
poison, and a killer of mothes.] It is called in low Dutch, Gagel: in English,
Gaul.

The Temperature.
Gaul or the wild Myrtle, especially the seed, is hot and dry in the third
degree: the leaves be hot and dry, but not so much.

The Virtues.
The fruit is troublesome to the brain; being put into beer or aile whilst it
is in boiling (which

The whole shrub, fruit and all, being laid among clothes, keeps them from
moths and worms.

CHAP. 73. Of Worts or Wortle berries.
The Kinds.
(...), or Worts, of which we treat in this place, differ from Violets, neither
are they esteemed for their flowers but berries: of these Worts there be diverse
sorts found out by the later Writers.

1 Vaccinia nigra. Black Worts or Wortle berries.
2 Vaccinia rubra. Red Worts or Wortle berries.


The Description.
1 VAccinia nigra, the black Wortle or Hurtle, is a base and low shrub or
woody plant, bringing forth many branches of a cub it high, set full of small
leaves of a dark green color; not much unlike the leaves of Box or the Myrtle
tree: amongst which come forth little hollow flowers turning into small
berries, green at the first, afterward red, and at the last of a black
color, and full of a pleasant and sweet juice: in which do lie diverse little
thin whitish seeds: these berries do color the mouth and lips of those that
eat them, with a black color: the root is woody, slender, and now and then
creeping.

2 Vaccinia rubra, or red Wortle, is like the former in the manner of growing,
but that the leaves are (...) and harder, almost like the leaves of the Box
tree, abiding green all the Winter long: among which come forth small
carnation flowers, long and round, growing in clusters at the top of the
branches: afterwhich succeed small berries, in show and bigness like the
former, but that they are of an excellent red color, and full of juice, of so
orient and beautiful a purple to limne withal, that Indian Lacca is not to be
compared thereunto, especially when this juice is prepared and dressed with
Allom according to art, as my self have proved by experience: the taste is
rough and astringent: the root is of a woody substance.

3 Vaccinia alba, or the white Wortle, is like unto the former, both in stalks
and leaves, but the berries are of a white color, wherein consists the
difference.

The figure which our Author here gives in the third place has need of a
better description,

3 Vaccinia alba. The white Worts or Wortle berries.
4 Vaccinia Pannonica, (...) Vitis idaea. (...) Wortle berries.
5 Vaccinia Vrsi, sieve Vua Vrsi apud Clusium. Bear Wortle berries.
6 Vitis Idaea folijs subrotundis mayor. Great round leaued Wortle berries.
(...) the difference is not only in the color of the berries. This differs
from the former in form and bigness; for it sends forth many stalks (...)
the root, and these three, four, or (...) cubits high, thick, and divided
into sundry branches, covered for the most part with a blackish bark: at the
beginning of the Spring from the buds at the sides of the branches it sends
(...) leaves all horie and hairy underneath, and green above: from the midst
of these, upon little foot-stalkes stand clustering together many little
flowers, consisting of five white leaves apiece without smell; and then the
leaves by little and little unfold themselves and cast off their downinesse,
and become snipt about the edges. The fruit that succeeds the flowers is round,
black, somewhat like, but bigger than a Haw, full of juice of a very sweet
taste; wherein lies ten or more longish smooth blackish seeds. It grows upon
the Austrian and Stirian Alps, where the fruit is ripe in August. Clusius calls
it Vitis Idaea 3. Pena and Lobel, Amelancher: Gesner by diverse names, as
Myrtomalus, Petromelis, Pyrus ceruinus, etc.

4 Carolus Clusius in his Pannonicke Observations has set down another of the
Wortle (...), under the name of Vitis Idaea, which differs from the other
Wortle berries, not only in stature, but in leaves and fruit also. The leaves
are long, narrow, sharp pointed, (...) of veins, a little hairy, and lightly
snipt about the edges, greener above than below: the fruit grows from the tops
of the branches of the former year, hanging upon long foot-stalkes, and being
as big as little Cherries, first green, then red, and lastly black, full of
juice, and that of no unpleasant taste, containing no kernels, but flat white
seeds commonly five in number: the stalks are weak, and commonly lie upon the
ground: (...) found it upon the Austrian mountain Snealben, with the fruit
partly ripe, and partly unripe, in August. It is his Vitis Idaea 1.

5 The same Author also sets forth another of the Wortle berries, under the
title of Vua (...), which is likewise a shrubby plant, having many feeble
branches, whereon grow long leaves blunt at the points, and of an ouerworn
green color: among which, at the tops of the stalks come (...) clusters (...)
bottle-like flowers of an (...) color: the fruit follows, growing (...) in
clusters, green at the first, and black when they be ripe: the root is of a
woody substance. This is always green, and the flowers are of a whitish
purple color.

6 This differs from the second, in that the leaves are thinner, more full of
veins, and whiter (...): the flower is like the common kind, whitish purple,
hollow, and divided into five parts: the fruit also is black, and like that of
the first described. This grows on diverse mountainous places of Germany, where
Clusius (...) it, who made it his Vitis Idaea 2.

The Place.
These plants prosper best in a lean barren soil, and in vntoiled woody
places: they are now and then found on high hills subject to the wind, and upon
mountains: they grow plentifully in both the Germanies, Bohemia, and in diverse
places of France and England; namely in Middlesex on Hampsted heath, and in the
woods thereto adjoining, and also upon the hills in Cheshire called Broxen
hills, near Beeston castle, seven miles from the Nantwich; and in the wood by
Highgate called Finchley wood, and in diverse other places.

The red Wortle berry grows in Westmerland at a place called Crosby
Rauenswaith, where also does grow the Wortle with the white berry, and in
Lancashire also upon Pendle (...).

I have seen none of these but only the first described, growing upon Hampsted
heath. The white formerly mentioned in the third description, and here again
in the place, seems only a variety of the second having white berries, as far
as I can gather by our Author; for it is most certain, that it is not that
which he figured, and I have described in the third place.

The Time.
The Wortle berries do flower in May, and their fruit is ripe in June.

The Names.
VVortle berries is called in High Dutch, Hepdelbeeren: in Low Dutch,
Crakebesien because they make a certain crack whilst they be broken between
the teeth: of diverse, Hauerbesien: the French men, Airelle, or Aurelle, as
Johannes de Choul writes: and we in England, VVorts, VVhortle berries,
Blacke-berries, Bill berries, and Bull-berries, and in some places,
VVin-berries.

Most of the shops of Germany do call them Myrtilli, but properly (...): (...)
are the (...) of the Myrtle tree, as the Apothecaries name them at this day.
This plant has no name for ought we can learn, either among the Greeks or
ancient Latins; for whereas most do take it to be Vitis Idaea, or the Corinth
tree, which Pliny syrnameth (...), it is untrue; for Vitis Idaea is not only
like to the common Vine, (...) is also a kind of Vine: and (...), who has
made (...) hereof does call it, without an Epethete, (...), simply, as a little
after we will declare; which without doubt he would not have done if he had
found it to differ from the common Vine: For what things soever receive a name
of some plant, the same are expressed with some (...) added to be known to
differ from others; as Laurus Alexandrina, Vitis alba, Vitis nigra, Vitis
syluestris, and such like.

Moreover, those things which have borrowed a name from some plant are like
thereunto, if not wholly, yet either in leaf or fruit, or in some other thing.
Vitis alba and nigra, that is, the white and black Bryonies, have leaves and
clasping tendrels as has the common Vine; and clyme also after the same
manner: Vitis syluestris, or the wild Vine, has such like stalks as the Vine
has, and brings forth fruit like to the little Grapes. Laurus Alexandrina,
and Chamedaphne, and also Daphnoides, are like in leaves to the Laurel tree:
Sycomorus is like in fruit to the Fig tree, and in leaves to the Mulberry tree:
Chamaedrys has the leaf of an Oak; Peucedanus of the Pine tree: so of others
which have taken their names from some other: but this low shrub is not like
the Vine either in any part, or in any other thing.

This Vitis Idaea grows not on the uppermost and snowie parts of mount Ida
(as some would have it, but about Ida, even the hill Ida, not of Candy, but of
Troas in the lesser Asia, which (...) in his fifth book of Geographie, chap.
3. does call Alexandri Troas, or (...) his Troy: whereupon it is also advisedly
named of Pliny, lib. 14. cap. 3. Vitis Alexandrina, no otherwise than (...)
Laurus is said of Theophrastus to grow there: Laurus, syrnamed (...), and (...)
quaedam, or a certain Fig tree, and (...). that is to say the Vine, are
reported, says he, to grow properly about Ida. Like unto this Vine are those
which Philostratus in the life of Apollonius reports to grow in Maeonia, and
Lydia, situated not far from Troy, comparing them to those vines which grow in
India beyond Caucasus: The Vines there, says he, be very small, like as be
those that do grow in Maeonia and Lydia, yet is the wine which is pressed out
of them of a marvelous pleasant taste.

This Vine which grows near to mount Ida is reported to be like a shrub, with
little twigs and branches of the length of a cubit, about which are grapes
growing aslope, black, of the bigness of a bean, sweet, having within a
certain winie substance, soft: the leaf of this is round, uncut, and little.

This is described by Pliny, lib. 14, cap. 3. almost in the self same words:
It is called, says he, Alexandrina vitis, and grows near unto Phalacra: it
is short, with branches a cubit long, with a black grape of the bigness of the
Latins Bean, with a soft pulpe and very little, with very sweet clusters
growing aslope, and a little round leaf without cuts.

And with this description the little shrub which the Apothecaries of Germany
do call (...) does nothing at all agree, as it is very manifest; for it is low,
scarce a cubit high, with a few short branches not growing to a cubit in
length: it does not bring forth clusters or bunches, nor yet fruit like unto
grapes, but berries like those of the Yew tree, not sweet, but somewhat (...)
and astringent; in which also there are many little white flat seeds: the leaf
is not round, but more long than round, not like to that of the Vine, but of
the Box tree. Moreover, it is thought that this is not found in Italy, Greece,
or in the lesser Asia, for that Matthiolus affirms the same to grow no where
but in Germany and Bohemia; so far is it from being called or accounted to be
Vitis Idaea or Alexandrina.

The fruit of this may be thought not without cause to be named Vaccinia, since
they are berries; (...) they may be termed of Baccae, berries, Vaccinia, as
though they should be called Baccinia. Yet this lets not that there may be
also other Vaccinia's: for Vaccinia is (...) dictio, or a word of diverse
significations. Virgil in the (...) book of his Bucolicks, Eclog. 10.
affirms, that the written Hyacinth is named of the Latins, Vaccinium,
translating into Latin Theocritus his verse which is taken out of his tenth
Eidyl.

(...) Virgil: Et nigrae Violae, sunt and Vaccinia nigra. Vitruvius, lib. 7. of
his Architecture does also distinguish Vaccinium from the Violet, and shows,
that of it is made a gallant purple; which seeing that the written Hyacinth
cannot do, it must needs be that this Vaccinium is another thing than the
Hyacinth is, because it serves to give a purple dye.

Pliny also, lib. 16. cap. 18. has made mention of Vaccinia, which are used to
dye bond-slaues (...) with, and to give them a purple color.

But whether these be our (...) or Whortle berries it is hard to affirm,
especially seeing that Pliny reckons up Vaccinia amongst those plants which
grow in waterie places; but ours grow on high places upon mountains subject to
winds, neither is it certainly known to grow in Italy. Howsoever it is, these
our Whortles may be called Vaccinia, and do agree with Plinies and Vitruvius
his Vaccinia, because garments and linen cloth may take from these a purple
die.

The red Whortle berries have their name from the black Whortles, to which
they be in form very like, and are called in Latin, Vaccinia rubra: in
High Dutch, Rooter Heidelbeere: in Low Dutch, Roode Crakebesien: the French
men, Aurelles Rouges: they be named in English Red Worts, or red Wortle
berries. Conradus Gesnerus has called this plant Vitis Idaea rubris (...): but
the growing of the berries does show, that this does far less agree with
(...) (...); than the black; for they do not hang upon the sides of the
branches as do the black (which deceived them that thought it to be Vitis
Idaea) but from the tops of the sprigs in clusters.

As concerning the names of the other they are touched in their several
descriptions.

The Temperature.
These Vaccinia or Wortle berries are cold even in the later end of the second
degree, and dry also, with a manifest astriction or binding quality.

Red Wortle berries are cold and dry, and also binding.

The Virtues.
The juice of the black Wortle berries is boiled till it become thick, and is
prepared or kept Rob, which is preferred in all things before the raw berries
themselves; for many times whilst they be eaten or taken raw they are
offensive to a weak and cold stomach, and so far are they (...) binding the
belly, or staying the laske, as that they also trouble the same through their
cold and raw quality, which thing the boiled (...) called Rob does not any
whit at all.

They be good for an hot stomach, they (...) thirst, they mitigate and allay
the heat of hot

The people of Cheshire do eat the black (...) in cream and milk as in
these South parts

The red Wortle is not of such a pleasant (...) as the black, and therefore
not so much used to

CHAP. 74. Of the Marish Worts or Fenne-Berries.
Vaccinia palustria. Marish Worts.


The Description.
THe Marish Wortle berries grow upon the bogs in marish or moorish grounds,
creeping thereupon like unto wild Time, having many small (...) and tender
stalks laid almost flat upon the ground, beset with small narrow leaves
fashioned almost like the leaves of Thyme, but lesser: among which come forth
little berries like unto the common black Wortle berrie in shape, but somewhat
longer, sometimes all red, and sometimes spotted or specked with red spots of a
deeper color: in taste rough and astringent.

The Place.
The Marish Wortle grows upon bogs and such like waterish and fenny places,
especially in Cheshire and Staffordshire, where I have found it in great plenty.

The Time.
The Berries are ripe about the end of July, and in August.

The Names.
They are called in High Dutch, (...); (...): that is to say, Fen-Grapes, or
FenBerries, and Marish-worts, or Marish-Berries. Valerius Cordus names them
Oxycoccon. we have called them Vacciniapalustria, or Marish Wortle berries, of
the likeness they have to the other berries: some also call them
Mosse-Berries, or Moore-berries.

The Temperature.
These Wortle berries are cold and dry, having withal a certain thinness of
parts and substance, with a certain binding quality adjoined.

The (...).
They take away the heat of burning agues, and also the drought, they quench
the furious heat

The juice of these also is boiled till it be thick, with sugar added that it
may be kept, which is I have brought this Chapter and the next following from
the place they formerly held, and seated them here amongst the rest of their
(...).


CHAP. 75. Of Cloud-berry.
Vaccinia Nubis. Cloud-berries.


The Description.
THe Cloud-berrie has many small threddy roots, creeping far abroad under
the upper crust of the earth, and also the moss, like unto Couch-grasse, of an
ouerworn reddish color, set here and there with small tufts of hairy strings:
from which rise up two small stalks, hard, tough, and of a woody substance
(never more nor less) on which do stand the leaves like those of the wild
Mallow, and of the same (...), full of small nerves or sinews running in each
part of the same: between the leaves comes up a stalk likewise of a woody
substance, whereon does grow a small flower consisting of five leaves, of an
herby or yellowish green color like those of the wild Auens. After comes
the fruit, green at the first, after yellow, and the sides next the Sun red
when they be ripe; in form almost like unto a little heart, made as it were of
two, but (...) no more but one, open above, and closed together in the bottom,
of a harsh or sharp taste, wherein is contained three or four little white
seeds.

The Place.
This plant grows naturally upon the tops of two high mountains (among the
mossie places) one in (...) called Ingleborough, the other in Lancashire called
Pendle, two of the highest mountains in all England, where the clouds are
lower than the tops of the same all Winter long, whereupon the people of the
country have called them Cloud-berries, found there by a curious gentleman in
the knowledge of plants, called Mr. Hesketh, often remembered.

The Time.
The leaves spring up in May, at which time it floureth: the fruit is ripe in
July.

The Temperature.
The fruit is cold and dry, and very astringent.

The Virtues.
The fruit quenches thirst, cools the stomach, and allayeth inflammations,
being eaten as My friend M. (...) of (...) received a plant hereof out of
Lancashire: and by the shape of the (...) I could not judge it to differ from
the (...) (...) described, page 1273. neither do the descriptions much differ
in any material point: the figures differ more; but I judge this a very (...).


CHAP. 76. Of shrub Heart-Wort of Aethiopia.
The Description.
THis kind of (...), being the Ethiopian Sesely, has blackish stalks of a
woody substance: this plant divides it self into sundry other arms or
branches, which are beset with (...) sat and (...) leaves, fashioned somewhat
like the Wood-binde leaves, but thicker, and Seseli Aethiopicum srutex. (...)
Sesely, or Hart-woort of Ethiopia.
more gummie, approaching very near unto the leaves of Oleander both in shape
and substance, being of a deep or dark green color, and of a very good
savor and smell, and continues green in my garden both winter and Summer,
like the Bay or Laurel. The flowers do grow at the tops of the branches in
yellow rundles like the flowers of Dill; which being past, there succeeds a
dark or duskie seed resembling the seed of (...), and of a bitter taste. The
root is thick and of a woody substance.

The Place.
It is found both in stony places, and on the sea coasts not far from
Marsilles, and likewise in other places of Languedocke: it also grows in
Ethiopia, in the dark and (...) woods: it grows in my garden.

The Time.
It flourishes, floureth and seedeth in July and August.

The Names.
The Grecians call it (...): the Latins likewise Aethiopicum Seseli: the
Egyptians, (...) that is, Dogs horror: in English, Sesely of (...), or
Ethiopian Hartwoort.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Sesely of Ethiopia is thought to have the same faculties that the Sesely of
Marsilles has,

CHAP. 77. Of the Elder tree.
The Kinds.
THere be diverse sorts of Elders, some of the land, and some of the water or
marish grounds; some with very jagged leaves, and others with double flowers,
as shall be declared.

The Description.
1 THe common Elder grows up now and then to the bigness of a mean tree,
casting his boughs all about, and oftentimes remains a shrub: the body is
almost all wooddie, having very little pith within; but the boughs and
especially the young ones which be iointed, are full of pith within, and have
but little wood without: the bark of the body and great arms is rugged and
full of chinks, and of an ill favored wan color like ashes: that of the
boughs is not very smooth, but in color almost like; and that is the outward
bark, for there is another under it nearer to the wood, of color green: the
substance of the wood is sound, somewhat yellow, and that may be easily cleft:
the leaves consist of five or six particular ones fastened to one rib, like
those of the Walnut tree, but every particular one is lesser, nicked in the
edges, and of a rank and (...) smell. The flowers grow on spokie rundles,
which be thin and scattered, of a white color and sweet smell: after them grow
up little berries, green at the first, afterward black, whereout is pressed
a purple juice, which being boiled with Allom and such like things, does serve
very well (...) the Painters use, as also to color vinegar: the seeds in these
are a little flat, and somewhat long. There grows oftentimes upon the bodies
of those old trees or shrubs a certain (...) called Auricula Iudae, or Jews
(...), which is soft, blackish, covered with a skin, somewhat like now and then
to a man's ear, which being plucked off and dried, shrinketh together and
becomes hard. This Elder grows every where, and is the common Elder.

2 There is another also which is rare and strange, for the berries of it are
not black, but white: this is like in leaves to the former.

1 Sambucus. The common Elder tree.
2 Sambucus fructu albo. Elder with white berries.


3 The jagged Elder tree grows like the common Elder in body, branches,
shootes, (...), flowers, fruit, and stinking smell, and differs only in the
fashion of the leaves, which does so much disguise the tree, and put it out of
knowledge, that no man would take it for a kind of Elder, until he has smelt
thereunto, which will quickly show from whence he is descended: for these
strange Elder leaves are very much jagged, rent or cut even unto the middle
rib. From the trunk of this tree as from others of the same kind, proceeds
a certain fleshie excrescence like unto the ear of a man, especially from
those trees that are very old.

4 This kind of Elder has (...) which are white, but the berries read, and
both are not contained in spokie rundles, but in clusters, and grow after the
manner of a cluster of grapes: in leaves and other things it resembles the
common Elder, save that now and then it grows higher.

The Place.
The common Elder grows every where: it is planted about (...)-burrowes for
the shadow of the (...); but that with the white berries is rare: the other
kinds grow in like places; but that with the clustered fruit grows upon
mountains; that with the jagged leaves grows in my garden.

The Time.
These kinds of Elders do flower in April and May, and their fruit is ripe in
September.

The Names.
This tree is called in Greek, (...): in Latin and of the Apothecaries,
Sambucus: of (...) Salicetus, Beza: in high Dutch, Holunder, Holder: in low
Dutch, Ulier: in Italian, Sambuco: in French, Hus and (...): in Spanish, Sauco,
Sauch, Sambugueyro: in English, Elder, and Elder tree: that with the white
berries diverse would have to be called Sambucus sylucstris, or wild Elder, but
Matthiolus calls it Montana, or mountain Elder.

3 (...) laciniatis folijs. The iagged Elder tree.
4 Sambucus racemosa, vel (...). Hearts Elder, or Cluster Elder.


The Temperature and Virtues.
Galen attributes the like faculty to Elder that he does to Danewoort, and
says that it is of a

The leaves and tender crops of common Elder taken in some broth or pottage
open the belly,

The seeds contained within the berries dried are good for such as have the
dropsy, and such as

The leaves of Elder (...) in water until they be very soft, and when they are
almost boiled enough

The green leaves pouned with Deeres suet or Bulls tallow are good to be laid
to hot swellings

The inner and green bark does more forcibly purge: it draws forth choler
and waterie humors;

Of like operation are also the fresh flowers mixed with some kind of meat, as
fried with eggs,

The vinegar in which the dried flowers are steeped are wholesome for the
stomach: being used

The faculty of the seed is somewhat gentler than that of the other parts: it
also moves the

The gelly of the Elder, otherwise called (...) ear, has a binding and drying
quality: the infusion

Dioscorides says, that the tender and green leaves of the Elder tree, with
barley meal parched,

The pith of the young boughs is without quality: This being dried, and
somewhat pressed or

CHAP. 78. Of Marish or Water Elder.
1 Sambucus aquatilis, sieve palnstris. Marish or water Elder.
2 Sambucus Rosea. The Rose Elder.


The Description.
1 MArish Elder is not like to the common Elder in leaves, but in boughs: it
grows after the manner of a little tree: the boughs are covered with a bark
of an ill favored Ash color, as be those of the common Elder: they are set
with ioints by certain distances; and have in them great plenty of white pith,
therefore they have less wood, which is white and brittle: the leaves be
broad, cornered, like almost to Vine leaves, but lesser and foster: among which
come forth spoked rundles which bring forth little flowers, the uttermost
whereof along the borders be greater, of a gallant white color, every little
one consisting of five leaves: the other in the midst and within the borders be
smaller, and it flowers by degrees, and the whole (...) is of a most sweet
smell: after which come the fruit or berries, that are round like those of the
common Elder, but greater, and of a shining red color, and black when they be
withered.

2 Sambucus Rosea, or the Elder Rose grows like an hedge tree, having many
knotty branches or shoots coming from the root, full of pith like the common
Elder: the leaves are like the vine leaves; among which come forth goodly
flowers of a white color, (...) and dashed here and there with a light and
thin Carnation color, and do grow thick and closely compact together, in
quantity and bulk of a man's hand, or rather bigger, of great beauty, and
savoring like the flowers of the Haw-thorne: but in my garden there grows not
any fruit upon this tree, nor in any other place, for ought that I can
understand.

3 This kind is likewise an hedge tree, very like unto the former in stalks
and branches, which are iointed and knotted by distances, and it is full of
white pith: the leaves be likewise cornered: the flowers hereof grow not out of
spoky rundles, but stand in a round thick and globed tuft, in bigness also
and fashion like to the former, saving that they tend to a deeper purple
color, wherein only the difference consists.

The Place.
Sambucus palustris, the water Elder, grows by running streams and water
courses, and in hedges by moist ditch sides.

The Rose Elder grows in Gardens, and the flowers are there doubled by Art,
as it is supposed.

The Time.
These kinds of Elders do flower in April and May, and the fruit of the water
Elder is ripe in September.

The Names.
The water Elder is called in Latin, Sambucus aquatica, and Sambucus
palustris: it is called Opulus, and Platanus, and also Chamaeplatanus, or the
dwarf Plane tree, but not properly: Valerius Cordus makes it to be
Lycostaphylos: the Saxons, says Gesner, do call it Vua Lupina; from whence
Cordus invented the name (...): it is named in High Dutch, (...) holder, and
(...) holder: in low Dutch, Swelcken, and Swelckenhout: of certain French men,
Obiere: in English, Marish Elder, and Whitten tree, Ople tree, and dwarf Plane
tree.

The Rose Elder is called in Latin, Sambucus Rosea, and Sambucus aquatica,
being doubtless a kind of the former water Elder, the flowers being doubled by
art, as we have said: it is called in Dutch, (...) Roose: in English, Gelders
Rose, and Rose Elder.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Concerning the faculties of these Elders, and the berries of the Water Elder,
there is nothing found in any writer, neither can we set down any thing hereof
of our own knowledge.

CHAP. 79. Of Dane-Wort, Wall-Wort, or Dwarf Elder.
The Description.
DAne-wort, as it is not a shrub, neither is it altogether an herby plant, but
as it were a Plant participating of both, being doubtless one of the Elders, as
may appear both by the leaves, flowers, and fruit, as also by the smell and
taste.

Wall-wort is very like unto Elder in leaves, spoky tufts, and fruit, but it
has not a wooddie stalk; it brings sorth only green stalks, which wither
away in Winter: these are edged, and full of joints, like to the young branches
and shoots of Elder: the leaves grow by couples, with distances, wide, and
consist of many small leaves which stand upon a thick ribbed stalk, of which
every one is long, broad, and cut in the edges like a saw, wider and greater
than the leaves of the common Elder tree: at the top of the stalks there grow
tufts of white flowers tipped with red, with five little chiues in them pointed
with black, which turn into black berries like the Elder, in the which be
little long seed: the root is tough, and of a good and reasonable length,
better for Physics use than the leaves of Elder.

Ebulus, sieve Sambucus (...). Dane-wort, or dwarf Elder.


The Place.
Dane-wort grows in vntoiled places near common ways, and in the borders of
fields: it grows plentifully in the lane at Kilburne Abbey by London: also in
a field by S. Ioans near Dartford in Kent: and also in the highway at old
Branford towns end next London, and in many other places.

The Time.
The flowers are perfected in Summer, and the berries in Autumn.

The Names.
It is named in Greek, (...), that is, humilis Sambucus, or low Elder: it is
called in Latin, Ebulus, and Ebulum: in High Dutch, Attich: in Low Dutch,
Adich: in Italian, Ebulo: in French, Hieble: in Spanish, Yezgos: in English,
Wall-wort, Dane-wort, and dwarf Elder.

The Temperature.
Wall-wort is of temperature hot and dry in the third degree, and of a
singular quality, which Galen does attribute unto it, to wast and consume; and
also it has a strange and special faculty to purge by the stool: the roots
be of greatest force, the leaves have the chiefest strength to digest and
consume.

The Virtues.
The roots of Wall-wort boiled in (...) and

The leaves do consume and waste away hard swellings if they be applied
pultis-wise, or in a fomentation

Dioscorides says, that the roots of Wall-wort do soften and open the matrix,
and also correct

The juice of the root of Dane-wort does make the hair black.

The young and tender leaf quenches hot inflammations, being applied with
Barley meal: it

The seed of Wall-wort drunk in the quantity of a dram is the most excellent
purger of waterie

If one scruple of the seed be bruised and taken with syrrup of Roses and a
little Secke, it cures

CHAP. 80. Of Bean Trefoile.
The Description.
1 THe first kind of Anagyris or Laburnum grows like unto a small tree,
garnished with many small branches like the shoots of Oziars, set full of pale
green leaves, always three together, like the Lotus or meadow Trefoile, or
rather like the leaves of Vitex, or the Cytisus bush: among which come forth
many tufts of flowers of a yellow color, not much unlike the flowers of
Broom: when these flowers be gone there succeed small flat cods, wherein are
contained seeds like Galega or the Cytisus bush: the whole plant has little or
no savor at all: the root is soft and gentle, yet of a woody substance.

2 Stinking Trefoile is a shrub like to a little tree, rising up to the height
of six or (...) cubits, or sometimes higher: it sends forth of the stalks
very many slender branches; the bark whereof is of a deep green color: the
leaves stand always three together, like those of (...) or meadow Trefoile, yet
of a lighter green on the upper side: the flowers be long, as yellow as gold,
very like to those of Broom, two or three also joined together: after them
come up broad cods, wherein do lie hard fruit like Kidney Beans, but lesser;
at the first white, afterward tending to a purple, and last of all of a
blackish blew: the leaves and flowers hereof have a filthy smell, like those of
the stinking Gladdon, and so rank withal, as even the passers by are annoied
therewith.

1 Anagyris. Bean Trefoile.
2 Anagyris (...). Stinking Bean Trefoile.


Of Anagyris there are four kinds, two with stinking leaves; the one with
longish leaves, the other with rounder.

Two other whose leaves do not stink; the one of these has sometimes four or
five leaves on one stalk, and the leaves are long and large. The other has
them lesser and narrower.

The Place.
These grow of themselves in most places of Languedocke and Spain, and in
other countries also by high ways sides, as in the Isle of Candy, as Bellonius
writes: the first I have in my garden; the other is a stranger in England.
Master Tradiscant has two sorts hereof in his garden.

The Time.
They flower in June, and the seed is ripe in September.

The Names.
The Bean Trefoile is called in Greek (...), which name remains vncorrupt
in Candy even to this day: in Latin also Anagyris, and Laburnum: of the people
of Anagni in Italy named Eghelo, which is referred unto Laburnum, of which
Pliny writes in his 16. book, 18. chapter. In English, Bean Trefoile, or the
Peascod tree.

The Temperature.
Bean Trefoile, as Galen writes, has a hot and digesting faculty.

The Virtues.
The tender leaves, says Dioscorides, being stamped and laid upon cold
swellings, do waste away

They are drunk with Cute in the weight of a dram against the (...) of the
lungs and do

They cure the headache being drunk with wine; the juice of the root
digesteth and ripeneth Matthiolus writes, the seed not only of stinking Bean
Tresoile does effect, but that also of the other likewise.

CHAP. 81. Of Judas Tree.
Arbor Jude. Judas Tree.


The Description.
IVdas tree is likewise one of the hedge plants: it grows up unto a tree of a
reasonable bigness, covered with a dark colored bark, whereon do grow many
twiggie tough branches of a brown color, garnished with round leaves, like
those of round Birthwoort, or Sowbread, but harder, and of a deeper green
color: among which come forth small flowers like those of Peason, of a purple
color, mixed with red, which turn into long flat cods, pressed hard together,
of a (...) or wan color, wherein is contained small flat seeds, like the
Lentill, or rather like the seed of Medica, fashioned like a little kidney: the
root is great and wooddie.

The Place.
This shrub is found in diverse provinces of Spain, in hedges, and among briers
and brambles: the mountains of Italy, and the fields of Languedocke are not
without this shrub: it grows in my garden.

The Time.
The flowers come forth in the Spring, and before the leaves: the fruit or cods
be ripe in Summer.

The Names.
It is commonly named in Latin Arbor Iudae: some have called it Sycomorus, or
Sycomore tree, and that because the flowers and cods hang down from the bigger
branches: but the right Sycomore tree is like the Fig Tree in fruit, and in
leaves to the Mulberrie tree, whereupon it is so named. Others take it to be
(...): of which Theophrastus writes thus, Cercis brings forth fruit in a
cod; which words are all so few, as that of this no certainty can be gathered,
for therebe more shrubs that bring forth fruit in cods. The French men call it
Guainier, as though they should say, Vaginula: or a little sheath: most of the
Spaniards do name it Algorouo loco, that is, Siliqua syluestris or fatua, wild
or foolish cod: others, Arbold' amor, for the braveness sake: it may be called
in English, Judas tree, for that it is thought to be that whereon Judas did
hang himself, and not upon the Elder tree, as it is vulgarly said.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The temperature and virtues of this shrub are unknown, and not found out: for
whereas Matthiolus makes this to be Acacia, by adding falfely thorns unto it,
it is but a surmise.

CHAP. 82. Of the Carob tree, or Saint John's Bread.
The Description.
THe Carob tree is also one of those that bear cods; it is a tree of a middle
bigness, very full of boughs: the leaves long, and consist of many set
together upon one middle rib, like those of the Ash, but every particular one
of them is broader, harder and rounder: the fiuit or long cods in some places
are a foot in length, in other places shorter by half, an inch broad, smooth,
and thick; in which do lie flat and broad seeds: the cods themselves are of a
sweet taste, and are eaten of diverse, but not before they be gathered and
dried; for being as yet green, though ripe, they are unpleasant to be eaten by
reason of their ill sauoured taste.

Ceratia siliqua, sive Ceratonia. The Carob tree.


The Place.
This grows in Apulia, a Province of the kingdom of Naples, and also in
diverse vntoiled places in Spain: it is likewise found in India and other
countries Eastward, where the cods are so full of sweet juice as that it is
used to preserve Ginger and other fruits, as Matthiolus shows. Strabo lib.
15. says, that Aristobulus reports how there is a tree in India of no great
bigness, which has great cods, ten inches long, full of honey; Quas qui (...)
non facile (...); which thing peradventure is only to be understood of the
green cods, and those that are not yet dry: it is very well known in the coasts
of Nicea and Liguria in Italy, as also in all the tracts and coasts of the West
Indies, and Virginia. It grows also in sundry places of Palestine, where
there is such plenty of it, that it is left unto swine and other wild beasts
to seed upon, as our Acornes and Beech mast. Moreover, both young and old feed
thereon for pleasure and some have eaten thereof to supply and help the
necessary nourishment of their bodies. This of some is called Saint John's
bread, and thought to be that which is translated Locusts, whereon S. John did
feed when he was in the wilderness, besides the wild honey whereof he did also
eat; but there is small certainty of this: but most certain that the people of
that country do feed upon these cods, in Greek called (...): in Latin,
Siliquae: but Saint John's food is called in Greek (...): which word is often
used in the Revelation written by Saint John, and translated Locusts. Now we
must also remember that this Greek word has two several interpretations or
significations, for taken in the good part, it signifies a kind of creeping
creature, or fly, which hoppeth or skippeth up and down, as does the
grasshopper; of which kind of creatures it was lawful to eat, Leuit. 11. 22.
and Mat. 3. 4. It signifies also those Locusts which came out of the smoke of
the bottomless pit, mentioned Apoc. 9. v. 3. 4. etc. which were like unto horses
prepared for battle. The Hebrew word which the English translators have turned
Grasshoppers, Tremelius daresnot give the name Locust unto it, but calls it by
the Hebrew name Arbis, after the letters and Hebrew name, saying thus in the
note upon the 22. verse of the 11. chapter of Leuit. These kinds of creeping
things neither the Hebrews nor the Historiographers, nor our selves do know
what they mean: wherefore we still retain the Hebrew words, for all the four
kinds thereof: but it is certain that the East country Grasshoppers and
Locusts were sometimes used in meat, as Math. 3. 4. and Marc. 1. 6. Plin lib.
11. Nature. Histor. cap 26. and 29. Thus far Tremelius and Iunius. By that which
has been said it appears what S. John the Baptist fed of, under the title
Locusts: and that it is nothing like unto this fruit Ceratia siliqua: I rather
take the husks or shells of the fruit of this tree to be the cods or husks
whereof the prodigal child would have fed, but none gave them unto him,
though the swine had their fill thereof. These cods being dry are very like
bean cods, as I have often seen. I have sown the seeds in my garden, where
they have prospered exceeding well.

There is no doubt but the (...) or Siliquae mentioned in Saint Lukes Gospel,
Chap. 15. v. 16. were the cods or (...) of this tree. I cannot believe that
either the fruit of this or the Locusts, were the (...) mentioned in the third
chapter of Saint Mat. v. 4. But I am of the opinion of the Greek Father
Isodore Pelusiota, who, lib. 1. Epist. 132. has these words, (...) etc. That
is: The Acrides which John fed upon are not living creatures like to Beetles,
as some unlearnedly suppose, far be it from us so to think; but they are the
tender buds of herbs and plants or trees; neither on the other side is the
Meli agrion any herb so called, but mountain honey gathered by wild Bees,
etc.

The Time.
The Carob tree brings forth fruit in the beginning of the Spring, which is
not ripe till Autumn.

The Names.
The Carob tree is called (...): in Latin likewise, Ceratonia: in Spanish,
Garouo: in English, Carob tree; and of some, Bean tree, and Saint John's Bread:
the fruit or cod is named (...): in Latin Siliqua, or Siliqua dulcis: in
diverse shops, Xylocaracta: in other shops in Italy, Carobe, or Carobole: of the
Apothecaries of Apulia, Salequa: it is called in Spanish, Alfarobas, or
Algarovas: and without an article Garouas: in high Dutch, S. Johans (...): that
is to say, Sancti Johan. panis, or S. John's Bread, neither is it known by any
other name in the Low Countries: Some call it in English, Carob.

The Temperature.
The Carob tree is dry and astringent, as is also the fruit, and contains in
it a certain sweetness as Galen says.

The Virtues.
The fruit of the Carob Tree, being eat when it is green, does gently loose
the belly; but

CHAP. 83. Of Cassia Fistula, or Pudding Pipe.
The Description.
CAssia purgatrix, or Cassia fistula, grows up to be a fair tree, with a
tough bark like leather, of the color of Box, whereupon some have supposed it
to take the Greek name (...), in Latin, Coriaceus: the arms and branches of
this are small and limber, beset with many goodly leaves, like those of the
Wall-nut tree: among which come forth small flowers of a yellow color, compact
or consisting of six little leaves, like the flowers of Chelidonium minus, or
Pile-woort: after these be vaded, there succeed goodly black round, long cods,
whereof some are two foot long, and of a woody substance: in these coddes are
contained a black pulpe, very sweet and soft, of a pleasant taste, and serving
to many uses in Physic, in which pulpe lies the seed couched in little cells
or partitions: this seed is flat and brownish, not unlike the seed of Ceratia
Siliqua, and in other respects very like unto it also.

The Place.
This tree grows much in Egypt, especially about Memphis and Alexandria, and
most parts of Barbary, and is a stranger in these parts of Europe.

The Time.
The Cassia tree grows green winter and summer: it sheddeth his old leaves
when new are come, by means whereof it is never void of leaves: it floureth
early in the spring, and the fruit is ripe in Autumn.

Cassia fistula. Pudding Pipe tree.


The Names.
This tree was unknown to the old writers, or so little accounted of, as that
they have made no mention of it at all: the Arabians were the first that
esteemed of it, by reason they knew the use of the pulpe which is found in the
Pipes: and after them the later Grecians, as Actuarius and other of his time,
by whom it was named (...) that is to say in Latin, Casia nigra. The fruit
thereof, says Actuarius in his fist book, is like a long pipe, having within
it a thick humor or moisture, which is not congealed all alike through the
pipe, but is separated and divided with many partitions, being thin woody
skins. The Apothecaries call it Casia (...), and with a double ss Cassia (...):
it is called in English after the Apothecaries word, Cassia fistula, and may
also be Englished, Pudding Pipe, because the cod or Pipe is like a pudding: but
the old Cassia fistula, or (...) in Greek, is that sweet and odoriferous bark
that is rolled together, after the manner of a long and roundpipe, now named of
the Apothecaries Cassia lignea, which is a kind of Cinnamon.

The Temperature.
The pulpe of this pipe which is chiefly in request, is moist in the later end
of the first degree, and little more than temperatly hot.

The Virtues.
The pulpe of Casia (...) extracted with violet water, is a most sweet and
pleasant medicine, and

Cassia is good for such as be vexed with hot agues, pleurisies, iaundice, or
any other inflammation

Cassia is good for the reins and kidneies, drives forth gravel and the
stone, especially if it be

It purges and purifieth the blood, making it more clean than before,
breaking therewith the

It dissolueth all phlegmons and inflammations of the breast, lungs, and the
rough artery called Trachea arteria, easing those parts exceeding well.

Cassia abateth the vehemency of thirst in agues, or any hot disease
whatsoever, especially if it be Intybum, Cichoreum, or Solanum, depured
according to Art: it abateth also the intemperate heat of the reins, if it be
received with diureticke simples, or with the (...) on of Licorice only, and
will not suffer the stone to grow in such persons as do receive and use this
medicine:

The best Cassia for your use is to be taken out of the most full, most heavy,
and fairest cods, or canes,

Cassia being outwardly applied, takes away the roughness of the skin, and
being laid upon hot

Many singular compounded medicines are made with this Cassia, which here to
recite belongs

CHAP. 84. Of the Lentiske, or Masticke tree.
The Description.
(...). The Masticke tree.


The Description.

THe Mastick tree grows commonly like a shrub without any great body, rising
up with many springs and shoots like the Hasell; and oftentimes it is of the
height and bigness of a mean tree: the boughs thereof are tough, and
flexible; the bark is of a yellowish red color, pliable likewise, and hard to
be broken: there stand upon one rib for the most part 8 leaves, set upon a
middle rib, much like to the (...) of Licorice, but harder, of a deep green
color, and oftentimes somewhat red in the brims, as also having diverse vains
running along of a red color, and something strong of smell: (...) (...) be
mossie, and grow in clusters upon long (...): after them come up the berries,
of the (...) of Vetches, green at the first, afterward of a purple color,
and last of all, black, fat, (...) (...), with a hard black stone within; the
(...) (...)- of is white, of which also is made (...), as (...) witnesses: it
brings forth likewise cods besides the fruit (which may be rather (...) an
excrescence, than a cod) writhed like a (...); in which lies at the first a
liquour, and (...) when this waxes stale, little living things like unto
gnats, as in the Turpentine horns, and in the folded leaves of the Elm tree,
There comes forth of the Mastick tree a Rosin, but dry, called Masticke.

The Place.
The Masticke tree grows in many regions, as in Syria, Candy, Italy,
Languedocke, and in most Provinces of Spain: but the chiefest is in Chios an
Island in Greece, in which it is diligently and specially looked unto, and that
for the Masticke sake, which is there gathered from the husbanded Masticke
trees by the inhabitants every year most carefully, and is sent from thence
into all parts of the world.

The Time.
The flowers be in their pride in the spring time, and the berries in Autumn:
the Mastick must be gathered about the time when the Grapes be.

The Names.
This tree is named in Greek (...): in Latin, Lentiscus: in Italian,
Lentisque: in Spanish, (...), and (...): in English, Masticke tree; and of
some, Lentiske tree.

The Rosin is called in Greek (...), and (...): in Latin, Lentiscina Resina,
and likewise, (...): in shops, (...): in Italian, (...): in high and low Dutch
and French also, Mastic: in Spanish, (...), (...), and (...): in English,
Masticke.

Clusius writes, that the Spaniards call the oil that is pressed out of the
berries, (...) (...) Mata.

The Temperature.
The leaves, bark, and gum of the Masticke tree are of a mean and temperate
heat, and are dry in the second degree, and somewhat astringent.

The Virtues.
The leaves and bark of the Masticke tree stop the laske, the bloody flixe,
the spitting of blood, the pissing of blood, and all other fluxes of blood:
(...) are also good against the falling sickness, the falling down of the
mother, and coming forth of the fundament.

The gum Masticke has the same virtue, if it be relented in wine and given to
be drunk.

Masticke chewed in the mouth is good for the stomach, staieth vomiting,
increases (...),

The same infused in Rose water is excellent to wash the mouth withal, to
fasten loosete eth,

The same spread upon a piece of leather or velvet, and laid plaisterwise upon
the temples, staieth

It prevails much against ulcers and wounds, being put into digestiues and
healing Unguents.

It draws phlegm sorth of the head gently and without trouble.

It is also used in waters which serve to cleanse and make fair the face with.

The decoction of this fills up hollow ulcers with flesh if they be bathed
therewith.

It knitteth broken bones, staieth eating ulcers, and provoke urine.

CHAP. 85. Of the Turpentine Tree.
1 Terebint hus. The Turpentine tree.
2 Terebint hus latifolia. The broad leafed Turpentine tree.


The Description.
1 THe first Turpentine Tree grows to the height of a tall and fair tree,
having many long boughs or branches, dispersed abroad, beset with long leaves,
consisting of sundry other small leaves, each whereof resembles the Bay leaf,
growing one against another upon a little stem or middle rib, like unto the
leaves of the Ash tree: the flowers be small and reddish, growing upon clusters
or bunches that turn into round berries, which at their beginning are green,
afterward reddish, but being ripe wax black, or of a dark blew color,
clammie, full of fat and oilous in substance, and of a pleasant savor: this
plant bears an empty cod, or crooked horn somewhat reddish, wherein are
found small flies, worms or gnats, bred and engendered of a certain humorous
matter, which cleaves to the inner sides of the said cods or horns, which
worms have no physical use at all. The right (...) issues out of the
branches of those trees, if you do cut or wound them, the which is fair and
clear, and better than that which is gathered from the bark of the (...) tree.

2 The second kind of Turpentine tree is very like unto the former, but that
it grows not so great: yet the leaves are greater and broader, and of the
same fashion, but very like to the leaves of the Pistacia tree. The berries are
first (...) a scarlet color, and when they be ripe of a sky color. The great
horned cods are sharp pointed, and somewhat (...), consisting as it were of
the substance of gristles. And out of those bladders being broken do creep and
come small flies or gnats, bred of a fuliginous excrement, and engendered in
those bladders. The tree does (...) yield his Turpentine by dropping like the
former.

The Place.
These trees grow, as Dioscorides says, in Jury, Syria, Cyprus, Afric, and
in the Islands called Cyclades. Bellonius reporreth that there are found great
store of them in Syria, and Cilicia, and are brought from thence to Damascus to
be sold. Clusius says, that (...) grows of it self in Languedocke, and in
very many places of Portingale and Spain, but for the most part like a shrub,
and without bearing Turpentiue.

Theophrastus writes, that it grows about the hill Ida, and in Macedonia,
short, in manner of a shrub, and writhed; and in Damascus and Syria great, in
manner of a small tree: he also (...) down a certain male Turpentine tree,
and a female: the male, says he, is barren, and the female fruitful. And of
these he makes the one with a berry red at the first, of the bigness of a
Lentill, which cannot come to ripenes; and the other with the fruit green at
the first, afterward somewhat of a yellowish red, and in the end black,
waxing ripe in the spring, of the bigness of the Grecians Bean, and rosenny.

He also writes of a certain Indian Turpentine tree, that is to say, a tree
like in boughs and leaves to the right Turpentine tree, but differing in
fruit, which is like unto (...).

The (...).
The flowers of the Turpentine tree come forth in the spring together with the
new buds; the berries are ripe in September and October, in the time of Grape
gathering. The horns (...) about the same time.

The Names.
This tree is called in Greek (...), and also many times (...): in Latin,
Terebinthus: in Italian, Terebintho: in Spanish, Cornicabra: in French,
Terebinte: in English, Turpentine tree: the Arabians call it Botin, and with an
article Albotin.

The Rosin is surnamed (...): in Latin, Terebinthina: in high Dutch,
Termintijn: in English, Turpentine, and right Turpentine: in the Arabian
language Albotia, who name the fruit Granum viride, or green berries.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The bark, leaves, and fruit of the Turpentine tree do somewhat bind, they
are hot in the second Dioscorides says, but it hurts the stomach.

It provoke urine, helps those that have bad spleenes, and is drunk in
wine against the bitings Phalangia.

The Rosin of the Turpentine tree excels all other Rosins, according to
Dioscorides his opininion: Galen writes, that the Rosin of the masticke tree
bears the pre-eminence, and then the Turpentine.

This Rosin has also an astringent or binding faculty, and (...) not so much
as masticke, but it

The fruit of Turpentine provoke urine and stirs up fleshly lust.

The Rosine of this tree, which is the right Turpentine, loses the belly,
opens the stoppings

The like quantity washed in water diverse times until it be white, then must
be put thereto the

CHAP. 86. Of the Frankincense tree.
The Description.
THe tree from which Frankincense flows is but low, and has leaves like the
Mastick tree; yet some are of opinion that the leaf is like the leaf of a
Pear tree, and of a grassie color: the rind is like that of the Bay tree,
whereof there are two kinds: the one grows in mountains and rockie places,
the other in the plain: but those in the plains are much worse than those of
the mountains: the gum hereof is also blacker, fitter to mingle with Pitch,
and such other stuff to trim ships, than for other uses.

Arbor Thurifera. The Frankincense tree.
Thuris Limpidifolium Lobelij. The supposed leaf of the Frankincense tree.


Theuet in his Cosmographie says, that the Frankincense tree does resemble a
gummie or rosiny Pine tree, which yields a juice that in time grows hard,
and is called Thus, Frankincense, in whom is found sometime certain small
grains like unto gravel, which they call the Manna of Frankincense.

Of this there is in Arabia two other sorts, the one, the gum whereof is
gathered in the Dog days when the Sun is in Leo, which is white, pure, clear,
and shining. Pena writes that he has seen the clear Frankincense called
Limpidum, and yielding a very sweet smell when it is burnt, but the (...) has
been seldom seen; which the Physician Launanus gave to Pena and Lobel,
together with (...) pieces of the Rosine, which he had of certain mariners,
but he could affirm nothing of certainty whether it were the leaf of the
Frankincense, or of some other Pine tree, yielding the like (...) or gum. It
is, says he (which does seldom happen in other leaves) from the lower part or
foot of the (...), to the upper end, as it were doubled, consisting of two thin
rindes or coats, with a sheath (...) (...) and a half long, at the top gaping
open like a hood or fools coxcombe, and as it were (...) with a helm at, which
is a thing seldom seen in a leaf, but is proper to the flowers of Napellus,
or Lonchitis, as writers affirm; the other is gathered in the spring, which is
reddish, worser than (...) other in price or value, because it is not so well
concocted in the heat of the Sun. The Arabians wound this tree with a knife,
that the liquour may flow out more abundantly, whereof some trees yield
threescore pounds of Frankincense.

The Place.
Dioscorides says it grows in Arabia, and especially in that quarter which
is called Thurifera, the best in that country is called (...), and is round,
and if it be broken, is fat within, and when it is burned does quickly yield a
smell: next to it in goodness is that which grows in Smilo, lesser than the
other, and more yellow.

The Time.
The time is already declared in the description.

The Names.
It is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Thus: in Italian, Incenso: in Dutch,
Uueirauch: in Spanish, Encenso: in French, Enceus: in English, Frankincense,
and Incense: in the Arabian tongue, (...), and of some few, Cond. r. The Rosin
carries the same name; but in shops it is called (...), os the Greek name and
article put before it.

The Temperature and Virtues.
It has, as Dioscorides says, a power to heat and bind.

It drives away the dimnesse of the eyesight, fills up hollow (...), it
closes raw wounds, staieth

Galen writes thus of it; Thus does heat in the second degree, and dry in
the first, and has some

The fume or smoke of it has a more drier and hotter quality than the
Frankincense it self, being

It does also cleanse and fill up the ulcers in the eyes, like unto Myrrh: thus
far Galen.

Dioscorides says, that if it be drunk by a man in health, it drives him into
a frenzy: but there are

Auicen reports that it does help and strengthen the wit and understanding,
but the often taking

CHAP. 87. Of Fisticke Nuts.
Pistacia. The Fisticke Nut.


The Description.
THe tree which bears Fisticke Nuts is like to the Turpentine tree: the
leaves hereof be greater than those of the Masticke (...), but (...) after the
same manner, and in like order that they are, being of a faint yellow color out
of a green; the fruit or Nuts do hang by their stalks in clusters, being
greater than the Nuts of Pine Apples, and much lesser than Almonds: the husks
without is of a grayish color sometimes reddish, the shell brickle and white;
the substance of the kernel green; the taste sweet, pleasant to be eaten, and
something sweet of smell.

The Place.
Fisticke Nuts grow in Persia, Arabia, Syria, and in India; now they are made
free Denizons in Italy, as in Naples and in other Provinces there.

The Time.
This tree does flower in May, and the fruit is ripe in September.

The Names.
This Nut is called in Greek (...) in Athenaeus: Nicander Colophonius in his
book of Treacles names it (...): Possidonius names it (...): others, (...):
the Latins observing the same terms, have named it Pistacion, Bistacion, or
Phistacion: the Apothecaries, Fistici: the Spaniards, Alhocigos, and (...): in
Italian, (...) English, Fisticke Nut.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The kernels of the Fisticke Nuts are oftentimes eaten as be those of the Pine
(...) (...)

They are good for those that have the phthisicke, or rotting away of the
lungs.

They concoct, ripen, and cleanse forth raw humors that cleave to the lights
and chest.

They open the stoppings of the liver, and be good for the infirmities of the
(...); they also remove out of the kidneies sand and gravel; and assuage their
pain: they are also good for ulcers.

The kernels of Fisticke nuts condited, or made into (...), with sugar, and
eaten, do procure

CHAP. 88. Of the Bladder Nut.
Nux vesicaria. The Bladder Nut.


The Description.
THis is a low tree, having diverse young springs growing forth of the root: the
substance of the wood is white, very hard and sound; the bark is of a light
green: the leaves consist of five little ones, which be nicked in the edges
like those of the Elder, but lesser, not so green nor rank of smell. It has
the pleasant whitish flowers of Bryonie or Labrusca, both in smell and shape,
which turn into small cornered bladders of winter Cherries, called Alkakengie,
but of an ouerworne greenish color: in these bladders are contained two little
nuts, and sometimes no more but one, lesser than the Hasell nut, but greater
than the Ram Cich, with a wooddie shel and somewhat red: the kernel within is
something green; in taste at the first sweet, but afterward loathsome, and
ready to provoke vomit.

The Place.
It grows in Italy, Germany and France; it grows likewise at the house of
sir Walter Culpepper near Flimmewell in the Weild of Kent, as (...) in the
Friar yard without Saint Paul's gate in Stamford, and about Spalding Abbey, and
in the garden of the right honorable the Lord Treasurer my very good Lord and
Master, and by his house in the Strand. It grows also in my garden, and in
the garden hedges of sir Francis Carew near Croydon, seven miles from London.

The Time.
This tree floureth in May, the Nuts be ripe in August and September.

The Names.
It is commonly called in high Dutch, (...), which signifies in low Dutch
(...): diverse call it in Latin Pistacium Germanicum: we think it best to call
it Nux vesicaria. (...) in his Epistles does judge the Turks (...) and Hebulben
to agree with this: Gulielmus (...) affirms, Coulcoul to be used of diverse in
Constantinople for a dainty, especially when they be new brought out of Egypt.
This plant has no old name, unless it be Staphylodendron (...): forwhich it
is taken of the later writers: and Pliny has written of it in his 16. book,
16. chap. There is also (says he) beyond the Alps a tree, the timber whereof
is very like to that of white Maple, and is called Staphylodendron, it bears
cods, and in those kernels, having the (...) of the Hasel nut. It is called in
English, S. Anthonies nuts, wild Pistacia, or Bladder nuts: the Italians call
it (...) Saluaticke: the French men call it Baguenaudes a patre nostres, for
that the Friars do use to make (...) of the nuts.

The Temperature and Virtues.
These nuts are moist and full of superfluous raw humors, and therefore they
easily procure a readiness

They have as yet no use in medicine, yet notwithstanding some have attributed
unto them some

CHAP. 89. Of the Hasell tree.
The Description.
1 THe Hasell tree grows like a shrub or small tree, parted into boughs
without ioints, tough and pliable: the leaves are broad, greater and fuller of
wrinckles than those of the Alder tree, cut in the edges like a saw, of color
green, and on the backside more white, the bark is thin: the root is thick,
strong, and growing deep; in stead of flowers hang down catkins, aglets, or
blowings, slender, and well compact: afterwhich come the Nuts standing in a
tough cup of a green color, and iagged at the upper end, like almost unto the
beards in Roses. The shell is smooth and wooddie: the kernel within consists
of a white, hard, and sound pulpe, and is covered with a thin skin, oftentimes
red, most commonly white; this kernel is sweet and pleasant unto the taste.

1 Nux Auellana, sive Corylus. The Filberd Nut.
2 Corylus syluestris. The wild hedge Nut.


2 Corylus syluestris is our hedge Nut or Hasell Nut tree, which is very well
known, and therefore needs not any description: whereof there are also
sundry sorts, some great, some little, some rathe ripe, some later, as also one
that is manured in our gardens, which is very great, bigger than any Filberd,
and yet a kind of Hedge nut: this then that has been said shall suffice for
HedgeNuts.

3 The small Turkey Nut tree grows but low, and the leaves grow without order,
upon the twigs, they are in shape like those of the former, but somewhat
longer: the chief difference consists in the fruit, which is small, and like
an Hasell Nut, but shorter: the husk, wherein sometimes one, otherwhiles more
Nuts are contained, is very large, tough, and hard, divided both above and
below into a great many iags, which on every side cover and hold in the Nuts,
and these cups are very rough without, but smooth on the inside. (...) first
set this (...) (having received it from Constantinople) by the name of Auellana
pumila (...).

3 Auellana pumila (...) cum suo (...). The Filberd Nut of Constantinople.


The Place.
The Hasell trees do commonly grow in Woods and in dankish vntoiled places:
they are also set in Orchards, the Nuts whereof are better, and of a sweeter
taste, and be most commonly red within.

The Time.
The (...) or aglets come forth very timely, before winter be fully past, and
fall away in March or April, so soon as the leaves come forth: the Nuts be
ripe in August.

The Names.
This shrub is called in Latin, Corylus: in Greek, (...), that is, (...)
Pontica, or Ponticke Nut: in High Dutch, Hasel strauck: in Low Dutch, Haseleer:
in English, Hasel tree, and Filberd tree; but the Filberd tree is properly that
which grows in gardens and Orchards, and whose fruit is commonly wholly
covered over with the husk, and the shell is thinner.

The Nut is named in Latin, Nux Pontica, (...) Nux, (...) Nux: it is also
called Nux Praenestina, Nux (...), and commonly Nux auellana, by which name it
is usually known to the Apothecaries: in High Dutch, Hasel Nusz: in Low Dutch,
Hasel Noten: in Italian, Nocciuole, (...), (...): in French, (...) and (...):
in Spanish, Auellanas: in English, Hasell nut, and Filberd.

These Nuts that have their skins red are the garden and planted Nuts, and
the right Pontick Nuts or Filberds: they are called in High Dutch, Rhurnusz,
and Rotnusz: in Low Dutch, Roode Hasel Noten: in English, Filberds, and red
Filberds.

The other Nuts which be white are judged to be wild.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Hasell Nuts newly gathered, and not as yet dry, contain in them a certain
superfluous moisture,

The kernells of Nuts made into milk like Almonds do mightily bind the belly,
and are good

The same does cool exceedingly in hot fevers and burning agues.

The catkins are cold and dry, and likewise binding: they also stay the lask.

The kernels of Nuts rather cause than cure the bloody flix and lasks,
wherefore they are not

CHAP. 90. Of the Wall-nut tree.
Nux Iuglans. The (...) tree.


The Description.
THis is a great tree with a thick and tall body: the bark is somewhat
green, and tending to the color of ashes, and oftentimes full of clefts: the
boughs spread themselves far abroad: the leaves consist of five or six fastened
to one rib, like those of the Ash tree, and with one standing on the top, which
be broader and longer than the particular leaves of the Ash, smooth also, and
of a strong smell: the catkins or aglets come forth before the Nuts: these Nuts
do grow hard to the stalk of the leaves, by couples, or by three and three;
which at the first when they be yet but tender have a sweet smell, and be
covered with a green husk: under that is a woody shell in which the kernel
is contained, being covered with a thin skin, parted almost into four parts
with a woody skin as it were: the inner pulp whereof is white, sweet and
pleasant to the taste; and that is when it is new gathered, for after it is dry
it becomes oily and rank.

The Place.
The Walnut tree grows in fields near common highways, in a fat and
fruitful ground, and in orchards: it prospers on high fruitful banks, it
loves not to grow in waterie places.

The Time.
The leaves together with the catkins come forth in the Spring: the Nuts are
gathered in August.

The Names.
The tree is called in Greek, (...): in Latin, Nux, which name does signify
both the tree and the fruit: in high Dutch, Auszbaum: in Low Dutch, Aoote
boome, and Aootelaer: in French, (...): in Spanish, Nogueyra: in English,
Walnut tree, and of some, Walsh nut tree. The Nut is called in Greek, (...),
that is to say, Nux Regia, or the Kingly Nut: it is likewise named Nux Inglans,
as though you should say Iouis glans, Jupiters Acorne; or Iuvans glans, the
helping Acorne: and of diverse, Persica Nux, or the Persian Nut: in High Dutch,
(...) Nusz, and Baumnusz: in Low Dutch, Ookernoten, (...) Noten: In Italian,
Noci: in French, Noix: in Spanish, Nuezes, and Nous: in English, Walnut; and of
some, Walsh nut.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The fresh kernels of the nuts newly gathered are pleasant to the taste: they
are a little cold, and

The dry nuts are hot and dry, and those more which become oily and rank:
these be very hurtful

Dry Nuts taken fasting with a fig and a little Rue withstand poison, prevent
and preserve the

The green and tender Nuts boiled in Sugar and eaten as Suckad, are a most
pleasant and delectable

The oil of Walnuts made in such manner as oil of Almonds, makes smooth the
hands and

Milk made of the kernels, as Almond milk is made, cools and pleases the
(...) of the

With onions, salt, and honey, they are good against the biting of a mad dog or
man, if they be

Being both eaten, and also applied, they heal in short time, as Dioscorides
says, Gangrens, Carbuncles,

The outward green husk of the Nuts has a notable binding faculty.

Galen devised and taught to make of the juice thereof a medicine for the
mouth, singular good

The leaves and first buds have a certain binding quality, as the same
Author shows; yet

Some of the later Physicians use these for baths and lotions for the body, in
which they have a

CHAP. 91. Of the Chestnut tree.
The Description.
1 THe Chestnut tree is a very great an high tree: it casts forth very many
boughs: the body is thick, and sometimes of so great a compass as that two
men can hardly fathom it: the timber or substance of the wood is sound and
durable: the leaves be great, rough, wrinkled, nicked in the edges, and greater
than the particular leaves of the Walnut tree. The blowings or catkins be
slender, long, and green: the fruit is enclosed in round a rough and prickly
husk like to an hedgehog or Vrchin, which opening it self does let fall the
ripe fruit or Nut. This nut is not round, but flat on the one side, smooth, and
sharp pointed: it is covered with a hard shell, which is tough and very
smooth, of a dark brown color: the meat or inner substance of the nut is
hard and white, and covered with a thin skin which is under the shell.

2 The Horse Chestnut grows likewise to be a very great tree, spreading his
great and large arms or branches far abroad, by which means it makes a very
good cool shadow. These branches are garnished with many beautiful leaves,
cut or divided into five, six, or seven sections or divisions, like to the Cink
foil, or rather like the leaves of Ricinus, but bigger. The flowers grow at
the top of the stalks, consisting of four small leaves like the Cherry
blossom, which turn into round rough prickly heads like the former, but more
sharp and harder: the nuts are also rounder. The flowers of this, says
Clusius (whose figure of them I here give you) come out of the bosom of the
leaf which is the uppermost of the branch, and they are many in number growing
upon pretty long foot-stalkes, consisting each of them of four white leaves
of no great bigness; the two uppermost are a little larger than the rest,
having round purple spots in their middles: out of the middle of the flower
come forth many yellowish threads with golden pendants. The fruit is contained
in a prickly husk that opens in three parts, and it is rounder and not so
sharp pointed as 1 Castanea. Chestnut tree.
2 Castanea Equina cum flore. Horse Chestnut tree in flower.
Castaneae Equinae (...).
3 Castaneae Peruanae fructus.
the ordinary (...), neither (...) (...) coat has it any peeling within as the
other has, neither is it of so good a taste.

3 This Americane Chestnut is almost round, but that it is a little flatted on
the sides, especially whereas it is fastened to the stalk: the utter coat is
sufficiently thick, yet brittle, and as it were fungous, of a brownish yellow
color: under this are abundance of small yet stiff prickles, fast sticking
to the shell that contains the kernel: the shell it self is brownish, not
thick, but tough and hard to break, smooth and shining on the inside, wherein
is contained a kernel of the bigness and color of an hares kidney, white
within, and sweet in taste like an almond or the common Chestnut. Clusius calls
this Castanea Peruana, or Chestnut of Peru; and he says he had it from the
famous Geographer Abraham Ortelius, who had it sent him by Benedictus Arias
Montanus. The figure is expressed under that of the Horse Chestnut.

The Place.
The first grows on mountains and shadowie places, and many times in the
valleys: they love a soft and black soil. There be sundry woods of Chestnuts
in England, as a mile and a half from Feuersham in Kent, and in sundry other
places: in some countries they be greater and pleasanter: in others smaller,
and of worse taste.

The Horse Chestnut grows in Italy, and in sundry places of the East
countries. It is now growing with Mr. Tradescant at South Lambeth.

The Time.
The blowings or aglets come forth with the leaves in April; but the Nuts
later, and be not ripe till Autumn.

The Names.
The Chestnut tree bears the name of the Nut both in Greek and Latin: in
High Dutch Kestenbaum, and Kastanibaum: in Low Dutch, Castaniboom: in French,
Castaignier: in (...), Chestnut tree.

The Nut is called in Greek, (...): in Latin, Castanea, Iouis glans, Sardinia
glans: in High Dutch Kesten: in Low Dutch, Castanien: in Italian, Castagne: in
French, Chastaigne: in Spanish, (...), Castanas: in English, Chestnut: the
greater Nuts be named of the Italians, Marroni: of the (...) men and of diverse
base Almaines, Marons.

The Horse Chestnut is called in Latin, Equina Castanea: in English, Horse
Chestnut, for that the people of the East countries do with the fruit thereof
cure their horses of the cough, shortness of breath, and such like diseases.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Our common Chestnuts are very dry and binding, and be neither hot nor cold,
but in a mean between

Of all the Acornes, says Galen, the Chestnuts are the chiesest, and do only
of all the wild

Being boiled or roasted they are not of so hard digestion, they more easily
descend, and are less

Some (...), that of raw Chestnuts dried, and afterward turned into meal,
there is made a

An Electuarie of the meal of Chestnuts and honey is very good against the
cough and spitting

The bark of the Chestnut tree boiled in wine and drunk, stops the laske, the
bloody flix, and

CHAP. 92. Of the Beech tree.
The Description.
THe Beech is an high tree, with boughs spreading oftentimes in manner of a
circle, and with a thick body having many arms: the bark is smooth: the
timber is white, hard, and very profitable: the leaves be smooth, thin, broad,
and lesser than those of the black Poplar: the (...) or blowings be also
lesser and shorter than those of the Birch tree, and yellow: the fruit or Mast
is contained in a husk or cup that is prickly, and rough bristled, yet not so
much as that of the Chestnut: which fruit being taken forth of the shells or
vrchin husks, be covered with a soft and smooth skin like in color and
smoothness to the Chestnuts, but they be much lesser, and of another form,
that is to say, traingled or three cornered: the kernel within is sweet, with
a certain astriction or binding quality: the roots be few, and grow not
deep, and little lower than under the turfe.

The Place.
The Beech tree loves a plain and open country, and grows very plentifully
in many (...) and desert places of Sussex, Kent, and sundry other countries.

The Time.
The Beech floureth in April and May, and the fruit is ripe in September, at
what time the Dear do eat the same very greedily, as greatly delighting
therein; which has caused forresters and huntsmen to call it Buck-mast.

Fagus. The Beech.


The Names.
The tree is called in Greek, (...): in Latin, Fagus: in High Dutch,
Buchbaum, or Buch: in Low Dutch, Bukenboom: in Italian, Faggi: in Spanish,
Haia, Faia, and Fax: in French, Fan, or Hestre: in English, Beech tree,
Beech-mast, and Buck-mast.

The fruit is called in Latin, (...) Fagi: in Greek, (...): in Low Dutch,
Bueken nootkens: in French, Feign: in English, Beech-mast. Dioscorides reckons
the Beech among the Acorne trees; and yet is the mast nothing at all like to an
Acorne. Of Theophrastus it is called Oxya: of Gaza, Sciscina.

Pliny also makes mention of this tree, but under the name of Ostrya (if so be
in stead of Ostrya we must not read Oxya) lib. 13. ca. 21. It brings forth
(says he, meaning Greece) the tree Ostrys, which they likewise call ostrya,
growing alone among (...) stones, like to the Ash tree in bark and boughs,
with leaves like those of the Pear tree, but somewhat longer and thicker, and
with wrinkled cuts which run quite through, with a seed like in color to a
Chestnut, and not unto barley: the wood is hard and firm, which being brought
into the house there follows hard travel of child and miserable deaths, as
it is reported; and therefore it is to be forborne, and not used as fire wood,
if Plinies copies be not corrupted.

The Temperature.
The leaves of Beech do cool: the kernel of the Nut is somewhat moist.

The Virtues.
The leaves of Beech are very profitably applied unto hot swellings, blisters,
and excoriations;

The kernels or mast within are reported to ease the pain of the kidneyes
proceeding of the

Petrus Crescentius writes, That the ashes of the wood is good to make glass
with.

The water that is found in the hollownesse of Beeches cures the naughty
scurfe, tetters, and

CHAP. 93. Of the Almond tree.
The Description.
THe Almond tree is like to the Peach tree, yet is it higher, bigger, of longer
continuance: the leaves be very long, sharp pointed, snipt about the edges
like those of the Peach tree: the flowers be alike: the fruit is also like a
peach, having on one side a cleft, with a soft skin without, and covered with a
thin cotton; but under this there is none, or very little pulp, which is hard
like a gristle not eaten: the nut or stone within is longer than that of the
peach, not so rugged, but smooth; in which is contained the kernel, in taste
sweet, and many times bitter: the root of the tree grows deep: the gum which
soketh out hereof is like that of the peach tree.

There are diverse sorts of Almonds, differing in largenes and taste: we
commonly have three or four sorts brought to us, a large sweet Almond,
vulgarly termed a Jordan almond; and a lesser, called a Valence Almond: a
bitter Almond of the bigness of the Valence almond, and sometimes another
bitter one less than it.

Amygdalus. The Almond tree.


The Place.
The natural place of the Almond is in the hot regions, yet we have them in our
London gardens and orchards in great plenty.

The Time.
The Almond floureth betimes with the Peach: the fruit is ripe in August.

The Names.
The tree is called is Greek, (...): in Latin, (...): in French, Amandier: in
English, Almond tree.

The fruit is called in Greek, (...): in Latin, Amygdalum: in shops,
Amygdala: in High Dutch, Mandel: in Low Dutch, Amandelen: in Italian, Mandole:
in Spanish, Almendras, Amelles, and (...): in French, Amandes: in English,
Almond.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Sweet Almonds when they be dry be moderatly

Sweet Almonds being new gathered are

There is drawn out of sweet Almonds, with liquor added, a white juice like
milk, which over Alexander Trallianus witnesses: for there is likewise in the
Almonds an opening and concocting quality, with a certain clensing faculty,
by which they are medicinable to the chest and lungs, or lights, and serve for
the raising up of phlegm and rotten humors.

Almonds taken before meat do stop the belly, and nourish but little;
notwithstanding many

They do serve also to make the Physical Barley water, and Barley Cream,
which are given

The oil which is newly pressed out of the sweet Almonds is a mitigater of
pain and all manner

It is good (...) women that are newly delivered; for it quickly remoueth the
throws which remain

The oil of Almonds makes smooth the: hands and face of delicat persons, and
cleanses the skin

Bitter Almonds do make thin and open, they remove stoppings out of the
liver and spleen, down the menses, help the strangurie, and cleanse forth of
the chest and lungs clammie humors: if they be mixed with some kind of looch
or medicine to lick on: with starch they stay the spitting of blood.

And it is reported that five or six being taken fasting do keep a man from
being drunk.

These also cleanse and take away spots and blemishes in the face, and in other
parts of the body;

With honey they are laid upon the biting of mad dogs; being applied to the
temples with vineneger Dioscoriaes writes.

They are also good against the cough and shortness of wind.

They are likewise good for those that spit blood, if they be taken with the
fine flower of Amylum.

There is also pressed out of these an oil which provoke urine, but
especially if a few scorpions

With oil it it singular good for those that have the stone, and cannot easily
make water but

Dioscorides says, that the gum does heat and bind, which qualities
notwithstanding are not

It helps them that spit blood, not by a binding faculty, but through the
clamminesse of his Dioscorides adds) if it be dissolved in vinegar.

CHAP. 94. Of the Peach tree.
The Kinds.
THere are diverse sorts of Peaches besides the four here set forth by our
Author, but the trees do not much differ in shape, but the difference chiefly
consists in the fruit, whereof I will give you the names of the choice ones,
and such as are to be had from my friend Mr. Millen in Old-street, which are
these; two sorts of Nutmeg Peaches; The Queens Peach; The Newington Peach; The
grand Carnation Peach; The Carnation Peach; The Black Peach; the Melocotone;
the White; The Roman; The Alberza; The Island Peach; Peach du Troy. These are
all good ones. He has also of that kind of Peach which some call Nucipersica
or Nectorins, these following kinds; the Roman red, the best of fruits; the
bastard Red; the little dainty green; (...) yellow; the white; the russet,
which is not so good as the rest. Those that would see any fuller discourse of
these may have recourse to the late work of Mr. John Perkinson, where they may
find more varieties, and more largely handled, and therefore not necessary
for me in this place to insist upon them.

The Description.
1 THe Peach tree is a tree of no great bigness: it sends forth diverse
boughs, which be so brittle, as oftentimes they are broken with the weight of
the fruit or with the wind. The leaves be long, nicked in the edges, like
almost to those of the Walnut tree, and in taste bitter: the flowers be of a
light purple color. The fruit or Peaches be round, and have as it were a
chinke or cleft on the one side; they are covered with a soft and thin down or
hairie cotton, being white without, and of a pleasant taste; in the middle
whereof is a rough or rugged stone, wherein is contained a kernel like unto
the Almond; the meat about the stone is of a white color. The root is tough
and yellowish.

2 The red Peach tree is likewise a tree of no great bigness: it also sends
forth diverse boughs or branches, which be very brittle. The leaves be long,
and nicked in the edges like to the precedent. The flowers be also like unto
the former; the fruit or Peaches be round, of a red color on the outside; the
meat likewise about the stone is of a gallant red color. These kinds of
Peaches are very like to wine in taste, and therefore marvelous pleasant.

3 Persica praecocia, or the d'auant Peach tree is like unto the former, but
his leaves are greater and larger. The fruit or Peaches be of a russet color
on the one side, and on the other side next unto the sun of a red color, but
much greater than the red Peach: the stones whereof are like unto the former:
the pulpe or meat within is of a golden yellow color, and of a pleasant taste.

Persicaalba. The white Peach.


4 Persica lutea, or the yellow Peach tree, is like unto the former in leaves
and flowers: his fruit is of a yellow color on the (...), and likewise on the
inside, harder than the rest, in the middle of the Peach is a woody, hard, and
rough stone, full of crests and gutters, in which does lie a kernel much like
to that of the Almond, and with such a like skin: the substance within is
white, and in taste something bitter. The fruit hereof is of greatest pleasure,
and best taste of all the other of his kind; although there be (...) this day
diverse other sorts that are of very good taste, not remembered of the ancient,
or set down by the later writers, whereof to speak particularly, would not be
greatly to our pretended purpose, considering we hasten to an end.

5 There is also kept in some of our choice gardens a kind of Peach which has
a very double and beautiful flower, but it is seldom succeeded by any fruit;
they call this, Persica flore pleno, The double blossomed Peach.

The Place.
They are set and planted in gardens and vineyards: I have them all in my
garden, with many other sorts.

The Time.
The Peach tree soon comes up: it bears fruit the third or fourth year
after it is planted, and it soon decaieth, and is not of (...) continuance; it
floureth in April, or a little while after that the leaves appear, and has
his fruit ripe in September.

The Names.
The Peach tree is called in Greek, (...): in Latin, Malus Persica, and
Persica: in high Dutch, Persichboum: in low Dutch, Perse boom: in French,
Perscher: in English, Peach tree.

The fruit, as Galen testifies, is named (...), and (...) also without any
addition: in Latin, Malum Persicum, and Persicum. in high Dutch, (...): in low
Dutch, Persen: in Italy, Pesche: in Spanish, Pexegos: in French, Pisches: in
English, Peach.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Peaches be cold and moist, and that in the second degree; they have a juice
and also a substance

The kernels of the Peaches be hot and dry, they open and cleanse; they are good
for the stoppings

Peaches before they be ripe do stop the laske, but being ripe they loose the
belly, and engender

The leaves of the Peach tree do open the stopping of the liver, and do gently
loosen the belly:

The same leaves boiled in milk, do kill the worms in children very speedily.

The same being dried, and cast upon green wounds, cure them.

The flowers of the Peach tree infused in warm water for the space of ten or
twelve hours, and

The kernel within the Peach stone stamped small, and boiled with Vinegar
until it be brought Alopecia.

There is drawn forth of the kernels of Peaches, with Peniroyall water, a
juice like unto milk,

The gum is of a mean temperature, but the substance thereof is tough and
clammy, by reason

CHAP. 95. Of the Aprecocke or Abrecocke tree.
1 Armeniaca malus mayor. The greater Aprecocke tree.
2 Armeniaca malus minor. The lesser Aprecocke tree.


The Description.
1 THis tree is greater than the Peach tree, and has a bigger body, it lasts
longer, (...) if it be grafted or inoculated: the leaves hereof are broad, and
sharp pointed, like those of black Poplar, but lesser, and coming more near
to the leaves of birch, (...) in the edges: the flowers are somewhat white: the
fruit round like a peach, yellow within and without, in which does lie a brown
stone, nothing rough at all as is that of the Peach, shorter also, and lesser,
in which is included a sweet kernel.

2 We have another sort of Aprecocke, whose trunk or body is equal with the
other in greatness, it is like (...) in leaves and brittle branches: his time
of flouring, flourishing, and manner of growing accords: the only point
wherein they differ is, that this tree brings forth less fruit, and not so
good in taste; in every other respect it is like.

Of this also Mr. Parkinson has set forth diverse varieties; and my
forementioned friend Mr. Millen has these five sorts; the common, the long and
great, the Musk, the Barbary, and the early Aprecocke.

The Place.
These trees do grow in my garden, and now adays in many other gentlemen's
gardens throughout all England.

The Time.
They flower and flourish in April, and their fruit is ripe in July.

The Names.
This tree is called in Greek, (...): in Latin, Malus Armeniaca: in English,
Abrecocke tree, and Aprecocke tree.

The fruit is named (...), and of diverse (...), or (...), which be words
corrupted from the Latin; for Praecox in Latin is diverse times called
Praecoquum: it is named Malum Armeniacum, and commonly Armeniacum: it is called
in High Dutch, Molletteu Mollelin, S. Iohans Pfersing: in Low Dutch, Uroege
(...), Auant Persen: in Italian, (...), Bacoche, Grisomele, Moniache: in
French, Abricoz: in Spanish, Aluarcoques, (...) as, and Albercocs: in English,
Abrecocke, and of some, Aprecocke, and Aprecox.

Galen seems to make a difference between Praecocia and Armeniaca, in his
book of the (...) of nourishments, preferring Praecocia before Armeniaca; yet
he does confess that both of them be called Armeniaca: others pronounce them
Armenia with four syllables. And in his book of the saculties of simple
medicines he affirms, that both the fruit and the tree are called (...):
diverse of the later Physicians do between these also make a difference, saying,
that the greater ones and those that are grasted be Armeniaca (which the French
men call Auant Perses) and the lesser Praecocia: in French, Abricoz.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Aprecocks are cold and moist in the second degree, but yet not so moist as
Peaches, for which

The kernel within the same is sweet, and nothing at all like in faculty to
that of the Peach.

The virtues of the leaves of this tree are not as yet found out.

CHAP. 96. Of Pomegranat tree.
The Kinds.
AS there be sundry sorts of Apples, Pears, Plums, and such like fruits; so
there are two sorts of Pomegranates, the garden and the wild, and a third sort
which is barren and fruitles: the fruit of the garden Pomegranat is of three
sorts; one having a sour juice or liquour; another having a very sweet and
pleasant liquor, and the third the taste of Wine: of the wild also there be
two sorts, and the difference between them is no more than betwixt crabs and
weildings, which are both wild kinds of Apples: therefore the description of
the garden Pomegranat shall suffice (...) the rest.

The Description.
1 THe manured Pomegranat tree grows up to the height of a hedge tree, being
seven or eight cubits high, having many pliant and twiggy branches, very
limber, tough, and of a brown color: whereon are set very many leaves in
shape like those of the Priuet, but more like those of the Myrtle tree, of a
bright shining green color tending to yellowness: amongst which there stand
certain sharp thorns confusedly set, and likewise hollow flowers like unto
the hedge Rose, indented on the edges like a star, of a Carnation color, and
very single: after which comes the fruit, covered with a hard bark, of an
ouerworne purplish color, full of grains and kernels, which after they be
ripe are of a gallant crimson color, and full of juice, which differs in
taste according to the soil, clymat, and country where they grow; some be
sweet, others sour, and the third are in a middle between them both, having
the taste of Wine.

1 Malus Granata, sieve Punica. The Pomegranat tree.
2 Malus Punica syluestris. The wild Pomegranat.
Balaustia, sieve Pleni flores Gran. syl. The double flowers of wild Pomegranat.


2 The wild Pomegranat tree is like the other in leaves and twiggy branches,
but it is more prickly and horrid: of this there are two sorts, the one having
such flowers and fruit as the tame Pomgranat; the other bearing flowers very
double, as may appear by the figure, which wither and fall away, leaving no
fruit behind them, as the double floured Cherry does, and diverse other herbs
and trees also; and it is altogether barren of fruit: of this Dioscorides makes
sundry sorts, differing in color: one is white, says he; another yellowish
red, and a third sort of the color of the Rose: this with red flowers is best
known among the Apothecaries.

The Place.
Pomegranats grow in hot countries toward the South, in Italy, Spain, and
chiefly in the kingdom of Granado, which is thought to be so named of the
great multitude of Pomgranats, which be commonly called Granata they grow in a
number of places also without manuring: yet being manured they prosper better;
for in gardens, vineyards, orchards, and other like husbanded grounds they come
up more cheerfully: I have recovered diverse young trees hereof, by sowing of
the seed (...) grains, of the height of three or four cubits, attending Gods
leisure for flowers and fruit.

The Time.
The Pomegranate floureth in the months of May and June: the fruit is ripe in
the end of August.

The Names.
The Pomegranate tree is called in Latin, Malus Punica: in Greek, of the
Athenians, (...), and (...), as Galen says: in English, Pomegranate tree: the
fruit is also named (...), or (...): in Latin, Malum Punicum: in shops, Malum,
or Pomum Granatum: in high Dutch, Granatopffel: in low Dutch, Gratappel: in
Italian, (...), and Pomo Granato: in Spanish, Granadas, and Romanas: in French,
Pommes Granades: in English, Pomegranate.

The flower of the fruitful Pomegranate tree is called of the Grecians, (...):
which is notwithstanding properly the cup of the flower: the Latins name it
also Cytinus.

The flower of the wild and barren Pomegranate tree is called (...): the
Apothecaries do likewise term it Balaustium.

The pill or rind of the Pomegranate which is so much in use, is named in
Greek (...): in Latin, Malicorium, and Sidium: in shops it is called Cortex
granatorum, or Pomegranate Pill.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The iuicie grains of the Pomegranate are good to be eaten, having in them a
meetly good juice:

The sweet ones be not so cold as the rest, but they easily cause hot swellings
to arise, and they

The sour ones, and especially if they be withal something harsh, do
evidently cool, dry, and

They are good for the heart burn, they repress and stay the overmuch
vomiting of choler,

There is made of the juice of these sour Pomegranats a fyrrup, which serves
for the same purposes,

The seeds of the grains, and especially of the sower Pomegranat, being dried,
do likewise cool

They stop the flix, stay vomiting, and stanch the spitting up of blood, they
strengthen the stomach.

Of the same effect be the flowers, both of the tame and wild Pomegranate
tree, being like to the

They fasten the teeth, and strengthen the gums, if the same be washed
therewith.

They are good against burstings that come by falling down of the guts, if
they be used in plasters

The rind or pill is not only like in faculty to the seeds, and both the
sorts of flowers, but also

Dioscorides writes, that there is also gathered a juice out of both those
sorts of flowers, which is Hypocistis, as the same Author affirms.

The blossoms of the tame and wild Pomegranates, as also the rind or shell
thereof made into

The seeds or stones of Pomegranats dried in the Sun, and beaten to powder, are
of like operation

CHAP. 97. Of the Quince Tree.
The Kinds.
COlumella makes three kinds of Quinces, Struthia, Chrysomeliana, and (...),
but what manner ones they be he does not declare, notwithstanding we find
diverse sorts differing as well in form, as taste and substance of the fruit,
whereof some have much core and many kernels, and others (...).

Malus Cotonca. The Quince tree.


The Description.
THe Quince tree is not great, but grows low, and many times in manner of a
shrub: it is covered with a rugged bark, which has on it now and then
certain scales: it spreads his boughs in compass like other trees; about
which stand leaves somewhat round, like those of the common Apple tree, green
and smooth above, and underneath soft and white: the flowers be of a white
purple color: the fruit is like an apple, save that many times it has
certain embowed and swelling divisions: it differs in fashion and bigness;
for some Quinces are lesser and round trust up together at the top with
wrinkles, others longer and greater: the third sort be after a middle manner
between both; they are all of them set with a thin cotton or freeze, and be of
the color of gold, and hurtful to the head by reason of their strong smell;
they all likewise have a kind of choking taste: the pulp within is yellow, and
the seed blackish, lying in hard skins, as do the kernels of other apples.

The Place.
The Quince tree grows in gardens and orchards, and is planted oftentimes in
hedges and fences belonging to gardens and vineyards: it delights to grow on
plain and even grounds, and somewhat moist withal.

The Time.
These apples be ripe in the fall of the leaf, and chiefly in October.

The Names.
The tree is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Malus Cotonea: in English,
Quince tree.

The fruit is named (...): Malum Cotoneum, Pomum Cydonium, and many times,
Cydonium, without any addition; by which name it is made known to the
Apothecaries: it is called in high Dutch, Quitten, Quittenopfell, or
Kuttenopffel: in low Dutch, Queappel: in Italian, Mele cotogne: in Spanish,
Codoyons, Membrilhos, and Marmellos: in French, Pomme de coing: in English,
Quince.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Quinces be cold and dry in the second degree, and also very much binding,
especially when they

They strengthen the stomach, stay vomiting, stop lasks, and also the bloody
flix.

They are good for those that spit up blood, or that vomit blood; and for women
also that have too

Simeon Sethi writes, that the woman with child, which eats many Quinces
during the time

The Marmalade, or Cotiniate, made of Quinces and sugar, is good and profitable
for the strengthening

Take fair Quinces, pare them, cut them in pieces, and cast away the core,
then put unto every stiff, and so box it up, and as it cools put thereto a
little Rose water, and a few grains of Musk, well mingled together, which
will give a goodly taste unto the Cotiniat. This is the way to make Marmalade:

Take whole Quinces and boil them in water until they be as soft as a scalded
codling or apple,

There is boiled with Quinces oil which therefore is called in Greek Melinon,
or oil of Quinces, (...), so often as we have need of a binding thing.

The seed of Quinces tempered with water, does make a (...), or a thing like
(...), which

The same is good to be laid upon burnings or scaldings, and to be put into
clisters against the

Many other excellent, dainty and wholesome confections are to be made of
Quinces, as ielly of

CHAP. 98. Of the Medlar Tree.
The Kinds.
THere are diverse sorts of Medlars, some greater, others lesser: some sweet,
and others of a (...) harsh taste: some with much core, and many great stony
kernels, others fewer: and likewise one of Naples called Aronia.

1 Mespilus sativa. The manured Medlar.
2 Mespilus sativa altera. The other Garden Medlar.


The Description.
1 THe manured Medlar tree is not great, the body whereof is writhed, the
boughs hard, not easy to be broken: the leaves be longer, yet narrower than
those of the apple tree, dark, green above, and somewhat whiter and hairy
below: the flowers are white and great, having (...) leaves a piece: the fruit
is small, round; and has a broad compassed navel or crown at the top: the
pulpe or meat is at the first white, and so harsh or choking, that it cannot be
eaten before it become soft; in which are contained five seeds or stones, which
be flat and hard.

2 There is another which differs from the last described, in that the leaves
are longer and narrower, the stock has no prickles upon it: the fruit also is
larger and better tasted: in other respects it is like to the last described.
This is the Mespilus fructu prestantiore of Tragus, and Mespilus Domestica of
Lobel.

3 The Neapolitane Medlar tree grows to the height and greatness of an Apple
tree, having many tough and hard boughs or branches, set with sharp thorns
like the white Thorn, or Hawthorne: the leaves are very much cut or (...) like
the Hawthorne leaves, but greater, and more like Smallage or Parsley, which
leaves before they fall from the tree do wax red: among these leaves come forth
great tufts of flowers of a pale herby color: which being past, there succeed
small long fruit, lesser than the smallest Medlar, which at the first are hard,
and green of color, but when they be ripe, they are both soft and red, of a
sweet and pleasant taste: wherein is contained three small hard stones, as in
the former, which be the kernels (...) seeds thereof.

3 Mespilus Aronia. The Neapolitane Medlar.
4 Chamaemespilus. Dwarf Medlar.


4 There is a dwarf kind of Medlar growing naturally upon the Alps, and hills
of Narbone, and on the rocks of Mount Baldus nigh Verona, which has been by
some of the best learned esteemed for a kind of Medlar: others, whose
judgments cannot stand with truth or probability, have supposed it to be
(...), of the Alps: this dwarf Medlar grows like a small hedge tree, of
four or five cubits high, bearing many small twiggie wands or crops, beset with
many slender leaves green above, and of a sky color underneath, in show like
to a dwarf Apple tree, but the fruit is very like the Haw, or fruit of the
white Thorn, and of a red color. The flowers come forth in the Spring three
or four together, hollow, and of an herbie color, it grows in diverse places
of the Alps: it is the Chamaemespilum of the Aduers. and the Chamaemespilus
Gesneri, of Clusius.

The Place.
The Medlar trees do grow in Orchards, and oftentimes in hedges (...) Briars
and Brambles; being grafted in a white Thorn it prospers wonderful well,
(...) brings forth fruit twice or thrice bigger than those that are not
grafted at all, almost as great as little apples: we have diverse sorts of them
in our Orchards.

The Time.
It is very late before Medlars be ripe, which is in the end of October, but
the flowers come forth timely enough.

The Names.
The first is called in Greek by Theophrastus (...): in Latin, Mespilus: in
high Dutch, Nespelbaum: in low Dutch, Mispelboome: in French, (...): in
English, Medlar tree.

The Apple or fruit is named in Greek, (...): in Latin likewise, Mespilum: in
high Dutch, (...), in low Dutch, Mispele: in Italian, Nespolo: in French,
Nefsle: in Spanish, Nesperas: in English, Medlar.

Dioscorides affirms, that this Medlar tree is called (...), and of diverse,
Sitanion: Galen also in his book of the faculties of simple medicines names
this Epimelis, which is called, as he says, by the country men in Italy,
Vnedo, and grows plentifully in Calabria; for under the name of Mespilus, or
Medlar tree, he means no other than Tricoccus, which is also named Aronia.

The Neapolitane Medlar tree is called in Greek (...) and (...): Galen calls
it Epimelis.

The fruit hereof is called Tricoccos of the three grains or stones that it
has: they of Naples call it Azarolo: and we may name it in English, three
grain Medlar, or Neapolitane Medlar, or Medlar of Naples.

The Temperature.
The Medlars are cold, dry, and astringent; the leaves are of the same nature:
the dwarf Medlar is dry, sharp, and astringent.

The Virtues.
Medlars do stop the belly, especially when they be green and hard, for after
that they have been

The fruit of the three grain Medlar, is eaten both raw and boiled, and is more
wholesome for the

These Medlars be oftentimes preserved with sugar or honey: and being so
prepared they are pleasant

Moreover, they are singular good for women with child: for they strengthen
the stomach, and

The stones or kernels of the Medlars, made into powder and drunk, do break
the stone, expel

CHAP. 99. Of the Pear tree.
The Description.
TO write of Pears and Apples in particular, would require a particular
volume: the stock or kindred of Pears are not to be numbered: every country
has his peculiar fruit: my self knows one curious in grasfing and planting of
fruits, who has in one piece of ground, at the point of three score sundry
sorts of Pears, and those exceeding good, not doubting but if his mind had
been to seek after multitudes, he might have gotten together the like number
of those of worse kinds: besides the (...) of those that be wild, experience
shows sundry sorts: and therefore I think it not amiss to set down the
figures of some few with their several titles, as well in Latin as English,
and one general description for that, that might be said of many, which to
describe apart, were to send an owl to Athens, or to number those things that
are without number.

Our Author in this chapter gave eight figures with several titles to them, so
I plucked a pear from each tree, and put his title to it, but not in the same
order that he observed, for he made the Katherine pear tree the seventh,
which I have now made the first, because the figure expresses the whole tree.

The general description.
THe Pear tree is for the most part higher than the Apple tree, having boughs
not spread abroad, but growing up in height: the body is many times great: the
timber or wood it self is very tractable or easy to be wrought upon,
exceeding fit to make moulds or prints to be graven on, of color tending to
yellowness: the leaf is somewhat broad, finely nicked in the edges, green
above, and somewhat whiter underneath: the flowers are white: the Pears, that
is to say, the fruit, are for the most part long, and in form like a Top; but
in greatness, color, form, and taste very much differing among themselves; they
be also covered with skins or coats of sundry colors: the pulpe or meat
differs, as well in color as taste: there is contained in them kernels,
black when they be ripe: the root grows strait down with some branches
running aslope.

Pirus superba, sieve Katherina. The Katherine Pear tree.
1 Pyra Praecocia. The Ienneting Pear.
2 Pyra Iacobaea. Saint James Pear.
3 Pyrum regale. The Pear royal.
4 Pyrum Palatinum. The Burgomot Pear.
5 Pyrum Cydonium. The Quince pear.
6 Pyrum (...). The Bishops pear.
7 Pyrum hyemale. The Winter pear.


The Place.
The tame Pear trees are planted in Orchards, as be the apple trees, and by
grafting, though up on wild stocks, come much variety of good and pleasant
fruits. All these before specified, and many sorts more, and those most rare
and good, are growing in the ground of Master Richard (...), a most cunning and
curious graffer and planter of all manner of rare fruits, dwelling in a small
village near London called Twicknam; and also in the ground of an excellent
graffer and painful planter, Mr. Henry Banbury, of Touthill street near
Westminster, and likewise in the ground of a diligent and most affectionate
lover of plants Mr. Warner near Horsey down by London, and in diverse other
grounds about London. Most of the best pears are at this time to be had with
Mr. John Millen in Old-street, in whose nursery are (...) be found the choicest
fruits this kingdom yields.

The Time.
The flowers do for the most part come (...) in April, the leaves afterward:
all pears are not ripe at one time: some be ripe in July, others in August,
and diverse in September and later.

The Names.
The tame or Orchard pear tree is called in Greek (...), or with a double
(...): in Latin, (...) vrbana, or Cultiua: of Tarentinus in his Geoponikes
(...): in high Dutch, (...), in low Dutch, Peerboom: in French, Porrier.

The Pear or fruit it self is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Pyrum: in
high Dutch, (...): in low Dutch, (...): in Italian, Pere: in French, Poyre: in
Spanish, Peras: in English, Pear.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Leaving the diverse and sundry surnames of Pears, let us come to the faculties
which the Physicians

All Pears are cold, and all have a binding quality and an earthie substance:
bur the Choke pears

The harsh and austere (...) may with good success be laid upon hot swellings
in the beginning,

Wine made of the juice of pears called in English, Perry, is soluble, purges
those that are not

CHAP. 100. Of the wild Pear tree.
The Kinds.
AS there be sundry kinds of the manured Pears, so are there sundry wild;
whereof to write apart were to small purpose: therefore one description with
their several titles shall be sufficient for their distinctions.

Pyrum strangulatorium (...). The great Choke pear.


The general Description.
THe wild Pear tree grows likewise great, upright, full of branches, (...)
the most part Pyramides like, or of the fashion of a steeple, not spread abroad
as is the Apple or Crab tree: the timber of the trunk or body of the tree is
very firm and sollid, and likewise smooth, a wood very fit to make diverse
sorts of instruments of, as also the hafts of sundry tools to work withal;
and likewise serves to be cut into many kinds of moulds, not only such prints
as these figures are made of, but also many sorts of pretty toies, for coifes,
brest-plates, and such like, used among our English gentlewomen: the branches
are smooth, covered with a blackish bark, very fragile or easy to break,
whereon do grow leaves, in some greater, in other lesser: the flowers are like
those of the manured Pear tree, yetsome whiter than others: the fruit differ
not in shape, yet some greater than others; but in taste they differ among
themselves in diverse points, some are sharp, sour, and of an austere taste;
some (...) pleasant, others harsh and bitter, and some of such a choking taste,
that they are not to be eaten of hogs and wild beasts, much less of men: they
also differ in color, every circumstance whereof to distinguish apart would
greatly enlarge our volume, and bring to the Reader small (...) or (...).

1 Pyrum strangulatorium maius. The great Choke pear:
2 Pyrum strangulatorium minus. The small Choke pear.
3 Pyrus syluestris. The wild hedge Pear tree.
4 Pyrus syluestris minima. The wild Crab pear tree.
5 Pyrus pedicularia. The Lousy wild pear.
6 pyrus Coruina. The Crow pear tree.


The Place.
The wild pears grow of themselves without manuring in most places, as woods,
or in the borders of fields, and near to high ways.

The Time.
The time of wild pears answers the tame or manured pear, notwithstanding
for the most part they are not ripe much (...) Winter.

The Names.
The wild pear tree is called in Latin, Pyrus syluestris and Pyraster: in
Greek, (...) by which name both the fruit and tree are known. Pears have
diverse (...) among the ancient Writers, and specially in Pliny, in his 15.
book, 15. chapter, none of which are known to the later Writers (or not
desired:) every city or every country have names of themselves, and pears
have also diverse names according to to the places.

The Temperature.
All pears are of a cold temperature, and the most part of them of a binding
quality and an earthie substance.

The Virtues.
The virtues of the wild pears are referred unto the garden pears as
touching their binding faculty, but are not to be eaten, because their
nourishment is little and bad.

CHAP. 101. Of the Apple tree.
The Kinds.
THe Latin name Malus reaches far among the old Writers, and is common to
many trees, but we will briefly first entreat of Mali, properly called Apple
trees, whose stock or kindred is so infinite, that we have thought it not
amiss, to use the same order or method with Apples that we have done with
pears; that is, to give them several titles in Latin and English, and one
general description for the whole.

The Description.
THe Apple tree has a body or truncke commonly of a mean bigness, not very
high, having long arms or branches, and the same disordered: the bark
somewhat plain, and not (...) rugged: the leaves be also broad, more long
than round, and finely nicked in the edges. The flowers are whitish tending
unto a blush color. The fruit or Apples do differ in greatness, form,
color, and taste; some covered with a red skin, others yellow or green,
varying infinitely according to the soil and climate, some very great, some
little, and many of a middle sort; some are sweet of taste, or something sour;
most be of a middle taste between sweet and sour, the which to distinguish I
think it impossible; notwithstanding I hear of one that intends to write a
peculiar volume of Apples, and the use of them; yet when he has done what he
can (...), he has done nothing touching their several kinds to distinguish
them. This that has been said shall suffice (...) our History.

Our Author gave four figures more out of (...), with these titles. 3. (...)
reginale, the Queening or Queen of Apples. 5 Platomela sive Pyra aestiua: The
Summer Pearemaine. 6 (...) sive Pyra hyemalia: the Winter Pearemaine.

1 Malus Carbonaria. The Pome Water tree.
2 Malus Carbonaria longo fructu. The Bakers ditch Apple tree.


The Place.
The tame and graffed Apple trees are planted and set in gardens and orchards
made for that purpose: they delight to grow in good and fertile grounds: Kent
does abound with apples of most sorts. But I have seen in the pastures and
hedge-rows about the grounds of a worshipful gentleman dwelling two miles from
Hereford called Master Roger Bodnome, so many trees of all sorts, that the
servants drink sor the most part no other drink but that which is made of
Apples; The quantity is such, that by the report of the Gentleman himself, the
Parson has for tithe many hogsheads of Syder. The hogs are fed with the
fallings of them, which are so many, that they make choice of those Apples they
do eat, who will not taste of any but of the best. An example doubtless to be
followed of Gentlemen that have land (...) living: but envy says, the poor
will break down our hedges, and we shall have the least part of the fruit) but
sorward in the name of God, graffe, set, plant and nourish up trees in every
corner of your grounds, the labor is small, the cost is nothing, the
commodity is great, vour selves shall have plenty, the poor shall have
somewhat in time of want to relieve their necessity, and God shall reward your
good minds and diligence.

The Time.
They bloom about the end of April, or in the beginning of May. The forward
apples be ripe about the Calends of July, others in September.

The Names.
The Apple tree is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Malus and (...): in high
Dutch, Opffelbaum: in low Dutch, Appelboom: in French, (...): in English,
Apple Tree.

The Grecians name the fruit (...): the Latins, Malum or Pomum: in high Dutch,
Opfell: in low Dutch, Appel: in French and Spanish, Mansanas: in English, Apple.

The Temperature.
All Apples be of temperature cold and moist, and have joined with them a
certain excrementall or superfluous moisture: but as they be not all of like
coldness, so neither have they like quantity of superfluous moisture. They
are soonest rotten that have greatest store of moisture, and they may be longer
kept in which there is less store: for the abundance of excrementall moisture
is the cause why they rot.

Sweet Apples are not so cold and moist, which being roasted or boiled, or
otherwise kept, retain or keep the soundness of their pulpe.

They yield more nourishment, and not so moist a nourishment as do the other
Apples, and do not so easily pass through the belly.

Sour Apples are colder and also moister: the substance or pulpe of these when
they be boiled does run abroad, and retains not his soundness: they yield a
lesser nourishment, and the same raw and cold.

They do easily and speedily pass through the belly, and therefore they do
mollify the belly, especially being taken before meat.

Harsh or Austere Apples being unripe, are cold; they engender gross blood,
and great store of wind, and often bring the Collicke.

Those Apples which be of a middle taste contain in them oftentimes two or
three sorts of tastes, and yet do they retain the faculties of the other.

The Virtues.
Roasted Apples are always better than the raw, the harm whereof is both mended
by the fire, and

Apples be good for an hot stomach: those that are austere or somewhat harsh
do strengthen a

Apples are also good for all inflammations or hot swellings, but especially
for such as are in

The juice of Apples which be sweet and of a middle taste, is mixed in
compositions of diverse Serapium expomis Regis Saporis, Confectio Alkermes, and
such like compositions.

There is likewise made an ointment with the pulpe of Apples and Swines grease
and Rose water, which is used to beautify the face, and to take away the
roughness of the skin, which is called in shops Pomatum: of the Apples whereof
it is made.

The pulpe of the roasted apples, in number four or five, according to the
greatness of the Apples,

The leaves of the tree do cool and bind, and be also counted good for
inflammations, in the

Apples cut in pieces, and distilled with a quantity of Camphere and
butter-milke, take away

CHAP. 102 Of the Wilding or Crab tree.
The Kinds.
LIke as there be diverse manured Apples, so are there sundry wild Apples, or
Crabs, whereof to write apart were to small purpose, and therefore one
description shall (...) for the rest.

Malus syluestris. The wilding or Crab tree.


The general Description.
THere be diverse wild Apple trees not husbanded, that is to say, not (...);
the fruit whereof is harsh and binding: for by (...) both Apples and Pears
become more mild and pleasant. The crab or wilding (...) grows oftentimes to
a reasonable greatness, equal with the Apple tree: the wood is hard, firm,
and sollid; the bark rough; the branches or boughs many; the flowers and
fruit like those of the apple tree, some red, others white, some greater,
others lesser: the difference is known to all, therefore it shall suffice what
has been said for their several distinctions: we have in our London gardens a
dwarf kind of sweet Apple, called Chamaemalus, the dwarf apple tree, or
Paradise apple, which bears apples very timely without grafting.

Our Author here also (out of Tabernamontanus) gave four figures, whereof I
only retain the best, with their several titles. 1 Malus syluestris rubens.
The great wilding or red Crab tree: 2 Malus syluestris alba. The white wilding
or Crab tree: 3 Malus syluestris (...). The smaller Crab tree: 4 Malus duracina
syluestris. The choking lean Crab-tree.

The Place.
The Crab tree grows wild in woods and hedge rows almost every where.

The Time.
The time answers those of the garden.

The Names.
Their titles does set forth their names in Latin and English.

The Temperature.
Of the temperature of wild apples has been sufficiently spoken in the
former Chapter.

The Virtues.
The juice of wild Apples or crabs takes away the heat of burnings,
scaldings, and all inflammations:

The juice of crabs or Veriuice is astringent or binding, and has withal an
abstersive or clensing

CHAP. 103. Of the Citron, Limon, Orange, and Assyrian Apple trees.
The Kinds.
THe Citron tree is of kindred with the Limon tree, the Orange is of the same
house or stock, and the Assyrian Apple tree claims a place as nearest in
kindred and neighborhood: whereore I intend to comprehend them all in this one
chapter.

The Description.
1 THe Citron tree is not very great, having many boughs or branches, tough
and pliable, covered with a green bark: whereon do grow green leaves, long,
somewhat broad, very smooth, and sweet of smell like those of the Bay tree:
among which come forth (...) and there certain prickles, set far in sunder:
from the bosom whereof come forth small flowers, consisting of sieve little
leaves, of a white color tending to purple, with certain threads like hairs
growing in the middle: the fruit is long, greater many times than the Cucumber,
often lesser, and not much 1 Malus medica. The Pome Citron tree.
2 Malus Limonia. The Limon tree.
greater than the Limon: the bark or rind is of a light golden color, set
with diverse (...) or bumps, and of a very pleasant smell: the pulpe or
substance next unto it is thick, white, hard, (...) a kind of aromaticall or
spicie smell, almost without any taste at all: the softer pulpe within that is
not so firm or solid, but more spungie, and full of a sower juice, in which
the seed lies hid, (...) and thicker than a grain of Barley.

2 The Limon tree is like unto the Pome Citron tree in growth, thorny branches,
and (...) of a pleasant sweet smell, like those of the Bay Tree: the flowers
hercof are (...) than those of the Citron tree, and of a most sweet smell: the
fruit is long and thick, lesser than the (...) Citron: the rind is yellow,
somewhat bitter in taste, and sweet of smell: the pulpe is white, more in
quantity than that of the Citron, respecting the bigness; in the middle part
whereof is (...) more soft spungic pulpe, and fuller of sour juice: the seeds
are like those of the Pome Citron.

3 The Orange tree grows up to the height of a small Pear tree, having many
(...) boughs or branches, like those of the Citron tree: the leaves are also
like those of the Bay Tree, but that they differ in this, that at the lower end
next the stalk there is a lesser lease made almost after the vulgar figure of
an heart, whereon the bigger leaf does stand, or is fastened: (...) and they
are of a sweet (...): the flowers are white, of a most pleasant sweet smell
also: the fruit is round like a ball, every circumstance belonging to the form
is very well known to all; the taste is sour, sometimes sweet, and often of a
taste between both: the seeds are like those of the Limon.

3 Malus (...). The Orange tree.
4 Malus Assyria. The Assyrian Apple tree.


4 The Assyrian Apple tree is like unto the Orange tree: the branches are like:
the leaves are greater: the flowers are like those of the Citron tree: the
fruit is round, three times as big as the Orange: the bark or peeling is
thick, rough, and of a pale yellow color, wherein appear often as it were
small clifts or crackes: the pulpe or inner substance is full of juice, in
taste sharp, as that of the Limon, but not so pleasant: the seeds are like
those of the Citron.

The Place.
The Citron, Limon, and Orange trees do grow especially on the sea coasts of
Italy, and on the Islands of the Adriaticke Turrhence, and also Aegaean Seas,
and likewise on the maine land, near unto meeres and great lakes: there is also
great store of them in Spain, but in places especially ioining to the sea, or
not far off: they are also found in certain provinces of France which lie
upon the midland sea. They were first brought out of Media, as not only (...)
writes, but also the Poet Virgil affirms in the second book of his
Georgickes, writing of the Citron tree after this manner:

Media fert tristes succos, (...) (...)
Felicis mali, quo non praesentius vllum,
Pocula si (...) (...) (...) (...),
Miscueruntque herbas, and non innoxiaverba,
Auxilium venit, ac membris agit atra venena.
Ipsaingens arbos, faciesque simillima Lauro;
Et, si non alium late iactaret odorem,
Laurus erit; folia haud vllis labentia ventis;
Flos apprime tenax. Animas and olentia (...)
Orafouent illo, and senibus medicantur anhelis.
The Country Media bears iuyces sad,
And dulling tastes of happy Citron fruit,
Than which, no help more present can be had,
If any time stepmothers worse than brute
have poisoned pots, and mingled berbs of suit
With hurtful charms: this Citron fruit does chase
Black venom from the body in every place.
The tree it self in growth is large and big,
And very like in show to th'Laurell tree;
And would be thought a Laurel, leaf and twig,
But that the smell it casts does disagree:
The flower it holds as fast as flower may be:
Therewith the Medes a remedy do find
For stinking breaths and mouths a cure most kind,
And help old men which hardly fetch their wind.
The Time.
These trees be always green, and do, as Pliny says, bear fruit at all
times of the year, some falling off, others waxing ripe, and others newly
coming forth.

The Names.
The first is called in Greek, (...): in Latin, Malus Medica, and Malus
Citria: in English, Citron tree, and Pomecitron tree.

The fruit is named in Greek, (...): in Latin, Malum Medicum, and Malum
Citrium: and Citromalum. Aemilyanus in Athenaeus shows, that Iuba King of
Mauritania has made mention of the Citron, who says that this Apple is named
among them, Malum Hespericum: Galen denies it to be called any longer Malum
Medicum, but Citrium; and says, that they who call it Medicum do it to the end
that no man should understand what they say: the Apothecaries call these apples
Citrones: in High Dutch, Citrin opffell, Citrinaten: in Low Dutch, Citroenen:
in Italian, Citroni, and Cedri: in Spanish, Cidras: in French, Citrons: in
English, Citron Apple, and Citron.

The second kind of Citron is called in Latin, Limonium Malum; in shops,
Limones: in French, Limons: in Low Dutch, Limonen: in English, Limon, and Lemon.

The third is named in Latin, Malnm anarantium or Anerantium: and of some
Aurantium: of others, Aurengium, of the yellow color of gold: some would have
them called Arantia, of Arantium, a town in Achaia or Arania, of a country
bearing that name in Persia: it is termed in Italian Arancio: in High Dutch,
Pomeranken: in Low Dutch, Araengie Appelen: in French, Pommes d'Orenges: in
Spanish, Naransas: in English, Orenges.

The fourth is named of diverse, Pomum Assyrium, or the Citron of Assyria, and
may be Englished Adams Apple, after the Italian name; and among the vulgar sort
of Italians, Lomie, of whom it (...) also called Pomum Adami, or Adams Apple;
and that came by the opinion of the common rude people, who think it to be the
same Apple which Adam did eat of in Paradise, when he transgressed Gods
commandment; whereupon also the prints of the biting appear therein, as they
say: but others say that this is not the Apple, but that which the Arabians do
call Musa or Mosa, whereof Auicen, cap. 395. makes mention: for diverse of the
Jews take this for that through which by eating, Adam offended, as Andrew
Theuet shows.

The Temperature and Virtues.
All these fruits consist of unlike parts, and much differing in faculty.

The rindes are sweet of smell, bitter, hot, and dry.

The white pulpe is cold, and contains in it a gross juice, especially the
Citron.

The inner substance or pap is sour, as of the Citrons and Limons, cold and
dry, with thinness

The seed because it is bitter is hot and dry.

The rind of the Pomecitron is good against all poisons, for which cause it is
put into treacles

It is good to be eaten against a stinking breath, for it makes the breath
sweet; and being so taken

The white, sound, and hard pulpe is now and then eaten, but very hardly
concocted, and ingendreth

Galen reports, that the inner juice of the Pomecitron was not wont to be
eaten, but it is now

Of this foresaid sharp juice there is a syrrup ptepared, which is called in
shops, Syrupus de (...) Citri, very good against the foresaid infirmities.

Such a sirrup is also prepared of the sharp juice of Limons, of the same
quality and operation,

A dozen of Orenges cut in slices and put into a gallon of water, adding
thereto an ounce of

Men in old time (as (...) writes in his fourth book) did not eat Citrons,
but were

As often as need required they used them against deadly poisons; for which
thing they were Virgils verses, which we have before alleged.

Athenaeus, lib. 3. has extant a story of some that for certain notorious
offenses were condemned

The distilled water of the whole Limons, rind and all, drawn out by a glass
Still, takes away

The same being drunk provoke urine, dissolueth the stone, breaks and
expels it.

The rind of Orenges is much like in faculty to that of the Citrons and
Limons, yet it is so

The inner substance or sour pap which is full of juice is of like faculty,
or not much inferior

Two ounces of the juice of Limons, mixed with the like quantity of the spirit
of wine, or the Aqua vitae (but the spirit of wine rectified is much better)
and drunk at the first approach of the fit of an ague, takes away the shaking
presently: the medicine seldom fails at the second time of the taking
thereof perfectly to cure the same; but never at the third time, provided that
the (...) be covered warm in a bed, and caused to sweat.

There is also distilled out of them in a glass still, a water of a marvelous
sweet smell, which being

The seed of all these does kill worms in the belly, and drives them forth:
it does also mightily

Those which be called Adams Apples are thought to be like in faculties to the
sour juice,

CHAP. 104. Of the Cornell tree.
The Description.
THe tame Cornell tree grows sometime of the height and bigness of a small
tree, with a great number of springs: it is covered with a rugged bark: the
wood or timber is very hard and dry, without any great quantity of sap therein:
the leaves are like unto the Dog berry leaves, crumpled rugged, and of an
ouerworne color: the flowers grow in small bunches before any leaves do
appear, of color yellow, and of no great value (they are so small) in show
like the flowers of the Cornus mas. The male Cornel tree.
Olive tree: which being vaded, there come small long berries, which at the
first be green, and red when they be ripe; of an austere and harsh taste,
with a certain soreness: within this berry is a small stone, exceeding hard,
white within like that of the Olive, whereunto it is like both in the fashion
and oftentimes in the bigness of the fruit.

The Place.
This grows in most places of Germany without manuring: it (...) not wild in
England. (...) yet there be sundry trees of them growing in the gardens of such
as love rare and dainty plants, whereof I have a tree or two in my garden.

The Time.
The tame Cornell tree floureth sometime in February, and commonly in March,
and afterward the leaves come forth as an untimely birth: the berries or fruit
(...) (...) in August.

The Names.
The Grecians call it (...): the Latins. Cornus: in High Dutch, (...): in
Low Dutch Cornoele boom: the (...), Corniolo: in French, Cornillier: in (...),
Cornizolos: in English, the Cornell tree, and the Cornelia tree; of some, long
Cherrie tree.

The fruit is named in Latin, Cornum: in High Dutch, (...): in Low Dutch,
Cornoele: in Italian, Cornole: in English, Cornel berries and (...) Cherries.

This is Cornus mas Theophrasti, or Theophrastus his male Cornell tree; for he
sets down two sorts of the Cornell trees, the male and the female: he
makes the wood of the male to be sound, as in this Cornell tree; which we both
for this cause and for others also have made to be the male. The female is that
which is commonly called Virga sanguinea, or Dogs berry tree, and Cornus (...),
or the wild Cornell tree, of which we will treat in the next Chapter following.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The fruit of the Cornell tree has a very harsh or choking taste: it cools,
dries, and binds

It is a remedy against the laske and bloody flix, it is hurtful to a cold
stomach, and increases

They heal green wounds that are great and deep, especially in hard bodies,
but they are not Galen writes.

CHAP. 105. Of the female Cornell or Dog-Berry tree.
The Description.
THat which the Italians call Virga sanguinea, or the bloody Rod, is like to
the Cornel tree, yet it grows (...) into a tree, but remains a shrub: the
young branches thereof are iointed, and be of an obscure red purple: they have
within a white spongie pith like that of (...), but the old stalks are hard and
stiff, the substance of the which is also white, and answerable to those of
the Cornell tree: the leaves are also like, the middle rib whereof as also the
brittle foot-stalkes are somewhat reddish: at the top whereof stand white
flowers in spoky rundles, which turn into Cornus foemina. The Dog-berry tree.
green at the first, and of a shining black color when they be ripe, in taste
unpleasant, and not cared for of the birds.

The Place.
This shrub grows in hedges and bushes in every country of England.

The Time.
The flowers come forth in the Spring in the month of April: the berries are
ripe in Autumn.

The Names.
The Italians do commonly call it Sanguino, and Sanguinello: (...) Crescentius
terms it Sanguinus; and Matthiolus, Virga sanguinea: (...), lib. 24. cap. 10.
has written a little of Virga (...): Neither is Virga Sanguinea, says he,
counted more happy; the inner bark whereof does break open the scarres which
they before have healed. It is an hard thing, or peradventure a rash part, to
(...) by these few words, that Pliny his Virga Sanguinea is the same that the
Italian Sanguino is. This is called in highDutch, (...): in Low Dutch, (...)
Cornoelle, that is to say, Cornus (...), or wild Cornell tree: and in French,
Cornellier (...): in English, Hounds tree, Hounds berry, Dogs berry tree,
Pricke-Timber: in the North country they call it Gaten tree, or Gater tree;
the berries whereof seem to be those which Chaucer calls Gater berries:
Valerius Cordus names it (...), that is to say, Falsa or Spuria Cornus, false
or bastard Cornell tree: this seems also to be Theophrastus his (...), or
Cornus foemina, female Cornell tree. This has little branches having pith
within, neither be they hard nor sound, like those of the male: the fruit is
(...), that is, not fit to be eaten, and a late fruit which is not ripe till
after the Autumn Aequinoctiall; and such is the wild Cornell tree or Gater
tree, the young and tender branches whereof be red, and have (as we have
written) a pith within: the fruit or (...) be unpleasant, and require a long
time before they can be ripe.

The Temperature.
The berries hereof are of unlike parts; for they have some hot, bitter, and
clensing, and very many cold, dry, harsh, and binding, yet they have no use in
medicine.

The Virtues.
Matthiolus writes, that out of the berries first boiled, and afterward
pressed, there issues an Pliny reports of Virga Sanguinea; for he says, as
we have already set down, that the inner bark thereof does break and lay open
the (...) which they before have healed.

CHAP. 106. Of Spindle tree or Pricke-wood.
The Description.
1 PRickewood is no high shrub, of the bigness of the Pomegranat tree: it
spreads (...) with his branches: the old stalks have their bark somewhat
white; the new and those that be lately grown be green, and four square: the
substance of the wood is hard, and mixed with a light yellow: the leaves be
long, broad, slender, and soft: the flowers be white, many standing upon one
foot-stalke, like almost to a spoked rundle: the fruit is four square, red,
and containing four white seeds, every one whereof is covered with a yellow
coat, which being taken off gives a yellow die.

1 Euonymus Theophrasti. English Prick-timber tree.
2 Euonymus latifolius. Broad leafed Spindle tree,
3 Euonymus Pannonicus. Hungary Spindle tree.


2 This other sort of Euonymus grows to the form of an hedge tree, of a
mean bigness, the trunk or body whereof is of the thickness of a man's leg,
covered with a rough or scabbed bark of an ouerworn russet color. The
branches thereof are many, slender, and very even, covered with a green bark
whilst they be yet young and tender; they are also very brittle, with some
(...) in the middle like that of the Elder. The leaves are few in number, full
of nerves or (...) dispersed like those of Plantaine, in shape like those of
the Pomecitron tree, of a (...) smell and bitter taste: amongst which come
forth slender footstalks very long and naked, whereon do grow small flowers
consisting of four small leaves like those of the (...) tree, but lesser, of a
white color tending to a blush, with some yellowness in the middle: after
comes the fruit, which is larger than the former, and as it were winged,
parted commonly into four, yet sometimes into (...) parts; and opening when it
is ripe, it shows the white grains filled with a yellow (...). The root is
tough and woody, (...) it self far abroad under the upper crust of the
earth.

3 The same Author sets forth another sort which he found in the mountains
of Morauia and Hungary, having a trunk or stock of the height of three or
four cubits, covered with a bark green at the first, afterward sprinkled over
with many black spots: the boughs are divided toward the top into diverse
small branches, very brittle and easy to break, whereon are placed leaves by
couples also, one opposite to another, somewhat snipt about the edges, in shape
like those of the great Myrtle, of an astringent taste at the beginning, after
somewhat hot and bitter: amongst which come forth small flowers standing upon
long naked foot-stalkes, consisting of four (...) leaves of a bright shining
purple color, having in the middle some few spots of yellow: after comes the
fruit, four cornered, not unlike to the common kind, of a spongious
substance, and a gold yellow color: wherein is contained not red berries like
the other, but black, very like to those of Fraxinella, of a shining black
color like unto burnished horn; which are devoured of birds when they be
(...), and the rather because they fall of themselves out of their husks,
otherwise the bitterness of the husks would take away the delight.

The Place.
The first comes up in vntoiled places, and among shrubs, upon rough banks
and heaps of earth: it serves also ostentimes for hedges in fields, growing
amongst Brambles and such other Thorns.

The other sorts Carolus Clusius sound in a wood of Hungary beyond the river
Drauus, and also upon the mountains of Morauia and other places adjacent.

The Time.
The flowers appear in April: the fruit is ripe in the end of August, or in
the month of September.

The Names.
Theophrastus calls this shrub (...), and describes it in his third book of
the History of (...): diverse also falsely read it Anonymos: Petrus Crescentius
calls it Fusanum, because spindles be made of the wood hereof; and for that
cause it is called in High Dutch, (...), yet most of them (...): in low Dutch,
(...): in Italian, Fusano: in French, (...), and (...) (...): in English,
Spindle tree, Prick-wood, and Prick-timber.

The Temperature and Virtues.
This shrub is hurtful to all things, as Theophrastus writes, and namely to
Goats: he says the

CHAP. 107. Of the black Aller tree.
The Description.
THe black Aller tree brings forth from the root straight stalks divided
into diverse branches: the outward bark whereof is black, and that next to the
wood yellow, and gives a color as yellow as Saffron: the substance of the
wood is white and brittle, with a reddish pith in the midst: the leaves be like
those of the Alder tree, or of the Cherry tree, yet blacker, and a little
rounder: the flowers be somewhat white: the fruit are round berries, in which
appear a certain rift or chinke, as though two were joined together, at the
first green, afterward red, and last of all black: in this there be two
little stones: the root runs along in the earth.

The Place.
The Aller tree grows in moist woods and copses: I found great plenty of it
in a wood a mile from Islington, in the way from thence toward a small village
called Harnsey, lying upon the right hand of the way; and in the woods at
Hampsted near London, and in most woods in the parts about London.

The Time.
The leaves and flowers appear in the beginning of the Spring; and the berries
in Autumn.

The Names.
This shrub is called (...), or black Alder: and by others, Frangula: Petrus
(...) (...) it Auornus: in low (...), (...), and oftentimes (...), because
boys make for themselves arrows (...): in (...) Dutch, (...): it is called in
English, black (...) (...); and of diverse (...) prick tree.

Alnus nigra, sieve Frangula. The black Aller tree.


The Temperature.
The inner bark of the black Aller tree is of a purging and dry quality.

The Virtues.
The inner bark hereof is used of diverse

There be others who affirm that the dried

The same bark being boiled in wine or

The leaves are reported to be good (...)

CHAP. 108. Of the Service tree.
The Description.
1 THe Service tree grows to the height and bigness of a great tree, charged
with many great arms or boughs which are set with sundry small (...),
garnished with many great leaves somewhat long like those of the Ash: the
flowers are white, and stand in clusters, which turn into small brown berries
somewhat long, which are not good to be eaten until they have lien a while,
and until they be soft like the Medlar, (...) it is like in taste and
operation.

2 The common Service tree grows likewise to the height of a great tree with
a straight body of a brownish color, full of branches, set with large
displayed leaves like the Maple or the White-Thorne, saving that they are
broader and longer: the flowers are white, and grow in tufts; which being
fallen, there come in place thereof small round berries, brown upon one side
and reddish toward the Sun, of an unpleasant taste in respect of the former: in
which are contained little blackish kernels.

The Place.
These trees are found in woods and groves in most places of England: there be
many small (...) thereof in a little wood a mile beyond Islington from London:
in Kent it grows in great abundance, especially about Southfleet and (...).
The later of these I have seen growing wild in diverse places, but not the
former in any place as yet.

The Time.
They flower in March, and their fruit is ripe in September.

The Names.
The first is called in Greek, (...), and (...): in Latin, Sorbus: in
High Dutch, (...): in Low Dutch, (...): in French, Cormier: in English, Service
tree, and of some after the Latins, Sorbe tree.

1 Sorbus. The Service tree.
2 Sorbus terminalis. Common Service tree.


The common Service tree is named of Pliny, Sorbus torminalis: in High Dutch,
(...), (...), and (...) (...): in English, Common Service tree.

The berries or fruit of the Service tree is called (...), or (...): in Latin,
Sorbum: in high Dutch, (...), (...): in Low Dutch, (...): in Italian, Sorbe,
and Sorbole: in French, (...) in Spanish, (...), and Sorbas: in English,
Service; of some, Sorbe Apple.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Service berries are cold and binding, and much more when they be hard, than
when they are mild and (...): in some places they are quickly soft, either
hanged in a place which is not altogether cold, or laid in (...) or chafe:
those Services are eaten when the belly is too soluble, for they (...) the
same; and if they yield any nourishment at all, the same is very little,
gross, and cold; and

These do stay all manner of fluxes of the belly, and likewise the bloody
flixe; as also vomiting: (...) (...) bleeding if they be cut and dried in the
sun before they be ripe, and so reserved for (...) these we may use diverse
ways according to the manner of the grief and grieved part.

CHAP. 109. Of the Ash tree.
The Description.
1 THe Ash also is an high and tall tree: it rises up with a straight body,
now and then of no small bigness, now and then of a middle size, and is
covered with a smooth bark: the wood is white, smooth, hard, and somewhat rough
grained: the tender branches hereof and such as be new grown up are set with
certain ioints, and have within a white and spongie pith: but the old boughs
are woody throughout, and be without either ioints or much pith: the leaves
are long and winged, consisting of many standing by couples, one right against
another upon one rib or stalk, the vpermost of all excepted, which stands
alone; of which every particular one is long, broad, like to a Bay leaf, but
softer, and of a lighter green, without any sweet smell, and nicked round
about the edges: out of the younger sort of the boughs, hard to the (...) on of
the leaves, grow sorth hanging together many long narrow and flat cods, as it
were like almost to diverse birds tongues, where the seed is persected, which is
of a bitter taste: the roots be many, and grow deep in the ground.

Fraxinus. The Ash tree.


The Place.
The Ash does better prosper in moist places, as about the borders of (...) and
River sides, than in dry grounds.

The Time.
The leaves and keys come forth in April and May, yet is not the seed ripe
before the fall of the leaf.

The Names.
This tree is called in Greek, (...), and of diverse, (...): in Latin,
Fraxinus: in highDutch, (...), (...), and (...): in Low Dutch, (...), and
(...): in Italian, Frassino: in French, Fresne: in Spanish, Fresno, Fraxino,
and Freixo: in English, Ash tree.

The fruit like unto cods is called of the Apothecaries, Lingua Auis, and
Lingua Passerina it may be named in Greek, (...): yet some would have it
called (...) Others make Ornus or the wild Ash to be called Orneoglossum: it
is (...) in English, Ash keys, and of some, Kite-keyes.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The leaves and bark of the Ash tree are dry

The juice of the leaves or the leaves (...) Dioscorides says.

The leaves of this tree are of so great virtue (...) (...), as that they dare
not so much as Pliny reports, li. 16. cap. 13. He also affirms, that the
serpent being penned in with boughs laid round about, will sooner run into the
fire, if any be there, than come near the boughs of the Ash: and that the Ash
does flower before the Serpents appear, and does not cast his leaves before
they be gone again.

We write (says he) upon experience, that if the serpent be set within the
circle of a fire and the

Both of them, that is to say the leaves and the bark, are reported to stop
the belly: and being

The leaves and bark of the Ash tree boiled in wine and drunk, do open the
stopping of the (...)

Three or four leaves of the Ash tree taken in wine each morning from time to
time, do (...)

The seed or Kite-keyes of the Ash tree provoke urine, increase natural seed,
and stir up (...)

The wood is profitable for many things, being exalted by Homers commendations,
and (...) Pliny writes. The shauings or small pieces thereof being drunk are
said to be pernicious and deadly, as Dioscorides affirms.

The Lee which is made with the Ashes of the bark cures the white scurse, and
such other (...) Pliny testifies.

CHAP. 110. Of the wild Ash, otherwise called Quicke-Beame or Quicken tree.
Sorbus syluestris, sieve Fraxinus Bubula. The Quicken tree, wild Ash, or wild
Service tree.


The Description.
THe wild Ash or Quicken Tree Pena sets forth for the wild Service: this
tree grows seldom or never to the stature and height of the Ash tree,
notwithstanding it grows to the bigness of a large tree: the leaves be great
and long, and scarcely be discerned from the leaves of the Service tree: the
flowers be white, and sweet of smell, and grow in tusts, which do turn into
round berries, green at the first, but when they be ripe of a deep red
color, and of an unpleasant taste: the branches are as full of juice as the
Osiar, which is the cause that boys do make Pipes of the bark thereof as
they do of Willowes.

The Place.
The wild Ash or Quicken tree grows on high mountains, and in thick high
woods in most places of England, especially about Namptwich in Cheshire, in the
Weilds of Kent, in Suffex and diverse other places.

The Time.
The wild Ash flowers in May, and the berries are ripe in September.

The Names.
The Latins call this tree Ornus, and oftentimes Syluestris Fraxinus, or wild
Ash: and it is also Fraxini species, or a kind of Ash; for the Grecians (as
not only Pliny writes, but also Theophrastus) has made two kinds of Ash, the
one high and tall, the other lower: the high and tall one is Fraxinis vulgaris,
or the common Ash; and the lower Ornus, which also is named (...), or (...)
Fraxinus, mountain Ash; as the other, (...), or field Ash; which is also named
(...), or as Gaza translateth it, Bubula Fraxinus, but more truly Magna
Fraxinus, or great Ash; for the syllable (...) (...) a sign of bigness: this
Ornus or great Ash is named in High Dutch, (...): in Low Dutch, (...), or
(...), of diverse, (...): in French, Fresne sauuage: in English, Wild Ash,
Quicken tree, Quick-beame tree, and Wicken tree. Matthiolus makes this to be
Sorbus syluestris, or wild Service tree.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Touching the faculties of the leaves, bark, or berries, as there is nothing
found among the old, Pliny seems to make this wild Ash like in faculties to
the common Ash; for lib. 16. cap. 13. where he writes of both the Ashes, he
says, that the common Ash is Crispa, and the mountain Ash Spissa: and
sorthwith he adds this: The Grecians write, that the leaves of them do kill
cattle, and yet hurt not those that chew their cud; which the old writers have
noted of the Yew tree, and not of the Ash tree. Pliny was deceived by the
ncerenesse of the words (...) and (...) is the Yew tree, and (...) the Ash
tree: so that he has falsely attributed that deadly faculty to the Ash tree,
which does belong to the Yew tree.

The leaves of the wild Ash tree boiled in wine are good against the pain in
the sides, and the

Benedictus Curtius Symphoryanus is deceived in the history of Ornus, when he
thinks out of Virgils Georgicks, that Ornus has the flower of the Pear
tree; for out of Virgils verses no such thing at all can be gathered: for he in
entreats not of the forms of trees, but of the graffing of diverse into
others, unlike and differing in nature; as of the graffing of the Nut tree into
the Strawberry tree; the Apple into the Plane tree, the Beech into the Chestnut
tree; the Pear into the wild Ash or (...)-beam tree, the Oak into the Elm
tree: and in this respect he writes, that the Plane tree brings forth an
Apple, the Beech tree a Chestnut; the wild Ash tree brings forth the white
flower of the Pear tree, as is most manifest out of Virgils own words, after
this manner, in the second book of his Georgicks:

Inseritur vero ex foetu nucis Arbutas horrida,
Et steriles Platani malos gessere valentes,
Castaneae Fagos: Ornus incanuit albo
Flore Pyri, glandemque sues fregere sub Vlmis.
The Tree-Strawb'ry on Walnuts stock does grow,
And barren Planes fair Apples often have borne;
Chestnuts, Beech-Mast; the Quicken tree does show
The Pears white flower; and (...) often times the Acorn
Have gathered under Elmes. --
CHAP. 111. Of Coriars Sumuch.
1 Rhus Coriaria. Coriar Sumach.
2 Rhus Myrtifolia. Will de or Myrtle Sumach.


The Description.
1 (...) Sumach grows up unto the height of a hedge tree, after the manner of
the Flder tree, bigger than Dioscorides reports it to be, or others, who
affirm that Rhus grows two cubits high: whose errors are the greater: but
this Rhus is so like to the Service tree in shape and manner of grow ing, that
it is hard to know one from the other; but that the leaves are soft and hairy,
having a red sinew or rib through the midst of the leaf: the flowers grow with
the leaves upon long stems clustering together like cats tail, or the catkins
of the nut tree, but greater, and of a whitish green color: after which come
clusters of round berries, growing in bunches like grapes,

2 Pliny his Sumach, or the Sumach of Plinies description, grows like a small
hedge tree, having many slender twiggie branches, garnished with little leaves
like Myrtus, or rather like the leaves of the Iuiube tree; among which come
forth slender mossie flowers, of no great account or value, which bring forth
small seeds, enclosed within a cornered case or husk, fashioned like a spoon:
the trunk or body of both these kinds of Sumach being wounded with some iron
Instrument, yields a gum or liquour.

The Place.
Sumach grows, as Dioscorides says, in stony places: it is found in diverse
mountains and woods in Spain, and in many places on the mount Apennine in
Italy, and also near unto Pontus. Archigenes in Galen, in the 8. book of
medicines according to the places affected, shows, that it grows in Syria,
making choice of that of Syria.

The Time.
The flowers of Sumach come forth in July, the seed with the berries are ripe
in Autumn.

The Names.
This is called in Greek (...) Rhus, says Pliny, has no Latin name; yet
Gaza after the signification of the Greek word, faineth a name, calling it
Fluida: the Arabians name it Sumach: the Italians, Sumacho: the Spaniards,
Sumagre: in low Dutch, by contracting of the word they call it (...) or (...):
in English, Sumach, Coriars Sumach, and Leather Sumach: the leaves of the shrub
be called (...): in Latin, Rhus coriaria, or Rhoe.

The seed is named Eruthros: and (...): in Latin, Rhus Culinaria, and Rhus
obsoniorum: in English, Meat Sumach, and Sauce Sumach.

The Temperature.
The fruit, leaves, and seed hereof do very much bind, they also cool and
dry: dry they are in the third degree, and cold in the second, as Galen
teaches.

The Virtues.
The leaves of Sumach boiled in wine and drunken, do stop the laske, the
inordinate course of

The seed of Sumach eaten in sauces with meat, stops all manner of fluxes of
the belly, the

The decoction of the leaves makes hairs black, and is put into stools to
fume upward into

The leaves made into an ointment or plaster with honey and vinegar, staith the
spreading nature Gangraenes and Pterygia.

The dry leaves sodden in water until the decoction be as thick as honey,
yield forth a certain Licium.

The seed is no less effectual to be strowed in powder upon their meats which
are Coeliaci or Dysenterici.

The seeds pouned, mixed with honey and the powder of Oken coals, heals the
Hemorthoides.

There issues out of the shrub a gum, which being put into the hollownesse of
the teeth, takes Dioscorides writes.

CHAP. 112. Of red Sumach.
The Description.
1 THese two figures are of one and the self same plant; the first shows the
shrub being in flower: the other when it is full floured with the fruit grown
to ripeness, notwithstanding some have deemed them to be of two kinds,
wherein they were deceived.

This excellent and most beautiful plant Coggygria (being reputed of the
Italians and the Venetians for a kind of Rhus or Sumach, because it is used for
the same purposes whereto Rhus serves and therein does far excel it) is an
hedge plant growing not above the height of four or five cubits, having tough
and pliant stalks and twiggie branches like to Oziers, of a brown color. The
leaves be round, thick, and stiff like the leaves of Capparis, in color and
savor of Pistacia leaves, or Terebinthus; among which arises a small upright
sprig, bearing many small clustering little greenish yellow flowers, upon long
and red stalks. After which sollow small reddish Lentill-like seeds that carry
at the tops a most fine woolly or flockie tuft, crisped and curled like a
curious wrought silken fleece, which curleth and foldeth it self abroad like a
large bush of hairs.

1 Coggygria Theophrasti. Venice Sumach.


and or

Cotinus Coriarius Plinij. Red Sumach.


The Place.
Coggygria grows in Orleans near Auignion, and in diverse places of Italy,
upon the Alps of Styria, and many other places. It grows on most of the hills
of France, in the high woods of the upper Pannonia or Austria, and also of
Hungaria and Bohemia.

The Time.
They flower and flourish for the most part in July.

The Names.
The first is called Coggygria, and Coccygria in English, Venice Sumach, or
Silken Sumach; of Pliny, Cotinus, in his 16. book, 18. chapter. There is,
says he, on mount Apennine a shrub which is called Cotinus adlineamenta modo
Conchylij color insignis, and yet Cotinus is (...), or Olea syluestris, the
wild Olive tree, from which this shrub does much differ; and therefore it may
rightly be called Cotinus Coriaria. Diverse would have named it Scotinus, which
name is not found in any of the old writers. The Pannonians do call it
Farblauff: it is also thought that this shrub is (...) Plinij, of which in his
13. book, 22. chapter he writes in these words: Coggygria is also like to
Vnedo in leaf, not so great; it has a property to loose the fruit with down,
which thing happens unto no other tree.

The Temperature.
The leaves and slender branches together with the seeds are very much binding,
cold and dry as the other kinds of Sumach are.

The Virtues.
The leaves of Coggygria, or Silken Sumach, are sold in the markets of Spain
and Italy for great sums of money, unto those that dress Spanish skins,
for which purpose they are very excellent.

The root of Cotinus, as Anguillara notes, serves to die with, giving to
wool and cloth a reddish Pliny knew, showing that this shrub (that is to say
the root) is (...) modo Conchylij color insignis.

CHAP. 113. Of the Alder Tree.
The Description.
1 THe Alder tree or Aller, is a great high tree having many brittle branches,
the bark is of a brown color, the wood or timber is not hard, and yet it
will last and endure very long under the water, yea longer than any other
timber whatsoever: wherefore in the fenny and soft marish grounds they do use
to make piles and posts thereof, for the strengthening of the walls and such
like. This timber does also serve very well to make troughes to convey water in
stead of pipes of Lead. The leaves of this tree are in shape somewhat like the
Hasell, but they are blacket and more wrinckled, very clammie to handle, as
though they were sprinkled with honey. The blossom or flowers are like the
aglets of the Birch tree: which being vaded, there follows a scaly fruit
closely growing together, as big as a Pigeons egg, which toward Autumn does
open, and the seed falls outand is lost.

1 Alnus. The Alder tree.
2 Alnus hirsuta. Rough leaued Alder.


2 Clusius and Bauhine have observed another kind of this which differs from
the ordinary, in that it has larger and more cut leaves, and these not shining
above, but hoary underneath: the (...), as also the rough heads are not so
large as those of the former: the bark also is whiter. Clusius makes it his
Alnus altcra: and Bauhine, his Alnus (...), or folio incano.

The Place.
The Aller or Alder tree delights to grow in low and moist waterish places.

The Time.
The Aller brings sorth new leaves in April, the fruit whereof is ripe in
September.

The Names.
This tree is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Alnus: Petrus Crescentius
names it (...): it is called in high Dutch, (...) and (...): in low Dutch,
(...) and (...): in Italian, Alno: in French, Aulne: in English, Alder and
Aller.

The Temperature.
The leaves and bark of the Alder tree are cold, dry, and astringent.

The Virtues.
The leaves of Alder are much used against hot swellings, ulcers, and all
inward (...),

The bark is much used of poor country Diers, for the dying of course cloth,
cappes, hose, and

CHAP. 114. Of the Birch tree.
Betula. The Birch tree.


The Description.
THe common Birch tree waxes likewise a great tree, having many bough es (...)
with many small rods or twigs, very limber and pliant: the bark of the young
twigs and branches is plain, smooth, and full of sap, in color like the
Chestnut; but the rind of the body or trunk is hard without, white, rough, and
uneven, full of chinkes or creuises: under which is found another fine bark,
plain, smooth, and as thin as paper which heretofore was used in stead of
paper, to write upon, before the making of paper was known: in Russia and
these cold regions it serves in stead of tiles and slate to cover their houses
withal: this tree bears for his flowers certain aglets like the Hasell
tree, but smaller, wherein the seed is contained.

The Place.
This common Birch tree grows in woods, fenny grounds, and mountains, in most
places of England.

The Time.
The catkins or aglets do first appeate, and then the leaves, in April or a
little later.

The Names.
Theophr astus calls this tree in Greek, (...): diverse, (...): others (...):
it is named in Latin, (...): diverse also write it with a double ll Betulla, as
some of (...) copies have it: it is called in high Dutch, (...): in low Dutch,
(...): in Italian, Betula: by them of Trent, Bedallo: in French, Bouleau: in
English, Birch tree.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Concerning the medicinable use of the Birch tree, (...) his parts, there is
nothing extant either in the old or new writers.

This tree, says Pliny in his 16-book, 18. chapter, Mirabili candore and
tenuitate terribilis (...) virgis: for (...) times past the Magistrates rods
were made hereof: and in our time also the Schoolemasters and parents do
terrify their children with rods made of Birch.

It serves well to the decking up of houses, and banqueting rooms, for
places of pleasure, and (...) of streets in the cross or gang week, and such
like.

CHAP. 115. Of the Hornebeame, or Hard beam Tree.
Betul us, sive Carpinus. The Hornebeame tree.


The Description.
BEtulus, or the Hornebeam tree grows great, and very like unto the Elm, or
Which (...) tree, having a great body: the wood or timber whereof is better for
arrows and shafts, pulleies for mills, and such like devises, than Elm or
Which Hazell; for in time it waxes so hard, that the toughness and hardness
of it may be rather compared unto horn than unto wood, and therefore it was
called Hornebeame, or Hardbeame: the leaves hereof are like the Elm, saving
that they be tenderer: among those hang certain triangled things, upon which
be found knaps, or little heads of the bigness of Ciches, in which is
contained the fruit or seed: the root is strong and thick.

The Place.
Betulus or the Hornebeame tree grows plentifully in Northamptonshire, also in
Kent by Grauesend, where it is commonly taken for a kind of Elm.

The Time.
This tree does spring in April, and the seed is ripe in September.

The Names.
The Hornebeam tree is called in Greek (...) which is as if you should say
Coniugalis, or belonging to the yoke, because it serves well to make (...) of,
in Latin, Iuga, yokes wherewith oxen are yoked together, which are also even
at this time made thereof, as witnesses Benedictus Curtius Symphorianus, and
our selves have sufficient knowledge thereof in our own country; and therefore
it may be Englished Yoke Elm. It is called of some, Carpinus and Zugia: it is
also called Betulus, as if it were a kind of Birch, but my self better like
that it should be one of the Elmes: in high Dutch, Ahorne: in French, Carne: in
Italian, Carpino: in English, Hornebeame, Hardbeame, Yoke Elm, and in some
places, Witch hasell.

The Temperature and Virtues.
This tree is not used in medicine, the virtues are not expressed of the
Ancients, neither have we

CHAP. 116. Of the Elm tree.
Our Author only described two Elmes, and those not so accurately but that I
think I shall give the Reader content, in exchanging them for better received
from Mr. Goodyer; which are these.

Vlmus vulg (...) folio lato scabro. The common Elm. 1 THis Elm is a very
great high tree, the bark of the young trees, and boughs of the Elder, which
are usually lopped or shred, is smooth and very tough, and, will strip or pil
from the wood a great length without breaking: the bark of the body of the old
trees as the trees grow in bigness, tears or rents, which makes it very
rough. The innermost wood of the tree is of reddish yellow or brownish color,
and curled, and after it is dry, very tough, hard to cleave or rent, whereof
aues of Carts are most commonly made: the wood next the bark, which is called
the sap, is white, Before the leaves come sorth the flowers appear, about the
end of March, which grow on the (...) or branches, closely compacted or thrust
together, and are like to the chiues growing in the (...) of most flowers, of a
reddish color: afterwhich come flat seed, more long than broad, not much
unlike the garden Arach seed in form and bigness, and do for the most part
fall away before or shortly after the leaves spring forth, and some hang on a
great part of the Summer: the leaves grow on the twigges, of a dark, green
color; the middle size whereof are two inches broad, and three inches long,
some are longer and broader, some narrower and shorter, rough or harsh in
handling on both sides, nickt or indented about the edges, and many times
crumpled, having a nerve in the middle, and many smaller nerves growing from
him: the leaf on one side of the nerve is always longer than on the other. On
these leaves oftentimes grow blisters or small bladders, in which at the spring
are little worms, about the bigness of Bed-fleas. This Elm is common in all
parts of England, where I have traveled.

Vlmus minor folio angusto scabro. The Narrow leaued Elm. 2 This tree is like
the other, but much lesser and lower, the leaves are usually about two inches
and a half long, and an inch or an inch and a quarter broad, nickt or indented
about the edges, and has one side longer than the other, as the first has,
and are also harsh or rough on both sides, the 1 Vlmus vulgatiss. folio lato
scabro. The common Elm tree.
2 Vlmus minor folio augusto scabro. The narrow leaued Elm.
bark or rind will also strip as the first does: hitherto I have not observed
either the flowers or seed, or blisters on the leaves, nor have I had any sight
of the timber, or heard of any use thereof. This kind I have seen growing but
once, and that in the hedges by the high way as I (...) between Christ Church
and Limmington in the New Forest in Hampshire, about the middle of September
1624. from whence I brought some small plants of it, not a foot in length,
which now, 1633. are risen up ten or twelve foot high, and grow with me by the
first kind, but are easily to be discerned apart, by any that will look on
both.

3 Vlmus folio latissimo scabro. Witch Hasell, or the broadest leaued Elm.
4 Vlmus folio glabro. Witch Elm, or smooth leaued Elm.


Vlmus folio latissimo scabro. Witch Hasell, or the broadest leaued Elm. 3
This grows to be a very great tree, and also very high, especially when he
grows in moods amongst other trees: the bark on the outside is blacker than
that of the first, and is also very tough, so that when there is plenty of sap
it will strip or peele from the wood of the boughs from the one end to the
other, a dozen foot in length or more, without breaking, whereof are often made
cords or ropes: the timber hereof is in color near like the first; it is
nothing so firm or strong for naues of Carts as the fruit is, but will more
easily cleave; this timber is also covered with a white sap next the bark:
the branches or young boughs are grosser and bigger, and do spread themselves
broader, and hang more downwards than those of the first; the flowers are
nothing but chiues, very (...) those of the first kind: the seed is also like,
but something bigger: the leaves are much broader and longer than any of the
kinds of Elm, usually three or four inches broad, and five or six inches
long, also rough or harsh in handling on both sides, snipt or indented about
the edges, near resembling the leaves of the Hasell: the one side of the
leaves are also most commonly longer than the other, also on the leaves of this
Elm are sometimes blisters or bladders like those on the first kind. This
prospers and naturally grows in any soil moist or dry, on high hills, and
in low valleys in good plenty in most places in Hampshire, where it is commonly
called VVitch Hasell. Old men affirm, that when long boughs were in great
use, there were very many made of the wood of this tree, for which purpose it
is mentioned in the statutes of England by the name of VVitch Hasell, as 8. El.
10. This has little affiaitie with (...), which in Essex is called VVitch
Hasell.

Vlmus folio glabro. VVitch Elm, or smooth leaven Elm. 4 This kind is in
bigness and height like the first, the boughs grow as those of the VVitch
Hasell do, that is hanged more downwards than those of the common Elm, the
bark is blacker than that of the first kind, it will also peele from the
boughs: the flowers are like the first, and so are the seeds: the leaves in
form are like those of the first kind, but are smooth in handling on both
sides. My worthy friend and excellent Herbarist of happy memory Mr. William
Coys of Stubbers in the parish of Northokington in Essex told me, that the wood
of this kind was more desired for naues of Carts than the wood of the first. I
observed it growing very plentifully as I rode between Rumford and the said
Stubbers, in the year 1620. intermixed with the first kind, but easily to be
discerned apart, and is in those parts usually called VVitch Elm.

The Place.
The first kind of Elm grows plentifully in all places of England. The rest
are set forth in their descriptions.

The Time.
The seeds of the Elm shows it self first, and before the leaves; it
falls in the end of April, at what time the leaves begin to spring.

The Names.
The first is called in Greek, (...): in Latin, Vlmus: in high Dutch, (...)
holtz, (...), (...): in low Dutch, Oimen: in French, Orme, and Omeau: in
Italian, Olmo. in Spanish, Vlmo: in English, Elm tree.

The seed is named by Pliny and Columella, Samera. The little worms which are
found with the liquor within the small bladders be named in Greek, (...): in
Latin, Culices, and Muliones.

The other Elm is called by Theophrastus, (...); which Gaza translateth
Montiulmus or mountain Elm. Columella names it Vernacula, or Nostras Vlmus,
that is to say, Italica, or Italian Elm: it is called in low Dutch, Herseleer,
and in some places, Heerenteer.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The leaves and bark of the Elm be moderately hot, with an evident clensing
faculty; they

The leaves of Elm glue and heal up green wounds, so does the bark wrapped
and swadled

The leaves being stamped with vinegar do take away scurffe.

Dioscorides writes, that one ounce weight of the thicker bark drunk with
wine or water purges

The decoction of Elm leaves, as also of the bark or root, heals broken
bones very speedily,

The liquor that is found in the blisters does beautify the face, and scoureth
away all spots,

It heals green wounds, and cures ruptures newly made, being laid on with
Spleenwoort and

CHAP. 117. Of the Line or Linden Tree.
The Description.
1 THe female Line or Linden tree waxes very great and thick, spreading forth
his branches wide and far abroad, being a tree which yields a most pleasant
shadow, under and within whose boughs may be made brave summer houses and
banqueting arbors, because the more that it is surcharged with weight of timber
and such like, the better it does flourish. The bark is brownish, very smooth,
and plain on the outside, but that which is next to the timber is white, moist
and tough, serving very well for ropes, trases, and halters. The timber is
whitish, plain and without knots, yea very soft and gentle in the cutting or
handling. Better gunpouder is made of the coals of this wood than of Willow
coals. The leaves are green, smooth, shining and large, somewhat snipt or
toothed about the edges: the flowers are little, whitish, of a good savor, and
very many in number, growing clustering together from out of the middle of the
leaf: out of which proceeds a small whitish long narrow leaf: after the
flowers succeed cornered sharp pointed Nuts, of the bigness of Hasell Nuts.
This tree seems to be a kind of Elm, and the people of Essex about
Heningham (whereas great plenty grows by the way sides) do call it broad
leafed Elm.

1 Tilia faemina. The female Line tree.
2 Tilia mas. The male Line tree.


2 The male Tilia or Line tree grows also very great and thick, spreading it
self far abroad like the other Linden tree: his bark is very tough and pliant,
and serves to make cords and halters of. The timber of this tree is much
harder, more knottie, and more yellow than the timber of the other, not much
differing from the timber of the Elm tree: the leaves hereof are not much
unlike luy leaves, not very green, somewhat snipt about the edges: from the
middle whereof come forth clusters of little white flowers like the former:
which being vaded, there succeed small round pellets, growing clustering
together, like Iuy berries, within which is contained a little round blackish
seed, which falls out when the berry is ripe.

The Place.
The female Linden tree grows in some woods in Northampton shire; also near
Colchester, and in many places along the high way leading from London to
Henningham, in the county of Essex.

The male Linden tree grows in my Lord Treasurers garden at the Strand, and
in sundry other places, as at Barn-elmes, and in a garden at Saint Katherines
near London. The female grows in the places here named, but I have not yet
observed the male.

The Time
These trees flower in May, and their fruit is ripe in August.

The Names.
The Linden tree is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Tilia: in high Dutch,
Linden, and Lindenbaum: in low Dutch, Linde, and Lindenboom: the Italians,
Tilia: the Spaniards, Teia: in French, Tilet and Tilieul: in English, Linden
tree, and Line tree.

The Temperature.
The bark and leaves of the Linden or Line tree, are of a temperate heat,
somewhat drying and astringent.

The Virtues.
Tilia boiled in Smithes water with a piece of Allom and a little honey, cure
the sores in childrens mouths.





Theophrastus) are very sweet, and be a fodder for most kind of cattle: the
fruit can be eaten of none.

CHAP. 118. Of the Maple tree.
1 Acer maius. The great Maple.
2 Acer minus. The lesser Maple.


The Description.
THe great Maple is a beautiful and high tree, with a bark of a mean
smoothness: the substance of the wood is tender and easy to work on; it
sends forth on every side very many goodly boughs and branches, which make
an excellent shadow against the heat of the Sun; upon which are great, broad,
and cornered leaves, much like to those of the Vine, hanging by long reddish
stalks: the flowers hang by clusters, of a whitish green color; after them
comes up long fruit fastened together by couples, one right against another,
with kernels bumping out (...) to the place in which they are combined: in all
the other parts flat and thin like unto parchment, or resembling the innermost
wings of grasshoppers: the kernels be white and little.

2 There is a small Maple which does oftentimes come to the bigness of a tree,
but most commonly it grows low after the manner of a (...): the bark of the
young shoots hereof is likewise smooth; the substance of the wood is white, and
easy to be wrought on: the leaves are cornered like those of the former,
slippery, and fastened with a reddish stalk, but much lesser, very like in
bigness, and smoothnes to the leaf of Sanicle, but that the cuts are deeper:
the flowers be as those of the former, green, yet not growing in clusters, but
upon spoked roundles: the fruit stands by two and two upon a stem or
foot-stalke.

The Place.
The small or hedge Maple grows almost every where in hedges and low woods.

The great Maple is a stranger in England, only it grows in the walks and
places of pleasure of noble men, where it especially is planted for the shadow
sake, and under the name of Sycomore tree.

The Time.
These trees flower about the end of March, and their fruit is ripe in
September.

The Names.
This tree is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Acer: in English, Maple, or
Maple tree.

The great Maple is called in high Dutch, (...), and (...): the French men,
Grand Erable, and Plasne abusiuely, and this is thought to be properly called
(...): but they are far deceived that take this for Platanus, or the Plane
tree, being drawn into this error by the neerenesse of the French word; for
the Plane tree does much differ from this. This is now commonly (yet not
rightly) called the Sycomore tree. And seeing use will have it so, I think it
were not unfit to call it the bastard Sycomore.

The other is called in Latin, Acer minor: in high Dutch, (...): in low Dutch,
(...): in French, Erable: in English, small Maple, and common Maple.

The Temperature and Virtues.
What use the Maple has in medicine we find nothing written of the Grecians,
but Pliny in his Serenus Sammonicus writes, that it is drunk with wine
against the pains of the (...).

Si latus immeritum morbo tentatur acuto,
Accensum tinges lapidem stridentibus vndis.
Hinc bibis: aut Aceris radicem tundis, and vna.
(...) vino capis: hoc praesens medicamen habetur.
Thy harmless side if sharp disease invade,
In hissing water quench a heated stone:
This drink. Or Maple root in powder made,
Take off in wine, a present medicine known.
CHAP. 119. Of the Poplar tree.
The Kinds.
THere be diverse trees under the title of Poplar, yet differing very notably,
as shall be declared in the descriptions, whereof one is the white, another the
black, and a third sort set down by (...), which is the Aspe, named by him
Lybica; and by Theophrastus, (...): likewise there is another of America, or of
the Indies, which is not to be found in these regions of Europe.

The Description.
1 THe white Poplar tree comes soon to perfection, and grows high in short
time, full of boughs at the top: the bark of the body is smooth, and that of
the boughs is likewise white withal: the wood is white, easy to be cleft:
the leaves are broad, deeply gashed, and cornered like almost to those of the
Vine, but much lesser, smooth on the upper side, glib, and somewhat green; and
on the nether side white and woolly: the catkins are long, downy, at the first
of a purplish color: the roots spread many ways, lying under the turfe, and
not growing deep, and therefore it happens that these trees be oftentimes
blown down with the wind.

1 Populus alba. The white Poplar tree.
2 Populus nigra. The black Poplar tree.


2 The black Poplar tree is as high as the white, and now and then higher,
oftentimes fuller of boughs, and with a thicker body: the bark thereof is
likewise smooth, but the substance of the wood is harder, yellower, and not so
white, fuller of veins, and not so easily cleft: the leaves be somewhat long,
and broad below toward the stem, sharp at the point, and a little snipt about
the edges, neither white nor woolly, like the leaves of the former, but of a
pleasant green color: amongst which come forth long aglets or catkins, which
do turn into clusters: the buds which show themselves before the leaves spring
out, are of a reasonable good savor, of the which is made that profitable
ointment called Vnguentum Populeon.

3 The third kind of Poplar is also a great tree: the bark and substance of
the wood is somewhat like that of the former: this tree is garnished with many
brittle and tender branches, set full of leaves, in a manner round, much
blacker and harder than the black Poplar, hanging upon long and slender stems,
which are for the most part still wavering, and make a great noise by being
beaten one to another, yea though the weather be calm, and scarce any wind
blowing; and it is known by the name of the Aspen tree: the roots hereof are
stronger, and grow deeper into the ground than those of the white Poplar.

4 This strange Poplar, which some do call Populus rotundifolia, in English,
the round leafed Poplar of India, waxes a great tree, bedect with many goodly
twiggie branches, tough and limmer like 3 Populus Libyca. The Aspen tree.
4 Populus Americana. The Indian Poplar tree.
5 Populus alba folijs minoribus. The lesser leaued white Poplar.
the Willow, full of ioints where the leaves do grow, of a perfect roundnesse,
save where it cleaves or grows to the stalk: from the bosoms or corners of
these leaves come forth small aglets, like unto our Poplar, but smaller: the
leaf is thick, and very like the leaves of Arbor Iudae, but broader, of an
astringent taste, somewhat heating the mouth, and saltish.

5 There is also another sort of Poplar which grows likewise unto a great
tree, the branches whereof are knotty and bunched forth as though it were full
of scabs or sores: the leaves come forth in tufts most commonly at the end of
the boughs, not cut or iagged, but resembling the leaves of that Atriplex
called Pes Anserinus; in color like the former, but the aglets are not so
closely packed together, otherwise it is like.

The Place.
These trees do grow in low moist places, as in meadows near unto ditches,
standing waters and rivers.

The first kind of white Poplar grows not very common in England, but in
some places here and there a tree: I found many both small and great growing in
a low meadow turning up a lane at the farther end of a village called
Black-wall, from London; and in Essex at a place called Ouenden, and in diverse
other places.

The Indian Poplar grows in most parts of the Islands of the West Indies.

The Time.
These trees do bud forth in the end of March and beginning of April, at which
time the buds must be gathered to serve for Vnguentum Populeon.

The Names.
The white Poplar is called in Greek, (...): in Latin, Populus alba: of
diverse, Farfarus, as of Plant us in his Comedy Penulus, as you may see by his
words set down in the chap. of Coltsfoot, page 813.

It is called in High Dutch, Poppelbaum, Meisz Alberbaum: in Low Dutch, Abeel,
of his horie or aged color, and also Abeelboome; which the Grammarians do
falsely interpret Abies, the Fur tree: in Italian, Popolo nero: in French,
Peuplier blanc, (...), (...), or Aubeau: in English, white Poplar tree, and
Abeell, after the Dutch name.

The second is called in Greek, (...): in Latin, Populus nigra: by Petrus
Crescentius, Albarus: in High Dutch, Aspen: in Low Dutch, Populier: in Italian,
Popolo nero: in French, Peuplier noir: in Spanish, (...) (...): in (...),
Poplar tree, black Poplar, and Pepler. The first or new sprung buds whereof
are called of the Apothecaries, Oculi (...), Poplar buds: others choose rather
to call it Gemma Populi: some of the Grecians name it (...): whereupon they
grounded their error, who rashly supposed that those rosenny or clammy buds are
not to be put or used in the composition of the ointment bearing the name of
the Poplar, and commonly called in English, Popilion and Pompillion, but the
berries that grow in clusters, in which there is no clamminesse at all.

They are also as far deceived, who giving credit to Poets fables, do believe
that Amber (...) of the clammy rosin falling into the river Poo.

The third is called of diverse, Populus tremula, which word is borrowed of the
French men, who name it Tremble: it also received a name amongst the low
Country men, from the noise and rattling of the leaves, viz. Rateeler: this is
that which is named of Pliny, Libyca and by Theophr. (...): which Gaza calls
(...) mont ana: in English, Aspe, and Aspen tree, and may also be called
Tremble, after the French name, considering it is the matter whereof women's
tongues were made, (as the Poets and some others report) which seldom cease
wagging.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The white Poplar has a clensing faculty, says Galen, and a mixed
temperature, consisting of a

The bark, as (...) writes, to the weight of an ounce (or as others say, and
that more truly,

That this bark is good for the Sciatica, Serenus Sammonicus does also write:

Saepius occultus victa coxendice morbus
Perfurit, and gressus diro (...) moratur:
Populus alba dabit medicos de cortice potus.
An hidden disease does often rage and rain,
The hip overcome and vex with the pain,
It makes with vile aching one tread slow and shrink;
The bark of white Poplar is help had in drunk.
The same bark is also reported to make a woman barren, if it be drunk with
the kidney of a

The warm juice of the leaves being dropped into the ears does take away the
pain thereof.

The rosin or clammy substance of the black Poplar buds is hot and dry, and of
thin parts, (...) acopis and malagmatis: the leaves have in a manner the like
operation for all these things, yet weaker, and not so effectual, as Galen
teaches.

The leaves and young buds of black Poplar do assuage the pain of the gout in
the hands or

The ointment made of the buds is good against all inflammations, bruses,
squats, falls, and such

Paulus Aegineta teaches to make an oil also hereof, called Aegyrinum, or
oil of black Poplar.

CHAP. 120. Of the Plane tree.
Platanus. The Plane tree.


The Description.
THe Plane is a great tree, having very long and far spreading boughs
casting a wonderful broad shadow, by reason whereof it was highly commended and
esteemed of among the old Romans: the leaves are cornered like those of Palma
Christi, greater than Vine leaves, and hanging upon little red foot-stalkes:
the flowers are small and mossie, and of a pale yellowish color: the fruit is
round like a ball, rugged, and somewhat hairy; but in Asia more hairy and
greater, almost as big as a Walnut: the root is great, dispersing it self far
abroad.

The Place.
The Plane tree delights to grow by springs or rivers: Pliny reports that
they were wont to be cherished with wine: they grew afterward (says he) to be
of so great honor (meaning the Plane trees) as that they were cherished and
(...) with wine: and it (...) found by experience that the same is very
comfortable to the roots, and we have already taught, that trees desire to
drink wine. This tree is strange in Italy, it is no where seen in Germany,
nor in the Low Countries: in Asia it grows plentifully: it is found also in
Candy, growing in valleys, and near unto the hill Athos, as Petrus Bellonius
in his Singularities does declare: it grows in many places of Greece, and is
found planted in some places of Italy, for pleasure rather than for profit. My
servant William Marshall (whom I sent into the Mediterranean sea as Surgeon
unto the Hercules of London) found diverse trees hereof growing in Lepanto, hard
by the sea side, at the entrance into the town, a port of Morea, being a part
of Greece, and from thence brought one of those rough buttons, being the fruit
thereof. There are one or two young ones at this time growing with Mr.
Tradescant.

The Plane trees cast their leaves in Winter, as Bellonius testifies, and
therefore it is no marvel that they keep away the Sun in Summer, and not at
all in Winter: there is, says Pliny, no greater commendation of the tree, than
that it keeps away the Sun in Summer, and entertaineth it in Winter.

The Names.
This tree is called in Greek, (...): and likewise in Latin Platanus: it
bears his name of the breadth: the French men's Plasne does far differ from
this, which is a kind of Maple: this tree is named in English, Plane tree.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The Plane tree is of a cold and moist essence, as Galen says: the green
leaves are good to be

Being boiled in wine they are a remedy for the running and the watering of
the eyes, if they be

The bark and balls do dry: the bark boiled in vinegar helps the toothache,

The fruit of the Plane tree drunk with wine helps the bitings of mad dogs
and serpents, and

(...) The burned bark does mightily dry, and scoureth withal; it remoueth
the white scurfe, and (...)

The dust or down, says Galen, that lies on the leaves of the tree is to be
taken heed of, for if Dioscorides does not attribute this to the dust or down
of the leaves only, but also to that of the balls.

CHAP. 121. Of the Wayfaring Tree.
Lantana, sieve Viburnum. The Wayfaringtree.


The Description.
THe Wayfaring man's tree grows up to the height of an hedge tree, of a mean
bigness: the trunk or body thereof is covered with a russet bark: the branches
are long, tough, and easy to be bowed, and hard to be broken, as are those of
the Willow, covered with a soft whitish bark, whereon are broad leaves thick
and rough, slightly indented about the edges, of a white color, and somewhat
hairy whilst they be fresh and green; but when they begin to wither and fall
away, they are reddish, and set together by couples one opposite to another. The
flowers are (...), and grow in clusters: after which come clusters of fruit of
the bigness of a pease, somewhat flat on both sides, at the first green,
after red, and black when they be ripe: the root disperseth it self far
abroad under the upper crust of the earth.

The Place.
This tree grows in most hedges in rough and stony places, upon hills and low
woods, especially in the chalky grounds of Kent about Cobham, Southfleet, and
Grauesend, and in all the tract to Canturbury.

The Time.
The flowers appear in Summer: the berries are ripe in the end of Autumn, and
new leaves come forth in the Spring.

This hedge tree is called Viurna of Ruellius: in French, Viorne, and Viorna:
in Italian, Lantana: it is reputed for the tree Viburnum, of which Virgil
makes mention in the first Eclog, where he commends the city Rome for the
loftiness and stateliness thereof, above other Cities, saying, that as the
tall Cypres trees do show themselves above the low and shrubby Viorn, so does
Rome above other cities lift up her head very high; in these verses:

Verum haec tantum alias inter cuput exulit vrbes,
Quantum lenta solent inter viburna cupressi.
But this all other cities so excels,
As Cypress, which amongst bending Viornes dwells.
I judge Viburnum not to be a name to any particular plant, but a general name
to all low and bending shrubs; amongst which this here described may take place
as one. I enquired of a country man in Essex, if he knew any name of this: he
answered, it was called the Cotton tree, by reason of the softness of the
leaves.

The Temperature.
The leaves and berries of Lantana are cold and dry, and of a binding quality.

The Virtues.
The decoction of the leaves of Lantana is very good to be gargled in the mouth
against al swellings

The same boiled in lee does make the hairs black if they be bathed or washed
therewith, and

The berries are of the like faculty, the powder whereof when they be dried
stay the laske, all issues

It is reported, that the bark of the root of the tree buried a certain time
in the earth, and afterward

CHAP. 122. Of the Beade tree.
1 Zizypha candida. The Beade tree.
2 Zizypha Cappadocica. The Beade tree of Cappadocia.


The Description.
1 THis tree was called Zizypha candida by the Herbarists of Montpellier; and
by the Venetians and Italians, Sycomorus, but untruly: the Portugals have
termed it Arbor Paradizo: all which and each whereof have erred together, both
in respect of the fruit and of the whole tree: some have called it Zizypha,
though in faculty it is nothing like; for the taste of this fruit is very
unpleasant, virulent, and bitter. But deciding all controversies, this is the
tree which (...) calls Azederach, which is very great, charged with many
large arms, that are garnished with twiggie branches, set full of great leaves
consisting of sundry small leaves, one growing right opposite to another like
the leaves of the Ash tree or Wicken tree, but more deeply cut about the edges
like the teeth of a saw: among which come the flowers, consisting of five small
blew leaves laid abroad in manner of a star: from the midst whereof grows
forth a small hollow cup resembling a Chalice: after which succeeds the
fruit, covered with a brownish yellow shel, very like unto the fruit of Iuiubes
(whereof Dodonaeus in his last edition makes it a kind) of a (...) bitter,
and unpleasant taste, with a six cornered stone within, which being drawn on a
string, serves to make Beads of, for want of other things.

2 (...) Cappadocica grows not so great as the former, but is of a mean
stature, and full of boughs: the bark is smooth and even, and that which
grows upon the trunk and great boughs is of a shining scarlet color: out
of these great arms or boughs grow slender twigges, white and soft, which are
set full of whitish leaves, but more white on the contrary or back part, and
are like to the leaves of Willow, but narrower and whiter: amongst these leaves
come forth small hollow yellowish flowers, growing at the ioints of the
branches, most commonly three together, and of a pleasant savor, with some few
threads or chiues in the middle thereof. After which succeeds the fruit, of
the bigness and fashion of the smallest Olive, white both within and without,
wherein is contained a small stone which yields a kernel of a pleasant
taste, and very sweet.

The Place.
Matthiolus writes, that Zizyphus candida is found in the cloisters of many
monasteries in Italy; (...) says that it grows in many places in Venice and
Narbon; and it is wont now of late to be planted and cherished in the good
lie orchards of all the Low Countries.

Zizyphus Cappadocica grows likewise in many places of Italy, and specially
in Spain: it is also cherished in gardens both in Germany and in the
Low Countries. It grows also here in the garden of Mr. John Parkinson.

The Time.
These trees flower in June in Italy and Spain; their fruit is ripe in
September; but in Germany and the Low Countries there does no fruit follow the
flowers.

The Names.
Zizyphus candida Auicen calls Azederach, or as diverse read it, Azederaeth:
and they name it, says he, in Rechi, Arbor Mirobalanorum, or the Mirobalane
tree, but not properly, and in Tabrasten and Kien, and Thihich. The later
writers are far deceived in taking it to be the Sycomore tree; and they as
much, that would have it to be the Lote or Nettle tree: it may be named in
English, Bead tree, for the cause before alleged.

The other is altera species Zizyphi, or the second kind of Iuiube tree, which
Columella in his ninth book and fourth chap. does call Zizyphus alba, or white
(...) tree, for difference from the other that is syrnamed Rutila, or
glittering red. Pliny calls this (...) Cappadocica, in his (...) book, ninth
chapter, where he entreats of the honor of Garlands, of which he says there
be two sorts, whereof some be made of flowers, and others of leaves: I would
call the flowers (says he) brooms, for of those is gathered a yellow flower,
and Rhododendron, also Zizypha, which is called Cappadocica. The (...) of these
are sweet of smell, and like to Olive flowers. Neither does Columella or Pliny
un (...) take this for Zizyphus, sor both the leaves and flowers grow out of
the tender and young sprung twigs, as they likewise do out of the former: the
flowers are very sweet of smell, and cast their savor far abroad: the fruit also
is like that of the former.

The Temperature.
Auicen writing and entreating of Azadaraeth, says, that the flowers thereof
be hot in the third degree, and dry in the end of the first.

Zizyphus Cappadocica is cold and dry of complexion.

The Virtues.
The flowers of Zizyphus, or Azadaraeth open the obstructions of the brain.

The distilled water thereof kills nits and lice, preserves the hair of the
head from falling,

The fruit is very hurtful to the chest, and a troublesome enemy to the
stomach; it is dangerous,

Moreover, it is reported, that the decoction of the bark and of Fumitorie,
with Mirobalans added,

The juice of the uppermost leaves with honey is a remedy against poison.

The like also has Rhasis: the Beade tree, says he, is hot and dry: it is
good for stoppings of

Matthiolus writes, that the leaves and wood brings death even unto beasts,
and that the (...) Oleander is.

(...) Cappadocica prevails against the diseases aforesaid, but the decoction
thereof is very

A looch or licking medicine made thereof or the syrrup, is excellent good
against spitting of The (...) that formerly was in the second place, was (...)
the narrow leaued kind of (...) (...), which you shall find in the second
place of the (...) (...) (...) (...).


CHAP. 123. Of the Lote, or Nettle tree.
Lotus arbor. The Nettle tree.


The Description.
THe Lote whereof we write is a tree as big as a Pear tree, or bigger and
higher: the body and arms are very thick; the bark whereof is smooth, of a
gallant green color tending to blewnesse: the boughs are long, and spread
themselves all about: the leaves be like those of the Nettle, sharp pointed,
and nicked in the edges like a saw, and dashed here and there with stripes of a
yellowish white color: the berries be round, and hang upon long stalks like
Cherries, of a yellowish white color at the first, and afterward red, but
when they be ripe they be somewhat black.

The Place.
This is a rare and strange tree in both the Germanies: it was brought out of
Italy, where there is found store thereof, as Matthiolus testifies: I have a
small tree thereof in my garden. There is likewise a tree thereof in the garden
under London wall, sometime belonging to Mr. Gray, an Apothecary of London; and
another great tree in a garden near Coleman street in London, being the garden
of the Queens Apothecarie at the impression hereof, called Mr. Hugh Morgan, a
curious conseruer of rare simples. The Lote tree does also grow in Afric, but
it somewhat differs from the Italian Lote in fruit, as Pliny in plain words
does show in his thirteenth book, seventeenth chapter. That part of Afric,
says he, that lies toward us, brings forth the famous Lote tree, which
they call Celtis, and the same well known in Italy, but altered by the soil:
it is as big as the Pear tree, although Nepos Cornelius reports it to be
shorter: the leaves are full of fine cuts, otherwise they be thought to be like
those of the Holme tree. There be many differences, but the same are made
especially by the fruit: the fruit is as big as a Bean, and of the color of
Saffron, but before it is through ripe, it changes his color as does the Grape.
It grows thick among the boughs, after the manner of the Myrtle, not as in
Italy, after the manner of the Cherry; the fruit of it is there so sweet, as it
has also given a name to that country and land, too hospitable to strangers,
and forgetful of their own country.

It is reported that they are troubled with no diseases of the belly that eat
it. The better is that which has no kernel, which in the other kind is
stony: there is also pressed out of it a wine, like to a sweet wine; which the
same Nepos denies to endure above ten days, and the berries stamped with
Alica are reserved in vessels for food. Moreover we have heard say, that armies
have been fed therewith, as they have passed too and fro through Afric. The
color of the wood is black: they use to make flutes and pipes of it: the root
serves for knives hafts, and other short works: this is there the nature of
the tree: thus far Pliny. In the same place he says, that this renowned tree
does (...) about Syrtes and (...): and in his 5. book, 7. chapter he shows
that there is not far from the lesser Syrtis, the Island Menynx, surnamed
Lotophagitis, of the plenty of Lote trees.

Strabo in his 17. book (...), that not only Menynx, but also the lesser
Syrtis is said to be (...): first, says he, lies Syrtis a certain long
Island by the name Cereinna, and another lesser, called Circinnitis; next to
this is the lesser Syrtis, which they call Lotophagitis Syrtis: the compass of
this gulf is almost 1600. furlongs; the breadth of the mouth 600. By both the
capes there be Islands joined to the maine land, that is, Circinna and Menynx,
of like bigness: they think that Menynx is the country of the Lotophagi, or
those that feed of the Lote trees; of which (...) Homer makes mention, and
there are certain monuments to be seen, and (...) Altar, and the fruit is
self, for there be in it great plenty of Lote trees, whose fruit is wonderful
sweet: thus says Strabo.

This Lote is also described by Theophrastus; in his (...) book he says, that
there be very many kinds, which be severed by the fruit: the fruit is of the
bigness of a bean, which when it waxes ripe does alter his color as grapes
do: the fruit of which the Lotophagi do eat is sweet, pleasant, harmeles, and
wholesome for the belly, but that is (...) which is without kerneis, and of
this they make their wine.

This Lote tree, as the same Author (...), is by nature everlasting: as for
example, the Lote trees whereof Pliny has written in his 16. book, 44.
chapter. At Rome, says he, the Lote tree in Lucinas court, how much elder it
was than the church of the city, built in the year which was without
magistrates, 469. it is uncertain: there is no doubt but that it was elder,
because Lucina bare the name of that Lucus or grove. This is now about 450.
years old. That is elder which is surnamed Capillata, or hairie; because the
hair of the vestall virgins was brought unto it: but the other Lote tree in
Vulcans church, which Romulus built by the victory of tenths is taken to be as
old as the city, as Massurius witnesses.

The Time.
They lose their leaves at the first approach of winter; and recover them again
in April: the fruit is ripe in September.

The Names.
This tree is called in Greek, (...): in Latin by Pliny, Celtis: in Italian,
Perlaro: by those of Trent, Bagolaro: and in English, Lote tree, and Nettie
tree.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The Lote tree is not greatly binding as Galen says, but of thin parts, and of
a drying nature.

The decoction of the wood beaten small, being either drunk or used
clisterwise, is a remedy

It stops the laske, and makes the hair yellow, and as Galen adds,
keeps hairs from

The shiuers or small pieces thereof, as the same Author alleges, are boiled
sometimes in water,

CHAP. 124. Of Italian wood of Life, or Pocke wood, vulgarly called Lignum
vitae.
The Description.
1 ITalian Lignum vitae, or Wood of Life, grows to a fair and beautiful
tree, having a straight and upright body, covered over with a smooth and dark
green bark, yielding forth many twiggy branches, set forth of goodly leaves,
like those of the Pear tree, but of greater beauty, and somewhat broader:
among which comes forth the fruit, growing close to the branches, almost
without stalks: this fruit is round, and at the first green, but black when
it is ripe, as big as Cherries, of an excellent sweet taste when it is dried:
but this is not the Indian Lignum sanctum, or Guaiacum, whereof our bowls and
physical drinks be made, but it is a bastard kind thereof, first planted in
the common garden at Padua, by the learned Fallopius, who supposed it to be the
right Guaiacum.

2 The leaves of this are longer and narrower than the former, but firm also
and nervous like as they are; the fruit is in shape like Sebestens, but much
less, of a bluish color when it is ripe, with many little stones within; the
taste hereof is not unpleasant. Matthiolus calls this Pseudolotus; and
Tabernamontanus, Lotus Africana: whose figure our Author in the last chapter
save one gave unfitly for the Zizyphus Cappadocica.

The Place.
(...) Patauinum grows plentifully about Lugdunum, (...) Lions in France: I
planted it in the garden of Barn. Elmes near London two trees: besides, there
grows another in the garden of Mr. Gray an Apothecarie of London, and in my
garden likewise.

1 Guaiacum Patauinum latifolium. Broad leafed Italian Wood of life.
2 Guaiacum Patauinum angustifol. Narrow leafed Italian Guaiacum.


The Time.
It floureth in May, and the fruit is ripe in September.

The Names.
Guaiacum Patauinum has been reputed for the Lotus of Theophrastus: in English
it is called the bastard Meuynwood.

This has no affinity with the true Indian Guajacum which is frequently used
in medicine.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The fruit of this is thought to be of the same temper and quality with that
of the Nettletree.

CHAP. 125. Of the Strawberry tree.
The Description.
THe Strawberry tree grows for the most part low, very like in bigness to
the Quince tree (whereunto Dioscorides compares it.) The body is covered with
a reddish bark, both rough and scaly: the boughs stand thick on the top,
somewhat reddish: the leaves be broad, long, and smooth, like those of Bays,
somewhat nicked in the edges, and of a pale green color: the flowers grow in
clusters, being hollow and white, and now and then on the one side somewhat of
a purple color: in their places come forth certain berries hanging down upon
little long stems like unto Strawberries, but greater, without a stone within,
but only with little seeds, at the first green, and when they be ripe they
are of a gallant red color, in taste somewhat harsh, and in a manner without
any relish; of which Thrushes and Black-birds do feed in Winter.

Arbutus. The Strawberry tree.


The Place.
The Strawberry tree grows in most Countries of Greece, in Candy, Italy, and
Spain, also in the valleys of the mountain Athos, where, being in other
places but little, they become great huge trees, as P. Bellonius writes. Iuba
also reports, that there be in Arabia of them fifty cubits high. They grow
only in some few gardens with us.

The Time.
The Strawberry tree floureth in July and August, and the fruit is ripe in
September, after it has remained upon the tree by the space of an whole year.

The Names.
This tree is called in Greek, (...): in Latin, Arbutus: in English,
Strawberry tree, and of some, Arbute tree.

The fruit is named in Creek, (...), or as others read it, (...): in Latin,
Memaecylum, and Arbutus; and Pliny calls it Vnedo: Ground Strawberries (says
he) have one body, and Vnedo, much like unto them, another body, which only in
apple is like to the fruit of the earth: The Italians call this Strawberry
Albatro the Spaniards, Madrono, Medronheyro, and Medronho: in French, Arboutes,
Arbous: It may be termed in English, Tree Strawberry.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The fruit of the Strawberry tree is of a cold temperature, hurting the
stomach, and causing

CHAP. 126. Of the Plum tree.
The Kinds.
TO write of Plums particularly would require a peculiar volume, and yet the
end not to be attained unto, nor the stock or kindred perfectly known,
neither to be distinguished apart: the number of the sorts or kinds are not
known to any one country: every Clymat has his own fruit, far different
from that of other countries: my self have three score sorts in my garden, and
all strange and rare: there be in other places many more common, and yet
yearly comes to our hands others not before known, therefore a few figures
shall serve for the rest. Let such as require a larger history of these
varieties have recourse to the often mentioned Work of Mr. Parkinson: and such
as desire the things themselves may find most of the best with Mr. John Millen
in Old street.

The Description.
1 THe Plum or Damson tree is of a mean bigness: it is covered with a smooth
bark: the branches are long, whereon do grow broad leaves, more long than
round, nicked in the edges: the flowers are white: the Plums do differ in
color, fashion, and bigness, they all consist of pulpe and skin, and also of
kernel, which is shut up in a shell or stone. Some Plums are of a blackish
blew, of which some be longer, others rounder, others of the color of yellow
wax, diverse of a crimson red, greater for the most part than the rest. There be
also green Plums, and withal very long, of a sweet and pleasant taste:
moreover, the pulpe or meat of some is (...), and easilier separated from the
stone: of other-some it is moister, and cleaves faster: our common Damson is
known to all, and therefore not to be stood upon.

1 Prunus Domestica. The Damson tree.
2 Prunus Mirobalana. The Mirobalane Plum tree.
3 Prunus Amygdalina. The Almond Plum tree.
5 Prunus syluestris. The Sloe tree.


2 The Mirobalan Plum tree grows to the height of a great tree, charged with
many great arms or boughs, which divide themselves into small twiggy
branches, by means whereof it yields a goodly and pleasant shadow: the trunk
or body is covered with a finer and thinner bark than any of the other Plum
trees: the leaves do somewhat resemble those of the Cherry tree, they are very
tender, indented about the edges: the flowers be white: the fruit is round,
hanging upon long foot-stalkes pleasant to behold, green in the beginning, red
when it is almost ripe, and being full ripe it glistereth like purple mixed
with black: the flesh or meat is full of juice pleasant in taste: the stone
is small, or of a mean bigness: the tree brings forth plenty of fruit every
other year.

3 The Almond Plum grows up to the height of a tree of a mean bigness: the
branches are long, smooth, and even: the leaves are broad, something long, and
ribbed in diverse places, with small nerves running through the same: the
flowers are white, sprinkled with a little dash of purple scarcely to be
perceived: the fruit is long, having a cleft down the middle, of a brown red
color, and of a pleasant taste.

4 The Damascen Plum tree grows likewise to a mean height, the branches very
brittle; the leaves of a deep green color: the fruit is round, of a bluish
black color: the stone is like unto that of the Cherry, wherein it differs
from all other Plums.

5 The Bullesse and the Sloe tree are wild kinds of Plums, which do vary in
their kind, even as the greater and manured Plums do. Of the Bullesse, some are
greater and of better taste than others. Sloes are some of one taste, and some
of others, more sharp; some greater, and others lesser; the which to
distinguish with long descriptions were to small purpose, considering they be
all and every of them known even unto the simplest: therefore this shall
suffice for their several descriptions.

The Place.
The Plum trees grow in all known countries of the world: they require a loose
ground, they also receive a difference from the regions where they grow, not
only of the form or fashion, but especially of the faculties, as we will
forthwith declare.

The Plum trees are also many times graffed into trees of other kinds, and
being so ingraffed, they faciem parent is, succum adoptionis, vt Plinius dicit,
exhibent.

The greatest variety of these rare Plums are to be found in the grounds of
Mr. Vincent Pointer of Twicknam, before remembered in the Chap. of Apples:
although my self am not without some, and those rare and delicate.

The wild Plums grow in most hedges through England.

The Time.
The common and garden Plum trees do bloome in April: the leaves come forth
presently with them: the fruit is ripe in Summer, some sooner, some later.

The Names.
The Plumme tree is called in Greek, (...): in Latin, Prunus: in high- Dutch,
(...): in low- Dutch, (...): in Spanish, Ciruelo: in French, Prunier: in
English. Plum tree?

The fruit is called in Greek, (...): in Latin, Prunum: in High Dutch, (...):
in lowDutch, (...): in Italian and French, Prune: in Spanish, Prunas: in
English, Prune, and Plum. These have also names from the regions and countries
where they grow.

The old Writers have called those that grow in Syria near unto Damascus,
Damascena Pruna: in English, Damsons, or Damask Prunes: and those that grow in
Spain, Hispanica, Spanish Prunes or Plums. So in our age we use to call those
that grow in Hungary, Hungarica, or Pannonica, Plums of Hungary: some,
Gallica Pruna, or French Prunes. of the country of France. Clearcus
Peripateticus says, that they of Rhodes and Sicilia do call the Damask Prunes
Brabula.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Plummes that be ripe and new gathered from the tree, what sort soever they are
of, do moisten

Dried Plums, commonly called Prunes, are wholsomer, and more pleasant to the
stomach, they Galen in his book of the faculties of Nourishments, that the
best do grow in Damascus a city of Syria; and next to those, they that grow in
Spain: but these do nothing at all bind, yet diverse of the Damask Damson
Prunes very much; for Damask Damson Prunes are more astringent, but they of
Spain be sweeter. Dioscorides says, that Damask Prunes dried do stay the
belly; but Galen (...), inhis books of the faculties of simple medicines, that
they do manifestly loose the belly, yet lesser than they that be brought out
of Spain; being boiled with Mead or (...) water, which has a good quantity
of honey in it, they loose the belly very much (as the same Author says)
although a man take them alone by themselves, and much more if the Mead be
supped after them. We most commend those of Hungary being long and sweet; yet
more those of Morauia the chief and principal city in times past of the
Province of the Marcomans: for these after they be dried, that the waterie
humor may be consumed away, be most pleasant to the taste, and do easily
without any trouble so mollify the belly, as that in that respect they go
beyond Cassia and Manna, as Thomas Iordanus (...).

The leaves of the Plum tree are good against the swelling of the Vuula, the
throat, gums, and kernels

The gum which comes out of the Plum-tree does glue and fasten together, as
Dioscorides

Being drunk in wine it wastes away the stone, and heals Lichens in infants
and young children;

The wild Plums do stay and bind the belly, and so do the unripe plummes of
what sort soever,

The juice of Sloes does stop the belly, the lask and bloody flix, the
inordinat course of women's

CHAP. 127. Of Sebesten, or the Assyrian Plum.
Sebestenae, Myxa, sive Myxara. Assyrian Plums.


The Description.
SEbestines are also a kind of Plums: the tree whereof is not unlike to the
Plum tree, saving it grows lower than the most of the manured Plum trees; the
leaves be harder and rounder; the flowers grow at the tops of the branches
consisting of five small white leaves, with pale yellowish threads in the
middle, like those of the Plum tree: after follows the fruit like to little
Plummes, fastened in little skinny cups, which when they be ripe are of a
greenish black color, wherein is contained a small hard stone. The fruit is
sweet in taste, the pulpe or meat is very tough and clammie.

The Place.
The Sebesten trees grow plentifully in Syria and Egypt; they were in times
past foreign and strange in Italy, now they grow almost in every garden, being
first brought thither in Pliny his time. Now do the Sebesten trees, says he,
in his 15. book, 18. chapter, begin to grow in Rome, among the Service trees.

The Time.
The time answers the common Plums.

The Names.
Pliny calls the tree Myxa, it may be suspected that this is the tree which
Matron Paradus in his Atticke banquet in (...) does call (...), but we cannot
certainly affirm it, and especially because diverse have (...) deemed thereof.
The berry or fruit is named Myxon and Myxarion, neither have the Latins any
other name. The Arabians and the Apothecaries do call it Sebesten: which is
also made an English name: we may call it the Assyrian Plum.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Sebestens be very temperately cold and moist, and have a thick and clammie
substance; therefore

They take away the ruggedness of the throat and lungs, and also quench
thirst, being taken in a

The weight of ten drams, or of an ounce and a half of the pap or pulpe hereof
being inwardly taken,

There is also made of this fruit a purging Electuarie, but such an one as
quickly mouldeth, and

CHAP. 128. Of the Indian Plums, or Mirobalans.
The Kinds.
THere be diverse kinds of Mirobalans, as Chebulae, Belliricae, Emblicae, etc.
They likewise grow upon diverse trees, and in countries far distant one from
another, and Garcias the Portugal Physician is of opinion, that the five
kinds grow upon five diverse trees.

Myr. flaua,
Myr. (...).
(...) (...).
Myr. chepula
Myr. (...)


The Description.
1 THe first of the Mirobalan trees, called Chebulae, is a shrubbie tree
altogether wild (which the Indians do call Aretca:) in stature not unlike to
the Plum tree; the branches are many, and grow thick together, whereon are set
leaves like those of the Peach tree. The fruit is greater than any of the rest,
somewhat long, fashioned like a pear.

2 This second kind of Mirobalan, called Flaua, or Citrina, which some do call
Aritiqui, but the common people of India, Arare, grows upon a tree of mean
stature, having many boughs standing finely in order, and set full of leaves
like unto the Service tree.

3 The third kind of Mirobalans, called Emblicae, the Indians do call Amiale,
which grow upon a tree of mean stature, like the former, but the leaves are
very much iagged, in shape like the leaves of Fern, but that they be somewhat
thicker: the Indians do not put the fruit hereof unto physical uses, but
occupy it for the thickening and tanning of their leather in stead of Rhus, or
Coriars Sumach, as also to make ink and bletch for other purposes.

4 Mirobalani Belliricae, called of the Savages Gotni, and Guti, grows up to
a mean stature, garnished with leaves like unto Laurel or the Bay tree, but
somewat lesser, thinner, and of a pale green color.

5 The (...) kind of Mirobalans is called Indicae, which the Indians do call
Rezannale; it grows upon a tree of mean stature, or rather upon a shrub or
hedge plant, bearing leaves like the Willow, and a fruit eight square. There is
a fifth kind, the tree whereof is not mentioned in Authors.

The Place and Time.
The last four kinds of Mirobalans do grow in the kingdom of Cambaia: they
grow likewise in Goa, Batecala, Malanor, and Dabul: the Kebula in Bisnager,
Decan, Guzarate, and Bengala, and many other places of the East Indies. The
time agrees with other fruits in those countries.

The Names.
Those which we have said to be yellow, the (...) of those countries where they
grow do call (...) Arare; those that be black they call Rezennale; the
Bellericae, Gotim; the Chebulae, (...); the Emblicae are called Aretiqui.

The Temperature.
All the kinds of Mirobalans are in taste astringent and sharp like unto the
unripe Sorbus or Service berries, and therefore they are of complexion cold and
dry.

The Virtues.
The Indians use them rather to bind than purge; but if they dovse them for a
purge, they use the Chebulae; the yellow and black be good that way likewise.

The yellow and Bellericae taken before meat, are good against a laske, or
weak stomach, as Garcias

The yellow and black, or Indicae, and the Chebulae, purge lightly, if two or
three drams be taken,

The yellow, as some write, purge choler, Chebulae phlegm, Indicae melancholy,
and strengthen the

There are two sorts especially brought into these parts of the world
conserved, the Chebulae, and Bellericae, which are round and lesser, and
tenderer in eating.

Lobel writes, that of them the Emblicae do meanly cool, some do dry in the
first degree, they

They purge best, and with lesser pain, if they be laid in water in the Sun
until they swell, and sod

Garcias found the distilled water to be right profitable against the French
disease, and such like

The Bellericae are also of a mild operation, and do comfort, and are cold in
the first degree, and Emblicae in operation. I have in this chapter contented
my self with the expressing of the fruits out of Clusius and (...), and (...)
the figures of the three Mirabalan (...), which (...) gave (...) out of (...);
because I judge them rather drawn by fancy than by the (...) (...).


CHAP. 129. Of the Juiube tree.
Iuiube Arabu, sive Ziziphus Dodonaei. The Iuiube tree.


The Description.
THe Iuiube tree is not much lesser than (...) candida, having a wreathed
trunk or body, and a rough bark full (...) rifts or cranies, and stiff
branches, beset with strong and hard prickles; from whence grow out many long
twigs, or little stalks, half a foot or more in length, in show like Rushes,
limmer, and (...) bowing themselves, and very (...) like the twigges of
Spartum: about which come (...) leaves one above another, which are somewhat
long, not very great, but hard and tough like to the leaves of Peruinca or
Peruinckle; and among these leaves come forth pale and mossie little flowers:
after which succeed long red well tasted sweet berries as big as Olives (of a
mean quantity) or little Prunes, or small Plums, wherein there are hard round
stones, or in which a small kernel is contained.

The Place.
There be now at this day Iuiube trees growing in very many places of Italy,
which in times past were newly brought thither out of (...), and that about
Pliny his time, as he himself has written in his 17. book, 10. chap.

The Time.
It (...) in April, at which time the seeds or stones are to be set or sown
for increase.

The Names.
This tree is called in Greek (...) and (...) with Iota in the second
syllable: in Latin likewise, Zizyphus; and of Petrus Crescentius, (...): in
English, Iuiube tree.

The fruit or Plums are named in Greek (...), (...): Galen calls them (...),
as (...) plainly shows in his 369. chapter, entreating of the Iuiube, in
which be set down those things that are mentioned concerning Serica in Galens
books of the faculties of Nourishments: in Latin likewise Zizypha and Serica:
in shops, Iuiubae: in English, Iuiubes.

The Temperature.
Iuiubes are temperate in heat and moisture.

The Virtues.
The fruit of the Iuiube tree eaten is of hard digestion, and nourishes very
little; but being taken

CHAP. 130. Of the Cherrie Tree.
The Kinds.
THe ancient Herbarists have set down four kinds of Cherrie trees, the first
is great and wild; the second tame or of the garden: the third, whose fruit is
(...): the fourth is that which is called in Latin Chamaecerasus, or the
dwarf Cherrie tree. The later writers have found diverse (...) more, some
bringing forth great fruit, others lesser; some with white fruit, some with
black, others of the color of black blood, varying infinitely according to
the climate and country where they grow.

1 Cerasus vulgaris. The common English Cherrie tree.
3 Cerasus Hispanica. The Spanish Cherrie tree.


The Description.
1 THe English Cherrie tree grows to an high and great tree, the body whereof
is of a mean bigness, which is parted above into very many boughs, with a
bark somewhat smooth, and of a brown crimson color, tough and pliable: the
substance or timber is also brown in the middle, and the outward part is
somewhat white. The leaves be great, broad, long, set (...) veins or nerves,
and slightly nicked about the edges: the flowers are white, of a mean bigness,
consisting of five leaves, and having certain threads in the middle, of the
like color: the Cherries be round, hanging upon long stems or footstalk,
with a stone in the midst which is covered with a pulpe or soft meat; the
kernel thereof is not unpleasant to the taste, though somewhat bitter.

2 The Flanders Cherry tree differs not from our English Cherrie tree in
stature or form of leaves or flowers; the difference consists in this, that
this tree brings forth his fruit sooner, and greater than the other:
wherefore it may be called in Latin, Cerasus precox, sive Belgica.

5 Cerasus Serotina. Late ripe Cherrie tree:
6 Cerasus vno pediculo plura. The Cluster Cherrie tree.


3 The Spanish Cherrie tree grows up to the height of our common Cherrie
tree: the wood or timber is soft and loose, covered with a whitish scaly
bark: the branches are knottie, greater and fuller of substance than any other
Cherry tree: the leaves are likewise greater and longer than any of the rest,
in shape like those of the Chestnut tree: the flowers are like the others in
form, but whiter of color: the fruit is greater and longer than any, white
for the most part all over, except those that stand in the hottest place where
the Sun has some reflection against a wall: they are also white within, and of
a pleasant taste.

4 The Gascoine Cherrie tree grows very like to the Spanish Cherry tree in
stature, flowers, and leaves: it differs in that it brings forth very great
Cherries, long, sharp pointed, with a certain hollownesse upon one side, and
spotted here and there with certain prickles of purple color as small as
sand: the taste is most pleasant, and excels in (...).

5 The lateripe Cherry tree grows up like unto our wild English Cherry tree,
with the like

7 Cerasus multiflora fructus edens. The double floured Cherry tree bearing
fruit.
8 Cerasus multiflora pauciores fructus edens. The doule floured barren Cherry
tree.
9 Cerasus auium nigra and racemosa. Birds Cherry, and black Grape Cherry tree.
10 Cerasus racemosarubra. Red Grape Cherry tree.
leaves, branches, and flowers, saving that they are sometimes once doubled:
the fruit is small, round, and of a dark bloody color when they be ripe,
which the Frenchmen gather with their (...), and hang them up in their houses
in bunches or handfulls against winter, which the Physicians do give unto their
patients in hot and burning seuers, being first steeped in a little warm
water, that causes them to swell and plumpe up as full and fresh as when they
did grow upon the tree.

6 The Cluster Cherry-tree differs not from the lastdescribed either in
leaves, branches, or (...): the flowers are also like, but never comes any
one of them to be double. The fruit is round, red when they be ripe, and many
growing upon one stem or footstalke in clusters, like as the Grapes do. The
taste is not unpleasant, although somewhat sour.

7 This Cherrie-tree with double flowers grows up unto a small tree, not
unlike to the common Cherrie-tree in each respect, saving that the flours are
somewhat doubled, that is to say, three (...) four times double; after which
comes fruit (though in small quantity) like the other common Cherrie.

8 The double floured Cherrie-tree grows up like unto an hedge bush, but not
so great nor high as any of the others; the leaves and branches differ not from
the rest of the Cherrie-trees. The flowers hereof are exceeding double, as are
the flowers of Marigolds, but of a white color, and smelling somewhat like the
Hawthorne flowers; after which come seldom or never any fruit, although some
Authors have said that it bears sometimes fruit, which my self have not at
any time seen; notwithstanding the tree has grown in my garden many years,
and that in an excellent good place by a brick wall, where it has the
reflection of the South sun, fit for a tree that is not willing to bear
fruit in our cold climat.

11 Cerasus nigra. The common black Cherry-tree
12 Chamaecerasus. The dwarf Cherry-tree.


9 The Birds Cherry-tree, or the black Cherry-tree, that brings forth very
much fruit upon (...) branch (which better may be understood by sight of the
figure, than by words) springs up (...) an hedge tree of small stature, it
grows in the wild woods of Kent, and are there used for (...) to graft other
Cherries upon, of better taste, and more profit, as especially those called the
Flanders Cherries: this wild tree grows very plentifully in the North of
England, especially at a (...) called Heggdale, near unto Rosgill in (...), and
in diverse other places about (...) (...), and there called Hegberrie-tree: it
grows likewise in Martome Park, (...) miles from Blackeburne, and in Harward
near thereunto; in Lancashire almost in every hedge: the leaves and branches
differ not from those of the wild Cherry-tree: the flowers grow along the
small branches, consisting of five small white leaves, with some greenish and
yellow thrums in the middle: after which come the fruit, green at the first,
black when they be ripe, and of the bigness of Sloes; of an harsh and
unpleasant taste.

10 The other birds Cherry-tree differs not from the former in any respect,
but in the color of the berries; for as they are black; so on the contrary,
these are red when they be ripe, wherein they differ.

11 The common black Cherry-tree grows up in some places to a great stature:
there is no difference between it and our common Cherry-tree, saving that the
fruit hereof is very little in respect of other Cherries, and of a black
color.

12 The dwarf Cherry-tree grows very seldom to the height of three cubits:
the (...) or body small, covered with a dark colored black: whereupon do
grow very limber and pliant twiggy branches: the leaves are very small, not
much unlike to those of the Priuite bush: the flowers are small and white:
after which come Cherries of a deep red color when they be ripe, of taste
somewhat sharp, but not greatly unpleasant: the branches laid down in the
earth, quickly take root, whereby it is greatly increased.

My self with diverse others have sundry other sorts in our gardens, one called
the Heart Cherry, the greater and the lesser; one of a great bigness, and most
pleasant in taste, which we call Luke Wards Cherry, because he was the first
that brought the same out of Italy; another we have called the Naples Cherry,
because it was first brought, into these parts from Naples: the fruit is very
great, sharp pointed, (...) like a man's heart in shape, of a pleasant taste,
and of a deep blackish color when it is ripe, as it were of the color of
dried blood.

We have another that brings forth Cherries also very greatb, igger than any
Flanders Cherrie, of the color of Iet, or burnished horn, and of a most
pleasant taste, as witnesses Mr. Bull, the Queens Majesty's Clockemaker, who
did taste of the fruit (the tree bearing only one Cherry, which he did eat;
but my self never tasted of it) at the impression hereof. We have also
another, called the Agriot Cherry, of a reasonable good taste. Another we have
with fruit of a dun color, tending to a watchet. We have one of the dwarffe
Cherries, that brings forth fruit as great as most of our Flanders Cherries,
whereas the common sort has very small Cherries, and those of an harsh taste.
These and many sorts more we have in our London gardens, whereof to write
particularly would greatly enlarge our volume, and to small purpose: therefore
what has been said shall suffice. I must here (as I have formerly done, in
Pears, Apples and other such fruits) refer you to my two friends Mr. John
Parkinson, and Mr. John Millen, the one to furnish you with the history, and
the other with the things themselves, if you desire them.

The Time.
The Cherrie-trees bloome in April; some bring forth their fruit sooner; some
later: the red Cherries be always better than the black of their own kind.

The Names.
The Cherry-tree is called in Greek, (...): and also in Latin, Cerasus: in
High Dutch: (...): in Low Dutch, (...), and (...): in French, Cerisier: in
English, Cherry-tree.

The fruit or Cherries be called in Greek, (...), and (...): and in Latin
likewise, Cerasa: in English, Cherries: the Latin and English names in their
several titles shall suffice for the rest that might be said.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The best and principal Cherries be those that are somewhat sower: those
little sweet ones

Spanish Cherries are like to these in faculties, but they do not so soon
putrify: they be likewise

The Flanders or Kentish Cherries that are through ripe, have a better juice
but watery, cold

The late ripe Cherries which the Frenchmen keep dried against winter, and are
by them Morclle, and we after the same name call them Morell Cherries, are dry,
and do somewhat bind; these being dried are pleasant to the taste, and
wholesome for the stomach, (...) as Prunes be, and do stop the belly.

Generally all the kinds of Cherries are cold and moist of temperature,
although some more

The common black Cherries do strengthen the stomach, and are whole somer than
the red Cherries,

The distilled water of Cherries is good for those that are troubled with heat
and inflammations

Many excellent Tarts and other pleasant meats are made with Cherries, sugar,
and other delicat

The gum of the Cherrie tree taken with wine and water, is reported to help
the stone; it may do Dioscorides adds, that it makes one well colored,
clears the sight, and causes a good appetite to meat.

CHAP. 131. Of the Mulberrie tree.
1 Morus. The Mulberrie tree.
2 Morus alba. The white Mulberrie tree.


The Description.
1 THe common Mulberie tree is high, and full of boughs: the body whereof is
many times great, the bark rugged; and that of the root yellow: the leaves are
broad and sharp pointed, something hard, and nicked on the edges; in stead of
flowers, are blowings or (...), which are downie: the fruit is long, made up of
a number of little grains, like unto a blackeBerrie, but thicker, longer, and
much greater, at the first green, and when it is ripe black, yet is the (...)
(whereof it is full) red: the root is parted many ways.

2 The white Mulberrie tree grows until it be come unto a great and goodly
stature, almost as big as the former: the leaves are rounder, not so sharp
pointed, nor so deeply snipt about the edges, yet sometimes sinuated or deeply
cut in on the sides, the fruit is like the former, but that it is white and
somewhat more tasting like wine.

The Place.
The Mulberry trees grow plentifully in Italy and other hot regions, where they
do maintain great woods and groves of them, that there Silk worms may feed
thereon. The Mulberry tree is fitly set by the slip; it may also be grafted or
inoculated into many trees, being grafted in a white Poplar, it brings forth
white Mulberies, as Beritius in his Geoponickes reports. These grow in sundry
gardens in England.

The Time.
Of all the trees in the Orchard the Mulberry does last bloome, and not before
the cold weather is gone in May (therefore the old Writers were wont to call it
the wisest tree) at which time the Silk worms do seem to revive, as having
then wherewith to seed and nourish them selves, which all the winter before do
lie like small grains or seeds, or rather like the dunging of a flesh (...)
upon a glass, or some such thing, as knowing their proper time both to
perform their duties for which they were created, and also when they may have
wherewith to maintain and preserve their own bodies, unto their business
aforesaid.

The berries are ripe in August and September. Hegesander in Athenaeus
affirms, that the Mulberie trees in his time did not bring forth fruit in
twenty years together, and that so great a plague of the gout then reigned and
raged so generally, as not only men, but boys, wenches, eunuchs, and women
were troubled with that disease.

The Names.
This tree is named in Greek (...), and (...): in Latin, Morus: in shops,
Morus Celsi: in high Dutch, (...): in low Dutch, (...) boom: in French,
Meurier: in English, Mulberry tree.

The (...) is called (...), and (...): in Latin, Morum: in shops, Morum Celsi:
in high Dutch (...): in Italian, Moro: in French, Meure: in Spanish, (...) and
Mores: in English, Mulberry.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Mulberries being gathered before they be ripe, are cold and dry almost in the
third degree, and do

They stay bleedings, and also the (...); they are good against inflammations
or hot swellings of

The ripe and new gathered Mulberries are likewise cold and be full of juice,
which has the taste

Of the juice of the ripe berries is made a confection with sugar, called
Diamorum: that is, after

These Mulberries taken in meat, and also before meat, do very speedily pass
through the belly, Galen says.

They are good to quench thirst, they stir up an appetite to meat, they are not
hurtful to the stomach,

The bark of the root is bitter, hot and dry, and has a scouring faculty:
the decoction hereof

The same bark being steeped in vinegar helps the tooth ache: of the fame
effect is also the decoction Dioscorides, who shows that about harvest time
there issues (...) of the root a juice, which the next day after is found to
be hard, and that the same is very good against the toothache; that it wastes
away Phyma, and purges the belly.

Galen says, that there is in the leaves and first buds of this tree a
cerraine middle faculty, both

CHAP. 132. Of the Sycomore tree.
Sycomorus. The Sycomore tree.


The Description.
THe Sycomore tree is of no small height, being very like to the mulberie tree
in bigness and show, as also in leaf: the fruit is as great as a Fig, and of
the same fashion, very like in juice and taste to the wild Fig, but sweeter,
and without any grains or seeds within, which grows not forth of the tender
boughs, but out of the body and great old arms very fruitfully: this tree
has in it plenty of milkie juice, which so soon as any part is broken or cut,
does issue forth.

The Place.
It grows, as Dioscorides writes, very plentifully in Caria and Rhodes, and
in sundry places of Egypt, as at the great Cayre or Alkaire, and in places that
do not bring forth much wheat, in which it is an help, and suffices in stead
of bread and corn when there is scarsitie of victuals. Galen writes, that he
(...) a plant of the Sycomore tree like to the wild Fig tree, fruit and all.

The Time.
It brings forth (...) three or four times in one year, and oftener if it be
(...) with an iron knife, or other like instrument.

The Names.
This tree is called in Greek, (...), of the Fig tree and the Mulbery tree: in
Latin, Sycomorus: (...) Celsus names it backward Morosycos: the Egyptians of
our time do call it Ficus (...), or Pharao his Fig tree, as witnesses
Bellonius: and it is likewise termed Ficus Aegyptia, Egyptian Fig tree, and
also Morus Aegyptia, or Egyptian Mulberrie tree. We call it English, Sycomore
tree after the Greek and Latin, and also Mulberry Fig tree, which is the right
Sycomore tree, and not the great Maple, as we have said in the chapter of the
Maple.

The fruit is named in Greek Sycomoron, and in Italian, Sycomoro and Fico
d'Egitto.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The fruit of the Sycomore tree has no sharpness in it at all, as Galen
says. It is somewhat sweet

It is good, says Dioscorides, for the belly; but it is (...), that is,
without any nourishment, and

There issues forth of the bark of this tree in the beginning of the Spring,
before the fruit appears,

It is both inwardly taken and outwardly applied against the bitings of
serpents, hardness of the

CHAP. 133. Of the Fig tree.
The Description.
1 THe garden Fig tree becomes a tree of a mean slature, having many
branches full of white pith within, like Elderne pith, and large leaves of a
dark green color, divided into sundry sections or divisions. The fruit
comes out of the branches without any flower (...) all that ever I could
perceive, which fruit is in shape like unto Pears, of color either whitish,
or somewhat red or of a deep blew, full of small grains within, of a sweet and
pleasant taste; which being broken before it be ripe, does yield most white
milk, like unto the kinds of Spurge, and the leaves also being broken do
yield the like liquour; but when the Figs be ripe, the juice thereof is like
honey.

1 Ficus. The Fig tree.
2 Chamaeficus. The dwarf Fig tree.


2 The dwarf Fig Tree is like unto the former in leaves and fruit, but it
never grows above the height of a man, and has many small shoots coming
from the roots, whereby it greatly increases.

There is also another wild kind, whose fruit is never ripe; Theophrastus
names it Erincos; (...) Caprificus.

The Place.
The Fig trees do grow plentifully in Spain and Italy, and many other
countries, as in England; where they bear fruit, but it never comes to
kindly maturitie, except the tree be planted under an hot wall, whereto
neither North, nor Northeast winds can come.

The Time.
The dwarf Fig tree grows in my garden, and brings forth ripe and very
great fruit in the month of August, of which Figs sundry persons have eaten at
pleasure.

In England the Fig trees put not forth their leaves until the end of May,
where oftentimes the fruit comes forth before the leaves appear.

The Names.
The Fig tree is called in Greek, (...), and of diverse, for difference sake
between it and the wild Fig tree, (...): in Latin, Ficus, and Ficus satiua,
and Vrbana: in high Dutch, Feygenbaum: in Low Dutch, Uijgheboom: in French,
Figuier: in Italian, Fico: in Spanish, Higuera: in English, Fig tree.

The fruit is named in Greek, (...): in Latin, Ficus: and the unripe fruit,
(...): in Latin, Grossus: that which is dried is called in Greek, (...): in
Latin, Carica: in High Dutch, Feygen: in Low Dutch, Uijghen: in French,
Figues: in Italian, Fichi: in Spanish, Higos: in (...), Fig: the little seeds
which are found in them are named by Galen, (...), Cechramides.

The Temperature.
The green Figs new gathered are somewhat warm and moist: the dry and ripe
Figs are hot almost in the third degree, and withal sharp and biting.

The leaves also have some sharpness, with an opening power, but not so strong
as the juice.

The Virtues.
The dry Figs do nourish better than the green or new Figs; notwithstanding
they engender

Figs be good for the throat and lungs, they mitigate the cough, and are good
for them that be

Figs stamped with Salt, Rue, and the kernels of Nuts withstand all poison
and corruption Mithridates, used this preservative against all venom and poison.

Figs stamped and made into the form of a plaster with wheat meal, the
powder of Fenugreek, Bubo, by reason of his lurking in such secret places: in
plain English terms they are called (...).

Figs boiled in Wormwood wine with some Barley meal are very good to be applied
as an implaister

Dry Figs have power to soften, consume, and make thin, and may be used
both outwardly

The leaves of the Fig tree do waste and consume the Kings Evil, or swelling
kernells in the

The milky juice either of the figs or leaves is good against all roughness of
the skin, lepries,

The milk does also cure the toothache, if a little lint or cotton be wet
therein, and put into the

It opens the veins of the hemorrhoids, and looseneth the belly, being
applied to the fundament.

Figs stamped with the powder of Fenugreeke, and vinegar, and applied
plaisterwise, do ease

The milk thereof put into the wound proceeding of the biting of a mad dog, or
any other venomous

The green and ripe Figs are good for those that be troubled with the stone of
the kidneyes, for

Dry or barrel Figs, called in Latin Caricae, are a remedy for the belly,
the cough, and for old

Dioscorides says, that the white liquor of the Fig tree, and juice of the
leaves, do curdle milk as

It brings down the menses, if it be applied with the yolke of an egg, or
with yellow wax.

CHAP. 134. Of the prickly Indian Fig tree.
Ficus Indica. The Indian Fig tree.
Fructus. The fruit.


The Description.
THis strange and admirable plant, called Ficus Indica, seems to be no other
thing than a multiplication of leaves, that is, a tree made of leaves, without
body or boughs; for the leaf set in the ground does in short space take root,
and brings out of it self other leaves, from which do grow others one after
another, till such time as they come to the height of a tree, having also in
the mean season boughs as it were coming from those leaves, sometimes more,
otherwhiles sewer, as Nature list to bestow, adding leaf unto leaf, whereby
it occupies a great piece of ground: these leaves are long and broad, as
thick as a man's thumb, of a deep green color, set full of long, slender,
sharp, and whitish prickles: on the tops of which leaves come forth long (...)
not unlike to those of the manured Pomegrenat tree, of a yellow color: after
which comes the fruit like unto the common Fig, narrow below, and bigger
above, of a green color, and stuffed full of a red pulpe and juice, staining
the hands of them that touch it, as do the Mulberries, with a bloody or
sanguine color: the top of which Figs are environed with certain scaly leaves
like a crown, wherein are also contained small grains that are the seeds: the
which being sown, do bring forth plants round bodied, like unto the trunk of
other trees, with leaves placed thereon like the other; which being set in the
ground bring forth trees of leaves, as we have showed.

Upon this plant in some parts of the West Indies grow certain excrescences,
which in continuance of time turn into Insects; and these out-growings are that
high prized Cochenele wherewith they dye colors in grain.

The Place.
This plant grows in all the tract of the East and West Indies, and also in
the country (...), now called Virginia, from whence it has been brought into
Italy, Spain, England, and other countries: in Italy it sometimes bears
fruit, but more often in Spain, and never as yet in England, although I have
bestowed great pains and cost in keeping it from the injury of our cold (...).

It grows also at S. Crux and other places of Barbary, and also in an Island
of the Mediterranean sea, called Zante, about a day and nights sailing with a
mean wind from Petrasse a port in Morea, where my servant William Marshall
(before remembered) did see not only great store of those trees made of leaves,
but also diverse other round bodied plants of a woody substance: from whence he
brought me diverse plants thereof in tubs of earth, very fresh and green, which
flourished in my garden at the impression hereof.

The Time.
These plants do grow green and fresh both Winter and Summer, by the relation
of my foresaid servant: notwithstanding they must be very carefully kept in
these countries from the extremity of Winter.

The Names.
This is thought to be the plant called of Pliny, (...); whereof he has
written, lib. 21. ca. 17. in this manner: About Opuns is the herb Opuntia, to
man's taste sweet, and it is to be marvelled, that the root should be made of
the leaves, and that it should so grow. Opuns is a city near unto Phocis in
Greece, as Pausanias, Strabo, and Pliny testify: but it is commonly called in
Latin, Ficus Indica: of the Indians, Tune, and Tunas, and also Anapallus, as
testifies Bellonius: in (...), Indian Fig tree.

There is a certain other described for the Indian Fig tree, by Theophrastus,
lib. 4. which Pliny, lib. 12. cap. 5. does eloquently express almost in the
same words, but (...) into Latin, whereof we intend to speak in the next
chapter.

The Temperature and Virtues.
We have no certain instruction from the Ancients, of the temperature of
faculty of this plant,

It is reported of some, that the juice of the fruit is excellent good against
ulcers of long continuance.

Cochenele is given alone, and mixed with other things, in malign diseases, as
pestilent fevers

CHAP. 135. Of the arched Indian Fig tree.
The Description.
THis rare and admirable tree is very great, straight, and covered with a
yellowish bark tending to tawny: the boughs and branches are many, very long,
tough, and flexible, growing very long in short space, as do the twigs of
Oziars, and those so long and weak, that the ends thereof hang down and touch
the ground, where they take root and grow in such sort, that those twigs become
great trees: and these being grown up unto the like greatness, do cast their
branches or twiggy tendrels unto the earth, where they likewise take hold and
root; by means whereof it comes to pass, that of one tree is made a great
wood or desert of trees, which the Indians do use for couerture against the
extreme heat of the Sun, wherewith they are grievously vexed: some likewise
use them for pleasure, cutting down by a direct line a long walk, or as it
were a vault, through the thickest part, from which also they cut certain
loope-holes or windows in some places, to the end to receive thereby the fresh
cool air that enters thereat, as also for light, that they may see their
cattle that feed thereby, to avoid any danger that might happen unto them
either by the enemy or wild beasts: from which vault or close walk does
rebound such an admirable echo or answering voice, if one of them speak unto
another aloud, that it does resound or answer again four or five times,
according to the height of the voice, to which it does answer, and that so
plainly, that it cannot be known from the voice it self: the first or mother
of this wood or desert of trees is hard to be known from the children, but by
the greatness of the body, which three men can scarsely (...) about: upon the
branches whereof grow leaves hard and wrinckled, in shape like those of the
Quince tree, green above, and of a whitish hoary color underneath, whereupon
the Elephants delight to feed: among which leaves (...) forth the fruit, of the
bigness of a man's thumb, in shape like a small Fig, but of a sanguine or bloody
color, and of a sweet taste, but not so pleasant as the Figs of Spain;
notwithstanding they are good to be eaten, and withal very (...).

Arbor ex Goa, sieve Indica. The arched Indian Fig tree.


The Place.
This wondrous tree grows in diverse places of the East Indies, especially
near unto Goa, and also in Malaca: it is a stranger (...) most parts of the
world.

The Time.
This tree keeps his leaves green (...) and Summer.

The Names.
This tree is called of those that have traveled, Ficus Indica, the Indian
Fig; and Arbor Goa, of the place where it grows in greatest plenty: we may
call it in English, the arched Fig tree.

Such as desire to see more of this Fig tree, may have recourse to Clusius his
Exoticks, lib. I. cap. I. where he shows it was mentioned by diverse ancient
Writers, as Q. Curtius, lib. 9. Plin. lib. 12. ca. 5. Strabo, lib. 5. and
(...). Hist. Plant. lib. 4. cap. 5. by the name of Ficus Indica.

The Temperature and Virtues.
We have nothing to write of the temperature or virtues of this tree, of our
own knowledge: neither have we received from others more, than that the fruit
hereof is generally eaten, and that without any hurt at all, but rather good,
and also nourishing.

CHAP. 136. Of Adams Apple tree, or the West-Indian Plantaine.
The Description.
WHether this plant may be reckoned for a tree properly, or for an herby Plant,
it is disputable, considering the soft and herby substance whereof it is made;
that is to say, when it has attained to the height of six or seven cubits, and
of the bigness of a man's thigh, notwithstanding it may be cut down with one
stroke of a sword, or two or three cuts with a knife, even with as much ease as
the root of a Radish or Carrot of the like bigness: from a thick fat threddy
root rise immediately diverse great leaves, of the length of three cubits and a
half, sometimes more, according to the soil where it grows, and of a cubit
and more broad, of bigness sufficient to wrap a child in of two years old, in
shape like those of Mandrake, of an ouerworn green color, having a broad rib
running through the middle thereof: which leaves, whether by reason of the
extreme hot scorching Sun, or of their own nature, in September are so dry and
withered, that there is nothing thereof left or to be seen but only the
middle rib. From the midst of these leaves rises up a thick trunk, whereon
does grow the like leaves, which the people do cut off, as also those next the
ground, by means whereof it rises up to the height of a tree, which otherwise
would remain a low and base plant. This manner of cutting they use from time
to time, until it come to a certain height, above the reach of the Elephant,
which greedily seeks after the fruit. In the midst of the top among the
leaves comes sorth a soft and fungous stumpe, whereon do grow diverse apples
in form like a small Cucumber, and of the same bigness, covered with a thin
rind like that of the Fig, of a yellow color when they be ripe: the pulpe or
substance of the meat is like that of the Pompion, without either seeds,
stones, or kernels, in taste not greatly perceived at the first, but presently
after it pleases, and entiseth a man to eat liberally thereof, by a certain
entising sweetness it yields: in which fruit, if it be cut according to the
length (says mine Author) oblique, transuerse, or any other way whatsoever,
may be seen the shape and form of a cross, with a man fastened thereto. My
self have seen the fruit, and cut it in pieces, which was brought me from
Aleppo in pickle; the cross I might perceive, as the form of a spred-Egle in
the root of Fern; but the man I leave to be sought for by those that have
better eyes and judgment than my self.

Musa Serapionis. Adams Apple tree.
Musae Fructus. Adams Apple.


April 10. 1633. my much honored friend Dr. Argent (now President of the
College of Physicians of London) gave me a plant he received from the
Bermuda's: the length of the stalk was some two foot; the thickness thereof
some seven inches about, being crested, and full of a soft pith, so that one
might easily with a knife cut it asunder. It was crooked a little, or indented,
so that each two or three inches space it put forth a knot of some half inch
thickness, and some inch in length, which encompassed it more than half
about; and upon each of these ioints or knots; in two ranks one above another,
grew the fruit, some twenty, nineteen, eighteen, etc. more or less, at each
knot: for the branch I had, contained nine knots or divisions, and upon the
lowest knot grew twenty, and upon the uppermost fifteen. The fruit which I
received was not ripe, but green, each of them was about the bigness of a
large Bean; the length of them some five inches, and the breadth some inch and
half: they all hang their heads downwards, have rough or uneven ends, and are
five cornered; and if you turn the upper side downward, they somewhat resemble
a boat, as you may see by one of them expressed by it self: the husk is as
thick as a Beans, and will easily shell off it: the pulpe is white and soft:
the stalk whereby it is fastened to the knot is very short, and almost as
thick as ones little finger. This stalk with the fruit thereon I hanged up in
my shop, were it became ripeabout the beginning of May, and lasted until June:
the pulp or meat was very soft and tender, and it did eat somewhat like a
Muske-Melon. I have given you the figure of the whole branch, with the fruit
thereon, which I drew as soon as I received it, and it is marked with this
figure 1. The figure 2. shows the shape of one particular fruit, with the
lower side upwards. 3. The same cut through the middle long ways. 4. The same
cut side ways. I have been told (but how certain it is I know not) that the
flowers which precede the fruit are bell-fashioned, and of a blew color. I
could observe no seed in the fruit; it may be it was because it had been cut
from the stock so long before it came to (...). This Plant is found in many
places of Asia, Afric, and America, especially in the hot regions: you may
find frequent mention of it amongst the sea voyages to the East and West
Indies, by the name of Plantaines, or Platanus, Bannanas, Bonnanas, Bouanas,
Dauanas, Poco, etc. some (as our Author has said) have judged it the forbidden
fruit; other-some, the Grapes brought to Moses out of the Holy Land.

Musae fructus exactior Icon. An exacter figure of the Plantaine fruit.


The Place.
This admirable tree grows in Egypt, Cyprus, and Syria, near unto a chief
city there called Alep, which we call Aleppo, and also by Tripolis, not far
from thence: it grows also in Canara, Decan, Guzarate, and Bengala, places of
the East Indies.

The Time.
From the root of this tree shoots forth young springs or shoots, which the
people take up and plant for the increase in the Spring of the year. The
leaves wither away in September, as is above said.

The Names.
It is called Musa by such as travel to Aleppo: by the Arabians, Musa Maum: in
Syria, Mose: The Grecians and Christians which inhabit Syria, and the Jews
also, suppose it to be that tree of whose fruit Adam did taste; which others
think to be a ridiculous fable: of Pliny, Opuntia.

It is called in the East Indies (as at Malauar where it also grows) Palan:
in Malayo, Pican: and in that part of Africa which we call Ginny, Bananas: in
English, Adams Apple tree.

The Temperature.
Dioscorides and Serapio judge, that it heateth in the end of the first degree,
and moistneth in the end of the same.

The Virtues.
The fruit hereof yields but little nourishment: it is good for the heat of
the breast, lungs, looseness in the belly: whereupon it is requisite for such
as are of a cold constitution, in the eating thereof to put unto it a little
Ginger or other spice.

It is also good for the reins, or kidneys, and to provoke urine: it
nourishes the child in the mothers

CHAP. 137. Of the Date tree.
Palma. The Date tree.
Palmarum fructus and flores cum Elate. The fruit and flowers of the Date tree.


The Description.
THe Date tree grows very great and high: the body or trunk thereof is
thick, and covered with a scaly rugged bark, caused by the falling away of
the leaves: the boughs grow only on the top, consisting of leaves set upon a
woody middle rib like those of Reeds or Flags: the inner part of which rib or
stalk is soft, light, hollow, and spongie. Among the leaves come forth the
flowers included in a long skinny membrane, as it were a sheath or hose, like
that which covers the Flower de-Luce before it be blown, which being opened
of it self, white flowers start forth, standing upon short and slender
foot-stalkes, which are fastened with certain small filaments or threddy
strings like unto little branches: after which spring out from the same
branches the fruit or Dates, which be in fashion long and round, in taste
sweet, and many times somewhat harsh, of a yellowish red color; wherein is
contained a long hard stone, which is in stead of kernel and seed; the which I
have planted many times in my Garden, and have grown to the height of three
foot: but the first frost has nipped them in such sort, that soon after they
perished, notwithstanding my industry by covering them, or what else I could
do for their succor.

The Place.
The Date trees grow plentifully in Africa and Egypt; but those which are in
Palestina and Syria be the best: they grow likewise in most places of the East
and West Indies, where there be (...) sorts, as well wild, as tame or manured.

The Time.
The Date tree is always green, and floureth in the Spring time: the fruit is
ripe in September, and being then gathered they are dried in the Sun, that
they may be the better both (...) into other countries far distant, as also
(...) from rotting at home.

The Names.
The tree is called in Greek, (...): in Latin, Palma: in English, Date tree.

The fruit is named in Greek, (...): that is to say, Glans Palmarum, or the
fruit of the (...) trees: and by one word, (...): in Latin, Palmula: in shops,
Dactylus: in High Dutch, Dattelen: in Low Dutch, Dadelen: in Italian, Dattoli:
in French, Dattes: in Spanish, Tamaras, and Dattiles: in English, Date.

The cod or sheath wherein the flowers and Dates are wrapped, is called (...):
and of some, (...)

The Temperature and Virtues.
All manner of Dates whatsoever are hard of digestion, and cause headache: the
worser sort be

The blood which is engendered of Dates in man's body is altogether gross, and
somewhat clammy:

The Dates which grow in colder regions, when they cannot come to perfect
ripeness, if they be

The drier sorts of Dates, as Dioscorides says, be good for those that spet
blood, for such as have

The best Dates, called in Latin Caryotae, are good for the roughness of the
throat and lungs.

There is made hereof both by the cunning Confectioners and Cooks, diverse
excellent cordial,

They do also refresh and restore such unto strength as are entering into a
consumption, for they

Dry Dates do stop the belly, and stay vomiting, and the wambling of women's
stomachs that

The ashes of the Date stones have a binding quality, and emplastick faculty,
they heal pushes Staphylomata, and falling away of the hair of the eye lids,
being applied together with Spikenard: with wine it keeps proud flesh from
growing in wounds.

The boughs and leaves do evidently bind, but especially the hose, that is to
say, the sheath (...)

The leaves and branches of the Date tree do heal green wounds and ulcers,
refresh and cool

Galen in his book of Medicines according to the kinds mentions a
composition called Diapalma,

CHAP. 138. Of the wild Date trees.
The Description.
1 THeophrastus makes this plant to be a kind of Date tree, but low and of
small growth, seldom attaining above the height of a cubit: on the top whereof
shoot forth for the most part long leaves like those of the Date tree, but
lesser and shorter; from the sides whereof breaks forth a bush of threddy
strings: among which rises up small branches garnished with clusters of white
flowers, in which before they be opened are to be seen imperfect shapes of
leaves, closely compassed about with an innumerable sort of thin skinny hulls;
which rude shapes with the flowers are served up and eaten at the second course
among other iunkets, with a little salt and pepper, being pleasant to the
taste. The stalk is about the thicknes of ones 1 Palmites, sieve Chamaerriphes.
The little wild Datc tree.
2 Palmapinus, sieve Palma conifera. The wild Date tree bearing (...)
Fructus Palmapini. The fruit of the Cone-Date.
little finger, here and there set with a few crooked pricks: the leaves within
some handful or two of the stalk are cut up and made into little besomes,
which are sold in many glass shops here in London.

2 The wild Date tree that brings forth cones or key-clogs, is of most
travelers into the Indies thought to be barren of Dates, except sometimes it
yields forth some small berries like unto Dates, but dry, and nothing worth.
This tree grows to the height and bigness of a low tree; the trunk or body
whereof is soft, of a fungous or pithy substance, unfit for building, as is the
manured Date tree: the branch it self was brought unto us from the Indies, dry
and void of leaves, wherefore we must describe the leaves by report of the
bringer. The branches (says my Author) are covered over with long flaggie
leaves, hanging down of a great length like those of the Date tree: the
branches are also covered with a scaly or scabbed bark, very rough, one scale
or plate lying over another, as tiles upon a house: thc fruit grows at the end
of the branches, not unlike a great Pine Apple cone, covered over with a skin
like the Indian Nut: wherein is contained a shel, within which shell lies hid
an acorn or long (...) of an inch long, and sometimes longer, (...) hard to be
broken, in taste like the (...); which the savage people do grate and stamp to
powder to make them bread.

The Place.
Theophrastus says the first grows in Candy, but much more plentifully in
Cilicia, and are now found in certain places of Italy by the sea side, and
also in diverse parts of Spain.

The other has been found by travelers into the West Indies, from whence have
bin brought the naked branches with the fruit.

The Time.
The time answers that of the manured Date tree.

The Names.
The little Date tree or wild Date tree is named of Theophrastus, (...): in
Naples, Cephaglione: in Latin commonly Palmites. That which is found in the
midst of the young springs, and is used to be eaten in banquets, is called in
Greek, (...): in Latin, Palmae cerebrum, the brain of the Date tree.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Galen supposes that the brain of the Date tree consists of sundry parts,
that is to say, of a certain

Being taken as a meat it ingendreth raw humors and wind, and therefore it is
good to be (...)

CHAP. 139. Of the drunken Date tree.
Areca, sieve Faufel. The drunken Date tree.


The Description.
THe drunken Date tree, which Carolus Clusius calls Faufel, is an Indian tree
of a great bigness, the timber whereof is very soft and spongious, exceeding
smooth and plain unto a great height, not possible to be climbed up; and
therefore the Indians for their easier ascending up, at some distances do tie
round about the tree certain wyths or ropes made of the barks of trees, as
may be perceived by the figure, whereby very easily they go up and down to
gather the fruit at their pleasure. The top of the tree is divided into sundry
branches, in substance like to the great cane; whereupon do grow fair flaggie
leaves like those of the Palm or Date tree, whereof doubtless this is a wild
kind: from the bottom of which branches comes forth fruit in long bunches
like traces of Onions, covered with a soft pulpe like unto the Wall-nut, rough,
and (...) full of hair of a yellowish color, and like the dried Date when it
is ripe: within which husk is contained fruit like unto the Nutmeg, but
greater, very hard, and striped over with red and white veins, or sinues.

The Place, Time, and Names.
This Date tree, which the Arabians call Faufel, that is by interpretation,
Auellana Indica, the Indian Nut or Filberd, Auicen and Scrapio call Filfel, and
Fufel. It grows in the East Indies in diverse and sundry places, as in
Malauar, where vulgarly it is called Pac; and of the Nobles and Gentlemen,
Areca: which name is used amongst the Portugals which dwell in those Indies: in
Guzarate and Decan it is called Cupare: in Zeilan, Poaz: in Malaca, (...): in
Cochin, (...): in English, the drunken Date tree, which name we have coined
from his quality, because the fruit makes those drunk that eat thereof.

The Temperature.
It is cold and dry in the second degree.

The Virtues.
The fruit of Areca before it be ripe is reckoned amongst the stupefactiue or a
stonishing medicines;

When the Indians are vexed with some intolerable ache or pain, or must of
necessity endure

The juice of the fruit of Areca does strengthen the gums, fasten the teeth
comfort the stomach,

CHAP. 140. Of the Indian Nut tree.
The Description.
1 THe Grecians have not known, but the Arabians have mentioned this Indian Nut
tree, the body whereof is very great, smooth and plain, void of boughs or
branches, of a great height; wherefore the Indians do wrap ropes about the body
thereof, as they do upon the tree last described, for their more ease in
gathering the fruit: the timber whereof is very spongie within, but hard
without, a matter fit to make their Canoos and boats of: on the top of the tree
grow the leaves like those of the Date tree, but broad, and sharp at the point
as thorns, whereof they use to make needles, bodkins, and such like
instruments, wherewith they sow the sails of their ships, and do such like
business: among these leaves come forth clusters of flowers like those of the
Chestnut tree, which turn into great fruit of a round form, and somewhat sharp
at one end; in that end next unto the tree is one hole, sometimes two bored
through: this Nut or fruit is wrapped in a couerture, consisting of a substance
not unlike to hemp before it be beaten soft: there is also a (...) and gentler
stuff next unto the shell, like unto Flax before it be made soft: in the
middle whereof is contained a great Nut covered with a very hard shell, of a
brown color before it be polished, afterward of a black shining color like
burnished horn: next unto the shell upon the inside there cleaves a white
cornelly substance firm and sollid, of the (...) and taste of a blanched
Almond: within the cauitie or hollownes thereof is contained a most delectable
liquor like unto milk, and of a most pleasant taste.

2 We have no certain knowledge from those that have traveled into the
Indies, of the tree which bears this little Indian Nut; neither have we any
thing of our own knowledge, more, than that we see by experience that the
fruit hereof is lesser, wherein consists the difference.

The other, expressed in the same table with the former, by the name of
Mehenbethene, Clusius received it by the same name from (...) of Padua: yet it
does not (as he says) well agree with the description; and he rather approues
of their opinion who refer it to the (...) vnguentaria, 1 Nux Indica arbor. The
Indian Nut tree.
Nux Indica. The Indian Nut.
2 Nucula Indica. The little Indian Nut.
(...). 3
or Ben. It is some inch long, of a triangular figure, with a hard and woody
shel: which broken, shows three cells or partitions, in each whereof is
contained a long kernel white and sweet.

The Place.
This Indian Nut grows in some places of Africa, and in the East Indies, and
in all the Islands of the West Indies, especially in Hispaniola, Cuba, and
Saint John's Island, and also upon the continent by Carthagena, Nombre de Dios,
and Panama, and in Virginia, otherwise called Norembega, part of the same
continent, for the most part near unto the sea side, and in moist places, but
it is seldom found in the vplandish countries.

The Time.
It grows green Winter and Summer.

The Names.
The fruit is called in Latin, Nux Indica: of the Indians, Cocus: of the
Portugals that dwell in the East Indies, Cocco, taken from the end, wherein are
three holes representing the head of a Monkie: Serapio and Rhasis do call this
tree Iaralnare, idest, Arborem Nuciferam, the tree bearing Nuts: of (...),
Glauci al hend: of the vulgar people, Maro, and the fruit Narel; which name
Narel is common among the Persians and Arabians: it is called in Malauar,
Tengamaran: the ripe fruit, (...); and the green fruit. Eleri: in (...) it is
called Lanhan: in Malaio, Triccan: and the Nut, (...).

The distilled liquor is called Sula; and the oil that is made thereof, Copra.

The Temperature.
It is of a mean temper betwixt hot and cold.

The Virtues and use.
The Indians do use to cut the twigs and tender branches toward the evening, at
the ends whereof

Likewise they make of the shell of the Nut, cups to drink in, which we
likewise use in England,

CHAP. 141. Of the Dragon Tree.
1 Draco arbor. The Dragon tree.
Draconis fructus. The Dragon tree fruit.


The Description.
THis strange and admirable tree grows very great, resembling the Pine tree,
by reason it does always flourish, and has his boughs or branches of equal
length and bigness, which are bare and naked, of eight or nine cubits long,
and of the bigness of a man's (...): from the ends of which do shoot out leaves
of a cubit and a half long, and full two inches broad, somewhat thick, and
raised up in the middle, then thinner and thinner like a two edged sword: among
which come forth little mossie flowers, of small moment, and turn into
berries, of the bigness of Cherries, of a yellowish color, round, light and
bitter, covered with a threesold skin or filme, wherein is to be seen, as
(...) and diverse other report, the form of a Dragon, having a long neck or
gaping mouth; the ridge or back armed with sharp prickles, like the
Porcupine; it has also a long tail, and four feet, very easy to be
discerned: the figure of it we have set forth unto you according to the
greatness thereof, because our words and meaning may be the better understood,
and also the (...) of the tree in his full bigness, because it is impossible
to be expressed in the figure: the trunk or body of the tree is covered with a
rough bark, very thin, and (...) to be opened or wounded with any small tool
or instrument; which being so wounded in the Dog days, bruised or bored, does
yield forth drops of a thick red liquour, which of the name of the tree are
called Dragons tears, or Sanguis Draconis, Dragons blood: diverse have doubted
whether the liquour or gummie juice were all one with Cinnabaris of Dioscorides
(not meaning that Cinaber made of Quicksiluer) but the received opinion is,
they differ not, by reason their quality and temperature work the like effect.

The Place.
This tree grows in an Island which the Portugals call Madera, and in one of
the Canarie Islands, called Insula Portus Sancti; and as it seems it was
first brought out of Afric, although some are of a contrary opinion, and say,
that it was first brought from Carthagena, in America, by the Bishop of the
same Province.

The Time.
The time of his growing we have touched in the description, where we said
that it flourishes and grows green all the year.

The Names.
The names have been sufficiently spoken of in the description and in their
several titles.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The Sanguis Draconis which is thought to proceed from this tree has an
astringent faculty,

Smiths also use it to varnish over their works to give them a sanguine
color, and keep them

CHAP. 142. Of the Sassafras, or Ague tree.
The Description.
THe Sassafras tree grows very great, much like unto the Pine tree: the trunk
or body is straight, smooth, and void of boughs, of a great height: it is
covered with a two fold gross rind, the uppermost of the color of ashes,
that next the wood of a tawnie color: on the top come forth many goodly
branches, like those of the Palm tree, whereon do grow green leaves,
somewhat like those of the Fig tree, of a sweet smell when they be green, but
much sweeter when they be dry, declining to the smell of Fenell, with much
sweetness in taste: they are green Winter and Summer, neither bearing fruit
nor flowers, but is altogether barren as it is said: the roots are gross,
conformable to the greatness of the tree, of a tawnie color, dispersing
themselves far abroad under the upper crust of the earth, by means whereof
they are often cast down with mean blasts of wind.

The wood of the tree is very strong, hard and brittle, it has not so strong
and a pleasant smell as (...) of the root, neither is it in such use. The
leaves are of two sorts, some long and smooth, and not snipt about the edges:
other-some, and those chiefly on the ends of the branches, are deeply gashed
in, as it were divided into three several parts. I have given the figure of a
branch taken from a little tree, which grew in the Garden of Master Wilmote at
Bow, who died some few years ago.

The Place.
This tree grows in the most parts of the West Indies, especially about the
cape of Florida Wingandico, and Virginia, otherwise named Norembega.

The Time.
It flourishes and keeps green Winter and Summer.

Svssafras. The Sassafras tree.


The Names.
The Spaniards and French men have named this tree, Sassafras: the Indians in
their tongue, (...): for want of an English name we are contented to call it
the Ague tree, of his virtue in healing the Ague.

The Temperature.
The boughs and branches hereof are hot ct dry in the second degree; the rind
is hotter, (...) that it enters into the third degree of heat and dryness,
as is manifestly perceived in the decoction.

The Virtues.
The best of all the tree is the root, and that

The rind tastes of a more sweet smell

It is a tree that grows near unto the sea,

The wood hereof cut in small pieces and boiled in water, to the color of
Claret wine, and drunk

The root of Sassafras has power to comfort the liver, and to free from
oppilations, to comfort

It provoke urine, remoueth the impediments that do cause barrenness, and
makes women

CHAP. 143. Of the Storax tree.
The Description.
THe Storax tree grows to the height and bigness of the Quince tree: the
trunk or body is covered with a bark or rind like unto the Birch tree: the
branches are small and limmer, whereon do grow leaves like those of the Quince
tree, greenish above, and whitish underneath: among which come forth white
flowers, like those of the Orange tree, of an unpleasant smell: after comes
the fruit or berries, standing upon long and slender footstalks, covered over
with a little woollinesse, of the bigness of a bladder nut, and of the same
color; wherein is contained small Styrax arbor. The Storax tree.
seed, whereunto also cleave certain (...) tears, bearing the name of the
tree, and which issue from the trunk or body when it is wounded.

The Place.
This tree grows in diverse places of France, Italy and Spain, where it
brings forth little or no gum at all: it grows in Iudaea, Pamphylia, Syria,
Pisidia, Sidon, and many other places of Jury or Palestine, as also in diverse
Islands in the Mediterranean sea, namely Cyprus, Candy, Zant, and other places,
where it brings forth his gummy liquour in full perfection of sweetness, and
also in great plenty, where it is gathered and put into great Canes or Reeds,
whereof as some deem it took the name Calamita; others deem often he leaves of
Reeds wherein they wrap it: hereof I have two small trees in my garden, the
which I raised of seed.

The Time.
It floureth in May, and the fruit is ripe in September.

The Names.
This tree, as may be gathered by some, was called Styrax, by reason of that
gum or liquour which droppeth out of the same, being like unto the hollow pipes
of Ise, that hang at the eaues of houses in Winter, called Styria, or of the
Canes or the leaves of Reeds spoken of before: in Latin, Storax Calamitae: in
English, Storax, which is kept in Canes or the leaves of Reeds: there flows
from some of these trees a (...) gummie liquor, which never grows naturally
hard, but remains always thin, which is called liquid Styrax, or Storax.

The Temperature.
The gum of this tree is of an heating, mollifying, and concocting quality.

The Virtues.
It helps the cough, the falling down of rheumes and humors into the chest,
and hoarsnesse Strumas, or the Kings evil, nodes on the nerves, and hard
swellings proceeding of a cold cause: it prevails also against all cold
poisons, as Hemlocks and such like.

Of this gum there are made sundry excellent perfumes, pomanders, sweet waters,
sweet bags,

CHAP. 144. Of the Sorrowful tree or Indian Mourner.
The Description.
ARbor tristis, the sad or sorrowful tree waxes as big as an Olive tree,
garnished with many goodly branches, set full of leaves like those of the Plum
tree: among which come forth most odoriferous and sweet smelling flowers, whose
stalks are of the color of Saffron, which flourish and show themselves only
in the night time, and in the day time look withered and with a mourning
cheer: the leaves also at that time shrink in themselves together, much like
a tender plant that is frost bitten, very sadly lumping, lowering, and hanging
down the head, as though it loathed the light, and could not abide the (...)
of the Sun. I should but in vain lose labor in repeating a foolish fancy of
the Poetical Indians, who would make fools believe, that this tree was once a
fair daughter of a great Lord or King, and that the Sun was in love with her,
with other toies which I Arbor tristis. The sorrowful tree.
omit. The flowers are white, somewhat like those of Iasmine, but more double,
and they are of a very sweet smell: there succeed them many little cods,
containing some six seeds a piece somewhat like those of Stramonium.

The Place, Time, and Names.
This tree grows in the East Indies, especially in Goa, and Malayo: in Goa it
is called Parizataco: in Malayo, Singadi: in Decan, Pull: of the Arabians,
Guart: and of the Persians and Turks, Gul: in English, the Sad or Sorrowful
tree, or the Indian mourner. The time is specified in the description.

The Temperature and Virtues.
We have no ceartaine knowledge of the

It is reported, that if a linen cloth be steeped

There is made of the splinters of the wood

CHAP. 145. Of the Balsam tree.
The Kinds.
THere be diverse sorts of trees from which do flow Balsames, very different one
from another, not only in form, but also in fruit, liquour, and place of
growing; the which to distinguish would require more time and travel than
either our small time will afford, or riches for our maintenance to discover
the same in their natural countries: which otherwise by report to set down
certain matter by incertainties, would discredit the Author, and no profit
shall arise thereby to the Reader: notwithstanding we will set down so much as
we have found in the works of some travelers, which best agree with the truth
of the history.

The Description.
1 THere be diverse trees growing in the Indies, whose fruits are called by the
name of the fruit of the Balsam tree: among the rest this whose figure we have
set forth unto your view, we our selves have seen and handled; and therefore
the better able to describe it. It is a fruit very crooked, and hollowed like
the palm of an hand, two inches long, half an inch thick, (...) with a
thick smooth (...), of the color of a dry Oken leaf; wherein is contained a
kernel (of the same length and thickness, apt to (...) said shell or rind)
of the substance of an Almond; of the color of ashes, fat, and oilie; of a
good smell, and very unpleasant in taste.

2 The wood we have dry brought unto us from the Indies for our use in Physic
(a small description may serve for a dry stick) nevertheless we have other
fruits brought from the Indies, whose figures are not set forth, by reason they
are not so well known as desired; whereof one is of the bigness of a Wal-nut,
somewhat broad on the upper side, with a rough or rugged shell, uneven, black
of color, and full of a white kernel, with much juice in it; of a pleasant
taste and smell, like the oil of Mace: the whole fruit is exceeding light, in
respect of the quantity or bigness, even as it were a piece of Cork; which
notwithstanding sinketh to the bottom when it falls into the water, like as
does a stone.

1 Balsamifructus. The fruit of the Balsam tree.
3 Balsamum Alpini cum Carpobalsamo. The Balsam tree with the fruit.


This tree, says Garcias, that bears the fruit Carpobalsamum, is also one of
the Balsam trees: it grows to the height and bigness of the Pomegranate
tree, garnished with very many branches: whereon do grow leaves like those of
Rue, but of color whiter, always growing green: amongst which come forth
flowers, whereof we have no certainty: after which comes forth fruit like
that of the Turpentine tree, which in shoppes is called Carpobalsamum, of a
pleasant smell; but the liquour which flows from the wounded tree is much
sweeter: which liquour of some is called Opobalsamum.

Prosper Alpinus has writ a large Dialogue of the Balsam of the Ancients, and
also figured and delivered the history thereof in his book De Plant. Aegypti,
cap. 14. whether I refer the curious I have presented you with a slip from his
tree, and the Carpobalsamum (...) forth by our Author, which seems to be of
the same plant. The leaves of this are like to those of Lentiscus, always
green, and winged, growing three, five, or seven fastened to one foot-stalke;
the wood is gummie, reddish, and well smelling: the flowers are small and (...)
like those of Acatia, growing usually three nigh together: the fruit is of the
shape and bigness of that of the Turpentine tree, containing yellow and well
smelling seeds, filled with a yellowish moisture like honey, their taste is
bitterish, and somewhat biting the tongue.

Of these Balsam trees there is yet another sort: the fruit whereof is as it
were a kernel without a shell, covered with a thin skin straked with many
veins, of a brown color: the meat is firm and solid, like the kernel of the
Indian Nut, of a white color, and without smell, but of a grateful taste; and
it is thought to be hot in the first degree, or in the beginning of the second.

There be diverse sorts more, which might be omitted because of tediousness:
nevertheless I will trouble you with two special trees worthy the noting:
there is, says my Author, in America a great tree of monstrous hugeness,
beset with leaves and boughs even to the ground; the trunk whereof is covered
with a twofold bark, the one thick like unto Cork, and another thin next to
the tree: from between which barks does flow (the upper bark being wounded) a
white Balsam like unto tears or drops, of a most sweet savor, and singular
effects, for one drop of this which thus (...) out of the tree, is worth a
pound of that which is made by decoction: the fruit hereof is small in respect
of the others; it seldom exceeds the bigness of a Pease, of a bitter taste,
enclosed in a narrow husk, of the length of a finger, something thin, and of a
white color; which the Indians do use against headache: which fruit of most
is that we have before described, called Carpobalsamum.

It is also written, that in the Island called Hispaniola; there grows a
small tree, of the height of two men, without the industry of man, having
stalks or (...) of the color of ashes; whereon do grow green leaves, sharp
at both ends, but more green on the upper side than on the lower; having a
middle rib somewhat thick and standing out; the foot-stalkes whereon they grow
are somewhat reddish: among which leaves comes fruit growing by clusters, as
long as a man's hand, fingers and all: the stones or grains in the fruit be
few, and green; but growing to redness more and more as the fruit waxes
ripe. From the which is gathered a juice after this manner: they take the young
shootes and buds of the tree, and also the clusters of the fruit, which they
bruise, and boil in water to the thickenesse of honey, which being strained,
they keep it for their uses.

They use it against wounds and ulcers; it stops and stancheth the blood;
makes them clean; brings up the flesh, and heals them mightily, and with
better success than true Balsame. The branches of the tree being cut, do cast
forth by drops a certain clear water, more worth than Aqua vitae, most
wholesome against wounds, and all other diseases proceeding from cold causes,
if it be drunken some few days together.

The Place.
These trees grow in diverse parts of the world, some in Egypt, and most of
those countries adjacent: there grows of them in the East and West Indies; as
travelers in those parts report.

The Time.
These trees for the most part keep green winter and Summer.

The Names.
Balsame is called in Greek, (...): in Latin also Balsamum: of the Arabians
Balseni, Balesina, and Belsan: in Italian, Balsamo: in French, Baume.

The liquor that flows out of the tree when it is wounded, is called
Opobalsamum: the wood (...): the fruit Carpobalsamum: and the liquor which
naturally flows from the tree in Egypt Balsamum.

The Temperature.
Balsame is hot and dry in the second degree, with astriction.

The Virtues.
Natural Balsame taken in a morning fasting, with a little Rosewater or wine,
to the quantity

It helps consumptions, cleanses the barren womb, especially being anointed
upon a pessary,

The stomach being anointed therewith, digestion is helped thereby; it also
preserves the

It also takes away all manner of aches, proceeding of cold causes, if they be
anointed therewith; (...); and strengthens the weak members.

The same refreshes the brain, and comfort the parts adioining, it helps
the palsy, convulsions,

The marvelous effects that it works in new and green wound, were here too
long to set

CHAP. 146. Of a kind of Balm, or Balsame Tree.
The Description.
THis tree which the people of the Indies do call Molli, grows to the
bigness of a great tree, having a trunk or body of a dark green color,
sprinkled over with many ash colored spots: the branches are many, and of very
great beauty; whereupon do grow leaves not unlike to those of the Ash-tree,
consisting of many small leaves, set upon a middle rib; growing narrower ever
toward the point, every particular one jagged on the sides like the teeth of a
saw; which being plucked from the stem, yields forth a milkie juice; tough
and clammie, (...) like the bruised leaves of Fenell, and as it seems in
taste somewhat astringent: the (...) grow in clusters upon the twiggie
branches, like those of the Vine a little before the grapes be formed: after
follows the fruit or berries, somewhat greater than Pepper corns, of an
oilic substance, green at the first, and of a dark reddish color when they
be ripe. The first of the sigures was taken from a tree, only of three years
growth, but the latter from a tree come to his full growth, as it is affirmed
in Clusius his Cur. Poster. It differs only in that the leaves of the old trees
are not at all snipt or divided on the edges.

1 Molli, sieve Molly Clusij, and Lobelij. The Balsame tree of Clusius and
Lobels description.
2 Molle arboris adult ae ramus. A branch of the old tree of Molle.


The Place.
This tree, says a learned Physician called Ioh. (...), does grow in the King
of Spain his garden at Madryll, which was the first that ever he did see:
since which time, John Ferdinando Secretary unto the foresaid king did show
unto the said Fragosus in his own 'garden a tree so large, and of such
beauty, that he was never satisfied with looking on it, and meditating upon
the virtues thereof. Which words I have received from the hands of a famous
learned man, called Mr. (...) Brown, Dr. in Physic, and Physician to the
Queens (...), at the impression hereof; faithfully translated out of the
Spanish tongue, without adding or taking any thing away.

They grow plentifully in the vales and low grounds of Peru, as all affirm
that have traveled to the West Indies; as also those that have described the
singularities thereof. My self with diverse others, as namely Mr. Nicholas
Let, a worshipful Merchant of the City of London; and also a most skillful
Apothecary, Mr. James Garret, who have received seeds hereof from the right
Honorable the Lord Hunsdon, Lord high Chamberlain of England, worthy of triple
honor for his care in getting, as also for his curious keeping rare and
strange things brought from the farthest parts of the world; which seeds we
have sown in our gardens, where they have brought forth plants of a foot high;
and also their beautiful leaves: notwithstanding our care, (...), and
industry, they have perished at the first approach of winter, as not being able
by reason of their tenderness to endure the cold of our Winter blasts.

The Time.
As touching the time of his flourishing, and bringing his fruit to maturitie,
we have as yet no certain knowledge, but is thought to be green both VVinter
and Summer.

The Names.
This most notable (...) is called by the Indian name Molle: of some, Molly,
and Muelle, taken from his tender softness, as some have deemed: it may be
called the Fennel tree, or one of the Balm, or Balsam trees.

The Temperature.
This tree is thought to be of an astringent or binding quality; whereby it
appears besides the hot temperature it has, to be compounded of diverse other
faculties.

The Virtues.
The Indians use to sees the fruit or berries hereof in water, and by a
special skill they have in

The leaves boiled, and the decoction drunk, helps them of any disease
proceeding of a cold

The gum which issues from the tree, being white like unto Manna, dissolved in
milk, takes

The bark of this tree boiled, and the legs that be swollen and full of pain,
bathed and washed

This tree is of such estimation among the Indians, that they worship it as a
god, according unto Pliny reports of Homers Moly, the most renowned of all
plants, which they had in old time in such estimation and reverence, that as it
is recorded, the gods gave it the name of Moly, and so writes Ovid:

Pacifer huic dederat florem Cyllenius album,
Moly vocant Superi, nigraradice tenetur.
If any be desirous to see more hereof, they may read a learned discourse of
it set forth in the Latin Lobel, who has at large written the history
thereof, dedicated unto the right Honorable, the Lord Chamberlain, at the
Impression hereof, faithfully ouerseene and examined by the learned Physician
before remembered, Mr. Doctor Brown, and his censure upon the same. Together
with Lobels reply, who judged this plant (and not without good reason) to be a
kind of the true Balsam of the Ancients, and not much different from that set
forth by Prosper Alpinus, whereof I have made mention in the foregoing chapter.

CHAP. 147. Of the Canell, or Cinnamon tree.
The Description.
1 THe tree which has the Cinnamon for his bark is of the stature of an Olive
tree: having a body as thick as a man's thigh, from which the Cinnamon is taken;
but that taken from the smaller branches is much better: which branches or
boughs are many, and very straight; whereon do grow beautiful leaves, in shape
like those of the Orange tree, and of the color of the Bay leaf (not as it
has been reported) like unto the leaves of flags or flower de-Luce: among
these pleasant leaves and branches come forth many fair white flowers, which
turn into round black fruit or berries, of the bigness of an Hasell Nut, or
the Olive berry, and of a black color; out of which is pressed an oil, that
has no smell at all until it be rubbed and chafed between the hands: the
trunk or body with the greater arms or boughs of the tree are covered with a
double or twofold bark, like that of Suber, the Cork tree: the innermost
whereof is the true and pleasant Cinnamon, which is taken from the tree, and
cast upon the ground in the heat of the Sun; through the heat Canellae
folium, Bacillus, and Cortex. The leaf, bark, and trunk of the Cinnamon tree.
thereof it turns and foldeth it self round together, as we daily see by
viewing the thing it self: this tree being thus peeled, recouereth a new bark
in the space of three years, and is then ready to be disbarked as before. That
Cinnamon which is of a palecolour has not been well dried in the Sun: that
of a fair brown color is best; and that which is blackish, has been too
much dried, and also has taken some wet in the time of drying.

2 Besides the Cinnamon vulgarly known and used, there is another sort which
also is commonly received for the Cassia of Dioscorides and the Ancients. Now
this differs from the former in that it is of a redder color, of a more hard,
sollid, and compact substance, commonly also thicker, and if you chew it, more
clammy and viscous: the taste and smell are much like Cinnamon, yet not
altogether so strong as that of the best Cinnamon. There is much controversy
in late Writers concerning both the true Cinnamon, and Cassia of the Ancients:
the which I have not time nor space here to mention, much less to insist upon:
I have observed that both the Cinnamon and Cassia that we have are covered over
with a rough grayish bark, like that of an Oak or other such tree, which is
clean scraped off, and taken away before it be brought to us.

The Place.
The chiefest places where the trees do grow that bear Cinnamon, are Zeilan,
and Malauar: but those of Zeilan are the best: they grow in other of the
Molucca Islands, as Iaoa, or Iaua, the greater and the less, and also in
Mindanoa, for the most part upon mountains.

The Time.
The Cinnamon tree grows green winter and Summer, as do all the other trees
of the Moluccaes, and East Indies for the most part: the boughs whereof are
cut off at seasonable times, by the express commandment of the King of the
Country; and not before he hauc appointed the time.

There has been some controversy among writers concerning the tree whose
bark is Cassia, and that tree that bears Cinnamon, making them both one tree:
but that opinion is not to be received: for there is a great difference
between them, as there is betwixtan Oak, and a Chestnut tree; for the tree
whose bark is Cassia, is doubtless a bastard kind of Canell, or Cinnamon: in
show it is very like, but in sweetness of smell and other circumstances
belonging to Cinnamon, far inferior.

The Names.
Cinnamon is called in Italian Canella: in Spanish, Canola: in French, Canelle:
in high Dutch, Zimmet coezlin: the Grecians, (...) the Latins likewise
Cinnamomum: the Arabians, Darseni, and as some say, Querfaa, others, Querfe: in
Zeilan, Cuurde: in the Island Iaua they name it Cameaa: in Ormus, Darchini (i.)
(...) Chinense, the wood of China: in Malauar, Cais mains, which in their
tongue signifies Dulce (...), Sweet wood: in English, Cinnamome, Cinnamon, and
Canell. The other is called Cassia, and Cassia lignea.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Dioscorides writes, that Cinnamon has power to warm, and is of thin
parts: it is also dry and astringent, it provoke urine, clears the eyes,
and makes sweet breath.

The decoction brings down the menses, prevails against the bitings of
venomous beasts'

The distilled water hereof is profitable to many, and for diverse infirmities,
it comfort the

The oil drawn chimically prevails against the pains of the breast,
comfort the stomach,

The distilled water of the flowers of the tree, as Garcias the Lusitanian
Physician writes, excels

Out of the berries of this tree is drawn by expression, as out of the berries
of the Olive (...), a certain

To write as the worthiness of the subject requires, would ask more time
than we have to bestow

Cassia used in a larger quantity serves well for the same purposes which
Cinnamon

CHAP. 142. Of Gum Lack and his rotten tree.
Lacca cum suis bacillis. Gum Lack with his staff or stick.


The Description.
THe tree that brings forth that excremental substance called Lacca, bothin
the shops of Europ and elsewhere, is called of the Arabians, Persians and
Turks, Loc (...), as who should say, Lacca of Sumutra: some which have so
termed it, have thought that the first plenty thereof came from Sumutra, but
herein they have (...), for the abundant store thereof came from Pegu, where
the inhabitants thereof do call it Lac, and others of the same Province, Trec:
the history of which tree, according to that famous Herbarist Clusius is as
follows. [There is in the country of Pegu and Malabar, a great tree, whose
leaves are like them of the Plum tree, having many small twiggie branches; when
the trunk or body of the tree waxes old, it rotteth in sundry places, wherein
do breed certain great Ants or Pismires, which continually work and labor in
the time of Harvest and (...) against the penury of Winter: such is the
diligence of those Ants, or such is the nature of the tree wherein they
harbor, or both, that they provide for their winter sood, a lump or mass of
substance, which is of a crimson color, so beautiful and so fair, as in the
whole World the like is not seen, which serves not only to physical, uses
but is a perfect and costly color for Painters, called by us, Indian Lack. The
Pismires (as I said) work out this color, by sucking the substance or matter
of Lacca from the tree, as Bees do make honey and wax, by sucking the matter
thereof from all herbs, trees, and flowers, and the inhabi tants of that
country, do as diligently seek for this Lacca, as we in England and other
countries seek in the woods for honey; which Lacca after they have found, they
take from the tree, and dry it into a lump; among which sometimes there come
over some sticks and pieces of the tree with the wings of the Ants, which have
fallen among it, as we daily see.

The Indian Lack or Lake which is the rich color used by Painters, is none of
that which is used in shops, nor here figured or described by Clusius,
wherefore our Author was much mistaken in that he here confounds together
things so different; for this is of a resinous substance, and a faint red
color, and wholly unfit for Painters, but used alone and in composition to
make the best hard sealing wax. The other seems to be an artificial thing,
and is of an exquisite crimson color, but of what it is, or how made, I have
not as yet found any thing that carries any probability of truth.

The Place.
The tree which bears Lacca grows in Zeilan and Malauar, and in other parts
of the East Indies.

The Time.
Of the time we have no certain knowledge.

The Names.
Indian Lack is called in shops Lacca: in Italian, Lachetta: Auicen calls it
Luch: Paulus and Dioscorides, as some have thought, Cancamum: the other names
are expressed in the description.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Lack or Lacca is hot in the second degree, it comfort the heart and liver,
opens obstructions,

There is an artificial Lack made of the scrapings of Brasill and Saffron,
which is used of Painers,

CHAP. 149. Of the Indian leaf.
Tamalapatra. The Indian leaf.


The Description.
TAmalapatra, or the Indian leaf grows upon a great tree like the Orange tree,
with like leaves also, but broader, a little sharp pointed, of a green
glistering color, and three small ribs running through each leaf, after the
manner of Ribwort, whereby it is easy to be known: it smells somewhat like
unto Cloves, but not so strong as Spikenard or Mace (as some have deemed) nor
yet of so sub till and quick a sent as Cinnamon. There was sent or added unto
this figure by Cortusus a certain fruit like unto a small Acorn, with this
inscription, Fructus Canellae, the fruit of the Canell tree, which may be
doubted of, considering the description of the forenamed tree holden generally
of most to be perfect.

The Place.
The Indian leaf grows not fleeting upon the water like unto Lens palustris,
as Dioscorides and Pliny do set down, (though learned and painful writers)
but is the leaf of a great tree, a branch whereof we have set forth unto your
view, which grows in Arabia and Cambaya, far from the water side.

The Time.
Of the time we have no certain knowledge, but it is supposed to be green
winter and summer.

The Names.
Tamalapatra is called of the Indians in their mother tongue, especially of the
Arabians, (...) Indi, or Ladegi Indi, that is, Folium Indicum, or Indum, the
Indian leaf: but the Mauritanians do call it Tembul. The Latins and Grecians
following some of the Arabians, have called it Malabathrum.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The Indian leaf is hot and dry in the second degree, agreeing with Nardus in
temperature, or as

It prevails against the pin and web in the eyes, the inflamed and waterie
eyes, and all other infirmities

It is laid among clothes, as well to keep them from moths and other vermin,
as also to give

CHAP. 150. Of the Cloue tree.
Caryophylli very Clusij. The true form of the Cloue tree.


The Description.
THe Cloue tree grows great in form like unto the Bay tree, the trunk or
body whereof is covered with a russet bark: the branches are many, long, and
very brittle, whereupon do grow leaves like those of the Bay tree, but somewhat
narrower: amongst which come the flowers, white at the first, after of a
greenish color, waxing of a dark red color in the end: which flowers are the
very cloves when they grow hard: after when they be dried in the Sun they
become of that dusky black color which we daily see, wherein they continue.
For those that we have in estimation are beaten down to the ground before
they be ripe, and are suffered there to lie upon the ground until they be
dried thoroughly, where there is neither grass, weeds, nor any other herbs
growing to hinder the same, by reason the tree draws unto it self for his
nourishment all the moisture of the earth a great circuit round about, so that
nothing can there grow for want of moisture, and therefore the more convenient
for the drying of the Cloves. Contrariwise, that gross kind of Cloves which
has been supposed to be the male, are nothing else than fruit of the same
tree tarrying there until it fall down of it self unto the ground, where by
reason of his long lying, and meeting with some rain in the mean season, it
loses the quick taste that the others have. Some have called these Fusti,
whereof we may English them Fusses. Some affirm that the flowers hereof
surpass all other flowers in sweetness when they are green; and hold the
opinion, that the hardened flowers are not the Cloves themselves, (as we have
written) but think them rather to be the seat or husk wherein the flowers do
grow: the greater number hold the former opinion. And further, that the trees
are increased without labor, graffing, planting, or other industry, but by
the falling of the fruit, which bear fruit within eight years after they be
risen up, and so continue bearing for an hundred years together, as the
inhabitants of that country do affirm.

The Place.
The Cloue tree grows in some few places of the Molucca Islands, as in
Zeilan, Iaua the greater and the less, and in diverse other places.

The Time.
The Cloves are gathered from the fifteenth of September unto the end of
February, not with hands, as we gather Apples, Cherries, and such like fruit,
but by beating the tree, as Wall-nuts are gotten, as we have written in the
description.

The Names.
The fruit hereof was unknown to the ancient Grecians: of the later writers
called (...): in Latin also Caryophyllus, and Clavus: in French, Clou de
Gyrofle: the Mauritanians, Charhumfel: in Italian, Carofano: in High Dutch,
Nagel: in Spanish, Clauo de especia: of the Indians, Calasur: in the Molucca's,
Changue: of the Pandets, Arumfel, and Charumfel: in English, Cloue tree, and
Cloves.

The Temperature.
Cloves are hot and dry in the third degree.

The Virtues.
Cloves strengthen the stomach, liver, and heart, help digestion, and provoke
urine.

The Portugal women that dwell in the East Indies draw, from the Cloves when
they be yet

Cloves stop the belly: the oil or water thereof dropped into the eyes,
sharpens the sight, and

The weight of four drams of the powder of Cloves taken in milk procures the
act of generation.

There is extracted from the Cloves a certain oil or rather thick butter of
a yellow color;

The use of Cloves, not only in meat and medicine, but also in sweet powder
and such like, is There were formerly three figures in this chapter: wherefore
I omitted two as impertinent.


CHAP. 151. Of the Nutmeg tree.
1 Nux Muscata rotunda, sieve foemina. The round or female Nutmeg.
2 Nux Myristica oblonga, five (...). The longish or male Nutmeg.


Nux Moschatacum sua Maci. The Nutmeg with his Mace about him.


The Description.
1 THe tree that bears the Nutmeg and the Mace is in form like to the Pear
tree, but the leaves of it are like those of the Bay or Orange tree, always
green on the upper side, and more whitish underneath; among which come forth
the Nut and Mace as it were the flowers. The Nut appears first, compassed
about with the Mace, as it were in the middle of a single rose, which in
process of time does wrap and enclose the Nut round on every side: after
comes a husk like that of the Wall-nut, but of an harder substance, which
incloseth the Nut with his Mace as the Wall-nut husk does cover the Nut, which
in time of ripeness does cleave of it self as the Wall-nut husk does, and
shows his Mace, which then is of a perfect crimson color, and makes a most
goodly show, especially when the tree is well laden with fruit: after the Nut
becomes dry, the Mace likewise gapeth and forsakes the Nut, even as the
first husk or couerture, and leaves it bare and naked, as we all do know; at
which time it gets to it self a kind of dark yellow color, and loses
that brave crimson dye which it had at the first.

2 The tree which carries the male Nutmeg (according to Clusius) thus differs
from the last described: the leaves are like those of the former in shape, but
much bigger, being sometimes a foot long, and three or four inches broad;
their common length is seven or eight inches, and breadth two and a half: they
are of a whitish color underneath, and green and shining above. The Nuts also
grow at the very ends of the branches, sometimes two or three together, and not
only one, as in the common kind. The Nut it self is also larger and longer:
the Mace that incompasses it is of a more elegant color, but not so strong as
that of the former.

I can scarce believe our Authors assertion in the foregoing description, that
the Nut appears first, compassed about with the Mace as it were in the
midst of a single Rose, etc. But I rather think they all come forth
together, the Nutmeg, Mace, the green outward husk and all, just as we see
Wall-nuts do, and only open themselves when they come to full maturitie. In
the third figure you may see expressed the whole manner of the growing of the
Nutmeg, together with both the sorts of Nutmegs taken forth of their shells.

The Place.
The Nutmeg tree grows in the Indies, in an Island especially called Banda,
and in the Islands of Molucca, and in Zeilan, though not so good as the first.

The Time.
The fruit is gathered in September in great abundance, all things being
common in those countries.

The Names.
The Nutmeg tree is called of the Grecians, (...): of the Latins, Nux (...),
and Nux Myristica: in Italian, Noce Moscada: in Spanish, Nuez de escetie: in
French, Noix Muscade: in High Dutch, Moschat Nurz: of the Arabians, Leuzbane,
or Gianziban: of the country people where they grow, Palla: The Maces,
Bunapalla. In Decan the Nut is called Iapatri, and the Maces, Iaifol: of
Auicen, Iausiband, (i.) Nux Bandensis. The Maces he calls Befbase: in
English, Nutmeg.

The Temperature.
The Nutmeg, as the Mauritanians write, is hot and dry in the second degree
complete, and somewhat astringent.

The Virtues.
Nutmegs cause a sweet breath, and amend those that do stink, if they be much
chewed and holden

The Nutmeg is good against freckles in the face, quickneth the sight,
strengthens the belly and

Nutmegs bruised and boiled in Aqua vitae until they have wasted and consumed
the moisture, Rhodomel (that is, honey of Roses) gently boiling them, being
strained to the form of a syrrup, cure all pains proceeding of windy and
cold causes, if three spoonfulls be given fasting for certain days together.

The same bruised and boiled in strong white wine until three parts be sodden
away, with the

As touching the choice, there is not any so simple but knows that the
heauiest, fattest, and fullest

CHAP. 152. Of the Pepper Plant.
The Kinds.
THere be diverse sorts of Pepper, that is to say, white, black, and long
Pepper, one (...) and longer than the other; and also a kind of Ethiopian
Pepper.

1 Piper nigrum. Black Pepper.
2 Piper album. White Pepper.


The Description.
1 THe Plant that bears the (...) Pepper grows up like a Vine among bushes
and brambles where it naturally grows; but where it is manured it is sown at
the bottom of the tree Faufel and the Date trees, whereon it takes hold, and
clymbeth up even to the top, as does the Vine, ramping and taking hold with his
clasping tendrels of any other thing it meets withal. The leaves are few in
number, growing at each joint one, first on one side of the stalk, then on the
other, like in shape to the long undivided leaves of luy, but thinner, sharp
pointed, and sometimes so broad, that they are four inches over, but most
commonly two inches broad, and four long, having always five pretty large
nerves running along them. The fruit grow clustering together upon long
stalks, which come forth at the ioints against the leaves, as you may see in
the figure: the root (as one may conjecture) is creeping; for the branches that
lie on the ground do at their ioints put forth new fibers or roots. We are
beholden to Clusius for this exact figure and description, which he made by
certain branches which were brought home by the Hollanders from the East
Indies. The curious may see more hereof in his Exotickes and notes upon
Garcias.

I have omitted in this chapter (...) (...) (...) (...), which was formerly
here.
3 Piper longum. Long Pepper.
4 Piper Aethiopicum, sieve Vita longa. Pepper of Ethiopia.


2 The Plant that brings white Pepper is not to be distinguished from the other
plant, but only by the color of the fruit, no more than a Vine that bears
black Grapes, from that which brings white: and of some it is thought, that
the self same plant does sometimes change it self from black to white, as
diverse other plants do. Neither Clusius, nor any other else that I have yet met
with, have delivered us any thing of certain, of the plant whereon white
Pepper grows: Clusius only has given us the manner how it grows upon the
stalks, as you may see it here expressed.

There is also another kind of Pepper, seldom brought into these parts of
Europe, called Piper Canarium: it is hollow within, light, and empty, but good
to draw phlegm from the head, to help the toothache and choleric affects.

3 The tree that bears long Pepper has no similitude at all with the plant
that brings black and white Pepper: some have deemed them to grow all on one
tree, which is not consonant to truth, for they grow in countries far distant
one from another, and also that country where there is black Pepper has not
any of the long Pepper; and therefore Galen following Dioscorides, were
together both ouerseen in this point. This tree, says Monardes, is not great,
yet of a woody substance, dispersing here and there his clasping tendrels,
wherewith it takes hold of other trees and such other things as do grow near
unto it. The branches are many and twiggie, whereon grows the fruit,
consisting of many grains growing upon a slender foot-stalke, thrust or
compact close 5 Piper Caudatum. Tailed Pepper.
together, green at the first, and afterward blackish; in taste sharper and
hotter than common black Pepper, yet sweeter, and of better taste. For this
figure also I acknowledge my self beholden to the learned and diligent Clusi
us, who caused it to be drawn from a branch of some foot in length, that he
received from Dr. Lambert Hortensius, who brought it from the Indies. The order
of growing of the leaves, and fruit is like that of the black; but the joints
stand somewhat thicker together, the leaf also does little differ from that of
the black, only it is thinner, of a lighter green, and (as (...) thought)
has a shorter foot-stalke, the veins or nerves also were less imminent, more
in number, and run from the middle rib to the sides, rather than along the
leaf.

4 This other kind of Pepper brought unto us from Aethiopia, called of the
country where it grows, Piper Aethiopicum: in shops, Amomum, and also Longa
Vita. It grows upon a small tree, in manner of an hedge bush, whereupon grow
long cods in bunches, a finger long, of a brown color, uneven, and bunched or
puffed up in diverse places, divided into five or six lockers or cells, each
whereof contains a round seed somewhat long, lesser than the seeds of Paeony,
in taste like common Pepper, or Cardamomum, whose faculty and temperature it
is thought to have, whereof we hold it a kind.

5 Another kind of Pepper is sometimes brought, which the Spaniards do call
Pimenta de (...), that is, Pepper with a tail: it is like unto Cubebes, round,
full, somewhat rough, black of color, and of a sharp (...) taste, like the
common Pepper, of a good smell: it grows by clusters upon small stems or
stalks, which some have unadvisedly taken for Amomum. The King of Portingal
forbad this kind of Pepper to be brought over, for fear least the right
Pepper should be the less esteemed, and so himself hindered in the sale
thereof.

The Place.
Black and white Pepper grow in the kingdom of Malauar, and that very good;
in Malaca also, but not so good; and also in the Islands Sunde and Cude: there
is great store growing in the kingdom of China, and some in Cananor, but not
much.

Pepper of Aethiopia grows in America, in all the tract of the country where
Nata and Carthago are situated. The rest has been spoken of in their several
descriptions. The white Pepper is not so common as the black, and is used
there in stead of salt.

The Time.
The plant rises up in the first of the spring; the fruit is gathered in
August.

The Names.
The Grecians, who had best knowledge of Pepper, do call it (...): the Latins,
Piper: the Arabians, Fulfel and Fulful: in Italian, Pepe: in Spanish, Pimenta:
in French, Poiure in High Dutch, (...): in English, Pepper.

That of Aerhiopia is called, Piper Aethiopicum, Amomum, Vita longa, and of
some, Cardamomum, whereof we hold it to be a kind. I received a branch hereof
at the hands of a learned Physician of London, called Mr. Steven Bredwell, with
his fruit also.

The Temperature.
The Arabians and Persian Physicians judge, that Pepper is hot in the third
degree.

But the Indian Physicians which for the most part are Emperickes, hold that
Pepper is cold, as almost all other spice, which are hot indeed: the long
Pepper is hot also in the third degree, and as we have said, is thought to be
the best of all the kinds.

The Virtues.
Dioscorides and others agreeing with him, affirm, that Pepper resists
poison, and is good to

All Pepper heateth, provoke urine, digesteth, draws, disperseth, and
cleanses the dimnesse Dioscorides notes.

CHAP. 153. Of bastard Pepper, called Betle, or Betre.
Betle, sieve Betre. Bastard Pepper.


The (...).
THis plant climeth and rampeth upon trees, bushes, or whatsoever else it
meets withal, like unto the Vine, or the black Pepper, whereof some hold it
for a kind. The leaves are like those of the greater Bindeweed, but somewhat
longer, of a dustie color, with diverse veins or ribs running through the
same. The fruit grows among the leaves, very crookedly writhed, in shape like
the tail of a Lyzard, of the taste of Pepper, yet very pleasant to the palate.

The Place.
It grows among the Date trees, and (...), in most of the Molucca Islands,
especially in the marrish grounds.

The Time.
The time answers that of Pepper.

The Names.
This has been taken for the Indian leaf, but not properly: of most it is
called Tembul, and Tambul: in Malauar (...): in Decan, Guzarat, and Canam it is
called Pam: in Molaio, Siri.

The Use and Temperature.
The leaves chewed in the mouth are of a bitter taste, whereupon (says
Garcias) they put thereto some Areca and with the lime made of oyster shells,
whereunto they also add some Amber Griece, Lignum Aloes, and such like, which
they stamp together, making it into a paste, which they role up into round
balls, keep dry for their use, and carry the same in their mouths until by
little and little it is consumed; as when we carry Sugar Candy in our mouths,
or the juice of Licorice; which is not only unto the seely Indians meat, but
also drink in their tedious travels, refreshing their wearied spirits; and
helping memory: which is esteemed among the Empericke Physicians, to be hot and
dry in the second degree. Garcias does not affirm that the Indians eat it for
meat, or in want of drink, but that they eat it after meat, and that to
give the breath a pleasant sent, which they count a great grace, so that if an
inferior person that has not chewed Betre, or some such thing, come to speak
with any great man, he holds his hand before his mouth lest his breath should
offend him.

CHAP. 154. Of Grains, or Grains of Paradise.
The Kinds.
THere be diverse sorts of Grains, some long, others Pear fashion; some
greater; and others lesser.

The Description.
THe first figure hereof sets forth unto your view the cod wherein the hot
spice lies, which we call Grains: in shops, Grana Paradisi: it grows, by
the report of the Learned, upon a low herby plant: the leaves are some four
inches long, and three broad, with somewhat a thick middle rib, from which run
transuerse fibers; they much in shape resemble those of Cloves. The fruit is
like a great cod or husk, in shape like a Fig when it grows upon the tree,
but of color russet, thrust full of small seeds or grains of a dark reddish
color (as the Figure shows which is divided) of an exceeding hot taste.

Cardamomi genera. The kinds or sorts of Grains.
(...) manus vulg
Caxdamomum manus vulg.


The other sorts may be distinguished by the sight of the picture, considering
the only difference consists in form.

The Place.
Grains grow in Ginny, and the Cardamones in all the East Indies, from the
port of Calecute unto Cananor; it grows in Malauar, in Ioa, and in diverse
other places.

The Time.
They spring up in May, being sown of seed, and bring their fruit to ripeness
in September.

The Names.
Grains are called in Greek, (...): in Latin, Cardamomum: of the Arabians,
Corrumeni: of diverse Gentiles, Door: of Auicen, Saccolaa quebir (i.) magnum:
the other, Saccolaa ceguer (i.) minus. It is called in Malauar, Etremelli: in
Zeilan, Encal: in Bengala, Guzarat, and Decan, Hill, and (...). The first and
largest sort are called of some, Mileguetta, and Milegetta: in English, Grains,
and Grains of Paradise.

The Temperature.
Auicen writes, that Saccolaa, Cardamomum, or Grana Paradisi, are hot and dry
in the third degree, with astriction.

The Virtues.
The Grains chewed in the mouth draw forth from the head and stomach waterish
and pituitous

They also comfort and warm the weak, cold, and feeble stomach, help the
ague, and rid the

CHAP. 155. Of Yucca or Jucca.
Yucca, sieve Iucca Peruana. The root whereof the bread Casaua or Cazaua is made.


The Description.
THe Plant of whose root the Indian bread called Cazaua is made, is a low herb
consisting only of leaves and (...): it has neither stalk, flowers, nor
fruit, that I can understand of others, or by experience of the plant it self,
which has grown in my garden four years together, and yet does grow and
prosper exceedingly; nevertheless without stalk, fruit, or flowers, as
aforesaid. It has a very great root, thick and tuberous, and very knobby,
full of juice somewhat sweet in taste, but of a pernicious quality, as says
my Author: from which root rises up immediately forth of the ground very many
leaves joined unto the head of the root in a round circle; the which are long,
of the length of a cubit, hollowed like a gutter or trough, very smooth, and
of a green color, like that of Woade: the edges of the leaves are sharp like
the edge of a knife, and of a brown (...): the point of the leaf is a prick
as sharp as a needle, which hurts those that unadvisedly pass by it: the
leaf with advised eye viewed is like unto a little (...), or such like boat:
they are also very tough hard to break, and not easy to cut, except the knife
be very sharp.

Lobel in the second part of his Aduersaria largely describes and figures this
plant; and there he affirms he wrote a description (the which he there sets
down) for our Author; but he did not follow it, and therefore committed these
errors: First, in that he says it is the root whereof Cazaua bread was made;
when as Lobel in his description said he thought it to be Alia species a Yucca
Indica ex qua panis communis fit. Secondly, in that he set down the place out
of the Historia Lugd. (who took it out of Theuet) endeavoring by that means
to confound it with that there mentioned, when as he had his from Mr. Edwards
his man. And thirdly, (for which indeed he was most blameworthy, and wherein
he most showed his weakness) for that he does confound it with the Manihot
or true Yuicca, which all affirm to have a leaf like that of hemp, parted
into seven or more divisions: and also in that he puts it to the Arachidna of
Theophrastus, when as he denies it both flower and fruit; yet within some few
years after our Author had set forth this Work it floured in his garden.

This some years puts forth a pretty stiff round stalk some three cubits
high, divided into diverse unequal branches carrying many pretty large flowers,
shaped somewhat like those of Fritillaria, but that they are narrower at their
bottomes: the leaves of the flower are six: the color on the inside white, but
on the out side of an ouerworne reddish color from the stalk to the midst
of the leaf; so that it is a flower of no great beauty, yet to be esteemed
for the raritie. I saw it once flower in the garden of Mr. Wilmot at Bow, but
never since, though it has been kept for many years in sundry other gardens,
as with Mr. Parkinson and Mr. Tuggy. This was first written of by our Author;
and since by Lobel and Mr. Parkinson, who keep the same name, as also Bauhine,
who to distinguish it from the other calls it Yucca folijs Aloes.

The Place.
This plant grows in all the tract of the Indies, from the Magellane
straights unto the cape of Florida, and in most of the Islands of the Canibals,
and others adjoining, from whence I had that plant brought me that grows in
my garden, by a servant of a learned and skillful Apothecary of Excester, named
Mr. Tho. Edwards.

The Time.
It keeps green both Winter and Summer in my garden, without any couerture
at all, notwithstanding the injury of our cold clymat.

The Names.
It is reported unto me by Travelers, that the Indians do call it in some
parts, Manihot, but generally Yucca and Iucca: it is thought to be the plant
called of Theophrastus, Arachidna; and of Pliny, Aracidna.

The Temperature.
This plant is hot and dry in the first degree, which is meant by the feces or
dross, when the poisonous juice is pressed or strained forth, and is also dry
in the middle of the second degree.

CHAP. 156. Of the fruit Anacardium, and Caious, or (...).
The Description.
THe ancient writers have been very brief in the history of Anacardium: the
Grecians have touched it by the name of (...), taking the name from the
likeness it has of an heart both in shape and color, called of the Portugals
that inhabit the East Indies, Faua de Malaqua, the bean of Malaca; for being
green, and as it hangs on the tree, it resembles a Bean, saving that it is
much bigger: but when they be dry they are of a shining blackish color,
containing between the outward rind and the kernel (which is like an Almond)
a certain oil of a sharp causticke or burning quality, called Mel
Acardinum, although the kernel is used in meats and sauces, as we do Olives
and such like, to procure appetite.

Anacardium. The Bean of Malaca.
Caious. The kidney Bean of Malaca.


The other fruit grows upon a tree of the bigness of a Pear tree: the
leaves are much like to those of the Olive tree, but thicker and fatter, of a
feint green color: the flowers are white, consisting of many small leaves
much like the flowers of the Cherry tree, but much doubled, without smell:
after comes the fruit (according to Clusius, of the form and magnitude of a
goose egg, full of juice; in the end whereof is a nut) in shape like an Hares
kidney, having two rindes, between which is contained a most hot and sharp oil
like that of Anacardium, whereof it is a kind.

The Bean or kernel it self is no less pleasant and wholesome in eating,
than the Pistacia, or Fisticke nut, whereof the Indians do eat with great
delight, affirming that it provoke Venerie, wherein is their chiefest
felicity. The fruit is contained in long cods like those of Beans, but
greater: near unto which cods comes forth an excrescence like unto an apple,
very yellow, of a good smell, spongious within, and full of juice, without any
seeds, stones, or grains at all, somewhat sweet in taste, at the one end
narrower than the other, Pear fashion, or like a little bottle, which has bin
reputed of some for the fruit, but not rightly; for it is rather an
excrescence, as is the oak Apple.

The Place.
The first grows in most parts of the East Indies, especially in Cananor,
Calecute, Cambaya, and Decan. The later in Brasile.

The Time.
These trees flower and flourish Winter and Summer.

The Names.
Their names have been touched in their descriptions. The first is called
Anacardium, of the likeness it has with an heart: of the Arabians, Balador:
of the Indians, Bibo.

The second is called Caious, and is thus written, Caious, and Caius: of some,
Caiocus.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The oil of the fruit is hot and dry in the fourth degree, it has also a
causticke or corrosiue quality: alopecia, and (...) the pain of the teeth,
being put into the hollownesse thereof.

The people of Malauar do use the said oil mingled with chalk, to mark their
clothes or any

They also give the kernel steeped in whay to them that be asthmaticke or
short winded; and

The Indians for their pleasure will give the fruit upon a thorn or some other
sharp thing, and

CHAP. 157. Of Indian Morris Bells, and diverse other Indian Fruits.
The figures were transposed.
1 (...) Theueti. Indian Morris Bells.
The figures were transposed.
2 Fructus Higuero. Indian Morosco bells.


The Description.
THis fruit grows upon a great tree of the bigness of a Pear tree, full of
branches, garnished with many leaves which are always green, three or four
fingers long, and in breadth two: when the branches are cut off there issues a
milky juice not (...) to the fruit in his venomous quality. The trunk or body
is covered with a grayish bark: the timber is white and soft, not fit to make
fire of, much less for any othervse; for being cut and put to the fire to
burn, it yields sorth such a loathsome and horrible stink, that neither man
nor beast are able to endure it: wherefore the Indians have no use thereof, but
only of the fruit, which in shape is like the Greek letter (...) of the
bigness of a Chestnut, and covered with a most hard shell, wherein is
contained a kernel of a most venomous and poysonsome quality, wherewith the
men being angry with their wives, do poison them, and likewise the women their
husbands: they likewise use to dip or anoint and invenome their arrows
therewith, the more speedily to dispatch their enemies. Which kernel they take
forth with some convenient instrument, leaving the shell as whole as may be,
not touching the kernel with their hands because of its venomous quality,
which would spoil their hands, and sometimes take away their life also. In
which shells they put some little stones, and tie them upon strings (as you may
perceive by the figure) which they dry in the Sun, and after tie them about
their legs, as we do bells, to set forth their dances, and Morosco Matachina's,
wherein they take great pleasure, by reason they think themselves to excel in
those kinds of dances. Which rattling sound does much delight them, because it
sets forth the distinction of sounds, for they tune them and mix them with
great ones and little ones, in such sort as we do chimes or bells.

2 There is also another sort hereof, differing only in form; they are of the
like venomous quality, and used for the same purpose. The fruit of Higuerro is
like that of a gourd in pulpe, and it may be eaten: the shape of the fruit is
round, whereas the former is three cornered.

The Place.
These do grow in most parts of the West Indies, especially in some of the
Islands of the Canibals, who use them in their dances more than any of the
other Indians. You may see these upon strings as they are here figured, amongst
many other varieties, with (...). John Tradescant at South Lambeth.

The Time.
We have no certain knowledge of the time of flouring or bringing the fruit to
maturitie.

The Names and Use.
We have sufficiently spoken of the names and use hereof, therefore what has
been said may suffice.

CHAP. 158. Of the vomiting and purging Nuts.
1 Nuces vomicae. Vomiting Nuts.
1 Nuces purgantes. Purging Nuts.


The Description.
1 AVicen and Serapio make Nux vomica, and Nux (...), to be one, whereabout
there has been much cauelling; yet the case is plain, if the text be true,
that the (...) Apple's Nux Methel Of the tree that bears the fruit that is
called in shops (...) vom (...) Nux Methel, we have no certain knowledge: some
are of opinion, that the fruit is the (...) (...) (...) herb, and not the nut
of a tree: and therefore since the case among the learned rests (...) (...)
(...) leave the rest that might be said to a further consideration. The fruit
is round, flat, like a little (...) of a russet ouerworne color, fat and
firm, in taste sweet, and of such an (...) (...), that it is (...) possible to
stamp it in a mortar to powder; but when it is to be used, it must be grated
or scraped with some instrument for that purpose.

2 There be certain Nuts brought from the Indies, called purging Nuts, of
their quality in purging gross and filthy humors, for want of good
instruction from those that have traveled the Indies, we can write nothing of
the tree it self: the Nut is somewhat long, ouall, or in shape like an egg,
of a brown color: within the shell is contained a kernel, in taste sweet,
and of a purging faculty.

The Place and Time.
These Nuts do grow in the deserts of Arabia, and in some places of the East
Indies: we have no certain knowledge of their springing, or time of maturitie.

The Names.
(...) affirms the vomiting Nut to be of a poisonous quality, cold in the
fourth degree, having a stupifying nature, and brings deadly sleep.

The Virtues.
Of the Physical virtues of the vomitting Nuts we think it not necessary to
write, because the

The powder of the Nut mixed with some flesh, and cast unto crows and other
ravenous fowls,

They make also an excellent sallet, mixed with some meat or butter, and laid
in the garden

CHAP. 159. Of diverse sorts of Indian fruits.
The Kinds.
THese fruits are of diverse sorts and kinds, whereof we have little knowledge,
more than the fruits themselves, with the names of some of them: therefore it
shall (...) to set forth unto your view the form only, leaving unto Time, and
those that shall succeed, to write of them at large, which in time may know
that, that in this time of infancy is unknown.

Our Author formerly in this Chapter set forth diverse figures of Indian
fruits, and amongst the rest Beritinus, Cacao, Cocci Orientales, Buna, (...),
(...), etc. but he gave but only three descriptions, and these either false or
to no purpose; wherefore I have omitted them, and in this chapter given you
most of these fruits which were formerly figured therein, together with an
addition of sundry other out of Clusius his Exotickes, whose figures I have
made use of, and here given you all those which came to my hands, though
nothing so many as are set sorth in his Exotickes; neither, if I should have
had the figures, would the shortness of my time nor bigness of the book
(being already grown to so large a volume) suffer me to have inserted them;
therefore take in good part those I here give, together with the brief
histories of them.

The Description.
1 THe first and one of the best known of these fruits, are the Cubibae,
called of the Arabian Physicians Cubibe and Quabeb; but of the vulgar,
Quabebochini; in Iaoa where they plentisully grow, (...): the other Indians,
(the Malayans excepted) call them Cubas sini, not for that they grow in China,
but because the Chinois use to buy them in Iaoa and Sunda, and so carry them to
the other ports of India. The plant which carries this fruit has leave

1 Cubibae. Cubibs.
2 Cocci Orientales. Cocculus Indi.
cubibe
Cocci.
3 Fagara.
4 Mungo.
5 Buna.
6 Amomum verum.
7 Amomum spurium.
8 Vmomis.
9 Beritinus.
10 Nuces insanae. Mad Nuts.
like those of pepper, but narrower, and it also winds about trees like as Iuy
or Pepper does: the fruit hangs in clusters, like as those we call red Currants,
and not close thrust together in bunches, as grapes: the fruit or berries are
of the bigness of Pepper corns, wrinckled, and of a brownish color: they are
of a hot and biting aromaticke taste, and often times hollow within, but if
theybe not hollow, then have they a pretty reddish smooth round seed under
their rough utter husk; each of these berries commonly has a piece of his
foot-stalke adhering to it. It is reported that the Natives where it grows
first gently boil or scald these berries before they sell them, that so none
(...) may have them, by sowing the seeds. Some have thought these to have been
the Carpesium of the Ancients; and other-some have judged them the seeds of
Agnus Castus, but both these opinions are erroneous.

These are hot and dry in the beginning of the third degree; wherefore they are
good against the

2 The Plant which carries this fruit is unknown, but the berrie is well
known in shoppes by the name of Cocculus Indicus some call them Cocci
Orientales: others, Cocculae Orientales: some, as Cordus for one, think them
the fruit of Solanum furiosum: others judge them the fruit of a Tithymale, or
of a Clematis. These berries are of the bigness of Bay berries, commonly
round, and growing but one upon a stalk; yet sometimes they are a little
cornered, and grow two or three clustering together: their outer coat or shell
is hard, rough, and of a brownish duskie color: their inner substance is very
oily, of a bitter taste.

They are used with good success to kill lice in childrens heads, being made
into powder and so Alaternus (where he confounded these with Fagaras) in these
words, which I have there omitted, to insert here;

In England we use the fruit called Cocculus Indi in powder mixed with flower,
honey, and crummes

3 Fagara is a fruit of the bigness of a Chich-pease covered with a thin coat
of a blackish ash color, under which outer coat is a slender shell containing
a sollid kernel, involued in a thin and black filme. The whole fruit both in
magnitude, form, and color is so like the (...) Indus last described, that at
the first sight one would take it to be the same. Auicen mentions this in his
266. Chap. after this manner. What is Fagara? It is a fruit like a Chich,
having the seed of (...), and in the hollownesse is a black kernel as in
(...), and it is brought out of Sofale.

He places it amongst those that heat and dry in the third degree and commends
it against the coldness of the stomach and liver, it helps concoction, and
binds the belly.

4 This which Clusius thinks to be Mungo (which is used in the East Indies
about Guzarat and Decan for prouender for horses) is a small fruit of the
bigness of Pepper, crested, very like Coriander seed, but that it is bigger
and black, it is of a hot taste.

5 Buna is a fruit of the bigness of Fagara, or somewhat bigger or longer, of
a blackish ash color, covered with a thin skin, furrowed on both sides
longwise, whereby it is easily divided into two parts, which contain each a
kernel longish and flat upon one side, of a yellowish color, and acide taste.
They say that in Alexandria they make a certain very cooling drink hereof.
Rauwolfius in his iournal seems to describe this fruit by the name of Bumu:
and by the appellation, form, and faculties; he thinks it may be the Buncho
of Auicen, and Buncha of Rhasis, to Almansor. Clusius.

6 This is a kind of Cardamome: and by diverse it is thought to be the true
Amomum of the Ancients, and to this purpose Nicholas Marogna, a Physician of
Verona, has written a treatise which is set forth at the later end of Pona's
description of Mount Baldus, to which I refer the curious: these cods or
berries (whether you please to call them) grow thick clustering together, they
are round, and commonly of the bigness of a cherry: the outer skin is tough,
smoother, whiter, and less crested than that of the Cardamome: within this
filme lie the seeds clustering together, yet with a thin filme parted into
three, the particular seeds are cornered, somewhat smoother and larger than
those of Cardamomes, but of the same aromaticke taste, and of a brown color.
Their temperature and faculties may be referred to those of Cardamomes.

7. 8. This with the next ensuing are by Clusius set forth by the names I here
give you them, though (as he says) neither of them agree with the Amomum of
Dioscorides, they were only branches set thick with leaves, having neither any
obseruable smell or taste: they were sent to the learned and diligent
Apothecarie Walarandus Donrez of Lions, from Ormuz the famous Mart and port
town in the Persian Bay.

9 Those that accompanied the renowned Sir Francis Drake in his voyage about
the World,

11 Cacao. Small Cocoes.
12 (...), Quince Dates.
13 (...), Arara. Orukoria. Cropiot.
14 (...). Tree Melon.
15 (...): The Pinia, or Pine Thistle.
light upon a certain desert Island, wherein grew many very tall trees, and
looking for something amongst these to refresh themselves, amongst others they
observed some bigger than Oaks, having leaves like those of the Bay tree,
thick and shining, not snipt about the edges; their fruit was longish like to
the small (...) of the Ilex or Holme Oak, but without any cup; yet covered with
a thin shell of an ash color, and sometimes black, having within it a longish
white kernel wrapped in a thin (...), being without any manifest taste; They
when they found it, though much oppressed with hunger, yet durst not taste
thereof, least it should have been poisonous: but afterward coming to the
Island Beretina, not far from this, they found it to abound with these trees,
and learned that their fruit was not poisonous, but might be eaten. Whereupon
afterward they in want of other victuals, boiled some as they do Pease, and
ground others into flower, wherewith they made puddings. They found this tree
also in the Moluccoes.

10 The first expressed in this table is the mad Plum, or as Clusius had rather
term it the Mad Nut; for he calls them (...), or Insanae Nuces. The Hollanders
finding them in their return from the East Indies, and eating the kernels, were
for a time distracted, and that variously, according to the particular
temperature of each that ate of them; as you may see in Clusius Exot. lib. 2.
Cap. 26. This was round, little more than two inches about, with a shell not
thick, but sufficiently strong, brownish on the out side, and not smooth, but
on the inside of a yellowish color and smooth, containing a membranous stone
or kernel covered with a black pulp, in form and bigness not much unlike a
Bullas or Sloe, having a large white spot on the lower part whereas it was
fastened to the stalk: under the pulpe lay the kernel, somewhat hard, and of
an ash color: the foot-stalke was short and commonly carried but one fruit,
yet sometimes they observed two growing together: the tree whereon this fruit
grew was of the bigness of a Cherry tree, having long and narrow leaves like
those of the Peach tree: the other fruit figured in the 2. place was of a
brownish yellow color, somewhat bigger, but not unlike a small Nut, and inch
long, and somewhat more about, smaller below, and bigger above, and as it were
parted into four, being very hard and sollid. Of this see more in the
fourteenth place.

11 The Cacoa is a fruit well known in (...) parts of America; for they in
some places use it in stead of money, and to make a drink, of which, though
bitter, they highly esteem: the trees which bear them are but small, having
long and narrow leaves, and will only grow well in places shadowed from the
Sun. The fruit is like an Almond taken out of his husk, and it is covered with
a thin black skin, wherein is contained a kernel obliquely divided into two
or three parts, brownish, and distinguished with ash colored veins, of an
astringent and ungrateful taste.

12 This which Clusius had from Cortusus, for the fruit of Bdellium, is thought
to be the Cuci of Pliny, and is the Cuciophera of Matthiolus, and by that name
our Author had it in this Chapter. The whole fruit is of the bigness of a
Quince, and of the same color, with a sweet and fibrous flesh, under which is
a nut of the bigness of a large Walnut or somewhat more, almost of a
triangular form, bigger below, and smaller above, well smelling, of a dark ash
color, with a very hard shell, which broken there is therein contained a hard
kernel of the color and hardness of marble, having a hollownesse in the
middle, as much as may contain a Hasell Nut.

13 In this table are four several fruits described by Clusins Exot. lib. 2.
c. 21. The first is called Baruce, and is said to grow upon a high tree in
Guyana called Hura: it consisted of many Nuts of some inch long, strongly
fastened or knit together, each having a hard woody shell, falling into two
parts, containing a round and smooth kernel covered with an ash colored silme.

They say the natives there use this fruit to purge and vomit.

The second called Arara grows in Kaiana, but how, it is not known: it was
some inch long, covered with a skin sufficiently hard and black, fastened to a
long and rugged stalk that seemed to have carried more than one fruit: the
kernel is black, and of the bigness of a wild Olive.

The natives use the decoction hereof towash malign ulcers, and they say the
kernel will loose

The third named Orukoria is the fruit of a tree in Wiapock, called Iuruwa,
they use this to cure their wounds, dropping the juice of the fruit into them.
This fruit is flat almost an inch broad, and two long, but writhen like the cod
of the true Cytisus, but much bigger, very wrinckled, of an ash color,
containing a smooth seed.

The fourth called Cropiot is a small and shriuelled fruit, not much unlike the
particular ioints of the Ethiopian pepper.

The savages use to take it mixed amongst their Tabaco to assuage headache:
there were diverse

14 This which by Clusius and Lobel is thought to be the Guanabanus mentioned
by Scaliger Exerc. 281. part. 6. is a thick fruit some foot and half long,
covered with a thick and hard rind, freezed over with a soft downinesse, like
as a Quince is, but of a greenish color, with some veins, or rather furrows
running along it, as in (...): the lower end is somewhat sharp: at the upper
end it is fastened to the boughs, with a firm, hard, and fibrous stalk: this
fruit contains a whitish pulpe, which the Ethiopians use in burning seuers to
quench the thirst, for it has a pleasant tartness: this dried becomes
friable, so that it may be brought into powder with ones fingers, yet retains
its aciditie: in this pulp lie seeds like little Kidneis, or the seeds of the
true (...), of a black shining color, with some fibers coming out of their
middles: these sown brought forth a plant having leaves like the Bay tree, but
it dyed at the approach of Winter. Clus.

15 Ananas Pinias, or Pine Thistle is a plant having leaves like the Aizoon
aquaticum, or water

16 Fabae Aegyptiae affinis.
17 Coxco Cypote. Amygdalae Peruanae: Almonds of Peru.
18 Buenas Noches.
19 Fructus tetragonus. The square Coco.
20 Arboris laniferae siliqua. A cod of the wooll-bearing tree.
Sengreene, somewhat sharp and prickly about the edges: the stalk is round,
carrying at the top thereof one fruit of a yellowish color when it is ripe, of
the bigness of a Melon, covered with a (...) rind: the smell is grateful, so
newhat like that of the Malocotone: at the top of the fruit, and sometimes
below it come forth such buds as you see here presented in the figure, which
they set in the ground and preserve the kind by in stead of seed: the meat of
this fruit is sweet and very pleasant of taste, and yields good nourishment;
there are certain small fibers in the meat thereof, which though they do not
offend the mouth, yet hurt they the gums of such as too frequently feed thereon.

16 The form of this is somewhat strange, for it is like a large Poppy head
cut off nigh the top: the substance thereof was membranous and wrinckled, of a
brownish color, very smooth: the circumference at the top is about nine
inches, and so it grows smallerand smaller even to the stalk, which seems to
have carried a flower whereto this fruit succeeded: the top of the fruit was
even, and in it were orderly placed 24. cauities, in each whereof was contained
a little Nut like an Acorn almost an inch long, and as much thick; the upper
part was of a brownish color, and the kernel within was rank and all moldy.
Clusius could learn neither whence this came, nor how it grew, but with a
great deal of probability thinks it may be that which the Ancients described
by the name of Faba Aegyptia.

17 The former of these two Clusius received by the name of Coxco Cypote, that
is the Nut Cypote: It is of a dusky brown color, smooth, and shining, but on
the lower part of an ash color, rough, which the Painter did not well express
in drawing the figure. The 2. he received by the name of Almendras del Peru,
(i.) Almonds (...) Peru: the shell was like in color and substance to that of
an almond, and the kernel not unlike neither in substance nor taste: yet the
form of the shell was different, for it was triangular, with a back standing
up, and two sharp sides, and these very rough.

18 This was the fruit of a large kind of Convolvulus which the Spaniards
called Buenas noches, or Goodnight, because the flowers use to (...) as soon
as night came. The seeds were of a sooty color as big as large Pease, being
three of them contained in a skinny three cornered head. You may see more
hereof in Clusius, Exot. lib. 2. cap. 18.

19 This is the figure of a square fruit which Clusius conjectures to have been
some kind of Indian Nut or Coco: it was covered with a smooth rind, was seven
inches long, and a foot and half about, being four inches and a half from
square to square.

20 About Bantam in the East Indies grows a tall tree sending forth many
branches, which are set thick with leaves long and narrow, bigger than those
of Rosemary: it carries cods six inches long, and five about, covered with a
thin skin, wrinckled and sharp pointed, which open themselves from below into
five parts, and are full of a soft woolly or Cottony matter, wherewith they
stuff cushions, pillowes and the like, and also spin some for certain uses:
amongst the down lie black seeds like those of Cotton, but less, and not
fastened to the down.

21 This which Clus calls Palma (...) (...), or the Bag Date, because it
carries the figure of an Hippocras bag, was found in a desert Island in the
Antlantick ocean, by certain Dutch mariners who observed whole woods thereof:
these bags were some of them 22. or more inches long, and some seven inches
broad in the broadest place, strongly woue with threads crossing one another, of
a brownish yellow color. These sachels (as they report who cut them from the
tree) were filled with fruit of the bigness of a Walnut husk and all: within
these were others, as round as if they had bin turned, and so hard that you
could scarce break them with a hammer: in the midst of these were white
kernels, tasting at the first (...) like pulse, but afterward bitter like a
Lupine.

22. The tree which carries this rough cod is very large, as I have been told
by diverse: some who saw it in Persia, and others that observed it in Mauritius
Island. Clusius also notes that they have bin brought from diverse places: the
cod is some three inches long, and some two inches broad, of a duskie red
color, and all rough and prickly: in these cods are contained one, two or more
round nuts or seeds of a grayish ash color, having a little spot on one side,
where they are fastened to the cod they are exceeding hard, and difficult to
break, but broken they show a white kernel very bitter and unpleasant of
taste. I have seen very many and have some of these, and some have offered to
sell them sor East Indian Beazor, whereto they have some small resemblance,
though nothing in faculty like them (if I may credit report, which I had
rather do than make trial) for I have been told by some that they are
poisonous; and by others, that they strongly procure vomit.

(...). The long cod expressed in this figure is called in the East Indies (as
Clusius was told) Kaye (...), it was round, the thickness of ones little
finger, and six inches long: the (...) was thick, black, hard and wrinckled,
and it contained a hard pulpe of a sowrish taste, which they affirm was eatable.

The other was a cod of some inch and half long, and some inch broad,
membranous, rough, and of a brownish color, sharp pointed, and opening into
two parts, and distinguished with a thin (...) into four cells, wherein were
contained (...) Pear fashioned little berries, having golden spots especially
in the middles. This grows in Brasile, and as Clusius was informed was called
(...).

24 In the second place of the tenth figure and description in this chapter you
may find the 21 Palma saccifera. The Sachell Date.
22 Lobus (...). Beazor Nuts.
23 Kaie baka. (...).
24 Nucula Indica racemosa. The Indian, or rather Ginny Nut.
25 Fructus (...). Scaly fruits.
26 Fructus alij Exotici. Other strange fruits.
26 Fructus (...) Exotici. Other strange fruits.
single Nut here figured, described, and set forth; but this figure better
expresses the manner of growing thereof: for first it presents to the view the
nuts in their outer husks growing close together, then the single nuts in and
out of their husks, and lastly their kernel: the shell of this nut contains
in it a certain oilie substance, somewhat resembling the oil of sweet almonds:
the tree whereof this nut is the fruit grows in Ginny, and is much used by the
people there, for they press a liquour forth of the leaves, or else boil them
in water, and this serves them in stead of wine and bear, or at least for a
common drink, of the fruit they make bread of a very sweet and pleasant taste.

25 These scaily fruits are set forth by Clusius, Exot. l. 2 c. 3. The first
was three inches long and two inches about, and had in it a longish hard sollid
kernel, with many veins dispersed over it, and such kernels are sometimes
polished, whereby they become white, and then their black veins make a fine
show, which has given occasion to some e (...) s to put them to sail for rare
and precious stones.

The second was small, round and scaily, and the scailes turned their points
downwards toward the stalk.

The third was also scaily, of the bigness of a Walnut in his husk, with the
scailes very orderly placed, and of a brownish color: it had a kernel which
ratled in it when it was shaken.

26 The first of the two in the former table was brought from Ginny, it was of
the bigness and shape of a plum, two inches long, and one and half broad, of
a thick fungous substance, somewhat wrinckled, and blackish on the outside,
and within containing a certain whitish insiped friable pulpe, wherein lay a
few small seeds.

The second was some inch and half long, an inch thick, covered with an ash
colored skin, composed within of many fibers almost like the husk of the Nut
Faufell, at the lower end it stood in a double cup, and it was sharp pointed at
the upper end: in this skin was contained a kernel, or rather nut, black,
hard, and very wrinckled not much unlike to that of Faufell, whereto I refer it
as a kind thereof. These two are treated of by Clusius, Exot. lib. 2. c. 23.

The first of the second table (wherein are contained four figures) was of a
round form, yet a little flat on one side, distinguished under the black and
shining coat wherewith it was covered, with furrows running every way, not
unlike to the Nut Faufell taken forth of his cover: the inner pulpe was hard
and whitish, first of a salt, and then of an (...) ingent taste.

The second of these was an inch long, but rather the kernel of a fruit, than
a fruit it self; it was round except at the one end, and all over knobby
(though the picture express not so much) there was also some show of a
triangular form at each end.

The third was two inches and a half long, and in the broadest part some inch
and more broad: it was somewhat crooked, the back high and rising, the top
narrow, and the lower part sharp pointed, of an ash color with thick and
eminent nerves running along the back from the top to the lower part, expressed
with such art as if they had been done by some curious hand: it seemed to have
bin covered over with another (...), but it was worn off by the beating of the
waves of the sea upon the shore.

The fruit Cunane figured in the fourth place of this table, was two inches
long, and an inch broad at the head, and so smaller by little and little, with
a back standing out, smooth, black, and shining, having three holes at the top,
one above, and two below: they said it grew upon a small tree called Morremor,
and was yet unripe, but when it was ripe it would be as big again, and that the
natives where itgrew (which was as I take it about Wiapock) roast it upon the
coals, and eat it against the headache. Clusius sets forth these four in his
Exot. l. 2. c. 22. he describes Cunane cap. 21.

CHAP. 160. Of Sun-Dew, Youth woort, Ros Solis.
1 Ros Solis folio rotundo. Sun-Dew with round leaves.
2 Ros Solis folio oblongo. Sun-Dew with longish leaves.


The Description.
1 SVn-Dew is a little herb, and grows very low, it has a few leaves
standing upon (...) stems, very small, something round, a little hollow, and
like an ear picker, hairy and reddish as be also the stems, having dew and
moisture upon them at the driest time of the year, and when the Sun shines
hottest even at high noone; and a month after there spring up little stalks, a
hand breadth high, on which stand small whitish flowers: the roots are very
slender, and like unto hairs.

2 The second kind is like unto the former, in stalks and flowers, but larger,
and the leaves are longer, and not so round, wherein consists the difference.

The Place.
They grow in desert, sandy and sunny places, but yet waterie, and seldom
other-where than among the white marish moss which grows on the ground and
also upon bogs.

The Time.
Sun-Dew flourishes in Summer, it floureth in May or June: it is to be
gathered when the weather is most dry and calm. The distilled water hereof
that is drawn forth with a glass still, is of a glittering yellow color like
gold, and colors silver put therein like gold.

The Names.
It is called in Latin, Ros Solis: of diverse, Rorella: it is named of other,
Salsi Rosa, of the dew which hangs upon it, when the Sun is at the hottest:
it is called in high Dutch, Sondaw, and Suidaw: in low Dutch, Loopichecruit,
which in English signifies Lustwoort, because sheep and other (...), if they
do but only taste of it, are provoked to lust. It is called in English,
Sun-Dew, Ros Solis. Youth-woort: in the Northern parts, Red Rot, because it
rotteth sheep; and in Yorkshire, Moore grass.

The Temperature.
It is a (...) or causticke herb, and very much biting, being hot and dry in
the fourth degree.

The Virtues.
The leaves being stamped with salt do exulcerate and raise blisters, to what
part of the body soever

The later Physicians have thought this herb to be a rare and singular remedy
for all those that

Cattle of the female kind are stirred up to lust by eating even of a small
quantity: which thing

It strengthens and nourishes the body, especially if it be distilled with
wine, and that liquour

If any be desirous to have the said drink effectual for the purposes
aforesaid, let them lay the

CHAP. 161. Of Moss of trees.
The Description.
TRee Moss has certain things like hairs, made up as it were of a multitude
of slender leaves, now and then all to be iagged, hackt, and finely carved,
twisted and interlaced one in another, which (...) fast to the barks of trees,
hanging down from the bodies: one of this kind is more (...) quernus. The
Moss of the Oak and of other trees.
slender and thin, another more thick, another shorter, another longer; all of
them (...) the most being of a whitish color, yet oftentimes there is a
certain one also which is black, but lesser and thinner: the most commendable
of them all, as Pliny says, be those that are whitish, then the reddish, and
lastly such as be black.

The Place.
This Moss is found on the Oak tree, the white and black Poplar tree, the
Olive tree, the (...) tree, the Apple tree, the Pear tree, the Pine tree, the
wild Pine tree, the Pitch tree, the Fur tree, the Cedar tree, the Larch
tree, and on a great sort of other trees. The best, as (...) says, is that of
the Cedar tree, the next of the Poplar, in which kind the white and the sweet
smelling Moss is the chiefest; the blackish sort is of no account. Matthiolus
writes, that in Italy that Moss is sweet which grows on the Pine tree, the
Pitch tree, the Fir tree, and the Larch tree, and the sweetest that of the
Larch tree.

The Time.
Moss upon the trees continues all the year long.

The Names.
It is called of the Grecians (...) of the Latins, Muscus: the Arabians and
some Apothecaries in other countries call it Vsnea: in high Dutch, Mosz in low
Dutch, Mosch: the French men, Lu Mousch: the Italians, Musgo: in Spanish, Musco
de los arbores: in English, Moss, tree Moss, or Moss of trees.

The Temperature.
Moss is somewhat cold and binding, which notwithstanding is more and less
according unto the nature and faculty of that tree on which it grows, and
especially of his bark: for it takes unto it self and also retains a
certain property of that bark, as of his breeder of which he is engendered:
therefore the Moss which comes of the Oak does cool and very much bind,
besides his own and proper faculty, it receives also the extreme binding
quality of the Oak bark it self.

The Moss which comes of the Cedar tree, the Pine tree, the Pitch tree, the
Fir tree, the Larch tree, and generally all the Rosine trees are binding, and
do moreover digest and soften.

The Virtues.
Serapio says, that the wine in which Moss (...) been steeped certain days,
brings sound sleep,

(...) writes, that the decoction of Moss is good for women to sit in, that
are troubled

It is fit to be used in compositions which serve for sweet perfumes, and that
take away wearisomnesse;

CHAP. 162. Of ground Moss.
The Kinds.
THere grows also on the supersiciall or uppermost part of the earth diverse
Mosses, as also upon rocks and stony places, and marish grounds, differing in
form not a little.

The Description.
1 THe common Moss grows upon the earth, and the bottom of old and ancient
trees, but specially upon such as grow in shadowie woods, and alsoat the bottom
of shadowy 1 Muscus (...) vulgaris, Common ground Moss.
2 Muscus (...) scoparius, Beesome ground Moss.
3. 4. Muscus capillaris, sieve Adianthuni aureum (...) and minus. Goldilockes
or golden Maiden-haire the bigger and less.
hedges and ditches, and such like places: it is very well known by the
softness and length thereof, being a moss most common, and therefore needs
not any further description.

2 Beesome Moss, which seldom or never is found but in bogs and marish
places, yet sometimes have I found it in shadowie dry ditches, where the Sun
never shows his face: it grows up (...) a cubit high, every particular
leaf consisting of an innumerable sort of hairy threads set upon a middle rib,
of a shining black color like that of Maiden-haire, or the Capillare Moss
Adianthum (...), whereof it is a kind.

3 This kind of Moss, called Muscus capillaris, is seldom found but upon
bogs and moorish places, and also in some shadowie dry ditches where the Sun
does not come. I found it in great abundance in a (...) ditch upon the left
hand near unto a gate that leads from Hampsted 5 Muscus (...) floridus.
Flouring branched Moss.
heath toward Highgate; which place I have showed unto diverse expert Surgeons
of London, in our wandering abroad for our farther knowledge in Simples. This
kind of Moss, the stalks thereof are not above one handful high, covered
with short hairs standing very thick together, of an obscure yellow green
color; out of which stalks spring up sometimes very fine naked stems,
somewhat black, upon the tops of which hang as it were little grains like
wheat corns. The roots are very slender and marvelous fine.

Of this Adiamhum aureum there are three kinds, different only in magnitude,
and that the two bigger have many hairie threads upon their branches, when as
the least has only three or four close to the root; and this is the least of
plants that I ever yet saw grow.

4 Of this there is also another kind altogether lesser and lower. This kind
of moss grows in moist places also, commonly in old mossie and rotten trees,
likewise upon rocks, and oftentimes in the chinks and crannies of stone walls.

5 The figure formerly in the first place (...) of the Muscus (...) of (...)
being a small kind of Muscus (...). The (...) and sixth were both of (...);
and so of the two descriptions I have made one more accurate, and (...) the
(...) figure.
There is oftentimes found upon old Oaks and Beeches, and such like ouer-grown
trees, a kind of Moss having many slender branches, which divide themselves
into other lesser branches; whereon are placed confusedly very many small
threads like hairs, of a greenish ash color: upon the ends of the tender
branches sometimes there comes forth a flower in shape like unto a little
buckler or hollow Mushrom, of a whitish color tending to yellownes, and
garnished with the like leaves of those upon the lower branches.

6 Muscus Pyxidatus. Cup or Chalice Moss.


6 Of this Moss there is another kind, which Lobel in his Dutch Herbal has
set forth under the title of Muscus Pyxtdatus, which I have Englished, Cup
Moss or Chalice Moss: it grows in the most barren dry and grauelly ditch
banks, creeping flat upon the ground like unto Liuerwort, but of a yellowish
white color: among which leaves start up here and there certain little things
fashioned like a little cup called a Beaker or Chalice, and of the same color
and substance of the lower leaves, which undoubtedly may be taken for the
flowers: the powder of which Moss given to children in any liquor for certain
days together, is a most certain remedy against that (...) malady called the
Chin-cough.

7 There is likewise found in the shadowie places of high mountains, and at
the foot of old and rotten trees, a certain kind of Moss in face and show
not unlike to that kind of Oak Fern called Dryopteris. It creeps upon the
ground, having diverse long branches, consisting of many small leaves, every
particular lease made up of sundry little leaves, set upon a middle rib one
opposite to another.

7 Muscus Filicinus. Moss Fern.
8 Muscus corniculatus. Horned or knagged Moss.
9 Muscus denticulatus. Toothed Moss.


8 There is found upon the tops of our most barren mountains, but especially
were sea Coals are accustomed to be dug, stone to make iron of, and also
where ore is gotten for tin and lead, a certain small plant: it rises forth
of the ground with many bare and naked branches, dividing themselves at the top
into sundry knags like the forked horns of a Dear, every part whereof is of
an ouerworne whitish color.

Our Author formerly gave another figure and description of this plant, by the
name of Holosteum petroeum, which I have omitted, thinking this the better.
Tragus, Lonicerus, and (...) refer this to the Fernes, and the last of them
calls it Filix (...) corniculata: Pena and Lobel made it their Holostium
(...): (...) calls it Adianthum (...), scu furcatum.

9 There is found creeping upon the ground a certain kind of Moss at the
bottom of Heath and Ling, and such like bushes growing upon barren mountains,
consisting as it were of scales made up into a long rope or cord, dispersing it
self far abroad into sundry branches, thrusting out here and there certain
roots like threads, which take hold upon the upper crust of the earth, whereby
it is sent and dispersed far abroad: the whole plant is of a yellowish green
color.

10 This other kind of Moss is found in the like places: it also disperseth
it self far abroad, and is altogether lesser than the precedent, wherein
consists the difference.

10 Muscus minor denticulatus. Little toothed Moss.
11 Muscus clauatus, sieve Lycopodium. Club Moss, or Wolf claw Moss.
The figure formerly in the first place (...) of the Muscus (...) of (...)
being a small kind of Muscus (...). The (...) and sixth were both of (...);
and so of the two descriptions I have made one more accurate, and (...) the
(...) figure.
12 Muscus clauatus folijs (...). Heath Cypres.


11 There is likewise another kind of Moss, which I have not elsewhere found
than upon Hampsted heath, near unto a little cottage, growing close upon the
ground amongst bushes and brakes, which I have showed unto diverse Surgeons of
London, that have walked thither with me for their further knowledge in
Simples, who have gathered this kind of Moss, whereof some have 13 Muscus ex
cranio humano. Moss growing upon the skull of a man.
made them hat-bands, girdles, and also bands to tie such things as they had
before gathered, for the which purpose it most fitly served; some pieces
whereof are six or eight foot long, consisting as it were of many hairie leaves
set upon a tough string, very close couched and compact together, from which is
also sent forth certain other branches like the first: in sundry places there
be sent down fine little strings, which serve in stead of roots, wherewith it
is fastened to the upper part of the earth, and takes hold likewise upon such
things as grow next unto it. There spring also from the branches bare and naked
stalks, on which grow certain (...) as it were like the catkins or blowings
of the Hasell tree, in shape like a little club (...) the reed Mace, saving
that it is much lesser, and of a yellowish white color, very well resembling
the claw of a Wolf, whereof it took his name; which knobby katkins are
altogether barren, and bring forth neither seed nor flower.

14 Muscus parvus stellaris. Small Heath Moss.


12 This, whose figure in the former edition was by our Author unfitly put for
Lauander Cotton (having more regard to the title of the figure in
Tabernamontanus, than to see whether it were that which he there described) is
no other than a kind of Muscus clauatus, or Club-Mosse. It is thought to be
the Selago mentioned by Pliny, lib. 25. cap. 11. Tragus and some others call it
Sauina (...): (...) and (...), Chamaecyparissus: but Bauhine the most (...)
names it Muscus clauatus folijs (...): and Turner not unfitly in English,
Heath Cypress. This is a low plant, and keeps green Winter and Summer: the
leaves are like those of Cypress, bitter in taste, but without smell: it
carries such (...) or catkins as the former, and those of a yellowish color:
it is found growing in diverse woody mountainous places of Germany, where they
call it (...) (...), or wild Sauine.

13 This kind of Moss is found upon the skulls or bare scalps of men and
women, lying long in charnell houses or other places, where the bones of men
and women are kept together: it grows very thick, white, like unto the short
moss upon the trunkes of old Oaks: it is thought to be a singular (...)
against the falling Evil and the Chin-cough in children, if it be poudered,
and (...) given in sweet wine for certain days together.

14 Upon diverse heathy places in the month of May is to be found growing a
little short Moss not much in shape different from the first described, but
much less, and parted at the top into star-fashioned heads. (...) calls this,
Muscus in Ericetis (...).

The Place.
Their several descriptions set forth their natural places of growing.

The Time.
They flourish especially in the Summer months.

The Names.
Goldilocke is called in High Dutch, Widertodt, golden Wedertodt, Iung Urauwen
har: in Low Dutch, Gulden Wederdoot: Fuchsius names it Polytrichon Apuleij, or
Apuletus his Maiden-haire, nevertheless Apuleius Maiden-haire is nothing else
but Dioscorides his Trichomanes, called English Maiden-haire; and for that
cause we had rather it should be (...) Muscus capillaris, or hairy Moss. This
is called in English, Goldilockes: it might also be termed Golden Moss, or
Hairy Moss.

Wolfes claw is called of diverse Herbarists in our age, Muscus terrestris: in
High Dutch, Beerlay, Surtelkraut, Seilkraut: in Low Dutch, Wolfs clauwen;
whereupon we first named it Lycopodium, and Pes Lupi: in English, Wolfes foot,
or Wolfes claw, and likewise Club-Mosse. Most shops of Germany in former times
did falsely term it Spica celtica: but they did worse, and were very much too
blame, that used it in compound medicines in stead of Spica celtica, or French
Spikenard: as touching the rest, they are sufficiently spoken of in their
descriptions.

The Temperature.
The Mosses of the earth are dry and astringent, of a binding quality, without
any heat or cold.

Goldilocks and the Wolfes claws are temperate in heat and cold.

The Virtues.






Hieronymus Tragus reports, wastes the stone, and drives it forth.





CHAP. 163. Of Liuerwort.
The Description.
1 LIuerwort is also a kind of Moss which spreads it self abroad upon the
ground, having many uneven or crumpled leaves lying one over another, as the
scales of Fishes do, green above, and brown underneath: amongst these grow up
small short stalks, spread at the top like a blasing star, and certain fine
little threads are sent down, by which it cleaves and sticks fast upon
stones, and upon the ground, by which it lives and flourishes.

2 The second kind of Liuerwort differs not but in stature, being altogether
less, and more smooth or even: the flowers on the tops of the slender stems
are not so much laid open like a star; but the especial difference consists
in one chief point, that is to say, this kind being (...) in a pot, and set
in a garden above the ground, notwithstanding it spitteth or casts round
about the place great store of the same fruit, where never any did grow before.

Of this sort which is small, and oftentimes found growing in moist gardens
among Beareseares, and such plants, when they are kept in pots, there are two
varieties, one having little stalks some inch long, with a starre-fashioned
head at the top: the other has the like tender stalk, and a round head at the
top thereof.

3 This is found upon rocks and stony places, as well near unto the sea, as
further into the land: it grows flat upon the stones, and creeps not far
abroad as the ground Liuerwort does, it only rests it self in spots and
tufts set here and there, of a dusty russet color above, and blackish
underneath: among the crumpled leaves rise up diverse small stems, whereupon do
grow little starlike flowers of the color of the leaves: it is often found at
the bottom of high trees growing upon 1 Hepatica terrestris. Ground Liuer-wort.
2 Hepatica (...) and (...). Small Liuer-wort with starry and round heads.
3 Hepatica petraea. Stone Liuerwort.
high mountains, especial in shadowie places.

The Place.
This is often found in shadowy and moist places, on rocks and great stones
laid by the highway, and in other common paths where the Sun beams do seldom
come, and where no traveler frequenteth.

The Time.
It brings forth his blasing stars and leaves oftentimes in June and July.

The Names.
It is called of the Grecians, (...): of the Latins, Lichen: and of some,
(...), that is to say, Muscus, or Moss, as (...) witnesses: it is named in
shops Hepatica, yet there (...) also many other herbs named (...), or
Liuer-worts, for difference whereof this may fitly be called Hepatica (...), or
Stone Liuer-wort, having taken that name from the Germans, who call this
Liuerwort, Steyn Leberkraut: and in Low Dutch, Steen Leuercrupt: in English,
(...).

The Temperature.
This Stone Liuerwort is of temperature cold and dry, and somewhat binding.

The Virtues.
It is singular good against the inflammations of the liver, hot and sharp
agues, and tertians which proceed of choler.

Dioscorides teaches, that Liuer-wort being applied to the place stancheth
bleeding, takes away all inflammations, and that it is good for a tetter or
ring-worme, called in Greek, (...): and that it is a remedy for them that
have the yellow iaundice, even that which comes by the inflammation of the
liver; and that furthermore it quenches the inflammations of the tongue.

CHAP. 164. Of Lung-wort, or wood Liuer-wort, and Oister-greene.
1 Lichen arborum. Tree Lung-wort.
2 Lichen marinus. Sea Lung-wort, or Oister-greene.


The Description.
1 TO Liuerwort there is joined Lung-wort, which is also another kind of
Moss, drier, broader, of a larger size, and set with scales: the leaves hereof
are greater, and diversely folded one in another, not so smooth, but more
wrinckled, rough and thick almost like a Fell or hide, and tough withal: on
the upper side whitish, and on the nether side blackish or dusty, it seems to
be after a sort like to lungs or lights.

2 This kind of sea Moss is an herby matter much like unto Liuer-wort,
altogether without stalk or stem, bearing many green leaves, very uneven or
crumpled, and full of wrinkles, and somewhat broad, not much differing from
leaves of crispe or curled Lettuce: this grows upon rocks within the bowels
of the sea, but especially among oisters, and in greater plenty among those
Oisters which are called Wall-fleet Oisters: it is very well known even to the
poor Oister-women which carry Oisters to sell up and down, who are greatly
desirous of the said moss for the decking and beautifying of their Oisters, to
make them sell the better. This moss they do call Oistergreene.

3 The branches of this elegant plant are some handful or better high, spread
abroad on every side, and only consisting of sundry single roundish leaves,
whereto are fastened sometimes one, sometimes two or more such leaves, so that
the whole plant consists of branches made up of such round leaves, fastened
together by diverse little and verysmal threads: the lower leaves which stick
fast to the rocks are of a brownish color, the other of a whitish or a light
green color, smooth and shining. This grows upon rocks in diverse parts of
the Mediterranean. Clusius sets it forth by the name of Lichen Marinus; and
he received it from Imperato by the name of Sertuloria: and Cortusus had it
from Corsica, by the title of Corallina latifolia; and he called it Opuntia
marina, having reference to that mentioned by Theophrast. lib. 1. cap. 12.
Hist. Plant.

3 Lichen marinus rotundifolius. Round leaued Oister-weed.
4 Quercus marina. Sea Oak or Wrack.
4 Quercus (...) varietas: A variety of the sea Oak or Wrack.


4 There is also another sort of sea Weed found upon the drowned rocks, which
are naked and (...) (...) water at every tide. This sea Weed grows unto the
rock, fastened unto the same at one end, being a soft herby plant, very
slipperie, insomuch that it is a hard matter to stand upon it without falling:
it rampeth far abroad, and here and there is set with certain puffed up
tubercles or bladders, full of wind, which gives a crack when it is broken:
the leaf it self does somewhat resemble the Oken leaf, whereof it took his
name Quercus marina, the sea Oak: of some, Wrack, and Crow Gall. His use in
physic has not been set sorth, and therefore this bare description may
suffice.

5 Quercus marina secunda. Sea Thongs.
6 Quercus marina tertia. The third sea Wrack.


Of this Quercus marina, or Fucus, there are diverse sorts, whereof I will give
you the figures and a brief history: the first of these is only a variety
of the last described, differing therefrom in the narrowness of the leaves,
and largeness of the swollen bladders.

5 This grows to the length of five or six foot, is smooth and membranous,
being some half fingers breadth, and variously divided, like wet parchment or
leather cut into thongs: this has no swollen knots or bladders like as the
former; and is the Fucus marinus secundus of Dodonaeus.

6 This Wrack or sea weed has long and flat stalks like the former, but the
stalks are thick set with swollen knots or bladders, out of which sometimes
grow little leaves, in other respects it is not unlike the former kinds.
Dodonaeus makes this his Fucus marinus 3.

7 The leaves of this other Wrack, which Dodonaeus makes his Fucus marinus
quartus, are narrower, smaller, and much divided; and this has either none or
very few of those swollen bladders which some of the former kinds have.

8 This, which Lobel calls Alga marina, has iointed black branched creeping
roots of the thickness of ones finger, which end as it were in diverse ears,
or hairy awnes, composed of whitish hairy threads somewhat resembling Spikenard:
from the tops of those ears forth leaves, long, narrow, soft, and grasse-like,
first green, but white when they are dry. It grows in the sea as the former.
They use it in Italy and other hot countries to pack up glasses with, to keep
them from breaking.

9 Of this Tribe are diverse other plants; but I will only give you the history
of two more, which I first observed the last year, going in company with
diverse London Apothecaries to find Simples, as far as Margate in the Island
of Tenet; and whose figures (not before extant that I know of) I first gave in
my Iournall or enumeration of such plants as we there and in other places
found. The first of these by reason of his various growth is by Bauhine in his
Prodromus distinguished into two, and described in the second and third places.
The third he calls Fucus longissimo, latissimo, crassoque folio, and this is
marked with the figure 1. The second he calls Fucus arboreus polyschides; and
this you may see marked with the figure 2. This sea Weed (as I have said) has
a various face, for sometimes from a fibrous root, which commonly grows to a
pibble stone, or fastened to a rock, it sends forth a round stalk seldom
so thick as ones little finger, and about some half foot in length, at the
top whereof grows out a single leaf, sometimes an ell long, and then it is
about the breadth of ones hand, and it ends in a sharp point, so that it very
well resembles a two edged sword. Sometimes from the same root come forth two
such fashioned leaves, but then commonly they are lesser. Otherwhiles at the
top of the stalk it diuides it self into eight, nine, ten, twelve, more or
fewer parts, and that just at the top of the stalk, and these never come to
that length that the single leaves do. Now this I judge to be the Fucus
polyschides of Bauhine. That these two are not several kinds I am certain;
for I have marked both these varieties from one and the same root, as you may
see them here expressed in the figure. At Margate where they grow they call them
sea Girdles, and that name well befits the single one; and the divided one they
may call Sea Hangers, for if you do hang the tops downwards, they do
reasonable well resemble the old fashioned sword-hangers. Thus much for their
shape: now for their color, which is not the same in all; for some are more
green, and these can scarce be dried; other-some are whitish, and these do
quickly dry, and then both in color and substance are so like parchment, that
such as know them not would at the first view take them to be nothing else.
This is of a glutinous substance, and a little saltish taste, and diverse have
told me they are good meat, being boiled tender, and so eaten with butter,
vinegar, and pepper.

7 Quercus marina quaria. Iagged Sea Wrack.
8 Alga. Grass Wrack.


10 This which I give you in the tenth place is not figured or described by any
that as yet I have met with; wherefore I gave the figure and description in the
forementioned Iournall, which I will here repeat. This is a very succulent and
fungous plant, of the thickness of ones thumb; it is of a dark yellowish
color, and buncheth forth on every side with many unequal tuberosities or
knots: whereupon Mr. Thomas Hickes being in our company did fitly name it Sea
ragged Staff. We did not observe it growing, but found one or two plants
thereof some foot long apiece.

9 Facus phasganoides and polyschides. Sea Girdle and Hangers.
10 Fucus spongiosus nodosus. Sea ragged Staff.
11 Conferua. Hairy Riuerweed.


11 In some slow running waters is to be found this long green hairy weed,
which is thought to be the Conferua of Pliny: it is made up only of long hairy
green threads, thick thrummed together without any particular shape or
fashion, but only following the current of the stream.

The Place.
It grows upon the bodies of old Oaks, Beech, and other wild trees, in dark
and thick woods: it is oftentimes found growing upon rocks, and also in other
shadowie places.

The Time and Names.
It flourishes especially in the Summer months.

It takes his name Pulmonaria of the likeness of the form which it has with
lungs or lights, called in Latin (...), of some, Lichen: it is called in
High Dutch, (...): in Low Dutch (...): in French, Herb a Poulmon: in English,
Lung-wort, and wood Liuerwort.

The Temperature.
This seems to be cold and dry.

The Virtues:
It is reported that shepherds and certain horseleeches do with good success
give the powder

Lungwoort is much commended of the learned Physicians of our time against the
diseases of

It is likewise commended for bloody and green wounds, and for ulcers in the
secret parts, and

Moreover, it stops the bloody flix, and other flixes and scourings, either
upwards or downwards, especially if they proceed of choler: it stays
vomiting, as men say, and it also stops the belly.

Oister green fried with eggs and made into a tansie and eaten, is a singular
remedy for to streng

CHAP. 165. Of Sea Moss, or Coralline.
The Kinds.
THere be diverse sorts of Moss, growing as well within the bowels of the sea,
as upon the rocks, distinguished under sundry titles.

1 Muscus marinus, sive Corallina alba. White Coralline, or sea Moss.
2 Muscus marinus albidus. White sea Moss.
3 Corallina Anglica. English Coralline.


The Description.
1 THis kind of Sea Moss has many small stalks finely covered or set over
with small leaves, very much cut or iagged, even like the leaves of Dill, but
hard, and of a stony substance.

2 The second is much like unto the former, yet not stony, but more finely cut,
and growing more upright, branching it self into many divisions at the top,
growing very thick together, and in great quantity, out of a piece of stone,
which is fashioned like an hat or small stony head, whereby it is fastened unto
the rocks.

3 This third kind of sea moss is very well known in shops by the name
Corallina; it yields forth a great number of shoots, in shap much like unto
Coral; being full of small branches dispersed here and there, diversely varying
his color, according to the place where it is found, being in some places
red, in othersome yellow, and of an herby color; in some gray, or of an ash
color, and in othersome very white.

4 The fourth kind of Sea Moss is somewhat like the former, but smaller, and
not so plentiful where it grows, prospering always upon shells, as of
Oysters, Muscles, and Scallops, as also upon rolling stones, in the bottom of
the water, which have tumbled down from the high cliffes and rocks,
notwithstanding the old proverb, that rolling stones never gather Moss.

4 Corallina minima. The smallest Coralline.
5 Muscus Corallinus, sive Corallina montana. Coral Moss, or mountain
Coralline.


5 There is found upon the rocks and mountains of France, bordering upon the
Mediterranean sea, a certain kind of Coralline, which in these parts has not
been found: it grows in manner like unto a branch of Coral, but altogether
lesser, of a shining red color, and of a stony substance.

I know not what our Author meant by this description; but the plant which here
is figured out of Taber namontanus (and by the same title he has it) is of a
Moss growing upon Hampstead heath, and most such places in England: it grows
up some two or three inches high, and is divided into very many little branches
ending in little threddy chiues: all the branches are hollow, and of a very
light whitedry substance, which makes it somewhat to resemble Coralline, yet is
it not stony at all.

6 There is also found upon the rocks near unto Narbone in France, and not far
from the sea, a

6 Fucus marinus tenuifolius. Fenell Coralline, or Fenell Moss.
7 Fucus-ferulaceus. Sea Fenell.
8 Fucus tenuifolius alter. Bulbous sea Fennel.
9 Muscus marinus (...). Branched Sea Moss.
kind of Coralline. it grows up to the form of a small shrub, branched
diversely; whereon do grow small grasse-like leaves, very finely cut or iagged,
like unto Fennel; yet are they of a stony substance, as are the rest of the
Corallines; of a dark russet color.

7 This grows also in the like places, having many small long Fennell-like
divided leaves upon stalks some foot long, with some swelling eminences here
and there set in the divisions of the leaves: this is by (...) called by the
name I here give you it.

8 This also has fine cut leaves like those of Fennel, but much less and
shorter, of a fair green color: these grow up from round tuberous roots,
which together with the fibers they send forth are of a blackish color: the
stalks also are tuberous and swollen, as in other plants of this kind. It grows
in the sea with the former. Dodonaeus calls this Fucus marinus virens
tenuifolius.

9 This kind of sea Moss grows some four or more inches long, divided into
many branches, which are subdivided into smaller, set with leaves finely
iagged, like those of Cammomill; at first soft, flexible, and transparent,
green below, and purplish above; being dried, it becomes rough and fragile,
like as Coralline. It grows in the Mediterranean sea.

10 This Sea Moss is a low little excrescence, having somewhat broad cut
leaves growing many from one root: in the whole face it resembles the moss
that grows upon the branches of Oaks and other trees, and is also white and
very like it, but much more brittle. This by Dodonaeus is called (...) Marinus
tertius.

10 Muscus marinus 3. Dod. Broad leafed Sea moss.
11 Abies marina Belgica, Clus. Clusius his Sea Firr.


11 Upon the rocks and shells of sea fishes are to be found diverse small plants,
having resemblance to others that grow upon the land; and Clusius says, upon
the coast of the Low countries he observed one which very much resembled the
Fir Tree, having branches growing orderly on both sides, but those very brittle
and small, seldom exceeding a handful in height, and covered as it were with
many small scales. He observed others that resembled Cypress trees, and other
branches that resembled Tameriske or heath.

The Place.
These Mosses grow in the sea upon the rocks, and are oftentimes found upon
Oister shells, Muskell shells, and upon stones: I found very great plenty
thereof under Reculuers and Margate, in the Isle of Thanet; and in other places
along the sands from thence unto Dover.

The Time.
The time answers the other Mosses, and are found at all times of the year.

The Names.
Sea Moss is called in Greek (...) in Latin, Muscus marinus: of the
Apothecaries, Italians, and French men, Corallina: in Spanish, Malharquiana
yerua: in high Dutch, (...): in low Dutch, (...) (...): in English, Sea Moss,
and of many Corallina, after the Apothecaries word, and it may be called Coral
Moss. The titles distinguish the other kinds.

The Temperature.
Corallina consists, as Galen says, of an earthie and waterish essence, both
of them cold: for by his taste it binds, and being applied to any hot
infirmity, it also evidently cools: the earthie essence of this Moss has
in it also a certain saltness, by reason whereof likewise it dries mightily.

The Virtues.
Dioscorides commends it to be good for the gout which has need to be
cooled.

The later Physicians have found by experience, that it kills worms in the
belly; it is given to

That which cleaves to Coral, and is of a reddish color, is of some
preferred and taken for the

CHAP. 166. Of Coral.
1 Corallium rubrum. Red Coral.
2 Corallium nigrum, sive (...). Black Coral.


3 Corallium album. White Corrall.
4 Corallium album alterum. The other white or yellow Corrall.
5 Coralloides albicans. Whitish bastard Coral.


The Description.
1 ALthough Corrall be a matter or substance, even as hard as stones; yet I
think it not amiss to place and insert it here next unto the mosses, and the
rather (...) that the (...) (...) do show themselves, as well in the manner of
their growing, as in their place (...) (...), like unto the Mosses. This later
age wherein we live, has sound more kinds hereof (...) (...) (...) known or
mentioned among the old writers. Some of these Corrals grow in the (...) (...)
(...) (...), or stony matter; others in a straight form, with crags and
ioints, such as we see by experience: the which for that they are so well
known, and in such request for Physic, I will not (...) to describe; only
this remember, that there is some Corrall of a pale yellow color, as there be
(...) red, and some white.

2 The black Corrall grows upon the rocks near to the sea about Massilia,
in manner of (...) former; herein differing from it, in that this is of a
shining black color, and very smooth, growing up rather like a tree, than
like a shrub

3 The white Corrall is like to the former, growing upon the rocks near the
sea, and in the (...) parts of England, about Saint Michaels mount; but the
branches hereof are smaller, and (...) (...), finelier dispersed into a number
of branches, of a white color.

6 Coralloides rubens. Reddish bastard Coral.
7 Spongia marina alba. White Sponge.
8 Spongia infundibuli forma. Funnell fashioned Sponge.
9 Spongia ramosa, Branched Sponge.


4 The fourth and last grows also upon the Western rocks of the sea, and in
the place aforenamed, and varieth his color, sometimes waxing white, sometimes
yellow, and sometimes red.

5 This grows up with many branches some two or three handfulls high; the
inner part is a hard woody substance, which is covered over with a white and
hard stony matter, so that it much resembles white Coral, but that it is
neither so thick, hard, nor smooth, but is rough and bends easily without
breaking, which Coral will not do. (...) calls this Corallina alba, it grows
in the Mediteranian sea, and upon the Coasts of Spain.

6 This in all respects is like the last described, the color excepted, which
is a dark red, and therefore better resembles the red Coral. Clusius refers
both these to the Quercus marina mentioned by Theophr (...), Hist. plant. lib.
7. cap. 4.

7 There is found growing upon the rocks near unto the sea, a certain matter
wrought together, of the foam or froth of the sea, which we call spunges, after
the Latin name, which may very fitly be inserted among the sea Mosses, whereof
to write at large would greatly increase our volume, and little profit the
reader, considering we hasten to an end, and also that the use is so well
known unto all: therefore these few lines may serve until a further
consideration, or a second Edition. Spunges are not like the Alcyonium, that
is, an accidental matter wrought together of the froth of the sea, as our
Author affirms, but rather of a nobler nature than plants, for they are said
to have sense, and to contract themselves at the approach of ones hand that
comes to cut them up, or for fear of any other harme-threatning object, and
therefore by most writers they are referred to the (...) which some render
Plantanimalia, that is, such as are neither absolute plants, nor living
creatures, but participate of both: they grow of diverse shapes and colors upon
the Rocks in the Mediterranian, as also in the Archipelago, or Aegean sea.

8 Clusius observed one yet adhering to the stone whereon it grew, which in
shape resembled a funnell, but in substance was like another Sponge.

9 There is also to be found upon our English coast a small kind of sponge
cast up by the sea, and this is also of different shapes and color, for the
shape it is always divided into sundry branches, but that after a different
manner; and the color is often times brownish, and (...) gray or white. Lobel
makes it Conferuae marinae genus.

The Place.
The place of their growing is sufficiently spoken of in their several
descriptions.

The Time.
The time answers the other kinds of sea Mosses.

The Names.
Corallium rubrum is called in English, red Corrall. Corallium (...), black
Corrall. Corallium album, white Corrall.

The Temperature.
Corrall binds, and meanly cools: it cleanses the scars and spots of the
eyes, and is very effectual against the issues of blood, and caseth the
difficulty of making water.

The Virtues.
Corrall drunk in wine or water, preserves from the spleen; and some hang it
about the

It is a sovereign remedy to dry, to stop, and stay all issues of blood
whatsoever in man or woman,

Burned Corrall dries more than when it is unburned, and being given to drink
in water, it

Corrall drunk in wine provoke sleep: but if the patient have an ague, then
it is with better

CHAP. 167. Of Mushrumes, or Toadstooles.
The Kinds.
SOme Mushrumes grow forth of the earth; other upon the bodies of old trees,
which differ altogether in kinds. Many wantons that dwell near the sea, and
have fish at will, are very desirous for change of diet to feed upon the birds
of the mountains; and such as dwell upon the hills or champion grounds, do
long after sea fish; many that have plenty of both, do hunger after the
earthie excrescences, called Mushrumes: whereof some are very venomous and full
of poison, others not so noisome; and neither of them very wholesome meat;
wherefore for the avoiding of the venomous quality of the one, and that the
other which is less venomous may be discerned from it, I have thought good to
set forth their pictures with their names and places of growth. Because the
book is already grown too voluminous, I will only give you the figures of such
as my Author has here mentioned, with some few others, but not trouble you
with any more history, yet distinguish between such as are eatable, and those
that be poisonous, (...) at least not to be eaten; for the first figured
amongst the poisonous ones, is that we call Iewes-eare, which has nopoysonous
faculty in it. Clusius (all whose figures I could have here given you) has
written a peculiar tract of these bastard plants, or excrescences, where such
as desire it may find them susficiently discoursed of.

1 Fungi vulgatissimi esculenti. Common Mushrums to be (...).


The Description.
1 GRound Mushrums grow up in one night, standing upon a thick and round
stalk, like unto a broad hat or buckler, of a very white color until it begin
to wither, at what time it loses his fair white, declining to yellowness:
the lower side is somewhat hollow, set or decked with fine gutters, drawn
along from the middle center to the circumference or round edge of the brim.

2 All Mushroms are without pith, rib, or vein: they differ not a little in
bigness and color, some are great, and like a broad brimmed hat; others
smaller, about the bigness of a silver coin called a doller: most of them are
red underneath; some more, (...) less; others little or nothing red at all:
the upper side which bears out, is either pale or whitish, or else of an ill
favored color like ashes (they commonly call it Ash color) or else it seems
to be somewhat yellow.

There is another kind of Mushrums called Fungi parui lethales galericulati:
in English, deadly Mushrums, which are fashioned like unto an hood, and are
most venomous and full of poison.

There is a kind of Mushrum called Fungus (...) laethalis, that is also a
deadly Mushrum, fashioned like a little buckler.

There is another kind of Mushrum, which is also most venomous and full of
poison, bearing also the shape of a buckler, being called Fungus venenatus
Clyptiformis: in English, the stinking venomous Mushrom.

2 Fungi tethales, aut saltem non esculenti. Poison Mushrums, or at the least
such as are not vulgarly (...).


The Mushrums or Toodstooles which grow upon the trunkes or bodies of old
trees, very much resembling Auricula Iudae, that is Jews ear, do in
continuance of time grow unto the substance of wood, which the Foulers do call
Touchwood, and are for the most half circuled or half round, whose upper part
is somewhat plain, and sometime a little hollow, but the lower part is plaited
or pursed together. This kind of Mushrum the Grecians do call (...) and is
full of venom or poison as the former, especially those which grow upon the
Ilex, Olive, and Oak trees.

There is likewise a kind of Musbrum called Fungus Fanaginosus, growing up in
moist and shadowie woods, which is also venomous, having a thick and tuberous
stalk, an handful high, of a duskish color; the top whereof is compact of
many small divisions, like unto the honey comb.

Fungus sambucinus, sive Auricula (...). Jews ears.
Fungi lethales, (...) non esculenti. Poisonous Mushrums.


There is also found another, set forth under the title Fungus virilis penis
arecti forma, which we English, Prick Mushrum, taken from his form.

3 Fungus orbicularis, or Lupi crepitus, some do call it Lucernarum fungus: in
English, Fusse balls, Pucke Fusse, and Bulfists, with which in some places of
England they use to kill or smolder their Bees, when they would drive the
Hiues, and bereave the poor Bees of their meat, houses, and lives: these are
also used in some places where neighbors dwell far asunder, to carry and
reserve fire from place to place, whereof it took the name, Lucernarum Fungus:
in form they are very round, sticking and cleaving unto the ground, without
any stalks or stems; at the first white, but afterward of a duskish color,
having no hole or breach in them, whereby a man may see into them, which being
trodden upon do breath forth a most thin and fine powder, like unto smoke, very
noisome and hurtful unto the eyes, causing a kind of blindness, which is
called Poor-blinde, or Sand-blinde.

Fungi lethales, sive non esculenti. Poisonous Mushrums.


There is another kind of Fungus, or Mushrum, which grows in moist meadows,
and by ditch sides, five or six inches high, covered over with a skin like a
piece of sheep leather, of a russet color; which being taken away there
appears a long and white stumpe, in form not much unlike to an handle,
mentioned in the title, or like unto the white and tender stalk of Aron, but
greater: this kind is also full of venom and poison.

There is likewise a kind of Mushrum, with a certain round excrescence,
growing within the earth; under the upper crust or face of the same, in dry and
grauelly grounds in Pannonia and the Provinces adioining which do cause the
ground to swel, and be full of hills like Mole-hils. The people where they grow,
are constrained to dig them up and cast them abroad like as we do Mole-hils.
spoiling their grounds, as Mole-hils are hurtful unto our soil: these have
neither stalks, leaves, fibers nor strings annexed or fastened unto them, and
for the most part are of a reddish color, but within of a whitish yellow: the
Grecians have called this tuberous excrescence, Idna, and the Latins Tubera:
the Spaniards do call them Turmas de (...): in English (...) may call them
Spanish Fusse bals.

The Place.
Mushrums come up about the roots of trees, in (...) places of meadows, and Ley
Land newly Fungus fauiginosus. Hony-comb'd Mushrome.
Fungus Virilis Penis effigy. Prick Mushrom.
Tubera terrae. Fusse-balls, or Puckfists.
turned; in woods also where the ground is sandy, but yet dankish: they grow
likewise out of wood, forth of the rotten bodies of trees, but they are
unprofitable and nothing worth. Poisonsome Mushroms, as Dioscorides says,
grows where old rusty iron lies, or rotten clouts, or near to serpents
dens, or roots of trees that bring forth venomous fruit. Diverse esteem those
for the best which grow in meadows, and upon mountains and hilly places, as
Horace says, lib. ser. 2. satyr. 4.

-- pratensibus optima fungis
(...), alijs male creditur.
The meadow Mushroms are in kind the best,
It is ill trusting any of the rest.
The Time.
Diverse come up in April, and last not till May, for they flourish but whilst
April continues: others grow later, about August; yet all of them after rain,
and therefore they are (...) one year sooner, and another later. Mushroms,
says Pliny, grow in shoures of rain: they come of the slime of trees, as the
same Author affirms.

The Names.
They are called in Latin, Fungi: in Greek, (...): in Italian, Fonghi: in
Spanish, Hungos, Cugumenos: in French, (...), which word the Low Country men
also use, and call them Campernoellen: in High Dutch, Schwemme, (...): in
English, Mushroms, Toad-stooles, and Paddock-stooles.

The Mushroms that come up in April are called in Latin of some, Spongiolae:
of the Italians, (...): and in High Dutch, Morchel.

They that are of a light red are called of some Boleti, among the later ones
which rise and fall away in seven days. The white, or those which be somewhat
yellow, are called in Latin, Suilli: which the later Physicians name Porcini,
or Swine Mushroms. Suilli, says Pliny, are dried, being hanged upon rushes,
which are thrust through them. The dry ones are in our age also eaten in
Bohemia and Austria: they that grow by the roots of Poplar trees are called of
the Latins, Populnei, Poplar Mushroms.

Puffes-fists are commonly called in Latin, Lupi crepit us, or Wolfes fists:
in Italian, Vescie de Lupo: in English, Puffes-fists, and Fusse-balls in the
North. Pliny names them Pezicae, as though he should say, flat.

Tree Mushroms be called in Greek, (...): in Latin, Fungi arborum, and Fungi
arborei: in English, tree Mushroms, or Touch-wood: in High Dutch also Schwemme.
They are all thought to be poisonsome, being inwardly taken. Nicander writes,
that the Mushroms of the Olive tree, the Ilex tree, and of the Oak tree bring
death.

The Temperature and Virtues.
Galen affirms, that they are all very cold and moist, and therefore do
approach unto a venomous

Fusse-balls are no way eaten: the powder of them does dry without biting: it
is fitly applied to

In diverse parts of England where people dwell far from neighbors, they
carry them kindled Lucernarum Fungi.

The dust or powder hereof is very dangerous for the eyes, for it has been
often seen, that diverse

The country people do use to kill or smother Bees with these Fusse-balls,
being set on fire, sor

The fungous excrescence of the Elder, commonly called a Jews ear, is much
used against

CHAP. 168. Of great Tooth-wort, or Clownes Lung-wort.
The Description.
1 THere is often found among the Mushroms a certain kind of excrescence
consisting of a jelly or soft substance, like that of the Mushroms, and
therefore it may the more fitly be here inserted: it rises forth of the ground
in form like unto Orobanche, or the Broome-Rape, and also in substance, having
a tender, thick, tuberous, or misshapen body, consisting as it were of scales
like teeth (whereof it took his name) of a dusty shining color tending to
purple. The stalk rises up in the middle garnished with little gaping hollow
flowers like those of Satyrion; on the outside of an ouerworne whitish color:
the whole plant resembles a rude form of that gellie, or slimie matter, found
in the fields, which we (...) the falling of stars: the root is small and
tender.

2 There is also another sort hereof found, not differing from the precedent:
the chief difference consists in that, that this plant is altogether lesser;
and has a root diversely diuaricated like Coral, white of color, full of
juice, and without any fibers annexed thereto; in other respects like.

1 Dentaria mayor Mathioli. Great Toothwoort, or Lungwoort.
2 Dentaria minor. Little Lungwoort.


The Place.
These plants do grow at the bottom of Elm trees, and such like, in shadowie
places: I found it growing in a lane called East-lane, upon the right hand as
ye go from Maidstone in Kent unto Cocks Heath, half a mile from the town;
and in other places thereabout: it does also grow in the fields about Croidon,
especially about a place called Groutes, being the land of a worshipful
Gentleman called Mr. Garth: and also in a wood in Kent near Crayfoot, called
Row, or Roughhill: (...) grows likewise near Harwood in Lancashire, a mile
from Whanley, in a wood called Talbot bank.

The Time.
They flourish in May and June.

The Names.
There is not any other name extant, more than is set forth in the description.

The Temperature and Virtues.
There is nothing extant of the faculties hereof, either of the ancient or
later writers: neither have we any thing of our own experience; only our
country women do call it (...), and do use it against the cough, and all other
imperfections of the lungs: but what benefit they reap thereby I know not;
neither can any of judgment give me further instruction thereof.

CHAP. 166. Of Saunders.
The Kinds.
THe ancient Greeks have not known the sorts of Saunders: Garcias and others
describe three, Album, Rubrum, and Pallidum: which in shops is called Citrinum.

The Description.
1 THe Saunders tree grows to the bigness of the Walnut-tree, garnished with
many goodly branches; whereon are set leaves like those of the Lentiske tree,
always green; among which come forth very fair flowers, of a blew color
tending to blackness; after comes the fruit of the bigness of a Cherry,
green at the first, and black when it is ripe; without taste, and ready to
(...) down with every little blast of wind: the timber or wood is of a white
color, and a very pleasant smell.

2 There is likewise another which grows very great, the flowers and fruit
agree with the other of his kind: the wood is of a yellowish color, wherein
consists the difference.

3 The third fort which we call Red-Saunders is a very hard and sollid wood,
having little or no smell, the color thereof is very red, it grows not in
those places where the other grow, neither is the form of the tree described
by any that I know of, it is frequently used to color sauces, and for such
like uses.

The Place.
The white and yellow Saunders grow naturally, and that in great abundance, in
an Island called Timor, and also in the East Indies beyond the river Sanges or
rather Ganges, which the Indians call Hanga, and also about Iaua, where it is
of better odor than any that grows elsewhere.

The red Saunders grows within the river Ganges, especially about Tanasarim,
and in the marrish grounds about Charamandell: Auicen, (...), and most of the
Mauritanians call it by a corrupt name, Sandal: in Timor, Malaca, and in places
near adjoining, Chandama: in Decan and Guzarate, (...): in Latin, Sandalum
and (...), adding thereto for the color album, flauum, or (...), and rubrum,
that is, white, yellow, and red Saunders.

The Time.
These trees which are the white and yellow Saunders grow (...) Winter and
Summer, and are not one known from another, but by the Indians themselves, who
have taken very certain notes and marks of them, because they may the more
speedily distinguish them when the Mart comes.

The Names.
Their names have been susficiently spoken of in their descriptions.

The Temperature.
Yellow and white Saunders are hot in the third degree, and dry in the second.
The (...) Saunders are not so hot.

The Virtues.
The Indians do use the decoction made in water, against hot burning agues, and
the overmuch Erisipelas, the gout, and all inflammations, especially if it be
mixed with the (...) of Nightshade, Housleeke, or Purslane.

The white Saunders mixed with Rose water, and the temples bathed therewith,
cease the

Auicen affirms it to be good for all passions of the heart, and makes it
glad and merry, and

Red Saunders have an astrictiue and strengthening faculty, but are not
cordial as the other

CHAP. 170. Of Stony wood, or wood made Stones.
The Description.
AMong the wonders of England this is one of great admiration, and contrary
unto (...) reason and capacity, that there should be a kind of wood alterable
into the hardness of a stone called Stony wood, or rather a kind of water,
which hardneth wood and other things, into the nature and matter of stones. But
we know that the works of God are (...) Lapideum, sieve in Lapides conuersum.
Stony wood, or wood made stones.
wonderful, if we do but narrowly search the least of them, which we daily
behold; much more if we turn our eyes upon those that are seldom seen, and
known but of a few, and that of such as have painfully traveled in the
secrets of Nature. This strange alteration of nature is to be seen in sundry
parts of England and Wales, through the qualities of some waters and earth,
which change such things into stone as do fall therein, or which are of purpose
for trial put into them. In the North part of England there is a Well near
unto Knaesborough, which will change any thing into stone, whether it be wood,
timber, leaves of trees, moss, leather gloves, or such like. There be diverse
places in Bed ford shire, Warwickshire, and Wales, where there is ground of
that quality, that if a stake be driven into it, that part of the stake which
is within the ground will be a firm and hard stone, and all that which is
above the ground retains his former substance and nature. Also my self being
at Rougby (about such time as our fantastic people did with great concourse
and multitudes repair and run headlong unto the sacred Wells of Newnam (...),
in the edge of Warwickshire, as unto the water of life, which could cure all
diseases) I went from thence unto these Wells, where I found growing over the
same a fair Ash tree, whose boughs did hang over the spring of water, whereof
some that were sear and rotten, and some that of purpose were broken off, fell
into the water, and were all turned into stones. Of these boughs or parts of
the tree I brought into London, which when I had broken in pieces, therein
might be seen, that the pith and all the rest was turned into stones; yea many
buds and flourings of the tree falling into the said water, were also turned
into hard stones, still retaining the same shape and fashion that they were of
before they were in the water. I doubt not but if this water were proved about
the hardening of some Confections Physical, for the preservation of them, or
other special ends, it would offer greater occasion of admiration for the
health and benefit of mankind, than it does about such things as already have
been experimented, tending to very little purpose.

CHAP. 171. Of the Goose tree, Barnacle tree, or the tree bearing Geese.
Britannicae Conchae anatiferae. The breed of Barnacles.


The Description.
Having traveled from the Grasses growing in the bottom of the fenny waters,
the Woods, and mountains, even unto Libanus it self; and also the sea, and
bowels of the same, we are arrived at the end of our History; thinking it not
impertinent to the conclusion of the same, to end with one of the maruells of
this land (we may say of the world.) The history whereof to set forth
according to the worthiness and raritie thereof, would not only require a
large and peculiar volume, but also a deeper search into the bowels of nature,
than my intended purposewil (...) me to wade into, my sufficiency also
considered; leaving the history thereof rough hewn, unto some excellent men,
learned in the secrets of nature, to be both fined and refined: in the mean
space take it as it falls out, the naked and bare truth, though unpolished.
There are found in the North parts of Scotland and the Islands adjacent, called
Orchades, certain trees whereon do grow certain shells of a white color
tending to russet, (...) are contained little living creatures: which shells in
time of maturitie do open, and out of them grow those little living things,
which falling into the water do become fowls, which we call (...); in the
North of England, brant Geese; and in Lancashire, tree Geese: but the other
that do (...) (...) the land perish and come to nothing. Thus much by the
writings of others, and also from the mouths (...) people of those parts, which
may very well accord with truth.

But what our eyes have seen, and hands have touched we shall declare. There
is a small Island in Lancashire called the Pile of Foulders, wherein are found
the broken pieces of old and bruised ships, some whereof have been cast thither
by shipwreck, and also the trunks and bodies with the branches of old and
rotten trees, cast up there likewise; whereon is found a certain spume or
froth that in time breeds unto certain shells, in shape like those of the
Muskle, but sharper pointed, and of a whitish color: wherein is contained a
thing in form like a lace of silk finely wouen as it were together, of a
whitish color, one end whereof is fastened unto the inside of the shell, even
as the fish of Oisters and Muskles are: the other end is made fast unto the
belly of a rude mass or Iumpe, which in time comes to the shape and (...) of
a Bird: when it is perfectly formed the shell gapeth open, and the first thing
that appears is the foresaid lace or string; next come the legs of the bird
hanging out, and as it grows greater it opens the shell by degrees, til at
length it is all come forth, and hangs only by the bill: in short space
after it comes to full maturitie, and falls into the sea, where it
gathers feathers, and grows to a foul bigger than a Mallard, and lesser
than a Goose, having black legs and bill or beak, and feathers black and
white, spotted in such manner as is our Mag-Pie, called in some places a
Pie-Annet, which the people of Lancashire call by no other name than a tree
Goose: which place aforesaid, and all those parts adjoining do so much abound
(...), that one of the best is bought for three pence. For the truth hereof, if
any doubt, may it please them to repair unto me, and I shall satisfy them by
the testimony of good witnesses.

Moreover, it should seem that there is another sort hereof; the history of
which is true, and of mine own knowledge: for traveling upon the shore of our
English coast between Dover and Rumney, I found the trunk of an old rotten
tree, which (with some help that I procured by Fishermens wives that were
there attending their husbands return from the sea) we drew out of the water
upon dry land: upon this rotten tree I found growing many thousands of long
crimson bladders, in shape like unto puddings newly filled, before they be
sodden, which were very clear and shining; at the nether end whereof did grow
a shell fish, fashioned somewhat like a small Muskle, but much whiter,
resembling a shell fish that grows upon the rocks about Garnsey and Garsey,
called a Lympit: many of these shells I brought with me to London, which after
I had opened I found in them living things without form or shape; in others
which were nearer come to ripenes I found living things that were very naked,
in shape like a Bird: in others, the Birds covered with soft down, the shell
half open, and the Bird ready to fall our, which no doubt were the Fowls
called Barnakles. I dare not absolutely avouch every circumstance of the first
part of this history, concerning the tree that bears those buds aforesaid,
but will leave it to a further consideration; howbeit that which I have seen
with mine eyes, and handled with mine hands, I dare confidently avouch, and
boldly put down for verity. Now if any will object, that this tree which I
saw might be one of those before mentioned, which either by the waves of the
sea or some violent wind had been ouerturned, as many other trees are; or that
any trees falling into those seas about the Orchades, will of themselves bear
the like fowls, by reason of those seas and waters, these being so probable
conjectures, and likely to be true, I may not without prejudice gainesay, or
endeavor to (...).

The Barnakle, whose fabulous breed my Author here sets down, and diverse
others have also delivered, were found by some Hollanders to have another
original, and that by eggs, as other Birds have: for they in their third
voyage to (...) out the North-East passage to China, and the Molucco's, about
the eightieth degree and eleven minutes of Northerly latitude, found two little
Islands, in the one of which they found abundance of these Geese sitting upon
their eggs, of which they got one Goose, and took away sixty eggs, etc. Vide
Pontani, (...) and vrb. (...). Hist. lib. 2. cap. 22. Now the shells out of
which these birds were thought to fly, are a kind of (...) marinus; and thus
Fabius Columna, in the end of his Phytobasanos, writing piscium aliquot
historia, iudiciously proves: to whose opinion I wholly subscribe, and to it I
refer the Curious. His asseueration is this: Conchas vulgo Anatiferas, non esse
fructus terrestres, neque ex ijs Anates oriri; sed (...) marinae speciem. I
could have said something more hereof, but thus much I think may serve, (...)
with that which Fabius Columna has written upon this point.

The Place.
The borders and rotten plankes whereon are found these shells wherein is bred
the Barnakle, are taken up in a small Island adjoining to Lancashire, half a
mile from the maine land, called the Pile of Foulders.

The Time.
They spawne as it were in March and April; the Geese are formed in May and
June, and come to fullness of seathers in the month after.

And thus having through Gods assistance discoursed somewhat at large of
Grasses, Herbs, Shrubs, Trees, and Mosses, and certain Excrescences of the
earth, with other things more, incident to the history thereof, we conclude and
end our present Volume, with this wonder of England. For the which Gods name be
ever honored and praised.

FINIS.
AN APPENDIX OR ADDITION OF certain Plants omitted in the former History.
The Preface.
Having run through the History of Plants gathered by Mr. Gerrard, and much
enlarged the same both by the addition of many Figures and histories of Plants
not formerly contained in it, and by the amending and increasing the history
of sundry of those which before were therein treated of; I find that I have
forgotten diverse which I intended to have added in their fitting places: the
occasion hereof has been, my many businesses, the troublesomenesse, and above
all, the great expectation and have of the Work, whereby I was forced to
perform this task within the compass of a year. Now being constant to my
first resolution, I here have, as time would give me leave, and my memory
serve, made a (...) collection and addition (though without method) of such as
offered themselves unto me; and without doubt there are sundry others which
are as fitting to be added as those; and I should not have been wanting, if
time would have permitted me to have entered into further consideration of them.
In the mean time take in good part those that I have here presented to your
view.

CHAP. 1. Of the Maracoc or Passion-floure.
The Description.
THis Plant, which the Spaniards in the West Indies call Granadilla, because
the fruit somewhat resembles a Pomegranat, which in their tongue they term
Granadas, is the same which the Virginians call Maracoc. The Spanish (...) for
some imaginary resemblances in the flower, first called it Flos (...), the
Passion flower, and in a counterfeit figure, by adding what was wanting, they
made it as it were an Epitome of our Saviors Passion: thus (...) persons
semper sibi somnium fingunt. Bauhine desirous to refer it to some stock or
kindred of formerly known plants, gives it the name of Clematis trifolia: yet
the flowers and fruit pronounce it not properly belonging to their Tribe; but
Clematis being a certain genericke name to all woody winding plants, this as
a species may come under the denomination, though little in other respects
participating with them. The roots of this are long, somewhat like, yet thicker
than those of Sarsa parilla, running up and down, and putting up their heads
in several places: from these roots rise up many long winding round stalks,
which grow two, three, sour, or more yards high, according to the heat and
seasonablenesse of the year and soil whereas they are planted: upon these
stalks grow many leaves divided into three parts, sharp pointed, and snipt
about the edges: commonly out of the bosoms of each of the uppermost leaves
there grows a clasping tendrell and a flower: the flower grows upon a little
foot-stalke some two inches long, and is of a longish cornered form, with five
little crooked horns at the top, before such time as it open it self, but
opened, this longish head diuides it self into ten parts, and sustaines the
leaves of the (...), which are very many, long, sharp pointed, narrow, and
orderly spread open one by another, (...) lying straight, others crooked: these
leaves are of color whitish, but thick spotted with a (...) color, and
toward the bottom it has a ring of a perfect Peach color, and above and
(...) it a white circle, which give a great grace to the flower; in the midst
whereof rises an (...), which parts it self into four or five crooked spotted
horns, with broadish heads: from the midst of these rises another roundish
head which carries three nails or horns, biggest above, and smallest at their
lower end: this flower with us is never succeeded by any fruit, but in the West
Indies, whereas it naturally grows, it bears a fruit, when it is ripe of the
bigness and color of Pomegranats, but it wants such a ring or crown about the
top as they have; the rind also is much thinner and tenderer, the pulpe is
whitish, and without taste, but the liquor is somewhat tart: they open them as
they do eggs, and the liquor is supped off with great delight, both by the
Indians and Spaniards, (as Monardus witnesses) neither if they sup off many of
them shall they find their stomach oppressed, but rather their bellies are gently
loosned. In this fruit are contained many seeds somewhat like Pear kernells,
but more cornered and rough.

Clematis trifolia, sieve Flos Passionis. The Maracoc or Passion-floure.


This grows wild in most of the hot countries of America, from whence it has
been brought into our English gardens, where it grows very well, but flowers
only in some few places, and in hot and seasonable years: it is in good plenty
growing with Mistress Tuggy at Westminster, where I have some years seen it
bear a great many flowers.

CHAP. 2. Of Ribes or red Currants.
The Description.
1 THe plant which carries the fruit which we commonly term red Currants, is a
shrubbie bush of the bigness of a Gooseberry bush, but without prickles: the
wood is soft and white, with a pretty large pith in the middle: it is covered
with a double bark, the undermost, being the thicker, is green, and the
uppermost, which sometimes chaps and pills off, is of a brownish color, and
smooth: the bark of the youngest shoots is whitish and rough: the leaves, which
grow upon footstalkes some two inches long, are somewhat like Vine leaves, but
smaller by much, and less cornered, being cut into three, and sometimes, but
seldomer, into five parts, somewhat thick, with many veins running over them,
greener above than they are below: out of the branches in Spring time grow
stalks hanging down some six inches in length, carrying many little greenish
flowers, which are succeeded by little red berries, clear and smooth, of the
bigness of the Whortle berries, of a pleasant tart taste. Of this kind there
is another, only different from this in the fruit, which is twice so big as
that of the common kind.

2 The bush which bears the white Currants is commonly straighter and bigger
than the former: the leaves are lesser, the flowers whiter, and so also is the
fruit, being clear and transparent, with a little blackish rough end.

1 Ribes vulgaris fructu rubro. Red Currants.
2 Ribes fructu albo. White Currants.


3 Besides these there is another, which disfers little from the former in
shape, yet grows somewhat higher, and has lesser leaves: the flowers are of a
purplish green color, and are succeeded by fruit as big again as the ordinary
red, but of a stinking and somewhat loathing savor: the leaves also are not
without this stinking smell.

The Place, Time, and Names.
None of these grow wild with us, but they are to be found plentifully growing
in many gardens, especially the two former, the red and the white.

The leaves and flowers come forth in the Spring, and the fruit is ripe about
Midsommer.

This plant is thought to have been unknown to the ancient Greeks: some
think it the Ribes of the Arabian Serapio. Fuchsius, Matthiolus, and some
other deny it; notwithstanding Dodonaeus affirms it: neither is the
controversy easily to be decided, because the Author is brief in the
description thereof, neither have we his words but by the hand of a barbarous
Translator. Howeuer the shops of late time take it (the faculties consenting
thereto) for the true Ribes, and of the fruit hereof prepare their Rob de
Ribes. (...) calls it Ribesium, grossularia rubra, and Grossularia transmarina;
and they are distinguished into three sorts, Rubra, Alba, Nigra (...), (...),
white, and black Currants: the Germans call them S. (...) traubell, or
traublin, and S. (...) (...): the Dutch, (...) over Zee: the Italians, Vuetta
rossa: the French, Groisseles, (...) (...) (...): the Bohemians, (...) S.
(...): the English, Red Currants: yet must they not be confounded with those
Currants which are brought from Zant, and the continent adjoining thereto, and
which are vulgarly sold by our Grocers; for they are the fruit of a small Vine,
and differ much from these.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The berries of red Currants, as also of the white, are cold and dry in the end
of the second degree,

They extinguish and mitigate feuerish heates, repress choler, temper the
ouer-hot blood, resist

The juice of these boiled to the height of honey, either with or without sugar
(which is called Rob de Ribes) has the same qualities, and conduces to the
same purposes.

CHAP. 3. Of Parsley Breake-stone, and bastard Rupturewort.
1 Percepier Anglorum Lob. Parsley Breake-stone.
2. Polygonu^ Herniariae facie. Bastard Rupture-wort.


The Description.
1 I Thought it was not altogether inconvenient to (...) these two Plants
together in one Chapter; first, because they are (...) one stature; and
secondly, taken (...) of one and the (...) History of Plants, to wit, the (...)
of (...) and Lobel.

The first of these, which the Authors of the (...) set sorth by the name of
(...), (and rather assert, than affirm to be the Scandix of the Ancients) is
by (...) called Scandix minor: and by (...) Columna, (...) montana minima: it
has a small woody yellowish fibrous root, (...) which rise up one, two, or
more little stalks, seldom exceeding the height of an handful, and these are
round and hairy, and upon them grow little roundish leaves, like the tender
leaves of Cheruill, but hairy, and of a whitish green color, fastened to the
stalks with short foot-stalkes, and having little ears at their setting on:
the flowers are small, green, and five cornered, many clustering together at
the setting on of the leaves: the seed is small, smooth, and yellowish: the
stalks of this plant grow sometimes upright, and otherwhiles they lean on the
ground: it is to be found upon diverse dry and barren grounds, as in Hide Park,
Tuthill fields, etc. It flowers in May, and ripens the feed in June and July.
It seems by the Authors of the Aduersaria, that in the West country about
Bristow they call this Herb Percepier; but our herb women in Cheapside know
it by the name of Parsley Breakestone.

This is hot and dry, and of subtle parts: it vehemently and speedily

The distilled water is also commended to be effectual to move

2 The history of this, by the forementioned Authors, Aduers. page 404. is
thus set forth under this title, Polygonium Herniariae folijs and facie,
perampla radice (...): Neither (say they) ought this to be despised by such as
are studious of the knowledge of Plants; for it is very little known, being a
very small herb lying along upon the ground, and almost overwhelmed or covered
with the grass, having little branches very full of ioints: the little leaves
and seeds are whitish, and very like those of Herniaria or Rupture-wort: the
whole plant is white, having a very small and mossie flower: the root is larger
than the smalnesse of the plant seems to require, hard, branched, diversely
turning and winding, and therefore hard to be plucked up: the taste is dry and
hottish. It grows upon a large Plain in Province, between the cities Arles
and Selon. Thus much Pena and Lobel. I am deceived, if some (...) years agone
I was not showed this plant, gathered in some part of this kingdom, but where,
I am not able to (...).

CHAP. 4. Of Heath Spurge and Rock Rose
The Description.
1 THese Plants by right should have followed the history of Thymelaea, for in
shape and faculty they are not much unlike it. The first is a low shrub,
sending from one root many branches of some cubit long, and these bending,
flexible, and covered with an outer blackish bark, which comprehends another
within, tough, and which may be divided into fine threads: the leaves are like
those of Chamaelea, yet lesser, shorter and thicker, a little rough also, and
growing about the branches in a certain order: if you chew them they are
gummie, bitter at the first, and afterward hot and biting: the flowers grow
amongst the leaves, longish, yellowish, and divided at the end into four
little leaves: the fruit is said to be like that of Thymaelea, but of a
blackish color, the root is thick and wooddie. It grows frequently in the
kingdom of Granado and Valentia in Spain, it flowers in March and April. The
Herbarists there term it Sanamunda, and the common people, Mierda-cruz, by
reason of the purging faculty.

1 Sanamunda 1. Clus. Heath Spurge.
2 Sanamunda 2. Clus. The second Heath Spurge.


2 The other is a shrub some cubit high, having tough flexible branches covered
with a dense and thick bark, which, the outward rind being taken away, over
all the plant, but chiefly next the root, may be drawn into threads like Flax
or Hemp: the upper branches are set with thick, short, fat, rough sharp pointed
leaves, of somewhat a saltish taste at the first, afterward of a hot and biting
taste: the flowers are many, little and yellow: the root is thick and wooddie
like as that of the former: this grows upon the sea coast of Spain, and on
the mountains nigh Granado, where they call it Sanamunda, and the common
people about Gibraltar call it Burhalaga, and they only use it to heat their
ouens with. It flowers in February. Anguillara called this, Empetron:
Caesalpinus, (...), and in the Historia Lugd, it is the Cneoron nigrum Myconi:
Sesamoides minus: Dalcchampij, and Phacoides, Oribasij (...).

3 This is bigger than either of the two former, having whiter and more
flexible branches, whose bark is vnmeasurably tough and hard to break: the
upper branches are many, and those very downie, and hanging down their heads,
set thick with little leaves like Stone-crop, and of the like hot or burning
faculty: the flowers are like those of the former; sometimes greenish,
otherwhiles yellow: Clusius did not observe the fruit, but says, it floured at
the same time with the former, and grew in all the sea coast, from the Straits
of Gibralter, to the Pyrenaean mountains. Alfonsus Pantius called this
Cneoron: Lobel and (...) call it Erica Alexandrina.

3 (...) 3. Clus. The third Heath Spurge.
4 Cneoron (...). Rock Rose.


4 This also may not unfitly be joined to the former, for it has many tender
flexible tough branches commonly leaning or lying along upon the ground, upon
which without order grow leaves greeene, skinny, and like those of the true
Thymelaea; at first of an ungrateful, and afterward of a bitter taste, yet
having none or very little acrimony (as far as may be perceived by their
taste:) the flowers grow upon the tops of the branches six seven or more
together, consisting of four little leaves of a reddish purple color, very
beautiful and well smelling, yet offending the head if they be long smelt
unto: these are succeeded by small berries, of color white, containing a round
seed, covered with an ash colored skin. The root is long, of the thickenesse
of ones little finger, sometimes blackish, yet most commonly yellowish, tough,
and smallest at the top where the branches come forth. It flowers in April and
May, and ripens the fruit in June: it flowers sometimes thrice in the year,
and ripens the fruit twice; for Clusius affirms that twice in one year he
gathered ripe berries from one and the same plant. It grows plentifully upon
the mountainous places of Austria about Vienna; whither the country women
bring the flowers to the market in great plenty to sell them to deck up houses:
it grows also in the dry meadows by Frankford on the Moene, where there is
observed a variety with white flowers. Matthiolus would have this to be the
Cneoron album of Theophrastus: Cordus calls it Thymelaea minor: it is the
Cneoron alterum Matthioli, and Oleander syl. (...) Myconi, in the Hist. Lugd.
The Germans call it Stein Roselin: and we may call it Rock Rose, or dwarf
Oleander.

5 This plant by Bauhine is called Cneorum album folio oleae argenteo (...):
and by Dalechampius, Cneorum album, which has been the reason I have put it
here, although Caesalpinus, Imperatus, and Plateau, who sent it to Clusius,
would have it to be and call it Dorycnium: It is a shrubby herb sending from one
root many single stalks some half cubit or better high: the leaves which grow
upon the stalks without order, are like those of the Olive, but somewhat
narrower, and covered over with a soft siluer-like downinesse: at the top of
the stalks grow many flowers clustering together, of the shape of those of the
lesser Bindeweed, but white of color. This grows wild in some parts of
Sicily, whence Caesalpinus calls it Dorychnium ex Sicilia.

5 Cneorum album folijs argenteis. White Rock Rose.
Chamaebuxus flore Coluteae. Bastard dwarf box.


The Temperature and Virtues.
The three first are very hot, and two first

The faculties of the rest are not known, nor written of by any as yet.

CHAP. 5. Of Bastard dwarf Box.
The Description.
THis which Clusius for want of a name calls Anonymos flore Coluteae Gesner
called Chamaebuxus: to which (...) adds flore Coluteae; and Besler in his
hortus Eystettensis, agreeable to the name I have given it in English, calls it
Pseudochamaebuxus. It is a small plant having many creping woody tough roots,
here and there sending forth small fibers; from these arise many tough bending
branches some span long, having thick sharp pointed green leaves, almost
like those of Box, and these grow upon the stalks without any order, and when
you first chew them they are of an ungrateful taste, afterward bitter and
hot; at the tops of the branches, do come forth amongst the leaves three or
four longish flowers, for the most part without smell; yet in some places they
smell sweet, like as some of the Narcisses; they consist of three leaves
apiece; two whereof are white, and spread abroad as wings, a whitish little
hood covering their lower ends: the third is wrapped up in form of a pipe, with
the end hollow and crooked, and this is of a yellow color, which by age often
times becomes wholly red: after those flowers succeed cods, broad and flat,
little less than those of the broad leaued Thlaspi, and green of color,
rough, and in each of these cods are commonly contained a couple of seeds, of
the bigness of little Chichlings, of a blackish ash color, rough, and
resembling a little dug.

This is sometimes found to vary, having the two winged leaves yellow or red,
and the middle one yellow:

The Place.
It flowers in April and May, and ripens the seed in June; it grows upon most
of the Austrian and Stirian Alps, and in diverse places of Hungary. It is
neither used in Physic, nor the faculties thereof in medicine known.

CHAP. 6. Of Winged Bind weed, or Quamoclit
Quamoclit, sive Conuoluulus Pennatus. Winged Windeweed.


The Description.
THe first that writ of and described this plant was (...), and that by the
name of Gelsiminum rubrum alterum: after him Camerarius gave a description and
figure thereof in his Hortus Medicus, by the name of Quamoclit: and after him
Fabius Columna both figured and described it more accurately, whose description
is put to the figure of it (we here give) in Clus. his Curaeposteriores. It is
so tender a plant that it will not come to any perfection with us, unless in
extraordinary hot years, and by other artificial helps, wherefore I will
borrow the description thereof out of Fabius Columna. This exoticke plant,
says he, cannot more fitly be referred to any kind, than to the family of the
(...), or Bindweeds, for in the nature and whole habit it is almost like them,
excepting the shape of the winged leaves: it is stored with less milk: the
flours are long, hollow, but parted into five at the top, of a pleasing red
color, with streaked lines or folds, standing upon long stalks one or two
together coming out of the bosoms of the leaves at each joint of the
branches, and they have in them five yellowish pointalls; then succeeds a
longish fruit standing in a scaly cup, ending in a sharp pointall, and covered
with a tough skin, as that of the common Convoluulus, but lesser, having within
it four longish black hard seeds, of a biting taste. The leaves grow
alternately out of the ioints of the purple winding branches, being winged and
finely divided, twice as small as the common Rheseda, of a dark green color,
but the young ones are yellowish, first having a few divisions, but afterward
more, till they come to have thirteen on a side, and one at the top: but the
lower ones are often times forked: by reason of the great plenty of leaves and
flouring stalks or branches, winding themselves about artificial hoops,
crossings, or other fashioned works of Reeds, or the like, set for winding
herbs to clime upon, it much delights the eye of the beholder, and is therefore
kept in pots in gardens of pleasure. The seed sown in the beginning of the
Spring grows up in June, and the first leaves resemble the winged fruit of the
Maple: it flowers in the end of August, and ripens the seed in the end of
September.

CHAP. 7. Of the sensitive Herb.
Herbamimosa. The sensitive berbe.
(...) exactior icon. A perfect figure thereof.


The Description.
THis which I here call the sensitive herb, is that which Christopher a Costa
sets forth by the name of Herba mimosa, or the Mocking herb, because when one
puts his hand thereto it forthwith seems to wither and hang down the leaves;
but when you take it away again it recouers the pristine greenesse and vigor.
I will here give you that which Acosta writes thereof, and the figure and
history which Clusius gives in his notes upon him; and also another figure
better expressing the leaves and manner of growing. There is found (says
Acosta) in some Gardens another plant some five handfuls long, resting upon the
neighboring shrubs or walls, having a slender stalk of a fresh green color,
not very round, set at certain spaces with small and pricking thorns: the
leaves are not unlike the former, [That is, the Herba viua, which in condition
is little different from this] being somewhat lesser than those of the female
Fern. It loves to grow in moist and stony places, and is called Herbamimosa,
for the reason formerly given. The nature hereof is much different from that of
Arbor tristis for every night at Sunset it as it were withers and dries, so
that one would think it were dead, but at Sunrise it recouers the former
vigor, and by how much the Sun grows hotter, by so much it becomes the
greener, and all the day it turns the leaves to the Sun.

This plant has the smell and taste of Liquorice, Acosta.

Now, says Clusius, the leaves of many plants, especially pulses, use to
contract or shrink up their leaves in the night time. Now I received a dry
plant, which was sent to me by the name of Herbamimosa, by James Garret in the
end of October, 1599, which he writ he had of the right Honorable the Earl of
Cumberland, who returning from Saint John de Puerto rico in the West Indies,
brought it put in a pot with some earth, but could not preserve it alive. But I
caused the figure of that dried plant to be expressed as well as it might, so
to fit it to the description following, made also by the dried plant. This
plant which was wholly dry and without leaves had a single root, and that not
thick, but hard and woody, with few fibers, from whence arose three or four
short stalks, which straight divided themselves into slender branches, which
spread themselves round about upon the ground, at each joint putting forth many
long and slender fibers, like as in the branches of the common Woodbinde, which
lie upon the ground: these branches were a cubit long, and sometimes more,
round, tough, with some prickles, broader at their setting on, as you may see
in the common bramble, yet lesser, fewer, and less firm; these again were
divided into other more slender branches set with many little prickles, out of
whose ioints betwixt two little leaves grew forth footstalk, bedeckt with
their little leaves, which were many, set in order, with other to answer to
them on the other side, but having no single leaf at the end: they were tender
and green, not unlike the little leaves of Acacia, and these (at their first
coming out) covered with a thin whitish hairines, as I gathered by a little
branch retaining the foot-stalke and leaves thereon (which he sent with the
former) and it had also some fibers coming forth thereof. He also added to the
former two little heads, which growing upon the same plant, he writ he received
of the forementioned right Honorable Earl, with some branches yet retaining
the leaves. These little heads consisted of many slender, narrow, and as it
were prickly little leaves; amongst which lay hid round seeds, smooth, black,
and somewhat swollen in the middle: the flowers I saw not, neither know (...)
whether they were brought with the rest: but whether the leaves of this plant
being green, and yet growing on the ground, do wither at the approach of ones
hand, as Christopher A Costa writes, and for that cause imposes the name
thereon, they best know who have seen the green and yet growing plant: for
the faculties you may have recourse to that which A Costa has set down. Thus
much out of Clusius.

November. 7. 1632. I being with Mr. Job Best at the Trinity house in Ratcliffe;
among other varicties, he showed me a dry plant hereof, which I heedfully
observed, and carefully opening out some of the fairest leaves, which (as also
the whole plant besides) were carelessly dried, I found the leaves grew usually
some dozen or more on a foot-stalke, just as many on one side as on the other;
and they were covered over with a little downines, which standing out on their
edges made them look as if they had bin snipt about the edges, which they were
not: also I found at every joint two little hooked prickles, and not two little
leaves or appendices at the setting on of the footstalk, but three or four
little leaves, as the rudiment of a young branch, coming forth at the bosom of
each footstalk: the longest branch (as far as I remember) was not above a span
long; I then drew as perfect a figure as I could of the perfectest branch
thereof, drawing as (...) as I could the leaves to their full bigness, the which
I here present you withal. There are two figures formerly extant, the one this
of (...), which I here give you, and the other in the 18. book, and 144 chap.
of the Hist. Lug which is out of A Costa, and this seems to be so far different
from that of Clusius, that Bauhine in his Pinax says, (...) notis suis in
Acostam diuer sam plane figuram proposuit, herbam minosam nominans: but he did
not well consider it, for if he had, he might have found these so much
different, thus far to agree; they both make the branches prickly and weak: the
leaves many on one rib, one opposite to another without an odd one at the end:
but Clusius figures the leaves so close together, that they seem but one leaf,
and Acosta makes them too far a sunder, and both of them make them too sharp
pointed; Clus. made his be taken from a dried plant, and Acosta I judge made his
by the Idaea thereof which he had in his memory, and after this manner, if my
judgment fail me not, are most of the figures in him expressed: but of this
enough, if not too much.

CHAP. 8. Of the Staff tree, and euer-greene Priuet.
1 Celastrus Theophrasti. The staff tree.
2 Phillyrea 1. Clus. Clusius his 1. Mocke-Priuet.


The Description.
1 THe history and figure of this tree are set forth in Clusius his Curae
poster and there it is asserted to be the (...), or (...) of Theophrastus; for
by diverse places in Theophrastus there collected, it is evident, that his
Celastus was ever green, grew upon very high and cold mountains, yet might be
transplanted into plain and milder places, that it floured exceeding late and
could not perfect the fruit by reason of the nigh approach of winter, and that
it was fit for no other use but to make staves on for old men.

Now this tree grows but to a small height, having a firm and hard body,
dividing it self at the top into sundry branches, which being young are
covered with a green bark, but waxing old with a brownish one; it has many
leaves, growing always one against another, and thick together, of a deep
shining green above, and lighter underneath, keeping their verdure both Winter
and Summer: they are of the bigness of those of (...), not snipt about the
edges, but only a little nickt, when they are yet young; at the top of the
tenderest branches among the leaves, upon footstalkes of some inch long, grow
five or six little flowers consisting commonly of five little leaves of a
yellowish green color, and these show themselves in the end of Autumn, or
the beginning of Winter, and also in the beginning of the Spring; but if the
Summer be cold and moist it shows the buds of the sloures in October; the
fruit grows on a short stalk and is a berry of the bigness of the Myrtle,
sirst green, then red, of the color of that of Asparagus, and lastly black
when it is withered: the stone within the berry is little, and as it were three
cornered, containing a kernel covered with a yellow filme. Where this grows
wild I know not, but it was first taken notice of in the public Garden at the
University of Leyden, from whence it was brought into some few gardens of this
Kingdom.

2 The first Phyllyria of Clusius, may fitly be referred to the rest of the same
tribe and name described formerly in the 59. chapter of the the third book. It
grows somewhat taller than the Scarlet Oak, and has branches of the
thickness of ones thumb or somewhat more, and those covered with a green
bark marked with whitish spots; the leaves somewhat resemble those of the
Scarlet Oak, but greater, greener, thicker, somewhat prickley about the edges,
of an astringent taste, but not ungrateful. The flower thereof Clusius did not
see, the fruit is a little black berry, hanging down out from the bosom of
the leaves, and containing a kernel or stone therein. It grows wild in many
wild places of Portugale, where they call it Azebo.

The temperature and virtues are referred to those set down in the formerly
mentioned chapter.

CHAP. 9. Of Mocke-Willow.
Speiraea Theophrasti, Clus. Mocke-Willow.


The Description.
THis Willow leaued shrub, which Clusius conjectures may be referred to the
Speiraea mentioned by Theophrastus, lib. 1. cap. 23. histplant. I have named in
English, Mocke-Willow, how fitly I know not; but if any will impose a fitter
name I shall be well pleased therewith; but to the thing it self. It is a
shrub, (says Clusius) some two cubits high, having slender branches or twigs
covered over with a reddish bark, whereon grow many leaves without order,
long, narrow, like those of the Willow, snipt about the edges, of a light green
above, and of a bluish green underneath, of a drying taste conjoined with
some bitterness. The tops of the branches for some fingers length carry thick
spikes of small flowers clustering together, and consisting of five leaves
apiece, out of whose middle come forth many little threads of a whitish red or
flesh color, together with the flower, having no (...) smell, but such as is
in the flower of the Olive tree; these flowers fading there succeed small five
cornered heads, which coming to full maturitie contain a small and yellowish
dusty seed: it flowers in July, and ripens the seed in the end of August.
Clusius had this plant from Frederick (...) Physician to the Duke of Briga,
and that from Briga in Silesia, and he (as I said) refers it to the (...) of
Theophrastus, which he reckons amongst the shrubs that carry spike fashioned
flowers.

This is not used in medicine, nor the Temperature and faculties thereof as yet
known.

CHAP. 10. Of the Strawberry-Bay.
Adrachne Theophrasti. The Strawberry-Bay.


The Description.
THe figure and history of this were sent by Honorius Bellus out of Candy to
(...), from whom I have it. It is that which Theophrastus calls Adrachne or (as
most of the printed books have it) Andrachne, but the former seems the
righter, and is the better liked by (...), lib. (...). cap. 22. At this day in
Candy where it (...) grows, it is called Adracla. It is rather a shrub than a
tree, delighting in rockie and mountanous places, and keeping green VVinter
and Summer, having leaves so like those of Bays, that they are distinguishable
only by the smell, which these are destitute of. The bark of the bole and all
the branches is so smooth, red and shining, that they show like branches of
Coral, this bark crackes or breaks off in Summer, and pills off in thin
fleakes, at which time it is neither red nor shining but in a mean between
yellow and ashcolour. It has flowers twice in a year like as the Arbutus, or
Strawberry tree, and that so like it, that you can scarce know the one from the
other; yet this differs from it in that it grows only in the mountains, has
not the leaves jagged, neither a rough bark; the wood hereof is very hard, and
so brittle that it will not bend, and they use it to burn and to make whorles
for their women's spindles. Theophrastus reckons up this tree amongst those
which die not when their barks are taken off, and are always green, and
retain their leaves at their tops all winter long: which to be so Honorius
Bellus observed. Bellonius also observed this tree in many places of Syria.

The fruit in Temperature, as in shape, is like that of the Stawberry-tree.

CHAP. 11. Of the Cherry-Bay.
The Description.
THe Cherry-bay is one of the euergreen trees: it rises up (...) an indifferent
height, and is divided into sundry branches, covered over with a swart green
bark: that of the younger shoots is wholly green, the leaves alternately ingirt
the branches, and they are long, smooth, thick, green, and shining, snipt also
lightly about the edges: when the tree is grown to some height, at the tops of
the branches amongst the leaves of the former years growth, upon a sprig of
some fingers length, it puts forth a great many little white flowers,
consisting of five leaves a piece, with many little chiues in them: these
flowers quickly fall away, and the fruit that succeeds them is a berry of an
ovall figure, of the bigness of a large Cherry or Damson, and of the same
color, and of a sweet and pleasant Laurocerasi flos. The Cherry-bay in flower.
(...) fructus. The Cherry-bay with the fruit.
taste, with a stone in it like to a Cherry stone. This flowers in May, and
ripens the fruit in August or September: it was first sent to Clusius from
Constantinople, and that by the name of Trabison curmasi. 1. Trapezuntina
dactylus, the Date of Trapeson; but it has no affinity with the Date. (...)
refers it to the second Lotus mentioned by Theophrastus, hist. plant. lib. 4.
cap. 4. but therewith it does not agree. Clusius and most since, call it fitly
Laurocerasus, or (...) folio Laurino. It is now got into many of our choice
English gardens, where it is well respected for the beauty of the leaves and
their lasting or continual greenenesse.

The fruit hereof is good to be eaten, but what physical virtues the tree or
leaves thereof have, it is not yet known.

CHAP. 12. Of the Euer-greene Thorn.
THis plant which Lobel and some other late writers have called by the name of
Pyracantha, is the Oxyacantha mentioned by Theophrastus, lib. 1. cap. 15. lib.
3. cap. 4. hist. plant. among the ever green trees, and I think rather this
than our white Thorn to be the Oxyacantha of (...), lib. 1. c. 123. and
certainly it was no other than this Thorn which Virgil makes mention of by
the name of Acanthus, lib. 2. (...). in these words, (...) semper frondentis
Acanthi. That is, And the berries of the (...)-green Thorn.

Oxyacantha Theophrasti. The Euer-greene Thorn.


The Description.
THis grows up like a bush, unless you keep it with (...), and then it will
(...) time grow to the (...) of a small tree, as the Hawthorne, whereto it is of
affinity, (...) the wood is white and hard, like it, and covered over with the
like bark; but the leaves are somewhat like those of the Damson tree, longish,
sharp pointed, and snipt about the edges: and they grow along the branches,
without any order, yet sometimes they keep this manner of growing: at each knot,
where commonly there is a sharp prickle, grows out one of the larger leaves,
which may be some inch and half long, and some three quarters of an inch
broad: then upon the prickle, and at the coming out thereof are three or sour,
more or less, much smaller leaves: now these leaves are of a (...) and shining
green above, but paler underneath, and they keep on all the year: At the ends,
and often times in the middles of the branches come forth clusters or vmbels of
little whitish blush colored flowers, consisting of five leaves apiece, with
some little chiues in their middles: then follow clusters of berries, in shape,
taste, and bigness like those of the Hawthorne, and of the same, but much more
orient and pleasing color, and containing in (...) the like seed: now these
berries hang long upon the tree, and make a gallant show amongst the green
leaves, and chiefly then, when as the Autumn blasts have deprived other trees
of their wonted verdure. This flowers in May and June, and ripens the fruit in
September and October: it grows wild in sundry places of Italy, and Province
in France, but is kept in gardens with us, where it is held in good esteem for
his ever greenesse and pliablenesse to any work or form you desire to impose
upon him.

The fruit have the same faculties that are formerly attributed to Hawes, in
the foregoing book, page 1328. and therefore I will not here repeat them.

CHAP. 13. Of the Egyptian Nap, or great (...) tree.
The Description.
THis tree, which for his leaves and manner of growing I think may fitly be
referred to the Iuiubes tree, is of two sorts; that is, the one prickly, and
the other not prickly, in other respects they are both alike, so that one
figure and history may serve for them both; which I will give you (...) of
Clusius, who received this figure together with a description thereof from
Honorius Bellus, and also added thereto that which Prosper Alpin. has written
of it in his 5. chap. de Plant. Egypt. It grows to the height of an
indifferent Peare-tree, and the body and branches thereof are covered with a
whitish ash colored bark: the leaves are like those of the Iuiubes tree, two
inches long, and one broad, with three nerves running along them; of a deep
shining green above, and more whitish underneath: and they grow alternately
upon the branches: and at their coming forth grow (...) of little white
flowers hanging upon single long footstalk: after these follows the fruit
like unto a small Apple, of the bigness for the most part of a large Cherry,
and sometimes as big as a VValnut, of a sweet taste, containing therein a
kernel or stone like that of an Olive. It bears (...) twice a year, (...) it
has ripe fruit both in the Spring and sall; yet the vernall fruit seldom comes
to good, Oenoplia non spinosa. The great Iuiubes tree.
by reason of the too much moisture of the season, which causes it to become
worme-eaten. The Thorny kind is described by Alpinus, who rightly judges it
the Connarus of (...), but the figure he gives is not very accurate. That which
wants prickles grows (as well as the prickly one) in Egypt and Syria, as also
in the city Rhetimo in Candy, whither it was brought out of Syria.

The history of both these trees is in Serapio by the name of Sadar: but he,
according to his custom confounds it with the Lotus of Dioscorides, from which
it very much differs. Bellonius in his second book, and 79. chap. of his
Observations, reckons up Napeca amongst the trees that are always green:
which is true, in those that grow in Egypt and Syria; but false in such as grow
in Candy. That tree in Egypt and Syria is called Nep, or Nap. Alpinus calls it
Paliurus Athenaet, or Nabca (...), thinking it (as I formerly said) the
Connarus mentioned in the 14. book of Athenaeus his Deipnosophists.

The Virtues out of Alpinus.
The fruit is of a cold and dry faculty, and the unripe ones are frequently
used to strengthen the stomach, and stop lasks: the juice of them being for
this purpose either taken by the mouth, or injected by clyster: of the same
fruit dried and macerated in water, is made an infusion profitable against the
relaxation and (...)

The decoction or infusion of the ripe dried fruit, is of a very frequent use
against all pestilent fevers: for (...) affirm that this fruit has a
wonderful efficacy against venenate qualities, and putrefaction, and that it
powerfully streng

Also the juice of the perfectly ripe fruit is very good to purge choler forth
of the stomach and first veins: and they willingly use an infusion made of
them in all putride fevers to (...) their heat or burning.

CHAP. 14. Of the Persian Plum.
The Description.
1 THis tree is thought by Clusius (to whom I am beholden for the history and
figure) to be the (...) arbor mentioned by Pliny and (...), but he somewhat
doubts whither it be that which is mentioned by Theophrastus. Dioscorides also,
(...) and Strabo make mention of the Persea arbor, and they all make it a tree
always green, having a longish fruit shut up in the shell and coat of an
Almond: with which how this agrees you may see by this description of Clusius.

This tree (says he) is like to a Pear tree, spreading it self far abroad,
and being always green, having branches of a yellowish green color. The
leaves are like those of the broadest leaued Baytree, green above, and of a
grayish color underneath, firm, having some nerves running (...), of a good
taste and smell, yet biting the tongue with a little astriction. The flowers
are like those of the Bay, growing many thick together, and consist of six
small whitish yellow leaves. The fruit at the first is like a Plum, and
afterward it becomes Pear fashioned, of a black color, and pleasant taste:
it has in it a heart (...) kernel, in taste not unlike a Chestnut, or sweet
Almond. I found it flouring in the Spring, and I understood the fruit was ripe
in Autumn, by the relation of (...). Persea arbor. The Persian Plum.
John Placa, Physician and Professor of (...), who showed me the tree growing
in the garden of a Monastery a mile from Valentia, brought thither, as they
say, out of America, and he said they called it (...): but the Spaniards who
have described America give this name to another tree. But diverse years after,
I understood by the most learned Simon de Tovar, a Physician of Civil, who has
the same tree in his garden, with other exoticke plants, that it is not called
Mamay, but Aguacate. Thus much out of Clusius; where such as are desirous, may
find more largely handled the question, whither this be the Persea of the
Ancients or no? Rariorum plan. Hist. l. 1. c. 2.

CHAP. 15. Of Gesners wild Quince.
The Description.
Cotonaster Gesneri. Gesners wild Quince


THe shrub which I here figure out of Clusius, is thought both by him and
others, to be the Cotonastrum or Cidonago, mentioned by Gesner in his Epistles,
lib. 3. page 88. It has branches some cubit long, tough, and bare of leaves in
their lower parts, covered with a black bark: and toward the tops of the
branches grow leaves somewhat like those of Quinces: of a dark green above,
and whitish underneath, snipt about the edges: at the tops of the branches grow
usually many flowers, consisting of five purplish colored leaves a piece, with
some threddes in their middles: these decaying, under them grow up red dry
berries without any pulp or juice, each of them containing four triangular
seeds. Clusius found this flouring in June upon the tops of the Austrian Alps,
and he questions whether it were not this which Bellonius found in the
mountains of Candy, and called Agriomaelea, lib. 1. cap. 17. This is not used
in Physic, nor the faculties thereof known.

CHAP. 16. Of Tamarindes.
Tamarindus. The Tamarinde.
Tamarindi siliqua. The cod of the Tamarinde.


The Description.
TAmarinds, which at this day are a medicine frequently used, and vulgarly
known in shops, were not known to the ancient Greeks, but to some of the
later, as Actuarius, and that by the name of Oxyphoenicae, that is, sour
Dates, drawn as it may seem from the Arabicke appellation, Tamarindi, that
is, Indian Date: but this name is improper, neither tree nor fruit being of any
affinity with the Date, unless the Arabicke Tamar be a word used in
composition for fruits of many kinds, as the Greek (...), the Latin Malum,
and Apple with us in English; for we call the Cone of the Pine, and excrescence
of the Oak leaf, by the name of Pine Apple, and Oak Apple. But how soever it
be, it is no matter for the name, whether it be proper or no, if so be that it
serve to distinguish the thing from others, and we know what is denoted by it.
In Malauar they call it Puti: in Guzarat, Ambili, by which name it is known in
most parts of the East Indies. This tree is thus described by Prosper Alpinus,
de Plant. Aegypti, cap. 10. The Tamarind (says he) is a tree of the bigness
of a Plum tree, with many boughs and leaves like those of the Myrtle, many
standing upon one rib [one against another, with a single one at the end:] it
carries white flowers very like those of the Orange tree: out of whose middle
comes forth four white and very slender threads: after these come thick and
large cods, at first green, but when they are ripe of an ash color; and
within these are contained thick, hard, brownish, cornered seeds, and a black
acide pulpe. These trees grow in some few gardens of Egypt, whither they have
bin brought out of Arabia and Ethiopia. This plant has this strange quality
that the leaves always follow the Sun, and when it sets they all contract
themselves, and open out themselves again at the rising thereof; and there is
observed to be such force in this motion, that they closely shut up and hold
their cods (if any be on the tree) and then at the rising of the Sun they
forgo them again. But I have observed this folding up of the leaves to be
common to diverse other Egyptian plants, as Acatia, (...), (...), and Sesban.
Thus much (...) of Alpinus.

The figure I here give in the first place, out of Lobel, is of a plant some
six months old, arisen of a seed: and such by sowing of seeds I have seen
growing in the garden of my deceased friend Mr. Tuggy, but they still died at
the first approach of Winter. The other figure expresses the cods, and some of
the seeds apart, taken forth of the cods: now the cods are never brought whole
to us, but the utter rindes are taken off, and the strings or nerves that run
along the cods: the pulpe and seeds in it are close thrust together, and so
are brought to us in pots and such like vessels.

The Temperature and Virtues.
The fruit or pulpe of Tamarindes is cold and dry in the third degree: it is of
good use in choleric

They use (says Alpinus) the leaves of Tamarindes to kill worms in young
children; and also

The Arabians preserve the small and yet green cods of this tree, as also the
ripe ones, either

In pestilent and all other burning putrid fevers they drink the water with
sugar, wherein a good

They are also used in all putrid fevers caused by choleric and adust humors,
and also against

Some also commend them against obstructions, the dropsy, iaundice, and the
hot distempers

They are not good for such as have cold stomachs, unless their coldness be
corrected by putting

CHAP. 17. Of the Mamoera, the Male and Female.
The Description.
THe history of these two trees, together with the figures I here give you,
are in the Curae Posteriores of Clusius, from whence I will take as much as
concerns their history, and briefly here give it you.

That of the Poet (says he) is most true, Non omnis fert omnia tellus: for I
think there is no province to be found, which produces not some peculiar plant
not growing in other regions, as they can testify who have traveled over
foreign countries, especially if they have applied themselves to the
observation of plants. Amongst such I think I may reckon that honest and
courteous man John Van Vfele, who returning out of that part of America called
Brasile, showed me in the year 1607. a book, wherein he in lively colors had
expressed some plants and living creatures: for as he told me, when he purposed
to travel he learned to paint, that so he might express in colors, for his
memory and delight after he was returned home, such singularities as he should
(...) abroad. Now amongst those which he in that book had expressed, I
observed two very singular, and of a strange nature, whose figures without any
difficulty he bestowed upon me, as also the following history.

These two trees, whose figures you see here expressed, are of the same kind,
and differ only in sex; for the one of them, to wit the male, is barren, and
only carries flowers, without any fruit; but the female only fruit, and that
without flower: yet they say they are so loving, and of such a nature, that if
they be set far asunder, and the female have not a male near her, she becomes
barren, and bears no fruit: of which nature they also say the Palm is.

Now the bole or trunk of that tree which bears the fruit is about two foot
thick, and it grows some nine foot high before it begin to bear fruit; but
when it has acquired a just magnitude, then shall you see the upper part of
the tree laden with fruit, and that it will be as it were thick girt about
therewith for some nine foot high more: the fruit is round and globe-fashioned,
of the shape and magnitude of a small gourd, having when it is ripe a yellowish
pulpe, which the inhabitants use to eat to loosen their bellies: this fruit
contains many kernels of the bigness of a small pease, black and shining, of
novse that he could learn, but which were cast away as unnecessary: the leaves
come forth amongst the fruit, growing upon long foot-stalkes, and they in shape
much resemble the Plane tree or great Maple.

Mamoera mas. The male Dug tree.
Mamoera (...). The female Dug tree.


What name the Brasilians give it he could not tell, but of the Portugals that
dwelt there it was called Mamoera, and the fruit Mamaon, of the similitude I
think they have with dugs, which by the Spaniards are called (...) and Tetas.

There is no difference in the form of the trunk or leaves of the male and
female, but the male only carries flowers hanging down, clustering together
upon long stalks like to the flowers of Elder, but of a whitish yellow color,
and these unprofitable, as they affirm.

Both these trees grow in that part of America wherein is situate the famous
Bay called by the Portugals, Baya de todos los (...), lying about thirteen
degrees distant from the Equator toward the Antarticke pole.

CHAP. 18. Of the Cloue-Berry Tree.
The Description.
I Must also abstract the history of this out of the Works of the learned and
diligent Clusius, who sets it forth in his Exoticks, lib. 1. cap. 17. in the
next chapter after Cloves.

I put (says he) the description of this fruit next after the history of
Cloves, both for the Amomum quorundam, forte Garyophyllon Plinij. The
Cloue-berry tree.
affinity of smell it has with Cloves, as also for another cause, which I
will show hereafter. James Garret in the year 1601 sent me from London this
round fruit, commonly bigger than Pepper corns, yet some less, wrinkled, of a
brownish color, sufficiently fragile; which opened, I found contained a seed
round, black, which might be divided into two parts, of no less aromaticke
taste and smell than the fruit it self, and in some sort resembling that of
Cloves: it grows in bunches or clusters, as I coniectured by many berries
which yet kept their stalks and two or three which stuck to one little stalk:
to these were added leaves of one form, but of much different bigness, for some
of them were seven inches long, and three broad; some only five inches long,
and two and a half broad; others did not exceed 3 inches in length, and these
were not two inches broad; and some a so were much less and narrower than
these, especially those that were found mixed with the berries, differing
according to the place in the boughs or branches which they possessed. I
observed none among them which had snipt leaves, but smooth, with many small
veins running obliquely from the middle rib to the sides, with their points
now narrower, otherwhiles broader, and roundish: they were of a brownish ash
color, of a sufficient acride taste: the branches which were added to the rest
were slender, quadrangular, covered with a bark of an ash color, and those
were they of a years growth; for those that were of an after growth were
brownish, and they had yet remaining the prints where the leaves had grown,
which for the most part were one against another, and these also were of an
acride taste, as well as the leaves, and of no ungrateful smell.

I received the same fruit some years before, but without the stalks, and with
this question propounded by him which sent it, An Amomum? And certainly the
faculties of this fruit are not very much unlike those which Dioscorides
attributes to his Amomum; for it has an heating astrictiue and drying
faculty, and I think it may perform those things whereto Dioscorides, Lib.
1. Cap. 14. says his is good; yet this wants some notes which he gives unto
his, as the leaves of Bryonie, etc.

But I more diligently considering this Exoticke fruit, find some prime notes
which do much move me (for I will ingenuously profess what I think) to judge
it the Garyophyllon of Pliny; for he, Hist. Not. lib. 12. cap. 7. after he has
treated of Pepper adds these words: [There is besides in the Indies a thing
like to the Pepper corn, which is called Garyophyllon, but more great and
fragil: they affirm it grows in an Indian grove; it is brought over for the
smells sake.] Though this description be brief and succinct, neither contains
any faculties of the fruit it self, yet it has manifest notes, which,
compared with those which the fruit I here give you possess, you shall find
them very like; as comparing them to Pepper corns, yet bigger and more
fragile, as for the most part these berries are: their smell is also very
pleasing, and coming very near to that of Cloves, and for the smells sake
only they were brought over in Plinies time. I found, this fruit being chewed
made the breath to smell well: and it is credible, that it would be good for
many other purposes, if trial were made.

CHAP. 19. Of Guaiacum, or Indian, Pock-wood.
Guaiaci arboris ramulus. A branch of the Guaiacum tree.


The Description.
GVaiacum, which some call Lignum Sanctum: others, Lignum vitae, is a well kown
wood, though of a tree nknown, or at least not certainly known; for this
figure which I here give you out of Clusius, was gotten, and the history
framed as you shall hear by his own words, taken out of his Scholia upon the
21 Chapter of Monardus. About the beginning (says he) of the year 1601. I
received from Peter Garret a branch of a foot long, which he writ was given him
by a certain Surgeon lately returned from America, for a branch of the tree
Guaiacum: which if it be a branch of the true Guaiacum, then has Nicolas
Monardus slightly enough set down the history of this tree. I thus described
this branch which was sent me.

This branch was a foot long, very writhen, and distinguished with many knots,
scarce at the lower end equalling the thickness of a writing pen or goose
quil, having an hard and yellowish wood, and a wrinkled bark o an ash color:
at the upper end it was divided into slender branches, whereof some yet
retained their leaves, and other some the flowers and the rudiment of the
fruit: the leaves, or more truly the wings or foot-stalkes of the leaves grew
upon slender branches one against another, each winged leaf having four or
(...) little leaves, always growing by couples one against other, as in the
Masticke tree; and these were thickish, round, and distinguished with many
veins, which by reason of their dryness (as I observed) would easily fall
off, leaving the footstalks naked, and only retaining the marks whereas the
leaves had been. In the knots of the upper branches there grew as it were
swellings, out of which together grew six, eight, ten, or more slender
foot-stalkes, some inch long, each carrying a flower not great, consisting of
six little leaves (but whether white, yellow, or blew, I could not by reason of
the dryness judge:) out of the middle of the flower grew many little threads,
and in some the rudiment of the fruit began to appear, having two cells, almost
shaped like the seed-vessell of the common Shepherds purse.

Thus much Clusius, who afterward received the fruit from two or three, but
the most perfect from the learned Apothecarie John Pona of Verona: they are
commonly parted into two parts or cells, yet he observed one with three: he
found longish stones in them almost like those of Euonymus, and they consisted
of a very hard and hairy substance like to that of the Date stones, containing
a smooth kernel of a yellowish color.

Now will I give you the descriptions of Monardus: then, what I have observed
my self of this wood, which I must confess is very little, yet which may give
some light to the ignorant. Of this wood (says Monardus) many have written
many ways, saying that it is either Ebonie, or a kind of Box, or calling it
by some other names. But as it is a new kind of tree, not found in these
regions, or any other of the whole world described by the Ancients, but only
those of late discovered; so this shall be a new tree to us: howeuer it be, it
is a large tree of the bigues of the Ilex, full of branches, having a great
matrix or blackish pith, the substance of the wood being harder than Ebonie:
the bark is thick, gummie or fat, and when the wood is dry falls easily
off: the leaves are small and hard: the flower yellow: the which is followed by
a round follid fruit, containing in it seeds like those of the Medlar.

It grows plentifully in the Isles of Sancto Domingo,

Another kind of this was afterward found in the Island of S. John de Puerto
rico, near to the former: it is also like the last described, but altogether
less, and almost without matrix or pith, smelling stronger, and being bitterer
than the former, which being left, this is now in use, and of the wondrous
effects it is called Lignum sanctum; neither without desert, being (experience
giving testimony) it excells the other: yet both their faculties are admirable
in curing the French disease, and therefore the water or decoction of both of
them are drunk, either mixed together, or severally, both for the cure of the
forementioned disease, as also against diverse other affects. Thus much for
Monardus his description.

The wood which is now in use with us is of a large tree, whose wood is very
heavy, sollid, and fit to turn into bowls or the like, and all that I have
yet seen has been wholly without matrix or pith, and commonly it is of a
dark brownish color, somewhat inclining to yellow, having a ring of white
ingirting it next to the bark; I have observed a tree whose diametre has been
two foot and a quarter, to have had as little or less of this white wood as
one whose diameter was thirteen inches; and this which was thirteen inches
had only a white circle about it of one inch in breadth: I think the younger the
tree is, the bigger the white circle is: the best wood is dense, heavy,
brownish, leaving a quick and biting taste in the decoction, as also his smell
and color. The bark of this wood is also dense and heavy, of a hard substance
and yellowish color within, but rough and greenish, or else grayish without,
and of somewhat a bitterish taste. Thus much for the description of the wood
and his bark. Now let me say somewhat briefly of the temperature and
qualities.

The Temperature and Virtues.
It is judged to be hot and dry in the second degree: it has a drying,
attenuating, dissoluing, and

The decoction of the bark or wood of Guajacum, made either alone or with
other ingredients,

It also conduces to the cure of the dropsy, Asthma, Epilepsie, the diseases
of the bladder and

It does also open the obstructions of the liver and spleen, warmes and
comforts the stomach

CHAP. 20. Of the Guayaua, or Orange-Bay.
The Description.
SImon de Touar sent Clusius a branch of the tree which the Spaniards call
Guayauas, from which he drew this figure, and thus describes it. This branch
(says Clusius) whose upper part together with the fruit I caused to be drawn,
was some foot long, four square, alternately set with leaves growing by
couples, being four inches long, and one and a half or two broad, of the
form of Bay leaves, very firm, having a swelling rib running along the
lower side, with veins running obliquely from thence to the sides, of an ash or
grayish color beneath, but smooth above, with the veins less appearing;
which broken, though old, yet retained the smell of Bay leaves, and also after
some sort the taste: the fruit was smooth, yet shriueled, because peradventure
it was unripe, of the bigness of a small apple, longish, blackish on the out
side like a ripe plum, but within full of a reddish pulpe, of an acide taste;
and in the middle were many whitish seeds of the bigness of Miller, (...)
those that are in Figs.

Nicolas Monardus (as he is turned into Latin by Clusius) thus gives us the
history of Guayauas, in his sixty sourth Chapter. It is a tree, says he, of
an indifferent bigness, and has spreading branches, the leaf of the Bay, and
a white flower, like that of the Orange, yet somewhat bigger, Guayavae arboris
ramus. The Orange-Bay.
and well smelling; it easily grows, wheresoever it be sown, and so spreds
and creepes that it is accounted as a weed, for it spoils the grass of many
pastures, with the too much spreading as brambles do; the fruit is like to our
apples, of the bigness of those the Spaniards call Camuesas, green at the
first, and of a golden color when they be ripe, with their inner pulpe white,
and sometimes red; divided: it has four cells, wherein lie the seeds, like
those of the Medlers, very hard, of a brownish color, wholly stony, without
kernel and taste.

The fruit is usually eaten, the rind being Monardus.

CHA. 21. Of the Coral tree.
The Description.
THe same last mentioned Simon de Touar a learned and prime Physician of Civil
sent Clusius three or four branches of this tree, from whence he framed this
history and figure. He writ (says Clus.) that this tree grew in his garden,
sprung up of seeds sent from America, which had the name of Coral imposed on
them, by reason the flowers were like Coral, but he did not set down there
shape; writing only this in his letter: That he had two little shrubs, which
had borne flowers, and that the greater of them bore also cods full of large
beans, but in the extreme Winter, which they had the year before, he lost not
only that tree, and others sprung up of Indian seed, but also many other
plants. Now seeing that this tree carries coddes, I conjecture the flowers were
in form not unlike to those of Pease, or of the tree called Arbor Iudae, but
of another color, to wit, red like Coral, especially seeing that in the
catalogue of his garden which he sent me the year before, he had writ thus [
Arbor Indica dicta Coral, ob eius florem similem Corallo, etc. that is, An
Indian tree called Corrall, by reason of the flower like to Corrall, whose
leaves are very like those of the Arbor Iudae, but this has thorns, which
that wants.] And verily the branches which he sent (for he writ he sent the
branches with the leaves, but the tree brought (...) some twice or thrice as
big) had leaves not much unlike those of Arbor Iudae, but fastened to a
shorter footstalke and growing one against another, with a single one at the
end of the branch, which was here and there set with sharp and crooked
prickles; but whether these branches are only the stalks of the leaves, or
perfect branches, I doubt, because all that he sent had three leaves apiece; I
could easily persuade my self, that they were only leaves, seeing the upper
part ended in one leaf; and the lower end of one among the rest, yet showed
the place where it seemed it grew to the bough. But I affirm nothing, seeing
there was none whereof I could inquire, by Coral arboris ramus. A branch of the
Coral tree.
reason of his death who sent them m e, which happened shortly after; yet I have
made the form of the leaves with the manner as I coniectured they grow, to be
delineated in the figure which I here give you. (...) Matthiolus in his last
edition of his Commentaries upon Dioscorides would have (...) this, by the Icon
of his first Acacia, which is prickly, and has leaves resembling those of
(...) (...), I know not; but if he would have expressed this tree, the painter
did not well play his part.

After that Clusius had set forth thus much of this tree in his Hist. (...)
(...). the learned Dr. Castaneda a Physician also of Civil certified me, says
he, that the flowers of this tree grow thick together at the tops of (...)
branches, ten, twelve, or more hanging upon short foot-(...), growing out of
the same place: whose figure he also sent, but so rudely drawn, that I could
not thereby have come to any knowledge of the flowers, but that (...) therewith
sent me two dried flowers, by which I partly gathered their form. Now these
flours were very narrow, 2. inches long or more, consisting of three leaves,
the uppermost of which much exceeded the 2. narrow ones on the sides both in
length and breadth, and it was doubled; but before the flower was opened it
better resembled a horn or cod, than a flower, and the lower end of it stood
in a short green cup, in the midst of the flower under the upper leaf that
was folded, but open at the top; there came forth a smooth pointall, divided at
the top into nine parts or threads, who se ends of what color they were, as
also the threads, I know not, because I could not gather by the dry flower,
whose color was quite decayed, and the picture it self expressed no separation
of the leaves in the flower, no form of threads, but only the flowers shut,
and resembling rather cods than flower, sand those of a deep red color. But
if I could have seen them fresher, I should have been able to have given a more
exact description: wherefore let the reader take in good (...) that which I
have here (...). Thus much Clusius.

CHAP. 22. Of the sea Lentill.
The Description.
SOme call this Vna marina, and others have thought it the Lenticula marina of
Serapio, but they are deceived, for his Lenticula marina described in his 245.
chapter, is nothing else than the Muscus marinus or Bryon thalassion, described
by Dioscorides, lib. 4. cap. 99. as any that compares these two places together
may plainly see.

1 The former of these has many winding stalks, whereon grow short branches
set thick with narrow leaves like those of Beluidere, or Besome flax, and among
these grow many skinny, hollow, empty round berries of the bigness and shape
of Lentills, whence it takes the name: this grows in diverse places of the
Mediterranian and Adriaticke seas.

2 This differs little from the former, but that the leaves are broader,
shorter, and snipt about the edges. But this being in probability the Sargazo
of Acosta, you shall here what he says thereof. In that famous and no less to
be feared navigations del Sergazo (for so they which sail into the Indies call
all that space of the Ocean from the 18. to the 34. degree of Northerly
latitude) is seen a deep and spacious sea covered with an (...) called
Sarguazo, being a span long, wrapped with the tender branches as it were into
balls, having narrow and tender leaves some half inch long, 1 Lenticula marina
angustifolia. Narrow leaued Sea Lentill.
2 Lenticula marina serratis (...). Cut leaued Sea Lentill.
much snipt about the edges, of color reddish, of taste insipide, or without
any sensible biting, but what is rather drawn from the salt water, than
naturally inherent in the plant. At the setting on of each leaf grows a seed
round like a pepper corn, of a whitish color, and sometimes of white and red
mixed, very tender when as it is first drawn forth of the water, but hard when
it is dried, but by reason of the thinness very fragile, and full of salt
water: there is no root to be observed in this plant, but only the marks of the
breaking off appears; and it is likely it (...) in the deep and sandy bottom
of the sea, and has small roots; yet some are of opinion that this herb is
plucked up and carried away by the rapide course of waters that fall out (...)
many Islands into the Ocean. Now the Master of the ship wherein I was did
stiffely maintain this opinion; and in the sailing here we were becalmed; but
as far as ever we could see we saw the sea wholly covered with this plant,
and sending down some young Sailers which should drive the weeds from the ship,
and cleanse the water, we plainly saw round heaps thereof rise up from the
bottom of the sea where by sounding we could find no bottom.

This plant pickled with salt and vinegar has the same taste as Sampier, and
may be used in stead

I found no faculties thereof; but one of the Sailers troubled with a
difficulty of making water, A Costa.

CHAP. 23. Of the Sea Feather.
Myriophyllum marinum. The Sea Feather.


The Description.
THis elegant plant, which Clusius received from Cortusus by the name of
Myriophyllum Pelagicum, is thus described by him: As much (says he) as I
could conjecture by the picture, this was some cubit high, having a straight
stalk, sufficiently slender, divided into many branches, or rather branched
leaves, almost like those of Fern, but far finer, bending their tops like the
branches of the Palm, of a yellowish color: the top of the stalk adorned with
lesser leaves, ended in certain scales or cloves framed into a head; which are
found to contain no other seed than tender plants already formed, in shape
like to the old one: which falling, sink to the bottom of the sea, and there
take root and grow, and so become of the same magnitude as the old one from
whence they came. The stalk is fastened with most slender and more than
capillarie fibers, in stead of a root, not upon rocks and Oister shells, as
most other sea plants are, but upon sand or mud in the bottom of the sea: this
stalk when it is dry is no less brittle than glass or Coralline; but green
and yet growing it is as tough and flexible as Spartum or Matweed.

The Place.
It grows in the deepest streams of the Illyrian sea, whence the Fishermen
draw it forth with hooks and other instruments which they call Sperne. The
whole plant, though dried, retains the faculties.

The Names.
The Italian Fishermen call it Penachio delle Ninfe, and Palma de Nettuno: some
also, Scettro di Nettuno.

The Virtues.
They say it is good against the virulent bites of the Sea serpents, and the
venomous stings or

Applied to small green wounds it cures them in the space of 24 hours.

Cortusus writ, that he had made trial thereof for the killing and voiding of
worms, and that he

CHAP. 24. Of the Sea Fan.
The Description.
THis elegant shrub grows upon the rocks of the sea (where it is sometimes
covered with the water) in diverse places; for it has been brought both from
the East and West Indies, and as I have been informed it is to be found in
great plenty upon the rocks at the Burmuda Isles. Clusius Frutex marinus
reticulatus. Sea Fan.
calls it Frutex Marinus elegantissimus, and thinks it may be referred to the
Palma Marina of Theophrastus. Bauhine has referred it to the Corallina's,
calling it Corallina cortice reticulato maculoso purpurascente. It grows up
sometimes to the height of three foot, having a stalk some handful or two high
before it part into branches: then is it divided into three, four, or more
branches, which are subdivided into infinite other lesser strings, which are
finely interwouen and joined together as if they were netted, yet leaving
sometimes bigger, otherwhiles lesser holes: and these twiggy branches become
smaller and smaller, the farther they are from the root, and end as it were in
small threads: these branches grow not up on every side, as in other plants, but
flat one besides another, so that the whole plant resembles a fan, or a cabbage
leaf eaten full of holes; yet sometimes upon the sides come forth other such
fanne-like branches, some bigger, some less, sometimes one or two, otherwhiles
more. The inner substance of this Sea-Fan is a blackish tough, and hard wood,
and it is all covered over with a rough (...)-like stony matter, of a reddish
or purplish color, and this you may with your nail or a knife scrape off
(...) the smooth and black wood.

I know no use of this, but it is kept for the beauty and raritie thereof, by
many lovers of such curiosities, amongst which for the rareness of the
structure this may hold a prime place.

CHAP. 25. Of China, and Bastard China.
The Description.
THis root which is brought from the remotest parts of the world, and is in
frequent use with us, has not been known in Europe little above fourscore
and ten years: for Garcias ab Orta the Portugal Physician writes, That he
came to the first knowledge thereof in the East Indies, in the year 1535, and
that by this means, as he relates it: It happened (says he) that about that
time a merchant in the Isle Diu told the noble gentleman Sr. Mart. Alfonso de
(...) my Patron, by what means he was cured of the French Poxes, which was by
a certain root brought from China; whose faculties he much extolled, because
such as used it needed not observe so strict a diet as was requisite in the use
of Guajacum, but should only abstain from Beef, Porke, Fish, and crude
fruits; but in China they do not abstain from fish, for they are there great
gluttons. When the report of this root was divulged abroad, every man
wonderfully desired to see and use it, because they did not well like of the
strict diet they were forced to observe in the use of Guajacum. Besides, the
inhabitants of these countries, by reason of their idle life are much given to
gluttony. About this time the China ships arrive at Malaca, bringing a small
quantity of this root for their own use. But this little was sought for with
such earnestness, that (...) gave an excessive rate for it; but afterward the
Chinois bringing a greater quantity, the price fell, and it was sold very
cheap. From this time Guajacum began to be out of use, and banished the
Indies, as a Spaniard that would famish the Natives. Thus much Garcias
concerning the first use thereof in the East Indies.

1 The China now in use is a root of the largeness of that of the ordinary
Flag, or Iris palustris, and not much in shape unlike thereto, but that it
wants the rings or circles that are imprinted in the other: the outer coat or
skin of this root is thin, sometimes smooth, otherwhile rugged, of a brownish
red color, and not to be separated from the substance of the root, which is of
an indifferent firmness, being not so hard as wood, but more sollid than most
roots which are not of shrubs or trees: the color is sometimes white, with
some very small mixture of redness; otherwhiles it (...) a greater mixture of
red, and some are more red than white: it is almost without taste, yet that it
has is dry, without any bitterness or acrimonie at all. The best is that
which is indifferently ponderous, new, firm, not worme-eaten, nor rotten, and
which has a good and fresh color, and that either white, or much inclining
thereto. The plant whose root this is (if we may believe Christopher A Costa)
has many small prickly and flexible branches, not unlike the Smilax aspera, or
the prickly Binde-weed: the biggest of these exceeds not the thickenesse of
ones little finger. The leaves are of the bigness of those of the broad leaued
Plantaine: the roots are as large as ones hand, sometimes less, sollid, heavy,
white, and also sometimes red, and many often times growing together.

1 China vulgaris Officinarum. True China.
2 Pseudo-China. Bastard China.


It grows abundantly in the territory of China, and is also found in
Malabar, Cochin, Cranganor, Coulan, Tanor, and other places.

The Chinois call it Lampatan: in Decan they call it Lampatos: in Canarin,
Bouti: the Arabians, Persians, and Turks term it Choph-China.

2 This other root, whose figure you see here expressed, was sent from London to
Clusius in the year 1591, by James Garret, being brought out of Wingandecaow,
or Virginia, with this inscription, Chinae species, A kind of China. Clusius
caused this figure thereof to be drawn, and thus describes it. This root
(says he) was very knotty, and formed with out-growings, or bunches standing
out, of a reddish color, and it yet retained at the top some part of the
stalk, being somewhat like unto that of Smilax aspera, or common rough
Binde-weed, hard, woody, and full of veins, as the stalks of Smilax aspera:
the substance of the root was also reddish, as the root of the common Flagge,
at the first of a (...) taste, it being old, (for so it was when I received it)
and then drying. Now I judge this the same that the writer of the Virginian
History mentions in his chapter of roots, and says, it was broughtinto
England for China, though the Natives knew no use thereof: but they use another
root very like China, which they call Tsinaw, of which being cut, beaten, and
pressed out with water, they draw a juice wherewith they make their bread. Thus
much Clusius, to whose words I think it not amiss to add that which Mr.
Thomas Hariot (who was the writer of the Virginian history, here mentioned by
Clusius) has set down concerning this thing.

Tsinaw (says he) is a kind of root much like unto that which in England is
called the China root, brought from the East Indies. And we know not any thing
to the contrary but that it may be of the same kind. These roots grow many
together in great clusters, and do bring forth a Brier stalk, but the leaf in
shape is far unlike: which being supported by the trees it grows neeerest
unto, will reach or clime to the top of the highest. From these roots whilst
they be new or fresh, being chopped into small pieces and stamped, is strained
with water a juice that makes bread, and also being boiled, a very good
spoonemeat in manner of a gelly, and is much better in taste, if it be tempered
with oil. This Tsinaw is not of that sort which by some was caused to be
brought into England for the China root; for it was discovered since, and is in
use as is aforesaid; but that which was brought hither is not yet known,
neither by us, nor by the inhabitants, to serve for any use or purpose,
although the roots in shape are very like. Thus much Hariot.

The Temperature and Virtues.
China is thought to be moderately hot and dry: the (...) thereof made alone
or with other Garcias, for to cure the French pox, but chiefly that disease
which is of some standing: yet by most it is judged less powerful than (...),
or Sarsaparilla.

It attennates, moves sweat, and dries, and therefore resists putrefaction: it
strengthens the liver,

The decoction of this root, says Garcias, besides the diseases which have
community with the

CHAP. 26. Of Costus.
The (...).
THis simple medicine was briesely described by Dioscorides, who mentions three
indes thereof, but what part of a plant, whether root, wood, or fruit, he has
not expressed: but (...) may probablely conjecture it is a root, for that he
writes toward the end of the Chapter where (...) treats thereof, (...). 1. cap.
15. that it is adulterated by mixing therewith the roots of Helenium (...); now
a root cannot well be adulterated but with another. Also Pliny, lib. 12. cap.
12. (...) it a root; but neither any of the ancient or modern Writers have
deliniated the plant, (...) (...) root should be this (...). (...) makes three
sorts, as I have said: the Arabian being the (...); which was white, light,
strong, and well smelling: the Indian, which was large, light, and (...): the
Syrian; which was heavy, of the color of Box, and strong smelling. Now Pliny
makes (...) kinds, the black, and the white, which he says is the better; so
I judge his black to be the Indian of Dioscorides, and his white, the Arabian.
Much agreeable to these (but whether the same or no, I do not determine) are
the two roots whose figures I here present to your view, and they are called by
the names of (...) dulcis (I think they should have said odoratus) and Costus
amarus.

1 The first of these, which rather from the small, than taste, is called
sweet, is a pretty large root, light, white, and well smelling, having the
smell of Orris, or a violet, but somewhat more quick and (...), especially if
the root be fresh, and not too old: it is often times divided at the top into
two, three, or more parts, from whence several stalks have grown, and you
shall sometimes observe upon some of them pieces of these stalks some two or
three inches long, of the thickenesse of ones little finger, crested, and
filled with a soft pith, like as the stalks of Elder, or more like those of the
Bur-docke: the taste of the root is bitter, with some acrimonie, which also
Dioscorides requires in his, for he says, the taste should be biting and hot;
thus much for the first, being (...) dulcis of the shoppes.

1 Costus Indicus sive odoratus. Indian or sweet smelling Costus.
2 Costus Officinarum Lobelij. Bitter Costus.


2 The second, which is the Costus amarus, and it may be the Indian of
Dioscorides, and Niger of Pliny, (...) root black both within and without,
light, yet very dense. It seems to be of some large root, (...) (...) it is
brought over cut into large pieces, of the bigness of ones finger, sometimes
bigger some (...) less, which it seems is for the more convenient drying
thereof, for a large root, unless it be (...) into pieces can scarcely be well
dried: the taste of this is bitter, somewhat clammy and ingrate: (...) smell is
little or none.

There are (...) other roots which have been set forth by late writers for
Costus, but because they are neither in (...), known here with us, nor more
agreeable to the descriptions of the Ancients, I hastening to an (...), am
willing to pass them over in silence.

The Temperature and Virtues out of the Ancients.
It has a heating (...) attenuating faculty, and therefore was used (...)
oil to anoint the body

It is also convenient to move urine, to procure the terms, to help strains,
convulsions, or cramps

It is good to be drunk against the bite of the viper: against pains of the
chest, and windiness

CHAP. 27. Of Drakes root, or Contra-yerua.
The Description.
THat root which of late is known in some shops by the Spanish name
Contra-yerua, is the same which Clusius has set forth by the title of Drakena
radix: wherefore I will give you the history of Clusius, and thereto add that
which Monrdus writes of the Contra-yerua. For though Bauhine, and the Author of
the Historia Lugdunensis seem to make these different, yet I find that both
Clusius his figure and history exactly agree with the roots sent us from
Spain by that title, wherefore I shall make them one, till some shall show me
how they differ: and Clusius seems to be of this mind also, who desired but
the degree of heat which Monardus gives these, and that is but the second
degree: now these have no taste at the first, until you have chewed them a
pretty while, and then you shall find a manifest heat and acrimonie in them,
which Clusius did also observe in his.

In the year (says Clusius) 1581. the generous Knight Sir Francis Drake gave
me at London certain roots, with three or four Peruvian Beazor stones, which
in the Autumn before (having finished his voyage, wherein passing the
Straights of Magellan, he had encompassed the World) he had brought with him,
affirming them to be of high esteem amongst the Peruvians: now for his sake
that bestowed these roots upon me, I have given them the title Drakena radix,
or Drakes root, and have made them to be expressed in a table, as you may here
see them.

1 (...). Contra-yerua.
2 (...) Drakenae affinis. Another sort of Contra-yerua.


These roots were for the most part some half inch thick, longish, now and
then bunching out into knots and unequal heads, and their tops looked as if
they were composed of thick scales, almost like those of the Dentaria
enneaphyllos; blackish without, wrinckled, and hard, because dried: their inner
part was white; they had slender fibers here and there growing out of them, and
some more thick and large, hard also and tough, at which hung other knots: I
observed no manifest smell they had, but found them to have a taste somewhat
astringent, and drying the tongue at the first; but being long chewed, they
left a quick and pleasing acrimonie in the mouth.

It seemed to have great affinity with the Radix S. (...), whereof Nic.
Monardus speaks in his book of the Simple Medicines brought from the West
Indies: but seeing N. Eliot (who accompanied Sr. Fran. Drake in that voyage,
said, that the Spaniards in Peru had them in great request; and they could not
easily be got of them, and that he had learned by them, that the leaves were
present poison, but the root an antidote, and that not only against the same
poison, but also against other; and that it strengthened the heart and vital
faculties, if it were beaten to powder, and taken in the morning in a little
wine; and given in water, it mitigated the heat of Fevers. By reason of these
faculties it should much agree with the Radix Contra-(...), whereof Monardus
writes in the same book: yet in these I required the aromaticke taste and
degree of heat, which he attributes unto these roots. Thus much Clus.

From Charcis a Province of Peru, says Monard. are brought certain roots very
like the roots of Iris, but less, and having the smell of Fig leaves. The
Spaniards that live in the Indies call them Contra-yerua, as if you should say
an Antidote against poison; because the powder of them taken in white Wine is a
most present remedy against all poison of what kind soever it be (only
sublimate excepted, whose malignitie is only extinguished by the drinking of
milk) it causes them to be cast up by vomit, or euacuated by sweat. They
also say that Philtres or amorous potions are cast forth by drinking this
powder. It also kills worms in the belly. The root chewed has a certain
aromaticke taste joined with acrimony; wherefore it seems hot in the second
degree. Thus far Monardus.

2 Clusius Exot. l. 4. c. 11. being the next after Drakena radix, describes
this root, whose figure I give you in the 2. place, and that by the same title
as it is here set forth. These roots, says he, seemed somewhat like the Drakena
radix which were found in the great ship which brought back the Viceroy from
the East Indies, and was taken by the English: for they were tuberous, and as
much as one may gather by their form, crept upon the surface of the earth,
having upon them many hairs and fibers, and being of a sooty color, yet
somewhat inclining to yellow, dying the spittle in chewing them, and being
bitter: they as yet retained footstalk of the leaves, but of what fashion
they were no man can easily guess. But it was likely they were of great use
among the Indians, seeing that the Viceroy brought them together with other
precious medicines growing in the East Indies, James Garret sent this to
Clusius with the little plant dried, whose figure you see expressed by it.

CHAP. 28. Of Lignum Aloes.
Lignum Aloes vulgar.


The Description.
IT is a question whether the Agallochum described in the 21. c. l. 1 of
Dioscorides be the same which the later Greeks and shops at this time call
Xyloaloe, or Lignum Aloes, many make them the same: others, to whose opinion I
adhere, make them differerent, yet have, not the later, show what Agallochum
should be, which I notwithstanding will do; and though I do not now give you
my arguments, yet I will point at the things, and show positiuely my opinions
of them.

The first and best of these is that which some call Calumbart: others,
Calumba, or (...): this is of high esteem in the Indies, and seldom found but
amongst the Princes, and persons of great quality; for it is sold often times
for the weight in gold; I have not seen any thereof but in beads; it seems to
be a whiter wood than the ordinary, of a finer grain, not so subject to rot,
and of a more fragrant smell, and but light.

The second sort, which is usually brought over, and called in shops by the
name of Lignum Aloes, is also a precious and odoriferous wood, especially
burnt: the sticks of this are commonly knotty and unsightly: some parts of
them being white, soft, and doted: othersome, dense; blackish, or rather i
ntermixt with black and white veins, but much more black than white, and
this put to the fire will sweat out an oily moisture, and burnt, yield a most
fragrant odor. This I take to be the true Xyloaloc of the late Greeks; and
the Agalugen of Auicen; and that they call Palo d Agula in the Indies.

The third is a wood of much less price than the former: and I conjecture it
might well be substituted for Thus: and this I take to be the Agallochum of
Dioscorides; the Lignum Aloes (...) of Garcias; and Agula braua of Linscoten.
It is a firm and sollid wood, somewhat like that of the Cedar, not subject to
rot or decay: the colourthereof is blackish, especially on the outside; but on
the inside it is often times brownish and speckled, containing also in it an
oilie substance, and yielding a sweet and pleasing smell when it is burnt, but
not like that of the two former: the taste also of this is bitterer than that
of the former: and the wood (though dense and sollid) may be easily cleft
long-waies; it is also a far hand somer and more sightly wood than the
former, having not many knots in it.

Garcias ab Orta thus describes the tree that is the Lignum Aloes (I judge it is
that I have set forth in the second place:) it is (says he) like an Olive
tree, sometimes larger: the fruit or flower I could not yet see, by reason of
the difficulties and dangers whic ha re to be undergone in the accurate
observation of this tree (Tigers frequently there seeking their prey.) I had
the branches with the leaves brought me from Malaca. Now they say that the wood
new cut down has no fragrant odor, nor till it be dried: neither the smell
to be diffused over the whole matter of the wood, but in the heart of the tree;
for the bark is thick, and the matter of the wood without smell. Yet may I
not deny, but the bark and wood putrefying that oilie and fat moisture, may
betake it self to the heart of the tree, and make it the more odoriferous: but
there is no need of putrefaction to get a smell to the Lignum Aloes: for there
are sundry so expert and skillful in the knowledge thereof, that they will
judge of that which is new cut down, whither it will be odoriferous or no. For
in all sorts of wood some are better than othersome: thus much out of Garcias;
where such as are desirous may see more upon this subject.

The Temperature and Virtues.
It is of temperature moderate ly hot and dry, and also of somewhat subtle
parts. Chewed it

Taken inwardly it is good to help the stomach that is too cold and moist, as
also the weak liver.

It is commended likewise in dysenteries and pleurisies: and put also into
diverse Cordial medicines

CHAP. 29. Of Gedwar.
1 Gedwar aut, Geiduar.
2 Zedoariae exactior icon. A better figure of Zedoary.


The Description.
IN the Chapter of Zedoarie (which I made the 28. of the first book) I might
fitly have given you this history of (...), which is thought to be that
described by Auicen, lib. 2. c. 734. and a kind of Zedoarie: Garcias says,
Gedwar is at a high rate, and not easily to be found, unless with the Indian
Mountibanks and juglers, which they call Iogues, which go up and down the
country like Rogues, and of these the Kings and Noblemen buy (...): it is good
for many things, but chiefly against poisons, and the bites and stings of
venomous creatures. Now Clusius in his Auctarium at the end thereof gives this
figure, with the following history.

1 Because Garcias, says he, cap. 42. l. 1. Aromatum hist. treating of (...)
writes, that Auicen calls it Gedwar; and says that it is of the magnitude of
an Acorne, and almost of the same shape, I in my notes at the end of that
chapter affirmed that it was not known in Europe, and hard to be known. But
in the year 1605, John Pona sent me from Verona together with other things two
roots written on by the name of Gedwar verum. They were not much unlike a
longish Acorne, or (that I may more truly compare them) the smaller bulbs of an
Asphodil, or Anthora: the one of them was whole and not perished: the other
rotten and broken, yet both of them very hard and sollid, of an ash color
without, but yellowish within, which tasted, seemed to possess a heating
faculty and acrimonie.

But although I can affirm nothing of certainty of this root, yet I made the
figure of the wholler of them to be expressed in a table, that so the form might
be conceived in ones mind more easily, than by a naked description. Let the
Studious thank Pona for the knowledge hereof. Thus much Clusius.

2 In the 28 chapter of the first book I gave the figure of Zodoarie out of
Clusius, having not at that time this figure of Lobel, which presents to your
view both the long and the round, with the manner how they grow together, being
not several roots, but parts of one and the same.

CHAP. 30. Of Rose-wood.
Aspalathus albicans torulo citreo. White Rose-wood.
Aspalathus rubens. Reddish Rose-wood.


The Description.
BOth these as also some other woods are referred to the Aspalathus described
by Dioscorides, l. 1. c. 19. But the later of these I take to be the better of
the two sorts there mentioned. The first of them is whitish without, having a
yellowish or citrine colored round in the middle: the taste is hottish, and
smell somewhat like that of a white-Rose.

The other has also a small ring of white, next the thick and rugged bark,
and the inner wood is of a reddish color, very dense, sollid and firm, as
also indifferent heavy: the smell of this is also like that of a Rose, whence
they vulgarly call it Lignum Rhodium, Rose-wood, rather than from Rhodes the
place where the later of them is said to grow.

The Faculties out of Dioscorides.
It has a heating faculty with astriction, whence the decoction thereof made
in wine is convenient Ozaena (a stinking ulcer in the nose so called.)

Put up in a pessarie it draws forth the child, the decoction thereof stays
the looseness of the

AT the end of this Appendix I have thought good to give you diverse
descriptions of Plants, which I received from my often mentioned friend Mr.
Goodyer, which also were omitted in their fitting places, partly through haste,
and partly for that I received some of them after the printing of those
chapters wherein of right they should have been inserted. They are most of them
of rare and not written of plants, wherefore more grateful to the curious.

Hicracium stellatum Boelij.

THis plant is in round, hairy, straked, branched stalks, and long, rough,
blunt indented leaves like to Hieracium (...), but scarce a foot high: the
flowers are also yellow three times smaller: which past, there succeed long
crooked slender sharp pointed cods or husks, near an inch long, spreading
abroad, star-fashion, wherein a long seed is contained: this has no heads or
woolly down like any of the rest, but only the said crooked coddes which do
at the first spread abroad. The root is small, threddie, full of milkie juice,
as is also the whole plant and it perishes when the seed is ripe.

Hieracium medio nigrum flore maiore Boelij.
This has at the first spreading upon the ground many long, narrow, green,
smooth leaves bluntly indented about the edges, like those of Hieracium
falcatum, but smaller: amongst which rise up three, four, or more, small,
smooth, straked round stalks, divided into other branches, which grow longer
than the stalks themselves leaning or trayling near the ground: the flowers
grow on the tops of the stalks, but one together, composed of many pale yellow
leaves, the middle of each flower being of a blackish purple color.

Hieracium medio nigrum flore minore Boelij:
This is altogether like the last before described in stalks and leaves: the
flowers are also of a blackish purple in the middle, but they are three times
smaller.

Hieracium lanosum
There grows from one root three, four or more round upright soft cottonie
stalks, of a reasonable bigness, two foot high, divided into many branches,
especially near the top, whereon grows at each division one broad sharp
pointed leaf, divided into corners, and very much crumpled, and also very soft
cottonie and woolly, as is the whole plant: the flowers are small, double, of a
pale yellow color, very like those of (...) repens, growing clustering very
many together at the tops of the stalks and branches, forth of small round
soft cottonie heads: these four plants grew from seed which I received from
Mr. Coys, 1620. and I made these descriptions by the Plants the 22. of August,
1621.

Blitum spinosum: est Beta Cretica semine aculeato Baubini Matthew. page 371.
This sends forth from one root many round green strailing, ioynted, small
branches, about a foot long: the leaves are of a light green color, and grow
at every joint one, somewhat like the leaves of great Sorrel, but they are
round topped without barbes or ears below, or any manifest taste or smell,
very like the leaves of Beets, but much smaller: the flowers grow clustering
together about the ioints, and at the tops of the branches small and greenish,
each flower containing five or six very small blunt topped leaves, and a few
dustie chiues in the middle: which past, there comes great prickly shriuelled
seed, growing even close to the root, and upwards on the ioints, each seed
having three sharp pricks at the top growing side-waies, which indeed may be
more properly called the husk; which husk in the inside is of a dark
reddish color, and contains one seed in form like the seed of Flos Adonis,
round at the lower end, and cornered toward the top, and sharp pointed,
covered over with a dark yellowish skin; which skin pulled away, the kernel
appears yellow on the outside, and exceeding white within, and will with a
light touch fall into very small powder like (...).

Geranij Baeticae species Boelij.
This has at the beginning many broad leaves, indented about the edges,
somewhat divided, like those of Geranium Creticum, but of a lighter green
color, and smaller: amongst which grow up many round hairy kneed trailing
branches, divided into many other branches, bearing leaves like the former, but
smaller, and no more divided. The flowers are small like those of Geranum (...),
but of a deeper reddish color, each flower having five small round topped
leaves: after follows small long hairie seed, growing at the lower end of a
sharp pointed beak like that of Geranium Moschatum: the whole plant perishes
when the seed is ripe.

Boelius a Low-countrey-man gathered the seeds hereof in Baetica a part of
Spain, and imparted them to Mr. William Coys, a man very skillful in the
knowledge of Simples, who has gotten plants thereof, and of infinite other
strange herbs, and friendly gave me seeds hereof, and of many other, Anno,
1620.

Antirrhinum minus flore Linariae luteum inscriptum.
This has at the first many very small, round, smooth branches from one root,
trayling on the ground, about four or five inches long, set with many small
green short sharp pointed leaves, like those of Serpillum, but that these are
longer, smooth, and three or four growing opposite one against another:
amongst which rise up five or six, sometimes ten or twelve upright round smooth
little stalks a cubit high, divided into branches bearing small long smooth
green leaves, growing without order, as narrow as the upper leaves of Oenanthe
Angustifolia: at the tops of the stalks and branches grow clustering together
five six or more small yellow flowers, flouring upwards, leaving along spike of
very small husks, each husk having a small line or chinke as though two
husks were joined together, the one side of the husk being a little longer
than the other, wherein is contained exceeding small blackish seed. The root is
very short, small, and white, with a few threads, and perishes at winter.

This plant is not written of that I can find. I received seed thereof from
Mr. William Coys often remembered.

Linaria minor aestiua.
The stalks are round, smooth, of a whitish green color, a foot high, weak,
not able to stand upright: whereon grow long narrow sharp pointed leaves, most
commonly bending or turning downwards. The flowers grow in spikes at the
tops of the branches, yet not very near together, and are (...) small and
yellow, with a small tail: the seed of this plant is small, flat, and of a
blackish gray color, enclosed in small round husks, and you shall commonly
have at one time flowers and ripe seed all on a stalk. The whole plant is like
to the common Linaria, but that it is a great deal lesser, and the flowers are
six times as small, and perish at Winter. I also received seeds thereof from
Mr. William Coys.

Scorpioides multiflorus (...).
This Plant is in creeping branches and leaves like the common Scorpioides
bupleuri folio: the flowers are also alike, but a little bigger, and grow four
or five together on one foot-stalke: the cods are rougher, and very much turned
round, or folded one within another: in all things else alike.

Scorpioides siliquacrassa Boelij.
This is also like the other in creeping branches and leaves: the flowers are
something bigger than any of the rest, and grow not above one or two together
on a foot-stalk: the (...) are crooked, without any rough hair, yet finely
checkquered, and seven times bigger than any of the rest, fully as big as a
great Palmer-worme, wherein is the difference: the seed is almost round, yet
extending somewhat in length, almost as big as small field Peason, of a brown
or yellowish color. This also perishes when the seed is ripe. Sept. 1. 1621.

Silibum minus flore nut ante Boelij.

This Thistle is in stalks and leaves much smaller than our Ladies Thistle,
that is to say, The stalks are round, straked, so newhat woolly, with narrow
skinny prickly edges three or four (...) high, divided into many branches,
whereon grow long leaves, deeply divided, full of white milkelike streakes and
sharp prickles by the edges: the flowers grow on the tops of the stalks and
branches, forth of small heads, commonly turning downwards, of the bigness of
an Olive, set with very small slender sharp pricks, containing nothing but
small purple chiues, spreading abroad like those of Iacea, with some bluish
chiues in the middle: the seed follows, enclosed in down, and is small and
grayish like the seed of other Thistles, but it is as clammy as Bird-lime. The
whole plant perishes at Winter, and renews it self by the falling of his
seed. I find not this written of. It was first gathered by Boclius in Spain,
and imparted unto Mr. William Coys, who friendly gave me seeds thereof.

Aracus mayor Baeticus Boelij.

It has small weak four square streaked trailing branches, two foot high,
lesser, but like those of Fetches, whereon grow many leaves without order, and
every several leaf is composed of six, seven, or more small sharp pointed
leaves, like those of Lentils, set on each side of a middle rib, which middle
rib ends with clasping tendrels: the flowers grow forth of the bosoms of the
leaves, but one in a place, almost without any foot-stalkes at all, like those
of Vetches, but of a whitish color, with purple streakes, and of a deeper
color tending to purple toward the nails of the upper covering leaves: after
which follow the cods, which are little above an inch long, not fully so big as
those of the wild bean, almost round, and very hairy: wherein is contained
about 4 peason, seldom round, most commonly somewhat flat, and sometimes
cornered, of a blackish color, near as big as field peason, and of the taste
of Fetches: the whole herb perishes when the seed is ripe. This plant Boelius
sent to Mr. William Coys, who has carefully preserved the same kind ever
since, and friendly imparted seeds thereof to me in Anno 1620.

Legumen pallidum Vlissiponense, Nonij (...).

This plant is very like, both in stalks, leaves, and cods, to Aracus (...)
Baeticus, but the flowers of this are of a pale yellow or Primrose color, and
the whole herb smaller, and nothing so hairy. It perishes also when the seed
is ripe. I received the seeds likewise from Mr. Coys.

Vicia Indica (...) albo. Pisum Indicum Gerardo.

This Vetch differs not in any thing at all, either in stalks, leaves, cods,
fashion of the flowers, or color thereof, from our common manured Vetch, but
that it grows higher, and the fruit is bigger and rounder, and of a very
clear white (...), more like to peason than Vetches. Mr. Gerrard was wont to
call this Vetch by the name of Pisum Indicum, or Indian Pease, gotten by him
after the publishing of his Herball, as Mr. Coys reported to me. But the said
Mr. Coys has in my judgment more properly named it Vicia fractu albo (...)
which name I thought most fit to call it by, only adding Indica to it, from
whence it is reported to have been gotten. Iul. 30. 1621.

Astragalus marinus Lusitanicus Boelij.

This has five, six, or more round straked reddish hairy stalks or branches,
of a reasonable bigness, proceeding from one root, sometimes creeping or
leaning near the ground, and sometimes standing upright, a cubit high, with
many green leaves, set by certain distances, out of order like those of Glaux
vulgaris, but lesser, every (...) being composed of fourteen or more round
topped leaves, a little hairy by the edges, set on each side of a long middle
rib, which is about nine or ten inches in length, without tendrels: the flowers
grow forth of the bosoms of the leaves, near the tops of the stalks, on long
round streaked hairy foot-stalkes, of a very pale yellow color, like those of
Securidacaminor, but bigger, growing close together in short spikes, which
turn into spikes of the length of two or three inches, containing many small
three cornered cods about an inch long, growing close together like those of
Glaux vulgaris, each cod containing two rows of small flat four cornered
seeds, three or four in each row, of a dark yellowish or leadish color, like
to those of Securidaca minor, but three or four times as big, of little taste:
the root is small, slender, white, with a few threads, and grows down right,
and perishes when the seed is ripe. I first gathered seeds of this plant in
the garden of my good friend Mr. Ioh. Parkinson an Apothecary of London, Anno
1616.

Fabaveterum serratis (...) Boelij.

This is like the other wild Bean in stalks, flowers, cods, fruit, and
clasping tendrels, but it differs from it in that the leaves hereof
(especially those that grow near the tops of the stalks) are notched or
indented about the edges like the teeth of a saw. The root also perishes when
the seed is ripe. The seeds of this wild Bean were gathered by Boelius a
Low Country man, in Baetica a part of Spain, and by him sent to Mr. William
Coys, who carefully preserved them, and also imparted seeds thereof to me, in
Anno 1620. Iul. 31. 1621.

Pisum maculatum Boelij.

They are like to the small common field Peason in stalks, leaves, and cods;
the difference is, the flowers are commonly smaller, and of a whitish green
color: the Peason are of a dark gray color, spotted with black spots in
show like to black Velvet; in taste they are also like, but somewhat harsher.
These peason I gathered in the garden of Mr. John Parkinson, a skillful
Apothecarie of London; and they were first brought out of Spain by Boelius a
Low Country man.

Lathyrus aestivus flore (...). July. 28. 1621:

This is like Lathyris latiore folio (...), in stalks, leaves, and branches,
but smaller: the stalks are two or three foot long, made flat with two skins,
with two exceeding small leaves growing on the stalks, one opposite against
another: between which spring up flat footstalk, an inch long, bearing two
exceeding narrow sharp pointed leaves, three inches long: between which grow
the tendrels, divided into many parts at the top, and taking hold therewith: the
flowers (...) small, and grow forth of the bosoms of the leaves, on each
foot-stalk one flower, wholly yellow, with purple strakes. After each flower
follows a smooth cod, almost round, two inches long, wherein is contained
seven round Peason, somewhat rough, but after a curious manner, of the bigness
and taste of field Peason, and of a dark sand color.

Lathyrus aestivus Baeticus flore caeruleo Boelij.

This is also like Lathyris (...) folio Lobelij, but smaller, yet greater than
that with yellow flours, having also adioining to the flat stalks, two eared
sharp pointed leaves, and also two other slender sharp pointed leaves, about
four inches long, growing on a flat foot-stalke, beetweene them, an inch and a
half long, and one tendrel between them divided into two or three parts: the
flowers are large, and grow on long slender foure-square foot-stalkes, from the
bosoms of the leaves, on each foot-stalk one: the upper great covering leaf
being of a light blew, and the lower smaller leaves of a deeper blew: which
past there come up short flat cods, with two filmes, edges, or skins on the
upper side, like those of Eruilia Lobelij, containing within four or five
great flat cornered Peason, bigger than field Peason, of a dark sand color.

Lathyrus aestivus edulis Baeticus flore albo Boelij.

This is in flat skinny stalks, leaves, footstalk, and cods, with two skins
on the upper side, and in all things else like the said Lathyrus with blew
flowers; only the flowers of this are milk white: the fruit is also like.

Lathyrus aestivus flore miniato.

This is also in skinnie flat stalks and leaves like the said Lathyris latiore
folio, but far smaller, not three foot high: it has also small sharp pointed
leaves growing by couples on the stalk, between which grow two leaves, about
three inches long, on a flat foot-stalk half an inch long: also between those
leaves grow the tendrels: the flowers are colored like red lead, but not so
bright, growing on smooth short footstalk, one on a foot-stalke: after which
follow cods very like those of the common field peason, but lesser, an inch and
a half long; containing four, five, or six cornered Peason, of a sand
color, or dark obscure yellow, as big as common field peason, and of the same
taste.

Lathyrus palustris Lusitanicus Boelij

Has also flat skinnie stalks like the said Lathyrus latiore folio, but the
pair of leaves which grow on the stalk are exceeding small as are those of
Lathyrus (...) luteo, and are indeed scarce worthy to be called leaves: the
other pair of leaves are about two inches long, above half an inch broad, and
grow (...) between those small leaves, on flat footstalk, an inch long:
between which leaves also grow the tendrels: the flowers grow on footstalk
which are five inches long, commonly two on a foot-stalke, the great upper
(...) leaves being of a bright red color, and the under leaves are somewhat
paler: after comes flat cods, containing seven or eight small round peason,
no bigger than a Pepper corn, gray and black, spotted before they are ripe,
and when they are fully ripe of a black color, in taste like common Peason:
the stalks, leaves, foot-stalkes and coddes are somewhat hairy and rough.

Lathyrus aestivus dumetorum Baeticus Boelij

Has also flat skinnie stalks like the said Lathyrus latiore folio, but
smaller, and in the manner of the growing of the leaves altogether contrary.
This has also two small sharp pointed leaves, adjoining to the stalk:
between which grows forth a flat middle rib with tendrels at the top, having
on each side (not one against another) commonly rhree blunt topped leaves,
sometimes three on the one side, and two on the other, and sometimes but four
in all, about an inch and a half long: the flowers grow on footstalk, about
two or three inches long, each foot-stalk usually bearing two flowers, the
great covering leaf being of a bright red color; and the two under leaves of
a bluish (...) color: afterwhich follow smooth cods, above two inches long,
containing, five, six, or seven smooth Peason, of a brown Chestnut color,
not round, but somewhat flat, more long than broad, especially those next both
the ends of the cod, of the bigness and taste of common field peason.

Iuniperus sterilis.

This shrub is in the manner of growing altogether like the Juniper tree that
bears berries, only the upper part of the leaves of the youngest and
tenderest bows and branches are of a more reddish green color: the flowers
grow forth of the bosoms of the leaves, of a yellowish color, which never
exceed three in one row, the number also of each row of leaves: each flower is
like to a small bud, more long than round, never growing to the (...) of a
quarter of an inch, being nothing else but very small short crudely chiues,
very thick and close thrust together, fastened to a very small middle stem, in
the end turning into small dust, which flies away with the wind, not much
unlike that of Taxus sterilis: on this shrub is never found any fruit. 15.
Maij. 1621.

WHen the last sheets of this work were on the Press, I received a Letter
from from Mr. Roger Bradshaghe, wherein he sent me enclosed a note concerning
some plants mentioned by our Author which I have thought fitting here to impart
to the Reader: he writes not who it was that writ them, wherefore I cannot
acquaint you with his name, but thank him, though unknown, for his desire to
manifest the truth, and satisfy our doubts in these particulars.

BEcause you write that Gerards Herbal is upon a review, I have thought good to
put you in mind what I have observed touching some plants which by him are
affirmed to grow in our Northern parts: first the plant called Pirola, which he
says grows in (...), I have made search for it the space of twenty years,
but no such is to be heard of.

Sea Campion with a red flower was told him grows in Lancashire: no such has
ever bin seen by such as dwell near where they should grow.

White Fox-gloues grow naturally in Lansdale, says he, it is very rare to see
one in Lansdale.

Garden Rose he writes grows about Leiland in Glouers field wild: I have
learned the truth from those to whom this Glouers field did belong, and I find
no such thing, only abundance of red wild poppie, which the people call
Corne-rose is there seen.

White Whortles, as he says, grow at Crosby in Westmerland, and upon Wendle
hill in Lancashire: I have sought Crosbie very diligently for this plant and
others which are said to grow there, but none could I find, nor can I hear of
any of the country people in these parts, who daily are laboring upon the
mountains where the VVortle berries abound, that any white ones have been
seen, saving that those which Gerard calls red Whortles, and they are of a
very pale white green till they be full ripe, so as when the ripe ones look
red, the unripe ones look white.

Cloud-(...) assuredly is no other than Knout berrie.

Heskets Prim-rose grows in Clap-dale. If Mr. Hesket found it there it was
some extraordinary luxurious flower, for now I am well assured no such is there
to be seen, but it is only cherished in our gardens.

Gerard says many of these Northern plants do grow in Cragge close. In the
North every town and village near any craggie ground both with us and in
Westmerland have closes so called, whereby Gerards Cragge close is kept close
from our knowledge.

Chamaemorus, seu Vaccinia nubis. Knot, or Knout-berrie, or Cloud-berrie.

THis Knot, Knout or Cloud-berrie (for by all these names it is known to us in
the North, and takes these names from the high mountains whereon it grows,
and is perhaps, as Gerard says, one of the brambles, though without any
prickles) has roots as small as pack thread, which creep far abroad under the
ground, of an ouerworne red color, here and there thrusting more fastly in to
the mossie hillockes tufts of small threddie strings, and at certain (...)
putting up small stalks rather tough than woody, half a foot high, something
reddish below: on which do grow two or three leaves of a reasonable sad green
color, with foot-(...) an inch long, one above another without order: the
highest is but little, and seldom well spread open; they are something (...),
crispie, full of nerves in every part, notched about the edges, and with some
four gashes a little deeper than the rest, whereby the whole leaf is lightly
divided into five portions. On the top of the stalk comes one flower
consisting of four, sometimes of five leaves apiece, very white and tender,
and rather crumpled than plain, with some few short yellow threads in the
midst: it stands in a little green husk of five leaves, out of which when
the flower fades, comes the fruit, composed of diverse grains like that of
the bramble, as of eight, ten or twelve, sometimes of (...), and perhaps
through some mischance but of three or two, so joined, as they make some
resemblance of a heart, from whence (it may be) has grown that error in
Gerard of dividing this plant into, kinds: (...) fruit is first witish green,
after becomes yellow, and reddish on that side next the Sun.

It grows naturally in a black moist earth or moss, whereof the country
makes a fuel we call Turfe, and that upon the tops of wet fells and mountains
among the Heath, moss, and brake: as about Ingleborow in the West part of
Yorkshire, on Graygreth a high fell on the edge of Lancashire, on Stainmor
such a like place in Westmerland, and other such like high places.

The leaves come forth in May, and in the beginning of June the flowers: (...)
fruit is not ripe till late in July.

The berries have a harsh and something unpleasant taste.

THis work was begun to be printed before such time as we received all the
figures from beyond the Seas, which was the occasion I omitted these following
in their fitting places: but thinking it not fit to omit them wholly, having
them by me, I will give you them with their titles, and the reference to the
places whereto they belong.

* In August last whiles this work was in the Press, and drawing to an end, I
and Mr. William Broad were at Chissel-hurst with my often mentioned friend Mr.
George Bowls, and going over the heath there I observed this small Spartum
whose figure I here give, and whereof you shall find mention, in the place
noted under the title of the figure; but it is not there described, for that I
had not seen it, nor could find the description thereof in any Author, but in
Dutch, which I neither had nor understood. Now this little Matweed has some
small creeping stringy roots: on which grow somewhat thick heads, consisting of
three or four leaves, as it were wrapped together in one skin, biggest below,
and so growing smaller upwards, as in Schaenanth, until they grow up to the
height of half an inch, then these rushie green leaves (whereof the longest
scarce exceeds two inches) break out of these whitish skins wherein they were
wrapped, and lie along upon the ground, and amongst these grows up a small
grassie stalk, some handful or better high, bending back the top, which
carries two rows of small chaffie seeds. It is in the perfection about the
beginning of August.

FINIS.
Cyperus Indicus, sieve Curcuma. Turmericke. Page 33. Lib. 1. (...). (...)
Iuncus minor capitulis Equiseti. Club-Rush. Page 35. Lib. 1. (...). 29. (...)
(...).
* Spartum nostras parvum Lobelij. Heath Mat-weed. Page 41. lib. 1. (...). 34.
the (...).
(...) flores. The flowers of (...) Hay. Page 43. (...) 1. (...). (...). the
(...).


INDEX LATINVS STIRPIVM IN HOC opere descriptarum necnon nomina quaedam Graeca,
Arabica, Barbara, etc.
A
(...) mas. and faem. 1363 Marina Belg. Clus. 1574 Abiga. 517 Abrotanum mas.
and faem. (...) reliquae spec. 1106. 1107 Absinthium latifolium and tenuif.
1096 Austriacum. 1098 Marinum. 1099 Album and Egypt. 1101 Inodorum and
Abrotani faem. facie. 1102. Abutilon, 935 Acacia Dios. 1330. 1331 Acanthus
(...) and syl. 1147 Virgilij. 1603 (...) album and (...). 1149 Acarna. 1175
Accipitrina. 300 Acer (...) and minus. 1485 Acetosa. 397. 398 Achillea. 1073
Achras gr. Pyrus syluestris. Acinos. 675. 676 Aconitum bacciferum. 980
Pardalianches Matthew. 762 Pardalianch. prim. Matthew. 815 Batrachaides. 953
Pardalianch. Gesn. 967 Hiemale. 968 Eius (...) spec. 969. ad. 975 Acorus Offic.
33. Palust. 50. Verus Antiq. 63 (...), Plin. quibusdam Christophor. Act gr.
(...). (...), (...), Polyacantha. (...) Moschata, id est, Geranium. Acus
pastoris, id est, Geranium (...) Pecten veneris. Acutella, id est. Anonis. Adia
ntum album. 1136 Nigrum. 1136. Verum. 1143. (...) 1559 (...) Peruv. 344
Adonidis flos. 387 Ador, adoreum semen. 69 Adracla, vel Adrachne. 1602 (...)
Narbon. 74 (...) Matthew. 75. Bromoides. 77 Aegopyrus, id est, Fago-triticum.
(...), id est, (...)-(...). Aegyros, gr. Populus. Aeromeli, id est, Manna.
(...). 446 Aethiopis. 779 (...). 1622 Agaricus. 1365 Ageratum. 648 Aglaophotis.
983 (...) castus. 1387 Agri Palma. 705 Agrifolium. 1339 Agrimonia. 712.
Syluest. 993 Agrioriganum. 667 Ahovay. 1545 Ajuga, id est, Chamaepitys. Aizoon,
vide Sedum. Alabastrites. 986 Alaternus. 1398 Albarum. 94 Album olus. 311
Alcanna. 1396 Aleea vulgaris. 931. Egypt. 937 Fruticosa. 934. Peregrina. 936
Alchermes. 1343 (...). 949. Montana. 1594. Alcibiadion. 803 (...). 1071 Alga.
1569 Alisma quorund. 443. Tragi. 649 Matthew. 742. Pratorum and syl. Col. 782.
Dioscoridis. 787 (...). 535 Alkekengi. 342 Alleluya. 1202 Alliaria. 796 Allium.
178. Syl. 179. Vrsinum. ib. Latisolium. 180. Alpinum. 182 Alnus. 1477. Nigra.
1469. Aloe. 507 Alopecuros. 87. Mix. Anglica. ibi. Alsine (...) spec. 611. 612.
ad. 617. Cruciata marina. 622 Altercum. 355. (...) (...) spec. 933. Lutea. 935.
Alus Gallica. 807 Alypum. 506 Alyssum Galen. and Dios. 465 Germaxicum. Tab.
699. (...) (...). 1122. Plin. 1125. Fruticans. 1306 Amara dulcis. 350 Amaracus.
664 Amarantus purp. and (...) spec. 322. 323. Luteus. 646 Amarella Gesn. 564
Ambrosia. 1108 (...). 283 Ambuxum. 887 Amellus Mont. 485. Virgil. 490 Amedanus.
1478 Ameos; id est, Ammi. Amelancher, Lob. 1417 Ammiet eius spec. 1036
Ammoniacum. 1056 Amomis. 1548 Amomum, Plin. 361 Germanicum. 1017 Verum and
spurium. 1548 Quorundam. 1610 Ampeloprassum. 176 Amygdalus. 1445 Peruana. 1552
Amyrberis. 1326 Anacardium. 1544 Anagallis mas. and (...). 617 Tenuifol. and
lutea. 618 Aquatica (...) spec. 620 Anagyris. 1427 Ananas. 1550 Anblatum, id
est, Nidus auis. Anchusa Alcibiad. Lut. etc. 800 Degener. 609 (...). gr.
Portulaca. Androsace. 531 (...). 543. 544 Anemone (...) spec. variae a p. 374
ad. 386. Anethum. 1033 Syluestre vel (...). 1052 Angelica. 999 Anguria, id est,
Citrullus. Anisum. 1035 (...). 1041 Anonis. 1323 Anonymos, Clus. 555 Flore
Coluteae. 1597 Anserina. 993 Anteuphorbium. 1178 Anthemis. 756 Anthera. 1263
Anthericus. 94 Anthora. 969 Anthos, id est, Flos (...) Antbriscus. 1040
Anthropomorphos. 352 (...) alter (...). 623 Lentifolia. 622 Marina. ib. Montana
Dal. 555 Valentina Clus. 566. Leguminosa. 1240 Antipathes. 1575 Antipthora, id
est, Anthora. Antrirhinum (...) spec. 549 Minus flore Linariae. 1626 Tragi. 494
Aparine. 1122 Aphaca. 291. 1228. 1250 Aphacoides. 1231 Aphedron, vide Ephedron.
Aphyllanthes. 637 Dodonaei 732 Apiastrum 691 Apios 504 Apium risus quorund. 385
Hortense. 1013 Palustre, vel rusticum. 1015 Montanum. 1015 Syluestre 1020
Apocynum. 903 Syriacum Clusis. 899 Apoll: naris. 355 Aqua vitae. 882 Aquifolium
vide Agrifolium. Aquileia (...) variet. 1093. 1094 Arabis Dod. 265, vide Draba.
Arachidna. 927 Aracus. 1228 Flore lut. Aduers. 1231 Mayor Baeticus. 1627
Arantium. 1463 Arara. 1550 Arbor ex Goa. sieve Indica 1514 Iudae 1428 Lanifera.
1552 Tristis 1527 (...) 1369 Arbntus. 1496 Arceion 810 Archangelica. 1000
Arcion vide Arceion. Areca. 1520 Arenaria. 428 Aresta (...) 1323 Argemone. 373
Argentina. 993 Argyrocome. 642 Aria Theoph. 1327 Arisarum latifol. and (...)
835 Aristolochia longa and rotunda. 846 Clematitis and saracen. 847 Armeniaca
malus. 1449 Armeria. 597. 598. 599 Armerius flos 3. Dod. 602 Armoraria
pratensis. 600 Armoracia. ib. Arnoglosson. 421. 422 Arresta bouis, id est,
Anonis. Arrenogonon, vide Phyllon. Artemisia alba vel marina. 281 Tenuifol.
Fuch. 653 Vulgaris. 1103 Lauendulae fol. ib. Arthanita, id est, Cyclamen.
Arthretica. 781 Arum vulgar and Aegyptiacum. 834 Arundo vallatoria. 36 Cypria.
ib. Farcta, etc. 37. Saccharina. 38 Florida. 39 Lithospermos. 88 Asarum. 836
Asarabaca, idest, Asarum. Asarina Matthew. 836 Lobelij. 855 Ascalonitides. 170
Asclepias floalbo and nigro. 898 Ascyrum. 542 Aspalathus. 1624 Asparagus and
eius spec. 1110. 1111. 1112. Asperula. 1124 Caerulea. ib. Asphodelus min. Clus.
49 Asphodelus (...) spec. a. 93. ad. 97 Asplenium. 1140. 1141 Assasoetida. 1007
Assyria malus. 1463 Aster Atticus and Ital. 486 Conyzoides. 487 Hirsutus and
mont. ib. Luteus sup. etc. 488 Marinus. 534 Astragaloides 1239 Astragalus and
(...) spec. 1338. 1239 1240. Marten. Baet. 1627 Syluaticus. 1237 Astrantia.
1002 Astrantia nigra. 978 Athanasia. 651 Atractylis. 1171 Attragene. 886
Atraphaxis, gr. Atriplex. Atriplex satiua. 324 Syluestris. 325. etc. ad. 328
Auellana. 1438. 1439 Auera vesca and (...) 75 Aurantia malus. 1463 Aurelia,
vide Helichryson. Auricomum, vide Staechas citrina. Auricula ludae. 1581
Leporina. 608 Muris. 337. 639 Auricula vrsi. 784. 785. 786. Axungia vitri. 535
Azadarac. vel Azedarach. 1492
B
BAaras. 983 Baccharis Monspeliensium. 790 Balanus Myrepfica. 1400 Balaustium.
1451 Ballote. 702 Balsamina mas. and faem. 362 Balsamita altera sieve luteae.
447 Mas. and faem. 648 Balsami fructus. 1528 Balsamum Alpinum Gesn. 1290 Verum
Alpini. 1528 Barranas, (...) Baunanas. 1516 Baptisecula, idost, Cyauns minor.
Barba Capri. 1043 Hirci. 736 Barbarea. 243 Bardana maj. and minor. 809 Baruce.
1550 Basilicum. 674 Batata. 925 Virginiana. 927 Batrachion, gr. Ranunculus.
(...). 1025 Becabunga. 621 Bechium, id est, Tussilago. Been, vel Ben album. 678
(...) Salamant. 602 Beidelsar Alpini. 899 Bellis mayor. 634 Media and minor.
635. 636 Caerulea. 637 Belvidere. 555 Benedicta herba. 996 Berberis. 1326
Beretinus fructus. 1548 Berula. 621 Beta alba, rub. etc. 319 Syluest. Plin. 418
Betele, vel Betre. 1541 Betonica. 714 Aquatica. 715 Foetida. 1005 Pauli. 629
Betula. 1478 Betulus. 1479 Buenas noches. 1552 Bifolium. 403 Bipinella. 1044.
Bisacutum. 1041 Bislingua. 909 Bismalua, id est, Althaea. Bistorta may and min.
399 Blaptisecula, id est, Cyanus minor. Blattaria. 777. 778. Blechon. gr.
Pulegium. Blitum. 320. 321 Spinosum. 1626 (...) 464 Boletus, vide fungus.
Bombax. 901 (...) vide Faba hort. Bonifacia. 909 Bonus Henricus. 329 Barago.
797. Minima. 807 Botrys. 1108 Branca vrsina. 1148. Germanica. 1009 Brassica
(...) spec. 312. 313. etc. ad. 317 Canina. 334 Campest. 537 Marina antiquorum.
839 Vsrgata Cordi. 272 Brathy vel Brathys, (...). Sabina. Britannica. 400. 401.
413 Concha anatifera. 1587 Briza monococcos. 73 Bromus sterilis and alt. 75
Brunella, vide Prunella. Bruscus, id est, (...). Bryon gr. Muscus. Bryonia.
alba. 869 Mexicana sieve Peruvlana. 871. Nigra 873. Bubonium. 490 Buceros, id
est (...) graecum. Bucranium, id est Antirrhinum. Buglossa, vel Buglossum. 798.
799 Hispanicum. 801 Bugula. 631 Bulbacastanum. 1064 Bulbanac, vide Bolbanac.
Bulbus eriophorus. 121 Bombicinus com. 122 Buna. 1548 Bunias sat. 235.
Syluestris. ibid. Bunium. 1064 Buphthalmum. 746. 747 Bispleurum angustifol,
Alp. 517 Angustifol. and latifol. 608 Bursa pastoris. 276 Butomus. 45 Buxus.
1410
C
CAealiae. 815 (...). 1550 Cachrys. 1010 Cactos. 1154 Cacubalus (...). 615
Caeciliana, vide Siciliana. Caious. 1544 Cakile. 248 Calambac. 1622 Calamintha
aquatica. 684 Montana, vulgaris, etc. 687 Calamagrostis. 7 Calamus aromat. ver.
63 Falsus Offic. ibid. Spinosus Perunianus. 1179 Calathiana verna and vera. 437
(...). 438 Calathiana Viola. 438 Calcaris flos, vide Delphinium. Calceolus
Mariae. 443 Calcifraga, vide saxifraga. Calcitrapa. 1166 Calendula, vel Caltha.
739 Alpina. 740. 742 Africana. 750 Calitrichum. 1144. 1146 Caltha palustris.
817. 818 Camelina. 273 Camomilla, vide Chamemaelum. Campana Caerulea. 865
Campanula. 450. 451. 452 Cancamum. 1532 Candela regia, vel Candelaria. 774
Canella. 1532 Cannabina mas, and foem. 711 Cannabis mas, and foem. 708 Spuria.
709 Syluestris Dioscor. 934 Cannacorus. 39 Cantabrica. 590 Capillus veneris.
1143. 1144. 1146 Capnos, gr. Fumaria. Capparis. 895 Leguminosa. 897
Caprifolium, id est, Periclymenum. Capsicum. 364. 365 Caput monachi. 291
Gallinaceum. 1243 Cardamine (...) spec. 259. 260, etc. Cardamomum. 1542
Cardamum, gr. Nasturtium. Cardiaca. 705 Carduus acaulis. 1158 Asininus. 1173
Benedictus. 1171 Calcitrapa. 1166 (...). 1155 Eriocephalus. 1152 Fullonum. 1168
Ferox. 1173 Globosus. 1151 Lanceatus. 1174 Lacteus, sieve Mariae. 1150 Mollis.
1183 Muscatus. 1174 Perunianus. 1156 Spaerocephalus. 1152 (...) and
solstitialis. 1166 Vulgatissimus Viarum. 1173 Carex Dod. 45 Carica. 1511
Carlina. 1157. 1158. Syluestris. 1159 Carnabadion. 1034 Carobe. 1429 Carota.
1028 Carpentaria. 633 Carpesium quor. 1548 Carpinus. 1479 Carpobalsamum, 1528
Carthamus. 1169 Carub. vide Carobe. Carui, vel Carum. 1034 Caryon, gr. Nux.
Caryophyllata (...) spec. 994. 995. Caryophyllus aromaticus. 1535 Caryophyllus
flos, and etus spec. and varietat. a. p. 588. ad. 597. Syluestris. 599. 600
Marinus. 602 Indicus. 750 Caryota, vide Carota. Cassia, vel Casia Poetica. 584
Poet. Lobel. 1293. Lignea. 1532 Nigra sieve fistula. 1431 Cassita, vel Cassutha,
vide Cuscuta. Castanea. 1442 Equina, and Peruana. ibid. Castrangula. 717
Catanance. 425 quorundam. 494. 1250 Cataputia minor. 503 Mayor. 496 Cattaria.
683 Caucason, id est, Moly Indicum. Cancalis (...) spec. 1021 Cauda equina,
vide Equisetum. Muris. 426. Uulpis. 87 Caulorapum. 318 Ceanothos. 1173
Cedrelate. 1352 Cedria. 1353 Cedrus Libani. 1352 Lycia. 1369 Altera. 1375
Celastrus. 1600 Geltis. 1494 Cenchrys, gr. Milium. Centaurium, vel Centeurea.
Magnum. 546 Parvum. 547 Centauroides. 582 Thalij 714 Centimorbia. 630 Centrum
galli. 770 Centum capita. 1162 Centumnodia. 565 Centunculus. 644 Cepa, vel
Gepe. 169 Cepaea. 621 Cerasus (...) spec. 1502. 1503, etc. ad. 1507 Ceratonia,
vel Ceratia. 1429 Cerefolium sativum and (...). 1038 Magnum. 1039 Cereus
Peruuiauus. 1179 Cerinthe. 538 Cerris, vel Cerrus. 1345. 1346 Ceruicaria. 450
Cestrum morionis. 46 Ceterach. 1140 Chaeresolium, (...) (...), gr. vide
Cerefolium. Chamaeacte, gr. Ebulus. Chamaebalanus. 1237 Chamaebuxus. 1597
Chamaecerasus. 1505 Chamaecissos, id est, Hedera terrest. Chamaecistus. 1284
Chamaecyparissus. 1109 Chamaedaphne. 895 Chamaedrys. 656 Syluestris. 657 (...)
fol. 527 Chamaeficus. 1510 Chamaefilix mar. Angl. 1143 Chamaegenista. 1313
Chamaeiris. 56. 57. 58. Chamaeitea. 1391 Chamaeleon albus. 1157 Niger. 1160
Tabernamont. 1175 (...). 812 Chamaelinum. 559 Chamaemalus. 1461 Chamaemelum.
754. 755 Syluestre. 757 Chamaemespilus. 1454 Chamaemorus. 1273. 1630
Chamaenerion, Gesu, 477 Chamaepericlymenum. 1296 (...). 1293 Chamaepitys (...)
spec. 525. 526. 527. Chamaeplatanus. 1425 Chamaerriphes. 1519
Chamaerododendron. 1407 Chamaelaea. 1402 Germanica. 1403 Chamaesyce. 504
Charantia. 363 Chelidonia, vel (...) minus. 816 Maius. 1069 Chermes. 1342
Cherua, vide Ricinus. China. 1618 Choeradolethron, id est, Xanthium. Chondrilla
(...) spec. 286. 287, etc. spec. tertia (...) 494 Christophoriana. 969
Chrysanthemum latifolium Alpinum. 742 Segetum. 743 Valentinum. ibid. Alpinum.
744 Secund. Clusii. 744 Creticum and Baeticum. 745 Peruvianum. (...) Littoreum.
534 Chrysocome, Col. 553. Capitulis. conglob. 646. 647 Chrysogonon. 992
Chrysolachanon, i. Atriplex satina. Cicer arietinum. 1222 Sylnestre. 1223
Cicerbita, id est, Sonchus Leuis. Cicercula. 1231 Cichorium, vel Cicorea. 281
Syluestre. 284 Spinosum. 283 Verrucarium. 289 Cicuta. 1061. 1062 Cicutaria
alba. 1039 Palustris, and tenuifolia. 1063 Cinamomum. 1532 (...) satiua, and
syl. 1153 Cineraria. 281 Cinnamomum, vide Cinamo. Circaea Lutet. 351. 352
Cirsium Maximum. 1181 May. alt. 1181. Eius relic spec. 1182. 1183. Cissos gr.
Hedera. Cistus (...), spec. 1275. 1276. ad. (...) Ledon, suie Ladanifera. 1285.
(...) ad. 1292. Citrago. 692 Citrium malum. 1464 Citrulus, vel Citrullus. 913
Clavus, idest, Carrophyllus. Clematis altera Matthew. 886 Alt. flo. pleno Clus.
887 (...). 886 (...). 887 Cruciata. 890 Daphnoides. 864 Pannonica. 899 Vrens.
888 Trifolia, Bauh. 1591 Cleoma, i. Ranunculus flammeus. Clinopodium Dodon. 671
Vulgar. 675 Alpinum, Anglicum and Austriacum. 676. Odoratiss. 677 Clymenon
Italorum. 543 Turneri. 715 Cneoron. 1403 Caesalpini. 1595 Matthew. 1596 Cnicus,
id est, Carthamus. Syluestris. 1171 Coccigria, vide Coggygria. Coccus baphicus.
1343 Cnidius. 1401. 1403 Oriental. 1548 Cocculus Indus. ib. Coccymelea. 1512
Cochenilia. 1512 Cochlearia. 401 Cochiophori, vide Cuchiophori. Coco, vel
Cocus. 1522 Coggygria, vel Coccigria. 1476 Colchicum (...) spec. 157. etc. ad.
164 Colocasia. 834 (...). 915 Colophonia. 1361 Coloquintida. 915 Colubrina.
400. 832 Colus Iouis, 769. Rustica. 1171 Colutea (...) spec. 1299. 1300
Colymbades. 1393 Colytea, vide Colutea. Coma aurea. 647 Comaros gr. Arbutus.
Conchae (...). 1587 Condrilla, vide Chondrilla. Conserua (...). 1570
Coniugalis. 1479 Conion, gr. Cicuta. Coniza, vide Conyza. Connarus. 1605
Consiligo. 747 (...). 976 Consolida mayor. 806 Media. 634 Minor. 633. 637
Regalis. 1083 Saracenica. 428 Saracen. Ger. 275 Conuolvulus argenteus. 862
Minor and minimus. 861. 862 Niger. 463 Caeruleus. 864. 865. Pennatus. 1598
Conyza (...) spec. a. p. 481. ad. p. 485. Mayor Matthew. 792 Cor Indum. 342 Coral
Arbor. 1614 Corallina. 1571. 1572 Alba (...). 1578 Montana. 1572 Corallium
rubrum and nigrum. 1575 Album. 1576 (...). 1576. 1577 (...). 676 Corculum
Ferulae. 1057 Coriandrum. 1012 Coris. 544 Cornu cer vinum. 427 Cornus mas. 1466
Faem. 1467 Corona fratrum. 1152 Imperialis. 202 Solis. 752 Terrae. 856
Coronopus. 425. 427. ex cod. Caesar. 1190. Corrigiola. 565 Corruda. 1112 (...).
788 Corylus. 1438 Cosmosandalos. 443 Costa, Came. 305. Canina. 421 Costus
hortorum. 649 Indicus and Officin. 1620 Cotinus. 1476 Cotonaria. 1644
Cotonaster. 1606 Cotonea mala. 1452 Cotula foetida. 757 Cotyledon altera Dios.
511. vide (...) Veneris. Coxco cypote. 1550 Cracca mator and minor. 1228
Crambe, gr. Brassica. Thalassia, id est, Soldonella. Crassula minor. 515 Mayor.
519 (...). 91 Crespinus. 1326 Crinon, gr. Lilium. Crista Galli. 1071 Crithmum
(...) spec. 533. quartum Matthew. 1165 Crocodilium. 1161 Crocus sativus. 151
Vernus a. 152. ad. 157. Hortensis vel Saracenica. 1170 Crocus Indicus, id est,
Curcuma. Cropiot. 1550 Croton, id est, Ricinus. Cruciata rubia. 1123 Gentiana.
433 Crus galli. 28 Cubebae. 1548 Cuciophoria. 1559 Cucubalus. 615 Cucumer, vel
Cucumis. 910 Asininus, vel agrestis. 912 Cucurbita syluestris. 915 Anguina and
Lagenaria. 923 Lagener. Syluestris. 924 Cuminum, vide Cyminum. Cunane. 1556
Cunila. 577. 667 Cunilago, idest, Conyza. Cupressus, vel Cypressus. 1367 Cupula
glandis. 1340 Curcuma. 34. fig. 1631 Curmi. 71 Cuscuta. 577 Cyamos, gr. Faba.
Cyanus mayor, and minor, and eiusque spec. 732. 733. Cyclamen eiusque spec.
843, 844 Cydanago. 1606 Cydonia mala. 1452 Cymbalaria. 529 Cyminum Aethiopicum
vel, Regium. 1037 Sativum. 1066 Syluestre, and siliquosum. 1067 Cynanchice,
vide Synanchica. Cynocrambe. 333 Cynoglossum and eius spec. 804 Cynara, vide
Scolymus. Cynorrhodos. 1271 Cynosbaton. 1271. 1274. Cynosorchis. 205. 206. 207.
Morio. 208. 209 Cyperus eius. spec. 30. 31. 32. Cyperus Indicus. 33 sig. 1631.
Cypressus. vide Cupressus. Cyprus. 1394. 1395 Cytinus. 1451 Cytisus eiusg spe.
1304, 1305. ad. 1309 Tragi. 1194.
D
DAburi. 1554. Damasonium Stellat, Ludg. 418 Nothum. 443 Matthew. 742. vide
Alisma. Daphne, gr. Laurns Daphnoides. 895. 1405. Datura, id est, (...)
perigrinum. Dancus, syl. 1023. 1028 Creticus. 1029 Delphinium. 1083
Dendromolache. 933 Dens caninus. 204 Leonis, 291 Dentaria bulbifera,
enneaphyllos, Heptaphyll, etc. 984. 985 Mayor and minor, Matthew. 1585
Dentillaria, Gesn. 485 Rondelet. 1254 Diagridium. 868 Diapensia. 948 Dictamnus,
vel Dictamnum. 797 Digitalis purp. alb. etc. 790 Dionysia, idest, Hedera.
Dipeadi, vide Muscari. Dipsacus sativus and syl. 1167 Diptamnum Offic. 1246
Dolichns. 1216 Dorea. 431 (...). 6 Clusil. 7. 12. (...) (...). 759. 760. etc.
Dorycnium Monspel. 1309 Caesalpini and Plateau. 1597 Draba, Dod. 265. Dioscor.
274 Alt. Clus. ibi. Draco arbor. 1523 Herba. 249 Syluestr. 607 Dracontia, vel
Dracontium. 400 Maius and minus. 831 Dracunculus Hort. 249 Dodonaei. 400
Aquaticus. 832 Drakenaradix, and ei affinis. 1621 Dryopteris. 1135 Nigra Dod.
1137 Drypis. 1112 Drys, gr. Quercus. Dnlcamara. 350 Dulcichinum. 32 Dulcis
(...), id est, Glycyrrhiza.
E
(...). 1426 Echinomelocactos. 1177 Echium palustre. 337 German. spinosum Fuch.
799 Vulgar. 802 Flore Pullo and rubro. ibi. Elaeagnos Cordi. 1414
Elaphoboscum. 1025 Elate, vide Palma. Elaterium. 913 Elatine. 625 Tertia Tab.
1250 Eleagnos Cordi, id est, Myrtus Brabantica. Elelisphacos, idest, Saluia.
Eliocrysum. 645 Elioselinum, 1014 Elephantis pediculus, i. Anacar (...).
Elleborastrum, vide Helleboraster. Elleborine. 950 Elleborus albus, vide
Helleborus. Empetrum. 569 Phacoides. 507 Endiuia, vide Cichorium. Enephyllon.
404 Enula campana. 793 Ephedra. 1116 Ephemerum Matthew. 492 Dioscoridis, Col. 791
Epilobion Gesneri. 476 Epilinum. 577 Epimedium. 480 Epimelis. 1455 Epipactis.
442. 950 Epistoebe. 578 Epithymum. 574 Epithymbrum. 578 Epiurtica. 577
Equapium. 1019 Equisetum (...) spec. 1113. 1114. 1115. Eranthemum, id est, flos
Adonis. Eribinthos, gr. Cicer. Erica and (...) variae (...). 1380. 1381. etc.
ad. 1386. Alexandrina, Lob. 1596 Erigeron. 278. 279. Marinum. 281. Erinacea
Clusii. 1321 Erisisceptron, id est, Cyperus. Erizambac. 97 Eruangina, idest,
Orobanche. Eruca sat. and syl. 247 Nasturt. cognat. ib. Marin. and aquat. 248
Muralis Dal. 275 Peregr. sieve Cantab. 278 Erucago Apula. 277 Eruilia. 1249
Eruum sativum Cordi. 1231 Album sat. Fuch. (...) Syl. 1249 Eryngium and cius
spec. 1162. 1163. 1164. (...) 1156 Erysimum. 254 Cereale. 89 Erythrodanum. 1120
Esula. 501. 502. 503. Indica. 899 Euforbium, vide Euphorbium. Eufragia, vide
Euphrasia. Euonymos Theoph. 1468 Eupatorium Mesue. 649 Auicennae sieve
Cannabinum mas. and foem 711. Vulgar. 712 Euphorbium. 1178 Euphragia sieve
Euphrasia rubra, alt. Dod. 92. Coerulea. 337 Alba sieve vulgaris. 663
Euphrosinum. 797 Euphrosyne. 663. Ezula, vide Esula.
F
FAba hort. and syl. 1209 Crassa. 519 Egypt. (...) Iouis suilla, sieve lupina.
(...) (...) folijs. (...) Fabago. 897 Fabaria. 519 Fagara. 1548 Fagi, vel
(...), 89 Fagopyrum idem. (...). 1444 Far. 69 Farrago. 68 Farfara, id est,
Tussilago. Farfarus. (i.) Populus alba. Faselus, id est, Faba. Faseolus, vide
Phaseelus. Fausel. 1520 Febrifuga. 653 Fell terrae. 548 Ferrum equinum. 1235
Ferula. 1056 Ferulago. 1056 Festuca Italica. 73 Altera Dod. 75 F caria minor.
816 Ficus. 1510 Egypt. 1509 Infernalis. 372 Phareonis. 1509 Indica. 1512
Indica Theoph. 1514 Filago. 642. 644 Filicula. 1133 Petraea. 1142 Filipendula
(...) spec. 1058. 1059. Filius ante patrem, id est, Lysimachia siliquosa,
quibusdam Colchicum, (...) Tussilago. Filix mas. and (...). 1128 Florida. 1131
Pumila sax. 1136 Saxatilis corniculata. 1561 Fistici. 1436 Fistularia. 1071
Flamula Iouis surrecta. 888 (...) 962 Flos Adonis. 387 Aphricanus. 749. 750.
Amberualis. 564 Creticus, Constantinop, vel Hierosolym. 467 Cuculi, vel
Cornicis. 600 Frumentorum. 734 Passionis. (...) Regis. 1083 Solis mayor. (...)
Solis pyramidalis. 753 Minor. 1285 Tinctorius. 1317 Fluida Gazae, id est, Rhus.
Faeniculum marinum. (...) Vulgar. 1032 Porcinum. 1055 Faenum Burgundicum. 1189
Faenum (...) sat. and syl. 1196 Folium (...). 1535 Fontalis. 823 (...) Lob. 823
(...) and Fraga. 997 (...). 1469 Fraxinesla. 1245 Fraxinus. 1471. vel
syluestris. Bubula, montana, 1473 (...) eiusque spec. 149. 150 (...) Indici and
perigrini. 1547. etc. (...). (...) Frumentum (...). 60. Turcicum Asiaticum,
sieve (...). 81. (...) Frutex marinus reticulatus. 1617 Fucus herba. 801 Marinus
Phasganoides. 1570 Spongiosus nodosus, ib. Marin. (...). 1573 Ferulaceus ib.
Fuga daemonum. 541 Fumaria. 1088 Bulbosa sieve Tuberosa. 1090. 1091 Fumus
terrae, ib. Fungus esculentus. 1579 Lethalis. 1580. 1581 Fusanum. 1469. Fusus
agrestis. 1171
G
Galanga mayor, and minor. 33 Galbanum. 1056 Galedragon. 1168 Galega. 1252
Galeopsis vera. 704 Quorundam. 715 Lutea. 770 Galla 1348 Gallitrichum. 768. 770
Gallium album and luteum. 1126 Rubrum and mont. 1127 Garipot. 1361 Garosmus.
327 Garyophyllata, v, Caryophyllata. Garyophillon Plinij. 1610 Garyophyllus
vide Caryophyllus. Gedwar, vel Geiduar. 1623 Gelseminum rubrum alterum. 1598.
Genista (...) spec. 1311. 1312. 1313 Spinosum and eius spec. 1319. 1320.
Genisteua (...) spec. 1316, 1317. Aculeata. 1320. Gentiana (...) spec. 432.
433. etc. Gentianella. 436. 437. Geranium (...) (...). 947 Anglicum varieg. 948
Batrachioides. 942 Baeticum. 1626 Bulbosum. 940. Bulbosum Pen. 947
Cicutae-folio. 945 Creticum. 946. Columbinum. 938. Indicum. 948 Malacoides. 943
Moscatum, 941 Maculatum. 945 Nodosum. 497 Robertianum. 939 Sanguinarium. 945
Violac. ib. Saxatile. 938 Geum Alpinum. 789 Gingiber. 61 Gingidium. 1042 Gith
(i.) Nigella. Githago. 1086 Gialcatamer. 378 Gladiolus (...). 29 Lacustris. 105
Narbon. and Ital. 104 Glans Beretina. 1548 Vnguentaeria. 1491 Glastum. 490
(...). 372. 346 (...) (...). 562 Dioscor. 1242 Glechon, gr. Pulegium.
Globularia. 637 Glycypicron, gr. Amara-dulcis. Glycyrrhiza. 1302 Glycyside, gr.
Poeonia. Gnaphalium Trag. 29 Vulgar (...) spec. 639. 640. ad. 644. Gossipium
vel Gossypium. 901 Gramen prat. maius, and minus. 2 Album. 3 Xerampel. 3
Duriusculum. 4 Iunceum. 4 Segetum. 5 Arund. 5 Miliaceum. 6 May. aquat. 6
Sorghinum. 5 Arund. panical. 7 Arund. min. 8 Toment. 9 Pan. elegans. 9 Syluat.
may. and minus. 9 Alopeucrum. 10. 11 Typhinum. 12 Cyperoides. 12 Iunc. aquat.
12. 21. 22. Aquat. 13 Fluviat. 14 Genicul. 15 Paniceum. 16 Echinatum. 17 Exile.
hirs. 17 Cap. glob. 18 Hirs. (...). 19 Cyper. 19 Spicat. 20 Cyper. 21. 22. 29.
30. Caninum. 23. 24. 25. 26. Striatum. 26 Mannae. 27 Ischaem. 28 Auen. 29
Murorum. 29 Cristatum. 29 Secalinum. 29 Spic. Brizae. 29 Lanatum. 30 Lol. min.
30 Iunc. Leucanth. 30 Sprat (...) 30 Spic. aspera. 30 Scoparium. 30 Toment. 31
Plumosum. 43 Leucanthemum, Dod. 47 Lupuli glumis. 86 Marinum sieve Polyanthemum.
603 Pernassi. 840 Granadilla (...). 1591 Granatum. 1451 Granum kermes, (...).
1342 Paradisi. 1542 Gratiae Dei. 1581 Fuch. 943 Gratiola (...) spec. 581
Grossularia. 1324 Rubra. 1593 Grossus. 1511 Gruinalis. 940 Guaiacum Indicum.
1611 Patauinum. 1495 Guanabanus. 1550 (...). 1613
H
HAlicacabus, vel (...) 342. Halimus. 523 Harmala. 1255 Harundo vide Arundo.
Hastula regia. 94 Hedera corimbosa. 858 Helix, ibid. Cilicia. 860 Spinosa. 860
Saxatilis and Terrestris. 856 Virginiana. 857 Hederula aquatica. 830 Hedyosmus,
gr. Mentha. Hedypnois. 283 Hedysarum and eius spec. 1233. 1234. 1235. Helenium.
793 Odorum Theoph. 671 Helyanthemum. 1282. 1283 (...). 645 Heliotropium. 334.
335 Minus. 337 Indicum. 753 Helleboraster. 976 Helleborine. 442 Helleborus
albus. 440 Niger 976. 978. Niger ferulaceus. 746 Helxine (i) (...). Cissampelos
(...). 863 Hemerocallis. 99 Valentina. 173 Dodonaei. 197 Maced. Lob. 200. Flo.
rub. eiusd. 197 Hemionitis. 1138 Hepatica alba Cordi. 840 Terrestris stellata.
and Petraea. 1565 Nobilis. 1203 Hepatorium, vide Eupatorium. Heptaphyllon
Clusii. 988 Vulgar, idest, Tormentilla. Herba Aegyptia. 700 Anatum. 829
Benedicta. 926 Cancri. 336 Cattaria. 683 Coxendicum. 529 Doria. 431 Fortis. 428
Gerardi. 1001 Giulia. 649 Graeca, ibid. Impia. 642 Iudiaca. 689 Lassulata. 649
Margarita. 637 Mimosa. 1599 Paralysis sieve Sti. Petri. 782 Paris. 405
Pedicularis. 495 Pulicaris. 587 Roberti. 939 St. (...). 711 Stella. 428
Studiosorum. 555 Terribilis. 507 Turca. 569 Tumca. 599 Trinitatis. 1203 Venti.
378. 385. 701. Hermodactylus Matthew. 104 Officin. 164 Herniaria. 569 Hesperus.
463 Hieracium minimum Clus. 289 Arboresc. palustris. 295 Maius, minus, etc.
296. 297. etc. ad. 303 Latifol. hortes. 305 Stellatum, Medio nigrum, and
lanosum. 1625 Higuerro. 1545 Hippia. 615 Hippoglossum, mas. and (...). 908
Valentinum Clus. 507 (...). 388. 389 Hippomanes. 349. 372 Hipposelinum. 1019
Agreste. 1024 Hippuris, vide Equisetum. Hirculus. 1079 Hirci triticum. 89 (...)
minor. 816 Mayor. Vide Asclepias. 1070 Holcus Plinij. 73 (...), (...) (...)
Matthew. 4 Salamant. and parvum. 423 Ruellij. 47 Creticum. 424 (...) 639 (...).
1561 Hordeum (...). 70 Polystichon, ib. Nudum, 72 Spurium, 73 Vstum. 77 (...)
(...). 768 Syluestre. 769. 771 Hyacinthus Poet. (...). 102 Stellaris. 106
(...). 107 Variae spec. a 106 ad 120. Hydrolapathum. 389 Hydropiper. 445
Hyoscyamus eius. spe. 353. etc. ad. 359 Hyosiris, 285 Hypecoum (...). 1067.
Matthew. 937 Hypericum and spec. 539. 540. 541 Hypocoeris. 289 Hypocistis. 1275
Hyssopoides, vel Hissopifolia. 581 Hyssopus Guilland. 552. Arabum. 579
I
Iacea nigra (...) spec. 727. 728 Tricolor. 855 Iacobaea 280 Ialapium, vel
Gelapum. 873 Iasminum Mexicanum. 344 Album. 89 Luteum. 893 Arabicum. 1400
Iberis cardimantica. 253 Ibiga, i. Chamaepitys. Ibiscus. 934 Ignames. 926 Ilex
cocigera. 1342 Mayor. 1344 Illecebra. 517 Impatiens herba. 447. 261
Imperatoria. 1001 Inguinalis. 490 Intybum, vel (...) sat. 282 Syluestris. 283
Inula, vide Enula. 793 Rustica. 807 Ion, gr. Viola. (...) barba. 511 Flos. 1095
Glans. 1443 Iphion. 96 Irio. 254 Iris Vulgaris. 50 (...) spec. a. 51. ad. 59
Iris bulbosa (...) spec. a. 99. ad. 102 Tuberosa. 103 Isatis satina and syl.
491 Syl. alt. 492 Ischaemon. 27 Ischas. 505 Isopyron, Col. 1095 Quorund. 1194
Itea, gr. Salix. Iua arthretica, id est, Chamaepitys. Moschata, eadem. Iucca
Peruana. 1543 Iuglans. 1440 Iuiube. 1501 Inncarid. 1115 Iuucus acutus, laevis
etc. 35 Bombicinus. 29 Marinus gramineus. 44 Oderatus, ib. Floridus. 29 Capit.
Equiseti fig. 1631 (...) (...) spec. 1372 Sterilis. 1629 Iusquiamus (id est)
Hyoscyamus. Ixia. 1351
K
KAiri, vide Keyri. Kali (...) spec. 535 Kaye baka. 1554 Keyri. 457 Kermes.
1342 Kiki. 497 Knawel. 566
L
LAblab, vide Leblab. Labrum Veneris. 1168 Labrusca. id est, Vitis syluestris.
Laburnum. 1427 Lacca. (...) Lachryma Iobi 88 Lactuca agrestis. 309. Crispa. 306
Sat etc. 307. Montanapurp. 295 Agnina. 310 Ladanum. 1291 Segetum Dalech. 699
Lagopus and eius spec. 1192. 1193. Lamium album, luteum. 702 Rub Pannon. 703.
704 Lampsana (...). 255 Lanaria. 774 Lancea Christi. 404 Lancealata. 422
Lanifera siliqua. 1552 Lantana. 1490 (...) (...) spec. 383. 389. etc. Lappa
inuersa. 712. 810. Mayor and minor. 810 minor. 1122 Larix. 1365 Laserpitium.
1006 (...). 503 Lathyrus and eius spec. 1229 Aestivus and eius var. 1628
Lauandula vel Lauendula. 583. 584 Lauer, vide Sium. Laurea-cerasus, vel
Lauro-cerasus 1603 Laureola. 1405 (...) Alexandrina. 909 Vulgaris. 1407 Tinus.
1409 Rosea. 1406 Lectipes, id est, Clinopodium. (...) (...). 1290 Silesiacum.
1288 Legumen pallidum. 1627 Lens palustris, vel lacustris 829. Mayor and minor.
1224 (...). 1224 Marina. 1615 Lentiscus. 1432 Leo carduus. 1173 Leonis pes. 237
Leont opetalon. 236 Leontopodium Lon. 337 Creticum. 424 Parvum. 642. 643
Leontostomium. 1095 Lepidium Aegin. 241 Annuum. 242 Maius. (...) Parvum. 643
Quorundam. 1254 Leprocaryon, id est, est, Nux Auellana. Leucanthemis. 756
Leucanthemum. 757 Leucas. 655 Leucographis. 1150 Leucoium bulbosum, 147. 148
Album. 458 Luteum. 456. Marin. 460. 461. Melancholicum. 463. Mont. 466
Syluestre. 457. Spinosum. 458. Loucolachanon. 311 Leuconarcissolirion. 146
Leucopiper, id est. Album piper. Leuisticum. 1008 Libanotis coronaria. 1293
Ferulacca, and Theophrasti. 1010 Luchenarborum. 1566 Marinus. 1567 Lignum
Aloes. 1622 Lapideum. 1587 Ligusticum. 1008 Matthew. 1049 Ligustrum. 1394 Album
Poetarum. 863 Nigrum. 865 Lilac, vel (...). 1401 Liliago Gordi. 49 Liliastrum.
99 Liliasphodelus. ib. Lilionarcissus (id est) Tulipd. Lilium album. 190.
Aureum. 192 Non bulbosum. 99. Rubrum. 192. Cruentum. 193 Purp. 194. Montanum.
196 Byzant. 197 Rub. Angust. 199 Mont. flo. flau. 200 Persicum. 201 Conuall.
410. Inter spinas. 891 Limnesion. 582 Limodoron, vide Orobanche. Limones. 1464
Limonium verum Antiq. 417 Vulgar. 411 Gesneri. 400 Limonio congener. 412
Limonium malum. 1462 Linaria (...) spec. a. p. 550. ad. 555. Hederaefolio Col.
529 Minor (...). 1626 Lingua Auis. 1472 Bubula. 797 Bouis. 799 Canis. 805
(...). 1139 Pagana. 909 Passerina. 555 Serpentis, sieve (...). 404 Linosyris.
553 Linum vulgar. 556 (...) Cordi, 29 Syluest. eiusque spec. 558. 560
Liqueritia. 1302 Liriasphodelus. 99 Lirion, gr. Lilium. Lirionarcissus, id est,
Lilionarcissus. Liriasphodelus, id est, Liliasphodelus. Lithospermum eiusque
spec. 609 Minus, Dod. 555 Lobus (...). 1554 Lolium album and rubrum. 78
Lonchitis prior Aldroandi. 104 Aspera. 1140 Lotus arbor. 1493. 1494 Lotus
herba, incana. 1191 Quadrifolia. 1198 Siliqua quadr. Trifolia corniculata.
1198. Vrbana. 1195 Lucernarum fnngi. 1584 Luiula, vel Lugula. 1202
Lunariaminor. 405 Graeca. 464 Aspera. 466 Mayor. 1132 Lupicrepitus. 1584
Lupinus and eius, (...). 1217 Lupulus, vel Lupus Salictarius. 885 Syluat.
Thalij. 1186 Lutea, vel Luteum, Luteola, (...) 494 Lychnis satiua. 469 Syl
eiusque (...). 469. 470. etc. Chaleedonica. 466 Syluest. 1. 3. 4. Clus. 601.
Lychnoides segetum. 1086 Lycium. 1332 Italicum. 1337 Lycoctonum. 971. 972
Lycopersicum. 346 Lycopodium. 1564 Lycopsis Anglica. 801 Lycostaphylos Cordi.
1425 Lysimachia eiusque (...). 474. etc. ad. 480. Galericulata minor. 582
M
M Acaleb. 1397 Macis. 1537 Macocks Virginiani. 916 Macropiper, id est, piper
longum. Magydaris. 1007 (...) hort. and Anglica. 664 Syluestris. 666 Maiz, vel
Mais. 83 Malabathrum. 1535 Malagueta, vel Millegeta. 1542 Malicorium. 1451
Malinathalla Theop. 32 (...). 345 Maltum. 71 Maina aestiua. 931 Crispa. ib.
Horaria. 937 Hortensis. 928. Rosea. 928 Purpurea. 929 Syluest. 930 Verbenaca.
931 Malua Viscus, id est, Malua Ibiscus. Malum Aethiopicum. 347 Armeniacum.
1449 Cotoneum, sieve Cydoneum. 1452 Granatum. 1451 Insanum. 345 Medicum. 1462
Persicum. 1447 Praecox. 1449 (...). 1451 Spinosum. 348 Terrae. 845 Vulgar
sativum. 1416 Malus Carbonaria, etc. 1459 Syluestris. 1461 Medica, and Limonia.
1462 Arantia, and Assyriaca. 1463 Mamoeramas and (...). 1609 Mandragoras,
Theophr. 341 Mas and faemina. 352 (...). 1592 Marathrum, gr. Foeniculum.
Marrubium album, etc. 693 Aquaticum. 700 Aquat. acutum. 1005 Nigrum. 701
Martagon. 193. 197 Pomponeum. 200 Maru. 539 Marum. 670 Mastiche. 1432 (...)
herbarum. 1103 (...). 652 Matrisaluia. 770 Matrisylua. 891 Mechoacan. 873
Mecon, gr. Papauer. Medica fructu cochleato (...). 1199 Marina. 1200 Medica
mala. 1462 Medium. 448 Mehenbethene. 1522 Mel frugum. 85 Melampyrum album, etc.
90 Melanopiper. id est, Piper nigram. Melangena, vel Melanzana. 345 Melanthium
(...). species. 1084. 1085 Meleagris flos, vide Fritilaria. Melegheta vel
Malagueta. 1542 Melica. 83 Melilotus and eius spec. 1204. 1205. 1206. Melissa
(...) spec. 689. 690 Molucha laeuis, and spin. 691 Melissophyllum, vide
Melissa. Melo. 9017 Saccharinus, Hispanicus. ib. Virginian. aquatici. 921
Melocactos, sine melocarduus echinatus. 1177 Melopepon. 918 Menianthe, vide
Trifolium paludosum. Mentha (...) (...) spec. 680 Cattaria. 682 Syl. aquat. 684
Corymbifera, Grae. Saracenica. 649 Mentastrum. 684 (...), mas and (...). 332
Canina vel syl. 333 Syl. alt. Trag. 447 (...) aronia. 1454 Satiua. 1453 Metel,
vel methella nux. 348 Meum. 1052 Mezereon. 1402. 1403. Militaris aizoides. 826
Milium. 80 Indicum. 83 Syluat. Tab. 92 Solis. 610 (...) aquaticum. 827. 828.
Terrestre. 1072 Luteum and nobile. 1073 Millegrana. 569 Millemorbia. 717
Mimmulus, vide (...). Mirabilia Peruv. 303 Molle. vel Molli. 1530 Mollugo. 1127
Molochia. 691 Moloche. 937 Moly Uirgin. Bauhini. 49 Dioscoridis. 183 Serpent.
Homeric. ib. (...). 184 Latifol. flau. 185. Min. 185 Narciss. fol. 186
Montanum. 187 Molybdaena. 1254 Momordica. 362 Monophyllon. 409 Morella, v.
Solanum. 339 Morion, vide Mandragoras. Morsus Diaboli. 726 Gallinae. 617 Fol.
(...). 617 Ranae. 818 Morus alba and rub. 1507 Multibona. 1016 Mungo. 1548
Musa, Mosa, vel Muz. 1595 Muscari. 120 Muscata Nux. 1537 Muscatella. 1090
Muscipula altera. 494 Lob, etc. 601 Muscus quernus. 1558 Terrestris. 1559
Marinus. 1571 Capillaris. 1559 (...). 1561 Clauatus. 1562 Denticulatus. 1561.
ex cranio hum. 1563. Filicinus. 1561 Pyxidatus. 1560 Ramosus. 1560 Siellaris.
1563 Mustum. 877 Myacantha, idest, Asparagus? Myagrum. 273 Myos otis
scorpioides. 337 Oura, velouros. 427 Myrica. 1379, 1385 Myriophyllon. 828
Marinum. 1616 (...). 1537 Myrobalani Bellericae, chepul, etc. 1500. Myrrhida,
Plin. idest, Geranium muscatum, Myrrhis Aequicolorum, 1038 Vulgaris. 1039
Parua. ib. Myrtillus German. 1417 Myrtocistus. 1279 Myrtus Agria. 907 Baetica
Latifolia. 1411 Baetica (...). 1412 Exotica. 1412 (...). 1414 Fructu albo. 1412
Laurea max. 1411 Minor. 1412 Myxa. 1499
N
NAbca, vel Napca. 1605 Napellus. 972 Napus. 236 Syluestris. ib. Narcissus, and
cius species a. p. 123. ad. p. 137. Tertius Matthew.. 173 Nardus, vel Nardum.
Celtica vera. 1079 Celtica Alpina. 740. 742 Cretica, vel rustica. 1078 Indica,
vel spica nardi. 1080 Montana. 1079 Narbonensis. 1080 Naronica Radix, id (...).
Iris. (...). 37 Nasturtium bortense. 250 Hispanicum. 251 Petraeum. ib. (...).
243 Indicum. 252 Sylustre. 253 Aquaticum. 257 Aquat. minus. 261 Natrix. 1323
Nenuphar, vide Nymphaea. Nepa. 1321 (...). 683 Vera. 688 Nerion. 1406
Neuroides. 418 Nicotiana, idest, Tabacum. 356. 358 Nidus Auis. 228 Nigella.
1084. 1085 Nigellastrum. 1087 Nolime tangere. 447 Nuces insanae. 1548 Nuclai
(...). 1355 Nucula terrestris. 1065 Indica racemosa. 1554 Nummularia. 630
Nummulus Plin. 1071 Nux methel. 348 Indica. 1522 Auellana. 1438 Byzant. 1439
Moscata. 1537 Persica, vel (...). 1441 Ponticasine (...). 1439 Vesicaria. 1437
Vomica and purg. 1547 (...), alba, and (...) mayor. 819 Alba, and (...). minor.
820 (...). 818
O
O(...), Ochra, vel (...). 1249 Ocimastrum, vel Ocymastrum. 474 Alterum. 679
Valentinum, Clus. 694 Ocimum, vel Ocymum. 673 Syluestre. 675 Ocimoides, vel
Ocymoides (...). 474 Ocularis. 663 Oculus bouis. 746. Christi. 772 Odontitis,
Tab. 92 Oenanthe aquatica. 1060 Matthew. 1065 Oenoplia. 1605 Olea satiua and
syluest. 1392 Oleander. 1406 Syluest. (...). 1596 Oleaster, vel Oleastrum. 1393
Oleastellus, (...) Oliuella. 1401 Olibanum. 1436 Olus album. 311 Atrum. 1019
Hispanicum. 330 (...) Gordi. 1020 Onobrychis. 440. and eius spec. 1244. 1245.
Quorundam. 1253 (...). 801 Ononis. 1322. 1323 Onopordon. 1147 Onopyxos. 1173
Onosma. 803 Ophiog bossum. 404 Ophioscoridon. 181 Ophris. 403 Opium. 400
Opobalsamum. 1529 Opopanax. 1003 Opulus. 1425 Opuntia. 1513. Marina. 1567.
Orchis (...) spec. a. p. 205. ad. p. 228. Oreoselinum. 1015 Origanum (...)
spec. 666 Oriza, vel Oryza. 79 Orminum, vidc Hormimum. Ornithogalum maius,
Clus. 97 Vulg. alt. lut. 165 (...) (...) (...). 166. 167. 168. Ornithopodium.
(...) Ornus. 1473 Orobanche. 1311. 1312 Orobus Herbariorum. 1225 Venetus,
syluaticus and montanus. 1247. 1248. Orontium. 550 Orualla. 770 Orukoria. 1550
Osmundaregalis. 1131 Os mundi Tragi. 1228 Osteocollon. 807 Ostrya. 1444 Osyris,
vide Linaria. 552 Othonua. 751 Oxalis, vulg. 396. 397 Tuberos. ib. Ten. etc.
Oxyacantha. 1325 Theophrasti. 1603 Oxyacanthus, 1327 Oxycedrus. 1374
Oxylapathum. 388 Oxymyrsine. 907 Oxyphoenix, vide Tamarindi. Oxys Plin. 1201
(...), vide (...) acutus. Oxytriphyllon. 1191 Padus Theophrasti. 1505 Paeonia
(...) spec. 980, 982 Pala d'Agula. 1623 Paliurus. 1336 Palma. 1517 Humilis.
1519 Palma Christi, sieve Satyrium palmatum 220. 221. etc. Christi mayor. 496
Palma Saccharifera. 1554 Palma pinus. 1519 Paludapium. 1014 Panaces, vel Panax.
Asclepium. 1057 Chironeum. 1285 Coloni. 1005 Heracleum. 1003 Pancratium mar.
172. 173 Panicum (...) spec. 84. 85 Paniscuculi. 1202 Porcinus. 845. St. Joan.
1429 Papas Peruvianorum. 927 (...) (...). 367 Sativum. 369 Syluestre. 400
Rhoeas. 401 Spinosum ibid. and 1156. Spumeum. 679 Heracleum Columnae. 734
Palustrc. 820 Papyrus Nilotica. 40 Paralysis. 781 Paralytica Alpina. 783
Parietaria. 331 Syluostris Clus. 91 Paronychia altera Matthew. 622 Vvlgaris and
rutaceofolio. 624 Parthenium. 652. 757 (...) 1103 Passerine. 554 Pastinaca
domestica, and Syl. 1025 Satiua penuifolia. 1027 Syluestris tennifolia. 1028
Marina. 534 Pastoria Bursa. 276 (...). 1168 Pecten Veneris. 1040 Pedicularis
herba. 495 Rubra. 1071 Pentaphyllon (...) spec. 987. 988. ad. 992. Peperi, gr.
Piper. Peplis. 503 Peplos, vel Peplus. 503 Pepo Maximus. 919 Indicus. 920
Cucumeralis. 921 Mayor, and min. syluestris. 922 Percepier Anglorum, Lob. 1594
Perdicium, idest, Parietaria. Perfoliata Alpina. 517 Napifolia. 537 Rubra Gesn.
492 (...) and (...). 536 Perforata. 540 Periclymenum. 891 Rcctum and eius.
spec. 1294. 1295. 1296. Periploca. 902 Peristerion, id est, Verbena.
Perseaarbor. 1606 Persica malus. 1447 Persicaria. 445 Repens. 446 Siliquosa.
ibid. Personata, vel Personatia. 810 Peruinca. 894 Pes anserinus. 328
Alexandrinus. 759 Asininus. 796 Columbinus. 938 Gallinaceus, siuepulli. 1023
Leonis. 949 Leporis. 1193 Vituli. 834 Petasites. 814 Petroselinum vulgar. 1013
Macedonicum Fuch. and alt. 1016 Alexandrinum. 1019 Caninum. 1064 Petum. 356.
358 Peuoedanum. 1053. 1054 Phacos, gr. Lens. Phalangium (...) species. 47. 48.
49. Phalaris sat. and syl. 86. 87 Phallus Adr. Iunij. 1583 Phasganum, idest,
Gladiolus. Phaselus. 1210 Phaseolus and eius. spec. and varietates a 1211. ad.
1216. Phellandrium, Dod. 1044. 1063. Philanthropos, idest, Aparine.
Philipendula, vide Filipendula. Phillyrea. 1395. 1396. 1397 Prima Clusii. 1600
Phleum. 417 Phlomos lychnites Syriaca. 767 Phoenix. 78 Pthora. 966 Phu. 1078
Phyllitis. 1138 Phyllonmarific. and samin. 333 Phyteuma. 1076 (...) and (...).
1354 Picuomos. 1175 Pilosella mayor. 305. 638 Syl. flo. cerul. 337 Repens 638
Pimpinella saxifraga. 1044 Hort. sieve sanguisorba. 1045 Spinosa. 1329 Pinaster.
1358. 1359 Pinguicula. 788 Pinus satiua sieve Vrbana. 1355 Syluestris. 1356
Montara. 1357 Maritima. 1358 Piper alb. nig. long. 1538. 1539. Calicuth. Indic.
sieve Hispan. 366 Aquat. 446 Agreste. 1388 Montanum. 1403. 1405 Piperitis. 366
Pirola, vide Pyrola. Pistaceum. 1436 Germanicum. 1437 Pistana magonis. 417
Pistolochia. 847 Virginiana sieve (...). 848 Pisum vulgar and eius. spec. 1219.
1220. 1221. Graecorum Tragi. 1231 Marinum Anglicum. 1251 Quadratum. 1198
Maculatum. 1628 Pituitaria. 495 Pix liquida. 1362 Plantago aquat. 417 Alpina.
740 Latifolia. 419 Rosca. 420 Quinquenervia. 422 Marina. 423 Platanaria. 45
Platanus. 1489 Platanus, vel Plantdnus Indorum. 1516. Plumbago. 447 Rondel.
1254 Pneumonanthe. 438 Podagra lini. 578 Podagraria German. 1002 Polemonium
palust. Gesn. 582 Alterum. 679 Fruticans. 1310 Polium. 653. 654. 655.
Polyacantha. 1173 Polyanthemum aquat. 830 Polygala. 563. 564. Matthioli. 1240
(...) (...) spec. 903. 904. 905. Polygonium Herniariae facie Aduers. 1594.
Polygonum mas. 565. Montanum, Serpillifolium, Selinoides. 566 Polyneuros, id
est, Plantago. Polypodium. 1132. 1133 Polyspermum. 324 Polytrichum. 1144. 1146
Pomum ameris. 346 Assyrium, vel Adami. 1464 Arant. 1463 Aureum. 346 Granatum.
1451 Hierosolym. sieve (...). 363 Spinosum. 348 Vnlgare domesticum. 1461 Populus
alba, and nigra. 1486 Lybica, etc. 1487 Populago, Tab. 818 Porcellia. 289
(...). 174 Vrtigineum. 176 Syriacum, Tab. 181 Portulaca satiua. 521 Syluestris.
519. 521. Aquat. 614 Marina. 524 (...). 821. 822 Potentilla. 993 Mayor. 1043
Poterium. 1329 Pothos flos. 1095 Praecocia mala. 1449 Praessium. 694 Foetidum.
702 Primulaveris. 780. 781 Heskethi. 782. Flore rubro and albo. 783
Proserpinaca. 565 Prunella. 632. 633 Prunus domestica, and syluest. 1497
Pseudochamaebuxus. 1597 Pseudochina. 1619 Pseudoasphodelus. 97 Pseudobunium.
243 Pseudocapsicum. 361 Pseudodictamnum. 797 Pseudocytisus. 1308
Pseudohermodactylus. 204 Pseudomelanthium. 1085 Pseudomyagrum Matthew. 473
Pseudonarcissus. 133 Pseudospartum. 1318 Pseudostruthium. 494 Psora. 725
Psyllium. 587 (...). 606. 607 Pulegiumregivm, and mas. 671 Angustifol. 672
Syluostre. 796 Pulicaria. 587 Pulmonaria aurea sieve Gallica. 304 Maculosa and
(...) spec. 808 Pulsatilla. 385 Punica (...). 1451 Pycnocomon. 726 Pycnomos.
1175 Pyracantha. 1603 Pyramidalis. 451 Pyrethrum Offic. and syl. 758 Syluest.
607 Pyrola. 408 Pyrus (...). 1456 Syluest. sieve strangulat. 1457. 1458
Pyxacantha. 1332 (...) gr. (...).
Q
Quadrifolium phaeum. 1198 Quamoclit. 1598 Quercus vulgaris. 1339. 1340 Marina
and eius species. 1567. 1568 Quercula minor. 657 (...). 661 Quinquefolium
ejusque spec. 987. 988 ad 992. (...). 422
R
RAbarbarum vide Rha. 391 Radix caua. 1090. 1091. (...). 1618 (...). 1621,
Rhodia. 532 (...). 1302. Spiritus sancti. 1000 (...) aquatilis. 829 Aruensis
prat. and Alpin. 951 Bulbosus and Illyricus. 953 Auricomus, Aconiti fol. etc.
954 Globosus, (...). 955 Montanus. Lut. 956. 964 Nemorosusut. and Lalb. 384
Max. (...) Multiplex, etc. 957 Asiaticus. 958. 959 Flammeus. 961 Palustris. 952
Latifol. Cret. fol. Plantag. 963 Syluarum flo. (...). 384 Praecox, parvus,
Thalietrifolio. 965. Minimus Septent. Lob. 1090 Raphanus. 237. 238. (...). 240
Aquaticus. ib. Rusticus. 241 Syl. Offic. ib. Rapistrum. 233 Aquat. 234 Rapum.
237. Syl. 233. 448. Terrae. 845 Genistae. 1311 Rapunculus. 454. 455. Rapuntium.
453. 455. Reginaprati. 1043 Remora aratri, i. Anonis. Reseda. 277 (...). 1361
Resta bouis, id est. Anonis. Rha (...) spec. 393. 395 Rhamnus 1. 2. 3. (...).
1334 Catharticus, sieve solutivus. 1337 Rhodia radix. 532 Rhodium lignum, vide
lignumrhod ium. 1624 Rhododaphne. 1406 Rhodora Plin. 1043 Rhus, vel Rhoe
coriaria. 1474 Syl. Plin. 1414 Ribes, vel Ribesium. 1593 Ricinus. 496 Ritrovel
Rutro. 1151 (...). 1340. 1348 Rorella Rorida, vel Ros solis. 1556 Rosahortensis
eius spec, 1259. 1260. ad 1268. (...), (...). 1269 1270 Hiericontea. 1186
Caeli, sieve Mariana. 468 Mariae. 1386 Rosea radix. 532 Rosmarinum, vel
Rosmarinus coronarium and syluestre. 1292 Rostrum ciconiae, vel Gruis, id ost
Geranium. Porcinum. 291 Rubia (...) spec. 1118. 1119. 1120 Cruciata. 1123 Rubus
Idaeus and vulg. 1272 Repens (...). 1271. Saxatilis. 1273 Rumex. 388. 390.
Ruscus, vel Ruscum. 907 (...). and syl. 1255 Canina. 1256 Capraria. 1253
Muraria. 1144 Pratensis. 1252 Syluestris Hypericoides. 543
S
SAbdariffa. 396 Sabina sterilis and baccifera. 1376 Baccata altera. 1377
Saccarum. 38 Sacerdotis crepida. 443 Sacra herba. 358 Saginae spergula. 1125
Sagitta, vel Sagittaria. 416 Salicaria. 479 Salicornia. 535 Saliuaris. 758.
Saliunca. 1078 Salix aquatica and vulgaris. 1389 Caprea. 1319 Humilis. 1391
Marina, vel Amarina. 1388 Rosea. 1310 Salsaparilla. 859 Saluia agrestis, (...)
Bosci. 661 Mayor and minor Hortensis. 764 Alpina, Cretica, Indica. 765
Absinthites. 764 Romana. 649 Vitae. 1144 Sambac, vide Iasminum. Sambucus (...)
species. 1422. 1423. 1424. 1425. Sampsuchum. (...) Sampsuchus. 665 (...). 996
Prima. 2. 3. Clusii. 1595. 1596 (...) Indorum, id est, Tabacum. Sardaracha
Arabum. 1373 Sanguinalis. 565 Sanguinaria. 428. 565. Sanguisorba, vide
Pimpinella. Sanguis Draconis. 391 (...). 948 Mayor. 949 Angustifolia. 783
Alpina Clus. Eboracensis and (...). 788 Foemina Fuch. 978 Santalum (...) (...)
and (...). 1586. Santolina. Dod. 1109 Santonicum. 1106 (...). 878 Saponaria
(...) Angl. 435 Vulgaris. 444 Minor. Dal. 474 Sarxifagon. 694 Sarzaparilla,
vide Salsaparilla. (...). 1525 Saturcia. 575. 576 Satyrium erythron. quibusdam.
204 (...) spec. a. p. 205. ad. 228. abortivum, 228 Sauina, vide Sabina.
Saxifraga Antiquorum. 604 (...). (...) Alsinefolia. 567 Aurea. 841 Alba (...).
842 Anglicana and Pan. 1047 Magna Matthew. 605 Rubra. 1060 Romanorum, Lugd. 254
Saxifranga, Dod. 572 Scabiosa (...) spec. 719. 720, etc. ad. 725. Scammonea,
Scammonia, vel Scammonium. 866. 867 Scandix Antiquorum Col. 1023 Vulgaris and
minor. 1040 Minor Tab. 1594 Scariola. 283 Scala Caeli. 905 Scatum Caeli. 529
Scaenanthos, vel Scaenanthum. 43 Adulterinum, ib. Flores. 1631 Schaenoprasum.
176 Scilla (...) spec. 171. 172 Sclarea. 750 Scolimus. 1104 Theophrasti. 1156
Scolopendria. 1139. 1141 Scolopendrium. 1141 Scoparia. 554 Scopa regia. 907
Scordium. 661 Scordonia, vel Scorodonia. 662 Scorodoprassum. 180. 181 Scorpius.
1321 Scorpioides. 337. and 338 (...). 1241 Multiflora and siliqua crassa. 1627
Scorpiurum. 336 Scorsonera, uel Scorzonera. 736. 737 Scrophularia, vel (...)
altera Dod. 715 Mayor, and Indica. 716 Flore luteo. 717 Minor. 816 Scythica
herba, vel radix, vide Radix. Sebestenae. 1499. Secacul Arabum quibusdam
Polygonatum, alijs Siser, alijs Pastinaca marina, alijs (...) marinum. Secale.
68. Securidaca. 1236 Sedum (...). 510. 511. Minus eiusque spec., 512. ad. 517
Aquatile. 826 Selago, Plin. 1563 Selinum Sij folijs. 1018 Montanum pumilum,
Clus. 1053 Semen contra Vermes. 1101 Sementina. 1100 (...), vide Sedum (...).
508. Sena. 1297 Senecio vulg. 279 Mayor, id est, Iacobaea. Serapias eisuque
spec. 222. 223. etc. Serica. 1502 Seriphium. 1100 Seris. 283. 285. Serpentaria.
427. 400. 630. Mayor. 832 Serpentina, Matthew. 425 Serpillum, vel Serpyllum
eiusque spec. 570. 571. Serratula. 713 Sesamoides mag. and (...). 493 Maius
Scal. 507 Magnum Cordi. 976 Minus Dal. 1595 Sesamum Dod. 273 Verum. 1232
Seselipratense. 1049 Creticum may. and Min. 1050. Montanum and Massiliense.
1051 Peloponense quorundam. 1062 Aethiopicum, (...). 1421 Siciliana. 544.
Sicla, idest, Beta. Sideritis Alpina, Scordioides. 696 (...) Dios. 697
Augustifol. Vulgaris, etc. 698. 699. Prima Matthew. 700 Grauis odoris (...). 1005
Secunda, Dioscoridis. 1046 Sigillum, B. Mariae. 871 Salomonis. 905 Silaus
(...). 1064 Siler montanum. 1048 Siligo. 66 Siliqua. 1429 Syluestris. 1428
Siliquastrum. 366 Silphium. 1000 Silybum. 1150 Minus flore nut. 1627 Sinapi
album, sat. syl. 244. Sion, vide Sium. Sisarum (...). 925 Vulg. 1026 Siser.
ibid. Sison. 1017 Sisymbrium alt. Dios. 258 Sisynrichium may. and minus. 103
Sium eiusque spec, 256. 257. etc. Minimum Alp. 261 Terrestre, seu agrorum. 1018
Smilax arbor. 1344 Smilax aspera. 859. 860 (...). 861 Hortensis. 1216 (...).
859 Smyrnium Creticum. 1024 Sol Indianus. 752 (...), vel Solatrum. (...), 340.
342. Odoriferum. 344 Pomiferum. 347 Lignosum fruticosum, vel rubrum. 350.
Arborescens. 360 Tetraphyllon. 406 Tuberosum esculentum. 927 Soldanella (...).
838 Montana mayor and minor. 839 Soler, vide (...) solis. Solidago saracenica.
429 minor. 633 Mayor. 807 Sonchus asper. 291 Lauis. 292 (...). lat. etc. 293.
294. Syluaticus, Tab. 255 Sophia Chirurgorum. 1068 Sorbus. 1471 Torminalis,
ibid. Syluest. Matthew. 1473. (...). 83 Sparganium. 45 Spartium. 1314 Spartum
Plin. (...) spec. 41. 42. 43, 1630. Spatula foetida. 59 Speculum Veneris. 438
Speiraea Theophrasti. 1601 Spelta. 69 Spergula flo. albo, and rub. 1125 Marina.
ibid. Sphaerocephalus. 1152 Spica. 584 Hortulana. 585. Nardi. 1080. Celtica.
1079 Spicata. 822. Spina alba sieve peregrina. 1152 Acida. 1325 Appendix. 1317
Cerualis. 1335 Cerui. 1338 Hirci. 1328 Infectoria. 1337 Lutea. 1323 (...).
1166. Spinachia. 330 Spondilium, vel Sphondylium. 1009 Spongia marina alba,
1577 Infundibuli forma, and ram. ib. Squamaria, id est, Dentoria mayor.
Squilla, id est, Scilla. (...) (...), id est, Scoenanthos. Stachys eiusque
spec. 695 Aquatica, vel palust. 1005 Staphis agria. 495 Staphylinus. 1028
Staphylodendrum. 1437 Stella leguminosa. 1240 Stellaria (...), 1167 Stellarid.
428 Aquatica. 830. (...) Alchimilla. Sternutamentoria. 607 (...). 725 Argentea.
730 Argent min. ibi. Rosmarini folio, and ex Cod. Cas. (...) Stoechas. 585. 586
Citrina. 646 Storax. 1526 Stramonia, vel Stramonium. 348 Stratiotes (...), vel
Potamios. 826 Millefolium. 1074 Strumaria. 810 Struthium, vide Saponaria.
Strychnodendron. 360 Strychnos, gr. Solanum. Styrax. 1526 Suber. 1347 Succisa.
726 Sumach. 1474 Superba, (...). 597. 599. (...). 1509. Symphytum maius and
tuberosum. 807 Parvum Boraginis facie. ibi Maculosum (...) syl. 809 (...). 1120
Syringa alba, and (...). 1399 (...), vide (...).
T
TAbacum. 358 Tartarum. 883 Tamalapatra. 1534 Tamarindi. 1607 Tamariscus. 1379
Tamus. 871 Tanacetum acutum album. 607 Vulgar and (...) spec. 650 Peruuianum.
750 Syluestre. 995 Tapsus barbatus. 773 Taraxacon. 291 Tarcon, vel Tarchon. 249
Tarton-raire. 507 (...). 883 Tatula, Datula, vide Datura. Taxus arbor. 1370
Teda. 1358. 1359 Telephium Dios. quorund. 337 Vulgar eiusque spec. 519. 520
Terebinthina Veneta. 1364. 1434 Terebinthus. 1433 Terra merita, i. Curcuma.
Terrae glans. 1237 Malum sieve Rapum. 845. 849 Textiola Caesalp. 1005 Testiculus
caninus. 207. Varij. a. 205. ad. 228. Tetragonolobos. 1198 Tetrahit. 689
Angustifel. 699 (...) pratense. 657 Latifol. (...), etc. 658. 659 Thalictrum
sieve Thalietrum. 1068. 1251. Thapsia. 1030. 1301 Thapsus barbatus vide Tapsus
bar. Theriacaria. 495 Thlaspi eiusque spec. 262. 263. etc. ad 271. Cratevae.
465 Thora (...). 966 Thuia, vel Thyia. 1369 Thus. 1435 Thymbra St. (...) 1575
Thymelaea. 1403 Thymum, vel Thymus durius and latifolium. 573 Creticum. 754
Thyselium, vel Thysselium. 1020 Tigridis flot. 122 Tilia mas and foem. 1483
Tinus, v. (...). Tintinnabulum terrae, i. Pyrola. Tipha. 46 Tithymalus syl.
Lon. 447 Paralius, Heliosc. Myrtifol. etc. a. p. ad. p. 497. 505 Tordilium, vel
Tordylum. 1050 Tormentilla. 992 Tota bona. 329 Trachelium. 450 Tragacantha,
Tragacanthum. 1328. 1329. Tragium Dios. Col. 1045 Tragon. 1117 Tragopogon. 735
Tragopyron. 89 Tragorchis. 210 Tragoriganum. 668. Clus. 671 Trasi. 32 Tribulus
aquaticus min. 823. may. 824 terrestris. 1246 Trichomanes. 1146 Trifolium
pratense. 1185 Maius purp. 1186 Luteum lupulinum and minus lut. ib.
Asphaltaeum, sieve bituminosum 1187 Americum and Burgund. 1189 Salmanticum, ib.
Cordatum, and siliquosum min. 1190 Luteum siliqua cornuta. 1191 Paludosum. 1194
Oderatum. 1195 Cochleatum. 1199 Acetosum. 1202 Hepaticum. 1203 Siliqua lunata,
Alpinum, and spinosum. 1207 Fragiferum, and stellatum. 1208 Fruticans. 1310
Triorehis. 218 Triphyllon gr. Trifolium. Tripolium. 413 Trissago, vel Trixago.
657 Palustris. 661 Triticum eiusque spec. 65. 66 Triticum amyleum. 69
Temulentum. 78 Vaccinium. 91 Trollius flos. 955 Tsinaw. 1619 Tuber terrae. 1583
Tulipa eiusque varietates a. p. 137. ad. p. 146. Tune vel Tunas. 1513 Turritis.
272 Turbith vel Turpethum. 415 Grisium. 1031 Tussilago. 811 Alpina. 812. 815
Mayor Matthew. 814 Tynnus vide Laurus. Typba, vide Tipha.
V
VAccaria. 492 Vaccinia, Vaccinium flos, quibusdum, Hyacinthus Botryoides,
alijs Violapurpurea Martia. Vaccinia, Vaccinium fructus. 1395 Nigra and rubra.
1415 Alba, Pannon, Vrsi etc. 1416. 1417 Palustria. 1419 Nubis. 1420. 1630
Valeriana rubra, Dod. 678 Hortensis and syl. 1075 Graca and Mexicana. 1076
(...), Alpina, lat. and angust. 1077 Veratrum album. 441 Nigrum. 977 Nigrum
Dodon. 978 Verbasculum. 781 Verbascum eiusque spec. 774. 775 Matthioli. 767
Saluiae folijs. 767 Verbena communis, sacra. 778 Foem. Tragi. 254 Vermicularis.
515 Frutex. 523 Vermiculata montana, Col 566 Veronica (...). (...). 625 Mas,
recta, etc. 627. 628 (...), (...). (...), vel (...) minus. Vesicaria. 342
Vetonica. 590 Viburnum. 1490 Vicia and eius spec. 1227. 1228 Indica. 1627
Victorialis. (...) Vinca perninca. 894 Vincetoxicum. 898. 899 Vinum. 878. 879.
880 Viola autumnalis sieve calathiana. 438 449. Aruensis. 440 Damasc. 463 Nigra
sieve purp. 850. 851 Canina syl. 851 Lutea. 456 Lunaris. 464 Mariana. (...)
(...). 463 Peregrina. 464 Palustris. 826 Pentagonia. 440 Tricolor, and eius
spet. 854 Violaria. 852 Viorna. 886 Viperaria. 736. 737 Virgaaurea. 429
Pastoris. 1168 Sanguinea. 1467 Virginea. 757 Viscago (...). 494 (...). (...)
Viscus, Viscum. 1350 Visnaga. 1041 Vita longa. 1539 Vitalba. 870. 886 Vitex.
1387 Vitis alba. 870 Fuch. 886 Idaea. 1416. 1417 Siluestris. 871. 886 Vinifera.
875 Vitriola (vel Vitraria) i. Parietaria. Vitrum, i. Glastum. Viurna, vide
Viorna. Vlmaria. 1043 (...) eiusque spe. 1481. 1482 Vmbilicus veneris. 529
Marinus. 532 Vnedo. 1496 (...) glans. 1401 Vngula caballina, i. Tussilago.
Vnifolium. 409 (...) mayor, minor, and (...). 863 Volucrum (...). 891
Vrceolaris. 331 (...). 291. Vrinalis. 555 Vrtica Romana, vrens. 706 Minor
vrens. 707 Vrtica (...) and iners. 704 Vsnea. 1558 Vstiiago Auen. Hord. Seca.
77 (...). 876 Corinthiaca. 874 Crispa. 1324 Quercinae. 1339 Lupina. 339. 1425
Marina. 1117. 1615 Passae. 877 Vulpina. 339 Vrsi. 1416 Taminia. 495. 871
Zibibi. 875 Vulgago. i. Asarum. Vulneraria rustica, Gesn. 1242 (...). 328
(...). 450. 909
X
XAnthium. 810 Xiphion. 105 Xyloaloe. 1622 Xylobalsamum. 1529 Xylocaracta. 1430
(...). 1297 Xylum. 901 Xyris. 59
Y
(...). 1543
Z
Zacintha, vel Zacyntha. 289 Zea. 69 (...). 74 (...), and (...). 34. 1631
(...). 72 (...). 61 (...). 366 Zizania. 78 Zizypha and Ziziphus Candida and
Cappadoc. 1491 Rubra. 1501 Zythum. 71
NOMINVM ET OPINIONVM HARmonia and consensus.
A
ABel, id est, Populus alba. (...), i. (...). (...) Serapionis, i. Pisum
cordatum. Abrotanum foemina, id est, (...). Abrugi, i. (...) cordatum. (...),
i. (...). Acanthus Germanica, i. Sphondylium. Acanthium, i. Onopordon. Acarna
Theoph. i. Scolymos. (...), i. (...). Accipitrina, i. Hieracium, vel Sophia.
Acinaria palustris Gesneri, i. Vaccinia palustris. Acinus, i. Clinopodium.
Achillea, i. (...). Aconitum bacciferum, id est, Christophoriana. (...)
Pardalianches (...), i. Doronicum. Acrocorion, i. Crocus vernus. Acutella, i.
Resta bouis. Acus (...), i. (...). Adianthum album, id est Capillus Veneris.
(...) album (...), id est, (...) (...) aria. Ador est quoddam (...) genus.
Ageratum, i. Balsamina minor. Agnus castus, i. (...). Agilensz, i. (...).
(...), i. Paeonia. Aegilops Plinij, id est, Cerris mayor Lobel. Aegilops. i.
(...). Aegopogon Tragi, i. Vlmaria. (...). i. (...) bona. (...) Plinii, i. noli
me (...), vel (...) herba mimosa. Aizoon, i. (...). (...), i. Chamapitys.
Alaseleti (...). i. Medica. (...) Daleschampii, i. (...) Lobel. Alectorolophos
Plinii, i. Fistularia. Alleluia, i. (...) acetosum. Alchilel Serapionis, i.
Polemonium. Alcibiadion, i. Echium. Alchimelech, i. Melilotus. Alfas fasa
Auicennae, i. Medica. Algosarel (...), i. Daucus. Alkakengi, i. (...).
Alimonia, i. Trifolium (...). Alnam, i. Pulegium. Alnus nigra i. Frangula.
(...), i. Ibiscus. Albucus, i. Asphodelus albus. Altercum (...), i. (...).
Alphesera Arabibus, id est, Bryonia nigra. Alsaharateia, i. (...). Alscobran,
i. (...). (...), i. (...). (...), i. (...). Amaracus, i. Maiorana. Amellus
(...), i. Aster (...). Amellus, i. Caltha palustris, Ambubeia, i. Cichorium
syluestre. Ampelos (...), i. Bryonia nigra. (...), i. Berberis. Anapallus
Bellonii, i. Ficus (...). Anas, i. (...). (...) Cordi, i. Dentaria mayor
Mathioli. Anblatum (...), i Nidus (...). Anchusa, i. Buglossum syluestre.
Andirian Rhasis, i. (...). Andration Auerrois, i. (...). Androsemum (...), i.
(...) (...). Auetum tortuosum, i. (...) Anguria, i. Pepo oblongus. Anonis i.
Resta bouis. Apiastellum Apuleii, i. Bryonianigra. Apiastellum (...), i. (...).
Apocinum Dios. i. Periploca. Apolinaris, i. Hyoscyamus. (...). i. (...) nigra.
Aprus, i. (...) (...). Argentina, i Potentilla. Aria Theophrasti, i. Sorbus
Alpina Gesneri Arcium, i. Bardana. Argentina, i. Vlmaria. (...), i. (...)
(...). Artemisia (...), i. (...). (...), i. Parietaria. (...), i. (...)
rusticus. Arornas, i. (...). Arzi, i. Oriza. (...), i. (...). Asterion, i.
Aster Atticus. Astergis Rhasis, id est, (...) (...). (...), i. (...) (...).
(...) (...), i. Lonchitis. Asplenium, i. Ceterach. (...), i. (...). Athanasia,
i. (...). Aulitica, i. (...). (...) (...), i. Atriplex. (...) Petri Placentii,
i. (...). (...), i. Meum. Azez, i. Lichen.
B
BAaras, id est, Paeonia. Baccaris, i. (...) (...). (...) ossicinarum, i.
Asarum. (...), i. (...). (...), i. Cianus. Barba hirci, i. (...). Barba Iouis,
i. (...). Barba Aron, i. (...). Barbarea, i. (...). Batis Plinii, i. (...).
Baton, i. Terebinthus. Bazari (...), i. Linum. Bazara (...), i. Psyllium.
(...), i. Anagallis aquatica. Bechion, i. Tussilago. Bedoara arabibus, i. Spina
alba. Bedeguar Math. Syluat. i. Spina alba. Bederangi, i. Melissa. Beluidere
Italica, i. Scoparia. Beiahalalen, i. Aizoon. Betonica Pauli, i Veronica.
Bihar, i. Buphthalmon. Bisaria, i. Dracunculus. Bisacutum, i. Gingidium.
Basiatrahagi, id est Polygonum. Bismalva, (...) est (...). Bislingua, id est
Hippoglossum. Bombax, id est Gossipium. Botonaria, id est Aphyllanthes. (...),
i. Platanaria. Branca vrsina, id est Acanthus. Britannica, i. Bistorta (...).
Brassica Canina, i. Cynocrambe. Broeggia Plinij, id est Helxine Cissampelos.
Bruscus, id est Ruscus. (...) agrest is, i. Colchicum. (...), id est Aster
Atticus. Buccinum, i. Cousolida regalis Bugia, id est, Cortex Berberis. Butomon
Theoph. i. Iris palustris. Bules, id est Salix.
C
CAchrys marinum, i. Crithmum. (...), id est, Libanotis. Cahade, id est Polium.
Cafal, i. Agrimonia. Calabrina, id est Lonchitis. (...), id est Fumariae.
(...), i. (...). Caltha, id est Calendula. (...) Poetarum. i. Calendula. (...)
Gesn. id est (...) (...). Callitricum, i. Capillus Veneris. Callion Plinij, i.
(...). Calicularis, id est (...). Calnegia, id est Galanga. Camphoratum, i.
Abrotanum (...) (...), i. Tapsus Barbatus. (...) Plin. id est Vrtica. Cancum
(...), id est (...) minus. Cant abrica Plinij, i. Rapunculus. (...) Turneri, id
est (...). (...), i. Capillus Veneris. Capnos, id est Fumaria. Capnitis, id est
Fumaria. (...) us Plinij, i. Ezula Tragi. (...), i. (...). Cardamum, id est
Pseudobunium. Cardopatium, id est Carlina. (...) fullonum, (...). Dipsacus.
Carobia Actuarij, id est (...) (...). Carica, idest Apios. (...) Simeonis
Sethi, i. (...). Cartamus syluestris, i. Atractylis. (...), (...).
Pseudobunium. Carpesium, i. (...). (...) Galeni, i. Ruscus. (...) Simeouis
Sethi, id est (...). Cardel, id est Sinapis. (...), (...). Coriandrum. (...)
Matthew. Syl. id est, Hyoscyamus. (...), id est (...). Castoris (...), id est
Trifolium paludosum. Casignete, id est (...). Castrangula, i. Scrophularia.
Calcitrapa Matthioli, id est Cardnus Stellatus. Catef, i. Atriplex. Cachrifera
Rosmarinus, id est Libanotis. Cathsum, id est Abrotanum. Cataputia mayor, i.
Ricinus. Caucon Plinij, i. Equisetum. Canda Vulpium, i. Alopecuros. Caeliros,
i. Gramen mannae. Caeciliana Plinij, id est (...) Dodo. Centummorbia, i.
Nummularia. Centrum Galli, i. Horminum. Centunculus, i. Gnaphalium. Cepaea, id
est Anagallis Aquaticae. Ceratonia, i. Ceratia siliqua. Cercis Theop. id est
Arbor (...). Cesis, id est Daucus. (...) mayor, i. Ricinus. Ceraunia, i.
Crassula. Ceruicaria, i. (...). Cichorium verrucarium, id est Hedypnois. Circca
Graecis, i. Mandragora. Cincinnalis, i. (...) Veneris. Cicerbita, i. Sonchus.
Cnicus, i. Carthamus. Cnicum supinum Cordi, id est (...) benedictus. Cnicus
syluestris, i. Atractylis. Citrago, i. Melissa. Cidromela, i. Malus Medica.
Cineraria, i. Iacobea (...). Charantia, i. Balsamina mas. Chamaecissus, i.
Hedera Terrestris. Chamaeleuce, i. Tussilago. (...), id est (...) syluestre.
Chamaexylon Plinij, i. Gnafalium. Chamaelea Germanica, id est, Mezereon.
Chamaedaphne, i. Laureola. Chamaedaphne Plinij, id est Vinca pervinca.
Chamaeplium, i. Erysimum. Chamaerrhiphes, i. Palmites. (...), id est Myrtus
Brabantica. Chamaerops (...). i. Palma humilis. Charnuba, i. Ceratia siliqua.
Charfi, i. Apium. Chastara, i. Betonica. Chathe, i. Cucumer. (...), i. Bryonia
(...). Chitini, i. Althea. Choeradolethron, i. Xanthium. Chubece, i. Malua.
Chiliodynamis, i. Ben album. Chrysolachanon Plinij, i. (...) sativa.
Chrysanthemum Peruvianum, i. Flos Solis. Chrysocome (...). i. Linaria.
Chrysogonon, i. Blattaria. Chrysomela (...), i. Malus Medica. Citrago, i.
Melissa. Clavum Veneris, i. Nymphaea. (...), i. Hedera Helix. Clematis
Peregrina. i. Flammula (...). Clematis Daphnoides, id est Vinca pervinca.
Clematis altera (...). i. Viorna. Cleome Horatij, i. Erysimum. Colabrina, i.
Arum Aegyptium. Cocior, i. Foeniculus. Colocasia, i. Faba Aegyptia. Columnaris,
i. (...) (...). Columbina (...), i. Verbena. Combul, i. Nardus. Condisi, i.
(...). Condurdum Plinii, i. Vaccaria. Consolida media Fuchsii, id est, Bellis
mayor. Consolida media, i. Bugula. Consolida minor Matthioli, i. Prunellas
Consolida minor Ruellij, id est Bellis minor Conzambuch Turcor. i. Hemerocallis
Valentina. Connarus Athenaei, i. Iniubae specios mayor. Concordie, i.
Agrimonia. Conila, i. Myrrhis. Consecratrix, i. Iris (...). Coralloides Cordi,
i. Dentaria (...). Corcorus Melochia, id est Olus Iudaicum. Corcorus Marcelli
vet. id est Anagal. mas. (...), i. Radix Caua. Cor Indum, i. Pisum Cordatum.
(...) Rhasis, i. Scamoneae. Corona fratrum, i. Carduus Eriocephalus. Corion, i.
Coriandrum. Coronopus, i. Cornu (...). Corigiola, i. Centumnodia. Corona
monachi, i. Dens Leonis. Corona Regiae, i. (...) spinosum. Coroneola, i.
Lysimachia. Corydalium, i. Fumaria. Corylus, i. (...). Costus spurius, Matthew.
i. Panax Chironium. Costus Hortorum, (...). Balsamita mayor. Costa Canina, i.
(...). Corydalopodium, i. Consol. Regalis. Cotinus Dodo. i. Coccygria (...).
Cot Auicennae, i. Medica. Crepanella, id est Dentillaria (...). Creta Marina,
i. Crithmum. Crinita, i. Capillus (...). Cucullata, i. Pinguicula Cucurida, i.
Dentillaria (...). Cuminum Aethiopicum, i. Ammi. Cunilago, i. Conyza. (...),
herba, i. Eupatorium Auicennae. Cunila Columellae, i. Satureia. Cunophoron, i.
Nux Indica. (...) Auicennae, i. Saponaria. Curcuma, i. Cyperus Indus. Curcat
Clusii, i. Ricinus. Cusbar, i. Coriandrum. Cyanus (...), i. (...) (...). Cyfo,
id est, Hyssopus. Cyminalis, id est, Gentiana. Cynanthemis, i. (...) foetida.
Cynospastus, i. Paeonia. Cynosorchis, i. Satyrium. Cynocephalus Apuleii, i d
est; Antirrhinum. Cynocephalus, i. (...). (...) Diosc. id est Rosa Syluestris.
Cynosbatos Tragi, i. Oxyacanthus. Cynosbatos (...), i. Rubus. Cynosbatos
Dalesc. i. Capparis. Cyprus, i. Ligustrum. Lobelij. Cyprus Dod. i. Phillyrea.
D
DAmedrios, i. Chamedrys. (...), i. Equisetum. Darach, i. Palma. Daracht mous,
i. Musa. Datura, i. Stramonia perigrina. Debonigi, i. (...). Decta, id est
Beta. Delphinium, i. Consolida Regalis. (...), i. Sanicula. Didar Arab. i.
(...). (...) Veneris, i. (...). (...), id est Isatis. Diocallia (...), i.
Chamomelum. Diospiron, i. (...) solis. Diospiros (...), i. (...) Job.
Diosanthos Theop. i. (...) (...). Dochon, id est Panicuus. Dolichus Theophr. id
est (...) Lobelii. Draco herba, i. Tarcon, Draco syluestris, i. Ptarmica.
(...), i. Haliabbi Anisum. Drosion Cordi, i. (...). Drypis Guillandini, i.
Tragon. Mat. Drypis Theop. i. Eryngium Marinum Dryopteris Tragi, id est
Pteridion Cordi. Dryopteris, i. Adianthum nigrum. Dryophonon (...), id est
Arabis Dodon. Dulb Arab. i. Platanus. (...), i. Amara Dulcis. (...), i.
Paeonia. (...) Guillandini, i. Cyperus dulcis Tragi. Dumbebe, i. Endivia.
E
EChium (...) Cordi, i. (...) (...). Eghelo, Dodon. id est (...) Lobelij. (...)
Mat. i. Ziziphus alb. Lobel. Eleoselinum, i. Paludapium. Ellisiphacos, i.
Saluia. Elkiageber, i. Rosmarinus. Empetron Dod. i. Kali. Empetron (...), i.
Crithmum. Empetron Tragi, i. herba (...). Empetron, i. Herniaria. Encephalus,
i. Chamaerrhiphes. Enephyllum, Lobelii, i. (...). (...), i. Lingua (...). (...)
Gesneri, i. Gramen Par. nassi. Ephaetium, i. Ranunculus. (...) Plinii, i.
Borago. Epilobion Gesn. i. Chamaenerium Lobel Epimetron, i. Epimedium.
Epipetron, i. Epimedium. Epipactis Recentiorum, i. Helleborine. Epipactis
Rondeletii, i. Herniaria. Eranthemum, i. Flos Adonis. Ericoides, i. Euphrasia
(...), Dod. Eringium Vegetii, i. Acarna Theop. Eringium Guillan, i. Carduus
Stellatus Erinus, i. Corcoros Plinii (...) syluestre, i. (...). Eryphion
Apulei, i. (...). Erysimum Theop. i. Camelina. Erythrodanum, i. Rubia
tinctorum. Exupera, i. (...).
F
FArfara, i. (...). Farfugium, i. Tussilago. Farfium Auicennae, id est Thora
Valdensis. Farfrugum, i. Calthapalustris. Faranum, i. Tussilago. Fandegeni, i.
(...). Fell Terrae, i. (...) minus. Foeniculus Porcinus, i. (...). Ferulacoli,
i. Thapsia. Ferraria, i. Agrimonia. (...) Lobelii, i. Scrophularia. Festuca
Plinii, i. Auena Sterilis. Flammula (...), id est Clematis Peregrina.
Filicastrum, i. Osmunda Regalis. Filix palustris, i. Osmunda Regalis. Filix
Florida, i. Osmunda Regalis. Filix Latifolia Cordi, i. Osmunda Regalis.
Ficaria, i. (...) minus. Flos Regius, i. Consolida Regalis. Flos Ambarualis, i.
Polygala. (...), i. Potamogeiton. Folium Indum, id est, (...) Garciae. Fuga
Daemonis, i. Hypericum. Fusus, i. Atractylis. Fumaria (...), i. Radix Caua.
G
GAledragon Plinii, i. Dipsacus: Garosmus, i. Atriplex Olida. Gallitricum, i.
Horminum. Gelseminum Indicum, i. (...) Peruviana. Genitura, id est, Anetum.
Genicularis, i, Phumagnum. (...), i. Bryonia nigra. Geum, i. Caryophyllata.
Giezar, i. Daucus. Giezar Aridras, i. Belbunen. Gith, i. (...). Githago (...),
i. Lollium. Gladiolus Aquatilis, i. (...) (...) Globularia, i. Aphyllanthes.
(...), (...), i. Fumaria. Gossypium, i. Xylon. Granum Regium Mesvae, i.
Ricinus. (...) Plinii, i. Calendula. Grossularia, i. Ribes. Grossularia, (...).
Vva crispa.
H
HAbonog (...) i. (...). Habal Nil Serapionis, i. (...) (...). (...) Aueroii,
i. Foeniculus. Halgazar Aueroii, i. Pastinaca. Halicacabum Vesica rium, id est
Alkakengi. Halicacabum Peregrinum, i. Pisum Cordatum. Hamesiteos, i. (...).
Hanab. Althaleb, i. Solanum. Haraha, i. Cucurbita. Harbatum, i. (...).
Harenaria, i. Cornu Cerui. Haronigi, id est Doronicum. Hasmisen Syriacum, id
est (...) Caeruleus. Hastula Regia, i. Asphodelus albus. (...), i. Thymus.
Handacocha Plinii, i. Trifolium (...). Haur Arab. i. Populus alba. Hebene, i.
(...) officinarum. Herculania, i. (...). (...) (...), i. (...). Hedera (...),
i. Smilax Aspera. Hedera Cilicia, i. Smilax Aspera. (...), i. Parietaria.
Helice, i. Hedera Helix. Hemen, i. Serpillum. Hepatica alba Cordi, i. Gramen
Parnassi. Herba Scythica, i. (...) (...). Herba Casta, i. (...). Herba Leonis,
i. Palma. Herba Lucis, i. (...) maius. Herba (...), i. Chelidonium maius. Herba
Vulcani, i. (...). Herba Scelerata, i. (...). Herba Vlceraria, i. (...). Herba
Caustica, i. (...). Herba (...), i. Consolida Regalis. Herba Stella, i. (...)
Cerui. Herba Cancri, i. Heliotropium. Herba (...) (...), id est Polypodium.
Herba Leonis Dodon. id est, Aquilegia. Herba S. Anthonij, i. (...) (...). Herba
Coxendicum, i. Cotyledon. Herba Benedicta, i. Caryophyllata. Herba Fortis, id
est Solidago Saracenica. Herba Paralysis, i. Primula veris. Herba Clauellata,
i. Violatricolor. Herba (...), id est Balsamita mayor. Herba Pinnula, id est,
Hyoscyamus. Herba Turca, i. Herniaria. Herba Hungarica (...). i. Alcea. Herba
Simeonis (...). id est, Alcea. Herba Vrbana, i. Acanthus. Herba Tunica
Gordonij, id est Ocymastrum. Herba Tunica Dodon, id est, Caryophyllata. Herba
Gallica Fracastorij, i. Galega. Herba Rutinalis, i. (...). Herba Sardoa, id est
(...) aquaticus, Herba Sacra, i. Tabaco. Herba Sacra Agrippae, i. Melissa.
Hermodactylus Dodon. id est (...). Hermodact. Italorum, i. Iris tuberosa Lobel.
Hesperis Clusij, i. Leucoium marinum Lobelij. Hippia, i. Alsine. (...), i.
Asclepias. Hortus Veneris, (...). Cotyledan. Horminum (...), id est Colus
Iouis. Humadh, i. Lapathum. Hunen, i. Iuiube. Huniure, i. Vrtica. Hydroselinum,
i. Paludaplum. Hydroselinum Camerarij, id est Lauer maius. (...) Peruvianus, i.
Tabaco. (...), Bonifacia, id est Laurus Alex. Hyosyris Plinij, i. Iacea nigra.
Hyophthalmon, i. After Atticus. Hypecoon Dodon, id est Cuminum sytuestre.
Hypecoon Clusii, i. Alcea (...) Hipposelinon, i. Olus atrum.
I
IArus, id est, Arum. Iackaiak, i. Anemone. Iasione, i. Campanula. Iasin, i.
Enula. (...), i. Nux (...). Ibiga, i. (...). Iezar Serapionis, i. Pastinaca.
Imperatrix, i. Meum. Inula (...) (...) Largi, i. Consolida (...). Inguinalis,
i. Aster (...). Intybus, i. Cichorium. (...) (...), i. (...). (...) Glans, i,
(...). (...) Flos, i. Lychnis. (...) Arbor, i. Quercus. Iorgir, i. Eruca. Irio,
i. Erysimum. Iuncus quadratus Celsi, i. Cyperus. Iua Muscata, i. Chamaepitys.
Iufacti, i. Sambucus. Iusquiamus, i. (...). Ixopus (...), i. Chondrilla.
K
KAnturion, i. (...). Kanz, i. Amygdalus. Kaper, i. Capparis. Kauroch. i.
Chelidonium mains. Kebikengi, i. (...). Keiri, i. Leucoium. Kemetri, i. Pyrus.
Kemum, i. (...). Kenne, i. (...). Keruagh, i. Ricinus. Kerugha, i. Ricinus.
Kermes, i. Coccus infectoria. Kulb, i. Milium solis. Kusbera Auerroij, id est
Coriandrum. Kusbor, i. Coriandrum.
L
LAbrusca, i. Bryonla nigra. Labrum Veneris, i. Dipsacus. Laburnum, i.
Anagyris. Lactaria, i. Tithymalus. Lactuca leporina, i. (...). Lactucella, i.
Sonchus. Lanata Cordi, i. Aria Theoph. Lancea Christi, id est, Lingua
Serpentina. Lantana, i. Viburnum. Lanaria, i. Radicula. Lanceola, i.
Quinqueneruia. Laudata Nobilium, i. Veronica. Lathyris, i. Cataputia. Lathyrus,
i. Pisumsyluestre. Lauer Lauacrum, i, Dipsacus. Laurus (...), id est,
Hippoglossum. Laurus rosea, i. Oleander. (...) syluestris, id est, Laurus
(...). Laurentina Mathioli, i. Bugula. Leo Columellae, i. Aquilegia.
Leontostomium Gesneri, idest, Aqullegia. Leo Herba Dodon. i. Aquilegia.
Lepidium Plinij, i. Piperitis. Lesen Arthaur, i. Buglossum. Leucacantha, i.
Carlina. Leuoanthemum, i. (...). Libadion Plinij, i. Centaureum. Libanium
Apulei, i. Borago. Limodoron Dodon, i. Orobanche. Lingua (...), i. Fraxini
semen. Lingua Pagana, i. Hippoglossum. Liliago Cordi, i. Phalangium Lobel.
Lisen, i. Plantago. Lotus Vrbana, i. Trifolium (...) Lobelij. Longina, i.
(...). Lichen, i. Hepatica officinarum. Lunaria Arthritica Gesneri, i. Auricula
(...). Luciola, i. Lingua serpentina. Lunaria (...), i. (...). Lunaria mayor
Dioscor. id est, Alysson. (...) Cordi, i. dracunculus. (...), i. Trifolium
Acetosum. Lycostaphylos Cordi, id est, Sambucus aquatica. Lycopsis, i.
Buglossum syluestre. Lycopersicum, i. (...) Amoris.
M
MAchla, id est, Palma. Madon (...), id est, (...) alba. Mahaleb (...), id est,
(...). Mahaleb, i. species (...). Magydaris Theoph. i. Laserpitium.
Malacoccissos, id est, Hedera Terrestris. Malinathalla Theop, i. Mala insanavel
(...), Cyperus Esculentus. Malaccissus Cassani Bassi, i. Caltha palustris.
(...), i. Ibiscus. Manus (...), i. Quinquefolium. Marana, i. (...). Marathrum,
i. Foeniculum. Maru herpa Dodon. id est, (...) (...). (...), i. (...) magnum.
Marmarites, i. Fumaria. Marmorella, i. Agrimonia. Mastastes, i. (...). Maston
(...), i. Scabiosa. Matter Herbarum, i. Artemisia. Materfilon, i. Iacea nigra.
Matrisaluia, i. (...). Matrisylua, i. Periclymenum. Maurohebrae Caput, id est,
Antirrhinum. Medium Dioscor. id est, Viola Mariana. Medium Lobelij, i. Iris
maritima Narbonensis. (...), i. Corcorus. Melampodium, i. Helleborus niger. Mel
frugum Dioclis, i. Panicum. Melampyrum, id est, (...) Vaccinum. Melaspermum, i.
Nigella. Melich Arab. id est, Trisolium fruticans. Meleagris Flos, i. (...).
Melanthium, i. Nigella. (...), i. Pomum Spinosum. Memiran Andr. Bellunensis, i.
Chelid. maius. Memiresin Auicen. idem. Meud (...) Arabibus, id est, Scamonnea.
Memitha Arabibus, id est, Papauer Cornutum. Memaecylum, i. Arbutus. Menogenion,
i. Paeoniae. Mentha Saracenica, id est Balsamita mayor. (...), id est Meum.
Memiren (...), i. (...) minus. (...), i. Stramonia. Merzenius, i. Maiorana.
Mescatremfir, id est, (...). Mill grana, i. Herniaria. Menianthe Theop. id est
Trifolium palustre. Militaris, i. Millefolium. Miha, i. Styrax. Millemorbia, i.
Scrophularia. Mixa, i. (...). Molochia Serapionis, id est, Corcoros Matthioli.
Molybdena, id est, (...) (...). Momordica, i Balsamita mas. Morghani Syriaca,
id est, Fabago Belgarum. Mochus Dodon. id est, Orobus Lobel. Morella, i.
Solanum Hortense. Mula Herba Gazae, i. Ceterach. Multibona, i. Petroselinum.
Mumeiz, i. Sycomorus. Muralia Plin. i. Helxine. Myophononon, i. Doronicum.
Myrtus syluestris, i. Ruscus. Myrica, i. Tamariscus. Myriophyllum, i. Viola
aquatilis.
N
(...), id est, Mentha. (...), i. Ammi. Nard and Naron Arab, i. Rosa. Nardus
Cretica, i. Phumagnum. Nardus Rustica Plinij, i. idest, Conyza vel potius
Asarum. Narf. i. Nasturtium. Nargol, i. Palma. Nasturtium hibernum, i.
Barbarea. Nenaphar, i. Nymphaea. (...), i. Nidus auis. Nepa Gazae, i. Genista
spinosa. Nerium, i. Oleander. Nicophoron Plinij, i. Smilax aspera. Nicosiana,
i. Tabaco. Nigellastrum, i. (...). Nilofer, i. Nymphaea. Nil Auicennae, id est,
(...) (...). Nola Culinaria, i. Anemone. Noli me tangere, i. Impatiens herba.
Noli me tangere, i. (...) syluestris. Nux Mitel, i. Stramonia Fuchsij. Nux
Vesicaria, id est, Staphylodendron. Nymphea minima, i. Morsus Ranae.
O
OCulus (...), id est, Horminum syl. Odontis, id est. Dentillaria (...).
Olualidia, i. Chamamaelum. Olea Bohemica, i. Ziziphus alba. Oleagnos, i.
Chamelaea. Oleastellum, i. Chamelaea. Olus Iudiacum, i. Corcoros. Olus album
Dodon, i,. Valeriana Campestris, vel Lactuca agnina. Onagra Veterum, i.
Chamaenerium. (...) Plinij, i. Origanum. Ononis, i. Resta (...). Onobrychis, id
est, Gaput (...). Onobrychis Belgarum, i. Campanula Aruensis. Onosma, id est,
Buglossum syluestre. Onopordon; id est, Acanthium (...). Ordelion Nicandri, i.
Tordylion. Ophris, i. Bifolium. Ophioglossum, id est, Lingua serpentis. Opuntia
Plinii, i. Ficus Indica. Opsago, i. Solanum somniferum. Orbicularis, i.
Cyclamen. Oruala, i. Horminum. Oreoselinum, i. Petroselinum. Ornus, i. Fraxinus
Bubula. Orontium, i. antirrhinum. Ostria Cords, i. Ornus Tragi. Osteocollon, i.
Consolida mayor. Ostrutium, i. Imperatoria. Osyris, i. Linaria. Othonna, i.
Flos Africanus. Oxyacantha. i. Berberis. Oxyacanthus i. Spina appendix,
velpyracantha. Oxys, i. Trifolium Acetosum. Oxymyrsine, i. Ruscus. Oxycoccus
Cordi, id est, Vaccinia palustris.
P
PAlma (...), id est, Ricinus. Palalia, i. Cyclamen. Paederota, i. Acanthus.
Panis Cuculi, id est, Trifolium Acetosum. Pancratium, i. Squilla. Panis
porcinus, i. Cyclamen. (...) Spumeum, i. Ben album. Paronychia Dioscor. idest.
Rusa (...). Passerina, Ruellii, id est, Morsus Gallina. Pedicularis herba, i.
Staphisagria. Peduncularia Marcelli, id est, Staphisagria. Peganou, i. Ruta
syluestris. (...) i, Ricinus. Peponella (...), id est, Pimpinella. Perlaro, i,
Lotus arbor. Perforata, i. Hypericon. Perdicion, i. Helxine. Peristerion, i.
Scabiosa minima. (...), i. Bardana. Pezicae Plinii, sunt fungi species. Pes
auis, i. Ornithopodium. Pes Leonis, i. Alchimilla. Pes vituli, i. Arum. Pes
Leporinus, i. Lagopus. Petrum Americae, i. Tabuco. Petilius Flos, i. Flos
africanus. Pharnaceum, i. Costus Spurius. Phasganon Theop, i. Gladiolus.
Phalangitis, i. Phalangium. Phellos, i. Suber. Phellandrium, i. Cicutaria
palustris. Phellandrium Guillandini, i. Angelica. Phoenix, i. Lolium.
Philomedium, i. Chelidonium maius. Phileterium, i. Ben album. Phleos, i.
Sagittaria. Phthirion, i. Pedicularis. Phylateria, i. Polemonium. Phillyrea
Dodon. i. Ligustrum. Phyllon Theophrasti, i. Mercurialis. Philanthropos, i.
Aparine. (...) Anguill, i. Rheseda. Pimpinella spinosa Camerarii, i. Poterion
Lobel. Pinastella, i. Peucedanum. Piper aquaticum, i. Hydropiper. Piper
Calecuthium, Indum, Brasilianum, i. Capsicum. Piper agreste, i. Vitex. Pistatta
syluestris, id est Nux Vesicaria. Pistana, i. Sagittaria. Planta leonis, i.
Alchimilla. Pneumonanthe Lobelii, i. Viola Calathina Dodonei. Podagraria
Germanica, id est Herbs Gerardi. Polytricum, i. Capillus Veneris. Polytricum
Fuchsii, id est Muscus capillaris. Polygonatum, id est, Sigillum Salomonis.
Polygonoides Dioscoridis, id est, Vincae peruinca. Polyanthemum, i. Ranunculus
aquaticus. (...), i. Centumnodia. Populago, i. (...), vel Caltha palustris,
Potentilla mayor, i. Ulmaria. Pothos Costei, i. Aquilegia. Pothos Theophrasti,
i. Aquilegia. Proserpina herba, i. Chamomelum. Protomedia, i. (...).
Pseudorchis, i. Bifolium. Pseudobunium, i. Barbaraea. Pseudocapsium, i.
Strichnodendron. (...) syluestre, i. Ptarmica. (...) (...) Tragi. (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...), idest, Fumaria. Riginaprati, i. Vlmaria. Rosa fatuina,
i. Paeonia. Rosa Iunonis, i. Lilium. Rorastrum, i. Bryonia. Rorella, i. Ros
solis. Rotula solis, i. Chamaeleum. Rhododaphne, i. Oleander. Rhododendron, i.
Oleander. Rhuselinum Apulei, i. Ranuculus. Rima Maria, i. Alliaria. (...)
Marinus, i. Crithmum. Rubus cerninus, i. Smilax aspera. Rumex, id est Lapabum.
Ruta capraria, id est Galega. Ruta palustris, id est (...).
S
SAbeteregi, id est Fumaria. Sabaler, i. Satureia. Sadeb, id est Ruta.
Sacraherba Agrippae, i. Saluia. Saffargel, i. Malus Cydonia. Safarheramon, i.
Sparganium. Salicaria, i. Lysimachia. Saliunca (...), i. Nardus Celtica.
Salsirora, i. Ros solis. Salicastrum Plin. i. Amara dulcis. Salix Amerina, i.
Salix humilis. Saliuaris, i. Pyrethrum. Saluia vitae, i. Ruta m^uraria. Saluia
agrestis, id est Scordium alterum. Salvia Romana, i. Balsamita mayor.
Salusandria, i. Nigolla. Samalum Plin. i. Pulsatilla. Samolum Plin. i.
Anagallis (...). Sampsuchum, i, Amaracus. Sanguis Herculis, id est Hesleborus
albus. Sanguinaria, i. Cornu (...). Sanamunda. i. Caryophyllata quibusda.
Sarax, i. Filix. Sardinia glans, i. Castanea. Sauch, i. Malus Persica. (...)
lutea Fuchsii, id est Melilotus. Saxifragia rubra, i. Philipendula. Sagitta, i.
Sagittaria. Scammonea tenuis, i. Helxine Cissampelos. Scandix, i. Pecten
Veneris. Scarlea, i. Horminum. Scaunix Auerr. i. Nigella. Scissema Gazae, i.
Fagus. Schehedenegi, i. (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) Scilla, i. (...) Scuck (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) Selago
(...) (...) Tragi. Seliem, i. Rapum. Seligonion, i. Paeonia. (...), i. Crocus
vernus. Selliga, i. Nardus Celtica. Seminalis, i. Equisetum. Sedum mains, i.
sempervivum. Senessigi, i. Viola martia. Serpentaria, i. Dracunculus. Sertula
Campana, i. (...). (...) mas, i. Orchis foemina Tragi. Seygar, i. Nux moscata.
Sida Theoph. i. Althaea palustris. (...) tertia Matthew. i. Ruta canina
Monspeliensium. Sideritis, i, Marrubium (...). Siciliania Camerarij, i.
Androsaemum Dodonaei. Siger Indi, id est Palma. Siringa caerulea Dodon, id est
Lilac Matthioli. Siliqua dulcis, i. Ceratia siliqua. Silicula Varronis; i.
Foenugrecum. Siliquastrum Plinij, i. Capsicum. Sigillum Mariae, (...). Bryonia
nigra. Sin, id est Ficus. Sinasbarium, i. Mentha aquatica. Sinapi Persicum, i.
Thlaspi. Siser, id est Sisarum. Silaus Plin. i. Thisselium. Sison Syriacum, i.
Ammi. Sissitiepteris Plin. i. Pimpinella. Siler Plin. i Alnus nigra. Sithim, i.
Larix. Smilax levis, id est (...) (...). albo. Smyrhiza Plin. i. Myrrhiz.
Sorbus aucuparia, id est Fraxinus bubula. Sorbus Alpina Gesn. i. Aria
Theophrasti. Sorbus syluestris, id est Fraxinus bubula. Solanum rubrum, i.
Capsicum. Solanum lignosum Plinij, id est Amaradulcis. Solanum tetraphyllum, id
est Herbi Paris. Solanum vesicarium, i. Alkakengi. Solatrum, i. Solanum
hortense. (...), i. Pimpinella. Sosibio Theoph. i. Anemone. Sparganion
Matthioli, id est Platanaria. Spina acuta, i. Oxyacanthus. Spina acida, i.
Oxyacantha. Spina hirci, i. Tragacantha. Spina infectoria, id est, Rhamnus
solutivus. Spina Iudaica, i. Paliurus. (...) Theoph. i. (...). (...) solis, id
est Ros solis. (...) Dodon. i. Scordium alterum (...). (...), i. radix cava.
(...), i. Potamogeiton. (...) (...). i. Nux vesicaria. Statice Dalescamp. i.
Caryophyllus marinus Lobelii. Stataria, i. Peucedanum. Stellaria Horat.
Augerii, i. (...) stellatus. Struthiopteris Cordi, i. Lonchitis. Struthium, i.
Saponaria. Strumaria Galeni, i. Lappa minor. Strangulatoria (...), id est
(...). Sucaram, i. Cicuta. Succisa, i. Morsus Diaboli. Surum Auicennae, i.
Nigella. Symphytum, i. Consolida mayor. Symphoniaca, i. Hyoscyamus. (...)
Veneris, i. Viola aquatilis. Supercilium terre, id est, Capillus (...). Sus, i.
Liquiritia.
T
TAgotes Indica, id est Flos Africanus. Tahaleb, i. (...). Tamecnemum Cordi, i.
Vaccaria. Tarifilon (...). i. Trifolium (...). Tatula (...), i. Stramonia.
Tatoula Turcis, i. Pomum spinosum. Tamus. Dodon. i. Bryonia nigra. Taraxacon,
i. Dens Leonis. Tarfa, i. Tamariscus. Teda arbor, i. Pinus syluestris. Terzola,
Baptistae Sardi, i. Eupatorium cannabinum. Tetrahit, i. herba Iudaica. Terdina
(...), i. Phu magnum. Terpentaria, i. Betonica Aquatica. Teliphano, i.
Doronicum. Thina, i. Larix. (...), i. Morus. Thuia Theophrasti, i. Arbor vitae.
Thysselium, i. Apium syluestre. Thymbra, i. Satureia. Tornsol (...); i.
Heliotropium. Topiaria, i. Acanthus. (...) Dactyius, id est Laurocerasus.
Tragium, i. Fraxinella. Tragium Germanicum, i. Atriplex (...) Tremula, i.
Populus Lybica. Trifolium (...), id est Trifoliumpalustre. Trifolium
cochleatum, i. Medica. Trifolium fruticans, i. (...). Trifolium Asphaltites, i.
Trifolium bituminosum Tuber terrae, i. (...). Turbith. i. Thapsia. Turbith
Auiceunae, i. Tripolium. Typhium Theophrast. i. Tussilago.
V
VEsicariaperegrina, i. Pisum cordatum. Veelgutta, Dod. i. Petroselinum.
Veratrum, i. Helleborus. Veratrism, (...). Dios. i. Astrantia nigra.
Verbascula, i. Primula veris. Verdelhel Haliah, i. Ranunculus. Victoriola, i.
Hippoglossum. Vitis alba, i. Bryonia. Vitis Idaea, i. Vaccinia. Virga sanguinea
Matthioli, i. Cornus foe mina. Virga pastoris, i. Dipsacus. Vitalis, (...).
Crassula. Vitalba, i. Viorna. (...), i. Momordica. Vincetoxicum, i. (...).
Viola nigra, i. Viola martia. Viola (...), i. Viola (...). (...), (...). (...).
Visnaga, i. Gingidium. (...) (...), i. Cotyledon. (...) (...). i. (...). Vngula
caballina, i. (...). Vlticana, i. Solanum somniferum. Vlpicum Columellae, i.
Allium. (...), i. dens leonis. (...), i. Muscus. Vua (...) Marcelli, i.
Sambucus aquatica. (...) taminia, i. Bryonia nigra. (...) lupina, i. Herba
Paris. Vuaversa, i. Herba Paris. Vuavulpis, i. Solanum hortense. (...), i.
Hippoglossum. (...), i. Laurus Alexandrina. (...) (...), i. Trachelium.
Vulvaria, i. Atriplex olida. Vulgago Maceri, i. Asarum. Vncata Caya, i.
Stramonia.
X
XAier, i. Alniriem Libanot is. Xanium, i. Melanthium. Xylon, i. Gossipium.
Xylocaracta, i. Ceratia siliqua. Xyphium, i. Gladiolus.
Y
(...), i. Anetum.
Z
ZAhara Auicennae, id est Anthyllis Lobel. Zaiton, i. Olea. Zarund, i.
Aristolochia. Zarza parilla, i. Sarsae parilla. Zerumbeth, i. Zedoaria.
Zizania, i. Lolium, Zinziber caninum, i. Capsicum. Ziziphus, (...). Iuiubae.
Ziziphus alba, i. (...) (...). Ziziphus alba (...), i. (...) (...):
A Table of such English names as are attributed to the Herbs, Shrubs, and
Trees mentioned in this History.
A
(...) 1449 (...) 1331 (...) 968. 969 (...), that is, (...). (...) Apple 1464.
1516 (...) (...), i. Dogs ballocks. Adderwort, i. Snake (...). Adders tongue
404 African Marigold 750 (...) (...) 347 Agaricke 1365 (...) 712 (...) and
water Agrimony 711 (...) (...) 1387 Ague tree 1525 (...), i. (...). (...), i.
false Mercury. (...), i. Henry, or English Mercury. (...) 1003. 1005 (...), i.
ground (...). Alexanders, or (...) 1019 Alexanders foot, (...). Pellitory of
Spain. (...) or Alder, and his kinds, 1469 1477 (...), i. (...) (...) 324
Alleluya, i. wood (...). Almond (...) 1445 Almond of (...) 1552 Almond Plum
tree 1497 (...) or (...), and his kinds 507 (...), i. winter Cherry. (...), or
wild (...) 800 Ameos and his kinds 1036 Ambrosy, i. (...) gods food 1108
(...) (...) 69 Anacardium, i. (...) of (...) 1544 Anemone and his kinds, (...)
374. (...) 386 Anise, or (...) seed 1035 (...), i. Dill 1033 (...) and his
(...) 999 (...), or stinking ground pine 622 Anthora 969 Apple and his kinds.
1459 Apple of the earth 845 Apples of love, or golden Apples 346 (...) Apples,
or of Peru, (...) (...) 348 Apples of (...) 363 mad Apples 345 (...) 1449 Arach
and his kinds 324 Archangel and his kinds 702 blacks Archangell, i. (...)
Horehound 702 water (...) or Arrowhead and his kinds, 416 (...) tree, or
Strawberry tree 1496 Arched tree, look (...) Fig tres 1514 (...), i. bastard
(...) and his kinds 373. (...) 846 (...) (...) 63 (...) 834 (...) 1153 (...),
i. water (...) 445 (...) (...) 836 (...) and his kinds 1110 Aspe tree, or
(...) tree 1487 (...) and his kinds, from 93 to 97 Ash tree 1472 Ash keys
ibid. Wild Ash, or Quicken tree 1473 Asses (...) (...) 1332 Assyrian Apple
tree 1474 (...) (...) 1499 Avens and his kinds 994, 995 (...) 1233 Axsoed ib-
Axwort ibid. Ayshweed 1001 (...) 511
B
(...), or (...) back (...) Baldmoine, or Baldmony 532 533 Bastard Baldmony
1052 Ball (...) 1152 Balm 689. 690 Balm Mint 684 (...) 684 (...) tree 1528
1530 Balm Apples, see Apples of (...), 363 Balsam (...) with the Fruit and
(...), 1528 Ballocke grass, i. Dogs (...), 207 triple (...), (i. e.) triple
Lady traces, 218 sweet (...) 218 Banewort. i. (...) 961 (...) 1516 S. Barbaraes
herb 243 Barberry bush and his kind (...) (...) and his kinds 70 (...) tree
1587 Barnacles, or tree (...) 1587 S. Barnabees (...) 1166 Barrenwort 480 (...)
and his (...) (...) wild (...) 675 red Cow (...) 678 cow (...) 492 Bastard
(...) Box (...) Batchelors (...) 472. 957 (...) and his (...) 689. 690 Bay
(...) and his (...), 1407. 1409 Bay willow, or (...) (...) (...), 477 cherry
Bay 1603 wild Bay tres 1409 (...) Bay 1612 (...) (...) 1492 Bean (...) 1429
Bean (...) 897 Bean and his (...) 1209 (...) (...), i. (...) 1217 Bearded
Grass 16 Bears breeth 1147 Bears ear and his kinds 784, 785 (...) (...)
179 (...) 1052 (...) 976 (...) Ladies (...) 1126 (...) (...) 450, 451 Indian
(...) (...) 1545 (...) (...) 438 (...) (...), or (...) (...), (...) (...) (...)
451 (...) bells 838 Bell (...) 450, 451 (...) Bell (...) 455 (...) Bells 438
(...) and his kinds 319 (...) tree 1444 (...) (...) 1444 (...) (...) 1028
(...) (...) 554 (...) (...), i. (...) (...). (...) (...) 678 (...) 602 (...) 5
Bertram 758 Betle, or Betre, i. Bastard pepper (...) Pauis Betony and his kinds
629 Betony 714 water Betony 715 Big, or big Barley 70 Bindeweed and his kinds,
from 861 to 865 Sea Bindeweed, or Withweed 838 (...) (...), or (...) of (...)
859 Blew Bindeweed 865 purging (...) 866 (...), Inchanters Nightshade 352
Bishops weed 1036 Bishops leaves 715 (...) or (...) 1417 Birch tree 1478 Birds
tongue 1565 Birds foot 1241 Birds (...) 783 Birds nest 228 Birthwort and his
kinds 846. 847 Bistort and his kinds 399 Bitter sweet 350 Bitter worts 533
Black (...), (...) Bramble (...). Bladder nut 1437 (...) ball, i. (...) bottle
Blessed thistle 1171 Blew bottle 732 (...) or (...) 320 Bloodwort, i. Bloody
Docke 389 Bloodstrange, i. Mouse tail 426 May Blossoms, i. Conual (...) 410
Bolbonac, i. white satin 464 Bombast, or Bumbast 901 (...) and his kinds 797.
807 Boots 818 Box thorn 1332 (...) Box. or ground Box 1410 (...) (...) Box
1597 Box tree 1410 Bramble bush 1272 Brake and his kinds, see (...) Branch
pease 1221 (...) (...) 1147 Bright wheat 66 (...) wort, i. Sow Fennel 1053
Bryonie and his kinds 869 Indian Briony, i. (...). Broom and his kinds 1311
(...) (...) 1311 (...) Brief bush, see (...). (...) bush, i. Hep tree 1271
(...) is (...) mustard. (...) 716 (...) (...) 1316 (...) Spanish (...), 1318
Brook (...) 621 (...), (...) (...) 444 (...) (...) 1194 Bucks horn and his
kinds 427 (...) wheat 89 (...) (...), i. (...) thorn 1336 (...) 179
Buckthorne 1338 Buckmast 1444 (...) and his kinds 798. 799 (...) 631 (...).
(...) (...). (...) Lungwort 773 Bullocks (...) 746 (...) (...) 728 (...) 1136
(...) 1497 (...), i. Buck wheat 89 (...) 1045 Burgundy (...) 1189 (...) and his
kinds 810 (...) (...) 45 (...) (...) (...) 814 Burstwort 569 (...) (...) 211
(...) or Butter root 788 (...) burre 814 Butter (...) 951 Butchers (...) 907
Butchers (...) (...) 1468
C
(...). i. (...) 312 (...), or Caious 1544 (...) violets 438, 449 Calamint and
his (...) 687 Water Caltrops 823. 824 Calves foot 834 Caltrop 1166 Calves snout
and his kinds 549 Calamus (...) 63 (...) hay, see Schenanthum, (...), i. Rest
harrow 1323 (...) and his kinds 754, 755 red (...) (...). (...) (...) 387
wild Cammomil 757 Campion and his kinds 467 Canaria grass, (...) or (...) 86
Cane, Cane reed and his kinds 36 Cankerwort, i. (...) in bed. Cankerwort, i.
(...) 625 Canker rose, i. red Poppy. Candy Mustard, or Candy (...) 265 Candy
(...) 1024 Candy Carrots 1029 Canturbury bells 261. 450 Capers and his kinds
895 Capons tail, i. great wild (...). 1075 Card (...) 1167 Carlocke or
Charlocke, and his Kinds 233 wild Carline thistle 1159 Carobe (...) 1429
white Caroline (...) 1157 Carrot and his kinds 1028 wild Carrot 1028 (...)
and deadly Carrots 1030. 1031 Carawa and Caraway seed 1034 Casses or (...) 1039
(...) 586 Castle (...), i. stock (...) Cast me (...) 586 (...) (...) 1431
Caterpillars, i. Scorpion grass, and his kinds 337 Cat mint or (...) 683
Catch fly 601 Cats foot 856 Cats (...), or Cats spear 46 Cats (...) (...) 12
prickly or Juniper Cedar tree 1374 Cedar of Libanus 1352 (...) 816. 1069
Centory 546. 547 Cesars tree spurge 501 Ceterach 1140 Chameleon thistle 1157
Champion (...) Holly 1164 Chadlocke, see (...). white Chameleon grass 26
Chaste (...) and his kinds 1387 Chaste (...), i. Cotton (...) 644 Cherry and
his kinds from (...) to (...) Cherry bay 1603 winter Cherries 342 long Cherry
tree 1466 (...) 1038. 1039 great or sweet (...) 1039 (...) (...), i. Shepherds
(...), 1040 water Chestnut 824 Cheese bowls 400 Cheese (...), i. (...) (...),
1126 Chestnut tree 1442 earth Chestnut 1064 Checquered Daffodil 149. 150
Chickweed and his kinds from 611, to 617 bastard Chickweed 616. 617 (...)
Mercury, i. (...) (...), 333 Chinaroot 1618 Choking Spurge, i. (...) Spurge 497
Christ's wort, or Christ's herb, and Christmas (...), i. black (...) 977
Christ's thorn 1336 S. Christophers (...) 979. 1131 (...) and his kinds 1230.
1231 Chithes and his kinds 1222. 1223 wild Chiches 1223 Cichory 281 (...), or
five finger grass. from 987 to 992 (...) root 790 of the Cinamome tree, the
leaf and trunks 1532 (...) (...) 898 Cistus and his kinds, from 1275, to 1281
(...) Ledon from 1285, to 1292 Citisus bush, i. (...) (...), or (...) (...)
from 1304, to 1309 Citron Apple (...) 1464 (...) Cucumbers 913 the wild Citrul
913 Cines or Chiues 176 Strange Clary, i. (...) Distaffe, 769 Clary, or (...)
770 wild Clary 769. (...) (...) 1185 1186 horned or black Clauer (...) Clauer
gentle 1187 Marish Clauer 1194 garden (...) 1195 (...) or sea Clauer 1199
Cleauers, or goose grass 1122 biting (...) 888 Clot burre 810 Cloud berries
1420. 1630 Cloue (...) and his kinds. from 588 to 597 Cluster of Grapes 875
Clownes Woodwort or All (...) 1005 Clownes Lungwort 1585 the (...) tree 1535
the Cloue berry tree 1610 Sea Cole 838 (...) Hawkweeds 289. 301. 302 Cocks foot
grass 27 Cocks heads, i. meadow (...) (...) Cocks heads, i. red (...) 1243
Cockle (...) Codded (...) 1190 Sweet Cods 218 Colewort and his kinds from 312,
to 317 (...), or Coloquint, and his kinds. 915 Hares Colewort (...) (...) 314
(...) foot and his kinds 811, 812 Cone, (...). (...) (...) 1355 Columbine and
his kinds 1093, 1094 Conyza, (...). (...) Mullet from (...) to 485 Consound 806
middle and little. 634, 637 Conuall Lilly 410 Contra-(...) 1621 Comfrey 806
(...) (...) Coral and his kinds 1575. 1576 Coral tree 1614 Coral priuet 1397
Coral worts 984. 985 Coralline or Coral moss 1572, 1573 (...) tree 1347 (...)
and his kinds 1012 (...) 65 Corn Flag and his kinds 104 Corn grass 5 Corn
Rose or Poppy (...) (...) or (...) 438 (...) 311 (...) 732 marigold 743 Cornel
tree and his kinds 1466. 1467 Cotula and his kinds 757 (...) grass 29 plant
901 (...) 1149 (...) 644 Cowslip and his kinds 781 Cowslip of Jerusalem, or
Sage of Jerusalem 808 mountain Cowslips 784 Cow Basil 492 Cow wheat 90 Wild
91 Corlars (...) 1474 Costmary 649 Costns 1620 Conch grass 23 etc. Couentry
bells 385. 448 Couentry Rapes 448 Cow parsncps 1009 Cocks combs, or Hens
combs, i. yellow Rattle 1071 Crab grass 535 Crab tree 1461 Crabs claw or
fresh water Soldier, 826 Crayfish 761 Cranes bill from 940 to 948 Craw or
Rape Crowfoot 953 Cresses and his kinds 243, 250, 253, 254, 257, 261
Crestmarine 534 Crimson Cedar 1374 Crossc floute 564 (...) and his kinds 433,
1123 Crowfoot and his kinds from 829 to 865. yellow Crow bells, or yellow
Narcissus 133 Crow sops, i. (...) Rose Campian, 471 Crow toes, i. (...) 107
Crow (...) 600 water Crowfoot 829 Crowfoot Cranes bill 943 double Crowfoot 957
white ib. Crow (...) 179 Cuckoo pint or pintic, and his kinds, 834 Cuckoo
(...) 600 Cuckoo (...) 208 Cuckoo flowers or Lady Smocks 259 Cuckowes meat, or
Cuckowes sorrel, i. wood Sorrel 1202 Cucumbers and his kinds 910 (...) 912
(...), see Cotton weed. Sweet Cullions 218 Cull me to you 855 Ladies Cushion
602 Culrage, i. (...) 445 Cullions and their kinds, from 205. to 228
Cumberland Hawthorne 1327 (...) and his kinds 1066 wild 1067 Curans or small
raisons 874 red, white, and (...) 1393 garden Cypres, (1.) Lauandir Cotton 1109
(...) tree 1367 Cypress grass and his kinds 12, 19, 21, 22, 29, 30. Cypres
(...), (...) (...), 1098 Cypres spurge, see Spurge 498 field Cypres 525 Cypres
wood Grass 19
D
DAffodill and his kinds from 123 to 137 Daffodowndilly 133 Day Lilly 99
Datsies 634, etc. Dalmatian Flower de Ince 52 Dalmatian cap, i. Tulipa 137
Dandelion 291 Danewort 1425 Darnel 78 Darnel grass 7, 30 Datetree 1517 drunken
Date tree 1520 Daucus 1023, 1028. 1029 Dead nettle and his kinds 702, 703 Dew
grass 27 Diers weed 494 greening weed 1316, 1317 Dill 1033 Diptame 797
Dittander 241 bastard Dittany 797 Devils bit 726 Docke 388, 389 Dodder 577 Dogs
grass 23. etc. Dogs rib 422 Dogs tooth 204 violet 984, 985 Dogs bane 903 cole
334 Cheries 1296 Rose 1271 piss or tongue 804 Thorns 1274 Mercury 334 Cullions
or stones 207 berry tree 1467 Eamomtl. 757 Leeke 106 Dorlas his Woundwort 431
Down thistle 1152 Doves foot 938 Dragons 831 Dragons blood, i. Bloodwort 390
Dragons blood, see Dragons tree biting Dragon, i. Tarragon. 249 Dragon tree
1523 Drakes root 1621 Draucke or Drake 76 Dropwort 1058 Double leaf, i.
Twayblade 403 Double tongue 909 Duck bill wheat 66 Ducks meat 829 Dug tree 1609
Dunce down, i. Cats tafle 46 Dwale, Nightshade 339 Dwarte grass red and white
3 Dwarf Cistus 1284
E
EAsterlin Priuet 1396 Eglautine, sweet (...) Egrimonte, (...) 712 Egyptian
Wormwood 1101 Egyptian thorn 1330 Egyptians herb, i. water Horehound 700
Egyptian Fig tree 1509 Egyptian Malberry tree ib. Elder and his kinds 142 etc.
marish 1425 dwarf 1426 Elwe and his kinds 1481. 1482 Elichore, see Hellebore.
Elecampane 793 Endive and his kinds 281, 282 (...) 284 English Mercury 329
Eringus and his kinds 1162 Ers, i. bitter (...) 1231 Earth nut 1064 Ethyopian
pepper 1539 Ethiopian Mullein 779 Euphorbium, i. gum (...) 1178 Torch or thorny
1179 Ew or Yew tree 1370 Eyebright 663 Ever green Priuet 1398 Ever green thorn
1604
F
Three Faces in a hood 855 Fair haired Iacinth 117 False Mercury, (...)
All-good 329 Faseles 1209 Feaberry bush 1324 Feather top grass 9 Felwort and
his kinds 432. 433 Hollow leafed 435 Bastard 436 Fennel and his kinds 1032
Fennel giant i (...) 1056 Fen berry. (...) Marish worts 1419 Sow Feunel 1055
Fennal tree 1530 Fenny stones 222 Fenngreeke and his kinds 1196 Fern and his
kinds 1128 wall 1132: 1133 water 1131 petty 1136 black Oak 1137 Oak ib.
dwarse (...) 1143 Feddersew or Fiuerscw 652 Fig tree 1510 dwarf ib. Figwort,
i. small Celandins 816 Fig bean 1217 arched or vaulted Fig tree 1514 Indian
Fig tree with the fruie 1512 Filberd tree 1438 Filipenvula and his kinds, i.
(...) 1058 Fir tree 1363 (...) nut tree 1436 Wolfes Fitts 1584 Red Fitching
1245 Bitter Fitch 1225 (...) (...) or (...) 1227. 1228 Indian Fitch 1627
Fingered (...) 220 (...) (...) 991 (...) (...) grass and his (...), i. (...)
(...), from 987 to 992 (...) Flag 104 Wild Flag and his kinds 50 garden (...)
556 Wild 558 to 560 (...) flax and Flax-weed with his kinds from 550 to 555
(...) Wheat, i. White Wheat. Fleahane Mullet 481 Fiea wort and his kinds 587
Flymilke wort 563 Flybane and his kinds. see Catch fly. (...) and (...) 1068
Florence Flower de Iuce 52 Flotegrasse or Flotergrasse 14 (...) gentle, or
Flower of (...) and his kinds 322. 323 Wild Flower gentle, look Blitum (...)
321 Flower of Constant snople or of (...), 467 Flower of Candy or of Jerusalem,
ib. Flower belure, i. Pass velours 333 Sun 751 (...) 387 Flower de Iuce and
his kinds from 50 to 59 bulbed from 99 to 102 Idols golden Flower 645 soonc
fading Flower 936 Flouring Reed 39 Floreamor, or (...) (...) flower, i. flower
gentle 322 female (...) 625 his kinds 627 Demi gods food, i. (...) 1108 look
Oak of Paradise Folefoot, i. Colts foot. sea Folefoot 838 Fools stones 208
Forebit 726 Forget menot, i. ground Pine 527 Four leafed graise 1198 For
gloves or finger flower, and his kinds 790 Fox stones 207 Fox (...) and his
kinds 87 Fox talie grass 10. 11 Forcible plant,, see Bupleurum. Framboise, i.
Rosyis 1272 (...) (...) spurry 1125 (...) Rosemary 1010 Frankincense tree 1435
Fricseland Drchis 219 Fresh water soldier, i. water Sengreen 826 French
Mercury 332 French Sage, or woody Muliein 767 Starwort 486 Marygold and his
kinds 749 Mallows 931 Leekes, or Mine leekes 176 Lungwort 304 Lauander 585
Worm wood 1098 Beans 1211 Pease 1221 Wheat 89 Oak 1344 (...) piss, i. Urine
wort 1079 (...) coule, or Friars hood 835 Friars crown 1152 Frog-bit 818 Frog
grass 535 Blood Frog grass, see Cragon 1117 diverse strange Indian (...), from
1547 to 1556. Fullers (...) 1167 (...) and his kinds 1088 bulbous 190 Furrowed
grass 26 Futz and Futzen bushes 1319 Fusseballs 1583
G
GAiiant, i. Anemous: Winde-floure. English or Spanish (...), i. (...).
Galingai great and small 33 Gallow grass. i. Hemp. Gall tree and Gail Oak
with his kinds 1348 (...) 564 Gardeners delight, or Gardeners Eye, 467
Gardrobe 1293 Garlic and his kinds 178, etc. Garlic Sage 662 Garland
thorn, see (...) thorn. Garlic Creaclewort, or Garlickemustard and his
kinds. See (...) mustard Stage or Hearts Garlic 179 Garlic Germander, see
Scordium. Garnsey violets, (i. e.) Stock (...). Gaten or Gater tree 1467
(...). or sweet willow 1414 Gelded Satyrion 223 Geldres Rose 1425 (...), or
(...), and his Kinds 432 Germander and his kinds 656 great or tree 658 water
or garlic 661 Gessemine 892 (...) creep by the ground 856 (...) and his
kinds 588 sea stocks 460 winter or Rogues 463 water 826 wilds 599 (...) 600
wallor yellow stock 457 Queens, Dames, violets 463 bulbed stock 147 stock
458 Ginger 61 Ginny hen flower 149 Gith i. Nigella 1084 stinking Gladdon (...)
water Gladiole 29 Glassewort 535 Globe Crowsoot 559 Globe thistle 1151 Globe
Daisy 637 Gods flower 647 Goodnight at nine before noone 936 Gold flower 645
Golden Mothwort, or golden Cudweed, 647 Golden flower of Peru (...) Golden
thistle. 1155 Golden Thistle of Peru 401. 1156 Golden Trefoile 1123 Gold of
pleasure 273 Goldylocks or golden moss 1559 Golden Ox eye, see Buphthalmum and
his kinds Golden flower gentle, and Goldilockes, 646 Goldenwort of
Langucdocke, (...) Herbn Dorea. Golden Saxafrage 841 Golden rod and his kinds
429 Golden Apples, see Apples of Love 346 Gold cup an Gold knop, and his
kinds, 951 Degenerate French Gold, or single French (...). Look Flos
Africanus. Goose tree, i. Barnaclo tree. brant or tree Geese 1587 Gorse, i.
Furz. Gooseberry bush 1324 Goose grass, i. Cleaures 1122 Goose foot, i. wild
(...), 329 Goose nest 228 Goose share, i. Goose grass. (...) to bed at noone
735 Geats beard, i. (...), or (...) Goats Origan, or Goats Matierome. 668 Goats
Raly, see Tragon 1117 Goats thorn and his kinds 1328 Goats (...) 1252 Goats
stones 210 Gourd and his kinds 923 wild 915 Soutwort. i. Herb Gerard. Grace
of God, or S. John's grass. See S. John's wort. (...) Dei 581. 943 sea Grape,
see (...) Grapes 876 sea Graps, i. Raisons of the sea 1615 Grapewort, that is,
Saint Christophers herb Grape flower 118 musked 119 (...) grass and his
kinds 840 Grass and his kinds, from 1 to 31. Grains of Paradise 1542 Winter
green 408 Greening weed and his kinds 1316 Gromil and his kinds 609 Gromil
reed 88 wild Gromil, see (...) 555 Ground saligot, i. land Caltrops Ground
furz 1323 sea Ground Pine 622 Gum thistle, i. (...) Gutwort 507 Groundswell and
his kinds 279 Gnaiacum tree 1611
H
HAiry grass (...). 19 Hairy wood grass 19 Hardbeame 1479 Hares bells 111
Hares ballocke, i. Fox stones. Hares foot (...) 1192 Hares (...). see Sonchus
laeuis. Hares ear (...) Hares stones 225 Good King Harry, i. English Mercury.
Hearts case 855 Hartichoke, see (...). Hartworts of Candy 1049 stone Hearts
tongue (...) Hartwort of Ethiopia 1421 Heart (...) 1190 Hearts (...) 1206 Heart
thorn 1338 Hearts horn and Buckes horn 427 Hearts tongue and his kinds 1138
(...) and his kinds 1010 Hartwort, i. (...). (...). Hasel. i. (...) or (...)
tree Haselwort 536 (...) and his kinds 450 (...) Fetch 1236 Hather, see (...)
Hawk weed and his Kinds. from 296 to 293. also 305, 1625 Hauer, i. Dats.
Grass 73 Hawthorne tree 1327 Heals dog 465 Hetons bill 940 Heath of (...), or
Heath rose 1386 Heath and (...) kinds 1380. to 1386 spurge 1505 Hedgehog (...)
1177 Hedgehog grass 17 (...) (...) 302 Hedge (...) 861 (...) Hyssop 564 581
(...) and his Kinds, White, 440 black 978 black (...) of Dioscorides 1002
(...) rd black (...) (...) 976 Helmet flower 972 yellow Helmet flower 970
Hemiocke and his Kinds 1061. 1062 Hemp and his Kinds 708 Hemp tree 1487
Wild or (...) Hempt 709 Water Hompe 711 Henbane and his Kinds 353. to 359 of
(...) 358 yellow 356 Hen 8 Heubit 617 Hens bill. see Onobrychis. Hens foot.
i. Hedge (...). Hens (...), see Cocks comb. Good Henry, (...) English Mercury.
Hep tree 1269 Herb (...) (...) Herb Ferula 1056 Herb Carpenter 633 Herb
William 1036 Gerard, i. (...) 1001 Paris 405 Grace, i. (...), and his Kinds
Benet 996 (...) 1203 Iuy, i. Hearts Horn (...). Robert 939 Two pence (...)
Aloes 507 (...), or ground (...) 525 (...) (...) swimming herb, or Ducks meat
829 Herb (...) 1010 holy Herb (...) Hercules his (...) Wort (...) (...) (...)
(...) 164 Hindeberry and his Kinds 1272 Hipwort 530 (...) hirse 83 Hissop and
his Kinds 379 Hockes, (...) (...) Hogs beans i. blew (...) 413 Hogs Fennel
1053 Holme, Holly, and Huluer, with his kinds 1339 Holme. or Holyoke 1342
Holyhocke and his Kinds 928 Holy (...), (...) blessed (...). Holy seed 1101
Holly rose and his Kinds from 1275 to 1292 Sea Holly, sea Holme, sea Huluer
1162. 1163 bastard sea Hollies 1164 Holwort or Hollow root and his Kinds. 190
Homlocks, i. herb Bennet 1061 Homlocks also is Filipendula. Wild or Water
Homlocks 1063 Stinking Homlocke 1062 Small Honesty, i. Pinckes Honewort, 1018
Houywort, see (...) 538 Honysuckle and his Kinds 891, 1294 1185 Hop and his
Kinds 885 Hop (...) 1186 Hooded willow herb 477 Hook heal 633 Horehound and
his Kinds 694 Wild 702 Water or marish 700 black or stinking 701 Horn:
beam or Hard=beametree 1479 (...) sea Poppy 367 Horestrong or Horestrange 1055
Horse=tongue 908 Horse flower, see Melampirum 90 Horse=heal, i. Elecampane.
Horse hoof 812 Horse foot 814 Horshooe 1235 (...), i. Shauegrafse, and his
kinds 1113 Horsemint 684 Water Housleeke 826 sea (...) great 510 Hounds tongue
or piss 804 Hound-berry tree 1467 Hundred headed (...), see Champion sea Holly
1163 (...) sickle, i. Blew bottle. Hyacinths, see Jacinths. Hyssop, see (...).
I
Jack of the buttery 515 Jack by the hedge, i. (...) garlickwort 796 Iacinth
and his Kinds from 106 to 120 S James wort: Ragwort 280 (...), (...), or Iesse
892 Jews thorn, i. (...) thorn. Jerusalem Artichoke 753 Imperial Lilly, or
Crown Imperial, 202 Incense root. see Frankincense Rosematic. Indian (...)
1080 reed. i. Flouring reed 39 Molly or Molle 1530 Sun flower 751 Fig tree
1512, 1514 Tobaco 358 (...) 85 Wheat 83 (...) 83 Mirabolans or plums 1500 (...)
btlls 1545 nut trees 1522 Cresses 252 Pannicke 84 Beans 1544 (...) 1487
Moutner,:. Sorrowful tree 1527 Swallow wort, i. (...) 899 leaf, i.
Tamalapatra 1534 Sweet John's and his kinds 599 Square S. John's wort 542 S,
John's wort and his Kinds 540 S. John's bread 1429 Jobs (...) or (...) 88 Ione
(...) pin. i. double (...). Joseph's flower, that is, God to Bed at noone.
Ireos. i. the root of the white Flower de iuce. (...). i. Hyssop. (...), i.
(...) (...), or wood made stones. Italtan Fitch 1252 wood of life, commonly
called Lignum vitae, 1495 (...) 1369 Nanslwort 530 Datmeale, look Panicum 84,
85 Rocket, see Rheseda 277 Iucca or (...) 1543 Judas tree 1428 Ivp and his
Kinds 858 Ground Iuy 856 (...) and his Kinds 1372, 1629 (...) tree 1501 the
greater 1605 Ianos tears 718 Jupiters eye or beard 511 Jupiters distaffe 769
Iuray, Darnell.
K
KArse see Cresses. S. Katharines (...) 1085 (...) 233 Kernelwort 716 Kexc 1062
Kidney bean and his Kinds from 1211 to 1216 Kidney bean of Brasil 1214 Kidney
bean of Egypt and America. 1214 1215 Kidney (...) 1240 Kik and (...), see
Palma Christi. 496 Kindly (...), i. Berried (...). 1376 Kings spear 96 King
Cob, i. Crowfoot. Kipper nut 1064 Kite Keys 1472 (...) Knapweed. see (...).
Knee hulver 907 Knapweed and his Kinds 727 Knawell and Parsley (...), i. small
Saxifrage 566 Kneeholme 907 (...) grass 15 Knights spur 1083 Knights
Milfoile 1074 Knights water Sengreen 826 gold Knops, i. Crowfoot. Knot berry
1630 (...) grass 1565 1566. 1567 Knotty Couch grass 23
L
LAcca and his rotten tree 1533 Dur Ladies shoe, see out Ladies slipper Ladies
Bedstraw 1126 Our Ladies hair 1144 Ladies comb 1040 Ladies glass, see Uenns
looking glass. Ladies bower 887 our Ladies (...) 1150 Lady (...) 26 Lady
smocks 259, 260 Ladies seal. i. wild Briony 871 Ladies (...), 1. great (...)
949 Lambs Lettuce 310 Lancashire (...) 96 Land (...) 1246 Londonets May bush,
i. White thorue. (...) or wild (...) 798 (...) Spurge, see Esula mayor, or
(...) (...) Larks spur and Larkes heel, or Larkes clam 1083 Larks spur or
Larks heel wolfes (...) 971. 973 Larch or Larix tree 1365 Laserwort 1006 Lauen
der cotton 1019 Lauender spike (...) sea Lauender 411 Lance for a Lad, see
Cats tasle, (...) of Alexondris 909 Laurel or Bay tree 1407 Laurel or spurge
Laurel 1405 Leeke and his Kinds 174. 176 Leadwort 447. 1254 Leather (...)
1474 Lentilli and his (...) 1224 Lentiske or Masticke tree 1432 Leopards bane,
fee A (...) 969 Lettuce and his kinds 306. etc. Liblong 590 Lichwale 609
Lignum (...) 1622 Lignum bite 1495. 1611 Lilly (...), i May Lilly 410 red or
purple 192. 193 great and small mountain Lilly, 196 200 Water 819 red at
Constantinople 197 (...) (...) Lilly. i. Moly White Lilly, and also White Lilly
of (...) (...) (...) Limon tree 1464 Limewort, see Viscaria 601 Linden or Lins
tree and his Kinds 1483 Ling, see Heath. Lingwort 441 Lions Turnep 236 Lions
foot, see Leontopodion 642 643 Lions leaf, see Lions turnep. Lions foot or paw
949 Liquerice or Licorice and his Kinds, 1302 Liriconfancy, i. May Lilly. Live
in (...) (...) (...) long, i. Spanish Orpine. Liver wort and his Kinds 1565
white 840 wood 1567 noble Linerwort, i. Garden Trefoile 1203 (...) (...) 955
London Tufts 599 Lockrom Goulons 955 London Tufts 599 Lote tree 1493 Louage
1008 bastard 1048 Lonseherbe or Lousewort, i. Stauesacre. (...). 774 Louse
(...) 1549 Loose strife. i. Lysimachia 474 Lowry. i. Louriel 1405 Lowsis grasss
977 Lungwort 304. 808. 1585 sea 1567 tree 1566 Lung flower 438 Luptues and his
Kinds 1217 Lustwort. i. Sun Dew. Lysimachia, i. Loose strife,
M
Mad apples 345 Madder and his kinds 1118 Madney 1009 Galens Madwoort. 465
Magydare. 1007 (...) and his kinds 1143. 1144 1146 Common Maidenhaire 1146
Garden Mallow and his kinds 928 The Wild Mallow. 930 (...) Mallow or cut
Mallow 931 Marsh Mallow 933 Yellow Mallow 935 Uenice Mallow 936 (...) 1608
Mandrake and his kinds 352 Mannagrasse 27 Mapie and his kinds 1485 Maracocke
1592 Margerites herbs 637 Maricrome and his kinds 664 Wild or bastard or
ground Marierome 666 Goats Marierome 668 Map weed 757 (...) see Marierome
Makebate 1310 (...) 448 Marigold and his kinds 739 Golden Marigolds 742 Corue
743 of (...) 751 Marsh 817 (...) 293 Maruelious apples. 363 Marvel of Peru 343
Master worts 1001 Black 978 Masticke and his tree 1432 Masticke Time 670 (...)
Goats Marierome 671 Mast rree, f. (...) Matchwood, i. Touchwood (...) 727 (...)
and the kinds 41, 42, 43 1630 Mandeline 649 Maithes, i. Mayweed Red 387 Meat
Sumach 1474 (...) 873 Meddicke (...) 1243 Fodder 1199 Mead sweet 1043 (...)
(...) 1009 Saffron, 157. (...), 1185. Grass, 2 Medlar 1453 Melon thistle 177
Melilote 1204 Melons 917, 921 Mercury (...) 332 Wild, (...). English, 329
Mercuries violets 448 Dutch Mezercou 1403 Bastard (...) 1495 Mew or Mcon 1052
(...) and his kinds 1072 Master (...) 827 (...) (...) or shrub (...). 1304
Milk vetch 1242 (...) and his kinds 563 Black and white 1243 Millet 80
Millet grass 6 (...) Spioenewort Milmountaine 560 Mint and his kinds 680
Water-mint, Fish, or. Brook Mint 684 Mountainemint 687 Mirtie and his kinds
1411 Mirobalane and his kinds 3500 Misseltoe or Mistletoo 1350 Mithridate
mustard 262 Mithridate wolfes bane 969 Mocke-willow 1601 Mocke-priuet 1395.
1600 Moly or forcevers Garlic 183, 184 Molle Clusii and Lobelii 1530
Money=wort 630 Moonewort and his, kinds 405, 464. 1132 Moone-ferue 1138, 1139
Morris (...) of India 1545 Moore=grass 1516 Morell or (...) morell, i.
Nightshade Mosses and his kinds 1558, to 1563 Moss Ferue, i. Polypoby Sea
moss, i. Corailine Mother=wort 705, 652 Mother of time 570 Mouse care and his
kind 337, 639 Mouse-taste 426 (...) and his kinds 1103 Mugwet, i. Woodroose
Petty Mugwet 1127 Mulberrie tree and his kinds 1507 Mulberrie (...) tree 1509
Mulleine and his kinds 774, 775 Woody (...), i. French sage 767 Base Mulleme
782 Moth Mulleins 777 Woolly or Ethiopian Mulleine 779 Vetty (...) 782 Munkes
hood 972 Bubarbe 391 Musks 941 Melons 917 Rose 1266 Mustard common 244 (...)
262 (...) 272 Murrein grass, i Scrophularia Much good 1016 Mushrums 1579 Tree
Mushrum, i. Touchwood 1584
N
NAilewort 624 Nauelwort 529 (...) Nauill 529 Nauet gentle 236 Navew and his
kinds 236 Navew Thorowwax 537 Neckwoed. i. (...) Neesing powder 441 Nenuphar,
i (...) (...) Nep so Cat mint Neesing wort or Neesewort and his kinds 606. 607
Nettle and his kinds 706 Nettle tree 1493 Dead or blind (...) 702 Never dying
borage 797 Nicotian, i. Tobacco Nigella and his kinds 1084, 1985 Field or
wild 1087 Nightshade 339, 340 Sleeping or deadly 339, 340 Red 350 Inchanters
351 Tree 360 (...) wheat 66 Nosebeed, i. yarrow Noone tide. see Go to bed at
Noone Nuts and his kinds 1438, 1437, 1441 1522, 1547 (...) tree 1537 Indian
Nut 1522 Spanish Nut 103 Mad nuts 1548 Purging or vomiting Nuts 1546 1547 Water
nuts 823
O
OCulus Christi, i. wild (...) 772 O (...) i. (...). (...) (...), i. Sea
Lung-wort Oily Puise, or Sesamum 1232 Oak and his kinds 1339 Fern 1135 Of
Jerusalem, of Cappadocia, or Para dice (...) scarlet 1342 Great Holme oak 1344
Oltander. (...) Rose bay Olive tree and his kinds 1392, 1393 Olive Spurge 1402
(...) verry, i. (...) Paris One blade, i. one leaf (...) and his kinds 169
Onion or (...) (...) 97 Open arse, i. (...) Ople, i. Marrish Elder Orach and
his kinds 324 Stinking 328 Wild 325, 326, 327 Orchanet i. Alkernet Orchis and
his kinds (...) to 228 Orengetrae 1463 Orange bay 1613 Organy i wild
Marierome. Goats Organy 668 Orobanch 1311, 1312 Orobus i. bitter (...) Orpine
and his kinds 519, 520 Orrice, i. Floure-de-luce Osier 1389 Osmund the Water
man, i. Waterferne 1131 Indian (...) 85 Oats and his kinds (...) Ote (...)
1173 (...) Rose 929 Ox eye and his kinds 746, 747 Ox tongue, i. Wild
Buglosle Great Oxeheale 979 Oxelips 780
P
PAdelion 949 Paddocke stools 1584 Paigles or (...) and his kinds 80, 781
Painted grass 26 Palm tree, see Datetree Palma Christi 120, and 466 Panax or
Wound wort, and his kinds, (...) 1003 1005 Pannicke and his kinds 84, 852
Pannicke grass 16 Small Pannicke grass 16 Pansies or (...) 855 Paper reed 40
Park leaves 544 Poor man's parmacety, i. Shepherds Purse Passeworts (...)
Prattling parnell 788 Parsely and his kinds 1013 Break stone 1594 Parsely
piert, i. (...) Walter and his kinds 1014 Bastard, or red Patsly (...)
Throughbored (...) 1024 Parsely knotted, 1022, mountain, (...), hedge, 1022
stone, (...), wild, 1020 Garden and wild (...) 1025 Cow Parsney (...) Pass
flower, or Pass velour. 385 Passions. i. Snakeweed Passion flower 1592 Pasque
flower see Pass flower Pastell, i. woad Patience, i. Docke Paul's Betony 629
Peach troe and his kinds 1447 Peach=wort. i. dead (...) Pear tree and his
kinds 1456 Wild (...) 1457 1458 Peason and his kinds 1219, 1220 (...) ib.
Square veluct 1198 Heach (...) 1237 Everlasting 1229 Norfolk sea Pease 1251
Pease earthnut 1237 Pearl grass 87 Pearl plant, i. Gromill Pellamountaine
571, 653 Pellitory of Spain 758 False Pellitory 1001. 607 Pellitory of the
wall 331 Penny grass 1071 Penny Mountain, i. Wild time Penny royal and his
kinds 671 Penny wort, or wall Penywort 529 Water Penywort 529 Sea Penny wort
532 Sheep killing penuy grass 529 Penny rot 1529 Pyony and his kinds 980
Pepon and his kinds 919 Pepper plant and his kinds 1538 Pepperwort, i.
Dittander Water Pepper, i. Arsmart Wall and country 517 (...) called (...)
1541 Genny, or Indian 366 Percep. er 1594 (...) Plin. 1606 Pescod tree (...)
Anagyris 1427 Pestilent worts, id est, Water (...) 814 Peruiucle and his kinds
894 Biting, or purging 888 S. Peter's corn 73 S. Peter's wort 542 Petty Cotty
644 Pety whin, that is, small Thorn broom (...), i. butchers broom Pharaoh
his figtree 1509 Pickepurse, i. Sheepheards purse (...) grass i. Columbine
(...) foot 938 Pild corn, i. Wild oats (...), i. Small (...) Pimpernell and
his kinds 617 Water Pimpernell 620 Sea Pimpernell 622 Pinkes and his kinds
597. 599 Pincke needle, i. Musked storkes bill Pine tree and his kinds 1355
White and blew (...) 1299 Piss a, or piss in bed 291 Pitch tree 1354 Pitch,
or stinking (...) 1187 (...) Clauer 1206 Plantaine and his kinds 419. 420. 422
423. Water and his kinds 417 Sea 423 Sea Buckhorne 425 Wild sea 426 Plantaine
a fruit 1516 Plane tree 1489 Dwarf, i. Marsh elder Plowmans spickward 790
Plums and his kinds 1497 Pockwood 1611. 1495 Poets Rosemary 1293 Pole reed 36
Poley and his kinds 653. 654 (...) of the wall 1132 Polypody of the Oak (...)
Powander (...), or bastard (...). 1397 Pomecitron 1464 Pomegranate tree 1451
Pompion 919 Wild Pompion 922 Pondweed and his kinds 821, 822 Knights Pondwort
826 Pooremans (...), i. Garlic Poplar and his kinds 1486 Wild Poppy 400 Sea
or horned 367 Bostard wild 373 Spatling, or frothy 679 Poppy and his kinds
369 (...) 521 Portingale trefoile 1189 Potatoes 925 (...) 927 White Potherbe
311 Sheepheards Poutch 276 Prickmadame and his kinds 412 Prick timber, or
prick wood tree 1468 Prickly box 1332 Pricket 517 Priests Pintle 834 Primrose
(...) and his kinds, that is, a (...) Primrose with the red flowers, and
primrose with the white 783 Tree Primrose 475 Private or Prim print 1394 Mock
1395 Bastard 1397 Fruitelesse 1398 Prunell 632 Pudding grass, i. Pennyroyall
Pudding pipe 1431 Puff fists 1584 Puliall Mountain 572 (...) from 1209 to
1253 Purslane 521 (...) 524 Water Purstane 614 Purple moth (...) 778 Purple
wort 1199 Sheepheards purse 276
Q
QUacsaluers spurge 503 Quacksaluers (...) 500 Quakers or quaking grass 86
Queens Gillofloures 463 Queen of the Medows, that is, (...). Queen Mother
herb, i. (...). (...) Quickbeane, and quickentree, i. Wild ash 1473 Quickly
gone flower, id est, Uenice Mallow Quichgrasse, i Dogs grass (...), i. (...)
Quince (...) 1452
R
RAbone (...) Radish Racket. i. Rocket Radish and his kinds 237. 238 Horse or
mountain 241 Rapwort 280 (...) 241 Raisons of the Suune 877 Rampions and his
kinds 454 Ramsons 179 Ram of (...). i. Christ's thorn Ram or Hearts thorn 1334
Ram Laxatiue 1337 Ramps 835 Rape and his kinds 232 Rape Crowfoot 953 Rape
Broom, see Drobanch Rape Cole 318 Raspes or, Frambales and his kinds 1272
Yellow Rattle, or White Rattle 1071 Red Rattle, or Rattle grass 1072 Red Cole
313 Red Curans 1593 Reed and his kinds 36. 37 Reeds mace, i. (...)
Reedegrasse, i. But Reed Reed wild 7 Thorny of Peru 1179 Sweet, i. Calamus
Aromaticus 63 Sweet or (...) 38 Red ray, i. (...) Rest harrow 1323 Rhein (...)
1337 Ribwort and his kinds 422 Rocket 247 Rock Rose 1595. 1596 Sheepheards
Rod, that is, Wild (...) Rogation flower 564 Roman Beans 1216 Roman Pease
1221 Rose and his kinds, from 1259 to 1270 Rose Bay, or Rose Bay tree. 1406
Dwarf Rose Bay 477. 1407 Rose (...) 1425 English Rose Willow 1390 Rose wood
1624 Ros solis. i. Sundeaw 1556 Wild Rose 1269 Rosewort, er roseroot 532 Water
Rose see water (...) Winter see Hollyhocke Campion 467 Wild Campion 469 Ruby
387 Rosemary and his kinds 1292 White Rot (...) Red Rot, i. (...) 1556 Root
of the holy Ghost 999 (...) 1221 Rubarbe and his kinds 393. 499 (...) Rubarbe
391 Bastard Rubarbe 391 English Bastard Rubarbe 1252 Ruddes, i. Marigolds Rue
and his kinds 1255 Wall Rue, or Rue Maiden: hair 1144 Rupture wort 569. 1594
Rush Sea grass 44 Rushleeke or sweth 176 Common Rush (...) Bull or water Rush
34 Sharp or hard Rush 35 Rush Daffodill (...) his kinds 129 Rush grasst 4
Rushy sea grass 21 Ryce 79 Rye and his kinds 68
S
SAffron and his kinds from 151 to 157 (...) Saffron 152. 153 etc. Bastard
Saffron, and his kinds 1170 Wild Bastard 1171 Sage and his kinds 764. (...)
Sage Rose and his kinds 1275. 1276 French Sage look Verbascum Matthioli 767
Sage Mullein ib. Sage of Jerusalem 808 Sage of Bethlem ib. Saligot or (...)
nuts and his kinds 823 (...) (...) and his kinds (...). 904 905 Salt wort and
his kinds look Sea Grape (...) Black Saltwort 562 Sallow, see willow 1390
Sampier, and his (...) 533 Sandeuer 535 Sandwoort 428 Sanicle, and his kinds
948 Neesewort Sanicle 949 Mountain, or (...) Sanicle 788 (...) parilla 859
(...) consound, or Saracens Country or woundwoort 429 Saracens Birthwoort 847
(...), or ague tree 1525 Satin, or Satin flower and his kinds 464 Satyreon
and his kinds from 205 to 128 Sauory and his kinds 575. 576 Sauin and his
kinds 1376 Sauce Sumach 1474 Saunders tree 1586 Saucealone i. Jack by the
hedge Saucewoort 713 English Saxifrage 1047 Burnct Saxifrage 1044 White, and
golden Saxifrage 847 Saxifrage of the Ancients 604 Scabious and his kinds 719
and so to 725 Silver Scabious 730 (...), or stony (...) 1136 Scabwoort, i.
Elecampane Scammony and his kinds 866 Scariole 283 Scarlet Oak 1342 (...)
grass, i. Wild cresses (...) 43 Close Scienses, i. Dames violets Shepherds
Scrip 276 Scorpion grass and his kinds 337. 338 Scordium, i. water (...) 661
(...) 736 (...)=grass, i. Spoonewort 401 Scottish Scuruie: grass 838 Sea
(...), i. (...) ib. Sea Feather 1616 Sea Fan 1617 Sea (...) 171 Sea Lentill.
1615 Sea Spskegrasse 20 Sea dogs grass 25 Sebesten, or (...) plumme 1499 Self
heal and his kinds. 632 (...) bush 1297 Bastard Seen, or Seen tree 1299
Sengreene 510 Water (...) 826 Field Senuie, Mustard Sensitive herb 1599
Serpents tongue see (...) tongue. Seraptas stones 222. 223 etc. Service tree
1471 Wild Service tree 1473 (...), or bastard (...) 493 (...), i. (...) pulse
1232 (...) i. Hartwoort 1050 (...) of Candy ib. Mountain Setwall. i. Nardus
(...) (...). i. (...) Setter grass 976 Setterwort ib. Setwall. 1076. 1076.
1077 Shadow grass. see woodgrasse Shane grass, i. (...) Sharewort 490
Shepherds needle 1040 Shepherds purse, scrip, or pouch 276 (...) grass 7
(...) tree 1509 (...), see Bugle (...) mountain. 1048 (...) Sumach 1476 Silver
(...) and his kinds 730 Silver Thistle 1149 Silver weed, id est, Wild Tansie
993 Sinkfield 987. 988 Skirtwort 1026 Ladies (...) 443 (...) 1497 Smallage and
his kinds 1015 Small hard grass 4 Garden Smilax 1211 Snake weed and his
kinds 399 of Uirginia 848 Snakes Buglosse. 802 Snakes Garlic 181 Snaile
(...) 1199 (...) and his kinds, 549 (...) 606. 607 Soldiers Yarrow 1074 (...)
fools and his kinds 147 148 (...) wort and his kinds 444 Sorbe tree and his
kinds 1471 (...) and his kinds 397. 398 Sorrel du Bois 1202 Sorrowful (...)
1527 Sothern wood and his kinds 1105 Sowbread and his kinds 843. 844
Southistle and his kinds 292 Spanish broom, or Spanish base broomes 1314
Sparrowes tongue, i. (...), also see 554 Sparrowes (...) (...) 554 Spear for a
King 94 (...) and his kinds 961 Spear Crowfoot. 961 Speed well look Fluellen
627 (...) and his kinds 69 (...), i. Hankeweed Sperage, i. asparagus Sporage
Beans, i. French Beans Spicknell 1052 Bastard (...) ib. Spiderwort 57. 58. 59
Spiked (...) gross 13 Spike (...) grass. 22 Spignell, i. Bald money 1052 Water
Spike 821, 822 Spiknard 1080 Rough, or wild Spleenewort 1140 Spinach and his
kinds (...) Spindel tree 1468 Spleenewoort and his kinds 1140. 1141 Spurg and
his kinds 497 to 505 Heath spurge. 1595. 1596 Spurgwoort, (...) stinking
gladin Spurge Olive, or widow (...) 1402 German olive spurg 1403 Spurge flax
or mountain widow (...) (...) Spurge Laurel 1405 Squill, i. (...) Onion 171
Squinanth 43 Staff tree 1600 Stagerwort or Stauerwoort see Ragwort
Standergrasse i. Dogs Cullions Starch corn 69 Starchwort 834 Sea starwort 413
Star (...) 1166 Staves acre 495 Starwort, or Sharewort and his kinds 490
491. 492 Stars of Bethlehem 165 Stars of Jerusalem. id est, Joseph's flower
Staechados and his kinds 585 Golden (...) 646 Stichwort 47 Stock Gillofloures
and his kinds 456 Stone (...) 1203 Stonecrop 517 Stone hoar, i. stone Pepper,
or stone Crop 517 White and golden stonebreake 841 Stonywood, that is, turned
to a stone 1587 Storkes bill and his kinds 938. 939. 940 (...) Storkesbill 941
(...) Storkesbill 945 Storax tree 1526 Straked grass 26 Strangle Weed and
strangle tare i. (...) Strawberry and his kinds 997 Strawberry tree, or (...)
tree 1496 Strawberry bay 1602 Stabwort i. woodsorreli Succory and his kinds
281. 282. 283 284 (...) (...) and his kinds 286 287 Wild Succory 284 Suckles,
see honysuckles Sugar reed 38 Sugar cane 38 Sulpher wort, i. (...) fennel
Swallowort and kinds 898 Sweet willow, i. Saul Sumach 1474 Red Sumach 1475
Sun dew 1556 Sunfloure 751 (...) (...). (...) his buckhorue 527 Swines-grasse
that is knotgrasse Stickedoue 585
T
TAbaco and his kinds 358 Tamarinde 1607 (...) and his kinds 1379 Tansie and
his kinds 650 Wild Tausie 993 Tare and his kinds 1227 Tare everlasting (...)
Great wild Tare 1230 Dioscorides his (...) Tare 1242 Tarragon 249 (...) and
his kinds 1167 Terrible herb 507 Tetterwort 1069 Tetterberry see Briony (...)
and his kinds etc. 1149. 1150. Thistle upon Thistle and diverse other wild
Thistles 1174 Thlaspy 262, 263 Thorn and his kinds 1327 White Thorn 1327
Thorn box 1332 Thorn broom and his kinds 1319 Thorn Apple, or of Peru 348
Thorn Grape, that is, Gooseberries Purging Thorn or Laxatiue (...) 1337
Through war, or through leaf 536 Three leafed grass 1185 Three leaued liuerwort
1203 Thrift 603 Threatwort and his kinds 450 Throughwort and his kinds 536
(...) and his kinds (...) Tine or wild Tetch 1228 Wild (...) 570 Creeping,
or running Time 570 Dodder, or laced Time 577 (...) Time 574 (...) and his
kinds 1579 (...) or wild flax and his kinds from 550 to 555 Tolmainers 599
Tormentill (...) his kinds 992 (...) 908 Tooth pick (...) 1041 Great
Toothwort (...) Torches 774 Tornsole 734 Touch me not 261. 447 912 Touchwood,
i. (...) (...) Towering mustard 272 Toywort, i. Shepherds (...) (...) Tracca 218
Triple Lady Traces (...). Traucliers joy. 886 Tree of life. 1369 Tree Primrose
475 Tree Spurge 501 Trefoile and his kinds 1185 Bean Trefoile 1427 of America
1189 (...) or marish 1194 shrub 1305 Sweet 1195 sour 1202 bastard shrub 1308
(...) tree 1309 Shrub, or makebate, or Marcelius his (...) Trefoile 1310 (...)
mustard and his kinds 262 Treacle (...) 273 (...), see Scorodothlaspi. (...)
(...) 1187 Tree bearing goese 1587 (...) herb 1203 Troll (...) 955 (...) love,
i. herb Paris. (...) and his kinds. from 137 to 146 (...) 856 Turbith of
(...) 415 Scrapia's Turbith, i. sea Starfloure. Turks herb. see Herniaria.
Turkey Balm 690 Turkey corn and wheat 83 Crowfoot 958 Cresses 274 Millet 1232
Turkey-(...) 149 Turmericke 34. 1631 Turnep and his Kinds 232 Turpentine tree
and his kinds 1433 (...) (...) Twayblade 403 Twig Withy or small Withy 1391
Two penny grass 630
V
(...) and his kinders 1075 red 678 (...)-Flower de luce 103 Uenice Sumach 1476
Uenus basin, i. (...). hair, see Maidenhairs Comb 1040 Looking glass 438
Ueruaine and his kinds 778 Uetch 1227 Bitter Uetch 1225 (...) and his kinds
875 Wild 871 White, i. Bryony. (...) and his kinds 850 Daines, and Damask
463 Water 826 Upright three colored 851 (...) 984 Bulbed 147 (...) grass 736
Uipers Buglosse and Uiper-herbe 802 (...) bower 887 Upright Dogs grass 25
W
(...) (...) 823 (...), i. (...). Way thorn, i. Buckthorne Waifaring tree 886
Wake robin 834 Wall flowers 457 Wall Barley, or Waybeunet 73 Walnut 1440
Wallwort, i. Danewort. sea Wartwort 505 Great Water grass 6. 13 Water Cypres
grass 21. 22 Water Archer and his kinds 416 Water nut, i. Saligot, and his
kinds 824 Weedwinde, i. Withywinde. Welcome to our house 505 Weld, i. Dyars
weed. Wheat and his kinds 65. 66 Three months 69 Whin and his kinds 1319
Whicken tree, i. will be (...). Whitblow or Whitlow Grass 624 (...), i. (...).
White root and his kinds, i. (...) seal. (...) tree, i. Water (...), or wild
Ash Whorts, or Whortle (...) and his kinds 1415 marish 1419 (...) (...), i.
(...) (...) Widow (...) 1402 The wilding tree, see Crab tree. Sweet Williams
598 Willow and his kinds 1389 Sweet, i. Gaul. Willow herb 474 Wind rose 385
Wind flours 385 Winged Windeweed 1598 Wild Windefloure 385 Withywinde, 861
Withy 1391 Withy wind, i. Withy and his kinds. Witch (...) 1481. 1582 Witch
Hasell 1479. 1481 Woab 491 Wood grass 9 Wood rushy grass 22 Wood waxen, i
Greenweed, woodbinde and his kinds 891 (...), or Ladies (...). 887 upright
1294 Woodreefe or Woodrow 1124 Wood made stones 1587 Woodsower, or Wood (...),
i. Alleluia, 1202 Woodrowell 1124 Wood or Garlic Sage 662 Woody (...) 350
Wood Clickweed or Wood (...) 92 Woolly Jacinth 122 Woollen, i. Mullein. Wolfes
bane and his kinds 969 Wolfes claw 1562 Winter Wolfes banc 968 yellow Wolfes
bane 969 Wolfes (...) 1584 (...), i. (...), Wormeseed 1101 English see (...).
Wormwood 1096 Holy 1101 Romani 1098 Sea 1099 small leafed garden, or (...)
1102 Foreign or bastard 1101 (...), i. (...) his Kinds 826. 1005. 1074
Y
YArrow 1072 Yew tree 1370 Yoks Time 1479 Youthwort, i. Sundew 1556 Yuca, i.
Jucca. 1543
Z
(...) 34, 1631


A Supplement or Appendix unto the general Table, and to the Table of English
Names, gathered out of ancient written and printed Copies, and from the mouths
of plain and simple country people.
A
(...) (...). (...), Ameos. Argentil, Percepier. (...), Smaliage. Alliaria, in
written copies (...).
B
(...), Gentian. (...), Meum. (...), Gentian. Belweed, (...) nigra. Bishop a
worts, Betony. Birds nest, wild Parsney. Birds tongue, Stitchwort Bigold,
(...) segetum. Blew ball, Blew bottle. Bolts, Ranunculus globosus. (...),
Knapweed. Brown (...), Bugle. (...) Consolida minor. Brother wort. (...)
mountain. Bride wort, Vlmaria. Bright, Cheledonia. Brokeleake, (...) Dragons.
Brusewort, (...). Bucks (...), Trifolium (...). Buckram, Aron.
C
(...), Alliaria. (...), Cresses. (...), Nepta. (...), Daffodill. Chaffeweed,
Cottonweed. (...) or Cheuerell was called (though untruly) Apium risus. (...)
Creacie, Allium. Churchwort, Penny=royal. Ciderage, Arsmart. (...), the Burre
docke. Citheren, (...) grass or Cliuers. (...), Lappa. (...) tongue, (...)
niger. Cocks foot, Columbine. Cock foot, Cheledonia mayor. Cow fat, Cow (...).
(...), the (...) Centory. (...), Vaccinia palustris. Crowbell, yellow (...).
Crow berries, Erica baccifera. Crowfootis Orchis, in (...) and Yorkshire. Crow
(...), Sopewort. Crow (...), Hyacinthus Anglicus. (...), Iacea nigra. (...),
Columbiue. (...), Arsmart. Cutherdole and (...) (...) Branke (...).
D
(...), Cyelamen, (...). wild Hemp. Dragons female, water Dragons. Dropwort,
Filipendula. Duncedowne, (...). Dwaie is Nightshade.
E
EDderwort, Dracontium. Eileber, Alliaria. Elfedocke, Enula Campana. Earth
gall, great Centory, or rather small. (...) is wall Fern. Exan, Croswort, yet
not our Cruciata.
F
(...), white Flower (...). (...), Cepea. Field Cypress is (...). Fieldwort,
(...) or Gentian. Filewort, Filago minor. Fleadocke, Petasites. Fleawort,
Psyllium. Forget me not, Chamaepitys. Forebitten more, Devils bit. (...), water
Dragons. Frank, Spurry. (...) is the harbe that bears Strawberries,
Strawberrier.
G
GAlingal meke is (...). rotunda. Gaten tree or Gater tree is Dogs berry tree.
Gandergosses is (...) eekes. (...), Aparine. Good King Harry, English Mercury.
Goosechite, Agrimony. Goosegrasse was sometime called Argentina. Goose bill,
Aparine. Garden Ginger, Piperitis. Giond, Cow Basil. Grace of God, S. John's
wort, Green Mustard, Dittander. Groundwill, Groundswell. Ground needle,
Geranium muscatum. Ground Enel, (...) comb.
H
(...), Cliuers. Hammerwort, Pellitory of the wall. Hardhow, Marygolds. Hares
eye, Lychnis (...). (...), Crow (...). Herb (...). Chamaepitys. Henbell,
Henbake. (...), Hedera terrestris. Herb (...), Hemlocke. Herb Peter, (...).
Herba martis, (...). Hertelowre, Chamaedryos. Hertwort, Fraxinus. (...), (...)
mountain. Hippia mayor. common Pimpernel, Holy rope, wild Pempc. (...),
Solanum. Horewort, Filago. Horsechire, Germander. Horseheale, (...). Horse
(...), wild (...). Honesty, (...). (...), Enula campana. Horsemint, Watermint,
Huiwort, Polium. (...), Ambrosia.
I
IAcca alba, wild or (...) (...). Imbrecke, Housleeke. (...) (...) pin double
(...).
K
KAndlegosts, Goosegrasse. Kings crown (...). King cob or King cup is
Crowfoot. Kiss me (...) I (...), Pansies. Kidney wort, (...) wort.
L
(...), Helleborus albus. Little Wale is (...). Lichwort is Pellitory of the
wall. Longwort, Pellitory of Spains. Lilly (...), Moly. Lilly (...),
Pennyroyall. Lodewort, water Crowfoot. Lousewort, Staphisacre. Lustwort is
Sundew. Lyngwort, (...) (...).
M
(...) Motherwort Palma Christi. May blossoms, Conual Lillies. Mawroll, White
Horehound. (...) or Mathes, Coiula (...). March, Smallage. March beetle, Cats
(...). Meedles Arage. (...). Pimpernel. Morel Nightshade (...), Orobus. (...),
woodroose.
N
NEle, Lollium. Nespite, (...). Nep, (...) mint. Nosebleed, Yarrow.
O
(...), Orpin. Oxan, (...). Oxtongue, Lingua bouis.
P
PAgle, (...). Palm de Dieu, Palma Christi. (...), Mercury. Pastell, (...).
(...) (...) niger. Peter's (...). Tapsus barbatus. Peuterwort, Horsetaile.
Pimentary, Bauline. Powkneedle, (...) bill. (...), Ligustrum. Pygie, Gramen
Leucanthemum.
R
RAms foot is water Crowfoot. Red knees is Hydropiper. Robin in the hose is
Lychnis (...). Rods gold is Marigold.
S
Scab wort is Enula Campana. (...) Docke is Branke vrsine. Seggrom is Ragwort.
Self heal was sometimes called (...). Sheep killing is Cotyledon aquatica.
Sleepewort is (...). Staggerwort and Stauerwort is Iacobea. Stanmarch is (...).
(...) is (...). S. Mary's seed is Sow (...) seed. Small honesty in Pinks.
Somerwort is Aristolochia. Stike pile is Storks bill. (...) is Palma Christi.
Stohwort is Oxys. Sparrow tongue is (...) grass. Stonnord and Stonchore is
(...). Stubwort is Woov (...). Swines grass is (...) grass. Swine Carss is
Knot grass. Swichen is Groundswell. Sowdwort is, Columbine.
T
(...) is wild (...). (...) is wild Parsnep. Tetterwort is great (...).
Toothwort is (...) (...). (...) Clymenum Italorum.
W
WAiwort is (...), which was sometime called Filipendula. Warence is Madder.
Warmot is Wormwood. Waywort is Pimpernell. (...) is Plantago. Waywort is Hippia
mayor. Waterwort is (...). (...) is (...). White Bothen is great Daisy. (...)
Sauager is Cockle. Wilve Nardus is Asarum. White Golds is great Dassy. Wood
march is Sanicit. Wood sower is Oxys, (...) is Fraxinus. Woodnep is Ameos.
(...) (...) is Chamaeleon; (...) is Vaccinea. Wymot is Ibiscus. Wit is (...).
Y
(...) (...) (...) (...),
Z
(...) was counted Satyrion minor, and is that which Lobel calls (...)
soemina pratensis.
A Catalogue of the British Names of Plants, sent me by Master Robert Dauyes of
Guissaney in Flint-Shire.
A
ANet. Dill. Aurddanadl. Red Archangell Nettles. Aurvanadl. vide Hwb yr ychen.
B
BAnadyl. Broom. Banatlos. Furze. Berw yr Frengie. (...). Berw yr (...). water
Cresses. Bedwen. a Birch tree. Biattus. Beets. Blaen yr Ywrch. Mercury. Blaen y
gwayw. Spearewort. Bleidd dug, Wolfes bane. Brialbv Mair. Cowslips. Brwynen. a
Rush. Bylwg. Cockle, or field (...). Bvst yly Ddayar. Centorie.
C
Carn yr ebol. Folefoot. Cas began gytbrel. Veruaine. Cacamweej. Burre. Caliwlyn
y (...). Agrimonie. Cancwlwm, Knot grass. Camamill. Camomil. (...). Oats.
Cennin. Leekes. Cennin Pedr. Daffodill. (...) (...). Horsetaile. Cegid.
Hemlocke. Celynen. Holly. Cbwerwlys yr kithin. Wood (...). Clust yr ewie.
Laurel. (...). Gillofloures. Clustiev yr Derw. vide Galladr. Clust llygoden,
Mouse ear. Claiarlys y dwr. Brookelime. Coed Ceri. Service tree. Cowarcb.
Hemp. Cower y llaeth, Caliwlyn y mel, Coed kirin. Plum trees. Corsen. a Poole
reed. Cribe y Bleiddiev. v. Cacamwcci. Craith vnnes. Prunel or Self heal.
Crafankc y vran. Crowfoot. Cribe san Fraid. Betony. Cynglennydd. white Mullen.
Cynson y Celioc. Setwell.
D
DAil y gwaed. Penny royal. Danadl. Nettles. Danadlen wenu. White Archangell
Nettle. (...) y (...). Dandelcon. Danadien ddall. dead Nettle.
E
EBolgarn yr ardd. Assarabacca. (...). Darnell. Eiddew. Iuy. Eiddew y ddayar.
ground Iuy. Eldral. ground Iuy.
Eithin yr ieir, v. Hwb yr ychen. Erienlys. S John's wort. Erbin. Calamint.
(...), bastard Partley.
F
FA. Beans. Fenich y Cwn. wild Cammomil. Fenich. Fenell. Fettes. Fitches.
G
GAlladr. Lungwort like Liuerwort. Garllec. Garlic. Glesyn y (...), Bugle.
Gladyn. Gladiol or Corn Flag. Geltudrem, v. Llysie Ewsras. Gold Mair,
Marigold. Gruc. v. Banatlos. Grayanllys y dwr. Brook lime. Gwlydd. small
Chickweed. Gwlydd Mair. Pimpernell. Gwenynddail. Gwenynoc. Balm. Gxyddsyd.
Woodbind or Honisuckle Gwden y Coed. Smooth Bindewood. Gwallt gwener. Venus
(...). Gwallt y forwyn. Maiden hair. Gwayw yr Brenbin. Daffodil. Gwenith.
Wheat. Gwinwydden. Vine.
H
HAd y gramandi. Gromel. Haidd. Barley. Hese (...). Water Torch, of (...).
Hoccyr. Mallows. Hoccys y gors Marish Mallows. Hwb yr ychen Camock, or rest
harrow
LL
LLaeth (...) Mair Sage of Jerusalem. Llaulys. Stauesacre. Llawenllys. Borage,
Llewic ychwannen, v. y Benselen. Llewic yr idr. Henbane. Llewpard dug.
Aconltum. Llysie Ivan. Mugwort. Llysie llwydion, v, (...) (...). Llysie
llewelyn. Paul's Betony. Llysie y wennel. Celandine. Llym y llygaid, v. Llysie y
wennol. Llysie Effras. Eycbright. Llysie yr Crymman, v. Gwylydd Mair. Llysie
(...), vide Dyars weed. Llysie pen (...). Housleeke. Llysie yr gwaedlin. Yarrow
or Milfoile Llysie Mair. vide Gold mair. Llysie Amor. Flower gentle. Llygaid y
Dydd. Daisies. Llysie yr pwdin, v. Dail y gwatd. Llysie yr gath, v. Erbin.
Llysie y Blaidd, v. Bleid (...). Llysie y (...). Nightshade. Llysit y Cribev.
Teasell. Llysie Simion, v. Cas began gytbrel. Llysie yr Cyrph. Periwinckle.
Llysie Eva. Sea bank horn. Lyriaid y mor. Sea bank horn.
Llysie yr meddyglyn. wild Carrot. Llwysen. Elm tree. Llwynlys, Seuruy
grass.
M
MAfon. Raspis. Marchalan. Elecampane. (...) (...) (...), Polypody, Oak Fern
Maip. Turnips. March ysgaly gerddi, Artichoke. Mesys. Strawberries. Menig
ellyllion. Fox gloves. (...). Juniper tree. (...) y (...). Right (...). Mintas.
Mints. Moron. Parsneps. Moron y (...). wild Parsneps. Mwg y ddayar. Fumetory.
Mwssogl. Moss. Mynawyd y bigail. Storks bill.
N
Nyddoes. Spinach.
O
(...). an Ash tree.
P
PAwen yr Arth. Bears breech. Padere Mair. Crossewort. (...) y dwr. water
Parsley. Persli Frengic. Smallage. (...) (...), v. Menic (...). Pidni y goc.
Aron, or Cuckoo pint. Poerlys, v. y (...). Poplys. a Poplar. Pwrs. y Bigail.
Shepheatds purse. (...) y (...). Tares.
R
RHedyn. Fern. Rhedegat y (...). v. Galladr. Rbug. Rye. Rbosyn. a Rose.
S
SAeds (...), v. (...). Siwdrmwt. Sothernwood. Siaccked y (...), v. (...)
(...). Sirian. (...). (...) Fair. English Galingall. Sowdl y Crydd. v. (...) yr
yiwrch. Suran y (...). wood Sorrel. Suran. Sorrel. Sysi, v. Mesys.
T
TAsod y (...). Dogs tongue. Tasod y neidr. Adders tongue. Tasod yr bydd. Hearts
tongue. Tafol. a Docke. Tafol (...). Bistort. Tagaradr, v. Hwb yr ychen. Tafod
yr edn. Birds tongue. Tafod yr (...). (...). Telepbin. Orpin. Tormaen,
Filipendula. Tryw, v. (...) y mel. Troed y glomen. Columbine. (...) tylodion.
Tormentilla. Troed y dryw. Parsley Breakstone, or small Saxifrage. Triacly
Cymro. Germander. Troed yr bedydd. Lark (...).
W
(...), v. (...) yr (...) (...). Onions.
Y
Y (...). Flcabane. Y (...) (...), v. (...). Y bengaled. red Scabiour. Y (...).
Blewbottle, or Cornfloure. Y (...). (...). Y (...). Seabious. Y Dorfagl. meadow
three leafed (...). Y (...). Herb Robert. Y (...). Caliwlyny (...). Y Ddwy
(...). herb Twopeace, or (...). Y (...). wild tansy or Siluerweed Y dew bannoc,
v. Cynffon (...). Y (...). (...). Y Ddayarlys. Peony. Y Doddedigc wenn.
Pilewort. Y (...). Tutsan or Park (...). Y (...). Poppy. Y fiolud. Violet. Y
(...). Y (...). small Celandine. Y (...) (...), v. (...) (...). Y fyddarlys.
Prickmadam. Y (...), v. (...) un (...). Y fyw (...). (...) (...). Y (...) gocb.
v. Bvstl y Ddayar. Y gynga, v. Llysie yr bidl. Y gloria. wild Rose, or
Spargwort. Y (...) wenwyn. Devils (...). Y gyfog. a kind of (...). Y
glaiarlys. Y grevlvs. Groundswell. Y gysgadvr. Nightshade or Morell. Y
gingroen. Todeflax. Y (...) gwynn (...). Garden Orach. Y (...) gwynn gwylls.
wild Orach. Y (...), v. (...) lliw. Y llwynbidydd. Ribwort. Y (...). Doder. Y
llyfiewyn bendigedic. (...). Y (...). Lunaria. Y Mor relyn. Sea Holly. Y (...).
Pellitory of the (...). Y Papi (...), v. red Poppy, orcorne (...). Yr Escarlys
(...) geon (...) (...), or Birthwort, or Hartwort, long. round. small.


Yr Alaw. Water Lilly. Yr (...) (...), i. ffordd. Waybread. Yr (...). Rue, or
herb Grace. Yr (...). (...). Yr yscallen (...). out Ladies (...). Yr yscallen
Fendigedic. Card. Benedict. Yr (...). Clownes wort. Yscall drain (...) Carline
Thistle. Yscall. wildo Thistles. Yscall y much. Sow thistle. Yscol (...).
Peter's wall or square, S, John's (...). Yscaw. Eldertrees. Yscaw Mair. Walwort.
Yspaddaden. White thorn. Ysniab. Mustard. Y wermod. Wormwood. Y wermod wenn.
Feuerfew. Y (...) wenn. white (...). Y winwydden (...). black Bryony. Y (...).
Llysie yr gwaedlin. Y wennwlydd. Great Thickweed.
A TABLE, WHEREIN IS CONTAINED THE NATVRE AND VERTVES OF ALL THE Herbs, Trees,
and Plants, described in this present Herbal.
A
CAusing Abortment, 60, d. 845, m. 1130, b. Against Abortment, 766, a. Against
Aches, 71, c. 359, l. 756, b. 1445, f. 1529, d. Against Aches in the joints and
limbs, 132, c. 164, b. 281 b. 1529, d. See Joints. To consume and heal the
Achores, being ulcers in the head. 191, a 1197, i. 1206, c. Act of generation,
vid. Bodily and Lust. Against the stinging of Adders. see (...) and Serpents.
To heal the (...), 74, a. 1361, h. 1362, d. 1441, h. Affects of the breast,
783, i. see Breast. Affects of the reins and bladder, 395. a. see (...) and
Bladder. Affects of the lungs, 306, e. 783, i. see Lungs. To bring down the
Afterbirth, 154, (...) 653, a. 756, (...). 796, a. 870, d. 1014, b. 1055, b.
1121, f. 1246, a. 1291, d. 1360, b. 1578, a. 1428, b. see Secondine. Lingering
Agues, 548, (...). 578, a. 837, (...). 885, b. 1015, a. 1298, s. 1525, d.
Agues, v. Quotidian, Quartan, (...). 392, l. 398, c. 572, a. 572, a. 637 g.
653. g. 715, 756 f. 853, l. 855, a. 924, c. 1051. b 1367, g. 1465, x. 1452, d.
1506, c. Agues, and the cold fits of them, 756, d. 759, a. 1002, c. 1107, d.
1257, (...). vid. Shakings. Agues, and the heat in them, 634, s. 829, a. 1326,
d. 1431, b. 1586, a. Alkermes, a cordial confection, 1343, b. Against the
swelling and inflammation of the Almonds of the throat, 281, c. 331, d. 456, b.
509, f. 726, a. 783, h. 825, a. 992, f. 998, a. 1092, a. 1333, a. 1341, f.
1353, k. 1362, a. 1424, k. 1451, l. see Inflammation. Against the malicious
ulcers of the Almonds, 1015, b. Against the (...), 95, c. 1545, a. To cure the
Alphus, vide Morphew. (...), v. Squinancie. To help wrenches of the Ankles,
132, c. Against S. Anthonies (...). 66, f. 331, b. 339, a. 370, i. 395, f. 511,
a. 588, c. 653, b. 799, a. 813, c. 826, a. 828, a. 1013, f. 1225, p. 1257, k.
1331, c. 1335, a. 1393, c. 1461, b. see Inflammation. (...) against poisons,
233, f. 236, a. 407, b. 586, a. 793, d. 1029, d. 1257, n. see Poison. Apparel
from Moths, vide (...) and Moths. To procure Appecite, 245, a. 308, d. 398, b.
522, a. 534, b. 714. (...). 736. b. 880. c. 896. a. 1002, d. 1027, d. 1219, i.
1314, i. 1325, g. 1326, d. 1393, c. 1420, a. 1424, b. 1433, b. 1465, i. 1501,
f. 1507, (...). 1508, f. 1525, c. 1594. b. Against the Apoplery, 459, b. 586,
b. 759, b. 883, d. 916, g. 102, m. 1058, f. (...), (...). 1484, c. To ripen and
break cold (...), 170, g. 1545, a. see (...). To ripen and break Apostems of
the mouth and throat, 580, a. see Mouth and (...). To bring liot Apostems to
suppuration. 1431, b. 1484, b. 1511, d. To break inward Apostems, 264, a. 269,
(...). 813, d. Against hidden cankrous Apostenis, 254, c. To cure pestilentiall
Apostems, see (...) and (...). To cure the Argema, 310, b. 373, a. 619, c 1195,
a. Against the rammish auor of the Armholes, see Sinell. To draw out Arrow
heads, see Chornes and Splinters. Against (...) d Arrows. 360. y. 1007. i.
(...) help those that (...) (...), 360, u. 1001, f. 1367, m. 1529, a. 1545, c.
1612, b. (...). (...) of breath. Against contagious and (...) Air, 178, e. see
Corruption. To (...) and make thin, 170, a. 175, d. 177, a. 182, a. 434, a.
1002, h. 1014, b. 1015, a. 1145, a. 1366, d. 1424, h. 1612, a.
B
A Against pain of the Back. 807, d. To strengthen the Back. 770, d. 812, l.
1571, d. Balsams for green wounds, etc. 360, a. 405, a. To cause Barrenness,
106, c. 892, b 1130, a. 1488, d. Against Barrenness, 1525, f. see help
Conception. Baths for ulcers and running sores, 1226, n. Baths for members out
of joint, gout, etc. 1413, f. To (...) (...). see (...). To make the Beard grow
quickly, 1107, g. To scour away the (...) uruinesse of the Beard, 191, a.
Against Bearwormes, 681, c. Birings of venomous Beasts, 45, a. 80, a. 175, b.
237, a. 317, c. 395, a. 434, d. 572, c. 619, d. 644, b. 661, b 667, a. 692, a.
713, c. 793, d. 1029, d. 1172, f. 1226, h. 1386, a. 1408, d. 1414, f. 1511, m.
1533, b. see (...). To (...) away venomous Beasts, 480, h. See (...), (...)
(...). To kill four footed Beasts, 763, c. 967, b. 1406, b. To cure Beatings
662, a. 1132, a. 1158, d See (...). To kill (...) 1584, c Against stinging
(...) (...), (...) Stinging. To cause Bees to keep together, 692, c. To help
(...), 1035, a. see Stomach. To loose the Belly gently, 62, a. 174, e. 319, a.
321, a. 327, (...) 329 a. 332, a. 352, e. 368, b 391, g. 398, (...) 527, (...)
637, b. 667, h. 674, a. 707, a. 715, (...) 741, b. 852, c. 924, d. 1100, a.
1112, a. 1216, b. 1224, d. 1226, f. 1252, a. 1263, (...) 1264, k. 1315, (...)
1430 a. 1434, f. 1445, (...) (...) 1447, d. 1498, a. 1500, c. 1506, c. 1511, k.
1608, (...) To open and purge the Belly mightily, 863, a. 816, (...) 925, (...)
1402, a. 1403, a. 1404, (...) (...) Purge. Against the griping pains of the
Belly, 24, (...) 524, (...) 665, b. 682, l. 756, g. 898, a. 1017, a. 1035, a.
1172, (...) 1426, c. (...) (...). To bind or stop the Belly, 80, a. 83, (...)
116, (...) 825, f 841, a. 880, (...) 884, (...) 1148, a. 1128, a. 1242, a.
1264, k. 1325, c. 1336, (...) 1360, b. 1419, b. 1471, a. 1472, (...) 1498, b.
1499, f. g. 1506, d. 1518, b. 1521, c. 1536, c. 1558, a. 1613, a. 1625, b (...)
(...) and (...). To dry a moist Belly, (...) b. To strengthen the Belly, 1538,
(...) To open and break Biles, 870, (...). see Botches. To retain the Birth
and give it life, 766, a. To hasten the bringing forth of the Birth, 60, c. 79,
f 154, c. 363, d. 1014, b. 1104, b. 1121, f. 1188, b. 1246, a. 1360, b. 1428,
b. (...) Deliverance and Women. To destroy the Birth. 845, i. 1130, a. 1353, m.
1378, a. 1404, f. 1408, c. To bring forth the dead Birth. see Child. To cure
the Bits of a mad Dog, 28, a. 66, a. 334, b. 434, d. 681, f. 692 h. 697 c. 702,
a. 810, b. 1001, g. 1172, f. 1426, (...). 1441, g. 1446, n. 1489, c. 1511, m.
See Dog and Mad. For Blackness of the face coming by stroke or bruise, 51, a.
239 h 245, k. 395, b. 665, c. see Marks. For wounds of the Bladder, 1116, a.
For ulcers of the Bladder, 1116, d. 1303, c. 1619, c. For pain of the Bladder,
87, a. 651, d. 714, c. 810, c. 877, (...). 932, d 984, b, 1017, a. 155, b. 161,
a. 1145, k. 1206, c. 1315, n. 1356, c. 1511, o. 1529, a. 1612, c. For the stone
in the Bladder. see Stone. For inflammation of the Bladder, 522, d. 821, d.
852, a. For stoppings of the Bladder, 578, d. 586, c. 661, c. 842, a. 1024, b
1042, b. 1045, (...). 1053, a. Good forth Bladder, 622, d. 626, d. 1025, a.
1041, b. 1065, c. 1112 b. 1303 c. 1502, a. see Infirmities. For Blastings, 935,
g. 1066, b. To stop Bleeding at the nose, 480, b. 688, g. 707, b. 1057, b.
1066, d. 1116, (...). 1257, m. To stanch Bleeding after the biting of the
Horseleech, 1211, u. To stop all kinds of Bleeding, 276, a. 325, a. 355, a.
396, b 421 a 480, b. 732, a. 876, a. 939, (...). 949, a. 991, a. 1046, a. 1073,
a, 1074 a. 1120, b. 1128, a. 1145, c. 1150, a. 1240, b. 1264, k, q. 1274, a.
1285, a. 1325, c. 1347, a. 1379, f. 1393, f. 1471, a. 1508, b. 1564 c. To
stanch Bleeding of wounds, 18, 430, d. 580, f. 509, d. 544, b. 821, c 901, c.
1123, c. 1451, n. To take away (...), 557, d. 872, a. (...) Face. For Blewishes
of any stroke or bruise, 872, b. 107, (...). see Blackenesse and mark. To
raise a Blister, 816, b. 963, a. 1557, a. Not to suffer Blisters to rise in
burned or scalded parts, 1331, d. 1461, a. To increase Blood, 880, c, (...).
1216, b. To dissolve and void (...) Blood, and keep it from congealing in the
body, 251, c. 434, c. 447, a. 527, c. 574, a. 632, b. 645, a. 665 (...) 773, d.
870, i. 872, c. 906, c. 993, b. 996, c. 1007, a. 1037, c. 1132 (...) 1195, c.
1408, i. 1527, (...). To (...) (...) temper inflamed Blood, 398, c. 522, c.
1263, g. 1326 b. 1594, b. To cleanse or purge the Blood, 391, h. 574, c. 629, a.
766, d. 885, b. 1089, b. 1167, c. 1431, d. Good against the Bloody flix, 276,
b. 398, f. 407, d. 480, a. c. 512, c. 522, c. 557, l. 649 c. 774 b. 884 c. 932
c. 991 a. 993 a. 998 a. 1046 c. 1073 a. 1224, b. 1281 a. 1285 a. 1311 d. 1368
a. 1443, c 1451 n. 1471 a. 1499 g. 1518, d. 1564, b. see Flix. Against spitting
of Blood, 67, f. 175, d. 546, a. 807 a. 810 a. 895 b. 993 c. 1047 f. 1285. 1367
m. 1368 a. 1373 k. 1443 c. 1446 t. 1451 g. 1452 c. 1518 d. 1524 a. 1564 b. see
Spitting. For those that piss Blood through the diseases of the kidneys, 826
a. see Piss. To provoke Bodily lust, 557 f. 772 b. 1232 a. 1517 b. 1536 d. See
(...). To allay outrageous lust of the Body, 522 d. 926 d. See Chaste. To
preserve the (...) from corruption, 884 c. To cool and moisten the Body, 1264
k. see Heat. To nourish the Body, 926, d. To make the Body well colored,
1367, g. see Colored. To make the Body soluble, 308 f. 317 c. 793 c. 798 b.
805 c. 877 c 911 c. 1089 c. 1517 a. To take away the rank smell of the Body,
see Smell. To preserve dead Bodies, (...) k. 1353 c. To cover Bones that are
bare of flesh, 1004 b. 1049 b. To glue together broken Bones in short space,
906 c. i 433 k 1482 c. To draw out broken Bones, 60, c. 870 c. 1055 f. To ripen
and break Botches, 360 y. 409 a. 870 c. 1007 a: 1011 a. To ripen and break
pestilentiall Botches, 191 c. 1007 a. k. 1172 f. How to make Bread light, and
cause it sooner to be leauened. 885 c. To comfort the cold weak and feeble
Brain, 33 b. 665 a. 692. 759 c. 766 b. 1293 a. 1294 i. 1433 b. 1492 a. 1501 f.
1529 c. 1549 a. To purgethe Brain, 441 d. 495 d. 607 b. 783 f. 1058 f, 1298 s.
To warm and dry the (...), 649 d. 759 c. 1086 d. 1294 i. To cure Breaking out
in the whole body. see (...) and Scabs. Against stopping of the Breast, 245 b.
580 b. 1109 a. Against pain of the Breast, 64 a. 779 b. 1058 h. 1257 q. 1533 d.
To increase milk in women's Breasts, see Milk and Nurses. Against vlcerations
of the Breasts, 255 b. To dissolve the hardness of women's Breasts, 28 c. 527 b.
1226 h. To assuage great Breasts and dry up the milk, (...) l. Good to amend a
stinking Breath, 31 e. 508 b. 1035 b. 1097 (...). 1177 h. 1294 d. 1433 c. 1465
g. 1525 c. 1529 a. 1533 a: 1537 a 1541 a. 1623 a. Good for such as cannot (...)
unless they sit or stand upright, and hold their necks straight up. 688 d.
692 h. 708 c. 793 a. 1024 d. 1107 a. Good for shortness of Breath, 174 d. 245
b. 350 f. 580 b. 657 a 725 a. 792 c. 793 a. (...) d. 849 f. 874 b. 878 k. 892
a. 913 c. 1035 b. 1051 a. 1109 a. 1116 d. 1145 i. 1170 a. 1257 q. 1303 k 1408
c. 1437 c. 1446 o. 1511 b. See Shortness. Good for those that are Broken or
hurt inwardly, 632 a. 774 c. For Broken winded catell, 434 c. For inward
Bruises. 64, c. h. 688 d, 715 i. 782 a. 794 h. 807 a. 849 c. 870 i. 906 e. 1047
h. 1121 i. 1158 d. Good for Bruises gotten by stripes or falls, 239 h. 632 a.
637 c. 756 b. 759 f. 849 c. 870 i. 906 b. 1078 d. see Falls. To ripen venereous
Bubo's in the flank or share, 60 c. 490 a. To heal Burnings, 46 a. 99 c: 133
b. 195 b: 308 g: 310 c: 349 a 356 a: 419 c: 541 a: 544 b. 768, a: 783, g: 811
i: 857 k. 1128 a. 1148 a: 1360 a. 1426 c: see (...): For all Burstings, 64 a:
95 f. 363 a. 395 c: 403 a. 434 b: 524 a. 546 a, 632 a. 661 a. 662 a. 671 a. 483
a: 714 a. 793 d: 507 a. 849 b. 909 b. 932 c. 1078 d. 1116 a: 1148 a: 1373 b:
1413 f. 1451 k: Sec (...) and Ruptures:
C
GOod for exulcerated Cankers, 1015 b: Good for the Cankers in the eyes, called
in Greek Carcinomata, 317, k. Good for the Cankers in the mouth, 450 a: 458,
b. 766 e: 825, a: 993 c: To stay Cankers from increasing or (...) farther, 79
d: 837 b: To cure Cankers. 373 d: Good for (...), 360 y. 1369 d. 1393 c: 1441
h: To ripen and break (...) (...); 317 d. 1226 h: To take away Carbuncles:
1378 d. Against the (...), 580 a. 820 h: To cure (...), 175 c. 360 n. 370 c:
649 d: 1053 b: 1333 a: 1526 a. see (...): To make a fair Carnation color,
1419 d: To knit together broken bones in Cattle, 906 c: To cure certain
diseases of Cattle, 705 d: 977, 1571 a: To cure Cattle of the cough of the
lungs: 434, c: 774 f: 1571 a: To help Cattle being chap-fallen, 3 e. For
Chaps of the fundament, 1169 b: 1333 a: 1362 c. see Fundament: For Chaps in
hands and feet, 1134 d: 1362 c: 1373 k: Chaps of the lips, 1333 a: 1444 a: To
make one Chaste, 821 c. 1388 a: Good for the (...), 586 a: 694 a. 756 f. 779 c:
877 h: 1170 a: 1194 a 1356 a. 1373 b. 1511 o: 1620 c: To clease the Chest of
ill humors, 239 c: 250 c: 574 b. 694 a: 714 b (...) 725 a. 776 a. 779 a: 791 b:
793 b: 794 i. 833 g. 835 a. 881 d. 1035 c: 1187 o: 1356 d: 1511 b. To
concoctraw humors of the Chest, 245 b. 714 b: 791 b. 791 b: 833 g. 1206 c: 1408
c: For Childblanes, 174 f. To drive forth the dead Child, 458 f. 527 c. 653 a.
672 a. 756 c. 796 a. 801 b. 870 d. 1048 b. 1051 a. 1055 b. 1218 d. 1257 a: 1378
a 1625 a. To nourish the Child in the womb, 1517 b. For the red gum and frets
in Children, see Gums and Frets. To repress Choler in the stomach, 1465 i.
(...) b. To purge (...), 868, 1423 f. Against (...), 72 a. 395 c. 852 a. 914 a.
993 g. 1420 a. 1501 f. Choleric passion, see (...). To dye Cloth, 491 b.
1211 t. 1477 b. To keep Clothes from Moths, 644 a: 645 a. 1097 c. 1100 f: See
Garments and Moths. To abate the swelling of the Cods. 64, d. Good against Cold
and hoarsenesse 360, n. see Hoarsnesse. Against Cold diseases of (...) in ward
patts. 434, e. 441, a. 683, a. See (...). Good against the Coldness of the
sinewer. 891, c. See (...). Good against coldness in the stomach. 34, d see
Stomach. Good for the (...) passion. 1007, g. 1349, c. A remedy for the (...).
1257, h. To ease the pain of the (...). 33, c. 74, a. 106, f. 132, g. 204, b.
360, x. 363, a. 387, a. 407, c. 413, a. 497, b. 874, b. 916, n. 996, a 1048 d.
1073, c. 1170, a 1257, c. 1339, a. 1436, c. 1445, f. Good against the collicke
and story. 242, f. 756, a. 794, b. 1002, h. 1029, c. 1162, a. To restore
color decayed. 31, c. (...), c. 1121, l. To take away the bad color coming
of the yellow iaundice. 667, d. 845, c. To cause a good colourin the face, 154,
c. 705, d. 1226, f. 1507, i. 1533, c. To make a fair yellow color. 1268, c.
1338, c. To make a deep green color. 1338, b. To color jellies, wines, and
meats of a purple color. 80, (...). 336, e. A Collyrium for the eyes, 95, d.
against Fistulaes. 836, a. To hinder Conception. 682, h. 1141, a. 1236, c. To
help conception. 79, f. 207, a. 332, b 1029, b. To help (...) in the stomach
692, g 880, c. 882, c. 1001, g 1034, a. 1049, c. To heal the Condylomata. see
Fundament. Good against, or to help a consumption. 736, b. 880, f. 1366, m.
1529, b. 1619, b. A medicine for the consumption of the back. 807, c. Good for
those that are entering into a consumption. 1518, g. To cure the contraction of
sinews, 524, a. 546, a. 557, h. 615, a. 672, c. 756, b. 1055, c. 1105, f.
1107, a. 1150, d. 1408, f. For convulsions. 44, d. 51, c. 60, h. 64, a. 95, b.
363, a. 395, a. c. 434, b. 545, a. 572, b. 665, f. 671, a. 688, d. 705, h. 705,
d. 783, b. 787, f. 792, c. 849, b. 883, a. 935, f. 1055, h. To cool. 398, d.
793, d. 1002, i. 1078, d. 1149, a. 1162, b: 1253, g. 1529, c. 1620. b. To cool
and dry. 398, a. 120 i, a. Against corruption of the air. 1373, f. 1511, c.
To take away corns. 196, f. 512, b. 1007, k. 1392, c. A counterposson against
deadly medicines, poisonous herbs, biting and stinging of venomous beasts.
1257, (...). Good against the cough 51, d. 64. l. 132. g. 232. c. 254, b. 355,
e. 546, a. 557, e. 574, a. 657, a. 766. c. 807, f. 813, b. 816, a. 853, l. 878,
k. 881, d. 901, a. 1007, d. 1014, b. 1024, d. 1051, a. 1055, k. 1116, d. 1145,
l. 1146, b. 1170, a. 1194, a. 1257, q. 1302, a 1330, a. 1336, d. 1373, b. 1443,
e. 1446, o. 1502, a. 1511, b, o. 1526, a. Against the chin-cough in young
children. 631, d. 708, e. 1373, c. To provoke the courses, etc. See Flowers and
Terms. To ripen or help an old cough 95, b. 174, d. 178, c 239, c, i. 331, a:
360, v. 580, b. 629, b. 661, a 694, a. 725, a. 774, c. 792, d. 870, i. 874, b.
1029. b. 103 5, c. 1058, h. 1356, a, c. 1366, m. 1373, c 1446, t. 1507, i. Good
against the crampe. 51, e. 59, a. 95, f, 363, (...). 395, c. 434, b. 514, a
546, a. 665, f. 671, a 672, c. 688, d 705, b. 715, d. 783, c. 793, d. 849, b
883, a. 935, f. 1102, i. 1055, c 1058, g 1078, d. 107, a. 1148, a. 1150, b.
1159, c. 1162, b. 1180, a. 1253, g. 1373, b. 1394, (...). 1108, f 1620, b.
Against crudities. 888, l 996, a. 1081, f. 1252, c. To glue together cuts made
about the veins sinews and tendons. 31, b. 191, a. 1116, a. 1343, a.
D
TO take away (...). 178, g. 1197, i. 1413, f. Against darkness of the sight.
See Sight. To expel the dead child. 352, f. 574, a. 688, c. 694, b. See
child. Good against Deafness. 317, h. 360, r. 916, h. 1172, b. 1408, d: To
scour away the deformities of the skin. 248, d. 883, o. See face and Skin. To
cause easy and specdie deliverance in childe-bearing. 191, f. 694. b. 705, c
1055, b. 1511, o. See Birth and women. Against difficulty of making water. 242,
f. 331, a. 527, a. 623, a. 645, a. 665, b. 810, c. 1615, b. 1625, b. see (...),
Strangury and Urine. A (...). 224, d. To help or make good digestion 31, c.
242, a: 245, a. 248, c. 366, b. 434, c. (...), i. (...), l. 793. c. 884, b.
1002, d, 1008, a, 1012, a. 1367, (...), 1459, d. 1529, c. 1533, d 1535, a.
1536, a. Good against dimnesse of the cies. 64, c. 310, b. 770, a. 833, h.
1011, b 1098, k To cure old and cold diseases 586, b. 665, a. 861, a. 874, b.
880, i. 882, n. 1008, a. 1058, d. 1257, u. 1531, b. 1531, b. 1612, c. A remedy
for dizzinesse. 360, r. 787, c. 870, c, 1055, h. See Head and Swimming. Good
against hot and sharp distillations into the eyes and other parts 355, a. To
cure the biting of a mad dog. 170, c. 466, a. 715, d 1226, h. 1271, a. 1424, l.
See Biting and Mad. To keep dogs from growing great. 637, d. To kill dogs.
763, d. 903, a. Good against the bitings of the sea Dragon. 1098, Against
drawing together, or awry of Sinews, 95, t. To cause troublesome and terrible
dreams: 175, e. 177, a. 1225, k, Good against melancholicke dreams. 984 f. To
put away vene: eous dreams. 821, h. Against the dryness of the lungs. 629, b.
To (...) drunkenness. 79, b. 92, a. 845, i. 1521, a. To preserve or keep from
Drunkenness. 308, d. 317, c. 1408 m. 1414, f. 1446, l. To help the (...), i.
pissing by drops, or drop after drop. 556, c 165, d. 651, d. 1061, a. 1460, t.
see Strangury. To help those that are entering into a (...). 64, h. 657, 665,
b. 1257, q. 1388, b. An excellent purge for the Dropsy. 1170, (...). 1426, f.
See Purgetions. Good against the (...) 31, a. 34, d. 59, b. 72, f. 174 d. 178,
c. 360, x. 391, h. 419, a. 441, a. 497, b. 529, b. 532, b. 548, c. 582, c. 649,
l. 655. a. 667, b. 766, d. 838, f. 839, a: 870, c. 872. a. 883, i. 913, c. 978,
f. 1002, c, i. 1007, c. 1014, b 1024, d. 1029, c. 1032, c. 1035. b. 1100, (...)
1158, c. 1170, a. 1188, c. 1222, c. 1257 s. 1314 c. 1409 r. 1426 a. 1511 c 1525
c 1534, a. 1608 f. 1612 c. 1619 b. To cure the sores of the dugs. 898, b.
Against (...) swellings of the dugs 99 b. Good sor ulcers of the dugs. 363 i.
939 a. To keep down maidens dugs. 949 a To drive away dullness. see
melancholy. To stay and cure Dysenteries. 291, a. 626, a, 639, c. 632 a 1349
c. 1524 a 1623 c. see Bloody and (...). To help the dissury or great pain to
make water. 3 a 242 f 657 a 1188 c. see drop-pisse and strangury.
E
GOod for mattering (...). 732 a 858 c 885 c 1098 k 133 a (...) (...) To
mitigate or cure the pains of the (...). 175 c 305 (...) 331 d 421 g 667 f 709
c 924 a 1206 f 1257 i 1291 c 1401 d 1408 d 1488 c Good for the noise or humming
in the ears. 175 c 306 c 856 a 916 e 1013 i 1232 f 1353 g 1526 a To help the
inuoluntarie (...) of natural seed. 291 a. Hurtful to the eyes. 177 a 674 a
Good for the (...). 663 c 677 a 856 c 1274 b Good for watering or running
(...). 66 d 428 a 550 c 637 f 681 d 694 g 859 h 1211 n 1264 r 1361 h 1489 b
1535 b To cease the pain in (...) eyes and stay the hot humor from run ning
into them 67 i 352 (...) 509 d 67 (...) a (...) 63 b 772 c 774 a 859 (...) 1187
c 1232 d 1263 c 1527 b To cleanse the (...) from filmes. 509 d 772 b 856 (...)
Good for to take away the inflammation of the (...): 373 a 378 c 511 a 512 c
634 a 734 a 741 d 772 c 774 a 776 b 856 e 914 b 968 a 1043 d 1331 b. see (...).
How to preserve the eyes that they (...) not hurt with the small pox or (...)
154 g. To take away the (...) of the (...). 772 c 913 d. To take a way the
yellowness of the (...). 694 g. To help black eyes coming by blows. 732 a
1211, (...). 1353 f. Good for weeping wounds of (...). 634 b. A remedy against
the (...) which is the falling of the blind gut into the cods. 46 b 106 d 639
c 787 a 986 a 1204 b see (...) and Buptures. Good for the entralles. 154 e 395
h 885 a 1264 a 1501 d1536 a. To (...) and scour the (...). 833 a 1053 d
Against the discase Ephialtes or night-(...) 984 f Good against the (...).
(...) falling (...). To (...) or assuage the inflammation called (...). 67 h
371 (...) 829 b 1586 a. see (...). To take away (...) 1225 n. Good against
(...) of the conduits of the yard. 284 b 1073 d To waste any (...) in any part
of the body 79 (...), see (...). Good against the (...) (...) the prluy parts.
1492 h.
F
TO take away sreckles and other such desormities of the face, 845, i. 998, d.
128 f. 1315 s. 1341 h. 1378 b: 1446 m. 1482 f. 1511 h. see Frockles, Morphsw.
To make the frace smooth, 67, k. 1433. h. 1441 c: see Skin. For red faces, 360
t. 715 b. 912 f. 1008 c. For (...) off of the hair, 1107, g. see Hair. Good
against the falling (...), 1106 b. 204, c. 245 g. 441, a. 465 b. 485 b. 490, c.
574 c. 578, b. 586 b. 597 a. 623 b. 414 a: 738 b. 759 b. 763 c. 774 h. 787 g.
798 f. 849 f. 852 f. 870 c. 883 d. 916 g. 977 a. 984 c. 991 c. 1002 i. 1007 f.
(...) c. 1035 d. 1051 a. 1055 b: 1058 f. l. 1061 b. 1162 b. 1188 c. 1253 c.
1323 c. 1367 l. 1432 a. 1484 c. 1507 g. 1578, a. 1612 c. Good for such as have
fallen from high places, (...) c. 350 b. 434 b 662 a: 792 c. 828 a. 896 f. 1002
c. 1121 a. 1132 a. 1148 b. 119 (...) c. 1408 i. see Bruises and Squats. Against
falling of the mother, see Mother. For the falling of the Uvula, see (...). For
the disease called the (...), 681 a. 688 d. 1419 b. 1451 d. For a fellon, 95 c.
447 b. 1015 c. To ripen and open (...), 67 h. 250 c. For hot burning (...), 284
a. 637 b. 814 a. 853 m. 1325 b. 1326 b 1419 b. 1420 a. 1465 i. 1608 a. see
Heat. For (...) and quartan (...), see Certian and (...). To help all (...),
582 c. For the (...) hectique, 219 a. To allay hear in a pestilent (...), 853
m. 1465 i. 1608 d. To cure wandering (...), 1367 g. Against pestilent (...),
589, b. 626 c. 725 f. 741 a. 814 a. 833 i: 992 a. 1373 c. 1605 b. see (...).
Against (...) (...), 429 b. 632 c. Against intermitting (...), 8801 1167 d. see
(...). To keep figs from putrisying, 674 k. For fire in burns and s alds,
511 b. For the (...) in the eye called (...), see Aegilops. To open the narrow
orifices of a (...), 1424 (...). Good against a (...), 373 d. 839, a. 856 b.
1072 a. 1424 m. For fistula's of the (...), 1169 b. To heal fistula's, 373 d.
409 a. 719 f. To mundisie fistula's, 441 c. To take away hardness in
fistula's, 441 c. 506 d. To kill (...), 506 c. For shaking fits in a quotidian
Ague, see (...). For ats of an Ague, 395 a 428 b. 441 c. See Ague. For (...) of
a quartan Ague, see (...). Against cold Ague (...), 545 (...). 1097 d. see
(...). For kernels in the (...), see Kernels. To purge tough phlegm by (...),
574 c. 653 c. 1009, c. 1092 b: 1170 1. 1197 b. 1482 d. 1501 f. Ste (...). To
draw raw (...) humors out of the head; 896 c. 1501 c. To attenuate or make thin
thick and tough (...), 880, c. 1001 f. To raise gently tough and gross phlegm
sticking in the (...) and chest, 275 b. 661 a. 756 f. 794 i. 807 b. 907 b: 1197
c. 1210 h. 1302 a, c. See Chest and Lunge. To keep raw flesh from (...); 661
d. To take away the superfluous out growings of the flesh, 1007 l. To consume
away (...) and (...) flesh (...), 1341 h. 1518 i. To drive away ficas, 485 d.
588 d. 1247 d. To drive away (...) 480, c, h. To stay the (...), 371 l. 1081,
d: 79c. 421 a. 787 g: 984 e. 991 a: 1118 a. 1339 c. 1341 f. 1451 f. Good
against the bloody (...), 395 a 413 a: 419 b. (...) b: 679 a: (...) a. To stop
the bloody flix, 116 b. 388 b. 391 c, i. (...) k. 400 b. 631 b. 661 f. 713 b.
787 c. 876 a. 884 a. 895 a. 935 d. 949 a. 993 d. 1012 b. 1043 a. 1057 a: 1069
a. 1116 b. 1121 b. 1139 a. 1150 a. (...) g. 1264 p. 1274 a. 1326 c. 1339 c.
1341 f. 1356 f. 1413, (...). 1419 b. 1432 a. 1436 c. 1445 b, c. 1452 b 1459 b.
1466 b. 1475 b. 1494 b 1508 a 1571 c. 1578 b. 1594 b. For hepaticke flures, 713
c. To bring down or provoke women's flowers, 31 b, (...) a 60 c: 79 c. 154 c.
170 c. 178 c. 239 i. 264 a. 269 a. 281 c: 317 g: 657 c. 618 l. 741 a. 743 a.
796 a 896 c. 916 q. 1014 b. 049 a. 1051 a: 1162 b. 1188 a. 1218 d. 1246 a. 1294
k. (...) g. 1378 a. 1379 b. 1388 d. 1405 a. 1408 g. 1409 n. 1428 b. 1445 i.
1620 b. (...) (...). To stay overmuch flowing of women's flowers, 36 a. 79 c:
355 a 371 l. (...) l. 400, b 413 b. 895 b. (...) a. 949 a. 1116 b. 1225 i.
1237, c. 1325, 1328, a. 1331, a. 1341 g. 1343, a, 1373 k. 1452, c. 1475, a.
1499, g. 1508 b. see (...). To stay the white Flux in women, see (...). Against
the Flux of the belly caused by the weakness of the stomach, 1007, g. 1436
c. To stop Fluxes of blood, 766 d. 1072 a. 1116, b. 1293, a. 1326, c. 1328, a.
1341, f. 1392, a. 1432, (...). 1448, k. 1452, (...). To stop all Fluxes, 522 c.
697, b. 1237, b. 1274, (...). 1281, a. 1471, a 1571, c. To supply want of Food,
360, p. To kill Foxes, 903 a. Against (...) of the head, 60, g. (...) of the
bones, see Broken Bones. Good (...) (...) persons, 395, f. 441, a. 572, a, d.
798, d. 1009, c 1055, h. 1388, d. To take away (...). 102, b. 317, i. 870, c.
901, b. 906, h. 994, b. 1008, c 1086 c. 1538, b. For the French disease, see
(...) Pox. Frenste, see (...). Frets in children, 279, c. Against (...) of the
guts, see (...). To dry and heal up moist and (...) of the fundament, see
Ulcers. To cool the heat of the Fundament, 296, c. 807. k. 852, b. For nsts
of the Fundament, and the (...), 67, k. 457, (...). 935 g. 1011, (...). 1388,
f. To help the falling of the Fundament in children, 619 c. 829, c. 852,
(...). 1432, (...). To cure hard swellings of the Fundament 1274, b. 1262, c.
G
TO help stoppings of the (...). 284, (...). 350, (...). 395, g. 548, (...).
632, (...) 714, b. 837, c. For (...) of the fundament, 1333, a. To stay
spreading of (...), 79, d. 877, l. 1218, c. 1219, k. 1226, h. 1441, h. 1475, d.
To give a good (...) to (...), and (...) (...) from moths, 1109, c 1535, c. see
(...) and (...). Hunfull to (...). 681, g. For (...) of the head, 584, b. 653,
d. 733, b. see (...), Head, and Swimming. To drive away: (...), 480, c, h. 485,
d. 1097, c. 1369, f. Good ag inst (...) of the belly, 787, e. 1097, g. See
Belly and Griping. To take away (...) of the stomach proceeding of hot (...),
296, b. For a (...) or (...) of the reins. 565, a. 807, (...). 821, d. h. (...)
h. 1364, b. 1435, g. 1460, f. 1608, e. To take away or (...) the pain of the
(...), 102, a. 164, b. 171, h. 317, f. 355, b. 371, k. 411, a, c. 458, e. 634.
c. 661, c. (...), i. 782, a. 811. h. 835, c. 845, k. 1002, f. 1011, d. 1013, h.
1225, m. 1307, g. 1315, l. 1335, b. 1423, e. 1426, e. 1488, g. 1511, l. (...),
e. 1575 a 1586, a. 1619, c. To purge (...) humors, 164, (...). 497, b. For the
hot (...), 511, (...). (...). 524, b. An approved remedy against the (...),
(...), b. 651 (...) 877, l. Good against the (...) in the huckle bones, 1107,
a. see (...). To help the (...) possessing the feet. 331, (...) 488, g. To
drive forth (...), 31, a. 239, c. 243, a. 331, a. 682, m. 708 (...) 825, c, f.
907, a. 935, f. 1162, a. 1172, c. 1364, a. 1431, c. 1434, f. 1455, c. see
(...). Agaidst the (...) Sickness, 391, h. 649, f. 743, a. 1314, e. (...)
(...) and Maids. To mitigate (...) of the belly, 64, a. 80, b. 174, d. 373, c.
395 a. 485, a. 546, a. 572, b. 634. f. 649, c. 916, g. 1027, d. 1029 b. 1033 a.
1048, c. 1051, b. 1053, b. 1055, a. 1066, (...). 1206, c. 1257 q. 1373 b. 1528,
d. (...) c. See Billy and (...). For the red (...) in children, 279 c. For
swellings in the Gums, 509, f. To strengthen the Gums, 998, a. 1451, i. 1521 c.
Against (...) and soreness of the Gums, 825, a. 1078, e. 1333 a. 1444, a. To
take away heat in (...) by (...), 171, k. 349, a. 857, k. Good against the
roughness and (...) of the (...). 395, a. 932, d. 1014, d. 1049, c. 1187, a.
1453, k. 1533, c. Against the falling forth of the Gut, called Saccus (...).
490. b. 619. d. 1349. b. Against the (...) of the Guts. 522, f. 1197., i,
(...), b.
H
To cause Hair to grow that is (...) off through the disease (...), 95, c. 97,
b. 1180, b. 1271, b. 1448, h. To hinder the growth of Hair. 116, c. 1211, r.
To cleanse the Hair from (...) and (...), 644, a. To cause the Hair to come in
places that want it, through burning, scalding, or otherwise. 73, a. 171, i.
191, b. 239, f. 245, k. 382, b. 1081, f. 1145, d. 1146, c 1177, (...). To cause
Hair to wax yellow. 480, c 776, c. 1326, d. 1494, c. To cause Hair to fall
off 506, b. 858, d. 876, c. 900, c. 1089, f. 1136, a. To make the Hair red,
1396, c. To make Hair black, 859, e. 1331, b. 1341, h, 1345, b. 1413, f.
1426, d. 1475, c. 1491, b. To preserve the Hair from falling, 37, c. 509, f.
719, c. 805, c. 821, b. 845, i. 1007, m. 1291, a. 1361, h. 1413, f. 1441, h.
1492, (...). 1494, c. 1528, i: To (...) the chaps of the hands coming of cold,
67. k. To make the Hands smooth, ib. Good to soften the Hardness of the
sinews and matrix, 191, d. see Matrix. To waste and consume Hardness of the
Spleen, 64. c. 250, c. see Spleen. To dissolve or waste the Hardness of
Tumors, 60, c. (...) (...) (...), and (...). A remedy against the poison of the
sea Hare. 787, d. 1353. m. To takeaway the (...) of the eye. 657, b. 845, d.
Good against sundry diseases of (...). 1070, f. To help or take away the
(...). 68, b. 339, a. 359, l. 509, f. 532, a. 575, g. 578, b. 586, b. 633, b.
644, c. 672, f. 674, c. 681, c. 682, l. 700, c 715, f. 719, d. 874, b. 883, d.
907, b. 916, g. 924, b. 1009, c. 1206, f. (...), c. 1367, l. 1388, d. 1396, d.
1428, c. 1446, n. 1484, c. 1551, c. 1619, c. To ease the intolerable pain of
the Head, proceeding of heat. 339, a, 341, c. 821, d. 853, o. To purge the
Head. 170, c. 317, g. 319, b. 619, b. 766, b. 858, c. 1298 p. 1405, a. Against
the wounds of the Head. 356, a. Good for the Head. 152, a. 674, i. 714. a. 767.
b 1293, a. To purge the Head mightily of foul and slimy humors. 378, a. 637,
c. 663, a. 816, b. 845, h. To heal scabbed Heads in children, 1218, e. sce
(...). To purge water and phlegm out of the Head by the mouth, 759, d. 877, l.
1002, m. 1020, o. 1433, g 1542, a. 1549, a. Good against dizzinesse of the
Head. 1484, c, (...) (...) and Swimming. To heal running ulcers of the Head.
1197, i. 1206, c. 1226, h. 1257, k. To strengthen Hearing, 856, a. To
strengthen the Heart. 152, b. 674, i. 741, a. 799, e. 852, d 882, p. 1001, g.
1406, d. 1264, a. 1501, f. 1536, a, b. 1586. c. To comfort the Heart. 64, g.
441, a. 590, a. 661, c, 686, b. 692, a. 741, a. 797. a. 799, c. 852, d. 853, l.
998, c. 1023, d. 1040, i. 1043 b. 1126, (...). 1263, a. 1294, h. 1465, i.
(...), f. Good against the trembling and i shaking of the Heart. 584, b. 741,
c. 882, o. 1047, i. 1264, i, a. 1343, c. Good for the Heart=burning. 308, a.
339, a 876, a. 1451, d. To take away Heat of the face, 999, f. To take away
the Heat of burnings and sealdings. 171, k. 511, b. 1461, a. To abate the
intemperate Heat of the Raines. 852, a. see (...). To quench the (...) (...)
of the eyes. see (...) and (...). To cool the Heat of the intrailes, 588, a,
914, a. 1325, g. 1465, i. 1501, f. 1516, a. To cool the (...) of burning
ulcers, 1394, m. To cool the Heat of the Liver. 72, c. 398, b. 852, a, 1325
g. 1326, b. See (...). To mitigate all kinds of (...). 296, c. 339, a. 1264,
n. See Inflammation. To refresh or increase inward and natural Heat. 880, e.
882, n. To alay extremity of Heat in burning Fevers or Agues. 398, d. 588, a.
807, f. 852, a, 1264, t 1578, d. 1594. b, see Feauers, To alay and takeaway the
Heat of urine, 32, b. 1330, b. Good for the Hectique Fever which is a
Consumption, 219, a. A remedy against the venomous qualities of Hemlockes. 708,
f. 880, h. 1098, i. 1100, b. To open the (...). 60, d. 170, d. 509, i. 845, g
1511, k. See Piles. To stop over much flowing of the (...) 509, 522, c. 807 k.
1011, a. 1121, d. 1274 b. 1373, k. 1413 b. 1475, g. To cure the (...), 363, c.
805, a. 1092 g. Good against the pain and swelling of the (...). 717, 2 852,
b. 916, p. 1092, a. A Counterpoison for (...) 708, g. Good to (...) Hens, 83,
a. To cause Hens to lay eggs. (...). 709, e. 1253, h. To cure Herneys. 639, a.
Good against the Hicket. 395, a. 572, a. 681, a. 849, b. 892, a. 1027, d 1033,
a, b. 1035, b. 1141, a. To cure all aches in the Hips. See Sciatico. To take
away (...). 232, c. 852, a. 877, b. 1007, d. 1303, k. 1330, a. 1526, a. 1549,
a. For stinging of (...). 1257, c. To refresh a wearied Horse, and make him
travel the betier 447, c. Against ache and pain of the Huckle-bone. 395, a.
645, a. 896, c 1257, d. See Sciatica. To cut tough Humors. 398. a. 657, a. 791,
a. 1023, d. 1187, (...) 197, (...) 1465, i. 1509, c. To purge by singe and
urine choleric Humors. 509. g. 880, e. To stay Humors from falling into the
cies. 355, c. 674, d. 677, a 1586, b. To make thin, thick gross and slimy
Humore. 51, c. 174, c. 175, d. 548, a. 586, c. 896, c. 1058, m. 1373, a. See
Altenuate and Raw. To digest salt and pituitous Humors. 1089, g. 1303, l. To
concoct and bring up raw Humors that stick in the Chest. 152. b. 175 a. 182,
a. 557, c. 707, a. 725, a. 877, h. 1066, c. 1146, b 1336, a. 1445, c. To draw
away waterish Humors. 665, a. 874, a. 883, i. 1314 c. To digestraw Humors of
the chest and lungs. 152, b. 170, c. 708, d 877, i. 996, b. 1226, a. 1549. a.
(...) Chest and Lungs. To dtaw forth black and thick Humors. 667, c.
I
Good against the yellow (...) 34, a. 97, a. 116, d. 154, e. 174, d 254, b.
284, a. 291, a. 327, c. 342, a. 350, a. 391, g, h. 395, c. 421, d 429, b. 485,
a. 497, b. 527. a, d. 534, a 548, a. 556, b. 578, a. 632, c 655, a. 688, c.
709, d. 712, a. 714 b. 745, c. 748, a. 801, c. 845, c. 856 d. 907, b. 978, i.
987, b. 992, c. 993. f. 1007, e. 1009, c. 1011, e. 1015. a. 1016, b. 1070, b.
1078, c. 1087 b. 1065, a. 1121, i. 1141, a, 1170 c. 1222, c. 1264, t. 1299, c.
1326, g. 1366, e. 1379, f. 1409, n. 1431, b. 1608, f. To cure the black (...)
1313 q. Good against the old and long lasting swellings of the Jowes 1092, a.
To assuage or heal the disease called (...) Sacer, or (...)-(...) 805. a. 823,
b. Against vain (...). 1343, d. Good to limne Imagerie with. 154. h. To take
away the swelling and pain of hot (...). 352. g. 615, a. 634, a. 718, b. To
bring hard Impostumes to maturation or ripeness, (...), (...) 557, 0. 935. g.
See Apostemes. To consume and dissolve all cold hard (...). 360, J. 1197, pc
Good against Impostumes in the ioints of the fingers, 447, b. (...) (...). To
break Impostumes, 67, g. 68, a. 870, e. To ripen and break venerous
Impostumes in the flank, 191, b, 480, a. 1351, b. 2511, d. see Buboes. To cure
the disease called Impetigo, 1011, f. Against the Infection of the plague or
pestilence. 495. b. 597, a 738, a. 1001, a. 1002, a. 1158, a. 1253 d. 1257 p.
1373, f. 1441, c. Good against all cold Infirmities of the stomach, 877. b.
1408, g See Stomach. Good for the Infirmities of the mother. 757. a. 1209, d.
1408, k See Matrix and Mother. Against the Infirmities of the heart. 705, a.
738 b. (...) Heart. Good against the Infirmities of the (...) or Milt. 667, h.
801, c 1141, a. 1408. g. 1608, f. (...) (...). To help the Infirmities of the
Liver. 527, d. 619. c. 632, a. 991, b 1408, g. (...) Liner. Good for
Infirmities of the kidneys. 527. d. 619, e. 801, c. 859, g. 8 74, b. 877, h.
1081, e. 1437, d. 1529, c. (...) (...). Good for Infirmities of the bladder.
877, (...). 1408, g, k. see Blader. Good for (...) of the Chest. 51, d. 776,
(...). See Chest. Good for Infirmities of the (...), 681, d. See Fundament.
Good against Infirmities of the sinews. 783, c 1055, h. See (...). Against
Infirmities in the (...). 154. f. To help the Inflammations of the almonds,
throat, and other parts adjoining. 876, a. 1274, a. 1478, a. 1508, b. see
Almonds. To help (...) of the (...). 95, c. Against Inflammations newly begun.
276, b. 1394, m. 1413, d. 1460, g. 1508, b. A remedy against the Inflammation
of the stones. 95, c. 355, a. 1211, q. To dissolve Inflammations of the breast,
lungs, and rough (...). 395, f. 853, l. 855, b. 911, c. 1303, k. To help or
eale Inflammations of the (...) 99, b. 284, f. 411, b. 421, (...). 626, b. 852,
(...). 1107, f. 1225, o. 1413, c. See (...). Good against all inward
Inflammations. 306, b. 637, g. 921, d. 1263, g. 1420, a. 1533. b. Against the
Inflammations of the raines. 64, (...). 395, f. 821, d. 1533, b. 1608, c. To
cool the Inflammation of the liver. 572, b. 637, g. 853. k. 1400, d. 1431, b.
See Liver. Good for Inflammations of the fundament. 490, b. 807, k. 1225, o
1257, (...). 1349, b. To take away or cure all Inflammations. 37, c. 66, b.
250, c. (...), a 301, c. 308 g. 117, d. 340, a. 352, g. 447, o. 511, a. 529, a.
719, a. 653, b 674, b. 678, b. 719, f. 792, b. 813, a. 825, a. 829, a. 852, a.
852, (...). 1012, 1121, b. 1187, b. 1197, f. 1201, a. 1325, f. 1396, 2. 1408,
k. 1426, c. (...), c. 1460, c. 1478, a. 1488, h. (...), l. To cure members out
of Joint. 196, d. 782, a. 794, h. 845, k. 876, e. 906, d. 916, m. 1007, e.
1134, d. 1148, a. 1388, f. To cure the shakings of the Joints declining to the
palsy. See Shakings. To help aches and pains in the Joints. 874, b. 1053, b.
1180, a 1232, c, 1257, b. 1533, g. 1612, c. To strengthen the (...) 532, a. To
assuage or dissolve swellings in the (...) 770, b. 935, g. 1257, b Good for
weeping wounds of the Joints, 634, b. To help the long continual pain of the
Joints. 861, 2. To cure the (...). See (...). For man's in voluntary Issue. See
(...). To stay or stop all Issues of blood. 355, c. 421, b. 565, (...). 631, b.
935, (...) (...), (...) (...), a. (...). a. 1012, b. 1043, a. 1047 (...). 1069,
a. 1237, b. 1264, m. 128. 5, a. 1368, a 1413, b. 1443, f. 1451, n. 1475, a.
1491, c. 1499, g 1578, b. See Fluxes of blood. To be laid upon Issues. 859, f.
To help the Itching in the corners of the (...), 509, f. To take away the
Itching of the (...). 1043, d. 856, (...). 1527, b. To cure the Itch (...) the
body. (...), h. 497, c. 794, l. 823, a. 855, b. 1226, l. 1298, c. 1333, a.
(...), m. 1608, f.
K
To take away the inflammation of the (...) under the ears, jaws, neck,
arme-holes and slankes. 704. a. 1211, m. (...), c. 1499, c. To consume or waste
away hard swellings of the Kernels, 518, a. 1245, a. 1362, r. 1511, g. Good
against (...) (...). 46, d. 135, d. 359, i. 529, a. 811, (...). 845, k. 1225,
p. 1226, l. 1584, b. To open stoppings of the Kidneys. 421, d. 534, b. 661, e.
885, f. 1023, d. 1025, a. 1045, a. 1053, a. 1112, b. 1314, b. 1431, c. To
cleanse the Kidneys. (...), e. 574, b. 623, a. 626, d. 841, a. 1032, f. 1041, b.
1364, a. (...), a. 1511, (...). 1594. c. Good for the vleers of the Kidneys.
See Ulcers and Ulcerations. To strengthen the Kidneys. 33, c. 1065, c. (...),
k. 1303, e. 1612, c. To (...) and drive forth the stone and gravel in the
Kidneys. 1437, d. 1444, b. 1511, n. See (...) and Stone. Good for to all wage
the pain of the Kidneys. (...), a. 714, c. 874, b. 877, h. 584, b. (...). a.
1032, c. 1055, b. 1145, k. 1206, c. 1315, n. 1437, d. 1444, b 1502, a. 1517, b.
Good for the dugges of (...) that have been bit by a venomous. worm, or are
chapt 789, a. To soften the (...), 51. g 6 (...), c. To consume and waste away
the Kings-(...). 518, a. 609. b. 619, a 704, (...). 810, d 1145. d. 1211, s.
1218, e. 1315, m. 1362, d, 1511, g. 1526, a. 1619, e. To dissolve and cure the
Kings (...). 366, c. 692, i. 717, (...). 783, h. 825, c. 845, h. 1007, a. 1012,
d. (...). see (...).
L
GOod for (...) 1180. a. Good against the (...). 36, a. 395, a. 631, b. Good
for those that are troubled with a hot (...). 36, a. 511, c. 820, a. 1326, c.
To stop or stay the (...). 71, d. 79, g. 85, a. 116, b 276, 388, b. 391, e.
(...), k. 398, f. 400, b. 522, h. 541, a. 671, b. 678, b. 774, b. 783, d. 876,
a. 881, f. 883, (...). 895, a. 935, h. 993, d. 993, a. 1012, b. 1027, d. 1035,
a. 1043, a. 1046, b. 1069, a. 1073, a. 1131, e. 1109, a. 1145, a. 1150, a.
1194, a (...), b. (...). a. 1257, y. 1264, p. 1292, f. 1322, a. 1328, a. 1331,
a. 1341, b. 1356, f. 1368, a. 1379, f. (...), c. 1432, a. 1440, d. 1443. f.
1445, b. 1447, c. 1452, b. 1459, b. 1466, b. 1475, a 1491, (...) 1494, c. 1501,
b. 1508, a. 1538, b. 1564, a. Good for them that would be (...). 1123, d. 1423,
c. 1472, g. To procure (...). See Bodily (...) (...). To take away swelling of
the (...). 69, a. 1531, d. Good against the manginesse of the (...). 870, k.
1461, b. To help the old aches and pain in the Legs. 281, b. To cure old and
(...) (...) in the Legs. 700, d. 870, k. To kill Leopards. 903, a. Good for
such as have the Lethargy. 245, g. 572, a, d. 1009, c. (...), h. 1180, c.
1388, d To ease the (...). 79, d. 378, e. 506, d. 578, b. 688, i, k. 801, a.
876 c. 1545, a. 1608, f. 1619, b. To take away (...). 57 (...). 870, g. (...).
(...). 890, a. 977, a. 1353, (...). 1511, h. Good against (...). 248, e. 366,
c. (...), c. To take away (...) in the face. 132, h. (...), (...). (...),
(...). To kill (...) 495, b 647, a. 858, d. 1379, b. 1492, b. 1549, b. To drive
(...) out of the beard, head, and all other parts of the body. 495, b, c. To
heal (...) (that is (...) or ringwormes) in children or young (...), (...), e.
To preserve and prolong the (...) of man. (...), n. For chaps of the (...). see
(...). Good for the (...). 395, a, e. 419, b. 434, b 649, f. 877, i. 992, e.
1032. f 1041, b. 1126, a. 1162, b. 1194 b. 1485, a. 1303. e. To cool the hot
burning or inflammation of the (...). 284, a. 306, b. 852, a. 1172, d. 1204,
(...) 1565, a. 1608, c. See (...). To help obstructions of the Liver. 327, d.
350, a. (...), a. (...), b. 434, (...). 442 b. 527, a 534, b. 548, a. 578, a,
d. 586, c 632, b, c. 845. b. 856, d. 984, b. 996, b. 1016, b. 1095, a. 1097, c.
1167, b. 1170, c. 1232, c. 1373, a. 1437, d. 1447, b. 1472, f. 1473, b. 1508,
g. 1525, d. 1534, a. 1612, d see Stoppings. To (...) and take away the hard
swellings of the (...). 242, c. To strengthen the (...). 395, a. 713, a 1089,
(...). 197, c. 1264, k. 1501, f. (...), e. 1534, a. 1536, a. (...). b. 1619, b.
1623, b. A good medicine against (...) of meat, 1097, b. 1393, c. 1408, g A
(...) for an old cough and (...) of the (...), 667, c. To stay the (...) of
(...) with child, 1451, e. see Women. Lotions for (...) and sores in childrens
(...), (...), i. (...) (...) A medicine against the (...) (...). (...), (...).
e. To dissolve (...) and hard (...) in any part of the body. 96, b. 702, b.
863, b. 894, b. 1012, b. 1058. h. To cure the (...) person 958, b. To quiet the
(...). 798, d. Good for the (...). (...), b. 776, a. 779, b. 807, (...). 877,
h. 881, d. 892 c. 991 b. 1025, a. 1032, f 1448, k. 1511, b. 1571, b. To open
(...) obstructions or stoppings of the Lungs. 360, (...) 586, c. 653, c. 849,
h. 916, g. 993, f. 1024, c. 1257, q. 1302, a. 1428, b Against destillations
upon the Lungs. 370, h. To cleanse the Lungs. 32, a. 175, a. (...), b. 672, b.
694 a. 807, c. For the consumption of the Lungs. 154, c. 629. b 940, c. 1040, g
1148, a. 1303. k. 1356, e. 1437, b. 1557. b. To help the Lungs inflamed. 580,
b. 629, b. 708, e. 852, (...). 1571, b Good against the cough of the Lungs.
644, c. 694, c. Good for the Lungs oppressed with raw cold humors, 152, b. 667
c. 776, b. 793, b. 878, k. 1053. b. 1066, b. 1437, d. 1445, i. To procure or
stir up bodily Lust. 106, c, 154, c. 207, b. 248, b. 251, d 707, c. 752, a.
770, c. 811, e. 880, f. 901, a. 1023. e, 1026, a. 1029, b. 1033, d. 1035, a.
1039, c. 1053, a. 1057, c. 1107, g. 1112, b. 1128, a. 1154, c. 1156, b. 1163,
c. 1356, c. 1434, f. 1437, e. 1438, b. 1472, (...) See Bodily. To restrain
bodily Lust. 821, c. 918, a. To ease all (...). 37, b. 1620, b.
M
A Medicine against Madness, 395, s. 572. To take away Madness procceding of
melancholy and the spleen, 578, b. 977, a. To cure the biting of Mad (...),
805, d. 1002, (...). 1004, (...). See Biting, Mad, and Dog. To kill Maggots,
1369. g. To cure Maidens of the green Sickness, and send again the lively
color into their faces, 258, b. See Green and Sickness. To cure Manginesse, 67,
f. 388, c. 391, h. 506, d. 536, c. 615, b. 794, (...). 1007, (...). 1444, d.
1482, c. An especial remedy against the night Mare, 984, f. To take away
black and blew Marks proceeding of beating and bruises, 373, b. 870, (...).
872, c. 1035, a c. 1098, i. 1211, m. 1218, e. 1408, (...). 1441, c. See
Blackness and (...). To take away Marks reniaining after small pox and
measels; 845, i. 1460, h. 1511, (...). Good for the Matrix, and to ease the
pains thereof, 395, a. 421, g. 485, c. 577, b. 653, 718, (...). 726, d. 766,
a. 787, f. 909, b. 1004, c. 1177, g. 1291, (...). 1294, (...). To help the
coldness and stopping of the Matrix, 31, d. 577, b. 586, c. 661, d. 672, g.
1055, l. 1104, c. 1188, c. 1246, a. 1257, a. 1373, b. 1549, (...). To mollific
and open the Matrix, 195, c. 586, c. 649, a. 672, g. 1197, h. 1206, a. 1291, d.
1426, c. To help the inflammation of the Matrix, 44, c. 196, (...). 522, f.
557, n. 1081, d. 1197, (...). 1388, d. To cure the suffocation and strangling
of the Matrix, 1051, a. 1055, m. 1104, c. See Mother. To bring the Matrix into
her right place again, 1257, b. 1341, g. To (...) the Matrix, 574, b. 715,
(...). Good for impostumes of the Matrix, 898, b. Good against the Measels,
629, a. 661, g. 801, (...). Good for such as cannot brook their Meat, 667, i.
1001, g. 1219, (...). To ease the pain of the megrim, 359, a. 360, r. 584, a.
637, c. 783, f 883, d. 1073, c. 1408, l. 1586, b. To purge Melancholy, 575, h.
653, c. 672, c. 798, d. 977, a. 1298, (...). 1343, d. Good for a Melancholy
person, 574, d. 674, f. 692, a. 993, g. 1343, c. The (...) plaster, 1206, b.
To cure (...), 1206, c. To warm cold Members, 1257, u. To strengthen weak
Members, 876, e. 1335, b. 1345, (...). To strengthen and preserve the weakened
Memory, 766, b. 1172, b. To comfort Memory, 411, b. 663, c. 1294, c. To stop
the overmuch flowing of the Menses, (...) Flowers and Terms, 51, h. To provoke
women's Menses, See Flowers and Terms, 51, c. 64, b. 1511, q. 1533, b. To make
one Merry, 152, a. 674, (...). 686, b. 705, d, 738, c. 797, a. 880, f. 1047, i.
1126, a. 1343, c. To keep from Merrygalis, 1388, g. Good against or to cure
Merrygalis, 359, i. 1360, a. 1584, b. To kill Mice and Rats, 441, e. To
increase or cause much Milk in Nurses breasts, 232, (...). 239, i. 296, b. 308,
a. 524, a. 803, b. 1033, a. 1035, (...). 1086, a. 1242, a. 1307, b. 1356, c. To
cruddle Milk, 1170, b. 1511, p. To dry up Milk, 674, a. 883, l. 1211, l.
1225, p. 1257, t. To hinder Milk from waxing sour and crudling in the
stomach, 681, f. 1511, p. To cure the hardness, (...) of the Milt, see
Spleen. To open the stoppings of the Milt, 534, b. 578, a. 586, c. see
Stopping, Obstruction, (...) Spleen. To draw much moisture from the head, and
(...) the brain, see Head. To dry up overmuch moisture of the stomach. 1242,
a. 1393, c. 1413, c. To being down the Monthly course of Women, etc. See
Flowers. To cleanse and take away the Morphew, 178, g. 196, (...). 289, (...).
466 a. 821, b. 833, b. 870, l. 90, h. 1161, a. To take away the white Morphew
of the face, 95, (...). 912, f. 1218 c. 1408, d. To take away the black
Morphew, 519, a. 833, b. 979, c. Against the rising and suffocation of the
Mother, 245, f. 328, a. 359, b. 653, c. 692, b. 743, a. 814, b. 984, f. 1007,
n. 1009, c. 1033, c. 1049, a. 1055, (...). 1058, l. See Matrix. To (...). fie
and soften the sores of the Mother, 51, f. 935, g. 1362, c. To help the
falling down of the Mother, 1432, a. To cleanse the Mother, 332, b. 353, m. To
keep garments from Moths, 1196, d. 1294, l. 1369, g. 1414, b. See Clothes and
Garments. To kill Moths, 1369, g. Against the biting of the Monse called a
Shrew, 178, h. 1098, i. To dry up and heal the virulent ulcers of the Mouth,
632, d. 1015 (...). 1202, b. To cure all ulcers of the Mouth, 273, b. 421, f
825, e. 992, f. 1121, l. 1274, (...). 1393, c. 1395, a. 1484, a. Against
inflammations of the Mouth, 400, c. 456, b. 825, e. 853, m. 876, a. 998, a.
1274, a. 1131, b. 1436, c. 1441, k. An excellent Mundificatiue for old vicers
and malignant Sores, 441, c. 1015, d. see Ulcers. Against the Murraine and
other infirmities of Cattle, See (...) (...). To help all Murs, 1086, d. To
help the fuffocation by (...), 708, f. 808, h. 1098, h. 1257, o.
N
TO strengthen Nature, 926, a. To help the standing out of the (...) 1055, d.
To take away loose Nalles on the fingers or toes, 877, (...). To cause ill
Nalles to fall off, 557, d. 816, b. 883, n. 963, a 1351 d. 1362, c. To heal
the galled Necks of cattle, 1130, b. To help contraction of the Nerves, See
Shrinking of the Sinewer. Good for Night Wheales, 1393, e. For stinging of
Nettles, 708, h. To cause (...), see (...). To cleanse the hair of (...), 644,
a. To kill Nits, 647, a. 858, d. 1197, r. 1353, l. 1379, b. 1492, b. To waste
hard Nodes, 245, i. 845, h. 1526, a. For the Noise of the ears, see (...). For
stanching bleeding at the Nose, see Bleeding. To cause the Nose to bleed,
(...), (...). To take away the disease of the Nose which is called (...), see
Polypus. To cure red fiery Noses, 912, f. To cure the old sores and ulcers
which breed in the (...), 858, c. Against Numnesse of the seet, hauds, and
sinews, 892, c. 1148, c. How to increase and engender milk in Nurses breasts,
378, c. 562 a. 1032, b.
O
TO open Obstructions, 34, a. 152, b. 177, a. 281, e. 434, a. 508 b. 534, b.
578, f. 657, a. 705, b. 778, b. 925, a. 1015, a. 1029, a. 1053, d. 1145, a. see
Stoppings. To open Obstructions of the liver, 3, d. 398, b. 421, (...). 556, b.
626, d. 661, c. 694, a. 714, b. 791, a. 837, c. 885, b. 896, a. 911, c. 993 f.
1001, c. 1015, a. 1023, d. 1024, b. 1089, b. 1121, i. 1139, b. 1236, d. 1264,
c. See Liver and Stoppings. Good against Obstructions or stoppings of (...)
spleen, 556, b. 626, d. 661. c, 694, a. 714, b. 791, a. 837, c. 885, b. 895,
a. 1001. c. 1023, d. 1024, b. 1089, b. 1121, i. 1236, d. see (...) and
Stoppings. To cure or waste Oedemata, viz. cold swellings, 776, b. 787, g. 883
l. 1336, c. 1529, d. 1619, c. A precious Oil to cure deep wounds, those made
through the body, or with any venomous weapons, and also pricked sinews, 541,
b. An excellent Ointment for members out of joint, gout, and kibed heels, 665,
c. Against the danger proceeding of Opium, 667, a. 787, d. 880, h. 1104, d. To
help Opilations or stoppings of the liver, 391, h. See Obstructions. Against
Oppression of the Chest with raw and cold humors, See Chest, (...), Raw. To
open Drifices of fislula's and issues, see (...). To cure the disease Oscedo,
see Scuruy. To (...) Dutgrowings, see Wens. Against the (...), 76, a. (...), a.
P
TO remedy the (...) of the Megrim, 759, b. see Megrim. To assuage Pain 71, c.
310, d. 352, i. 355. a. 370, d. (...), e. 557, h. 756, h. 872, e. 935, a. 1033,
d. 1195, b. 1292, e. 1394, (...). 1413, d. 1445, f. For the Pain of the gout,
359, b. 1195, b. see Gout. For the extreme Pain of the stone, see Stons.
Against all Pains of the joints, 637, a. 874, b. Good against or to assuage
all Pains of the (...). 71, e. 557, h. 651, c. 1058, f. Against Pain of the
bladder, joined with heat and sharpnes of urine, 291, a. To help the (...) in
the side, 47, a. 64, a. 661, a. 694, a. 625. a. 756, g. 766, c. 849, b. 870, i.
935, b. 1017, a. 1058, h. 1066, c. 1159, c. 1188, a. 1257, q. For Pains of the
Fundament, 421, g. For Pains proceeding of cold causes, 245, h. For Painting
women's faces, 801, d. For Panting of the heart, see Heart. To keep down
maidens (...), 949, a. To cure sore Paps, 363, i. 898, b. To take away
hardness of the Paps, 527, b. To cure (...) of the Paps, see Dugs. Good for
feeble (...), 1196, k. For the (...) Passion, see Felony. (...) Passion of the
heart, 798, f. 998, c. To cure the Palsy, 134, b. 317, (...). 458, e. 459, b.
584, b. 705, b. 759, a. 766, b. 792, a. 896, (...). 1055, c. h. 158, g. 1180,
a. 1529, c. 1619, c. To stay or take away the Pearl of the eye, 694, c. 845,
d. 1206, d. For (...) persons, (...), d. 799, c To preserve from Pestilence,
154, i. 409, c. 438, a. 1029, d. 1172, e 1253, e. To expel the poison of the
(...), and cause it to break forth in blisters outwardly, 191, h. To break
(...) sores, 726, c. 1007, k. (...) Botches and (...). To cure (...) (...),
1002, b. Against (...) (...), 1002, k. 1037, b. 1172, c. 1246, b. 1253, c.
1420, a. See Fevers. Good against Phlegmons, 829, b. 1511, d. To (...) (...) of
the breast, lungs, and rough Artery, 1431, c. For (...), see Fronticke. To
consume Phymata, 1218, e. 1336, c. 1508, h. Vernish for (...), 1374, l. To
(...) the (...), 360, x. 717, c. 774, d. 817, c. 876, c. 1423, d. See (...). To
open (...) of the fundament, 508, b. For (...) off of the hair, see Hair. To
take away Pimples of the face, 912, f. 994, e. 1315, s 1445, h. For the Pin in
the eye, 856, f. See Web. To open the Pipes, 577, a. 792, a. Remedy fo^r these
that Piss in bed, 79, g. To help (...) by drops, 64, a. see (...). Good
against (...) blood, 44, d. 276, c. 421, b. 565, a. 713, a. 715, g. 825, f.
892, d. 993, c. 1065, b. 1195, c. 1432, a. 1564, b. see Blood. To cause one to
(...) frecly, 714, c. 1045, a. See provoke (...). Good against the (...), 814,
b. 833, i. 969, c. 993, b 1001, a 1158, (...). To draw venom of the Plague
from the heart and other vital parts, 958, a. 963, c. Good for the (...), 395,
f. 653, c. 708, e. 766, g. 779, a. 853, l. 2007, d. 1066, e. 1188, c. 1303, k.
1445, c. 1623, c. Against the small Pocks, 629 a. (...), g. 801, e. 1218, c.
Against the French Pocks, 578, b. 661, k. 855, c. 1089, (...). 1167, b. 1172.
k. 1501, h. To (...) the French Pocks, 444, a. 1612, b. 1619, a. (...) against
(...), 688, c. 1104, d. Good against Poison, 49, b. 64, c. 254, c. 359, k. 273,
c. 407, a 409, c. 414, b. 431, b. 434. d. 441. a. 518. b. 527, b. 661, b. 665,
a. 667, h. 694, c. 712, d. 715, d. 726, c. 741, a. 833, i. 845, b. 861, b. 898,
a. 991, b. 1001, a. 1004, a. 1014, b. 10029, d. 1110, a. 1172, d. 1246, b.
1257, p. 1336, b. 1373, b. 1414, f. 1441, c. 1464. f. 1492, e. 1511, c. (...),
a. 1622, a. See (...). Against cold Poisons, 177, a. 880, h. 882, o. 1002, a.
1366, f. 1526, a. Against the disease Polypus in the nose. 400, a. 833, c.
(...), l. 1369 c. A singular Populeon, 512, a. To open the (...), 756, a. To
help the Pose, 1086, d. A (...) against a (...) or pestilent air, 741, (...),
(...), c. A Preservative against the infection of the Plague, 661, g. 833, i.
1078, a. Against all venom and poison, 1511, c. 1622, a. To Preserve grapes a
whole year, (...), d. To draw out (...), see (...) and Splinters. To help the
(...), 132. g. Good against the (...), 694, a. 940, c. 1040, g. 1148, b. 1356,
(...) 1408, c. A Pultis for swellings, 557. o. 621, c. To cure Punctures made
with sharp weapons, 801, g. To (...) Pullen, and cause them to lay great store
of eggs. See Hens. To cure the Pimples of the face, see Pimples. To Purge
choler, 548, b. 564, b. 588. a. 922, a. 1264, t. 1268, b. 1297, a. (...), a.
1431, b. 1501, d. To Purge Choler and waterish humors mightily, 51, b. 344, a.
507, a. 783. 839, a. 868, a. 900, b. 1403, a. 1404, a. To Purge (...) humors,
536, a. 839, a. 872, a. 874, a. 913, a. 1268, a, b. 1447, g. To Purge by siege
and (...), 60, i. 350, h. 578, b. 870, a. 883, i. 1089 g. 1097, a. To Purge
choler and tough phlegm by siege, 60, b. 415, b. 471, a. 494, a. 497, a. 542,
a. 544, a. 580, c. 845, a. 885, b. 890, a. 916, (...). 925, b. 977, a. (...),
a. 1057, c. 1134, a. 1338, a. 1339, a. 1402, a. (...), a 1423, b. 1470, a. To
Purge the belly, 382, a. 336, a. 508, a. 560, a. 578, c. 582, b. 845, b. 883,
i. 969, a. 1055, a. l. 1268, a. 1297, a. 1338, a. 1339, a. 1364, a. 1366, d.
1402, a. 1501, c. 1508, h. To Purge by urine, see Urine. To Purge gross
humors, 414, a. 896, c. 913, a. 922, a. 1367, g. To Purge tough phlegmatic
and raw waterish humors, 134, a. 164, a. 310. b. 332, a. 415, a. 582, a. 666,
a. 870, b. 1180, h. 1501, d. 1597, a. To Purge tough humors and choler by (...)
506, a, 518, b. 783, b. 837, a. see (...). To Purge the head of raw
phlegmatic humors, 59, a. To Purge by vomit and stool, 264, a. 359, g. 506,
a. 870. b. 913, a 1078, f. 1319, b. 140i. b. 1469, a. 1551, a. To Purge
Melancholy, 575, h. 578, c. 866, a. 977, a. 1134, a. 1297, a. 1501, d. (...) in
the dropsy, (...), b. 344, a. 507, a. 536, a. 1402, c. 1403, a. 1404, d. 1405,
b. 1423. f. For (...), 653, c. For the Purples, 661. g. 1199. a. To dye Purple.
see Color. To take away Pushes, 1107, e. 1225, p. To resist (...), 508, b.
877, i. 992, f. (...), e. 1594, b. (...), e 1612, a. 1619, b. Against (...) of
the Jaws, 825, e.
Q
AGainst (...) (...). 221, a. 242, b. 896, a. 991, c. 1089, b. 1172, c. 1188 f.
To cure (...), 542, f. 575, g. 718, c. 838, f. 977, 1002, (...). 1007, h. 1043,
b. Against the venom of (...), 708, f. To cure (...) Agucs. 582, d. 1525, d.
R
GOod for the (...), 844, a. see Kidneyes. For the running of the Raines, 51,
e. 811, l 1163, h. see Gonorrbaea. For obstructions of the Raines, 578, a. To
purge or cleanse the Raines, 254, d. To void gravel and stones of the Raines,
see Kidneys and Stone. To correct and take away Ranknes of the body, see Smell.
To (...) skin, 656, g. To kill (...), 441, e. To concoct and waste away Raw
humors, 756, g. 1002, h. 1033 d 1051, b. 1107, h. 1612, c. See Humors. To
digest and bring up Raw humors lying in the chest, 1145, c. 1145, k. Against
Rawnesse of the stomach, see Stomach. For Redness of the face, 360, (...).
715, b. 912, f. 999, f. 1008, c. To stay the Reds, 1264, k, p. 1341, b. 1413,
b. 1494, b. (...), c. see Flowers and Terms. To procure Rest, see Sleep.
Restoratiue to the (...), (...), b. 1437, b. Against Rhenmes, (...), (...).
359, l. 370, c. 421, a. 792, a. 813, b. 893, (...) a. 1081, c. 1086, d. 1211,
p. 1294, c. 1349, a. 1373, i. 1433, c. 1499, c. To purge (...) humors out of
the head, 759, d. 856, g. To dry up Rheum, 1013, i 1081, c. 1294, c. For the
Rifts of the fundament, 60, d. see Fundament. For Rifts in the hands and feet,
74, b. 1011, f. Against Ringwormes, 178, g. 395, b. 876, c. Against (...), 421,
a. 849, c. To take away (...) of the tongue in hot burning Feauers, 634, d.
914, a. 1453, (...). For (...) of the throat and breast, 38, a. 816, a. 852, a.
1302 a. 1356, a. 1500, b. 1502, i. 1518, c. To help inward Ruggedness of the
eye lids, 509, f. For Ruggedness of the (...), 233, h. 273, a. 712, a. 1431,
h. 1511, h. For Running of the eyes, see Eyes. For Running of the ears, see
Ears. For Ruptures, 95, b. 363, f. 403, a. 547, a. 570, a. 572, b. 634, c.
692, k. 714, a. 715, d. 792, c. 807, c. 829, a. 939, b. 949, a. 991, d. 1011,
e. 1055, d. 1124, b. 1145, l. 1195, b. 1369, c. 1482, g.
S
TO drive away Sadness, 665, b. 692, a. 798, c. 799, c. 880, f. For Salt
humors, 877, h. 1303, l. 1330, a. 1453, k. An excellent Salve to cure wounds
and old filthy ulcers of the (...), 360, b. Salve to cure Apostems, tumors,
green wounds, old ulcers, burnings, hurts, or cuts of the head, 356, a. An
excellent Salve to incarnate or bring up flesh in deep hollow. wounds and
ulcers, See (...). To dissolve and drive sorth cluttered (...), see. (...). To
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) Good for Sauce, 62, a. 180, b. 239, a. 242, a.
245, 398, b. 1316 a. 1324, a. To (...) spreading Scabs, 79, d. 506, d. 1218, c.
To heal Scabs, 359, f 360, y. 388, c. 391, h. 536, c. 578, b. 667, d. 712, a.
725, c. 794, l. 870, g. 876, c. 885, b. 978, c. 1089, a. 1161, a 1298, r. 1393,
h. 1408, d. 1434, d. 1444, d. 1470, c. 1619, b. For Scald heads in children,
178, g. 68`, d. 1218, (...). Scabs of horses and Kine, 1444, d. For Scabs of
the bladder, 1303, c. For scabs of sheep, 1218, g. 1444, d. (...) scalding of
the urine, 1356, c. see (...). For scalds with oil or water, 310, c. 349, a.
360, z. 363, k. 776, d. 805, d. 858, b. 1232, c. 1281, b. 1396, b. 1424, b.
1453, k. 1489, c. see Burning. To take away scales. 1146, c. 1441, c. To draw
forth scales of bones, 849, c. 872, c. To take away (...), 363, k. 870, c. 871,
c. 958, b. 1197, m. 1291, b. Against the Sciatica, 60, h. 237, a. 242, c. 245,
h. 250, c. 253, a. 254 b. 264, b. 269, a. 281, d. 360, x. 441, a. 497, b. 527,
a, d. (...), e. 544, a. 545, a. 548, b. 574, d. 688, h. 715, e. 793, f. 811, i.
838, f. 856, c. 872, c. 935, f. 1007, b. 1055, c. 1159 c. 1180, g. 1307, g.
(...) 1311, d. 1319, c. 1488, b. 1619, c. 1620, a. To mollify schirrous
tumors, 458, 1619, c. see Tumors. Against Scolopenders, see Bearwormes. For the
Scorbute, see (...). Against the (...) scorpion, 681, e. For stinging of
scorpions, 708, g. see stingingo. To stay scourings. 75, d. see Flix and Lasks.
For scratches, 632, (...). For the (...), see Kings evil. To take away scurfe
of the head, 37, c. 66, c. 1007 m. 1146, c. 1180 b. 1197, r. 1226, n. To help
scuruinesse or manginesse, 67, f. see Manginesse. To heal the dry scurfe, 890,
(...). 1086, (...), 1156, b. 1373, g. 1393, (...). 1441. c. 1472, k. 1489, d.
To cure the Scuruy, 243, b. 250, b. 158, a. 402, a, b, c. 621, (...) 1491,
(...). To drive forth the secondine, 191, f. 242, d. (...), f. 574, a. 662 a.
694, b. 697, (...). 741, a. 909, a. 1001, c. 1019, b. 1040, g. 1048, b. 1104,
b. 1257, a. 1408, g. see Afterbirth. To increase seed, 232 b. 811 e. 1033, a.
1112, b. 1356, (...). 1472, h. To stay flowing of the seed in Dreams, or
otherwise, 308, h. 820, a. 1154, b. see (...). To destroy natural seed, 308,
h. 310, c. 892, b. To dry up the seed, 709, b. 1257, t. To revive the senses,
152, a. 766, b. 882, n. 1294, e. To cure the Serpigo, 74, b. Against the
bitings of serpents, 49, a. 51 c. 55, b. 195, a. 237, a. 391 c. 400 a. 645, a.
661, b. 688, e. 694, e. 708, g. 715, d. 725, d. 766, c. 796, b. 803, a. 810, c.
849, a. 880, b. 898, a. 1024, d. 1026, d. 1037 a. 1121, h. 1139, a. 1150, c.
1188 d. 1246, b. 1257, o. 1336, b. 1362, b. 1373, (...). 1388, e. 1406 b. 1489,
c. 1509, d. 1616, (...). To drive away serpents, 480, c. 536, b. 667, g. 688,
c. 796, c. 803, a 1107, g. 1257, o. 1388, (...). Against the biting of the
serpent Cerastes. (...), c. 1353, l. To help shakings of the joints inclining
(...) a (...), 766, b. 1105, f, For the shakings of an Ague, 458, c. 688, a.
849, b. 1001, c. 1007, h 1465, (...). 1529, (...). 1542, b. 1620, (...). For
sharpness of the urine, see Heat. To allay sharp humors, 807, f. To kill and
(...) sheep, 429, c. 789, (...). 1557. Good against the shingles, 331, b. 339
a. (...) a. 992, g. 1225, p. 1257, k. 1331, c. 1393, e. For (...) shins. 544,
(...). For shiuerings of Agues, see shakings. Against shortness of breath, 51
d. 72 b. 245 b. 395 a, (...). 546, a. 574, a. 870 b. 1055 a. 1055 k. 1058 h.
1086, a. 1146, b. 1246, a. 1257 d. see Breath. For the shot of envenomed darts
and arrower. (...) Arrows and Wounds. For the biting of the Shrew Mouse, see
Mouse. To help shrinking of the sinews, 66 e. 363 c, 651 c. 665 f. 1007 c
1058 g, 1180 a. For the falling sickness. see Falling. To bring down the
desired sickness in women, see Flowers and Terms. To (...) the green
sickness, 548 c. 880 i. 883 i. See Green and Maidens. For pain in the side,
71 c. 95 b. 372 a. 574 d. 1078 a. 1445 i. 1473 b. 1485 a. 1620, b. To preserve
the sight, 663 a. 1032, a. To takeaway things which hinder the sight, 548 d.
1070, a. 1195 a. Good against darkness of the sight, 62 a. 310 a. 317 a. 619
c. 663, b. 674 d. 773 d. 1436 b. 1541 h. To quicken the sight, (...) b. (...)
s. 663 b. 770 a. 845 d. 882, n. 1008 c. 1023 d. 1043 d. 1045. 1070 a. 1206 d.
1257 g. 1298 s. 1333 a. 1353 f. 1507 (...). 1531 c. 1533 a. 1536 c. 1538 b.
(...) sor wounds, pricks, and hurts of the sinews. 363 k. (...) i. 1529 e. For
the loosnesse of the sinews, 916 n. To strengthen the sinews, 317 k. 548 d.
766 b. 1058 g. 1232 c. 1396 c. 1401 d. 1501 f. 1529 e. To stay the weeping of
cut or hurt sinews, 634 b. 1015 d. To cleanse and amend the skin of the face,
(...) i. 1210 c. 1445 h. 1460 c. see Face. To make the skin fair and smooth,
712 a. 911 c. 1331 b. 1401, d. 1445 h. 1465 q. To procure sleep, 72 a. 284 a.
308 a, b. 310, d. 341 a. 352 h. 355 c. 359 g. 370 c, h. 971 m. 792 b. 821 g.
852 b. 880 f. 936 c. 1033 d 1263 c. 1578 d To shake off heavy and drowsy
sleep, 152 a. 1002, m. 1180 c. To waken one out of a dead sleep, 882 o. 1009.
1055 i. 1180 c. To eause dead sleep, 355 d. To restore smelling, 1086 d. For
rank smell of the arm holes, 1154 d. 1156 b. (...) b. To drive away snakes,
and against the (...) of the Rattle Snake, 849 h. see serpents. To cause
sneesing, 245 f. 441 d. 665 a, 674 f, 1405 b To cleanse old filthy sores, 368 f,
629 a. 896 d, 1049 b, 1511 h For sores in the throat, see Throat. To cleanse and
heal old stinking and corrupt sores, 317 f, 329 b, 509 d, 629 a, 1055 f To
consume or waste away plague Sores. 725, c. 726, c. 1172, f. To drive away
Sorrow 692, g. 738, c. 797, a. 799, c. 1298, s. To take away (...) proceeding
of melancholy. 674, i. 798, c. 1343, c. To take away Sounding in the (...).
See Ears. To restore lost (...) unto those that are taken with the dumb
paulsie and Apoplexy. 411, a. 1180, d. 1294, c. 1448, i. To increase Sperme.
See Seed. Good against Spetting of blood. 276, c. 372, a. 391, f. 395, a, c 419
b. 421, b. 522, e. 565, a. 694, (...). 715, g. 766, c. 884. a 949, b. 1057, a.
1065, b. 1148. b. 1194. b. 1303, k. 1341, b. 1392, a. 1413, b. 1432, a. 1436,
c. 1445, i. See Blood. To procure Spitting. 378, (...). Against the (...) of
the Spider called Phalangiam. 36, c. 49 a. 116, a. 310, d. 545. a. 1015, c.
1040, g. 1123, a. 1257, o. 1379, f. 1434, b. To make the vital Spirits fiesh
and lively. 692, f. 705, d. 998, c. 1263, a. 1541, a. To cool and refresh the
fainting Spirits. 1523. b. (...). See Infirmities, (...), and (...). To help
the (...) if it be wasted. 374, f. Remedies for those that have evil Splaenes.
55, b. 317, b. 955, a. 858, b. (...), a 1130, a 1434, b. Against the pain of
the (...) 64, a. 395, a. 572, e. 876, e. To help the Spleen ouercharged with
gross blood. 1097, d. Against hardness of the Splaen. (...), a. 849, b. 892,
a. 896, c. 1139, b. 1197, g. 1257, e. 1351, c. 1379, a. 1509. d. 1529 c. To
open the stoppings of the (...). 350, e. 527, a. 548, a. 1100. c 1130, (...).
1311, c. 1379, g. 1472, f. 1508, g. 1549, a. 1612, d. See (...) Obstruction and
Stopping. To draw forth Splinters fixed in any part of the body. 37, a, 106 a.
557. m. 770, b. 796, c. 849. c. 870, c. 1055, f. See Thorns. To take away or
cleanse Spots in the face. 132, h. 289, a. 366, c. 1045, c. (...), d. To take
away black and (...) Spots of the face or any other part. 248, d. 360, f 402,
d. 509, f. 688, c. 994, c. 118, c. 1226. g. See Blackness and Marker. To take
(...) Spots of the (...) called in Latin (...), 1195, a To help Squatts, 1002
e. 1488. h. see Falls, (...). To ease the Squinancy or Squincy. 175, c. 490, c.
557, k. 852, f. 1013, i. 1098, i. To help the Squinancy. 395, f. 688, g. 1035,
c. 1121, m. 1319, c. 1353 k. 1362, a. A pure white Starch. 835, e. To cure the
Stench of the mouth 402, a. To take away the (...) of the armcholes. see.
(...). Good for (...) of the ioints. 1394, l. Against Stinging of bees and
waspes. 682, n. 686, a 932, a. 1253, i 1257, o. 1408, k. Against Stinging of
Nettles. 360, y. Good against Stinging of Scorpions. 49, a. 301, d. 310, d 336,
b. 337, a 468, a. 679, a. 725, d. 852, f. 932, a. 968, a. 1083, a. 1107, b.
1172, a 1257, o. 1311, b. 1465, y. Good against the Stinking of the breath, 76,
b. see Breath. Good against Stiches. 74, a. 736 a. 996, b. 1145, i. 1257, d. To
take away the Stich in the side with the pains thereof presently. 766, g.
1351, e. To cure the disease (...) 402. a see (...). To dry and (...) the
Stomach. 508, a. 682, i. 1172, c. 1558, a. 1619, c. 1623, b. To comfort a
weak and feeble Stomach. 51, h. 62, a. 228, a. 284, c. 291, a. 434 b. 661, f.
681, a 841, a. 880, e. 881, (...). 882, o. 992, e. 1002, c 1042. b 1048, c
1089, c. 1156, a. 1177. g 1202, a. 1246, a 1264, k. 1303, f. 1367, m. 1441, d.
1451, g. 1452, b. 1460, b. 1501, b 1518, b. (...), c. 1533, c. Against crudity
or rawnesse of the (...) 64, g. 366 b. 434, (...). 682, i. 896. (...). 1525.
(...). 1549, a. Good for an hot Stomach 284, e. 304, c. 306, b. 339, a. 398,
b. 522, a. 852. e. 876, a. 911, d. 921, d. 998, b. 1302, d. 1326. d. 1419, b.
1420, a. 1460, b. 1506, c. To cure or (...) pains and grief of the Stomach
360, n. 388, b. 672, d. 793 c. 877, h. 1032, c. 1081, c. 1105, e 1274, f. 1281,
a. 1408 k. 1430, a 1433, b. 1529, a. To drive away or dissolve all (...) or
windiness of the (...), 33, a. 366, b. 1008. a. 1529, c. 1549, a. To (...) or
heat a cold Stomach. 33, a. 51, h. 178, e. 235 i. 242 a. 245 a. 359. a. 366,
b. 682, b 692, g. 736, b. 756, c. 773, d. 811, g. 880. i 882, o. 1002, (...),
a. 1019, a. 1023, d. 1025, a. 1034, a. 1040 h 1081, b. 1097, a. 1257 c. 1465.
g. 1535 a. 1542, b 1549, a. 1612, d To purge the Stomach of phlegm and evil
humors, 508, a, b To consume or help windiness and sower belchings of the
Stomach. 667, i. 669, a. 714, c. 756, c. 1034, b. 1257, c 1509, d. To heal
the pain and ache of the Stomach, proceeding of cho. ler 279, a. 308, a. 391,
c, 1097, a. To close up the mouth of the Stomach, 1012, a. Against the Stone
in the bladder. 541, a. 572, a, 782, a. 876, c. 935 (...) 1048, a. 1141, a,
1314 h. 1336, d. Against the (...). 331, d. 569, c 708, i. 1274, h. Good
against the (...). 254, d. 258, b. 387, a. 529, b. 597, (...). 609, b 610, a.
622, c. 626, d. 653, c. 825, c. 841, b. 842, a, 859, g. 907, a. 935 f. 936, b.
984, c. 993, d. 1014, b. 1016, b. 1023, c. 1029, b. 1032, c 1042, b. 1045, a.
1061, a, 1145, b. 1167, a. 1206, c. 1246, c. 1271, c. 1315, n. 1322 a. 1355, h.
1328 (...). 1336, a. 1364, a. 1397, a 1408, o 1431, c. 1455, e. 1465, (...).
1507, i. 1564, d, 1619, c. To all wage the pain of the Stone. 935, b, f. 1446,
r, (...). 1578, c. Good for the Stone of the kidneys. 180 d. 219, d. 281, d.
430 a. 570, a. 605, a. 672 a. 682 m. 707 a. 714 c. 782, a. 876 c. 921 c. 998, d
1048, a. 1222 b. 1247 b. 1274 h. 1314 h. 1356 c. 1445 f. 1499 (...). To remouc
hot swellings of the Stones. 355 b: To cease and cure the burning heat and
inflammations of the Stones. 279. b To (...) to (...) See Belly and (...) Good
(...) (...) of the Spleen. 174 d 1016 k 1158 b 1294 f. 1314 b 1388 b (...) f
1445 i. 1447 b. Against the stoppings of the Liver and Gall. 154 c 174 d 1070 b
1158 b 1294 (...) 1314 b 1388 b 1434 f 1445 i: To open stoppings of the inward
parts. 1014 a 1226 c 1236 a 1298 o 1366 d 1408 o. Good for (...). 37 b 1620 b:
Good against the (...). 24 c 60 h 64 h 242 f 243 a 413 a 485 a 5 2 a 622 d 623
a 671 a 679 b 682 m 811 i 842 a 909 a 1019 b 1029 a 1037 a 1048 a 1051 a 1053 a
1107 h 1141 a 1167 a. 1226 i 1245 a 1246 c 1271 c 1303 m 1364 b 1369 e 1376 c.
1445 i 1488 b To help the strangling and pains of the (...). see Matrix and
mother: To recover strength again 736 b 877 i 880 c 882 l 1040 i 1356 b. To
(...) stripes of the eyes. see (...): Against Struma's or swellings in the
throat: 106 (...) 279 b 896 e 1001 c: See (...) eutil. To soften the Struma's
or swellings of the throat 60 c To draw (...) out of any part of the body: 132
f: see (...) and (...). A remedy against (...) of the head through coldness of
the brains. 1293 b: A remedy against (...) of the Lungs. see Lungs To cure the
(...) of the Matrix or Mother: See, Matrix To heal (...): 1211 o To take away
(...). 132 d 289 a 317 i 466 a 557 d 845 i 870 c 872 a 912 h 994 (...) 1226 g.
To consume (...) humors, 688 a 1081 f (...) c Good against a (...) (...): 154 d
852 f. To preserve one from (...): 1001 g 1097 b To case the difficulty of
(...) caused of cold rheumes 580 a: To provoke sweat: 80 b 251 e 463 a 572 a
662 b 688 a 725 e 756 g 759 f 799 b 861 a 880 e 993 b 1002 c 1002 h 1011 e 1055
g: 1158 a 1172 c 1245 a 1253 c 1404 b 1441 m 1465 x 1612 a 1619 b To stay (...)
1264 k Good against or to dissolve hot (...) that are newly begun: 66 c 541 a
1018 a. To cure and dissolve all hard swellings. 71 b 250 c 494 b 557, h: 748 a
756 g 811 k 837 c 845 h 896 c. 1007 a (...) a 1086 c 1206 a 1211 n 1226 h 1245
a 1361 b 1362 f 1402 d See (...). To waste and consume cold and old swellings.
447 a 719 f. 745 b 748 a 756 b 894 b 900 b 949 a 1009 a 1011 c 1150 a 1428, a
1444 a: To consume and take away hot swellings: 72 f 352 g 447 d. 557 d 615 a
626 a 924 b 938 a 1172 f 1393 c 1423 c 1484 b. To take away the hot (...) of
the uvula and Almonds in the throat. 71 c 245 d 1499 c See (...) and (...): To
open (...). 67 g: To waste away hot swellings of the kernels in the flank, 883
(...) See (...). To take away the swelling in the spleen. 242 c 639 c 1055 a
1538 b To assuage the swelling of the yard. 196 c 1226, m. To supple or waste
away hard swellings of the fundament. 876 c see (...). To ripen hard swellings
behind the (...). 1351 b (...) d. To molliste or waste away the hard Swellings
of the mother. 932, c. 1216, n'. To cure swelling of the throat. 327, b. 1225,
n. Good for hot swellings of the rawes. 1508 b. c. To assuage swellings of the
(...). 196 c. 254, c. 1066, b. 1211, k. (...), c. A remedy for (...) swellings.
1345, a. To take away any swellings in the leg or arm. 615, (...). 621, b.
To help the swelling of the ioints 74 a. 588, b. 1066 b. Against the hard
(...) of the breasts and pappes 28, c. 66, c. 234, 1211, k. Good against (...)
in the head called (...). 672, f. 759, b. 883, d. 916 g. 1172, b. 1367, l. See
(...) and Head. Against (...). 607, i. 798, f, 1343, c. Good for such as are
fallen into a (...), or accustomed to. (...). 360, x. 7. 8, b. 881, b. A good
(...) to soften the belly, and to purge Choler. (...) 852, g. A (...) seruirg
for many (...) cellent purposes. 807, f. (...) of the insusion of Roses with
the sorce thereof. 1264. t. (...) of the juice of Roses. 126 4, x.
T
DFlightsull to the taste, 1263, b. 1455, c. 1533, c. To remedy the pain of
the Teeth. 355, t. 521. g. 1352, i. 1423, c. 1470, c 1475. h. 1489, h. 1511, i.
1545, a. See Toothache. To stop hollow teeth. 506, c. Good for tecth that are
set on edge of astonished. 522, a, g. To fasten loose teeth. 400, c. 522, g. 719,
g. 793, c. 849, g. 998, a. (...). d 1451, i. 1491, a. 1521, c. 1524. a. To glue
together cuts about the Tendons. see Cuts To provoke or bring down the Cermes.
95, a. 177, b. 185, a. 245, c. 251, d. 289. c. 310, d. 378, c. 341, h. 458. c.
508 b. 527. a. 534, a. 545, a 572, a. 653, a. 661, a. 667. b. 672, a. 683, b.
688, c. 694, b. 697, a. 705, c 756, c. 774, c. 792, 284, d. 907, b. 909, a.
984, a, 1001, c. 1016, a. 1017, a. 1019, b. 1023, c. 1024 b c. 1029, c, 1037,
a. 1040, g. 1401, b. 1708, a 1086, a. 1087, a. 1104, b. 1107, a. 1121, d. 1158,
c 1257, a See Flowers and Menses. To stay the overmuch flowing of women's
terms. 419, b. 421, c. 480, g. 522, e. 678, b. 661, c. 807, h. 857 i. l. 1046,
c. 1072, a. 1524, 2 1564, b. 1586, a. See Flowers and Menses. To take away the
tertian Ague. 171, l, 542, f. 582, d. 712, b. 718, c. 991, c. 1 188, f. 1525,
d. Good against long and lingering tertians. 1097, c. Good for tertians that
procced of choler. 195, c. 969, g. 1565, a. To take or scour away tetters.
178. g. 250 c. 395, b. 801 a. 883, o. 896, c. 900, c. 978, c. 1156, b. 1161, a.
1360, b. 1393, h. 1444, d. 1446 t. 1465, q. 1511. h. 1608, (...). To cure
dangerous tetters, 79, d. Good against, or to help the foul spreading
tetters. 619, a. 1413, (...). To quench thirst. 71, c 308, a. 398, d. 588, 3,
852, a. 88 (...), c. 998, b 1035 1263 g. 1303 f. 1419, b. 1420, a. 1500, b.
1501, (...). 1506, c. 1508, f. 1594, b. 1608, d. To quench thirst in hot
burning fevers. 511, d 914 a. 1202 b. 1431, f. 1608, d. To draw forth (...)
fixed in any part of the body. 557, m. 619, a. 783, i. 871, c. 1058, m 124 6,
d. See Splinters. To break or ripen imposthumes or tumors in the throat. See
Aposthumes. Good for diseases happening in the throat. 429, c. 450, a. 1055, b.
1123, b. Good sor inflammations of the throat, 281, c. 892, f. 1395, a. 1491, a
1584, f. To take away the asperity or roughness of the throat. 178, c. 779, a
798, b. 1330, a. To help the Chrowes or griping pains of the belly in women
after their childing. 133 g. 984 a. To help those that are strangled with
eating Toad-stooles. See (...). To take away the Corns of the Coes. see
Corns. To take away the roughnes of the tongue in hot burning Agues. see
Roughness. To cure the disease of the Tongue called de Braan, which is a
ruggedness, blackenesse, and dryness with a swelling. (...). d. To cause
(...) tools to cut iron or stone without turning the edge. 639, c. To appease
the Toothache. 245, c. 359, c 492, a. 495, c. 607, a. 619, b 665, a. 692, h.
719. g. 741, c. 759, d. 811, i. 859, c. 883, a. 896, d. 916, i. 963, d. 992, f.
1002, l. 1007, c. 1016, b. 1020, a. 1070, c. 1073, b. 1150, a, 1158, b 1254, a.
1323, b. 1353, h. 1360, d. 1379, b. 1508, h. See Teeth. Against the
inslammations of the Conssis. See Almonds. Good against the griping torments of
the belly. see Belly and Gripings. Good against the torments of the guts. See
Guts and Collickr. To cause women to have speedy travel in childe-bearing.
See Birth, Deltuerance, and Women. To ease or help women that have hard
ttauell in childebearing and are in great extremity. 163, d. To help a
Craueller from Merrigalls. 1388, g. A good ointment for a wearied traveler.
1128, a. Good against trembling and shaking of the heart-see Heart. Good
against trembling of sinews. 759, b. Good against tumors. 356, a. 360, y. see
swellings. To take away the swelling and pain of hot tumors. 529, a. 678, b.
(...), l. 1424. b. To dissolve or disousse hard tumors. 74, a. 168, a. 1058, i.
1206, a. 1426, b. 1511. g. 526, a. To consume, dissolve, and dtiue away cold
tumors. 665, c. 682, k. 935. g. 1058, i. 1107, k. Good against the turning of
the head called Vertigo. see Dizzis nesse and swimming. To help the (...).
391. g. 1473, b.
V
TO purge the Maines of superfluous humors. 578, a. See (...). To glue together
rists, gashes, and cuts about the (...). see Cuts. To open the Maines of the
Haemorrhoides. See (...). To repress Uapours that hiuder sleep. 1578, d. To
(...) up to (...). 32, a. 33. c. see (...). Good against (...). see Lust. To
help those that are (...) with (...) beasts, 34 a. 95, (...) 177. a, b. 438,
a. 471, a. 494 (...). 527, b. 655, c 671, a. 674, b. 692, h. 787, d. 803, c.
825, d. 845, b. 876, c. 996, a. 1001: g. 1002, c. 1004, a. 1007, i 1253, f.
1311, b. see Bitings. Good against (...). 34, a 738, a. 793, d. 803, c. 825, d.
932, b. 969, a. 993 b.: 037, b. 1058, ka. (...), b. 1107, b. 1107, f. 1158, a.
1162, b. 1247, d. 1253, a. 1341, c. 1408, d, 1465, y. see poison. To drive away
venomous beasts. 485, d. 651, c. To drive away (...) or windiness, 672. g 726,
d. 882, 0, 996 b. 1002, d.: 014 b. 1029, c. 1048, d. 1055, a. 1066, a. 1086, a.
1294, f. 1533 d. 1538, b. 1612, c. 1625, b. see Wind. Good for those that are
bitten of (...). 619, d. 738, a. 810, d. 849, h, 1057, b. 1123, a. 1247, c.
1373. f. 1472. b. 1620, b. To be preserved from being bit of the (...). 833, d.
To cure (...). 195, b 373, d. 409, a. 421, a. 491, a. 511, a. 527, c. 630, a
793, c. 813, a. 836, a. (...), b. 880, a. 1014, a. 1069 b. 1264, m. 1303, p.
1351. c. 1360, a 1366, b. 1369, b. 1411, f. 1437, d. 1518, l. To mundific
(...). (...), b. 509, d. 694, c. 702, b. 715, (...) 849, c. 1225 n. 1226 g.
1446, m. To cure (...) of great difficulty or hard to be cured. 360, y. 527, b.
713, d. 833, a. 1004, b. 1171, h. 1551, b. To cure foul rotten and stinking
(...). 95, c 281, a. 359, c. 402, a. 541, a. 719, f 814, c. 949 a. 1011, c.
1281, b. 1393, c. To keep (...) from inflammation. 615, a. 700, d. To dry up
moist virulent (...), stay th: humor, and heal them. 31, f. 1219, k. 1362, d.
1378, b. 1489, d. 1619, b. To assuage and consume corrosiue vleers in any part
of the body, 1225, p. 1226, h. 1281, b. Good to cleanse malign and corrosiue
(...). 359, c. 378, d. 626, a 661 a. 718, b 823, b. 1315. o. 1402; c. 1433, k.
Good for, or to cure hollow old and new (...). 67, l. 168, a. 191 g. 349, h.
356, a. 548, c. 793, c. 801, a, 858, a. 935, g. 1074, a. 1130, b. 1240, a.
1252, c. 1513, b. To appease the rage of cankerous ulcers. 991, g. To fill up
hollow ulcers with flesh. 849, c. 1072, a. 1224, d. (...), n. 1393, k. 1424. l.
1433, i. 1439. b. To cure venomous ulcers. 1218, c. 1315, (...). For running
(...) in the heads of young Children. (...) Achores. To (...) (...) of the
secret parts and fundament, 31, f. 1033, c. 939, (...). To stop bleeding (...),
430 d. For Ulcers of the kidneys, 807, g. 1116, d. Good for (...) in the low
gut, 1197, b. To heal and fill up the (...) growing in the eyes, 776, b. 1436,
e. For (...) Ulcers of the mouth, 458, b. 509, f. 719, g. 825, e. 1285, b.
(...), i. 1396, a. 1508, d. To cure Ulcers growing on the glandulous part of
the Yard, 363, i. For venomous Ulcers of the mouth, and almonds of the throat,
see Mouth and Almonds. For (...) in the priuities of man or woman, 565, c. 632,
e. (...), b. (...), c. For (...) of the matrix, 363, i. Against Ulceration of
the (...), 306, f. 631, c. (...), a. 807, f. 809 a 811, f. To cure Ulcerations
of the kidneys and bladder, 409, b. 421 d. 949 a. For the pain of an Uncome,
447, c. Good for the Understanding, 1436, g. 1501. f. An Unguent for wounds,
537, b. 805 b. 1005, a. An (...) Unguent to bring up flesh in deep wounds, 537
b. 649, c. To clear the Uoice, 38, a. Against harshnesse of the Uoice, see
(...). To stay Uoiding of blood, 807, f. See Blood. To provoke or cause Uomit,
(...), g. 132, h. 174, c. 239, b, g. 242, b. 279, c. 330 a. 441, a. 495, a.
497, a. (...), b 715, f. 783, b. 837 a. 870, b. 969, b. 1314, f. 13 5, u. 1319,
b. 1405, a. 1408, k. 1428, c. To repress overmuch Uomiting of Choler, 1451, d.
See (...). To stay (...), 34, a. 400, c. 421, b. 669, a. 672, d. 681, a. 841,
a. 883, (...). 993, g. (...). 2, a. 1032, c. 1419, b. 1420, (...). 1433, b.
(...), b. 1471, a. 1472, (...). 1501, (...). 1518, h. 1521, c. (...), (...).
1558, a. 1564, a 1571, c. 1594 b. For (...) of blood, 572, a. 631, b. 681,
(...) (...), d. 884, a. 1097, d 1452, c. 1625, b. To stay (...) in women with
child, 884, a. To stay the desire of (...) at the sea, 669, a. 1081, c. For
(...) of the stomach, 876, a, d. To provoke (...) mightily, 177, b. 340, f.
342, a. 896, f. 1121, k. 1364, a. 1378, a. 1535, a. 1594, e. To provoke (...),
44, a. 64, a, h. 71, a. 95, a. 116, a. 154, d. 170, b. 174, d. 177, a. 178, c.
180, d. 232, b. 239, c. 240, a. 245, c. 248, c. 258, b. 284, a. 331, d. 430, a.
431, a. 527, d. 529, b. 532, a. 534, a. 541, a. 545, a. 565, d. 574, a. 578, f.
586, c. 610, a. 626, d. 649, a. 655, b. 661, a. 962, a. 665, a. 667, b. 672, a.
674, a. 679, b. 688, c. 705, c. 707, a. 725, b. 746, (...). 792, a. 794, h.
814, d. 838, d. 841, b. 842, a. 859, g. 881, e. 885, b. 907, a. 909, a. 911, c.
921, a, c. 924, f. 1002, h. 1014, a. 1016, a. 1017, a. 1019, b. 1023, a. 1024,
c. 1025, a. 1027, d. 1028, b. 1029, b. 1032, c. 1033, a. 1037. a. 1039, b.
1042, b. 1049, c. 1051, a. 1053, (...). 1055, b. 1061, (...). 1065, a. 1078, a
1081, a. 1086, a. 1089, c. 1121, f. 1148, a. 1154, c. 1156, b. 1158, c. 1172,
c. 1188, a. 1206, c. 1216, b. 1219, h. 1229, b. 1226, f. 1240 a 1246, c. 1257,
a, u. 1274, h. 1292, f. 1294, f. (...), d. 1315, (...). 1323, a 1336, d. 1356,
f. 1360, b. 1408, g 1430, a. 1434, b. 1472, h. 1517, b. 1525, f. 1533, a. 1534,
a 1536, a. 1541, b. 1564, d. 1620, b. Against the stopping of the (...), 331,
a. 674, e. 708, i. 1162, (...). To provoke (...) gently, 534, b. 578, a. 1035,
a. 1145, k. 1325, h. 1341, c. 1373, a. 1397, a. 1433, k. 1445, i. 1465, (...).
To purge much (...) out of them that have the Dropsy, 191, h. (...), b. To
(...) or purge the (...) vessels of tough and raw humors, 430, a. To allay
sharp (...), 342, a. 623, a. 1445, f. To cleanse ill humors by (...), 1097, c.
1177, a. For swelling of the (...), 450, a. 509, f. 707, b. 730, b. 853, n.
892, f. 1362, a. (...). k. 1508, d. For loosnesse of the (...), 639, d. 1095,
d. 1508, d.
W
TO help (...) of the stomach, 1032, e. To stay (...) of women's stomachs
being with-child, 1518, h. To take away rugged Warts, 963. a. To take away
Warts in any part of the body, 290, d. 33 (...). 374, f. 506, d. 1511, h. 1545,
a. For stinging of (...), (...) (...). For pain in making (...), see
Droppisse, Dissury, and (...) To cause one make (...), 243, a. 1107, a. see
(...). For Watering of the eyes, see Eyes. To amend (...) Water (...) sea, 672,
e. Good Water to wash a sore throat, mouth, and (...), 421, f. 429 c. 766,
(...). 450, (...). 892, f. 998, c. 1274, i. 1395, a. 1625, a. To consume Wax
kernels, see (...). Against Weakness of the liver, 1204, (...). see Liver. To
(...) Weak (...), 940, b. For Weak backs, see Back. To cause a (...) to
feel no (...), 1104, d. 1388, g. To remove (...), 700, c. 756, h. 880, l. 892,
a. 1361, b. 1408 d. 1523, b. 1558, c. To take away (...) of the eyes, 360, s.
657, b. 694, e. 833, c. 845, d. 1187, e. 1206, d. 1211, n. 1303, h. 1531, c.
1535, b. 1536, c. To stay or keep back the Web in the eye, 694, (...). 1211,
(...). 1535, b. To stay Weeping in cut or hurt sinews, 634, b. 1015, d. To
(...) young Wenches (...), 391, h. Against (...) 704, a. 894, b. 1024, d. To
consume, dissolve, and take away (...), 79, a. 837, c 1012, d 1225, n Against
night (...), 1098; i. 1393, e. To take away all (...), see Pimples and (...).
To take away the pain of, and heal (...), 306, e. 624, a. 870 c. 1331, c. To
stay or heipe the Whites, 631, b. 681, b. 692, k. 704, c. 811, (...). 821, b.
883, l. 1035, a. 1118, a. 1264, k. 1282, c. 1294, g. 1341, b. 1364, h. 1379,
(...). 1393, f. 1413, b. 1475, b. 1491, c. 1494, b. 1558. b, (...) to be
hardened against the pain of Whipping, 248, d. To kill (...) beasts, see
(...). To raise gross and slimy humors out of the conduits of the (...), 1145,
c. For Wind in the bowels, 766 d. 1008 a, 1019 b. 1023 d. 1025 c. 1028 b 1032
e. 1033 a. 1035 a. 1257 x. For (...) (...), 674, e. 901, a. Against (...) in
the stomach and colicke gut, 34, (...). 71, c. 395, (...). 577, b. 1017, a.
1027, d. 1049, c. 1053, a. 1081, (...). 1388, b. 1626, c. see (...). To break,
expel, and consume (...), 170, b. 178, c. 574, d. See (...). To break or wast
the Windiness of the matrix, 940, a. See Matrix To keep (...) from sowring,
175, d. 1130, b. Moderat use of Wine commended, 881. To cause Wins taste well,
1046, d. To restore spirit in Wine, 1564, f. Difference of Wines, 878. a, b. To
temper or (...) them, 881, 882. For what persons Wine is fittest, 881, k. and
for whom not, 881, (...). 884, d. Choice of (...), 879, g. Against (...), 1001,
(...). To kill (...), 903, a. Against poison of (...), 527, d. 880, h. 1257, o.
To cleanse the barren (...), and make it fit for conception, 1529, b. To cure
fluxes of the (...), 639, e. Hurtful to Women with hilde, 833, k. To raise
Women out of their fits, being sick of the Mother, See Mother. Good for the
overmuch vomiting of Women with childh. see (...) (...). For swellings in
Women's breasts. 355, b. To make (...) fruitful, 683. b. 766, a. To bring down
the natural sickness of Women, see (...) and (...). To dissolve the hardness
of Women's breasts or pappes. See (...). Good for Women with child, 1455, d. To
cause easy and speedy travel to Women that are with child. 845, e. 892, a.
909, a. 1029, b. 1058, k. 1095, c. See Birth and (...). Good for Women newly
delivered, 1445, g. To stay lusting or longing in Women with child, 876, a.
881. f. See Longing. Good for Women not well cleansed after their delivery, 350,
(...) 849, a. 984, a. 1257, s. To stay the Flux of Women's terms, see (...). To
drive forth Worms, 793, c. 866, a. 916, h. 969, v. 978, k. 1012, b. 1086, b.
1353, n. 1367, g. To kill (...) in young children, 3, b. 34, a. 204, a. 233, g.
242, g. 317, i. 359, d. 368, d. 522, b. 548, a. 574, b. 644, b. 649, g. 705, b.
715, i. 814, b, d. 1097, c. 1100, (...). 1107, a. 1110, b. 1172, c. 1218, b. c.
1246, f. 1253, a. 1373, k. 1378, c. 1441, c. 1447, (...). c. 1465. y. 1508, g.
1545, c. 1575, b. 1608. b. 1626. c. 1620, b. 1622. a. To drive (...) flat and
round Worms. 174, g. 239. g. 273, c. 336. d. 508, b. 651, b. 688. s. 1101, a.
To void Worms of the guts, 178, d. 251, d. 360, x. 580, c. 647, a. 1130, a.
1158. a. To kill Worms in the ears. 688, f. 1353, g. To close up (...)
without peril of inflammation, 639, c. 692. c k. 697, b. 1005. a. 1047, h.
1073, a. To cure Wounds, 24, (...). 18, 67, (...). 195, b. 306, a. 356, a 360.
y. 563, c. 373 d. 407. d. 409, a. 414, b. 447, d. 491, a. 509, d. 527. b.
(...). 537 a 541, a. 629. a. 630, a. 632, b. 633, a. 635, a. 662, a. 700, a.
705, d. 712. c. 714. a. 718, f. 839, d. 938, a 939, a. 941, (...). 943, a. 949.
a 993, f. 1004, b. 1024, a. 1078, b. 1124, a. 1126, a. 1195, b. 1264, a. 1285,
a. 1433, f. 1509, c. To glue together and cure green Wounds. 3, b. 24, a. 281,
(...). 329, b. 363, a. 403, a. 480, b. 546, b. 548, c. 799, a. 807, b. 906, a.
936. a 1005, a. 1070, g. 1116, a. 1132, (...). 1303, f. 1315, c. 1361, c. 1366
b 1436, b. 1447, f. 1466, c. 1482, b. 1518, l. 1571, (...). 1616, b. To comfort
and heal Wounds in sinewy parts, 196, 279, d. 360, a 615, a. For Wounds in the
head, 60, g. To knit or loyne together great Wounds, 132, a. 360. a. 363; b.
425, a. To keep green Wounds from inflammation or fiery swelling, 363 h. 445.
b. 557. o. 621. c. 718. b. 826. a. 828. (...). 935, g. Good to foment or wash
deep and perrilous Wounds with. 541. b. To cure Wounds of the inward parts.
409 b. 541. b. 631, c. 632. b. 633 a. 649. a. 712. c. 715. g. 787, a. 807, a.
939, b. 949, a. 986, a. 993, d. 1121, c. To stanch the bleeding of Wounds, 18.
276, b. To heal and skin up Wounds that are made in the head. 1364 c 1393 e.
Good for Wounds made with a venomed weapon. 541, b. 796, e. 1007. i. 1058. k.
1188. h. Good for Wounds of the dugs, 939, a. For Wounds of the (...). 939, a.
993, d. For the burning heat of Wounds, 363 h. 998 a. For Wounds made by
venomous beasts. (...) (...), (...) Beasts. For Wrinches of the ancles, 132 c.
To take away Wrinckles, 870. c.
Y
TO help the swellings, vlcerations, and (...) of the (...), 349, b 1073, d.
To take away the (...) of the skin. 556, a. 845, c. To stay or help (...).
395. a. 682. l. 1027. d. 1033, a. (...) (...).
Errata.
I would wish the courteous Reader to take notice and amend these faults
escaped in the printing, and to pardon other such literal faults as he may
perhaps here and there observe.

Faults in Figures transposed.
Page 48. The two figures of Phalangium ramosum and Phalangium non ramosum are
put one for another. Page 50. The two figures are put one for another. And
likewise in Page 808. the two first figures are transposed.
Faults in Words and Marks.
Page 9. lin. 1. elegasis, read elegans. p. 31, l. 32, Cyriacus, r. Syriacus.
p. 84, l. 22, longissimo. r. (...). p. 186, l. 1. for 79, r. 101. p. 242,
title, Lepidium annum, r. (...). p. 228, l. 15, abortinum, r. abortivum. 229,
l. 14, arbertiram, 1. abortivum. p. 245, l. 1. Wild, read white, p. 256, l.
1. in the title, add the figurea. p. 282, l. 17. Itybus, r. Jntybus. p, 289,
l. 4. (...), r. (...). p. 494. l. 43. (...), r. (...). p. 604, l. 7, has been
absurd from, r. had been absurd, for. p. 848, l. 15. Virginia, r, Virginiana.
p. 929, l. 21. (...), r. (...). p. 935, l. 28. Lilly, r, Mallow. p, 941, l. 13,
Arcus, r. Acus. p. 1011, l. 25. Strum, r. (...). p. 1016, l. 19. Macedonium, r.
Macedonicum. p. 1051, l. 4. (...) (...), r. Seseli montanum. p. 1133, l. 37,
Oken case, r Oken leaf. p. 1323, l. 7, Rest-Yarrow, r. Rest. Harrow. p. 1401,
(...) and 51. Cnidicus, r. Cnidius. p. 1424, l. 17. upon, r. open. p. 1524, l.
40, a pleasant, r. pleasant a. p. 1628, l. 39. them, r. it. Page 169, lin. vlt.
put. p. 184, l. penult. put. p. 257, l. 16 and 20, put.. page 203, l. 18, put.
page 261, l. 13. put. and l. 17, put. p. 264, l. 5 and 12, for put. p. 287, l.
6, for put, p. 303, l. 12, put. p. 1143, l. 2, put. p. 1339, l. 8, put.

