THE MARROW OF DIVINITY Thomas or Harris A Golden Chain of divine sentenses
Written By John Gerhard Doctor of Divinity and Superintendent of Heldburg.

Buy the truth* Prove. 23.23.

LONDON Printed (...) 1632 (...)

A GOLDEN CHAIN OF DIVINE APHORISMS Written By JOHN GERHARD Doctor of
Divinity and Superintendent of Heldburg.

TRANSLATED BY RALPH WINTERTON Fellow of Kings College in CAMBRIDGE.

Printed by the printers to the University 1632.

TO The Right Worshipful his most worthy friend and Benefactour Sir John
Hanburie of Kelmersh in Northamptonshire, Together with his Son and heir
Edward Hanburie Esquire, and Mary his daughter Lady to Sir Miles Sandys of
Brimsfield in Glocestersh. and all that are descended from them, Gerhards
Interpreter wishes what Temporal happiness this world can afford, and
Eternal happiness in the world to come.
SIR,
FRom me perhaps you expected Physical Aphorisms, rules and directions for
health, as from a Physician; rather then Theological Aphorisms, doctrines of
salvation, as from a Divine. And, I confess, considering my Profession, it had
been more proper for me to have sent over such unto you. But such is the nature
and condition of man, whilst he lives here below, under the clouds, that no
Profession can Privilege him from storms and tempests, and from injuries of
weather: Insomuch that even Physicians themselves many times become Patients.
The Great world is a Theater in which are Acted nothing but Tragedies of humane
miseries: Every man has his Intrat, as soon as he is born: He Acts (if I may
call it Acting, and not rather Suffering) all his life: He finds no Exit, till
he descends into the chambers of death, to put off his dress. I may truly
call The Great world, The Common school of Patience; and every Society, a
Private; and every Person in each Society being a Little world within himself,
an Epitome, or Module of the Great. To School we must, to learn Patience: And
where should a man learn Christian Patience but in the School of Christ? And
where is that but in the Scripture and Books of Devotion? I for one have been
so exercised in a World of Sufferings, that it has driven me to the School of
Christ to learn Patience, and according to the counsel of the Apostle, In all
estates to be content, and troubled at nothing whatsoever can happen to me from
without, considering that nothing comes to pass without a divine Providence.
Apollonius, as Philostratus reports, being asked if he did not tremble at the
sight of the Tyrant, made this answer, (...) God which has given him a
terrible Countenance, has given also unto me an undaunted Heart. And it is the
saying of Saint Chrysostom, (...) It is not so much the nature of Things, as
the weakness of Persons. Troubles happen alike to all: but all are not alike
troubled. Fire is one and the same for Nature: but for Effect it is not always
the same. It consumes wood and cole: but it purifies gold and silver. The Sun
softens wax, and hardens clay. The Light is comfortable to the sound, but
troublesome to the diseased. The saying of Apollonius I may apply thus unto my
self, Though God has suffered storms and tempests to arise and to be stirred
up against me, yet he has not suffered me to be removed or cast down. Though
Fortune frown upon me, yet (I thank God) having a cheerful heart I can smile
upon her. And the saying of Saint Chrysostom I may thus apply, Though troubles
have come upon me, yet (I thank God who has given me Patience) I have not been
troubled. But amongst many crosses nothing has more afflicted me then the
death of him who truly honored you in his life, and was truly beloved by you
to his death, my dear brother Francis Winterton late one of her Majesty's
Privy Chamber. Unhappy man! But shall I call him unhappy in his death, who was
most happy in his life? That I cannot: He that lived well, certainly could not
but die well? Shall I call him unhappy, because he died in a strange Country?
Nay rather happy in this, because he died for his Country. Shall I call him
unhappy in this, because he is taken from me? This were to love my self more
then him, and to envy his happiness. Or shall I grieve that I my self was not
with him to take care for him for things necessary in time of life, and for
his funerals after death? He wanted neither comfort in life, nor honorable
burial after death. Ever let my tongue be tied and my hand dried up, If I do
not as a poor scholar serve him with both who was so careful for him, I mean
that most Heroical worthy, (with the splendor of whose Titles and Greatness
I dare not presume to set a luster on so small a work as this, but shall ever
admire, and proclaim his Virtues and Goodness) who of his innate and noble
disposition loved all his followers in general, as his fellow soldiers, and
my brother in special; who to his power provided for all, as for his own
family, but made much of him in health, as a faithful servant; took care for
him before his death, as for a friend; lamented for him a^ his death as for a
brother; and after death, saw him honorably buried, as a soldier. I will not
then lament his death, who is translated to a better life: Neither will I weep
for him, that is in joy: Nor put on mourning clothes for him that is clothed
with immortality. If it was any unhappiness for him to die, it is his friends
not his. I wept for him when he was alive: and then he seemed to me to die when
I left him on shipboard at Graves-end. The next news I hear, he lies buried at
Custrin in Silesia. Whom sea and land and death has parted, I hope blessed
Eternity shall at length bring together again. So I leave him and return to
you. Sir, I hope you will pardon this digression, or rather count it no
digression at all, to speak of him whom I know you dearly loved. But I was
speaking of my troubles: for which still I find a Remedy in the Sanctuary.
For my manner is, when troubles seize upon me, presently to retire my self into
my study, and take in hand some book of devotion. So presently after I parted
from my brother I took in hand Drexelius his Enchiridion of Eternity: And
since, upon a new occasion offered, I renewed my acquaintance with Doctor
Gerhard. It were fit that I should present my service unto you my self in mine
own person, considering my many obligations to you, and your kind invitations
of me. But being otherwise hindered I have sent Gerhard in my place, who
dedicates himself and his best service to honor you and your progeny.
Concerning whom I may truly say thus much, If you make him your Counselor
and Companion, you shall never be without a walking Library: So full is he of
Scripture Fathers and Schoolmen. Concerning my self I can say no more but this
(for I know not how to complement) I am and ever shall be in all hearty
affection

Your servant RALPH WINTERTON.

To the Translatour of GERHARDS APHORISMS.
DO; Let the Antichristian Clergy keep
Their Owl-ey'd Laity prisoners in the deep
And horrid shades of everlasting night,
Whilst thy clear beams, and more illustrious light
Disperse these clouds of Language, and display
The close-drawn Curtains of thy newborn day:
Shine forth (bright Lamp) and chase these shades of night:
Truth seeks no corners; Error baulks the light.
ED. BENLOVVES

TO THE READER, concerning the Author and Interpreter of this Book.
BEhold choice Aphorisms here like rings beset
With Pearls locked up in this rich Cabinet.
If worth not number does commend the store,
Viewing but one, me thinks I need no more.
Yet in this volume many hundreds dwell:
And every one's a volume to live well.
Each leafe's a perfect book: each line is such,
Each part's enough, yet not the whole too much.
Gerhard his Aphorisms like stars do shine:
Thou giv'st them luster; let me call them thine.
Most bright themselves, by thee they shine most bright:
As if the sun had borrowed greater light.
Apollo needs not to renew his fame,
Who twice is made immortal by thy name.
DOVE WILLIAMSON, Fellow of Kings College.

Upon the Golden chain of divine Aphorisms.
AS no such Malady, so no such Balm
Like that which can the souls distempers calm
What soul is not diseased? How hard to find
A salve to cure diseases of the mind?
This, Winterton has found. Who but he knew
That such an herb in Ger^ards Herball grew?
(No Empirick, no Chymicks daring Heart,
Who sets poor Nature on the wrack of Art,
Descri'd such medicines) Sure in this he can
Approove himself a true Physician.
Each Aphorism's an antidote to thee
Against the old Serpents sting: the book may be
A Garden richly stored; in which place
Grows the true Hearts-ease, and the Herb of Grace.
These now translated are: because it is guest
That plants translated often times thrive the best.
He then undoubtedly thrice happy is,
Who being immured from men, can choose out this*
Garden to be his prison. Who would disdain
Thus to be fettered in a Golden Chain?
ROBERT NEVVMAN, Fellow of Kings College.

MOst men that put forth Books have thi^ main art,
First for their Credit, then their better Mart,
With Title fair, with fine Inscription
To deck their work their only Minion.
This man forsooth with Amalt^ea's Hor^
Does of his Book the Frontispice adorn:
This writes, A Honycombe: A third does call
His works the Pandects, as comprising all.
The Muses here the Reader waiting stand:
There is an Enchiridion for his hand.
Such Titles serve to please the Readers eye,
And strangers do invite the books to buy.
But yet (alas!) within what do they find?
Scarce ought that can content or ease the mind.
The Pandects having all, cannot the Will;
The Enchiridion scarce the Hand does fill.
The Honey cloyes: The Horn is quickly dry:
At best The Muses do but sweetly lie.
Take then into thy hands Gerhard divine
Who saving doctrine has in every line:
He in his text more truth does comprehend,
Then others Titles vainly do pretend.
In him all Authors are both new and old,
Fathers and Schoolmen faithfully enrolled.
If all these Authors severally do please:
How then shall he who jointly has all these?
HENRY WHISTON, Fellow of Kings College.

WHo list to glance a gentle look
Upon The Golden Chain this book,
As in a Crystal first, may see
The secrets of Eternity.
Such as in Time should come to pass,
Decreed by God before Time was:
Such as transcend the Hearts desire,
And only Silence can admire.
But next does entertain the sight
An Emblem of our woeful plight,
He that ere long Heavens darling was,
Gods Archetype, Man's Looking-glass,
Which being dimmed, Nature no more
To its first brightness could restore:
He that enjoyed so rare a bliss,
Made happy with a Paradise:
Behold him now cast out from thence,
Disrobed of milky Innocence.
Poor naked man! naked alas,
Who only clothed with fig leaves was!
But Jesse's branch our souls arraid,
And wrapped our sins in mercies shade:
Since when is ceast that fatal strife
Of tree of Knowledge and of Life.
One Book contains them: let one breast
Read, know, enjoy Eternal rest.
THOMAS PAGE, Fellow of Kings College.

The TRANSLATOUR To the Reader.
THis book when first I read; It pleased me well:
I sought another; There was none to sell.
When others read it; They were of my mind:
They sought as I; for what they could not find.
Had not it been by me interpreted,
For ought I know, it might have perished.
Was It not great pity that a book so good
By English Men should not be understood?
I challenge nothing but what is mine own:
Had not one been, I never had it known.
'Twas Mr. Carew that did give it me.
I, in plain English, Reader, give it thee.
(He loved good books, and often turned them ore:
I think no young man of his time had more.
He lived as if he looked always to die,
And died to pass to immortality.
I flatter not: A dead man I commend,
Who godly lived, and made a godly end.
He Is now with God in blessed eternity:
But late was one of our Society.
He was my friend, whilst we did live together:
And, once my friend, he is my friend for ever.)
READER, This book was Gerhards, Carews, Mine:
Now it is a common good; and therefore Thine.
The Contents of this Book In VERSE.
BEfore Time was, ^ere are divine decrees,
Fulfilled in Time; and after, P^omises
To be fulfilled, when Time shall cease to be,
And in its place succeed Eternity.
Reader, Behold the Worlds Nativitie,
And Adam in his happy Infancy.
He was created at the first Upright*
His Understanding filled was with Light,
His Will with God's did hold Conformity,
And his Affections kept good Harmony.
Yet such ^e was that he might stand or fall.
He fell; We feel't: In him we perished all.
His Understanding, Will, Affections: All
Lost what they had at their Original.
His Understanding was deprived of Sight,
And Darkness did succeed in place of Light:
His Will fell from the first Conformity,
And tended altogether to Obliquitie:
His jarring did Affections disagree,
And Discord did break off their Harmony.
His Body, which disease none knew before,
Let in diseases now at every Pore.
His Body made Immortal for to be,
Became now Subject to Mortality.
And thus he was deprived of End^esse joys,
And plunged into Eternal Miseries.
By Nature such are we which from him come,
Blind, Crooked, Froward from our mothers womb
Conceived in sin; Borne in iniquity;
Acting in Life a Sinful Tragedy.
We for our Parts deserve no other due
But Death; and that of Soul and Body too.
But God of his mere Mercy Promised,
The Woman's Seed should break the Serpents head*
He gave his Law, a Glass for man to see
His Spots and Stains, and his Obliquitie:
He gave his Law, a Rule for man to be,
That he thereby might learn Conformity.
He gave his Law, a Light for man to see
The Way to Life, and blessed Eternity.
Do this: and live. Do this: and Life is due.
But no man living ever this could do;
No man but one: And, that ^e this might do,
As he was Man, so was ^e God most true.
God sent his Son, as he had Promised,
According to the Time determined.
He was Conceived and Borne, and Lived and Died,
All without sin: And we are justified.
He did fulfill the Law, which none could do,
And freed us from the Curse to us most due:
He by his Life for us has merited
Eternal Life to be inherited:
And by his Death, which he once suffered,
From Death for ever us delivered.
But that we may these benefits partake,
We must Repent, and all our Sins forsake.
We must by Faith in Christ be Justified,
And by the Holy Spirit Sanctified.
Now to this end Christ left his Testament,
The Gospel, and a Twofold Sacrament:
And sent his Spirit for to Sanctify
Those whom hereafter he will Glorify.
Hear, and obey Christ's will and Testament,
Wash and be clean, Receive his Sacrament:
Obey the inward Calling of the Spirit,
Be Constant: And Eternal Life inherit.
READER, I have presented to thine eye
The Sum of Gerhards whole Divinity.
The Contents of each Chapter in this Book.
The First Chapter contains the Sum of all the rest.

Chapter. Concerning Page. 2 The Holy Scripture. 1 3 God, and his Attributes.
18 4 The Person, and Office of Christ. 33 5 The Creation, and the Angels. 52 6
The Providence of God. 66 7 Election, and Reprobation. 81 8 The Image of God in
Man before his fall. 91 9 Original sin. 105 10 Free Will. 122 11 The Law.
136 12 The Gospel. 150 13 Repentance. 174 14 Faith. 197 15 Good Works. 217 16
The Sacraments. 239 17 Baptism. 260 18 The Lords Supper. 283 19 The Church.
306 20 The Ecclesiastical Ministry. 324 21 The Civil Magistracy. 345 22
Wedlock. 361 23 Our latter end, or The four last things. 37^
CHAP. I. A DESCRIPTION OR REPRESENTATION of the Theological places, or Heads
of Divinity, contained in this book, together with their order and connection.
1 THe only and proper Principle of Divinity, is the word of God.

2 For God came forth from the secret throne of his Majesty, and manifested
himself unto men, in the word.

3 At sundry times, and in diverse manners God spoke in time past unto the
fathers by the Prophets. In these last days he has spoken unto us by his
Son, and his Apostles. Hebr. 1.1, 2.

4 That word of God was first preached by the Prophets and Apostles: and
afterward the chief and necessary heads of divine revelation were penned by
them, according to the will of God. Iren. lib. 3. cap. 1.

5 Therefore the undoubted word of God cannot at this day any where be found,
but in the writings of the Prophets, and Apostles.

6 From this word of God flows Theology, and is busied about it, propounding
unto us the oracles of God. Romans 3.2.

7 Now Theology is, as the name it self imports, A doctrine concerning God.

8 And by this doctrine men are instructed, concerning the essence and will of
God, unto their salvation.

9 And this is life eternal, To know the only true God, and Jesus Christ,
which came in the flesh. John 17.3.

10 The doctrine concerning the Essence of God, is absolved in this question,
What God is: to wit, Jehova Elohim, One in Essence, three in Persons.

11 For God has so manifested himself; that in the divine Essence being but
one, and that undivided, there are three Persons, neither more nor less, to
wit, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

12 The Father is the first Person, neither made, nor created, nor begotten,
nor proceeding.

13 The Son is the second Person, not made, nor created, but begotten of the
Father from all eternity.

14 Who in the fullness of time took upon him our humane nature, in which and
through which he paid the price of our redemption.

15 The Holy Ghost is the third person, not made, nor created, nor begotten;
but proceeding from the Father and the Son from all eternity.

16 We must judge of the Will of God, by his decrees made from all eternity.

17 Whereof there are two more principal, The decree of Creation, and the
decree of Reparation: or (as the Greek words signify) Creation and Recreation;
Formation and Reformation.

18 What those decrees were, the fulfilling of them in time does declare.

19 For what God does, and in what manner he does in time, the same thing, and
in the same manner he decreed to do from all eternity.

20 The reason of which assertion depends upon the immutabilitie of Gods will.

21 Creation made in time, is the manifestation of the decree, concerning the
creation of all things, made from all eternity.

22 And it is the production of the Angels, Men, and all other creatures in the
six first days of the world, wrought by God the Father, through the Son, in
the Holy Ghost, to his own glory.

23 A great part of the Angels fell away from God: The rest being confirmed in
goodness, do laud and praise God, and are ministering Spirits for the good of
men.

24 Our first parents, Adam and Eve, in like manner, at the instigation of
Satan, transgressed the law of God, which was written in their hearts, and
proclaimed by the mouth of God.

25 So then by this fall of theirs the image of God was quite defaced in them,
and their nature was corrupted with sin.

26 Whereupon their posterity also were and are to this day born stark-naked of
original righteousness, and in a miserable manner corrupted with sin.

27 Through the contagion whereof all the powers and faculties in the soul of
man are so infected, that there is little or no light of Reason left, and
scarce any power at all in the will, even about external things.

28 God who is omniscient could not but know that our first parents would fall:
and therefore of his infinite mercy, he made a decree, concerning the
Reparation or Redemption of man, from all eternity.

29 What that decree was, the fulfilling of the same in like manner does
declare. He sent in time his Son to be our Redeemer and Mediator: Therefore
he decreed to send him, from all eternity.

30 God by his word offers the benefits of a Mediator unto all, and applies
them unto those that believe: Therefore from all eternity he decreed to offer
them unto all by the word, and to apply them unto those that believe.

31 This decree, in Scripture is called Predestination: of which we must not
judge but (a posteriori, that is) by the manifestation thereof.

32 For the fulfilling of the decree, concerning the Reparation of man, God
has appointed the Word and the Sacraments.

33 The Word is reduced to two chief heads, the Law and the Gospel.

34 The Law is, the doctrine of works: Therefore it manifests unto us the
corruption of our nature; it terrifieth us, and prescribes unto us the rule of
well-doing.

35 The Gospel is, the doctrine of faith: which points at Christ our
Mediator, who has made satisfaction for our sins, and raises up the
conscience of man.

36 The practice of the Law and the Gospel consists in true Repentance.

37 Whereunto there is required Contrition, to be wrought in us by the Law; and
Faith, by the Gospel.

38 Faith apprehends the Righteousness of Christ offered in the word of the
Gospel: by which man, after Contrition wrought in him by the voice of the Law,
is justified before God, and begins to be renewed by the receiving of the
Holy Ghost.

39 For by faith our hearts are purified. Acts 15.9.

40 Therefore the fruits of true Repentance are good works.

41 For, Faith works by Love. Gal. 5.6. And Christ gives unto us not only
his righteousness, but also his Holy Spirit, which begins to renew our
nature, and bridle in us the concupiscences of the flesh.

42 Of Good works there are three ranks: some have respect unto God, some unto
Our selves, and others unto our Neighbors.

43 For the Sum of Piety and Christian Religion is this, That we live
soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world. Tit. 2.12.

44 The Sacraments are the Seals of the word, appointed for the confirming and
strengthening of our Faith: And they are the Visible word.

45 Such in the Old Testament were, Circumcision and the Paschal Lamb: and
such in the New Testament are, Baptism and the Lords Supper.

46 By the Audible and Visible word, God gathers together his Church here on
earth.

47 Whereof there are three Hierarchies, ranks or orders: The Ecclesiastical,
Political, and Oeconomicall.

48 Of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy the Pope of Rome makes himself Monarch
and Head.

49 But inasmuchas he sets himself against Christ, he makes himself
Antichrist.

50 The Ministry of the word, or the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy is ordained
at this day by a mediate vocation.

51 The Political Hierarchy comprehends Magistrates both inferior and
superior.

52 Unto the Oeconomicall Hierarchy belongs Matrimony, which is, (as I may
so call it) a certain Seminary or Nurserie of the Church.

53 God in this life puts his Church under the Cross: and that for many
weighty and urgent reasons.

54 But at length he will glorify it in the life to come, being delivered and
freed from all enemies; from all evils, perils, and dangers.

55 Death, and the Last Judgment, without going through any Purgatory, is to
the godly and those that believe, the entrance into everlasting life.

56 But the ungodly and unbeleevers shall at length be cast into everlasting
fire.

CHAP. II. Wherein are contained Theological Aphorisms concerning the HOLY
SCRIPTURE.
1 THe only Principle of Theology is, The WORD of God contained in Holy
Scripture.

2 By the name of Holy Scripture properly and strictly taken, we understand the
books of the Old and New Testament, which undoubtedly are Prophetical and
Apostolical*

3 Which also are called Canonical: because they are a full and perfect Canon
or Rule of the knowledge of God and his worship.

4 Such in the Old Testament are, Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers,
Deuteronomie, Joshua, Judges, Ruth, two books of Samuel, two of the Kings, two
of the Chronicles, Ezra, Nehemiah, Esther, Job, the Psalms, the Proverbs,
Ecclesiastes, the Song of Solomon, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Lamentations, Ezechiel,
Daniel, Hosea, Joel, Amos, Obadiah, Jonah, Micah, Nahum, Habakkuk, Zephaniah,
Haggai, Zachariah, Malachi.

5 The rest of the books of the Old Testament are called by S. Jerome
Apocrypha: because they were neither wrote by the Prophets, nor received by the
Jews for Canonical

6 Again, they want the testimony of Christ and his Apostles.

7 Moreover, by the most approved Counsels* and Fathers, they are reckoned
without the Canon.

8 And besides, there is to be found in many of them places either expressly
repugnant to the Canonical Scripture; or else peccant against the truth of
History and Chronology; or else Contradictorie one to the other.

9 In the New Testament those are called Canonical which at all times, and by
all the Churches have been received without doubting for Apostolical, truly
and certainly so called.

10 Such are, The Gospel according to S. Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John; the
Acts of the Apostles; the Epistle of S. Paul to the Romans, two to the
Corinthians, one to the Galatians, one to the Ephesians, one to the
Philippians, one to the Colossians, two to the Thessalonians, two to Timothy,
one to Titus, one to Philemon, the First of Peter, and the First of John.

11 The rest have not been heretofore received by all with such a common
consent as the former: in which respect they are called by some Apocrypha.

12 Such are the Epistle to the Hebrews, the Epistle of James, the Second of
Peter, the Second and Third of John, the Epistle of Jude, and the Revelation of
John.

13 But forasmuch as most of the ancients do not so much doubt of their
Primarie author, which is the Holy Ghost, as of their Secundarie authors:
therefore for their Authority I willingly suffer them to be equal with the
Canonical; neither will I contend with any man about this matter.

14 All Scripture is given by inspiration of God. 2. Tim. 3.16. And holy men of
God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. 2. Pet. 1.21. Neither spoke
they only, but they wrote also.

15 The same word of God which with a lively voice was preached, and preserved
unwritten for a long time in the Old Testament, and likewise in the New
Testament; but not so long: The same word, I say, was afterward by the will of
God written, and became Scripture. Iren. lib. 3. cap. 1.

16 Therefore between the word of God preached, and the word written, we make
no real difference.

17 For it is but an Accident unto the word of God, either to be preached, or
to be written.

18 But although the Prophets and Apostles moved by the Holy Ghost have not
wrote their whole sermons: yet they have made such a choice of what they wrote,
that it is sufficient for the salvation of those that believe. August. tract.
49. in Joan.

19 And therefore we say that the Holy Scripture is perfect, and contains in
it all things necessary for those that strive for the prize of eternal life
which is set before them: both for the instructing of them in the faith; and
the informing them in life.

20 That it is perfect, it is proved by evident testimony. 2. Tim. 3.16, and
17. where it is said that the Holy Scripture is profitable for doctrine, for
reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness: That the man of God
may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works. And therefore also the
Holy Scriptures are able to make us wise unto salvation. 2. Tim. 3.15.

21 Seeing therefore that which is Profitable, in relation to Indigency and
want, is taken two ways: either for that which of it self alone is
All-sufficient, excluding all want; or else, for that which is but In part
profitable, and not sufficient of it self without the help of something else:
It is manifest that the Apostle here speaks of that which is profitable taken
in the first sense.

22 By those things which are written we may be taught to believe on Christ.
John 20.31. And, ^e furnished unto all good works. 2. Tim. 3.17. And the
brethren of the rich glutton by hearing Moses and the Prophets in the
Scriptures might have escaped the torments of Hell. Luke 16.29.

23 Whereupon it follows without forcing, that the perfection of the Holy
Scripture is such as we assign unto it: For whosoever believes on Christ, and
is furnished unto all good works, and made partaker of eternal life, what can
he desire more?

24 This also is an Argument worthy our consideration, That the Apostle Saint
Paul declared unto the Church of Ephesus all the counsel of God* (to wit,
concerning our salvation) Acts 20.27. Again, the same Apostle said none other
things then those which the Prophets and Moses did say should come. Acts 26.22.
Therefore in Moses and the Prophets is contained all the counsel of God
concerning our salvation.

25 Now if the Scripture be perfect (as indeed it is) Away then with
Traditions, which some would thrust upon us to be received with like affection,
and to be believed with like authority as the Scripture.

26 For they are full of doubts, and sometimes also contradictions, being very
apt to be corrupted, and many ways subject unto error.

27 The Eccl^siasticall History witnesses that in the time of the Primitive
Church under the name of Apostolical Traditions many falsities were broached:
and that men of great note have been deceived in former time by the opinion of
Traditions.

28 Furthermore, seeing that the Holy Scripture was by God given unto men to
this end, to instruct them unto salvation: from hence we conclude, that The
Scripture is perspicuous.

29 What? Could not God which made both mind and tongue speak plainly and
perspicuously? Yea certainly he used great care and providence that all men
might understand what he spoke unto all men. Lactant. lib. 6. Div. Institut.
cap. 21.

30 Ought not that which is to instruct the rude and ignorant, and make them
wise and learned, ought not that, I say, be perspicuous?

31 It is perspicuity which is fit to teach and instruct, not obscurity or
perplexity.

32 Yet, when we say that the Holy Scripture is perspicuous, we would not have
it so understood, as if we meant, that whatsoever is contained any where in
Scripture, were so easy and plain, that any man at the first sight may
understand it.

33 But this is our meaning, that The perspicuity of Scripture is such, that
from thence a man may learn sure and infallible grounds and principles of
religion; the knowledge whereof is necessary unto every man, toward the
attainment of everlasting salvation.

34 The books of the Prophets and Apostles are the integrall parts of Holy
Scripture: And that both those are perspicuous, it is proved by good
testimonies. If the parts of Scripture then be perspicuous; how can the whole
be said to be obscure?

35 The Prophetical word in the Old Testament is compared unto a Lamp, Light,
or Lantern. Psalm 119.105. And, as much is said of the Apostolical word. 2.
Pet. 1.19. And again, If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost. 2.
Cor. 4.3. Whereby it appears, that if the Scripture be obscure, and hid, it
is so only by Accident: But of it self, and by its own nature it is
perspicuous.

36 Seeing therefore it is demonstrated that the Scripture is perfect and
perspicuous: It follows, that It is and ought to be the certain, infallible,
and only rule and judge of all controversies, that are moved about points of
Christian religion.

37 What David says concerning the Apostles, Psalm. 19.4. Their line (or, their
rule, or direction) is gone out through all the earth: the fame, Paul applies
to the doctrine of the Apostles, Romans 10.18. Their sound went into all the
earth. But the Apostles wrote and taught the same things.

38 Christ also and his Apostles for determining controversies of faith,
appealed unto no other Judge, went by no other Rule but the Holy Scriptures;
and they send us also to search the Scriptures: And what sheep will not follow
Christ his Shepherd and Leader, and the Apostles his followers?

39 The word of Christ contained in the Holy Scriptures Prophetical and
Apostolical shall judge all men in the last day. John 12.48. Romans 2.16. Revel.
20.12. What hinders then, but that it may be unto us in this life a Perfect
Rule?

40 For if there be any part of celestial doctrine not contained within the
Canonical books: How shall the judgment which shall be passed hereafter
according unto them, be entire?

41 Furthermore, seeing that it is not only permitted, but also commanded to
all Christians to try the Spirits, 1. John 4.1. to beware of false prophets,
Matthew. 7.15. to prove all things, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. and thus it lies upon them to
discern between divine truth and humane dreams: certainly the rule of truth,
that is, the Holy Scripture belongs unto all men. And therefore, The common
people ought not to be debarred the reading of the Scripture.

42 What the Spirit of God approves and commends, let not any man say, It is
forbidden: But the Bereans are commended for this, that they examined Paul's
sermon by the Rule of the Scriptures. Acts 17.11. The elect, strangers
scattered throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia, 1. Pet.
1.1. are commended for attending unto the word of prophecy as unto a light. 2.
Pet. 1.19. And, Coloss. 3.16. the diligent study in the Scripture is commended
to all Christians.

43 And seeing that the common people are altogether ignorant of the Hebrew and
Greek tongue, wherein the books of the Old and New Testament were written; and
yet are bound to read the Scriptures: Therefore their pains is to be
commended, who have translated the Holy Scriptures into the vulgar tongues.

44 But yet the Hebrew text only in the Old Testament, and the Greek in the
New Testament, is Authentical: because they were both written in those tongues.

45 Whatsoever flows not from those fountains, hitherto has not, cannot,
neither must it be accounted Canonical: seeing that it is not inspired by God.

46 Therefore that vulgar interpretation, which may sooner be said then proved
to be Saint Jeroms, is without cause exalted to that high throne of
authentical authority.

47 For there are in it many faults both Graphicall, Ellipticall,
Chronographicall, and Dogmaticall: faults in writing, in leaving out many
things, in Chronographie, and in points of doctrine.

48 They have a corrupt judgment, that say that the Hebrew text is corrupted.

49 Neither do they love pure truth, who say that the fountains do not flow
pure.

50 The end and use of Holy Scripture is attained by the true and lawful
interpretation thereof.

51 Seeing that the Scripture is perfect, and perspicuous: therefore It is to
be interpreted of it self, and by it self.

52 For that which is perfect, ought not to be patched with things of another
kind: and that which is perspicuous of it self, does not stand in need of
another light.

53 Yet notwithstanding the Scripture is of it self perspicuous; the blind
eyes of our understanding are dazzled at the light of it.

54 Whosoever therefore will take in hand to interpret Scripture: let him with
earnest prayers and groans desire to have his understanding enlightened by the
Holy Ghost.

55 Let the glory of God, and the instruction of men unto salvation, be the
supreme law of interpretation.

56 And seeing that every head of celestial doctrine is in Scripture, in one
place or other: therefore let the interpretation of other places be conformable
unto it. So shall the Analogy, or proportion of faith be kept. Romans 12.6.

57 Observe diligently the natural significations of words.

58 In matters of doubt have recourse unto the fountains: the Hebrew in the Old
Testament, and the Greek in the New.

59 Have respect and regard to the scope of every word, to the circumstances,
to that which goes before, and that which follows after.

60 Let the obscurer, and fewer places of Scripture be expounded by those that
are more clear, and more in number.

61 Depart not from the letter* in articles of faith especially: unless the
Scripture it self shows some impropriety of speech, and also expound it.

62 Use the writings of the Fathers for an help to lead thee by the hand as it
were, in the interpretation of the Scripture: but see that thou usest them
aright.

63 Yet count them not for Canonical, but examine them by the Canonical. What
in them is agreeable unto the authority of divine Scripture, embrace with due
commendation of them; what is not agreeable, by their leave reject and refuse.
August. lib. 2. cont. Cresc. cap. 32.

CHAP. III. Wherein are contained Theological Aphorisms concerning GOD.
THe chief end of all the Scripture is, To know God, and worship him being
known.

2 From him alone are all things: and, To him alone are all things.

3 That there is a God, even the book of Nature shows: For, The world is the
school of the knowledge of God. Basil. in Hexam.

4 The leaves of this book are especially three, Heaven, Earth, Sea, and all
things therein contained, as Clemens Alexandrinus speaks.

5 But there is a more certain, evident, and perspicuous knowledge to be fetched
out of the book of holy Scripture.

6 The eyes of our understanding are blinded by our fall: and from thence it is
that we cannot so readily make progress and proficiency in the book of Nature.

7 The end of that Natural knowledge of God is according to the Apostle, To
seek the Lord, Acts 17.27.

8 Nature herself confesses that her book is imperfect: and therefore she
must, as it were, lead us by the hand, to find out a more perfect revelation
in the Church.

9 The Essence of God transcendeth all created things: Therefore the perfect
knowledge of God surpasses all understanding* God is incomprehensible: so
says Damascen, lib. 1. Orth. ^id. cap. 1.

10 And from hence it follows, That as God is a Spirit above all, and cannot
properly be found out, or comprehended by any understanding: So likewise he
cannot be defined or determined by any definition. August. de cogn. ver. vit.
cap. 7.

11 We cannot in any words so fully express what God is, as by confessing our
ignorance, That we know not what God is. Scal. Exerc. 365. Sect. 2.

12 What therefore God would have hidden from us, that must we not search into:
But yet notwithstanding so much as he has manifested unto us by revealing of
himself, we must in no wise neglect; for fear lest we be found on one side more
curious then is lawful, and on the other side damnably ungrateful. Ambros. 1.
de vocat. Gent. cap. 7.

13 God gave being unto all things: Therefore he is the first, chief and
independent Being.

14 He is (...), that is, He has his Being from himself. Scal. He is a Being
above all beings. Dionys. lib. 1. de divinis nom. cap. 1.

15 He is the Essence of all essences, the Creator of all creatures, the Life
of all lives, the Cause of all causes.

16 He it is that gives all unto all, but receives not ought from any.

17 Above him, is nothing; without him, is nothing; beneath him, is nothing:
Under him, is all; in him, is all; with him, is all: From him, are all things;
by him, are all things; in him, are all things. Aug. de Spec. cap. 33.

18 Between the Essence of God and the essence of the creatures there is an
infinite difference: Gods Essence is after a singular, peculiar, and
supereminent manner.

19 God is a Spirit, John 4.24. A Spirit has not flesh and bones. Luke 24.39.
Therefore God is incorporeall.

20 Whatsoever corporeal things are attributed unto God, they are to be
understood as it beseems the majesty of God: not properly spoken, but by (an
Anthropopathie) a figure by which that is improperly said to be in God, which
properly belongs unto man.

21 God condescendeth unto us, that we may ascend up unto him: and seeing that
we are men, he vouchsafes to speak unto us after the manner of men.

22 The Scripture by things corporeal teaches us spiritual, and likewise by
things visible, things that are invisible.

23 So God is said to have Eyes, which are over the just; an Hand, by which he
gives food unto all flesh; Feet, whose footstool the earth is: All these are
in God in Effect, not in Affect. Bern. Sermon. 4. sup. Cant.

24 He is therefore All-eye; because he sees all: All-hand; because he works
all: All-foot; because he is every where. August. sup. Psalm. 136.

25 God is Eternal, without beginning or end: From him are all things; but he
is from nothing: He is subject to no change or succession: He alone it is that
can say, I AM THAT I AM. Exodus 3.14.

26 If God had a beginning, then he should be subject unto change: But he is
uncreated, without time, without beginning, without end, not subject to
alteration: Therefore he is truly Eternal.

27 But if God be without change or alteration; he is also void of all
composition whatsoever.

28 He alone is truly and properly Simple: Besides him all things else are
compounded. (At least Ex Actu and Potentia, Ex esse and Essentia) as the School
speaks?

29 The Essence of God is not only most Simple, but also most Infinite, and
Immense. God is present with all things: not only by his Power, by which he
conserveth all things; but also by his Essence, by which he is present with all
things created, after a more near and intimate manner then they are with
themselves.

30 In those words, in which it is said, That God is every where by his
Essence, we are to believe that there is more contained, then any living man is
able to conceive. Lomb. 1. Sent. Did. 37.

31 Neither yet must we conceive that God is as it were diffused through space
of places by any corporeal substance, so that he is half in one part of the
world, and half in the other; and all in all: But he is all in heaven, all in
earth, every where all in himself, and contained in no place. August. Epist.
57. ad Dard.

32 Neither yet suffers he mixture with other things, nor is infected by
other things: But he is within all creatures, and yet not included; without all
creatures, and yet not excluded.

33 The Goodness, Wisdom, and Power of God is understood by his Providence
over the creatures; His Mercy, Justice, and Truth, by the Government of the
world: whereby those which were more wise amongst the Gentiles were brought to
acknowledge all these.

34 In the book of Scripture, concerning these and other attributes of God,
there are testimonies extant for number more, for authority more weighty, and
for perspicuitie more clear.

35 Forasmuch as God is Immutable: therefore these Attributes of God are not
qualities in God; but they are the very Essence of God. Wisdom is not any
thing superadded unto Gods Essence, but his very Essence.

36 There is nothing in God, which is not God himself. Bern. Sermon. 80. sup.
Cant.

37 Let us understand if we can, and as far as we are able, That God is Good
without Quality, Great without Quantity, Creator without Indigencie, Present
without Position of place, Containing all things without Habit, Every where all
without Place, Everlasting without Time, Making all things mutable and yet
himself Immutable, and suffering in nothing. August. 5. de Trin. cap. 1.

38 That there is One only true God, The Catholic Church believes and
professes, being taught it of God himself in the Holy Scriptures.

39 With this Unity of unities (that I may so speak) in the Divine Essence,
the Trinity of Persons does well agree without repugnancie. The Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost are that One only true God.

40 We say that there are Three Persons; but not to the prejudice of the Unity
in Essence: We say that there is One God; but not to the confounding of the
Trinity. Bern. lib. 5. ad Eugen.

41 Do thou demand how this can be? Let it be sufficient for thee to believe
that it is so: To make search beyond the bounds and limits of the word, it is
Rashness; To believe that it is so as it is said, it is Piety; To know it, it
is Life eternal. Bern. l. d.

42 The Essence of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost is all one:
but to be the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost, is not all one.

43 I and my Father are one, says the Son, Joh. 10.30. In that he says One
he has respect to the Unity of Essence; and delivers thee from Arius: In
that he says Are, in the plural number, he has respect unto the Distinction
of Persons; and delivers thee from Sabellius. August. lib. 5. de Trin. c. 9.

44 Neither must we so think upon One God, as to forget the glory and
brightness of the Three Persons: Nor must we so distinguish the Three Persons,
but that still we have our thoughts upon One God. Nazianz. Sermon. de Sacr. Bapt.

45 Let us believe one Divinity without separation of confusion distinct: So
that we neither think that there is a single Person in the Trinity, nor a
threefold substance in the Unity; but so assign a Plurality unto the Unity,
that we take not an equality from the Trinity. August. Sermon. 29. de temp.

46 The Father is made of none; neither created, nor begotten, nor proceeding.
The Son is of the Father alone; not made, nor created, but begotten. The Holy
Ghost is of the Father and of the Son; neither made, nor created, nor
begotten, but proceeding. Athanas. in Symb.

47 We must so avoid, in these divine matters, the name of diversity; that we
take not away the Unity of Essence: We must avoid the name of Separation and
Division; that we take not away the Simplicity of the Divine Essence: We must
avoid the name of Disparitie; that we take not away the Equality of Persons:
We must avoid the name of Alienietie or Discrepancie; that we take not away the
Identitie of Essence: We must avoid the name of Singularity; that we weaken
not the Deity, which being but One, is common to the Three Persons.

48 We must so avoid Terms of Unity; that we take not away the Number of
Persons: We must so avoid Terms of Confusion; that we take not away the Order
of Persons: We must so avoid the name of Solitary; that we take not away the
Fellowship of the Three Persons. Th. p. 1. q. 31. art. 2.

49 It is well said by S. Augustine, that the Essence is predicated of the
Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; but neither as a Genus of his
Species, nor as a Species of an Individuum, nor as the Whole of its Parts; but
after another ineffable, and incomprehensible manner.

50 We must not therefore deny the Son to be Eternal; because he is
begotten of the Father: For he is begotten from all Eternity.

51 The Eternal Father begets the Eternal Son.

52 We must understand the Begetting of the Son without passion, without
time, without flowing, without separation. Damasc. lib. 1. Orthod. fid. c. 8.

53 Notwithstanding the Son is properly said to be begotten. The Word is
properly the Son of God: And therefore he is truly and properly begotten of
the Father.

54 But observe both here and elsewhere, whatsoever is translated from the
creatures unto God, is first to be purged from all imperfections: and then at
length that which is perfect is to be attributed unto God. Zanch. 6. de trib.
Elohim, cap. 7.

55 The sayings of the ancients, That the Son proceeded out of the intellect
or mind of his Father, are not bitterly to be inveighed against: for they
intended chiefly to show his impassibilitie in that he was begotten. Nazianz.
Orat. 2. de Filio. Basil. sup. 1. Joan.

56 Neither yet are these things to be stretched too far; but piously they
ought to be expounded

57 To speak worthily of the Persons, it surpasses the strength of reason, and
goes beyond the wit of man. What it is to be Begotten, what it is to Proceed,
I profess I know not. Rob. Holcoth. q. 10. determine. referent. Biel. 1. Sent.
did. 13. q. un.

58 Let us gather from what has been said, this Definition: GOD is a
Spiritual Essence, Simple, Intelligent, Eternal, True, Good, Just, Holy,
Chaste, Merciful, Most free, of Infinite Wisdom and Power: another from all
creatures of the world, and all bodies: The Father Eternal, who of his own
Essence from all Eternity begot the Son his substantial Image; And the
Son begotten of his Father from all Eternity; And the Holy Ghost proceeding
from the Father and the Son: Creator and Conserver of all things Redeemer
and sanctifier of the Church, one only true God blessed for ever.

59 In brief thus: GOD is Jehovah Elohim, that is, one Divine Essen^e of Three
Persons: The Holy and undivided Trinity in Unity.

CHAP. IV. Wherein are contained Theological Aphorisms concerning the PERSON
and OFFICE of CHRIST.
1 AS saving as the knowledge of Christ our Savior is: so acceptable ought the
explication of the doctrine of Christ be unto us.

2 Christ is ((...)) true God and true Man.

3 Therefore, whether a man deny Christ's Divinity, or Christ's Humanity, it
is a matter of like danger.

4 He is God, by eternal generation of the Father: He is Man, by assumption of
the flesh, from his Mother.

5 For the Word brought not flesh with him down from heaven, but assumed the
true Humane nature from the blood of Marie being purified.

6 This Assumption far exceeds the course of nature, and the reach of man's
understanding: For it was wrought by the Holy Ghost after a peculiar manner.

7 Not after the manner of men: but by a wonderful overshadowing.

8 That a Virgin should conceive without the seed of man; That a Virgin should
be the Mother of a most holy offspring; That a Virgin should bring forth God:
This exceeds the bounds of Nature, but not the operation of the Holy Ghost

9 The Word assumed the Humane nature, not only true but also entire; that is,
both perfect and free from all stain of sin.

10 But he assumed it into the Unity of his Person: And therefore the
Assumption of the Flesh, is the very Personal Union of the Word and the Flesh.

11 One Person did not assume another: But the second Person of the Trinity
assumed the Humane nature.

12 Therefore in Christ God is not one, and Man another: But one and the same
is God and Man.

13 In Christ there is not ((...)) one person and another, that is, two
Persons: But ((...)) one thing and another, that is, two Natures.

14 For so must we hold a Du^litie of Natures, that we deny not the most near
and indissoluble Unity of Person.

15 It is said by the Ancients, That the Person only of the Son was
incarnate.

16 In which manner of speaking the name of Person is not opposed to the divine
nature of the Son; but to the Person of the Father and the Holy Ghost.

17 For elsewhere it is said, and that truly, That all the Divinity was
incarnate; but yet only in on^ of the Persons.

18 The Person of the Word* and the divine Nature of the Word, do not really
differ.

19 The Divinity is entire and perfect in each Person.

20 Therefore inasmuchas one of the Persons was incarnate, all the Divinity is
said truly to be incarnate: to wit, in that one Person of the Word.

21 The Union of the divine and humane Nature in Christ is Personal, but not
of Persons: It is an Union of Natures, but not Natural.

22 It is also an Union inseparable, both in respect of time and place.

23 For the Flesh which the Word once assumed, he shall never put off.

24 The Nature which he once united unto himself, that does he never put off.

25 The humane Nature assumed does neither consist by it self, nor subsist of
it self: nor is it without subsistence, but having a subsistence in another.

26 It has a subsistence after no ^light manner, being supported in the Word,
but by a most plenarie communication of the whole Person of the Word.

27 Therefore since the Incarnation, neither must the Person of the Word be
said to be without the Flesh, nor the Flesh without the Person of the Word.

28 What God has joined together, and what is joined together in God, let no
man separate, or put asunder.

29 Neither must we judge it to be a bare and naked Peristasis, approximation,
or near position of the united Natures, but a most intimate and near
Perichoresis, Conjunction or Union.

30 To note the Unity of Person the Ancients say, That this Union was made
indivisibly, inseparably, indistractibly.

31 To note the Dualitie of Natures they say, That this Union was made without
confusion, without conversion, without alteration, without mutation.

32 The Flesh remains finite even in this Union: Therefore there is not an
exequation, or coextension of Natures.

33 The Flesh is made partaker of an infinite subsistence by the Union:
Therefore there is no separation of the Natures through distance of places.

34 By reason of this Hypostaticall Union it is truly said, The Son of God
is the Son of Mary; and again, The Son of Mary is the Son of God: God is
Man; and Man is God.

35 And these Propositions are fitly called Personal.

36 For their foundation consists in the Personal Union: and all their
force, verity, propriety, and connection is to be judged by the Personal
Union of the two Natures.

37 Neither can they, neither ought they to be referred to Logical rules:
seeing that the Incarnation of the Word far exceeds the understanding of Men
and Angels.

38 These are not therefore Regular Propositions: for they go far beyond the
rules of reason and Logic.

39 Neither are they to be called Figurative: For the Son of God is the Son
of Man, not in a figure, but truly and properly.

40 Upon the Personal Union follows the Communication of properties.

41 For seeing that the Deity and Attributes of God are the self-same thing;
and the Humanity has its own properties nearly pertaining to its Nature:
Therefore the Union of the divine and humane Nature in Christ brings with it a
certain Communication of Properties.

42 For the two Natures do not subsist apart one from the other: but they are
united into one Person.

43 Therefore neither do they apart or alone each what is proper to its own
nature: but the Person does all according to the Properties of each Nature.

44 Hence it is that the Properties of one Nature are attributed to the Person,
in the Concrete.

45 The Ancients call this Communication of properties (...), and most usually
(...), a mutual reciprocation, when each makes that its own which is proper to
the other.

46 The name of the Person is put in the place of the Subject in these
Propositions: to vindicate the unity of the Person.

47 And words of distinction are added in the Praedicate, sometimes expressly;
but they are always implied, and to be understood: to prove the distinct
Properties of the Natures.

48 These Propositions are Reciprocal, that is, As well that which is divine
is praedicated of man, as that which is humane is praedicated of God.

49 For the Union is equal: The humane Nature is as well united unto the
divine; as the divine Nature unto the humane.

50 The Son of Man is Creator of Heaven and Earth: The Son of God
suffered. Both these are most true.

51 Creation is not competent to the Humanity assumed, by condition of Nature:
but yet it is most truly attributed unto the Son of Man, by reason of the
Identitie of Person.

52 Suffering, in like manner, is not competent to the Divinity, by condition
of Nature: but yet by reason of that intimate, and ineffable Union of Natures
it pertains to the Son of God no less then if the divine Nature it self
had suffered.

53 For the Word, by assuming the humane Nature into the Unity of Person,
appropriated Personally unto himself all the Properties thereof.

54 That is expressed thus by Vigilius (Lib. 2. contr. Eut.) God suffered, not
in the Property of Nature, but in the Unity of Person.

55 Again, that Personal Union was made for the Office of the Mediator.

56 In which, one Nature does not rest idle, or else privately works, and
apart, the other doing nothing, or somewhat else: But each Nature works by
Communication with the other.

57 From hence it is that the names of this Office are competent to Christ, and
are praedicated of Christ according to both Natures.

58 For the actions of both Natures do concur to one common effect or
perfection: and the action is, of both God and Man.

59 The ancients call it a Coenopoeia, or a making common, and a Periphrasis or
Circumloquution.

60 Thirdly in the Office of Mediator the humane Nature does not only the
actions of the Humanity; but because it is enriched with divine energies by
reason of the most pure Union unto the Word, Therefore it both is, and also is
called the organ or instrument of the Deity, not separated or divided, but
Personally united; in which, with which, and by which the Word works in the
Office of the Mediator. Damasc. 3. Orthod. fid. cap. 17.

61 The Divine Nature in Christ, inasmuchas it is most perfect, was nothing
enriched in this union: but there was a great addition made unto the Humane
Nature, inasmuchas besides, above, and beyond its own Essential Properties, it
has received Divine excellencies in and from this Hypostaticall union, which
excellencies it retains for ever.

62 The Ancients call it Superexaltation, glorification, participation of
divine dignity, participation of divine power, melioration, riches, ascent.

63 That this collation of excellencies upon Christ was according to the Humane
Nature, the Scripture does evidently witness, and all the godly of old with
great consent approve.

64 When as therefore such things are said to be conferred by the Father upon
the Son in time: we must understand that they are conferred according to the
Humane Nature.

65 That so the relation may be between the Father giving and the Son
receiving in time, not in respect of the Divine Nature, according to which he
is Essentially one with the Father, and does likewise the same things that the
Father does, Joh. 5.19. but in respect of the Humane Nature, which is capable
and has need of these things.

66 Now there are conferred immense and infinite gifts indeed, to wit, All
power, divine glory, all the treasures of wisdom, a quickening efficacy,
power to execute judgment, present rule in heaven and earth.

67 Neither yet must we here once think of, or imagine a natural effusion of
divine properties: But as the Union is Personal, so likewise is the
Communication Personal.

68 The Divinity of the Word suffered no falling off of its own properties:
neither are those properties made proper to the flesh by this communication.

69 But the Divine Nature of the Son retaining its own properties within the
most near complexure of the Person, and notwithstanding assuming the Humane
Nature unto the communion and Unity of the Person, assumeth also the same
Nature unto the communication of the divine properties; that is, In and with
the Humane Nature, and by it as by an Hypostaticall organ or instrument,
exerteth, or shows forth its properties.

70 Therefore the foundation of that Communication consists properly in the
Assumption.

71 For the Humane Nature did not assume the Divine: But the Word is the Person
assuming; and in it, and by it is the Humane Nature assumed.

72 The union of the Natures is equal: but so, that in this union the Word is
truly said to assume, and the Flesh to be assumed.

73 And therefore although the union of the Natures is equal, yet the
condition of the Natures united is unequal.

74 That the Flesh is glorified by the Majesty of the Deity assuming; that I
know, and confess: But, That the Deity suffered any injury by the Flesh
assumed* that I deny. August. cont. Fell. c. 11.

75 To conclude, That communication was made in the very first moment of the
Incarnation, forasmuch as it is an Essential consequent of the union.

76 Yet the state of his Exinanition, or emptying of himself, interceded for us
and for our salvation.

77 For Christ our Mediator, that he might suffer and die for us, in the days
of his flesh showed not forth the full light of the glory and Majesty
communicated unto him according to his Humane Nature.

78 I say, He did not show it forth, and yet I do not say that he was
altogether without it: He emptied himself, not by laying aside his glory and
power altogether, but by withdrawing the use of his splendor and glory.

79 To this State of his Exinanition or emptying of himself pertain his
Conception, his Being born in the womb, his Nativitie, his Increase in Age,
and Wisdom, his Obedience in the form of a servant even unto the death of the
cross, and, after that, his Burial.

80 After the Exinanition followed Christ's glorious Exaltation: to which
pertain his Descent into Hell, his Resurrection from the Dead, his Ascending
into Heaven, and his Sitting at the right hand of God.

81 All which pertain to the Office of Mediator: for which that wonderful
Union was made, of the Divine and Humane Nature, and which also Christ
fulfilleth according to both Natures.

82 The diversity (or dualitie) of Natures in Christ, and the Unity of Person
was available unto this, That what was needful for the redemption of man, if
the Humane Nature could not, the Divine might effect; and what was not
beseeming the Divine Nature in any wise, that the Humane Nature might do or
suffer.

83 And so he was not to be one and another; but one and the same both perfect
God, and perfect Man: that by the Humane Nature he might pay what was due; and
by the Divine Nature effect what was expedient. Anselm. 2. Cur Deus Homo. cap.
18.

84 Bare Man could not satisfy; and God owed nothing: Therefore God was made
Man, that he which owed nothing for himself might make satisfaction for us.

85 This Office of a Mediator Christ so executes, that he is unto us both a
Prophet, a Priest, and a King.

86 The Prophetical office consists in the Revelation of the Gospel, and in
the institution and conservation of the Ministry.

87 The parts of his Priestly office are Satisfaction and Intercession.

88 The Kingdom of Christ is considered either in this life, or in the other.

89 In this life is the Kingdom of Power and Grace: That is his general rule
over all things; but This comprehends the special works of his grace in the
Church.

90 In the other life shall be the Kingdom of glory: into which all the elect
being raised out of the dust shall be received. Of which Kingdom Christ make
us partakers, who is our King blessed for ever.

CHAP. V. Wherein are contained Theological Aphorisms concerning the
CREATION, and the ANGELS.
1 GOd who by Nature is invisible, that he might be made known by things
visible, wrought a work, which by the visibilitie thereof might manifest him
whose work it is. Ambr. in cap. 1. Romans

2 This work of God wrought in time is, and is also called, Creation.

3 Which is nothing else but the production of the whole Universe out of
nothing, in six distinct days, being wrought by God through the Son in the
Holy Ghost, for the glory of God, and salvation of men.

4 The Author then of Creation is God, One in Essence, Three in Persons.

5 Moreover that Creation of all things, is the immediate work of God alone.

6 The Father created all things by the Word: which, as the Evangelist teaches
us, is to be understood of the Hypostaticall and consubstantiall Word of God.
Joh. 1.1.

7 The Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters, Genesis 1.2. That, as the
Psalmist shows, is to be understood of the breath of his mouth Psalm. 33.6.
that is, the Hypostaticall and consubstantiall Spirit of God.

8 Therefore, where Moses calls the Creator Elohim: it is rightly referred
to the Trinity of Persons.

9 Whereas it is said, That the Father by the Son, in the Holy Ghost created
all things: we must beware, that we understand it not of inequality of Essence,
or Power in the work of Creation.

10 For what things soever the Father does: the same does the Son likewise.
John 5.19.

11 But all this ought to be referred to the real distinction of Persons and
the order of working in works ( ad extra, or) external, which results from
thence.

12 The Father therefore created by the Son, not as by one that worked not,
or an instrument separate, but as by his coeternall, and consubstantiall Image.

13 And he created all things out of nothing.

14 Some things indeed immediately, but other things mediately. Damasc. 2.
Orth. fid. cap. 5.

15 And all in six distinct days: whence it is, that the Ancients call
CREATION the six days works.

16 That all things were created in a moment it seems indeed agreeable unto
reason: but it is against the Mosaicall Scripture.

17 On the First day were created the Heaven and the Earth, that is, the matter
of all things to be made, rude and without form.

18 Light also was created, to dispell the darkness of the deep, and to
inchoate or begin the vicissitude or intercourse of day and night.

19 That Light without doubt was something obscure: And therefore the question
concerning the Nature thereof is also obscure.

20 On the Second day was the Firmament made, that is, the whole System or
comprehension of the celestial bodies.

21 Above which that there are waters, the Holy Spirit speaks expressly: To
what use, that only knows he which made them.

22 Let us herein believe the Scripture, whose authority is greater then the
capacity of man's understanding. August. 2. de Gent. ad lit. cap. 4.

23 On the Third day at the command of Almighty God were the waters under the
heavens, gathered together unto one place, and the dry land appeared. Genesis 1.9.

24 And what are the Bases or foundations of the Earth? what are the banks of
the Sea? They are The Almighty word of God.

25 Neither would God have the earth to be unfruitful; but caused it to bring
forth every kind of herb. Genesis 1.12.

26 And yet, not all for the food of man; but yet all for the use of man.

27 One the Fourth day God set the greater and the lesser Lights in the
firmament of heaven. Genesis 1.17.

28 Which are nothing else but as it were the Chariots of the Light which was
first made.

29 The stars, as well those that are fixed, as those which are called
Planets, or Erraticall, do work upon these bower bodies, by their motion,
light, and influences.

30 What these influences are, it is very obscure and past our finding out.

31 We must beware therefore that we do not ascribe unto the stars the causes
of humane wickedness: seeing that he which made the stars is free from all
wickedness.

32 He that is wise shall have dominion over the stars: Understand this of
true and divine wisdom, which consists in the fear and sincere worship of
God.

33 It is not therefore to be called Mathesis but Mataeologie, not skill in
Astrology, but Vaniloquie, to go about by the stars to foretell humane
actions and events. Scal. Exerc. 251.

34 On the Fifth day was the Water replenished with Fishes, and the Air with
Fowls, Genesis 1.22.

35 Out of water God produced the things which cannot live within the water,
and the things which cannot live but in the water: which is an Argument of his
Almighty Power and Wisdom.

36 The Sixth day was the Birthday to all terrestiall living creatures, and to
Man himself likewise, Genesis 1.24, 25, 26, 27.

37 All which were created for Man; and Man for God.

38 No Creature had ever been hurtful unto Man* yea rather all the Creatures
had been at Man's service, had not Man sinned. August. lib. 3. de Genesis ad Lit.
cap. 15.

39 Man by not doing his bounden duty and service to his Creator, lost the
dominion which was given him over the Creatures.

40 God being about to create man, called as it were a Council before hand:
because he was to create a living creature capable of reason and counsel.

41 After that all other things were created, God in the last place created
Man: because he was to be the Epitome, Center, Abridgement, Complement, and
Perfection of the whole Universe.

42 Man was made in the Earth, and of the earth, but not to the earth, and for
the earth: but he was made to Heaven, and for Heaven.

43 God which is the Creator of Heaven and Earth would end his work in Man:
Therefore he rested when he had made Man.

44 He made all things, I say, for Man: insomuch that the very Angels
themselves far superior both for Nature and Dignity, do at Gods appointment
minister as servants unto Man.

45 And what wonder is it, that God made all things for Man, when as for Man
even God himself was made Man?

46 Moses describes not the Creation of the Angels: but ye^ notwithstanding he
does not exempt them from the number of the creatures.

47 There is more subtlety in enquiring, then fruit in finding, on what day
they were created.

48 In respect of their Nature which is incorporeall, they are called Spirits:
and in respect of their Office they are called Angels.

49 They are indeed Spirits: but yet they are not Simple, as God is.

50 For their (Esse and Essentia, Actus and Potentia) Nature and Actions are in
them distinguished.

51 Sometimes they appear in bodily shapes, and yet they are not corporeal:
For they are but the Forms Assistent and not Forms Informant of the bodies
which they assume.

52 The Angels understand by Species as well Connate as Superadded.

53 Which Knowledge of the Angels is called Vespertine: unto which is added
that which is called Matutine; by which in the light of the Word they are said
Intuitively to know all things.

54 But what can the Intellect of poor man that crawleth upon earth know or
conceive concerning the Intellect or understanding of the Angels?

55 Alas! we know not the manner of our own knowledge: And why do we begin to
babble like children about the knowledge of the Angels.

56 Neither are the Angels endued only with understanding, but also with
power: And therefore they are called Virtues and Powers.

57 But yet this Power of theirs is finite, as is also their Essence.

58 They are Finite, not by circumscription of any bodily place, but by
designation of a certain Vbi.

59 Some say that the Eternity of God is the Measure of the Angel^. Scal.
Exerc. 359. Sect. 7.

60 This is to be understood of the Measure of Perfection and not the Measure
of Duration.

61 That there are certain Hierarchies or Orders amongst the Angels, we deny
not: But that we are able to know what they are, That we deny.

62 The Order of the Angels is only known unto him that did ordain them.

63 Whom we shall hereafter behold face to face, when we shall be equal unto
the Angels. Luke 20.36.

64 All the Angels were created by God, good and perfect: For from him which is
good and perfect nothing can proceed but that which is good and perfect.

65 But some, yea a great part of them by a voluntary fall fell away from that
goodness in which they were created.

66 Which fall of the Angels, what it was, seeing that the Scripture says
nothing of it, who shall declare it? The Ancients dispute that it was either
Pride, or Envy.

67 The evil Angels fell without all hope of recovery: But the good Angels are
confirmed in goodness, and freed from all fear of falling.

68 Which Confirmation of theirs was not the Adequate and due reward of any
merit; but the free gift of God rewarding beyond all condignitie.

69 From the Confirmation of some of the Angels in goodness, and the
obstinatenesse of others in malice, there arise contrary works on both parts.

70 The good Angels are praising and lauding God, and sent as ministering
Spirits for the good of men.

71 The Angels are present with us, for good: to protect us, and to fight for
us. Bern. Sermon. 10. in Psalm. 92.

72 The number of the Angels is innumerable, as concerning us.

73 How the Angels conferr^ and discourse one with another, let them discuss
and determine, who are present at their conferences and discourses.

74 The Devils by the subtlety of their nature, and their experience for time,
and also by superior revelation may foreknow some things, but yet not all.

75 They may do many things to be admired: but they cannot work Miracles
properly so called.

76 They do what they can, by Gods permission: They do not, what otherwise they
can, at Gods prohibition.

77 And this is, such as it is, The description of the first work of God, which
was wrought in time, that is, the Creation: whereof there can be no other
moving cause given but only the superabundant riches of his goodness. Damasc.
2. Orthod. fid. cap. 2.

78 For God wrought his works not out of any indigencie, but of his mere
beneficencie: Nothing is added unto him by our praises; but he is manifested
unto us by his works. Euch. lib. 1. in Genesis

79 He is the Final Cause of the Universe in respect of his Goodness; the
Exemplarie Cause in respect of his Wisdom; and the Efficient Cause in respect
of his Power. Thom. 1. q. 46. art. 1.

80 Therefore the Glory of God is the Vltimate and chief end of Creation: and
the good of Men is the Mediate and secundary end.

81 God which is Good, yea Goodness it self, did all things well, and made all
things good, whatsoever he made. To him be praise honor and glory for ever and
ever. Amen.

CHAP. VI. Wherein are contained Theological Aphorisms concerning the
PROVIDENCE of GOD.
1 GOD which is Almighty is not only the Creator of the Universe, but also
the Vpholder, Conserver, and Governor of the same.

2 He did all things well, and does guide and govern all things well whatsoever
he at first made.

3 As nothing was made but by Gods creating Essence: So nothing is able to
stand or endure but by his conserving Power. Ansel. in Monol.

4 Gods upholding, supporting, and governing all creatures, is usually called
Gods Providence.

5 Concerning which, Nature it self gives an evident testimony: But the Holy
Scripture gives a testimony much more evident.

6 The Laws therefore of true Religion do proclaim it, that All things have
their being and existence, and are governed by the Providence of God. Eusebius. 6.
de praepar. Evang. cap. 5.

7 Now the Providence of God consists in these three things, His
Foreknowledge, his Purpose, and his Administering and Governing all things.

8 Which is expressed by Hugo (de Sancto Victore) after this manner: In the
Providence of God we must consider his Knowledge directing, his Will
commanding, and his Power exequuting.

9 His Foreknowledge is, a most present and clear sight of all things past,
present, and to come.

10 God in a moment, fixed, and not sliding; stable and immovable, and not
successive, beholds all things clearly altogether all at once.

11 God by the property of his Eternity excludes all space, and distinction
of time.

12 As God is not said properly to Remember that which is past: so neither is
he said properly to Behold afar off the things which are to come. For to him
all things are present.

13 The things which are known are mutable, transitory, and successive: but
the vision of him that knows, knows no change, alteration, or succession.
Polycrat. lib. 2. cap. 21.

14 By this knowledge all things are known unto God, better then they are unto
themselves.

15 God beholds himself in himself, and all other things likewise in himself:
For from him and in him are all things.

16 This knowledge of God is immutable: But yet notwithstanding some things
unto which Gods knowledge extends it self are in themselves mutable.

17 All things are Necessary by a necessity of Consequence, but not by a
necessity of the Consequent.

18 For it cannot be unknown unto God, who is Omniscient, which way the force
of action, in causes or Agents working contingently and freely, will incline.

19 Yet God by this his Vision does not infer upon them any absolute
necessity: For then should they not be free and contingent Agents.

20 It is a most grievous and heinous sin, to make the Providence of God to
be the author and cause necessitating man to sin.

21 If Gods foreknowing a man will sin, be the cause why man sins; then
Gods foreknowledge, is not of man's sin, but of his own: which is impious once
to imagine.

22 God does not only foresee (the (...)) things to be done; but also (the
(...)) the cause and manner of doing.

23 He foreseeth things; he foreseeth the causes of things: What things
therefore are from their causes voluntary or contingent, notwithstanding Gods
Providence, cease not to be such as they are of their own Nature.

24 How should the Order of causes, which is certain in the Foreknowledge of
God, be the cause that nothing should be in our will, when as even our wills
have place in the Order of causes? August. 5. de civ. Dei, cap. 9.

25 Neither is the Providence of God a bare Foreknowledge; seeing that God is
not an idle spectatour of things: But also (a (...) or (...), Predestination or
Purpose) a will and decree to use Providence, and take care for all things.

26 It is the part of him that is provident, not only to have knowledge, but
also a will to provide for, and to do good,

27 That Eternal Purpose, after a most exact manner has respect unto the
Actual Administration and governing things in time.

28 For whatsoever God does, and after what manner soever he does In time, by
way of this Administration; That, by his Purpose he decreed to do, and in the
same manner, From all Eternity.

29 Gods Administration, is his Actual and Temporal supporting and governing
all things: by which he guides and directs all things well, wisely, freely,
and powerfully.

30 This Administration extends it self to all things, at all times, and in
all places: it reaches from one end to another mightily, and sweetly does it
order all things. Wisdom 8.1.

31 For if it be no injury or shame to God to have made the least and meanest
things that are: then certainly it is not unbeseeming Gods majesty to govern
them being made. Ambros. 1. de Offic. cap. 13.

32 All things were made of nothing: All things again would return to nothing,
did not that Chief and True Being sustain and uphold all things. Which
Conservation is nothing else but the Continuation of their Existence and Being.
Scal. Exerc. 135. sect. 1.

33 As the Being of the sunne^eams depends on the Sun, and the Being of the
shadow, on the Body: So the Being of all Creatures depends on the Providence
of God conserving them. Raim. de Sabaud. in Theolog. Nature. cap. 16.

34 Neither does God only conserve things created, but also he does guide,
govern, and direct them.

35 And although all things are under Gods guidance and governance: yet he has
a care of mankind after a more special and peculiar manner; and yet after a
more special and peculiar manner he has a care of his Church which he
gathers out of mankind.

36 According to this his Providence, God ordinarily conserveth the appointed
course of Nature.

37 For God so administreth and governs all things, that he suff^rs them to
exercise their own proper motions. Aug. 7. de Civ. Dei. cap. 30.

38 Gods Providence ordinarily works by means: but yet our trust and
confidence must not rely upon them.

39 For there is no efficacy of the Second causes, which descends not from
the First.

40 And yet the Providence of God is not so tied to means, but that he can work
without means.

41 The virtue of all Second causes is Eminently and Causally in the First.

42 Therefore the defect of Second causes may be easily supplied by the virtue
of the First.

43 Suppose the Second causes were in Act: yet notwithstanding the divine
Providence can change and hinder their Effect.

44 But the Second causes cannot work without the influence of the First.

45 Moreover the divine Providence can by the Second causes produce another
manner of Effect, then that which is agreeable to their natural properties.

46 He which gave the Laws, and order of Nature, is not bound to the Laws and
order of Nature.

47 The very brute beasts themselves by a kind of Natural instinct have a
sense of this Providence, by which they are sustained and directed.

48 God has a peculiar and special care of Man in the whole course of his
life: in his Ingresse, Progress, and Egresse.

49 Thine hands have made me and fashioned me together round about. Job 10.8.
And again, Thou art he that took me out of the womb. Psalm. 22.9.

50 God does so govern our whole life, that not so much as one hair of our head
does at any time fall without his will and providence. Matthew. 10.30. Luke
21.18. Act. 27.34.

51 He has appointed Man his bounds that he cannot pass. Job 14.5.

52 Yet the divine Providence does so guide and govern man in the whole course
and end of his life, that it does neither exclude the second causes, neither
yet is tied unto them.

53 Hence we may learn, That Marriages are in such manner Fatal, that
notwithstanding they prove sometimes Fatuall.

54 And, That the bounds of man's life are appointed which he cannot pass: but
yet, not by any Law or decree of the ( Parcae, or) Fatal sisters, nor by any
Stoicall necessity.

55 As the divine Providence governs man's Life, so all his Actions.

56 But yet God concurreth to good and bad Actions after a far different
manner.

57 Actions civilly good he does govern in such manner, that he does not only
conserve the Natural Agent, and furnish him with ability and power for
action; but does also approve and set forward the actions themselves, and in a
special manner sometimes moves men unto them.

58 Actions spiritually good he does both command and approve in such manner,
that he effects them in us and by us, by his Holy Spirit.

59 As for evil Actions he neither commands, nor wills, nor furthereth, nor
inciteth or moves unto them.

60 For in Evil we are not to seek so much the Efficient cause, as the
Deficient. August. 14. de Civ. Dei, cap. 7.

61 Because it is rather a defect from Gods work, then any work it self.
August. 14. de Civ. Dei, cap. 11.

62 God who is a most perfect and pure Act, cannot be deficient: Therefore he
cannot be the cause of evil.

63 Gods Providence concurreth in Evil actions, by foreknowing them, sustaining
and upholding the Nature of the Agent, permitting, forsaking, delivering to
Satan, setting bounds, and drawing good out of them.

46 He hardneth Negatively, that is, by not softning; Privatively, that is, by
taking away such softnes as there is; Traditively, that is, by delivering a man
unto himself and unto Satan to be hardened; Materially, that is, by showing
signs and wonders; and Dispositively, that is, by ordering and directing the
induration or hardness to a good end.

65 Hereupon says Suidas out of the Ancients, God does administer all things
according to his Dispensation and his good will and pleasure, in that which is
Good: and by way of Permission only, in that which is ^vil.

66 This Permission is not as of one imprudent, or simply unwilling, or not
caring, or idly looking on, or opening a wide field to the Plots and
machinations of men and Satan: but it is the Permission of a most just judge
and avenger, and also a most wise ruler and governor.

67 God does in such manner punish sins with sins, that yet he is not the
cause of sin.

68 And seeing that the divine Providence does not exclude the Second causes,
neither change their quality, according to the ordinary manner: Hence it is
that in respect of the Particular causes some things may be said to be
fortuitous and casual, which yet come under the order of the Universal cause.

69 Chance and Fortune are the voice and words of Humane ignorance. August. 5.
de Civ. Dei, cap. 9.

70 The holy Meditation upon the divine Providence may effect thus much in us,
That we be neither lift up in prosperity, nor cast down with despair in
adversity.

71 Let us wholly commit our selves, and all that is ours, unto his care, who
has such a care of every one of us, as if he had but one to take care of; and
such a care of all, that he forgets not to take care of every one.

CHAP. VII. Wherein are contained Theological Aphorisms concerning ELECTION
and REPROBATION
1 PRedestination is a certain peculiar act of the divine Providence, about the
salvation of men.

2 By it the reasonable creature is directed to an end which exceeds its
proportion, to wit, unto eternal life.

3 In which sense Predestination is made part of the divine Providence. Thom.
p. 1. q. 23. art. 1.

4 The doctrine of Predestination is not to be involved or concealed in the
cloud of silence, seeing that it is in Scripture evolved or revealed by the
Holy Ghost.

5 But we must handle it soberly, reverently, and prudently.

6 Let us speak; not what, and as much as the curiosity of man's heart
desires: but what, and as much as the Holy Ghost teaches.

7 Predestination or Election is called, The Enrolling, Registring, or writing
of our names into the Book of life.

8 But yet this Book of life serves not to put God in mind of some, lest he
forget them: but it signifies the Predestination of those which shall inherit
everlasting life. Aug. 20. de Civ. Dei, cap. 15.

9 As therefore none of those that are elected do perish: So of those that have
their names written in the Book of life, none are ever blotted out.

10 But they are Properly, and according to the phrase of Scripture said to be
written in the Book of life, who cleave unto Christ by Faith and Perseverance.

11 Election as well as Creation is the immediate action of one and the only
true God alone.

12 Which belongs also to the Son of God, not only as he is one with the
Father and the Holy Ghost, but also as he is appointed to be the Mediator.

13 In which sense we are said to be elected not only by Christ, but also in
Christ. Ephesians. 1.4.

14 And it is an Action, not Emanant but Immanent.

15 And it is also Ordinate: whence it is, that the elect are said to be
ordained to eternal Life, Act. 13.48.

16 The reason and manner of this order is made manifest unto us by the Gospel:
by which the Mystery of our salvation, which was kept secret since the world
began, is now made manifest. Romans 16.26, 27.

17 In which sense we are said to be elected according to the Purpose and
Foreknowledge of God, Ephesians. 1.11. and 1. Pet. 1.2.

18 That Purpose is the counsel and good pleasure of God concerning the
salvation of men, by faith on Christ.

19 Gods Election is merely of his grace, not according to any merits of works
foreseen.

20 The only cause and foundation of this grace, is Christ. In him the beloved
we are freely beloved. Ephesians. 1.6.

21 But inasmuch as Christ profits no man without Faith: Therefore the mention
of Christ in this business does include the action of Faith.

22 In which sense we are said to be elected not only in Christ, but also
through Faith. 2. These. 2.13.

23 Again, Because the end of Faith (I do not mean such Faith as is temporary,
and endures but for a time; but that which persevereth and continues unto the
end) is Eternal Life: Therefore, when we name Faith, we understand
Perseverance also.

24 The end of Election in respect of our selves, is sanctification in the
kingdom of Grace, and glorification in the kingdom of Glory.

25 The end of our Election in respect of God, is the glory of God, and the
clear manifestation of his mercy.

26 God wills and earnestly wills the life of a sinner: but he wills also
his conversion by the word and the Holy Spirit.

27 If the sinner refuses and rejects the word, and resists the Holy
Spirit, and so is not converted: then God wills the death of the sinner, and
that most justly.

28 These things are not repugnant, the one to the other; but do manifest unto
us the wonderful temper of Gods mercy and justice.

29 What some produce, concerning the hidden will of God, contrary to his will
revealed in his word: That inasmuchas it is not revealed, is not without just
cause hidden from the godly.

30 Neither does God in word only testify unto us that he earnestly desires
the salvation of all men; but also in deed and in truth.

31 The first Adam was created after the Image of God: whereof immortality was
a part.

32 All men were in the loins of their first Father Adam: Therefore in him they
may be all said to have been created after the Image of God unto immortality.

33 What Christ by his precious bloudshedding purchased for all, That the Holy
Ghost in the precious treasure of the word offers unto all.

34 The Gospel is offered unto all; and in the Gospel, the benefits of Christ;
and in them, the grace of God; and in that, eternal life.

35 And thus the love of the Father, the satisfaction of the Son, and the
calling of the Holy Ghost are allwaies joined together.

36 That calling in it self, and of it self, in respect of God which calls,
is Universal: For it is his good will and pleasure that the Gospel should be
preached unto all.

37 But it is made Particular by the fault of men, who by their detestable
contempt of the word rob themselves and their posterity of so great a treasure.

38 In which sense such are said to judge themselves unworthy of everlasting
Life. Acts 13.46.

39 If we descend unto particulars: we confess that there are many things yet
obscure, which hereafter shall be made manifest unto all in the light of glory.

40 Neither is the Grace of God, which calls all, to be depressed: nor the
Power of Freewill accepting Grace to be extolled.

41 Let the salvation of men be acknowledged to be the mere gift of Gods
grace: But let the damnation of men be attributed merely to their own fault.

42 The judgments of God we must allwaies acknowledge to be just, allthough
they are not allwaies manifest unto us.

43 Gods grace preventeth and prepares us before we can be able; it works in
us, that we may be able; and it works with us, whenever by his gift we are
enabled to do any thing that is good.

44 As God in time does justify men and save them: So also from all eternity
he decreed to justify them and save them.

45 The action of God in time is as it were a Glass wherein we may behold his
decree concerning that action made from all eternity.

46 The reason whereof is, the immutabilitie of his divine will.

47 Therefore as God saves all those and only those that with perseverance
believe on Christ in time: So also he purposed from all eternity to save all
those and only those that with perseverance unto the end shall believe on
Christ, that is, He elected them unto eternal life.

48 Therefore let us with sobriety begin the doctrine and meditation of
Predestination from the wounds of Christ.

49 In the light of the word there shines unto us the true light which is
Christ; and in Christ, the love of God electing us unto salvation.

50 Without the path and light of the word, whatsoever we can think or imagine
in our hearts, whatsoever we can speak or utter with our lips, is but darkness
and error.

51 But on the other side if we follow the light of the word, we shall neither
decline to the right hand of presumptuous temeritie, nor to the left hand of
carnal security.

CHAP. VIII. Wherein are contained Theological Aphorisms concerning the Image
of GOD in MAN before his Fall.
1 THe Creation of man, after the Image of God, in time, followed after the
decree of Predestination made without time.

2 I could wish that this Image of God, in the first man, were so obvious to
our understanding, as it was sometimes glorious, to the procuring of grace and
favor to the whole stock of man.

3 But alas! (to our grief we may speak it) The knowledge of that is quite fled
from our understanding, the possession whereof we lost long ago.

4 And our discourse concernning that, is not unlike unto theirs, who being
prisoners in a dark and deep dungeon make inquiry after the excellency of the
light which is altogether unknown unto them.

5 That Image of God, according to the Apostles exposition, is the Image of
Righteousness and true Holiness. Ephesians. 4.24.

6 The Image of God is repaired in those that are regenerate and born again, by
the renewing in knowledge. Coloss. 3.10.

7 That light of divine knowledge is not a property created together with the
soul of man after the fall: but it is the conformity of the regenerate unto
God by the gift and illumination of the Holy Ghost.

8 Whereupon it follows, that the Image of God is not to be defined by those
things which essentially may be found in the soul of a man unregenerate.

9 That Primitive righteousness and holiness in which the Apostle places the
Image of God, does comprehend the light of divine knowledge, in the mind; full
conformity unto the Law of God, in the will; and rectitude of all the powers
and affections of the soul, in the heart.

10 Man was a lively mirror of divine wisdom, goodness, charity,
righteousness, holiness, and purity.

11 His Reason was perfectly subject unto God; his Will, unto his Reason; and
his Affections and other powers, unto his Will.

12 There was in man no servile fear, no sorrow; but blessed rest and
perpetual exultation in God his Creator.

13 He had the knowledge of God, not only from without, in the book of the
creatures; but he had also within himself inward impressions and lively
characters of divine knowledge.

14 Man bore the Image of God, as a Son does his Fathers, to whom he owes
duty and love; as a Servant his Masters, to whom he owes reverence and fear;
as a Soldier his Captains, to whom he owes obedience and fidelity; as a
Steward his Lords, to whom he is bound to give an exact account of his
stewardship.

15 Man's outward nakedness was a sign of his innocence, and inward purity:
His dwelling in Paradise did manifest his inward rest and felicity.

16 There was no motion in his body, whereof he needed to be ashamed: He
thought there was nothing in him stood in need to be covered, because he felt
within himself nothing that stood in need to be bridled. August. 11. de Genesis ad
lit. cap. 1.

17 It cannot stand with the perfection of the first man, that we should
attribute unto him any discord or jarre of the superior and inferior powers
of his soul.

18 Neither do they teach sound doctrine, that say, That any disease or malady
was cured or repressed in the first man by the Antidote of original
righteousness.

19 They deserve to be hated of God, whosoever dispute and hold, That any evil
concupiscence and such as was odious unto God, was to be found in man at the
first, considered in his pure Naturals, by reason of the matter whereof he was
made.

20 To hold and say that from the condition of the matter whereof man was made,
any concupiscence of it self evil did arise in him, is injurious to the God of
Nature.

21 Neither can it stand with the wisdom and power of God, that beside his
intent any evil concupiscence should arise from the condition of the matter.

22 For who can with patience hear the works of God thus blasphemed?

We looked for an Amphora;
The wheel went round about:
In stead of looked for Amphora;
A Pitcher there came out.
23 What can arise beside his intent, without whose intent nothing can arise?

24 Those relics of the divine Image, which, such as they are, are still in
man ever since his fall, are natural unto him. Therefore certainly that
original and primitive rectitude was natural unto the first man.

25 For in those things which are Homogeneall, or of the same kind, we argue
truly from the Nature of the part unto the Nature of the whole.

26 The Image of God might have been propagated (if man had stood) unto his
posterity by natural generation: And now those things which are propagated
naturally, are themselves also natural.

27 From all which it is apparent, That the Image of God was not any external
and supernatural ornament of the first man, as a Virgins garland or Sampsons
strength, but a kind of beauty internal, and created together with him.

28 And yet it is not the very substance of man, or any essential part of him.

29 Man is said to have been created after Gods Image: Therefore Man himself is
one thing, and the Image of God in him is another.

30 Holiness and Righteousness are only in God by way of Essence* in Man
they are not but by way of Inherence.

31 Immortality was a part of that divine Image: For God created man to be
immortal, and made him to be an Image of his own Eternity. Wisd. 2.23.

32 That death of the body unto which we are all subject, since the fall of
Adam, is not the natural condition of man: But it is derived upon us as a
punishment, for the wickedness of his transgression.

33 It is not a debt due unto our nature as it was at first created by God: but
it is our just merit and wages for falling away from God.

34 At what time man opened the gate of sin unto Satan knocking, death entered
in upon him, and so passed upon all men. Romans 5.12.

35 That immortality unto which man was created, as likewise the whole Image
of God was a natural and internal property of the humane nature.

36 In the body there was a most exact harmony of all the qualities, and it
was governed by the soul, which was created after the Image of God unto
immortality.

37 As therefore since the fall, We are by nature the children of wrath,
Ephesians. 2.3. So before his fall, the first man was by nature the Son of grace
and life.

38 But the Degree of Immortality, which was in our nature at the first
institution, and the degree that shall be at the perfect restitution are far
different the one from the other.

39 The Immortality of the first man was, That he had power not to die: but
the Immortality of the Elect shall be hereafter, That they cannot die. August.
6. de Genesis ad lit. cap. 25.

40 And further seeing that Immortality is a part of the divine Image, from
hence it is apparent, That even in the body of man there is some glimpse of the
divine Image.

41 The comeliness of the clay did argue also the beauty of the soul. Bern.
Sermon. 24. Sup. Cant. Col. 564.

42 If any one ask whether Eve was made after the Image of God, or no: we
answer that the name of Image is taken two ways.

43 Primarily and properly the Image of God was resplendent in the conformity
of the soul and all the powers and faculties of man with the Law of God: which
was common to both sexes, saving the diversity of degrees.

44 Secundarily, the Image of God was resplendent in that external privilege
of Dominion and rule, the eminency whereof properly belonged unto the man.

45 And that there might be nothing wanting to man's felicity; beside the grace
of soul and body, God added also the grace of place: for he gave him his
dewlling place in Paradise.

46 Man was created by God partly Spiritual and partly Corporeal. Therefore
God gave unto him also a twofold Paradise, both a Spiritual and a Corporeal.

47 The Corporeal or Terrestrial Paradise, was a Type and School of the
Spiritual and Celestial Paradise, that is, great tranquillity and joy in the
mind of man.

48 If any man be desirous that we should show unto him, in what part of the
earth the Corporeal Paradise was situate: That we will do, if he will first
plainly show unto us the situation of the earth as it was before the flood.

49 That the garden of Paradise is yet extant and to be seen: then will we
believe, when any man can bring us a bough or a branch from thence, or else
demonstrate it unto us upon a good foundation.

50 It is certain that Henoch and Elias live in Paradise: But in what Paradise?
Not the Terrestrial, but the Celestial, where Christ promised the good thief
that he should be. Luke 23.43.

51 There were two trees especially, which were a great grace to the garden of
Paradise: to wit, the tree of Life, and the tree of Knowledge of good and
evil. Genesis 2.9.

52 In the tree of Life there was set before man a Preservative against
sickness and old age, as also a Type of eternal beatitude.

53 The tree of Knowledge was man's Temple and Altar: and the service which he
was to have performed unto God was, To abstain from the fruit thereof.

54 After man's fall it was so called from the Event: For by tasting of the
fruit thereof man learnt by woeful experience, what a great good he had
deprived himself of, by reason of his sin; and what a great evil he drew upon
himself by his disobedience.

55 As concerning the question about the production of souls whether by way of
Propagation, or by a daily and immediate Creation: we do not dislike the
modesty of those, which say, That it is sufficient for them to believe and
know whither they shall come by living a godly life, although they be ignorant
from whence they came. August. 10. de Genesis ad lit. cap. 23.

56 Let me be ignorant of the original of my soul, if so be that I can come to
the knowledge of the propagation of original sin, and the redemption of
souls. Aug. Epist. 157. ad Optat.

57 If by the Image of God we understand, according to the Scripture phrase,
true righteousness and holiness, The Holy Ghost witnesses that we have lost
it, and we find it true by woeful experience.

58 For what is Original sin, but the loss and want of the di^vine Image,
which succeeded in the place of Original righteousness?

59 This doctrine concerning the Image of God leads us as it were by the hand,
that so we may come to the knowledge of Gods mercy, and our own misery: and
further establishes our hope.

60 All laud and praise be given to God the Father, God the Son, and God the
Holy Ghost: To the Father, which created us in Adam after his own Image; to the
Son, which merited for us the renewing of that Image; and to the Holy Ghost,
by whom this Image begins again to be renewed in us.

CHAP. IX. Wherein are contained Theological Aphorisms concerning ORIGINAL
SIN, That is, The Fall of our first parents, and the corruption of nature
which followed thereupon, and is propagated unto their posterity.
1 THe first man continued not in the integrity and perfection wherein he was
created: and therefore it descended not upon his posterity by any right of
inheritance.

2 He followed the deceitful persuasion of the Serpent, and so fell into sin
and the transgression of Gods commandment.

3 In that natural Serpent the infernal Serpent lay lurking.

4 So then the Serpent, which by his subtlety deceived our first parents, was
disguised: For there was a Devil in the shape of a Serpent.

5 He sets upon the woman first being the weaker, and not to be compared with
man for the gift and endowment of wisdom.

6 By a treacherous and deceitful question, about the meaning of Gods
commandment, he sollicits her to a very dangerous kind of doubting.

7 Outwardly with a feigned voice he propounds a question unto her: Inwardly he
wounds her soul with venomous darts, and inspires into her the poison of
doubting.

8 Afterward being grown more audacious and bold by reason of his success, he
turns Eve^ doubting into an open denial.

9 He accuses God of Envy and Malice, being himself more malicious: By a
feigned pretense and promise of divine excellency and wisdom he deceived her,
being himself most remote from divine wisdom.

10 The Causes then of our first Fathers fall were, the Devil seducing, and
himself freely and willingly consenting.

11 We must not in any case make God to have an hand or bear a part in man's
fall: because God is good, and the author of nothing but that which is good.

12 As God created man at the first, so it was his will that he should always
have continued: And therefore God did not by any secret decree or command force
him to fall.

13 God is not the author of that thing, whereof he is the punisher and
avenger: The iniquity which he punishes is not of his doing. Fulgent. lib. 1.
ad Monim.

14 God gave unto man, before his fall, a perfect power that he might have not
fallen; and an entire will that, if he would, he might have had no will to
fall: and further he added a most severe commination of death, that so he might
have been kept from falling.

15 Man was not created that he should have a will to sin; and yet he was set
in that liberty that he might have a will; but he was also furnished with such
light, that, if he would, he might have had no such will.

16 For God has no need of the righteousness of the upright and straight, or
the iniquity of the crooked and perverse. August. 11. de Genesis ad lit. Cap. 7.

17 No perfection is added unto God by his external works, which are but the
prints and footsteps of his inward perfection.

18 Incredulity and unbelief, according to the order that Moses has set down
in his description, was the first sin of man.

19 As long as the word and faith is retained in the heart, there is no proud
swelling or lifting up of ones self against God.

20 Whatsoever was first for order of internal intention: certainly
incredulity was the first sin for order in the act of external commission.

21 Neither had the mind of man, being illuminated with such divine light as
it was, ever turned away from God by pride, unless first it had made a
secession or revolting from the word.

22 The Apostle denies that Adam was deceived. 1. Tim. 2.14. which we must
understand, of the manner and order of being deceived.

23 Though we should grant that Adam was not deceived by another; yet he was
deceived by himself.

25 It is an idle question, to ask whether of the two sinned more grievously,
Adam or Eve. They sinned both, unlike indeed for Sex, but alike for Pride. Aug.
11. de Genesis ad lit. cap. 35.

26 The opening of their eyes, which followed immediately upon their fall, was
nothing else but the sense of their sin, and the sting of a terrified
conscience.

27 They saw that they were naked, that is, bestripped of the robe of
integrity and innocence, with which they were invested at their first
creation. They knew before their fall that they were naked: but their
nakedness was such as was neither shameful nor disgraceful.

28 They felt after their fall, that their flesh was incited to lust, and that
the law of their members was shamefully repugnant to the Law of their mind.

28 What great darkness seized upon their understanding presently after their
fall, it is apparent from hence, in that they thought with fig leaves to hide
themselves from his sight, whose eyes are much clearer then the sun.

29 Fain would they have been concealed from him, from whom nothing can be
concealed: and hide their flesh from his sight, who is the beholder of the
heart. August. 11. de Genesis ad lit. cap. 34.

30 With their blindness of mind there was also joined the trembling of
heart: For they were affrighted with the shaking of a leaf; who before were
delighted with the presence and conference of God.

31 They are called before Gods Tribunal, or Judgment Seat, and before him
their cause is examined: and so punishment follows close upon their sin.

32 This sin of our first parents corrupted and putrified the humane nature,
which was all in them, and no part in any other. Anselm. conc. virg. cap. 2.

33 Adam was, and in him were we all: Adam was undone; and in him are we all
undone. Ambros. in cap. 15. Luc.

34 If the parents lands be confiscate, their children lose their inheritance.

35 From a corrupted root spring forth evil fruits; from an impure fountain
flow forth filthy waters; and of parents which are leprous, children also are
begotten which are leprous.

36 Even so, of our first parents being destitute of original righteousness,
and infected with the pollution of sin, such children are begotten as they
themselves; that is, destitute of righteousness, and infected with sin.

37 For Adam begat a son: not after the Image of God; but in his own
likeness, that is, corrupted with sin.

38 The Personal sin of Adam corrupted his Nature, and the corruption of
Nature is by carnal generation propagated unto the person of his offspring.

39 Adam sinned; not as a private man: but as the lump, mass, and head of all
mankind.

40 As his Nature; so likewise the corruption of his Nature is propagated unto
his posterity: As his sin; so also the guilt, which is a consequent of his
sin.

41 And this is that which we call Original sin: which whosoever they be
that deny or extenuate, they detract exceedingly from the grace of God.

42 They which plead so much for Nature, are enemies unto Grace.

43 Concerning this Original sin not only the most clear oracles of the Holy
Ghost bear witness, but also all Actual sins, and the grievous weight and
burden of diverse calamities, and death it self, and likewise regeneration which
is necessary for all men toward the attainment of eternal life.

44 Therefore vain and frivolous is that which is said by Pelagius, That sin
came into the world by imitation, not by propagation.

45 For death, which is the wages of sin, reigned even over them that had not
sinned after the similitude of Adams transgression. Romans 5.14.

46 And we are by nature the children of wrath and not by imitation, as the
Apostle teaches Ephesians. 2.3.

47 This sin is called Original not from the original of the universal
nature, or the humane nature, but from the original of every person descended
from Adam since his fall.

48 Moreover it is called Original in reference to Actual sins, whereof it
is the common head and fountain.

49 As for the quidditie of the thing, it is not only the privation of
original righteousness, but it is also the position of a vicious quality,
and guilt which is a consequent or follower of them both.

50 Hence it is, that from ou^ parents we are damned before we are born. Bern.
in Med. cap. 2. Col. 1190.

51 Evil concupiscence, in which the power and force of original sin does
chiefly appear, is not only the punishment and cause of sin, but it is also
sin it self.

52 For there is in it disobedience and rebellion against the dominion and law
of the mind. August. lib. 5. contra Julian. cap. 3.

53 Neither has the veice of evil concupiscence place in the inferior
faculties of the soul only, but also in the superior.

54 For the will of a man not yet regenerate is prone to evil and to vanities.

55 Amongst the works of the flesh these are reckoned, Heresies, Idolatry,
Strife, Variance, etc. Gal. 5.20.

56 From whence we may gather evidently, That the Flesh is to be taken for the
whole man, such as he is since the fall without the grace of God and
regeneration.

57 By Original sin the whole nature of man was most intimately and inwardly
corrupted: But yet we must distinguish between the vice, and the very substance
of man. For the substance of man is the good work of God and Nature.

58 Sin is an evil Adjunct, or evil present with me, says S. Paul Romans 7.21.
Therefore it is not any thing consisting or subsisting of it self.

59 Men are conceived in sin: Therefore they are not very sin itself.

60 The whole man is the subject of original sin, with all the powers of the
soul and members of the body.

61 Original righteousness was not only an equal and just temperament of
the body, but also a rectitude of all the powers of the soul, and an
intrinsecall ornament.

62 So Original sin, which succeeded in the place of original
righteousness, is not any diseased quality of body, but an infection of all
the powers of the soul.

63 For, Habit and Privation are to be considered with reference to the same
Subject.

64 This evil is propagated by carnal generation.

65 Therefore Man since the fall, is flesh, because he is born of flesh. John
3.6. He is by nature the child of wrath. Ephesians. 2.3. By being born then he
contracts sin, for which he becomes the child of wrath.

66 Whosoever therefore are born of parents according to carnal generation,
are also guilty of original sin.

67 Therefore even the children of the faithful, and those that are born
again, bring this original sin and pollution with them into this world.

68 For it is Regeneration, and not Generation that makes Christians. August.
3. de peccat. merit. and remiss. cap. 9.

69 Men are made, and not born Christians. Tertull. in Apol. cap. 17.

70 Only He was born without sin, who without the seed of man was conceived
by the Holy Ghost in the womb of the Virgin.

71 He is not infected with the pollution of sin, who was born holy and
sanctified from the sanctified womb of the Virgin.

72 To the participation of this privilege and dignity (that is, To be free
from Original sin) we do not admit the blessed Virgin herself.

73 We say, That the glorious Virgin Mary conceived by the Holy Ghost; not,
That she was conceived by the Holy Ghost: We say, That a Virgin brought forth;
not, That she was brought forth of a Virgin. Bern. Epist. 174. ad Lugdun.

74 Some effects of Original sin are only punishments: some are both
punishments and sins.

75 Punishments are both Temporal and Eternal: as sundry calamities,
innumerable swarms of diseases, temporal death, the wrath of God, and eternal
damnation.

76 Punishments and sins both, are evil motions of concupiscence, damnable
desires of the heart, and an heap of actual sins.

77 The pravitie of original sin draws us headlong into vice* Cassiodor. in
Psalm. 118.

78 The number of these actual sins, are in respect of us altogether
numberless. For who can understand his errors? Psalm. 19.12.

79 The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses all those that believe, from all sin,
both Original and Actual. 1. John 1.7.

80 With which we are sprinkled in Baptism, which is therefore called the holy
and saving laver, or the washing of regeneration. Tit. 3.5.

81 Unto which Regeneration, Renovation, or renewing, is added as an
inseparable companion: though it be not altogether absolute and perfect in this
life.

82 For if there were a perfect renewing in Baptism, then would not the
Apostle say, That the inward man is renewed daily. Aug. 2. de peccat. merit.
and remiss. cap. 7.

83 Knowing therefore the extreme corruption of our nature, let us send up our
prayers and sighs unto Christ our Physician, to renew us every day more and
more, till at length we be perfectly renewed in the life to come which is
eternal.

CHAP. X. Wherein are contained Theological Aphorisms concerning FREE WILL.
That is, The Power which is left in man since the fall.
1 THe poison of Original sin has quite overrun, and inwardly infected all
the powers and faculties of man.

2 Whereupon there must needs follow great Detriment and Decrement, or loss
and decay in them all.

3 The Powers and Faculties of man are chiefly to be estimated by the
Reasonable Soul, which was created after the Image of God.

4 The Faculties of the Reasonable Soul are two; a Mind, to know and
understand; and a Will, to elect and choose.

5 From the concurse of these two faculties arises that which is commonly
called Free Will.

6 Which is a Faculty both of the Mind and the Will: For the arbitrament or
judgment is of the Mind, and the Freedom or Liberty is of the Will.

7 Liberty or Freedom is attributed unto the Will, first having a respect
unto the Manner of Working, which is Free and Voluntary.

8 For it is not compelled or violently carried away by any External motion,
neither does it work only by a Natural instinct, but it has an Internal and
Free principle, or cause, of its own motion.

9 This Liberty is a natural and essential property of the Will.

10 And therefore it was not lost by the fall.

11 For the Will did not cease to be a Will by reason of the fall.

12 This Liberty from coaction or necessity, is called Interior Liberty, or
Liberty in the Subject.

13 Therefore the Will of man in this respect is always free, though not
always good. August. in Enchirid. cap. 30.

14 But yet the will of man is so free, that still it must needs acknowledge
the all-ruling power of God.

15 And therefore it is not free from Law and Obligation.

17 For God has imprinted in the mind of man certain Natural Motions, the
light and leading whereof the Will must follow.

17 If it follows them, it is free.

18 For the True Liberty and Freedom is, to serve God, and to obey his Law.

19 In which sense Tullies saying is very good, in his Oration for Cluentius,
We are servants to the Laws, that so we may be freemen.

20 Therefore, as in respect of Liberty or freedom from coaction man has
allwaies free will, yea since his fall:

21 So in respect of Liberty or Freedom from obligation man has never
free will, neither had he before his fall.

22 Again this Liberty or Freedom of the Will is estimated, in respect of
the Object, which is either good or bad.

23 This is called Liberty unto the Object, and Interior.

24 What this Liberty or Freedom of man's Will is, it will best appear from
the consideration of the diverse states of man.

25 The Liberty in man before his fall, was a faculty of his Reason and his
Will, by which he might sin, or not sin, stand or fall. Anselm. de lib.
arbitr. cap. 7.

26 For his Will, even then, was not immutably determined to that which is good.

27 The Will of man was set as it were between two paths: There was set before
him life and death. Ecclus. 15.17.

28 In his Mind there shined the light of Wisdom; in his Will there was
conformity to the will of God: But yet notwithstanding there was left in him a
Liberty, either to persevere in the goodness wherein he was created, or to
fall away from it.

29 This may be called a Liberty of rectitude, a Liberty from servitude and
misery.

30 But it was not any essential property of the Will, but a separable
accident.

31 For as by falling it might be lost: so too truly may we speak it, and not
without grief, it was lost.

32 Man abusing his Free Will lost both himself and it. August. in Enchir. cap.
30.

33 In which respect the Will of man is no longer free, but servile and
captivated.

34 Whosoever commits sin, is the servant of sin. Ioh. 8.34.

35 The Image of God being lost by the fall, the Liberty of rectitude and
power of choosing good was also lost.

36 In place whereof there succeeded extreme corruption of the faculties and
powers, and an unbridled propension and greediness to that which is evil.

37 Hence it is, that the Will of man since the fall is only free to that
which is evil; which is a wretched and miserable kind of freedom.

38 Or rather it is to be accounted a most heavy and grievous kind of servitude.

39 The Apostle calls it a Freedom from righteousness. Romans 6.20. For man
refusing to be a servant unto righteousness, became subject to the yoke of sin
and iniquity, and so a servant to an ill Mistress. August. de verb. Apost.
sermon. 12.

40 The Soul of man, under this voluntary, and unhappily free necessity, is
held both as a Bondwoman, and a Free.

41 A Bondwoman for necessity, but for Will free. Bernhard. Ser. 81. Sup.
Cant.

42 The Will of man since the fall is prone to that which is evil; and yet it
cease not to be free: because it is not forced by compulsion to that which is
evil, but does freely and willingly chose and embrace it.

43 From whence it appears, that the inward Liberty of Will may consist and
stand together with the servitude of sinning.

44 As the Liberty does consist with the immutabilitie of doing ^ood, and with
the confirmation in ^oodnesse.

45 Whereof the former is only ^elonging unto God, and the latter unto the
good Angels.

46 There remained therefore ^n man, yea after the fall, Freedom ^f Will: but
we must understand it of Freedom from coaction.

47 The Freedom of Will pe^ished in man: if we understand it of the power of
choosing good, and ^schewing evil.

48 For in the place of Light, which shined in the understanding of man being
created together with him, there succeeded dark^esse. Ephesians 5.8.

49 Wherefore the understanding of man, as concerning the saying knowledge of
God, is not only blind, but quite obscured and ^ut out.

50 The Will is become subject unto the tyranny of sin, and waits upon it as
a slave.

51 In which respect men are said to be dead in their sins. Colos^ 2.13.

52 Because by nature they ca^ do nothing, but lie rotting and stinking in the
grave of their sins.

53 Wherefore Conversion is the work of God alone, in which work man is
merely and altogether passive.

54 It is God which opens the heart of man at his conversion: it is he which
does soften it, circumcise it, and renew it.

55 It is God that works in us both to will and to do, of his good pleasure.
Philip. 2.13.

56 Man indeed has an external power, freely to move himself from place to
place, and so may perform some civil act of justice:

57 Which of itself indeed, as it ^s an act, is no sin: but because the person
is not yet reconciled unto God, in another respect, is a ^in.

58 So that the saying of the A^ostle stands firm and sure: Whatsoever is not
of faith, is sin. Romans 14.^3.

59 For, That works may be ^ruely good, and that in the sight of God: It is
necessary, that they be ^one after a good manner, by those that are good, and
to a good end.

60 Although then, as concer^ing outward actions belonging to ^he life of man,
or the outward ^xercise of religion, there is left ^ome liberty to the will of
man:

61 (For, as the Apostle wit^esseth, The Gentiles which have not ^he Law do by
nature the things con^ained in the Law. Romans 2.14.)

62 Yet, as concerning the begin^ings of spiritual motions, and the performing
of acceptable service unto God, man has no power lef^ unto him; no, not at all.

63 For, We are not sufficient o^ our selves to think any thing that i^ good,
as of our selves: but our sufficiency is of God. 2 Cor. 3.4.

64 Therefore every good though^ every godly resolution, every go^^ purpose,
every good motion of Will i^ from God: by whom we are abl^ to do something that
is good* bu^ without him, nothing. August. (...) dogm. Eccl. cap. 17.

65 And yet that liberty in external works and actions of this pre^sent life,
is not without some hi^^derance and impediments.

66 Men often take counsel to^gether, but God which guides and governs all
things, often brings it to naught. Isai. 8.10*

67 We may propound; it is Go^ that does dispose:
We wish for what we should not (...) God knows.


68 Moreover great is the tyranny of Satan, who by Gods permission draws,
whither he lists, the wills of the reprobate being entangled in the cords of
their sins.

69 The weight and burden of sundry businesses does often disturb the judgment
of the Understanding, and the arbitrament of the Will.

70 Unto which external impediments is also added an internal weakness in
the powers of man, even in external things, arising from sin.

71 With which weakness there is also joined a disorder of the affections,
which like a torrent oftentimes carries away the Will, and perverts the
judgment of the Understanding.

72 Which consideration of our powers in spiritual things altogether
abolished, and even in external things much weakened, sets before us the
greatness of Gods grace to be acknowledged by us in our conversion and
salvation, drives security out of our hearts, pulls down the crests of
pride, and makes us more diligent in praying, and keeping the gifts of the
Holy Ghost.

73 After Conversion, the Will of man being freed is not idle, but through
power given from above is made operative, and a fellow-worker with God.

74 The Holy Ghost, without us, works in us to will that which is good. And
when we will, and will after such and such a manner, it is he that works
together with us, to enable us to work.

75 For the children of God are so moved to working, that they also have a part
in the working. August. de corrept. and great. cap. 2.

76 This may be called Liberty or freedom from the service of sin: For where
there is the Spirit of God regenerating and illuminating a man, there is
Liberty or freedom. 2. Cor. 3.17.

77 But yet that Liberty or freedom of the Will being freed stands still in
need of the aid and guidance of the Holy Ghost.

78 For seeing that even in the regenerate the flesh lusts against the
spirit, and the spirit against the flesh. Gal. 5.17. Therefore they are not
fully free from all sin.

79 In the spirit of the regenerate there is a free servitude, and in the flesh
of the regenerate there is a servile freedom.

80 In the other life at length the regenerate shall obtain full and plenarie
liberty or freedom of will, by which they shall be freed not only from the
service of sin, but also from all manner of sin, from all misery, and from
all fear of falling.

81 Which may be called a Liberty or freedom from sin and mu^abilitie.

82 By which they shall not only not sin, nor only have power not to sin,
but also have no power to sin at all. To that Liberty and freedom Christ
bring us, who is the author of our Liberty and freedom.

CHAP. XI. Wherein are contained Theological Aphorisms concerning the LAW.
1 THe Word and the Sacraments serve for the repairing of man, being sovereign
Antidotes and preservatives against the poison of sin, and our spiritual
diseases.

2 The Word is reduced to two chief heads, the Law and the Gospel.

3 By the Law we come to the knowledge of our diseases: and by the Gospel we
are directed to our Physician.

4 For the Law was given by Moses, but Grace and truth by Jesus Christ. John
1.17.

5 The Law which was given by Moses is divided into the Moral, the Judicial,
and the Ceremonial.

6 The Moral Law was only repeated by Moses, by a solemn promulgation: for it
was at first engraven in the heart of man.

7 And it is the Glass of Gods Eternal justice; The glass of Natures
perfection, such as it was before the fall; The glass of Sin and the inward
corruption of Nature since the fall; The glass of Obedience, which the
regenerate are to perform; and The glass of Perfection, which shall follow in
the life to come.

8 They which would have this Law to be thrust out of the Church, deserve
themselves to be thrust out of the Church.

9 For they gainsay Christ, who began his preaching from the expounding of the
Law. Matthew. 5.6, 7.

10 They gainsay the Apostles, who preached Repentance and Remission of sins
in the name of Christ.

11 The Law is indeed a Glass to behold Sin, but it is not a remedy to cure
sin.

12 But yet unless we first come to a sight of our sin, we can have no
desire or will to seek for a remedy.

13 For They that be whole need not a Physician. Matthew. 9.12. that is, They
that think themselves to be whole: for indeed all men are not only sick, but
even dead in their sins.

14 The Law was given, that we should seek for Grace. August. d^ Spir. and lit.
cap. 15.

15 What the Law commands, Faith obtains. Idem Homil. 29. in Joan.

16 By the Law sin is made known unto us, and by Faith it is abolished.
Ambros. in 3. cap. Romans

17 And therefore the ministry of death was in this regard necessary: that
we might desire and seek for life in Christ.

18 God pours not the oil of of Mercy but into the vessel of an humble and
contrite heart. Bern. sermon. 3. in Annun^. Col. 113.

19 God does not pardon, unless thou do first acknowledge thy sins:
neither does he cover them, unless thou do first lay them open: neither does
he send comfort, unless thou be first grieved for them.

20 The Law is the perfect way to Eternal life, but it was weak through the
flesh. Romans 8.3. And therefore it is not available for us unto Eternal life.

21 The Law is spiritual. It requires entire obedience of body* of soul, and
spirit, inward and outward, throughout all the parts of our life: It requires
that our thoughts words and deeds be spiritual: It requires soundness and
perfection of Nature every way.

22 But we are carnal. Romans 7.14. We are born flesh of flesh. John 3.6.
Neither are we altogether freed from the old flesh in this life.

23 Therefore we cannot fulfill the Law in this life.

24 There is no man that sins not. 1. Kings 8.46. Now we know that, To
sin, and To fulfill the Law* these are contrary the one to the other:
Therefore there is no man that can fulfill the Law.

25 That every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may become guilty before
God* Romans 3.22.

26 God by the word of the Law has concluded all under sin. Romans 11.32. Galat.
3.19.

27 The Rule of the Affirmative precepts, or commandments, is tha^ First, Of
the loving and fearing God above all things.

28 The Rule of the Negativ^ precepts, or commandments, is that Last, Of not
coveting. August. de perfect. just.

29 Therefore the Affirmative precepts, or commandments, are not satisfied or
fulfilled by the love and fear of God begun in us, in any kind whatsoever.

30 Neither are the Negative precepts, or commandments, satisfied or fulfilled
by our abstaining from outward offenses in any kind whatsoever.

31 Though we should begin our outward obedience in never so great a measure,
and eschew outward offenses: yet still we should fail in the first and last
commandments.

32 Therefore in the Decalogue* or Ten Commandments, there is express mention
made of the outward and grosser offenses: that the mind of man may conceive by
the judgment of God, what to judge of the grievousnesse of inward offenses.

33 Before God he is an Adulterer, not only that lies with another man's wife,
but whosoever looks on a woman to lust after her. Matthew. 5.28.

34. Before God he is a Thief, not only that takes another man's goods from him
by force, but whosoever does usurp them, by coveting them in an unlawful
manner.

35 Gods Laws and commandments do not only bind the hand and the other
outward members, but the whole man.

36 Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from sin, my heart is
free from concupiscence? Prove. 20.9. Who then can boast, that he is not a
transgressour of the Law?

37 Therefore the promises of the Law profit us nothing.

38 But, in Christ, All the promises of God are Yea, and Amen. 2. Cor. 1.20.

39 For, what the Law could not do, God sending his Son has done for us.
Romans 8.3.

40 But, if righteousness come by the Law, then is Christ dead in vain. Gal.
2.21.

41 And if the regenerate do perfectly fulfill the Law, why do they pray daily,
Forgive us our trespasses, according as they are taught by Christ? Matthew. 6.11.

42 If there be no trespass committed, why is forgiveness required?

43 Moses hands are heavy, and the yoke of the Law is unsupportable. Exodus
17.12. Bern. sermon. 3. in Cant.

44 Moses face shines so, that we are not able to look on it. Exodus 34.29. 2.
Cor. 3.13.

45 Moses is of a slow tongue, his words are harsh: we cannot hear and obey
them* Exodus 4.10.

46 The Tables of the commandments are of stone: Exodus 24.12. They break our
hearts in pieces, but they do not cure them.

47 It was not Moses, but Joshua, that brought the children of Israel into the
promised land: It is Christ and not Moses that leads us unto eternal life.

48 The Law is the Hammer of Death, the flashing of Hell, and the Thunderbolt
of Gods vengeance.

49 This profit the Law brings with it, That it convinces a man of his
infirmity and weakness, and compels him to sue unto Christ for the
medicine and remedy of grace, to strengthen him. August* Epist. 200. ad Asell.

50 Let us therefore learn to know the voice of the Law, that so we may come
to know the comfortable voice of Christ our Shepherd.

51 Whatsoever shows unto us sin, vengeance, and death, it is in the place
and steed of the Law, and does the office of the Law, whether it be in the Old
Testament or in the New.

52 We must not therefore appropriate the Law to the Old Testament, and the
Gospel to the New.

53 There was indeed a solemn promulgation of the Law, made in the Old
Testament, and of the Gospel in the New.

54 But yet the Doctrine as well of the Law as of the Gospel sounded in both
Testaments.

55 Neither in the New Testament only, but also in the Old, come we to the
knowledge, of sin by the Law, and the abolishing of sin by Christ.

56 The Ceremonial and Judicial Laws in the Old Testament, are abrogated.

57 For the Ceremonial were but Shadows and Types of Christ: and therefore at
the coming of Christ they expired.

58 The Judicial were fitted for the Common Wealth of the Jews: which God
would have to be kept within such bounds until the coming of Christ.

59 But yet the Ceremonial and Judicial Laws are so abrogated, that
whatsoever in them is Moral, still abides.

60 And the Mosaicall Ceremonies, by an Allegorical exposition, may be fitted
to serve for our edification.

61 So much of the Law in General. Now we are to make inquiry in Special
concerning the Decalogue, or the Ten Commandments, and concerning Images.

62 The Number of the Commandments is certain, but the Order of them is not
so certain.

63 As concerning their Order then, it is but a matter of question, and not a
matter of faith.

64 We must not therefore move unnecessarie stirs, and contentions about it,
to the disturbing of the peace of the Church: neither must we suffer our
Christian Liberty in such things to be captivated by our adversaries.

65 Christian Liberty admits of Historical Images: But as for Idolatrous,
Superstitious and Lascivious, them the Law of God abolisheth: And as for such
as truly cause Scandal, Charity takes them away.

66 As often therefore as there accreweth unto them an opinion of worship,
insomuch that divine honor is given unto them; or, that they are thought to
have in them any peculiar sanctity; or, that men imagine that God is so tied
unto them that he is there present in a more peculiar manner, and hears men's
prayers more effectually there then elsewhere: The use of them is no longer
indifferent.

67 Neither yet do I commend the saying of that Greek Pelusiote, in the
seventh Synod, to this purpose; That, A temple unles it were adorned with
Statues, images and pictures was nothing worth, and not to be regarded.

68 For my part, I like not the multitude of sumptuous and costly images. For
fear lest it come to pass, as Bernard complains, that whilst the Church
shines gloriously in the walls, it look pitifully in the poor; lest, whilst
the stones are covered with gold, the children starve for want of clothing; and
whilst rich men's eyes are pleased, poor men's purses be exhausted.

69 As therefore in other things which we call indifferent, so also in this
there is a Christian prudence required, that we give no scandal to ou^ weak
brethren, by the unseasonable use thereof: neither yet must we give place to
those, Which come in privily to spy out our liberty which we have in Christ
Jesus, that they may bring us into bondage, Gal. 2.4.

70 He which heretofore wrote his Law in tables of stone with his own finger,
write them likewise in our hearts by his Holy Spirit.

CHAP. XII. Wherein are contained Theological Aphorisms concerning the
GOSPEL.
1 THe Gospel is Parallel to the Law.

2 The Doctrines of both have a celestial Original.

3 In both, there is life eternal promised: but in a different manner.

4 In the Law it is promised to those that perform perfect obedience: but in
the Gospel it is promised to those that truly believe on Christ.

5 The Doctrines of both are to be propounded unto us in the Church.

6 For both of them are of necessary use in the conversion of man.

7 Both of them are most nearely joined together in the heart and practice of a
Christian man.

8 But yet they are so conjoined, that notwithstanding they are accurately to
be distinguished.

9 For if we either take quite away, or else weaken the difference which is
between them, we pull down the very Tower or Pillar of Christianity.

10 Neither yet must we make them so contrary the one to the other, as that
the one should destroy the other.

11 For, The Law is not against the promises of God. Gal. 3.21.

12 But, The Law is established through faith. Romans 3.31.

13 What the Law requires of us, that has Christ fulfilled for us: as it is
declared unto us in the Gospel.

14 For Christ is the end, and fulfilling of the Law for righteousness^ to
every one that believes. Romans 10.4.

15 The righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in us by Christ. Romans 8.4.

16 Moreover Faith kindled in our hearts by the Holy Spirit, through the voice
of the Gospel, works by love. Galat. 5.6.

17 And Love is the sum, or fulfilling of the Law. Romans 13.10.

18 And thus the Law is written in our hearts. Jerem. 31.33.

19 But yet this love is not perfect in this Life.

20 And therefore we cannot perfectly fulfill the Law.

21 Our Obedience here is but Inchoate, or begun: it shall be complete and
consummate in the Life to come.

22 The Gospel, according to the Etymology of the Greek name in^erpreted,
signifies, a good message, or good tidings.

23 For it brings unto us the good ^idings, How that by the counsel of the
most sacred and Holy Trinity, Christ both God and Man was appointed to be our
Media^our, and Redeemer.

24 And again, How that Christ by his most holy obedien^e has perfectly
fulfilled the Law for us; and merited the grace of God, remission of sins,
the gift of the Holy Spirit, righteousness, and life eternal for the whole
world.

25 And again, How that those benefits obtained by Christ are applied unto
those that believe, and are bestowed merely of grace.

26 Therefore, because the preaching of this Doctrine brings with it most
plentiful matter of ^oy, The Prophets and Apostles, the better to express it,
have made choice of these two words Bisser and (...), which signify good
tidings.

27 Some derive Bisser from Basar signifying flesh, which signifies, To
declare fleshy and soft things.

28 Others give another reason of the name: because Bisser signifies, To
declare joy unto all flesh.

29 That so the condition and nature of this doctrine may be declared^ How that
in it all good things are freely offered unto us.

39 And again, That the condition of the hearers thereof may be expressed: How
that they are flesh, and so subject to many infirmities; and therefore must not
in any case neglect this so great salvation offered by God.

31 Bisser and (...), words of good tidings, are commonly used, when we hear
of enemies put to flight, from whom there was great fear of imminent and
apparent danger; and likewise when it is declared that peace is restored. 1 Samuel 4.17. 1 Samuel 31.9. 2 Samuel 1.20. 2 Samuel 4.10. 2 Samuel 18.19.

32 So the Gospel declares unto us, That God has delivered us out of the
hands of our enemies. Luke 1.74. That he has delivered us from the power of
darkness. Colos. 1.13. That he has spoiled principalities and powers, and
made a show of them openly, triumphing over them. Col. ^.15.

33 Bisser and (...) are also used, when tidings are brought that a Child is
borne. Jerem. 20.15.

34 So in the Gospel good tidings are brought unto us: Unto us a Child is
borne, unto us a Son is ^iven. Isai. 9.6. As many as received ^im, to them gave
he power to be^ome the sons of God, even to those that ^eleeve on his name.
Ioh. 1.12. That ^o through him we might receive the adoption of sons. Galat.
3.5.

35 Again these words are used* when deliverance is declared unto captives, and
consolation to those that mourn. Isai. 61.1, 2.

36 So in the Gospel it is de^clared unto us, That Christ has sent forth the
Prisoners out of the (...) wherein is no water. Zach. 9.11.

37 Hence is that most joyful^ Acclamation, Isai. 40.1. Comfort (...) comfort
ye my people, says your God* 2. Speak ye comfortably to Jerusa^lem, and cry
unto her, That her warre^fare is accomplished.

38 Hence also flow these swe^^ Elogies and appellations of this Doctrine, to
wit, That it is The Gospe^^ of the grace of God. Acts 20.24* The knowledge of
salvation. Lu^* 1.77. The word of the kingdom Matthew. 13.19. The power of God
(...) to salvation to every one that bele^^veth. Romans 1.16. The word of lif^
Acts 5.20. Philip. 2.16. The wo^^ of eternal life. John 6.68. The word of
salvation. Acts 13.26. The word of reconciliation. 2. Cor. 5.19. The law of the
spirit of life. Romans 8.2. The Gospel of our salvation. Ephesians. 1.13. The
promise of inheriting, or heirship. Romans 4.13. A well of water springing up
into everlasting life. John 4.14. Green pastures, still waters. Psalm. 23.2. A
table prepared, a cup that runs over. 5. A rod, and staff. 4. The savor
of life unto life. 2. Cor. 2.16.

39 Therefore that joyful voice of the Gospel is not to be changed into the
voice of the Law accusing and terrifying.

40 Which thing they do, whosoever dispute that the Law delivers imperfect
precepts only concerning outward works, to be performed out of fear: And that
the Gospel sets before us precepts more severe, more excellent and perfect.

41 As if the Law were not long ago a yoke, which our fathers were not able to
bear. Acts 15.10. The yoke of burden, the staff of the shoulder, the rod of
the oppressor. Isai. 9.6. insomuch that we stood in need of another Lawgiver.

42 Therefore we are to seek out other differences of the Law and the Gospel,
which the Scripture expresses thus.

43 The Law is in some sort known by nature. Romans 2.14.15. The Gospel is a
mystery altogether hidden from our reason. Romans 16.25. 1. Cor. 2.7. Ephesians.
1.9. Coloss. 1.26.

44 The Law is the doctrine of works, and preaches unto us what we are to do:
The Gospel is the doctrine of faith, and preaches unto us what is already
done, that is, declares unto us, That Christ has performed for us what the
Law requires. Romans 8.4.

45 The Law requires of every man perfect obedience to all Gods commandments:
But the Gospel requires faith, teaching us to believe on Christ our Mediator.

46 The Law has concluded all under sin. Galat. 3.22. That all the world may
become guilty before God. Romans 3.19. The Law works wrath. Romans 4.15. It makes
us subject to the curse. Galat. 3.10. Therefore it is the ministry of death
and condemnation. But the Gospel is the word of salvation, peace and
reconciliation.

47 Therefore the doctrine both of the Law and of the Gospel is busied about
sin, but yet in a different manner.

48 The Law lays open, accuses, and condemns sin: But the Gospel
points at him, which made satisfaction for sin. And therefore it covers,
takes away, and remitteth sin.

49 The promises of the Law require perfect obedience of works: But the
promises of the Gospel are of free grace.

50 Hereupon it is, that the promises of the Law do nothing profit us, by
reason of the weakness of our flesh. Romans 8.3. But in Christ all the promises
of God are Yea and Amen. 2. Cor. 1.20.

51 The Law shows unto us what are good works, but it does not give us
strength and power to do them. The Gospel contains the promise of the Spirit
of renovation, which writes the Law in our hearts. Jerem. 31.33.

52 Both these benefits therefore, to wit, of Justification and Renovation
belong unto the Gospel: Grace, and the gift by Grace, the imputation of
Christ's righteousness, and the donation of the Holy Ghost.

53 But yet they are not to be confoun^ed: neither is Justification to be
placed in Renovation: for Renovation is the consequent of Justification, and
not the cause.

54 For God does not receive us into grace, and justify us, for our Renovation
or Inchoate obedience: but being justified and received into grace, he renews
us by his holy Spirit, that our obedience, according to the Law, may be
Inchoate.

55 Which Inchoate obedience although it be imperfect, and many ways polluted
and defiled: Yet the Gospel teaches us that it pleases God, in as many as
are justified by faith in Christ.

56 The Law is to be thundered out to those that are secure, and unto
hypocrites: But the Gospel is to be preached to those that are contrite, and
broken in heart.

57 The Law bridleth and keeps in the Old man: But the Gospel keeps the
New man under grace.

58 And because the regenerate are not altogether freed from the old flesh, but
there remains still in them a fight between the flesh and the Spirit. Galat.
5.17. Therefore also they stand in need of the ministry of the Law.

59 And that for a twofold end: That the flesh or the Old man may be in them
kept under: and that the New man may learn, in what works to exercise himself.

60 But it is very worthy to be noted and observed, That the promises of the
Gospel are Universal in a twofold respect: both in respect of the Time; and
also in respect of the Object.

61 By the Universality of time we understand, That it is one and the same
Gospel by which all the saints, of all ages from the beginning of the world,
are saved.

62 Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and today, and for ever. Hebr. 13.8.
Therefore the passion of Christ was useful and profitable, before he suffered.

63 For he is the Lamb ^lain from the foundation of the world. Revel. 13.8.
that is, in respect of Gods eternal decree, in respect of his promises, in
respect of the types, and in respect of the efficacy.

64 Therefore we believe with the Apostle, that through the grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ we shall be saved even as our fathers. Act. 15.11.

65 Neither only in the New Testament, but also in the Old, as many as seek
for righteousness and salvation in the works of the Law are under the curse.
Galat. 3.10.

66 Presently after the fall there was a promise made, That the seed of the
woman should bruise the serpents head. Genesis 3.15. Which was the first Gospel,
by which our first parents were supported and sustained.

67 How this promise was in after times more clearly expounded and repeated by
divine revelation made unto the Patriarchs and Prophets, it is excellent well
declared by Chemnitius part. 2. loc. page 579, etc.

68 And as the Gospel is one, so is faith one, and the way and means of
attaining righteousness and salvation is also one.

69 And therefore it is but a mere fiction, and without any ground of truth,
That men were saved in the time of Moses, by the Law of Nature; after the time
of Moses, by the Leviticall Law; and in the New Testament, by the Evangelicall
Law.

70 And that likewise is false, which is said by some, That the latitude of the
Law with the Old Testament, and the Gospel with the New, is equal: if the
meaning be this, That whatsoever is propounded in the Old Testament
appertains unto the Law, and whatsoever is propounded in the New appertains
unto the Gospel

71 For the Gospel was promised before by the Prophets in the Holy Scripture.
Romans 1.2. And To him give all the Prophets witness, That through his name,
whosoever believes in him shall receive remission of sins. Acts 10.43.

72 In a word, whatsoever the Prophets foretold should come to pass, the same
do the Apostles declare to be fulfilled.

73 By the Universality of the Object we understand, that the promises of the
Gospel belong unto all men.

74 But here we must distinguish between the Promise, and the Application of
the promise. The Promise belongs unto all men, but the Application of the
promise is only made unto those that do believe.

75 For the question is not here, Whether all men are actually made partakers
of the benefits of the Gospel, which by the preaching thereof are offered unto
all: for it is too manifest to be denied, That all men are not partakers of
them.

76 But the question is, Whether the Promises of the Gospel, of themselves,
and in themselves are Universal, or else so restrained that by the counsel
and decree of God they belong not but to some certain men absolutely chosen, by
the good will and pleasure of God, before others.

77 For answer hereto we say, That God does seriously desire the salvation of
all; That Christ made full satisfaction for all; and therefore That God does by
the Gospel seriously offer the benefits of Christ unto all.

78 Christ commands his Apostles to go and preach the Gospel to every
creature. Mark 16.15. Therefore it is his will, that they preach the Gospel
every where all abroad unto all, and offer it unto all; and in the Gospel, the
benefits of his death and passion; and in them, remission of sins; and in
remission of sins, the grace of God; and in the grace of God, salvation, and
everlasting life.

79 Whosoever therefore believes (that is, Whosoever by faith, which by the
preaching of the Gospel the Holy Ghost works in all those that hear, and do
not stubbornly resist) receives the benefits which are offered unto him, he
shall be saved. Mark 16.16.

80 Therefore God offers the Gospel unto all to this end, That by the
hearing thereof, they may conceive Faith, whose Forerunner is Contrition, and
whose Followers are Good works, which are the fruits of Renovation, and Faith
kindled by the Holy Ghost.

81 But by the Consequent and Judicial will of God, the preaching of the
Gospel becomes unto some the savor of death unto death. 2. Cor. 2.16.

82 Concerning this Universality of Object, it is to be marked and observed,
that it does not exclude Faith, but rather include it.

83 For Faith and the Promise are as Correlates, they have relation one to the
other.

84 Whereupon the doctrine of the Gospel is called the word of Faith. Romans
10.8. 1. Tim. 4.6. and again, Gal. 3.2. it is called, the hearing and preaching
of Faith.

85 Which condition of Faith is not Aitiologicall, or showing the cause; as the
promises of the Law are Conditional: but it is Syllogisticall, or showing the
instrument: For the manner and instrument is expressed by which we come to
embrace the good promises.

86 The voice of the Law is, If thou shall perform perfect obedience, thou
shall be saved: Here the Condition is Aitiologicall, or Causaell: because
perfect obedience is the cause for which eternal life is promised to those
that keep the Law.

87 But the voice of the Gospel is, If thou do believe, thou shall be
saved: Here the Condition is Syllogisticall, or Isntrumental: because the
Gospel pronounces that we are justified before God, and saved, not for Faith,
but by Faith.

88 By the definition of the Gospel it is easy to be understood, whether, to
speak properly, the Gospel be the preaching of repentance or no.

89 When the Gospel is taken generally for all the doctrine preached by Christ
and his Apostles, It is most true, that the Gospel is the preaching of
Repentance.

90 Moreover, The Gospel does only declare the grace of God to those that
repent, that is, to those that are humbled through the acknowledgement of their
sins, and the sense of Gods wrath.

91 And inasmuch as it pronounces that salvation is to be sought for only in
Christ, it presupposes that without Christ all is concluded under sin.

92 Besides, The Gospel does demonstrate and expound unto us many places in
the Law, which we cannot easily and evidently gather from the Law it self.

93 In this sense therefore and in these respects the Gospel may be said, and
truly understood to be the preaching of Repentance: But yet we must know that
the proper doctrine of the Gospel is about the free remission of our sins
through Jesus Christ.

94 Thou will say perchance, Faith is by the Gospel: Therefore unbelief is
reproved by the Gospel: For the Law knew not Christ to be the Mediator.

95 I answer: The Law bids us believe all the word of God. The Gospel
propounds unto us this word, That Christ dying on the cross for our sins
is become our righteousness before God. Let the Law conclude: Therefore
believe this word of God.

96 The Law reproves all sins: therefore also unbelief: The Gospel declares
by the Antithesis thereof, that not to believe on Christ the Mediator is a
sin and the head of all sin: as Chemnitius teaches. p. 2. loc. page 570.
The Law concludes: Therefore for this sin thou art accused and condemned.

97 In this sense said Holy Luther, That the Law and the Gospel, in the
practice, are more nearely conjoined then any Mathematical point.

98 And yet the proper work of the Law remains, which is, To reprove sin,
to work wrath, and to condemn: But the proper work of the Gospel is, To
comfort, to raise up, and to save.

99 When the Law propounds the Major, Whosoever steals, is under the Curse:
The Conscience of the Thief assumeth the Minor, But I have stolen. Hereupon
the Law infers the Conclusion, Therefore thou art under the curse.

100 Here the whole Syllogism accusing and condemning is a^tributed to the
Law, although the Conscience of the Thief make the Assumption.

101 So again the Law propounds this Major, Whosoever is under sin, is
under the Curse: The Gospel propounds the Minor, But whosoever does not
believe on Christ, is yet under sin, and the wrath of God abides on him. Joh.
3.36. Hereupon the Law infers the Conclusion, Therefore he is under the
Curse.

102 Here again the whole Syllogism accusing and condemning is attributed to
the Law, although the Gospel make up the Assumption.

103 The Law concludes all under sin. Galat. 3.22. Whosoever therefore does
not believe the Gospel, which points at Christ, he is under the curse of the
Law, and over him does the Law exercise the office of accusing and condemning,
with all severitie and rigor.

104. Therefore the Accusation of Unbelief belongs to the Law, as it is
illustrated by the light of the Gospel.

105 Hereupon Holy Luther writing upon Genesis, cap. 22. f. 303. says thus,
That the work of Faith on Christ, and the sin of Unbelief opposite unto it,
are reduced to the first commandment.

106 The Lord Jesus by the voice of his Gospel lift up our hearts, and uphold
us in all tentations, and specially in the hour of death. Amen.

CHAP. XIII. Wherein are contained Theological Aphorisms concerning
REPENTANCE.
1 THe Practice of the Law and the Gospel consists in Repentance.

2 For it is not enough for us to know what is the Office of the Law, and what
is the Office of the Gospel: but the Practice of them both is required at our
hands. Theology, or Divinity, is a Practical Doctrine.

3 Repentance is attributed either unto God, or unto Men.

4 It is attributed unto God after the manner of men, not that it is in God: it
is in God Figuratively, not Properly* in Effect, not in Affect. We see the
Effects of it: God feels no such Affect, or Passion in himself.

5 For as the Anger of God is no perturbation of his mind, but the judgment by
which he inflicts punishment upon sin: So the Repentance of God is his
immutable disposition of things mutable. August. 15. de Civitat. Dei, cap. 25.

6 Gods thoughts are not as man's thoughts, as if he at any time altered his
purpose; neither is he angry as one that is mutable: but these things are
therefore written, that we may thereby learn the grievousnesse of our sins.
Ambr. lib. de arca, and N^ah, cap. 4.

7 Repentance is attributed unto men in a far different sense then it is to
God. For God is not a man, that he should repent. 1 Samuel 15.29.

8 Repentance, as it is attributed unto man, is in Scripture taken two ways,
either Totally or Partially.

9 Totally, for the whole act of Conversion: Partially, for Contrition only.

10 The force and meaning of the word does incline rather to the latter sense.
For To Repent, is as much as to be ashamed and grieved for some thing
committed. Gell. 17. cap. 1.

11 But, as it is used in Scripture, and received by our Churches, it is to be
taken rather in the former sense.

12 Wherefore some of the Ancients, in stead of Repentance thought it fitter to
use the word Resipiscence, which signifies amendment, returning unto ones self
again, and after going astray coming into the right way again. Tertull. 2.
contra Marc. Lactant. 6. Instit. cap. 24.

13 The Hebrews call it by a most apt and fit name Theschubah, which the Greeks
call (...), and we call Conversion.

14 Phavorinus expounds this well after this manner, That it is A Conversion
from sins and offenses unto the contrary good.

15 Understand Goodness it self, and the true and chief good.

16 But Damascene expounds it exceeding well, That it is, A returning from that
which is against nature, unto that which is according unto nature, and from the
Devil unto God. 2 de Orthod. fid. 30.

17 That which we call Penitence or Repentance, is by the Greeks called (...),
and (...), that is Grief for what is past, and Change of mind for the time to
come.

18 But yet so, that (...) (which is grief of mind not mixed with faith. Heb.
4.2.) does answer Penitence or Repentance, which is taken for Contrition only:
And (...) (which is Repentance unto salvation not to be repented of. 2 Cor.
7.10.) does answer Penitence, or Repentance as it is taken Generally.

19 And yet this difference is not always constant, and every where to be
found, as it appears out of Matthew. 21.29. and Heb. 12.17.

20 But yet most an end (...) notes true and saving Repentance; and (...),
false Repentance, and such as leads to destruction.

21 That false Repentance is twofold: One is Hypocritical, and counterfeit
consisting merely in outward show and appearance, which the Prophet calls
Theatricall, to be seen of men: which Christ himself expresses in the 6 of
Matthew* verse. 1. where he forbids To do alms before men to be seen of them.
And, in the 16 verse, he says that some fast and are of a sad countenance,
that they may appear unto men to fast.

22 The other is but Lame Repentance and by the halfes, deploring sin, but
without grace and faith.

23 But true and saving Repentance consists in serious Contrition and Faith.

24 Some call it Evangelicall: But here we must add this explication, That in
respect of the better part, that is, Faith, which is from the Gospel, it is so
called.

25 True Repentance is a motion of the heart, kindled by the Holy Ghost, by
which a man coming to the knowledge of his sins and the wrath of God, does
earnestly grieve; and by faith in Christ, who made satisfaction for his sins,
is again raised up, being certainly persuaded, that for Christ his sake his
sins ar^ forgiven.

26 For Repentance is a kind of Conversion from darkness to light, and from
the power of Satan unto God. Act. 26.18.

27 Therefore the Term from whence, is our sins; from the consideration
whereof there arises Contrition: and the Term unto which, is God; unto whose
Mercy we have access by the merit of Christ.

28 As many Kinds of Celestial Doctrine as there are, by the ministry
whereof God preaches unto men Repentance and Remission of sins, and works
the same in men; so many are the Essential parts thereof: But there are two
kinds of Celestial Doctrine, to wit, the Law and the Gospel. Therefore also
there are two parts of Repentance.

29 Each of these Doctrines has its proper and peculiar effect in the
conversion of man: The Law strikes fear and terror, whilst it manifests
sins, and the wrath of God against them: The Gospel gives comfort, whilst
it sets before the man that is co^trite, Christ the Mediator, that Lamb of
God which takes away the sins of the world.

30 These Effects of the Law and the Gospel, although they be distinct, yet
they both concur in this, to make up the complement and perfection of
Repentance.

31 We do not call good works, or new obedience, a part, but the Fruits worthy
of Repentance, as the Scripture witnesses. Luke 3.8. Acts 26.20.

32 Some dispute, That there are two parts of Repentance, to wit, Mortification
of the flesh, and Vivification of the Spirit.

33 For my part I am not against them, if by Mortification they understand
Contrition or grief conceived upon the acknowledgement of sins, and the
sense of Gods wrath: and by Vivification likewise, Consolation* which is from
Faith.

34 But if they understand that perpetual study of the converted and
regenerate in mortifying the old man, and following the fruits of the Spirit:
Then I say it belongs to new obedience.

35 Which forasmuchas it is not perfect in this life, therefore The whole life
of a Christian man is called a continued act of Repentance. Luther. in prim.
suis propos. de Indulg. th. 1.

36 Those three parts of Repentance according to which it is divided into
Contrition of heart, Confession of mouth, and Satisfaction of work, have no
place in that saving and inward Conversion unto God, by which we return unto
God: but they have place only in that public and Ecclesiastical Pe^ance used
by the Ancients.

37 For in time past those which by their public offenses had given ^^and all
unto others, and were therefore excluded out of the communion of the Church,
were required to give public testimony and signs of their repentance, beside
inward contrition of heart, to wit, by their sorrow, confession, and begging
pardon and forgiveness, etc. To give the Church satisfaction. B. Rhe^anu^,
(...) Schol. ad Tertull* d^ Poenit.

38 Therefore they abuse that division* whosoever say that those are the parts
of that saying Repentance, by which we return unto God.

39 For from that can Faith by no means be excluded: for without Faith,
Repentance cannot be Repentance unto life. Act. 11.18.

40 Tears are good, if thou do acknowledge Christ. Ambros. in cap. 24. Luc.
17.

41 But that which is annexed is far worse, If those actions of the Penitent
or Repentant are made to have the force of an Element or the Material not
only signifying, but also causing and effecting remission of sins, in the
Sacrame^^ of Penance: and the voice of the Confessor absolving be added
thereunto as the Formal. Concerning which there is wonderful great difference
amongst writers.

42 For thus we should attribute unto our own endeavors and merits, that
remission of sins which the Scripture appropria^eth unto Christ, and his
merit apprehended by Faith.

43 Contrition is required in our Conversion, not as the cause and merit of our
reconciliation with God, out in respect of order.

44 Christ preaches the Gospel, but it is to the poor; he heals, but it is
the humble in heart; he preaches liberty, but it is to the captives; he
preaches sight, but it is to the blind; he preaches binding-up, but it is to
the broken in heart. Isai. 61.1. Matthew. 11.5* To the broken in heart, that is,
to those that know and acknowledge their own spiritual poverty, captivity,
and blindness, and therefore are contrite and broken in heart.

45 To this Contrition belong, Acknowledgement of sin, sense of Gods wrath,
grief and anguish of a terrified conscience, detestation and ^light of sin;
as also outward signs of Contrition, Tears, fasting, beating of the breast,
sackcloth, etc.

46 But there is a great difference between the Contrition of the Good and
Godly, and the Contrition of the Hypocrites and Ungodly.

47 The Contrition of the Godly arises from the special operation of the Holy
Ghost: but the Contrition of the Ungodly and Hypocrites arises for the most
part from the old man, and from the natural powers of free will.

48 The Godly in the terrors of Conscience have an eye unto the principal
Object of sin, that is, God himself; and are only grieved that they have
offended him: But the Hypocrites contrarily are more afraid of the judgment of
their own minds and the judgments of other men, and they are vexed more with
the consideration of the punishment, then of the sin.

49 The Godly have an eye not only to their Actual sins, but also to
Original the fountain of all Actual; not only to outward offenses, but also
to their inward corruptions; not only to the punishments of this present life,
but also of the life to come: But the Hypocrites make confession only of their
outward offenses, and that in a negligent manner; and for the most part they
think only upon the punishments of this present life: but if at any time their
thoughts be bent upon the consideration of eternal punishments, they are
carried headlong into the gulf of despair.

50 The Godly confess and acknowledge God to be just, and that his judgments
are just: But it is the property of Hypocrites to extenuate their sins, and
to challenge Gods justice.

51 But yet, we must beware that we make not one Contrition Legal, and another
Evangelicall.

52 For even that Contrition of the godly (which they call Evangelicall) is of
the Law, and not of the Gospel.

53 Unto the preaching of the Law, God sometimes adds real and ocular
preaching concerning the greatness of sins and his wrath, to wit, public
and private calamities, both upon our selves and others.

54 For to this end does God send upon us punishments in this life, that he may
bring us to the acknowledgement and detestation of sin.

55 The doctrine of Contrition is perverted, if it be denied to be a part of
Repentance, and terror conceived from the threatenings of the Law: and if it be
further averred, that it is a grief for sin voluntarily apprehended.

56 And again, if men teach such doctrines as these, That a man yet in the old
flesh does work together with God truly in his Conversion; That Contrition
does especially belong unto the Gospel; That it is the cause of remission of
sins; and That the purpose of leading a good and godly life is included in it.

57 For all these are averred and maintained, contrary to the truth of the Holy
Scripture.

58 What the Schoolmen dispute concerning grief and sorrow in the highest
degree, Appreciatively and I^^ensively: and how that the grief and sorrow for
sin should exceed or equal the joy and pleasure conceived in sin, etc. This
I say tends to the butchering and slaughtering of souls.

59 The Contrition that is required must not be Hypocritical, and
Superficial; but serious, and from the heart.

60 God forbid that we should say that it can be correspondent or unswerable to
the greatness of sin, Gods wrath, and ^he punishments deserved.

61 God which is offended, is an infinite good: the sin* which is committed,
is an (...) the punishment which is prepared, is likewise infinite.

62 How then can God who is infinite, whose justice is infinite, whose wrath is
infinite against sin, be appeased and satisfied by a finite Contrition?

63 As concerning Confession, take notice of these errors: That a man after
diligent premeditation and strict examination, is bound by the Law of God to
make confession of all his sins that he can call to mind, together with their
several circumstances, in the ear of the Priest: and, That by such confession
a^ this, sin is blotted out: and, That by a little confusi^^ of face for the
present, which those that confess their sinne^ before the Priest do s^ffer
(...) they are delivered from that great confusion which they should otherwise
suffer at the day of Judgment, etc.

64 But yet there is a great deal of variance and dissension betwixt those
that stand for this Confession: For some extend this precept to Venial sins,
as they call them; and others restrain it only unto Mortal. Some seek the
Original thereof in the Law of God; and others seek it in the Constitutions of
the Church. Some extend the force of Contrition to the Remission of the sin;
others restrain it to the Remission of the punishment, either in whole or in
part. Vid. de hac. tota reomn. Biclem 4. sent. did. 17. q. 1.

65 We say that private Confession is very useful and profitable, both for the
Minister of the Church, and for those that do confess.

66 For by this means order may be taken, that those which are unworthy be not
admitted unto the participation of the Lords Supper; those that are delinquent
may be corrected; those that are negligent may be stirred up; to those that are
terrified, remission of sins may be preached; to those that are doubtful
counsel may be given; and that the ruder fort may be instructed.

67 Well therefore says D^. Philip. in his explication of the Gospel (Miser.)
on the first Sunday after Easter, which he delivered to his Auditors the last
year of his life, in these words. Love that custom of private absolution: For
if that custom be abolished, what will the Church become? yea, says he, that
custom is a testimony that in the Church there is remission of sins.

68 Neither do we mislike the reckoning up of certain sins, especially those
which most trouble the conscience.

69 But yet we altogether deny that the reckoning up of all sins is
necessary by the Law of God.

70 Neither do we acknowledge any merit of confession for the obtaining of
remission of sins.

71 Some indeed there are that teach such a kind of satisfaction by which a
man may satisfy either for the sin or at least for the temporal punishment
due unto it; and that by indulgencies he may be freed and delivered from it:
but if he do not fully satisfy, that then he is to sweat it out in Purgatory.

72 But we acknowledge no other satisfaction but the satisfaction of Christ:
and we say that sin is forgiven to the penitent freely for that satisfaction
of Christ.

73 The calamities which God sends upon the godly after their reconciliation
with him, are not properly to be called punishment^ as of an angry and severe
judge, but rather fatherly castigations.

74 Which castigations are not therefore imposed upon them, (...) if by
suffering them they could make recompense and satisfaction for their sins:
but That they may more and more detest sin; That the fear of God may increase
in them; That they may shake off security; That they may mortify the flesh
with the lusts thereof; That thereby they may understand that otherwise they
should perish for ever, were they not received into grace through Christ their
Mediator; That they may be humbled under the powerful hand of God; and That
others may be put in mind of Gods judgment against sin.

75 In a word, That there may increase in them Patience, Hope, Desire of
eternal Life, Prayers, Mortifi^ation of the old Adam, etc.

76 Admirable well speaks Nazianzen of the calamities of the godly, That they
are bitter arrows sent by the sweet hand of God* In (...)

77 Thus much concerning Repentance, which we may very well call the Haven of
Salvation, with Lactantius 6. div. Institut. cap. 24. God, says he, knowing
our great weakness and infirmity has in his pity opened unto us the Haven
of salvation, that the medicine of Repentance might remedy the necessity,
whereunto our frailty is subject.

78 Which that we defer not, many things there are which ought to invite us:
There is no access unto the grace of God, but by the way of Repentance.

79 The impenitent heart treasureth up unto it self Gods wrath: and an
impenitent life is the slaverie of the Devil.

80 We are not certain that we shall live till to morrow: Why then do we
defer our Repentance till tomorrow?

82 Late Repentance is seldom true: and they which persevere in their sins
even to the end of their life, are not said to leave their Sins; but their
sins are said to leave them.

83 Convert us, O Lord; and we shall be converted: and what we cannot do of our
selves, that work thou in us by thy Holy Spirit. Amen.

CHAP. XIV. Wherein are contained Theological Aphorisms concerning FAITH.
Whereby we are justified before God.
1 FAith is not only a knowledge and Assent but also a Sure Confidence.

2 That it is a Knowledge, it is manifestly showed by these appellations,
whereby it is denoted unto us in Scripture, of Science, Wisdom, Understanding,
Light, etc.

3 Neither can Sure Confidence of heart be carried to an Object not known to
the Understanding.

4 Away then with that Implicit Faith, by which we are freed from this labor
to try the Spirits, whether they be of God or no. 1 Ioh. 4.1. And, to beware of
false Prophets. Matthew. 7.15.

5 Away with that fiction and new invention, That Faith is better defined by
ignorance them by knowledge.

6 For though Faith be not a Knowledge drawn from principles of reason, and
built upon them: yet it is the light of Knowledge arising from the revelation
of God by the Gospel. In this light do we see light. Psalm. 36.9.

7 Manifest it is, that Faith is ^n assent, and approbation: For it is not
sufficient to know what God has revealed, but we must also give assent and
approbation to what God has revealed.

8 That Faith is a Sure Confidence, it is manifestly showed by these
appellations whereby it is denoted unto us in Scripture, viz. Substance. Hebr.
11.1. Assurance. Hebr. 10.22. Confidence. Ephesians. 3.12. Boldness. Heb. 16. and
in many other places.

9 The same also is declared by the Practical Descriptions of Faith. The Faith
of Abraham is thus described: That he against hope believed in hope. Romans 4.18.
That he was not weak in Faith. 19. That he staggered not at the promise of God
through unbelief, but was strong in Faith, giving glory unto God. 20. That ^e
was fully persuaded tha^ what he had promised, he was also able to perform. 21.

10 The Faith of the Woman which was troubled with the issue of blood, which
Christ so commends, is thus described: That she said within her self* If I
may but touch his garment, I shall be whole. Matthew. 9.21.

11 The Faith of the Canaanitish Woman, the greatness whereof Christ
proclaims, is thus described: That she fought and struggled within herself,
against the tentation about the deferring of help, the particularitie of the
promises, and her own unworthiness. Matthew. 15.22.23. etc.

12 So Faith receives Christ. Ioh. 1.12. It is the Spiritual food of the
Soul. Ioh. 4.14. Ioh. 6.35. Revel. 21.6. It is the Seal of divine promises.
Ioh. 3.33. It is the beholding of Christ hanging on the cross. Ioh. 3.15.
These things certainly cannot be attributed to a bare knowledge.

13 Add hither, that they are Opposites under the same next G^nu^: Unto Faith
there is opposed not only ignorance and darkness of understanding, but also
little Faith, and Fear. Matthew. 8.26. Wavering or doubting. Matthew. 14.31.
Fear. Luke 8.25. Staggering through unbelief. Romans 4.20.

14 The Adequate Object of Faith in respect of Knowledge and Assent, is the
Word of God contained in the Prophetical and Apostolical Scripture.

15 Whatsoever is without the Spheer or compass of this Object, cannot be a
foundation or ground of Faith.

16 Therefore far be it from us to believe, or to be persuaded that
traditions are to be received of us with the like affection and piety as the
written Word of God.

17 Neither can humane reason be the measure and rule of Faith; but it is to be
conformed according to the prescript of the Word. For every thought is to be
brought into captivity, to the obedience of Christ. 2 Cor. 10.5.

18 The Adequate Object of Faith in respect of Confidence, is Christ the
Mediator and Redeemer, or, which is all one, The promise of the Gospel
concerning the satisfaction and merit of Christ.

19 But yet we deny not but that Faith also does apprehend the promises
concerning other Spiritual and Corporal goods: Yet in this respect it does
not justify.

20 For it is necessary that first it rely on Christ, and seek reconciliation
in him and by him, before it can apply unto it self the other promises of God.

21 For in Christ alone are all the promises of God Yea and Amen. 2 Cor 1.20.

22 But Faith does justify, inasmuchas it apprehends the Merit of Christ
offered unto it in the word of the Gospel.

23 Those things which in Scripture are set before us to be believed are indeed
of diverse kinds: But yet Christ as concerning his Office of Mediatourship is
the Scope and end of all Scripture; as in the volume of the Book is written of
him. Psalm. 40.7.

24 So also Faith does in such manner assent unto the whole Word of God, that
chiefly it has respect unto the promise of grace propounded in the Gospel.

25 Now if Faith be a Sure Confidence, relying on the merit of Christ: It
follows, That a man which does truly believe on Christ may and ought
certainly resolve, that for Christ his sake his ^innes are forgiven him; that
God is merciful unto him* and that he shall be made an heir of everlasting
life.

26 And this, the firmness of Gods promises, the certainty of his oath, the
truth of the Holy Spirit witnessing and sealing the infallibility of Gods
promise concerning the hearing of our prayers; and the property of true Faith,
do evidently prove.

27 Hither may we add very ^^tly that most excellent pla^e of Saint Bernard
(Sermon. 3. de fragm. sept. miser.) Where he says thus, I consider three things
in which all my hope consists; to wit, Gods Love in my adoption, the Truth of
his promise, and his Power of Performance. Therefore let my foolish cogitation
murmr, as long as it list, saying, Who art thou? and, What is that glory?
or, By what merits do thou hope to attain it? For I can answer with sure
Confidence, I know on whom I have believed, and I am certain, that in his Love
he adopted me; that he is true in his promise; and that he is able to perform
it. This is the Threefold chord, which is not easily broken, which God lets
down from heaven unto us into this prison, which I pray God we may apprehend
and firmly hold; that it may raise us up, and draw us unto the sight of the
great God of glory.

28 This true and saving Faith is the free Gift of God. Ephesians. 2.8. Phil. 1.29.
The Operation of God. Colos. 2.1^. Whose Author and Finisher is Christ. H^br.
12.2.

29 Therefore Faith is not the merit of works foregoing, but the foundation of
works following.

30 Neither does God immediately work it in our hearts: but the Holy Ghost by
the Word of the Gospel, as by an heavenly light, does kindle the light of
Faith in our hearts, which by nature are altogether dark. Faith comes by
hearing, and hearing by the Word of God. Romans 10.17.

31 Unto the Word there are also added the Sacraments, which serve for means
to beget and nourish Faith in us.

32 Therefore to look for heavenly raptures, without and beside the Word of
God, Is the property of those that will not be contented with the means that
God has instituted and ordained.

33 True Faith is not dead. Jam* 2.17. For the Spirit of God works it in our
hearts by the lively Word of God.

34 Yea rather it is Operative and Working. Galat. 5.6.

35 That Energie or working of Faith is Twofold: One, by which it relieth on
Christ the Mediator declared in the word of the Gospel, and apprehends and
lays hold on his benefits; and Another* by which it works through love.

36 When as we say the^, that Faith does justify, and Faith alone: we are to
expound these two propositions.

37 Faith does justify; not in respect of the excellency or dignity thereof,
nor in respect of the latter Energie or working: but because it apprehends
and lays hold on Christ the Mediator.

38 Therefore there is no real difference betwee^ these, Whether we say that
Faith does justify, as some say, Instrumentally; or, as others, Formally.

39 In the former acception, it is taken for the Gift of God, kindled in the
heart by the Gospel, or the faithful heart: and so it is an Instrument by
which Christ is apprehended.

40 In the latter acception, it is taken for the very Apprehension of Christ by
Faith: and so it is the Formal cause, that is, the reason and manner of our
Justification.

41 Neither is there any real difference, whether we say, as some do, that
Faith does justify Formally; or, as others, that it is Christ; or, as others,
that it is Christ's merit.

42 For it is all one, as if you should say, Faith, which apprehends Christ,
does justify; or, Christ being apprehended by tr^e Faith is (...)
justification; or, The merit ^f Christ through Faith is imputed unto us to
justification.

43 For the proper Object of saving Faith is Christ with his merit: and again
Christ does nothing profit us, unless through Faith his righteousness be
imputed unto us.

44 To speak properly then, The Formal cause of our Justification is Christ's
righteousness, that is, his active and passive obedience apprehended of us by
Faith, and by God imputed unto us.

45 God in his Judgment does exact of us an account of all his gifts bestowed
upon us, that is* of that perfection and integrity in which we were created
after his Image.

46 But he found not in us that integrity, wisdom and righteousness wherein
we were created; but in stead thereof sin and iniquity: for which by the
(...) which is the rule of justice, we are accused and condemned.

47 But here the free Mercy of God steps in unto judgment, and exhibiteth unto
us Christ our Mediator and Redeemer: He takes from us that which is ours,
that is, sin and iniquity; and bestows upon us that which is his, that is,
his obedience which he performed unto the Law.

48 From this foundation, God who is both Merciful and Just, by a most
excellent temper of his mercy and justice, imputes no^ unto us our sins,
but imputes unto us Christ's righteousness, through Faith, which rests and
relieth upon Christ, as the only Propitiatory.

49 This Imputation of Christ's righteousness unto us through Faith, is as true
and real, as it is true that Christ took upon him our iniquities. Isai. 53.5.

50 Remission of sins is grounded on Christ's righteousness: For God does not
remit sins out of error or ignorance, levitie or negligence, but for Christ
apprehended by Faith.

51 And thus the Justice and Mercy of God show themselves in our
Justification. His Justice shines in that most perfect satisfaction which
Christ made for our sins* His Mercy appears in his acceptance of Christ's
satisfaction, and the applying of it unto us through Faith.

52 Again, the Imputation of Christ's righteousness is made, in that our sins
are remitted: for the guilt of the person cannot consist with the imputation of
Christ's righteousness.

53 Therefore, as Original sin is not only a want or privation of Original
righteousness, but also an evil Concupiscence: So likewise our Justification
before God, consists in the Remission of sins, and the Imputation of
Christ's righteousness.

54 With this Remission of sins, Imputation of Christ's righteousness,
Regeneration, and Adoption, there is allwaies joined Renovatio^ by an
inseparable union: For Christ does not only bestow upon us his righteousness,
but his Spirit also, which renews our nature.

55 But yet our Justification before God does not consist in both these joined
together.

56 But Renovation is a Consequent of Justification: and, because through the
imbecillitie and weakness of our nature it is never full and perfect,
therefore we cannot attribute unto it the glory of righteousness, as if it
were able to subsist before Gods judgment.

57 And this is it which we labor to show, when we say that we are justified
by Faith alone.

58 Where the word Alone does not determinate Faith the Subject, as if
justifying faith were at any time alone, and separate from charity, and other
Christian virtues.

59 For True Faith is a Lively Faith, and not a dead Faith: It works by Love,
and is not without works.

60 But that Exclusive particle, or word Alone does determinate the Predicate;
because the Righteousness of Christ alone (the power of apprehending whereof
belongs to Faith alone, and not to works) is imputed unto us to Justification.

61 We do not deny then that the Holy Spirit does kindle new motions in the
regenerate, and that those that are justified do walk in good works.

62 Nay rather we say plainly, Where there are not those new motions stirred up
by the Holy Spirit, neither is there true Faith as yet kindled. We say plainly,
that Good works must follow in those that are justified.

63 But this it is which we deny, That either these new motions are habitual
righteousness of force before God; or that these good works are actual
righteousness, on which we may rely before Gods judgment.

64 But indeed all the certitude of our confidence is in the precious blood of
Christ. August. In Meditat.

65 For woe unto men even of the best and most laudable life, if God setting
aside his mercy, proceed to their examination in his justice.

66 We therefore urge Exclusive particles in matter of merit, in application,
and in form of justification.

67 For fear lest that works should seem to be set up, either as the merit, or
means, or form of our Justification before God.

68 But it is the grace of God only, which through Christ alone by Faith alone
apprehended, does justify us.

69 The end of this saving Faith is the salvation of our souls and life
everlasting. 1. Pet. 1.9.

70 For by Faith we have not only acc^sse unto grace, but we also stand in
grace. Romans 5.2. And we are kept by the power of God through Faith unto
salvation. 1. Pet. 1.5.

71 But yet, notwithstanding Faith can be no more separate from love and
Charity, then the Rays from the Sun, and the Heat from the Fire: Far be
it from us to say, that Faith is formed by Love and Charity.

72 For Faith without works is said to be dead, not as if works were the life
thereof; but because that profession and boasting of Faith which has not the
testimony of good works, is no better then an image or karkeise altogether
without life.

73 Therefore works do testify that there is true Faith, as breathing does
testify that there is Life: but yet they are not the life of Faith.

74 As good fruits do testify that the tree is good, but do not make and
constitute the tree to be good.

75 Justly therefore is it reckoned amongst those causes for which good works
are to be done: that Faith and the Holy Spirit be not shaken off.

76 For the Scripture witnesses both by word and by example, that those which
through Faith in Christ are justified before God, if they afterward cherish
and make much of their sins contrary to conscience, they do both lose Faith,
and consequently also the grace of God, righteousness, the Holy Spirit, and
eternal life, and also incur eternal damnation, unless by true repentance
they return again unto God.

77 Therefore let these admonitions of the Apostles always sound in our ears,
and sink into our hearts: Work out your salvation with fear and trembling.
Philip. 2.12. Let him that thinks he stands take heed lest he fall. 1. Cor.
10.12. Give diligence to make your calling and election sure. 2. Pet. 1.10.
Examine your selves whether you be in the Faith, prove your own selves: Know
you not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be
reprobates? 2. Cor. 13.5.

78 The Lord Jesus the author of our Faith, be also the finisher thereof.
Hebr. 12.2. To him be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

CHAP. XV. Wherein are contained Theological Aphorisms concerning GOOD WORKS,
That is, Renovation of the man that is regenerate by Faith in Christ.
1 WIth Regeneration and Adoption by Faith in Christ, is Renovation always
joined as an inseparable companion.

2 For even as a man by Carnal Generation, is made partaker of Natural Life,
after which do follow Natural motions:

3 So he that is borne again of the Holy Spirit by Regeneration, is made
partaker of Life Spiritual, after which do also follow motions Spiritual.

4 Neither Generation, is without Life: neither Life, is without Motion.

5 This inward Renovation is oftentimes denoted unto us by the name of Good
Works, and that by a figure which is called Synecdoche.

6 For Renovation consists not only in Outward good Works, and actions
transient, but also (and that more principally) in the Inward renewing of the
mind, will, and all the faculties of the Soul.

7 From this Inward renewing flow forth Good actions: and Outward good Works
bear witness of it.

8 But it pleased the Holy Ghost by the name of Good Works to describe
Renovation, and that for our sakes: Because Outward good Works are better
known unto us* then Inward qualities of the mind, and affections of the heart.

9 Moreover, All the praise of virtue consists in action: Therefore we are
renewed by the Holy Ghost within, that the fruits of the Spirit may appear
without.

10 And last of all, By this means deceitful Hypocrisy is excluded, which is
a counterfeit show of inward piety: which indeed is none at all, unles it be
also demonstrated by good Works.

11 As therefore Faith the Queen has Contrition for her Usher or Forerunner,
so she also has Good Works for her waiting Maids or Followers.

12 For Good Works do not go before Justification, or before a man be
justified; but they follow after Justification, or when a man is justified. It
is the saying of S. Augustine, cap. 14. de fid. and operibus.

13 But, Where Good Works appear not without, neither will I believe that
there is Faith within. It is the saying of John Husse.

14 Neither is it any hard matter to assign the cause of this near Union, and
indissoluble knot, which is between true Faith and Good Works.

15 For this is the Nature of True Faith, That it does demonstrate it self by
love and charity.

16 He that believes is borne of God. Ioh. 1.13. He will therefore resemble
the nature of his Spiritual Father. Now God is Love. 1 Ioh. 4.8. And, He that
loves not, knows not God.

17 Faith is an inward, saving, and efficacious knowledge of God: How then can
that chief good choose but be beloved, if it be once truly known? If any man
love me, he will keep my words. Ioh. 14.23. He that has my commandments
(says our Savior) and keeps them, he it is that loves me. 21.

18 From hence the Apostle concludes: Hereby we do know that we know him, if
we keep his commandments. 1. Ioh. 2.3. And again, He that says, I know him,
and keeps not his commandments, is a Liar, and the truth is not in him. 4.

19 Faith is the spiritual Light of the Soul: But, if there be Light within,
it will show forth the Rays without. Matthew. 5.16. Let your Light so shine
before men, etc.

20 By Faith Christ dwells in our hearts. Ephesians. 3.17. Where Christ is, there
is the Holy Spirit; and where the Holy Spirit is, there also are seen the
Fruits of the Spirit.

21 Our Faith is the victory which overcomes the World. 1 Ioh. 5.4. And, What
is the World? The lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of
life. 1. Ioh. 2.16. Where these are cherished and made much of, there the world
is not yet overcome; and therefore there is not true Faith.

22 That Faith is saving and most true,
Which living is and conquering too.


23 Our hearts are purified by Faith. Act. 15.9. Therefore they which live in
security, and delight themselves in filthiness and impuritie; How can they
have inward purity of heart? For, Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth
speaks. Matthew. 12.14.

24 These things were thus plainly to be expounded, That we might not only be
freed from the Tridentine accusation, as if we preached only Confidence and
Assurance remote from all piety; but also that all vain opinion and persuasion
of Faith might be taken away from all sinners that live in security.

25 We may make answer to them out of S. James, 2.26. As the Body without the
Spirit, (that is, without breathing) is dead: So Faith without works is dead
also.

26 Neither only do Good Works proceed from Faith; but, to speak the truth,
there are no good works unles they proceed from Faith.

27 Seeing therefore Faith has respect unto the Word as unto its Correlate:
Therefore the Law of God, or the ten commandments are the Rule of Good Works.

28 Therefore superstition and will worship pleases not God but those works
only which are done according to the Canon and; rule of the moral Law
comprehended and contained in the ten commandments.

29 And we are to understand the Commandments, according to the exposition of
the Prophets, of Christ, and his Apostles.

30 Moreover, seeing that Faith does not arise from any natural power of
free will, but is the Gift of the Holy Ghost: Therefore from what we said, that
works must proceed from Faith, we infer further that there are no works good
indeed done by men, except they be regenerate by the Holy Ghost.

31 For men by nature are dead in sins. Ephesians. 2.5. Coloss. 2.13.

32 As therefore those which are not yet regenerate have no spiritual life: So
also they have no spiritual works pleasing God.

33 Rightly therefore disputes S. Augustine, and with much vehemency: Those
works, which seem to be good, if they be without Faith, they are no better
then Sins, or, at best, but shining sins. Lib. 3. ad Bonifac. cap. 5. as
also in many other places.

34 Anselme disputes thus, That all the life of infidels and unbeleevers is
sin: because without the chief good nothing is good. Upon the 14 Chapter to
the Romans.

35 Which opinion of his whosoever hold to be cruel, they themselves are
cruel against the truth, Cens. Colon. page 29.

36 A corrupt tree cannot bring forth good fruit. Matthew. 7.18. So neither can a
person not reconciled unto God be accepted of him, neither can his works please
him.

37 From this Conclusion, That it is necessary that those works which are
truly good proceed from Faith, we might gather many other things. For from
thence it follows, That Good Works, although they reach not to that high pitch
of perfection, which is prescribed in the Law, yet they are pleasing unto God.

38 Christ apprehended by true Faith, makes a man and his works done in Faith
acceptable before God.

39 And thus is that to be understood, which is said in our Churches, That
Faith is the form of Good works.

40 For this is not our meaning, That Christ's satisfaction is so imputed to our
works, that for those works of ours we are justified before God.

41 For seeing that they themselves stand in need of justification (as I may so
speak) certainly they cannot justify us.

42 But this we say, That those good works are therefore and from thence
acceptable and pleasing unto God, because the person reconciled by Christ
works good works through Faith.

43 The Good Works of the regenerate do please God, but they do not appease God.

44 To conclude: Because Good Works proceed from Faith, we are not therefore by
them and for them justified before God.

45 For what we have already obtained by Faith in Christ, what need have we to
seek for by Good works?

46 When the question therefore is moved, Whether we be justified by Good
works, and so merit salvation: Let us diligently examine the Terms, and words
of the Question.

47 Good works are the works of those that are already justified: Therefore
they are not works (if I may so speak) Justifying. Even as fruits are good:
because they are the fruits of a good tree; but do not yet make the tree good.

48 I know the common answer: It is by way of distinction, between the First
and Second Justification.

49 But beside other things, even this one thing does take away quite that
distinction; whereas the Apostle denies that Abraham in the very midst of his
Good Works was justified before God by his Works. Romans 4.1, 2, 3. If any where,
then certainly in Abraham, that Second Justification by Works (if there were
any such) should have found place.

50 Moreover all places of Scripture, which deny that we are justified by
Works, overthrow that difference.

51 Our Good Works are due Debts unto God: Luke 17.10. Therefore we merit
nothing by them.

52 Our Good Works are imperfect and unclean, forasmuchas our Renovation it
self is not altogether absolute and perfect in this life: How then can we by
them merit eternal life? What are all our merits to so great glory? Bern.
sermon. 1. in Annun. Col. 106.

53 Good works are the fruits of the Spirit leading and drawing the regenerate,
and working effectually in them: Therefore man is so far from meriting by
them any thing at Gods hands, that he is rather indebted to God for them. Bern.
ibid.

54 If Good works could merit eternal life, then they ought and might be done
to that end and with that intent, that thereby we might obtain the reward of
eternal life: But works done with such intent are not truly good works. For
true love is not mercenarie, although it never be unrewarded.

55 So much for the Subject of the question. I come now to the Predicate or
Attribute, which is, To justify, and to merit eternal life.

56 But if Righteousness be by Christ, then is also Salvation by Christ: For,
He that believes on the Son, has everlasting life. John 3.36.

57 The nature of a merit requires, that the work by which we merit be freely
performed by us, and in no wise due from us unto him to whom it is performed:
But whatsoever we do, it is but a part of that duty and service which we owe
unto God: And therefore no merit.

58 Again, The nature of a merit requires, that it be profitable and useful
for him, at whose hands we are to merit: But God stands not in need of our
goods: And therefore they are not meritorious.

59 Last of all, The nature of a merit requires, that the thing offered by us,
for worth and price, be equal unto the thing which we are to receive in lieu
of it: But what proportion is there between our works and eternal life? And
therefore they cannot merit.

60 Eternal life is the free gift of God. Romans 6.23. Therefore it is not the
merit of our works.

61 Thou take from Grace, whatsoever thou give unto Merit: Away therefore
with that Merit, which excludes Grace, Bern. sermon. 67. in Cant.

62 We cannot merit at Gods hands so much as a crust of daily bread, but we are
compelled to pray unto God every day, Give us this day our daily bread. How*
then can we merit eternal life?

63 Let others, if they will, seek after Merit: but let us study to find
Grace. Bern. sermon. in nativ. Mat. Col. 213.

64 If, what some call Merits, we will call by their proper names: They are the
Seminaries of Faith, the Incentives of Cha^itie, the Tokens of secret
Predestination, the Presages of future felicity, the Wa^ to the kingdom, but
not the Cause of reigning there. Bern. tract. de Great. and lib. Arbitr. sub
finem.

65 Although yet Good works are not necessary to merit justification and
salvation: Notwithstanding, they are necessary for the regenerate. First, in
respect of God: Secondly, in respect of our neighbors: And lastly, in respect
of the regenerate themselves.

66 In respect of God, they are necessary many ways. 1 Because it is Gods
will and commandment, That the regenerate should walk in Good Works. 2. Because
he is our Father, and we are his children; and therefore we ought to be like
unto him. 3. Because we were created to this end. 4. Because we are redeemed by
Christ. 5. Because we are regenerate, and sanctified by the Holy Ghost, to walk
in Good Works. 6* Because we are to glorify God by our Good Works. 7. That the
most Holy name of God and his Word be not for our sakes evil spoken of.

67 In respect of our Neighbors, they are necessary. 1. Because we are to
help them according to our ability. 2. Because we are to edify them by our
good example. 3. Because we are to avoid scandal. 4. Because we are to stop
the mouths of Backbiters and Slanderers, by doing good.

68 In respect of the regenerate themselves, they are necessary. 1. Because
they are to testify by newnes of life, that they are a new creature in Christ.
2. To prove by their walking as children of the Light, that they are delivered
out of darkness. 3. To show forth the true fruits of Faith, and to make their
calling and election sure. 4. To avoid the suspicion of Hypocrisy. 5. To
escape pains temporal and eternal, which are the rewards of evil Works. 6.
That by sin they do not shake off Faith, grieve the Holy Spirit, and lose the
grace of God. 7. That they may obtain of God rewards Corporal and Spiritual.

69 Faith is exercised in Good Works, and by them increases, and as it were
waxes fat. Luther. in cap. 17. Genesis

70 These things are often to be urged, and earnestly insisted upon, That we
entertain not once any such thought, as if remission of sins, and
justification by grace, were any privilege for ungodliness.

71 When as God of his mere goodness unto us in Christ does receive us into
Grace, that he may have a peculiar people zealous of Good Works. Tit. 2.14.

72 Where the Apostle, in the verse next but one going before, makes three
ranks or degrees of Good Works. For he requires that we live Soberly,
Righteously, and Godly in this present world.

73 To live Godly, has respect unto the Worship due unto God, according to the
first Table of the Commandments: And it comprehends the Love and Fear of
God, Confidence in him, true Invocation, Confession, and Giving of thanks.

74 To live Righteously, or justly, has respect unto our Neighbor* And it
comprehends all good offices of humanity due unto our Neighbor, according
to the second Table of the Commandme^ts, to wit, That we give all due Obedience
and Reverence to our Superiors, that we afford Counsel and help to our
equals, and that we defend and instruct our inferiors. Bernard. Sermon. 3. de
adv. Domini.

75 To live Soberly, has respect unto Our selves: And it requires the Keeping
of our bodies under, and the moderating of our passions. There is no victory
more glorious then for a man to overcome himself.

76 After the same manner does our Savior, (being about to show the manner of
doing Good works, contrary to the practice of the Hypocritical Pharisees) He
does, I say, make three kinds of Good Works: Alms, Prayer, and Fasting.

77 By the name of Alms, (by a Figure called Synecdoche, by which, A part is
put for the whole) we are to understand all offices of Love and Charity due
unto our Neighbor: From whence proceeds the difference between Corporal and
Spiritual Alms, comprehended in these verses: Visito, Poto, Cibo, Redimo,
Tego, Colligo, Condo:
Consule, Castiga, Solare* Remitte, Fer, Ora.


In English thus: To visit sick, and Prisoners:
To give drink to the dry:
To feed the hungry: To redeem
Men in captivity:
To cover them that naked are:
Poor strangers to invite:
The harbourles within thy house
To lodge with thee at night.
To Counsel such as counsel need:
The faulty to chastise:
To comfort such as comfort want:
To forgive injuries:
To bear with such as froward are
In their infirmity:
To pray for such as are cast down
In their adversity.


78 By the name of Prayer likewise we understand all religious and devout
service which we owe unto God: For, That our Prayers may be accepted of God,
and be pleasing unto him, it is necessary that they proceed from true Faith,
Fear, and Love of God.

79 By the name of Fasting, we understand the keeping of our Bodies under: For
we are so to nourish our flesh, that it may serve us; and so to tame it, that
it wax not proud, and lift up the heel against us, According to the counsel of
Hugo.

80 From what has hitherto been said, we gather this Definition. Good Works
are the actions of men regenerate commanded by God, and done to the glory of
God, through Faith in Christ, according to the rule of the divine Law.

81 That we may be rich in them* God of his infinite mercy grant unto us, for
Christ his sake who is the Author and Finisher of our Faith and Good Works:
who together with the Father and the Holy Ghost is to be blessed and praised
world without end. Amen.

CHAP. XVI. Wherein are contained Theological Aphorisms concerning the
SACRAMENTS.
1 UNto the Word of the Gospel God has added the Sacraments, which are the
Visible Word.

2 And, The visible signs of invisible grace. August. Libr. 19. contr. Faust.
cap. 16.

3 For by the Sacraments is represented unto our Eyes, what by the preaching of
the Word we hear with our Ears.

4 The word Sacramentum (which we translate Sacrament) is exta^t indeed in
Scripture: (I mean in the vulgar Latin)

5 But not in that sense in which it is here used.

6 And yet we are not to interdict or forbid the Church the use of the word, as
Carolstadius would have us.

7 For it were a miserable servitude, absolutely to be forbidden the use of all
words unwritten.

8 Amongst profane authors this word Sacramentum is used first for money laid
(in deposito) in the hands of the Pontifex, by the Plaintiff and Defendant, by
way of caution, that he which was overcome in judgment should forfeit his money,
and he which overcame should again receive his own.

9 Again it is used for that Solemn Oath, which Soldiers take according to a
prescript form of words, to bind them to their allegiance and fidelity to the
State, and Governors thereof.

10 From whence afterward it came to signify generally any kind of oath.

11 In the Scripture, according to the Latin interpreter, Sacramentum is that
which the Greeks call (...), the Chaldees Rasa, and the Hebrews Sod.

12 Ecclesiastical writers by the name of Sacrament understand a Ceremony of
divine institution, by which the good promises of the Gospel are offered and
applied to those that believe.

13 These our Sacraments are Holy and undefiled Mysteries, as Damascen speaks
(4. Orth. fid. cap. 14.) or, as out of the ancients speaks Jeremie Patriarch
of Constantinople (Resp. 1. ad Theol. Wirteh.) Mysteries to be trembled at.
Therefore not without just cause is the name of Sacrament given unto them.

14 By the Sacraments we are bound unto God, to believe on him, and to obey
him; as Soldiers are bound unto their General, by an oath. By the Sacraments
we are also bound to love one another, as they which contended in judgment,
having first laid their money ( in deposito) in the hands of the Pontifex.

15 Furthermore, the word Sacrament is properly and most frequently taken for
the whole Sacramental action: but sometimes improperly, and by a Synecdoche it
denotes one essential part of the Sacrament, to wit, the outward and visible
sign; or (as Ireneus speaks, lib. 4. cap. 34.) the terrene matter.

16 So also the Matter of the Sacrament, or the Sacrament as concerning the
thing, denotes the saving fruit of the Sacrament: and sometimes the other
essential part of the Sacrament, to wit, the heavenly matter.

17 But the Sacraments are to be defined by actions: For wheresoever the
Sacraments are instituted, there are certain actions prescribed and required;
neither have the Sacraments their essential integrity unless those actions
prescribed by God be also added.

18 Now these actions are sacred and solemn; because instituted by God: because
in them God works with us; and in them we have to do with God.

19 God it is, who not only at the first did institute the Sacraments, and
commend them unto his Church: but also does even to this day dispense heavenly
benefits by them, by the mediation of man's ministry.

20 The Sacramental dispensation does consist in Giving and Receiving.

21 The Giving, does denote the action of him that does administer, prescribed
by God: The Receiving, does denote the taking of the Sacrament.

22 In both, we must distinguish between the Thing, and the Manner of the
thing. Giving and Receiving are simply necessary: but the Manner of giving and
receiving admits of some liberty.

23 To God alone is the power of instituting Sacraments to be ascribed

24 For it is one and the same, who does confer grace, and institute the
means of grace.

25 Well therefore says Thomas (p. 3. q. 64. art. 2.) The virtue of the
Sacraments is from God alone: Therefore God alone is the Institutour of the
Sacraments.

26 Where also he adds these things worthy our remembrance: The Apostles and
their successors are Gods Vicars, as concerning the regiment of the Church
instituted of God by Faith and the Sacraments of Faith: Wherefore, as it is not
lawful for them to constitute another Church; so neither is it lawful for
them to deliver any other Faith, or institute any other Sacraments. But the
Church of God is said to be built and constituted by the Sacraments which
flowed from the side of Christ hanging on the Cross.

27 God also does dispense the Sacraments, not Immediately, but Ordinarily by
the Ministers of the Church.

28 For they are the dispensers or Stewards of the mysteries of God. 1. Cor.
4.1. and, Laborers together with God. 1. Cor. 3.9.

29 Seeing then the Minister is here an Agent not in his own name, but in Gods
name: Therefore his worthiness or unworthiness can nothing add to or take
from the efficacy of the Sacraments.

30 The Sacraments for virtue are the same:
Although the Minister be too too blame.


31 The Ministers work here but as Instruments. Now we know that instruments
work not according to their own proper form, but according to the virtue of him
that moves them. Thom. p. 3. q. 64. art. 5.

32 From whence are these similitudes of the Ancients. How that the life of the
Minister does no more take away the benefit of the Sacraments; no more, I say,
then a dunghill or dirty place, by which the sun passes, does pollute and
defile the light thereof. And again, How that it matters not whether the water
be conveyed through a pipe of stone, or a pipe of silver. And again, How that
the figure and impression of the seal is all one, whether it be made with a
gold ring, or one of iron. August. Tract. 5. in Joan. lib. 3. de Bapt. cap. 10.
and Nazianz. orat. de Bapt.

33 And this also we add concerning the Intention of the Minister, That it is
not absolutely and necessarily required to the perfection and fruit of the
Sacrament.

34 For that Non-intention (if I may so speak) is a species of blemish or
malice in the Minister. What then is true of the Genus, is also true of the
Species.

35 Furthermore the Sacraments were instituted only for men, and such men as
are living: Therefore they are only to be administered unto such.

36 Two things are required unto a Sacrament: The Word, and the Element or
outward visible thing.

37 Let the Word be added unto the Element, and it becomes a Sacrament. Aug. de
cat. c. 3. tract. 80. in Joan.

38 By the Word is understood, 1. Gods institution, by which the Element
(having received the calling of God as Ir^neus speaks l. ^. cap. 34.) is
separated from common use, and destinated to a Sacramental use: 2. The proper
promise of the Gospel which is to be applied and sealed by the Sacrament.

39 And therefore we must judge of every Sacrament, by Gods institution, or
(which is all one) by the proper place in which Gods institution is described
and set down.

40 And, because every Sacrament has its own peculiar institution, therefore
also it has its own peculiar administration, as its proper form.

41 And therefore the substantial words of the institution of the Sacrament
are in no wise to be altered or changed.

42 The Sacraments in the Old Testament are two, as likewise also in the New:
1. Circumcision in the Old, unto which answers Baptism in the New; and the
Paschall Lamb in the Old, unto which answers The supper of the Lord in the New.

43 If any other be added unto these, they want either Gods institution, or the
outward Element, or the proper promise of the Gospel.

44 The Ends of the Sacraments are many: but two only are Principal; the rest
are Subordinate, and lesse-principall.

45 The First Principal end is, That the Sacraments may be the instruments,
means, and conveyances, or conduits by which God exhibiteth offers and
applies unto those that believe, the proper promise of the Gospel concerning
remission of sins, justification, and life everlasting.

46 Whatsoever is competible and agreeable unto the Word, that also is not to
be denied unto the Sacraments, which are the visible word: But the word of the
Gospel is such an instrument: And therefore also the Sacraments.

47 By the Sacraments we are received into the Covenant of God, and are
preserved in it: But that Covenant, is the Covenant of grace: And therefore the
Sacraments are instruments of grace and salvation.

48 Therefore we dissent and depart from those, who derogate and detract from
the Sacraments, making them only bare signs signifying grace.

49 The Ancients indeed some times call the Sacraments, Sign* But they
understand Signs sealing or (as it is expounded in Augus. Confess. art. 13)
Signs testifying co^^cerning the grace of God toward us.

50 In which sense the wor^ Sign or token used in Genesis 17.11 the Apostle
expounds by the word Seal. Romans 4.11.

51 So also sometimes the out^ward Element of the Sacrament i^ called a Sign;
yet not barely signi^fying an heavenly thing absent: bu^ offering and
delivering an heavenly thing present, and Sacramentally united unto the Element.

52 For it is a Sign that signifies or signeth the invisibilitie of the thing
signified or signed; but presupposes not the absence thereof.

53 A Sign, is a Thing beside the Species which it represents to our senses;
and of it self causes us to call to mind somewhat else. August. 2. de doctr.
Christ. cap. 1.

54 Therefore they that from hence, That it is a Sign, do gather that one
essential part is absent, do it certainly for lack of wit, and want of
learning.

55 We dissent and depart likewise from those also who attribute too much unto
the Sacraments; in that they affirm and aver, that they confer grace ( ex
opere operato) even upon the outward act and administration thereof.

56 Which their Position, or Opinion they expound thus, That there is not
required any good motion in the Receiver, but that the Sacraments have a
supernatural virtue in themselves, by which they are the cause of Grace, as
fire is the cause of Heat.

57 But as the Word profits not, not being mixed with Faith. Hebr. 4.2. So
neither do the Sacraments, which are the Visible Word.

58 Neither does it profit any thing, To have a benefit offered, unles there be
one to receive it: The Word and the Sacrament: are Gods Hands, by which he
offers unto us: But it is the Hand of Faith, which must receive what is
offered.

59 Well says Hugo (5. de Sacrament. page 9. cap. 2.) The spiritual Gifts of
grace, are as it were certain Invisible Antidots: In the Visible Sacraments
they are as it were in certain Vessels offered unto man. Now, As that which is
in the Vessel is not of the Vessel, but is drawn with it: So Grace is not
from the Sacraments, or, of the Sacraments, but is derived from an eternal
fountain; and is sucked from thence by the Soul, in the Sacraments.

60 And seeing that the Sacraments in general have assigned unto them this
end: from hence it may be gathered, That we are to attribute the same unto the
Sacraments of the Old Testament.

61 For unto Circumcision was added that promise, Of being received into the
Covenant of Grace, which is Emphatically set down in those words, I will be a
God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee. Genesis 17.7. Which words are to be
expounded out of Leviticus* 26.12. Jerem. 31.1. Matthew. 22.32. And it will
appear that in them is contained a promise of Gods grace, his special
inhabitation, or indwelling, and eternal life.

62 Therefore we dissent and depart from those, who dispute, That the
Sacraments of the Old Testament were not Isntrumental causes of Grace: as if
they had not some virtue from the Passion of Christ, etc.

63 The lesse-Principall end of the Sacraments is, To be Signs and Seals of
Gods love toward us, instituted and ordained for the confirming and
strengthening of our Faith.

64 For the Apostle calls Circumcision, A Seal of the Righteousness of
Faith. Romans 4.11. And the proper use of a Seal is, as we know, to testify,
confirm, and seal that thing unto which it is annexed.

65 Whereupon the Godly of former ages in time of danger did fetch solid
comfort and consolation out of Circumcision. 1 Samuel 14.6. and again, 1. Sam.
17.16, 36.

66 Moreover, what is said of the end of Circumcision, that also is rightly
referred to the other Sacraments: For all the Sacraments agree in their
Efficient, and Final Genericall cause.

67 From hence it is that Baptism is said to be A Good Conscience's going unto
God for counsel. The word by which it is expressed is in Greek (...), which
the Septuag^nts in the Old Testament do use, when there is signified asking
counsel at the mouth of God. Oecumenius, by this word understands an Earnest
or Pledge.

68 The meaning then is, That Baptism does testify unto our Consciences, and
confirm the grace of God. And here observe that the foundation of this
obsignation or ^ealing consists in the resurrection of Christ: For (as it is,
Romans 4.25.) He was raised again for our Justification: Upon which follows
peace of Conscience, or Peace with God. Romans 5.1.

69 Hither do we refer that place. 1 John 5.8. There are three that bear
witness in earth, the Spirit, and the Water, and the Blood. The Paraphrase of
which place, according to the Scope of the Text, and the Analogy of Faith, is
this, That the Holy Spirit in the ministry of the Gospel (which is The
ministration of the Spirit. 2 Cor. 3.8.) And the Water in Baptism (which is
The washing of water, by the Word, Ephesians. 5.26.) And the Blood (which in the
Lords supper is offered unto us to drink* 1 Cor. 11.15.) do testify and bear
witness concerning the Fatherly goodness, and love of God toward us.

70 Hereupon Tertullian (Libr. de poenitent.) calls Baptism the Obsignation
or Sealing of Faith: and Augustine (de Catech. rud. cap. 26.) calls the
Sacraments, Seals.

71 We dissent then and depart from those, who deny that the Sacraments are
Seals sealing unto us the promise of Grace.

72 Secundarie and Lesse-Principall ends of the Sacraments we may reckon up
many: as, That they are the very Nerves and Sinews of public Society,
concord, and agreement; That they are the Badges and cognizances, by which the
Church is distinguished from other assemblies; That in them we are tied and
bound unto God, to Faith and to Obedience; That they are the Types and
resemblances of virtues, but especially Love, etc.

73 The Schoolmen dispute, That in, or by some Sacraments there is a Character
imprinted.

74 Which they describe after this manner, That it is a spiritual stamp
imprinted by God alone in the soul of man at the receiving of the Initerable
Sacrament, (that is, the Sacrament of Baptism which is not to be reiterated or
repeated) remaining Indelible, Ordinarily.

76 About the Quidditie, Subject, and End of this Character, we might reckon up
their wonderful strange and miserable jarrs and contentions.

77 But we conclude with Biel (4. Sentent. did. q. 2.) That neither necessary
reason does demonstrate, not evident authority prove, that we are to hold any
such Character.

78 For all the authorities brought out of Dionysius, Augustine, Damascen and
Lombard, are expounded truly, and more pertinently unto the minds of their
authors, of the Sacrament or Sacramental form of Baptism, then of any
Character imprinted really in the Soul. This says Biel.

79 Therefore that Character of theirs is Indelible indeed: because it is not
written at all.

80 And thus much concerning the Sacraments in general. Out of that which has
been said we gather their definition, after this manner, The Sacraments are
sacred and solemn actions instituted by God, in which God, by the ministry
of man mediating, does dispense a certain thing, instituted by his peculiar
word, to offer, apply and seal unto those that believe, the proper promise of
the Gospel.

81 Of which that we may worthily partake, and to our salvation, God grant unto
us who is the only author of them, blessed for ever. Amen.

CHAP. XVII. Wherein are contained Theological Aphorisms concerning the
Sacrament of BAPTISM.
1 Baptism is the Porch, or first Gate of Grace, the Entry into the Church,
the Key of the kingdom of heaven, and the Investiture of Christianisme, or the
putting on the robe or liverie of Christianity.

2 And therefore being the first Sacrament of the New Testament, it is for that
cause called the Sacrament of Initiation.

3 Baptism, generally taken, signifies any washing, dipping, or dying,
whether it be done by immersion, ^ffusion, or aspersion.

4 It is taken Metaphorically in Scripture, for the Cross and calamities.
Matthew. 20.23. for the visible and large effusion of the gifts of the Holy
Ghost. Acts 1.5. for the miraculous passing of the Israelites through the sea.
1. Cor. 10.2.

5 It is taken Synecdochically, for the doctrine, and indeed the whole
ministry of John the Proto^Baptist, that is, which first baptized. Matthew.
3.11.

6 Specially and by way of Excellency, yea and by the common use of the Church
it is taken for that solemn mystery of Initiation, to wit, the first
Sacrament of the New Testament.

7 Which, in respect of one of the Essential parts thereof, is called Water.
John 3.5. In respect of its Essence, The washing of water, by the Word. Ephesians.
5.26. In respect of the Effect thereof, The washing of regeneration, and
renewing of the Holy Ghost. Tit. 3.5. In respect of the Type thereof which wen^
before Circumcision made without hands. Coloss. 2.11.

8 The Prime author of Baptism, and therefore the Proper and Principal
Cause, is God.

9 For God by his Prophets in the Old Testament did preach by Types and
Prophecies concerning this saving Laver or washing of Baptism.

10 The Types are, Noah's ark in the flood. 1. Pet. 3.20. Circumcision. Coloss.
2.11. The passing of the Israelites through the red sea. 1. Cor. 10.2. Waters
mixed with the blood of the bird that was killed, which cleansed the leprosy,
Levit. 14.6, 7. The water of Expiation, or Separation, whereinto were strewed
the ashes of the red heifer. Numb. 19.17. etc. Diverse washings, ablutions, and
aspersions used by the Jews. Heb. 9.10. The water of Jordan, by which Naaman
was cured of his leprosy. 2. King. 5.14.

11 The Prophecies consist partly in proper words, and partly in words
Allegorical. THE Lord sits upon the flood. Psalm. 29.10. There is a river,
the streams whereof shall make glad the city of God. Psalm. 46.5. The Gentiles
shall bring thy sons in their arms. Isai. 49.22. I will sprinkle clean water
upon you: and you shall be clean from all your filthiness. Ezech. 36.25. It
shall come to pass that every thing that lives, which moves whithersoever
the rivers shall come, shall live. Ezech. 47.9. In that day there shall be a
fountain opened to the house of David, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, for
sin and for uncleanness. Zechar. 13.1. A fountain shall come forth of the
house of the Lord, and shall water the valley of Shittim. Joel 3.18.

12 The same God it is, which sent John to baptize, or to baptize with water.
Joh. 1.33. From whence it is said, That his Baptism is from heaven. Matthew.
21.25. and the Pharisees, refusing to be baptized of him, are said to have
rejected the counsel of God. Luke 7.30.

13 This divine Institution of Baptism, Christ after his death and
resurrection did as it were renew, by a solemn promulgation, and command to
continue the same throughout the whole world.

14 Therefore the Baptism of John was the same Sacrament with ^he Baptism of
Christ, that is, which Christ administered by his Apostles, and does at this day
administer by the Ministers of the Church: It had also the same efficacy;
neither was it necessary that, after the Baptism of John, the Baptism of
Christ should be received.

15 The same Causes and the same Effects do argue that the Sacrament of
Baptism, both John's and Christ's, was the same.

16 Yet notwithstanding we do not deny but that with the Baptism of the
Apostles there was joined also the visible effusion of the miraculous gifts of
the Holy Ghost: which was wanting to John's Baptism.

17 Now God administers this Sacrament, not Immediately, but by the Ministers
of the Church, unto whom this does Ordinarily belong, as unto the Stewards of
the mysteries of God. 1. Cor. 4.1.

18 Again, Forasmuchas they are the Ministers of another good, their vices do
not take away the essence and benefit of Baptism.

19 And therefore even Heretics themselves, if they do observe the
Substantialls of Baptism, they do administer true Baptism.

20 Which also we determine in that case, when the Minister of the Church
privately and secretly does favor and cherish an heresy contrary to the
truth of Baptism, and the doctrine of the Church.

21 But those which are baptized by Heretics without the invocation of the
Holy Trinity, and afterward come unto us; we pronounce that such are to be
Baptized; but we do not say Rebaptized: For it is not to be believed that they
were ever baptized, whosoever were not baptized In the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

22 The external Element of Baptism is water; water natural and elementarie.

23 Whosoever therefore do either substitute, and use in stead of water any
other liquor, or any other external Element; or else are of opinion that they
may be substituted and used in the stead thereof: They depart from Gods
institution.

24 But yet Baptism is not simply water; but the washing of Water, by the
Word. Ephesians. 5.26.

25 Therefore neither Water without the Word, nor the Word without the Water
has the nature, force, and virtue of Baptism.

26 That Word is the word both of Command, and of Promise.

27 For the Apostles are commanded to go and teach all nations, Baptizing them
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Matthew.
28.19. And there is a promise added, That he that believes and is Baptized,
shall be saved. Mark. 16.16.

28 Therefore, according to this word, all the Holy Trinity, The Father, the
Son and the Holy Ghost are present at Baptism, as at the Baptism of Christ,
who is the Head of the Church. Ephesians. 1.22.

29 The Father, for his Son our Mediators sake, does receive him that is
Baptized, into grace: The Son by his own blood does cleanse him from all his
sins: The Holy Ghost does regenerate and renew him unto eternal life.

30 And, if all the most sacred and Holy Trinity be present; then also Christ
God and Man is certainly present, and by his blood washes him that is
Baptized, from all the filthiness of his sins.

31 From whence it is, that the Ancients say, and Luther repeats it, That
Baptism is red with the blood of Christ. August. tract. 11. in Joan. Bed. in
Psalm. 80.

32 We must not therefore look upon the water of Baptism according to the
natural properties, and use that it has in common life: But we are to have an
eye unto it as it is a Sacrament, and means sanctified by the word of God, with
which and by which all the most sacred, and Holy Trinity does work in those
that are Baptized, unto their salvation.

33 The Form of Baptism is, to Baptize a man with water, That is, to sprinkle
the water upon him, or to dip him in the water, In the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

34 And forasmuchas it is the Form, which gives being unto a thing: Therefore,
if this Form of Baptism be changed, it shall be no longer a Sacrament.

35 Whether the party Baptized be sprinkled or dipped Thrice, or but Once it
matters not to the integrity and perfection of Baptism. The usual rites and
custom of the Church, in these indifferent things, is to be observed.

36 By the Three sprinklings, or dippings, the Trinity of Persons is
signified; and by One only, the Unity of the Divinity, or Godhead.

37 Those words, In the name, or On the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost, have a great Emphasis, which is accurately and
frequently to be expounded to the godly and devout auditorie, or congregation.

38 For the Minister professes* that, what he does in this part, he does not
in his own name, but in the name of God, and at his command.

39 For he declares that the true God, which is One in Essence, and Three in
Persons, is called upon, over him that is Baptized.

40 Moreover those words do evidently witness that every Person of the most
sacred and Holy Trinity is present at Baptism, by the presence and efficacy
of grace* to wit, The Father for the merit of his Son does re^eive him that
is Baptized, into grace; and does seal him by his Holy Spirit, unto salvation.

41 Whereupon those that are Baptized are called the Sons of God, Christians,
and Spiritual men, in respect of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost.

42 Whereunto belongs the Collation, or comparing of Creation and
Re-creation, Formation, and Reformation. For, As the Father, by the Son,
through the Holy Ghost created the first man: So is it at the Sacrament of
Regeneration, where all the most Holy and blessed Trinity does work in like
manner.

43 Last of all, By those words, he that is Baptized in the name of God, is
bound to acknowledge him, and to call upon him as the true God, and serve him
all the days of his life.

44 For you must be Baptized, as we have received, and believe, as we are
Baptized; and glorify the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, as we have
believed. Basil. Epist. 78.

45 From this Fountain ^low forth all the praises which are extant in the
writings of the Apostles concerning the saving fruit of this mystery.

46 As for example, That it is The washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the
Holy Ghost. Tit. 3.4. By which the Church may be cleansed. Ephesians. 5.26. Sins
may be washed away. Act. 22.16. Christ may be put on. Gal. 3.27. And, in a
word, salvation may be obtained. 1 Pet. 3.21.

47 By way of Comparison, it will not be amiss, to consider the Baptism of
Christ, by which Our Baptism is consecrated: For what was done there in
visible signs, we must not doubt but that the same is done at our Baptism
after an invisible manner.

48 The Father for Christ his sake receives us to be his Sons: The Son by
his blood washes ^s: The Holy Ghost regenerateth and ^eneweth us, and
prepares himself a dewlling place in us, and opens the gate of Paradise unto
^s.

49 We sticking close to the literal sense of the words (as we must always do
in articles of Faith) do firmly believe that Bap^isme is an effectual means by
which man is regenerated and re^ewed unto eternal life.

50 Which end comprehends ^n it, Adoption, Remission of sin, ^ngraffing into
Christ, Sanctifica^ion, and the Inheritance of eternal ^ife.

51 But we deny that Baptism does either imprint an indelible character; or,
confer grace (ex ^pere operato) upon the work done, or outward act of
administration; or that it does take away, and altogether together blot out
both sin and the punishment thereof. For concerning this matter the Scripture
is silent.

52 Furthermore, seeing that in Baptism God does make a Covenant of grace with
man: certainly the efficacy thereof endures throughout a man's whole life.

53 For the Covenant of God i^ not made of no effect by reason o^ our
unbelief. Romans 3.3.

54 Therefore though we should for our parts go never so far astray from this
covenant, yet by true and serious conversion we may return, and be received
again into it.

55 Unto whom this Sacramen^ appertains and belongs, we learn even from
Gods own institution: by which it is commanded that all nations should be
baptized.

56 Yet the order and manner, which Christ there has prescribed, is to be
observed: that is, That they which are of age to hear the Gospel, should
first be taught, and then baptized.

57 Seeing then all are either infants, or of years: we must answer distinctly
concerning both.

58 Those infants are to be baptized who are either born of Christian parents,
(it matters not whether one or both the parents be Christians) or else are to
be brought up under them.

59 Therefore Bastards, and children that are found, whose parents are not
known, are not excluded from the benefit of Baptism: (although it be doubted
of by some) nor yet those who at their birth have some external defect, etc.

60 But those which are no^ yet born, are excluded: For a man cannot be born
again, unless he be first born. And so are also the children of Infidells and
unbeleevers to be excluded, as long as they are under their tuition.

61 Those of years are to be baptized, who being instructed concerning Christ
do profess the Christian religion.

62 Neither here are women excluded: as it is confirmed by the practice of the
Apostles, beside other arguments. Acts 8.12. and 16.15.

63 For the confirming of this our opinion concerning the baptizing of infants,
out of Scripture serve many things: and it will be useful for us to consider
these following Hypotheses or suppositions.

64 First, Infants are conceived and born in sin: And therefore they are by
nature the children of wrath.

65 Secondly, God would have little children to be brought unto him: For it is
not the will of him, that one of the little ones should perish.

66 Thirdly, There is no dealing with them by the preaching of the word:
Therefore there remains only to them that means, to wit, Baptism which
succeeded in the place of Circumcision.

67 Beware of saying, That Baptism is not profitable unto infants, forasmuchas
yet they neither do nor can believe:

68 Because in Baptism, and by Baptism, the Holy Spirit does so work in
infants, that it is, no less then Circumcision, A seal unto them of the
righteousness of Faith. Romans 4.11.

69 For, although we cannot understand after what manner the Holy Ghost
works: yet we must not therefore deny the working of the Holy Ghost.

70 If a question be moved concerning infants departing without Baptism: we
must proceed distinctly.

71 Those which are without the Church, are left to the judgment of God.

72 But those which being born of Christian parents, by reason of some case of
urgent necessity, could not be baptized; or those which die in their mothers
womb: those, I say, by the prayers of their parents and the Church may be
commended unto God; but are not excluded from the fellowship of the kingdom of
heaven.

73 It remains now that we speak something concerning certain Circumstances*
which are wont to be observed at the administration of Baptism.

74 Impious and superstitious ceremonies are to be rejected.

75 But what rites and ceremonies are of their own nature indifferent, and of a
middle rank, and not repugnant to the Analogy of faith, but rather commended
by the authority of the Apostles and the Primitive Church, and further do
make the action, use, and efficacy, yea the necessity and dignity of
Baptism more conspicuous to the eyes of the ruder sort: such as these are not
Simply, and to the scandal^ of the Church, to be rejected.

76 Exorcisme is to be expounded after this manner, That it is a testimony that
infants are by nature under spiritual captivity in the kingdom of the Devil;
That by the virtue and efficacy of Baptism they are translated from the
kingdom of Satan unto the kingdom of Christ; That the end of the
Ecclesiastical ministry consistet^ not only in the application of Christ's
benefits, but also in a continual warring and fighting against Satan.

77 But the Church has liberty to propose and expound the doctrine concerning
original sin, the power and kingdom of Satan, and the efficaci^ of Baptism
in other words more agreeable unto Scripture. Chemnit. part. 3. (...). Theolog.
page 178.

78 It is a most ancient custom, at the Baptism of infants, to have Sureties,
which we call Godfathers and Godmothers: Whose office it is, First, to pray for
them, that God would receive them into grace by Baptism; Secondly, by their
answering to repeat that, which Christ, as the mouth of the infants, has
witnessed for them; Thirdly, to instruct them in the principles of religion, if
their parents be dead.

79 Imposition of names is rightly used in Baptism, not only because it was
formerly used in Circumcision: but especially, because it puts us in mind,
that in Baptism our names are written in the book of life. Luke 10.20. Revel.
20.15. and that our names are enrolled* in the Catalogue of Christian
soldiers, from thenceforth always to fight under the banner of Christ.

80 Concerning other ceremonies and circumstances, more shall be said in
another place: On^ thing only we add, That it were to be wished that at a
full congregation in the Church at Morning-prayer children were baptized; that
so the administration of this most sacred mystery might be performed with more
attention and devotion.

81 Neither yet do we say, that rashly and unadvisedly any man out of his own
private fancy may depart from the custom of the Church wherein he lives: nor
do we prescribe Laws for cases of necessity.

82 From all that hitherto has been said, we gather^ That Baptism is the
first Sacrament of the New Testament, in which a living man is dipped into
water, or sprinkled with water, In the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost; that being regenerated and renewed he may be made an
heir of everlasting life.

83 God, who by Baptism has received us into the covenant of grace, keep and
preserve us in the same even unto the end* Amen.

CHAP. XVIII. Wherein are contained Theological Aphorisms concerning the
LORDS SUPPER.
1 THe latter Sacrament of the New Testament is, The Lords Supper, so called
from the Author and time of the institution thereof. 1. Cor. 11.20, 21. etc.

2 It is also called the Lords Table, to distinguish it from profane eating and
drinking. 1. Cor. 10.20.21, etc. And again, The communion of the body and blood
of Christ. 1. Cor. 10.16. because therein consists the essence of this
Sacrament. And again, The Testament of Christ. Luke 22.20. 1. Cor. 11.25.
because therein do appear all the requisites of a Testament. And again, The
breaking of bre^d. Acts 2.42. and 20.7. because by it the bread in the
Eucharist was prepared of old to be distributed.

3 It was called by the ancients, the Eucharist, or Giving of thanks. 1. Cor.
11.24. Because ^olemne thanks were to be given to Christ at the celebration of
this Sacrament. Again, It was called, a Synaxis, or coming together. 1. Cor.
11.20. Because this Holy Supper was wont to be celebrated in a full
congregation in the Church, and was a sign and pledge of their mutual
conjunction in Christ. Again, It was called, an (...), or a feast in Love and
Charity, by reason of Holy feasting instituted and made of gifts conferred in
common. Again, It was called (...), or Li^urgie: because it is no small part of
public and common service.

4 The name of Missa which is taken for the Mass, had its beginning from the
form of dismissing the people used by the ancients, when they said unto the
Catech^m^ni, to the possessed of vill Spirits, and to the Excommunicate, Ite:
Missa est. Beat. (...)* Super. 4. Libr. Tertull. adv. Marc.

5 The Types of this Sacrament in the Old Testament are sundry and diverse; but
the best are these: The Paschall Lamb. Exodus 12.27, etc. 1 Cor. 5.7. and,
Manna. Exodus 16.15. Ioh. 6.49. The corn^ of heaven. Psalm. 78.24. Angels food,
verse. 25.

6 The Author of this Sacrament, who did both institute and commend it unto
his Church, is Christ. Matthew. 26.26. Luke 22.19. 1 Cor. 11.23.

7 Who, seeing that he is true God, and One with the Father and the Holy Ghost,
Omnipotent, True, All-wise, our Mediator and Savior: Therefore, if we desire
truly to be his Disciples, we must without any tergiversation backsliding or
unwillingnesse believe his words and rest on them. Joh. 8.31.

8 And the Son it is, who still ^o this day does exhibit unto us his Body
and Blood, at the distribution of the bread and wine in the Eucharist, to ^e
eaten and drunk by us.

9 Believe ye all therefore that even now the Supper, at which Christ sat down,
is here celebrated: For there is no difference betwixt this and that: They have
both one Author. Do not think it is the Priest or Minister, but Christ himself
that stretches forth his hand unto thee. Chrysostom. Hom. 51. in Cap. 24. Matthew.

10 Yet he does not administer ^his Supper now immediately by himself, as he
did at the first Institution: But it has pleased him to use the Ministers of
the Church to ^his purpose; because they are The Stewards of the Mysteries of
God. 1 Cor. 4.1.

11 The Eucharist consists of two things; an Earthly* and an Heavenly: The
Earthly is Bread and Wine; the Heavenly is the Body and Blood of our Lord.
Iren. Libr. 4. Cap. 34.

12 That which we see, is the Bread, and the Cup, as our eyes declare unto us*
but the Bread and Wine, which we are to look up unto with the eye of Faith, is
the Body and Blood of Christ. These therefore are called Sacraments; because in
them one thing is s^ene, and another understood: That which is seen has a
Corporeal species, or bodily show; but that which is understood, has a
Spiritual fruit. August. Sermon. ad Neoph. Bed. in 1 Cor. 10.

13 Because therefore Bread and Wine are by Christ's own Institution ordained
and appointed for this Sacrament: Neither of these Elements are to be changed
for any other, which may have some resemblance with them.

14 Nothing can be better here, nothing more holy, nothing more safe, then for
us to be content with Christ's authority alone.

15 But, as concerning the Bread, whether it be Long or Round, Great or Small;
and as concerning the Wine, whether it be Red or White: It matters nothing to
the integrity or Perfection of the Sacrament, inasmuchas it detracts nothing
from the Institution of the Sacrament.

16 The Nicene Canon we exceedingly approve. We take not much, but little: that
we may know that these things are not taken for Satietie, but for Sanctity.

17 In like manner whether the Bread be Leavened or Unleavened, we think it not
much material: neither do we like of that wrangling and jangling about the
Bread; which was of old so frequent in the Greek and Latin Churches.

18 But yet we following the custom of the Church do use Bread Unleavened, for
the example of Christ, and many good lessons not to be contemned, which the
Unleavened Bread does afford.

19 To mingle water with the Wine in the Eucharist we hold it not necessary,
forasmuchas there is express mention made only of the Fruit of the vine.
Matthew. 26.29.

20 But this we hold necessary, That not only the Bread, but the Wine also is
to be distributed to all those that come with reverence to this venerable
Sacrament.

21 Either let them receive the Sacrament in both kinds, or in neither: For
there can be no division of one and the same mystery without grand Sacrilege.

22 Eating and drinking i^ distinctly instituted and ordained by that wisdom,
unto which all humane wisdom concerning the inseparabilitie of the Living
Blood from the Living Flesh, must give place: For here we are not to dispute
out of humane reason; but we are to look unto the will of Christ, who
instituted no imperfect Feast, but with the meat added drink also. Andr. Fric.
4. de Rei^. emend. Cap. 19.

23 What God has joined together, let no man put asunder. Matt. 19.6.

24 We do not dislike searching out diverse Analogies or Resemblances between
the Bread and the Body of Christ, and between the Wine and the Blood of Chrst:
but we must beware that we place not therein all the Sacramental Office of the
Bread and Wine in the Eucharist.

25 For herein does that consist, That the Bread in the Eucharist be the
Communion of the Body of Christ; and the Cup of Blessing, the Communion of the
Blood of Christ. 1. Cor. 10.16.

26 We hold no Local Enclosing of the Body into the Bread, or the Blood into
the Wine; nor any Impanation, or Incorporating into Bread; nor any natural
Inexistence; nor any Delitescence, concealment, or lying-hid of the Body under
the Bread; nor any Penetration of two Bodies; nor any Capernaiticall
Creophagie, or eating of flesh which the Capernaites did hold.

27 For all these are but the dreams of humane Reason being too curious to
enquire into the manner of the Sacramental presence: and they proceed for the
most part from a lust and desire to calumniate.

28 But this we hold, according to the Apostle, That the Bread in the Eucharist
is the Communion of the Body of Christ; and the Wine, the Communion of the
Blood of Christ.

29 The Form of this Sacrament consists in the Blessing of the Bread and Wine;
and in the Distributing of the Bread and Wine so blessed; and in the Eating and
Drinking of the Bread and Wine so distributed.

30 This Sacramental Blessing consists not in any Magical conversion of the
Bread into the Body of Christ, and the Wine into his Blood by any virtue lying
hid in the words.

31 But it is a sacred and efficacious destinating or setting apart of the
external elements to a Sacramental use: which is therefore called
Consecration.

32 When the Minister therefore of the Church, following the institution of
Christ and the example of his Apostles (concerning which speaks Gregory.
Lib. 1. Cap. 63. in Registro: and Platina in the life of Sixtus the first, and
many others) when the Minister, I say, does repeat the words of institution,
saying first over the Lords Prayer: we must not in any case think that it is a
mere Historical reading of the Text.

33 For, First, The Minister does testify, that he neither does nor has any
will to do any thing according to his own will and pleasure, or in his own
name; but, that as the lawful Steward of the Mysteries of God he does exequute
his function in performing this sacred and solemn action in the name of Christ.

34 Secondly, He does by this means set apart the Bread and Wine for an Holy
use, that afterward they are no more mere Bread and Wine, but the Sacraments
of the Body and Blood of Christ.

35 Thirdly, He does earnestly pray, that Christ would be mindful of his
promise, and vouchsafe to be present at the Sacramental action, and distribute
both his Body and Blood together with the external Elements, or the Bread and
Wine.

36 Last of all, He does testify that by virtue of the Lords institution and
promise, the Bread in the Eucharist is the Communion of the Body; and the Cup
of Blessing, the Communion of the Blood of Christ: and further does admonish
all those that intend to receive the Sacrament, to remember that they are
Christ's Guests, to rely on his words with true Faith, and to come with due
preparation, that so they may receive it unto their salvation.

37 But thus much we must know, That the Scripture does not in any place say,
that by consecration or blessing, the Bread is turned into the Body, and the
Wine into the Blood of Christ. Yea the Scripture is expressly against it.

38 And Transubstantiation, (a thing barbarous both for Name and Nature)
gathers little strength from the Disputation of some of our modern writers,
who thus expound it, That the Body of Christ is made of the Bread, not as of
the Matter; as it was made of the flesh of the Virgin Marie; but as from a
Term (a Qu^, or) from whence, as Heaven was made of Nothing, the Night is made
of the Day, and the Wine was made of Water.

39 For besides that they digress from the opinion of their predecessors (for
they held the Essential conversion of the Bread and Wine into the Body and
Blood of Christ) they do also involve and entangle themselves in very great
difficulties.

40 For whosoever says, that one substance is converted into another, when it
only succeeds in the place thereof, he abuses names.

41 Who ever said, that Nothing was transubstantiated into Heaven, or that the
Day is transubstantiated into Night?

42 But if the Body of Christ is made of the Bread after the same manner as
Wine was made of Water: It follows, That the Essence of the Bread is converted
into the Body of Christ; that the accidents of the Bread do perish; that the
Mass Priests by the same power do turn the Bread into the Body of Christ, as
Christ turned the Water into Wine: And so they become the Creators of their
Creator, and Makers of their Maker. Stella Clericorum.

43 It was a Sacrament that Christ would institute, and not a New creation: It
was the Communion of his Body and Blood by the external Elements of Bread and
Wine, that Christ would institute, and not the Transubstantiating of them into
an heavenly matter.

44 And that it may appear how little or no foundation there is for
Transubstantiation in these Words of Christ, This is my Body, We will pass by
all others, and hear only what Biel, the Compiler of Schoole-Divinitie, says
concerning this matter.

45 Thus says he (Lib. 4. Sent. Did. 11. q. 1. Art. 3. Dub. 1.) All
Affirmative Propositions, in which the Terms signifying Bread and Wine are put
in the Nominative case, are false. As, Bread is the Body of Christ; That which
is Bread, is, was, shall, or can be the Body of Christ. (He disputes upon the
Hypothesis of Transubstantiation) Again, Those Propositions are true, in which
the Term ( a Quo, or) From whence, that is, the Bread and the Wine is
expressed by the Ablative case with a Praeposition (Ex, or De) Of, or From: or
the Term (ad Quem, or) Whereunto* that is, the Body and Blood of Christ is
expressed by the Accusative case with a Praeposition. So then these
Propositions (if they be found in Scripture) are true: Of Bread is made the
Body of Christ, Of Wine is made the Blood of Christ; and these likewise are
true (if they be found in Scripture) Bread is changed, converted, or
Transubstantiated into the body of Christ; etc. So says Biel.

46 Therefore down falls all their work, which for the rearing up of their
tower of Transubstantiation, they build upon the words of Christ. For there is
not any place to be found in Scripture, where Christ says, Of this bread is
made my Body, Of this Wine is made my Blood.

47 Upon their Transubstantiation, the superstructure is, The Reposition, or
laying up, Circumgestation, or carrying about, Adoration* or worshipping of the
external Elements. Therefore we may pass the same judgment upon them.

48 The second Sacramental action is, the Distribution: before which goes
Fraction, or breaking of the bread.

50 Whether the bread be broke before the blessing or after, it matters not
much, if so be that it be distributed.

51 For the breaking of the bread does not constitute a peculiar Sacramental
act, but it is an act of the Minister preparing it to be distributed.

52 Again, It neither adds to, nor takes from the integrity and perfection of
the Sacrament, whether the external Elements of bread and wine be given into
the hands or put into the mouths of the Communicants.

53 For we are always to distinguish between the Thing and the Manner of the
thing, Giving and the Manner of giving.

54 The Third Sacramental action, is eating and drinking: which has not
respect unto the bread only and apart, or to the wine only and apart, but
unto that Bread which is the communion of the Body of Christ, and to that Wine,
which is the communion of the Blood of Christ. 1. Cor. 10.16.

55 This eating is neither merely natural, nor merely spiritual, but
Sacramental, depending on the Sacramental union of the bread and body of
Christ.

56 As therefore the Sacramental union, by which, in the true and lawful use,
the body of Christ is united with the bread; and the blood of Christ is united
with the wine; So also the Sacramental eating and drinking depends on the
institution of Christ, who is true and omnipotent; but it cannot be
comprehended by humane reason, neither must it curiously be searched into.

57 If then thou opposest the spiritual eating, to the natural, carnal,
physical, local, and Capernaiticall: then rightly do we say, that the eating
of the body of Christ with the bread is spiritual.

58 But if by spiritual eating thou understandest that whereof John speaks
in the sixth chapter: That appertains to the fruit of the supper, and
therefore undoubtedly not to the essence thereof.

59 The end of the Holy Supper is set down in these words of Christ, Do this in
remembrance of me. 1. Cor. 11.24.

60 Which remembrance has respect unto the words foregoing, to wit, How that
body is eaten in the Supper, which was delivered to death for us, and that
blood is drunk, which on the altar of the cross was poured forth for our
sins.

61 From whence it appears, that the primarie and principal end of the Holy
Supper is, the confirming of our faith.

62 Which comprehends in it these fruits, That in the true and saving use of
the Holy Supper the promise of the forgiveness of sins is sealed unto us;
That the grace received in Baptism is confirmed in us; That the covenant of
friendship and reconciliation between God and Man is renewed in us; That we are
again ingrafted into Christ; and, That we are fed with incorruptible food, by
faith, unto everlasting life.

63 To speak all in few words, These taken and drunk by us, make Christ to
abide in us, and us in him. Hilar. 8. de Trinit.

64 The bread in the Eucharist is called by Ignatius, The Medicine of
Immortality, and an Antidote against the poison of sin. By Basil it is
called, The viaticum or viand of eternal life, and an Apology which is well
accepted before the judgment seat of God. By Damascen it is called, The pledge
of the kingdom and the life to come.

65 Lesse-principall ends we may reckon up many: For by the use of this
Sacrament we approve unto God our Obedience* unto Christ our Thankful
remembrance of his great benefit* unto Men our Repentance, our Consent in
doctrine, and our earnest study and desire after Love and Charity.

66 But that this mystery is either a Propitiatory, or Impetratorie Sacrifice,
this we utterly deny.

67 For there is but one Priest of the New Testament, one Propitiatory
sacrifice, one oblation.

68 Unto the use of the Holy Supper are to be admitted only Christians, and
such Christians as can try and examine themselves. 1. Cor. 11.28.

69 From hence is to be understood, what we may judge of notorious sinners,
which will not try and examine themselves: and what also of children, and
others, which cannot try and examine themselves.

70 This true examination consists in the earnest acknowledgement of sins,
and detestation of the same; in true faith in Christ; and a steadfast purpose
and resolution of amendment of life.

71 He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to
himself, not discerning the Lords body. 1. Cor. 11.29.

72 For whosoever shall eat this bread ( which is the communion of the body of
Christ. 1. Cor. 10.16.) and drink this cup of the Lord (which is the communion
of the blood of Christ. 1. Cor. 10, 16.) unworthily, shall be guilty of the
body and blood of the Lord. 1. Cor. 11.27.

73 Therefore, as concerning the integrity and perfection of the Sacrament, it
matters not with what faith a man comes to receive it: but as ^oncerning the
fruit and benefit of it, surely it matters very much. Aug. 3. contr. Donat.
cap. 14.

74 Concerning the time, place, and other circumstances of the Holy Supper if
we be asked the question: Our answer is according to the counsel of the
Apostle, Let all things be done decently and in order. 1. Cor. 14.40.

75 God grant, that our bodies which are fed with the body and blood of
Christ, may at the last day be raised up unto everlasting life. Iren. lib. 4.
adv. b^r. c. 34. Amen

CHAP. XIX. Wherein are contained Theological Aphorisms concerning the CHURCH.
1 BY the Word and the Sacraments, the Holy Ghost also working together
effectually, God gathers himself a Church here on earth.

2 Which Church is in Greek called (...), because it is called out of the whole
race of mankind, and gathered together into an holy Assembly.

3 For the Church is an Assembly or company of men gathered together unto the
kingdom of God by the ministry of the Word and the Sacraments: amongst whom
there are always some true godly which persevere in the true faith even unto
the end: with whom also are mixed many not holy, but yet agreeing in the
profession of doctrine.

4 This Assembly or company, because it must always fight under Christ's banner
against the Flesh* the World, and the Devil, is therefore called the Church
Militant.

5 And because the ministry of preaching the Word, and administering the
Sacraments is obvious to our senses, it is also called the Visible Church.

6 But yet again, Forasmuchas it is not conspicuous to the eyes of men, who be
true believers, and godly: in respect of them it is called an Invisible Church.

7 Therefore that distinction of the Church into Visible and Invisible does not
introduce two as it were distinct Churches, or diverse companies:

8 But it considers the Church, or the company of those which are called
after a diverse respect and in a different manner, that is, Inward and Outward.

9 The Inward beauty and glory of the Church does consist in Faith, and
Renovation, or renewing, with which is immediately joined the Inheritance of
eternal life.

10 This spiritual Regeneration, and Renovation is hidden under the
infirmities of the flesh: and this communion or Inheritance of eternal life
is, by the scandal of the cross and death, covered as it were with a vail
here in this life. And in this respect the Church is said to be Invisible.

11 The Outward beauty and glory of the Church does consist in the sincere
preaching of the Word, and the profession thereof, and the lawful
administration of the Sacraments: In which respect the Church is said to be
Visible.

12 To make a man therefore a true and living member of the mystical body of
Christ, the external profession of the same doctrine, and the participation of
the same Sacraments is not sufficient: but there is required also, and that
necessarily, inward regeneration; and the inward dwelling of the Holy Ghost.

13 But yet we are not to seek for the Invisible Church without the Visible,
seeing that it is included within it: For the elect are not to be sought for
without the company of those which are called.

14 Neither are we in any nation under heaven to seek for that Invisible Church
of the elect, pure, unspotted, undefiled, outwardly separate from all
hypocrites.

15 For here in this life the Jebusites, and they of Jerusalem dwell together;
in the same garden* the Nettle and the Myrtle, in the same wood the low Shrub
and the lofty Cedar grow together; in Jacobs flock the white and the speckled,
the Lambs and the Kids feed together; in Peter's net fishes Good and Bad are
caught together; in the Lords field the Lillies and the Thorns spring up
together; in the Lords floor the Corn and the Chafe are mingled together; in
Christ's cellar the Wine and the Oil have both their Lees and Dregs; in Noah's
ark there were beasts Unclean as well as Clean.

16 This company of the elect, this Church, is by the Holy Ghost in Scripture
adorned with most honorable Titles.

17 For it is called, The body of Christ, The spouse of Christ, The kingdom of
God, Gods peculiar, Gods beloved people, etc.

18 But all these Titles and appellations are to be understood by a Synecdoche,
as not belonging to all in the Church: For they are attributed unto the Church
for the truly regenerate and elects sake, which are in and of the Church.

19 For there is a manifest and evident difference between the truly
regenerate, and the hypocrites, which are only joined unto the Chuch in an
outward profession.

20 The Truly regenerate are True and Living members of the Church, because
from Christ their Head they draw both Spirit and Life; The Hypocrites, are but
rotten and dead members: Those belong unto the Church Internally; These, only
Externally: Those, in Heart; These* only in Outward show: Those, In deed*
These, In thought only: Those, in the Judgment of God; These, only in the
Judgment of Men: Those, as True and sound parts of the Body; These, as Scabs
and Ill humors: Those, to speak properly, are of the Church; These, are only
in the Church. August. in Brevic. Collat. Collat. 3. in Joan. Tract. 6. De
Bapt. lib. 3. cap. 18. etc.

21 The Church, in the Creed, is called, One, Holy, Catholic, and Apostolic.

22 It is called One, for the Unity of the Spirit, which the Apostle expounds,
Ephesians. 4.3. etc. There is one Body and one Spirit, even as ye are called in one
hope of your calling: One Lord, on^ Faith, one Baptism: One God and Father of
all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all.

23 It is called Holy, because it is sanctified of Christ, by the Spirit and
the Word: Which Sanctity, or Holiness consists, in this life, in the imputation
of Christ's Sanctity, and the Study of true Sanctity; but at length it shall
be made perfect and absolute in the life to come.

24 It is called Catholic, in respect of the Catholic Faith, which is to be
estimated by the common consent of all the Godly, and their agreement in the
true Doctrine, at all times, and in all places, whether they lived in former
ages, or whether they be at this day yet living.

25 But it is necessary that this consent be grounded on the Catholic
writings of the Prophets and Apostles, which are the only foundation of the
Church.

26 It is called Apostolic in respect of the Doctrine of the Apostles; because
it began in the New Testament to be propagated by the Apostles (which taught
none other things then those which the Prophets and Moses did say should come.
Act. 26.22.) And because it is yet at this day gathered together by the
Doctrine of the Apostles sounding in the Scriptures.

27 From whence it may be easily gathered, what are the true Characters and
signs of the True Church, to wit, The pure preaching of the Word, and the
Lawful administration of the Sacraments.

28 For seeing that the Church is nothing else but a Company of such as
profess the true Doctrine of Christ publicly, and use the Sacraments
lawfully; and there is no surer note of a thing the^ its Form: Therefore we
conclude that these and no other are the true proper and genuine Characters,
tokens, and cognizances of the Church.

29 If there be assigned any other; as the Catholic name, Antiquity,
Duration, Amplitude, Succession of Bishops, Temporal felicity, etc. I say,
These are common to other Societies and Companies as well as to the Church;
neither are they of any force to prove a true Church, unles they exactly agree,
and are joined with the other notes before mentioned by us.

30 Wherefore we thought good to note the words of Stapleton (in relect. princ.
fid. Controv. 1. Quaest. 4. Art. 5. page 113.) Even as, says he, little
children do distinguish a man from a beast, by the external lineaments of
body, and outward figure of a man; because they are led only by their sense:
And those which are of riper years and have the use of reason, but yet are
rude and unlearned, do it by operations of life and functions which are only
proper to a man* as to speak like a man, to walk like a man, etc. But they
which are wise and prudent whose judgment pierces deeper, do it by prudence
and understanding, and other endowments which are proper unto man after a far
more excellent manner.

31 So the Church of Christ is by those that are wise and Spiritual, (such as
are the Teachers and Pastors of the Church) known by the sound Do^trine and the
right use of the Sacraments: But as for those which are unlearned, weak, and
little in Faith, who are not able to judge of the Doctrine it self considered
in its causes, principles, and means; as also those which are without Faith,
who know little or nothing of the Church: they judge only by the outward face
and appearance, and by the multitude of the people which believe, and their
Pastors.

32 This Similitude or Comparison of Stapletons, we thought worthy to be noted.
For from hence it may be concluded, that our notes of the true Church are
proper, genuine, and well beseeming spiritual men; but theirs are doubtful
and uncertain.

33 The outward show and face of the Church shadowed ou^ by lineaments, we
willingly grant unto them: But as for the Soul thereof, that must they leave
unto us.

34 Hither belongs that which Bellarmine himself openly confesses, That by
those notes and marks by him assigned, it is not proved evidently to be true,
That the Church of Rome is the true Church of God, but yet it is made eviden^ly
credible. Libr. 4. de Eccl. cap. 3. Col. 210.

35 Furthermore seeing that the Gospel is not preached, nor the Sacraments
administered with like sincerity in all particular Churches; but the ^eaven of
humane traditions and inventions is mixed with the pure mass of Gods Word:
Therefore in this respect, and in this sense, the Church is said to be more
pure, or more impure, comparing one with another.

36 So Christ would have the Scribes and Pharisees to be heard, Sitting in
Moses Chair. Matt. 23.2. that is, delivering the Doctrine which Moses
delivered (according to the interpretation of Biel. 4. Sent. Did. 1. Quaest.
4. Art. 3.) But withal he gives an Item, to beware of the leaven of the
Pharisees, that is, their false Doctrine. Mat. 16.6.

37 God can even by a corrupt Ministry beget spiritual children unto
himself. Ezech. 16.20.

38 The ears of the hearers are many times more pure then the lips of the
teachers.

39 So the Popish Church is not a true and pure Church: But yet in former ages
under Popery did God gather, and even at this day still does gather unto
himself a Church.

40 Our Churches are gone out of the Romish Babylon according to Gods command.
Jerem. 15.19. They have taken forth the precious from the vile; They have
accepted, and do still profess and maintain the writings of the Prophets and
Apostles, and the Doctrine which is conformable and agreeable unto them,
separating them from the leaven of humane traditions.

41 Can any one then deny that our Church is Apostolic? Such as the doctrine
is, such is the Church: The Doctrine is Apostolic; And therefore our Church is
also Apostolic.

42 Let them therefore either convince us, out of the writings of the Prophets
and Apostles, to have departed from the Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles:
or let them not deny unto us the name of Catholic and Apostolic Church.

43 And here we would have it accurately to be observed, what the Acts of the
Diet at Ausburg Ann. 1530. do witness, How that the chiefest of our adversaries
there confessed that the confession of our Faith could not be refuted out of
Scripture.

44 Hither will we add out of S. Augustine (Epist. 166.) that, In the
Scriptures we have learned Christ; in the Scriptures we have learned the
Church^ And, why then do we not in them retain both Christ and the Church?

45 And again, we have another saying out of S. Augustine (De unitat. Eccl.
Cap. 2.) which makes against them: Between us, says he, and the Donatists (the
Romanists) the question is, Where the Church is. What then shall we do? Shall
we seek it in our own words, or in the words of our Lord, which is the Head of
the Church? In my judgment, we ought rather to seek it in his words, who is
Truth it self, and best knows his own body.

46 And further we urge upon them that Exclusive particle of Saint Chrysostom
(Hom. 49. oper. imperf. in Matthew.) They which would know which is the true
Church of Christ, can know by no other means but Only by the Scriptures.

47 The word of God, which this day is not extant but in the writings of the
Prophets and Apostles, is the seed, the foundation, and, as it were, the soul
of the Church: If the Church departs from the tract thereof, it departs
into error, and that so much the more grievous, by how much the more remote
and distant from the sincerity of the word.

48 From whence it may be easily gathered, what we are to determine concerning
that question Whether the Church can err or no.

49 For we are to distinguish be^tween the Catholic Church, and Particular
Churches.

50 Again we are to distinguish between errors overthrowing the Foundation,
and stubble buil^ upon the Foundation.

51 And again we are to distinguish between the Visible Church, and the
Invisible.

52 The Romanists; after long and tedious disputation about the infallible
judgment of the Church, bring us at length to the Pope alone. The
Infallibility, says Bellarmine (4. de Pointif. cap. ^.) is not in the
assembly of the Counselors, or in the Council of the Bishops, but in the Pope
alone.

53 The faithful people err not, as long as they follow their Pastors; The
Pastors err not, as long as they follow their Bishops; The Bishops err not as
long as they follow the Pope. Therefore according to them, the immunitie of the
Church from error descends from the Pope alone.

54 What they attribute unto the Pope, that do we attribute un^Christ, who
teaches his Church by the Scriptures and in the Scriptures: The Church does
not err as far forth and as long as it follows the voice of Christ, and is
ruled by the Holy Ghost.

55 To conclude, To this end does God gather himself a Church, that he may
have an assembly or company to acknowledge, to praise, and to glorify him
aright, both in this life and in the life to come.

56 The Militant Church here on Earth is the Seminary of the Church Triumphant
in Heaven. Unto which Christ bring us, who is the Head thereof: To whom be
glory for ever and ever. Amen.

CHAP. XX. Wherein are contained Theological Aphorisms concerning the
ECCLESIASTICAL MINISTRY.
1 THere are in the Church three states or orders, instituted all by God: The
Ecclesiastical, Political, and Oeconomicall: The First, of the Church; the
Second, of the Commonwealth; the Third, of the Private family.

2 They are commonly called three Hierarchies.

3 The Ecclesiastical order is called in Scripture ((...)) The Ministry, and
Service.

4 Therefore it is not any Despoticall or Lordly dominion.

5 In this Ecclesiastical Ministry, we are to consider the lawful Vocation
thereunto, and the faithful Discharge thereof.

6 Vocation is certainly necessary for Ministers of the Church, and that such
as is lawful.

7 For, How shall they preach, except they be sent? Romans 10.15.

8 The power and right of calling Ministers is Gods own: It is he, who as the
Lord of the harvest sends forth laborers into his harvest. Matthew. 9.38.

9 Now God calls the Ministers of his Church both Immediately, and Mediately.

10 Immediately he called the Prophets in the Old Testament, and the Apostles
in the New.

11 Which manner of calling the Apostle, Gal. 1.1. describes thus, That it was
neither of man, nor by man, but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father who raised
him from the dead.

12 With which description this is nothing repugnant, That sometimes by some
Prophet or Apostle, or else by Lot, this immediate vocation or calling of God
is outwardly declared.

13 The Immediate vocation or calling is always accompanied with some
extraordinary Testimonies and Gifts of God.

14 But yet by Testimonies and Gifts we would not have miracles to be
understood.

15 For John the Baptist did no miracle. Joh. 10.41. And yet it is certain that
he was Immediately called.

16 But by these Testimonies of Immediate Vocation, we understand the peculiar
declaration and manifestation of the Spirit, and the singular power and
efficacy of their ministry.

17 The doctrines of those which are Immediately called by God, forasmuchas
they speak as they are moved by the Holy Ghost, are simply and absolutely to be
believed. 2. Pet. 1.21.

18 Whereupon we are said to be built upon the foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles. Ephesians. 2.20.

19 They which are called after this manner, have this privilege, That they
are not tied and bound to any certain and particular Church, but they are
furnished with power and authority to preach every where.

20 From whence it appears that this Immediate vocation has especially place,
either in the constituting of a Church, or in the purging of it from errors.

21 The Mediate Vocation is also the calling of God: but it is by fit men,
according to the Canon and rule expressed in the word of God.

22 Where we must very accurately observe, that the Mediate Vocation also as
well as the Immediate belongs unto God.

23 For it is God that has set in the Church, not only Prophets, Apostles,
and Evangelists, but also Pastors and Teachers. 1. Cor. 12.28. Ephesians. 4.11.

24 The Ministers of the Church of Ephesus are said to be made by the Holy
Ghost, although Paul by the imposition, or laying on of hands commended the
ministry unto them. Acts 20.28.

25 The Holy Ghost even at this day reproves the world of sin, by those which
are called by a Mediate Vocation. John 16.8.

26 God, when he calls by a Mediate Vocation, uses the ministry of the
Church.

27 For unto the Church has he committed the pledge of his word. Romans 3.2. He
has delivered unto her the Sacraments, and unto her as to his spouse he has
given the keys of the kingdom of heaven. Matthew. 18.18.

28 So then the Church has power and right to call Ministers: but it is from
God, and it must be in such manner and order as is expressed in the Scriptures.

29 What manner and order of calling we here understand, it is declared by the
precepts and practice of the Apostles.

30 Whomsoever you shall approve by your letters (says the Apostle, 1. Cor.
16.3.) them will I send. A Bishop must have a good report. 1. Tim. 3.7. Lay
hands suddenly on no man. 1. Tim. 5.22. suddenly, that is, before thou have the
testimony and consent of the Church.

31 Add hither also the Practice of the Apostles. At the ordination and
election of Deacons, the Apostles speak after this manner, Brethren look ye out
among you seven men of honest report, full of the Holy Ghost and wisdom, whom
we may appoint over this business. Acts 6.3. and again, Elders were ordained
in every Church by suffrages, or voices Acts 14.23.

32 Whereupon were made those old Canons. No reason it is that any should be
suffered to be reckoned and accounted amongst Bishops unless they be elected
by the Clergy, desired by the People, and consecrated by the Bishops of the
same Province with the judgment of the Metropolitan. (c. null. did. 62. ex
Leon. Episc. Rom.)

33 Item, Let them be desired by the People, elected by the Clergy, and
ordained by the judgment of the Bishops.

34 Item, Whosoever are to be made Priests, for such let a postulation be made
unto the Bishops, let them have the hands of Clergiemen of good credit, and let
them also have the testimony and consent of the People.

35 That place of Cyprian (Lib. 1. Epist. 4.) is e^pecially to be noted, where
it is said, The people especially have power of electing such as are worthy,
and refusing such as are unworthy to be Priests, and we see apparently that it
descends by authority from above, That the Priest be elected in the ^ight and
presence of the people, and be approved and thought worthy by public judgment
and testimony.

36 Wherefore seeing that the power and right of calling Ministers belongs unto
the whole Church: Neither let the Presbytery alone, nor the Magistracy alone,
nor the rest of the multitude alone, usurp and challenge to themselves this
power.

37 For what concerns all, That must all have a care of.

38 But let all things be done decently and in order. 1. Cor. 14.40.

39 The public and solemn testification of this Mediate Vocation, is the rite
of Ordination, by which in the sight of God and in the presence of the whole
Church, the person lawfully called is separated from the rest of the multitude
to this charge and office, and is commended unto God by prayers, and has a
public testimony of his foregoing Vocation.

40 We deny that Ordination is a Sacrament, if the word be properly and
strictly taken.

41 For it wants the outward Element expressly instituted by Christ himself in
the New Testament: It wants also the promise of application and obsignation of
grace proper to the Gospel.

42 Before Ordination there goes diligent Examination of the party to be
ordained, by which inquiry is made concerning his confession, learning,
aptness to teach, and order of life.

43 The Rule of this Examination is set down unto us 1. Tim. 3.2* etc. Tit.
1.6, 7, 8, etc.

44 In which places such virtues are required of him, that has committed unto
him the office of teaching in the Church, as are either Common to him with
other true godly, or else are Proper and peculiar unto him.

45 The Common are these, That he must be blameless, the husband of one wife,
vigilant, s^ber, of good behavior, given to hospitality, Not given to wine,
no striker, not greedy of filthy lucre, but patient, not a b^awler, not
covetous, etc. 1. Tim. 3.2, 3, 4, etc. Tit. 1.6, 7, 8, etc.

46 Now the reason, why the Apostle makes mention of these common virtues, is:
Because integrity of life is required of Ministers not only for the same
causes for which they are required of other private Christians; but also in a
peculiar name: That their ministry be not calumniated, reproached, and ill
spoken of, and so the fructification of the word be hindered.

47 The Apostle requires that a Bishop be the husband of one wife, to stop the
mouths of Heretics, which speak against their marrying: showing thereby that
marriage is no impure thing, but so honorable, that it is no hindrance to a
man from ascending up unto the Bishops chair. Chrysostom. in cap. 1. Tit.

48 Therefore the Ecclesiastical Order, or the Clergy are not by Gods law
forbidden marriage.

49 For the temperance or continency which the Apostle requires in a Bishop (
Tit. 1.8.) cannot be proved to be understood of the vow of Continency, or
living unmarried; until it be first showed that there is no temperance or
continency in the married life of the Godly. Ecclesiasticus 26.22. Galat. 5.23.

50 Neither does the Apostle hereby hinder those from the ministry, who after
they have buried one wife, have lawfully married another.

51 But he forbids those to be chosen unto the Ministry, who in any sort
sin so against the ^eventh commandment, that they are not the husbands of one
wife.

52 As for example, If they live in adultery: If at the same time they have
more wives then one: If putting away and divorcing from them a lawful wife
(except it be in case of adultery) they marry another, or choose unto
themselves one that is divorced from another.

53 Neither yet does he prescribe marriage unto all Ministers of the Church as
a thing absolutely necessary: but he leaves it as a thing arbitrarie, either
to marry or not to marry; and makes married Ministers subject unto the laws of
Matrimony established by God.

54 The Proper and peculiar virtues, which the Apostle requires of the
Ministers of the Church are these, That they must be apt to teach. 1. Tim. 3.2.
That they be furnished and instructed with the gift to teach, and be able by
sound doctrine both to exhort and to convince the gainsayers. Tit. 1.9.

55 So much concerning the lawful vocation or calling unto the Ministry: Now
follows the faithful discharge of the same.

56 By the faithful discharge of the Ministry, we understand all duties of
Ecclesiastical ministration, according to the Apostle. 1. Cor. 4.1. Let a man
so account of us as of the Ministers of Christ, and the Stewards of the
Mysteries of God. and in the 2. verse, Moreover it is required in Stewards,
that a man be found faithful.

57 Which faithfulness consists in this, That the things of the Church
wherewith the Minister is entrusted by God, be ordered and administered
according to the prescript will of God.

58 The things of the Church either concern Doctrine, or the Sacraments, or
Discipline.

59 The Office then of a Minister, is contained in these three things* the
lawful administration of Doctrine, the Sacraments, and Discipline.

60 The administration or discharge of the Ministers office as concerning
Doctrine consists in the Confirmation of the Truth, and the Refutation of
Errors.

61 The Rule both of Doctrine and Reproof is the only Word of God. 2. Tim.
3.16.

62 Unto Doctrine pertains the interpretation of the Holy Scripture, and the
applying of the same unto the use and benefit of the Church.

63 In the Administration of the Sacraments we are to consider both the Object,
and the Manner.

64 By the name of Object we understand that provident care of the Minister, by
which he is held to have regard and foresight unto whom the Sacraments are to
be administered, and who are to be kept back from them.

65 And this is the chiefest cause why private Confession and Absolution are
still held in some Churches, although there are not wanting many other reasons.

66 By the name of the Manner is understood that all things are to be
administered according to the prescript rule of Christ, and, as the Apostle
says, decently and in order. 1 Cor. 14.40.

67 The Ecclesiastical Discipline is exercised in correcting faults, and
passing Ecclesiastical Judgment and Sentence.

68 Faults are to be corrected according to the order and degrees prescribed by
Christ. Matt. 18.15.

69 Let Private and Public admonition and warning go before: and if those will
not serve the turn, let the severe Administration of Ecclesiastical Judgment
and Sentence succeed in the place thereof, which consists in Excommunication.

70 Excommunication (the latter part of the keys) is either that which is
called the Lesser, or else that which is called the Greater.

71 The Lesser is that, by which the Sinner is interdicted the participation of
the Lords Supper for a time.

72 The Greater, is that by which, Lawful Knowledge going before, the
obstinate and contumacious sinner is excluded from the Society of the Church,
and is delivered up unto Satan.

73 The first is called ((...), or) Excommunication of Separation for a time:
The second is called ((...) or) Excommunication of Execration.

74 It were to be wished that in this last and worst age of the World the
reigns of Ecclesiastical Discipline were held with a stiffer hand, then
commonly they are.

75 The Power of Excommunicating belongs unto the whole Church, and is
pronounced by the Minister in the name of the Church.

76 Therefore the express or silent consent of the Church is required. When ye
are gathered together (says the Apostle 1 Cor. 5.4, 5.) and my Spirit, with
the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, deliver such a one unto Satan, etc.

77 The Pope of Rome as he offends against the Lawful Vocation of Ministers:
So also he offends against the Administration of Ecclesiastical Discipline.

78 For he derogates too much from the Magistracy, and from Christian People
in taking from them the right and power of electing Ministers: and arrogates
too much unto himself, in taking upon him to give the Sole power unto Bishops,
and reserving it more especially unto himself.

79 He boasts and glories that he is the Monarch, the Head, and Bridegroom of
the Church.

80 But by this and many other marks we know him to be the very Antichrist.

81 For what marks soever the Scripture has given to know Antichrist by, they
all meet together in the Pope of Rome, as Histories do witness, and
experience teaches.

82 In like manner the Pope of Rome offends against the Administration of
Ecclesiastical Discipline, many ways.

83 For he challenges unto himself the Supreme power of Excommunicating,
absolving, dispensing with, reserving cases, conferring indulgences, benefices,
and such like, of propounding Laws, of determining, punishing, and governing
the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, etc. Franc. Vargas. de Jurisdict. Episc.

84 He boasts and glories that this power is seated in himself as in the Head
and Fountain, and that it is derived from him unto the Bishops as unto the
Arms and Streams.

85 He puts the Presbytery in subjection under the Bishops, and grants unto
them far less power of Jurisdiction.

86 This also is to be disliked in the Papal Excommunication, that he thunders
it out against whole Cities, whole Provincies, yea whole Kingdoms, for one, or
some few men's sake.

87 Neither does he exercise Excommunication against Atheism and notorious
offenses: But, as Histories do witness, it proceeds for the most part from
private hatred, levitie, ambition, and desire of domineering.

88 For he confounds the Ecclesiastical Discipline with civil punishments:
For after that he has Excommunicated Kings and Emperors, he thrusts them out
of their Kingdoms and Empires, he absolves their Subjects from their Homages
and Services, and from their Oath of Allegiance, and exposes their goods unto
all men for a pray.

89 What the end of Papal Excommunication is, Let us consult with Histories,
but especially let us have recourse unto Rodericus Z^morensis (in speculo vit.
Human. Lib. 2. Cap. 3.) and Nicholas de Cleman. (Lib. de Ruin. and Reparat.
Ecclesiae) whose testimony is most true on this part.

90 By these and the like abuses without doubt it is so come to pass, that the
most wholesome part of Ecclesiastical Discipline is at this day fallen to
decay and come to ruin. See other causes thereof in Luthers Commentaries (
Supr. 3. Joel. Tom. 4. Jen. Fol. 801. etc.) Read them and perpend them.

91 O Christ thou which thrustest forth Laborers into thy harvest, Thrust in
thy sickle, and reap: for the time is come for thee to reap: for the Harvest
of the Earth is ripe. Revel. 14.15. and The grapes are fully ripe. 18.
Whosoever loves thee, let him say, Come. Amen.

CHAP. XXI. Wherein are contained Theological Aphorisms concerning The
POLITICAL ORDER, OR The CIVIL MAGISTRACY.
1 THe goods, not only of the life to come, which are eternal, but even those
of this life, which are temporal, the hope of fruition whereof man lost by his
Apostasy and falling away from God, are by God restored again to mankind for
the merit and intercession of the Son.

2 By the Ministry of the Word God gathers unto himself a Church, by which
he may be rightly and duly acknowledged and praised, in the true members
whereof he may restore his decayed image, and inchoate or begin eternal life.

3 But, because this gathering together of the Church, and the restoring of the
divine Image is wrought in this life: Therefore God has instituted and
ordained the Political Order or the Civil Magistracy, to be as it were an
Hedge to the Church.

4 For to this end has God appointed Kings, and all that be fet in authority,
and given them rule and power, that under them we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. 1 Timothy 2.2.

5 The Church is gathered together out of mankind. Mankind being miserably
corrupted since the fall cannot possible consist without civil government.
Therefore was it necessary for the Churches sake, that the Political Order,
or Civil Magistracy should be instituted and appointed.

6 The parts of the Political Order are two: The Magistrates and the Subjects.

7 The Magistrates rule; The Subjects obey.

8 The Magistrates are either supreme or subordinate. Submit your selves to
every ordinance of man for the Lords sake: whether it be to the King, as
Supreme; or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him. 1. Pet. 2.13.

9 The Supreme Magistrate has sovereign and full power and authority, under
God: The Subordinate is so set over others, that he is still set under the
Supreme.

10 Both are Gods own institution: For there is no power but of God. Romans 13.1.

11 Therefore a Christian man is not forbidden to be a Magistrate, and to bear
rule and authority.

12 The Gospel does not take away Civil Government: neither do Gods
institutions overthrow one another.

13 God calls men unto the Magistracy either Immediately or Mediately.

14 Examples of Immediate calling we have in Moses, David, etc. For God by his
own voice called them Immediately and Extraordinarily unto the rule and
governing of his people.

15 Mediate calling is especially two ways, either by Hereditarie succession,
or by Men's election: Unto these two ways of calling may all other be referred.

16 They which are called unto the Magistracy Mediately, are no less to be
accounted as instituted and appointed by God, then those which were called by
the voice of God himself Immediately.

17 For whereas Peter calls them the Ordinance of man. 1. Epist. 2.13. he
does it not therefore, as if they were only an humane ordinance: but because
they are ordained by men, because they are men, and because they are made and
appointed for the good of men, and common benefit of humane society.

18 The Office of a Magistrate is seen or considered, either in Peace or War.

19 In the time of Peace let him administer Justice and Judgment.

20 By Justice we understand external obedience to both Tables of the
commandments.

21 For it is the Magistrates charge and care, to see that both the Tables of
the commandments be kept and observed, as far as it concerns External
Discipline.

22 He may and must hinder false and blasphemous opinions from being spread
abroad: He may and must punish those which are seducers of Souls, especially
such as are seditious: He may and must hinder the profanation of the Sabbath.

23 But yet he must not take upon him authority and power over the Consciences
of men, whereof God only is King.

24 Therefore neither must the Magistrate compel the Subjects to any false
religion, neither must the Subjects obey, if he goes about to compel them.

25 Unto the Administration of Justice, there belongs also the power of
making Civil Laws, to be the determination of the Law of nature.

26 For Christian Commonwealths are not simply tied and bound to the Judicial
Laws of Moses.

27 Unto the same also belong Contracts, which are to be moderated by Charity
and Equity: From whence it is easily gathered, what we may determine in the
question, about Usury.

28 The Scripture simply forbids Usury: But what be Contracts of Usury,
that we must learn from the end of the Law, which is Charity; and from the
description of the Prohibition, as also from the incorrupt judgment of the
prudent.

29 By the name of Judgment forementioned, we understand the defending of the
good, and the punishing of those which do that which is evil. Romans 13.4.

30 To which end and purpose were judicial Laws invented, for the hearing and
judging both Civil and Criminal causes.

31 Therefore a Christian man is not forbidden to go to Law, so he do it in a
lawful manner.

32 The Punishment which the Magistrate inflicteth upon the transgressors of
the Laws, and the troublers of humane society, must be Correspondent to the
Fault committed.

33 For it is not free for the Magistrate at his pleasure, to let delinquents
and offenders, especially such as are in any enormous crime, escape and go
unpunished.

34 Yet sometimes Equity and Moderation of the rigor of the Law is to be
used: but still with a respect unto the Delinquent or Offender, and the Offense
it self.

35 As Extreme rigor of the Law is sometimes, Extreme injuries: So likewise
Extreme indulgence and remissness does Dull the Edge of the Law and much
diminish the power and authority of the Magistrate.

36 Here a question is moved about Heresy, Theft, and Adultery, Whether the
Punishment thereof ought to be Capital.

37 Whosoever does maintain an Heresy Privately, or else does spread it
abroad but not seditiously: we deny that such a one is to be put to death.

38 Other ways of sowing, and spreading abroad heresies, we leave unto the
Magistrate to punish.

39 To say that the punishment of simple Theft* especially if it be but of a
light and petty matter, ought to be Capital: that is very hard.

40 Yet we do not mislike that the rigor of the Law should be executed upon
such as are common robbers, breakers into houses, and such as have often
escaped for stealing, and yet steal again.

41 The Law of God has adjudged Adultery to be punished with death.

42 In the time of War let the Magistrate be mindful of his office and duty,
that he wages War lawfully.

43 For neither is the Magistrate forbidden to Denounce War, nor the Subjects
to take up arms: If the War be Lawful.

44 The Conditions of a Lawful War are these, That it be undertaken upon
Authority of superious, upon a good Cause, and with a good Intention. Thom.
2.2. q. 40.

45 War is not war but robbery, if it be undertaken without lawful
Authority of him that denounces it.

46 The Just causes of war are Three, Either Just defense, or Just
Punishment, or Recovering what is unjustly taken away.

47 There must also be added an Intention of a fit and convenient end. The Will
must be for Peace, and War is not to be undertaken but upon necessity: The
End of going to War is or ought to be the procuring of Peace. August. Epist.
205.

48 To a right Intention we refer also the Lawful manner of waging war.

49 It was worthily spoke by Aurelianus to a certain Tribune of Soldiers, If
thou will be a Tribune, if thou will live, hold thy Soldiers in, that they
commit no outrages. Let none of them st^ale an hen, take away another man's
sheep, pull of a grape, ^read down the standing corn, exact oil, salt, or
wood, but let them be content with their own wages: If they go a forraging and
boothaling, let them do it in their enemies country and not in the country of
their friends and allies.

50 For it can never be hoped, that those soldiers should be prosperous in
warlike enterprises, and feats of arms, which at their departure carry away
with them curses and tears for their Viaticum to feed upon by the way. Gregor.
lib. 6. Histor. cap. 12.

51 Let them try their strength against their enemies: But even against them
let the stratagems of war which they use be lawful.

52 But yet it behooves a Magistrate to try all courses before he goes to
war: For he may not do it, but when the extreme necessity of the commonwealth
calls for it. As Physicians are wont to do, when other remedies will not serve,
at length to come to searing and lancing.

53 As in playing at Dice, when money is laid once at stake, it is a question
upon the cast whose it shall be: So is it in war, The chance is doubtful;
what the event will be, it is uncertain: The king and the country lies at
stake.

54 The other part of the Political order, or Civil state, is made up by the
Subjects, which are Relatively opposed to the Magistrates.

55 And they are either mere Subjects, or else they are joined also in some
power.

56 The Subjects owe unto their Magistrates honor, fear, fidelity, obedience,
tribute, and prayers for them.

57 This honor must be performed in heart and mind, in mouth and word, in
work and deed.

58 We must look upon the Magistrates as the ordinance of God: neither must we
detract from them with a black mo^th, nor deny unto them outward reverence.

59 The Obedience which is to be performed has certain bounds and limits: For
those Subjects which also themselves are joined in some power, may inhibit the
Magistrates from usurping too much power and authority over them.

60 Yea those also which are merely Subjects are not bound to obey the
Magistrates in all things: that is, If they shall command any thing against
piety and honesty.

61 Subjects are to fear their own Kings; For they have rule and authority
over them: But Kings also must fear God; For his kingdom rules over all.
Psalm 103.19.

62 We must Fear God rather then Man: God, whose commands are always just,
rather then Man commanding that which is unjust.

63 If any thing be commanded, which seems hard and grievous to be born, yet we
must bear it: But if that which is commanded be impious and unjust we are
bound not to obey it.

64 We owe Tribute unto Kings and Magistrates: because they labor for us;
because they rule and govern us; and because they defend us.

65 But here a due moderation is required: For the tribute must be such as the
Subjects are well able to pay, and such as the necessity of the commonwealth
requires.

66 Here the question is moved, whether that place 1. Sam. 8. is to be
understood of Right or Custom. It may be answered, by distinguishing between
the Necessity of Government, and the Pleasure of the King.

67 Prayers also are a due which subjects are to pay unto kings and those that
are in authority, as the Apostle teaches expressly. 1. Tim. 2.2.

68 It was well said by B^genhagius, That if we were as ready to pray for the
Magistrates, as we are to d^^ract from them, then certainly things would go
better with us, and it would be the better for us.

69 The Hebrew Rabbis have such a saying as this, Woe unto tha^ people which
bury their own Lords. Rabb. Solomon Jar* in Comment. Hos. 1.

70 And Antigonus after his death is often dug up again by his Subjects.

71 And thus much concerning the Political Order, or Civil State. That which
remains concerns the Political Doctrine.

72 God who establishes kingdoms, grant unto all Christian Kings Princes and
Governors peace and tranquillity both in body and mind here in this life, and
eternal salvation both of body and soul in the life to come. Amen.

CHAP. XXII. Wherein are contained Theological Aphorisms concerning WEDLOCK,
OR MARRIAGE.
WEdlock is a state which was ordained by God even then when man stood in his
integrity, and before his fall.

2 Marriage is honorable in all, and the bed undefiled. Heb. 13.4.

3 But to speak properly and accurately, it is no Sacrament, according to the
definition which is given unto Baptism, and the Lords Supper.

4 For it wants the external and visible element according to Gods
institution, and likewise it wants the promise which is proper to the Gospel.

5 But if we speak generally and in a large sense, so it may be called a
Sacrament, that is, a sign of an holy thing. Ephesians. 5.32.

6 The proper place and seat of the doctrine concerning marriage is to be found
in Genesis 2.18, etc.

7 Unto which Christ calling us back, Matthew. 19.5. shows that the answer and
solution of all questions and doubts concerning Marriage is to be fetched from
that place.

8 There it is taught that Marriage is the lawful and indissoluble knot and
joining together of two only, to wit, the man and the woman.

9 There, Digamie and Polygamie, that is, having two wives or more is against
the institution of marriage.

10 Digamie is not, when a man after the death of the first woman marries a
second, but when a man at the same time has two wives. Chrysostom. in 1. Tim. 3.

11 For neither are second marriages, nor third, nor more then these forbidden
by the Holy Ghost, if so be that those that marry marry in the Lord.

12 Again, The woman after the death of her first husband may be married again
as before, and yet oftener.

13 God tolerated in the fathers in the Old Testament Polygamie or having many
wives, but he no where commanded it.

14 God tolerated it, I say, not for unbridled lusts sake, but for propagating
of the Church, and promoting the promise concerning the blessed ^eed.

15 And so God used that, which was evil in them, to a good end.

16 That the Marriage-knot may be lawful, there is required the mutual
consent of both parties.

17 Therefore there must be no violence used, neither must there be any error,
especially such as touches the substantialls of marriage.

18 The Consent which is required must be lawful, honest, just, free, full,
and sincere.

19 But, though we said there must not be any error, yet if the faith be once
pledged, and the promise of marriage once made, it is not to be broken upon
every error.

20 Neither is the Contract to be made void and of none effect, for want of
every condition which is required in the Consent.

21 And further the Consent of the parties is without force and efficacy, if
there be not also the Consent of their parents.

22 And therefore we say that the Consent of the parents is as well required as
the mutual Consent of the parties, and that not only for honesties sake, but
also for necessity.

23 And this we say following the authority of the Divine, Natural, and
Civil law.

24 Which also some Canons of the Pontificiall law, especially the more
ancient, do approve.

25 If the Parents forget the duty which they owe unto their children, or if
they will abuse their power: the Magistrate is to succeed into the place of the
parents.

26 Unto the lawful joining together in Matrimony this is also required that
the degrees of kindred be not violated.

27 Who may lawfully be joined together in Matrimony, and who are forbidden we
are taught in Leviticus, chapt. 18, and 20. by an express limitation of
degrees both of Consanguinitie and Affinity.

28 Which Texts we say are to be taken and understood not only of the Persons,
but also of the Degrees.

29 And we expressly and plainly affirm that these are the Constitutions of the
Law of Nature.

30 In these therefore there is no place for Dispensation.

31 To these Divine Laws, not without good and wholesome counsel and advice,
for greater reverence, there are also added by godly Magistrates Prohibitions
even to the third degree of an unequal line.

32* Which we also hold fit to be observed; but yet so, that upon a good and
probable cause they may be relaxed.

33 But still there must be a Proviso, or care had, that Dispensation be not
turned into Dissipation.

34 In the Computation or reckoning of the Degrees, we follow the Disposition
and order of the Canon^.

35 Not that we acknowledge our selves to be bound unto the Canons of the
Pontificiall Law: but because herein it is sound and good.

36 In a right line there is given this Rule: As many as the Persons are; so
many are the Degrees, excepting one.

37 In a Collateral equal Line this Rule is given: As many degrees as one
Person is distant from the stock; so many degrees is it distant from the other.

38 In a Collateral unequal Line, In what degree the Person more remote is
distant from the stock, in that likewise it is distant from the other.

39 In respect of Affinity also some there are which are not to be married
together.

40 But this Affinity, which hinders marriage, does not stretch it self far.

41 For between the kindred of the husband and the kindred of the wife, there
is no such Affinity but that they may marry one another.

42 But between the Wife and the Kindred of the Husband, as also between the
Husband and the Kindred of the Wife, there is such Affinity that they may not
marry one another.

43 Therefore, according to the Constitutions of all Laws, in a right Line
Prohibition extends it self Infinitely.

44 In a Collateral Line, by the Provincial Laws, Prohibition is extended to
the Third degree.

45 And it respects not only Consanguinitie but also Affinity.

46 And it is good counsel which is given by Ictus, That in joining together
in matrimony, we are not only to consider what is Lawful, but also what is
Honest.

47 The Principal end of marriage is the propagation of mankind, and of the
Church consequently.

48 The Lesse-Principall ends are, That the Man and the Wife may be mutual and
faithful helps the one to the other, and that they may be a Type of Christ and
his Church.

49 The Accidental end is, The avoiding of fornication.

50 For what before the fall was instituted for an Office or Duty, after the
fall became an Help or Remedy.

51 Before Matrimony, not without good reason, there must go Betrothing.

52 Which is the Promise of future Marriage.

53 After Betrothing, there may be a Separation, for sundry causes* which are
to be judged in the Consistories by godly learned and prudent men.

54 In general, we say that Refusalls may be made for more causes and reasons,
then Divorces may.

55 For many things may hinder Matrimony to be contracted, which cannot
dissolve it when it is contracted.

56 Matrimony is dissolved by Death and by Adultery.

57 By Adultery the very Knot of Matrimony is dissolved, insomuch that the
party innocent may marry again.

58 Jerome thinks that the Adulteress may not be retained: Augugustine thinks
that she may not be dismissed, and put away: But we go in a middle way.

59 If one party forsake the other and go away out of malice: the Magistrate
does well in providing and taking care for the party innocent.

60 But still we must remember Christ's Exclusive, That there is no other just
Cause of Divorce but only Adultery.

61 A Statute speaking Exceptively is not extended to other causes. Bald. Lib.
28. C. de Adult.

62 Inhabilitie of body for the use of Matrimony does not make a Divorce, but
it shows that no true Matrimony went before.

63 It is proved by this Argument: Because that Inhabilitie happening after
marriage does not admit of a Divorce.

64 We may judge the like concerning any error in the Substantialls.

65 Violence is counted equal to Desertion.

66 That Matrimony is to be dissolved for Heresy, we do not hold, neither do
we grant it.

67 Virginity is Subordinate to Wedlock: for chastity in both states is
pleasing unto God.

68 The Apostle preferres Virginity before Wedlock, to wit, in idoneous and
fit persons, which have the Gift of Continency: Not absolutely, but in some
respect; by reason of troubles, which follow those that are married, and the
circumstances of times.

69 The yoke of Virginity is not to be imposed upon any against their wills:
for all are not able to bear it.

70 Therefore it is free for all to marry: But, as for those that burn, it is
necessary.

71 If the Spirit voluntarily make thee a Virgin, then art thou a Virgin
indeed: There is no need of a Vow, or any Coaction.

72 If thou art a Virgin upon Coaction, before God thou art no Virgin: neither
does thy Vow profit thee.

73 Virginity of Body without Virginity of Mind is but Hypocritical

74 Which is not to be compared with Holy Wedlock, but is to be put far after
it.

75 It profits nothing to keep the Body Impolluted without, and to have the
Mind Fuming and Flaming with lusts within.

76 What does it profit to have the Flesh sound, and the Mind corrupted?

77 And yet what one of a thousand is there of those that Vow Virginity, which
keeps his body altogether impolluted?

78 But certainly there is not any that has his Mind free from the burning of
lust within.

79 Paul himself that great Apostle would here make no Law, nor cast a snare
upon any man.

80 It were to be wished therefore that they which cannot contain themselves,
would not give up their names to Virginity, and vow to live a single life: It
is a sumptuous tower, and a great word which all cannot receive. Bern. Sermon. ad
Cler.

81 I know no woman, and yet I am no Virgin. ( Cassianus cites this saying out
of Basil. Lib. 6. de Spir. fornic.)

82 A good man uses Wedlock well: But an evil man uses neither Wedlock nor
Virginity well.

83 Christ, who is the Bridegroom of the Church, be present by his grace with
all those that are married, that they may lead a godly life; and vouchsafe at
length to bring us all unto the celestial Marriage. Amen.

CHAP. XXIII. Wherein are contained Theological Aphorisms concerning the
four last things: DEATH, the RESURRECTION, the JUDGMENT, and the PLACE either
of Eternal JOY, or Eternal TORMENT.
WE have seen the estate of Christ's Church Militant here on Earth. It remains
now that we lift up our minds, and elevate our thoughts to the consideration
of the Church Triumphant in the Heavens.

2 The Passage of the godly out of the Militant Church into the Church
Triumphant is by the gate of Death. In which consideration Gregory Nyssen in
his oration concerning Death, wittily compares it to a Midwife which brings us
forth into another world unto a life truly so called.

3 After Death follows the Judgment: whose Forerunner is the Universal
Resurrection. It is appointed unto all men once to die, but after this follows
the Judgment. Hebr. 9.27.

4 They that have done good shall come forth, unto the resurrection of life:
and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation. John 5.29.

5 Four things there are which are called a man's last; the consideration
whereof should never depart out of our memory: and these are they, Death, the
Resurrection, the Judgment, and the Eternal Mansion, and habitation, of the
godly in Heaven, and the damned in Hell.

6 By the name of Death here we understand not the continual Miseries of this
present life. 1 Cor. 15.31. Nor the Death of the Soul in trespasses and
sins. Ephesians. 2.5. Nor that Blessed Death by which being dead unto sin, that
is, freed and delivered from the dominion thereof, and so from damnation, we
live unto God. Romans 6.2. Nor that Eternal Death, or second death of the
damned. Revel. 2.11.

7 But we understand the Death of the Body, which is the separation of Soul
from Body, the privation of carnal life, and the passing away of the little
World.

8 He that Dies unto Vices, before he dies the Death of the Body, does not die
an Eternal Death, when he dies the Death of the Body. Sphinx Phil. Cap. 36.

9 By the gate of Sin Death entered into the World, and so passed upon all
men. Romans 5.12.

10 Which Death is not the dissolution and reduction of the Soul into nothing,
but the departing of the Soul out of the House of the Body. The Soul cannot
be destroyed. Matthew. 10.28.

11 The Scripture makes mention but of two receptacles of Souls separated
from their bodies: The one, of the godly; the other of the wicked.

12 Away then with Purgatory; away with that [(...) or] night and sleeping of
Souls, between the Day of Death and the Day of Judgment: Away with
Pythagoras his ((...), or) Transmigration of Souls; away with Apparitions of
Souls.

13 For there is no middle place, where one can be out of Punishment, if he be
not in the Kingdom: no place, where one can be out of the Devils company, if
he has not Fellowship with Christ. August. de Pecc. Mor. and Remiss. Cap. 2.

14 Before the Universal Resurrection, the greater world shall pass away: and
after that shall follow the Universal Judgment.

15 Many of the ancients were of opinion that the World should pass away, by
the Change of Quality only, and not by the Abolition of Substance.

16 But the Scripture uses words very Emphaticall. Heaven and Earth shall
pass away. Matthew. 24.35. Luke 22.33.

17 The Key which is to open our Graves, and the Pledge of our Resurrection, is
the Resurrection of Christ our Head.

18 The Resurrection of our bodies is confirmed by manifest Testimonies of the
Holy Spirit in the Scripture, and they are often repeated.

19 The Preludes, or forerunners of our Resurrection are the particular
examples of those which were raised up again to life in the Old and New
Testament: whom Tertullian calls the Candidates of immortality.

20 Man was at the first both in Body and Soul created for immortality: The
Body is the Souls instrument, by which it works in actions good or bad. The
body of the godly is the Temple of the Holy Ghost: Yea our bodies are fed with
the quickening Body and Blood of Christ. And how then can they always remain
in the Grave?

21 God is the Author of our Resurrection: But Christ is the Finisher thereof,
in and with his humane nature assumed.

22 Not only all flesh, but even the same flesh that was, shall be raised up
again.

23 Their change in a moment, which shall be found alive upon Earth at the last
day, shall be to them in stead of Death and Resurrection from the dead.

24 Neither shall Christ only raise us up, but he shall be also our Judge.
Joh. 5.27. The Father has given him authority to exequute Judgment.

25 Christ, when he comes to Judge the world, shall appear in the same
nature, which he united unto himself by his Incarnation. That Flesh shall sit
and Judge, which stood before the Judge: That Flesh shall Judge, which was it
self formerly Judged.

26 This Universal Judgment Gods Truth and Justice do require.

27 The exact Form, Manner, and Proceeding in Judgment at the last day,
Experience it self will then better teach, then any humane understanding can
now conceive.

28 Let us, whilst we are here, pray unto God with sighs and groans, to be
delivered from the Sentence of Condemnation in that day: Let us now hear the
Voice of Invitation, that then we may hear the Voice of Consolation.

29 After Sentence is once passed, immediately follows Execution. Then shall
they, which are set at the right hand of the Judge, enter into Life
everlasting, and they which are on the left, shall be cast into Everlasting
fire. Matthew. 25.34.41.

30 The Blessedness of eternal Life comprehends in it the Privation and
Absence of all Evil, and the Presence and Fruition of all Good.

31 We shall be Freed and delivered from all Sin, and from all Punishment
due unto sin.

32 Our vile Body shall be fashioned like unto Christ his glorious Body.
Philip. 3.21. But there shall be great difference in glory.

33 We shall see God Without end, we shall Love him always Without loathing,
and praise him evermore Without being wearied. August. 22. de Civit. Dei cap.
30.

34 Vision shall succeed in the place of Faith, Fruition in the place of Hope,
and Charity here only Inchoate, shall be there Consummate.

35 God shall be fulness of Light to the Understanding, superabundance of Peace
to the Will, and continuance of Eternity to the Memory. Bern. Sermon. 11.
Super. Cant. Col. 519.

36 The Saints shall Rejoice for the Pleasantness of Place, which they shall
possess; for the sweet Company, with whom they shall reign; for the Glory
of their Bodies, which they shall put on; for the World, which they have
contemned; and for Hell which they have escaped. Bonavent. in Dioet. Cap. 50.

37 Let us then Pant and Breathe for earnest desire after that Life, whose King
is the Trinity, whose Law is Charity, and whose Measure is Eternity.

38 Neither shall our Being be subject unto Death, nor our Knowledge unto
Error, nor our Love unto Offense. Sphinx Phil. page 5.

39 We shall see God face to face: we shall hear him speak immediately unto
us.

40 The Elect shall have Wisdom in the highest degree; Righteousness in full
perfection; Joy which is everlasting; and shall Sing Praise and Glory unto God
without end.

41 All the Elect Salvation shall see:
But Glory in a different degree.


42 It has not at any time entered into the heart of man to conceive, what
glory God has prepared for his Elect. 1 Cor. 2.9. And if his Heart is not
able to conceive it, much less is his Tongue able to express it.

43 To the Eternal Life of the blessed is opposed the Eternal Death of the
damned, which in the Revelation is called the Second Death.

44 The life of the damned shall be, to be always dying: and the death of the
damned, to be always living. If it be life, why does it kill? and if it be
death, why does it endure?

45 The damned shall so live, that they shall be always dying, and so dye that
they shall be always living. Bern. in Med. Devot. Cap. 3. Col. 193.

46 In the Flesh shall they be tormented with Fire, and in the Soul with the
Worm of Conscience. Ibid.

47 It is the Eternity of the Punishments which beyond all measure increases
their torments, laying upon them a weight unsupportable.

48 For to be tormented without end, this is that which goes beyond all the
bounds of desperation. Isidor. Clar. Orat. 12.

49 Grievous is the Torment of the damned for the Bitterness of the
Punishments: But it is more grievous for the Diversity of the Punishments: But
most grievous for the Eternity of the Punishments. Dionys. in 18. Apocalypse.
fol. 301.

50 The Gate shall be shut upon them. Matthew. 25.10. Understand the Gate of
Indulgence, the Gate of Mercy, the Gate of Hope, the Gate of Consolation, and
the Gate of Good Works.

51 To be for ever deprived of the beatificall vision of God, goes beyond all
the Punishments in Hell.

52 Being squeezed under the unsupportable weight of Punishments they shall
wish they had no being: but it shall be all in vain. They shall desire to die;
but death shall ^lee from them. Revel. 9.6.

53 They shall roar for the very disquietnesse of heart; they shall rage for
madness, and gnash their teeth: There shall be weeping for grief, and
gnashing of teeth for madness. Bern. Ser. 8. in Psalm. 91.

54 Of all which some have a taste even in this Life.

55 The Company of the Devils, and the Qualiti^ of the Place do exc^edingly
increase the Torments of the Damned.

56 Neither shall the Torments of the Damned be only Eternal, but they shall
also be Without all Intermission at any time. The smoke of their Torments
ascends up for ever and ever. Revel. 14.11.

57 As in Heaven one is more glorious then another: So likewise in Hell one
shall be more miserable then another. August. in Enchirid. Cap. 3.

58 We are very curious to know where Hell is: But we are not so careful to
learn how we may escape it. Our thoughts were better spent in meditating upon
it.

59 When we sit down to eat and drink, and when we rise from table again;
when we lie down to sleep, and when we rise up again: at all times, and in
all places, it is very good to think upon Hell.

60 For, To think upon Hell preserves a man from falling into it. Chrysostom.
Hom. 44. in Matthew.

61 Do thou think to quench the flames of Hell by not speaking of it? or,
Do thou think thou kindlest the flame thereof by speaking of it? Whether
thou speak of it or no, the flame is always there alike. Idem in Homil. 2.
in 2 Thessalonians.

62 He deliver us from eternal death, who himself died for us: He bring us
unto eternal Life, who himself is the Prince of Life blessed for ever. To
whom with the Father and the Holy Spirit be all honor and glory World
without end. Amen.

FINIS.

