THE ORDER OF EQVALITIE. Contrived and diuulged as a general Directorie for
common Sessements. Serving for the indifferent defraying, taxing, and rating of
common Impositions and charges, liable to Cities, Towns, or Villages, that
they may be done in some equal and proportionable Order, for the benefit of
the commonwealth. Very necessary for all persons, to whom the execution and
apprehension of this business appertain. 1. Corinthians. 14. 40. Let all things
be done honestly and by order. HINC. LVCEM. ET. POCVLA. SACRA

ALMA MATTER CANTA BRIGIA



PRINTED BY JOHN LEGATE, PRINTER TO the University of Cambridge, 1604. And are
to be sold at the sign of the Crown in Paul's Churchyard by Simon Waterson.

TO ALL IVDICIALL and indifferent Readers.
IT was no marvel that the heathen man Xenophon willed every one
aequalitatem colere, to honor equality, seeing it serves so much to the
commending of a civil life, to the managing of common affairs, to the
conseruing of popular unity, which is so excellent in comparison, so general
in comprehension, so necessary in all actions, that no Common wealth can do
well without it: yet such is the error of this age, that more are ready to
confess then to express this equality in any of their actions.

There is no common weal can flourish without imposition of charges: for they
are as necessary, says Plato, as arteries or sinews to the body, but
inequality in the sessing and rating of these charges is but an enemy to a
Commonwealth: for they are as ill as pricks or thorns to the body, every
one is willing to bear charge respectively to his portion, but who can endure
to be surcharged in no equal proportion to others? there is a fit instance in
one Aemilius appliable to this purpose; who being complained of unto Tyberius
Caesar for unequal taxations he imposed upon the people, T. Caesar returned
this answer, Se tondere velle suas oues non deglubere, that he would have him
to sheare his sheep, but not to flea them. Bruson: this saying is worthy to be
observed of all sessors, to deal indifferently without extremity, and equally
without partiality in common wealth cases: seeing unequal rates under the
title of unrighteousness is said to be abomination, as well as unjust weights
and measures, Deuteronomy. 25. 16.

As sin is aggrauated by circumstances, so is that iniquity of inequality:
for to deal unequally in private callings, is not tolerable, but to use
inequality in public cases is far more detestable, because the injury is
more general, as the Schoolmen say, quanto iniquitas in plures extenditur
tanto grauius peccat, the sin is the greater the more it is extended and
dispersed: and therefore such as are taken therein tardie, ipso facto, in the
deed doing, or, as the Civilians term it, in flagr^nti crimine, in the
apparent fault, are to be punished exempli causa, if it were but for example
sake, that i^ might restrain the rest, according to the old Canon, Vt vnius
poena metus fit multorum, That the punishment of one might be a terror to many;
and to this end S. Paul says, Them that sin rebuke openly, that the rest
also may fear, 1. Tim. 4. 20. for amongst many sinners some must be made
examples.

There is no man doubts but that inequality has some intercourse and
continual current in common sessments, some that cannot see into it, suffer
it, others that are favored in it, wincke at it, those that are wronged in it,
murmr at it, howsoever it be, they must with patience take this pill of
Virgill omnis fortuna superanda ferendo, learn to suffer that they cannot
remedy. For this cause having some obiectes of inequalities offered to my
eyes, I could not forbear my pen without impiety, considering that
mellifluous Father says, est consentire silere cum arguere possis, to be
secret where one may say something is a sin in consent, and to conceal
verity est aurum sepelire is no better then to bury gould, as Enagrius says.

I spleen no man's person but his unequal proceedings, I inuey not against
common impositions and charges, but against unequal proportion in the taxing,
I aim not at any one man; because I speaks generally to all, and it is a
principle in all arts, He that speaks generally speaks to none* when David
heard the general report of the parable; the delinquent (says he) shall die
the death; he little thought it concerned himself, until Nathan told him he
was the man. When Judah heard the common clamor against Thamar; let her be
burnt, says he, he did not suspect himself to be criminal, until Thamar
showed him his ring, his cloak and his staff. Genesis 38. so by these examples we
may perceive, that general speeches can detect none unless he be named,
though they may touch any if they be tainted with guilt.

Such as be galled may take reformation by this and conceal it: for I cannot
say he is the man; such as be not guilty may take information by this, to
continue so; for it is rare to see such a man, notwithstanding it is pity
that so common an evil as inequality which by custom is made no sin*
should be test up and down from one to an other like a tennys ball, and pass
without any check or reproof: the fowls of the air will bewray. Eccles. 10.
20. the stones in the wall will cry out. Haba. 2. 11. nay the very dumb beast
will speak rather then sin should pass unreproved. 2. Pet. 2. 16.

The greatest works are sometime wrought by the weakest instruments, as Goliath
was slain by a little stone with a slinge, when no cumbatant durst encounter
with him, and as the Elephant is said to be afrighted at the grunting of a
pigge, so men may sometime be terrified and reclamed by mere trifles, and made
true penitentes by the dash of a pen, as Peter was stroke with sorrow at the
crowing of the cock.

I desire nothing but that my pen may be as a prick to the hearts of the
guilty to see their faults, and that my prayer may be as a mean to have their
hearts ope^ed with Lydia to amend their faults: so God shall be much glorified
by their conversion, the Agents more esteemed by their actions, and the Author
well satisfied for his pains.

C. Gibbon.
THE CONTENTS OR chief heads handled in this Treatise, as the same are
distributed into 12. Chapters.
1 Of the signification and sundry acceptions of the word Equality. 2 Of the
excellency of equality. 3 Of the generality of equality. 4 Of the
necessity of equality. 5 What equality is, as it extends to common
impositions and charges. 6 What charge signifies, that they must be
necessary, with description of such necessary charges. 7 What is meant by
imposition of charge, and wherein they differ from voluntary charges. 8 Of
equal proportion, how it is to be taken, properly, comparatively, and
respectively, and that every one is to be rated properly in some equality to
his ability, according to national customs. 9 That every one is to be taxed
comparatively in some equal proportion agreeable to general taxations. 10
That every one is to be charged respectively, according to the quality of the
sessement, whether it be lands or goods. 11 The probable causes and conjectures
why men are so unequally rated in common impositions and charges repugnant to
general proportions. 12 What persons are liable and ought to be taxed toward
common impositions and charges.
THE ORDER OF Equality.
CHAP. 1.
Of the Signification and sundry Acceptions of the word Equality.
EQVALL is not unfitly derived of aequus right or just, to signify that there
can be no equity without equality, in this sense it is taken in the
scripture, do that which is just and equal Collos. 4. 1. which words are but
voces co^uertibiles: for the copulative (and) does show that they accord in
sense though they differ in sound, and that like relatiues one cannot be well
without an other.

To be equal, does import as much as to be even, it is so accepted in Genesis 44.
18. where Judah perceiving the dignity and deportment of his brother Joseph,
said by way of insinuation to him, thou art even as Pharaoh, intending thereby
that he was equal in authority to him, as it is well quoted in the marginall
note thereupon.

It is common amongst the Latins as they term it euphoniae gratia for the
better sound to contract two words into one, as for equal quality, to say
aequalitas, and for equal ability to say aequabilitas, which words although
they be confounded in our common speech and are taken promiscue one for an
other, yet they somewhat dissent in signification.

Equality is so called of aequali qualitate of equal quality; because it
has special reference to qualities and conditions, and therefore the word is
taken sometime for unity, sometime for paritie or likeness.

Equality is taken for unity, when many are of one mutual consent, they are
said to be Monanthropos, one man, as it was said of the Israelites in Judge. 20.
10. they were knit together as one man, and so in affections, when many are of
mutual minds they are said to be vnaenimi, knit together in one mind as the
Apostle phraiseth it. 1. Cor. 1. 10. according to that which is said of the
believing company in the Acts. 4. 32. they were of one heart and of one soul.

Equality is sometime taken for a paritie or likeness: when the Apostle would
have us to be equally affected, he wills us to be like minded one to another.
Romans 15. 5. and not to bear the proud mind of the insulting Pharise to say, I
am not like others, or the ambitious mind of Pompey to admit none to be his
equal, but as we are taught to make our selves equal to them of the lower
sort, Romans 12. 16. (not in titles and degrees as some urge equality, or in
possessions or goods as many pretend community where God has put a
difference) but in lowlines of mind, as one commentes upon that place, by
imitating him which says, learn of me I am meek and lowly: Math. 11. 29.

Equabilitie is so called of aequali habilitate, of equal ability; because it
does most properly extend to Abilities by the natural etymology of the word.

What Ability and Non-abilitie is in our common laws, I will omit, but in the
scriptures it is most commonly taken for a temporal state of living, to
signify that as there ought to be an unity in profession, an unanimity in
affection, a sympathy in affliction, so there ought to be an equality in
outward affairs, that where me^ are of equabilitie or equal value in
ability, they should be equivalent in all good actions; both by the prescript
rule of God. Let every one minister according to his ability. 1. Pet 4. 11.
and by president in the godly, we according to our abilities do. Neh. 5. 8.

Thus in some transparent sort I have given some light and introduction to the
matter: for by the sundry acceptions of the word you may see that to be even,
all one, equal, and like, are but synonomies or words of like sense and
signification, and by the deriuation of the word you may perceive the
signification of the subject: for as in the beginning Adam gave names agreeable
to the nature of every creature, so in the first invention of words
Etymologicians gave denomination according to the signification of every word,
which might be derived from some language by exquisite linguistes, although now
where we want reason to derive a word, we are enforced to call it primitive.

For as much as this is no problem or disputable question to controuert,
before I enter into the definition and division of this subject, I will first
(omitting the order of disputants) illustrate and set forth the excellency,
generality, and necessity thereof, that it may appear to be a fit argument
for this age, as an instigation to move every one to make more care and
conscience of equality in all their actions.

Chap. 2.
Of the Excellency of Equality.
TO begin with him, who gave beginning to all, and yet is without beginning
himself, if we enter into that metaphysicall and divine mystery of the
Deity, there appears to be an apparent union of equality: for though there
be a trinity in persons, there is an unity and equality in godhead, although
the father is said to be greater, Ioh. 14. 28. then the son, as he was man.

In the first creation of man, he was a kind of Microcosme or little world, not
because he is circular or sphericall, as the Philosophers hold, but for that
there was some likeness and similitude of the Creator resplendent in the
creature, for it is said, Let us make man to our own image and likeness:
behold (says god) the man is become as one of us, Genesis 3. 22. Yet none must
hereby think himself equal to God as Tyrus did, Ezech. 28. 6. least he
become a beast, as Nabuchadnezzar was: for God can endure no equal upon earth,
To whom will you compare or make me equal? says God, Isaiah, 46. 5.

In the Redemption of mankind, he which was deified and equal with God, did
vouchsafe to be homified, by assuming upon him, the very flesh and form of
man, by participating with man in eating, drinking, sleeping, talking, walking,
being passible as man, in hungring, thirsting, watching, weeping; in a word,
he was equal to man in all things saving sin, as Joseph was to Pharaoh,
saving the scepter.

In the dignifying of man, God did not only impart to him his own image in
purity of mind, and impose humane shape in habit of his person, but he does
further grace and adorn him with his own equal titles, by tearming of him a
God, est animata imago Dei, as one says, he is the lively image of God: for as
Lactantius says, though he be but a man before God, yet he is a God amongst
men: it was this that made the Egyptians affirm that man was a terrestrial
God; but yet least he should have too sublimious a conceit of his singularity,
it is not amiss to remember what the Cynicall person said to Alexander, though
he were a God upon earth, yet he was but a God of earth; and as the Phoenix
being bred of ashes does burn to ashes, so he being made of earth must yield
to earth.

In the Dissolution of man, god does still grace him with his small glory:
for if he dies well, he will divide his glory to him: Haman thought it was
the greatest honor to man in this life, to have the kings royal apparel put
upon him; to ride upon his own horse, and to have his crown set upon his
head, Ester, 6. 8. then how great glory is it to man in the life to come, to
be made like him that is most glorious? 1. Ioh. 3. 2. to sit upon the throne
with him that shall judge us? Apoc. 3. 21. and to be partaker both of a crown
and a kingdom?

In the taking of Eve from Adam there is showed a coequalitie between man and
woman; for they were equal every way until the sin made man her superior,
and therefore subjection was one part of her punishment, as may appear in Genesis
3. 16.

In the estates of men although they be different in respect of prosperity and
poverty, yet God has showed therein an excellent pattern of parilitie: for
if he had made all rich, one would not care for another* if all poor, one
could not help another; so that rich and poor have need one of another, 2.
Cor. 8. 14.

In the Regiment of a common wealth, God has ordained equality amongst many
vnequalls: for if all were Rulers, then it were monstrous, for one head is
enough for one body, as one sun is sufficient for the whole world. If there
were no ruler, then were it confused, as it is said of the Israelites when they
were without a King, every man did that which was good in his own eyes, Judge.
17. 6. for in extremities it is better to have a tyrant (as the heathen man
says) then no ruler: and therefore for one to Rule and the rest to obey is the
only square of equality.

What should I speak more of equality? seeing it is of such excellency that
the very Ethnickes did honor equality, because it does combine the good with
the good, says Xenophon, and does conserve cities in tranquillity, says
Aristotle, 2. polit. whereas inequality is said to be seditionis seminarium,
the very seed of sedition, as Plutarke terms it. To end all with this
epiphonema, seeing equality is deitatis Idea, the express Idea of the
indivisible Deity in heaven, and vnitatis causa, the isntrumental cause of
universal unity upon earth, what is of greater excellency then equality?

Chap. 3.
Of the Generality of Equality.
IN the old law Lex talionis was ordained to no other end, but that an evil
action might have an equal punishment, as an eye for an eye, a tooth for a
tooth, life for life; the validity of which law is in some cases yet recent
amongst us: for by our positive law, he that of malice prepensed takes away
another man's life, loses his own life.

It is commonly seen in this life that where the parents care not how they
gather their goods together with the rake, the children care not how they cast
them abroad with the forke, so that old saying is justly verified, goods evil
gotten are evil spent. Hemingius reports a thing of his own experience, of
one that was capax, rapax, and tenax in getting of his goods by oppression, he
afterward left them to his children, who played the prodigal sons, and went up
and down a begging: so true it is, ex male quaesitis non gaudet tertius
haeres, that the third heir shall never come to enjoy them* Such therefore as
by extorting and griping make a gain, should do well to remember non male
lucreris, mala lucra aequalia damna, that their evil lucre will have equal
loss, sometime or other.

It is a general note in the scriptures, that malum culpae and malum poenae
have commonly concourse together in some equal proportion between the
malefactor and the misdeede, according to that old verse, Qualia vir faciet
tali quoque fine peribit, that which a man practices to others, he shall
perish by himself; whereof there are many examples in the scriptures. Pharaoh
caused the children to be cast into the river, he himself was overcome in the
red sea. Haman made a gallows to hang Mordecai, he himself was hanged on the
same gallows: the Rulers caused Daniel to be cast into the den of Lions,
they themselves were devoured with the Lions. Adoni-bezek did cut of the thumbs
and the feet of seauentie Kings, he himself had his thumbes and feet cut off
by others, Judge. 1. 6. The prodigal son because he lived in filthiness like
a swine, he did afterward eat husks with the swine.

It is the judgment of the Almighty in the life to come, to inflict equal
punishment according to the quality of the delinquent, and that may be
probably collected out of Esaias, 26. 17. where it is said, Judgment will I lay
to the Rule, and righteousness to the Balance. By the Rule is understood the
even measure that shall be between the party and the punishment: and by the
Balance is signified, the equal weight that shall be between the torment and
the sinner, according to that saying in the Apocalypse, 18. 7. For as much as
she (meaning the Babylonian whore) has glorified her self, and lived in
pleasure, so much give her torment and sorrow. We read that Dives because he
would not give Lazarus a crumme of bread to quench his hunger upon earth, he
himself could not have a drop of water to cool his tongue in hell.

To come to a more general and universal instance of equality, though Pompey
would suffer none to be his superior amongst men, though Tyrus affirmed that
he was a God, Ezech. 28. 2. though Nabuchadnezzar exalted himself above God,
though Kings are as gods upon earth; yet howesoeuer men differ in humors and
affections, or in degrees or dignities in this world, if they come to this
memento, to consider in man, that his creation is of earth, his dissolution is
to earth, his resurrection is from earth; may not every one say, he is
conceived in sin with David? he is a miserable sinner with the Publican? he
is the greatest sinner with Paul? 1. Tim. 1. 15. Is not God father to us all by
faith? Savior to us all by grace? then what does this intimate unto us all,
but a general Equality in state and condition.

When we shall all be arraigned before that great Judge of that high
Star Chamber in heaven, when the tares must be taken from the wheat, and the
goats separated from the sheep, and this general Echo shall sound in the
ears of al Ite, Venite, what other difference shall be there then this? such
as have wrought in the vineyard shall have all one price, and such as have no
oil in their lamps shall have all one punishment, that is such as have done
well shall be coheires in heaven, and such as have done ill shall be copartners
in hell, whether they be Emperous, kings, keysers, beggars, without exception
of any: for God will deal equally without respect of persons.

The generality of equality is so copious that they are not to be contained in
a nut shell like Homers Iliades, but they would rather require a large Tome
then a short Tractat: I will therefore refer you to the particulers in the next
chapter for further illustration hereof.

Chap. 4.
Of the Necessity of Equalite.
IN natural causes, by the opinion of Naturalists, if all parts and members
of the body be not proportionable and equal, there cannot be that perfect
Symmetry which is required in nature, and therefore such as be of goodly parts
and lyneamentes of body do carry a king of encomion in the scriptures: it is
said of Saul, that he was a goodly young man, 1. Sam. 9. 2. and of David, that
he was a comlie person 1. Sam. 16. 18, and of Christ, that he was of a mean
composition and stature, as Publius Lentulus reports: the poet gives a
reason hereof, gratior est pulchro veniens e corpore virtus, those gifts are
more gracious that proceed from a comely person: for oftentimes a deformed
body does argue a deformed mind, and therefore Aristotle in his book of
government would have co^ly me^ called to office and not mishape^ and deformed;
for which cause such as had a ble^ish might not e^ter the order of preisthood
by the old law. And by the civil law this composition and habitude of body
is so estimable, that it allows the son an action of the cause against him
that shall deface the portract of his father.

In the constitution and state of man's body good proportion and equality of
humors and qualities causes health, and therefore health is defined by the
philosphers to be nothing else but a well proportioned union of many humors
together: for where one quality and humor does exceed another, they are the
very symptoms of some natural defect by judgment of physicians.

In Aeconomicall matters if that co^iugiall bond between man and woman be not
equal, the conjunction is inconvenient: if parties dissent in religion, then
will follow prophanes of life: as Solomon was drawn to Idolatry by marrying
of strange women: and therefore the Apostle says, be not unequally yoked, 2.
Cor. 6. 14.

If they differ in lynage, then there will be vpbrayding by birth: it was this
that made David say, seeme^ it a light thing to marry a kings daughter, seeing
I am a poor man and of small reputation. 1. Sam. 18. 23, therefore Plutarke
says, marry a wife of thine own degree.

If they disagree in conditions and manners, then will be nothing but
contentions and malice: hereof one says there is ill agreement in that house
in qua gallina eantat, gallus tacet: where the hen does crow, and the cock
holds his peace, alluding to that saying in the proverbs. 27. a continual
dropping in the day of rain and a contentious woman are alike.

If they vary much in years then their brains will be busied with jealousy
and they shall be constrained to exclame with Terence O me miserum duxi vxorem
that he was miserable by marrying a wife: for age and youth are as repugnant in
quality as frost and fire.

So that from hence every one may learn to make equal election in nuptials,
and to endeavor to match with a meet wife, as God made Adam a meet helper:
for as bordes if they be not even joined can never hold: so men and women if
they be not equally joined can never agree, and therefore remember that
poetical verse of Ovid Siqua voles apt nubere, nube pari, if thou willt fitly
marry, marry thy equal.

In Families where there is no equality used by masters to servants, there is
mere tyranny: hereof it is said, give to your servants that which is just and
equal. Col. 4. 1. that is aequabilitatem legis analogice as Aristotle terms
it: it is not so to be interpreted that masters should make themselves equal
to their servants in condition and degree, but sub hoc nomine, as Marlorat
notes, is understood the humanity, clemency, and gentle entreating masters
ought, to use, without too much rigor: Leu. 25. 43. for albeit they are masters
amongst men, yet they are but servants before God, who sees the doings of
all, because he is chief master of all: and earthly masters can in nothing
more lively represent their heavenly master, then in showing of mercy.

In political causes, in all contractes, if there be not some analogy and
equal proportion in the price between the venditor and the emptor, it is no
better then oppression, therefore Abraham when he should purchase the field of
Ephron gave him the value of it; Genesis 23. 13. and Melanctho^ says ex naturali
aequalitate nemo locupletetur cum alterius iniuria, even from natural equality
or justice there is no reason why one man should enrich himself by hindering
of an other: Mel. in lib. definit. appellat.

In partition of possessions there is mere injury without equality, and
therefore the ordinance of lottes were used to that end in causes civil and
diuisorie: and it was this that made the copartener come to Christ to have him
divide the inheritance between the two brethren, for no other end, but that
the partition might be equal: as Bullinger observes in his Decades: or ad
iustam patrimonij diuisionem for a just division, as Aretius interprets that
place in Luke. 12. 13.

In buying and selling, if the weights and measures be not just and equal, it
is abominable before God Deuteronomy; 25. and punishable by the laws of men: for as
Chytraeus says aequalitas precij and mercis seruanda est equality must be
used as well in the price as the ware, least it be said of such as the prophet
reports; there is like buyer and like sellar* Esa. 24. 2.

In Military affairs, where the adversaries be not equal, the conflict is
dangerous: when Joshua sent thirty thousand men to encounter with the Citizens
of Ai, the City was soon sacked, because the enemies were not equal.

In Duel, where combatantes be not equal, the inconvenience is great: what
was David to deal with Goliath, if God had not assisted him? ne Hercules co^tra
duos: he must be a strong man that is able to withstand two.

In Spiritual warfare, where the enemies exceed, how do they insult over the
spirit? in what case was Job, when he says, he was assaulted with whole armies
of sorrows? Job. 10. 17.

In Music, where there is no equal proportion of soundes there can be no
perfect symphonie.

In Arithmeticke, without the use of equal nombers there can be no exact
computation.

In Architecture, where there is no equal proportion in the work, it can be
no exquisite building.

Do we not see by experience, that in Vegetative creatures, where trees are
unequally planted in the orchyard, they never prosper well? that in Sensitive
creatures, where oxen are unequally yoked in the plough, they never draw well?
that in Senseles creatures, where stones are unequally laid in masonrie, they
never couch well? then much less among rational creatures can there be any
concordance without the use of equality. To conclude, let this suffice, that
all laws, all creatures in their kind, yea all arts and sciences for the most
part are ordained and do aim at this end, to reduce things to a general
uniformity and equality.

Chap. 5.
What equality is.
IF I should discourse of Equality according to the curious definitions and
divisions of philosophers, as they controuert their aequaliae and inaequalia in
logical manner, it were tedious and frivolous; seeing my purpose is summarily
to entreat only of that equality which tends to the taxing and rating of
common impositions and charges liable to Cities. Towns, Villages: etc. because
this may convict the conscience of such as use no equality at all in these
actions.

Equality (thus considered) is nothing else but a Necessary Charge imposed in
some equal proportion upon every one respectively.

In this definition or rather description we may observe 4. things concurring
in the words.

1. The Charge 2. The Imposition 3. The Proportion 4. The Collection
that it be Necessary Lawful Equal General
must have reference to the Cause Authority. Abilities. Persons.


Chap. 6.
1. What Charge signifies. 2. how Charges ought to be necessary. 3. What
Charge is necessary.
CHarge may be said to be a departing from something to the benefit or use of
others from the dominion of the owener; and this may be done either as the
Lawyers say, in pecunijs numeratis, in ready money; or as the Schoolmen say,
pecunia mensurabile, of that which may be valued for money.

This Charge is according to the occasion said to be impensae mitior aut
acerbior, lesser or greater: it is called a charge of onus which comes of
ones an ass, to signify that heavy burdens are fit for the ass, but
necessary burdens are fit for men: and therefore heavy burdens are condemned
in the scriptures. You lay heavy burdens, Matthew. 23. 4.

As there is a logical necessity in the precepts of Art* a physical
necessity in the order of nature, so there is a political necessity in
disbursing of charges; to work upon the Sabbath if it be necessary it is
tolerable, to give alms where it is necessary, it is charitable; and so to
pay charges if they be necessary, it is profitable, which the heathen man
observes when he said, emas non quod opus est, sed quod necesse, Seneca, lib.
14. Epist. 34. he would have us to lay out money, not for all things we need,
but for those which are most needful and necessary.

Charges ought to be necessary for these reasons: It is far more difficult,
capere quam fundere, to get goods, then to give them away, as the Philosopher
says, and therefore it is no less discretion qua^ querere partae tueri, after
they be once gotten, to be careful in the disposing of them, as the Poet
says: so true is it that Tacitus says, Many know how to dispend, but not to
dispose. Tacit. lib. 1. hist.

The wiseman says, the Riches of the godly are precious, Prou. 12. 17. and
therefore as we will not use a pearl like a pebble, so we must regard how we
impart our riches, seeing they are so precious, even as Naboth was loath to
depart with his patrimony, and we must not abuse them with the prodigal
son, but use them as Gods blessings in all necessary occasions.

When the general Auditor of the whole world shall take a computation of all
his stewards how they have bestowed his goods (for the gold is mine says he,
Hag. 2. 9.) this will be a lawful discharge for such as impose and pay
charges, to plead they were necessary, and that may be inferred from that
saying in Math. 25. 40. For as much as ye have done these things, come and
enter, etc.

Those charges are said to be necessary which concern a common wealth: In the
charge of a common wealth, respect must be had unto the Prince, the Country,
the Poor, etc.

The Prince is called Princeps quasi Principalis; because he is the principal
person amongst the people, as the head is the principal part of the body:
now as the head in some natural sort provides for the body, so ought the
subjects in a reciprocal sort to provide for their prince: for he that is
Princeps ought to be particeps boni; for this cause we are commanded to give to
Caesar that which is Caesar's, aliud est sceptrum, aliud est plectrum; it was
this made king Seleucus say, he that knew what a diadem were would not take it
from the ground to set upon his head: for a crown is accompanied with many
cares and combrances, David had less trouble with his sheephooke, the^ his
scepter, and therefore every Prince in this case may say to his subjects as
Moses did, How can I alone bear your combrances and your charge? Deuteronomy. 1. 12.
for which cause he was the first that ordained Magistrates under him to
extenuate his troubles: and the first that invented Tributes amongst the
Israelites to support his charge, as Polidor: Virgil reports.

It was first called Tribute a Tribu, because it was imposed upon all the
Tribes of Israel, to signify that all men ought to contribute to their Prince,
according to that saying in Romans 13. 5. Give tribute to whom tribute
belongs, and therefore Subsidies and such like charges are necessarily
granted by the Commons, quasi subsidium, as a help to uphold their Prince,
which every one ought to bear, because he is partaker of the benefit comes
by it. Bullinger Decad. 6, praecept.

One demanding of Diogenes what country man he was, said, he was Ciuis mundi,
a citizen of the world: Paul said he was no citizen but a soiourner in the
world; yet commonly we account that our Country where we have our birth,
bringing up, and abode, and therefore it is called our Nation a natu, because
it is as it were natale solum, our native country: but more properly it is
called our country a patriae, which is derived of pater, to signify that in
both kinds our Country is the father and the mother of us all. And this should
make us regard our native country, as our natural parents. Hence it is that
Pythagoras being asked how he should demean himself to his country; he
answered, vt ergamatrem, as to my mother. And Phocion said that he would have a
son tam patriae quam patri, every way as loyal and dutiful to his country
as his father: the examples are infinite of such as have lost their lives for
their country, it was ever deemed so honorable a service, pro patria magnum
decus est profundere vitam, says Homer. Now such charges as are for the
defense of our country, as charges of chivalry or such like, are necessary:
for we should not enjoy our lives, wives, or livings without them. Hereof that
mellifluous Father says, Sumptus pro militia honorabilis est, the charge for
wars is honorable.

The Poor man is called Pauper, as one says, quasi parum potens, putans, aut
imperans, because he possesses, thinks, or commands little, yet poverty
is the subject to provoke mercy, when riches are but objects to procure envy:
therefore one says, Viuitur paruo been, a man lives best of a little, if he
can be content with his lotte; according to the verse, Qui placide sorte^ far
scit, ille sapit.

To be poor by Grace, diuinum est, it is heavenly, which Christ notes in the
Gospel after Matthew, 19. 29. for this voluntary poverty is a kind of
Martyrdom, as S. Bernard says.

To be poor by Nature humanum est, it is incident to mankind, for all the
Apostles, yea Christ himself was so: and therefore Seneca says, Quemcumque
miserum vides hominem scias, Whom thou see to be miserable, thou may
know he is a man.

To be poor by Folly belluinum est, it is brutish, as appears by the
prodigal son; howesoeuer men come to poverty, we are not to dispute, but to
dispense, because civil humanity (as Lactantius says) binds us to do good
to a man, because he is a man, Lact. lib. 6. cap. 11. and as the moon shows
her light she receives from the sun, so should men show their liberality
of that they receive from God: but seeing all creatures in their kind are
compassionate one to another, and all laws in commiseration provide for the
releife of the poor; I shall not need to urge the necessity of this charge
by multiplicitie of arguments.

There be diverse other necessary charges which for breuity I forbear, but all
the rest may be reduced and comprehended under these heads: for if the Prince
be our father, the Country our mother, and the poor our brethren, we ought to
supply their deficiencie in such sort as may design our natures, and serve
their necessities.

Chap. 7.
1. What is meant by Imposition of Charge. 2. How Charges imposed differ from
others.
THere are many Charges necessary which are called Voluntary, because every
one as he has any natural sympathy or instigation to good, does depart with
all of benevolence or willingly, according to his free disposition, but because
the great Schooleman says, Volenti non fit iniuria, there is no wrong done to
the willing; it were impertinent to speak prolixly of these charges, the
rather, because this Charge is more properly said to be exhibitio, then
Impositio, a gift of good will, then a charge against will, which being left to
a man's own liberty, cannot be said to be done of necessity, but willingly.
Philemon. 14.

There be other charges called Compulsatorie, because they are imposed by the
Magistrate of every City, Town, village, etc. which charg differs from the
former, for that is done of benevolence, this is to be paid volens nolens,
whether a man will or nill, hereof it is called an Imposition quafi in populum
impositum because it is imposed upon the people by order of mandatum, praecept,
commandment, warrant, or otherwise; charges thus imposed are to be paid
auctoritatis causa though there were no necessity to urge it, as D. Chytraeus
says, for we are taught to obey the magistrate; and he that does thus pay it
non peccat, qui iniuriam patitur does not offend. I remember a pretty saying of
Saint Augustine Da quod iubes and iube quod velis, seeing these do as well
impart as impose charge, the common sort must by supposition deem these
charges to be necessary.

D. P. Martyr reports in his co^mentary upon the Romans that magistrates had
wont to be called patres co^scripti appointed fathers, and so in many places in
the scriptures they are phrased by the name of fathers, to no other end but
that their denomination might give them information velle bonum non diuellere
to help and not hinder, but to show themselves as loving to the people even as
fathers are to their children, hereof Xenophon says bonus magistratus nihil a
bono patre differt; a good magistrate does little differ from a good father;
which if they do, then will they not impose any impertinent charge, but that
which is instant for the necessity, convenient for the persons, and expedient
for the place, considering there is a father in heaven which ouerseeth and
observes the actions of all the fathers upon earth.

Chap. 8.
1. Of Equal proportion. 2. how many ways it is to be taken. 3. that every
one is to be taxed in some equality to his ability.
Equal proportion is to be taken 3. ways; properly, comparatively,
respectively. Properly it is that charge which is imposed upon any according to
his own ability: comparatively is that charge laid upon one which agrees in
some equal proportion to the general taxation of others. Respectively is that
charge which is exacted of any sortable to the quality of the Sessment in
lands or goods.

That portion which is proper to a man's owner estate ought to be taxed in some
measure equal to his estate according to the common course and custom of the
country, and this is called a proportion properly, the reasons follow.

You shall read that in cases of redemption the Priests were to proportion the
prices according to the estate of the persons, as appears in Leuit. 27. 8.
where it is written. If he be poorer then thou have esteemed him, then shall he
present himself unto the priest, and the priest shall value him according to
his ability, now the priest he is called presbiter quasi praebens alijs iter
of showing others the way, and therefore his action ought to give example to
others in all charges to make an equal taxation in some proportion to the
ability of the person.

It is noted in the people of Jerusalem that in a general charge for the
common good they did not press themselves beyond their powers: for (say they)
we according to our Abilities have done it. Neh. 5. 8. which is a good
president to be observed of all sessors to rate men according to their
abilities.

In dispencing to the poor, men are willed to minister but according to their
Abilities. 1. Pet. 4. 11. so, it ought to be in all other charges: men are not
to be urged beyond their abilities: for in giving away and in paying away there
is no difference in the work but in the will: for there is a departing from
something in both, saving one is a free co^mmutatio^, the other is a kind of
coaction.

If the saddle be not set right on the horseback it will wring him, if the
balance be not equal in weight, it will wrong one, so if a man be not taxed
equally to his portion it will injury him, and that is against the word which
says, thou shall not do thy neighbor wrong Leuit. 19. 13.

Men use to lade the Camel when he lies down as he may rise up with his
burden, he that will have his beast to hold out in travel must not ouerburden
him: the like course must be taken with men, so to tax them as they may
continue in undergoing charges, and not to make impositions become oppressions.
To this purpose Bruson reports a matter of one Aemylius a ruler in Egypt, who
being complained of to Tiberius Caesar by the people for oppressing them with
paiments, he wrote to Aemylius se tondere velle suas oues non deglubere, that
he would have him to sheare his sheep but not to flea them, meaning thereby
that he would have men assessed indifferently and not surcharged extremely.

In all Taxations every man should remember this golden rule To do as he would
be done to, that is to tax others as he would be taxed himself by others,
now as the string ouerstraind in the lute will never sound well, or cloth too
much stretched on the tayntors will never wear well; so if he himself be
taxed above his state he will never take it well: then consider what Seleucus
the Emperor said, which Gualter observes to that end quod tibi non vis fieri
alteri ne feceris that thou will not have done to thy self do not to others:
but as in martial divisions the Quartermaster sets out every one his share
according to his place and degree, so in political impositions the Sessor
should tax and set every one his rate according to his state and portion.

Chap. 9.
That every man is to be taxed equally in some comparatiue and proportionale
sort agreeable to the general traxation of others.
THe grasshopper is a burden to one, Eccles. 12. 5. when a bull was but a burden
to Milo: a myte is as much to the widow, as a talent was to Alexander, and
therefore seeing the abilities of men are not equal, it is not meant hereby
that al men should be equal in taxation, which are unequal in estate, but
that every one may have as indifferent valuation as another by comparing their
portions together: for as the heathen man says he is an evil man cui non
satis est id quod caeteris est satis to whom that is not enough to one that is
enough to others: if Esau could say I have enough when he should take, men must
not urge more then enough when they do tax. Genesis 33. 9.

Where one buyeth cloth he will look to have as good measure as the other,
where one buyeth Iron he will look to have as good weight as an other: where
one buyeth ware he looks to have as good a pennyworth as an other: and
therefore why should not one man that is taxed in charges look to be as well
used as an other? and if there be required such proportion in giving that one
must not be greiued when an other is eased, as Paul says, the same reason may
stand in the proportion of taxing, that one must not be racked when another is
remitted, but that there must be equality in both. 2. Cor. 8. 13.

If there were a survey of general sessements, in some places it will appear
that there is inaequalium Catalogus a catalogue of confused inequalities: you
shall find that Benjamin shall have five times more to his mess; Genesis 43. 34.
when Lazarus shall have hardly a crum, Naboth with his vyneyard shall be as much
as Naball with all his revenues, and as in India there are antes as big as
mastiues, and mise as hie as Camells, as Pomponiue Mela reports, so in England
you shall find poore-men as much as rich-men, and mean men as much as gentlemen.

All rates for the most part are either par, Suppar, or Impar, that is the
lesser part are like one an other, the greater part are somewhat like others,
but the most part are nothing like others: are not many worth six hundredth
pounds taxed at xx. in terris, when an other not worth an hundred is as much,
and an other of equal value is VI. in bonist is there not some worth six
thousand pounds, set at IIII. p. when an other under a thousand is rated at
VIII. p. and another that may dispend three thousand is but VIII. p. and yet
able to buy or countermaine Twenty three pound men? what should I dilate these
endless inequalities, as Protogenes knew Apelles by the draught of one line, and
Hercules proportion was perceived by the size of his foot, so you may judge
the general by these particulars, seeing it is no more seen then the monstrous
heads were of Hydra, the deformed body was of Esope, or the infamous mark was
of Cayne.

Plato resembles man's life to a chance at dyce, and so may our sessmentes,
therefore it is grown to a proverb that me^ are charged as the dice chance,
deuce ace cannot, sise sink will not, but quater trey he must pay: this is no
matter of novelty, but antiquity; for it is observed in that general charge
about Jerusalem in Nehem. 2. The poor were unable and could do nothing, for
vltra posse, non est esse, and we can have no more of a catte but her skin;
the best sort were unwilling and would do nothing: so it is noted, The great
men would not put their necks to it, Nehem. 3. 5. but the middle sort they
bare most of the burden, and so it is in most of these rates: as the sun
moves slowest when it is highest in the zodiac, so men are ever slackest
that are highest in estate: and as the lighter balance ever mounteth hiest, so
the meaner sort are commonly taxed heauiest.

This Inequality is mere iniquity in the agents that impose it, and manifest
injury to the patient that pay it, and therefore it is condemned by the
example of God himself, and by the laws of God and man.

Inequality is condemned by the example of God himself; for God is equal,
and he deals equally with every man, to the end one man should deal equally
by another: vt sementem feceris it a metes: for such measure as we mete shall
be met to us.

Inequality is by inference condemned by the word of god, in this sort if
false weights and measures which are unequal and unjust are said to be
abominable, these unequal rates of charges cannot be tolerable: for in both
there is but a defrauding of a due: and therefore it is condemned as well as
the other. Deuteronomy. 25. 16.

Where many of equal state are unequally taxed, it argues partiality,
because there is respect of persons, tribuere aqualibus inaequalia and
inaequalibus aequalia est personarum acceptio: for as D. Chytraeus upon the
Commandments says, To give to equal persons unequal things, and to unequal
persons equal things is respect of persons, which is a sin generally
condemned in the law of God.

Inequality is condemned by positive and national laws, if you have recourse
to the Statute made in Anno 43. of our late sovereign Lady of famous memory,
Queen Elizabeth, there is a clause concerning the Sessement of subsidy
inserted in these words, The said Commissioners to whom it shall appertain,
shall Indifferently set, tax, and sesse themselves, and the said Assessors.
This is spoken demonstratiuely to show that indifferency and not inequality
should be used in all Sessements to all persons: for indifference est quasi non
differens, that is, there ought to be no difference in these dealings, in
regard of persons, but that every one should have a proportionable penniworth
according to his portion as well as another.

What should I speak more of Inequality? do we not see that as Cocks cannot
fight well that are unequally matched, so men can never agree well that are
unequally charged* for whereas Equality is the cause of love, and is therefore
called vnitatis nutrix, the nource of unity; this Inequality is nothing else
but the cause of discontent, and is therefore called seditionis altrix, the
nource of sedition: for as wheels going upon unequal ground will make a
rumbling, so men pressed with unequal rates will make a murmuring, as appears
by the laborers in the Vineyard: for if they did murmr in receiving of
money, because their wages was equal when their work was unequal; what will
they do in departing from money where their estates are equal, if they be
unequally taxed?

Chap. 10.
That every one is to be charged respectively according to the Quality of the
Sessement, whether it be in lands or goods.
AS every one ought to be taxed properly according to his own estate,
comparatively according to general taxations, so he must be used respectively
according to the quality of the Sessement, whether it be in terris or bonis,
or else it is no better then inequality.

If a levy be made for a common charge in money, and the direction or warrant
be general to collect six pence in the pound as well of lands as goods
without difference, this is mere injury; because that proportion is not
observed which aims at equality. For the Statute it self concerning
Sessement of subsidies does make a diaphora or distinction therein; for lands
be at four shillings, and goods at two shillings and eight pence the pound:
and therefore to make lands and goods all at one rate in other charges is
repugnant to the equality and equity of the law; aequalitas quam Magistratus
statuit seruanda, which as Hemingius says, ought to be observed: but yet this
is made but a superficial and light matter in many places, amongst such (no
doubt) as are more forward to impose then to pay charges, which that learned
man D. Chytraeus noted in his time, and therefore he left this sentence to all
Sessors, Quae alijs praecipis ipse facere primus videare, That which thou do
command others to do, see that thou thy self first do it: for that common
wealth must needs do well, where precepts and presidents go together, as
Plato says.

The rate of the Subsidy is, or ought to be, aequabilitatis Normam, the very
rule of equality to derive and direct all other charges by: for this cause
many respect not altogether the proportion observed in the Subsidy: but
because in most places, especially in cities or great towns, collections are
made commonly by the rate of the subsidy, such as are therein unequally taxed,
are made subject to infinite inequalities and injuries in all other charges.

In common charges to see one that is set at twenty shillings, to pay four
pence, when another of his value paieth two shillings by the rate of the
subsidy; to see one that may dispend in annual reuenews two hundred pounds,
taxed at two shillings, when another that has not the tithe of his living,
laid as much by the rate of the subsidy; what greater inequality and injury
can there be, that these which disdain to consort with the lowest in cases of
countenance, should be linked with the lowest in matters of charge? so the old
proverb is still approved, The weakest must to the wall. For as worms breed
soonest in the softest wood, so wrongs are soonest offered to the weakest
person.

These Inequalities are so apparent that in most places when a Charge is
imposed, the better sort with the Constables of the town assemble together,
about the equal taxation and collection of it: if it be in Hundreds they
divide themselves into Villages: if in great towns, they divide themselves into
Wards, and so tax men not according to the rates in the Subsidy, but in some
measure according to their abilities agreeable to the general proportion of
others, which must needs be a very indifferent and discreet course for the
conservation of the people in much unity, where there is so great
circumspection to equality: and sithence it is plebeiae and publica expensa,
the common charge of the vulgar sort, it is great reason they should proportion
their own rates, so the charge which is imposed be discharged, as Bullinger
delivers in his Decades.

Chap. 11.
The probable causes and conjectures why men are so unequally taxed in common
Impositions and charges, repugnant to general proportions.
THese unequal proportions are committed by the Sessors, either of negligence
for want of duty, or of indiscretion for want of judgment, or of ignorance by
way of Apology, or of wilfulness by way of affection.

These inequalities are committed of Negligence for want of duty: for there
are some which rate men upon rumors and reports; now as it is a maxim amongst
Philosophers in vniversalibus versatur dolus, so it is a principle of
experience in the world, that general relations are but common fallations. I
will not say but that sometime vox vulgatis veritatis est, the vulgar voice may
be verified: but yet as the Physician in some cases says, that Vrina est
fallax; so in these cases I would have men think that fama est mendax, rumor
is but a flatuous echo of idle tongues: and therefore Thales Milesius being
demanded how much truth did differ from rumors? so much (said he) as the eyes
are distant from the ears, noting thereby that men ought to be oculer and not
auriculer agents, if they will know the truth: for many are blazond to be
persons of great living, which when they come to be founded, it appears but a
false allarum, and thus are many hindered by hearsay.

It was well said of one melius est, it is far better to fall into the hands
of the judge, then into the mouths of the common people: for he will not
sentence any without examination and proof, when the other will censure every
one by rumors and reports.

If you look into all our statutes concerning the sesment of subsidies and
taxes, there is a provision made for the appointing of certain persons with
the Constables of every Town to be sessors of their neighbors, and this is
done to prevent injury by reports that the sessors should by their own
personal inquiery take inteeligence of every man's estate, and not rely upon
relations of others, and therefore this may be one cause why many are wronged
by inequality if the sessors neglect their duties in the order of equality.

These inequalities are committed of Indiscretion for want o Judgment: for as
Seneca says quidam homines duplo plus vident quam alij; some men can see twice
as much as others, and there be some as wise as Choraebus that would undertake
to tell the waves of the sea, and yet he could not number above five, thereof
came the proverb stultior Choraebo. And this is sometime the oversight of the
sessors, they can pry into men's estates what they have to live on, but they
never expend their charge which is to live of them, and so they aim at men in
these matters as the blind man does at the crow.

The merchant recounteth his charges and detriments before he can resolve what
he gaynes by his ware, the vintner defrayeth the loss of leckage before he can
set down what he saues by his wine, the husbandman respects the charge of
fowing and reaping before he can see what he getts by his harvest, and so
sessors ought to look into the charge of a man's family before they can well
tell how to charge him by his ability: for as it is noted in Summa Angelica,
lucrum non dicitur nisi deductis expensis, it is not properly called gain
until expenses be deducted, so it is to be observed in the estates of men,
unless there be consideration of their charge, there can be no information of
their estate.

It is reported by historians, that in Florence he that was father of five
children was exempted from all impositions; Amongst the Lacedaemonians, he that
was father of three children was freed from watches, he that was father of
four children, was released ab omni onere, of all charges, Amongst the Woman's
he that was father of three children was never enforced to any embassage, if he
were father to five children, he was freed from common charges, but if he were
father of thirteen children, he might challenge immunity from all charge, as
Vlpian says.

I note these examples to this end, not that any should be privileged from
charges which are able to pay, but that in common taxations there should be
some regard of every man's estate by his charge, and to have the more favor in
respect of his family: as for instance where one is worth a thousand pounds and
has none but his wife and himself to provide for, and being a Man yet lives
not like a man but feeds like Diogenes with a root, and goes like Lazarus
with a ragge, such a miser as this (if he be compared with another of equal
portion which has seven or eight children and maintains his charge in some
civil and credible sort) is to be called to quadruple charge more then the
other, or else in all reason it can be no equality but injury.

These inequalities are commonly excused by way of Apology deduced from the
example of the laborers in the Vyneyard, who being malcontent because they
had equal pay for unequal pains, the master reproved them and said, Is thy
eye evil because mine is good? Under this pretext many do apologize
inequality.

When any complain and plead for equal ease of charge as well as others, what
is that to you (say they) do you envy an others good seeing you are taxed but
according to your worth, are you any way wronged? Maledicta glossa quae
corrumpit textum as one says; it is a cursed gloss that mars the text, and
this is nothing but a retrouerting of the text for a man's own turn as the
devil did wrest the scriptures to supply his purpose: for first it is not fit
to mix spiritual and temporal matters in one sense, no more then it was
allowed in the old law to wear lynsey wolsey both in one garment: secondly,
it was lawful for the master of the vyneyarde to dispose his own goods at
his pleasure, but it is not lawful for a sessor to use reipublice bonis at his
pleasure: and although the master did them no injury, because he compounded for
equal salarie, yet these are offered wrong which are used without equality
according to general proportions, as in the 9. chapter appears very
pregnantly.

These inequalities are for the most part lead by swaie of affection, either in
love or hatred, favor or displeasure: for in these cases, as one says,
voluntas and amicum and inimicum fait, it is the will that does make equality
and inequality: for if men were all beloved a like then should they be charged
alike respecting their portions, but whether they be loved or hated in these
general actions of inequality, the Poets words prove true, Sic volo, sic
iubeo, stat pro ratione voluntas, the will bears the greatest sway amongst
sessors, who are as skillful in substraction and Addition as the best
Arithmetitians, and they can as closely vent their wills under a visor, as
Thamar did her vice under a veil, for this Cymmerian darkness cannot endure the
sun no more then owls can the light: yet as the Steward when he had a
sinister pretense could readily conceive and say, I know what to do. Luke.
16: so these men are not to seek of a secret conueyance when they intend what
to do as by the sequel you may observe: for as Paul. said of the Ephesians,
so do I of these sessors, it is shame to speak of the things are done often
them in secret, Ephesians. 5. 1.

Such as have ease upon Favor or Affection are for the most part spared in
these respects.

It is my kinsman (says one) I must use him kindly in regard of aliance,
affinitas est quasi immunitas: for one says, affinity is a kind of immunity.

It is my friend (says another) I must gratify him because of his good
remembrances, munus amicos parit: for gifts will beget friends. It is my
customer (says another) I will ease him because I take his money. Quid non
perunia potest? for what will not money do?

It is my man (says another) I will spare him in respect of his service, est
vir palliatus: for a cloak is good for the rain.

It is my tenant (says another) I must forbear him because I am his Landlord:
for he had need of an easy rate that pays an hard rent.

This may well be said to be a Favor: for such as are thus set at a low rate
in the subsidy, are the less subject to privy seals, to millitarie munition,
to multiplicine of charges, and therefore amongst the Scithians he was
accounted the happiest man that had the best freindes as Lucian reports
thereof: came the proverb, vbi amici ibi opes, where there are friends there
are riches; yet this is called a Favor but abusiuely as Christ was called
sin: for that cannot be deemed gracious which occasioneth a double disgrace
both in the sessor and the receptor.

That may be said of the sessor which Nehemiah said of such persons, that which
you do is not good; Neh. 5. 9. for according to the proverb, you do but cut
large thonges of other men's leather, such as these which can frankely effuse an
other man's goods as the wastfull steward did, Math. 16. for their own
pleasures, if they were to do good with their own goods they would be as
near as Naball was, loath to part from a penny; if you will afforde a favor
where you affect, you should do well to effect it with your own: for these
are Reipublicae Bona and therefore this doing is not worth gramercie, seeing
it is rather to be deemed a fault then a favor.

Those which are thus taxed with Favor it is but an ecclips to their credites
by exposing themselves to all opprobrie: for flesh and blood cannot brook to
see such as have wealth and possessions like Dives, that look to be called
Rabbi with obsequious congies, and to have the highest places with the proud
Pharisees, that such as these should pay no more the^ the Publican, toward
public charges, and such as these are no better then Impostors to their
prince: for he that is rated most according to his portion is a better subject
to his prince then such an one as exceedes him in common sessements and yet is
taxed far under his substance, as the myte of the poor wydowe was far better
to the treasury then the offerings of the rich.

As those which are taxed with favor, it is perceived by a kind of
substraction in taking somewhat from assessements without equality, so such as
are rated upon displeasure, as the stone is said to grow per additamentum by a
kind of adding to, so that will appear by a kind of Addition or putting to
more with in equality, which may be apparently discerned upon these or such
like occasions.

He has set up his trade (says one) in the town to hinder me, I will now
help him forward in this, figulus figulum odit: for it is a common thing to
see how one mechanicke will malign another.

He would not give (says another) to such a voluntary charge when he was
moved; I will now meet with him in this: for he which is in office can do
much ex officio, under color of his office, if he fears not confusion of
face.

He would not do me such a pleasure (says another) when I had occasion to use
him, I will now remember him in this: I have a way (says Iesabell) when she
could not have her will another way.

He has done me much injury (says another) by suites and speeches; I will
now somewhat requite him in this: for private grudges are easily protected
under public business.

He is very thriftie in the world (says another) I will now crop his living a
little in this, as the Egyptians did oppress the Israelites with burdens,
because they did multiply and increase.

This may well be said to be a Displeasure: for vnius compendiu^ alterius
dispendium, that which the other of Favor does prevent, this of Displeasure
must undergo, in extremities Simon must needs bear the cross.

It is too odious in this age to see how such as dare not play the lion, will
play the Fox, and when they can no way quite themselves in their own matters,
they will cloak it sub officio, under their office, or pretense of some legal
or regal business; and because this shall not seem to be a paradoxe, I refer
you to scripturall instances for proof.

When the Rulers had a spite against Daniel because he was seconded by the
king, they could no way tell how to be reue^ged, but by soliciting the king to
make a decree, that by color thereof, they might work their wills upon good
Daniel.

When Haman did malice Mordecai because he would not move his hatte, he durst
not openly be revenged of him, but by suggesting the king to write letters,
that under pretext thereof, he might have his mind of good Mordecai.

It is so general a note in the nature of man, that such as have their minds
cauterized with malice, care not with what weapons they fight, so they may have
their wills.

These kind of Sessors should consider this saying, posse and nolle nobile, it
is the part of a wiseman sometime to sequester his will from his power, and in
some cases not to do, what he might do, is held for a true type of nobility;
this were a good course to kirbe in men of these conditions, that in their
taxations they deal not as their wills and affections carry them, but as
Cicero says, quid lex and religio cogat, what law and religion compel them,
and to do what is meet to be done, and not that which they may do: for who
knows not what a man in office may do pretextu officij by color of his
office, where there is no care or conscience in the execution of it?

The Philosopher says, iniquus est qui inuidet aut fauet, that he is a wicked
person that does envy or favor especially in public cases where there
ought to be some proportion in equality without respect of partiality:
therefore Sessors should do well to observe what a great reproach it is to be
reputed partial, it is to their names far worse them a myte to the cheese,
or a moath to the cloth; and who would be branded for bad dealing, either with
the black cole as a mark of infamy to the world, or by casting of the black
stone (in sign of ignominy) into the water, as it had wont to be an ancient
custom amongst the heathens, to excuse or accuse men by casting of white and
black stones into the water, which Ovid reports, Mos erat antiquis, niueis,
atrisque lapillis, his damnare rees, illis absoluere culpa. Metamorph. lib. 15.

Such Sessors which seek to revenge their private wrongs or wills under
public business, should fear by following the former presidents, least they
incur the like punishments.

If your Statutes punish those which use false weights and measures to deceive
others, God will not spare those which use false and unequal rates to iniure
others, and if Jurors are bound by oath to present such as use false weights,
all men are bound by allegiance to discover such as make false rates: for by
the civil law, peccata nocentium expedit esse nota, it is deemed a sin to
conceal any sinister dealings.

Chap. 12.
What persons are liable and ought to be taxed toward common Impositions and
Charges.
ALL persons of ability as well subsidy men as others cohabiting within any
city, town, village, etc. are to be taxed toward common impositions and
charges.

Charges are said to be a burden, and we are taught to bear one another
burden: for a burden being borne by many, though it be heavy, it will seem
light, according to the old saying, many hands make light work.

It is noted amongst swine, that one hog will succor an other that is
baited, then amongst Christians one man ought to help another that is
burdened.

It is the nature of dogs in fighting, not to rescue, but to fall upon him
that is beaten: men do not differ from dogs, if they will not releive him
that is under a burden, and if a good man will be merciful to his beast, he is
worse then a beast that will not be merciful to his brother.

It is reported of that godly governor Nehemiah, how in a common wealth
cause, to animate others, he made himself the first example; Even I (says he)
do it, Nehem. 5. 10. the magistrate is called Magistratus, either of magis and
stratus, because he is of more dignity and authority then others; or of magis
and status, because he is of greater state and ability then others: and
therefore such as be Magistrates will rather addere then adimere, that is, they
will be as ready to conioyne as to inioyne any charge; for the office cannot
privilege any from expense, but as the Poet says, Si quaratur honos non
fugiatur onus, if any will get honor by his office, he must not eschew the
burden: and such as are ready to command and will not commute with others, est
onus non honos, as one says, it is chargeable but not honorable: for as Peter
said to Christ, Master pity thy self, so it will be reported of these, they
are of Peter's mind, they will pity themselves though they oppress others,
but by reason of authority they will not put their necks to it, as it was
said of the great men of Jerusalem, Nehem. 3. 5. nay they will not put so much
as their finger to it, as it was noted in the Scribes and Pharisees, Math. 23. 4.

It is observed in the Priests and Levites that in these common charges they
were presidents to the common people: for they are first placed to commend
their forwardnes as you may read in Neh. 3. 1. which is a good memento to all
ministers of the word: for a minister is so called a ministrando of ministering,
to show that there is required as well exhibition with the hand, as exhortation
with the tongue, which S. Gregory notes when he says qui alios ad been
operandum excitat ad been agendum seipsum ligat: he that exciteth others to
welldooing does bind himself to the like, otherwise as Cato says, turpe est
doctori it is a shameful thing to the teacher if his deeds reprove his
doctrine, as it was in the Priest and Leuit who could show others the way, and
yet themselves did shun the way when they should compassionate the wounded man.

Thus when the magistrate does prodesse as well as praesse and the minister dare
as well as fari, it must needs be a great encouragement to the common sort to
follow: for similitude and example do move much, faith Cicero, and S.
Austine says that examples are as sermons to the vulgar people, and therefore
as many horses which travel together go more willingly in the way, so many
men participating together, pay the more cherefully their charges.

There be some which under color of office do challenge a kind of immunity
from common charges: for it is a common practice of Constables in some places
in respect of their pains to save their purses.

In taking of pains they do but their office, the very word officium does
signify duty, to teach such as are in office to do their duties, which cannot
be without pains.

This duty and pains is required by the laws of god and man.

The word of God commands every one that is in office to be diligent therein,
hereof it is written, let him that has an office wait of it, Romans 12. 7. and
therefore it is observed in such officers as fear God that they would perform
their duties with all sedulitie even for conscience sake without commodity, they
deemed it so odible to save by their office. Neh. 5. 15.

The laws of men do not only compel Constables to be diligent and attendant
in the execution of their office, as appears in the Statutes made in the 33.
Hen. 8. cap. 10. 37. Hen. 8. cap. 8. and in diverse others, but there is
inflicted punishments upon Constables for negligence in their office, in some
cases, with the loss of five pounds, 14. Eliz. 5. in other cases with the
loss of twenty pounds. 23. Hen. 6. cap. 14, yea and in some cases with the
loss of all their goods. 11. Hen. 4. cap. 12. so that pains is urged as a
thing penal.

If we should reason a pari by comparing the Constables pains with others that
are in office, if you consider the office of overseers for the poor, they take
triple pains to the constables and neglect their own private business for a
public benefit, and yet they are contributors as well as others, and shall
Constables be paid for their pains? de similibus simile debet esse iudicium, I
can see no reason for it in equity or equality.

If we should respect the loss of their time, why? in doing of their duties
they do redeem the time, when in their idle pastimes and sportes they do but
mispend the time, and seeing as Plato says, Nascimur pro patria, how can they
better improve their time then for the common good of their country, whereunto
we ought to dedicate our pains, purses, and persons if occasion constrains?

In Cities and in great towns where there are many Constables, their pains
are the lesser, but their sauings are the greater. In a levy of twenty
pounds, if Constables may be suffered to reserve their own payments, how
soon may they save above thirty shillings according to ordinary rates, which
is unreasonable? considering it far exceeds princely allowance: for the
Constable or other officer in subcoliecting of the subsidy has but two pence
in the pound allowed him, and shall the Constables save above eighteen pence
in the pound for the collection of all other common charges? nominatim aliquos
refer possum: I fear there be too too many, I will not malign them, but God
amend them.

If you search all the statutes you shall not find (unless it be in the
subcollection of the subsidy) that constables are to make a profit of their
pains: for then it were rather an occupation then an office; and therefore
this kind of saving is not to be suffered in a commonwealth: for it is
condemned in the scriptures by an argument drawn a maiori ad minue from the
greater to the lesser in this sort; such as were covetous were not to be called
to office by the word of god Exodus, 18. 21. but these which save their own
charges under color of their office are covetous, ergo etc.

This underhand saving may by circumstance be condemned by our positive laws,
in this manner. Saving is secret kind of getting, he that secretly gets by
sinister means is no better then a thief, and therefore if he be deemed a
felon by our laws which takes above five shillings from a private person what
shall we term these that defraud the Common-welth of so much money in a
public charge? It makes me remember that pretty allusion of M. Cato sitting
to this purpose, fures tenues the lesser thieves (says he) are restrained with
shackells and linckes of iron about their legs, but the greater thieves, do
gestare in colo Catenas aureas, iett up and down with chains of gould about
their necks, and costly induments upon their body. I pray god these kind of
sauers be not such, if they be they are no better then caterpillars to a
common-welth.

There be others that plead a privilege from common charges; because they are
out of the Subsidy book; if they be of any competent ability, this is rather a
reason of some emphasis to make them capable of other charges: for seeing they
neither pay subsidy, or find armor as others do which are in the subsidy,
they may the better contribute to other charges.

Who knows not that many are spared out of the subsidy for many respects and
yet they are (or ought to be) liable to the charge of puruey for the prince,
provision for the poor, impositions of a town? the widow gave her myte,
as well as others that gave more, he lives like a hog that does no good while
he lives, nay as Seneca says, Non viuit qui nemini viuit he lives not at
all, that lives for none but himself.

He that will have the rose must away as well with the prick as the savor, the
philosopher could say qui sentit commodum debet sentire onus, he that receives
profit must not refuse expense: for such as cohabit together to reap a
benefit, must be coadiutors together for ease of a burden, otherwise they
deserve not the name of a neighbor, but are fit to be secluded from humane
society.

FINIS.

