TWO COMMON PLACES TAKEN OVT OF ANDREAS HYPERIVS A LEARNED divine, whereof,

In the one, He shows the force that the Son, Moon and Stars have over
men, etc. In the other, Whether the Devils have been the shewers of Magical
arts, etc.
Translated into English by R. Y.

printer's or publisher's device VBIQVE FLORESCIT.



LONDON Imprinted by John Wolf 1581.

To the worshipful and his especial good friend M. Latham of Sandowne in Essex.
YOur very courteous affability, whereof I have had so great experience,
continuing without any show of a mutable mind has greatelye moved mine
affection to make no small account of your worships friendship. And I would to
God that it were in me by any means to make any small amends unto you for the
same. Which to do is easier for me to wish than to accomplish. Wherefore as
there is no remedy but that I must remain endebted: so on the contrary part
to show no signs of a willing mind, were nothing else but a manifest toke^ of
an ungrateful person. Whereupon having perused certain of the common places
contained in the Method of Hyperius and lighting upon these two here
specified, and thinking them not unmeet to be revealed for the instruction of
the people: I purposed for declaration of my loving mind toward you to put them
forth in print dedicated unto your worship. Unto whom I know they shall be no
less acceptable then if they were things of very great account. Thus
committing you and your affairs to the protection of the highest; I bid you
farewell.

Yours to command R. Vaux.

An admonition to the Reader.
THou art to consider gentle Reader that a translator is bound as nighe as may
be unto his author that he pretends to translate, so that he is not only to
show his sense and meaning: but as far forth as may be to show his very
words. Wherefore if in turninge some places of the holy scripture by mine
author cited, I do not aunsweare thine expectation: thou may, seeing thou have
those places quoted unto thee, have recourse if it please thee to thine own
translation, which peradventure is plainelier done to thy capacity, and
because thou art accustomed thereunto, more to thy contentation. And so
yeldinge to Hyperius the praise which he has well deserved for his labors:
thou may content thy mind.

Farewell.

THE FOVRTH DAY WORK BY GOD MENTIONED GEnesis the first chapter.
Moses prosecutynge the great works of God, writes that in the fourth day
were made lights in the firmament of heaven, which might give light to the
earth, might make difference between day and night, between light and darkness,
and might be for signs and for times, and for days, and for years. There
were two such lights made, the one greater to govern the day, the other less
to govern the night: to the which also are adjoined the stars. These
questions therefore in this place are to be discoursed.

1 What are the offices of the Son and Moan, and how they be for signs and
times.

2 Whether there be distinct circles in heaven, and the same be driven about
with a sure and certain motion.

3 Whether by the moving of the circles, there be any concent or harmony
brought forth.

4 Whether the Stars have life, and 44.
as they thought which did offer drink offeringes to the Queen of heaven.

5 Whether the Stars and the celestial mouinges do bring to pass any
thing upon these inferior bodies

As touching the first question, first stion.
The light was made the first day. There was also a difference between
light and darkness: but certain it is, that it was not so perfect and
distinguished, as it was after the Son and Moon were made: beside that those
effects could not come of that light which afterward followed of the Son
and the Moon. It shall therefore be worth the while, to weigh the offices ot
the Son and Moon whereby we shall understand, for what great and just
causes God has made them.

1. First both are called lights, whereof is manifest, that in kind they are
brought forth, that they may increase and make perfect the light.

2. Secondly, when as both do show light, so notwithstanding are the offices
of their geuinge light distinguished, that ye one most clearly does shine,
and does strayghtwayes drme away all darkness: the other does not shine so
clearly, and does admit some darkness although it does make the same somewhat
less. 1. cor. 15. Thee is one manner light of the Son another of the Moon,
another of the Stars

3. Thirdlye this diverse power in geuinge light, is the cause that the one
shyninge it is day, the other shining it is night. Which reason even in Moises
words is expressed.

4. Fourthly this diversity in giving light brings to pass that men also
may discern their deeds, and may appoynte the day to labor, the night to
rest: yea and brute beasts do appoint to themselves a certain difference.
Psalm. 10.^. He has made the Moon for certain seasons and the Son knows
his goinge down. Thou make darkness and it is nighter in it go abroad all
the beasts of the wood, the Lions roaring gape after their pray, that they
may seek their meat at God. The Son rises, and they are gathered back and
lie down in their dens, man goes out to his work and to his labor until
the eueninge.

5. Fifthly. The Son is so made of god that it warmeth and dries: The Moon
does gently make cold and moist. Which temperature is so necessary in these
inferior things, that without it neither living creatures, neither any
things else might abide, Peradventure ye first light might have sufficed,
to note the difference between light and darkness: but it was convenient that
new bodies should be brought forth, in which other and greater force
should be, to nourishe and preserve those things which are in ye earth. And
therefore as well with the heat and dryness of the Son, as with the cold and
moystnes of the Moon all things in the womb of the earth are nourished,
brought forth, take their increase, and so all generation and nutrunente
flows from them into these inferior things.

6. Sixthly: Moreover, the motions of the Son and Moan chiefly, whereby every
day they are carried and recaried from the east into the west, in certain
spaces of times, and from the southe toward the north, do show a great
commodity. For not only light and darkness, but also heat and cold, with a
certain most apt proportion are dispersed abroad otherwhyle by these
regions, otherwhyle by other regions of the world: which things as they are
necessary to ye good constitution of men's bodies, so do they more avail then
can be spoken to the alteration of the earth if self, and to the ordinary
encreasse of all things that come forth in it. Nether yet could the earth,
or men abide, without ceassinge in one place continual light or continual
darkness, or else continual heat or continual cold: wherefore even most
necessary was this moderation which follows through the appointed motion of
the heavenly bodies.

7. Seventhly. Out of these things it appears how the Son and the Moon
are, according to the saying of Moses, for certain seasons, and for days and
for years. The daily and most swifte motion from the East into the West does
describe unto us days and nights: and that same more slow motion from the
South into the North does describe unto us years, and the parts of the year,
that is to say, the Spring, the Summer, the Autumn and Winter with their
effects. And so we do count and distinguishe times, according to the
diversity of such manner of motions: so that it is not altogether said amiss
of the Philosophers, that Tune, is the numbringe of motion. And unto only man
it is given, as a great benefit, to be able to note those motions, and to
gather the distances of times by them.

8. Eyghtly. The Son and the Moon are for tokens unto men, which happens
two manner of ways.

1. The one, when as by a certain ordinary reason they stand still, go
forward, or go backwarde: and either are joined together, or are opposite, or
do suffer eclipse: also when they show forth raynebowes or mistye circles
about the Son, Moon or Stars, to be seen, by which things fair wether,
tempests, and many effects are wont to follow in the earth, which because
with long time and diligent markinge they are perceived, and therefore may now
and than be also soresene of us, let the place of Matthew. cha. 16. as
concerning the heaven lokinge read be added.

2. The other, some things are seen to happen in the Son and Moon contrary
to the course of nature, the which are wont to portend or show something to
mankind, and to denounce the anger or merey of God toward us. The Son and
the Moon stood vmnoueable, while Iehosue did over come: Iosue 10. That Ezechias
the king might know that he should recover his health, both the Son and
the shadow in ye dyall went back 2. Kings. 20. That Eclipse of ye Son worthy
of remembrance, at ye death of Christ happened contrary to natural order,
Augustine bearinge witness in the 80. epistle to Hesychius, and in his book De
ciuitate Dei the 3. book chapt. 15. Hierome upon Matthew. etc. and the writers
of histories do show many things in their commentaries. Of these things in
general Christ says Luke 21. There shall be signs in the Son and in the
Moon and in the Stars etc. nether are there wan tynge some, among whom is
Iunilius Africanus, which do interpret the Son and the Moon to be signs,
because as well those that sail in the sea, as those which travel in the
wilderness, have regard unto them, and by their guidaunce they learn how they
must direct their journey. And thus much of the offices of ye Son and the Moon.

Of the seco^ Question.
As touching the second question whether that there be several circles in
heaven, and the same be driven about with a certain motion. Now let us
discourse, and yt in few words. The holy scriptures do seem to allow the
round form of the world as described with a circle, when as Proverbs 8.
the heavenly wisdom, that is, the Son of God speaks thus: Before the
mountains were founded and before the hills. I am fourmed. As yet he had not
made the earth and those things that are without it and the head of the duste
of the round world: when he did prepare the heavens I was present, and when
he did describe the circle upon the face of the depth. If there be any man
whom these words do not satisfy, let him hear experience it self: which
does plainly show, how ye Son with his daily motion does paynte forth a
circle in heaven, so that we may in deed perceive the Son to be contained
in a certain roundell or circle. The which also the Preacher. chapter 1^ has
expressed. The earth (says he) stands for ever, the Son arises, and the
Son goes down, and he goes to his place. where he may a^yse, he goes over
to the southe, and turns to the north. The wind turns round, whisketh
about, and goes forth, and by his circuites it returns again.

That there are distinct circles, the situation of the Stars do manifestlye
show, when as some are in an higher place and some in a lower: beside that we
do plainly se that some Stars are carried about more swiftly and some more
slowly. As for the number of ye circles the scripture does not define them: and
otherwise does the old Astronomers, otherwise does the new determine: yea and
not at this present amongst ye Astronomers that now be, is there any agreement
thereof. But that they be moved by p^^ scripte laws or order, it is both found
by the long observation of times, and the scripture does not dissemble it. For
that I may omit the words of the preacher lastly rehearsed, thus do we read
Psalm. 104. He has made ye Moan for appointed seasons, and the Son knows his
going down. Iob^ 31. it is said, The Moon moueably going. and the 38.
chapter. God alone is showed to bring to p^^^e very great things by his
providence, and amongst the rest to set laws also to the motions of the
Stars; in which, man can perform nothing. Wat thou bind (says he) the
sweet influences of the seven Stars? 38.
or will thou let loose the force attractiue of Orion: or if thou shall be able
to being the constellation of Mazaroth (...) season? or will thou be able to
lead the North star with his children^ know thou the laws of the heaven,
that thou may show forth the dominion thereof upon the earth? But
Chrysostom in the 14. homily upon the epistell to the Hebrews does deny the
heaven to be of a round figure, or to be moved: leaninge to those words
wherewith it is said Hebr. 8. That Christ the high Priest sittinge at the
right hand of majesty, is a minister of holy things, and of the tabernacle
that God has pighte, and not man. There he notes heaven to to be called
pighte or fixed. But it is manifest, that in that place mention is made of the
outmoste or highest heaven, in the which Christ sits at the right hand of
his father: and I do discourse of the firmament in which the Stars are
placed. But to reason of these matters, either curiously or contentiously,
Augustine upon Genesis after the letter. lib. 2. cap. 9. and 10. supposes it
to be more then neadeth, specially since the knowledge of such matters does
littell or nothing avail to godliness.

Let us go forward to the third question. It is apparaunte that this opinion
came first from Pythagoras: that is to say, that the celestial circles because
they be most large and set one upon another, and that they all in like manner
are driven about continually with a certain moderation: give a most sweet
sound, and a plain musical harmony: Cicero in somnio Scipionis and other
wirters make mention of it. Some sinatterers in divinity, to the end that
that lie may be smothed, do bring forth these words of the 38. of Job. Who
shall show the reason of the heavens, or who shall make the concente or tune of
the heavens to sleep? But in few words I answer, denyinge simply any
consent or tune to be brought out of the motion of the heavenly circles. The
reasons of the Pithagoreans are overthrow with small ado: but lest I should
lose time in this matter, I had rather the confutation should be gathered out
of Aristotle de coelo lib. 2. cap. 9. than to be l^ked for of me. And whereas it
is certain that Pithagoras brought forth almost all his opinions in certain
dark senses or allegories: it is more probable that he would with such
excogitate or deep reason show and commend the wonderful obedience and
agreement of all things, but chiefly of heavenly creatures, in performinge
diligently the duties which te^de to the settinge forth of the power and
providence of God, than any outward or corporal conce^t, as we may perceive
in musical instruments. In which sense we are accustomed to save in a Church,
schole, or commonwelth well ordered, in which every one do their duty with
great concord, that there is a certain very beautiful harmony to be seen.
Furthermore that place in Job is not faithfully translated according to the
truth of the Hebrew, but thus it ought rather to be read: Who shall number the
clouds in wisdom, or who shall make the bottels of heaven to rest? where the
word Nebel signifies a waterbudge or a bottell, and so those which are most
skillful Hebricians do note in that place. And although otherwhile the same
word do signify a musical instrument: notwithsta^dinge because words go
before of the clouds, out of which as out of bottels, it is manifest that
water is largely powered, the reason of the text does require, that so as I
say it must be expounded. Let no man therefore rashly abuse the words of the
scripture to establishe an absurd or unlikely opinion.

The fourth question is, whether the Stars have life? This question I do not
therefore only touch, because Plato in Timaeo and his folowers, Cicero
shewinge the same in lib. 2. De Natura deorum, do defyne the Son the Moon
and the other Stars to be living things endued with mind and reason, and to
feed of humors which every day they draw upward, finally to be Gods: but also
because the scripture does witness, that there were some among the Jews did
believe the like things, for 2. kings 23. chapter it is showed, that some did
burn ince^se to the Son, the Moon the Planetes, and the whole host of
Heaven: and that there were horses and charrets dedicated to the Sun:
Moreover because ye Manichaei a kind of heretics, besides the strange
dotinge dreams, which Augustine against Faustus Manicheus libr. 20. cap. 9.
does write that they inverted of the Son and the Moon, they thought also
that they ought to be worshipped: the which is gathered out of Augustine.
Epistola 74. ad Deuteriu^ episcopum, against Faustus Manichaeus lib. 5. cap.
40. and De Genesi contra Manichaeos lib. 1. cap. 3. lib. 2. cap. 25. also
Disputatione prima contra Fortunatuni. But that the Stars by no means are to
be worshipped every man by him self may determine, which does only mark the
scripture to show plainly that they are creatures made of God in a certain
time. And it is manifest, that the honor which is due to the Creator, by no
means ought to be given to the Creatures, Romans 1. etc. And Josias the king
is openly praised 2. kings 23. which did take away such idolatrous customs.
Ier. also the 7. and 44. chapters does most sharply chide, and threateneth
greuouse punishments to them which did sacrifice to the Stars: specially
since that Deute. 17. the worshippinge of Heavenly bodies whatsoever they were
is plainly forbidden, and the transgressors are commanded to be punished with
the pain of stoninge. Men were induced to so great idolatry at that time
specially, that they did falsely suspecte, that the Stars had life, and were
delighted with false worship. But that they have not life appears by this,
that in Genesis the 1. and 9. chapters, where those things are reckened up,
unto whom a lyuinge soul is given: only men, fishes, birds, crepinge things
and living things remayninge upon the earth, are rehearsed: but the Stars
are excluded out of that number. And that man only is endued with reason, and
also among bodily substances, is more euidente, than that it ought to be
proved with any arguments: which reasone will worthily suffice unto wits not
over curiouse. To gather, by their motion or by their certain offices, that
they have life, it is not necessary: for many things destitute of life, both
do naturally, and also suffer: as artificial fire shines, burns, kindles,
moves and is moved: also water flows, is moved with great violence or force
etc. also pretiouse stones, herbs and other symples have their force: and yet
no man for these considerations will attribute life to them. And where as the
scripture does say, the Sun knows his goinge down, let the Heavens be
glad, and let the Earth rejoice etc. these must be taken as spoken by a
metaphor or prosopei, as also full often the Autors of holy books accustomably use
such kind of figurs. As example, Psalm. 114. The sea saw it and fled. Iordade
was driven backward. The Mountanes leaped as ra^mes, and the little hills as
la^mes, what meanest thou o Sea that thou did fly etc. Therefore rightly do
Lactantius Firmianus. lib. 2. institutionu^ diuinarum cap. 5. Hierome
expoundinge the 45. chapter of Esaias. Basil. in lib. de opere septem dierum. and
Damascenus following him libr. 2. de Orthodoxa fide cap. 6. determyne that the
Stars are without life and do lack sense. And although August. who was
noseled in the Platonicall discipline, does seem in Enchiridio ad Laurentium
and de Genesi ad litera^ lib. 2 cap. 18. to leave it in doubt: yet in his
book ad Orosium contra Priscillianistas and Origenistas he does openly say
thus: furthermore as touching the Son and the Moon and the rest of the
Stars, that they be celestial bodies we see, but that they be living bodies
we see not. Where after a few words he adds, these things are not so set
out in the scriptures, that the knowledge of them is commended unto us. This is
morcouer to be considered, that in his retractations lib. 2. whereas certain
things are spoken against Faustus Manichaeus libr. 14. touching the Son and
the Moon, as though they had sense and therefore exalted diverse their
worshippers, he gives this admonition, that those words are to be taken as
spoken Metaphorically. And he wrote these books, after them in the which he
seemed to doubt. Which things saying they are so, it is euidente that
Origenes which goes altogether in the steps of the Platonians and pronounces
that the Stars have life, is in no wife to be harkened to. And I am in doubt
that that, which is thought to be, is not the mind of the Philosophers: for it
is to be believed that they did not think that in deed the Stars were endued
with life, as we say that men, birds, fishes, and such like are: but rather
that they spoke so by a Metaphor or else truly that by an Allegory they feigned
that there was life and reason in the stars: whereby they might more
evidently declare, that in a most decent order, and as it were in a measure
they do finish their motions, even as though after the manner of men, they were
endued with reason.

Now lastly it is expedient that I should go through with the fifth question,
Whether the stars and the celestial motions do bring to pass any thing upon
these inferior bodies. It is to be understood that about the year 380. (in
which season Augustine lived) there was a certain Spaniard named
Priscillianus, which dispersed through the Churches many false opinions taken
partly of the heretics called Gnostici, partly of the heretics called
Manichaei: and among the rest, he taught that the doings of me^ were governed
by the motions of the stars, and that the body of man was so compou^ded that
certain signs of the circle of the Zodiac did rule certain parts and
members: and some other things like these. Neither are there wanting at these
days, some which are delighted with such foolish toys. I have also marked
some of the school writers to grant, that the stars do move and incline the
wills of men.

That I may therefore answer the question, and encounter unsavory errors, it
is meet to distinguish the inferior bodies: for there are some which are
brought forth and have their being in the air, the carth, the water, and the
same partly are without life, partly have life, having only a vegetative or else
a sensitive life. The other I understand to be men's bodies: and so whole man
consisting of soul and body, and not vegetative or sensitive only, but also
endued with reason. As touching the inferior bodies of the former kind, as
there is great diversity of them, so a good part of them seems to consist
and to be governed with the motion and power of the heavenly bodies: the which
some do endeavor to prove with some arguments and examples. First: Those
Meteores or high things (say they) which are seen in the air, as comets or
blasing stars, misty circles about the Son, Moan, or Stars, lightnings,
thunders, rain, hail, do chiefly come from the stars, whereby some
observing the situation of the sta^res, do foreshew such Meteors to appear.
And Aristotle in his first book of Meteors the second chapter, among
principles does determine, that it is to be granted, that those things which
happen in the inferior world, ought to be esteemed as taken of the motion and
efficacy of the celestial circles. Secondly, Those things which grow out of
ye earth as herbs, trees, fruits, corn, and such like, all men hold as a
thing confessed, to be very much helped by the warmth of the Son and the
moystnes of the Moon: and it is found by proof that ^^^^cetie does follow
where the deaw or rain wants, yea and the Scripture it self does witness
it. 2. Sam. 23. and 1. Kings. 17. Thirdly. The bodies of all living things are
fostered and nourished with the warmth of the Sun: moreover according to the
motion of the Moon they are afferted with ^undrie chaunges, of which sort is,
that humors chiefly are somewhile increased somwhile diminished. Moreover the
Sun is thought to help to generation; in so much that some men have not
fear^^ to say that man is engendered of the Sun and the Moon. Many things
also are said of the offices of the Sun and Moon, whereby these things seem
to be established. Fourthly. Inumerable things there are, which with the Sun
the Moon, and the stars do communicate diverse affections, and have a
certain Synpathia or like affection or passion with them. The ma^igold and
lupine being hear^es, are ^^^tinually moved about with the son. Crabbes,
oysters, cockels, and the fish called Echinus, are filled while the Moon
increases, contrarywyse when she is minished, there is less fish in them.
Moreover the Moon does draw to, and drive away the returninge tides of the
sea, whereof more is to be seen in Plin. lib. 2. chapters
4.41.97.98.99.100.101. also lib. 18. cap. 27.

Although these things are probably spoken, yet we must defyne that the
things which happen in these inferior bodies, are by no ways brought to
pass by the power of the celestial bodies or of the Stars. The reasons are
in readiness.

1 Unto God alone, who is the only author of all good things, and does create
nothing in vain, but governs the things which he has created by his
providence, all these effects ought to be ascribed: as also he verily has
once given to inferior things those powers and qualities from the beginning,
that of their own nature by themselves they should bring forth such effect
and should receive no help of other things. The which in the confutation of
the former arguments I will make manifest by the Scriptures.

2 If the offices of the Sun the Moon and Stars be nombred, it is not
expressly found in the Scriptures, that it is committed unto them, that they
should imparte or infuse any actions into these inferior bodies by
themselves or by their motion: but that chiefelye is attributed to them, that
they give light, they rule the day and the night, they discern light from
darkness, they are for signs, finally they are for seasons for days and for
years

3 But if any thing may be attributed unto them, it may not be attributed but
as to second causes, and the same very far of, of which there is no use but
when, where, how far, and how it shall seem good to God himself which is
the first cause, and the cause of causes. And so the Sun, the Moon, ye Stars
shall scarcely be set in that place, in which instrume^tall causes are wont to
be set. It is manifest that isntrumental things by them selves do nothing,
and do only so far profit, as by men they are put to it: And whereas men may
hardly want isntrumental things, God truly eue^ without these does bring to
pass every thing mightily and quickly. Medicines are used for to recover
health: nevertheless that is a proof, that by them selves they do nothing,
because many times in vain they are given, the diseases in no case being
driven away: yea God often times has restored health even without medicine.
Wherefore the Son the Moon and the Stars, it they seem to be of any
force to heat or cold, to generation or corruption, or else to any other
action, sure it is that by themselves they perform none of these things, and
without them the like may come from some other thing, other causes and h^^^es
coming to: but of God him (...) are all things made perfect, and (if I may ^e
say) thoroughly finished. One planteth, another waters, but only God gives
the increase: and neither they which plant or water are any thing, but God
alone is all in all. 1 Cor. 3.

1 Now will I answer to their arguments in order. As concerning the
Meteores, it is false, that they come by the force of the Stars. First, al
their matter is believed to be brought forth out of these inferior things: and
there is a certain force in the earth it self to cast out vapors and what
soever is of that sort. Moreover, such matter abides nere us in the air, very
far of from the stars, and is freely, and at liberty, moved, or driven,
until it have taken some convenient form. Besides that, oftentimes the matter
being gathered together, is suddenly disseuered, and again, when it is thought
not to be, some of the Meteores come forth. As for the Cometes, the
Philosophers themselves dare not ascribe unto the stars. Many of them
affirming (among whom is Seneca) that they are peculiar stars, shining by the
commandment of the highest God, yt they may show some strange thing unto men.
Besides that, what great variety of the Thunder and Lightning is there: we,
contrary to the laws of the philosophers, have felt them, even in the midst
of winter, and in cold Regions, as also that Snowes have fallen oftentimes in
summer.

Furthermore the violence of ye lightning is marvelous wherewith huge building
are cast down, money is melted, the lether of the purse being unhurt: the
bone of the leg is broken, and the flesh without, remaining whole: a man
stain, and no sign of a wound. Of these I say, and the like, what reason (I
pray you) will they give? Wherefore Aristotle him self grants in the
beginning of his meteorology, that there are many things spoaken of this
matter, doubtful and uncertain, and some things to be so so touched. And if
otherwhile they do foreshew a Comet, or some such thing to appear, yet we
must see again, how often they are deceived, and do deceive: how often in like
manner such things are seen, when as no man has showed any thing before, so
that no such kind of predictions are nothing else, but light and uncertain
conjectures.

Finally, whereas Aristotle does define that all these inferior bodies are
moved and gouernd by the motion of the celestial bodies, we will take it as
spoken of him, which has bent his mind to search out only natural causes,
and human wisdom. As for the true God, the Author and gouerner of all
things, he never did know. Whilst he does behold and look upon the
creatures more then right was, he could not ascend to the Creator himself,
whereof it comes, that the self same Aristotle has defyned, that the world
was not made in time, but that it is eternal, and many other things contrary
to the truth of the holy scripture. Let us therefore follow the scritures, which
manifestlye do persuade that all meteors are formed and showed forth by God
alone, when and how it pleases him. God is said to give rain, Psalm. 147.
Amos. 4. Mat. 5. Act. 14. to bring the winds out of his treasures, Psalm. 135.
to stir up a showrie storm, which lifts up ye waves of the sea, and
throws down the ships with a vehement force. And straight way again,
commau^ding the tempests to cease, and the waves to be ^il. Psalm 107. Also.
Job. 37 God has thundered with his voice doing maruels, and great things, we
not knowing how they be done, He speaks to the snow that it may be upon the
earth. Also out of his privy chambers comes the whirle-winde, and out of the
seatterings of the clouds his cold. By the breath of God the frost is geeuen,
and the breadth of waters is frozen. Beside that, for the watring of the earth
he weryeth the clouds, and again, he drives away the clouds with his light,
(...).

Moreover, the earthquake when Christ was in dying, Mat. 28. and those which
are showed to come before the day of the last judgment, Matt. 24. Luke 21. As
also Act. 4. and 16. are written that they shall be wrought by the power of God.

2 To the second argument wherewith it is said that herbs, trees, and fruits
are very much helped with the heat of the sun, and moistnes of the moon: it
may be granted, that by some means they are helped. But that they are the
cause that they grow, or spring forth so largely as they do, that I do
constantly deny. For even the earth it self does within nourish a certain
native heat: Beside that, even through the same earth, waters are shed abroad
here and there, as it were in veins, the which we must grant no less, nay
rather because they are nigher, more to avail then the sun or the moon.
What say you to this, that God oftentimes, even without dew or rain, does
make the ground fruitful, and sends plenty of corn, chieflye in Egypt,
where the common watering chau^ceth not with raines, but with the yearly
ouerflowing of Nilus, Pliny witnessing it, Lib. 5. cap. 9. and lib. 18. cap.
18, and other writers.

Farthermore, the dearth of corn is seen sometime even then, when rain
enough and enough has fallen before. For God punishes the sins of men by what
means he lists. Again, when it lyketh him, suddenly and in very great
drought, he geeueth abundance of all things, the which in the time of Elias
and Elizeus and many other times is marked. 1. Kin. 17.18.2. Kin. 18. and Psalm,
107. it is plainly said, that God turns Rivers into a wilderness, and the
water springes into a thirsty or dry place. And also he changes a
fruitful land into barrainenesse, for the wickedness of the^ that dwell
therein. And again, he changes the wilderness into a poole of waters, and a
dry land into water springes etc. Wherefore with great consent have the
fathers taught that it ought not to be granted that with the heat or help of
the Sun any things here are increased, or else come forth. Basilius of the
six dayworkes, the first homily, the Lord says: let the earth bring forth
green herb. By it self let it bring forth herb, needing the help of no
other thing at all. For because some think the Sun to be the cause of those
things which grow out of ye earth, by means of the attraction of the warmth
that draws the force of which is in the depth of the earth, to the rimme or
outside, even therefore more ancient is the making of the earth than of the
sun. With which error let them that be deceived, cease to adore the Sun, as
if he gave the cause of life. If therefore they will believe, that before his
generation or beginning, all things about the earth were made, let them also
remitte the unmeasurable serving of him: thinking thus, that he is younger
than herbs and hay, as touching his generation. Chrisost. is of his opinion,
the 5. Homily upon Genes. The holy scripture (says he) reproving the
unthankfulness that should be of men, as it does declare all things, so does
it show unto us the order of things made, that it might bridle the trit^ings
and dotages of them, which commend the vanities of their own inventions, and
dare say that the operation of the Sun is necessary to the increase of
fruits, and there are other which go about to ascribe the same to the stars.
Therefore the holy ghost teaches us that before the making of these elements,
the earth, obaying both the word and commandment of God, has brought forth
all seeds, having need of none other thing to work with it. Many things
follow to the same purpose, as well in ye place as in the 6. Hom. Neither does
Ambrose disseute, or disagree with these in his 3. book of the six day works,
c. 6. and Lib. 4. c. 1. 2. In sum they pronounce it to be the property of
Gentiles and heathen people, to attribute the generation, or bringinge forth of
things to ye Son, ye moon or stars.

For there are very many things to be together considered in the work of the
generation of things growing out of the earth, first and formoste, seeds, and
those things which have a stedy power in the^ which must be added for because
of those things which are thought to come up of their own accord: then the
diverse qualities of the earth it self, that is added that heat, moistnes,
fatnes, and the rest like unto these: Beside that, men and cattle, and those
things which come by the diligence and labors of men, as dunging, cutting,
and diverse works of husbandry. And after all these, rain, cleerenes of the
air, Sunshining, specially when the time of ripenes is at hand But as well
before, as after all this, the loving kindness and blessing of God him self,
which alone does give increase, without the which all the rest are in vain.

Therefore Chrysostom in his 6. homily, both say that the Gentiles do
grievously offend, which have in such admiration, and are so astonished at the
elemente of the Sun, and look not further, neither do praise the maker
thereof. And therefore, after that athe earth had brought forth all kind of
seeds, and had taken her Artire and Decking, this elemente of the Sun was
made, that hereafter no man may say that without the operation of the Sun the
Fruits of the Earth are not perfect.

To this place belong the Canons 73.74.75. gathered out of the Synodes of the
East by Martine, Bishop of Braccara: wherewith is forbidden unto Christians
to follow the traditions of the Gentiles, in observing or worshipping the
elements, or the courses of the moon or stars, or the vain deceate of singes:
For building an house, or for to sow or plant trees, or to make marriages:
Also wherewith is forbidden yt they should abstain from work ye days of the
Calendes after the manner of the Gentiles, or that they should ha^g about their
houses ye green boughs of Laurel or other trees: And that they should use
observation in gathering herbs for medicine. The same chapters are rehearsed
quast. 26. can. 5. Non licet.

Now shall you hear saint Augustine de Ciuitate Dei, Lib. 5. Cap. 7. Why do
they choose (says he) some days fit to set vines or trees, or to sow
corn: other some days to tame or break cattle, or to let them go to make or
fellow: by means whereof their heardes of mares or kine may be fruitful, and
such like?

If therefore chosen days do ana^e to these things, because the position of
the stars has dominion over all earthly bodies, whether they have life or
not life according to the diversities of the momentes of times: But them
consider how many things without number under one point of tune, are either
borne, or do spring, or arebegun: and have such diverse endings, that they
persuade that these obseruatio^s are to be laughed at of every child. For who
is so without understanding that he dare say that all trees, herbs, beasts,
serpents, birds, fishes, worms have one by one diverse moments of beginning?
And a little after he says: Nether will they mark, that in the day which they
have chosen to sow their field, so many corns come into the ground at once:
they shut out together, when the corn is spronge they grow green together,
they spindle, they begin to look brown together: and yet of those ears being
of the same age and of ye same shut with the rest, some is sinitten, some the
birds do destroy some, men pull away. How will they say that to these there
were other constellations, which they do see to have so diverse ends. So much
has he: And in other places he is exercised in the same argument: as Epist.
129. ad Iannurium de viribus Ecclesiae, de doctrina Christiana Lib. 14. ca. 29.
In Enchir. ad Laurentium lib. 1. c. 79.

In the exposition of the 4. Chapter to the Galat. where he does interpret
that against such obseruers it is said of the Apostle: Ye observe Days, and
Months, and times, and years. I am afraid of you least I have labored in
vain toward you. Of these things then it is sufficiently manifest that in no
wise it is to be granted, that by the power of the sun, the moon or the
stars, things in the earth are engendered or brought forth the more
plenteously. And the holy fathers were very dilligent in beating of this
doctrine which I propounde, into men's heads, for because of the Gentiles
which were full of foul errors.

3 By these things it is easy to be understood what may be openly said to
the third argument. There abides in the bodies of living creatures a native
warmth, the which also is nourished with blood: beside that, it is stirred with
certain instruments, specially those which work to concoction ordigestion
and moving of the parts: It is also sustained with meat, drink, and other
helps beside, as before also I said that in the earth it self there is a
certain warmth. And whether they will or not, all men must grant, that to
generation specially are required seeds, or those things which have in them a
seedie power. Moreover, that other actions are required to come from certain
bodies, but before all things (as I have said before) the will and working of
God, as that without the which the rest are of no weight or moment: and how
absurd a thing and unlikely to be true it is, that man is engendered or
begotten of the Sun and man, every man of himself does understand. Why shall
any consideration be judged to be had of age: What causes also shall be showed:
wherefore men and women of lusty bodies and having al their members whole and
sound, are found to be vnfrutful and barrayne.

Besides this, if fruit of the body come by the sun, how happens it that the
procreation of children is accounted among the singular benefits of God? Why
did ^nna the wife of Eicana, and other saints require children to be given
them of God? Or is there any that will build upon this, that souls are put
into bodies by the Sun, which it self is without soul. Let then this
human and carnal philosophy give. place, and let all men acknowledge the
faculty and benefit of generation, yea and power also to put souls into the
bodies to be received, not of the Sun, the Moon, or any stars, but of God
alone, which has wisely made the members of generation.

4 The fourth argument is very weak. For it does not follow, for because that
some things have like affections with the Moon, yt they take the same of the
Moon: But this shall be more aptly said, yt look whence such affections come
to the Moon, even from thence also come the like affections in other things,
which by them selves, and of their own nature do contain the beginninges of
chaunges and diverse qualities. No man will rightly say, because that the most
part of living creatures sleep in the night, and also do certain other
things at the same tune and after the same manner that men are wont to do the
like, that they take this faculty of men. With what right then shall we
affirm that such things as are incresed or diminished when the Moon
increases or diminishes, or else are changed by any other means, that they
take the cause of this change by the Moon? But these things shall suffice as
touching the power of the heavenly bodies, upon the inferior bodies which lack
reason.

5 Now remains that I should show what force those things (that is, the
Sun, the Moon and the Stars) have over men which are endued with reason.
The Priscillianistes (as I said before) and certain of the Schooledoctors of
the same opinion, inferpreting ye second book of sentences of Petrus
Lombardus Distinct. 14. have attributed to the Stars more the^ right was.

Two principal points must here be discoursed. The one whether the of man be
moved by the power of ye Stars? The other whether any certainty of man's
life, and the good or evil actions in the same may be forshewed by the
position of ye stars? As touching the former question, I will plainly prove
with diverse reasons, that in no wise it is to be granted, that the will of man
is moved to do any thing by the force of the Stars.

Firstly, If it like you to behold the principal cause wherewith many are moved
to affirm the contrary, you shall find it very weke. They were persuaded
that all inferior bodies without exception, were diversely affected by the
Stars: that being granted, they went further and gathered: when as the
bodies were so affected, the organes or instruments themselves of the senses
set here and there in the bodies, were affected also: and of the instruments
affected, it seems necessary that the senses themselves likewise should be
moved: as we see in them, of who^ some parts (specially being within) are
hurt nigh their eyes, also which are diseased with madness, phre^sie,
melancholy etc.

Furthermore, the instruments and senses being moved, from thence passes a
certain force to the understanding and will. In this order therefore, and as
it were by certain degrees the will of man shall be moved: or (as they say)
inclyned by ye stars. But I, in the premises, have sufficiently showed that
the Celestial bodies do not (as they think) work in these inferior bodies,
no not in those which are without life, and which are without reason. How much
less then shall they work in the bodies of men, whom God has garnished with
reason and judgment above all the Creatures that that live in the earth?
Therefore the Stars do not one jot bring any thing to pass in the
understanding or will of man.

Secondly, the holy scripture does plainly attribute to God the inclination and
gouernmente of man's heart: that is to say, of the understanding and will of
man, Proverb. 21. As the Rivers of waters so the heart of the king is directed
by the hand of the Lord, and he does incline it whether he will, Proverb. 16.
The heart of man must devise his way, but God will order his going. Proverb.
20. The goynges of a man are of the Lord, and how then shall man be able to
understand his way. And many such like sentences there are. The Scripture
also does in many places command that we should fashion our will to the
will of God which does rule our will: and that we should always way say as often
as we purpose any thing: If the Lord will.

Thirdly, if the actions of man were distinguished, of which it is manifest
that some are Spiritual and inward, pertaining to the worshipping of God and
health of ye souls: some earthly or outward, and belonging to Princely or
household government: some to be mean, tending directly neither to good nor
ill: we shall find none of these of which it may be said, that they are
governed of the Stars, but rather we must grant that they depend and are
moved of God alone. For as God alone does rule our actions, so does he rule our
will.

Fourthly, no nor the precepts given of the obseruers of the Stars can stand
firm, or promise any certainty. For where as they command to behold the
signs of the zodiac in every bodies nativity, in the signs to distinguish
the degrees in the degrees the sixtieth parts: and in those sixty parts the
very small divisions of minutes or scruples: it can not be (as Basile in his
sixth homily does plainly prove, and Augustine in his fifte book De ciuitate
Dei. cap. 4 does confirm) that such distinctions of very small parts should
be exactlie enough noted in ye horoscope or the sign ascendent, and in the
Stars partly fixed, partly wandering. How then can be rendered causes (says
the same Basile) for the which of two, which are both conceived and borne in
one indiuidible (as I may say) moment of time, that the one afterward becomes
a King, the other a beggar? how happens if (says Augustine in his fifth book
De ciuitate Dei cap. 2.) that in twins, in whom is marked a marvelous
consent of momentes in their conception and in their birth, and in the other
things adioyninge to them, that yet there is seen a bevy great unlikeness of
health, of strength, of manners, and of all their estate. The same ^tigustine in
the 4. chapter adds a notable erample of very great dinersitie in all their
succeedinges throughout all their life, of the twins Jacob and Esau out of
the 25. chapter of Genesis. What say you of this, that the Mathematicians
themselnes do teach contraricties, as well ofthe form of the choosing of the
12. houses, (For the oide Mathematicians do it one way, Ptolomeus anotherway,
Ca^panus another way, Ioannes Regiomontanus another way,) as of the manner of
accounting: and one does teproue another of error. By which means truly,
themselves do bewray the bn^^r^^intie of the art which they profess.

Fifty, if the governmente of our actions should Depend upon the Stars,
many absurdities would follow. First, the Stars, of which it is said the
aspect to be evil, should be evil by them selves, being made of God: or else
should become evil and mischeuous through theic own will: of which neither
may be said. The first may not be said: seeing that what soever things God
made from the beginning were bery good, Genesis 1. The later may not be said,
for seeing the Stars are without life, it is not labofull to attribute will
bnto them: therefore as they are made in a certain high perfection, so must we
indge of them to be bnhurtfull. This reason is Discoursed of Basis Dom. 6. and
of Ambrose Lib. 4. Derameri cap. 4.

Secondly, if the beginnings of ations either honest or evil Do take their
original of the Stars, or of every marmes nativity, there shall need no
labomakers to prescry be what may be done, or what may be avoided: without
cause shall Judges be appointed which may honor bertue with rewards, and
punish wickedness with pains. Thieves shall not be erccuted, others that are
guilty shall not be punished, because the constellation of the Stars when they
were buine, did enforce them to do wickedly. It shall be superfluous also to
erecise Sciences to the sustentation of life, seeing that the Stars will give
unto us abundance of all things, we being idle and ^^rlesse.

T^^^uclude, The great hope of Christis is shall become baine, if nether to
b^^^ning there be a reboard nor sinnecond aned, for because that nor lang is
done of men after their will, for where as necessity and fate of the stars
have dominition, there estunation for worthynes has no place, which is the
principal point of just judgment. These things I had almost woide for woide
out of Basile: more migh be added to the same purpose out of other godly
wiyters.

Many of the Mathematicians do say that they do not affirm the Stars to
lay on necessity in men's actions: but only that they do enclyne and somewhat
move the minds: and therefore as not greatly trusting them selves, they are
wout to bsurpe that common saying, that is, Sapientem posse dominari Astris,
that a wise man may rule the Stars. By this reason surely they cudeuor to
make their cause more plausible, and to bring men to agree to it.

But I have sufficiently declared that they do not so much as endine the
minds: saying that they have not so much power, no not bpo^ things without
life, that they may procure either frutfulnes or barrannes. And if they did so
much as incline, yet should many ince^modities folovo as yet, as a little atore
I said, specially when there so few to be found so wife which can resist. But
so they say that afrerwar^ they may proceed further, an that they may plainly
define that ye fat of the stars are inevitable: by which means many,
whatsoever i showed to happen prosperously or other wise, dare affirm, that so
was the destiny: and so by little and little when you have granited certain
things which to see too are but sinale, straightwaye they proceed, to the
buylding bp of such things by degrces as it were, which olighte by no means
to be granted. Wherefore it is lawful to grant to them neither the first,
nor the latter: that is to say, neither inclination nor any necessity.

Therefore let us conchide with Jeremy the Prophet the 10. chap. that the way
of the Gentiles may not be learned of us: and the signs of heaven may not be
feared of us, as the Gentiles are afraid of them. for the laws of the Gentiles
are vanity, etc.

The unne, the Moon, and sta^^s are appointed for signs: and many marucilous
things are done by them, by which men are often warned of the will of God being
just and good, but that they do so pour in a certain hidden force into ye
minds and bodies at the birth of every man, that thereof come diverse
successes, as well in the whole life as in death: or that they bring to pass
any thing at all in the will and actions of men now lining, are things most
untrue, and contrary to the moide of God. The woides of Clay the Prophet chap.
47. are most clear, who obiectcth in this wise against the Babilonians, their
desire to inquire things to come of Astrologiers. Thou art grieved, says he,
in the multitude of thy conceits, let the heaven gasers, and the beholders of
the Stars, and them which them things to come by ye Moon, stand by now and
save thee, and show what things shall come upon thee. Behold, they are become
as straw, and the fire burns them, neither shall they deliver their life
from the fire and. Therefore rightly is it thus determined in the first
Colletane counsel which was held against the Priscillianistes about the year
of out Lord 400. In articulis Fidei, c. 21. If any man esteeine that his
Astrologies or Mathesis are to be beleened, let hun be accursed. And Leo Bishop
of Roine the first of ye name, being astied counsel as touching that matter,
about the year of our Lord 450. did write back in this manner to Turbius Bish.
of Asturica: The eleventh blasphemy of them (he speaks of the
Priscillianistes) is this where by they suppose by the fatal Stars, both the
bodies and souls of men to be bound: by which madness, of necessity it
follows, that they (as men wiapped in the errors of Daganes) desire both to
worship the Stars favoring them as they suppose, or to mitigate them being
contrearie or displeased. but unto such as follow these things there is no place
in the Catholic^e church, for because that he that has given hun self to such
persuasions is wholly gone away from the body of Christ.

Again, when as yet in Spain long after, certain went about to establi2he
those false opinions, about the ire of our Lord 630. there was appointed a
Council at Braccar^, wherein cap. 19. we read decreede: If any man do
belerue the souls and bodies of men to be bound by fatal sign, as the
Paganes and Priscillians have said, let him be acrursed.

And Cap. 10. If any do believe the twelve signs, that is to say, the signs
which the Mathematicians are wont to obse rue to be spread abroad through
every the members of the soul or body, and say ye they are ascrybed to the
names of Patriarchs, as Priscilianus said, let him be accursed. As therefore
the same question has oftentimes and long been tossed in the Church, so often
again have they condiscended into the same opinion of it: whereby it may
appear, what we should also think of it at this time.

Now as touching the second question, that is to say, wherher any certayntie
may be foreshewed, of the life and actions of men, by the motion and situation
of the Stars it is easy to determine. Let this be therefore established, that
no certain art of predictions or foretelliges may be ratified. The reason is
because, as before I have touched in the fourth reason, the most ercelle^t
Mathematicians do not agrce among themselves of the manner of the appoyntinge
of the twelve houses, and of the manner of accompting: Again it is impossible
eractlie to distingui2he those sirtieth most 2inale parts, into the which the
degrees of the signs are divided: to conclude many other things of like sort
do concur, which witness the vantric of the falsely supposed art. They do
foreshew soinetyine the truth, but (as Augustine says libro 5. De ciuitate
Dei cap. 7.) rather beings pr^^^^^ taught by the suggestion of sonie evil
spirit, then (as they safely suppose) leaning to the firm foundation on of
their art Whereby it comes to pass, that they which are thought sometime to
have fore showed the truth by the aid (or warrate) of their art, being
again deceived very often times by their deceive able rules, filthelie
beguiled them selves, and also do beguile others. I could cecke^ infmnit
examples, here of, taken out of histories. Therefore even heathen Cmperoures and
magistrates have supposed it to belong unto them, to bridle so great a vanity
by the laws. For Ciberins, Uitellius, Dioclccianus, Constantinus, Gratianus,
Ualentinianus, and Theodosius, commnaunded the Mathematicians, as hurtful
people, to be driven out of the city. Look upon Suetonius Tranquillus, also
upon Cornelius Tacitus, Lib. 2.12.18. Also Nicephorus Calis^us Hist.
Ecclesiasticae lib. 5. c. 24. lib. 9. ca. 5. and Lib. 11. cap. 45. And in the
Civil Law they are severely punished of Justinian, Codue de maleficis, and
mathematicis. Many also being cunning in Mathematical matters, have mightily
battered the whole predictions of natiuities, as Johannes Gerson, Johannes
Picus Mirandulanus. Therefore it is not to be maruailed at, though the holp
Fathers have be stowed much labor in hissinge out, and condemning of it: Namely
Epiphanius, Basilius, Gre gorius Nazianzemis, Chrysostomus, Hieronymus,
Ambrosius, and Augustinus.

Epiphanius reasoning against the pharisees the 16. heresy, against the
Maniehei heresy 66. Basile in the six dap works, 1. and 6. Homlies.
Gregorius Nazianzenus in his oration of taking regard for the pooze. Also in
his sermon of the Arctians, and that it is not convenient always to reason of
God openly. And in his second book of Divinity, Chrysostom on Grnesis,
Homily 5. and 6. On Matthew Homily 6. where he entreats of the Star that
appeared at the birth of Christ. Again, in that work upon Mat. which is
unperfect (the which the learned doubt whether they may father upon
Chrysostom.) Also on the Esaias, where the Prophet does drilie mock, and
threaten destruction to the Babilouians. who asaed counsel at the
Astrologiars. Amorose in the places vefore alleged, and of Aoraham the
Partriarche, Lib. 2. Cap. 3. Augustine of the City of God, Lib. 5. From the
beginning to the tenth Chapt. And in Lib. 4. of Confessions, Chapter. And Lib.
7. Cap. 6. against the Academians lib. 1. cap. 7.

And of the Christian doetrine lib. 2. cap. 21.22.23.24. and lib. 8. of
questions. Qu. 45. in the exposition of the 31. Psalm. upon that verse, I will
declare against my self mine unrighteousness.

And these things may suffice to the explieation of those things which are
set forth by Moses of the fourth dayworke.

WHETHER THAT THE DEVILS HAVE BEEN THE Shewers of Masuall arts; and by their
help, evil men do Work signs and wonders.
Hyp. Lib. 2. page 306.
WE read in the 7. capter of Exodus, that when as Moises and Aaron by the
commandment and help of God did work signs before Pharao, to certifye,
that they were by God commanded to obtayn deliverance for the people: that
Pharao also called the wisemen and inchaunters and magicians of E gipt, which
wrought ye like signs, with the great admiration of all men, against Moses:
and so were they Autors that Pharao being hardened, he did not obey the
commandments of God. And in the second epistle to the Chessalonians the
second chapter it is said, that the coming of that wicked man, whom the Lord
shall dcstroy with ye breath of his mouth, shall be according to the working of
Satan, in all power and sigues, and lyinge wonders, and with all deceipte of
bnrighteousues. By these and such like places the holy Fathers have gathered
that sigues, wounders and micacles sometimes be wroughte by deuiles, beside
that, that men being taught and helped by them, may do the like. Of which
matter writ Ireueus lib. 1. Cap. 9. Tertullianus in many words, in Apol. Cap.
2. and 23. Also August. de Trinitate. Lib. 3, Cap. 7. and again in his work
de Ciuitate Dei. lib. 8. ca, 19. where he does wring out, even of the Gentiles
themselves this confessto^: to wit, that Magical arts ought to be ascribed as
taken from evil spirits, by this means: for that they thought them worthy to
be punished by the Laws, that exercise those arts.

I comprehend in the name of Magike, diverse arts named in the Scriptures, but
which are harniefull and forbidden by God, of which there may seem three
orders to be appointed. In the first order are meautations, wilchcrafre or
ingling, which do specially belong to deluding the senses, Of which is
mentioned Exodus 7. Deuteronomy. 18.2. Chron. 33 Esaias 8. and 47. Psalm. 58. Gal. 3.

2 In the second order are placed diners fashious of soothsayings, or
diumation, of which sort are the observation of Auguries, Deuteronomy. 18. Also the
marking of dremes, Leuit. 19. Deuteronomy. 13.2. Chron. 32. Iere. 23. and 27. Zacha.
10. The divining by lottes, Deuteronomy. 18. Also they which ask counsel at
Spirits. Leuit. 20. Deuteronomy. 18.1. Sam. 28.2. Kings 21.1. Chro. 10. Esaias 8. and
29. Act. 16. Also they which ask eounsell at the dead, Deuteronomy. 18. 1. Sam. 28.
Esaias 8. Luke 16. By these founes of Diuinations which the Scripture has
expressed, understand the rest what soever they be, which be manifold, as the
devil having a manifold, wiles, does greatly rejoice to put into men's
heads, diverse things that be harmefull.

3 In the third order of Magike is numbered or accounted a certain general
faculty of writing diners signs and miracles by the help of evil Spirits,
whereof is mentioned 2. Ches. 2. But to the intent that every man may more
rightlye judge of these forms of Magike, and furthermore of those places of
scripture: I will add somcwhat of every one of the^. Incantatio^ is said
acantando, of singing or chaunting, And with the Hebrews it is Lachat of ye
verb Lachasch, which is to whisper, to mumble, to speak with a still voice, or
softly. Wherefore all those thiuges are said to be done by Incantation or
inchauntment, in which words, verses, prayers, humble desires or adiurations
are used, nether makes it any matter, whether beside, there are used
instruments or observations, or no. Whereby ye may note that Incantation does
stretch very far, and by the same very many and great things are brought to
pass, of which sort are mentioned Exodus 7. and such as the Poets do often
show. And so (to let pass other) in the 7. book of the Metamorph. of Ovid, a
certain wiche boasts her self, saying: When as I would, the banks agaste
she rivers backs
Imo their heads returnde: the boistrous seas likewise
That rage I stay, that stay with Charm I make torage.
The clouds I drive to flight, to make the sky look clear,
And bring them in again when that it is my will:
Eucn so I use the winds both with my check and call.
With words and charms the cruel vipers chawes I brast.
I move the growing rocks, and pluck from native ground
The mighty oaks, and groves and woods cause shake and quake.
And ground like kine to low, and dead to leave their graves.
And thee I draw, O Moon, etc.


Neither ought it to seem incredible, ye so great things are brought to pass
by Enchauntment. For it is not to be doubted ye there is a great force in
words, chiefly in prayers, procceding from a faithful heart.

Wherefore as holy men do stay upon the couenaute that they have with God, and
having made their prayer, and called on the name of God they obtain, that
things not hard of, are brought to pass: so it is meet that we should
understand, the Magicians also to have some covenant with the Deuile. And
whereas also they pray unto him, call upon him, and require his help, and
paradue^ture with certain customs and obseruationes Do as it were worship to
him: he is at haud, and willingly does grant their desires. And he does
rejoice when he is so honored and worshipped: and therefore as much as he can
(and he can do very much) he studyeth to bind men unto him, and to the
intent he may still keep them in ungodliness, he does willingly gratify them:
and although otherwhile in such kind of prayers there seem to be mingled
certain words that be gooly, religious, and somewhatagreeing with lawful
invocation of God, yet somewhat is always found either in the words themselves,
or else in ye rites and circumstances, or else in the causes moving, or in the
effects following, that tends to the reproach of God, and where with God is
tempted, blasphemed, mocked, despised, and therefore the devil rejoices,
turns all things to his own honor, and readily does perform those
things which he sees to be asked of him. Let every prayer be suspected, which
swarueth, yea but a little, from that simple fashion of praying, the which the
holy Scriptures do show. Oftentimes, whereas a more gay kind of Religion (to
see to) is brought in, there the greter sin lurketh. God has forbidden to
abuse at any time, his holy name, Every false imitation of Religion is a poison
of true Religion. In sum, Incantation does signify a mean, whereby men do
require help of the devil, and whereby he is moved to suceoure, or to set
forward their appointed inchauntmentes or^ing lines.

Furthermore, bewithinges, and inglinges with the Hebrews, called Chaschias, in
latin called Fuscinatores, and Praestigatores. (which words are Erod. 7.
Miche. 5. and Galat. 3) are understood, by the consent of all Interpreters,
t be done when the senses of men are so hurt and illuded, that they all think,
that certain unwonted things are brought to pass, or else natural things
are changed. And therefore with the words of bewitchinge or iuglinge,
propertic is noted the formal cause, and the mean, whereby the devil will
satisfy the desires of men: or else, when as otherwise he is a liar, and a
deceauer, he fayneth at the least wise, that he does satisfic. And if we look
more narrowly, ye nature of Relatiues is after a sort seen in Incantations
and bewitchinges, while they (that is, inca^tations) are understood to be
wroughtby men that request somewhat to be done, and these (that is,
bewitchinges) are understood to be wrought by the devil, willinge to
perform those things which are requested. And they properly unto whom the
devil has showed by this mean, ye way to bring to pass any unwonted
things, are said, to bewitche, and to iuggle to the decreauinge of the minds
and senses of men. Therefore of this sort is that which is read in the life of
S. Macarius. Certain Parents supposed-their daughter to be turned into a
Cow, because that their senses were so hurt by the bewitching of the devil,
or some ill persons, that they did see no other thing in their daughter, the^
ye shape and all the actions of a Cow, and they thought plainly that she was a
Cow. But Macharius, when they came to him with the supposed Cow, saw a very
wenche, rightly arrayed with all such apparraue as became a woman: because
forsooth, he could not be hurt with bewithing, the devil having no power upon
him, But when as he had fervently called upon God, all the bewitching also was
taken away from the Parents, and straightway they knew their daughter, such as
before they did. Neither was her shape of a wenche taken away from her, but
only the seuces of the beholders were deluded, that they thought it to be
taken away.

So also does Augustine, De Ciuit. Dei, Lib. 18. cap. 17. and 18. suppose the
mates of Ulisses to be changed into diverse beasts: and in Archadia, that men
while they did swim over a stagne or poole, were turned into wolves. De
adds also that in his time, certain in Italic, when they had caten cheese,
were turned into Asses, and the same, although always they remained sound in
reason, to have carried lo^gtune great burdens, and after that to be turned to
their former shape. Neither surely do the devils (says he ca. 18.) create
natures if they do any of those things whereof in this question is
discoursed: but change in shape only, those things which are created of the
true God, that they seem to be that which they be not, and therefore I believe
that not only the mind, but also that the body neither, can by any reason, by
art or power of devils, be truly altered in to the members or lineamentes of
beasts.

Thus says Augustine. Therefore of these things is manifest, that bewitchinge
does stretch very far and that under it are comprehended all things, which
are don with the elusion of the senses: that things are believed to be seen,
hard, and perceived, which notwithstanding are no such manner of things. And
it is no hard matter for the devil, or his disciples being studious of
magike, to do these things. For the senses of men are by diverse means
deceived. First, when that some fraud or change is committed in that thing
which is laid before the senses. By which reasone the devil takes to him,
and again puts from him, such bodies or shapes as pleseth him: by the same
reason he can show forth all kind of bodies and shapes, and put forth the
same to the senses, to be seen and touched and by some means or other to be
perceived. S. Hierome in the life of Hilarion does show, that the devil did
somtune set forth before the said holy man to be hard of him the cryinge of
young children, the wailing and lamentation of women, the noise of armies, the
blating of cattle, and strange sounds of diverse voices, that he ran away
rather for the sound than for the sight. And a while after he shows: at
unawares, when the Moon shined, he saw a chariot with fiery horses to run
upon him: and when he had caled upon Jesus, before his eyes all the pomp was
swalowed up with a sodden openinge of the earth. He adds: how ofre naked
women appeared unto him while he lay, how often very great ple^^ie of delicates
appeared to him being an hungered. And he reckeneth up certain other things.
And all things were on this wise prepared of deuiles, which to call him away
from faith, from fervent invocation, and contemplation of divine things, did
set forth things not true, but shapes and unages of things, or else bodies for
the time formed. Secondly the instruments of the senses, or ye means by which
they work, are otherwhi^^ stricken and hurt, by reason whereof they cannot
decerner. As for erample: many times such humors are shed about the eyes, for
the which some man believes that he looks through a syue, that he sees
gnattes or other sinal bodies, parthy clear, partly unstie, also cobwebbes,
the small heirs of wol, circles about candels, that are lighted ^ the wh^che
disease the Physicians call ((...)) suffusio, a sheading abroad, or a web, in
the eye: and in ertendinge she sight of the eye, all bodiesseme less, but in
diminishing thereof, they all seem greater. They that are sioke of of the
disease called Glaucoma, (which is a humor in the eyes like crystal)
according to the proportion of the humor aboundinge, do think all things are
diversely colowred. And how the sight and other senses of them that be dronken
are deceived for because of the gross humors that are dispersed, is too much
known. And how say you by this that the Media or means which are put in
between the instrument of the sight and the bodies laid against it, do often
bring to pass, that things are judged to be other the^ they be. Through
glass the sense and color is changed: the same may likewise happen of subtle
or thin humors and exhalations dispersed by the air nigh unto us. And wood
that is part put into the water, appears crooked, the which notwithstanding
is right. For that, that things put between the instruments of the senses,
and the bodies laid against them, do cause such deceauing shapes. And these
impedimentes can the devil easilye bring forth, as well in the instrument of
the sight, as in the instruments of the other senses: and he does so beguile
men, that they believe and perceive other things then in deed they see and
perceive.

Thirdlye, many times are the powers of the mind troubled, I say memory,
understanding or reasoning, thought, imagination, and the rest that are toyned
to them, whereof it comes, that they which are so affected, cannot any more
judge right and they think they hear, see, and perceive wondrous things, and
yet they are deceived. These effects are seen in them which are sick of the
frenzy, melancholy, or madness. Galene in his book of the differences of the
effects that follow sicknesses, does show that Theophilus the physician when
he was sick of the frenzy, be thought that he saw and heard miusirels
continually playing in his chamber, and he commanded they should be driven
out. But when he was recovered, he could tell of all things, that he, or they
which came to him, said or did: that is to say, because only imagination in him
was hurt, and not cogitation or reasoning. In many that are frenzy,
reasoning or cogitation is only hurt, in some the memory also, and more
powers of the mind.

Furthermore, the molancholicall humor having dommion, does cause that some do
think themselves to be brute beasts, whose voices and motions they imitate:
that they be stone or glass vessel: that they are invaded of murderers and
enemies: that they are inspyred with the power of God, and foreshew things to
come.

Hot humors, as blood and yelow choler, when they abound, and do molest ye
brayn, they cause madness and woodnesse, so that men use themselves after the
manner of wild beasts. And who is ignorante, that the imagination of some
otherwhile is so vehement, either when they wake, or when the other senses are
at rest through sleep, that they think themselves to perceive and do those
things, which notwitstanding, by no means they do? Whereas therefore devils,
when God does permit, can infecte meat, drink, the air that is dispersed
about us, and therefore also may strike our bodies with diseases and other
discommodities, it is never a whit to be maruayled at, if also they hurt our
brain and the powers of the mind abydinge therein, that we think we do
perceive, and do strange things.

Hither may be referred that which Augustine in the 18. book De Ciuit. Dei
cap. 18. does make mention of, in these words: A certain man did report that
at his own house, in the might, before he slept, he saw a certain
Philosopher very well known unto him, coming unto him, and that he did
expound unto him certain Platonicall matters, which he being before requested,
would not open. And when it was demanded of the same philosopher why he did
that in that other man's house which he denied to do in his own house when he
requested it? I did it not, said he, but I dreamed that I did it. But by this
means, that which the one dreamed, was declared unto the other being awake, by
a fantastical Image. Thus much has Augustine.

And a little before in ye same place he had said, The fantasy of man, as in
dreaming when men sleep, so also in cogitation, while they wake, may be
innumerable kinds or sorts of things be diversely altered: of this sort is
that, which in a certain Canon of the Auciran counsel, held the year 308.
Certain do affirm to be written: and it is reported of Gratian 26. Duest. 5.
Canon. Episcopi. Certain wicked women being gone back after Satan, seduced
by illusions of devils and phanfasies, do believe and porfesse that they do ride
upon certain beasts in the night hours, with Diana a godnesse of the
pagans, or with Herodias, or with an innumerable multitude of women, and that
they pass over a great deal of ground in the dead time of the night, and
that they obey her commandment as their Lady mistres and that they are
certain nights called forth to do her service.

And after a few words he says: Priests ought to preach, that by all means
these things are false, and that such phantesies are put into the minds of
the faithful not by a godly spirit, but by a wicked spirit^ for Satan which
does transfigure or change him self into an angel of light, when he has
faken the mind of any woman, and has subdued her unto him through unbelief,
straightway does transform himself into diverse fashions, and similitudes of
diverse persons, and does bring out of the way by all bywayes, the mind which
he holds captitle, deluding it in dreams, showing somewhile joyful things,
somewhile heavy things, somewhile known persons, somewhile unknown persons.
And when as only the spirit does suffer this, the unfaithful mind supposes
these things to happen not in the soul, but in the body etc. These and such
like things therefore happen when as the powers of the mind (as I said
before) are troubled.

Fourthly, The devils oftentimes do quicklye place some bodies in stead of
other some: whereof it comes to pass, that we suppose those former to be
changed into the latter, and so our senses are deceived by the only alteration
of the bodies. And therefore August. in his work De Ciuitate Dei. Lib. 18. Cap.
18. does say: That the fellows af Diomedes were not changed into birds (as
they commonly fabled) but that they were taken away and destroyed by evil
Angels, Reuengers, and in their stead Birds being brought from some other
place, were suddenly set down: the which birds those that have falsely
supposed those men to be turned into since that time have called the fellows
of Diomedes, or Diomedes his birds. In like manner Iphigenia ye daughter of
Agamemnon, when she stood before the altar to be slain, was quickly taken
away by some evil Spirit, and in her place was placed an hind, the same
spirit doing it. This is a token that it is true, for that she was afterward
found alive in Chersonesus beside ye mountain Taurus, And there was presidense
of Dianas sacrifice. And oftentimes are unbelievers by this means deceived of
deuiles, and these mockages have given a beginning to so many triflinge
transformations, as of Ovid and other are famously set forth.

From these does not greatly differ the fraud of certain vacabunds iugglers,
which playing with the nimblenesse of their arms and hands are thought to
thruste themselves thoro we the arm, or tongue or forhead^ with a dagger, to
draw out blood, and to do many other things, when as notwithstanding they do
nothing else but suddenly chaung the instruments, and do deceive with the only
swiftnes of motions. By these means therefore and by others which the deuile
being endued with the knowledge of natureall things, and with passinge
experience, does understand, and man's wit does not conceive: men may be
deceived, as well of the devil him self, as of those whom he teaches, so
that of diverse things they apprehend false opinions. And God does sometime
permit, that either with incantation, or else with the foresaid forms of
illusions, men be hurt or take damage, whether in their bodies or in senses of
the mind, or in o? there things, not for because of the virtue or strength of
any words or actions, which are done of the Magitians with observation, as
though in them were some syngular force: but for the couenante that priuelie
they have with the deufles, by cen^ sone of which covenant the deuiles do
gladly perform onto there worshipperes the things which they tequire, as far
as they can, and specially those things which are fit to hurt. Moreover God
does permit. the deuiles to exercise their power upon some, as well for the
sins of them which desire that other may be hurt: the which because they have
once given them selves to the devil, God will harden in their wickedness: as
also for their sins who are touched with the harm, or else for some other
causes whcih are hidden, and yet always on God his behalfiust. According to
which opinion I have read Augnstin in a certain palce to have spoken as
touthinge these matters. Neither sures; iy it is lawful to put away these
mischicfes with other mischiefs, that is to say, with charms or inbocaffon
of deuilles: for that were to ask at the devil, the author of all euile, that
which is good, which ought to be waighted for at God alone, and of him is wont
to be given: but by faith in God, and the fruits of faith, that is to say with
prayer and alms, we must require of God that he according to his goodness
deliver us from eilill. And if it be not so taken away, then if remains that
we suffer paffenflie all incommodities, as long as it shall seem good to him
to punish and to try us, Which manner of counsel against this kind of
temptations and dangers to be bsed is here and there commended in the
soripfures, also in the 33 question, 1 Cano. Spiper Sortiarias. And so also
Macaruis brought to pass, that the parents of the wench were no longer let
with the bewitehing etc.

Now must I speak of those things which I have referred to the second order of
magical matters, that is to say of diuinations. I have reekened up those
forms of diuinations, which the scripture does mention, if any desire more,
he may seek them out of other wrytcrs. In the prophets writhinges they are
all in general condenmed: And the godly are commanded to aunyde them: and
that chiefly for these causes.

first for that they are invented of the devil, whose works are all euile,
and do tend always unto mischief. Wherefore very far are distant, profane
divination, and holy prophecy: as well because that is faught of an evil
spirit, and this is adininistred of God and the holy Ghost: as also because
that is not of what things so ever, but only of certain things and for the
most part evil? and this may be accounted of what things soever, but esperedye
see the natural causes prepared. For natural causes being laid, the
effecfes do always (for the most part) follow. By which teason both
Physicians and Husbandmen ofcen do fore see that certain things do follow of
sure causes. And in brute beasts also may be considered in certain hidden
power of perceauing before things that are to come: whereof are noted by their
motions and actions rain, te^pestes and many such like things. And because
they are thoroughly cunning in many things by long erperience of time, they can
most certainly pronounce of as such like things. Therefore oftentimes do they
gather Prophesies of those effects which are wrought by the help of natural
things.

Thirdly, they do mark what things are already prepated in any place or
begin to be done. And these self same things then straight way show to some
body (dwelling) in another place, and perhaps far distante, which as a
Prophet does manifest the same to all men, and de sireth to seem to be a
shewer of things to come. And when ye men of that place, do after a certain
space perceive that the matter is so as it was told them, they think that of
that thing there was bttered a pro phesie. Yea easy it is for the devil,
which is of a most subtle and most nimber nature, and does most swiftly pearce
into every place, to spy out whatsoever things are done on every side, and of
the same to bring tydinges whether he lists. But they do not perceive the
thoughts od men (the which Augustine grants that he some while thought, but
he did afterward determine otherwise in his second book of Retractations,
Cap. 30.) but they note the signs only, and the words and speeches and the
geshires of the bodies, where with the thoughts of the mind are after a sort
set forth: and by these and other things concurring they judge as certainly as
they can. fourthly, they show things to come, which in some place or other they
have understood to be for showed of an holy Prophet, or some good Angel:
which notwitstanding is not published among others. And so that which is other
folks, they do suttlely challenge and show out for their own, and do hunt
for the praise and glory for themselves.

fifthly, they dare oftentimes foreshew things to come, although they have no
certainfie, and are foully deceived, after which forte sometime certain
lightbrained fellows dare affirm as things most certain, these things
which by conjectures they do gather as well as they can. And that do the
devils, as well when any impedimentes may be alleged, to which it shalve
imputed, that the success has not answered: as also when willingly they are
desirous to deceive; and to destroy those of whom they are asked counsel.
Hither belong these doutfull Oracles given in Delphos, and in other places, as
bnto Cresus: Cresus perdet Halym transgressus plurima regna. ^^oke for (...)
expo^^ her of, (...) the end (...) the (...).
And unto Pirrhus: Aio te Aeacida Romanos vmcers posse. The which they would
not use if as often as they would, they could show the truty. And of these
manner. of doings you may see many things in Augustine in his book De
diuinatione Daemonum. cap. 5. whcih also ars repeated 26. quest. 3. and 4.

Hereof may we gather what may be spoken of the old prophets of the Centils,
and of them which while they were asked counsel as touching doubtful matters
and things to come, did give Oracles or answers. The fatetelling Prophetisse
in Delphos was inspired and gave aunsweres, either with a still wind, or by
fire which brake out of the den, or else sitting in the secret sanctuary upon a
brazen seat which having three or four feet, was dedicated unto the God. So
the Prophet in Branchis did sit upon an Areltree, orels did carry in his hand
a rod which was given him of some god: sometime he did wash his feet with
water. Among the Ligurians in Thracia the priests of Bacchus did drink wine
sustely.

Of these therefore and such like we must say, that the rite and superstitous
ceremony being put to, ma keth nothing to the purpose, and that it is only a
sign of the obseruaunce and wuenant of wicked persons and evil spirits
between them selves: and the spirits so to the honored, and so retain men in
a folish persuasion. As touching the answers themselves or the inspiration,
what soener concerns this comes from the devil, who does teach it privily
or apertly, to wit, with some representastons which he shows forth, with
sightes or hissings, whcih voice or other signs. But says some, what shall we
determine of the Sibilles? there is no doubt but they were taught those
things, which they did foretell rightly and truly, especially of Christ, and
things perteyning to the salvation of mankind by the mspiration of the holy
Ghost, nessher onght it to seem strange that I should so say of gentlles and
vnbelee^ers, when as it is apparent that the holy Ghost sometime has spoken
true and notable things of Christ, even by the wicked: as by Baleam Number. 24.
and by Caia. Io. 11. Although many things wece (...) obscurely spoken by them
thau it may be doubted, whether they v^ deessode those things which they
sasde: as neither Caia^has did properly understand his prophecy. But it
pleased God that such prophesies should be manifested so the Gent us to thend
that afeereard, if at ante time they did sirnie agaunst Christ and the truth
being manifesieu in the carth, they might be conainced by their own men's
predicftions and testunomes. Cn which end to be used, they ought also to have
great weigh or importance as Angasim in his oration against the Iemes and
Pagans cap. 16. and agauist I. Manich. lib. 13. cap. 25. Chrisost. homilia 3 in
epistolam ad Titum, do wit nesse. And the inoste ancient writers conterding
against the Gennls for our religion, have willingly for that cause used the
testimonfe of the Sivilles as Justinius Martyr, Clemens Alerandrinus, Lactantius
Firmianus S. Augustine and other. Hitherto as touching dininations, auswers,
and predictions.

Now the matter requires that I should speak somewhat of miracles, which I
have put in the third order among magical matters, Do the end that every man
may more easily mark, what manner of miracles, and how miracles may be done of
the devil and his disciples being expert in magike, it shall avail to show
which are true miracles. Miracls properly are said to be certain outward
works or deeds had in admiration among memand such in deed as appear to be
wroughte by Gods power for to declare the truth and certainty of doctrine, of
faith, or of God his promises, or else ye power of God, and to the glory of
God. This definition is gathered of causes, and by it may be understood how
the miracles of Christ and holy men may be distinguished from these which are
wroughte either of the devil or of wicked men: which also ought to be called,
not true but lying miracles, as the Apostle says 2 Chessa. 2. And these lying
signs or miracls may diversely be wrought by the wicked.

1 Firstly, miracls are done in those things in which the things are in deed
such, as they apeare to be: after which forte the Magitians of Pharao are
believed to have brought forth serpents in deed and other things of that
forte: but those are two ways done. The First by calling on the name of God,
as Christ speeketh of the false Prophts Mat. 7. that in the last day they shall
say: Lord have not we cast out devils in thy name? notwithstanding it shall
be said to them, I know you not. After the same manner Christ does foreshew Mat.
24. false christ's and false prophets to work signs and wonders, and miracls
are done so by them, not because God is moved with their faith and holiness
(which utterly is none) but for the invocation of his name which they use unto
him: moreover for the persons standing by, whom God will have either confirmed
in found dortrme by miracles, or else does suffer them to be carried away stom
the same. And the wicked do use the name of God in these inuocations, but not
rightly, neither to lawful ends: wherefore more rightly they do abuse it,
which also shall happen to them to thewe damnation: of which matter Chrisost.
has spoken somewhat tom. 5 Homil. 21.

3 The second by calling upon the devil: for the Magitians with their charms
do call upon enell spirits and allure them, the which also for the covenant
that is between them, are ready to do any thing. And God does give them leave,
so that they ran fashion certain bodies for a time which with our senses are
perceived, as I have aforesaid. And by this means did Pharao his Magicians
work miracles: of whose whisperinges, that is to say, still inuocationes the
scripture speaks plainly Exodus 7. etc. Although in these signs or wonders
very things are laid before the senses, yet shall they not be called true
miracles: since that the other causes which must be considered in true and
properly said nuracles, are lackinge.

2 Secondly, miraels are wrought of spirits and evil men, in which veric
things are done and seen, but using certain natural things only. For in
stones, hearvs, and such like things there is a certayre hidden force or
strength, wherewith strange things may be done, and the deuns and magitians have
notable knowledge of such natural forces, others in the meaue while, which do
not understand this use of natural things do suppose great miracles to be
wrought, when there is nothing less. Such a thing is it that the lamp which
never goes out in a certain chapel of Venus is counted a miracle: when as
notwithsian ding that may be done by art and natural instruments, that is to
say with the stone called Asphestus, which is found in Arcadia: (as says
Plini. lib. 37. cap. 10) and is of that uature, that being once kindled it
never goes out. And Plini. makes mention in the 18 book of his natural
history. Chap. 1. of Limis viuus or asphestinue (a kind of flar) that it can
not be consumed by fire. Therefore these miracls also because they are not done
by the power of God but rather by a natural force, deserve not to be reckoned
among true racles.

3 Thirdly, miracles are done by magitians, in which certain things appear to
the senses, and yet are not very things: but there is nothing else, but that
the senses of men are deceived and deluded, that they think they see and
perceive things which nevertheless they neither set nor perceive. Which deceate,
how many ways it may be done, I have before declared. Therefore not these
neither ought to be deemed true miracles, because the very things are wanting,
and the senses are deceived.

4 Fourthely. By what means soever, either apart or privy, miracles are
wrought by Magicians, and whether very things be remaining in them, or only
do falsely appence: yet aslonge as the causes, once manbred in the definition,
are not seen in shem, they can not be indged any other but lyenge signs and
lyenge unra^^es. For they can not be true, which art neither done by the true
power of God, neither to the presor^^ed ends, that ^^, to pro^^ the truth of
doctrine, of faith, ^^ of Gods proinisses, or of the ^^^ght of God, nor are
directed to set ^^^th the glory of God. Nevertheless (...) vuto the wicked is
gran^ (...) to work miracles, such as the Godly can not: as Christ has
signified Mat. 24. sainge: that f^^se prophets and false christ's should work
signs and wouderes: that even the elect, if it might be, may be ^^^^aued. And
yet not therefore as rightly Augustine does note lib. 83. questionum questi.
79, are the wicked to be thoughtmore worthy then the godly, or more acceptable
unto God, as neither the Magicians before Phar^^ more hette^ the^ Moses the
man of God: Although the wicked h^^e not power given them to work miracles
where and when they wall: but only where, when, ^ how it seems good to God.
Wherefore these Magicians of Egypt, although they the need serpents, blond^^
^^aters and frogs, which were an deed great matices: Yet when they came to
lice, they could do nothing: and they were compelled to to confess, (...)
Moses did all things with the finger of God, that is to say, by Gods power,
Good.s. Also the Grorcistes Act. 19. are not able to drine out the evil
spirit. So always at the length must a lie give place to the truth. There
are diners causes for which God does give so great power to the ungodly

1 The first: If any of the ungodly do work miracles, using invocation of
the name of God: the^ must we understand those miracles to be brought to pass
for the only worthiness of the name of God: for that God will have his name to
be had in beneration, neither does he suffer it in vain to be called upon: of
which matter I have touched somewhat before.

2 The second cause, If any work miracles, not calling upon the name of God,
but by other means, as by help of devils, etc. This happens that the evil,
that is to say, as well they that work the^, as those which look on them and
follow them, ane confirmed in evil, are seduced and drawn into new erxours.
After which sort Pharao and the Magicians were hardened in evil. And 2 Thessalonians. 2. the wicked are blineded that they should believe lies.

3 The third cause: Unto the wicked power to do miracles is given, that the
constancy of the godly may be tried, and their patience exercised. Whereof it
is said Deuteronomy. 13. that God, by a false Prophet which foresheweth true things,
and works miracles, does try his people. Simon Magus is written to have
wrought many wonders against Peter the Apostle.

4 The fourth cause: Evil me^ are sussered to work miracles, least holy men
(unto whom the same faculty is by God granted) should be too proud in them
selves, and should hunte after vain glory: Moreover least the residue of men
should measure holiness by miracles: Or else, which is greater, and sounds to
Gods dishonor, that they should give godly worship unto them, as Act. 15.
the men of Licaonia, for because of a lame man restored to health, would by and
by give divine honors and sacrifices to Paul and Barnabas.

5 The fifte causE: that happens lest any should think the gift of working
miracles to be greatly des^red, before many other gifts, which as well are
more necessary to the church of God, as also do oringe more plentiful profit:
of which sort specially are the gifts of prophecy, go^^enment etc. For God
does, garnish his church at all seasones with so sorry gifts, the which good
do v^e to many good purposes: and some gifts in the mean while are sometime
common to the vugodlie, but they fowly abuse them: therefore as many vugodly
me^ do sometime abuse the gift of tongues, of wisdom, or the like, even so
do they somewhile abuse the gift of miracls Therefore as the Apostle gives
warning. 1. Corinthians, 11. let us behold and embrace the more excele^t gifts.
Hither beiongeth that also, that Christ says to his discipls Luc. 10. re^oce
not in this that spirits are subject unto you: but rejoice because your names
are written in heaven.

6 The sixth cause: Therefore also signs and wonders are wrought^ of ungodly
and false feachers, sest rashly we should receive any dortrine, which shall
happen to be proved by miracles: or rather that we require not the doctrine
which is set forth to us to be established with signs and wonders. Both do
alike incur reprehension, (that is,) casilie to believe for because of
miracles, and not to believe ercept unracles be adiovned. The former is a sign
of light headed men: the later, of unbelievers. Of the former it is plainly
said Deu. 13. If there arise in the midst of thee a Prophet, or a Dreamer of
dreams, and give thee a sign or a wonder, and that sign or wouder which he
has foretold thee come to pass: and he shall say, let us go after strange
gods which thou have not known, and let us serve the^: thou shall not hear
the words of that Prophet, or him which has dreamed such manner of dream.
Because the Lord your God does te^pte you, that he may know whether ye love the
Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul. ^e shall walk
after the Lord your God, and him shall ye fear: ye shall keep his
commandments, and hear his voice: ye shall serve him, and claue unto him.

Of the latter, that is to say, that we ushold not require signs for
confirmation of the doctrine, is ertante the grievous chiding of Christ to ye
Jews, Mat. 12. The wicked and adulterous generation seek a sign; but no sign
shall be given them, but the sign of Jonas the prophet. And 1. Cor. 1. the
Jews reqire a sign, and the Greeks wisdom. It remains then that indgement
touching doctrine which is set foor^h, must not be taken of miracles joined
thereto, but of the word of God, that is, the writings of the Prophets and
Apostles, as Christ does discuss Luke 16. where he brings in Abraham
speakinge: They have (says he) Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them.
And if they hear not Moses and the Prophets neither will they believe if any
rise again from the dead. And Esaiaas says cap. 8. Ask counsel at your
charming Divines which mumble and say: Does not a people ask counsel at his
gods? Shall men run to the dead for the living? Get thee to the law and
Te^^^^onie.

Therefore let us know that all doctrine which agrees not with the holy
Scripture, is to be reie^ted although great miracles are joined, and though
Paul himself, or an Angel from heaven, aftirme the same. Galath. 1.

Soli Deo honor and gloria.
The English of those Latin verses not Englished, Page 92.

1 Croesus passing over Halys Shall destroy many kingdoms, meaning other men's.
^he ambigue being in ^ word Per^t which sig^^ieth both to ^^troy and lose.
Shall loose many kingdoms, meaning his own.
2 I say O Pyrthus thou may overcome the (...) Or For it has ^oth there sen
^^^in the La^^e and it is to (...) const^ued ^^^^^^way you (...).
I say O Pyrthus the Romans may over come thee.

