A Work vvorth the Reading.

Wherein is contained, five profitable and pithy Questions, very expedient,
as well for Parents to perceive how to bestow their Children in marriage, and
to dispose their goods at their death: as for all other Persons to receive
great profit by the rest of the matters herein expressed.

Newly published by Charles Gibbon.

The wisdom of a man comes by using well his vacant time, and he that
cease from his own matters and labor, may come by wisdom. Eccles. 38. 24.
LONDON Imprinted by Thomas Orwin: and are to be sold by Henry Kyrkham,
dwelling at the little North door of S. Paul's Church, at the sign of the
Black Boy. 1591.

To the Right Worshipful, Sir Nicholas Bacon Knight: long life in prosperity,
with endless joy by Mortality.
IAakob could not bear the unkindness of Laban, but departed from him: David
could not suffer the discurtesie of Hanun, but attempted war. The Heathen Man
made a Law to punish unthankful persons with death: And Solomon says, He
that rewards evil for good, evil shall never depart from his house. These
examples and sayings (right Worshipful) although they be manifest in many to
practice, they be impertinent in this place to repeat; for I fear no
ingratitude for my goodwill, though I merit displeasure for my presumption. But
where the Unicorn drinks all infection is driven away, where the Bear
breaths no other beasts will feed, where lenity harboreth no misliking can
happen. It was boldly done of Sinaetaes to offer Cyrus a handful of water, or
of the Persian to give Artaxerxes the like; they being beggars by ability,
those being Kings by calling, and the presents far unfit for Princes. Yet
their willingness in accepting, did bewray the worthiness of their calling: for
as the tree is known by the fruit, the gold by the touch, the bell by the
sound: even so is a man's birth by his benevolence, his honor by his humility,
his calling by his courtesy, and indeed true Gentillitie should observe one
thing by the Lark, which although he mounts never so high in the air, yet he
builds his nest very low on the earth. I presume with these poor men to
offer a book no better worth than their water, and I hope by the courtesy of
these kings your worship will accept of it as it is, measuring the matter by
the mulberie, which will ever be red though it be not ripe, but if the tree
be full of blossoms and bear not, we commonly impute the fault to the
rygorous weather, and not to the root, and if my book carry a great show
without substance, I trust your Worship will attribute the defect to my
ignorance and not to my benevolence: for he that diggeth in the coale-pit
would work in mineral if he might, and he that blows the fire would
fashion the iuell if he could, the twigg must have much time to grow ere it be
great, and I more liberty to practice, ere I be perfect: All men write not
according to their learning, but their leisure, Apelles drew the picture of
Venus in the beginning very rude, by continuance very rare, so he that at the
first by his attempts appears simple, at length may prove singular,
Demosthenes did mend his stammering with much striving against the hill, and so
shall I my learning with more labor in study, yet he that carries mortar
though he be no mason, is not to be blamed because he furthereth the building;
neither is he that shows his diligence, though he cannot do well, to be
reprehended, because of his good disposition: we mislike not the Tailor, so he
can mend where he makes a fault in the garment, neither ought any to
discourage that Author, so he may correct, where he comitteth an escape in his
writing, considering what difference there is between cutting with the hand,
and conceiving with the head: But I hope your Worship (in whom the pure word
of GOD is planted) will carry Moecenas mind, to further and favor as well the
forward as the famous writers, and then shall my Treatise, though it be simple
have good success: it suffices me although it be but barbarous, that it has
been allowed by my betters, or whatsoever it be, so it be well accepted of
your Worship, I crave no other reward, than your patronage of this enterprise
though it be simple, and your pardon for my good will if I offend. Thus being
loath to trouble your worship with many words, referring the oversight hereof to
your grave censure, humbly submitting my self to your courtesy, I commit the
tuition of your W. to the Almighty.

Your Worships to command, CHARLES GIBBON.

To the indifferent Reader.
I Was in a doubt after I had finished this treatise, whether I should publish
it, or pull it a pieces, I thought it too base to be read, and better worth
than to rende, but seeing I have bestowed some pains in the pe^ning, I mean
to hazard my hap in the printing, he shall write well that can satisfy all,
and he as bad that can please none, if Christ could not content al, being a
God, it is no marvel we mislike many, being but men; In times past they did
not care how plain a thing were, so it were profitable, and now we force not
how bad it be, so it be pleasant, it is this that makes so many writers employ
their time more wantonly than wisely, because they see a vain trifle is more
accepted tha^ a divine treatise. If it be so, that those books which are most
light are best liked, and those men that employ their learning to leuitie, are
most laudable, then the tenor will but impair the title of my book: for it
will not be worth the reading: but (good Reader) thou must observe in writing,
the manner of it according to the matter, we must not paynt the Scriptures
with superfluous speeches, as men do their own fictions after their fancies:
for the majesty of the word requires modesty in the wrter, this is not unlike
that gem Chalazias, which will be cold though it be cast in the fire or the
Chorall, which is best without coloring, those be like water which is apt to
any color as it has course, or the Camelion which will change it self into
any hew it beholds, but this I am sure, there is none can afford so fruitful
a phrase as the Bible, though they practice never so fine terms in their
books; I speak this not to that end I would gloss to get credit by my words,
or to disgrace those that deserve it by their works, but to show what
difference there is between a pleasant story (which we may handle according
to our humors) and a grave discourse (which must be penned according to the
platform.) Well seeing my former attempts have found such favor, my care
shall be the less for the latter, for this I know, that the envious will
spite, be a thing never so special, the flatterer will sooth, be it never so
simple, the idle will inuay, be they never so ignorant, and there are some will
find fault, be they never so foolish; (were not he a wise man could stop al
their mouths?) but my meaning is not to satisfy such readers which be rude,
but reasonable, not the curious but the courteous, the one will excuse and cover
a fault with discretion, the other will but carpe and cavil without cause: so
farewell. Bury S. Edmond in Suffolk.

Yours Charles Gibbon.

Whether the Election of the Parents is to be preferred before the affection of
their Children in Marriage.
The Speakers are Philogus. Tychicus.
Two lovers of Learning. Philogus THere is an old verse which retains his
old virtue being as credible for antiquity as truth,

It is this; When Adam dig'd and Eve span
who was then a Gentleman?
Then came a rich churl and gathered good,
and so came in the gentle blood.
Wherein appears that the ground of gentillity began with goods: for (as the
wiseman says) have not all men one entrance into life and a like going out.
Sap. 7. 6. are we not equal by creation, heirs by adoption, brothers by
profession, and yet it is a strange thing to see what precisenes of Petigrees,
and difference of bloods there is amongst us, the days have been, that Kings
would bestow their daughters upon plain men, and yet thought it no
disparagement of blood, as Saul, who bestowed his daughter Michol 1. Sam. 18.
27. upon David being but a simple shepherd; that Lords would have matched
their sons with mean men's daughters, and yet account it no blemish to their
birth, as Sechem the son of Hemor, who joined with Dinah, the daughter of
Iaakob, he was a Lords son that ruled a whole Country, Genesis 34. 1, 2. she, a
plain man's daughter that dwelt in tents, Genesis 25. 27. The time was when rich
men would have taken poor women to their wives, and yet never made any respect
of their portions, as Boaz did Ruth, he was a man of great authority and
riches. Ruth 2. 1. as some think judge of Israel Judge. 12. 8. she, a poor
woman, that glened upon his land for her living. But now it is no match amongst
us, where the parties be not answerable in birth, and agreeable in abilities,
where indeed the best gentilitie consist in piety, and the most wealth in
contentment.

I thought good to use this preamble for this purpose. There is old Cleanthes
an ancient Gentleman, who is adorned as well with the affluencie of fortune,
for great possessions, as with the excellency of Nature, for good properties;
he has amongst many children but one daughter (yet a sister to every son,)
this maid is very desirous to marry, and has made her choice of such a one,
as is both of a goodly composition of body, and of a godly disposition of
mind. Yet as he is proper and well disposed, so he is very poor, insomuch as
her father by reason of the baseness of his lineage, and barenes of his living,
will not allow of her liking, but has appointed her another, which both by
parentage and portion may counteruaile her calling and his contentment, yet
nothing answerable to his daughters desire, because for his years he may
rather be her father than her husband, which as he cannot be the first, so he
is so far from the latter that she will rather be martyred than married to
him, now in this case whether is the affection of the child to be preferred
before the election of the father.


Tichi. You produce your preamble (as it seems) to impugn and reprove such
as (upon circumstances of parentage and possessions) will permit or prohibit
marriage, and therefore before I answer your proposition, I will say somewhat
to your protestation. You bring an old verse to prove that gentilitie began
with goods. Indeed goods in these days add a grace to many, yet gentry has
not his beginning all of one ground. Some have been base borne, yet came to
great estimation, not by their possessions, but by their valiant exploytes, as
Iphtah, being son of a harlot: Judge. 11. 1. became Judge of Israel. Judge. 12.
7. Others have been poor, and yet came to great promotion, not for their
wealth, but their wisdom; as Joseph who being an abject of his brethren, Genesis
37. 4. became fellow to king Pharaoh, and was made governor over all Aegipt
Genesis 41. 40. and in these days amongst us, many come to preferment, not for
their living, but learning, not by progeny but prowes, not by desert, but
descent: notwithstanding I affirm your sayings that as touching the bare
birth, a king has no better beginning than a beggar, or in respect of the
ordinary end, the Prince has no privilege above the poor; for as both
proceed from a woman, so both shall feed the worms; yet that follows not
although all be made of one metal, none should be more excellent in
majesty, or albeit none be noble by nature, any should not be renowned by
calling: for as many differ in degrees of dignity, so according to their title
and authority they are to be preferred, and what renown the predecessor does
purchase by his life, it discendeth by succession to his posterity after him.
You proceed further and say, that kings would bestow their children upon plain
men, and for proof you bring in Saul's daughter and David? this example nothing
avails: for David had her, not by intercession, but upon condition, if he
had not slain Goliath he had gone without her, 1. Sam. 17. 25. Yet are you
advised of David's answer after he should have her, What am I (says he) and
what is my life, or the family of my father in Israel, that I should be son
in Law to the King. 1. Sam. 18. 18. Herein he does show his unworthiness to
match with such a man's daughter (I mean for petigree, not for piety) and this
argues that in those days they had a special respect of parentage? And Lords
(say you) would match with mean men's children, and for this you infer Shechem
and Dinah; you must note, although he were a Lords son he played a leaud part
to deflower her, and therefore no doubt it was the filthiness of the fact that
forced him to marry her. Yea and rich men (say you) would take poor women to
their wives, as Boaz did Ruth, still you strive against the stream, for Boaz
was her kinseman, and therefore was to take her by the title of affynity
according to Gods law as it was commanded. If brethren dwell together, and one
of them die and have no son, (as she had not) the wife of the dead shall not
marry to a stranger, but his kinseman shall go in to her and take her to
wife, and do the kinsmans office to her. Deuteronomy. 25. 5, 6, 7. So that your
preamble is impertinent: for where parties be matched equally according to
their birth and abilities there is ever best agreement. Now to your question:
Whether the election of the father is to be preferred before the affection of
the child. This is as easy to answer as to ask: The ten commandments teach
children to honor and submit themselves to their parents, therefore if they
contract and couple contrary to their contentatio^, they rather rebel tha^
obey them.


Phi. It is true indede but you know the common by word, It is the eye of the
master, that fatteth the horse, and the love of the maid that makes the
liking, she that matcheth her self after another mind, is like him that
fitteth his foot by another last: one is often wroong with his shoes in the
wearing, the other often vexed with her husband after wedding, either let us
linck to our own liking or else better unborn, than living.


Tich. Your talk tends only to sensual circumstances altogether
preposterous from the proposition: for the word of God has given parents great
prerogative over their children, even in this matter concerning Marriage;
insomuch as no contract (much less any conjunction) can be lawful unless the
parents allow it, according as it is written. If a woman vow a vow unto the
Lord and bind her self by a bond being in her Fathers house in the time of
her youth, and her Father hear her vow and bond wherewith she has bound her
self, and her Father hold his peace concerning her, then all her vows shall
stand, and every bond wherewith she has bound her self shall stand. But if
her father disallowe her the same day that he hears all her vows and bonds
wherewith she has bound her self, they shall not be of value, and the Lord
will forgive her: because her father dissalowed her. Nomb. 30. 4* 5, 6.Hereof
it is that where the maid was taken away and abused, albeit she was afterward
married to the man that did it, yet he was to pay a piece of money to her
father, because he had not his preconsent, as it is written, If a man entice a
maid that is not betroathed and lie with her, he shall endowe her and take her
to his wife, If her father refuse to give her to him, he shall pay money
according to the Dowry of Virgins. Exodus 22. 16, 17. It is more fully
confirmed in Deuter. 22. 28, 29. If a man find a maid that is not betroathed,
and take her and lie with her and they be found, Then the man that lay with
her, shall give unto the maids father fifty Shekels of silver, and she shall
be his wife, because he has humbled her, he cannot put her away all his life,
yea Saint Paul himself does approve the superiority of Parents in this
respect, for (says he) If any man think that it is uncomely for his Virgin,
if she pass the flower of her age, and need so require let him do what he
will, he sins not: let them be married, 1. Cor. 7. 36. And hereto agrees
the same saying of the wise man, Marry thy daughter, and so thou shall
perform a weighty work. Eccles. 30. I could amplify the matter very much,
but these are sufficient to resolve you, that children cannot match without
their Parents consent.


Phi. Alas, you do not consider the innumerable inconveniences that be
incident to those parties which be brought together more for lucre than love,
more for goods than good will, more by constraint than consent, nay more than
that, you do little way the inequality of years, the contrariety of natures
between age and youth, is there no difference between the withered Beech and
the flourishing Bay tree, no opposition between frost and flowers, or is it
possible that oxen unequally yoked should draw well together? if you would
conferr al these circumstances together with the accidents you shall find that
such an husband, is an hell to a tender Virgin, and that such a marriage, is
the beginning of al misery, and no doubt he that bestows his daughter no
better, shall abridge her grief, by following her to the grave. So that I
conclude, seeing marriage is of great moment, not for a month but a whole life
time, there is no reason, but he or she that enters into that bond, should
make their own bargain: because it is they that must abide by it.


Tich. You still continue your carnal positions, to confirm your crased
opinion, as though the prescript rule of Gods book, where to be impugned by the
natural reason of man's brain. If a man may give his goods to whom he will,
he may as well bestow his Children where he thinks best, for Children are
the goods of the Parents? So it seems by that which God himself said to
Satan, when he earnestly desired to deal with Job, All that he has (says
the Lord) be in thy hands. Job. 1. 12. If you look into the old law, you
shall find that Parents might sell their Children to supply their necessity,
as appear in Exodus 21. 7. If a man sell his daughter to be a servant etc.
Laban did little better than make a benefit of his daughters before he bestowed
them: For by Iaacobs servitude it appears he made a sale of them, and so they
could say themselves afterward. Genesis 31. 15. Therefore if Parents had this
great privilege then (which is almost importable) why should they be barred
of this benefit now, not in selling but in bestowing them (which is so
reasonable) you allege it is good reason they should make their own bargain,
because they must abide it; as though parents would seek the prejudice of
their own children, but what liberty of liking had Leah to Iaakob, who
instead of her sister Rahel was brought to his bed, Genesis 29. 23. This argues
that parents would dispose their children at their pleasure.


Phi. I perceive by your speech you so much prefer the parents, that you
altogether enjoin their children to an inconvenience; that is, not to match to
their own liking but as their parents list, as though they ought not to show
as well a fatherly affection, as they look for filial obedience.


Tich. You mistake both the matter and my meaning, for albeit parents ought to
yield their consent to their childrens choice, yet they have no power to
provoke them to marry, if necessity urges not, hereof says Paul. He that
stands firm in his heart that he has no need, but has power over his own
will, and has so decreed in his heart that he will keep his Virgin he does
well. 1. Cor. 7. 37. neither may they deprive them of that remedy if they
cannot live continent, for it is better to marry than burn. ibid. verse 9 nay
more then that, the parents must presently provide for them as a duty
enjoined to them, which the same Apostle proves in these words, Let them be
married 1. Cor. 7. 36. neither may they enforce the^ to any match, if their
children mislike; we have example thereof in Rebecca, for when the servant (who
should have her) whom Abraham sent was requested that she might remain ten
days before their departure, his expedition was such that he had rather go
away without her, than tarry to take her: whereupon her parents called her, to
ask her consent, and to know whether she would go with that man or no, her
answer was, she would: Genesis 24. 27. etc. this argues that parents must not
use any coaction, where their children have no disposition to the party.


Phi. Yet all this is to no purpose to the question I propose, for the maid
neither means to live single as a Virgin, yet she cannot be suffered to
match to her mind, as she would do: now in this case whether may the
peruersitie of the parents hinder the choice of the child?


Tich. It is needelesse to add a double answer to a single question, or to
demand a reason where there is no doubt, your word peruersitie, is so termed
of the wilful, but it is taken for prudencie amongst the wise; for they know
that it is the property of parents, not to deal frowardly but fatherly with
their children, and to bestow them not as they desire, without discresion; but
as is most expedient; with circumspection: but admit, that Parents be sometime
perverse, shall children be pernicious, or (as we commonly say) drive out one
nail with another? God forbid, they must win the^ by peticion, not
provocation; by obedience, not obstinacy. The parents joy depend upon their
children, and therefore their evil placing, turn to their displeasure, did
not Esau by taking wives, contrary to his fathers will, procure his sorrow,
insomuch as his mother said, It should not avail her to live if his Brother
Iaacob did bestow himself so, Genesis 27. 46. let then the example of Esau dehort
the disobedient which care more to please their fancies, than their fathers,
and let Iaacob be an imitation to the dutiful, which prefer their fathers
precept, before their own pleasure: and to resolve you more fully I will show
some apparrant examples that shall approve the submissio^ of children to their
parents in this respect; Sechem, the son of a Lord having deflowred Dinah,
although (by reason of the filthynes of the fact) it was more time for him to
marry the maid, than to motion the matter, yet before he would marry he
craved his fathers good will, as appears in the text for it is there said, He
said to his father Hamer, get me this maid to wife, Genesis 34. 1, etc. If the
consent of Parents was observed as a principle amongst the very Infidels, how
much more ought we to be careful of it that be Christians* Sampson was Judge
of Israel, and a strong and valiant man, yet falling in love with Dalilah he
did not satisfy his lust without his fathers liking: for he said to his
Father, Give me her to wife. Judge. 14. 2. Ruth was content to be ruled by
Naomi her mother in law, yea even in this matter concerning her marriage.
Ruth. 3. 5. then how much more ought we to submit our consents to our natural
parents? Many such examples I could insert, but these may satisfy a sensible
man in a reasonable matter.


Phi. I have permitted your sperch hitherto, not because I could not prevent
your Apology, but that I was desirous to learn what you could allege; and
now I plainly see, that a fearce stream has no stay, if it be not stopped in
time, nor your arguments an end, if they be not intercepted; to the matter, I
confess that children are commanded to obey their Parents, yet I affirm they
must not in many things approve their proceedings, for their limits are
prescribed, They must obey them in the Lord: for this is right, (says Paul)
Ephesians. 6. 1. if parents will provoke their children to marry with Infidels they
may not: for they have no warrant by the word of God. 2. Cor. 6. 14.


Tich. Yet the same Apostle says, The unbelieving husband is sanctified by the
believing wife, and the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband. 1. Cor.
7. 14. What say you to this?


Philog. I thought by taking your rise so rashly you would leap short: for
there are three things to be obserned which you ouerslipped in those words,
the cause that provoked him: 1. the persons he respected; 2. the end he aimed
at; 3. the cause that provoked him was to answer an objection against such as
thought that the godly should be defiled by the society of the wicked, which
he contrarieth in the same chapt. verse. 14. the persons he respected, were such
as were so already contracted, to prevent those that under that pretense might
take occasion purposely to separate themselves, which we may gather by the 15.
verse. the end he chiefly aymeth at, was to premonish the unmarried not to
match in that manner as apeareth in the 2. Cor. 6. 14. 15. Be not (says he)
unequally yoaked with Infidels: then he shows a reason, for what fellowship
has righteousness with unrighteousness, and what communion has light with
darkness, and what concord has Christ with Belial, or what part has the
believer with the Infidel? So having answered your objection, I will iterate
where you interrupted me: As children may not intercommon with Infidels, so
their parents may not urge them to match with Idolators, or such like because
it is prohibyted.


Tich. And yet it is nothing respected in these days, for in marriages amongst
us, we make no regard of godliness, but goods, of righteousness, but riches, how
well, but how welthy, they be made: be he Atheist, be he Papist, be he Newter,
we respect not the man, but his money, not his life, but his living, not his
profession, but his promotion; and therefore I see no reason, but that they may
deal with Idolators. The Israelites a chosen people of God did intercouenant
with the Gentiles which were great Idolators. Judge. 3. 6. Solomon that prudent
king took the daughter of king Pharaoh. 1. King. 3. 1. and David that holy
man, matched with the daughter of king Saul, yet Pharaoh and Saul were gross
Idolaters.


Phi. I see you strive to wring water out of the pomice, or else you would
never waste the time with such words, does it follow because most in marriage
have regard of goods, that I by their example should impair Gods glory, why
we are taught, not to follow a multitude in evil. Did the Israelites
intercouenant with the Gentiles? why they did contrary to the commandment of
God: Deuteronomy. 7. 3. Yet the Lord did not let them pass unpunished. Judge. 3. 8.
Did Solomon marry an Idolatrous wife? why he was drawn to Idolatry by them,
and what followed; he incurred the wrath of God for his wickedness. 1. King.
11. 14. As for that act of David it cannot animate us, seeing the example of
diverse may deter us, neither is it expedient for any to presume of Gods
power, without his will. Now having answered your digression, I will proceed
where I left, I say still, that the glory of God not the motions of men, his
praise not their practices are to be preferred in every thing, as in this
matter concerning marriage; we ought indeed to obey our earthly parents, yet
we must not dishonor one eternal father, for we are taught by the Apostle
Peter to obey God more than man. Act. 5. 29. We ought to love our worldly
parents, yet we must not offend our heavenly father: for, He that loves father
and mother more tha^ me is not worthy of me, (says Christ) Mat. 10. 37. we
ought to fear our natural parents, that have government of our bodies, yet we
must be more afraid of our celestial Father, which preserues both body and
soul, and is able to cast them into hell fire Mat. 10. 28. whereupon I ground
my argument, that if Parents will profer and impose upon their children such a
match as tends more to profit, than piety, more to content their greedy
desire for lucre, tha^ their childrens godly choice for love, as this man has
done to his daughter, neither they nor this maid ought to depend on their
Parents in this point: what greater occasion of incontinencie can be given,
than to match a young and lusty maid against her own mind, with an infirm
and decrepite person to satisfy an others pleasure? what a cross contract
would this be? and shall not the maid (who has made a fit choice to her own
mind) marry, unless she take such an old man, against her mind? what say
you, shall the severity of of her Father abridge her liberty, or deprive her of
the lawful remedy? Nay more than that, shall the maid increase in sin for
want of her desire, because her father will not yield his consent, unless it
be to her disliking? I say no. The Apostle tells us, It is better to marry
than burn, and yet she shall keep her within the bounds of obedience, because
she does it not of purpose in contempt of her parents, but in regard of Gods
glory to avoid the occasion of evil.


Tich. Indeed I must needs confess that to match a young maid with an old
man, it is miserable: nay then that which is more admirable, some man that has
lived single above sixty years, will (upon a little fleshly fancy) needs to
the world; yet he will sooner angle for a frogge than a fish; I mean, he will
sooner catch a light minio^, tha^ couple with a grave matron, and as the world
does wonder at him for his wantonness, in making such a match, so his kindred
which did hope to have good of him, are deceived by this means: for he will so
much respect the trifling tricks of his Cosset, that he will not care to cast
off the tried love of his kindred, whom of a long time he has put in hope of
some great promotion by his death (which no doubt by their duty and diligence
they have deserved) and at last does recompense them with this delusion, by his
life to give all to his young wife, fie upon flesh that rages so furiously,
and of men that have no more modesty, and of age that yields no better gravity
(for the grace of man consists not in proportion, but properties; nor the glory
of age in gray hairs, but in gravity. The days have bin that men would not
have their possessions go out of the name, Ruth 4. 5. but these account more of
their filthy pleasure, tha^ their posterity; Moses made a law in Israel, that
he that had no issue, should give his inheritance to such as were of his
consanguinitie, for fail of such, to some of his affinity: Nombr. 27. 8. etc.
but these do more regard their greedy lust, than a godly law. We shall read
in the old Testament that they might not sell any parcel of their possessions
from their Kindred: Ruth* 4. Then with what conscience may these give all away
from them? Good GOD what a strange thing is this, that those which go holding
down their heads as though they would drop into their graves, should be
casting up their eyes a doting after girls, when it were more meeter for them
to make a covenant with death, than a contract with a damsel: but it seems
such have lived longer for their years, than their virtues, that neither the
decrepitie of their age, nor the imbecilitie of their bodies, can bridle their
concupisence, but they must further their infirmities by their own follies;
the young flesh of Abishah (say they) did foster David in his age, this gives
a great light to their leuitie, as though David would make his deathbed, a
place of beastlynes, when the text says He knew her not. 1. King. 1. 4. and to
cover their dotage, they will carry this cloak for an excuse, It is better to
marry than burn (as though rotten wood could take fire so fast), It is lawful
for them to marry I confess, yet not expedient to match with moathers, the
original of such a marriage is grounded upon no goodness; for he takes her upon
a burning unbridled lust, she him upon a leaud desire of living, the sight of
such nuptials are ridiculous, for who sees them that in derision will not say,
the old horse has got him a young fillie, the succes of such a contract is
sorrowful: for there is no greater rage than the jealousy of man (says
Solomon) Pro. 6. 34. it is as cruel as death Cant. 8. 6. and who can be more
ielous tha^ an old man over his young wife: the end of such a uniting is but
evil, for imbecilitie and debilitie is a mean to cause his wives
inconstancy. Then what reason should move the old man to make such a match,
or what maid well disposed will match with such a man, my reason is: It is not
sufficient for us to do well, but therewith to avoid the occasion of evil,
although she be of an honest conversation, yet the taking of such an old
huddle, will give occasion to the world to judge the worst.


Whether the Father may lawfully disinherit his first borne.
PHilogus. Children (no doubt) are a great blissing of God, and happy are those
that have them to increase his kingdom. What joy conceived Elizabeth when
she found herself to be conceived with child, Luke 1. 15? for barrennes was a
great reproach among the Jews. How joyful was Hannah when she had a child?
for she was but vpbraided before for her barrennes. 1. Sam. 1. 5. What made the
daughter of Iphtah desire two months to go to the mountains to bewail her
virginity before she died? was it not her barrennes? for it was counted as a
shame in Israel to die without children. Judge. 11. 38. The Grecian women
accounted their age, from that day they were Brides, and not from the day of
their birth; for then (say they) we enter the world, when we have children to
take charge of. When Rahel had for a time left childbearing, she was content
to suffer her maid Bilhah to bear upon her knees, to cover her unfruitfulness
as though it came from her, Genesis 30. 3. for barrennes was counted as a curse,
because fruitfulnes came of Gods blessing, who said, Increase and multiply:
barrennes is a sign of disobedience, for the Lord has promised to those that
fear him, There shall none cast their fruit, or be barren. Exodus 23. 26. It is
said, the Lord shut up every womb of the house of Abimelech, and why? for a
punishment of sin, because of Sarah, Gen 20. 18. The barren woman enioyes not
the promise, which God made to them that were married, to have issue, but
principally she is deprived of that promise that God made to Abraham, that he
would increase his seed. Therefore let no man lightly esteem of children, as
many do, which account them rather a charge, than a blissing, a trouble, than a
benefit: for, as they be arguments of the love of God, as may appear in
Hannah, whose prayer the Lord remembered, 1. Sam. 1. 19. so they be means to
increase mutual love between man and wife; for after Leah had borne a son,
she was persuaded her husband would love her and keep her company, Genesis 29.
32. 34. Notwithstanding, as godly children are a great gift of God, so the
wicked are a great grief to the parents; one a renown, the other a reproach
to them. Now many will say, A good tree brings forth good fruit, and so
condemn the parents, by their childre^s impiety: but let no man judge rashly,
for it falls out sometime by men, as in other matters: there are few trees
that bear fruit, but have some windfalls; few gardens that bring forth flowrs,
but have some weeds; few men that have issue, but some prove evil. Noah had
Cham as well as Sem, Abraham, Ismael as well as Isaac, David Absalom as well as
Salomo^: yet Noah, Abraham, and David were the children of God. But I will omit
this matter, and manifest my meaning by an example.

There is one that dwells by me, that is very wealthy, who has but three
sons to impart his living to, he has bestowed great cost upon the eldest to
prefer him by learning, yet (presuming of his patrimony, as many rich
heirs do in these days) he is either foolish, or unfortunate, for he yields
in steed of wisdom, wantonness, for learning lewdnes, and for obediencie
obstinacy; yea, he had better have bin put to Cart than to Cambridge, so he
might have reaped more profit, and have eased his fathers purse: but his other
two sons he has brought up with little cost, and yet they increase his
possessions by their pains; now this man at his death does disinherite his
eldest son, that procured his grief, and bequeath it to the two younger that
augmented his gain. Now in this case I demand whether he may lawfully
disinherite his eldest son, yea or no.


Tych. I do not think that the prauitie of his demeanor, can bar him of the
privilege of his dignity: for the first borne were ever most to be
preferred, according as it is written; If a man have two wives, one loved and
another hated, and they have borne him children, both the loved and also the
hated: if the first borne be the son of the hated, then when the time comes
that he appoints his sons to be heirs of that which he has, he may not make
the son of the beloved first born, before the son of the hated, which is the
first borne, but he shall acknowledge the son of the hated for the first borne,
and give him double portion of all that he has, for he is the first of his
strength, and to him belongs, etc. Deu 21. 15, 16, 17


Phil. What dignity has the first borne above the rest of his brethren,
seeing they are al engendered in one womb, and proceed al from one woman, beside
that law you repeat was little respected: for Abraham had children of the
hated, before the loved, Genesis 18. 4. of his concubines, before his wives, Genesis
22. 24. and yet it is said of him, he gave all his goods to Isaac, whom he had
by Sarah his wife. Genesis 25. 5.


Tych. If the elder were not to be dignified above his brethren, what moved
the Lord to say to Cayne, that his brother Abels desire should be subject to
him, and that he should rule over him. Genesis 4. 7? Yea, what caused Iaacob to
say to Reuben his eldest son, thou art my might and the beginning of my
strength, the excellency of dignity, and the excellency of power. Genesis 49. 3?


Phil. But is it not lawful for a man to give his possessions to whom he
please?


Tych. Not in all cases: for it is neither natural nor agreeable to Gods word,
for a man to give his inheritance to a mere stranger, having both children and
kindred, as it appears in the old Law, where it is written, If a man die
and have no son, then ye shall turn his inheritance to his daughter, and if
he have no daughter, ye shall give his inheritance unto his brethren, and if he
have no brethren, ye shall give his inheritance unto his fathers brethren, and
if his father have no brethren, ye shall give his inheritance unto his next
kinseman of his family, and he shall possess it. Nombers. 27. 8. etc. What
was Naboths answer to King Ahab when he demanded to buy his vineyard, The
Lord keep me (says he) from giving the inheritance of my father unto thee. 1.
King. 21. 3. it was this that made the King not only to kill him, but (to
extinguish all issue of inheritance) his sons likewise 2. King. 9. 26. Naomi
came out of her Country of Moab, to sell a little parcel of ground at
Bethlehem, not because there was not any would buy it, but because she was
first to profer it to her kindred. Ruth. 4. 3. If Naomi might not sell her own
to none but such as were of her alliance, much more we ought not to give away
our own, from our children and kinsmen.


Phil. Indeed, as touching inheritance I hold with you, yet all be not
inheritors by descent, but many do purchase by the penny, and gather their
goods by their pains, and therefore what reason is there, a man should not
dispose of that at his own pleasure?


Tych. You say very well, but as there is no cause to constrain any, to give
against his will, so there is no conscience to abridge one of that benefit, he
should enjoy by right, A man shall do very well to give several portions as he
sees cause, yet he ought to respect the superiority of his eldest son, that
he make him not equal with his brethren, but as he is better by prioritie of
birth, so to prefer him by sufficiency of living, which as it is most
charitable by the course of nature, so it is best tolerable with the course of
scripture: for it is written in the behalf of the first borne, Thou shall give
him double portion of all that thou have. Deu 21. 17. meaning as much as to two
of the others, Iehoshaphat King of Judah had many children, to whom (the text
says) he gave great gifts of silver and of gold, and of precious things
with strong Cities in Judah, but the greatest thing of all which was his
kingdom, he gave to Iehoram: and why? it is there said, because he was the
eldest. 2. Chro. 21. 3. so that the prerogative of the elder, is to be
preferred above his brethren.


Phil. Is a man so bound to exalt his his elde^st son of duty, that he may not
prefer others before him, of desert? May not the younger have preferment by
benevolence, though the elder has pre-eminence by birth? I see no cause to the
contrary, because I have examples to confirm it. Iehoiakim was the eldest son
of Josiah that good king. 1. Chron. 3. 15. yet Iehoahaz his younger brother was
preferred to the dignity royal before him, 2. Kin. 23. 30. Esau was the eldest
son of Isaac, yet Iaacob his younger brother got the blessing before him: so
that it is a matter, not of coactio^ but election to prefer the eldest.


Tych. I know not what you may urge by argument, but I am sure your proofs are
altogether repugnant, which upon examination of your examples will appear. For
Iehoahaz although he were preferred to the regal regiment a time before his
brother, it was by the choice of the people, and not by consent of his father,
yet he was deposed from the place within 3. months, and Iehoiakim his eldest
brother installed in his stead, according to right. 2. Kin. 23. 30. 34. As for
Esau, there were three causes, that might lawfully deprive him of his dignity;
one was his own greedines in selling of his birthright to his brother Iaacob.
Genesis 25. 33. Another was, his brothers dissimulation which he practiced with
his father to get the blissing from him. Gen 27. 19. The third was, the
necessity of Gods prophecy to come to pass, that the elder might serve the
younger. Genesis 25. 23. So that all these examples do rather prolong the time to
no end, than approve your proposition to be true.


Phil. Because you both convince me of the time for tediousnes, and of my
speeches for prolixitie, I will cut off many curious terms, and come briefly
to the matter, and according to my first motion let me common with you in this
manner; Is the eldest most dissolute and inclined to evil, and are the younger
more diligent and forward to thrive? has the father bestowed a great portion
of the other to prefer him by learning, and brought up these hardly to take
pains for his living? is all his cost cast away upon the other, and have these
yet received no profit for their pains? then what reason is there, to tie
gold to the girdle of him that is graceles, and leave a brown crust for them
to chew that are well given? What wisdom to bestow abundance on him that will
wast it, and to leave such to thrive with a penie, that will prosper? Are men
so bound to prefer the elder of custom, that they will iniure the younger
without conscience? No, no, A wiseman will alter custom after discretion, and
dispose his wealth according to wisdom, he will not leave his riches to him
that is riotous, for he knows full well, that a broken vessel will hold no
water, that wealth in his fingers, is like wax aganst the fire, one will
consume with much heating, the other with much handling: he consequently
considers, that the leaud lauishing of his living after his death, will be
an argument to others, they were evil gotten by him self in his life, he
will therefore make him his heir, not which is first borne, but best
inclined, not the eldest, but the excellentest, he will (I say) give most of
his goods to such a one, as by his own life, he shall have foresight of his
forwardnes to live, and not to such a one, as has no regard to be reformed in
his life; yea, he will make him the better that is most obedient and dutiful
to do him good, this is the course Christians ought to take, and for this they
have warrant by the word of God, and thus it may be proved; Goods are the gift
of God, and he has appointed us, not to do as we list with them, like Lords,
but to dispose them well, as his Stewards, and therefore we ought to have a
great regard of this, to bestow them on such, where he that gave them may be
glorified, according to the Apostles teaching, VVhatsouer ye do (says he) do
all to the praise and glory of God. 1. Cor. 10. 31. If one should give his
goods to his eldest Son, that takes his felicity in venurie, voluptuousnes,
or such like, I would suppose the gift would be so far from Gods glory, that
it would rather be a mean to maintain than reclaim him from sin: and shall
he not make another his heir, which is more worthy, because he is elder and
most wayward? Why? Iaacob was a very godly man, and had two sons Reuben and
Judah, Reuben was his eldest son, yet he gave his kingdom to Judah, Gene.
49. 4. What made him dispossess his first borne of his privilege and Kingly
honor? Nothing but his improbitie; for he was given so much to beastlines,
that he did not let to defile his fathers bed; and therefore it is lavvfull for
any man, upon such leaude occasions, to take the like course.


Tich. If parents should alter their disposition upon every small displeasure,
then they may make a Will every week, and yet never a wise one in the end. A
wise man, has reason, to whom he gives, and therefore is resolute when he
gives, he will be angry, and yet sin not, that is he will not ready in his
rage, to diminish his gift for every grudge, but mitigate his wrath with
wisdom, he may well put up some displeasures, that has received many
pleasures, if one offense shall make a man froward, the remembrance of many
forepassed benefits, may purchase his benevolence. I speak this to this end,
there is many a good man that has ungodly children, yea and sometimes they are
most evil, that are eldest* but yet it were pity they should be deprived of
their dignity. Josiah did not so much beat down Idolatry, as his eldest son
after him did set it up, yet he possessed his fathers kingdom. 2. King. 23. 32
Iehoshaphat abolished al superstition as his father did before, but his eldest
son after him did erect it, yet he came to his fathers kingdom, 1. Chro. 21.
6. and therefore God forbid the elder son should have injury for every light
occasion: for he runs far that never turns, and though it be long, it is
better late than never.


Phi. I perceive a great sound may come from an empty Caske, much pith from a
piece of weak elder, and a great flame of a little bundle of briars, but I
will leave the censuring of it to your self: if I should reason with a
scholar, I could forbear him, because he is my better, or with one that is
ignorant I would suffer him, because he is simple, but the wilful I cannot
permit, because they are peevish: your examples (I deny not) are singular, but
your application is so single that it would make a man stretch his lips like
a piece of leather, to hear such a reason proceed from one that professes
learning. I speak of such as have present experience of their childrens
impiety, by their life, and you of those that have come to future filthiness
after their parents departure. Iaacob in his time saw his sons untowardness,
but neither Josiah or Iehoshaphat did theirs, in their days: then how can
these arguments agree, yet to mend the matter you say they run far that
never turn, as though that were a reason worthy of record? why is not he
that gives them grace to repent, as able to give them goods to enrich them,
either infer that which is effectual to the purpose, or else refer your
self to common sense in judgment, if neither, then let us desist.


Whether a reasonable allowance may be taken for lending of money.
PHilogus Because I will not prolong the time with any impertinent
protestation, I will begin briefly with another question: So it is, there is a
neighbor of mine that is of great report for riches, who has converted his
possessions into a piece of money, and by reason of his age being not able to
labor, he lets his money to get his living, there resorts of al sorts to
borrow of him, to the poor he lends only for love, to the rich for loan,
now my desire is to know whether he may lawfully take Usury of the rich yea
or no?


Tich. If we despise the droane that lives by the honey, and the caterpiller
that consume the fruit, shall we supporte him that sucketh the lucre of our
labors? neither do I think that Usury may be admitted or excused in regard
of our external estates, or any such sinister circumstances, for it is both
generally and flattly forbidden, Thou shall not give to Usury to thy brother,
as Usury of money, Usury of meat, Usury of any thing that is put to Usury.
Deuteronomy. 23. 19.


Phi. Yet you omit that you should remember, for it follows further in that
place you produce, Unto a stranger thou may lend upon Usury, Verse. 20.
whereby it appears Usury was then permitted, and yet there was some difference
to whom it was done.


Tich. It was not restrained from strangers, rather for the hardness of their
hearts at that time, than because the thing it self was tolerable, but God
forbid we should by that liberty practice it as lawful, for you must note, it
might be offered to none but strangers (such as were addicted to Idolatry and
enemies to religion) but to their brethren (which were inclined to the true
service of God) it might not, therefore amongst us which be Christians (being
all brethren by profession) it may not.


Ph. You are greatly deceived herein for it appears by the year of freedom,
that not only one neighbor but one brother, have taken Usury of an other, these
are the words: At the term of seven years thou shall make a freedom, and this
is the manner of the freedom, every creditor shall quite the loan of his hand
which he has lent to his neighbor, he shall not ask it again of his neighbor
nor of his brother, for the year of the Lords freedom is proclaimed, Deuteronomy.
15. 1. 2. So that I can see no cause but that the rich may lawfully pay usury,
and so much the rather because that year of privilege was in respect of the
poor, but as for the rich creditor he had no ease by that order but might be
constrained to pay, for so it appears by the words, that which thou have of
thy brother thy hand shall remit, Save when there shall be no poor with thee.
Deuteronomy. 15. 3. 4. yea, and there be diverse places of proof in the scripture
whereby one may gather that Usury is prohibited in respect of the poor and not
of the rich as apeares in Exodus 22. 25. where it is written, If thou lend money
to my people, that is to the poor with thee (he says not to the rich with
thee) thou shall not be as an Usurer unto him, ye shall not oppress him with
Usury: and for further confirmation, I refer you to Leuit. 25 37. 38. where
the matter in effect dissents not from this. These be the words, If thy
brother be impouerished and fallen in deacay with thee, thou shall relieve him
etc. thou shall take no Usury of him nor vantage, etc. what can be more
properly and emphatically spoken in respect of the poor than this without any
regard of the rich: for indeed you pretermit two things you ought to expend:
the first is the ability of the borrower, the next is, the cause that induces
him to borrow, his ability is sufficient, the cause is superfluous:
sufficient, because it rather exceeds tha^ is equal with the living of the
lender: superfluous, because it rather proceeds of some covetous forecast,
for commodity than upon any urgent use of necessity, and therefore what deed
of charitte is it to lend such a one as needs not, Luke 14. 12. or if he
borrow, what reason is it the lender should not be partaker of his profit.


Tich. Your sayings are very sensual, and be rather means to animate many,
than restrain any from evil, wherein you take a confused course to maintain
such a monstrous sin as Usury is, for the next way to quench fire is not to
power on oil, or to drive away the dropsy to follow drinking, neither is it
the best course to aba^don Usury by excusing it: if the Apostle would have us
to abstain from al appearance of evil, 1. These. 5. 22. how horrible is it to
become approouers of evil? I perceive that the drift of your long discourse is
to no other end but to prove that Usury may be taken of the rich; yet I
cannot find it lawful for them to give it, the Prophet Iheremie confessing
his integrity amongst the wicked (which did curse him without cause) to clear
himself altogether of the blotte of Usury says in these words: I have
neither lent on Usury, nor men have lent me on Usury. Iherem. 15. 10.
showing thereby that it is a sin as well to give, as to take interest.


Phi. I perceive he that deals with knottie wood must not want an iron wedge,
and yet I see no reason why that single protestation of Iheremie which you
object, should confound the double confirmation of Moses which I allege:
Notwithstanding I confess that same saying of Iheremie is singular, as he
placed it, although it be but simple as you apply it; for if you understand it
simply by the verbal sense, then you show your self so simple that you be
void of all sense; for I never read of any godly Prophet that did ever let or
take money to Usury, neither was it like that he whose calling was so excellent
by inspiration, would have his life to savor of such corruption: and what
though the Prophet does by a Simile make a mention of Usury to some intricrate
end, does it follow that the naming of it shall make the thing to be nocent,
without exception? Therefore no doubt you are greatly deceived herein, for those
words (I have neither lent, or men lent me to Usury) are used of the prophet
for two principal ends: The first is by Synecdoche pars pro toto (to set
forth the simplicity of his calling) showing that he was as well clear of
that, as of all other worldly matters and means which might either be
impediments to his profession, or give any occasion of cursing: the next is by
a Metaphore drawn from an act of the accidents (to note the peruersitie of the
people) who exclaymed against him as bitterly (and yet without cause) even as
the poor do when they are grievously oppressed by the Usurer, which outcries
are sometime said to be so pitiful that they pierce the skies. Esa. 5. 9. now
because here may rise some ambiguity in this latter assertion, I will prove it
sufficiently by reason, for your better resolution, It seems by all sense and
reason that the original of these outcries should proceed from the poor, first
because they of all others have most occasion to borrow, and whether should
they repair but to the rich? next, because when they are oppressed (by reason
of want) they can not use those remedies the rich may, and it is this that
makes them to exclaim against them. Yea to conclude these exclamatio^s can
never be construed to come from the rich: for they will sooner crucify than
curse the poor, because (as Solomon says) he makes his goods his strong
City Pro. 10. 15. besides that the same wise man says in another place, his
friends are many. Pro. 14. 20. so what by the help of his riches one way, and
the furtherance of his friends another way, he will use his remedy by
reuengement not by exclamation.


Tich. Your discourse is so long that I may justly cut short your logitia^
cauils, with a laconian quib and yet your matter is more tedious to remember,
tha^ troublesome to answer, but because I have other proofs apliable for this
purpose, I will ouerpasse ye I could impugn, and infer that you cannot refel.
That famous City of Jerusalem being destroyed, the Lord by the mouth of his
Prophet showing the cause that provoked him thereto (amongst many other
iniquities) notes this for oee, Thou have taken usury and increase, and have
defrauded thy neighbor. Ezekiel. 22. 12. no doubt this saying was set down for
3. causes, 1. to show us that it was a horrible sin, and that in measure
amongst the rest it procured part of the punishment; secondly that we might by
this example shun it; thirdly that it was not one but many sins that caused
the destruction of that City.


Phi. I cannot deny but that Usury was much used in that city, yet I ca^ see
no cause thereby that should make me to yield to your argument: for the Lord in
that place means not the interest that one richma^ takes of an other, but
the usury that the rich took of the poor by oppression, and that we may
perceive apparently in the 5. of Nehemiah, where the rich, had gotten from the
poor all their lands, houses vinyardes, corn, and what they had into their
hands verse 11. Insomuch, as the exclamation of the poor of that City, was
very pitiful against the rich, until such time as the same Prophet did make a
mitigation thereof: So that the intrusio^ of your last position is nothing to
the purpose; because our talk tends only for the taking of interest of the
rich.


Tich. You still inuert my proofs at your own pleasure, but yet I ground not
my opinion, upon your persuasion, for I cannot see but that Usury is very
contemptible. The Prophet David declaring who should dwell in the Tabernacle of
God, he names him to be one in the number that has not given forth upon
Usury. Psalm. 15. (this is spoken generally without exception of persons and
that is clean opposite to your opinion) so consequently we may gather, that
he that does contrary shallbe excluded according to the allusion of the Prophet
Ezekiel, He that has given forth upon Usury or taken interest shall not live.
Ezekiel. 18. 13.


Phi. I perceive your principal proofs consist in your last positions, which I
have no doubt to refute as well as the rest. The Evangelist Luke records a
saying that should be used by our Savior Christ, which is this: It is a
blessed thing to give rather than to receive. Act. 20. 25. Now if you should
demand how I could prove these words by any other part of the Scripture, my
answer should be, I know not (for the like literal form, is not to be
found) but if you should ask, why I believe those bare words to be true? the^
I would answer, the effect of them may be gathered (though not orderly, yet
sufficiently) by the words of our Savior Christ in many other places in the
scriptures. Even so, touching your authorities and places you produce, I
persuade my self they are altogether pronounced against such as oppress the
poor: if you should ask me how I could prove it? I might answer, I know
not: for there is no one special place of proof for it. But if you should
demand, what reason should enforce me to say so? then I would make this
answer, If you confer all places of the Scripture together, tending or
pertaining to this purpose concerning Usury, it will appear that every part
has a special respect to this end, to support and profit the poor, and to
repress the rich from oppressing them: whereof as I have shown you some
examples of it before, so for your further confirmation, I refer you to Esa.
5. 8. Amos. 8. 4. others at your own leisure you may look out.


Tych. As no man doubts, but that the word of God is of sufficiency of it
self without circumstance, yet there is reason to make a doubt of your bare
surmise without authority, seeing we all know it is a course wool will take
no color, and a bare matter that will bear no argument. Solomon that wise
man, does note the sin of Usury by this sentence, He that increases his
riches by usury and interest, gathers them for him that will be merciful to
the poor. Prou. 28. 8. the Lord will not only abridge his days (for the
wicked shall be soon cut off) but also those goods he has gathered so ungodly
together (how hardly soever he had them) shall be taken from him, and left to
such a one as shall better bestow them. I pray you, do but consider into what
an intolerable extremity the people were brought in the time of Nehemiah by
burdens of usury and exactions, insomuch, as if the same Prophet had not
speedely sought a remedy, there had followed great confusion upon it. Nehem.
5. And no doubt, if good laws had not been provided to repress it amongst us,
it would have caused ere this day, as great calamity in England, as it did
then in Iherusalem. So that you may plead what you please every way to excuse
Usury, but I see no reason any way to admit it.


Phil. He that wants wood, will rather burn turfe, than be without a fire;
and he that lacks matter, will rather multiply words, tha^ cease from
reasoning: who would think you should give over so many good arguments, to
rely upon this last allegation of Solomon, when indeed his intent is clean
contrary to your interpretation; for he means those that gather their goods
by interest of the poor, and not of the rich, yea, and (that which is more
malignant) those that spare the rich, and pinch the poor: which may be
gathered in another place in his Proverbs, He that oppresses the poor to
increase himself, and gives unto the rich, shall surely come to poverty.
Prouer. 22. 16. As for that matter of Nehemiah, I marvel you implie it so
impertinentlie, having proved before that it pertains to the oppression of
the poor: and that may more evidently appear unto you by the Prophets own
protestation, who (the better to beat down Usury, and to move the rich to
remorse) persuades them by his example to be good to the poor: For (says he)
even I and my brethren and my servants do lend them money and corn: I pray
you let us leave of this burden. Nehe. 5. 10. As for your last assertion,
touching our Laws against Usury, certes they are very well provided: for
albeit they restrain the unreasonable loan for lettage, yet they admit some
competent allowaunce for lending: (I mean not of the poor but the rich)
otherwise, me^ may want sometime of a sudden, but they may be bold to borrowe
at leisure. So that all your objections, be rather needless for prolixity,
than necessary for probability.


Tych. I remember there is a common saying, that he that is once wet, cares
not how deep he wade; so it seems, that you having ouershot your self in
your sayings, care not how you maintain them by shifts, our S. Christ has
given us a new commandment (not to lend for lone as the Jews did in their
days) but (says he) Lend looking for nothing again. Luke 6. 35. what say you
to this?


Phil. I say, it were best to intercept you with some other sentence, that
might bar the borrower from all the benefit; could you be content to lend a
sum of money to your friend at his instance, and take this piece of scripture
for payment at your day? I think not. Our S. Christ does not only will us to
le^d looking for nothing again, but also in the same chapter, of him that
takes away thy goods, ask them not again, Luke 6. 30. yet his meaning is not
by these words to maintain wrong; for if we be forbidden to covet our
neighbors goods, much more we may not violently take them away: neither does
he mean by le^ding looking for nothing again, that a man should loose al when
he lends; for he wills us to do, eue^ as we would be done to; then what is
he will lend to loose all, albeit he could be content to borrowe and brook
all? Besides, to detain a man's duty, it is a great argument of impiety, and
that may appear by the Prophet David's saying; For (says he) the wicked
borrows, and paieth not again, Psalm. 37. 21. Therefore you must not conster
the Scriptures by the literal but the mystical sense, as having regard to the
time when, and to the end wherefore it is spoken: and consequently you may
perceive that all your positions, are discrepant from your opinion. Now having
attended and answered all your objections with patience: you have reason to
hear a little what I can allege for proof: for indeed, it is the part of a
cunning Chirurgian, not only to purge the wound from corruption, but to
apply a plaster to cure it. But to the matter; The new Testament may be a
testimony with me: for all other particular sins (as covetousness, extortion,
and such like) are expressed and set down, but as for usury there is no
mention made of it, saving in one place, where it appears by the words of our
Savior Christ, that usury is rather admitted than adempted, (when he reproved
the sloathfull servant, that under idle excuses made no profit of his talent)
Thou oughtst (says he) to have put my money to the exchangers, and then at my
coming should I have received mine own with vauntage. Mat. 25. 27.


Tych. If the Surgeon you speak of could no better cure by his art, than you
convert me by these arguments, he should rather procure a putrefaction than a
purgation; for there is neither sense nor sequel in your assertion: because
usury is not expressly named in the new Testament, you will conclude ex
consequenti that Usury is no sin. What a paradoxe is this? is not the
affection the cause of the action, the intent, the procurer of the attempt: why
then, it is impossible but that usury should be comprehended and condemned
with covetousness; for where there is no auaricious desire, men will lend for
love without lucre: and seeing covetousness is the root of all evil, it is no
marvel, though Usury be a branch of it. Thou ought to have put my money to
the Exchangers says our Savior Christ) ergo (say you) Usury is tolerated.
What a parabolicall proof is this? are we now to learn the purport of a
parable, when indeed it is not to be believed simply but significantlie, not
according to the circumstance of the matter, but the substance of the sense,
and the doctrine, that may be deduced from it, thus your simple handling of
your two last propositions, may be wray the loosenes of all the rest of your
allegations.


Phil. I have read that the Tigresse milk the more it is salted, the less it
is seasoned, that the Cipresse tree the more it is watered, the more it
withers, so it fares with you: for my reasons the more forcible the les
effectual they be to persuade you, whether I should impute it to your
ignorance, or obstinacy, I know not: but no doubt to err, and excuse it is
a greater argument of wilfulness than wisdom; you say Usury is included
within covetousness, for where there is no greedy desire, men will lend for
love only, by this reason, he that lets his land shall be restrained of his
rent, for if his desire were not covetous, he might as well take God amercie as
money, what a conclusion were this, you would have men, live by the air like
the Elephant, when you abridge them of their lawful course to increase. You
proceed further and say my proof is parabolicall? I confess it, yet it
follows not it should be improbable? The husbandman that sows the seeede
(albeit he refers the blissing to God) yet he has great regard of the
ground; and shall we that read a parable (although we respect chiefly the
end and effect of it) neglect the matter that does manifest the same? Is it
possible that the mystery being serious and singular, that the matter should
be light and sinister? Would GOD bewraye his heavenly Wisdom, by similitudes
without sense, or not worth our observation? I deny it: for his divine
providence disposes althings to a good purpose. The end of the parable of
Dives and Lazarus, is to terrify us from hardening our hearts against the poor,
yet there is somewhat else to be observed in the matter of that parable: for I
believe that after death every one shall go immediately either to heaven or
hell, as there be manifold proves in the scripture, so I have a manifest
example of this even of Dives and Lazarus. The like I may say by the other
parable, although the efficient end therein was to reprove the slothful
servant, because he made no use of Gods benefits; yet we may perceive that the
matter besides does not only import but aproue that it is better to employ our
treasure to some profit by exchange, than to hide it in the earth to no end
by excuse; for Gods gifts are abused if they be not used. Therefore let us not
so lightly esteem of parables, knowing to what end our S. Christ used them,
that the people by seeing might see and not perceive, and by hearing might
hear and not understand the^. Mat. 13. 13. Now, if we shall both hear and see
the^ and yet (by reason of our curious constructions) neither understand or
perceive the^, shall not those parables, nay that people procure our greter
co^de^natio^?


Tych. Although in worldly matters (for lucre sake) we deal rather subtly
than simply, yet in matters of Religion, we must not wrest the word of God to
our wills, by cunning without conscience; for that is the divine rule of all
humane reason. It is an easy matter by folly to make a piece of good timber
to serve for burning as for building; as many places of the scripture by
cauilling, as soon to bolster as to bridle sin. But what of that? If me^ (eue^
in matters of no moment) are so circu^spect that they will not put that to burn
that is meet to build with, how much more ought we (in a cause of conscience)
to be careful, we apply not that to support which is meet to suppres sin?
If all I have said will not serve to satisfy you, yet in this respect Usury
is not to be permitted, because the Apostle Paul teaches us to shun things
of evil report. Therefore, seeing there is nothing more odious and opprobrious
amongst us than Usury (to avoid the very occasion of evil) it must not be
practiced but expelled.


Phil. Either you delight to urge argument to no end, or else you are
ouerweened with the sufficiency of your own wit; then I shall sooner beat the
truth into your head with a hammer, than remove your determination with
reason, for There is more hope of a fool (says Solomon) than of him that
stands in his own conceit, and yet of both the fool is more to be borne
with: for he erreth of ignorance, the other of malice. It seems you are put
to great penury, by your last positio^, for thereby we may as well shun that which
of it self is absolutely good, as that which commonly by occasion is evil, and
this was the iniquity of Jonah, who being willed by the Lord to go preach at
Niniue, he went another way, (yet the word of God is excellent and worthy to
be preached, and the commandment given him expedient to be performed) what was
the cause of his contempt? nothing else but for fear he should be evil spoken
of. Jonah. 4. 1, 2. etc. Thus he did omit that which was good and meet to be
done, for fear of the evil might follow of it. But admit the Apostle
persuades us to shun such things as be sinister and of evil report: yet
those words condemn not usury, as it may be used; for if you note the
original of that report, it will appear that it is the extremity of the rich
that urge the poor to cry out upon them, and hereof consequently rises this
evil report. Nehe. 5. verse. 6. 9. so that this position is preposterous, for
our conference concerns the rich, and not the poor.


Tich. Yet there remains one thing that comes fitly to my remembrance for
this purpose, our first father Adam after his creation was put into the garden,
to dress and keep it, and after his fall, he was enjoined to get his living,
In the sweat of his face: whereby I gather that all Christians ought to live in
some good vocation; now the Usurer has none, therefore for want of a calling
he must needs be condemned.


Phi. What a simple Silogisme is this? the Gentleman that lets his land,
will have a reasonable rent to live by, the merchant that sells his ware will
take a reasonable gain to save by, yea al me^ that have any dealings will have
some devise to get by: and shall he that has money be only barred of that
benefit, as though it were not as tolerable to use the lawful means to
profit by money, as in any other matter?


Tich. I grant so too, but in Usury nothing is to be taken of covenant but of
courtesy.


Phi. What a ridiculous reason is this? You will allow al other men to be
circumspect in bargaining for their own benefit, but bind him that lets
his money to the benevolence of others; those may work surely for their own
profit, this simply at other men's pleasures; when indeed it is no wisdom
for a man that lends to tie his liberty at another election, nor conscience
in him that borrows, to receive a benefit without amends? But I pray let me
demand one question of you? We have hitherto contended about Usury, but what
call you Usury?


Tich. We term that Usury which is taken over and besides the principal that
is lent.


Phi. If it be Usury to take any thing more than the principal, who is not a
Usurer? The Gentlemen will require, the husbandmen will raise, the tradesmen
will rate, in selling of their land, corn, and ware a proportional price
according to the time of payment: now if Usury be after your definition, these
as well as the Usurer do sin, though they deal not in like sort: for Usury
extends not only to money, but also to meat, or any thing that is put forth.
Deuteronomy. 23. 19. What a proper exposition is this, that men may take no allowance
to live by without offense. It seems you would have them spend all they have
first, and then to see what they can gather without a beginning he that does in
this forte provide for his family, is no better than an Infidel by his folly.
And therefore it is no marvel, you have used so long a circumsta^ce without
sense, seeing you are ignorant of the foundation you defend: for Usury is not
the reasonable, but the unreasonable, taking of any overplus above the
principal; which the Prophet in respect of the poor calls a burden, Neh. 5.
7. 10. So according to my former conference I fully conclude, that although
Usury is prohibited to be taken of the poor, I see no reason it should be
remitted of the rich.


Whether the Rich or the Poor are to be accounted most blessed.
PHilogus I might move a question concerning the state of men, whether the rich
or the poor are to be counted most blessed? for riches are the gift of God and
therefore I would think him most happy, upon whom, God most abundantly
bestows his benefits.


Tich. If we consider of men by their external estates then it is hard to
judge who is most blessed: for in that respect as Solomon says all things come
alike to all, and the same condition is to the just and the wicked. Eccles. 9.
1. Lot had abundance of wealth, so had Dives, one was just and saved, the
other wicked and damned, Lazarus had less than both, yet his joy was equal
with the best: so that your antecedent is doubtful, and your conclusion
indirect* because poverty as well as prosperity is Gods gift, Pro. 14. 31. and
therefore seeing the greatest gift is not goods but grace, the poor being
partaker thereof, may be more blessed than the rich.


Phi. Yet this is no reason to disanul my argument, for as God gives goods, so
he can give grace, and both those blessings meeting, must needs make that man
more blessed tha^ him that has but the benfite of one, for though gold be
good, yet being beautified with pearl it is more precious according as a
learned divine said. Iuncta wirtus fortior.


Tic. There is no man will deny but that goods of themselves are singular
good, yet most will say, that such are seldom seen that can well use them,
besides there be some special reasons, why the poor by all presumptions should
be preferred before the rich into heaven; riches make men high minded.
Nabucadnez-zers heart was lifted up, and why? (the text says) because of his
riches. Ezeki. 28. 5. Riches makes us forget God: David said he should not be
moved, when said he so? it appears by his own speech, in his prosperity.
Psalm. 30* 6. Riches withdraw us from well doing: The ruler was very heavy
when he heard he could not possess eternal life, unless he parted from his
living: and why? for the Evangelist says, he was merueilous rich. Luke. 18.
23. Riches makes men bold to do evil, whereas poverty bridleth the poor
from many evils. Proverbs 10. 15. To be brief richmen have so many temporal
consolations, that they little regard any spiritual considerations: Therefore
as he that is empty shall with more ease enter in at a straight gate, than he
which bears a great burden; so the poor (who have none of these impediments)
shall with more facility obtain eternal felicity, than the rich (who by
reason of their abundance) shall go to heaven as a Camel through a needles
eye.


Phi. Your long protestation is more preposterous than pertine^t, for as no man
doubts but that prosperity with godly government is good* so none can deny
but that poverty with the fear of God is co^me^dable. Pro. 15. 16. Yet as you
say, such are seldom seen, that can well use wealth, so I may allege such are
rare to find that can possess poverty patiently. Riches (say you) make men
high minded; and yet the devil has other devises to draw poor men to pride
he has many engines to work evil with, and can allure men to one sin after
many sorts, as wealth may inflate the rich man, so knowledge may puff up the
poor man, and sometime he that wants both, is proud in his own conceit:
riches makes us forget God (say you), so does poverty, for this cause the
wiseman desired to be kept from it, least he fell to stealing and so forget
the name of GOD. Pro. 30. 9. As the rich man has many temporal consolations,
and the less regards any spiritual meditations; so the poor man has so
many temporal miseries, that it makes him often despair of Gods mercies.
Therefore as there is no difference of danger to escape Scylla, and to rush
upon Caribdis, so there is no equality of evil to sin either by excess or
by extremity.


Tich. It appears by many places of the Scripture that the poor are most
preferred, and more to be regarded than the rich, for although in this world,
the mighty ouermaister them, yet in the world to come God has chosen such to
confou^d the mighty: 1. Cor. 3. 27. albeit here they are despised and are of
no reputation, yet the Apostle says, God has chosen them to bring to naught
things that are: 1. Cor. 3. 28. Again our Savior Christ says Blessed be ye
poor, for yours is the kingdom of God. Lu. 6. 20 now on the contrary he says
to the rich* Woe be to you for you have received your consolation. Lu. 6. 24.
The Apostle James says God has chosen the poor in this life to be heirs of
eternal life Jacob. 2. 5. but he wills the richmen to weep and howl for
the miseries shall come upon them. Jacob. 5. 1.


Phi. I marvel you prolong the time with such friuolus positions, as though
God had so peculiarly chosen the poor, that he has utterly excluded the
rich, as for those exclamations that are threatened against the rich, it is not
against such as use their riches well, but wickedly; and the like I may say, as
for those blessings that are used to the poor, it is not meant by such as are
poor in estate and have little to live on, but by such as are poor in
spirit, and renounce their own righteousness. Esai. 6. 2. for if the poor man
does contemn his cross, he shall be punished as well as the rich man that
abuses his benefit.


Tich. I perceive you and I shall vary in argument: for you draw your speech,
by imagination what a richman should be, and I decipher them by contemplation,
what they commonly be, if it were possible to find such a one as you set
forth, then your proposition could no way be imperfect.


Phi. I have read in the scriptures that Job was a very rich man, and yet he
used his goods very godly as may appear by his protestation made in his
extremity concerning his integrity. Job. 31. 16. Zacheus was a rich man, yet
he used his wealth very well, he gave one half to the poor, and proffered
restitution four fold to such as he had offended: infinite are the examples
I could recite, but two shall be as good as twenty to resolve you.


Tich. What does the view of the virtuous examples of others avail us* seeing
we have no practice of their proceedings amongst us, you should do well to show
where any of these benefactors are.


Phi. It is not necessary to note any by name, yet this I can say, there be
some that are good to the poor at their doors, a few that will help their
friends in distress, otherwise as I do not love to look into the dealings
of many, so I can say little of the dispositions of most.


Tich. They say that one swallow is no argument of summer, nor the Aethiopians
white teeth cannot make his face fair, neither may the forwardnes of a few, be
a general presumption for all that be rich, It were hard if amongst many
blossoms all should prove blasts, or amongst many rich men, all should be
misers, but yet if you mark the manner of such as do good, you shall find
they either do it grudgingly or glorionsly, and that was the fault of the
Pharisees, one does a pleasure and but seldom, and yet he must speak of it
very often, he cannot be content to do good before God who can make
restitutio^, but he must have it known to the world, that laugh at his vain
ostentation to give, it is good; the deed is charitable to him that has need,
but not acceptable to God, because he sins if he does it not simply: and
surely he that braggeth or vpbraydeth where he has done good, deserves no
better amends than his own mouth. Other there be that be wealthy, that will
hardly part from a penny by their life, but give great promises of much after
death, and yet I think if they could carry it with the^, they would hardly
leave it behind. It is a wonderful thing that such men as almost have no
heirs to inherit, no cause to be covetous, no reason to hold fast, should
show themselves so wretched to the world, that they will crucify their own
carcass for want of cost, and sooner die than depart with ought to do another
pleasure. Alas, what possibility of preferment is to be expected of such a
person, that will yield no likelihood of liberality by his life? Besides, do
they think, one can feed upon fair words, or prosper by bare promises? Why,
he may go long barefoote that tarries for dead-mens shoes, and yet when he
has them, they will not be worth the wearing: for I have known such, as have
promised golden hills by their life, that have performed but durtie days at
their death: It is but a fetch of fraudulencie, yea oftentimes the cause of
farther inconvenience, to bring one in hope of having a thing, and then to
delude him at the last with nothing. These should do well to remember the
Wisemans words, to do good before they die. For it is far better they should
send their works before them, than they should follow after them, and it is a
greater work of charity for them to do good by their life freely, than to
do it after their death forcibly. Well, to be brief, let this suffice, where
there is one that does good with his goods, there are a hundred that do hurt
with them.


Phil. If I should make as long a description of the poor, as you have made a
vain inuection against the rich, you might justly say, I use more words than
wit, both because your circumstance of speech, is nothing to the substance of
the matter, as also, because if both their cuills were weyed together in an
equal balance, although they differ in exterior estate in regard of living, I
fear me they would not be inferior in interior deserts in respect of their
lives: for as you say of the rich, so amongst the poor for the most part there
be many that be leaudly addicted. But because it is a needless discourse to
discover them, I will omit that, and to the matter; The good man (says
Solomon) shall give inheritance unto his Childrens Children. Proverbs. 13. 22.
then it seems, such as have nothing to give, are ungodly. But the Prophet
David does make it more manifest: for (says he) I never saw the righteous
forsaken, nor his seed begging bread Psa. 37. 25. If we conster this by the
contrary, what should I say, is not poverty an argument of impiety?


Tych. It is a perilous thing to give any peremptory judgment of the poor,
considering what the Psalmograph says, Blessed are they that judge wisely of
such. What though Solomon says, The good man shall give inheritance, etc? Yet
that is no consequent to condemn the poor, that have nothing to part with?
For the Scripture says, God has chosen such. I am. 2. 5. Besides that, the
Prophets, nay the Apostles, yea Christ himself was but poor, and had no
worldly possessions to dispose; yet we must not say they were impious:
therefore that position was ill put in, and your latter to as little purpose.
For though David in his days never saw the righteous beg their bread: yet
since, we have seen in the Scripture an example to the contrary, for Lazarus
lay begging at the rich man's gate, and yet his soul did rest in Abraham's
bosom.


Phil. You must consider there are diversity of pouerties: David was a King,
and yet in regard of a richer, he counted himself but poor; for says he (to
his son Solomon) According to my poverty have I prepared for the house of
the Lord. 1. Chr. 22. 14. Now, I speak not in respect of a competent living,
for it was that, the Wiseman most desired; neither of him that has but a
little to live on, for with the fear of God, it is better than great treasure
and trouble with it. Prou. 15. 16. but of such as cannot support themselves,
but by the benevolence of others, as the beggar does.


Tych. Why, has not God ordained such as instruments to try the hearts of the
rich? and shall we so badlie account of beggars?


Phil. Yet the workman is more worthy than the instrument, if he can use it
well: and why? because the Apostle says, it is a blessed thing to give, rather
than receive. Act. 20. 35.


Tych. If the poor man be content with his wallet, shall we condemn him for
want, seeing we are taught that Godliness is great riches, if a man be content
with that he has. 1. Tim 6. 6.


Phil. Yet our Savior Christ commanded his Apostles, to use neither staff
nor wallet. Matthew. 10. nor to go from door to door: for as the Wiseman
says, It were better to die than beg. Eccle. 40. 28. It was this that made
Paul labor with his own hands, rather than he would be chargeable to any.


Tych. The cause of the rich-mans happiness co^sists party in the poor, as
appears by Salomons saying, He that has mercy on the poor is blessed. Pro.
14. 21. therefore the poor are most to be preferred: for if the cause be
adempted, the effect must needs diminish.


Phil. This argument is not worth any thing: for though I did admit your
antecedent, it would make against your self, if I should reason with you by way
of comparison, in this sort; If he be blessed that bestows on the poor, what
is he that has nothing to give them? if the conclusion be made by the
contrary, what say you to this? yet between your argument and this, there is
neither barrel better herring; as for your consequent, it is vainly intruded:
for if the poor can effect the blessedness of the rich, the cause can never
fail, considering that our Savior Christ says, ye shall have the poor
always with you. Mat. 26. 11. Therefore in this you do but resemble the
Spaniell, that forsakes the Partridge to bait after birds, when you defend the
matter by casting such bolts; it is better to lay the finger on the mouth, tha^
to speak without modesty: but because it is a folly to strive to go over a
style when the gap lies open, I will leave off such terms as I might well
return, for the imperfection of your positions, and produce such matter as is
meet to apply, for the proof of my proposition. You know the question, I
were loath to be much about it, lest you should think I would beg it. I
affirm that the Rich man (although it be rare) that disposes of his goods
like a good Steward, is more blessed than the poor that have not any thing to
give. All men will grant this, because it has been proved even by the
Apostles speech in my former defense. Act 20. 35. Again, this is another
reason; such kind of poverty is to be counted as a cross, and for this
cause, the Wiseman desired to be kept from it, Proverb. 30. 9. And this was one
of the punishments that fell upon Job. Solomon wills us not to love sleep?
and why? least (says he) thou come unto poverty. Therefore, if it were not a
punishment, he would not premonish us to prevent it Proverb. 20. 13. Yea, and
in the same Chapter by this he does add a double punishment to the
sloathfull person: for he tells him, because he will not work in Winter,
he shall beg in Summer, but have nothing. verse. 4. So that I may conclude,
the rich man is more blessed than the poor in this respect, because God gives
him the benefit of a double blissing, one in this World with abundance,
another (if he use them well) in the world to come more superabundant.


Whether there be degrees of glory in heaven, or difference of pains in hell.
PHilogus. There is a Question much debated upon, but not decided? which
although it be not a principle in Religion to be observed, yet it is an
argument of ambiguitie, not to be ouerslipped. I have heard, that in heaven all
be not equal in excellency, but (as some say) there be degrees of glory even
amongst the Angels.


Tych. If you can as readily approve by reason as you do show me by report
such a matter, then I should be the rather induced to believe such a mystery.


Phil. You know the Prophet Daniel says, The godly shall shine as stars in
heaven, Daniel. 12. 3. Now the Apostle Paul says, that one star differs
from another in glory 1. Cor. 15. 41. Hereof it is they say, the Saints shall
do so.


Tychichus The Apostle has such a saying, yet this is nothing pertinent to
your proposition, because he speaks it in another sense. For in that place
(speaking of the resurrection) he does not only reprove the Epicure that
prefers the pleasures of this life, but he proves by way of comparison,
that although our bodies be in some sort glorious upon earth, yet they shall
be much more glorious in heaven, and this he describes by the difference of
stars: but that there should be degrees of glory, it can no way be gathered
thereby. For that appears plainly in the same chapter verse. 48. where the
words extend rather to equality, As is the heavenly (says he) such are they
also that are heavenly. Again it is said of our Savior Christ, that the just
shall shine as the Sun, Mat. 13. 43. Now, the light of the Sun exceeds
the light of the stars, yet that were no consequent that the just should so
far exceed the godly in glory, for both are but Saints, and neither could
have been saved, if their sins had not been covered in Christ Jesus: but
these similitudes do show us, that although the purity of the godly be
obscured in this world by the prauitie of the wicked, as the sun and stars
be often ouercast by reason of the clouds; yet in the world to come, when both
are separated by themselves, then the better shall have his perfect appearance,
and shine like stars, yea like the Sun (when they are not shadowed) to the
great glory of themselves, and the utter grief of the ungodly.


Phil My meaning is not to refell your reasons, but to recite such as I have
heard: and amongst others, this they allege, that in the palace of an earthly
Prince, there be many several rooms, and in the house of our heavenly King
there be many dwelling places, so says our Savior Christ John. 14. 2. Now as
there is never a room in an earthly Palace, but has his several Office,
and every Office does somewhat differ in dignity from another, so say they,
there be many mansions in heaven, and every one according to the worthiness
of his placing, is preferred to the greater glory.


Tych. As though he which is the omnipotent Creator would take a pattern by
the proceedings of his Creatures, when we read that those things which are
highly esteemed amongst men are but abomination in his sight. Our Savior
Christ used that speech to his disciples for their consolation because he
perceived they were much troubled to think of his departure, as though when
he were gone, he would either utterly forget them, or go to such a place,
that there should be no space for the^ to be where he was: therefore our
Savior Christ, to comfort them in these cross cogitations, does nothing else
but by these many dwelling places, amplify and set forth the largenes of his
heavenly house to assure them they (as the faithful) should be where he was:
for although the gate be very straight to enter, heaven is wide enough for
those that shall inherit it. This I take to be the true meaning of our Savior
Christ: for albeit he makes mention of many ma^sions, we must not think
there be any distinct dwellings in heaven, (much less any degrees of glory)
for it is written, the godly shall all meet in one place in Gods presence, and
minister a like service to his Majesty. Apocalipse cap. 7. ver. 15.


Philogus To prove there is difference of glory in Heaven, they proceed
further and say; The Apostles shall be more glorious than the rest: because
they shall sit upon twelve Thrones, and judge the twelve Tribes of Israel.
Matthew. ca. 19. verse. 28.


Tychicus I remember our Savior Christ says in another place to his
Disciples, that they shall eat and drink at his Table in his Kingdom, Luke.
22. 30. yet I do not think so. And in the self same place, he says, They
shall all sit on seats, and judge the twelve Tribes of Israel; yet I do not
take it so. For those Similitudes and sayings, import nothing else but their
assurance to be partakers of his glory. My reason for the first, is this, In
heaven is neither eating nor drinking, because we shall read, that there we
shall neither hunger nor thirst any more. Apocalips. 7. 16. Esaias. 49. 10. My
reason for the latter is this, The Apostles shall not judge us, because they,
we, and all, shall be judged by Christ Jesus. Symbolum.


Phi. They rest not so but refer themselves to a saying of saint Paul to
approve some difference of dignity in the Saints, because he says that they
shall judge the world. 1. Cor. 6. 2.


Tich. This assertion is answered by my former, yet for your better resolution
I will explain it by a temporal constitution: you know that when a prisoner
(being a heinous malefactor) has his accusation laid open apparently to all
that be present (although the chief office of giving sentence belongs to the
Judge) yet all the rest that be there may easily judge what punishment that
prisoner deserves, even so in this respect the Saints may be said to judge the
world when our sins and lives are laid open manifestly in the presence of so
many millions of Angels and Saints (albeit it appertains properly to Christ
to judge us) yet it is an easy matter for them to judge what we are, and in
this sense it may very well be said, we shall stand helples before so many
Judges as have excelled us in good works; for the sight of such as are
innocent is sufficient to judge those that have iniuried them, yea, it will
strike such a horror into their hearts that their very thoughts (as the Apostle
says) will accuse or excuse them Romans 2 15. 16. at that day.


Phi Yet they leave not here but aleadge this for a further probation of the
matter, they say that as we have on earth Bishops, so there are which differ
from them in dignity, which are entitled Archbishops, so in heaven there are
Angels of great glory, and yet there are Archangels which are of greater glory.


Tych. This conclusion is nothing forcible, because your comparison is
fallible, for although many be preferred more than others to higher dignity
in this world, yet their inferiors may be equal to them in excellency,
(considering how these earthly preferments come to men oftentimes as much for
their revenues, as their virtues): now we know with God is no respect of
persons, neither does he regard the promotion of a man by his title, but the
purity of his life by his works: and therefore, albeit it pleases God (of his
good pleasure) to call us by sundry names, as Archangels, Angels, Saints,
Citizens, Just, Righteous, Children, Heirs, Sons, and such like, it is no
consequent any should differ in glory from another; for what greater glory
can any have more, than to be like him that is most glorious? 1. John. 3. 2.
and to sit upon the Throne with him that shall judge us? Apoc. 3. 21. Yet this
is spoken generally to all the faithful.


Phil. I have read that some of the Prophets as Esaias, was cut in pieces with a
saw of wood, Jeremy was stoaned to death, Amos thrust into the temples of the
head with a great nail: others, as the Apostle says, were tried by mockings,
scourgings, etc. Hebr. 11. 36, 37. yea in our times, many have suffered as
Martyrs for the testimony of the truth. And shall not these which have endured
such extreme torments in this world far above their brethren, possess some
greater glory in heaven than they?


Tych. If you had said possess some greater joy in heaven, then it might have
bred a question: for, if in this world (where all our pleasures are but
purgatories) when one that is poor does attain riches, which are but
mome^tany, if he takes more joy by remembrance of his misery past, than he
that was never pinched with penury, then no doubt, in the world to come (where
the least pleasure is unspeakable) it cannot be, but that he, which has bin
most afflicted here, shall conceive and receive far more exceeding joy, than
he which has been touched with less tribulation, and yet the joys of heaven,
are fitly compared to vessels filled with licour of all quantities, for
every man shall have his full measure there. Again, it pleases God to
afflict all whom he loves, and yet he does it not in like manner and measure
to all. For as his gifts and graces are not of like excellency in every one,
so his afflictions are not of like equality to all; yet that argues not any
should exceed others in glory in heaven, so they endure that cross with
patience, which God does lay upon them on earth. There be two special
reasons, that make much against you in this matter: one is this. All the
afflictions a man may suffer cannot save him, because when he has done his
best, he is but an unprofitable servant says our Savior Christ. Luke 1^. 10.
Another reason is this, no man may hope to have greater glory than his
brother: because they themselves (for all their sufferings) are not worthy the
glory of the life to come. Romans 8. 18. Therefore, let every one rejoice (as
Peter persuades us) inasmuch as he is counted worthy to be partaker of
Christ's sufferings: for, as by faith the thief was saved upon the gallows at
the last gasp, even so all men are saved by that means when they have
perpetrated as much as is possible. The Similitude of our Savior Christ is
sufficient to satisfy you in this behalf; it is concerning the householder
that hired laborers into his vineyard at all hours in the day: he that came
early and wroght in the heat of the day, had no greater reward than those
which were idle and wrought but an hour* seeing the hyre is indifferent to
all, none shall have glory greater than another.


Phil. Yet to prove the matter more apparently, they draw a reason by the
contrary, and say, that seeing there is difference of pains in hell amongst
the wicked, it must needs follow there must be difference of degrees in
heaven amongst the Angels; for there is inequality as well of good as of evil.


Tych. Although your antecedent can never approve your consequent, yet I would
be glad to know such places as may prove those difference of pains in hell?


Phil. Our Savior Christ says, he that knows not his masters will, and yet
does it not, shall be beaten with some stripes; but he that knows it and does
the contrary shall be beaten with many stripes, this they allege for one. The
same our Savior speking of the hypocrites in another place, says, that they
shall receive the greater damnation. This saying is inviolable (which they
likewise produce. Also our Savior Christ, (speaking of Chorazin and Bethsaida,
he tells the^ that it shall be easier for Tyrus and Sydon than they at the day
of judgment, Luke. 10. 13, 14. This is another notable objection of theirs.


Tych. I must needs confess that it stands with great reason, where God most
abundantly bestows his benefits, there the abuse and ingratitude deserve to
be most punished, yet (that there should be degrees of glory in heaven because
there are difference of pains in hell) it is against all reason: for the
sins which draw us to hell are many, and differ one from another, but the
mean whereby we be drawn to heaven, is but one, and indifferent to all: if
every sin deserves death, it should appear, the more grievous sin should
have the greater damnation, but seeing no merit can deserve heaven, the means
are not many can effect our salvation, but only faith in Christ Jesus.


FINIS.

