Not so new, as True.

Being a very necessary Caveat for all Christians to consider of.

Wherein is truly described the iniquity of this present time, by occasion
of our confused living: And justly approved the world to be never worse, by
reason of our contagious leaudnes.

By Charles Gibbon.

The weaker the world is by reason of age, the more shall the evils be
increased upon them that dwell therein.

2. Esdr. 14.16. Imprinted at London by Thomas Orwin, dwelling in Paternoster
row over against the sign of the Checker. 1590.

To the Right Worshipful, the Mayor of the Borough of Kings Linne, to his
Associates or Brethren, the Aldermen of the same Town: And to my very loving
friends the Burgesses, commonly called the Eighteen of the same Assembly.
CHARLES GIBBON wishes prosperous health, and perpetual happiness.
APollos being both eloquent and mighty in the Scriptures, disdained not to be
further instructed in the way of the Lord by a poor Craftsman Act. 1^.24.
. Which example (Right Worshipful and my very loving friends) as it
commends Apollos for his piety, so it incourageth me to proceed in hope of
the like lenity, albeit it condemns many in these days for their
curiosity: who commonly measure men of learning by their living: valuing the
singlenes of their gifts, by the simplenes of their estate: which is as much as
if they should reject the fine gold, because it lies in the filthy ground: or
the pure wine, for that it comes from the homely press: or the precious
stone Draconites, because it is drawn from the head of the Dragon. Nay more
than that, for by how much spiritual gifts are to be preferred before
temporal, so much the more are the comparisons intolerable, and the sin
more execrable: and which indeed is a greater argument of insolency, than
humility: of prauitie, than piety: and undoubtedly is much repugnant to that
same conformable course which S. Paul prescribes, who wills, That in
meekenes of mind every man esteem other better than himself Phil 2.3.
. The same Apostle (I speak it without presumption) was well accepted of the
Nobles at Berea Act. 17.11.
, yet who more oppressed any way than he? they did not balance the barenes of
his ability, with the excellency of his doctrine: but we, or most of us in
these days are so far puffed up with our knowledge, that we pretermit those
things which tend to our profit, by following our own humors which turn to
our hurt. And herein many of us which term our selves Protestants, are
justly to be condemned with those we (...)

In all the kingdoms of Siria, Palestina, Arabia, Persia, in all Armenia, and
the Empire of Cappadocia, through the whole compass of Asia, with Egypt, and
with Africa also (unless amongst the far Aethiopians some old steps of
Christianity peradventure do yet remain), If the word of God decrease, sin
must needs increase.
the Church of God has not one foot of free land, but is all turned either to
infidelity, or to captivity whatsoever pertains to him: and if Asia and
Africa were only decayed, the decay were great, but yet the defection were
not so universal.

Now of Europa a great part also is shronk from the Church: all Thracia, with
the Empire of Constantinople, all Grecia, Epirus, Illiricum, and now of late
almost all the kingdom of Hungaria, with much of Austria, with lamentable
slaughter of Christian blood is wasted and all become Turks, only a little
angle in the West parts yet remaining in some profession of his name. Then
seeing it is so, let us not think our selves only happy by having the word,
but more blessed if we obey it, and worse than Infidels if we abuse it: let us
not increase, but cease from sin, least the Lord do punish us as he did
those places: seeing we have partly experience of our apparent adversary
already the Pope of Rome, who stirs up his Bishops to burn us, his
confederates to conspire our destruction, setting Kings to deal cruelly
against their subjects, and subjects to rebel disloyallie against their
Princes. These practices may premonish us to esteem better of the word of God,
if we have any spark of grace: and our impendent destruction may enforce us to
repent, if we have any fear of his wrath, which God grant, Amen.

Yours in the Lord, Charles Gibbon.

In this Book is contained a few effectual notes
Concerning the latter day, and how far our earthly experience may extend in
that secret.

Of the danger of the good and bad together, and for what cause the wicked are
to be cut off.

Touching the true use of hospitality, and why it ought not to be rejected.

For such as have satietie of riches, and how they ought to esteem and use
them.

Against such as abridge the liberties of the poor, and what punishment is
pronounced against them.

Against rent raisers, and the plagues that impend over their heads.

Against Usurers, and the hurt that comes of their hard dealing.

Whereby is approved the world to be never worse, by many probable arguments.

Wherein is inserted many necessary instructions amongst the rest, for all
sorts to consider of.

(...) earth and behold it was corrupt: for all flesh had corrupt his way upon
earth Genesis 6.12.
. You shall find how Sodom and Gomorha in the pride of their filthiness were
consumed with fire: for it is written, the cry of Sodom and Gomorha was great,
and their sin exceeding grievous Genesis 18.20.
. Now, as this does manifest the end to be impendant, where the people be
impenitent: so, concerning amendment (if a particular example may argue a
general presumption) you shall read, how the Ninevites in their abundance of
abomination, did repent and amend by the preaching of Jonah Jonah 3.10.
. Such is the divine providence of the almighty, that where he sees any care
of reformation, he prolongeth the days; where there is no hope of conversion,
he proceeds to destruction.

Nican. You say well; but I am persuaded it will sooner end than amend, and so
much the rather, because in conferring all ages together, by computation of
years, this time approaches to the end; by revelation of prophecies, all
things are apparent; by course of Scripture, all things are accomplished. Have
we not seen merueilous wonders in the heavens Matthew. 24. Luk 21. Mark. 13.
? strange mutations on the earth: Has not rumors run of wars, and Realm
risen against Realm? Have we not tasted of famine, been touched with plagues,
and terrified with Earthquakes? Is there not at this day common murmuring
amongst the people, continual wresting of the word, derision of Gods
Ministers, division between father and son? Has not the Gospel been
preached to the world Coloss 1 6.
? Is not that prophecy of Daniel long since expired Dan. 12.12.
? Does not Antichrist play rex? Is there not a defect and Apostacy from the
faith 2 Thessalonians. 2.^.
? yea what signs precede the end that have not come to pass? or what may
procure that heavy day of wrath that is wanting? The world is now wounded with
all corruption, as the Apostle John says: It lies in wickedness 1. Ioh. ^.1^.
. The same cup of wine which the prophets speak on, is drunk to the very
dregs of Gods indignation Psalm. 75.8. Isay. 51.17. Iere. 25.15.
: the people are now nusled in all iniquity: and no doubt if the Lord should
look down from heaven, as he did in the days of David, he should see, they
are all gone out of the way and altogether become abominable, there is none
that does good, no not one Psalm. 14 2^
. Yea they are grown so sottish, they slay their own souls; so sinful, they
forget GOD; so secure, they fear no destruction; O carnal vanity, O earthly
vilanie, O mortal misery: Insomuch as the conte^plation of this confused
wretchedness, would enforce our Savior Christ himself to shed tears, as he
did for Iherusalem Luke 19.41.
, and should make that terrible noise of the last Trompe to be daily sounding
in our ears, to awaken us from our wickedness. And therefore, The prauitie of
our lives is a presumption of the end.
seeing it is with us, as it was in the days of Noah and Lot, exceeding evil,
what should we expect but a sudden end? As for amendment, it is doubtful
(unless Gods mercy surmounteth): for the devil being come down amongst us,
he has great wrath: because he knows his time is very short Apoc. 12.12
. Besides, it is rare to see a rotten root revive, or withered grass to wax
green, or (as we commonly say) sower drink (...)

If the wisdom of it be mere folly before God 1. Cor. 1.20.
? who would apply his wits altogether to worldlines; seeing Paul judged all
things here no better worth than dung Phil. 3.8.
, to win Christ.

As concerning the latter day.

If the Apostles said above fifteen hundred years past, the day draws near
Heb. 10.25.
, and is at hand Romans 12.12. 1. Pet. 4.7.
; how nigh may we now think it is? If the Lord has deferred his coming, let
us not imagine (with those mockers Saint Peter speaks of) he has forgot his
promise; but let us rather suppose his long suffering 2. Pet. 3.15.
is salvation; who uses patience only to draw us to repentance: and
therefore let us not despise the riches of his bountifulnes toward us, but
call for grace in time, least at his coming we procure Rom 2.4.
our greater condemnation.

As concerning the certeintie of the time.

If Christ comes unawares as a thief in the night, and in the hour we
think not Matthew. 24.44
, how carefully ought we to watch and pray continually least he comes
sodeinlie and find us sleeping? It behooves us to take heed to our selves that
our hearts be not oppressed with surfeiting, dronkennes, and such like Luke
21.34.
, but that we may have always an earnest meditation of our end: for then (as
Syrack says) we should not do amiss Eccle 7.36.
. Oh that they were wise, Deuteronomy. 32.29.
(says Moses) then they would understand this: they would consider their
latter end. So that it rather stands us upon to be in preparation for the end,
being sudden, than in disputation of a matter, We should ever live as we would
daily die.
being doubtful: and as every day does threaten our destruction; so let
every one have a feeling of his infirmities: and seeing the reward of sin is
death Romans 6.23.
, the day of death uncertain, and every man's death is his own dome Eccle.
11.3.
, we should daily think our end to be imminent, and so by the fear of Gods
punishment, have a care of repentance; least dispensing leaudlie with the time,
we presume vainlie of our selves, the devil plaieth subtillie with our
souls, and God plague us suddenly for our sins.


Nican. You mistake my meaning altogether: for albeit I believe Christ will
come to judgment, and that shortly; It is a great sin to enter into Gods
secrets. 2. Esdr. 4.2.
yet I do not presume of the very time of his coming certeinlie; that were
abominable before GOD, and not tolerable among men: but, as many writers have
made much discourse of this matter; so amongst them, such are most to be
preferred that rather persuade us by apparent proves of an imediat end, than
those which by palpable means, would prolong the time by prolixious arguments:
the one does put us in mind to be in a daily preparation, with the five wise
Virgins to meet the Bridegroom Matthew. 25.4.
: the other does feed us with a vain delusion, as an occasion to make us
follow that confused course of the leand servant our Savior Christ describes
Matthew. 24 49
: that does dehort us from impiety, and draw us to amendment; this does
flatter us in security, and move us to all mischief. To what end did the
Apostles in their days persuade the people so often, the day of (...)


Alpheus. Indeed the superstition in times past should so pity us to
remember, that it should provoke us to amendment, for it was so far from good
conformity that I pray God utterly to confound it; notwithstanding, when
Idolatry was most rifest, a faithful congregation was resident, even as there
has always been from the beginning; for GOD has as well his elected as
eiected in all places: they are but few in number, and therefore termed very
fitly, a little flock Luke 12.32.
: alluding to that saying of our Savior Christ, the way is narrow that
leads unto life, and few there be that find it Matthew. 7.14.
. God had reserved some righteous amongst the reprobate, although Elias thought
there was none left but himself alone Romans 11.4.
. We have had experience of late days, of godly Martirs among the wicked
malefactors, who like the Glazeworme glistered most brightlie in the night, or
like the Lamp gave most light in the dark, whose faith was tried as gold in
the furnace; The godly will rather die tha^ deny Christ.
who did rather choose to suffer many troubles in a good cause, than abide the
terror of an ill conscience; yea rather to endure the torments of fire, than
submit themselves to the extremity of their factions. Acts and Monuments.
If you peruse the Acts and Monuments, you shall find how they yielded their
bodies like faggots to the fire, rather than they would follow any sottish
filthiness contrary to their sincere profession; To suffer for the name of God
is his only gift. Philip. 1.29.
being encouraged by that saying of S. Paul: If we suffer with Christ, we
shall also reign together with him: As contrariwise, if we deny him he will
also deny us 2. Tim. 2.12.
. Remembering what our Savior Christ says: Blessed are they that suffer
persecution for righteousness sake Matthew. 5.10.
: knowing indeed, that he which indureth to the end shall be saved Matt.
24.13.
and obtain a crown of life Apoc. 2.10.
. But to the matter, as for the free liberty of the glorious Gospel amongst
us (God maintain it with her Majesty) for as she does use all the means that
may be to increase the light; so God knows how many there be (which upon a
mischief) would extinguish it: and as it was in the time of Popery, If God be
on our side, who can be against us says Paul.
although superstition was generally established and allowed, and yet all did
not affect or follow it, but some would rather suffer than do so: Even so it
is in these religious days of ours, although Gods word be amongst us
publikelie maintained; A privy Papist is worse than a professed, because he
shows himself to be but lukewarm.
yet no doubt there are many that privily mislike it, as there be some that
openly oppose themselves against it. Have we not had amongst us such as term
themselves the Family of Love, Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and such like
sottish sects? These think there is a day coming, which they account their
Iubile.
Is there not among us at this day, opinatiue persons, Papists, and such like
sorts? What should I say, I pray God it be not verified by the people of
England, as it was by the children of Israel, Though their number were as the
sand of the sea, yet shall but a remnant be saved Romans 9 27. Esaias. 10.21.
. I fear me, the most, if their faith should come to trial by fire, would
keep their bodies from the brands, they would (as we commonly say) rather
turn than burn. A true Christian is not known in peace, but in persecution:
All that will live godly in Christ (says 2. Tim 3.12.
Paul) shall suffer persecution. Not when (...)


Nican. These days I must needs confess be dangerous 1. Tim. 4.1.
, and it is come to pass as Christ himself prophesied, that after his
departing, grievous woolues should enter into his flock Luk 10.3. Act. 20.29.
: no doubt there is now as has been at all times, the good and bad together;
as Paul says, vessels of honor and dishonor 2. Tim. 2.20.
: and no marvel; for it is common to see the corn and cockle grow together
on one ground; the flower and the weed in one gardaine; the blossom and the
blast both on a tree. You shall read in the Scriptures, that wheat and tares
shall grow both together until harvest, The wicked shall wander with the
godly until the end of the world.
that the sheep and the goats shall go together until the last separation;
and that the godly and the wicked shall walk together until the end of the
world. When the servants would have gathered the tares from the wheat, our
Savior Christ would not suffer them, least (says he) while ye go about to
gather the tares, ye pluck up also with them the wheat: but let both grow
together till harvest Matthew. 13.29
. So that of necessity the wicked must remain, because it is impossible to
root them out, or very dangerous to remove them. Your next discourse
touching hypocritical dealing, as it is a supposition uncertain to man's
censure; so being so tedious, I will say little to it; I detest such as double
in Religion, but I cannot detect any to be an hipocrite; and although we ought
to abstain from all appearance of evil 1. These. ^.22
, yet we must not judge always according Ioh. 7.24.
to appearance, especially in this secret of the heart, Omne simile non est
idem.
seeing it is only reserved to God; neither may I judge evil of my brethren,
when I deem none worse than my self, considering God shall judge us all: but
if there be any such as you set down; this is most certain, as every fatt
does stand of his own bottom, so every sinner, shall bear his own burden
Galat 6.5.
; and as the tree lies as it falls, so shall he be judged as he dies Heb.
9 27.
. Besides if the righteous scarslie be saved 1. Pet. 4.18.
(as it is fearful to all sinners) so how horrible will it be for the
hypocrite to appear, whose portion is to suffer the extremest pains of hell
Job. 36.13.
. As for your conclusion, concerning the sufferance of such as have liberty to
do well, and will not: Truly such is the good pity of our Prince, that
where heretofore some have burned such as were godly, for a good cause; she
bears with such as be unreformed, for a further consideration: not tendering
their case, to their confusion; A godly prince exte^deth mercy in hope of
amendment.
but intending a care of their conversion, staying oftentimes where she might
strike, in hope of amendment; yet striking sometime where she must needs, for
fear of a mischief (Oh Princely pattern of patience, oh worthy mirror of
mercy): Remembering always to set good against evil, to bear with the weak,
and to forbear the froward a while, as uncertain in what hour GOD may call
such into his vineyard Matthew. 20.1. etc.
, considering he is both miraculous and merciful in his calling, who although
he leaves the wicked to their own lusts a time, he eftsoone does convert
them to goodness by his grace, as he did the Gentiles, Act 14 16.
that walked in their own ways; as he did the prodigal child, Luk 15 11.
that lauished all he had (...) consequent (if they be not cut off) overcome.


Nican. The company of the good and bad together, as it is common, so I must
needs confess it is dangerous: and as supersticious errors, heresies, and
such like, are utterly to be condemned; so in some sort they are to be
admitted, as may appear by that saying of S. Paul to the Corinthians: There
must be heresies (says he) amongst you, that they which are approved among you
might be known 1. Cor. 11.19
. Not that heresies and errors are to be allowed or followed; but that by them
the infallible truth may the better be discerned, Though error be admitted, it
is not to be imitated.
and more esteemed of the elect; for this is certain, when contraries are
opposite, the good has his better appearance, even as black appears best
being drawn of a white border; so virtue is then most visible when it is
environed with vice; and what may more move us to regard the excellency of the
word of God, The inconvenience of error is an instigatio^ to goodness in the
godly.
than to set before us the enormitie that may ensue of error. God sometimes to
prove his children will place them amongst the wicked, to see whether they
will follow their ways, as he did by the Israelites Judge. 2.22.
; yet he does it not to that end we should incline to evil, or that he himself
is ignorant of the issue; but that he would have it appear to us, he has
appointed them as his instruments for the trial of our faith Deuteronomy. 13.3.
, and that by constant perseverance we shall obtain a crown of life Apoc
2.10. Al those means that have been offered to reclaim us, shall come against
us to condemn us.
. But to the purpose, as for the wicked, if neither the preaching of the word
will reclaim them, the prick of their own conscience stir them, the
persuasion of the godly move the^, nor the patience of a good Magistrate amend
them; no doubt, all these means will be a witness of their own misery Deuteronomy.
18.19.
, and every hour will threatten their mishap: for it is written, There shall
be no end of plagues to the evil man, and his destruction shall rise suddenly
Prou 24.20.22.
. And therefore (as it is recorded in the Revelation of John) Let him that is
unjust, be unjust still; that is filthy, be filthy still; that is righteous,
be righteous still; that is holy, be holy still: and behold, says Christ, I
come shortly, and my reward is with me to give to every man according as his
work shall be Apoc. 22.11. Every one shall bear his own burden.
. Then they shall find that the same soul that sins shall die; that every
one shall give account of himself, and that the reward of wickedness is hell
fire. So, let us neither envy them Pro. 24.19.
, but use all the ways that may be to win them; neither let us imitate them,
but let every one of us say with good Joshua, I and my household will serve the
Lord Josh 24.15. It is wisdom to fear, but not to follow the worst.
. As for cutting them off for fear of corruption, is to forbear a good deed
for fear of a displeasure; and he that fears all inconveniences shall never
do his duty: according to that saying of Solomon, He that observes the
wind, shall not sow, and he that regards the clouds, shall not reap
Eccle. 11.4.
. You produce many reasons for this matter, which indeed are more prolixious
to make argument, than probable to confirm the truth, or appliable to your
opinion: None may plead against Gods providence
for there is no carnal reason current with God, neither must you plead
earthly experience against his eternal providence: For albeit to our sensual
judgment there seems no hope or means of (...) have the foxes, yea the
little foxes taken away Can. 2.15.
; noting indeed, that although the oldest did most mischief, yet the youngest
did some hurt, and were not to be suffered, least they disturb, or (by
continuance) destroy the vine: The declaiming of Justice increases evil.
Eccle. 8.11.
whereby we may learn to remove the means of mischief, and to cut off the
causes of corruption in the beginning, especially in these perilous days,
considering the ready inclination of many to evil 1. Tim. 4.1.
: for such is the inconvenience of error and such like, that it will spread
like the vine, if it be not cut off; scatter like the strawberie, Beware of
the leaven of the Pharisees. Mark. 8.15.
if it be not staid; and mount like the palm, if it be permitted: and
therefore in time it is to be prevented. As for that same place of S. Paul you
produce touching the admission of heresies amongst the Corinthians 1. Cor. 21.19
; truly it is to no purpose to prove the opinion you hold: for the same
Apostle (foreseeing the great prejudice might come by such infectious members)
willed Titus to reject him that is an heretic, after once or twice admonition:
knowing that he that is such, is perverted, and sins being damned of his
own self Tit. 3.10.11.
. And what should move any to maintain or meddle with such, seeing their
properties (described by an ancient father) are so pestiferous; they are
subtle like foxes, biting like dogs, proud like Lions Barnard.
? And as for the rest of your matter, seeing it is nothing material to the
purpose, I will (for brevity sake) omit to answer it: So that all things
being seriously considered (according to my former assertion) I can see no
cause why such (as we have argued of) should be continued.


Nican. If you be ignorant of that you should know, you must not be obstinate
where you may learn; you harp all upon one string, which although it please
your self, it yeeldes no perfect sound: what should we so singularly account
of our selves, seeing (as the Apostle says) in many things we sin al Iam.
3.2.
? Or what should we so stricktlie deal with others that cannot do well,
considering when we have all done what we can, yet the best is but an
unprofitable servant Luk 17.14.
? And surely if we did descend narrowly into our selves, it would appear we
are so blind, we cannot see the beams in our own eyes, though we be so busy
to meddle with motes in others: The loosenes of our lives make the adversaries
more obstinate.
for undoubtedly there is nothing that gives greater liberty of offense to
those which we term Papists, and such like, than the loosenes of our lives,
which profess our selves to be Protestants: If our conversation were
conformable to our profession, it could not but draw them to a more desire of
amendment. It was this that provoked Peter to persuade the wives to sobriety
and subjection, that others may be won by their conversation which obey not
the word 1. Pet. 3.1^.
; and for this cause there is required in us a more integrity, that we may
give no evil occasion any way to the adversary 1 Pet. 2 12.
. What profits protestation of great learning, where there follows no
forwardnes in our living. It is proper to many to profess well, but given to
few to follow it
It is expedient for a good Christian, not only to be an open professor of
the word of God, but also to be a godly pattern by his life and deeds.
Hereof says our Savior Christ, (...) Let ter tolerate him that trips in the
true knowledge of God, than him that utterly denies his Godhead If any man
love not the Lord Jesus Christ let him be had in execration. Maranatha. 1. Cor.
16 22.

Those that swerve from the word of God cannot abide to be admonished. Prou.
15.10. etc.


: if we hang such as imbeasell our goods, shall we harbor such as impair his
glory? shall we prefer temporal commodity, more then his eternal Majesty?
No no, all liberty is too little where there is hope of recouetie; any, is
too much where the case is incurable. Therefore to conclude, as those which are
tractable to be taught, and conformable to good orders, are to be continued,
so such as set abroach gross importable errors, and obstinatlie persevere, are
to be cut off, least others by their example be animated to evil: for better
it were to decide one member, than endanger the whole body. And this is
tolerable by the warrant of Gods word, as may appear by these directions The
Minister of God bears not the sword for naught: but to take vengeance on him
that does evil. Romans 13.4.
. That man that will do presumptuously not harkening unto the Priest that
stands before the Lord thy God to minister there, or unto the Judge, that man
shall die and thou shall take away evil from Israel; so all the people shall
hear and fear and do no more Deuteronomy 17.12.13.
. And hereto agrees that godly act which is recorded by Ezra. Whosoever will
not do the Law of God, and the Kings Law, let him have judgment without
delay whether it be unto death, or to banishment, or to confiscation of goods,
or to imprisonment Ezra. 7.26.
. I could dilate the confirmation hereof by many other approbations to the
like effect, but seeing it is already sufficien the proved: it were not so
superfluous for me to insert, as it will be frivolous for you to reply; and so
I leave it to your consideration.


Nican. Albeit I was somewhat willing to defend the weak, I was never so
forward to justify the wicked, or so foolish, to stand in my own conceit: for
as the word of God is the perfect touch of all truth, Men's reasons are but
tickle, but the written truth can never ouerturne.
so I even refer my reasons to that rule, and at this time submit my self to
your sayings; not for want of matter to make further objection, but because it
is altogether impertinent to prove your first opinion, and therefore I pray show
me what moves you to say the world was never worse, being already partly
approved to the contrary.


Alph. Then I pray tell me, what are become of these ancient Monuments,
stately Monasteries, and huge buildings that were wont to be, where the poor
might have continual access for relief, and the stranger free resort for
succor? are these not defaced? but their free stones have bewtified most of our
fair buildings The high places were not taken away out of Israel, yet the
heart of Asa was perfect all his days. 2. Chro. 14.17. We feed the poor with
fair shows in steed of food.
. Where are become all the revenues and lands that belonged to them, which (by
report) were large? are not the better sort enriched with their livings? Yea no
doubt (superstition set apart) this season were incomparable to it. We have now
sumptuous houses, but slender hospitallitie: for all the smoke comes out of one
chimney; great substance, but small charity, for every one is for himself;
now hospitality is turned to prodigality, all bounty to bravery: then was
good faith amongst all folks; The time has been, when more words were used
tha^ writings, and yet better dealing than at these days.
truth went by tallies, their dealing was so simple, now nothing will serve,
men are so subtle: then was good neighborhood without nicenes, now given over
for griplenes; or little used without curiousnes: all things then (...) gather
thy grapes clean after thee, but they shall be for the stranger, fatherles
and widow, that the Lord thy God may bless thee in all the works of thy hand
Deuteronomy. 24.19.20.21.
. Such was the good providence of God, that somewhat should be left by the way
of relief to the distressed: but in these days we are grown so hard, that
we neither leave sheaues, rakings, nay hardly gleanings for the poor to
gather: and as for fruit, many keep them till they rot, and give them to hogs,
rather when they are good, impart them to the poor. If hospitality were not
necessary, why did the Apostle put the Romans in mind to give themselves to
it Romans 12.13.
? Or admonish the Hebrews not to be forgetful of it Hebr. 13.2.
? Or exhort us to be harberous one to another without grudging 1. Pet. 4.9.
? If hospitality be hurtful, why have those prospered that have performed
it, as Abraham and Lot, who in shape of men received Angels into their houses
Genesis 18.2.3.
? As the Shunammite, who by intertayning Elisha, according to her desire had a
son 2. King. 4.14
? If hospitality were not good, why are those plagued that pretermit it, as
Nabal, who for the hardness of his heart to David in his distress, and for the
unthankfulness of his delivery being in great danger, the Lord abridged his
days 1. Sam. 25.38
? As the rich man, who not tendering Lazarus extremity, was tormented with
intolerable pains in hell Luke 16.22.
?

What moved our Savior Christ to say, I was an hungered, and ye gave me no
meat: I was astranger, and ye took me not in: I was naked, and ye clothed me
not: sick, and in prison, and ye visited me not, etc. Verelie I say unto you,
in as much as ye did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to me:
depart from me ye cursed into euerlasling fire Math 25.41. etc.
. Surely not that we should presume our salvation depends upon works or
merits; but that we should learn to live within the compass of charity, and
not so lightly to account of hospitality. It was this that made Job in his
innocence to burst forth and say; If I have restrained the poor of their
desire, The true use of hospitality, is to make prouesion for the poor.
or have caused the eyes of the widow to fail, or have eaten my morsels
alone, and the fatherles have not cate thereof: If I have seen any perish for
want of clothing, or any poor without covering; If his loins have not
blessed me because he was warmed with the fleece of my sheep; If I have lift
up my hand against the fatherles, when I saw I might help him in the gate,
let my arm fall from my shoulder and be broken from the bone Job. 31.16. etc.
. We have such indeed amongst us, that will make bounteous fare for their
betters; sumptuous feasts for their friends; costly cheer for their kindred,
and yet will scarce afford a little bread or broth to the poor; Hospitality
consists not in superfluity, or in preparation of great dilicates for our own
diots.
is not this (as we term it) basting the fat hog, where they may be
acquitted with like cost and courtesy. Call you this hospitality; then Dives
did well, for he fared delitiouslie; but if we take his course, we shall never
come in heaven. Our Savior Christ shows us the true use of hospitality:
When thou make a feast (says he) call the poor, the maimed, the lame, and
the blind, and thou shall be blessed because they cannot recompense thee Luke.
14.13.
. Hereto agreeeth that same notable saying of the Prophet Esaias, (...) he dealt
by Job, who having abundance of wealth, they were suddenly taken away Job.
1.12.
. What folly to be a drudge for them? Why? Solomon wills us to travail not
much to be rich Pro. 23.4.
, but to cease from our wisdom: for indeed as we come naked out of our
mothers womb, so we shall return: and (as David says) carry nothing away
when we die Psalm. 49.17.
. What felicity to gather them? Why? they can neither prolong our life in this
world Luke 12 15.
, or avail us in the day of wrath Prou. 11.4.
. What fearefulnes to possess the^? Why? It is easier for a Camel to go
through a needles eye, than for the rich man to enter into the kingdom of
heaven Matt. 19 24.
. Go to now ye rich men (says James) weep and houle for the miseries shall
come upon you Iam. 5.1.
. Thus if men had as much grace as they have goods, or were as mindful of their
salvation, as their substance, they would neither be so griple in gathering, so
hard in withholding, or so loath in leaving this worldly wealth; but so
account of them, to possess them as the gift of God; to dispose them as his
stewards, Christians should thus account of their riches.
and to impart them as Christians: So by this means the poor should be more
respected, the Common wealth more increased, and this time not so justly
condemned. Against such as use incrochment upon the poor.
Is there not such amongst us, as do enlarge their own livings, by incroching
upon the poor, by eating up their lands, in buying houses over their heads, by
abridging their liberties, and taking away their Commons? I fear me, if the
complaints of the poor were favorably pitied, their estate would appear
lamentable; and if the extremity of the rich were exactlie searched, their
dealings would prove intolerable. What a thing is this, The stone shall cry
out of the wall, and the beam out of the Timber shall answer it. Hab. 2.11.
that those which have the whole world at will to walk in, should so hardly
allow their poor brethren the bare air to breathe in. These are they whom
Solomon speaks on, There is a generation (says he) whose teeth are as
swords, and their chawes as knives to eat up the afflicted out of the earth,
and the poor from among men Prou. 30.14.
. I marvel what should move men to be so miserable in their dealings, seeing
it is so reproueable by the word of God? Are the Scriptures written only for
our learning Romans 15.4.
, and shall we contemn it in our living? Is it sufficient for us to talk, and
not to walk well; to profess much, and follow nothing? Does the Prophet Esaias
say in vain, Woe unto them that join house to house, and lay field to field,
that there be no place, that ye may be placed by your selves in the mids of
the earth Esaias. 5.8.
. Does the Prophet Jeremiah speak to no purpose, Woe unto him that builds his
house by unrighteousness, and his chambers without equity Iere. 22.13.
. Is it written to no end, Cursed is he that remoueth his neighbors mark, and
all the people shall say, Amen Deuteronomy. 27.19.
Is it foretold in Hosea to no effect, The Princes of Judah were like them that
remove the bound: therefore will I power out my wrath upon them like water
Hosea 5.10. Gods threatenings are a terror to a troubled conscience.
. Oh horrible exclamations for a hard conscience? Oh fearful judgment for
wicked creatures? What conquest is it to overcome the poor, seeing it will be
the cause of your own confusion: For (as Solomon says) the Lord will defend
their cause, and spoil the soul of those that spoil them Prou. 22.23.
. What say, He that shows no mercy, shall have merciles condemnation Jacob.
2.13.
. Does not our Savior Christ say, Such measure as you mete shall be met to you
again Marc. 18.28. etc.
. Have you not example of the Servant, who being pitied of the King his master,
because he showed no favor to his fellow that was in his danger, he was cast
into prison, Rehoboam oppressed his people grieuouslie, but the Lord did punish
him by the loss of the tenth part of his Realm. 1. King. 12. 2. Chro. 12.
there to remain until he had paid the uttermost penie to his master? But if
you had as forward wills to practice that is good, as you have flattering
reasons to persuade you to your hurt, you would neither provoke God of malice,
when you see what is written, or oppress the poor by might, when you know
you do wrong, or hate him that reproues you, when you hear he does well.

Is there not amongst us one neighbor that enuieth another, For such as be
contentious and take delight in lawing.
that will wrangle for a word, that will go to law (as we commonly say) for a
straw? Truly there was never more impiety amongst Pagans, then there is now
contention amongst Christians, Many spend their money upon malice, without
regard of the goodness of the matter.
who often times wilfully will spend their money wastfullie, lauishing more
upon fury in a matter of no importance, than they gathered together before
with great pains, giving that lightly to the Lawyer, that they have gotten
hardly by their labor: Goods are the gift of God, but sedition is the seed
of the devil.
Be these Christians? Then they are more of spite, than the spirit. Are they
neighbors? then they are more near than necessary: Be they men? then they
are more wilful than wise: these are they that grutch to give a penie to a
poor Lazar, but they will not stick to bestow a pound upon the Lawyer: but
when the sting of their stomachs begin to be staid, The law is made, not to
cause, but to keep men from contention and discord.
and the swelling of their purses do somewhat assuage, then they leave the
law against their wills, and lament their oversight to their shame, sustaining
afterward great loss to their grief, which before made the Lawyers to laugh
with their gains, Lawyers are necessary to plead for preferment of truth,
but needeles, if they procure suites for their own profits.
and then commonly they fall from all reason to rage, exclaiming against the
law without cause, when they should condemn their own leaudnes, which was
the cause: they do not consider at the first what counsel S. Paul gave to
the Corinthians when they were contentious: Is it so (says he) there is not a
wise man amongst you? no not one that can judge between his brethren? Now
therefore there is altogether infirmity in you, in that ye go to law one with
another: why rather suffer ye not wrong? why rather sustain ye not harm 1.
Cor. 6.5, 7. etc.
? but at the last (yea too late) when all or much is wasted, then the Apostle
can persuade them to compromit matters, No wisdom will persuade the wilful in
time.
and bring them to abide the arbitrame^t of their brethren. Oh foolish fury of
man, that cannot bridle the lust of his mind, without loss of his money, and
permit some injury with patience, without commensing suit to his greater
sorrow. We ought to overcome evil with good with out rendering evil for evil.
These are none of those (whom our Savior Christ counsels) that will part
from the cloak with the coat, rather then they will sue; or turn the cheek
to take another blow, rather than they will strive; or bliss where they curse,
rather than they will suffer Matthew 5.39. etc.
: they can hardly do as Abraham did, rather resign his right, than contend
with Let Genesis 13.8, 9.
: but they prosper? No, for although you have no will to do well your self,
you shall leave them to such as shall better bestow them; according as Solomon
says, He that increases his riches by usury and interest, gathers the^ for
him that will be merciful to the poor Prou 28.8. None may take lawfully by
lending one penny of profit.
. What warrant have you by the word of God to take any lucre by lending; but
rather a commandment to the contrary, Thou shall not give to usury to thy
brother, as usury of money, usury of meat, usury of any thing that is put
to usury Deuteronomy. 23.19. leuit. 25.37.
. What says the Prophet Ezekiel: He that has given forth upon usury, or
taken increase, he shall not live Ezekiel. 18.13.
. Hereof says David on the contrary, He that gives not his money unto
usury, nor takes reward against the innocent, shall never be moved Psalm. 15.5.
. But these do not care for the sayings of the Scripture, Suauisest odor
lucri: Sed extremus est dolor inferni.
which do but grieve them: they are so carried with the savor of gain, which
is so sweet to them, who as they repose all their pleasure in this life, so
they have no respect in their living, or any feeling of the felicity to come.
As for the rest of the sins that reign amongst us, because they be many, I
will omit: for it would require a large volume to express every vice; but let
this suffice, there is no sin so heinous to repeat, so horrible to
enterprise, or so abominable before God, but at this day is amongst us as
rife, as if the devil bare the banner; as common, as though we had no souls
to save; as careless, as though there were no God to revenge: So that I may
lawfully affirm my first speech, the world was never worse than now.


Nican. Your long discourse discovers many a sin, which although they be
common amongst us, All people have their impersectiont.
yet it is no consequent occasion to condemn this time only; because the
world has always been bewitched with such wickedness, even from Adam our first
predecessor, as permanent to all his posterity: there is none exempted from
sin; Lot, David, Solomon, yea al our forefathers had their infirmities: there
is no fire made of wood, but has smoke; nor any man made of flesh, but has
his faults: as the wiseman writes, There is no man just on the earth that does
good and sins not Eccles. 7.^^.
: for if we were able to refrain that we ought, and willing to follow that
we should, we might rather be canonized for Saints, than condemned for
sinners: but there is such a continual combat between the flesh and the
spirit Jacob. 4.1.
, that when we have a motion to do good, it withdraws us; and when we have
a provocation to evil, it puts us forward; according as our Savior Christ
says, The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak Matthew. 26.4.
. It was this that made Paul complain and say, I allow not that which I do;
for that I would, that do I not; but what I hate, that do I Rom 7.19.
. And therefore it is no marvel that we be so inclined to evil in these
days, seeing the Apostles Matt. 26.74.
, nay the Prophets 2. Sam. 11.2. etc.
, yea the Patriarchs themselves Genesis 19.30.
have been surpressed with sin, and that most horribly.


Alph. I remember S. Barnard says, Barnard.
That the dissembling of our weakness, the ignorance of our wretchedness, the
excusing of our wickedness, and the perseuering in freely? Is there not learned
Divines to expound it effectually? zealous preachers to instruct the people
continually? Where there is no will to do well, Gods benesites are abused.
Yea, if any people were ever certified by outward signs of Gods goodness, it
is we in England; who have had all the means that may be to reclaim us, being
wicked; and to continue us, doing well; that although our untowardness would not
suffer us, the time has been sufficient to have taught us: but no doubt every
one knows his duty, though he does it not; knows evil from good, though he
eschew it not: And therefore the very Turks, Infidels, and all the rest of
the unbelievers shall rise against us at the latter day: for no doubt if they
had tasted the sweet treasure of the word so long time as we have done,
Heathen shall condemn Christians for the abuse of Gods benefits.
they would ere this day have brought forth better fruits of their profession
in their lives and conversation, to our utter shame and confusion. So that I
may conclude, the whole course of the Scripture will condemn us.


Nican. I cannot yet hear any reason that should enforce you to continue your
former speech, much less perceive any cause should confirm it to be true:
for I am sure we all acknowledge one God.


Alph. And so do the devils, and they fear and Jacob. 2.19.
tremble: but it is not sufficient for us to say we know God, unless we keep
his commandments 1. Ioh. 2.4.
: for such a one (the Apostle says) is a lier.


Nican. There is not one can keep the Commandments perfectly in all points.


Alph. Yet we must not omit the means to come as nigh as we may: besides,
Christ's righteousness is ours by imputation.
as Christ has performed the^ for us, so he has somewhat mitigated the
hardness thereof: for (says he) my yoke is easy Matthew. 11.30 1. Ioh. 5.3.
, and my burden light.


Nican. We all like Christians serve GOD, and call upon his name.


Alph. And so do the devils likewise: for they serve god as his instruments,
to do his good pleasure, Job. 1.12.
and can call upon him earnestly for a leaud practice Mark. 5.10.
; but it is required of us, when we call upon his name; not to continue in
evil, (as Paul says) Let every one that call upon his name 2. Tim. 2.19
depart from iniquity: but to do his will revealed in his word. Hereof says
our Savior Christ, Not every one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven Matthew. 7.21,
, but he that does the will of my father which is in heaven.


Nican. We frequent sermons continually.


Alph. But what does that prevail, We ought so to hear the word as we may
obey it, or else we do but abuse it. Eze. 33.31 etc
unless we conform our selves by them? The Apostle says, The hearers of the
law are not righteous before God, but the doers of the law shall be justified
Romans 2.13.
. And to this may fitly be annexed that same saying of S. James, He that
hears the word and does it not, is like unto a man that beholds his
natural face in a glass Jacob. 1.22.
: for when he has considered himself he goes his way, and forgets
immediately what manner of one he was. Our Savior Christ says, that he is
blessed Luke 11.23.
that hears the word and keeps it.


Nican. We have al great knowledge in the scriptures as may be, and so much;
that every one thinks himself apter to teach than to learn.


Alph. our Savior Christ himself describes by the servant Luke 12.47.



Nican. Whatsoever I say, I perceive you conster it to the contrary; which
seeing it is so, I had rather submit my self to your censure, so it be
reasonable, than proceed still in argument, if it were superfluous: and
therefore I pray in few words approve your first speech.


Alph. I could infer further matter to this effect; but that which is
already said is sufficient to approve it to be true, if it be well
considered, and may persuade you to believe it, if you be not obstinate; both
for the free passage we have had of the word many years without restraint;
the blessed peace we have enjoyed in this land long time without trouble; and
the little profit we have reaped to our selves, by reason of the benefit of
both; where in times past, The more benefits God bestows upon ante people,
the more does their ingratitude and abuse deserve to be punished. Luke 10.14.
etc. Psalm. 99 8. etc.
the word was disturbed with superstition, the land was incombred with
persecution, so that the people could not come to the knowledge of true
religion, in respect of the iniquity of the time. And therefore, if they shall
be beaten with few stripes, which were allowed no liberty to learn
publicly; or at the least, wanted the ways to win them to it, as we have
had continually, how many stripes are we worthy of, that are worse than
they, and yet have had all the means that may be to amend us?


Nican. Although I cannot but sigh to see that which is evil, I must not let
to say that which is true: for now I am fully resolved the world was never
worse, especially with us, who have greatly abused the benefit of Gods word,
considering the innumerable sins that reign so rife in all sorts of people.


Alph. Then, seeing we are a people as wicked, as they of Sodom and Gomorha,
and it is a season as sinful, as it was in the time of Noah, we must not
think (as the Apostle Peter says) the Lord will spare us, more than those 2.
Pet. 2.6.
whom he has made ensamples for us.


Nican. No doubt if we do not presently repent we shall so provoke the Lord,
that in stead of peace he will procure us trouble, and cause him (according as
it is written) to set his face against us Leuit. 26.17.
, yea and suffer such as hate us to reign over us.


Alph. Nay, more than that, if we still abuse his blessed word, let us take
heed least that same prophecy against Israel, be verified in England; that
the Lord send us not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water; but a famine of
hearing Amos. 8 ^^.
his word, which God defend.


Nican. The Lord so do, and grant that his fervent spirit may so thawe our
frosen hearts, that being brought to the sight of our sins, we may be sorry
for the same, and so afterward lead our lives in holiness and righteousness
before him.


Alph. Amen.


Nican. Seeing we have waded thus far, let us proceed a little further: for
me thinks we cannot be better occupied, than to spend the time in godly talk,
and to employe our pains to the profit of others.


Alph. (...) ways on earth; for the fashion of it goes away 1. Cor. 7.31.
. If God has appointed that all must once die Hebr. 9.27.
let us not refuse to suffer for the testimony of a good conscience; for as it
is the only gift of God, so it is given but to a few Philip. 1.29.
; but blessed are those that embrace it Matthew. 5.10.
. Though the world be waucring, notwithstanding, It is required of us so to
profit whilst we possess the word, as we may persist when it pleases God
to prove us for the same.
though some be infected, yet all be not affected to superstition; but many
are so far from following it they utterly defy it. If the world be so
waiward as you say, let not our minds be as mutable; but in these Alcyon
days let us learn to lay a good foundation for our faith, that we may gather
such godly consolation in time of peace, as may confirm our constancy
against the days of persecution: for true it is the Apostle says, All that
live godly in 2. Tim. 3.12.
Christ shall suffer persecution: and this is most certain, the world will
increase in evil 2. Esd. 14.16
as it does in age.


Alph. We have not said any thing but that is tolerable by the word of GOD,
and profitable to many, especially to the well disposed, who will allow it,
though the froward mislike it. As we have touched the Papists in friendly
manner, so we have not ouerslipped our selves in flattering sort: for both, nay
all of us are evil inclined, and therefore none of us but may be admonished,
yea and the best of us amended. We have not busied our selves (as some do of
late setting forth) in presuming to meddle in many matters that are unmeet
(who thinking to get credit by showing a great gloss by their curious art,
do nothing else but reap reproach by their presumptuous attempts, whose grace
is altogether in disgracing others); but we have conferred of such matter as
concerns the necessity of the time, the beating down of sin, and the
advancing of Gods glory. And therefore least we be counted to occupy our
selves (as they did) more busily than wisely, we will here abruptly end
till our next meeting, and then as occasion shall be ministered, we will use
further conference. In the mean time I thank you for your company, and commit
you to the Almighty.


FINIS.

