A very proper dittie:
to the tune of Lightie love.
Leave Lightie love Ladies, for fear of ill name:
And True love embrace ye, to purchase your Fame.

BY force I am fixed my fancy to write,
Ingratitude wills me not to refrain:
Then blame me not Ladies although I indite
What lighty love now amongst you does reign
Your traces in places, with outward allureme^ts
Does move my endeavor to be the more plain:
Your nicyngs and ticings, with sundry procurementes
To publish your lightie love does me constrayne.
Deceit is not dainty, it coms at each dish,
Fraud goes a fisshyng with friendly looks,
Through friendship is spoiled the seely poor fish,
That boouer and shouer upon your false hooks,
With baight, you lay weight, to catch here and there,
Which causes poor fisshes their freedom to lose:
Then loute ye, and floute ye, whereby does appear,
Your lighty love Ladies, still cloaked with gloss.
With DIAN so chaste, you seem to compare,
When HELLENS you be, and hang on her train:
Me thinks faithful Thisbies, be now very rare,
Not one CLEOPATRA, I doubt does remain:
You wincke, and you twincke, till Cupid have caught,
And forces through flames your Lovers to sue:
Your lyghtie love Ladies, too dear they have bought,
When nothing will move you, their causes to rue.
I speak not for spite, ne do I disdain,
Your beauty fair Ladies, in any respect:
But ones Ingratitude does me constrayne,
As child hurt with fire, the same to neglect:
For proouyng in loving, I find by good trial,
When Beauty had brought me unto her beck:
She staying, not waying, but made a denial,
And she wyng her lightie love, gave me the check.
Thus fraud for friendship, did lodge in her breast,
Such are most women, that when they epsy,
Their lovers inflamed with sorrows oppressed,
They stand then with Cupid against their reply
They taunte, and they vaunte, they smile when they view
How Cupid had caught them under his train,
But warned, discerned, the proof is most true,
That lightie love Ladies, amongst you does reign.
It seems by your doings, that Cressed does scoole ye,
Penelopeys virtues are clean out of thought:
Me thinks by your constantnesse, Heleyne does rule ye,
Which, both Greece and Troy, to ruin has brought:
No doubt, to tell out, your manyfolde driftes,
Would show you as constant, as is the Sea sand:
To trust so unjust, that all is but shieftes,
With lightie love bearyng your lovers in hand.
If ARGVS were living, whose eyes were in number*
The Peacockes plume painted, as Wri;ters reply,
Yet Women by wiles, full sore would him ^umber,
For all his quick eyes, their driftes to epsy:
Such feats, with disceates, they daily frequent,
To conquer men's minds, their humors to feed,
That bouldly I may give Arbittrement:
Of this your lightie love, Ladies in deed.
Ye men that are subject to Cupid his struck,
And therein seems to have your delight:
Think when you see baight, there is hidden a hook,
Which sure will ^ane you, if that you do bight:
Such wiles, and such guiles, by women are wrought
That half their mischefes, men cannot prevent,
When they are most pleasant, unto your thought,
Then nothing but lightie love, is their intent.
Consider that poison does lurk oftentyme
In shape of sugre, to put some to pain:
And fair words painted, as Dawes can define,
The old Proverb says, does make some fools feign:
Be wise and precise, take warning by me,
Trust not the Crocodile, least you do rue:
To women's fair words, do never agree:
For all is but lightie love, this is most true.
ANEXES so dainty, Example may be,
Whose lightie love caused youg IPHIS his woe,
His true love was tried by death, as you see,
Her lightie love forced the Knight thereunto:
For shame then refrain, you Ladies therefore,
The Clouds they do vanish, and light does appear:
You can not dissemble, nor hide it no more
Your love is but lightie love, this is most clear.
For Troylus tried the same over well,
In loving his Lady, as Fame does report:
And likewise Menander, as Stories does tell,
Who swam the salt Seas, to his love, to resort:
So true, that I rue, such lovers should lose
Their labor in seeking their Ladies unkind:
Whose love, they did prove, as the Proverb now goes
Even very lightie love, lodgde in their mind.
I touch no such Ladies, as true love embrace,
But such as to lightie love daily apply:
And none will be grieved, in this kind of case,
Save such as are minded, true love to deny:
Yet friendly and kindly, I show you my mind,
Fair Ladies I wish you, to use it no more,
But say what you list, thus I have definde,
That lightie love Ladies, you ought to abhore.
To trust women's words, in any respect,
The danger by me right well it is seen:
And Love and his Laws, who would not neglect,
The trial whereof, most peryllous been:
Pretending, the endyng, if I have offended,
I crave of you Ladies an Answer again:
Amend, and what is said, shall soon be amended,
If case that your lightie love, no longer do rain.
By Leonarde Gybson.
FINIS.
Imprinted at London, in the upper end of Fleetlane, by Richard Ihones: and are
to be sold at his shop joining to the Southwest Door of Saint Paul's Church.

*reversed

An Epitaph on the death of the virtuous Matrone, the Lady Maioresse, late
wife to the right Honorable Lord, (Alexander Auenet) Lord Mayor of the City
of London. Who deceased the vii. Day of July. 1570.
Help now ye Muses nine, power out your Noates of woe:
Aid me with pitious pearcing plaints, the l^^^^ of her to shoe.
Whose Virtues (maugre Death,) shall live and last for aye:
As fliyng Fame in Golden Trump, does cherefully display.
Ye Ladies leave your sportes: your Pastymes set aside
To weep this Ladies Fatal fine: Cunduictes of streams provide.
Cast off your costly Silks: your Iuelles now forsake:
To deck your selves in mourning Weeds, now poastynge haste do make:
Help now ye faithful Wives, to wayle this faithful Wife:
Whose flowynge Virtues were not hyd, while she enjoyed life,
As well to Friend as Foe, her Courtesy was known:
But now the Gods have thought it good, to claim again their own.
LVCINA has forgot her Chardge, the fatal Fates have don:
CLOTHO has left the Rock of life: and LACHAS long has spon.
These werie of their wonted toil, at mighty JOVE'S Decree:
To whom the Heavens the Earth and Sea: and all things Subject be.
The Sister dire, fearce ATROPOS, with schortchyng cuttynge Knyfe,
Has shred the Threede that long did hold, this Godly Ladies life.
Whose loss dear Dames bewail: and weep with many a tear:
For you shall miss a Matrone grave, in danger you to cheer.
Whose Counsel in their need, her Neighbors could not want:
Her Help unto the Comfortless, could never yet be scant.
Unto the poor oppressed, with Sickness, grief and pain:
To minister and give relief: her Heart was ever feign.
The Poor have lost a Nurse, to help their nedie state:
The Ritche shall want a perfect Friend: as they can well relate.
Thus Ritche and Poor shall want, her Aid at every need,
For both Estates in danger deep: she labored to feed.
The Ritche with Counselles sweet, to chearish still she thought:
The Poor by Alms and lyberall Gifts: to tender long she sought.
But who shall have the greatest loss: I know is not unknown,
Her best beloved: the Wight whom she, accounted for her own.
The Lord MAYOR which now does rule: in LONDON noble City:
Shall want her sight, (the greater grief, to miss a Mate so witty
A Phenyx rare, a Turtell true, so constant in her love:
That Nature needs must show her Force, her Husbands Tears to move
Who for the loss of such a Wife: can sobbyng Sighs refrain?
In whom so many Virtues did, continue and remain.
You Damselles dear Domestical, which in her House abide:
Have cause to wayle, for you have lost a good and godly Guide.
Whose Lenytie and gentell Heart, you all have known and felt:
For unto you in Courteous sort, her Gifts she ever dealt.
You Officers that daily serve, her Lord at every need:
Can testify that you have lost, a Lady kind in deed.
So gentell, grave, demure and wise: as ye your selves express:
That needs ye must gush forth your Tears: and weep with bytternesse
In fine, both Ritche and Poor, have just cause given to wayle:
The Rich in Counsel lack a Friend, the Poor their Comfort fail.
The Troop of married Dames, which shall her Virtues know:
Have offered cause, in bitter Tears, some time for to bestow.
But since it is the Gods Decree, to whom all Flesh must bend:
To take this Lady from the earth, and bring her days to end.
Who can withholde that they will have? who dare their will withstand?
To vain it were for mortal men, the cause to take in hand
Her Virtues were so great, that they have thought it meet:
To take from hence unto the Heavens, her Crystal Soul so sweet.
Which now enclosed is, with Aungelles rownde about:
Such hoape we have, no other cause, is given us for to doubt.
Her Corpse shall shrowde in Claye, the Earth her right does crave:
This Lady yeldes her Parent too: her Tomb, her Cell and Grave.
From whence, no King nor Keysar can, nor Ruler bearing swaye:
For all their Force and Puissaunce, once starte or go away.
All Flesh shall have an end: as Gods do grant and will:
And reap reward as they deserve, hap good, or hap it ill.
But though that Death have done his worste, this Dame to take away:
In spite of Death, her Virtues shall endure and last for aye.
Farewell (O Lady Dear) the Heavens have chosen thee
Receive this VALE, I have done: thou gettest no more of me.
Post Funera viuit virtus.
Quoth John Phillip.
Imprinted at London by Richard Iohnes.


