The Souls WATCH: OR, A Day-Booke for the Devout SOVLE. Consisting of 52
heavenly Medications, and diverse godly Prayers, ^^^^d to all the days of ^he
WEEK.

Being holy Exercises for a Sanctified conversation, and spirit^all riches for
the ^^^^ard Man:

By JOHN GERHARD Dr. of Divinity, and superintendent of Heldourge.

PSALM. 143.10. Let thy good spirit lead me into the land of righteousness.
Englished by R. B. With the Lords Prayer expounded by him.

The fourth Edition.

London, printed by Thomas Harper for John Harison, and are to be sold at his
shop in Pater noster row at the sigue of the Unicorn. 1632.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, Religious and worthy Lady, the Lady LVCIE, Countess
of BEDFORD.
Right Honorable:
THe favor that these Meditations found with the more judicious and devout sort
of people, when they where first imprinted, has caused me to take more pains
and care about this, then I did about the former. What I have swept out that
was in that, what I have newly added unto this I have prefaced to the Reader. I
have enough for all my pains, if the Prayers which I have added will serve at
any time to stir up the least fire or spark of devotion in any Christian
heart: but for the Meditations I can never speak enough: so heavenly, so
pithy, so feeling, and so quick, that he that reads or hears them, if he
have any life of grace in him, shall feel them not only pleasing to his taste
and sweet unto his ear, but moving his affections also, and working on his
heart.

Now, that this book is named unto your Honor from the man that you have not
known, may be an imputation of my great presumption, that have dared to offer
it, will be an intimation of your greater goodness vouchsafing to accept it:
This may your Honor pardon in me, that shall I praise in you; and yet there
are some reasons that have inclined me hereu^to. For besides the advice of my
friends herein, that are people of your knowledge, two things as just motives,
have induced me thus to do.

First, having lived some years in the place near, where your Honor kept your
residence; and hearing diverse well-affected people testify of your love to
religion, your pious heart, and godly conversation, I thought good in this
living and lives like Book, to give a testimony thereof also to the men of
this age, and to the people that shall come hereafter.

Secondly, because I could not choose but do, as I think all other did, that
either knew your person, or had heard of your Honorable name; and known your
sorrow, namely, condole you in your loss I thought the comforts of this Book
would befit your mourning, which speaks oppositely to that purpose, as in
other places, viz the exercise of the first and seventh days, so especially in
the two and thirtieth Meditation: you will think when you read it, that it
was meant and written purposely for your comfort.

I speak out of experience of mine own affliction, when the Lord of late had
made many sorrows to lay hold of me at once, and brought upon me breaking
upon breaking, like the waves of the Sea, one in the neck of another: after
he had plucktout of my bosom, and slain the Who died the 19 of August 1614.
Mother of my children, mine honest and best-deseruing Wife: after he had bound
me to the peace, on the Bed of my sickness, hopeless of life and health, and
had like yet farther to have made a further slaughter in my house, amongst my
young ones: In the recovery of my health, when I came to visit my solitary
dwelling, these Meditations were mine especial comforts in the house of my
mourning.

God Almighty make this Book this way also useful unto your Honor, and
otherwise profitable unto your soul, and to the souls of all that read it;
and the Lord give unto you a blessing in the increase of grace and honor in
this life, and the full fruition of happiness in the life to come.

Your Honors to be commanded in the Lord Christ, RICHARD BRVCH.

To the READER.
I Am enforced to Epistle thee also (gentle Reader) that thou may know
somewhat from me concerning the Editions of this Book; I made it indeed at
first to speak English, and then delivered it to be printed; but there were
added unto it diverse things without my knowledge. For it took from me neither
name, nor any other thing in it else besides the version. All which things thus
come into it, I have now taken out, and in this Editio^ have added to this
Book near half so many Prayers as there were before Meditations. So that now
there is nothing in it, but that which I must either answer for as another
man's, or father as mine own. I must desire thee also, that have seen the
former Edition, to account it no violence offered to the Book, though many
things are here inserted into the Meditations themselves, and Notes in the
margin put unto them. All that has been done, was to help thee in thy prayers
and devotion. Fare thou well.

Thine in the Lord Christ, RICHARD BRVCH, Minister of Gods Word.

THE EPISTLE OF THE AVTHOR TO THE CONSVLS, AND THE WHOLE Order of the Senators
of the famous Common wealth of Halberstat.
THey which compare Divinity and Physic together, are many, and they seem
to unfold the matter very well. For, as the end of Physic is twofold, to
maintain health in man's body, and to recover the same when it is lost: so
Divinity, in respect of the diseases of the soul, after the same manner does
acknowledge a double end: for it shows not only how we may be freed from
sins, but also how we may be preserved in grace. Both Physickes, as well
that of the body, as that of the soul are of God, as said Gregory, therefore
also they agree in the Author. Physike has her certain principles: that is to
say, Reason, and experience, which for that are called certain legs thereof,
with which she accepts that which is agreeable, and refuses that which is
disagreeing: so Divinity has her sure and unmoved principle, the Word of God,
comprehended in the Prophetical and Apostolical Writings, with which that
which agrees, she does accept of, that which disagrees, she does refuse. Others
go further, and show, that all true Physike is of regeneration, seeing that
nothing can regenerate which is not it self regenerated, therefore to the
cleansing of the vital spirits from the impure tinctures of diseases, which is
as it were a certain regeneration, there are required regenerated bodies, that
is, spirits which are bodies spiritual for penetration and tincture: and
nevertheless they are all spirits corporeal: so also the true end of Divinity
is, that spiritual regeneration of the inward man, which the Truth does
testify to be made of Water and the Spirit. They add also the comparison of
the Philosophers stone, with the blessed stone in the Church: but because this
is neither known of all, nor granted of all, I will not dwell on these things,
it is sufficient for my purpose, that out of the comparion of Divinity with
Physike, I can gather by very good reason, that Divinity is a practike
doctrine: and therefore that they do not judge aright, which contend that it is
only speculatiue, which in number are some of these School men; for although
not only those things that are to be done, but also which are to be believed
and hoped for, are proposed unto us in this heavenly Philosophy, yet that does
not hinder, but it may as yet be called practike, for Physike also is occuped
in the Theory of certain things, neither yet is therefore a speculatiue
discipline, because it follows this same Theory by reason of practice, and in
order to practice: so is it in Divinity; yea, I may add, that in those very
things that are to be believed, or in the Articles of the Faith, there is
required not bare knowledge only, but also consent, which that it is an action
of the part of the will, they do confirm by fit arguments to whom this care
does appertain.

Now, if Divinity be a practike doctrine, then the end thereof shall not be
bare knowledge and subtle Theory, but rather practice. If ye know these
things, blessed are ye, if ye do them, says our Savior to his Disciples. The
matters of our Religion do not consist in words, but in deeds, says Justin.
Not to talk only, but also to be, makes Christians, says Ignatius. The sum
of Christian Religion is to imitate him whom thou worshippest, says Augustine.
What is Christianity? The likeness of God according to that which befalls the
nature of man, says Basil. Now if the end and perfection of Christian religion
be not a bare knowledge, but a practice, how few true Christians shall thou
find at this day? there is every where much science, little conscience. It is
very well done that the Orthodoxe doctrine is defended by Books, Disputations,
Sermons, and all manner of means, but we must also do our endeavor, that our
life may answer to the Christian profession. If I have the knowledge of all
mysteries, and have not love, I am nothing, says the Apostle. What then shall
they answer hereafter, which have not the knowledge of all, but of few? not a
perfect, but a very slender knowledge of mysteries, and yet they are proud of
it; they contemn others, they envy others, scarcely making any account of
Christian Charity. I will hither ascribe a place out of a certain notable
Book. He that will fully and sauourly understand the words of Christ, it
behooues him that he study to conform his whole life unto Christ. What does
it profit thee to dispute on high of the Trinity, if thou want humility, from
whence thou may displease the Trinity? If thou knew the whole Bible, and
the sayings of all the Philosophers, whar would all this profit thee without
the love of God, and grace? Vanity of vanities, and all is vanity, besides the
love of God and his service only. Knowledge without the fear of God, what does
it import? If I knew all things which are in the world, and were not in
charity, what would it help me before God? By how much the more and better thy
knowledge is, by so much the more grievous and heavy from thence shall be thy
judgment, unless thou live the more holily. Be not therefore lifted up for
any Art or Science, but rather fear for the knowledge that is given unto thee.
Hither also pertains a place of Erasmus. Whereto pertaines it to dispute how
many ways sin may be taken, whether it be only a privation, or else a
blemish inherent in the soul: let the Divine rather labor this, that all men
may abhor and hate sin. We contend without end, what distinguishes the Father
from the Son, and both of them from the holy Ghost, res an relatio, and how
it can be that they should be called three, of whom there can be none which
is other, seeing they are one essence: how much does it more pertain to the
purpose, to labor this by all means, that we worship and adore godlily and
holilty that Trinity, whose Majesty it is not lawful to search into, and that
we express the unspeakable concord thereof by our concord, as far as we
may, so that hereafter it may come to pass, that we may be taken into the
fellowship thereof? We dispute, how it can be, that the fire with which the
souls of the wicked shall be tormented, seeing it is material, can work
upon an incorporeall thing: how much more did it concern to labor with all
our strength to this end, lest that fire find any thing in us, which it may
burn, etc?

But I say, again, that the thing it self is not taxed, but the abuse of the
thing: it is well done, that our endeavor and study is spent on the accurate
knowledge of the Articles of the Faith: it is well done, that the Orthodoxe
doctrine is defended against Heresies, if so be that the sum and perfection
of Christian Religion be not thought to consist therein, if so be also there
be a respect had of Christian I fe and charity. There is an ill life where
there is not a good belief in God: and again, it is an unprofitable belief,
where there is not a good life: there is no true faith within, where works do
not appear without: they that walk not in the light, are not the sons of
light: they are not Christians which do not lead a life worthy of a Christian.

That therefore in this most cold old age of the world, I might put to some
heat to Piety, that is almost extinct, that I might put to a goad or somewhat
that would prick forward, to those that are slow in the way of the Lord, and
that I might admonish my self and others of our duty, I have written this
little Book of holy meditations at successiues hours, insisting in the
footsteps of Augustine, Bernard, Anselme, Tauler, and others in this kind,
whose sayings I do diverse times use in this Enchyridon, yet no where (which
might most easily have bin done) do I put to the names of the Authors, seldom
note the places of Scriptures; for I did fear, lest thereby the meditation of
those that read, might be troubled. I do not think that it skils much to be
known, whether any thing be expressed in the words of the Fathers, or in mine,
so that that which is spoken be diligently attended unto. If it please any one
to attribute all things that are spoken fitly and conveniently in this little
Book to the holy Fathers, and to assign those things unto me which are
uttered nothing so fitly, I do not stand against it; that only I seek, that
some fruit may redound from thence to the sons of the Church: and truly I
shall think I have my wish, if out of the reading of this Book, some one
godly and holy cogitation do arise but in one soul, at one moment. If any man
meet with words that are not so pure, so fitly used, I say moreover with words
that are not so fitly agreeing with the Analogy of Faith (which yet I hope he
shall not) let him not straightway cast away the whole Book, nor straightway
mark me for an Heretic, but let him weigh the kind of writing. I handle
holy things, which do not much desire Rhetorical ornaments: I write Homilies,
not exact disputations; I would have a greater care of things, then of words.
Thou shall not find here thornie and knotty quest ons, but earnest
exhortations to holy life: thou shall not find here scurrilous conceits, but
the spiritual riches of the inward man: thou shall not find here, that which
may exercise thee in the subtility of disputing, but that which may instruct
thee in the way of humility. I do sometimes follow Allegories, not that I
think that all things must be transformed into Allegories, but because this
kind of writing, being directed to teach and admonish, not to striving and
disputation, did not seem to refuse them, but why do I speak more about this
matter, and why do I bring so many things to defend my self? seeing I have
already satisfied the indifferent Readers; but I shall be never able to
satisfy the unjust Censurers.

Now to you (most famous, wise and prudent men) do I dedicate and offer these
holy meditations, that there may be some public testimony extant of mine
observance toward your Honors, your constancy in preserving of the purity of
religion is known of all, and praised of all, your singular prudence in the
government of the Commonwealth, your benevolence toward all that are
lettered, these and such like things have easily persuaded me, that I should
not doubt to offer these first fruits of my studies, such as they be, this
usury of my winters rest, such as it is, to your Honors, with due signification
of reverence, and specially seeing by my grandfathers, on the fathers and on
the mothers side, of godly memory, some of your Honors famous Order do come
near unto me in consanguinity and affinity. Take therefore (most excellent
Men) with a cheerful countenance and indifferent mind, this paper gift from
my tenuity, receive me into your protection, and go forward to favor my
studies as heretofore, so hereafter. I beseech the good great God, with humble
sighs, that he will continue your good things unto you, that is, that he
vouchsafe most favorably to preserve the holy pledge of his Word, peace and
tranquillity, an happy increase of the Common wealth, and all those good things
which he has most largely bestowed on your City, and that he vouchsafe also to
pass them over to your posterity.

At leanes in the month of April. 1606.

Your Honors most dutiful M. JOHN GERHARDI. Quedlinburg.

THE TABLE.
Monday Morning Prayer; for Gods help and assistance in all our labors. Fol.
1 The Mornings Meditations. OF the inconstancy of this present life. Fol. 5 2
Of the vanity of the World. Fol. 15 Monday Noones prayer. The Noone
meditations. 3 Of the lying in wait of the Devil. Fol. 25 4 Of the daily
consideration of death, Fol. 35 Monday nights Meditations. 5 Of the grieuousnes
of the torments of hell, Fol. 43 6 Of the eternity of the pains of hell. Fol.
53 Monday nights prayer, on the days Meditations. Fol. 66 Tuesday Morning, a
thanks giving for all kind of benefits. Fol. 63 The mornings Meditations. 7 Of
the true acknowledgement of our sins. Fol. 69 8 Of the shaking off of security.
Fol. 77 Tuesday noone, a Prayer. The noone Meditations: 9 Of the denying of a
man's own self. Fol. 87 Tuesday nights Meditations. 10 Of the profit of
Temptation. Fol. 97 11 Of the study of true humility. Fol. 105 Tuesday nights
prayer, on the days Meditations. Fol. 113 Wednesday morning, a prayer for a
blessing in spiritual things. Fol. 116 The Mornings Meditations. 12 Of the
assurance of our salvation. Fol. 119 13 Of Predestination. Fol. 126 14 Of the
satisfaction for our sins. Fol. 135 Wednesday Noone, a prayer. The Noones
Meditations. 15 Of the name of Jesus. Fol. 142 16 Of the mystery of the
Incarnation. Fol. 149 27 Of the wholesome fruit of the Incarnation. Fol. 158
Wednesday nights Meditations. 18 Of the fruit of the Passion of our Lord. Fol.
165 19 Of the Ascension of Christ. Fol. 172 20 An Homily of the Holy Ghost.
Fol. 180 Wednesday nights Prayer, a confession of sins. Fol. 191 Thursday
Morning, a Petition for temporal blessings. Fol. 194 The Mornings Meditations.
21 Of the natures and properties of true faith. Fol. 197 22 Of our true
reconciliation with God. Fol. 206 23 Of the fruits of Baptism. Fol. 212
Thursday Noone, a Prayer. The Noones Meditations. 14 Of the dignity of the
Church. Fol. 221 Thursday nights Meditations. 27 Of the mystery of the Lords
Supper. Fol. 247 28 Of the serious preparation before the use of the Lords
Supper. Fol. 254 29 Of the wholesome participation of the Body and Blood of
Christ. Fol. 262 Thursday nights Prayer on the days Meditations. Fol. 269
Friday Morning, a Prayer for deliverance from all spiritual evils. Fol. 271
The Mornings Meditations: 36 Of the wholesome efficacy of Prayers. Fol. 274 31
Of the custody of the holy Angels. Fol. 285 32 Of the consolation in the death
of our friends. Fol. 299 Friday noone, a prayer. Fol. 305 The Noone
Meditations. 33 Of the true rest of the soul. Fol. 306 34 Of an exercise of
Faith, out of the love of Christ, in the Agony of death. Fol. 315 Friday nights
Meditations. 35 Of the fruit of true and earnest repentance. Fol. 321 36 An
exercise of repentance, out of the Passion of our Lord Christ. Fol. 331 37 A
consolation of the penitent, out of the Passion of Christ, taken out of Ansel.
especially. Fol. 338 Friday nights Prayer, for the Church, and all such as in
charity we are bound to remember in our prayers. Fol. 345 Saturday Morning, a
Prayer for deliverance from all bodily dangers. Fol. 348 The mornings
Meditations, 38 Of general rules to live godly. Fol. 350 39 Of loving God
only. Fol. 360 40 Of the holy imitation of the life of Christ. Fol. 370
Saturday Noone, a prayer. Fol. 378 The noone Meditations. 41 Of the pureness
of the Conscience. Fol. 379 42 Of the avoiding of Covetousness. Fol. 389 43 Of
the properties of true Charity. Fol. 400 Saturday nights Meditations. 44 Of the
studay of Chastity. Fol. 411 45 Of the foundation of Christian patience. Fol.
421 46 How the temptation of perseverance is to be overcome. Fol. 430 Saturday
nights prayer, on the days Meditations. Fol. 447 Sunday Morning, a prayer that
we may keep holy the Sabbath. Fol. 449 Sunday Mornings Meditation. 47 Of the
spiritual resurrection of the godly. Fol. 452 48 Of the avoiding of
Covetousness. Fol. 459 Sunday noone, a prayer. Fol. 462 The Noones
Meditations. 49 Of the last Judgment. Fol. 463 50 Of the desire of eternal
life. Fol. 471 Sunday Nights Meditations. 51 Of the most sweet company of the
Angels in Heaven. Fol. 481 52 Of the most blessed vision of God in Heaven. Fol.
489 Sundy Nights Prayer, on the days Meditations. Fol. 493 A prayer for a woman
in travel of Child. The thanksgiving of a woman after the birth, and her
deliverance. Lastly, the Lords Prayer expounded Fol. 105
A DAY-BOOKE for the Devout SOVLE.
Monday Morning Prayer.
WHither, O Lord God, Father everlasting, maker of all things, Author of
goodness, shall I direct my heart and voice? to whom shall I address my self
for help and succor; but to thee, which art a God of nature most benign and
loving, of grace most free, of power Almighty, and therefore most ready to
hear, and most able to help. I know, O Lord, that without thee all mine
endeavor is but vain: If thou do but blow upon my labor, it will come to
naught; If I begin, and thou withdraw thy self from my help, I shall faint in
the way, and fall from my purpose, because I am not able of my self as of my
self, so much as to think, much less to do any thing that is good, but all my
sufficiency is of thee: therefore I implore thine aid, and pray thee with thy
grace preventing, accompanying and following, to be with me in all my works, and
in all my ways, that I may see the success and prosperity of that which I
shall take in hand, the dew of thy blessing distilling evermore on the works of
mine hands. Direct thou, O Lord, my way in thy truth, put counsel and
understanding into my heart, and into my reins. Grant that in all my business
I may propose unto my self firmly these ends: First, thy glory, next, the good
of mine own soul, then the profit of my brethren. Take from me floath and
wearisomnesse: give unto me strength, virtue, and courage, that I may both
begin and finish the works of my Calling, with all faithfulness and
diligence: But before all things, O Lord, put into my mind a care of religious
duties, thy worship, and the works of Charity, that I may glorify thee in
them here on earth which are in heaven. O Lord, in my beginning I take on me a
vow of serving thee; give strength, O Father, that I may perform my vows! so
assist me in thy service, so confirm me in thy ways that nothing be able to
divert or turn me out of the right way. Rebuke Satan, that is on my right hand
to hinder me, let not his contradictions, nor the gainesayings of men dismay
me, or make me to quail: Let not mine own infirmity, the weakness of flesh
and blood, make me either to halt in the way, or faint before I come to the end
of the way: But grant that in thy power my soul may march valiantly, and that
through thine assistance, I may run a good race, and finish up a good course,
at the end whereof I may meet with bliss and immortality in thy Kingdom,
where there is all joy without sadness, all mirth without mourning, full
contentment without any disgust, sweetness without gall, saciety without
surfer, peace without all wars, rest without disturbance, plenty without
penury, the fullness of happiness, and the River of pleasures, unto which,
thou which have made me, bring me, for thy dear Sons sake Christ Jesus.

Hominis quid vita? Cylindrus. What is the life of man? a Cylinder.

1. Meditation. Of the inconstancy of this present life.
Think, O devout soul, of the misery and inconstancy of this life, that thy
heart may be lifted up to desire the heavenly inheritance.

While this life does grow, Waining.
it does daily decrease: while it is increased, it is also diminished:
whatsoever is added unto it, somewhat also is taken from it.

It is but a minute of time that we live, Short.
and somewhat less then a minute: while we turn our selves, immortality will
be here: we are in this life as it were in another man's house.

Sepulcher.
2 Abraham had not in the land of Canaan, a ground of his own to dwell in, but
only the inheritance of a sepulcher: so this life present, is a place of
lodging and of a grange. Our life is like to one that sails: Death be ginneth.
he that sails, whether he stand, or whether he sit, or whether he lie,
always goes nearer to the haven, and thither he goes, whether he is led by the
course of the Ship: so we also, whether sleeping, or whether waking, whether
unwilling, or whether willing, by the moments of times, are always led to our
end. This life is rather a death, because every day we dye, seeing that every
day we consume somewhat of our lives. The entrance into this life is
straight-wayes the beginning of death.

3 This life is full of the grief of the things that are past, Grievous.
of the labor and pain of things that are present, of the fear of things to
come. The Ingresse Ingresse.
into life is lamentable, because an infant begins his life with tears, as it
were foreseeing the evils to come: the Progress Progress.
weak, because many diseases do afflict us, many cares do vex us: the Egresse
Egresse.
horrible, because we go not forth alone, bu our works go forth with us, and
by death we go forth to the severe judgment of God.

4 Our conception is a fault: Sum.
our birth is misery: our life is pain: our death is distress. We are
begotten in filthiness, we are fostored in darkness, we are brought forth in
heaviness. Before we come forth into the world, we are a burden to our
wretched mothers: in our coming forth, we tear them after the manner of
Vipers: we are pilgrims in our birth, and strangers in our life, because we are
compeld to go forth by death.

Lives parts miserable.
The first part of our life, knows not it self, the midst is overwhelmed with
cares, the last part is oppressed with troublesome old age. All the time of our
life. is either present, or past, or to come.

If it be present, it is unstable: if it be past it is now nothing: if it be to
come, it is uncertain.

Matter miserable.
We are putrefaction in our beginning, a bubble in all our life, and the food of
worms in our death: we bear the earth we were the earth, we shall be earth.

The necessity Necessity
of our birth is abject, of our life is wretched, of our death is hard.

Our body is an earthly habitation, in which dwells death and sin, which
every day consume it.

All our life is a spiritual warfare: the devils above us, Life crossed.
wait for our destruction, on the right hand and the left, the world does
oppugn us, beneath us and within us, our flesh does war against us: the life
of man is a warfare, because in it there is a continual wrestling of the flesh
and of the Spirit.

5 What therefore can be the joy No joy
of man in this life, when there is no secure felicity in it? What can there
happen unto us of things present to delight us, when all things passing away
together, yet that does not pass away that hangs over our heads? when this is
wholly ended that is beloved, and that always comes nearer where grief is
never ended: we gain that by our longer life, that we do the more evils, that
we see the more evils, that we suffer the more evils: our longer life does this
for us, that in the last judgment the accusation of our sins is greater.

Uncertain.
6 What is man? the slave of death, a traveler that passes away, lighter then
a bubble, shorter then a moment, vainer then an Image, vainer then a sound,
frailer then a grass, more changeable then the wind, more inconstant then a
shadow, more deceivable then a dream.

7 What is this life? Life miserable.
an expectation of death, a scene of mockeries, a sea of miseries, one only
vial of blood, which every light fall breaks, every little Ague does corrupt.

8 The course Course.
of our life is a Labyrinth, we come into it out of the womb, we go out of it
by the gates of death.

We are nothing but earth, Matter.
but the earth is nothing but smokes but smoke is nothing. We therefore are
nothing.

9 This life is fraste as glass, Uncertain.
slippery as a River, miserable as warfare: and yet to many it appears very
worthy to be desired.

10 This life appears a precious Nut outwardly, Deceitful
but if thou open it with the knife of truth, thou shall see that there is
nothing but worms and rottennes within. There grow Apples about the Region of
Sodom, which delight with the outward beasty, but being touched, do go into
dust: so the felicity of this life does delight outwardly, but if thou touch it
with a straighter consideration, it will appear like to smoke and dust.

Counsel.
Do not therefore, O beloved soul, refer the chiefest of thy thoughts to this
life, but with thy mind always aspire to the joy to come. Compare between
themselves the most short moment of time, which is granted unto us in this
life, with the infinite and never to be ended ages of ages, and it will appear
how foolish a thing it is, to clean to this most inconstant life, and to
neglect the eternal. This life of ours is most swift and vanishing, and yet in
it eternal life is either gotten or lost. This life is most miserable, and yet
in it eternal felicity is either gotten or lost. This life is most full of
calamity, and yet in it eternal joy is either gotten or lost.

11 If therefore thou aspire to the life eternal, Use the World.
desire it with all thine heart in this life most swiftly flying and fading
away: use the world, but let not thy heart cleave to the world: follow thy
business in this life, but let not thy soul be fastened to this life: the
outward use of worldly things does not hurt, if the inward love does not cleave
unto them.

12 In heaven is thy country, in the world thy lodging on the way: be not so
delighted with the lodging of this world, which is but for a day, that thou be
withdrawn from the desire of thy heavenly country

This life is a sea, Trouble. Rest.
eternal life is the Haven: be not so delighted with the momentany
tranquillity, that thou contend not to come to the haven of
eternall-tranquillity.

Failing.
13 This life is slippery, and does not keep touch with her lovers, because
besides all opinion, it oftentimes flies from them: why therefore will thou put
any trust unto it? It is a dangerous thing if thou surely promise unto thy
self but the security of one hour, because ofttimes in that one hour this
fading life is finished: it is most safe at all hours to expect the departure
of this life present, and to prepare a man's self thereto by earnest repentance.

Uncertain
14 In the gourd wherewith Jonas was delighted, God prepared a worm that it
might wither away: so in worldly things, to which many do cleave by love,
nothing is stable, but the worms of corruption do breed in them.

Counsel.
The world is now worn out with so great a blemish of all things, that it has
also lost the show of seducing, forasmuch as they are to be praised and to be
set out, which have not vouchsafed to flourish with the flourishing world so
much are they to be blamed, and to be accused, whom it delights to perish
with the perishing. Withdraw our hearts, O Christ, from the love of this world,
and stir up in us a desire of the heavenly kingdom.

Praestant aeterna coducis. Things eternal pass those that perish

2. Meditation. Of the vanity of the world.
DO not love those things, O thou soul, which are in the world: the world
shall perish, and all things that are in it shall be burnt: where therefore
will thy love be then? Love the eternal good, that thou may live for ever.

Creatures vain.
1 Every creature is subject to vanity: he therefore that cleaues unto the
creatures by love, shall himself also become vain. Love the true and stable
good, that thy heart may be made stable and quiet.

Honor.
2 Why does the honor of the world delight thee? He that seek^s the honor of
men, cannot be honored of God: he that seeks the honor of the world, is
constrained to conform himself to the world: he that pleases the world,
cannot please God. All things are perishing and unstable, which are given from
those which are perishing and unstable: wherefore the honor of the world
cannot be stable: whom the day before they lifted up to Heaven with the highest
glory, Quem dies veniens viderit superbum, etc.
him oft-times the day following, they reproach with the greatest ignominy.
Desire to please God, that thou may be honored of God: the honor of God,
1. Sam. 2.
is true and stable. What is man the better from thence, that he is reputed
greater of man? Romans 2. 2. Cor. 10
As much as every one is in the eyes of God, so much he is, and no more. When
Christ was sought for for a Kingdom, he fled away: Contempt better the^ honor.
when he was sought for to reproaches and the ignominious punishment of the
Cross, he offered himself of his own accord. That therefore thou may be
conformed unto Christ, let the ignominy of the world delight thee more then the
glory. He that for Christ does not despise worldly honor, how would he lay
down his life for him? And there is no other way to glory, but by the
contempt of worldly glory, even as Christ by the ignominy of his cross entered
into his glory. Phil. 2.


3 Love therefore to be contemned, to be despised, to be put back in this
world, that thou may be honored in the world to come. Christ has taught us
by his life, what we are to esteem of the worldly glory: all the glory of
heaven does serve him, nay, he alone is true glory, but he does as it were
cast away glory. By how much therefore a man is the more honored, and abounds
with the more corporal comforts, by so much he ought to be the more profoundly
and inwardly sad, seeing himself to be so much the farther off from the
conformity of Christ. Vain is the praise of man, if an evil conscience accuse
us within: what does it profit him that has a fever, if he be placed in an
Iuory bed, when he is afflicted nothing the less with inward heat? true honor
and true praise is the testimony of thine own conscience. No man is a more
indifferent judge of thy doings then God and thy conscience, desire to approve
thy doings to his judgment. Is it not sufficient for thee that thou art known
to thy self, and that which is most of all to God?

But why do thou so much desire riches? Riches.
He is too covetous, to whom the Lord is not sufficient. This life is the way
to the everlasting country: what then does great wealth profit? It does rather
load the traveler, as great burdens the ship.

5 Christ, the King of heaven, Romans 8.
is the riches of the servants of God. The true treasure ought to be within a
man, not without him. The true treasure is that which thou can bring with
thee to that universal judgment: Perish. 2. Pet. 3. Luke 12.
but all those exterior goods are taken away from us in death. They perish
being gathered together, but the gatherer of them together does perish worse,
if he be not rich in God.

Poor. Job 1.
6 Thou came poor into the world, and thou shall go poor out of it. Wherefore
should the middle differ from the beginning and the end? Riches should tend
only to use, and how little will suffice? The least good of grace and virtue
is more excellent then all earthly riches: why? because virtue pleases God,
but riches do not, unless it be through virtue.

Christ poor.
7 The poverty of Christ ought to be more acceptable unto us, then the riches
of the whole world. Poverty is sanctified in Christ. He was poor in his
Nativity, poorer in this life, most poor in his death.

8 Why do thou doubt to prefer the poverty of the world before riches,
Poverty better the^ riches.
when Christ has preferred it for the kingdom of Heaven? How will he trust
God with his soul, which will not trust him with the care of his flesh? How
will he lay down his life for his brother, which does not lay out his riches
for him? Riches bring forth pain in the getting, fear in the possession,
grief in the loss; and (that which is more to be lamented) the labor of the
covetous is not only periturus, perishing, but also peremptorius, killing, as
Bernard teaches us. Thy love is thy God: where thy treasure is, Mat. 5.
there is thy heart also. He that loves these corporal, worloly, perishing
riches, cannot love the spiritual, heavenly, eternal riches: why? Because
those do depresse a man's heart, and draw it downwards, but these do lift it
upwards. The love of earthly things is the birdlime of spiritual wings, said
one of the true lovers of Christ.

9 The wife of Lot, turned into a pillar of Salt, does as yet preach unto us,
that we look not back to those things that are in the world: but that we go
the straight way to our heavenly country. The Apostles leaving all did follow
Christ. Why? Because the knowledge of true riches does take away the desire of
riches falsely so called. To him that has tasted of the spirit, the flesh does
not relish well: the world is better to him to whom Christ is sweet.

Pleasure.
10 But why do thou so greatly desire pleasures? let the remembrance of him
that was crucified, crucify in thee all desire of pleasure. Let the
remembrance of the burning of hell, extinguish in thee all the heat of lust.
Compare the most short Short.
moment of pleasure, with everlasting torments

11 Pleasures are beastly, Beastly.
and make us like to the bruit beasts. The sweetness of the kingdom of heaven
does not savor with him that is daily full of the husks of Hogs. Mortify it
Let us mortify all the pleasures of our senses, and with Abraham, let us
offer unto God in spiritual sacrifice, that beloved son, that is to say, the
desires of our souls, voluntarily renouncing all pleasures, and embracing the
sharpness of the Cross.

12 It is not a plain way and strawed with roses, Matthew. 2.
but a rough way, and beset with thorns, that leads to the kingdom of heaven.
The outward man takes increase by pleasures, the inward by the cross and
tribulations: as much as the outward increases, so much the inward is
diminished. Pleasures serve the body, but they that are truly godly, have the
least care of their body, and the greatest of their soul* Pleasures do
captiuate our heart, lest it should be free in the love of God. Thou shall not
carry away the pleasures, but the contempt of pleasures with thee in death, and
bring it to the judgment.

13 Therefore let the love of God kill thy flesh, lest carnal love deceive
thee. Let the remembrance of Gods judgment be continually in thy mind, lest
the perverse judgment of thy sensual appetite lead thee away into bondage.
Regard not the flattering countenance of the serpent, Reu. 12.
but think upon his tail that pricks sharply at the last. Overcome by the
grace of Christ, that at length thou may be crowned a conqueror by Christ.

Monday Noone.
PRosper thou the works of our hands upon us, Psalm. 90.17
O Lord o prosper thou our handy work.

Quis norit daemonis astus? Who knows the devils wiles?

3. Meditation. Of the lying in wait of the Devil.
Think, O devout soul, in how great danger thou art which does always hang
over thee from thine adversary the devil: he is an enemy: Sat^^^ art.
1. in boldness most ready: 2. in force most strong, 3. in cunning most
crafty, 4. of all treacheries most full, 5. in the desire of fight infatigable,
6. and into all shapes variable.

1 Treachery
2 He enticeth us unto diverse crimes, and after he has enticed us, he does
accuse us before the tribunal seat of God.

Genesis 3. Reu. 12: 2 Cunning
He accuses God with men, and men with God, and men again between themselves.
He does first exactly look into every ones inclination, and afterward sets
for him the snares of temptations: As they that assault Cities, Force.
Comparison of assaulting Cities.
go not in their assaults to the strong and fenced parts, but where they think
that the walls are weak, the ditches plainer, and the towers not well guarded:
so the Devil, always assaulting the soul of man, first sets upon that which
he shall perceive to be weak, and of least resistance. Being once overcome, he
does not altogether yield, Infatigable
but he comes on again more valiantly to tempt, that he may overcome them by
wearisomnesse and negligence, whom he could not overcome by temptations
violence.

From whom can he refrain his wiles, 1 Bold.
which durst to set upon the Lord of Majesty himself, with the fraud of his
cunning? From what Christian will he abstain, which desired to winnow the
Apostles of Jesus Christ themselves as wheat?

He deceived Adam in natures institution, Cunning*
whom shall he not be able to deceive in natures restitution? He deceived
Judas in the school of our Savior, whom shall he not be able to deceive in the
world, the school of error? In all things the deceits of the devil are
altogether to be feared: Infatigable cunning.
In prosperity he prouokes us to pride of mind: in adversity he eggs us on
to desperation: If he sees any one to be delighted in parsimony, he delights
to tie him in the gives of insatiable covetousness: If he see one of a gallant
and heroicke spirit, he sets him on fire with the prouocations of wrath: If he
see a man somewhat iocond and merry, he prouokes him to the heat of mad lust:
those whom he sees fervent in Religion, be does endeavor to hamper in vain
superstition: those whom he sees placed in high dignities, them does he vex
with the firebrarnds of Ambition: when he drives unto sin, he amplifies the
mercy of God: when he has cast a man head long into sin, then he does
exaggerate the justice of God. First he will lead a man to presumption,
afterward he endeavors to bring him down to desperation.

3 Sometimes he does oppugn us from without with persecutions: sometimes he
does oppugn us inwardly with fiery tentations: sometimes he does impugn us
openly and violently: sometimes hiddenly and fraudulently. Sometimes he
distorteth the body with sickness, casts into the fire, blows down
houses, blasteth our selves, servants, and cattle. Sometimes he raises open
tyrants, oppressors, murderers, thieves, false witnesses, adulterers to
spoil us. Sometimes false teachers, false friends, at home, abroad, in land,
and sea, city and country, to seduce, betray, and make merchandise of us.

He has put gluttony in feeding, Corrupts.
luxury, in generation; sloth, in exercise; envy, in conversation;
covetousness, in government; wrath, in correction; pride* in dignity; evil
thoughts in the heart; false speeches in the mouth; unjust works in the
members: in watching he moves to evil deeds, in sleeping to filthy dreams. So
therefore every where, and in all things, the deceits of the devil are to be
feared.

Against security.
4 The Lord watches over us, and he watches: we are secure, and he goes about
like a roaring lion.

5 If thou should behold an angry lion to come violently upon thee, how
would thou tremble for fear? and when thou hear that the infernal lion
does lay wait for thee, do thou as yet sleep securely on both ears?

Remedies.
6 Consider therefore, O faithful soul, the wiles of this most mighty enemy, 1
Spiritual armor. Ephesians. 6.
whom of thy self thou can not escape, seek for the help of spiritual
Armor: Let thy loins be girt with the truth* and putting on the breast plate
of righteousness, put on the perfect righteousness of Christ, and thou shall
be safe from the temptations of the devil: hide thy self in the holes of the
wounds of Christ: as often as thou art terrified with the darts of this
malignant Serpent, do thou truly believe in Christ: as therefore Satan has no
right in Christ, so also he has no right on him that truly believes in Christ.
Let thy feet be shod in the preparation of the Gospel of peace.

7 Let the confession of Christ be always heard and sound in our mouth, 2
Confession.
so no temptation of the devil shall hurt us: the words of the inchanter do
not so much drive away the bodily serpent, as the speeches of a constant
confession do drive away this spiritual serpent.

8 Let the buckler of faith 3 Faith.
be taken up, that the fiery darts of this most wicked enemy may be quenched
by us. It is faith, which also remoues mountains: understand the mountains of
doubtings, of persecutions, and of temptations.

9 The Israelites were not smitten of the Destroyer, whose posts were signed
with the blood of the Paschal Lamb: they shall not be hurt of this Destroyer,
whose hearts are sprinkled with the blood of Christ by faith.

10 Faith relyes on the promises of God, but Satan cannot ouerturne the
promises of God: therefore also he shall not be able to prevail against faith.

11 Faith is the light of the soul, therefore the temptations of the malignant
spirit do easily appear in this light.

12 By faith our sins are cast into the deep sea of Gods mercy, in that the
fiery darts of the devil will easily be extinguished.

13 We ought also to take the helmet of Salvation, that is, 4 Hope.
an holy hope: endure temptation, Fight better then peace.
looking unto the end of temptation. For God is the governor of them that
strive, and the crown of them that overcome: if there be no enemy, there is no
fight: if there be no fight, there is no victory: it there be no victory, there
is no crown: better is that fight which makes us near unto God, th^n that
peace which enstrangeth us from God. 5 Sword of the Spirit.


14 We must also take the sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God: let
the consolations of the Scriptures be of more force with thee, then the
contradictions of the devil: Christ overcame all the temptations of Satan with
the Word, the Christians as yet overcome all the temptations of Satan with the
Word.

6 Prayer.
15 To conclude, in prayers thou have the greatest help against temptations: as
often as the ship of thy soul is overwhelmed with the waves of temptations,
awake Christ with prayers: by smiting we overcome our visible enemies, by
pouring out of prayers, we overcome our invisible enemy. Fight, O Christ, for
us, in us, that also we may overcome in thee.

Mortis meditatio vita est. The meditation of death is life.

4. Meditation. Of the daily consideration of death.
O Faithful Soul, Think of death all times.
look for death every hour, because that lays wait for thee at all hours.
In the morning, O man, when thou risest, think that this will be the last day
of thy life: in the evening when thou go to bed, think that this will be
thy last night upon earth.

1 Whatsoever thou do, In all works.
whatsoever thou undertake, think always first, and consider with thy
self, whether thou would do such things, if thou should dye this hour,
and come to the judgment of God? Do thou think, if thou do not think
of death, that it does not draw near unto thee? or that death is hastened, if
thou think upon it? whether thou think upon it or not, whether thou
speak of it or not, it is always at thy back, hard at thy heels: thy life
is but lent unto thee, it is not thy freehold. Thou came in on this
condition, that thou should go out: thou came naked, thou shall go away
naked: thy life is a pilgrimage, when thou have walked long in it, at last thou
must return: thou art but a Farmer and Tenant of the world, not a lasting
Lord. Think every hour, that every moment thou art hasting. We are deceived
in this that we think we dye at the last gasp of our life: we dye every day,
every hour, every minute. That of our life which comes on also goes away^
that of our life which is added, is likewise withdrawn and taken from us: we
do not suddenly fall on earth, but we go toward it by degrees.

2 This our life is a way, Comp^se thy self to dye.
we must daily finish somewhat of it. Death and life seem to be most distant,
when notwithstanding nothing is nearer then death to life: this always slides
away, and that follows hard after. As they that go a journey in a ship,
oft-times when they feel it not, when they think not of it come to their
haven; so whatsoever we do, whether we eat, or whether we drink, or whether
we sleep, always we draw near to death. Many have made an end of their way,
when they seek things needful for the way.

3 No man receives death cheerfully when it comes* but he that has long
compo^ed himself unto it. Die to thy self daily in thy life, so thou may
live in death unto God. Before thou dyest, let thy vices die in thee: let the
old Adam dye in thee in thy life, so Christ shall live in thee in death: let
the outward man daily decay in thy life, so the inward man shall be renewed in
thee in death.

Prepare to dye to eternity.
4 Death does forthwith translate thee to eternity, because where the tree
falls, there it will abide: how carefully therefore must we think on death?
Time passes away, and the infinite spaces of eternity remain, therefore in
time prepare thy self to eternity. Such as we shall be for eternity, blessed
or wretched, it is decreed in that one hour of death, in this one moment
eternal felicity is either possessed or lost. Benefits of the meditation of
death.


5 Wherefore, O faithful soul, how carefully ought thou to prepare thy
self to this hour? Thou shall easily contemn all things in the world, if
thou will but think that thou shall dye: Think on thine eyes that shall wax
dim in death, and thou shall easily turn them away from vanity: think of
thine ears that shall wax deaf in death, and thou shall easily stop them
against wicked and obscene words: think of thy tongue that shall wax stiff
in death, and thou shall have a greater care of thy speech. Let the swet and
anxiety of those that die, be continually before thine eyes, so thou shall
easily contemn the delights of the world: let the nakedness of those that go
out of this life be continually before thine eyes, and poverty in this life
shall not be grievous unto thee: think on the horror of the whole body in
death, and thou shall easily contemn the glory of the world. See the pitiful
wailing of the soul when it is compelled to go out of the house of the body,
and thou shall easily take heed of the guilt of all sin. Think on the
rottenness that follows death, and thou shall easily make humble thy proud
swelling flesh. Think how destitute and naked thou art left of all the
creatures in death, and thou shall easily turn thy love away from them, and
turn it to thy Creator.

6 Think how narrowly death does look that thou carry nothing with thee out of
this life, and thou shall easily contemn all the riches of the world.

Sin brings e^^rna^l death
7 He that in this life does daily dye through sin, passes by death to the
punishments of eternal death No man passes to eternal life, but he that
begins to live here in Christ: that thou may live in death, graft thy self
by faith into Christ: let death always be in thy thought, because it is
always in expectation of thee: we always carry about death, because we
always carry about sin: but the wages of sin is death.

9 But if thou desire to escape the bitterness of death, By faith we escape
death.
keep the word of Christ. Faith does conioyne and unite us with Christ. They
therefore which are in Christ, dye not, for Christ is their life. He that
cleaues to God by faith, is one spirit with him: and therefore the faithful
shall not dye for ever, because God is his life.

10 The people of Israel pass through the Red Sea to the promised land: Death
a gate to life and death
Pharaoh and his army are drowned therein: so the death of the godly is the
beginning to them of true life, and the gate of Paradise: but the death of the
wicked and evil is not the end of their evils, but the knitting together of
those that went before, and those that follow, they pass from the first death
to the second.

The benefit in death of our union with Christ.
11 So straight is the union of Christ and the faithful, that it cannot be
dissolved by death: in the very thickest shadow of death, the torch of Gods
grace does shine before them: in the perilous passage of death, Christ does
provide his beloved the protection of Angels. The bodies of the Saints are the
temples of the holy Ghost: the holy Spirit will not suffer his temples to be
utterly destroyed by death. The Word of God is an incorruptible seed, that is
not extinguished by death, but is hidden in the hearts of the godly, and will
quicken them in his time.

Semper meditare gehennam. Think ever of hell

5. Meditation. Of the grieuousnesse of the torments of hell.
Think, O devout soul, on the heaviness of the pains of hell, and thou
shall easily overcome all the wicked pleasure of sinning. All evil no good to
sinners.
There will be the presence of all evil, and the absence of all good. What
evil can be away from them which are punished for the greatest evil, that is
to say, sin? What good can there be present with them, which are removed from
the chiefest good, that is to say, God? whatsoever has been given to the
elect to the increase of their glory, all that shall turn to the damned to the
augmentation of their pains.

Touching.
1 There shall be the heat of fire, and the extremity of cold. There shall
be perpetual darkness. There shall be smoke and continual tears. There
shall be the terrifying sight Sight.
of the devils. There shall be crying for ever. Taste. Smell.
There shall be drought, thirst, the stink of brimstone, the worm of
conscience, fear, grief, shame, Within.
and the confusion of sins, manifested to all: envy, hatred, sadness,
Without.
the want of the sight of God, the taking away of all hope.

2 By the power of God the brightness of the fire Fire.
shall be separated from the adustiue virtue thereof. The brightness shall
turn to the joy of the Saints: the force of burning to the torment of the
damned. It shall shine to the wretched, not for an object of consolation, that
they may see, whereat they may rejoice: but for increase of their misery,
Shining to increase sorrow. Eyes.
that they may see whereat they may more grieve.

3 The sight shall be deprived of the beholding of the Sun, the Moon, and
all the Stars; as also of the sight of Christ, and all the Saints: and it
shall be punished with weeping, smoke, and the beholding of the devils* and all
the damned. The ears Ears.
shall hear the howlings and continual blasphemies of the damned: as also the
horrible roarings of the devils. The taste Taste:
shall be afflicted with thirst and hunger: and shall be deprived of all the
pleasure of meat and drink. Smell.
The smelling shall be tormented with a sulphurous stink. The touching Touching.
shall feel the fire burning within and without, and piercing even unto the
marrow.

Body deformed.
4 The bodies of the damned shall be ill-shapen, dark, slow, ponderous. The
memory Memory
shall be tormented with the remembrance of sins. Neither shall it grieve so
much that it has sinned, as that it has lost his pleasures. The fantasy
shall be afflicted with hard imaginations, and discourses of life and death,
good and ill, heaven and hell. Spark many torments.
One spark of the fire of hell, shall hurt the sinners, more then if a woman
should endure a thousand years in labor, and bringing forth a child. There
shall be no vice which shall not there have his proper torment. There shall
be weeping for grief, and gnashing of the teeth for madness: in the flesh
they shall be tormented by the worm of conscience.

Nothing avails.
5 As nothing is desired in the kingdom of God, which may not be found: so
there is nothing found in hell, which is desired. It shall there nothing avail
the damned, that they have used diverse pleasures Pleasures.
in this life. But the remembrance of them shall rather torment them. It shall
nothing avail the damned, that in this life they have lived in continual
saturitie and drunkenness: Drunkenness.
Which cannot then obtain as much as a drop of water. It shall nothing avail
them that they have been here gallantly arrayed, Apparel.
because they shall be covered with confusion, and their bodies shall be
clothed with shame. It shall nothing avail them that in this life they were
placed in honors: Honor.
because in hell there shall be no honor, but continual groaning and grief.
Riches.
It shall nothing avail them, that in this life they have heapt riches:
because there shall be equal poverty of all.

Shall not see God.
6 They shall be removed from the blessed, and blessed-making sight of God: not
to see God, is more then all the torments of hell.

7 If the damned that are shut up in the prison of hell, could see the face of
God, they should feel no pain, no grief, no sadness. But they shall have
experience of the wrath of God: and yet they shall never behold the blessed
face of God: They shall feel punishments from his face: and yet they shall
never behold his face. The wrath of God shall everlastingly inflame the fire of
eternal damnation like a River of Brimstone. Neither shall they only be
removed from the beholding of God, but they shall also miserably be tormented
with the sights of devils.

8 They shall feel their scourges, Scourges of devils. Sight.
whose will they have followed in their life. If the beholding of some spirit
does almost make a man dead in this life: what shall the horrible looks of the
devil do, which shall abide for ever?

9 Neither shall the damned be constrained only to be perpetually conversant
with the devils: Converse.
but they shall also feel themselves to be everlastingly tormented of them. If
the devil by the permission of God does so grievously afflict the Saints in
this life: how grievously shall he torment the damned, when they are delivered
to his power for ever? The damned shall not only be tormented by the devils
without: but also by the worm of conscience within.

No help of repentance.
10 All the sins which ever they have committed, shall continually be set before
their eyes: but the torment shall be by so much the more grievous, because
there remains no more the benefit of repentance. When the virgins that are in
readiness shall enter with the Bridegroom, by and by the gate shall be shut:
No mercy
understand the gate of indulgence, the gate of mercy, the gate of consolation,
the gate of hope, the gate of grace, the gate of holy conversion.

No hills.
11 The damned shall cry out and say to the hills and rocks, fall upon us, and
hide us from the wrath of the Lamb: but that cry shall be in vain, because
heaven and earth shall fly from his wrath, as it is written, Every Island flies
away, and the hills are not found.

12 The damned shall not feel any ease from thence, that some of their
kinsfolk and friends are taken up into heaven: because the elect also shall
feel no grief from thence, that they know that some of their kinsfolk are
gone to everlasting punishment.

13 There shall be indeed degrees Degrees.
of punishments, but yet he which feels the least torments, shall thenceforth
feel no ease. He that shall be tormented with greater torments, shall envy him
which is afflicted with less. There shall be so great grief and torment in ye
damned, that their mind can be directed to no other thing, but to that the
force of grief does drive them.

14. The damned shall hate all the creatures of God, Hate God
they shall hate one another, they shall hate the holy Angels, the elect men,
yea, even God himself, not in himself, and in his nature, but in the effects
of his justice.

15 All the evils of this life are singular: one is pressed down with poverty,
another is tormented with the grieuousnes of a disease, one is cast down under
hard slavery, another is burdened with an heap of reproaches: but there all
shall be tormented together with all evils: There all.
there shall be universal griefs in all the senses and members. Here hope
There none.
In this life the hope of ease does mitigate all vexations: but there is left
no hope of deliverance. The pain of hell is not only eternal, but also without
interruptio^, even for the space of one minute.

Great torments.
16 And hence it is, if all the men born since Adam until this day, and that
shall be borne hereafter, and live till the last day: if they should divide but
one punishment which the soul is constrained to endure for one sin in hell
equally amongst them, then every particle of that punishment of one man, would
be greater then all the torments which all robbers and malefactors ever have
endured. O Lord grant that we may think upon hell, lest we fall into hell.

Tormenta aeterna malorum. The torments of the wicked are eternal.

6. Meditation. Of the eternity of the pains of hell.
Think, O devout soul, on the eternity of the pains of hell, and thou shall
the better understand the grieuousnesse thereof. There is in Hell a raging
flame, and burning without end: Life, death
the life of the damned is to dye without end: Torment.
their death is to live in eternal pains. Neither is ho wearied which
tormenteth: neither does he at any time dye which is tormented. The fire does
so consume there, that notwithstanding it always reserues: the torments are so
augmented there, that notwithstanding they are always renewed, the damned shall
so dye, that they may always live: they shall so live, that they may always
dye.

Never have desire.
2 That a man should be tormented for ever without end, that goes beyond all the
bounds of desperation. For, what is more grievous then always to will that
which never shall be, and always to be unwilling to that which for ever shall
not choose but be? The damned shall not attain that which they would for ever,
and they shall be compelled to suffer that which they would not for ever.

3 When the justice of God Justice of God.
shall be changed, the torments of the wicked shall also be changed: but the
justice of God is inuariable, therefore the punishments of the damned shall be
eternal. When the wrath of God shall cease, Gods wrath ever.
the pains of the damned shall also cease: but his wrath is eternal, therefore
their pains shall be eternal.

4 It pertains to the sentence of the severe Judgment, ^udgeme^t.
that they never want punishment, which in this life would never want sin.
The damned have chosen momentany pleasure, and the finite goods of the world,
before the infinite good God: they have striued rather to attain the delights
of this fading and short life, then the riches of the life eternal: it is just
therefore that they feel infinite pains. It is just that there be no bounds
of vengeance given to the damned, who, as long as he was able, would have no
bound of sin. The damned have sinned for their lasting, Ever sin
that is, as long as they lived: it is just that they be punished for Gods
everlasting. They have sinned with end, because they have lived with end:
verily they would not have offended with end, if they might have lived without
end, that they might sin without end.

Devils tormenting.
5 When the devils shall leave off to torment, the damned shall cease to be
tormented: but the rage of the devil shall never cease; therefore the torment
of the damned man shall never cease.

Repenting never.
6 When the damned shall truly repent, they shall be freed from their sins: but
the time of repentance is shut up before, therefore there remains no hope of
mercy. An evil will shall never be taken away from the damned: The will ever
ill.
therefore the punishment of an evil will shall never be taken away.

Fire eternal, sin.
7 The manner also of the fire of hell is eternal, that is to say, the spot of
sin, theerefore also agreeably the pain is eternal. The filthiness of
sins in the damned shall not be removed from the eyes of God: how then can
the greatness of the punishments appointed against sin be removed? Sins
object infinite.
Moreover, sin is an infinite evil, because it is committed against the
infinite good: and Christ paid for it an infinite price, therefore agreeably
an infinite punishment is appointed for those which dye in sins.

8 God created man in the beginning to his own Image, Creation.
that he might live with him for ever.

9 Man killed Gods Image killed.
in himself the eternal good, therefore by the just judgment of God, he fell
into the eternal evil.

10 God reformed man, Reformation in Christ.
being fallen into sin, through Christ, to his own Image: he has provided
for him all the means of eternal salvation, and has offered unto him all the
rewards of eternal life: therefore it is just that they which will want the
eternal rewards, be also subject unto eternal punishments.

Eternity ever begins torments.
11 O eternity without all bounds! O eternity that can be measured by no spaces
of time! O eternity that can be understood by no understanding of man! how
much do thou increase the punishments of the damned? After innumerable
thousands of years, they shall always be constrained to think, that this is
to them only the beginning of torments.

Comparison.
How grievous a thing is it to lie in a most soft bed immovable for thirty
years? what will it be to burn thirty thousand years in that lake of fire
and brimstone?

12 O eternity, eternity! thou alone beyond all measure do exaggerate the
torments of the damned. Grievous is the punishment of the damned, by reason of
the sharpness of their torments: it is the more grievous, by reason of the
diversity of their torments: it is most grievous, for the eternity of their
torments: there shall be death without death, end without end, defect without
defect: because death ever lives, and the end ever begins, and the defect
knows not how to fail.

14 The damned shall seek life, Seek ease in vain.
and shall not find it, they shall seek death, and death shall fly away from
them: after an hundred thousand thousand thousand years, without any end they
shall return to renewed torments. The thought of the continuance of their grief
shall more torment them, then the feeling of their outward torment: what can be
more wretched then so to dye, that thou may always live, so to live, that
thou may always dye? that life will be deadly, and death immortal. If thou
art life, why do thou kill? If death, why do thou always endure? We do
not perfectly know what manner of thing eternity may be. For it is no doubt,
but that which is circumscribed by no measure of time, Eternity not known
can also be comprehended by no created understanding. Yet if thou will esteem
any thing of the space of eternity, thou must think of the time before the
world: if thou can find the beginning of God, thou may also find when
the torment of the damned will have end.

15 Imagine some most high mountain, A mountain and bird.
which in greatness may exceed the space of heaven and earth, Imagine a
certain Bird to carry away every thousand years from this hill one little
grain of the thinnest dust: It might be hoped, that at length, after many
incomprehensible thousands of years, the greatness of that Hill would be
finished: but it cannot be hoped that the fire of Hell will ever have end.

16 The rewards of the Elect shall never have end, Contrary to the same, joy.
the torments of the damned shall never be finished: because as the mercy of
God is infinite toward the chosen, so the justice of God is infinite toward
the reprobate.

17 Imagine that there are as many kinds of torments in the damned as there
are drops of water in the great Sea: A Sea and Bird.
imagine that after every thousand year a certain Bird should come, and draw
up one small drop of water: it might be hoped, that at length the abundance of
the Sea might be exhausted, but it cannot be hoped that the torments of the
damned should ever have end.

Meditate,
18 O devout soul, let the eternal punishment of the damned be ever before
thine eyes: the remembrance of hell keeps us from falling into hell.

Repent.
19 Have a care of repentance, while there is as yet a time of mercy: what other
thing shall that fire devour but thy sins? by how much the more thou heapest
up sins, by so much thou reseruest the more matter for the fire. O Lord Jesus,
which have satisfied by thy passion for our sins, keep us from everlasting
damnation. Amen.

Monday, Evening Prayer.
THat my mind being freed from the distractions of worldly businesses, which
are the bane of piety, in the shutting up of this day, I may lay me down to
quiet rest, ruminating devoutly on those holy Meditations wherein I have been
exercised: purify, O Lord, and cleanse my heart from all worldly and unclean
thoughts, and put into it the desire of good things, that it being lifted up
above these earthly, I may fasten the eye of my soul on the contemplation of
heavenly matters. And because (my good Lord) that that spiritual Nahash, the
Devil, labors to put this right eye of contemplation out of mine head, and to
leave unto me only the left to look down upon, and to behold this earth and
this world, which bewitching my senses, may make me enamoured of them, and
forsaking thee, in inordinate love to cleave unto them. Give me, O Lord, the
light of knowledge, to discern between the earthly and the heavenly, the
perishing and the lasting, and the grace, these to prefer, to my chiefest
joy, and to choose the better part, lest my soul cleaving to this earth and
clay, and embracing this present evil world should leave and leese thee which
art life and bliss, yea, and leese it self, and perish with the perishing.
Grant therefore, O my God, that I may always think of the inconstancy of this
life, lest I build unto my self here a Babel of confused, ruinous and forlorn
hopes. Give grace that I may consider seriously of the vanity of this world;
lest the honors, pleasures, riches, lusts thereof deceive me. Let not that
wily Serpent entrap my soul, which lays his snares for me in all the paths
wherein I walk: Make me, whilst here I live, to compose my self to death,
that when the time of my dissolution shall come, I may not dye the death: And
save my soul, O Lord, from the lower-most Hell, the pains whereof are most
grievous, and torments eternal, that I may live and praise thee in thy
kingdom: unto which bring me for thy dear Sons sake, Christ Jesus, which
has died for me to save me. To whom, etc.

Tuesday, Morning Prayer.
ABout the opening of the eyelids of the morning, when I awake (O my Lord God)
and think of the benefit of rest, that thou have given me, while I have paused
in my bed by night, lo, the day sprung from on high visiting; and the light
blessing mine eyes, minds me of thy other benefits and blessings, which thou
have given me, as well the light as the night; the light, therein to go forth
unto my labor until the evening, the night therein to pause and rest. Lord
think I, what am I? or what is man? that thou should thus make the Sun, the
Moon, the Stars to serve us in their courses, to serve us in their seasons?
Early and late thou visitest us, and fillest our hearts with joy and gladness:
as if it had been a small thing for thee to have given us the sons of men, the
earth for a possession, to have made us lords of the beasts of the field, of
the fowls of the air, and the fishes of the sea, and to have put all these
things in subjection under our feet: thou have made the heavens themselves to
serve us, nay what is more, the Angels also, the inhabitants of the heavenly
country, to minister unto us. These are great and excellent things that I have
spoken of, tokens of thy love; but when I think, how besides all these, thou
have sent thine own Son, thine only begotten Son, out of thine own bosom,
in the similitude of sinful flesh, into this world, to poverty, ignominy, to
death, even the shameful death of the Cross, for us men and for our
salvation, then my heart fails within me, melting away, because I cannot
conceive sufficiently of so great a benefit of so great love, and of so great
salvation: what thanks (O Lord) do I owe unto thee, for creating me, when I
was not? For redeeming me, when I was worse then naught? for calling me by thy
Word, for justifying me by thy righteousness; for sanctifying me by thy
Spirit; for conseruing my body unto this day in the life natural, and my
soul in the life of grace spiritual? I must confess with Jacob, and say, I
am less then all the mercy, and all the truth and goodness that thou have
showed unto thy servant: for thy goodness has been greater toward me, then
I can esteem: thy mercies have been more toward me, then I can tell how to
number. I owe unto thee my whole self, for that thou have creaed me: I owe
unto thee more then my self, for that thou have redeemed me. I cannot utter
nor conceive thanks worthy of thy love and kindness, of thy bounty and
goodness toward me; the oblation of my heart, the sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving, the calves of my lips I offer up unto thee; Accept them (O Lord)
and accept me thy servant, in thy Son Christ Jesus, and for his sake. To
whom, etc.

Sanat confessio Morbi. Confession cures souls.

7. Meditation. Of the true acknowledgement of our sins.
O Holy God, O just Judge, my sins are always before mine eyes, always in
my mind, every hour I think of death, because death hangs over mine head at
all hours: I think every day of judgment, because I must render an account
of every day in judgment.

Vain life.
1 I examine my life, and behold it is altogether vain and profane: vain and
unprofitable are many my actions: vain as yet are more my speeches: vain
moreover are most my cogitations: neither is my life only vain, but also
profane Profane.
wicked, I find no good in it, for if any thing seem in it good, it is not
truly good and perfect, because the contagion of original sin, Corrupt.
and my corrupt nature has marred it with defect.

2 The holy man Job said: I did fear all my works. If the holy man complain
so, what ought the wicked man to do? Our best, corrupt.
All our righteousness is like the cloth of a menstruous woman: if such be our
righteousness, what will be our unrighteousness?

3 If you do all things (says our Savior) which are commanded you,
Unprofitable.
say ye are unprofitable servants: if in obeying we are unprofitable, surely
in transgressing, we shall be abominable.

4 If I owe my self, and whatsoever I can do, unto thee (O holy God) yea when
I do not sin, what can I render unto thee for my sin? Our righteousness it
self, which seems to be such, compared to Gods righteousness is mere
unrighteousness. A light A light in the Sun.
is seen to shine in darkness, which being put in the Sunbeams, is quite
darkened by his brightness. A piece of wood is thought to be straight, if it be
not laid to ye Line, but when it is laid to the Line, Timber to the Line.
by a certain crookedness it is found where it is out of square. A picture A
picture to a workman.
will seem perfect in the eyes of those that look on it, which
notwithstanding is much imperfect in the eyes of the Artificer: so, that
oftentimes is foul in the discretion of the Judge, which shines in the opinion
of the workman. For the judgment of God and of men are not all one.

Memory.
5 The memory of many of my sins does affright me: but more of them are
hidden from me. Hid faults.
Who understands his faults? Cleanse me (O Lord) from my hidden sins.

No refuge in heaven
6 I dare not lift up mine eyes to heaven, because I have offended him which
dwells in heaven. Neither do I find any refuge in the Earth: Earth.
for what favor can I hope for of the Creatures, when I have offended the Lord
of the creatures? Mine adversary the Devil does accuse me: The devils claim.
Most just judge, says he to God, judge him for his fault to be mine, which
through grace would not be thine: thine he is by nature, mine by taking
pleasure together with me in sin: thine he is by thy passion, mine by my
persuasion: disobedient he is to thee, obedient to me: of thee he received the
long robe of immortality and innocence, of me he has received this patched
coat of a most wicked life: he has let go thy garment, and is come to me with
mine. Judge him to be mine, and to be damned with me.

7 All the Elements accuse me. The Heaven says, Heaven.
I have ministered light unto thee to comfort thee. The Air says, Air.
I have given thee all kind of birds to obey thee. The Water says, Water.
I have given thee all kind of fishes to feed thee. The Earth says, Earth.
I have given thee bread and wine to nourish thee: but yet thou have abused all
these, to the contempt of our Creator. Genesis 4.
Therefore may all our benefit turn to thy torture.

Fire.
8 The fire says, let him be burned in me: the water says, let him be drowned
in me: the air says, let him be winnowed in me: the earth says, let him be
devoured of me: and hell says, let him be swallowed up of me.

Lost the benefit of Angels.
9 The holy Angels accuse me, whom God had given to minister unto me in this
life, and to keep me company in the life to come: but by my sins I have
deprived my self of their holy ministry in this life, and of the hope of
their society in the other life.

God by the law accuses.
10 The voice of God it self does accuse me, that is to say his divine law:
either I must fulfill the law of God or else I must perish: but that I should
fulfill the law is impossible, and to perish everlastingly, is intolerable. God
the most severe Judge The Judge
does accuse me, the most mighty executor of his eternal law. I cannot deceive
him, for he is wisdom it self. I cannot fly from him, for he is the power
that reigns every where. Whither therefore shall I fly? To thee most loving
Jesus, my only Savior and Redeemer. Savior, Satisfaction
My sins are great, but thy satisfaction is greater. My unrighteousness is
great, Righteousness.
but thy righteousness is greater. I acknowledge, do thou forgive. I open, do
thou shut. I uncover, do thou cover. There is nothing in me, but whence I may
be damned: there is nothing in thee, All sufficient.
but whence I may be saved I have committed many things for which I may be most
justly damned: but thou have not lost that through which thou may most
mercifully save me. I hear the voice in the Canticles, which bids me hide me
in the holes of the Rock: thou art a most sure Rock. Thy wounds my caves.
The holes of the Rock are thy wounds, in them will I hide me against the
accusations of all creatures. My sins cry unto heaven but thy blood Blood
cries. Heb. 12.
which was shed for my sins, cries more strongly. My sins are of great
power to accuse me before God, but thy passion is of greater power to defend
Defend.
me. My most unrighteous life is able to condemn me, but thy most just life is
more able to save Save.
me. I appeal from the Throne of thy justice in the Law, to the Throne of thy
mercy in the Gospel. Neither do I desire to come to judgment, unless thy
most holy merit be placed between me and thy judgment.

Secure viuere, mors est. A secure life is death.

8. Meditation. Of the shaking off of Security.
Think, O devout soul of the difficulty to be saved, and thou shall easily
shake off all security. At no time, and no where is there security, neither in
heaven, nor in Paradise, much less in the world.

1 The Angel fell in the presence of the divinity. The holiest fall.
Adam fell in the place of pleasure.

2 Adam was created to the image of God, nevertheless he was deceived by the
cunning of the devil.

3 Solomon was the wisest of all men, notwithstanding he was turned away from
the Lord by women.

4 Judas was in the school of our Savior, and did daily receive the wholesome
words of that great Doctor: neither yet was he safe from the snares of the
seducer: he was cast headlong into the pit of avarice and out of avarice, into
the pit of eternal sadness.

David was a man after Gods own heart, and the most dear Son of the Lord:
but by murder and adultery, he was made the son of death.

5 Where therefore is there security in this life? cleave with a firm
confidence of thy heart to the promises of God, God a safe refuge.
and thou shall be safe from the assaults of the devil. There is no security
in this life, but that which the infallibility of Gods promises yields to them
that believe, and walk in the ways of the Lord. We shall come to the future
felicity, then at length shall we have full security. In this life fear and
religion are knit together, neither ought one to be without the other.

6 Be not secure in adversity, Adversity no security.
but whatsoever adversities befall thee, think they are the scourges of thy
sins. Often times God does punish hidden faults by manifest chasticements.
Think of the grievous blemish of thy sins, and fear the just revenger of
sins.

7 Be not secure in prosperity: Prosperity
for God is angry with him that is not corrected in this life. What are the
afflictions of the godly? bitter darts cast out of the sweet hand of God. God
counts many unworthy of the present punishment, which notwithstanding he does
reprobate for ever. The success of humane felicity is ofttimes a token of
eternal damnation. Nothing is more unhappy then the felicity of sinners:
nothing is more miserable then he that knows no misery. Whither soever thou
turnest thine eyes, thou find matter of grief, and beholdest remedies
Remedies.
against security. Above think of God, God.
whom we have offended: Hell.
beneath of hell, which we have deserved: behind of our sins which we have
committed: Sins, Judgment Conscience.
before of the judgment, which we fear: within of our conscience, which we
have defiled: without of the world World.
which we have loved.

Place.
8 See from whence thou come, and blush: where thou art, and sigh: whither
thou art going, and tremble.

Gate and way.
9 Narrow is the gate of salvation, but yet straighter is the way of salvation.
God has given thee the treasure of faith: Faith.
but thou bear that treasure in earthen vessels. God has given thee the
Angels Angels.
to keep thee: but the devil is not far off to seduce thee. Renouation.
He has renewed thee in the spirit of thy mind: but thou have much as yet of
the oldnesse of the flesh. Grace.
Thou art set in the grace of God; but thou art not yet placed in the eternal
glory.

10 A mansion Mansion.
is provided thee in heaven: but yet the world by her assaults must first
afflict thee.

11 God has promised thee leave to repent: Repentance.
but he has not promised to give thee a will to repent when thou do
offend. The consolations Consolation.
of eternal life do abide thee: but yet thou must enter by many tribulations.
The crown Crown.
of eternal reward is promised thee: but there remains a great fight which
must first be overcome of thee. God does not change his promise, neither
ought thou to change the study of an holy life. To the servant that does not
do as he is commanded, the Lord will do as he has threatened. We must
therefore sigh continually, and mourn, setting aside security: lest a man be
forsaken by the just and secret judgment of God, and be left in the power of
the devils, to be destroyed. So long as the grace of God is present with thee,
be thou delighted in it: Grace delightful.
yet so, that thou think not that thou do possess the gift of God by an
hereditarie right, so secure of it, as if thou could never leese it, lest
suddenly when the Lord shall withdraw his gift, and draw back his hand, thou
be abashed in thy mind, and become more sad then thou ought. Happy art
thou doubtless, Beware.
if thou take care to beware of carfulness, the source of all evils.

11 God will not forsake thee, but take heed Take heed
that God be not forsaken of thee. God has given thee grace, Pray.
pray that he may also give thee perseverance. God has commanded thee that of
thy salvation thou be sure, Be sure.
but he has not commanded, that thou be secure.

13 Thou must fight Fight.
valiantly, that at length thou may triumph sweetly. Thy flesh within thee
fights against thee, an enemy by how much the nearer, by so much the
fearefuller. The world about thee fights against thee, an enemy by how much of
the greater number, by so much the more to be feared. The devil above thee
fights against thee, an enemy by how much the more mighty, by so much the
more to be feared. Fear not in the strength of God to wrestle with those
enemies, in the strength of God thou shall get the victory.

Enemies not observed.
14 But thou shall not overcome so great enemies by security, but by continual
fighting. The time of thy life, is the time of fight. Then art thou specially
set upon, when thou know not that thou art set upon. Then do they specially
gather their strength, when they seem to yield thee some rest.

Be ready.
They watch, and do thou sleep? They prepare themselves to hurt thee, and
do not thou prepare to resist?

15 Many faint in the way, before a place can be given them in the Country.
How many of the Israelites died in the Desert, none of which attained unto the
promised Land? How many of the spiritual sons of Abraham perish in the
desert of this life, before they attain the promised inheritance of the
heavenly Kingdom? Think of examples.
There is nothing of more force to shake off security, then if we think of
the small number of those that persevere.

Therefore let there be so great desire of the heavenly Desire of heaven.
glory in us, and love to come thither: let there be so great grief Grief,
loss.
that we have not yet attained it: let there be so great fear, Ever fear.
lest we should not attain it, that we perceive no joy, unless it be of
those things that minister unto us either help or hope to come thither.

16 What does it avail thee to rejoice for a moment, Joy momentany.
if thou be enforced to lament everlastingly? What joy can there be in this
life, if that pass away which delights, but that pass not away which
tormenteth?

17 We live secure, as if we had past over the hour of death and judgment.
Christ says, that he will come to judgment in the hour that we think not:
Hear and fear. Unprovided.
the truth says this, and repeates it again: hear, and fear, If the Lord
shall come in that hour in which we think not, it is greatly to be feared
lest we come unprovided to judgment. If we come unprovided, how shall we be
able to bear the severe examination of this judgment? Nevertheless that
which is lost in this one moment, Lost, never got again Judgment in a moment.
cannot be gotten again for ever. It shall be adjudged in the shortness of
one moment, what manner of men we shall be for all eternity. In this one
moment, life and death, damnation and salvation, eternal pain, and eternal
glory, shall be adjudged to every one. O Lord which have given us grace unto
good, give us moreover perseverance in that which is good.

Tuesday Noone.
What reward shall I give unto thee, O Lord, Psalm 116.11.
for all the benefits that thou have done unto me?

Jlle negat Christum, qui se non abnegat ipsum. Thou must deny thy self, or
Christ.

5. Meditation. Of the denying of a man's own self.
HE that will follow me, Deny our self.
let him deny himself, says our Savior: to deny himself, is to renounce the
love of his owno self, the love of a man's own self keeps out the love of God:
if thou will be the Disciple of Christ, it is necessary, that the root of the
love of thine own self dye in thee utterly. Root out self-loue.
No man loves Christ but he that hates himself. Unless the grain of corn
that falls into the earth be dead, it brings forth no fruit: so also thou can
not entertain and receive the fruits of the holy Ghost, unless the love of
thy self be dead in thy heart.

Abraham forsook his country. Genesis 12.
1 The Lord said to Abraham, Go out of thy own land, and from thy kindred, and
from the house of thy father, to the land which I shall show thee. Abraham
could not have been made so great a Prophet, unless he had first gone out of
his own country. Thou shall not be a true Disciple of Christ, and a true
spiritual man, before thou departest from thine own love.

2 Jacob by the touching of the Angel did halt upon one foot, the other being
sound and whole. Two feet double love.
By these two feet is understood a double love, that of a man's own self, and
that of God: then shall a man be partaker of Gods blessing, when he shall halt
on the foot of the love of himself, that other of the love of God remaining
whole and sound. The eye.
It cannot be that with one and the same eye thou can behold heaven and
earth: so it cannot be, that with one and the same will a man should love
himself inordinately and God too. Love Love the best only.
is the chiefest good of our soul, therefore we must give this chiefest good
of our soul, to the chiefest of good, that is, to God.

3 Thy love is thy God, that is to say, What thou love, is thy God.
whatsoever thou love principally, that do thou set up in the place of
God. Whatsoever thou love chiefly, that thou think to be chiefest: but God
is truly the chiefest of all things: he therefore that loves himself, Self
love. Idolatry.
thinks himself to be God, and sets himself up in the place of God, which
is altogether the greatest idolatry.

4 That which thou do especially love, that thou esteemest the end of all
things and hold it the last complement of thy desires: but God alone is the
beginning and end of the creatures: he is the first and the last: he alone
fills the desire of our heart, God fills all desires.
and nothing of that which is created can satiate the desires: therefore thou
oughtst to prefer the love of God, before the love of thine own self. God
is the beginning and the end: in him therefore ought our love to begin, in him
also ought it to end.

5 The Essence of God is without all the creatures, even as God was from
everlasting Everlasting.
in himself therefore withdraw thy love from all the creatures. Such as thy
love is, such also are thy works. If thy works proceed out of true faith, and
out of the love of God, they are acceptable unto God, and great in his eyes,
although they be but little in the eyes of all men: if they proceed out of the
love of thine own self, they can never please God.

The love of a man's own self does defile all the excellentest works.

6 When Christ was in the house of Simon, Mary's example good.
a certain woman broke a vessel of precious ointment, and anointed the head
of Christ: the work appears to be small, notwithstanding it was acceptable
unto Christ, because it did proceed out of true faith, Luke 7.
pure love, and serious contrition. The sacrifice was a work acceptable to God
in the old Testament: notwithstanding it did not please God that Saul Saul ill.
did separate the prey of the Amalekites, to offer sacrifices unto God. Why?
because this did not proceed out of the love of God. For if he had loved God
truly, he had not contemned the commandment of God of burning the spoil: he
loved himself and his own devotion. Love is a certain fire, for so prays
the Church: Come holy Ghost, and kindle the fire of thy love in the faithful.
Love as fire ascends.
Fire does not stick as fastened in the earth, but always goes upward: so thy
love ought not to rest in thy self, but to lift it self upward unto the Lord.

7 Moreover, to deny a man's own self, is to renounce his own honor. Honor
given to God, not our selves.
The greatest and highest honor is due to the chiefest good alone: God is the
chiefest good. He that seeks his own glory, cannot seek Gods glory, as our
Savior said to the Pharisees: How can ye believe, which receive glory one of
another? Behold Christ's example and follow it: he oftentimes testifies of his
own self, Christ does not seek his own glory.
that he seeks not his own glory, that he receives not honor from men,
that he is humble in heart.

7 All thy gifts thou receiuest from God, therefore give all again unto God:
all the rivers Rivers.
of good things proceed from this fountain of divine goodness: therefore let
all good things be carried again into the Sea. The herbs which are called
Sollequia, Marigold.
always turn themselves to the Sun, from whom they draw their life and
nourishment: so with all thy gifts, and with all thine honor turn thee unto
God, and attribute nothing unto thy self. If thou have any thing of thy self,
What have thou that thou have not received?
thou may seek thine own honor, and attribute thy gifts unto thy self:
but because thou have nothing of thy self, but all from God, therefore thou
ought not to seek thine own but Gods honor. A man's own honor does turn
man away from God. There is an example Example.
in Nabuchadnezzar which safe, This is that Babylon which I have built for the
house of my kingdom, in the strength of my power, and for the glory of any
Majesty.

8 But what follows? as yet the word was in the mouth of the King, when a voice
came from heaven: I say unto thee, Nabuchadnezzar, thy kingdom is gone from
thee: they shall cast thee out from among men, and thy dwelling shall be with
the beasts of the field. So if of thine own honor and pride, that is to say,
of the building of thine own works, thou esteem of thy spiritual Babylon,
and give the honor thereof to thine own self, and not to God alone, thou
shall be cast out of the sight of God.

9 To conclude, Gods will best.
to deny a man's own self, is to deny his own will. We must always obey the
best will: but the will of God is always best. We must obey his will, from
whom we have all that we have: but all things come from God unto us. We must
obey his will, which always leads us to life, and to good: the will of God
does always lead us to life and to good. Delight in the Lord, and he will
give thee the request of thy heart. Our own will does lead us to death and
damnation. Through what did our first Father fall out of the grace of God and
state of salvation, into eternal damnation? Setting aside the will of God, he
followed his own will, he neglected the commandment of the Lord, and
hearkened to the persuasion of the devil.

10 Therefore the true disciple of Christ, renounceth his own will, and
desires to follow the will of God. Behold Christ, he being in the agony of his
passion, offers up his own will, as a most acceptable sacrifice unto God.
Offer thou also thine own will unto God, Christ's will offered to his Father.
and so thou shall perform that which Christ requires of thee, the denying of
thy self. O Lord, let thy holy will be done, as in heaven, so also in the
earth.

Crescit sub pondere palma. The Palm increases under the weight.

10. Meditation. Of the profit of Temptation.
IT is profitable for the faithful soul, to be tried and confirmed by
Temptations in this world. Christ tempted,
Our Savior himself would wrestle with the devil in the Wilderness, that
he might overcome him for us: and for our salvation, and that he might be
the first and faithful fighter of our conflict. He descended first into hell,
afterward again he ascended into Heaven: so the faithful soul does first
descend to the hell of temptations, that she may ascend to the heavenly glory.

1 The people of Israel Israel.
could not possess the promised land of Canaan, unless they had first
overcome diverse enemies: neither can the faithful soul promise to it self
the kingdom of heaven, unless she first overcome the flesh, the world, and
the devil. Temptation does try us, purge us, illuminate us. Temptation does
try us: because our faith being shaken with adversity, is strengthened more
firmly on the Rock of salvation, propagates it self wider into the branches
of good works, and it is lifted up higher into the hope of deliverance.

2 When Abraham Abraham's sacrifice.
being commanded to sacrifice his son, showed himself readily obedient to
the commandment of God, the Angel of the Lord appeared unto him after the
temptation, saying, Now I know that thou fear God, seeing thou have not
spared thine only Son for me: so if thou shall offer unto God the beloved
son of thy soul, that is to say, thine own will in temptations thou shall be
reputed truly fearing God, and shall feel the talk of God in thine heart. The
fire tries gold; temptation, faith. Faith trie^ by tentat^on.
It appears in the battle how valiant the soldier is: so temptation shows
how strong our faith is. When the boisterous rage of winds, and the
tempestuous waves of waters rush upon the ship of Christ, then it appears, of
how little faith are some of his disciples.

3 The Israelites, whom the Lord commanded to be led to overcome the
Midianites, were first tried at the waters: so they are first tried in the
waters of tribulations and temptations, which ouercomming their enemies, are to
be brought into the heavenly country. Whatsoever adversity therefore,
whatsoever temptation happen to the faithful soul, let her think it to be
for probation, not for reprobation.

4 Temptation does also purge us. Our Physician Christ does use many grains of
Aloes to draw out the pestiferous humor of the love of our selves, and the
world. Tribulation does stir us up to search our conscience, and calls again
into our memory, the sins of our life that is past. Yea, as the physic of
the body keeps us from contagious diseases: so tribulation preserues us from
sins. Man truly is always inclined to fall, yet more in the time of
prosperity, Ease slays prosperity.
then of adversity. Riches are thorns unto many: Therefore God pluckes up the
thorns, lest they might strangle their souls.

5 Variety of worldly business Business.
does hinder many from the service of GOD: therefore God sends them diseases,
that returning to themselves, they may begin to dye to the world, to live to
God. It has been profitable unto many to have fallen from the high tower,
either of wealth or honor, unto the quiet rest of a mean condition. The
honor Honor.
of the world lifts up many unto pride: God therefore sends contempt, and
withdraws that which nourishes pride.

^ipes ^e vn^^rstand^^g.
6 Finally, temptation does enlighten us. We know not, we acknowledge not,
unless it be in temptations, how frail and vain all the worlds comfort is.
When Stephen was stoned, he saw the glory of Christ: so Christ shows himself
to the contrite soul in calamities. True and solid joy comes not but from God
dwelling in us. God dwells in a contrite and humble spirit: it is affliction and
temptation which makes the spirit humble and contrite: therefore true and solid
joy is in the soul of the afflicted.

7 Temptation is a certain way to the knowledge of God: therefore the Lord
says, I will be with him in trouble: I will deliver him, and make him see my
salvation.

8 Tobias, when he was blind, saw nothing of those things which were above,
beneath, or before him, no not himself: but being illumined of God, by the
Angel Raphael, he saw all things, which before he could not see: using no other
medicine then the gall Gall gives sight.
of the fish: that by this it might be declared, that our eyes must be
anointed and illuminated with the gall of bitterness, that we may come to the
true knowledge of our selves, and the goods of the world.

9 Wherefore says the Apostle, that we know in an enigme or dark saying?
because we know in temptations, that God can make his Elect merry, under the
form of sadness: that he can quicken them, under the form of death: that he
can heal them under the form of diseases: that he can enrich them, under the
form of poverty.

10 Therefore the cross and temptation ought to be acceptable unto him, which
is not ungrateful unto Christ that was crucified for us, and tempted for us. O
good Jesus, burn here, Correct us O Lord.
strike here, that thou may spare us in the world to come. O good Jesus,
which oft-times by sparing do cast us from thee, make us by stripes to
return unto thee. Afflict and press our outward man, that our inward man may
grow and be lively: fight, O good Jesus in me, against me.

11 Be thou my governor in striving, and my crown in ouercomming. Let
whatsoever adversity I feel in my self, be the strength and increasing of my
faith. Increase our faith.
Help, O good Jesus, my weak faith, for so thou have promised in thine holy
Prophet. Even as a mother comforts her sons, so will I comfort you. A mother
does foster and nourish her sucking Infant with very great care: so, O good
Jesus, lift up and confirm my languishing faith. Grant that thy inward
consolations may prevail more with me, then the contradictions of all men, and
of the devil: yea, then the thoughts of mine own heart. O gentle Samaritane,
Wine and oil.
power biting wine into my wounds, but put thereto also the oil of divine
consolation: multiply thy cross, but vouchsafe unto me further ability to
bear it.

Quid homo? quid bulla? nihil sunt. What is man? a ^ubble? nothing.

11. Meditation. Of the study of true humility.
Wretched.
Think, O faithful soul, on the miserable condition of man, and thou shall
easily escape all the temptations of pride. Man is vile in his ingresse,
wretched in his progress, lamentable in his egresse. Sinful.
He is impugned of the devils, he is provoked by temptations, he is enticed by
delights, he is cast down by tribulations, he is wrapped in crimes, he is
spoiled bare of virtues, he is ensnared in evil customs.

1 Whence therefore art thou Thou art.
proud, earth and ashes? What wast thou before thy birth? stinking sperme. What
art thou in thy life? a sack of doung. What shall thou be after death? the
food of worms. Thou have
If there be any good in thee, it is not thine, but Gods: nothing is thine but
thy sins: therefore thou may arrogate nothing of those things that are in
thee to thy self, but thy sins He is a foolish and unfaithful servant,
which will be proud of the goods of his Master.

2 Behold, O man, the example of Christ: See Christ's example.
all the glory of the heavens does do service unto him. Nay, he alone is true
glory, and nevertheless, he casts away from himself all worldly glory: be
cries as yet, Learn of me: because I am meek and humble in heart.

3 The true lover of Christ is also an imitator of Christ. To whom Christ is
dear, to him also his humility is dear. Let the proud servant The Servant as
the Master.
be ashamed and confounded, when the Lord of Heaven is so humble. Our Savior
says of himself, that he is the Lilly of the Valleys, Lilly of the valleys.
because that he which is the most noble flower, springs, and is preserved,
not on the hills, that is to say, in proud and lofty hearts, but in the lower
Valleys: that is, in the contrite and humble minds of the godly. For the
humble soul, is verily the seat and delectable bed of Christ, as says a
certain holy man.

4 True grace The works of grace.
does not lift up, but humble a man: therefore he is not as yet partaker of
true grace, which does not walk in the humility of heart.

5 The streams of Gods grace do flow downwards, not upwards. As the waters by
nature do not go to high places: so the grace of GOD does not flow but to
humble hearts. The Psalm says, So sings the virgin Mary.
the Lord dwells on high, and beholds the low and humble things in heaven,
and in the earth. This truly is wonderful, that we do not draw near to the
greatest and highest God, but by humility. He that is vile in his own sight,
is great in Gods: he that displeases himself, pleases God.

6 God made the heaven and the earth of nothing. Ephesians. 2.
As it was in the creation: so is it as yet in man's reparation. God creates of
nothing, and he repaires of nothing. That therefore thou may be partaker of
the regeneration, and reparation, Be humble.
be nothing in thine own eyes, that is, attribute nothing to thy self,
arrogate nothing to thy self. We are all weak and frail, but judge no man
frailer then thy self. It hurts not if thou judge thy self inferior to all,
and through humility put thy self under all: but it does much hurt, if thou
set thy self but before one.

7 The twenty four Elders, Elders.
that is to say, the whole Church triumphant, casts away their crowns before
the Throne, gives all righteousness and glory unto God: what then may a vile
sinner do? The Scraphins, the holy Angels Angels. Isa. 6.
cover their faces in the sight of the majesty of God: what may man do, so
vile a creature, and so many ways unthankful to his Creator? Christ Christ.
the true and only begotten Son of God, out of his wonderful humility,
descended out of heaven, and too^e our frail nature upon him, set himself as
low as our flesh, to death, to the Cross: what may man do, who through his
sin has departed so far from God? See, O faithful soul, with what
wonderful humility Christ Follow Christ.
has healed our pride: and do thou as yet desire to be proud? By the way
of his humility and passion, Christ entered into his glory: and do thou
think that thou can come to the heavenly glory walking in the way of pride?
The devil The devil.
for his pride was expelled out of the kingdom of heaven: and do thou,
which were never yet in the glory of Heaven, go thither wards, through the way
of pride? Adam Adam.
for his pride, was cast out of Paradise, and do thou desire to come to the
heavenly Paradise through the way of pride? Let us desire rather to serve and
wash the feet of others, with Christ, then to seek for the more worthy place
with the Devil: Let us be humbled in this life, that we may be exalted in the
life to come.

See thy want.
10 Think always, O faithful soul, not of what thou have, but of what is
wanting unto thee. Grieve more for the virtues which thou have not, then brag
of the virtues which thou have. Cover thy virtues, Cover virtue.
reveal thy sins. For it is greatly to be feared, lest if thou lay open the
treasure of thy good works, through glory, the devil spoil thee thereof
through pride.

11 The fire is best kept, if it be covered with ashes: so the fire of Charity
is never kept more securely, then when it is buried in the ashes of humility.
Pride Prides mischief.
is the seed of all sins: take heed therefore, that thou be not lifted up,
lest it happen that thou be cast headlong into the deep pit of sin. Pride is
the acceptable chamber of the devil: The devils Chamber.
take heed therefore that thou be not litted up, lest it happen that thy
wretched soul be subdued of the devil. Pride is a wind that burns and dryes
up the fountain of Gods grace: Dries up grace.
take heed therefore that thou be not lifted up, lest it happen that thou be
separated from the grace of God.

12 Heal, O Christ, the swelling of our pride: let thy holy humility be unto
us the merit of eternal life: let it be also the example of our life: let our
faith firmly embrace thy humility, and let our life constantly follow the same.

Tuesday, Evening Prayer.
I Will not hide my sin, like Adam, but I will confess against my self, mine
own unrighteousness, that there may be an healing of my sin, that thou, O
Lord, may do all mine iniquity out of thy sight: I will bewail mine
original corruption, I will confess against my self mine actual
transgression: my best things are but bad, my worst things are abominable,
Lord, be merciful unto me a sinner.

While sin dwells in my house, whilst the devil daily fights against my
soul, and lays siege unto it, I will not say to my soul, Peace, peace, when
there is no peace; but I will stand upon my guard, lest in my security the
enemy oppress me at unawares. To whom should I fly for succor in all my
distresses, but to my Savior? O Christ, I will cleave unto thee, I will leave,
I will deny, I will hate my self for thy love: I will love thee above all
things, I will honor thee above all other, I will resign my will to thine,
since I have learned, that mine own will leads me to death, and to damnation,
but thy will to life and health.

Give strength, O Lord, that I faint not for the fiery trial, but that I may
stand fast in the evil day, and possessing my soul in patience, by thy help
profit by all manner of Temptations. Above all things, O Lord, let not pride
get the upper hand of me; but grant me, that considering mine own vileness
and misery, and looking upon the example of thine humility, I may from thence
learn to be lowly and small in mine own eyes, that so thou may exalt me
in the time of need. In conclusion of this my prayer, I pray thee to close up
mine eyes this night in quiet sleep: yet while mine eyes sleep, O Lord, let my
heart watch and wake unto thee. Lighten thou mine eyes, O Lord, that I sleep
not in death, but raise me here from the death of sin, to the life of grace
elsewhere, to the life of glory, that therein thy light I may see light, and
be partaker of thy glory. Amen.

Wednesday, Morning Prayer.
IT is the word of Truth it self, which says, Ask, and it shall be given
unto you: I wretched creature (O Lord) which know my self to have fallen into
the hands of those thieves, which have not only wounded me, but also utterly
stripped me of grace, so that to me is left no good thing, relying with assurance
on the confidence of this word and promise, do ask those things at thy hands,
which my soul wants, whereof she has been spoiled, that thou with a free
hand may give them unto me. Now of the things whereof I feel my self to
stand in need, what shall I ask first? Even thy grace to strengthen me in mine
inward man, that I may be able to resist and overcome mine own corruptions,
mine own evil nature, the law of sin in my members, which contradicting the
law of my mind, leads me captive to sin, and draws me to destruction. Thy
grace (O LORD) I beg and crave, without which I can do nothing, which
strengthening me in thee, I am able to do all things. Next to this gift of
grace, the gift of fear bestow upon me, O Lord, thy fear to wound my flesh,
lest the love of sinful flesh deceive me: with these give me a firm faith,
with faith, sound hope and confidence, then let all other virtues and
spiritual graces come trouping into my soul, like the company of Leahs
children into Jacobs house, with temperance, patience; with patience,
humility; with humility, true obedience; and with these, meekness and
holiness, chastity of mind, chastity of body, the love of thee my God, and
the love of my neighbor. O gracious and loving God, withdraw not thy self
from my help, withhold not from thy servant any thing that shall be good for
him, but fill my soul with all spiritual benediction, that it may be as the
field which the Lord has blessed, sweetly smelling, richly fruitful in all
grace and goodness, which thing I beseech thee to grant unto me for thy dear
Sons sake Christ Jesus.

Bona spes confundere nescit. Good hope shameth not.

12. Meditation. Of the assurance of our salvation.
Why art thou troubled, Thy Creator makes.
O my soul? why do thou as yet doubt of the mercy of GOD? Remember thy
Creator, who created thee without thee; who formed thee in secret, when the
house of thy body was framed, in the lower parts of the earth. He therefore
which undertook the care of thee when as yet thou were not, should not he
take a care of thee, after be has made thee to his own Image? After his own
image
I am the creature of God, I turn me to my Creator. What if my nature be
infected of the Devil? what if it be maimed and wounded of thieves, that is
to say, of sinners? yet my Creator lives as yet: Creator cures.
he that could make me, he also could renew me. He that created me without
any evil, can also take from me all evil, which being entered into me by the
suggestion of the Devil, by Adams transgression, and by mine own action has
gone through my whole substance. Therefore my Creator can renew me, if so be he
will. Yea, Gods love.
and he will: for who ever hates his own work? Are not we before him as
clay in the hands of the Potter? but if he had hated me, he had never
created me of nothing. He is the Savior of all, especially of those that
believe.

1 He has created me wonderfully, Christ's Passion.
but he has redeemed me more wonderfully. It never appeared more clearly that
God loved us, then in his wounds and passion. Phil. 2.
He is truly beloved for whom the only begotten is sent out of the bosom of
the Father.

2 If thou did not desire my salvation O Lord Jesus, wherefore should thou
descend from heaven? but thou have descended to the earth, to death, to the
cross. That God might redeem his Servant, Redemption.
he spared not his Son. He therefore loves mankind with a truly great love,
which for the redemption of mankind delivered his Son to be afflicted, to
be slain, to be crucified.

3 It is altogether a dear and great price, with which we are redeemed: dear
therefore and great is the mercy of the Redeemer. It may seem therefore to
some, that God loves His love in adoption.
his chosen sons, as well as his only begotten Son. For that on which we
bestow any thing, is dearer then that on which we bestow nothing. That he might
have adopted sons, he spared not his natural and coessentiall Son.

4 What great thing is it therefore, that he has provided for us mansions in
the house of heaven: Mansions in heaven.
when he has given us his own Son, in whom is all the fullness of his
Godhead? Surely where is the fulness of the Godhead, there is the fullness of
eternal life Fullness of eternal life.
and glory. But if he has given us the fullness of eternal life in Christ,
how shall he deny us the least particle thereof? The heavenly Father loves us
sons adopted with a truly great love, for whom he delivered up his only
begotten Son. The Son embraces us with truly great love, which for us
delivered up himself. That he might make us rich, Makes us rich.
he endured extreme poverty: for he had not where he might lay down his
head. That he might make us the sons Sons.
of God, he was borne man. Neither having once performed the work of our
redemption, does he afterward neglect us: but he is as yet placed on the right
hand of the Majesty of God, Makes still intercession Obtains all things.
and makes intercession for us.

5 What will he not obtain for me necessary to salvation, when he has
imparted himself to deserve my salvation? What will the Father deny the Son,
who was made obedient unto him, even unto the death, yea, the death of the
Cross^? What will the Father deny the Son, which has accepted the price of
redemption, paid by the Son? Great is mine assurance in the holy spirit. For
my Savior dyed to send him to my comfort. He tells my spirit I am the son of
God. He helps me to cry to my Father. Yea, in this sinful vale he leads me
to the land of righteousness.

Romans 8. Nothing separateth from Gods love: Not Satan
6 Let my sins accuse me, I trust in this Intercessor: he is greater that
excuses, then he that accuses. Let my weakness affright me, I glory in his
strength. Let Satan accuse me, so that this Mediator excuse me: Let heaven and
earth accuse me, and sue me guilty of iniquity: it suffices me, that the
Creator of heaven and earth, and righteousness it self, does entreat for me.

7 It suffices me to merit, to know that my merit is not sufficient. Not sin
It suffices me to have him favorable unto me, against whom only I have
sinned. Whatsoever he has decreed not to impute, shall be as if it had not
been. Neither does it move me, that my sins are both heavy and diverse, and
often doubled: for unless I were laden with my sins, I should not desire his
righteousness.

8 Unless I had a disease, I should not crave the help of the Physician. He
is the Physician, he is the Savior, he is the righteousness, he cannot deny
himself. I am sick, I am damned, I am a sinner, I cannot deny my self: Have
pity upon me, O thou the Physician: O thou the Savior: O thou the
righteousness: O thou the comforter and reioycer of the heart. Amen.

In Christo electio facta. God chose in Christ.

13. Meditation. Of Predestination.
By Gods decree before the foundation of the world. Reu. 13. and 17. Ephesians. 1.
AS often, O devout soul, as thou will think of thy predestination, behold
Christ hanging on the Cross, dying for the sins of all the world, rising
again for our righteousness. Begin from Christ lying in the manger, and so
shall shy disputation of Predestination go on in good order.

Chosen in Christ.
1 God has chosen us before the foundations of the world were laid, but yet the
election was made in Christ. If therefore thou be in Christ by faith, Faith.
doubt not that the election does pertain unto thee also. If thou cleave unto
Christ with a firm confidence Confidence.
of heart: doubt not that thou art in the number of the elected.

2 But if from the former, without the bounds of the Word Not without the Word.
thou will search the depth of Predestination, it is greatly to be feared lest
thou fall into the depth of desperation. Without Christ God is a consuming
fire: take heed therefore that thou come not near this fire, God a fire
without Christ.
lest thou be consumed. Without the satisfaction of Christ, God by the voice of
his Law does accuse all, does condemn all; take heed therefore, that thou draw
not the mystery of predestination out of the Law. Inquire not into the reasons
of Gods counsels, Predestination no^ in the law
lest thy thoughts do much seduce thee.

Be sober.
3 God dwells in the light that no man can attain unto, endeavor not rashly
to go forward unto it. The Gospel safe.
But yet God has revealed unto us the light of the Gospel: in this thou may
safely enquire after the doctrine of this secret, The secrets belong to God,
the revealed thing to us. Deuteronomy. 16.
in this light thou shall see true light. Leave the profunditie of this
eternal and from everlasting made decree, and turn thee to the clearness of
the manifestation made in time. Justification, that is made in time, is the
looking-glass of Election, which was made without time.

4 Acknowledge out of the law Law.
the wrath of God for sins, and repent thee. Acknowledge out of the Gospel,
Gospel.
the mercy of God for Christ's merit, and apply that by an assurance to thy
self. Acknowledge the nature of Faith, Working faith.
and show it through a godly conversation. Acknowledge Gods fatherly
chastisement in the cross, Correction.
and bear it with patience. Then at length begin to handle the doctrine of
Predestination. This method has the Apostle showed us: let the true disciple
of the Apostle follow this method.

5 Three things there are, which are always to be observed in this mystery.
The mercy of God, Gods mercy.
that loves us: the merit of Christ, Christ's merit.
that suffers for us: the grace of the holy Ghost, Grace of the Spirit.
that calls us by the Gospel.

6 Great is the mercy of God, because he has loved all the world. The earth
Great as the earth.
is full of the mercy of the Lord, nay, it is greater then the heaven and the
earth. For it is so great as God himself is: because God is love. As himself
He has testified in his word, that he would not the death of a sinner. Says
it.
If this be little, he has also confirmed it with his oath. Swears it.
If thou can not believe Believe.
God when he promises, at least believe him when he swears for thy salvation.

7 He is called the Father Father.
of mercies, because it is his property to pity and to spare. Pity from
himself.
He takes the cause and original of showing pity from his own: Judgment
from others.
of judging and revenging rather from another. So that taking of pity seems
to proceed far otherwise from his heart, then taking of punishment. Great
also is the merit of Christ, because he has suffered for us all. Love in
creation.
What therefore could prove the love of God more openly, then that he loved us,
when as yet we were lost, because it is of his love that we are created? In
giving his Son.
He loved us moreover when we were turned away from him, because it is a part
of love, that he gave his Son unto us to be a Redeemer. To the sinner that
is adjudged to eternal torments, and not having wherewith he may redeem
himself, says God the Father, Take my only begotten, and give him for thee.
The Son himself says Take me, and redeem thy self.

8 Christ is the flower of the field, Cont.
not the flower of the Garden: Christ's merit open.
because the savor and smell of his grace is not shut up to a few, but opened
unto many. And lest thou should doubt of the greatness of his merit,
Christ, To his enemies.
when he suffered, prayed for those that crucified him* and poured forth his
blood for them which poured forth his blood themselves.

9 Great also and large are the promises of the Gospel: because Christ says,
Mat 1^. All come.
Come unto me all ye which labor. That which was performed for many, is
offered unto many. As much as thou shall stretch forth the foot of confidence
in these good things: so much also shall thou obtain. Christ denies his grace
Grace.
unto none, but to him that thinks himself unworthy of it. Consider therefore
O faithful soul, these three props Three props.
of Predestination, and lean on them with a firm confidence of thine heart.
Consider the benefits of Gods mercy, that are past, and thou shall not doubt of
final perseverance.

Creation.
10 When as yet thou wast not, God created thee: when thou were damned by Adams
fall, he redeemed thee: Redemption. Calling. Instruction.
when thou did live in the world, out of the Church, he called she: when
thou were ignorant, he instructed thee: when thou wentest astray, Seeking.
he brought thee back: when thou did sin, he corrected thee: Correction
Vpheld.
when thou stoodest, he held thee: when thou did fall, he raised Raised.
thee up: when thou did go, he led thee: Load. Received
when thou came unto him, he took thee up: in expecting thee, he showed his
long suffering: Patience. Pardon.
in pardoning, that he was easy to be entreated.

11 The mercy of God goes before thee, Mercy first and last.
hope firmly that it will follow thee also. The mercy of God does prevent
thee, that thou may be healed, it will follow thee also that thou may be
glorified. It preuenteth thee, that thou may live godly, it will follow thee
also, The Lord preserues
that thou may live for ever with him. Wherefore is it, that falling thou art
not bruised? Who has put under his hand? who but the Lord? Trust therefore
hereafter also in the mercy of God, and hope firmly for the end of thy faith,
eternal salvation.

Gods hands safe
12 In what hands also can the matter of thy salvation more safely lie, then in
those which have made heaven and earth? in those which are not shortened? in
those which do flow with the bowels of mercy: neither want their holes, by
which it may flow out?

Election for sanctification:
13 Howbeit, think, O devout soul, that we are chosen of God, that we should
be holy and without rebuke. In whom therefore there is not the study of an holy
life, to them the benefit of election does not pertain. We are chosen in
Christ: in Christ we are by faith: faith shows it self forth by love:
therefore where there is not love, there is no faith: where there is no faith,
there is no Christ: where there is no Christ, there is no election. Truly, the
foundation of God abides sure, having this seal, the Lord knows who are
his. But yet let him depart from iniquity, whosoever calls on the Name of the
Lord. No man shall snatch the sheep of Christ out of his hand: but yet let the
sheep of Christ hear his voice. We are the house of God: but let us retain
the confidence and glory of our hope firm unto the end. O Lord, which have
given unto us to will, give unto us also to do thy will.

Mors Christi vita piorum est. Christ's death Saints life

14. Meditation. Of the satisfaction for our sins.
COme unto me, ye which labor and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you:
they are the words of our Savior. Truly, O Lord Jesus, I am too much laden,
and groan under the burden of sin: but I haste me unto thee, the fountain
of living water. Christ first came, to entice us to come.
Come unto me, O Lord Jesus, that I may come unto thee. I come unto thee, O
Lord, because first thou came unto me. I come unto thee, O Lord Jesus, and
carefully I seek thee: for I find no good in my self. No help in man.
But if I could find any good in my self, I should not seek thee so
carefully. Truly, O Lord Jesus, I labor and am laden: neither can I compare my
self to any of thy Saints: or else of penitent sinners, unless perchance to
the Thief upon the cross. Have pity upon me, O Lord, because thou had
pity upon the Thief on the cross.

1 I have lived wretchedly, I have lived in sins, Desire a good death by
Christ's mediation
but I desire to dye godly: but I desire to dye in righteousness. But piety
and righteousness is far from my heart: therefore I fly to thy piety, and
to thy righteousness. Let thy soul (O Lord) help me, which thou have laid
down for a redemption for many. Let thy most holy body help me, afflicted for
me with scourges, spittings, buffets, and thorns, and fastened also to the
cross. Let thy holy blood, O Jesus, help me, which was poured out of thy
side, as thou did suffer and dye, which cleanses us from all sins.
Divinity resting, but present in the passion.
Let thy most holy Divinity help me, which sustained thy humane nature in thy
passion, and which resting, and not showing it self forth, the most holy
mystery of our Redemption was wrought, and which added infinite power and
weight to thy holy Passion: So that God has purchased me poor wretch to
himself with his blood. Let thy wounds help me, in which is all my souls
salvation. Christ suffered for sinners, not for himself.
Let thy most holy passion help me, let thy merit help me, my last refuge and
remedy against sin, for that which thou have suffered, thou have suffered
for me.

2 That which thou deseruedst, that do thou also deserve for me, and mine
unworthiness. God gives his Son.
Therefore God does commend his charity and love in us, and does prove it by a
testimony that exceeds the understanding of all men, yea, of the Angels, that
Christ dyed for us, when as yet we were sinners, To sinners
and the enemies of God.

3 Who wonders not hereat? who can choose but be amazed? being entreated of no
man, yea being hated of men, the most merciful Son of God does entreat
sinners and his enemies. Neither does he only entreat: Satisfaction by
Nativity, holy Life, Passion, Death.
but he also makes satisfaction to the justice of God, by his nativity most
poor, by his life most holy, by his passion most bitter, by his death most
cruel.

4 O Lord Jesus, Jesus loves first.
which did entreat for me, suffer and dye for me, before I could desire thy
merit and passion, or could solicit thee with prayers to pay my Redemption:
how will thou cast me from thy face? how will thou deny me the fruit of thy
most holy passion, when now out of the deepes I cry unto thee, Cries not cast
away.
and desire the fruit of thy merit with tears and groans.

5 I was an enemy by nature: now since thou have dyed for me, I am become a
friend, a brother, and a son by grace. Thou heardst thine enemy, when he
did not yet entreat thee: how shall thou despise thy friend when he comes unto
thee with tears and prayers: A friend not despised.
Thou will not cast him forth that comes unto thee, because thy Word is truth.
Come but in Gods truth.


6 Thou have spoken unto us in spirit and truth, and we have received of thee
the words of eternal life. Attend, and lift up thy self, O my soul: before we
were sinners by nature, now we are just by grace* before we were enemies, now
we are friends and allies: before our help was in the death of Christ, now also
in his life: before we were dead in our sins, now we are quickened in Christ.

7 O the great love of God, wherewith he loved us! O the abundant riches of his
divine grace, Divine riches.
whereby he has made us to to fit together in heavenly places! O the bowels
of the mercy of our God, in which he has visited us, rising from on high! Of
death. Rom 5.10. Of life.
Now if the death of Christ has brought life and righteousness to us, what
can his life? If our Savior paid a price to his Father for us dying, what
shall he do living, and making intercession for us? For Christ lives and dwells
in our hearts, if so be there live and flourish in them the remembrance of his
most holy merit.

8 Draw me, O Lord Jesus, Cant. 1.5.
that I may possess that in very truth, which here I expect in a sure hope:
let thy Minister, The Servant with the Master
I beseech thee, be with thee and see the brightness which thy Father has given
thee: let him inhabit the mansion, which thou have provided for him in thy
Fathers house. Blessed are they that dwell in thy house, O Lord, they shall
praise thee for ever and ever.

Wednesday Noone.
Psalm 68.16:
TVrne thee unto me, O Lord, and have mercy upon me: give thy strength unto thy
servant, and help the son of thine handmaid.

Nomine quid Jesu suauius esse potest? What can be sweeter then the name of
Jesus? The sweetest.

15. Meditation. Of the name of Jesus.
O Good Jesus, be thou also unto me Jesus: for thy holy Name, have pity upon
me. My life does condemn me, but the Name of Jesus will save me. For this thy
name, do unto me according to thy name. And whereas thou art a true and great
Savior, Jesus respects sinners.
thou do also respect true and great sinners. Have mercy upon me, O good
Jesus, in the time of mercy, lest thou condemn me in the time of judgment. If
thou receive me within the bosom of thy mercy, Jesus ample.
thou will not be for me more straightened. If thou distribute unto me the crummes
of thy goodness, thou will not be therefore more needy. For me thou have been
borne, for me thou have been circumcised, be thou also unto me Jesus.

1 O how sweet and delectable is this name! for what is Jesus, but a Savior?
and what inconvenience can happen unto those that are saved? what can we ask,
or what can we expect as yet beyond our salvation? Desire it in thy particular.
Take me, O Lord Jesus, within the number of thy sons, that with them I may
praise thy holy and saving name. Where sin abou^deth, grace abounds. Romans 5:
If I have taken away mine own integrity, have I also destroyed thy mercy? If
I wretched man, was able to destroy and damn my self, art not thou therefore,
merciful Lord, able to save me? Do not, O Lord, attend so to my sins, that
thou forget thy mercy. Do not so weigh and ponder my defaults, that they
preponderate thy merit. Do not attend so unto mine evil, that therefore thou
forget thy good. Be not mindful of thine anger against the guilty, but be
mindful of thy mercy toward the wretched.

Jesus shows our misery to help us.
2 Thou which have given me a mind that I might desire thee, will thou withdraw
thy self from my desire? Thou which have showed unto me mine unworthiness,
and just damnation, will thou hide from me thy worthiness, and promise of
eternal life?

3 My cause is to be handled before the judgment seat in heaven: Jesus is
Judge.
but it comforts me, that the name of Savior is assigned unto thee in the
Court of heaven: because that name was brought by an Angel from heaven.

4 O most merciful Jesus, to whom will thou be Jesus, if to wretched sinners,
which seek grace and salvation, thou will not be Jesus? Jesus calls not the
righteous but sinners.
They that trust to their own righteousness and holiness, seek salvation in
themselves: but I, because I find nothing in my self worthy of eternal life,
fly unto thee my Savior. Save me that am condemned: have mercy upon me a
sinner: justify me that am unrighteous: absolve me that am accused. Thou (O
Lord) art truth, thy name is holy and true. Let therefore thy name be true in
me, be thou also unto me Jesus and a Savior.

Every where be Jesus.
5 Be thou unto me Jesus in this life present: be thou unto me Jesus in death:
be thou unto me Jesus in the last judgment: be thou unto me Jesus in the
life eternal. Yea, thou will be, O good Jesus, because as thou art inuariable
in Essence, so thou art inuariable Inuariable
in mercy: thy Name shall not be changed, O Lord Jesus, for me one only
wretched sinner, but thou will also be unto me a Savior. For thou do not
cast forth a doors him that comes unto thee. Thou that have given me a will
to come, wilt give me also favor, Ioh. 6.
that coming I may be received. For thy words are truth and life.

6 Let the propagation of original sin in me condemn me: Conquer through
him that loved us.
notwithstanding, thou art unto me Jesus. Let my conception made in sin
condemn me: notwithstanding thou art unto me Jesus. Let my shape made in
sin and under the curse condemn me: notwithstanding thou art my Savior. Let
my corrupt nativity condemn me: notwithstanding thou art my salvation. Let the
sins of my youth condemn me: yet thou art my Jesus. Let the leading of my
whole life, spotted with most grievous sins condemn me: yet thou remainest
my Jesus. Let death which is to be inflicted upon me for my sins and diverse
offenses condemn me: yet thou art my Savior. Let the most district sentence
of the last Judgment condemn me: yet thou art my Jesus.

Death in us, life in Jesus.
6 In me is sin, reprobation, damantion: in thy name is righteousness,
election, salvation: but I have been baptized into thy name: I believe on thy
name: I will dye in thy name: I will rise again in thy name: I will appear
before the judgment in thy name. All things are provided for us in this name,
and shut up like a treasure: so much is wanting of these good things, that I
detract by my diffidence. Which that thou may command to be far from me, I
pray thee by that very name, O good Jesus, that I be not damned by my fault and
unbelief, whom thou desire to have saved by thy precious merit, and thy
saving name.

Fulgent cunabula Christi. Christ's cradle does shine

16. Meditation. Of the Mysteries of the Incarnation.
LEt us withdraw our minds a little from these temporal things, The Nativity.
and behold the mysteries of the Nativity of our Lord. The Son of God
descends out of heaven unto us, that we may obtain the adoption Adoption.
of sons. God is made man, that man may be made partaker of the divine
Divine.
grace and nature. Christ would be borne about the evening of the world, that
he might signify that the benefits of his Incarnation do not concern this
life Life.
present, but the life eternal.

1 He would be borne in the time of Augustus the peaceable, Peace.
which has made mankind at peace with God. He would be borne in the time of
the servitude of Israel, which is the true deliverer, Deliverer.
and auenger of his people. He would be borne under the Empire of another Lord,
Empire of another world.
as he whose kingdom was not of this world. He is borne of a Virgin, that he
may signify that he is not conceived and borne but in the hearts of them which
are spiritual Virgins, Spiritual Virgins conceive Christ. Reu. 14.
that is, whose minds do neither cleave to the world, nor to the Devil, but
to God in one spirit. He is borne pure and holy, that he may sanctify our
impure and defiled nativity. Sanctify our nativity.
He is borne of a Virgin that was espoused to a man, for the honor of
Matrimony, instituted of God, and to draw us to love our spiritual marriage
with him* He is borne in the darkness of the night, Enlighten the dark world.
which was the true Light, inlightening the darkness of the World. He is
borne in Bethlehem, that is to say, in the house of Bread, which brought with
him most plentiful food of the heavenly benefits. He is laid in a cratch,
which is the true food Food.
of our souls. John 6.
He is borne between an Ox and an Ass, that he might restore men unto their
ancient dignity, Dignity.
which were made like unto the beasts by sin. He is the first begotten, and
the only begotten of his mother in earth, which according to his divine nature
is the first begotten, and the only begotten of his Father in heaven, that we
might be numbered among the first begotten, whose names are written in heaven.
He is borne poor and needy, that he may get for us the heavenly Riches.
Riches.
He is borne in a vile Stable of Cattle, that he may bring us to the Palaces
of the heavenly Court. Heavenly places.


2 The messenger of so great a benefit is sent out of heaven, because none in
the earth did understand his greatness. Of celestial gifts, there is also
worthily a celestial messenger. Mat 11. Angels fellows.
The armies of the Angels rejoice, which may have us fellows of their happiness,
for the incarnation of the Son of God.

3 So great a miracle is first told to Shepherds, because the true Shepherd
of our souls Shepherd of souls.
was come to bring back the lost sheep into the way. The matter of so great
joy is told to the contemned and ignoble, Ignoble partake in Christ.
because none can be made partaker thereof, which does not displease himself
in his own eyes. This Nativity is told to them that watch by their flock,
because not they which snort in sins, but whose heart does watch to God,
Watchful.
are made partakers of so great a gift. The company of the heavenly Soldiers
does triumph, Angels joy
which was grievously sorrowful for the fault of our first Parent.

4 The brightness of that Lord and King, A light in darkness.
appears in the Heavens, whose baseness man did despise in the earth. The
Angel commands to let go fear, because he was borne, which was to take away
out of the midst, Cast out fear.
the causes of all fear.

5 Joy is denounced out of heaven, because the Author and giver of all joy was
borne. Rejoice.
Joy is commanded, because the enmity between God and men, the cause of all
sadness, is removed. Glory Glory.
is given unto God on high, which our first parent, by the unlawful
transgression of the commandment, would have snatched away.

6 True peace Peace.
is gotten by this Nativity, because before men were enemies unto God: before
their own conscience was an adversary unto them: before they were at
difference with themselves, between themselves. True peace is restored
Restored.
to the earth, because he is overcome which did hold us captives.

Go to Christ.
7 Let us also with the Shepherds go unto Christ's Cratch, that is, the Church,
and we shall find this infant wrapped up in Swathes, that is to say, the holy
Scriptures. Let us also conserve with Mary, the holy Mother of the Lord, Keep
his words.
the words of so great a mystery, and let us renew the same always in our
daily remembrance. Let us with our voice follow the Angels that sing before us,
Sing with Angels.
and let us give deserved thanks for so great a benefit. Let us rejoice and be
glad with the whole heavenly army. With the heavenly Army.
For if the Angels do rejoice so greatly for our sakes: how much more ought
we to rejoice, for whom this Infant was borne and given?

8 If the Israelites did lift up their voices, With Israel
and shout when the Ark of the covenant was brought unto them, which was the
figure and shadow of the Lords incarnation: how much should we rejoice that
the Lord himself has descended, taking our flesh upon him? If Abraham With
Abraham.
did rejoice when he saw the day of the Lord, and when the Lord appeared unto
him in the shape of a man taken upon him for the time, what shall we do, when
he has joined our nature unto him in a perpetual and indissoluble league?

9 Let us here marvel at the infinite bounty of God, who when we could not
ascend to him, Admire Cods bounty.
would himself descend unto us. Let us wonder at the infinite power of God,
which of two things most distant, that is to say, the divine and humane nature,
could make one thing most coniunct, that now one and the same is both God and
man. Let us wonder at the infinite wisdom Wisdom.
of God, which could find a means of our redemption, when neither Angels nor
men could see the means. The infinite goodness was offended, and an infinite
satisfaction was required: man has offended God, of man was the satisfaction
required: but neither could an infinite satisfaction be performed of man:
neither could the divine Justice be satisfied without an infinite price.

11 Therefore was God made man, that both he which had sinned might make
satisfaction: and that he which was infinite, might pay an infinite price. Look
upon and desire it.
Let us wonder at this amazing temper of Gods justice and mercy, which no
creature, before God did manifest it, could find out, nor since it is
manifested, can fully perceive. Let us wonder at these things, let us not
search curiously into them, let us desire to look into them, although we
cannot fully conceive them: let us rather confess our own ignorance, then go
about to deny Gods power, bounty, or wisdom.

Sit grata Redemptio Christi. Be thankful for Christ's redemption.

17 Meditation. Of the wholesome fruit of the Incarnation.
I Bring you tidings of great joy, says the Angel, at the Nativity of our
Savior. Truly it was great, and greater then man's understanding can conceive.
It was the greatest of evils, that we were held as captives under the wrath of
God, under the power of the Devil, under eternal damnation. It was a greater
evil as yet, that men were either ignorant of these greatest evils, or else
did neglect them. But now tidings of great joy is brought unto us, Joy for
salvation.
that he came into the world, which should free us from all these evils. The
Physician Physician.
came to the sick, the Redeemer Redeemer.
to the Captives, Way. Life.
the way to the wanderers, life to the dead, salvation to the damned.

1 As Moses was sent of the Lord, Moses.
to free the people of Israel out of the bondage of Egypt: so Christ was sent
of his Father to redeem all mankind from the captivity of the Devil. Even as
the Dove, Noah's Dove.
when the waters were dried up, after the Deluge, brought a branch of Olive to
the Arc of Noah: so Christ came in to the world to preach peace, and the
reconciliation of mankind with God. We do therefore worthily rejoice, Due
joy.
and conceive great things of the mercy of God, which loved us so, when we
were as yet enemies, that he scorned not to assume our nature into the most
straight embracing of the Divinity. Assuming our nature. Therefore denies
nothing.
What shall he deny them which are joined unto him by participation of his
flesh? who ever hated his own flesh? how therefore can that highest and
infinite mercy, drive us away from him, being now made partakers of his nature?

Wondrous mystery.
2 Who can conceive aright of the greatness of this mystery, much less utter
it in words? there is the greatest height, and the greatest baseness: there is
the greatest power, and the greatest infirmity: there is the greatest majesty,
and the greatest frailty. What is higher then God, and viler then man? What is
mighter then God, and weaker then man? What is more glorious then God, and more
frail then man? Gods power reconcileth all as in it self impossible.
But that greatest power did find a mean, whereby these things might be
joined together, when that greatest righteousness did require the necessity of
such a conjunction.

3 Who also can conceive the greatness of this mystery? Infinite sins require
infinite price.
an equivalent and infinite price was required for the offense of man: because
man has turned himself away from the infinite goodness, that is to say, God.
But what can be equivalent to the infinite God? The infinite justice therefore,
as it were of it self, does take an equivalent price to it self, and God the
Creator does suffer in the flesh, lest the flesh of the creature should suffer
for ever. The infinite goodness was offended, there could none but the
Mediator of infinite power make intercession, but what is infinite besides God?
Therefore God himself has reconciled the world to himself, God himself is
made the Mediator: God himself redeemes mankind with his own blood.

The Creator reconcileth the creature.
4 Who can perceive the greatness of this mystery? the great Creator was
offended: neither was the creature careful to pacify him, or to make a
reconciliation with him, the same that was offended, assuming the flesh of the
creature, made the reconciliation.

5 Man had forsaken God, and had turned himself to the enemy of God, the
Devil: but he that was forsaken, does carefully enquire after him that
forsook him, and does most kindly again inuit him to him. Man went away from
the infinite good, and was slipped into the infinite evil, but that infinite
good, giving the infinite price of his redemption, set free the creature from
that infinite evil.

6 Is not this infinite mercy, which exceeds all the finite understanding and
thought of man? our nature is made more glorious by Christ, More glorious in
Christ.
then it was disgraced by the sin of Adam We have gained more in Christ, then
we have lost in Adam: sin did abound, Romans 5.
but Gods grace did superabound.

7 In Adam we have lost innocence, in Christ we receive full righteousness.

8 Let others marvel at Gods power, his divine bounty Gods bounty the greatest
marvel.
is more to be marvelled at, although in GOD both power and mercy be equal,
both of them infinite. Let others marvel at the Creation, I rather list to
marvel at the redemption: although both the creation and the redemption be
deeds of infinite power. It is a great thing to create man which had deserved
nothing at all, as who as yet had no existence: but it seems as yet a greater
thing to redeem man which had ill deserved, Wonderful.
and to take the satisfaction Satisfaction
of the debt upon himself. It is a wonderful thing, that our flesh and our
bones Bones.
were formed unto us of God: it is as yet more wonderful, that God would be
made flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bones. O my soul, be thankful Be
thankful.
unto thy God, which created thee, when as yet thou wast not: which redeemed
thee, when thou were damned through sin: which has prepared the heavenly
joys for thee, which cleauest by faith to Christ.

Measpes est passio Christi. The passion of Christ my hope.

4. Meditation. Of the fruit of the Passion of our Lord.
AS often as I think of the passion of Christ, so often I presume highly of
the love of God, and of the forgiveness of my sins. His Head is bowed down
to kiss Kiss.
me: his Arms are stretched forth to embrace me: Cant. 1.1. Embrace.
his Hands are open to give Give.
unto me: his Side is open to show me his Heart flaming with love: See love.
he is exalted from the earth, that he may draw Draw me.
all to himself: his wounds are pale with grief, but bright in love.
Therefore by the ouerture of his wound we ought to enter Enter in to him.
into the secret of his heart. Doubtless there is plentiful redemption
Plentiful redemption.
with him; because not some drop only, but a whole stream of blood did flow
plentifully through five parts of his body. Even as the grape cast into the
wine press, is broken by the weight that is laid upon it, and on every Every
way flowing.
side poures out his liquour: so the flesh of Christ pressed down with the
weight of Gods wrath, and the burden of our sins, does every where pour
forth the liquor of his blood.

1 When Abraham would have offered his son in sacrifice, the Lord said, Now I
know for a truth that thou love me: do thou also acknowledge the great love
of the eternal Father, Great love
that he would deliver his only begotten Son to death for us. We were
beloved, when as yet we were enemies: Loves enemies.
shall he forget us now, when an atonement is wrought by the death of his
Son? Can the so precious blood of his Son be forgotten before him, when he
also numbers the tears and the steps of godly men? Numbreth tears.
Can Christ forget them in life, for whom he would sustain even death?
Sustaineth.
Can he forget them in his glory, for whom he suffered such torments in his
humility?

2 Consider, O faithful soul, In death.
the manifold fruit of the Passion of our Lord. Christ poured out a bloody
sweat for us, lest the most cold sweat in the agony of death In the Agony of
death.
should oppress us. He would wrestle with death, lest we should faint in the
agony of death. He would sustain a most grievous anxiety and sadness, even
unto death, Sorrow.
that we might be made partakers of eternal joy in heaven.

3 He would be betrayed with a kiss, which is a sign of friendship and good
will, that that sin might be extinguished, Treason of the serpent.
by which Satan under the show of singular good will betrayed our first
parents. He would be taken and bound of the Jews, that he might loose us
which were tied with the bonds of sin, Bond of sin.
and were to be cast into eternal damnation.

4 He would have his passion to begin in the Garden, Garden.
that he might expiate the sin Sin removed.
which had his beginning in the Garden He would be comforted of an Angel,
Company of Angels
that he might make us companions to the Angels in heaven. He is forsaken of
his own Disciples, that he might join us to himself, which were severed from
God Unite us to God.
by so foul a falling away. He is accused of false witnesses before the
Council, that we might not be accused of Satan, Not accused.
by the Law of God. He is condemned in the earth, that we might be absolved
Absolved.
in heaven. He held his peace for our sin, Open our mouths before him
which had done no sin, lest we should be constrained to hold our peace for
our sins brought against us into the judgment of God. He would be buffeted,
Freed from ^^pes.
that we might be absolved from the stings of our own conscience, and the
buffetings of Satan He suffered himself to be mocked, Mockes.
that we might mock at the insulting Satan. His face was covered, that he
might remove the veil of sin from us, Vail of sin.
which hinders in us the sight of God, and brings into us damnable ignorance.
He would be stripped of his garments, that the garment of innocence, lost by
sin might be restored unto us. He is pricked with thorns, that he might heal
the compunctions of our heart. He bore the weight of his Cross, Heal the
heart.
that he might remove from us the weight of eternal pain. Remove burdens.
He cries out that he was forsaken of God, that he might provide an
eternal habitation for us with God. Provide habitation with God.
He thirsted on the Cross, that he might deserve for us the dews of Gods
grace, Dew of grace.
and lest we should be constrained to perish with eternal thirst. He would
be scorched with the heat of Gods wrath, that he might take from us the fire
of hell. Take away hell fire.
He was judged, that he might free us from Gods judgment. He was pronounced
guilty that he might absolve us from guilt. Absolve us
He was beaten with unrighteous hands, that he might take away from us the
stripes of the devil. From the Devils stripes.
He cried out for grief, that he might keep us from everlasting howlings.
Howling.
He powered forth tears, that he might wipe away our tears. Tears.
He was dead, that we might live. He felt the pains of hell thoroughly, Hell.
that we might never feel them. He was humbled, Pride.
that there might a salve be brought for our proud swelling. He was crowned
with a thorny crown, Give a crown. Save all.
that he might deserve for us the heavenly Crown. He suffered of all, that he
might bring salvation unto all. His eyes were darkened in death, See heaven.
that we might live in the light of the heavenly glory. He heard contumelies
and reproaches, that we might hear Hear Songs.
the Iubilies of Angels in heaven.

5 Despair not therefore, No d^sp^ire^
O faithful soul. The infinite goodness is offended by thy sins, but an
infinite price is paid for it. Thou art to be judged for thy sins, but the
Son of God is judged already for the sins of the whole world, which he
has taken upon him. Thy sins are to be punished, but God has punished them
already in his Son. Great are the wounds of thy sins, but precious is the
balm of the blood of Christ. Moses pronounces thee cursed, because thou have
not kept all things which are written in the book of the Law, but Christ is
made a curse for thee. There is an handwriting against thee in the Court of
heaven, but it is blotted out by Christ's blood. Therefore thy passion, O holy
Jesus, is my last refuge.

Cum Christo ascendere nostrum est. Ascend w th Christ.

19. Meditation. Of the Ascension of Christ.
Think, O faithful soul, on the ascension of thy husband, Christ has
withdrawn his visible presence from his faithful, that Faith might have her
exercise: We walk by faith, not by sight.
for blessed are they which see not and believe. Where our treasure is, there
also let our heart he. Our treasure, Christ, is in heaven, Col. 3.
therefore set our heart adhere to heavenly things, and think on those things
that are above. The Bride desires the return of the Bridegroom, with most
ardent sighs: so the faithful soul always desires that the day may come
wherein she may be brought unto the marriage of the Lamb. Let her trust in the
earnest of the holy Spirit, Trust the Spirit.
which the Lord left her when he descended unto her. Let her trust in the body
and blood of the Lord, The Testament.
which she receives in the mystery of the Supper. Let her believe that our
bodies being filled with this incorruptible food, shall sometime be raised up
again. That which we now believe, then we shall see, Our hope a possession.
and our spes shall be res, we shall enjoy the substance of our hope: the Lord
is present with all travelers under a strange form, but in the heavenly
country we shall see him, and know him as he is.

1 Now our Savior would ascend from mount Oliuet: the Olive is a sign of
peace and joy, therefore he does fitly ascend from mount Oliuet, which by his
passion has brought forth peace and tranquillity to the consciences that were
terrified and cast down. Peace:
He does fitly ascend from the mount Oliuet, who is received with the greatest
triumph of the Court of heaven, because he is the King of Peace.

2 Those mountain places do call us unto heavenly things: Set affect^o^s on
heavenly t^ings.
let us follow with holy desires, because we cannot follow with bodily feet.
Moses likewise went up unto the Lord, in the mount: the holy Patriarchs
worshipped on the Mount: Abraham chose the hills, but Lot the plains.

3 Let the faithful soul leave the plains of the world, and strive with an
holy devotion unto the hills of heaven: There speaks with God
so shall she perceive the most sweet talk of God, speaking inwardly unto
her: so in her prayer, she shall be able to worship in the Spirit: In spirit.
so shall she be able with Abraham, to escape E^cape.
the everlasting conflagration that is prepared for the plains of the world.
Genesis 19.


4 Bethany does note unto us the Village of humility and affliction: by which
there is an entrance for us to the kingdom of heaven: Humility, the gate to
glory.
as Christ also out of the village of affliction, has descended unto the
heavenly joys.

Paradise open.
5 Hitherto heaven did seem to be shut, and the vper paradise to be kept by the
glittering sword: now Christ the conqueror opens heaven, that he might show us
the way into our heavenly country, from which we are fallen. The disciples did
stand with lifted up eyes, Look thither.
looking into heaven: so the true disciples of Christ lift up the eyes of their
hearts to behold heavenly things.

6 O Lord Jesus, how glorious a conclusion did follow thy Passion? how happy
and how sudden a change was this? what a one did I behold thee suffering in
mount Caluary? and what a one do I now behold thee in the mount Oliuet? Alone.
there thou were alone, here accompanied with many thousands of Angels. With
Angels.
There thou did ascend Ascend.
unto thy Cross: Cross.
here thou do ascend in a cloud to heaven. Heaven.
There thou were crucified among thieves: With Thieves.
here thou do triumph among the quires of Angels. Angels.
There thou were fastened to the Cross with nails, Suffered Delivered
and condemned: here thou art free and a deliverer of the damned. There thou
were dying and suffering: Dye. Triumph.
here thou art rejoicing and triumphing.

7 Christ is our head, The change in Christ our joy.
we are his members: be glad therefore, O faithful soul, and rejoice in the
ascension of thy head. The glory of the head is also the glory of the members.
Where our flesh Flesh,
reigns, there let us believe that we shall reign: Where our blood Blood.
bears rule, there let us hope that we shall be glorious, although our sins
do h^no^r us, yet the communion of nature Nature.
does not repel us. Where the head Head.
is, there also shall the rest of the members be: our Head is entered into
heaven, therefore the rest of the members have just reason to hope for heaven:
not this only, but they have already taken their possession in heaven.

Came, etc. Ascended for us.
7 Christ came down out of heaven to redeem us: he ascended again into heaven
to glorify us. He was borne for us, he suffered for us, therefore also he
ascended for us. Ground.
Our charity is grounded on the passion of Christ, our faith on the
resurrection, our hope on the ascension.

8 Now we must follow Follow.
our Husband and Bridegroom, not only with ardent desires, but also in good
work. Nothing that is defiled shall enter into that City that is above:
Undefiled.
in token whereof the Angels coming out of the heavenly Jerusalem, Like Angels.
appeared clothed in white garments: by which is set out unto us pureness and
innocence.

9 Pride does not ascend with the master of humility, Sins enter not.
nor malice with the author of goodness: nor discord with the friend of peace:
nor lust and luxury with the Son of the Virgin. Vices do not ascend after the
father of virtues: nor sins after the Just: neither can infirmities go after
the Physician. He that desires sometimes to behold God face to face, let him
also live worthily in his sight. He that hopes for heavenly things, Hate earth.
let him contemn earthly things. Draw our hearts unto thee. O good Jesus, to
Paradise, where thou art.

Electos Deus obsignat spiramine sancto. The elect are sealed by the spirit.

20. Meditation. An Homily of the holy Ghost.
Gift of the holy Ghost
Our Lord ascending into the heavens, and entering into his glory, sent the holy
Ghost unto his Disciples, on the very day of Pentecost. Even as in the old
Testament, God promulging his Law on mount Sinai, did descend unto Moses
himself: so when the Gospel was to be propagated, through the whole world by
the Apostles, the Spirit it self did descend to the Apostles. The Law thundreth
There were thunderings, and lightnings, and the most shrill voice of a
trumpet, because the Law does thunder against our disobedience, and proves us
guilty of the wrath of God: but here is the sound of the Wind Gospel sh ill
wind.
making a still noise, Fly. Exodus 20.
because the preaching of the Gospel does lift up the minds that are cast
down. There was the fear and terror of all the people, because the law
works wrath: but here the whole multitude comes together, Assembly. Act. 2.
Heb. 12.
and hears the wonderful things of God: because there is a passage open for
us unto God, by the Gospel. There Jehovah comes down in fire: but in the fire
of wrath Fire of wrath.
and fury, therefore the hill was moved and did smoke: but here Jehovah, the
holy Ghost, descends in fire, Fire of love.
but in the fire of love and charity, from whence the house is not moved with
the wrath of God, but rather it is wholly filled with the glory of the holy
Ghost. What marvel is it if the holy Ghost be sent out of the Court of heaven
to sanctify mankind, when the Son was sent to redeem mankind? the Passion
of Christ had not been profitable, unless it had been declared unto the
world by the Gospel. For what use is there of a treasure Treasure communicated.
that is hid? therefore the most benign Father not only prepared a great
benefit by the passion of his Son, but also would offer it to the whole
world, by the sending of the holy Spirit.

Two breasts
1 A faithful mother gives both her breasts to her tender son: our faithful
God sends unto us, poor wretches, both his Son and his holy Spirit. Son
and Spirit.
But the holy Ghost came upon the Apostles when they did continue together with
one accord in prayer: Spirit of prayer.
for it is the spirit of prayer, it is obtained by prayers, and it drives unto
prayers. Why? because it is that bond by which our hearts are united unto God,
Spirit unites to God.
even as it unites the Son with the Father, and the Father with the Son.
For it is the mutual substantial love of the Father, and of the Son. This
spiritual conjunction of us with God is made by faith, By faith.
but faith is the gift of the Spirit, it is obtained by prayers, but true
prayers are made in the Spirit.

2 In the Temple of Solomon when Incense was burned unto the Lord, Spiritual
prayers sweet odours,
the Temple was filled with the glory of the Lord: so if thou offerest the
sweet odours of prayers unto God, the glory of the holy Ghost will fill the
temple of thine heart.

3 Let us here marvel at the mercy and grace of God: Marvelous help of
prayer.
the Father promises to hear our prayers: the Son makes intercession for
us: the holy Ghost prays in us: the Angels carry our prayers unto God, and so
the whole court of heaven is open to our prayers.

Affection.
4 The merciful God gives us an affection to pray, because he gives unto us the
spirit of grace, and of prayers. He also gives unto us the effect of prayer,
Effect.
because he always hears our prayers, if not according to our will, yet to
our profit.

5 The holy Ghost came, when they were all with one accord in one place: Spirit
of concord. With Christ, God. Man.
forsooth he is the spirit of love and concord: he joins us unto Christ by
faith: he joins us unto God by charity, he does unite us also with our
neighbor by love.

The devil divides.
6 The devil is the author of discord and separation, he separates us by sins
from God: he separates men from themselves by hatred, contentions, and
brawles: but the holy Ghost, The spirit joins.
as it has joined together in Christ the divine and humane nature, by his
wonderful ouer-shadowing: so also by his gifts that are poured forth upon us:
he ioynes together both men with God, and God with men.

7 As long as the holy Ghost remains in man, As long as he abides.
by his grace and by his gifts, so long man abides united unto God. As soon as
man by his sins falls from faith and charity, and shakes off the holy Ghost,
he is separated from God, and that most blessed union is taken away.

8 He that has the holy Ghost, No hate of members.
hates not his brother. Why? because by the spirit he is made partaker of the
mystical body of Christ, whose members are all the godly: but who ever hates
his own members? Ephesians. 5. But love.
Nay, he loves his enemies which is governed by the Spirit of the Lord. Why?
because he that cleaues to the Lord, is made one spirit with him. But now God
suffers his Sun to arise both upon the good and upon the evil, and hates
nothing of those things that he has made: Like God.
so he that has the Spirit of God, is ready to serve all, after his power,
does do good unto all; offers himself to be used of all, because God also is
the fountain of all mercy and grace toward all. Spirit works Gods Image.
Now the holy Ghost brings to pass such motions in man as he himself is. Even
as the soul makes the body to have life, feeling, and moving: so the Spirit
makes a man spiritual, Makes spiritual.
it does fill a man's mind with the pleasure of Gods sweetness, and does
direct all his members to perform obedience to God and his neighbor. That
found came out of heaven, which was a token of the holy Ghosts coming, because
that holy Spirit is of an heavenly nature, that is to say, Heavenly
of the same essence with the Father and the Son, from which Father and Son
he proceeds from all eternity: he makes men also to have mind of heavenly
things, and to seek those things that are above: he that does yet cleave to
earthly things, and is knit to the love of the world, he is not made partaker
of the holy Spirit.

10 He comes under the similitude of a wind or breath, Comfortable.
because he does minister lively consolation to the afflicted. Because also by
a reciprock breath and respiration of the aeriall spirit, we live according to
the flesh: Life.
therefore he came under the similitude of spirit and breath, which gives unto
us, that we live according to our better part.

Joh. 3.
11 The wind blows whither it will, and thou hear the sound thereof, Passing
understanding.
but know not whence it comes, and whither it goes: so is every one which is
begotten of the Spirit.

12 He came also agreeably under the similitude of breath, which proceeds from
the Father and the Son at one breathing from everlasting. That was a vehement
breath, Quickening.
because the grace of the holy Ghost knows no slow endeavors. That holy Spirit
does move the godly, in whom he dwells, to every good work, and so moves
them, Ready.
that they neither care for the threatenings of Tyrants, nor the deceits of
Satan, nor the hatred of the World, but in all temptations serve God with a
ready mind.

13 He bestows on the Apostles the gift of tongues, because their sound ought
to go forth into all the earth. Speaking.
And so the confusion of tongues which had been a punishment of the pride and
rashness in building of the Tower of Babel, is taken away: and now the Nations
that were dispersed through the diversity of languages, Gathering and
conuersing
are gathered together by the gift of the holy Ghost into the unity of faith.
He came agreeably under the figure of tongues, of whom inspired, the holy men
of God have spoken, which spoke in the Apostles, which puts the word of God in
the mouths of the Ministers of the Church.

14 Think, O devout soul, of this great gift which Christ ascending gave
thee. The great goodness and mercy of the Lord is made thine own only by his
blessed spirit. Thou wast empty, it fills thee with graces. Thou wast a
stranger, it knitteth thee to God. Thou did stray like a lost sheep, the
Spirit only brought thee to the Shepherd of thy soul, and led thee in all
truth. Thou wast without hope, the Spirit did fill thee with hope. Many were
the just causes of sorrow for fear of sin to infect thee, the Devil to
accuse thee, God to judge thee, Hell to swallow thee, the world to fail thee,
and every misery to gnaw upon thee. The Spirit it is that in all afflictions
does comfort thee, turns thy tears to joy, thy sighs to smiles, thy fears
to assurance, by assuring thee that the Father does love thee and provide for
thee, to whom the Son will bring thee. O dear Soul, keep safely this
pledge and earnest, of thy happiness, grieve not him that is thy comfort,
quench not that fire that burns up thy corruptions, and inflameth thy cold
heart with charity and zeal. Let this sweet loving Spirit sleep sweetly in
thy breast, and wake him not till himself do please. For so great gifts that
holy spirit is to be lauded and blessed, together with the Father and the Son
for ever.

Wednesday, Evening Prayer.
When I draw near unto thee (O Lord my God) and think of the many rebellions
and transgressions which I have committed against thee, me thinks I cannot but
take up the word of the Prodigal Son against my self, and say; Father, I
have sinned against heaven and against thee, I am no more worthy to be called
thy son: I blush and am ashamed to lift up mine eyes unto thee: I think my
self unworthy to lift up mine eyes to heaven; for my sins have covered my face
with confusion, mine offenses have taken such hold of me, that I am unable to
look up. What shall be done unto the man that has dishonored his Father?
that has disobeyed his Master? that has dealt unfaithfully with his friend?
that has rebelled against his Prince? that has sinned against his God? O
Lord, I am that son of confusion, that servant of undutifulness, that
companion of unfaithfulness, that subject of rebellion, that creature of
sin: thy sentence is gone forth against me in thy Word, that I am but the
son of death, I have received the sentence of death in my self. What help,
what hope is left unto me, wretched and vile sinner? Whither shall I fly to
save me from the tempest of thy wrath? my help is in thy mercy, my hope is
also in thee, I will fly from thy wrath to thy good pleasure; from thee my God
offended with me for my sin to thee my God appeased toward me in thy Son. O
Lord unto me belongs shame and confusion, but to thee mercy and forgiveness:
remit therefore the evil deseruings of thy servant, for the merits sake and good
deserving of thy Son. Look O Lord, upon the face of thine anointed, and hide
thy face from my sins, and blot out all mine offenses. Take me, O Lord,
again into thy favor, take me this night also into thy safe protection, watch
over me whilst I sleep: keep me as the apple of thine eye: hide me under the
shadow of thy wings: compass me about with the wall of Angelical defense:
give sweet sleep to mine eyes, and slumber to my eyelids, and raise me up in
the morning to walk before thee in thy fear, through thy Son Christ Jesus: To
whom, etc.

Thursday, Morning Prayer.
WE have a sure word of promise in thy Word (O gracious, loving, and
bountiful God) not only of spiritual, but also of corporal things, as of
food convenient, and those things that shall be needful for this bodily life:
yea, the Truth has taught us also to pray for daily bread, and confuted our
mistrust of having sufficient food and raiment, from thy feeding of the young
Ravens that call upon thee, and clothing of the Lillies. Now as these things,
though not in the first place to be sought, yet are to be sought for; so
likewise, though not in the first place, yet are they to be prayed for. I
therefore, knowing how many things the frailty and necessity of my life
requires, do call upon thee the Author and giver of every good and perfect
gift, beseeching thee to give me things needful for this life, food and
raiment, and a mind therewith content, and cut out unto me my commons, O Lord,
according to Agurs wish, neither too much, nor too little, lest plenty and
fullness make me either to forget or deny thee, lest poverty and want make me
to fall to stealing and take the name of thee (my God) in vain. And whereas, O
Lord, thou have placed me in a particular calling, therein to serve thee here
on earth, grant, I pray thee, that herein I may walk conscionably, and bless
thou the works of mine hands upon me: make al my ways, mine out-going, and my
in-comming to prosper unto me. Give me health and strength of body, and a good
disposition of mind, that I may be the better fitted unto all my labors: take
from me rebuke and shame, the thing that I fear: vouchsafe me the sweet savor
of a good name, with the testimony of a good conscience, which may refresh and
feast me in this life, and at the end of my pilgrimage here on earth, bring me
(O Lord) to everlasting life. Amen.

Viva est and victrix, si modo vera fides. True faith a lively conqueror.

21. Meditation. Of the nature and properties of true Faith.
O Beloved Soul, consider the power of faith, Faith grafteth us into Christ.
and give thanks unto God the only giver of faith It is faith alone that does
graft us again into our Savior: that as the Vine branches draw juice out of
the Vine, so we may draw out of him life, righteousness and salvation.

1 Adam fell from the grace of God, Gives favor and Gods Image.
and lost the Image of God by his incredulity: but we are received again into
favor by faith, and the Image of God begins to be reformed in us.

2 By faith, Christ ours.
Christ is made ours, and dwells in us. But where Christ is, there is the grace
of God. Where is the grace of God, there is the inheritance of everlasting
life. Abels sacrifice.
By faith Abel offered a greater sacrifice to God then Cain: so we offer
spiritual sacrifices to God by faith, that is to say, Henochs translation.
the fruit of our lips. By faith Henoch was translated: so faith does
translate us out of the society of men, into the society of heaven: yea, even
in this life. For even now Christ dwells in us, even now there is in us
everlasting life, Noah's Ark.
but hidden. By faith Noah prepared the Arc: so by faith we go into the
Church, in which our souls are saved, all the rest perishing in the vast sea
of the world. Abraham left Idolatry.
By faith Abraham did leave the Idolatrous land: so by faith we go out of the
world, leaving parents, brothers, and kinsfolk, and cleaving to the Word of
Christ that calls us. By faith he soiourned as a stranger, Soiourneth.
and looked for the promised land: so we do look for the heavenly Jerusalem,
which God has prepared in Heaven: we are strangers and pilgrims in this world,
by faith aspiring to our heavenly country. By faith Sara conceived Sara
conceived aged.
her son Isaac in her age: so we being dead spiritually, do receive virtue
to conceive Christ spiritually. For as Christ was once conceived in the holy
bowels of the Virgin Mary: so he is daily borne spiritually in the faithful
soul, which keeps it self pure from worldly companies.

3 By faith Abraham offered Isaac: Abraham offered Isaac.
so we by faith do spiritually kill and sacrifice our own will, which is the
beloved son of our soul. For he that desires to follow Christ, ought to deny
himself, that is to say, renounce his own will, his own honor, his own
love.

Isaac blessed Jacob.
4 By faith Isaac blessed Jacob: so by faith we are made partakers of all the
heavenly blessings. For in the seed of Abraham, that is, Joseph removed.
in Christ, all nations are blessed. By faith Joseph prophesied of the going of
the Israelites out of Egypt, and gave commandment of his bones: so by faith we
look for a going out of this spiritual Egypt, Moses hidden.
that is, the world, and an happy resurrection of the body. By faith Moses was
kept for three months: so faith does hide us from the tyranny of Satan, till
at last we be brought into the regal palace of God, and adopted for spiritual
kings. By faith Moses chose rather to be partaker of the calamities of his
people, Chooses affliction.
then to live in the glory of Egypt: so faith does stir up in us a contempt
of the glory, honor, riches, and pleasures of this world, and a desire of the
heavenly kingdom. By faith we chose rather the rebukes of Christ, then the
treasures of this world. By faith Moses left Egypt, Left Egypt.
neither feared the kings wrath: so faith does animate and confirm us, that we
be not terrified with the threatenings of the tyrants of this world, but that
with a valiant and constant mind we obey God when he calls. By faith Israel
did celebrate the Passover: The Passover.
and we also by faith do celebrate our Passover Christ. Our Passover is
sacrificed for us, whose flesh is meat indeed, and whose blood is drink
indeed. Israelites pass the Red sea.
By faith the Israelites passed over through the Red Sea: so we by faith do
pass through the Sea of this world. By faith the walls of Jericho Jericho
falls.
fell down: so we by faith do destroy all the munitions of Satan. Rahab safe.
By faith Rahab was saved: so in that universal overthrow of the whole world,
by faith we shall be saved from destruction. Fathers mighty by faith.
By faith the Fathers overcame kingdoms, stopped the mouths of Lions, put out
the force of fire: so we also by faith destroy the kingdom of Satan, escape
the snares and rage of the infernal Lion, and are freed from the burning of
the fire of hell.

Faith, where it is
5 Howbeit faith is not a bare opinion and profession, but a lively and
effectual apprehension of Christ proposed in the Gospel: it is a most full
persuasion of the grace of God, a fiduciall rest of our heart, and peace
relying on the merit of Christ.

6 This faith springs out of the seed of the word of God. It springs from the
Word.
For faith and the spirit are one: but the Word is the Wagon of the holy Ghost
The fruit follows the nature of his seed. Fruit of divine seed
Faith is a divine fruit, therefore there must be a divine seed, that is to
say, the Word. Even as in the creation the light did spring out of the Word of
God: for God spoke, and the light was made: so the light of Faith springs out
of the light of Gods Word. In thy light shall we see light, says the Psalmist.
All the Word is light: but the word of promise brings in Christ, that Sun
that enlightneth every one that comes into the world. There faith does spring
from the word of promise as from the greatest light.

7 Seeing Faith does join unto us Christ: Mother of (...) virtues
seeing Faith does unite us with Christ, therefore it is also in us the mother
of all virtues. Where is faith, there is Christ: where Christ is, there is an
holy life, that is to say, true humility, true meekness, true love. Without
Christ we can do nothing. Joh. 15.
Christ and the holy Spirit are not disioyned: where the holy Spirit is, there
is true holiness. Therefore where there is not an holy life, there is no holy
Spirit: where there is no Spirit, No Christian life, no faith.
there is no Christ, where there is no Christ, there is no true faith at all.
What branch soever does not draw life and juice out of the Vine, it is not to
be judged to be joined with the Vine: so we are not as yet joined unto Christ
by faith, unless we draw life and juice out of him. Faith is a certain
spiritual light: for our hearts are enlightened by faith: Faith light.
therefore it scatters abroad the beams of good works. Where there are not
the beams of a spiritual life, there also, as yet, is not the true light of
faith. Ill works darkness.
Evil works are the works of darkness: but faith is light. Now what
society has the light with darkness? Evil works are the seed of Satan,
faith is the seed of Christ. Now what society has Christ with Satan? Faith
purifieth.
By faith our hearts are purified: but how can there be an inward purity of
the heart, where impure words and impure works appear from without?
Ouercometh.
Faith is our victory: therefore how can there be true faith, where the flesh
ouercomes the spirit, and leads it as it were captive? By faith we have
Christ, and in Christ eternal life: but no impenitent person and that
perseuers in his sins, is partaker of eternal life: how therefore of Christ?
how therefore of faith? Kindle in us, O holy Jesus, the light of true faith
that by faith we may attain everlasting salvation.

Solvit mea debita Christus. Christ pays my debts.

22. Meditation. Of the Reconciliation with God.
Christ our buckler. Genesis 15.
TRuly God has taken upon him our infirmities, and he has borne our griefs.
O Lord Jesus, that which deserved in us eternal punishment, that have thou
translated upon thy self. Refreshing Mat. 11.
Thou have taken upon thee the burden that was ready to press us down unto
hell. Thou art wounded for our iniquities, Health.
and thou art smitten for our sins. By thy stripes we are healed. The Lord
has laid on thee the iniquities of us all. Wonderful change
Wonderful truly is the change, thou translatest our sins on thy self, and
thou give thy righteousness unto us: thou layest death, that was due unto
us, on thy self, and give unto us thy life. I cannot therefore by any mean
doubt of thy grace, No cause of despair Christ takes the worst that is in us.
or despair for my sins.

1 Thou have translated that which was worst in us on thy self: how shall thou
despise that which is best in us and thy work, that is to say, our body and
our soul. Leaves us not. Psalm. 32.
Thou will not leave my soul in hell, neither will thou suffer thine holy One
to see corruption. For he is truly holy, whose sins are abolished and taken
away: he is happy, whose iniquities are remitted, to whom the Lord does not
impute sins.

2 How can the Lord impute our sins to us, when he has imputed them to
another? for the wickedness of his people he struck his most beloved Son:
Struck for us.
he therefore with his knowledge shall justify many, and he shall bear their
iniquities.

3 How shall he justify his? Hear, Christ justifies.
O souls, and attend: he will justify them which cleave unto him by knowledge:
By knowledge.
that is to say, by a saving acknowledgement of Gods mercy and grace in Christ,
and by a firm apprehension of the same by faith. Faith.
This is life eternal, that they know thee the only true God, Ioh. 17.
and whom thou have sent, thy Son Jesus Christ: and therefore if thou shall
confess thy Lord Jesus with thy mouth, Romans 10.
and shall believe in thy heart that God raised him from the dead, thou shall
be saved.

Satisfaction.
4 But faith does apprehend the satisfaction of Christ. For he has borne the
sins of his: he has taken upon him the sins of many, and has made
request for the transgressors. For truly he had had none just, unless he had
mercifully received the sinners.

5 Thou should have, No condemnation to the faithful.
O Jesus, few just, unless thou did remit their sins to the unjust. How
then shall Christ judge the sins of the penitent in severe judgment, which
he has taken upon himself? how shall he condemn him that is guilty of
sin, when he himself was made sin? He shall judge those whom he calls
friends: he shall judge those for whom he has prayed: he shall judge those for
whom he has dyed.

6 Lift up thy self, Have peace with God. Romans 5.
O my Soul, and forget thy sins, because the Lord has forgotten them. Whom
do thou fear to take vengeance of thy sins, but the Lord which has
satisfied for thy sins? No other name under heaven.
If any one else had paid the price for my sins, I might as yet doubt
whether the just Judge would accept that satisfaction. If any man or Angel had
satisfied for me, it might be doubted whether the price of the redemption were
sufficient. But now there is no place left for doubting. No fear.


7 How shall he not accept the price which he paid himself? how shall that
not he sufficient which was paid by God himself? Why art thou as yet
troubled, O my soul? Mercy and Justice do comfort us.
All the ways of the Lord are mercy and truth: for the Lord is just, and just
is his judgment. Why art thou troubled, O my soul? let the mercy of God lift
thee up: let the justice of God comfort thee. For if God be just, he will not
exact a double punishment for one only fault. For our sins he smote his
Son: how shall he smite us his servants for the same? how shall he punish in
us the sins thae were punished in his Son? for the truth of the Lord shall
not fail for ever. Truth.
I will not the death of a sinner, but that he may be converted and live, cries
our God.

8 Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will refresh
you, cries our Savior. Shall we go about to convince God of a lie? and shall
we endeavor to depresse his mercy with the weight of our sins? The greatest
sin to distrust God.
To accuse the Lord of a lie, and to deny his mercy, is a greater sin then
all the sins of the whole world: when Judas sinned more in despairing, then
the Jews in crucifying Christ.

Grace most rich.
8 But rather where sin has abounded, there grace has abounded also, which
is infinitely more weighty then the balance of our sins. For the sins are
of men, but the grace is of God. Sins are temporal, but the grace of our
Lord is from everlasting to everlasting. Satisfaction is made for my sins:
the grace of God is repaired by the death of Christ, and established for ever,
to whom I fly with all devotion and humility.

Sacrum Baptismalauacrum est. An holy bath is Baptism.

23. Meditation. Of the fruits of Baptism.
REmember, O faithful soul, the great grace of God showed unto thee in the
wholesome bath of Baptism. Baptism is the washing of regeneration: therefore
seeing thou art dipped in the font of Baptism, New birth
thou art not altogether in the oldnesse of the carnal nativity: but because
thou art borne of God, that is, by water and the Spirit, Son and heir.
therefore thou art also a son of God, and because a son, therefore also an
heir of eternal felicity.

1 For as the eternal Father at the Baptism of Christ, uttered this voice:
Mat. 4:
This is my beloved Son: so all that do believe and are baptized, he does
adopt for sons. Even as in the Baptism of Christ, the holy Ghost appeared in
the shape of a Dove: so also in our Baptism, the same spirit Receives the
Spirit.
of the Son of God is present, and gives force unto it. Yea, by Baptism he
is bestowed on the believers: and he works new motions in them, that they may
be prudent as Serpents, and simple as Doves.

2 As it was in the Creation: so it is also in our regeneration. In the first
creation of things the Spirit of the Lord rested on the waters, and gave unto
them vital force: so also in the water of Baptism the holy Ghost is present,
Spirit of life.
and makes it the wholesome means of our regeneration. Our Savior Christ
himself would be baptized, that he might make it known that we are made his
members by Baptism. Christ's members. Physic to the head for the members.
Oftentimes physic is applied to the head, that the other members of the body
may be healed: our spiritual head is Christ, he took the physic of Baptism
for the health of his mystical body.

3 In the Circumcision God did enter into a covenant with his people in the old
Testament: so by baptism we are received into the Covenant of God in the new
Testament, Enter into the kingdom of heaven.
because Baptism succeeded in the place of Circumcision. He therefore that is
in the covenant of God, let him not fear the accusation of the devil.

4 In Baptism Christ is put on. Christ put on.
Hence the Saints are said to have made white their long robes in the blood of
the Lamb. The perfect righteousness of Christ is that most fair garment. As
a robe.
He therefore that is clothed with this garment, let him not fear the spots
of sin. There was at Jerusalem a poole about the sheepe-market, John 5.
into which at a certain time an Angel did descend and trouble it: he that
first after the troubling of the water did go down into it, was healed of
whatsoever disease he was holden. All diseases cured.
The water of Baptism is that poole which does heal us from every disease of
sins, when the holy Ghost descends into it, and troubles it with the blood of
Christ, which was made a sacrifice for us: as also in time past in that
fish-poole at Jerusalem the sacrifices were washed.

Heavens gate.
5 About the Baptism of Christ, the heavens were opened: so also in our
Baptism the gate of heaven is opened. In the Baptism of Christ there was
present the whole holy Trinity: so also he is present in our Baptism.
Trinity present.
And so in that word of promise which is annexed unto the element of water,
faith receives the grace of God that adopts, Received.
the merit of the Son that cleanses, and the efficacy of the holy Ghost
that regenerates. Pharaoh and all his Army was drowned in the Red Sea, the
Israelites passed through well and safely: so in Baptism all the army of vices
is drowned, Vice drowned.
and the faithful come safely to the promised inheritance of the heavenly
kingdom. Therefore Baptism also is that Sea of Crystal glass, Reu. 4. and
15.
which John saw through, as through a certain glass, the bright shining of the
Sun of righteousness does enter into our minds. Washed white before the
Throne.
But that Sea of glass was before the throne of the Lamb: the throne of the
Lamb is the Church, in which alone is found the grace of holy Baptism.

6 The Prophet Ezekiel saw waters going out of the Temple, Chap. 47.
Waters of health issue out of th Temple.
which did quicken and heal all things: in the spiritual Temple of God; that
is, the Church, do as yet spring forth the wholesome waters of Baptism, into
the depth whereof our sins are cast: all things shall be healed and live, to
which that brook shall come.

7 Baptism is the spiritual Deluge, Drown sin.
in which all the flesh of sin is drowned: the unclean crow or devil goes
out, but the Dove or holy Ghost flies back, and inspires into our minds, the
leaf of Olive, that is, peace and tranquillity.

Memorable favors.
8 Remember therefore, O faithful soul, that great favor that was showed unto
thee in Baptism, and give due thanks unto God.

9 Howbeit by how much the grace bestowed upon us by Baptism is more
plentiful, by so much there ought to be a more diligent custody of the gifts
that are conferred. Keep them
We are buried with Christ by Baptism into his death: therefore as Christ was
raised up from the dead, into the glory of the Father, so let us also walk in
newness of life. New life.
We are made whole, therefore let us sin no more, Sin no more.
lest a worse thing happen unto us. We have put on Christ's righteousness, a
most precious garment, therefore let us not defile it with the spots of sins.
Our old man is crucified, Fall not.
and dead in Baptism: therefore let our new man live. Mortify the old man.
We are regenerate and renewed in the spirit of our mind in Baptism:
therefore let not the flesh reign Let it not reign.
over the Spirit. Old things are past away, behold, all things are made new:
let not the oldnesse of the flesh therefore prevail over the newness of the
Spirit. We are made the sons of God by spiritual regeneration: therefore
let us lead a life worthy of such a Father. Walk worthy our Father.
We are made the temple of the holy Ghost: let us prepare therefore an
acceptable resting place for so great a ghest. Cleanse the Sanctuary
We are received into the covenant of God, let us take heed therefore that we
serve not under the devils pay, Keep covenant.
and so fall from the grace of the covenant.

10 Bring all these things to pass in us, O blessed Trinity, which art one
God: thou have given us so great grace in baptism, give us also perseverance
in so great grace.

Thursday Noone.
Psalm 85.13.
O Lord God, be thou my light and defense: give me grace and worship, and no
good thing withhold from me that am thy servant.

Christi Ecclesia sponsa. The Church Christ's Bride.

24 Meditation. Of the Dignity of the Church.
Think, O devout soul, how great a benefit God has bestowed upon thee,
Communion.
that he has called thee to the communion of his Church. My beloved is one,
says the Husband in the Canticles: one indeed, because the true and orthodoxe
Church is one only, the beloved Spouse of Christ. One Church.
Without the body of Christ is not the Spirit of Christ, but he which has
not the spirit of Christ is not his: he that is not Christ's, One spirit*
cannot be made partaker of eternal life.

1 All without the Arc of Noah, Without, all perish, 1 Pet. 3.
were constrained to perish in the deluge: without the spiritual Arc of the
Church all are folded up in everlasting destruction. Not Gods sons.
He shall not have God his Father in heaven, which has not the Church his
Mother on the earth.

Meditate on this.
2 Think, O devout Soul, that every day many thousand souls go down into
hell, therefore, because they are without the bosom of the Church. Nature has
not separated thee from them, but the grace of God alone that took pity upon
thee. When Egypt was wrapped up in palpable darkness, Darkness.
amongst the Israelites only was light: so in the Church alone is the light of
the knowledge of God: they which are without the Church, pass from the
darkness of ignorance in this life present, to the darkness of eternal
damnation in the life following. He that is not a portion of the Church
Militant, shall never be a portion of the Church triumphant. Inseperable
communion.
For these things are most inwardly joined together, God, the Word. Faith,
Christ, the Church, and Life eternal.

3 The holy Church of God is a Mother, a Virgin, and a Spouse. Mother.
She is a Mother, because she does daily bring forth sons unto God: Virgin.
she is a Virgin, because she does keep her self clean from the
embracements of the Devil and the World: she is a Spouse, Spouse.
because Christ has espoused her to himself, in an everlasting covenant, and
has given her the carnest of the Spirit.

4 The Church is that Ship Ship.
which carries Christ and his Disciples, and brings us at last to the haven of
eternal happiness: the Church sails, being furnished with the stern of
Faith, with an happy course through the Sea of this world, Steerman.
having God her steerman: Rowers. Freight.
the Angels her Rowers: carrying the Quires of all the Saints: and in the midst
of her, as her Mast, Mast.
is set up the wholesome tree of the Cross, on which are hanged up the sails
of the faith of the Gospel: Wind.
by which the holy Ghost blowing on them, she is brought to the security of the
eternal rest.

Vineyard. Isa. 5. Planted.
5 The Church is that Vineyard which God has planted in the field of this
world: which he has watered with his blood: Watered.
which he has compast with the hedge Hedged.
of Angelical protection: in it he has built the wine press Wine Press.
of his passion: and out of it he has taken stones Stones taken out.
and stumbling blocks. Reu. 12.
The Church is that Woman Woman clothed.
which is clothed with the Sun, because she is covered with Christ's
righteousness: Her footstool.
she treads the Moon under her feet, because she despises earthly things,
that are subject to diverse changes: crowned with stars for celestial
doctrine.

6 Consider this great dignity of the Church, O devout Soul, Meditations.
and give due thanks unto God. Verily, great are the benefits of God in the
Church, but they are not obuious unto all. It is a garden A garden.
that is enclosed, and a fountain that is sealed up: no man sees the beauty
of a garden that is enclosed, but he which is in it; so no man acknowledges
these great benefits in the Church, but he which is in it himself.

7 This Spouse of Christ is black outwardly, Blackes Psalm 45.
but fair inwardly: for great is the glory of the Kings daughter within. This
ship is shaken with diverse tempests of persecution, Shaken.
yet ariueth safe to her desired haven. This Vineyard being down, is raised
up: Cut.
being cut, is increased. The infernal Dragon himself does diverse ways lay
wait for this woman.

Among Thorns.
8 The Church is a fair Lilly, but yet amongst thorns. The Church is a most
fair Garden, but when the North wind Wind.
of tribulations blow upon it, then do her Spices give their smell. The Church
is the daughter of God: but very much hated of the world. She looks for the
heavenly heritage, Hated.
therefore she is constrained to be a pilgrim Pilgrim.
in this world. In her pilgrimage she is oppressed: in her pressure she is
silent: in her silence she is strong and valiant: in her strength she
ouercomes. The Church is a spiritual mother: Mother under the Cross.
but she is constrained to stand under the Cross, as also Mary, of whom Christ
was borne into the world, stood under the Cross. The Church is a Palm,
because it grows more and more under the weight of tribulations and
temptations. Palm.


9 Think, O devout soul, Depend on thy mother.
of the dignity of the Church: and take heed thou do nothing that is unworthy
of her. The Church is a mother, take heed therefore that thou contemn not her
voice. She is a mother, therefore thou ought to hang upon her breasts. The
breasts of the Church are the Word and Sacraments. The Church is a Virgin: Keep
thy Virginity*
if therefore thou be her true son, abstain from the embracings of the
world. Thou art a member of the Vir^in Church: see that thou prostitute not thy
Virgins members, and commit whoredom with the Devil through sin.

10 The Church is the Spouse Be a good Spouse.
of Christ, as also every devout soul: let her take heed therefore that she
cleave not to the devil. Thou art the spouse of Christ, see that thou leese
not the earnest of the holy Ghost that is given unto thee. Thou art the Spouse
of Christ, pray daily that thy Husband may make haste and bring thee in to the
heavenly marriage. Now thy husband will come in the night of security: watch
therefore, lest when thy husband shall come he find thee sleeping, and shut
against thee the gate of eternal salvation. Let the oil Have oil.
of thy faith shine, lest at the coming of the Bridegroom thou be constrained
to desire it in vain.

Make not shipwreck.
11 Thou art carried in a ship: see that thou cast not thy self headlong into
the sea of the world, before thou come to the haven. Thou art carried in a
ship, pray that it be not swallowed up of the tempests of afflictions, and of
the waves of temptations.

12 Thou art called into the Vineyard of the Lord: Labor.
see that thou labor stoutly, let the consideration of thy hire, the penny,
take away from thee the tediousness of the day. Thou art the Vineyard of the
Lord, Prune thee.
cast away the unprofitable branches, the unfruitful works of the flesh: and
think that the whole time of thy life, is the time of pruning and cutting.
Thou art a branch in the true Vine Christ: see that thou abide in him, and
bear much fruit, Ioh. 15.
because the heavenly Husbandman will take away the branch that bears not
fruit, and will purge that which bears fruit, that it may bring forth more
fruit. Thou have put on Christ by faith, Affect not earthly things. Col. 3.
and art clothed with this Sun of justice: keep therefore thy garments, lest
thou walk naked: see that thou tread the Moon, that is, all earthly things
under thy feet, and in respect of the everlasting good things, esteem little
of all things. O good Jesus, which have brought us into the Church militant,
bring us also at length into the Church triumphant.

Animarum sponsus Jesus. Jesus the Souls Bridegroom.

25. Meditation. Of the spiritual marriage of Christ and our Soul.
Christ the Husband.
I Will espouse thee for ever to my self, says Christ to the faithful soul.
Christ would be present at the marriage that was celebrated at Cana Testified
at Cana.
in Galilee, that he might show that he came into the world to spiritual
marriage. Rejoice in the Lord, and triumph, O faithful soul, in thy God, which
does cloth thee with the garments The bride* garments
of salvation, and compasses thee about with the vesture of righteousness, as
a Spouse adorned with jewels. Rejoice for the honor of thy husband: A husband
chief of a thousand. Cant.
rejoice for the comeliness of thine Husband: rejoice for the love of thine
Husband.

1 His honor is very great, for he is the true God, blessed for ever: how
great therefore is the dignity of this creature, that is to say, the faithful
soul, that the Creator A Creator Comely. Psalm 45.
himself will espouse her unto himself! His comeliness is very great, for
he is fairer then the sons of men. Truly they saw his glory, as the glory of
the only begotten of the Father: his face did shine like the Sun, his
garments were like snow: Mat. 17.
grace is poured out in his lips: he was crowned with honor and glory. A part
of how great mercy Unspeakable mercy.
therefore is it, that bright beauty does not scorn to choose unto himself for
a Spouse, the soul deformed with the spots of sin? there is very great
majesty of the part of the Bridegroom, very great infirmity of the part of
his Bride: very great comeliness of the part of the Bridegroom, very great
deformity of the part of the Bride: and greater is the love of the Bridegroom
toward his Bride, Love.
then of the Bride toward that most honored and beautiful Bridegroom.

2 See the unmeasurable love of thy Bridegroom, O faithful soul. Love drew
him from heaven to the earth, bound him to a pillar, fastened him to the
Cross, shut him up in the sepulcher, and drew him down to hell. Who did all
these things but love toward his Spouse? Unkind Spouse.
but our heart is more heavy then stone and lead, that the bond of so great
love does not draw it upwards unto God, since first it drew God down unto men.
The Spouse was naked, neither could she so naked be brought into the royal
Palace of the heavenly kingdom: He clothed her that was naked.
he clothed her with the garments of salvation and righteousness, when she
lay wrapped in the loathsome garment of her sins, and in the most filthy rags
of her iniquity: he granted her, that she should cover her self with shining
and white Silk, which Silk are the righteousnesses of the Saints. This
garment was gotten by the righteousness, death, Reu. 19.
and passion of the Husband himself.

3 Jacob did labor fourteen years, that he might get Rachel to wife: Serves
more then Jacob.
Christ for almost four and thirty years did sustain hunger, thirst, cold,
poverty, ignominies, reproaches, bands, scourges, the bitterness of gall,
death, the cross, that he might get the faithful soul a Spouse for himself.

4 Sampson went down, and from amongst the Philistines, a people adjudged to
destruction, Excels Sampsons love.
he sought him a wife: the Son of God comes down, and chooses him a Spouse
from amongst men that were condemned and adjudged to eternal death.

Romans 5. Enemies reconciled
5 The kindred of his Spouse was at enmity with his heavenly Father, but he has
reconciled it to his Father by his most bitter passion. His spouse was defiled
in her own blood, Filthy.
and cast out in the face of the earth, but he has washed Washed.
her with the water of Baptism, and made her clean in a most holy Bath. He
has cleansed the blood of the Spouse with his own blood, because the blood of
the Son of God does cleanse us from all sins.

6 His Spouse was foul and deformed, Deformed Beautiful
but he has anointed her with oil, that is to say, with mercy and grace. His
spouse was not honorably attired, but he gave unto her bracelets, and
earerings, and adorned her with virtues, and diverse gifts of the holy Ghost.
His spouse was most poor, Poor cnriched.
and had nothing that she might give in stead of earnest, therefore he left
unto her the earnest of the Spirit, and took from her the earnest of the
flesh, and brought it into Heaven. His Spouse was hungry: but he gave unto her
fine flower and honey, and oil to eat: he feeds her with his flesh, Hungry
fed.
and with his own blood unto everlasting life. His Spouse is disobedient,
Adultresse converted, is accepted.
and oftentimes breaks her faith plighted in Marriage, she commits fornication
with the world and the Devil: but out of his infinite love, her husband takes
her again into favor, as often as in true conversion she returns unto him.

7 Acknowledge, O faithful soul, so many and so great tokens of his infinite
love. Love, O faithful soul, the love of him, which for the love of thee came
down into the womb of the Virgin. Love him again.
By so much ought we to love him more then our selves, by how much he is
greater, which has delivered himself for us. Let all our life be made
conformable unto him, which for the love of us has conformed himself wholly
unto us: he is accounted deservedly most unthankful, which loves not him
again that loves him: how much therefore is he to be beloved of us, which for
the love of us has forgotten as it were his own Majesty? Happy is the soul
which is joined unto Christ in the bond of this spiritual marriage. True
happiness,
It does apply all those benefits of Christ to her self safely and
confidently: as otherwise in marriage, the wife shines bright by the beams of
her husband. By faith we are married to Christ. Engraffeth,
But we are made partakers of his happy and spiritual marriage by faith alone,
as it is written, I will espouse thee to my self in faith. Faith does graft us
branches into Christ, as it were the spiritual Vine, that we may draw life and
juice out of him. And even as they that live in marriage, are no more two but
one flesh: so they which cleave unto the Lord by faith, Makes one with him.
are made one spirit with him, because Christ dwells in our hearts by faith, and
that faith, if it be true, is working through love, as a good tree bears
fruit.

8 Even as in the old Testament the Priests were constrained to marry Virgins:
Present thy self a Virgin.
so that heavenly Priest does couple such a Virgin to himself spiritually,
which keeps her self whole and undefiled from the embracements of the
Devil, the World, and her own Flesh. Make us worthy, O Christ, that one day
we may be led in to the marriage of the Lamb. Amen.

Quid Deus est animae? lux, medicina, cibus. What is God unto the soul? Light,
Physic, Meat. Prou. 9.

26. Meditation. Of the spiritual repast of the Soul.
THE most bountiful God has prepared a great banquet, Banquet.
but we must bring hunger-bitten hearts unto it. He does not perceive the
sweetness of the heavenly banquet, which tastes it not, he tastes it not, that
hungers Hunger.
not. To believe in Christ, Ioh. 6.
is to come to the heavenly banquet: but no man can believe, but he which
acknowledging his sins; is truly contrite and penitent. Contrition is the
spiritual hunger of the soul: faith is the hand, mouth, and stomach that
receives, and profitably digesteth this spiritual food.

1 God gave Manna to the Israelites in the Desert, the bread of Angels: in this
banquet of the new Testament God gives the heavenly Manna, Christ the true
Manna.
that is to say, his grace, the forgiveness of sins, nay, his own Son, the
Lord of the Angels.

Ioh. 6.
2 Christ is that true heavenly bread, which came down from heaven, that he
might give life unto the world. He that is full of the husks of hogs, that
is to say, of the delights of this world, does not desire that sweetness. The
outward man does not perceive what is sweet to the inward. God gives his Manna
in the Desert, that is to say, where all earthly food, Given where is no food.
all earthly consolation is withdrawn from the soul. They that have Wives
delay to come: the chaste virgins, that is, Virgins.
the souls which neither cleave to the Devil through sin, nor to the World
through delights, do come to this banquet. I have espoused you a chaste virgin
to one man, says the Apostle: Beware Adultery.
our soul ought not to give it self to spiritual adultery, that God may
contract with it spiritual marriage, and so bring it to his heavenly banquet,
where does enter none that is unclean They that were withheld with the
delight of seeing of the field, did refuse to come, they which love the
pleasures of this world, Pleasures.
do not aspire to the heavenly sweetness. Desire is the foot of the Soul,
our soul does not come to this mystical banquet, if it does not desire it:
the soul that is filled with the consolation of this world, cannot desire the
heavenly sweetness. Riches.
When the rich young man heard, that the riches to which his soul did stick
fast, must be forsaken for Christ, he departed heavy. Christ the heavenly
Elizeus, Fills the empty, not rich.
Christ does not pour in the oil of celestial sweetness, unless all the
vessels be first empty: the love of God does not enter into our soul, unless
the love of our selves, and the love of the world, do first go out of it. Love
draws.
Where our treasure is, there is our heart: if the world be thy treasure, thy
heart is on the world. The force of love is to unite, if thou love the earth,
thou art united to the earth. Unites.
The force of love is to change, Changes.
if thou love the world, thou shall become worldly, if thou love heaven,
thou shall be heavenly.

Covetous.
3 They that buy Oxen, and do trade, come not unto Christ: they that cleave unto
riches with their heart, seek not the heavenly riches. Earthly riches fill the
desire of the soul with a certain false show of sufficiency: lest it should
go to seek her true sufficiency in God, which does fully satiate. All earthly
riches consist in the creatures, in silver, gold, buildings, grounds, cattle:
but no creature does truly satiate our soul, because that it is more excellent
than all the creatures, No satiety in earth.
for all of them were made for her use. How weak the creatures are to fill and
satiate our desires, appears in death, in which we are forsaken of all the
creatures. Fly at death.
It is a wonder that we stick so firmly to the creatures, when they stick so
weakly and inconstantly to us.

4 Adam when he turned himself away from the comfort of God, Lust of the
world, is the loss of life.
and sought deli ht in the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, he was
driven out of Paradise: our soul if it turn it self from God to the
creatures, is deprived of the heavenly consolation, and is driven altogether
from the tree of life.

Neglecters deprived of food.
5 But what remains to them which neglect this banquet? the world passes away,
and all that cleave unto it: the creatures pass away, and all that put their
hope in them. The heavenly Father swears that they shall not taste of his
Supper, which prefer Oxen, Farms, Wives, that is to say, whatsoever earthly
things, before the sweetness of the heavenly Banquet. After Supper there is no
more meat provided, when Christ is neglected, there remains no further
remedy. Those contemners shall be punished with eternal famine, Famished.
and shall live in everlasting darkness, which would not hear Christ's
calling, Come unto me ye which labor, and are laden. They shall hear him
sometime commanding, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire. Cursed.


6 The Sodomites were consumed with fire, Like Sodomites.
when called to this banquet by the preaching of Lot, they refused to come: the
fire of the wrath of God that endures for ever, shall consume them, which being
called by the Gospel, have despised this banquet. When the Bridegroom was
coming, Foolish Virgins.
the Virgins, whose Lamps were destitute of oil, made delay; in the mean time
the gate was shut: they whose hearts are not filled with the oil of the holy
Ghost in this world, Christ will not let them into his joy, but the gate of
indulgence shall be shut against them, the gate of mercy, the gate of
consolation, the gate of hope, the gate of grace, the gate of good works.

7 There is as yet a certain inward calling of Christ: happy is he which
hears it. Happy hearers, knockers by sighs.
Chiist oftentimes knocks at the door of our hearts by holy desires, by devout
sighs, by holy cogitations, happy is he that opens to him when he knocks.

8 As soon as thou feel any holy desire of heavenly grace in thy heart,
Desire.
set down this surely with thy self, that Christ does knock at thy heart:
Open.
let him in, lest he pass away, lest he shut against thee afterward the gate
of his mercy.

9 As soon as thou feel any little flame of holy meditations in thy heart,
Meditation.
think that it is kindled by the heat of the love of God, that is to say, of
the holy Ghost: foster and cherish that flame, that it may grow out into a fire
of love: take heed that thou quench not the Spirit, and hinder the work of the
Lord.

10 He that destroys the temple of the Lord, shall feel his severe judgment.

11 The temple of the Lord is our heart: that does he destroy, Destroyers of
the temple.
which refuses to give place to the holy Ghost, calling him inwardly by the
Word. In the old Testament the Prophets could hear the Lord speaking inwardly:
in the new Testament all that are truly godly, do feel those inward motions
and drawings of the holy Ghost. Blessed are all which hear and follow.

Mirari, non rimari sapientia vera est. Wisdom wondreth, enquireth not.

27. Meditation. Of the mystery of the Lords Supper.
IN the holy Supper of the Lord, there is a great and wonderful mystery
proposed unto us, there is the treasure The Supper a treasure.
and store house of the grace of God. We know that the Tree of Life A tree of
life.
was planted of God, whose fruit should keep our first parents, and their
posterity, in the happiness of the immortality wherein they were created.
There was also placed in Paradise the Tree of the knowledge of good and evil.
Which lost by sin.
But even that same which was given of God for their health and life, and for
the exercise of their obedience, that was an occasion of death and damnation:
while they poor wretches are led by the inticements of Satan and their own
desires. Is here restored.
Here again is gotten that true Tree of Life, that sweet wood, whose leaves
are healing, whose fruit is salvation: the sweetness thereof takes away all
bitterness of evils, yea, even of death it self.

1 Manna True Manna.
was given to the Israelites, that they might be nourished with heavenly food:
here is that true Manna which came down from heaven, that he might give life
to the world: this is the heavenly bread, and Angelical food, of which if a
man eat, he shall never hunger.

2 The Israelites had the Arc The true Arc.
of the covenant and the propitiatory, where they might hear the Lord
speaking face to face: here is the true arc of the covenant, the most holy
body of Christ, in whom are hidden all the treasures of knowledge and
wisedome^ here is the true propitiatory in the blood of Christ, which makes us
to be beloved in the beloved. Neither does he only speak unto us by inward
consolation, The true Oracle.
but he dwells in us. He does not feed us with heavenly Manna, but with
himself. Here surely is the gate of heaven, Heaven gate.
and the Ladder of the Angels: for whether is heaven greater, then he that is
in heaven? whether is heaven knit nearer and straighter unto God, then man's
flesh and nature which he has assumed? Heaven truly is the seat of God, but
in the nature that Christ has assumed rests the holy Ghost. God is in heaven,
Heaven.
but in Christ dwells the fulness of the Godhead. Verily this is a true and
infallible pledge of our salvation. He had no greater thing that he might give:
for what is greater then himself? what is so straightly knit unto him, as his
humane nature, which being taken into the society of the most blessed Trinity,
Knit to the Trinity.
is made the treasury of heavenly good things?

3 What is so straightly joined unto him as his flesh and blood? but with this
heavenly nourishment he does refresh us miserable worms, and makes us
partakers of his nature, We are in him partakers of divine nature.
how not also of his grace? who ever hated his own flesh? how therefore can
the Lord despise us whom he feeds with his own flesh, Despises us not.
and his own blood? how can he forget them, to whom he has given the earnest
of his body? how shall satan be able to subvert us, Satan hurts not.
when we are refreshed with heavenly food, that we faint not in the battle?
Christ does esteem us dear, because he bought us dear: Dear to Christ
bought.
he does esteem us dear, because he feeds us with dear and precious things:
Fed.
be does esteem us dea^e, because we are his own flesh and members. Members.
Healthful Balm.


4 This is the only sovereign salve of all spiritual diseases: this is the
salve of immortality: for what sin is so great, that the holy flesh of God
may not expiate?

Quickening.
4 What sin is so great, that the quickening flesh of Christ may not heal?
what is so deadly, that it may not be taken away by the death of the Son of
God? Devils darts quenched Spots cleansed.
what darts of the devil are so deadly, that they may not be extinguished in
this Fountain of the grace of God? What spot of the conscience is so great,
that this blood may not cleanse? the Lord was present with the Israelites in
the cloud and fire: Light.
but here not the cloud, but the Sun of righteousness it self is present,
which is the present light of our souls. Here the fire of Gods wrath is not
felt, Not fear of wrath.
but the heat of his charity, neither does he depart from us, but he makes
his abiding with us.

5 Our first Parents were brought into Paradise, that most fragrant and sweet
garden, a type of the eternal blessedness, that being admonished of Gods
benignity, they might yield due obedience to their Creator.

6 Behold more then Paradise, Better then Paradise.
in this place: for the creature is filled with the flesh of the Creator: the
penitent conscience is cleansed by the blood of the Son of God: the members of
Christ, Benefits.
the head, are nourished with the body of Christ: the faithful soul is fed
with divine and celestial banquets.

7 The holy flesh of God, which the Angels do adore in the unity of person,
the Archangels do worship, the powers do tremble at, Most reverend food.
the virtues do admire, that is made our spiritual nourishment. Let the
heavens rejoice, and the earth triumph: but more the faithful soul, on whom
gifts so great and of such quality are bestowed.

Christi sis prouidus hospes. Be Christ's careful ghest.

28. Meditation. Of serious preparation before the use of the Lords Supper.
NO vulgar banquet, neither any feast of a King, but the most holy mystery of
the body and blood of Christ is set before us: therefore there is required
worthy preparation: Worthy preparation.
lest for life we find death, lest for mercy we receive judgment. How does
that most holy Patriarks, Abraham.
famous for the strength of his faith, tremble? how does he fear, when the
Son of God appeared unto him in the shape of a man, and told him before that
he would ouerturne Sodom? Here the Lamb of God is not set before us to be
looked upon but to be tasted, and to be eaten. Tremble then at his presence.

1 Vzzias when he came vnconsiderately to the Ark of the Covenant, was
forthwith stricken with leprosy of the Lord: what marvel is it therefore, if
he eat and drink his own judgment, Tremble at the judgment.
which eats of this bread, and drinks of this wine unworthily? for here is the
true Arc of the new Covenant, prefigured by that old.

2 But the Apostle teaches us true preparation in one word: let a man, says
he, examine himself, Examine.
and so let him eat of this bread. But as all godly and divine examination is
to be tried by the rule of the holy Scripture, in like reason also this, which
the Apostle requires.

Our corrupt nature.
3 In the first place therefore let us consider our own infirmity. What is
man? dust and ashes: out of the earth we are borne, of the earth we live, unto
the earth we return. What is man? stinking sperme, a sack of dung, and the
food of worms.

Frail life.
4 Man was borne to labor, not to honor. Man was borne of a woman, and
therefore with guilt: he lives a short time, and therefore with fear: he is
full of many miseries, and therefore with weeping: and very many, because of
body and soul together.

5 Man knows not his birth: he knows not his death: we are for a while as the
herb of Summer, And short.
and that short life has griefs and labors that are nothing short. Vain
compared to God.


6 In the second place, let us consider our unworthiness: surely every creature
in respect of the Creator is a shadow, a dream, nothing, so also is man.

7 But more and more heinous ways is man unworthy: for he has offended his
Creator with his sins. Sins.
God is just by nature and essence: he is angry therefore at sins by nature
and essence.

8 What are we but stubble to that consuming fire? how shall our most foul
facts consist? That cannot consist.
or how shall our iniquities appear, which thou put before thee, and our
errors which thou placest in the light of thy countenance? God is infinite,
and always like himself, Before an infinite God.
of infinite justice, and of infinite wrath. For if he be so in all his works,
he is so also in wrath, in righteousness and in vengeance. God is altogether
great and wonderful. That spared not his Son.


9 He that has not spared his Son, shall he spare his other workmanship? he
that has not spared the most holy, shall he spare an evil servant? In so
great hatred is sin with God, that he punishes it in his most beloved:
which appears in Lucifer, the chief of the Angels. The chief Angels.


Examine the Sacrament.
10 Howbeit, let this examination not only respect our selves, but this blessed
bread also, which is the communion of the body of Christ, then will the true
fountain of grace, and the vnexhausted spring of mercy appear. God cannot
altogether neglect us whom he has made partakers of his own flesh: In the
benefits.
for who ever hated his own flesh? therefore these holy feasts shall
transform our souls: Of making us divine.
these divine banquets shall make us divine men, until at last we be made
companions of the future felicity, being capable of God wholly and alone, and
wholly like unto God. That which we have here in faith, and in a mystery,
there we shall have in deed and most openly. Let us therefore examine our
selves, whether we be in the faith or not: Examine then thine eye of faith by
knowledge, whether it truly discern the Lords body, in this mystery. Examine
the ground of thy faith, whether it be assured, without wavering. Examine the
fruit of thy faith, whether it has banished all ungodliness and
unrighteousness, and has begot an Academy of virtues: so shall temptations
give ground, and fly, and so shall appear the happy change of thy soul.

11 Our bodies also shall attain this dignity, Happy body.
that in them we shall see God face to face, which now are the temples of the
holy God: and are sanctified and quickened by the body and blood of Christ
dwelling in them. This most holy salve heales all the wounds of sins: All
whole by salve.
this quickening flesh ouercomes all mortal sin. This is the most holy seal
of the promises of God, By promises sealed.
which we may show before the judgment of God. This pledge By pledge.
being given us, we boast safely of eternal life. If Christ's body and blood be
exhibited unto us, then also all the benefits which are gotten by that most
holy body, and by that blessed blood. Gift.
How shall he that has given us greater things, deny us the less? he that
has given his Son unto us, Romans 8.
how shall he not with him give us all things?

12 Therefore let the Spouse rejoice: Rejoice.
because the time is nigh, that she shall be called to the marriage of the
Lamb. Let her be clothed Be clothed.
with her precious garments, let her take the wedding garment, that she be not
found naked. That garment is the righteousness of the Bridegroom, which we
put on in Baptism. So far is it that our righteousness should be the
wedding garment, that it is rather the cloth of a menstruous woman. Let us
therefore fear to bring to the solemnity of that marriage, the most filthy
and stinking garments of our own works: let the Lord cloth us, that we be not
found naked.

Vitae fons est caro Christi. Christ's flesh, life's fountain

25. Meditation. Of the wholesome participation of the body and blood of Christ.
HE that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, shall live for ever, says
Christ. Verily, great is the benefit of our Savior, that he has not only
taken upon him our flesh, and lifted it up into the Throne of the heavenly
glory: but also feeds us with his body and blood to life eternal. O wholesome
dainties of the soul! Wholesome dainties.
O desired banquet! O celestial and Angelical food! Although the Angels
desire to look into that great mystery, Seen of Angels.
yet he did not take upon him the Angels, Heb. 2.
but the seed of Abraham, our Savior is nearer unto us, Christ nearest us
then to the Angels themselves: because we have known his love out of this,
that he has given us of his Spirit: In Spirit.
and not only of his Spirit, but also of his body Body.
and his blood, for so does the Truth speak of the bread and wine in the
Eucharist. This is my body: This is my blood. How can the Lord forget them,
Cannot forget us.
whom he has redeemed with his body and blood, whom he has nourished with
his body and blood.

1 He which eats the flesh, and drinks the blood of Christ, abides in
Christ, In Christ.
and Christ in him.

2 I do not therefore greatly wonder, that the hairs of our head are numbered,
that our names are written in heaven, that we are written in the hands of the
Lord, Excellent benefits.
and that we are carried in his bosom, and in his womb, because we are fed
with the body and blood of Christ.

Dignity of soul.
3 Verily, great is the dignity of our souls, which are fed with the precious
price of his redemption. Great also is the dignity of our bodies, which are
the habitations of the soul, that is redeemed by the body of Christ, that are
filled with the body Body.
of Christ, which are the temples of the holy Ghost, and houses of the whole
most holy Trinity. For it cannot be that the same should abide in the grave,
Christ raised us.
when they are nourished with the body and blood of our Lord.

It feeds us by changing us.
4 This is that meat of men, that are of age, we eat it, neither yet do we
change it into our body, but are changed into it.

Lively members fed.
5 We are the members of Christ, we are quickened by his Spirit, and we are fed
by his body and blood.

6 This is the bread which comes down from heaven, and gives life to the
world: of it if any one shall eat, he shall not hunger for ever. That hunger
not.
This is the bread of grace and mercy, which if any man shall eat, he tastes
and sees how sweet our Lord is, and of his fullness he receives grace for
grace. Taste sweet grace.
This is the bread of life, not only living, but also quickening, if any one
eats of this, he shall live for ever. Live ever.
This bread comes down from heaven, neither is it only heavenly, but also
it makes the ghests heavenly Makes heavenly ghests.
which eat it wholsomely and in the spirit. They shall be heavenly, because
they shall not dye, but shall be raised raised.
up again in the last day. But they shall be raised up not unto judgment,
because he which eats of this bread, comes not unto judgment; not to
condemnation, because there is no condemnation to them which are in Christ
Jesus: but to life Life.
and salvation. For he which eats the flesh of the Son of man, and drinks his
blood, has life in himself, and shall live: for Christ his flesh is meat
indeed, and his blood is drink indeed.

7 Let us therefore be filled Be filled.
not with the food of our own works, Eat.
but of the Lord. Let us be drunken of the fullness not of our own house,
Drink.
but of the Lords. This is the true fountain of life, The fountain of life.
he that shall drink the water thereof, it shall become in him a fountain of
water springing up unto eternal life.

8 All ye that thirst, come Come.
to these waters, and you that have no silver, make haste, buy, eat: let them
that are athirst come: come also my thirsty soul, vexed with the heat of thy
sins.

9 But if thou art destitute of the silver of thy deserts, make so much the
more haste: Haste.
being destitute of thine own merit, haste thee so much the more earnestly to
Christ's merit: make haste therefore and buy without silver. Here is the chamber
of Christ To Christ's Chamber.
and our soul, from which let not thy sins deter thee, neither let thy
merits enter with thee.

10 But what can our merits be? Without merit.
They weigh silver, but not for bread: and labor, but not for fullness, says
the Prophet. Our labors do not fill us, neither is the grace of God bought
with the money of our merits. Hear therefore, O my soul, and eat that which
is good, and be delighted in fatness.

11 Those words are spirit and life, and the words of eternal life. Eternal
life.
The cup of blessing is the communicating of the blood of Christ: the bread
which we break, is the participation of the body of the Lord. We cleave unto
the Lord, therefore we are one spirit with him: we use not only the
communion of nature with him, but also the participation of his body and blood.

John 6.
12 Therefore I do not say with the Jews, how can he give us his flesh to eat?
But I rather cry out, how does the Lord distribute unto us his flesh to eat,
and his blood to drink? I search not into his power, I wonder at his good
will: Wonderful good will.
I look not into his majesty, but I worship his bounty: I believe a presence,
Presence inward.
I am ignorant of the manner of the presence: I certainly know that it is most
strait and inward.

Ephesians. 5.
13 We are members of his body: flesh of his flesh, bone of his bones: he dwells
in us, and we in him. My soul desires to be drowned in the cogitation of this
most profound depth: The soul drowned in meditation.
it has not as yet found out by what words it may utter or declare that
goodness: but if is utterly amazed at the beholding of that so great grace in
God, and that so great glory in the blessed.

Thursday, Evening Prayer.
O Lord God, gracious and merciful Father, having learned what is the nature
and properties of true faith, and desiring it earnestly for the excellency
thereof, I come humbly to crave it at thy merciful hands, that thou
vouchsafing to enrich me with so great a blessing, in the power thereof, I may
overcome the World, and being fully persuaded thereby of thy love and favor
toward me in Christ, in whom thou wast reconciling the world to thy self, I
may know for certain, that thou art at peace with me, and may also feel the
fruits of my Baptism in my soul, through which I had an entrance into thy
Church; the dignity whereof is such, that thy Son has knit it in the
straightest bond unto himself, in which alone is salvation; out of which all
that are, are yet in the state of damnation. O Lord, vouchsafe to keep me
always within this thy fold, a lamb of thy flock, a member of this Church.
And to this end knit my soul unto thee, espouse it to thy Son, that I may
partake of this honor, and be made comely by his beauty, and enriched with his
love, and satisfied evermore with the fatness of thine house, partaking here
of the spiritual repast that is offered unto me in thy Word, and at thy Table,
until the time come, that I shall drink the wine of gladness within thy
kingdom, there to rejoice with thee everlastingly, O blessed God, Father,
Son, and holy Ghost. Amen.

Friday, Morning Prayer.
THis life being full of cares, this world full of snares, wherewith the cruel
Nimrod, the Devil, hunts for the souls of men: what shall be my comfort in
this life, but thy refreshing, O God of all comforts and consolations? What
shall be mine assurance and direction in the ways of this world, to avoid the
snares of death, but thy hand and thy staff, O Lord, that leadest unto life,
even those that walk in the shadow of death? Give me therefore thy refreshing
Spirit, I do beseech thee, to comfort and cheer me up in all the afflictions
of my life, that I be not overcome of too much sorrow. Give me thy Spirit of
truth to lead me into all truth, that I perish not in the common errors of
the world, nor in the gaine-sayings of the rebellious children, nor fall into
the pit that the enemy has dug to entrap my soul; but that preserved in
the truth, I may walk safe from all dangers, through the labors of this valley
of tears, toward my rest in the heavenly Country. Free me, O Lord, from all
spiritual evils: keep my soul from the jaws of the Lion: take the seals of
ignorance from mine eyes: take the cawle of hardness from mine heart: keep me
from presumptuous sins, that they get not the dominion over me. Let not
pride puff me up let not covetousness press me down: let not the filth of
mine own flesh defile me: let not the deceiuablenesse of the world beguile
me: let not wrath and passion transport me: let not sloth make me to be
likened to the Dog, or to the Swine: let not envy bleare mine eyes: let not
surfeiting drown mine heart: let me not presume to take thine office upon me
to revenge my self, but grant that in all my pleasures, in patience I may
possess my soul. Have pity (O Lord) upon mine infirmity, and loose the yoke
of my captivity, and from all sin and danger of the enemy deliver me this
day and ever, for thy dear Sons sake Christ Jesus, Amen.

Penetrant suspira Coelum. Sighs pierce the Skies.

30 Meditation. Of the wholesome efficacy of prayers.
THis is an exceeding great benefit of God, that he requires the familiar
talk of godly prayers: Talk with God.
he gives unto us the affection to pray, he also gives unto us the effect of
our prayer. Great is the force of prayer. Prayer forcible.
which is powered forth in the earth, but works in heaven. The prayer of the
just is the key of heaven: The key of heaven.
prayer does ascend, and Gods deliverance does descend. Prayer is the buckler
of salvation, Buckler,
by which all the darts of the wicked are driven back.

1 When Moses did stretch forth his hands, Israel did prevail against the
Amalekites: if thou stretch forth thy hands unto heaven, Satan shall not
prevail against thee. Weakneth enemies.
Even as a wall by the enemy, so the wrath of God is broken by the prayers of
the godly.

2 Our Savior himself did pray. not for any necessity, Christ's example.
but that he might commend unto us the dignity of prayers. Prayer is the
tribute of our subjection, Tribute.
because God has commanded us that we offer unto him daily prayers, as a
certain spiritual tribute. It is the ladder of our ascension: A Ladder.
because prayer is nothing else but a certain peregrination of the mind unto
God. It is the buckler of our defense: Buckler.
because the soul of a living man is safe in prayer from the assaults of the
devil. It is the faithful messenger of Embassage: Messenger.
because prayer ascends to the Throne of God, and inuites him to help us: this
messenger is never frustrate of his purpose, for God always hears us, if not
according to our will, Euerheard
yet for our profit and salvation. We may hope for one of the two undoubtedly,
either he will give us that which we ask, For good.
or that which he knows to be more profitable.

5 God gave his Son, that most excellent gift, being not entreated: what
shall he do being entreated? Without doubt.
we can neither doubt of the Fathers hearing, nor the Sons intercession. In
any cause whatsoever, thou may enter with Moses into the Tabernacle, to ask
counsel of the Lord, and thou shall soon hear the answer of God. When Christ
prayed, he was transfigured: so in prayer there are made great changes in the
soul because prayer is the light of the soul, Transfiguring the soul.
which very often leaves him triumphing whom it found despairing. With what
forehead do thou behold the Sun, All sanctified by prayer, Sun.
unless thou have first worshipped him which sends that most sweet light to
thine eyes? by what means do thou enjoy thy table, Table.
unless thou have first worshipped him, which does give and minister unto thee
so great good? with what hope will thou deliver thy self to thy nights rest,
Rest.
unless thou have first guarded thy self with prayer? What fruit can thou
hope for of thy labors, Labors.
unless thou have first worshipped him, without whom all labor is unprofitable?
Ask.
If therefore thou desire gifts either spiritual or corporal, ask, and thou
shall receive. If thou desire Christ, seek Seek.
him by prayers, and thou shall find him. If thou desire to have the door of
Gods grace and eternal salvation opened unto thee, knock Knock.
at it by prayers, and it shall be opened unto thee: If the thirst of
tentations and the penury of spiritual good things does afflict thee in the
Desert of this world, draw near Draw near.
to the rock of spiritual things, which is Christ, by devotion, and smite it
with the rod of prayer, and thou shall feel that the waters of Gods peace can
quench the thirst of thy penury.

4 Will thou offer Offer.
an acceptable sacrifice unto God? offer prayers: God shall feel the odor of
sweetness, and his wrath will cease. Will thou daily be conversant with GOD?
love prayeers, Confer.
which are the spiritual conference of GOD and the devout soul? Taste God.
will thou taste how sweet the Lord is? inuit him by prayers to the house of
thy heart.

5 Prayer does please GOD but it is that prayer which is made after a due
manner: therefore he which desires to be heard, let him pray wisely, As he
ought. Wisely.
ardently humbly, faithfully and confidently. Let him pray wisely, that is,
that he pray for those things which serve for the glory of God and the
salvation of his neighbors. GOD is almighty, therefore thou may not let him
down a measure in thy prayers: he is most wise, therefore thou may not
prescribe him an order: prayers may not break forth rashly, but let them
follow, faith going before: but faith respects the word. Those things therefore
which GOD promises absolutely in his word, thou may pray absolutely
Absolutely
for: those things which he promises with a condition, With condition.
as temporal things, those thou may likewise pray for with a condition:
those things which he by no means promises, No promise, no prayer.
thou may also by no means pray for. Oft-times God grants that when he is
angry, which he denies when he is pleased: follow Christ therefore, which
wholly resigneth his will unto God. Gods will be done. 2. Ardently:
Secondly, let him pray ardently: for how can thou require that God should
hear thee, when thou can not hear thy self? Will thou have God to be
mindful of thee, when thou art not mindful of thy self? When thou will pray,
go into thy chamber, and shut the doors: thy chamber is thy heart, into it
thou must enter. If thou will pray after a due manner, thou must shut to thy
doors, lest the thoughts of worldly businesses chance to trouble thee. See
none trouble thee.
The words come not to the ears of God, unless there be an affection of the
mind. Stir the mind.
The mind ought to be so stirred up with the heat of cogitation, that it may
far go beyond all that which the tongue expresses: and this is to worship in
spirit In Spirit.
and truth, which the Lord requires. Christ did pray in the mount, and lifted
up Job. 4. Lift up.
his eyes to heaven: so having turned our mind away from all the creatures, we
ought to turn it unto God. Thou do injury unto God, if thou prayest him
that he would attend unto thee, when thou do not attend to thy self. We
may pray incessantly, if we pray in the Spirit, that is, if our mind do
always watch with holy desires unto God.

No cries.
6 It is not always needful to cry out, because God also hears the sighs of
the heart, seeing be dwells in the hearts of the godly. Much babbling.
There is not always need of many words, because he is also amidst our
thoughts. Sometimes one groan, One true groan.
one sigh stirred up by the holy spirit, and offered in the spirit unto God, is
more acceptable unto God, then the prolixe saying of prayers, where the tongue
speaks, but the heart is dumb. Thirdly, let him pray humbly, 3 Humbly.
Without our merit.
that he trust not to his own merit, but only to the grace of God. If our
prayers rely on our own worthiness, they are condemned, although for devotion
our heart should sweat out blood. No man pleases God, but in Christ: In
Christ.
therefore also no man prays aright, unless through Christ, and for Christ.
The sacrifices did not please God, which were not offered on that only altar
of the Tabernacle: Prayer pleases not God, which is not offered on that only
altar The only altar.
Christ. The Israelites were promised the hearing of their prayers, if they
prayed with their face turned to Jerusalem: so let us turn our selves unto
Christ in our prayers, which is the temple of the Divinity. And divine Temple.


7 Christ being about to pray in his passion, Cast thee down.
casts himself on the earth: see how that most holy soul does humble himself
before the divine majesty! Fourthly, let him pray faithfully, 4 Faithfully.
that he offer himself to the wanting of all joy in himself, and to the
patience of all punishment. By how much a man prays the sooner, by so much the
more profitable. Soon.
By how much the oftener, Often.
by so much again the more profitably. By how much the more fervently, Fervent.
by so much the more acceptably unto God. Fifthly, let him pray confidently, 5
Confidently.
and with perseverance: Persevere.
because when the Lord gives slowly, he commends his gifts, he does not deny
them. Things that are long in desiring, are the more sweet in the obtaining.
Again, let him pray confidently, that is, that he make request, nothing
doubting Not doubting.
in faith. O most merciful God, which have commanded us to pray, grant also
that we may pray aright, and thereby obtain that which is for our good.

Sanctis sacer Angelus astat. Saints kept by Angels.

31. Meditation. Of the custody of the holy Angels.
Think, O devout soul, Angels assist us.
how great the grace of God is, that he has appointed thee the guard of
Angels. The heavenly Father sends his Son to deliver us, the Son of God was
incarnate to save us, the holy Ghost is sent to sanctify us: the Angels are
sent to protect us. Protect us.
So therefore the whole Court of heaven All the Court of Heaven.
does as it were serve, and traduceth their benefits unto us. I do now no more
marvel, that all the inferior Creatures were created for man, when the Angels
themselves, which are far more worthy Creatures, Creatures.
do not deny their ministry unto man.

1 What marvel is it, that the heaven does minister light Light.
unto us in the day, that we may labor: darkness Dark.
in the night, that we may rest, when the inhabitants themselves of the
heavenly kingdom minister unto us? What marvel that the air Air.
gives us vital breath, and all kind of birds to obey us, when the heavenly
Spirits do watch for the preservation of our lives? What marvel that the water
gives us drink, cleanses our uncleanness, waters Waters.
our dry places, and affords us all kind of fishes: when the Angels
themselves are at a readiness, when we are wearied with the heat of
calamities and tentations, that they may refresh us? What marvel that the
earth Earth.
does hear us, that it nourishes us with bread and wine, that it fills our
tables with all kind of fruits and living creatures: when charge is given to
the Angels, that they keep us in all our ways, Psalm. 91.
that they bear us in their hands, lest we offend our foot against a stone?

2 The Angels were careful of Christ, The Angels served Christ.
because an Angel does tell of his conception, an Angel does manifest his
nativity, an Angel does command him to fly into Egypt, the Angels serve him
in the Desert, the Angels minister unto him in the whole ministry of his
preaching: an Angel is present with him in the Agony of death, an Angel
appears in his Resurrection, the Angels were present in his ascension, and
shall be present in his future return to judgment. As therefore the Angels
served Christ in the days of his flesh: So us the faithful.
so they are also careful over all them which are incorporate into Christ by
faith: Members
as they served the head, so do they serve the members. They do rejoice to
serve them in the earth, whom they shall sometimes have for their companions in
Heaven: Their companions, And fellows.
they do not refuse their Ministry, whose most sweet fellowship they do
sometimes hope to have.

3 The tents of the Angels appear to Jacob in the way to his country: so the
Angels are given as keepers to the godly in this life, As they did Jacob.
which is the way to the heavenly country. The Angels protect Daniel Daniel.
in the midst of the Lions: so they keep all the godly in safety, from the
laying awaite of the infernal Lion. The Angels do deliver Lot Lot.
out of the burning of Sodom: so they often deliver us by holy inspirations,
from the devils tentations: and by their protections, out of the infernal
fire. The Angels carry the soul of Lazarus Lazarus.
into the bosom of Abraham so do they translate the souls of all the elect,
into the palace of the heavenly kingdom. The Angel brings Peter Peter.
out of prison: so he often delivers the godly out of present dangers.

4 Verily, great is the power of our Adversary the Devil, but let the
custody of the Angels comfort us. Neither do thou doubt, but that these
helpers are present Comfortable. Present.
with thee in all dangers, because the Scripture, under the figure of the
Cherubim and Seraphim, does paint them out unto us winged, that thou may
certainly resolve, that they will be present with incredible swiftness,
Speedily.
to bring help unto thee. Doubt not, but that in all places In all places.
these protectors are present with thee: because they are most subtle spirits,
Without impediment.
whom no body can withhold. All bodies alike, howsoever they be solid and
thick, are pierced by them, and are peruious to them. Doubt not, They know.
but that these spirits do know thy dangers and afflictions: because they
always see the face of the heavenly Father, and are pressed most readily to all
his ministeries.

5 Think also, O devout soul, that these Angels are holy: They be holy.
therefore study holiness, if thou will have them thy fellows. The similitude
of manners, does especially reconcile friendship: accustom therefore thy self
to holy actions, if thou desire the custom of the holy Angels. Cause of care
in all places.


6 In every place and corner yield reverence to thine Angel: neither do any
thing in his presence, which thou art ashamed to do in the sight of men. These
spirits are chaste, therefore they are driven away Easily driven away.
with filthy actions. Smoke expells Bees; and stink, Doves: so woeful and
stinking sin drives away the Angels that are the keepers of our life. These
guards being lost through sins, To our danger, by devils.
how will thou be safe from the snares of the devil? being destitute of the
Angels protections, how will thou be safe from the incursion of diverse
dangers? If thy soul want the wall of Angelical defense, the devil will
soon overcome it by the deceit of evil persuasion.

7 These holy Angels are sent from God to their ministry: therefore thou must
first be reconciled unto God by faith, Be faithful
if thou will have the Angel of God to be thy keeper. Where there is not the
grace of God, No grace, no Angel.
there also is not the custody of the Angels.

8 Let us behold the Angels as certain saving hands of God, which can move
themselves to no work but by his direction. Directed by God. Joy in our
conversion.
There is joy in heaven before the Angels over one sinner that repents: the
tears of penitent sinners, are as it were the wine of Angels, but the
impenitent heart drives away the Angels keepers. Let us therefore repent us,
that we may stir up joy to the Angels. Be penitent.


9 The Angels are of an heavenly and spiritual nature; therefore let us think
on heavenly and spiritual things, Have heavenly thoughts.
that it may be a pleasure unto them to be present with us. The Angels are
humble, Be humble
and pride is altogether hateful unto them, because they are not ashamed to do
service unto little children: why therefore is dust and ashes so proud, when
the heavenly spirits do humble them selves so much?

10 The craft of the devil is specially to be feared at death, Proved for
death.
because it is written, that the Serpent lays wait for the heel: the last
part of our body is the heel, the last term of our life is death. In that
last agony of death, most necessary is the custody of the Angels, which may
deliver us from the fiery darts of the devil, and conueigh our soul, when it
is gone forth of the house of our body, into the heavenly Paradise. When
Zacharias did perform his holy ministry in the Temple, the Angel of the Lord
came unto him: Rejoicing in prayers.
so also if thou reioycest in the exercise of the word and prayers, thou shall
enjoy the patronage of the Angels. O most merciful God, which do lead us by
the holy Angels through the wilderness of this world, grant that by the same we
may be brought to thy heavenly kingdom.

Vitam moriendo lucramur. Life gained by death.

32. Meditation. Of the consolation in the death of our Friends.
Think, O devout soul, on Christ thy Savior, and thou shall not fear deaths
terror. If the violence of death make thee sad, let the power of Christ again
lift thee up. The Israelites could not drink the waters of Mara, for the
bitterness: but God showed Moses a tree, Deaths sweetning.
which being cast into the waters, made them sweet. If thou art afraid for the
bitterness of death, God shows thee a tree which turns it into sweetness,
that is to say, the branch which springs out of the root of Iesse: that branch
is Christ, whose word who so shall keep, he shall not see death for ever.

1 Our life is full of burdens the ease of them therefore is good. Misery, not
the man dies
The misery of a Christian man dies, and not a Christian man. It is but a
certain taking of a journey, A journey.
which we think to be death: it is not an end, but a passage. We do not leese
our friends, but send them before us: they dye not, but are as it were borne
again. They go before us, they go not away, they depart not utterly from us:
it is not a death, but rather a going away for a short time. The departure of
the godly is the doubling of their life, their burialls are their advantage.
Deaths advantage.


2 Our friends die: interpret it thus: that they cease to sin: that they
cease to be tossed up and down: that they cease to be miserable. Cease to be
miserable.


3 They dye in the faith, interpret it thus: that they depart out of the shadow
of life, that they may pass to the true life: Go to beter.
out of darkness, that they may go unto light: from men, that they may go unto
God. Our life is a navigations, Navigations.
death is the most safe haven.

4 We must not therefore grieve that our friends are dead: but we must rather
rejoice on their behalf, that they are come out of the turbulent sea, into the
haven.

5 This life is the prison Deliverance from prison.
of the soul, but death is the deliverance: therefore Simeon being about to
dye, cries out, Lord now let thou thy servant depart. He desired to be
dismissed, being shut up as it were in the prison of his body. Therefore we
must rejoice with our friends, that being freed out of this prison, they are
come to the true liberty. The Apostle likewise desires to be dissolved, Slavery
dissolved.
as though he were tied to this body of earth, in a certain wretched slavery.
Shall we therefore be sad, that our friends having wrested themselves out of
these hands, are now truly free? shall we wear for them black garments, when
they have taken on them white robes? because it is written, that to the elect
are given white robes for their innocence, Reu. 6.1.
and palms in their hands for victory: shall we afflict our selves with
tears and sighs for them, when God has wiped away all tears Tears wiped
away.
from their eyes? shall we mourn for them and trouble our selves in our
sorrow, when they are in such a place where neither mourning, nor grief, nor
crying is heard any more, and they rest Rest.
from their labors? shall we kill up our selves with immoderate sadness for
their death, when in the fellowship of the Angels With Angels,
they enjoy true and solid gladness? shall we lift up a weeping voice for
them, when they before the Lamb sing Sing.
a new song, having their Harps and golden Viols? shall we grieve that they are
gone out of this earth, when they rejoice Rejoice.
on their own behalf that they are departed? How much it profits to go out of
this world, Christ shows, who, when his disciples were sad, because he said
that they would go away, answered: If you loved me, you would versly rejoice.

6 If when thou did sail a troublesome and stormy tempest, the waves being
stirred up with the force of the winds, should foreshew shipwreck Exempt from
shipwreck.
to come, would thou not betake thee to the haven with all haste? behold,
the world does flit and slide, and testifies her ruin not only by her age,
but also by the end of things: and do not thou give God thanks, do thou
not rejoice in the behalf of thy friends, that by a more timely death, are
exempted from the ruins, and shipwrackes, and plagues that hang over their
heads? In whose hands is the salvation of thy friends more safely Safe.
placed, then in the hands of Christ? In what place shall the soul of the
friends more safely abide, then in the kingdom of Paradise? Hear what the
Apostle says of death: death is gain: Gain.
it is gain to have escaped the increase of sin, it is gain to have avoided
worse things, it is gain to have past to better. If those whom thou have lost
by death, were very dear, let God be dearer, Let God be dearer.
which would have them to be translated unto himself. Be not angry with the
Lord, which has taken away nothing, but that which he gave, he took back his
own, Which takes his own.
he has not taken away thine.

7 Be not angry with the Lord, that he should ask that which he gave thee
only to loan. The Lord alone foresees the evils to come: Provides for them.
therefore he does provide for thine, lest they should be wrapped in the
disasters to come. They that are dead in the Lord, rest sweetly Sweet rest.
in their graves, when they that remain alive, are grievously vexed, in the
very palaces of their kingdom.

8 If thou have lost thy dear friends by death, Thou shall have them again.
believe that hereafter thou shall receive them more dear. Shortly.
A short space of time does separate thee from them, blessed and secure
eternity shall join thee again together with them. When thou go
For we do hope on a most faithful promise, that when we go out of this life,
from whence we have sent some of our friends before us, we shall come to that
life, where, by how much they shall be better known unto us, so much they shall
be dearer More dearer.
unto us, and without the fear of any dissension amiable.

9 The multitude of the heavenly spirits, shall receive as many souls as there
shall be, and as many as have been before us, with great applause. With
applause.
Here we shall know the countenances of our own Nation, and talk together
with them: And knowledge.
here the sister shall go with the brother, the sons with the parents, neither
shall any evening shut up their Festival days.

10 Do not therefore regard only the time of forsaking, for that thy friends
forsake thee in death: but also respect Respect this.
the time of restitution, when they shall be restored unto thee in the
resurrection. Where there is a firm faith By faith
of the resurrection, there is not the shape of death: but of rest rather.

11 The whole university of things is a looking-glass of the resurrection.
The resurrection showed.
The light By lights.
that sets daily, does shine forth again: the herbs Herbs.
that are dead in the Winter, do revive in the Spring: the Phoenix Phoenix.
does engender it self again in death: the times Times:
begin where they are ended: the fruits Fruits.
are consumed and do return: the seeds Seeds.
do not rise up fruitfully, unless they be corrupted and dissolved: all things
are preserved by perishing: all things resume their shape out of death. What
then, is God to be thought to have set forth such types unto us in nature in
vain? shall nature be more mighty then God Gods promise.
that promises the resurrection of our bodies?

12 He which quickens the grains of seeds which are dead and putrified, More
excellent the^ nature.
by which thou may live in this world, will much more raise up again thee,
and thine, that thou may live with them for ever.

13 God has called thy beloved to his chambers, do not envy Enuyeth not.
them their secure rest, shortly will come the time of raising them up again.
Thou perhaps did hope that thy friends before their death would be
profitable members of the militant Church: but it has pleased God that they
should be members of the triumphant The triumphant members.
Church: it has pleased God, let it also please thee. Thou perhaps did
hope that they should have gotten the knowledge of diverse things before their
death, but it has pleased God that they should learn true wisdom in the
heavenly University: Truly wise
this has pleased God, let it also please thee.

14 Thou perhaps did hope, that thy friends before their death should first
been lifted out of the dust, and placed with Princes: but it has pleased God
to associate them to the heavenly Princes, Advanced.
the holy Angels: this has pleased God, let it also please thee. Thou perhaps
did hope, that thy friends before their death should get together much
riches: but it has pleased God that they should feel the pleasures Rich
pleasure.
of the heavenly kingdom: this has pleased God, let it also please thee. O
holy God, thou have taken away that which thou have given, thy holy Name be
blessed for ever.

Friday Noone.
DEfend me, o Lord, Psalm. 91.4.
under thy wings, and keep me safe under thy feathers: let thy faithfulness
and truth be my shield and buckler.

That no evil happen unto me, Verse 10.
nor no plague come nigh my dwelling.

Domino men's nixa quieta est. The mind is quiet that relies on God.

33 Meditation. Of the true rest of the soul.
THE soul oft-times seeks her rest in transitory and worldly things, No peace
in the world.
but does not find it. Wherefore? because the soul is more worthy then all
the creatures, therefore she cannot find rest and peace in those viler things.
All worldly things are vain and transitory: Which is transitory.
but the soul is immortal: how therefore should she find true rest in them?
All these things are earthly: Earthly.
but our soul is of an earthly beginning, how therefore should she be able to
fulfill her desire in them? In Christ she finds rest, Rest in Christ by faith.
In his wounds.
he can satiate and fulfill her desire.

1 Against the wrath of God, she rests in the wounds of Christ against the
accusation of Satan in the power of Christ. Against the terror of the Law in
the preaching Preaching Blood.
of Christ. Against her sins accusing, in the blood of Christ, which speaks
better before God, then the blood of Abel. Against the terror of death she is
at rest, and trusts in the sitting of Christ at the right hand Sitting at Gods
right hand,
of the Father.

2 And so our faith finds rest in Christ, but our charity Charity rests. Not
on the world.
also finds the chiefest rest there. He which loves earthly things, has not
true rest, because earthly things themselves have it not, neither can they
sufficiently satiate the appetite of the soul, because they are all finite,
but our soul being made after the Image of God, desires that infinite good, But
on infinite good.
in whom are all good things.

3 As therefore our faith ought to rely on none of all the creatures, but on
the only merit of Christ: so our love also ought to cleave to no creature, no
not to our own selves: And on Gods love
for the love of our selves does hinder the love of God: and we ought to prefer
the love of God before all things.

A Spouse.
4 Our soul is the Spouse of Christ; therefore she ought to cleave to him
alone. Our soul is the habitation of God, Dwelling.
therefore she ought to give place to him alone. Many seek rest in riches,
Not in riches.
but without Christ there is no rest of the soul: but where Christ is, there
is poverty, if not indeed, yet in affliction. He the Lord of Heaven and earth,
had not where to lay down his head: and so would he commend and consecrate
poverty unto us. Riches are without us, Without.
but that which must make our soul at rest, ought to be within us. But to what
shall our soul cleave in death, when all things in the world are to be left?
That leave us.
either riches forsake us, or we them, very often in our life, but always in
death. Where therefore then shall the soul find peace and rest? Many seek
rest in pleasures, Not pleasures.
but that may be the rest and quiet of the body for a while, but not of the
soul: at length follows the companion of this pleasure, grief, and mourning.

5 Pleasures belong to this life: but the soul is not created for this life's
sake, because it is constrained to go out by death. How therefore can she find
rest in pleasures? Not without Christ
without Christ there is no rest of the soul, but what manner of life was the
life of Christ? Christ life.
The greatest grief from the first time of his Nativity, even to his death.

No pleasure.
6 So he that could truly esteem of all things would teach us, what we were
to think of pleasure. Not honors.
Many seek rest in honors: but they are wretched which are constrained to
want their rest upon every change of the favor of the people. Fleeting.
Honor is a good external, and most fleeting, but that which ought to give
rest to the soul, must be in our selves. What will thou speak more of humane
praise and glory, then of the praised picture of Apelles? Consider the corner
wherein thou lie hid, how great is the proportion thereof to the whole
Province, to Europe, to the whole world, that is habitable.

7 That is the true honor which shall be bestowed hereafter of God upon his
chosen. Rest in thy end.
The rest of a thing is in the end thereof, neither does a thing rest
naturally, but after it has obtained his end and place. The end of the created
soul, is God: Which is God.
seeing it is made to the Image of God, therefore she cannot be quiet and
pacified, but in that her end, that is to say, in God.

8 As the soul is the life of the body, In life.
so God is the life of the soul: as therefore the soul lives truly, in which
God Of God.
dwells by spiritual grace: so the soul is dead, Without him dead.
which has not God dwelling in it: But what rest can there be to a dead soul?
that first death, in sins, does necessarily draw with it the second death of
damnation? Damned.


9 He therefore which cleaues firmly in love unto God, Rest not disturbed.
and cnioyes inwardly the divine consolation, outward evils cannot disturb his
rest. In sorrow he is joyful, Joyful. Rich. Secure.
in poverty rich, in the tribulations of the world secure, in worldly troubles
at tranquillity, amongst the reproaches and contumelies of men pacified,
Pacified. Ever alive
in death it self alive. He cares not for the threatenings of Tyrants: because
he feels inwardly the riches of Gods consolation.

10 In adversity he is not sad, Not sad.
because the holy Ghost does comfort him effectually within. He is not vexed in
poverty, Vexed.
because he is rich in Gods bounty. He is not troubled Troubled.
with the rebukes of men, because he enioyes the pleasures Enjoys pleasure.
of Gods honor. He cares not for the pleasure of the flesh, because he
accounts the sweetness of the Spirit The sweet spirit.
more acceptable. He seeks not the friendship of the world, because he feels
the pleasures of God, Gods pleasures.
who is kind and friendly unto him. He does not gape after the earthly
treasures, because he has his chief treasure Treasures.
laid up in heaven. He fears not death, Life.
because he lives always in God. He desires not greatly the wisdom Wisdom.
of the world, because he has the holy Ghost to teach him inwardly: the
perfect takes away that which is more imperfect. He does not fear lightnings
and tempests, burnings, and the ouerflowings of waters, the sad configurations
of the Planets, and the darknings of the Lights of heaven: because being lifted
up above nature, he relyes by faith on Christ, he lives in Christ. Lives in
Christ.


11 He is not drawn away with the inticements of the world, because he hears
in himself the sweeter voice Hears his voice
of Christ. He fears not the power of the Devil, because he feels Feels
mercy.
the mercy of God. Strength.
He is stronger which lives and ouercomes in him, then the devil which in
vain does go about to overcome him. He follows not the inticements of the
flesh, because living in the Spirit, Quickening Spirit.
he feels the riches of the Spirit: the quickening of the Spirit does mortify
and crucify the flesh.

12 He fears not the devil his accuser, because he knows Christ to be his
intercessor. Intercession.
The only Lord our God, which is blessed for ever, the Author and giver of
this rest, grant unto us this true rest of our soul.

Mihi Jesu gratia quaestus. Christ's grace my gain.

34. Meditation. Of an exercise of Faith, out of the love of Christ in the
Agony of death.
SEe, O Lord Jesus, how injurious I am to thy passion: my heart is vexed, and
my soul is very sad, because I have no works of mine own, no merits, when
notwithstanding, Christ's Passion our action.
thy passion is mine own, thy works are my merits. I am injurious to thy
passion, because whereas that is most sufficient, I do yet doubtfully seek
mine own works supplement: Wrong to seek work for supply.
now if I could find righteousness in my self, thy righteousness would
profit me nothing: or surely I should not so much desire it. Law condemns.
If I require the works of the Law, I shall be condemned out of the Law.

1 But I know that I am now no more under the Law, but under grace, I have
lived wretchedly: I have sinned, O holy Father, against heaven, neither am I
worthy to be called thy son, yet thou will not refuse to call me servant.
God calls me servant.


Christ's Passion freeth the soul.
2 I beseech thee let not the most holy fruit of thy Passion be denied me: let
not thy blood wax dry and barren, but let it bring forth fruit in freeing my
soul. Kills sin.
My sins have always lived in my flesh: let them, I beseech thee, Causes
the spirit triumph. Mortifieth the flesh.
at length dye with me. Always hitherto has my flesh had dominion over me,
at length let the spirit triumph: let my outward man be subject to rottennes
and worms, that mine inward man may come forth unto glory. Always hitherto
have I obeyed the devils suggestions, at length I beseech thee, let him be
beaten down under my feet.

3 Satan is ready, and does accuse me, but he has nothing in me. The shape of
death does affright me, but death is the end of my sins, and the beginning of
a holy life. Now at length I can perfectly please thee, O my God, now at length
I shall be confirmed in goodness and virtue.

4 The Devil terrifies me with my sins, but let him accuse him, which has
undertaken mine infirmities, whom the Lord has smitten for my sins. My debt
is very great, neither can I pay any thing thereof: but I trust in the riches
and benignity of my surety let him free me which became surety for me, let him
pay for me, which has taken my debt upon himself.

5 I have sinned, O Lord, and my sins are very great, yet I will not commit
that heinous sin to accuse thee of a lie, God acquiteth me
which testifiest by thy words and deeds, and oath, that thou art satisfied for
mine iniquities. I fear not my sins, because thou art my righteousness.
Righteousness.
I fear not mine ignorance, because thou art my wisdom. I fear not death,
because thou art my life. Life.
I fear not errors, because thou art my truth. Truth.
I fear not corruption, because thou art my resurrection. Resurrection. Joy.
I fear not the sorrows of death, because thou art my joy. I fear not the
severity of judgment, because thou art my righteousness.

6 Let the dew of thy grace and quickening consolation be instilled into my
thirsty soul. Refreshes* Comfort.
My spirit is dry, but shortly it shall rejoice in thee: my flesh languisheth,
and is withered, but shortly it shall wax green. Reuiueth.
I am constrained to undergo corruption, but thou shall deliver me out of my
corruptions, From corruption.
which have delivered me out of all evils. Thou have created me, how can the
workmanship of thine own hands be dissolved? Not to be diss^lued
Thou have redeemed me from all mine enemies, how then can death alone have
dominion over me? Nor dye.
Thou have spent thy body and thy blood, and all that thou have, yea, even
thine own self, for my salvation, how then shall death detain those things
which are redeemed with so precious a price? Thou art righteousness, Christ
Almighty to save.
O Lord Jesus, my sins shall not prevail against thee: thou art the life and
the resurrection, my death shall not prevail against thee: thou art God, Satan
shall not prevail against thee.

Gives the spirit.
7 Thou have given me the earnest of thy Spirit: therein I rejoice, therein I
triumph, and most firmly believe, nothing doubting but it shall be granted me
to enter into the marriage of the Lamb.

8 Thou art my wedding garment, Wedding Garment.
most dear husband, which I have put on in Baptism: thou shall cover my
nakedness: neither will I sow the rags of my righteousness to this precious
and most fair garment. What is the righteousness of man, but a menstruous
cloth? how then should I dare to sow that abominable ragge to the most
precious garment of thy righteousness?

9 In this garment will I appear before thy face in thy judgment, when thou
shall judge the whole world in justice and equity. In this garment will I
appear before thy face in the heavenly kingdom: this garment shall cover my
confusion and shame, Couers our shame.
that it be remembered no more for ever.

10 There will I appear glorious Glorious appearance.
and holy in thy face, and this my flesh, this my body, shall be clothed with
most blessed glory, I say, with glory everlasting, and that shall endure world
without end. Come, Lord Jesus, and he that loves thee, let him say, Come.

Christus Resipiscite clamat. Christ cries, Repent.

35. Meditation. Of the fruit of true and earnest Repentance.
THE foundation and beginning of an holy life, is wholesome repentance.
Repentance.
For where there is true repentance, there is remission Remission.
of sins: where there is remission of sins, there is the grace Grace.
of God: where is the grace of God, there is Christ: where is Christ, Christ.
there is his merit: Merit.
where is Christ's merit, there is satisfaction for sins: where is
satisfaction Satisfaction
for sins, there is righteousness: where is righteousness, Righteousness.
there is a glad and quiet conscience: Quiet conscience.
where there is tranquillity of conscience, there is the holy Ghost: Holy
Ghost.
where there is the holy Ghost, there is the whole holy Trinity: where the holy
Trinity Trinity.
is, there is life eternal: Eternal life*
therefore where there is true repentance, there is life eternal.

No repentance, no life.
1 Where true repentance is not, there is neither remission of sins, nor the
grace of God, nor Christ, nor his merit, nor satisfaction for sins, nor
righteousness, nor a quiet conscience, nor the holy Ghost, nor the holy
Trinity, nor life eternal. Defer not.


2 Why therefore do we defer our repentance? why do we cast it off till to
morrow? neither to morrow, nor true repentance, are in the power of our
strength: Account for every day.
neither must we only render an account of to morrow, but also of this day in
judgment. To morrow is not so certain as destruction to the impenitent. God
has promised forgiveness to him that repents, but he has not promised him to
morrows No promise for to morrow.
day to repent in.

3 There is no place for Christ's satisfaction, Christ's only plac^
but in that heart where there is true contrition. Our sins make a separation
betwixt God and us, as witnesses the Prophet Esaias, but by repentance we
return unto him. Acknowledge and be sorry for thy sin, so shall thou find
God pacified toward thee in his Son. I blot out thine iniquities, says the
Lord: Sins writ.
therefore our sins were written in the Court of heaven. Turn thy face from
our sins, Put out.
prays the Prophet: therefore God puts out our iniquities in his sight.

Sin separateth.
4 Be thou turned unto us, O God, prays Moses: therefore our sins do separate
us from God. Our sins have answered us, complains Isaiah: therefore they do
accuse Accuse.
us before the tribunal seat of Gods justice. Cleanse me from my sins,
prays David: therefore sin is a most filthy Filthy:
soulenesse before God. Heal my soul, because I have sinned against thee,
prays the same Prophet: therefore sin is a disease Disease.
of the soul. Whosoever shall sin against me, Blotteth us out.
I will blot him out of my book, says the Lord: therefore for our sins we
are blotted out of the book of life. Casts us away.
Cast me not from thy face, prays the Psalmist, therefore for our sins we
are cast from God. Quenches the spirit.
Take not thy holy Spirit from me: therefore the holy Ghost is cast out of the
Temple of our hearts by sins, as Bees are driven away with smoke, and Doves by
stink. Restore unto me the joy of salvation: therefore sins do vex the
mind, Vex us.
and draw out the juice of the heart. The land is infected by her inhabitants,
which have transgressed the Law, cries the Prophet Isaiah: therefore sin is
a certain contagious venom. Contagio^.
Out of the depths have I cried unto thee, O Lord, says the Psalmist:
therefore by our sins we are depressed even unto hell. Depresseth us.


6 Sometime we were dead in sin, says the Apostle: therefore sin is the
spiritual death Death.
of the soul. By deadly sin man loses God: God is infinite and
incomprehensible goodness, therefore to lose God, is infinite and
incomprehensible evil. Incomprehensible ill. Greatest. Affliction not evil.
Even as God is the greatest good, so sin is the greatest evil. Punishments
and calamities are not true evils, because many good things are drawn out of
them, nay, from thence it appears that they are also good, because they come
from the chiefest of good, that is to say, God, from whom there can proceed
nothing but good: they were in the chiefest of good, that is to say, Christ,
but the chiefest of good does not partake of that which is truly evil. But
good.
They lead also to the chiefest of good, that is to say, eternal life:
through his suffering Christ entered into his glory. And through many
tribulations, Christians do enter into life eternal.

7 The greatest evil therefore is sin, because it draws us away from the
greatest good: as much as thou drawest near to God, so much thou do recede
from sin: as much as thou do draw near to sin, so much thou do depart
from God. Draws from God
How wholesome a thing therefore is repentance, which recalls us from sin, and
reduces us to God? Sin, as great as God.
Truly so great is sin, as he is great which is offended by the sin, but
him heaven and earth cannot contain: again, so great is our repentance, as
he is great to whom we return by repentance. Repentance great Sin accused
by the conscience.


8 The sinner is accused of his own conscience, which he has polluted: of
his Creator, Creator. Fault.
whom he has offended: of the fault, wherein he has transgressed: of the
creature which he has abused: of the Devil, Abused. Devil.
whose instigation he has followed. How wholesome therefore is repentance,
Repentance freeth.
which freeth us from so great accusations?

9 Let us hasten Haste.
therefore, let us hasten to so wholesome a medicine of so great a disease. If
thou repent at thy death, Before death.
thou do not leave thy sins, but thy sins leave thee: thou shall
scarcely find any one that did truly repent him at his death, but that one
Thief on the Cross. Fourteen years have I served thee, Then rare
said Jacob to Laban: Do as Jacob with Laban.
it is time that I provide for mine own house: and then, if thou have served
this world and this life so many years, is it not fit that thou begin to
provide for thy soul? every day our flesh heaps up sins, every day Every day
therefore let the spirit wash them away by repentance. Christ dyed, Because
Christ took the^ away.
that sin should dye in us, and will we that that should live and reign in
our hearts, whose life that he might take away, the Son of God himself did
suffer death?

10 Christ does not enter into the heart of man by grace, Else Christ does not
enter. God first humbles, then lifts up.
unless John Baptist make way for him by repentance. GOD does not pour the
oil of his mercy, but into a vessel that is well contrite. The Lord does
first kill by contrition, that afterward he may quicken by the Spirit of
consolation, He does first lead us into hell, by earnest grief, that he
might bring us back out of hell by the savor of grace. Elias first heard a
great and strong wind, which ouerturned the mountains, and tore the rocks, and
after the wind, an earthquake; and after the earthquake, fire; but at length
followed the still noise of a soft air: so also terror goes before the taste
of Gods love, Sense of terror before of love.
and sadness before consolation. God does not bind up the wounds, unless thou
do first acknowledge and deplore Deplore.
them. Uncover.
God does not cover them, unless thou first detect them. He does not pardon
them, unless thou first acknowledge them. He does not justify thee, unless
thou first condemn thy self. He does not comfort thee, unless thou first
despair in thy self. God bring to pass in us this true repentance by his
Spirit. Amen.

Patientem respice Christum. Behold Christ suffering.

36. Meditation. An exercise of repentance, out of the Passion of our Lord
Christ:
BEhold, O faithful soul, the grief of him that suffers, A blessed spectacle.
the wounds of him that hangs, the torments of him that dies upon the Cross.
That head which is feared of the Angelical spirits, is pricked Head pricked.
with thick thorns: the face which is fairer then the sons of men, is
deformed Face deformed.
with the spittle of the wicked: the eyes Eyes darkened.
that are brighter then the Sun, are darkened in death: the ears Ears have
mocks.
which hear the praises of Angels, are full of the outrageous mockings, and
bitter scoffs of sinners: the mouth Mouth bittered.
that vtters heavenly sayings, and teaches the Angels, is drencht with Gall
and Vinegar: the feet, Feet nailed. Hands stretched.
at whose footstool there is worship done, are fastened with nails: the hands
which have stretched forth the heavens, are stretched forth on the Cross: the
body, Body beaten.
which is the most holy seat, and most pure habitacle of the Deity, is beaten
and wounded with the Lance, neither remained there any thing whole in him, but
his tongue, that he might pray for those that crucified him.

1 He that reigns in heaven Heavens King crucified.
with the Father, is most woefully afflicted of sinners on the Cross. God God
suffers.
dies, God suffers, GOD poures out his blood. From the greatness of the price,
esteem of the greatness of peril: Then great was our misery.
from the price of the remedy, esteem the danger of the disease. Surely, great
were the wounds which could not be healed but by the wounds of that quick and
quickening flesh: surely great was the disease, which could not be cured but by
the death of the Physician.

2 Consider, O faithful soul, Great is our Advocate Christ
the burning wrath of God, after the fall of our first Parent: his eternal and
only begotten, and only beloved Son, became an Intercessor. He made
intercession: by whom he made the heavens: And he the great Advocate of our
salvation, took the cause of us poor wretches on himself. Notwithstanding,
as yet was not his wrath turned away. Incarnate.
Our Savior put on our flesh upon him, that the glory of the Divinity being
communicated to our flesh, For us in communion Expiation.
might expiate our sinful flesh: that the medicinable force of his perfect
Justice, being communicated to our flesh, Healing.
might wipe away the venomous quality of sin, sticking in our flesh, and
that grace might be given to our flesh. Giving grace.
Notwithstanding, as yet was not his wrath turned away. He translated our
sins and the merits of our sins on himself: Takes our sins. Suffered.
his body is bound, beaten, wounded, nailed, crucified, laid down into the
Sepulcher: Buried. Bloodshed.
the blood, like unto dew, flows most abundantly through all his members as he
suffers: his most holy Soul Sad soul.
is sad beyond measure: nay, he is sad even unto death: To death.
he is subject to the pains of hell. Hell.
The eternal Son of God cries out, Cries.
that he is forsaken of God. He poures out such abundance of bloody sweat:
Sweat.
he feels so great anguish, Anguish.
that he wants the comfort of an Angel, which comforts all the Angels: Death.
he dies, which is the giver of life to all the living.

3 What shall be done in a dry tree, if this be done in a green? what shall
be done to sinners, All due to us sinners.
if this be done with him that is just and holy? More due.
how shall he punish the sins of offenders, which was so fierce toward him
that had not offended? how shall he endure that perpetually in his servants,
which he punished so grievously in his Son? what shall they suffer whom he
has reprobated, if he suffer so great things whom he only loves? If Christ
went not out without a scourge, that came in without sin, of how many
scourges are they worthy, which come into the World with sin, live in sin,
and go out with sin? The servant rejoices while the son sorrows grievously
for his fault: Wonderful love.
the servant heaps up the wrath of his Lord, whiles the Son labors so much
for the appeasing and pacifying of the wrath of his Father. Gods wrath feared.
O the infinite anger of God! O his unspeakable wrath! O the inestimable rigor
of his justice! he that is so fierce against his only and most beloved Son,
which partakes of his own essence; not for any fault of his, but because he
makes intercession for his servant, what will he do to that servant, that
perseuers carelessly in sins and offenses?

4 Let the servant fear Then fear servant.
and tremble, and be sad for his own deserts, when the Son is punished for
the merits that are not his. Let the servant fear which does not cease to
sin, Sinner.
when the Son endures so much for sin. Let the creature Creature.
fear, which has crucified his Creator: let the servant fear, which has
slain his Lord. Let the wicked Wicked.
and sinner fear, which has so afflicted the holy and just*

5 Let us hear him crying out most clearly: let us hear him weeping: he
cries from the cross: See man, what I suffer for thee: I cry unto thee,
because I dye for thee: see the pains with which I am punished: see the nails
with which I am pierst: there is no grief like to my grief: when mine outward
grief is so great, mine inward plaint is more grievous, when I find thee so
ungrateful. Have pity, have pity upon us, thou that only do take pity,
and turn our stony hearts unto thee. Let every several branch of thy bitter
passion, destroy a several root of sin in our naughty hearts.

Crux Christi nostra corona est. Christ's Cross out crown.

37. Meditation. A consolation of the penitent, out of the Passion of Christ:
taken out of Anselme especially.
ALl the glory of the godly Godly glory.
is in the ignominy of our Lords Passion All the rest Rest.
of the godly is in the wounds of our Savior: Life in Christ.
our life is in his death, our glory in his exaltation How great is thy mercy,
O heavenly Father, Almighty God? I could offend thee by my self, but I could
not pacify thee toward me by my self: therefore thou do reconcile
Reconciliation.
me to thy self in Christ.

1 See therefore, O holy God, the sacrament of his flesh, and remit Remit.
unto me the guilt of my flesh. Behold what the good Son has suffered, and
forget Forget.
what thy evil servant has committed. My flesh has provoked thee to anger:
but I beseech thee, let the flesh of Christ bend thee to mercy. Incline thy
mercy
Great is that which I have deserved by mine iniquity but far greater is
that which my Redeemer has deserved by his piety. To desert.
Great is mine unrighteousness, but much greater is my Redeemers
righteousness. Righteousness.
For by how much God is higher then man so much my wickedness is inferior to
his goodness, as in quality, so also in quantity.

2 All that I am by condition is thine, grant also that by love it may be all
thine. Let me be thine.
Thou that make me to ask, make me also to receive. To receive.
Thou give unto me to seek grant me also to find. Find.
Thou teach me to knock, open therefore unto me that knocks. Of thee have
I to desire, Enter.
of thee also let me have the complement of my desire: Have my desire.
thou have given me to will, To will.
give me also to do thy will. O holy God, O just Judge, if my sins be
covered, they are incurable: if they be seen, they are detestable: they
afflict me with grief, but they do more terrify me with fear. I beseech
thee, withhold not so true mercy, where thou do acknowledge so true misery.
Show mercy to true misery.
Thou find here great sin, let thy grace as yet be greater and more full.
O holy Father, I beseech thee pour not forth upon me thy wrath, Not wrath.
seeing for my sins thou have already smitten thine own Son. Holy Jesus,
Jesus free me.
free me from the wrath of God, which have borne it upon thee for me on the
Cross. O holy Spirit, protect me Holy spirit protect me.
with thy consolation against the wrath of God, which have preached mercy to
the contrite and penitent in the Gospel.

O holy God, O just Judge, I find no place No place else safe.
into which I can fly from the face of thine anger. If I climb up into
heaven, Heaven.
thou art there, if I go down into Hell, Hell.
thou art there also, if I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the
uttermost part of the Sea, Sea.
there also thine hand will lead, and thy right hand will lay hold on me. I
will fly therefore unto Christ, Christ safe
and will hide me in his wounds. By his wounds.
O merciful God, behold the body of thy Son, wounded on every part, with
wounds, and behold not the wounds of my sin. Let the blood Blood.
of thy Son wash me from all the spots of my sin. Hear his most ardent
prayers Prayers.
offered unto thee for the salvation of thine elect.

Life a terror.
4 O holy Ghost, O just judge, my life does terrify me, for being diligently
sifted, it appears wholly to be either sin or barrenness: and if any fruit
be seen in it, so it is, that it is either fained, or imperfect, or some ways
corrupted, that it can either not please, or else that it does altogether
displease thine eyes. Surely my whole life is either in sin, and so damnable:
or else unfruitful, and so contemptible: but why do I separate unfruitful from
damnable? Damnable.
for if it be unfruitful, it is damnable: for every tree that brings not
forth good fruit, shall be cast into the fire: not only that tree that brings
forth evil fruit shall be cast into the fire, but that also which brings forth
no fruit.

5 The Goats Goats ^errible.
do affright me, that stand at the left hand of the Judge: not because they
have done any evil, For omission.
but because they have done no good, they have not given meat to the hungry,
nor drink to the thirsty.

6 O therefore dry and unprofitable wood, and worthy of eternal fire: what
will thou answer in that day, when an account Account feareful^.
shall be required of thee, even to the twinkling of an eye, of all the time
of life that God has lent thee, how it has been spent by thee? an hair of
thine head shall not perish, nor a moment of thy time. O woeful streights!
Woeful streights.
on this side of thee shall be thy sins Sin.
accusing, on that side, justice Justice.
terrifying, under thee the horrible pit of hell Hell.
gaping, above thee, the angry Judge Judge.
threatening, within thee, thy conscience Conscience.
burning, without thee, the world World.
flaming. The just shall scarce be saved, the sinner taken after this sort,
whither shall he turn him? to lie hid will be impossible; to appear will be
intolerable.

7 Whence therefore is the salvation of my soul? whence is the counsel? Jesus
the counselor
who is it which is called the Angel of the great Counsel? It is even Jesus
himself, the same is the Judge, between whose hands I tremble. Take heart,
Co^forter.
O my soul, despair not. Hope in him whom thou fear, fly to him whom thou
have forsaken. O Jesus Christ, for this thy Name, do unto me according to thy
Name, look upon me poor wretch, calling upon thy Name. If thou will admit
me into the most broad bosom of thy mercy, His bosom large.
it will not be the narrower for me. It is true, O Lord, my conscience has
deserved damnation, and my repentance is not sufficient for satisfaction: but
it is certain that thy mercy does exceed all trangression. In thee, O Lord, do
I put my trust, let me not be confounded for ever.

Friday, Evening Prayer.
THou (O Lord) which have taught us to pray, have commanded us not to pray
only for our selves, but minding us in the first words of that prayer which
thy Son has taught us, of a common Father, have showed that we are to
commend others to thy piety in our prayers, as well as our selves. Wherefore as
a feeling member of that body whereof thy Son Jesus Christ is Head, I beseech
thee that thy goodness may be plentifully showed on thine own Vineyard, thy
Church, the inheritance which thou have purchased to thy self. Water it (O
Lord) with abundance of rain from Heaven, take out of it all things that
offend, and commit abomination; bless it universally, with all spiritual
blessings: but more especially I do beseech thee, to look on the members
thereof, in these our kingdoms, and grant that here thy Word having free
passage amongst us, many Sons and Daughters may thereby be begotten unto
thee. And because as in the health and good disposition of the body, the soul
can better show forth her force, and use her faculties; so also in the peace
and prosperity of the Commonweal, the Church will also the better flourish.
Bless Lord, and prosper the government established here amongst us: bless the
King, and his Progeny, with the whole Council, Clergy, Nobility, Gentry, and
Commons of this Land, and make these kingdoms as a City or a Country, that is
at unity in it self, which being safe from all homebred enemies, may the
better be defended from all foreign invasion, and power of the Aliants.
Look, Lord, I pray thee, on the distress and affliction of all poor people,
that are either under pressure of any want, sickness, prison, infamy, or under
any other kind of trouble or danger; be merciful unto them, and deliver them,
and give them, for what they want here of outward comforts, a full measure of
inward consolations. Behold with the eye of pity, all men of a wounded heart,
and broken spirit; bring home to thy fold all sheep that wander and go astray:
forgive mine enemies and persecuters, recompense their good plentifully to the
souls of my Benefactours: deal graciously with those of mine own flesh, and
of my family; and confirm me O Lord, in all goodness, and keep me safe this
night, and the whole course of my life from all dangers, for thy dear Sons
sake, Christ Jesus. Amen.

Saturday, Morning Prayer.
While I bear about me this body of clay, this body of death, I am daily in
danger for my body, lest the things from within or without me, offend my
health, and be to me an occasion of ruin: as well plenty as penury may hurt
me, as well that which I have, as that which I want may annoy me: as well
labor as ease may destroy me. What from the beasts of the field, what from the
sons of men set on fire, what from the violence of fire, what from the
tempests, infectio^, unseasonableness of the air, drought and moisture, heat
and cold; what from the depth and raging of the waters; what from the pits and
praecipices of the earth, I am daily in hazard of breaking and spilling this
vial of blood. The pestilence consuming with a whole band of other diseases,
the war wasting, and sword devouring, famine pinching, and making to pine
away, are three maine enemies of my bodily life. I may say of the dangers of my
body, as David of the number of his enemies, they are mo then the hairs of my
head. Seeing then I walk in the midst of so many perils, what shall be my
security and defense against all inconveniences, fears and hurts, but the
shadow of thy merciful wings (O Lord) under which I do beseech thee, to hide
me this day, and all the days of my life, that neither the shape of death
affright me, nor any evil come near to hurt me, but that I may be preserved
as in soul, so in body, from all things that may annoy me: which thing I
beseech thee to grant unto me, for thy dear Sons sake, Christ Jesus. Amen.

Pietas sapientia summa est. Godliness chiefest wisdom.

38. Meditation. Of general rules to live godly.
Learn to dye.
EVery day thou drawest more ^eare to death to judgment, and eternity: think
therefore every day how thou may stand in the severe discussing of death and
judgment: And live.
and how thou may live for ever. We must have a straight care of all our
thoughts, Look to thoughts.
words, and deeds, because hereafter a strict account must be rendered of all
our thoughts, words, and deeds. Think in the evening, that death Death
imminent.
hangs over thy head this night: think in the morning, Certain.
that death hangs over thy head this day. Defer not thy conversion and good
work till to morrow, because to morrow is uncertain, To morrow uncertain.
but death that hangs over thy head is always certain. Nothing is a greater
adversary to piety, Delay, foe to piety.
then deferring. If thou contemnest the inward calling of the holy Ghost, To
the holy Ghost.
thou shall never come to true conversion. Defer not thy conversion and good
deeds to thine age: but offer unto God the flower of thy youth. Give God thy
youth.
Age is uncertain to a young man, bot certain destruction is prepared for an
impenitent young man: Impenitent youth
no age is more fit for the service of God then youth, that flourishes in
strength both of body and mind.

1 Thou ought to undertake an evil action for no man's favor: Respect no
man's favor.
for not that man, but God sometimes shall judge thy life: therefore resolve
that no favor of men is to be preferred before the favor of God. In the way
of the Lord, we do either go forward, or go backward, examine Examine thy
mending.
thy life therefore every day, whether in the study of godliness, thou be
proficient, or deficient.

2 To stand still Stand not still.
in the way of the Lord, is to go backward: let it not delight thee therefore
to stand still in the course of piety, but study always to walk in the way of
the Lord. In thy conversation Wise conversation to God.
be kind to all, grievous to none, familiar to few: to Godward live godly, to
thy self Thy self.
chastely, to thy neighbor justly: use thy friend Friend.
with favor, thine enemy Enemy.
with patience, all with benevolence, those whom thou can with beneficence:
dye daily Dye daily.
in thy life to thy self, and to thy vices, so in death thou shall live unto
God.

3 Let mercy appear in thy affection, Be gentle.
benignity in thy countenance, humility in thy habit, modesty in thy
dwelling, patience in thy tribulation. Always think of three things that are
past: Three things past.
the evil that thou have committed, Ill.
the good Good:
that thou have omitted, the time Time.
that thou have lost. Always think of three things present, Three present.
the shortness of this life present, the difficulty to be saved, Short life:
the small number Number.
of those that are to be saved. Salvation.
Always think of three things to come death, Three to come, Death.
then which nothing is more horrible, judgment Judgment.
then which nothing is more terrible: the pains of hell, Hell.
then which, nothing is more intolerable.

Let day mend day.
4 Let thy evening prayers amend the sins of the day that is past: let the
last day of the week amend the faults of the days that went before. Think in
the evening, how many have been cast headlong into hell that day: and give God
thanks that he has granted thee a time of repentance.

5 Three things are above Three above.
thee, of which let the remembrance never depart from thee. The eye Eye.
that sees all, the ear Ear.
that hears all, and the books Books.
into which all things are written. God has communicated himself wholly unto
thee, communicate thy self also wholly unto thy neighbor: God to thee, thou
to thy neighbor
that is the best life which does serve wholly for others. To all sorts.
Show to thy superior obedience and reverence, to thine equal counsel and
help, to thine inferior keeping and discipline.

6 Let thy body be subject to thy mind, Order.
and thy mind unto God. Respect.
Bewail thine evils that are past, lightly esteem the good things present,
and desire the good things to come, with the whole desire of thy heart.

7 Remember Remember
thy sin, that thou may grieve for it: remember death, that thou may
cease from it: remember Gods justice, that thou may fear: remember Gods
mercy, that thou do not despair. As much as thou can, withdraw thy self
from the world, Go from the world to God.
and addict thy self wholly to the service of God. Think always that
chastity is in danger Virtues in danger.
in delights; humility, in riches, piety, in worldly affairs. Desire to
pelase none but Christ, Please Christ.
fear to displease none but Christ. Always pray Pray.
God that he command what he will, and give what he commands: that he hide
that which is done, that he govern that which is to come. Petitions. No
Hypocrite.
Such a one as thou will seem to be, such a one also ought thou to be, for
God judges not according to the appearance, but according to the truth.

8 In words, Words*
take heed of babbling, because the judgment requires an account of every vain
word: thy works, Works.
whatsoever they be, do not pass away, but are cast as certain seeds of
eternity: if thou sow in the flesh, of the flesh thou shall reap corruption:
if thou sow in the spirit, of the spirit thou shall reap the reward of
eternal retribution. The honors Honors, etc. follow not.
of the world will not follow thee after death, nor the heaps of riches:
pleasures will not follow thee, nor the vanities of the world: but after the
last date of thy life, all thy works Works.
will follow thee,

9 Such therefore as thou will be in judgment, such appear Appear well.
to day in the sight of God. Esteem not of the things that thou have, but
rather esteem Esteem aright.
of the things that thou have not. Be not proud for that which is given thee,
but rather be humbled Humble.
for that which is denied thee: learn to live, Live.
while as yet thou may live. Here work
In this life eternal life is either gotten or lost, after death there
remains no time of working, but there begins the time of recompense: The
recompense
in the life to come working is not looked for, but the retribution of works.

10 Let holy meditation Meditation.
bring forth in thee knowledge; Knowledge.
knowledge compunction; Compunction.
compunction devotion; Devotion.
let devotion make prayer. Prayer.
A great good for the peace of the heart, is the silence Silence*
of the mouth. By how much the more thou shall be separated Separated.
from the world, by so much the more shall thou be acceptable unto God.
Whatsoever thou desire to have ask it of God, Ask of God. Give all to God.
whatsoever thou have, attribute it unto God: he is not worthy of the things
that are to be given, which does not give thanks for the things that are given,
the course of graces cease, where there is not a recourse of thanks.

All to the best.
11 Whatsoever happens unto thee, turn it into good: as often as prosperity
Prosperity.
happens unto thee, think that there is ministered unto thee matter of blessing
and praising: as often as adversity Adversity:
befalls thee, think that it is an admonition of repentance and conversion.
Show the force of thy power in helping, the force of thy wisdom in teaching,
All to edification. Not hurt.
the force of thy riches in doing good. Let not adversity break thee, neither
let prosperity lift thee up. Let Christ be the scope Scope.
of thy life, whom follow in the way, that thou may attain him in thy
country.

12 In all things let this be thy greatest care, profound humility, and
ardent charity. Charity.
Let charity lift up thy heart unto God, that thou may cleave unto him: let
humility depresse thy heart, Humility. Esteem God a Father. Lord.
lest thou be proud. Esteem God a Father in clemency, a Lord in discipline: a
Father in mild command, a Lord in severe: love him as a Father, godlily: fear
him as a Lord necessarily: love him because he will have mercy: fear him
because he will not sin: fear the Lord, and hope in him: acknowledge thy
misery, and proclaim his grace. O God which have given unto us to will, grant
us also to perform thy will.

Domino iungaris amore. Be joined to God by love.

39. Meditation. Of loving God only.
God the true good.
LIft up thy self, O faithful soul, and love that chiefest good, in which are
all things that are good, without which there is no other true good. No
creature can exatiate our will, because no creature has in it perfect, but
only Only.
the participated good. A certain little stream of goodness is derived from
the divinity to it, but the fountain And fountain.
always abides in God, wherefore then leaving the fountain, will we follow
these little streams? all the goodness that is in the creatures, is but a
certain image and shadow of that perfect goodness which is in God, Perfection
nay, which God himself is. Wherefore catching at the shadow, Body.
will we forsake the thing it self? The Dove which was sent out of the arc of
Noah, could not on the sliding water find where her foot might rest: so our
soul, in the number of all things under the Moon, All else fragile.
cannot find any thing which can fully replenish her desire, by reason of
their great inconstancy and fragilitie.

1 Does not he do injury to himself, which loves any thing below his own
worth? Below our worth.
But now our soul is more noble then all the Creatures, because it is redeemed
by the Passion and death of Christ.

2 Wherefore then will it love the creatures? is it not contrary to the
Majesty into which God has exalted it? whatsoever we love, Causes of Love.
we love it either for the might, Might.
or for the wisdom, Wisdom
or for the beauty: Beauty.
but what is mightier then God? what is wiser then God? what is more full of
beauty then God? In a l God excels.
all the might and power of worldly kings is from him, and under him: all the
wisdom of men compared to Gods wisdom, is but foolishness: all the beauty
of the creatures compared to that of God, is but deformity.

3 If some most mighty King A mighty king offers marriage.
should deal by his Ambassadors about marrying with a Virgin of low estate and
condition, should not that Virgin do foolishly, if passing by that most potent
king, she should adhere to the poor ambassadors and Ministers of the king? so
God by all that beauty of the creatures would call us unto himself, would
stir us up to the love of himself: Cleave not to messengers.
why then does our soul, whom her Husband Christ desires, cleave unto the
creatures which are as the Ambassadors of this spiritual marriage? the
creatures themselves cry, Which advise us better.
Why do you cleave unto us? why do you put the end of your desire in us? we
cannot fill your appetite: go to the Creator of us both. There can no
reciprocke love be hoped for from the Creatures: no love also begun toward us
from the creature, God loves first.
but God which is love it self, cannot choose but love him that loves him:
nay, with his love he preuents all our desires, all our love. How much
therefore is he to be loved, which loved us so much first of all? Before we
were.
he loved us when as yet we were not: for it is of the love of God, that we are
borne into this world.

4 He loved us when we were his enemies: When enemies.
for it is of the mercy and love of God, that he sent his Son the Redeemer.
He loved us when we were fallen into sins: Fallen.
for it is of the love of God, that he does not forthwith deliver us unto death
if we sin, but expect^ our conversion.

Translateth us.
5 It is the love of God, that besides our deserving, yea, contrary to our
deserving, he does translate us to the heavenly habitations. Love brings
knowledge.
Without the love of God thou shall never come to the saving knowledge of him:
without the love of God, all knowledge is unprofitable, nay, it is hurtful.
Wherefore does love exceed the knowledge of all mysteries? because this is
also in the Devils, that but in the godly. Misery not to love God.
Why is the Devil most unhappy? because he cannot love the chiefest good.
Wherefore on the other side, Happy love.
is God most happy and most blessed? because he loves all things, he is
delighted in all his works.

6 Why is the love of God in this life not perfect in us? Love as knowledge in
part.
because we love but as much as we know: but in this life we know only in
part, and in a dark saying: in the other life we shall be perfectly Or
perfect
blessed, because we shall love God perfectly: we shall love him perfectly,
because we shall know him perfectly.

7 No man can have hope of the perfect love of GOD in the other World, Begin
here.
that does not begin to love him in this world: the kingdom of God must begin
in the heart of a man in this life, otherwise it shall not be consummate in
the life to come. Without the love of God there is no desire of eternal life,
Love desires eternity.
how then can he partake of the greatest good which does not love? which does
not seek? which does not desire? Such as thy love is, such art thou thy self,
because thy love does change thee Love changes thee.
into it self. Love is the greatest bond, because the lover and the thing
beloved are made one. To be one.
What has conjoined God the most just, and forlorn sinners? what has joined
these things together, so infinitely distant between themselves? infinite
love. Yet lest the justice of God should be impaired, With God
the infinite price of Christ did come between. What as yet does join
together God the Creator, and the faithful soul created, things infinitely
distant? Love. By Christ to the highest degree.
In the life eternal we shall be joined in the highest degree to God: why?
because we shall love him in the highest degree.

8 Love does unite and change: if thou love carnal things, thou art carnal:
if thou love the world, thou shall become worldly: but flesh and blood shall
not inherit the kingdom of God.

9 If thou love God and heavenly things, To become heavenly.
thou shall become heavenly. The love of God is the chariot of Elias Elias
chariot.
ascending into heaven. The love of God is the pleasure of the mind, the
Paradise of the soul, Benefits of love.
it excludes the world, it ouercomes the devil, it shuts hell, it opens
heaven. The love of God is that seal Seal of the elect.
with which God does mark the elect and believing. God in the last judgment
will acknowledge none for his, which is not marked with this seal. For faith
it self is not the only true cause of our righteousness and salvation,
unless it show forth it self by love. There is no true faith, unless there
be a firm confidence: there is no firm confidence Gives confidence.
without the love of God: the benefit is not acknowledged for which we give
not thanks* we give not thanks to him whom we do not love.

Faiths fruit.
10 If therefore thy faith be true, it will acknowledge the benefit of Christ
thy Redeemer, it will acknowledge, and it will give thanks: it will give
thanks, and it will love.

11 The love of God is the life and rest of our soul: Love of God, the souls
life.
when the soul departs by death, the life of the body dies: when God departs
from our souls through sin, In us.
the life of the soul dies. Again, God dwells by faith in our hearts, he
dwells by love in our soul, because the love of God is poured out into the
hearts of the elect by the holy Ghost. There is no tranquillity of the soul,
Love of the world troubles it.
without the love of God: the world and the devil are her greatest
perturbation, but God is her greatest rest. There is no peace of conscience,
but in those that are justified by faith: there is no true love of God, but in
them which are affected with a filial confidence Filial confidence.
in God. Therefore let there dye in us the love of our selves, the love of the
world, the love of the creatures: that there may live in us the love of God,
which may begin in us in this world, and may be perfected in that to come.

Sit vitae regula Christus. Christ's life be thy lives rule.

40 Meditation. Of the holy imitation of the life of Christ.
THe holy life of Christ is the most perfect pattern Perfect pattern.
of Virtues: every action of Christ is also our instruction. Many would attain
Christ, but they refuse to follow him: they would enjoy Christ, but they would
not imitate him. Learn of me, because I am meek and humble in heart, For
disciples.
says our Savior to his Disciples: unless thou will be the disciple of
Christ, thou shall never be true Christian.

1 Let not only the passion of Christ be thy merit; but let also the action of
Christ be the example of thy life. Thy beloved is white and ruddy: be thou
also red with the aspersion of the blood of Christ, and white with the
imitation of the life of Christ.

2 How do thou love Christ truly, Imitation Of holy life.
if thou love not his holy life? If ye love me, says our Savior, keep my
precepts. He therefore that keeps not his commandments, does not love him.
The holy life of Christ is a perfect rule of our life. One only rule of the
life of Christ, is infinitely to be preferred before all the rules of men
whatsoever.

3 If thou will be the adoptiue son of God, As the Sons
see how that only begotten Son had his conversation. If thou will be a
coheire Coheires.
of Christ, thou ought also to be the imitator of Christ. He that will
live with vices, Vice*
has given himself over to the obedience of the Devil. But he that will be
with the Devil, how can he also be with Christ? To love sins and vices,
Loves the devil.
is to love the devil, because all sins are of the devil: how therefore can
he be a true lover of Christ, Not Christ.
which is a lover of the devil? To love God, is to love an holy life, Holy
life. Loves God.
because all holy life is from God. How therefore can he be a lover of God,
which is not a lover of an holy life? The trial of love is the showing forth of
the work: it is the property of true love to obey him that is beloved, Obeys
him.
to will the same with him that is beloved, to think the same things with him
that is beloved. If therefore thou love Christ truly, thou will show thy
self obedient to his commandments, thou will love an holy life with him: and
being renewed in the spirit of thy mind, thou will think on heavenly things.

4 Eternal life is in the knowledge of Christ, Without love, no virtue.
but he that loves not Christ, does also not know him: he which loves not
humility, chastity, meekness, temperance, charity, does not also love Christ:
because the life of Christ was no other thing, but humility, chastity,
meekness, temperance, charity. Christ says, that he does not know them which
do not fulfill the will of his Father: therefore also they know not Christ, No
knowledge of Christ. Christ's Spirit fruitful.
which do not the will of the heavenly Father.

5 But what is the will of the Father? Even our sanctification, says the
Apostle. He is not Christ's, which has not the spirit of Christ: but
wheresoever the holy Ghost is, there he is present with his gifts and fruits.
But what are the fruits of the Spirit? Love, joy, peace, lenity, benignity,
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance. Even as the holy Ghost did rest upon
Christ, Upon the faithful.
so he does also rest upon al those which are in Christ by true faith: because
the Spouse of Christ does run in the smell of the ointments of Christ.

Who knit in spirit.
6 He which cleaves to the Lord, is one spirit with him. Even as the carnal
knot of the man and wife, makes of them one flesh: so the spiritual
conjunction of Christ and the faithful soul, makes of them one spirit.

7 But where there is one spirit, there is the same will: where is the same
will, there are also the same actions. Are conformed to him.
He therefore which does not conform his life to the life of Christ, is
convinced that he neither cleaues unto the Lord, nor has the Spirit of Christ.
As is meet
Is it not meet and just, that all our life be made conformable unto him,
which out of his love has conformed himself wholly unto us? God manifesting
himself in the flesh, In the flesh.
has set forth unto us the example of an holy life, lest any one refusing an
holy life, should betake himself to the excuse of the flesh. True pleasure.
No life is more pleasant and quiet then Christ's life, because Christ is true
God: But what is more pleasant, or more full of tranquillity then God, as who
is the chiefest good? And good.
the life of the world brings short joy, but draws with it eternal sadness.

8 To whomsoever thou conformest thy self in thy life, Like here goes to like
at last.
to him also thou shall be conformed in the Resurrection. If thou beginnest
here to conform thy self to the life of Christ, Christ.
thou shall also more fully be conformed unto him in the Resurrection: if thou
conform thy self to the devil by heinous wickedness, Or the devil.
in the Resurrection thou shall be conformed unto him by grievous torments:

9 He which will follow me, let him deny himself, Deny thy self.
says our Savior, and let him take up his cross daily. If in this life thou
deny thy self, Christ will acknowledge thee Honor thee.
Christ in the judgment will acknowledge thee to be his. If for Christ in this
life thou renounce thine own honor, thine own love, thine own will, Christ
in the life to come, will make thee partaker of his honor, of his love, of his
will. If in this life thou art partaker (Crucis) of the Cross, in the life to
come thou shall be partaker (aeternae lucis) of the eternal light. Give thee
light.
If in this life thou art partaker of tribulation, in the life to come thou
shall be partaker of the consolation: if in this life thou art partaker of
persecution, in the life to come, Consolation.
thou shall be partaker of the most large retribution.

10 He that confesses Confesses thee.
me in this world, says Christ, I will also confess him before my Father
which is in heaven. Keeping doctrine and life.
But we ought to confess Christ, not only in the profession of doctrine, but
also in the conformity of life, so at length he shall acknowledge us for his in
judgment. Whosoever shall deny me before men, Else deny.
I will also deny him before my Father which is in heaven.

11 Christ is not only denied in words, His denyers.
but also much more in a wicked life. Him therefore which denies Christ in his
deeds in this world, will Christ deny in deeds in the judgment. He is not a
Christian, which has not the true faith of Christ: but true faith does graft
us into Christ the spiritual Vine, as it were branches: every branch in Christ
that bears not fruit, And fruitless branches.
the heavenly Husbandman takes away: but he which abides in Christ, and in whom
Christ dwells by faith, this man brings forth much fruit. That branch is not in
the Vine, which does not draw nourishment out of the Vine: Which are not in him
that soul is not in Christ by faith, which draws not the spiritual moisture
of charity out of Christ by faith. Conform us to thy life, O good Jesus, in
this world, that we may be fully conformed unto it in the world to come. Amen.

Saturday Noone.
Psalm. 91.11.
Give thine Angels charge over me, O Lord, to keep me in all my ways.

Men's recti conscia vita est. A good conscience is life.

41 Meditation. Of the pureness of the Conscience.
IN all thy actions have the greatest care of thy conscience: Conscience.
If the Devil entice thee to any sin, fear the inward judgment of thy
conscience. If thou fear to sin in the presence of other men, Use.
much more let thine own conscience recall thee from sin: the inward
testimony is of greater force then the outward. Although therefore thy sins
escape the accusation of all men, Force.
yet they can never escape the inward testimony Testimony
of thy conscience. Conscience shall be amongst those Books, A book. Reu.
20. 1 Book of knowledge.
which the Apocalypse does testify that they shall be hereafter opened in
judgment. The first is the Book of Gods al-knowledge, in which shall shine
forth manifestly the deeds, the words, the thoughts of all men whatsoever. 2.
Of life.
The second Book is Christ, which is the Book of Life. In this whosoever
shall be found written by true faith, he shall be conveyed of the Angels into
the Court of heaven. The third Book is the Scripture, 3 Scripture.
according to the rule whereof our faith and works shall be judged: The word
which I have spoken, says our Savior, shall judge them in the last day. The
fourth Book contains the outward testimonies of the poor, 4. Poor. Luke 16.
which in the day of judgment shall receive us into the everlasting
habitations. The fifth Book contains the inward testimony of our conscience,
5. Conscience.
because our conscience is the Book in which all our sins are written: the
Conscience is a great volume, A great volume.
in which all things are written with the pensill of truth. The damned shall
not be able to deny their sins in judgment, because they shall be convinced
Conuincing.
by the testimony of their own conscience. From which no flying.
They shall not be able to fly from the accusation of their sins, because
the tribunal of their conscience is within them.

1 A pure Conscience is the most clear looking-glass A looking-glass.
of the soul, in which it does behold it self and God: an vncleance sight
cannot behold the brightness of the true light. Hence says our Savior;
Blessed are the pure in heart, because they shall see God.

2 As the fair and clean face of man is acceptable Accepted.
to the sight: so a pure and clean conscience is accepted before the eyes of
God, but a putrified conscience begets the neuer-dying worms. Worms begot. To
be strangled.
Therefore in this life present we must feel and strangle the worm of
conscience, and not cherish it to immortality.

Conscience controlled.
3 To amend this Book, all the other were invented. What profits great science,
if there be an impure conscience? Thou shall be judged when the time comes,
before the Throne of GOD, By it judged.
not out of the Book of Science, but out of the Book of Conscience. If thou will write this book aright, Make it by the book of life, Christ. By
conformity.
write it according to the example of the Book of life, the book of life is
Christ: let the profession of thy faith be conformed to the rule of the
doctrine of Christ: let the leading of thy life be conformed to the rule of the
life of Christ.

4 Thy conscience will be good, Good.
if it has pureness in thy heart, truth in thy mouth, and honesty in thy
actions. Use it a light.
Use thy conscience for a light in all thy actions: for it will thoroughly show
what are the good actions in thy life, and which are the bad. Fly this
judgment Fly it in judgment
of Conscience, in which one and the same is the guilty, the plantiffe in Law,
the witness, the judge, the torturer, the prison, the whip, the executioner
and hangman. No escape.
What escaping can there be here, where the same that accuses is the
witness, and nothing can be hidden from him that judges? Else no profit.
what profits it thee, if all praise thee, and thy Conscience accuse thee?
what can it hurt thee, Hurt.
if all derogate from thee, and thy Conscience alone defend thee? This judge
alone is sufficient for every man to accuse him, Sufficient.
to judge him, to condemn him. This is an vncorrupt Vncorrupt.
Judge, neither can he be won with prayers, nor corrupted with gifts.
Whither so ever thou go, wheresoever thou art, Present.
thy conscience is always with thee, bearing with it, Register.
whatsoever thou have put into it, whether it be good or evil. This keeps
for a man, Remembrancer.
and restores to him when he is dead the charge which it received to be kept.
So they of a man's own house, are his enemies indeed; so in thine own house,
and of thine own Family, thou have thine accusers, Accuser.
obseruers, torturers. What profits it to live in the plenty of all
abundance, and to be tormented with the scourge Scourge.
of Conscience? the fountain of man's felicity, The fountain within.
and misery is in the very mind. What does it profit him that is afflicted
with a burning Fever, to be placed in a golden Bed? what does it profit him
that is tormented with the Firebrands of his conscience, to rejoice in the
abundance of outward felicity? As great a care Care.
as thou have of eternal salvation, so great also let thy care be of
conscience: for when a good conscience For good conscience.
is lost, faith is lost: when faith is lost, the grace of God is lost: when the
grace of God is lost, Greatest loss.
how can we hope for eternal life? Such as is the testimony of thy conscience,
such a judgment shall thou expect from Christ. The sinners, when none accuse
them, or bring any thing into the midst against them, they themselves shall
be made their own accusers. Self accusing.


5 As a drunken man, when he swils in much Wine, feels no hurt of the wine,
but afterward when he is raised up from his drowsinesse and sleeping, Sin
not at first felt.
he feels the discommodities of drunkenness: so sin also, until it be
finished, does darken the mind, and as it were a thick cloud, does shadow the
brightness of true judgment: but then at length the conscience rises up,
Gnaweth at last.
and gnaws more grievously then any accuser.

6 There are three judgments, Three judgments.
the judgment of the world, World.
the judgment of thy self, Thy self.
and the judgment of God. But as thou can not escape the judgment of God,
God.
so also thou can not escape No escape.
the judgment of thy self, although sometime thou escape the judgment of the
world. No walls do hinder, that this witness should not see thine actions.
What excuse shall be able to defend thee, No defense.
when the inward accusation does condemn thee? The peace of conscience is the
beginning of life eternal: thou shall take more true and pleasant joy True joy
of a good conscience in distress, then of a bad conscience amongst all
worldly delights: against all the backbiting of ill-willers thou may
confidently Confidence.
turn the excuse of conscience. Ask thy self of thy self, because thou
know thy self far better then any other man. In the last judgment what
will other men's false praises avail thee, or what will other men's false
backbitings hurt thee? thou shall stand or fall to Gods or thine own
judgment. Thou shall not stand or fall Stand or fall by thy conscience.
Eternal.
to other men's testimony. The conscience never shall end, even as the soul
never has end. The joys of the saved shall endure so long, to lift them up on
high in Gods favor, as the defense of a good conscience does last. The pains
of hell In hell.
shall so long press down the damned, as the accusation of conscience shall
endure. No outward fire does so greatly afflict the body, as this inward flame
does grievously Most grievously.
burn the soul. Eternal is the soul which is burned: eternal is the fire
of conscience which burns. No outward scourges are so grievous to the body,
as these inward wounds are tormenting to the soul. Fly therefore the guilt
Fly guilt.
of sin, that thou may escape the torment of conscience. Blot out thy
sins Blot sin
by true repentance out of the book of Conscience, that they be not read in
judgment, and the voice of Gods sentence be to be feared of thee. Kill the
Worm Kill the worm.
of Conscience by the heat of devotion, lest the gnawing thereof bring forth
unto thee eternal horror. Quench this inward fire by thy tears, that thou
may feel the pleasures of the heavenly cooling. Quench fire with tears.
O Lord, grant that we may war a good warfare, fight a good fight, holding the
faith, and a good conscience, that at last we may come safe and sound to the
heavenly country.

Quis vere pauper? Avarus. Who Is poor indeed? the covetous.

42. Meditation. Of the avoiding of covetousness.
AS acceptable as is the salvation of our souls, so odious ought the sin of
covetousness Odious Covetousness.
to be unto us. The covetous is the poorest of all men, because he wants as
well that which he has, as that which he has not. The covetous is the most
afflicted Afflicted
of all men, because he is good to none, but he is worst to himself.

1 The beginning of all sin is pride, the root Root of ill.
of all evil is covetousness, that by turning away from God, this by turning
unto the creatures. Riches cause sweat Riches cause sweat.
in the getting of them, they breed fear Fear.
in the possessing of them, they bring forth grief Grief.
in the losing of them: and that which is worse, the labor of the covetous is
not only perishing, Perishing.
but also killing: either thy riches do forsake thee, or thou them.

2 If therefore thou hope in riches, what will thy hope No hope.
be in the hour of death? How will thou trust God with thy soul, Nor trust in
God. The might
if thou will not trust him with thy body? the Almighty God takes care of thee:
wherefore do thou doubt, left he cannot sustain thee? The wisdom.
the most wise God takes care of thee, wherefore do thou doubt, how he will
sustain thee? The most bountiful Bounty.
God takes care of thee, wherefore do thou doubt, whether he will sustain
thee? Thou have the handwriting By writing.
of Christ, the Lord of all in heaven and earth, that nothing of those things
which are needful for man shall be wanting to them which seek the kingdom of
God: trust to this promise of Christ, he will not deceive, for he is the truth.

3 Covetousness is the root of all evil. As the brief of all goodness is in
all charity, so the seeds and sum of holy wickedness, is in covetousness.
What sin is there against God or man, but it springs from covetousness?

4 Covetousness is the highest Idolatry, Idolatry.
because it sets the creatures in the place of God: the covetous man does
translate the confidence that is due unto God, to the creatures: whatsoever is
more loved then God, that is preferred before God: whatsoever is preferred
before God, is set up in the place of God.

Belly.
5 Esau sold the right of his birthright for pottage: so many s^ll the
inheritance of the kingdom of Heaven, which is gotten by Christ, for to get
temporal goods.

6 Judas sold Christ for thirty pieces of silver: Silver.
the covetous sell the grace of Christ for temporal riches. How can he aspire
Hinders to aspire.
to the kingdom of heaven, which is every day full of the husks of hogs? how
can he strive to Godward in lifting up of his heart, which studies to find
the rest of his soul in riches. Riches are thorns, Riches thorns.
says the Truth: he therefore that loves riches, loves very thorns. O
Thorns, how many souls do ye choke! Choke.
Thorns do hinder Hinder.
the increase of the seed, so the care of riches does hinder the spiritual
fruit of the Word. Thorns afflict Afflict,
the body with pricklings, so riches do vex the soul with cares.

7 Thou shall perish, They perish.
if thou gather only perishing treasures. They that gather together treasures
in the Earth, are like to them which lay up their corn in low and moist
places, not regarding that there it will most quickly putrify.

8 How foolish Foolish end.
are they that place the end of their desires in riches? how can a bodily thing
fill the soul which is a spirit, Not fill the Spirit
when rather the spiritual nature by his own virtue, does so comprehend
corporal things, that it is stretched forth by no quantity? The soul is
created to eternity, thou do injury Injury to eternity.
unto her, if thou place the end of her desires in temporal To make her end
temporal.
and momentany things.

9 The soul, by how much the more it is lifted up unto God, The soul to God.
by so much the more it is withdrawn from the love of riches. From riches.
All things, by how much they are nearer to heavenly Near heaven.
things, by so much they desire less, and gather together fewer things: as the
fowls Like fowls.
of heaven do neither sow nor reap. It is a great token that the soul does
think on heavenly, if she little esteem and contemn earthly goods. Not
esteeming earthly things.
The Mice Like mice
and the creeping things do heap together in their caves, for they are of
worse condition, and more ignoble nature then the Birds.

10 It is a great sign that the soul is turned away from God, Be not turned
from God to love riches.
and fastened to earthly things, if it cleave to riches with an inordinate love.

11 God has given thee thy soul, and dare thou not trust Trust God.
him with the care of thy flesh? God feeds the birds As Birds.
of heaven, and do thou doubt whether he will sustain thee, seeing thou art
created to his own Image? God clothes the Lillies And Lillies.
of the field, and do thou doubt whether he will provide thee clothing? Let
it shame us, that faith and reason By faith and reason.
cannot work that in man, which natural instinct does work in the bird. The
birds do neither sow nor They sow nor.
reap, but commit the care of their little body unto God. The covetous do As
covetous do.
not give credit to the Word of God, before they have provided wherewith to
sustain themselves.

12 The covetous man is most unjust: Unjust.
Why? because he brought nothing into the world with him, and yet he is so
careful of earthly goods, as if he should bear away very many things out of
the World with him.

13 The covetous man is most unthankful: Unthankful.
Why? because he enioyes much of Gods goods, and is never carried up with a
confidence of his heart, to the giver of those good things. The covetous man is
most foolish. Foolish.
Why? because he leaves the true good, without which nothing is truly good,
and cleaues unto that which without the grace of God is not good.

14 He that is entangled in the love of earthly things, does not possess
Possessed not possessing.
them, but is possessed of them* Covetousness is neither extinguished by
abundance, Not satisfied.
nor want: it is not therefore diminished by want, By want:
because the desire of having does increase, when that cannot be obtained
which is long desired: it is not therefore diminished by abundance, By
abundance.
because the covetous man by how much the more he gets, by so much the more he
seeks. When that is gotten which was desired of covetousness, there is withal
ministered as it were under hand, a new matter of desiring: New desire.
and so after the manner of fire, Like fire.
when it has taken the Woods that it consumes, it increases. Covetousness is
a Brook, Or a Brook increases.
little in the beginning, but afterward it increases vnmeasurably. Set down
therefore a bound Set bounds.
to thy desire of riches, lest that desire draw thee to eternal destruction.
From hell.
Many devour in this life that which afterward they digest in hell: many
while they thirst after gain, run into present destruction. And destruction.


15 Thinking on these things, O devout soul, as much as thou can, fly Fly.
from covetousness. Thou shall bear nothing Thou shall carry nothing.
of thy goods to judgment with thee, but that which thou have given to the
poor. But alms.
Deny not to the poor thy perishing and frail goods, for whom Christ has not
refused to give his life. Give to the poor, Give to the poor.
that thou may give to thy self: whatsoever thou have not given to the
poor, another shall have.

16 He is too covetous, to whom the Lord is not sufficient. The Lord
sufficient.
He does not yet truly hope No true hope in riches.
for heavenly things, which does much est^eme earthly goods. No love.
How would he lay down his life for his brother which denies his brother whom
he asks his temporal substance? The hand of the poor is the treasure of
heaven, The poor heavens treasure.
that which it takes, is put in heaven, lest it perish in the earth. Will thou
perform an acceptable duty to Christ? Christ.
Exhibit a benefit to the poor: that good which is done to the members, the
Head takes as done to himself.

17 Christ says unto thee. Give Give to Christ.
me of that, which I have given thee of thine own. Do good of thy good, that
thou may get thee good. Give earthly things Earthly things.
that thou may keep them because thou shall leese them, by keeping them too
sparingly.

18 Hear Christ's adminition, lest thou be enforced to hear him saying in
judgment, Mat 25. Cause of damnation.
Go ye cursed into everlasting fire: because ye have not fed me, when I was an
hungered. Alms deeds are an holy seed, Seed and Harvest.
as it is scattered sparingly or bountifully, the harvest will be either
sparing or plentiful. If thou will be in the number of the sheep, Sheep.
do some good also to the sheep. Uncharitable.
Let the goats Goats.
which are placed at the left hand terrify thee: not because they have taken
away, but because they have not fed. Incline our heart, O God, to thy
testimonies, and not to covetousness.

Sanctos dilectio signat. Love is the Saints mark.

43 Meditation. Of the properties of true Charity.
TRue and sincere Charity, is the constant property of the godly. There is no
Christian without faith, and no faith without charity: Charity Inseperable.
where there is not the shining of charity, there also is not the heat of
faith: remove light from the Sun, and thou may remove charity from faith:

1 Charity is the outward act of the inward life of a Christian A Christians
life.
man. A dead body is without breathing, so dead faith is without love. He is
not Christ's, which has not the Spirit Fruit of the Spirit.
of Christ: he has not the Spirit of Christ, which does not show forth the
gift of charity, because the fruit of the Spirit is love. Matthew. 7.
A good tree is not known, unless it be seen to bring forth good fruits.
Charity is the bond of Christian perfection. Bond of perfection.
As the members of the body are joined together by the spirit, that is, the
soul: so the true members of the mystical body, are united in the bond of
charity through the holy Ghost.

2 In the Temple of Solomon all things were laid over with gold True gold.
within and without: so in the spiritual Temple of God, all things are adorned
with charity within and without. Let charity move the heart to compassion:
let charity move the hand to liberality. Compassion Compassion.
is not sufficient, if there be not also outward liberality: Liberality.
outward liberality is not sufficient, if there be not also inward compassion.
Faith receives all from God: Charity on the other side gives all to his
neighbor. Giving.


3 By faith we are made partakers of the divine nature, but God is charity. He
that has not charity, has not God. Therefore where charity No charity, no
faith.
does not show it self outwardly, let no man believe that there is faith
within. No man believes in Christ, which does not love Christ: no man loves
Christ, but he which also loves his neighbor. He does not as yet with true
confidence No confidence.
of heart apprehend the benefit of Christ, which denies a due office to his
neighbor.

4 That is not a good work No good work.
indeed, which proceeds not of faith, neither is that a good work indeed,
which proceeds not of charity. Charity is the seed of all virtues: Charity
virtues seed.
there is no good fruit, but that which springs of the root of Charity.
Charity is the spiritual taste of the soul. Souls taste.
For this alone does season all that is good, all that is hard, all that is
full of adversity, all that is laborious. The taste of charity also does make
death most sweet: because love is strong as death, nay stronger then death:
because love brought down Christ to death. Love also does stir up Stirs
us up.
those that are truly godly, that they doubt not to dye for Christ.

5 All the works of God do proceed of love, yea, even punishments themselves:
so let all the works To works.
of a Christian man proceed out of charity. In all the creatures God has set
before us a looking-glass of love. All shows love.
The Sun and the Stars Stars.
do not shine for themselves, but for us. The herbs Herbs.
do not purge themselves, but our bodies. Elements.
The air, the water, the brute beasts, Beasts, etc
and all the creatures serve man: so do thou also give thy self wholly to do
good to thy neighbor.

6 The knowledge of tongues The tongues co^paring with charity.
does not profit without love, because without love the knowledge Knowledge.
of tongues puffs up, but love edifieth. The knowledge of mysteries does not
profit without love, because mysteries are also known to the devil, but love
is only the true property of the godly. Faith Faith.
also that remoues mountains, does not profit without love: because such a
faith is only a miraculous, not a saving faith.

7 Charity excells the gift of working miracles: Better the^ miracles.
because that is the indubitate note of true Christians: this is sometimes
granted to the wicked. Alms.
It profits not to distribute all our substance to the poor, if there be no
charity, because the outward action is hypocritical, it there be not inward
love.

8 The rivers of beneficence Beneficence:
profit not, if they spring not out of the fountain of charity. Charity is
patient, Patience.
because no man is easily angry with him whom he loves truly. Charity is
bountiful: for he which has given his heart the chiefest good of his soul,
through love, how should he deny the outward things which are nothing so good?
Charity enuies not: Enuies not
because she beholds other men's goods as her own. Charity does not frowardly,
Not froward.
because no man does easily hurt him whom he loves truly, and from his soul.
Charity is not puffed up, Puffed up.
because by love we are made the members of one body, but one member does not
prefer it self before another. Charity does not behave it self uncomely,
Uncomely
because it is the property of an angry man to behave himself uncomely, but
charity is the bridle of anger. Charity does not seek those things that are
her own: Seeks not her own.
because that which one loves, he preferres before himself, and seeks the
good thereof more then his own. Charity is not provoked: Not provoked.
because all anger is out of pride, but charity casts it self below others.
Charity does Does none ill.
think no evil: because it is manifest that a man does not truly love him,
against whom he is known to plot evil. Charity rejoices Rejoices not in ill.
not in iniquity, because charity makes other men's misery ^ trowne. Charity
endures all Endures all.
things, it believes all things, it hops all things, it sustaineth all
things: for that which charity destres to have done to it self, she refuses
not to do to others: the tongues shall cease, prophesyings shall be abolished,
and knowledge shall vanish away, Lasts.
but charity shall not cease: the imperfection thereof shall be complete in the
life to come, and the perfection Perfected.
thereof shall be increased in the life to come.

9 God commanded two altars to be set up in the Tabernacle, the fire from that
without was translated to that within: God has gathered together a twofold
Church, Militant and Triumphant: the fire of love in time to come shall be
translated Translated to triu^ph.
from the militant to the triumphant.

10 Thinking on these things, (O devout soul) apply Apply love.
thy (...) to holy charity. Whosoever is thy neighbor, he is the man for whom
Christ would dye. Wherefore then do thou deny to lay out thy love on thy
neighbor, To thy neighbor.
when Christ did not doubt to spend his life for him: if thou love God truly,
thou ought also to love his Image. Gods Image.
We are all one spiritual body, With one Spirit.
therefore let there be one spiritual mind of us all. It is an unjust thing,
that they should be at difference in the earth who sometimes must live together
Must live together.
in heaven. While our minds agree in Christ, let our wills also be conjoined:
One household.
we are the Servants of one Lord, it is not meet that we should be at
difference between our selves. That member of the body Body.
is dead, which does not feel the affection of another: let him not esteem
himself a true member of the mystical body of Christ, which is not grieved
with another member that suffers.

11 There is one God the Father One Father.
of all, whom bring taught of Christ, thou do daily call Father: how shall he
acknowledge thee his true Son, vnl^ss^ thou again acknowledge his sons for
thy brothers? Love Love him that G^d commends.
the man that is commended unto thee of God, if he be worthy, Worthy.
because he is worthy whom thou love: but if he be unworthy, Unworthy
love him therefore, because God is worthy to whom thou should obey. By the
love of man, thine enemy, Enemy.
thou art showed to be the friend of God. Attend Attend not man, but God.
not what man can do unto thee, but regard what thou have done unto God. Attend
not what injuries thine enemy does thee: but regard what benefits He conferres
upon thee which commands thee that thou love thine enemy. We are neighbors in
the condition of our earthly nativity, we are brethren in the hope of the
heavenly inheritance, let us therefore love one another. Kindle in us (O God)
the fire of charity by thy Spirit. Amen.

Christi, men's casia, cubile. The chaste Soul Christ's chamber.

44. Meditation. Of the study of Chastity.
HE that will be the true disciple of Christ ought to give himself to holy
Chastity. Chastity necessary
The most bountiful God is a chaste God chaste:
and pure Spirit: him thou ought to call upon with chaste prayers. A
certain wise man said, that chastity of the body, and sanctity of the
soul, are two keys of Religion Two keys of religion.
and happiness.

1 If the body be not kept pure and unspotted from whoredom, Whoredom.
the soul can hardly be fervent in prayer. Hinders prayer.
Our body is the temple of the holy Ghost, we must take great heed that we
defile not this holy habitation of the holy Ghost. Defiles Gods temple.
Our members are the members of Christ, we must take heed that we take not the
members of Christ Prostitute Christ's members.
and make them the members of an harlot.

2 Let us clean unto the Lord by faith and chastity, that we may be one
Spirit with him. Let us not cleave unto an harlot, lest we be made one body
One body with a harlot.
with her. The Sodomites burning in lusts, were stricken of the Lord with
blindness Punished with blindness.
both corporal and spiritual. the same as yet this day is the punishment of
unclean men. The lusts of the Sodomites were revenged with fire With fire.
and brimstone that came down from heaven: so God will torment the heat of
that evil concupiscence in whoremongers, with eternal fire: this fire is not
put out, but the smoke of the torments does ascend throughout all ages. Without
Without heaven.
that is to say, of the heavenly Jerusalem, are dogs, that is to say, impure
and libidinous men.

3 Christ does wash us with his precious blood in Baptism: we must take great
heed, that we defile not Defile not.
our selves with unclean lusts. By the guidance of Nature it self, wicked men
do blush to commit such heinous sins in the sight of men, and yet they are
not ashamed to commit them in the sight of God and the Angels. Before Angels
And God
No walls do hinder the eyes of God, which are brighter then the Sun: no
corners do exclude the presence of the Angels. E^^^p ^ sent. Before Conscience.
No withdrawing places do take away the inward testimony of the Conscience.
This is a wonderful thing, that the heat of luxury Luxury crye^h to heaven
and hell.
does ascend as it were to heaven, when as yet the stink thereof does descend
to hell. That short pleasure Pleasure short.
will bring forth eternal pain: it is but a momentany thing that delights,
it is eternal that tormenteth: short is the pleasure of fornication,
perpetual is the punishment Perpetual punishment.
of the fornicator.

Let mortify thee the cross.
4 Let the remembrance of him that was crucified, crucify in thee thy flesh.
Let the remembrance of hell Hell.
extinguish in thee the heat of concupiscence. Let the tears Tears.
of repentance extinguish in thee the heat of lust. Let the love of God Love of
God.
kill thy flesh, lest carnal love deceive thee. Think that the desire of lust
is full of anxietie and folly, the act of abomination Abomination of the lust.
and ignominy, the end, of sorrow and shame. Look not on the flattering face
of the devil, Devils flattery.
when he enticeth thee to lust, but his pricking tail when he flies from
thee: think not on the short pleasure, but rather on the eternal damnation.

5 Love the knowledge of the Scriptures, Scriptures
and thou shall not love the vices of the flesh. Be always doing somewhat,
Labor.
that when the tempter comes, he may find thee busied. He deceived David in
idleness, he could not deceive Joseph in his business.

6 Think on death Death
that hangs over thy head at all hours, and thou shall easily despise all the
pleasure of the flesh. Love temperance, Temperance.
and thou shall easily overcome evil concupiscence: the belly that is hot with
wine, does quickly froth over into lust: chastity is endangered in dainties:
if therefore thou feed thy flesh with immoderate dainties, thou nourishest
thine own enemy. So must the flesh be nourished, that it may serve thee: so
must it be tamed, that it be not proud.

7 Think on the terror of the last judgment, Last judgment.
and thou shall easily extinguish the heat of lust: the secrets of hearts
shall be revealed, All manifest.
how much more the deeds that were committed in secret? an account must then be
rendered of unprofitable words: how much more of filthy speeches? an account
must be given of filthy words; how much more of unclean deeds? Account to be
made of words, Deeds.
as long as thy life has been, so long Long. All.
shall thine accusation be. As many as thy sins have been, so many shall be
thine accusers: those thoughts, which with us are common, will not abide in the
discussing.

8 What therefore does it profit thee, that thy whoring should be hid for a
time before men, when in the day of judgment it must be revealed Revealed.
unto all men's eyes? what does it profit thee to escape the judgment of an
earthly Judge, when as yet thou can not escape the tribunal of the Judge
Judged The Judge not corrupt.
that is above? thou can not corrupt this Judge with gifts, for he is a most
just Judge. Thou can not overcome Overcome.
him with prayers, for he is a most severe Judge. Thou can not escape
Escaped.
out of his Province and Jurisdiction, for he is a most mighty Judge. Thou
can not deceive Deceived.
him with vain excuses, for he is a most wise Judge. Thou can not appeal
from Appealed from.
the sentence that he gives and promulges, for he is the supreme Judge: there
will be truth in the Inquisition, opennesse in the Publication, severity in
the Execution.

9 Therefore, O devout soul unto God, let the terror Set before thee terror.
of this Judge be ever before thee, so the heat of lust shall not deceive
thee. Be thou the Rose of Charity, the Violet of Humility, and the Lilly of
Chastity. Learn humility of Christ Christ's example.
thine Husband, learn chastity also of him. Great is the dignity of Chastity,
which was consecrated Consecrated.
in the body of Christ. Great is the dignity of Chastity, because it makes a
man to live in the flesh, besides the flesh.

11 As nothing is more vile then to be overcome of the flesh; so nothing is
more glorious then to overcome the flesh. Neither are outward whoredoms only
to be avoided, but also impure thoughts, Impure thoughts.
because GOD is not only the Judge of our exterior actions, but also of our
interior cogitations. Piety is oft-times hurt with the countenance; chastity
is oft-times hurt with the eyes. Hear what the Truth says: He that looks
Looks.
upon a woman to lust The mischief of lust.
after her, has committed fornication already with her. As hard as the fight
is here, so glorious is the victory. It is an hard thing to quench the burning
of lust: it pricks on those that are not ripe of age, Ripe age.
it sets young Young.
men on fire, it wearies the old Old.
men and decrepit, it despises not cottages, it fears not Palaces. But as
hard a thing as it is to fight here, so glorious Glorious victory.
a thing it will be to triumph here. The first assaults must be represt,
neither is the fuel of evil cogitations to be put unto this flame.

12 The Apostle when he sets down how he must wr^Sstle with all vices,
against fornication he commands not fight, but flight: By flight.
Fly, says he, fornication: for even as a strange beggar comes unto us with
fained simplicity, that he may deceive us: if we do not admit him, he goes
away, if we suffer him to enter, he becomes a ghest, Admit nor an il ghest.
he gathers strength, at last, if we agree thereto, he becomes a master: so
the motions of evil concupiscence do prick us, if we give them not kind
entertainment they depart. If thou will not have this enemy to rule over thee,
receive him not into the house of thine heart. Conserve us, O God, in sanctity
of soul, and chastity of body. Amen.

Tandem Patientia victrix. Patience overcomes at last.

45. Meditation. Of the foundations of Christian Patience.
REst thee, O devout soul, and patiently bear the Cross Bear the Cross.
that is laid on thee of GOD. With Christ.
Think on the Passion of Christ thine Husband. He suffered for all, Suffered
for all.
of all, in all. He suffered for all, even those which contemn that his
precious Passion, Even enemies.
and trample on his blood nefariously with their feet. He suffered of all: Of
all.
of his heavenly Father, Father.
he is delivered, bruised: left of his beloved Disciples, Disciples.
he is forsaken: of his own peculiar people People.
the Jews he is rejected, which prefer the Thief Barabbas before him: of
the Gentiles Gentiles.
he is crucified: refused by the Master Builders, to build upon the heathen
Tyrants of Rome: Builders.
he bears the sins of all men; therefore also he is afflicted of all men.
All men.
He suffered also in all. In all.
His soul Soul.
is heavy even unto death, and presses down with the feeling of Gods
judgment, cries out that she is forsaken of God: all his members Members.
do sweat out blood, his head Head.
is crowned with thorns, his tongue Tongue.
tastes a bitter cup, his hands Hands.
and his feet Feet.
are boared through with nails, his side Side.
is wounded, his whole body Body.
is scourged and stretched forth on the Cross. He suffered hunger, Hunger, etc.
thirst, cold, contempt, poverty, reproaches, wounds, death, the Cross. Now
how unjust a thing were it, that the Lord should suffer, So suffered the Lord.
and the servant rejoice? how unjust a thing were it, that our Savior Savior.
should be grievously punished for our sins, and that we should still take
pleasure in them? how unjust a thing were it, that the head Head.
should be afflicted, and the rest of the members should not grieve together
with it? Nay, rather, as it behooued Christ, by his passion, to enter into the
heavenly glory, so also it behooues us by many tribulations Follow him by
tribulation.
to enter into the kingdom of heaven.

1 Think also on the large reward. Be patient for the reward.
The sufferings of this time are not worthy of the glory Glory.
that is to come. How great so ever our suffering be, it is but temporal, nay
sometimes but for a day: but that glory is eternal. Eternal.
God does diligently observe all our adversities, and will one day bring them
into judgment: All come to judgment.
how filthy a thing will it be therefore, in that most glorious meeting of the
world, to be seen without the ornaments of the Cross Ornaments of the cross.
and sufferings. He also will wipe away all tears Tears wiped.
from the eyes of those that are his.

2 O happy Happy.
tears, which the hand of such and so great a Lord shall wipe away! O happy
cross, which shall find his reward in heaven!

3 David was not ten whole years in banishment, but forty Ten to forty.
in the kingdom: A figure.
here is pre^^gured the shortness of sufferings, but the eternity of the glory
following. Moment to everlasting.
It is but a moment of time in which the Saints are exercised by the cross:
the mercies are everlasting, by which they are gathered together, and so surely
to the mornings sorrows succeed the euenings joys. Learn patience of the
Saints.


4 Think moreover on the tribulation of all the Saints. Behold Job Job.
mourning on the dunghill, John John.
hungring in the wilderness, Peter Peter.
stretched out on the cross, James James.
beheaded of Herod's sword.

5 Behold Mary Mary the type of the Church.
the blessed mother of our Savior, standing under the Cross of her Son,
which bears the Type of the Church, the spiritual mother of the Lord.

6 Blessed are ye, says Christ, if they shall persecute you for my name, for
so did they to the Prophets. Prophet.
Consider the Martyrs of Jesus, that shed their blood in the sight of all the
world, and then ascended to heaven. O glorious persecution! which makes us
conformable to the Prophets and Apostles, to the blessed Martyrs, yea, to all
the Saints, nay, to Christ himself.

Let us therefore suffer with those that suffer, Suffer with them.
let us be crucified with those that are crucified, that we may be glorified
with those that are glorified. But if we be sons, let us not detract the
condition of the rest of the sons. If we do verily desire the inheritance of
God, let us take it whole.

Inheritance, joy with sadness.
7 But now the sons of God are not only the heirs of the joy and glory in
the life to come, but also of sadness and sufferings in the life present,
because God scourges every son To receive sons.
that he receives. He punishes their sins, that he may spare them in the
judgment To spare at the judgment.
to come: he multiplyeth here their tribulation, that there he may multiply
their reward, To multiply the reward.
and so not so much the persecution, as the reward is multiplied.

Benefit of the Cross
8 Think on the happy condition of the Cross. It does extinguish the root of
worldly love Rooteth out worldly love.
in us, and does sow the seed of the love of God in our hearts. The Cross
ingenders in us the hate of worldly things, Engendereth hate of the world.
and lifts up our minds to heavenly things: when the flesh is mortified, the
spirit lives, when the world waxes bitter, Christ waxes sweet.

9 Great is the mystery of the Cross, because by it God does call us to
contrition, Calls to contrition
to true fear, to the exercise of patience: let us open to him that knocks,
and we shall hear what the Lord will speak in us. The sight of the Cross is
contemned before the world, and before the carnal eyes of the outward man: it
is glorious before God, Glorious before God.
and before the spiritual eyes of the inward man.

10 What was accounted of the Jews more vile and abject, then the suffering of
Christ? As Christ's sufferings.
but what was more worthy and precious in the eyes of God then it? as that
which is the price for the sins of the whole world. So also the just is
afflicted, the just man dies, and no man considers it, but precious is the
cross, precious is the death Precious death.
of the Saints in the sight of the Lord.

Trouble black.
11 Black is the Church, the Spouse of Christ outwardly, by reason of
calamities and persecutions: fair inwardly, by reason of Gods consolation.
Consolation fair.
The Church is a garden shut up, and every faithful soul, because no man
knows the beauty thereof, but he that is in it. We shall never fully and
perfectly feel the consolation of the Spirit, In spirit.
unless our flesh be afflicted outwardly.

12 If the love of the world dwell in us, there is no place for the love of God
to enter: a full vessel cannot be filled with new liquour, Empty the pleasures
of the world.
unless that which was in before be euacuated: therefore let us pour out the
love of the world that we may be filled with the love of God. Fill with Gods
love.


13 Therefore does God, by the Cross, extinguish in us the love of the world,
that there might be place for the love of God. Place for God.
Besides, the cross drives us to prayers, Pray.
and is the occasion of virtue. When the North-winde North-winde.
blows upon the garden, that is, when persecutions exercise the Church, then do
her sweet odours flow, Make odours flow.
then are her virtues increased, which breathe out an acceptable smell before
God.

14 The beloved Husband of the soul is white and ruddy: So Christ.
white in his innocence, ruddy in his suffering: so also the beloved Spouse of
Christ, Made white: Dan. 12.
that she may be white in her virtues, is made red in her sufferings. And so
the grace of God can bring forth oil and honey Oil and honey.
out of the most hard stone of afflictions: so knows he out of the root of
calamity to bring forth the most sweet fruit of eternal glory: To which the
same grace promote us and bring us in. Amen.

Spes confisa Deo nunquam confusa recedet. Hope departs not with shame.

36. Meditation. How the temptation of perseverance is to be overcome.
O Holy Lord Jesus, the most dear husband of my soul, when will it be, that
thou will lead me into the solemnity of thy marriage? When? Married.
I am a pilgrim, and am in banishment from thee: but I most firmly believe,
nothing doubting, Not doubting.
that it will come to pass shortly, that being loosed out of the bands of thy
body, I shall appear before the face. Fear 1. Fear.
and trembling are come upon me, because I bear my treasure in earthen
vessels, my mind is prone to errors, my will is prone to sins: Prone to
sin.
whereupon the Spirit is not always ready in me, but the flesh is always
weak. Not ready
Sin leads me captive, and the law of my members does resist the law of my
mind. Fear and trembling are come upon me, because Satan 2. Satan.
lays wait for my treasure: his craft is great, his desire to hurt is most
earnest, his power is greatest.

1 He deceived Deceived.
Adam in Paradise, Judas in the School of our Savior: how shall I poor
wretch be secure from his deceits? Fear and trembling are come upon m^e,
because I am as yet in the world, 3. World.
which is wholly set upon wickedness: the delights Delights.
of the world do inuit me, the adversities Adversities.
in the way of the Lord do affright me, sometimes the inticements Enticements.
of the world please me well, all the world is full of snares; Snares.
how shall I poor wretch be able to escape them? joy Joy.
oppugnes me, Sorrow.
sadness oppugnes me: how shall I poor wretch be able to stand? Fear and
trembling are come upon me, because it is God 4: God.
which works in me both to will and to do. I fear lest perchance my
negligence and carelessness cause God to take away Take away.
that good will also which he has given me. I do unworthily use the
remission of sins, and refuse the first grace that was given gratis:
whereupon I fear, lest by the secret and the just judgment of God, that be
taken worthily from me which I unworthily use. I fear lest I be forsaken
Forsaken,
of him, whom after my first conversion I have often forsaken. How grievously
am I tormented, thinking that a grievous and a more severe judgment Judgment.
does follow these benefits of God, if I use them unworthily?

2 But the infinite mercy of God does lift me up, 1 Lifted up by mercy.
who as he has given me to will, so he will give me also to do his will,
because he is God, and is not changed. His mercy also is confirmed Confirmed
upon me, and shall not be changed. The foundation of God abides firm:
therefore firm, because it is in God himself, with whom there is no varying.
Without varying.
Therefore firm, because it is confirmed by the blood of Christ, By Christ's
blood.
which speaks always before the Throne of God. Therefore firm: because it is
sealed Sealed.
up with the sure seals of the Sacraments.

Not the least in my sell e.
3 If I should sake but for a very little of my salvation in my self, then
might I well doubt of my salvation: but as all my righteousness, so all my
hope of salvation is in Christ. If out of mine own will I had laid hand on
Christ, I might very well fear lest my will Not my will.
being changed, I might leese Christ. But he which was found of him that sought
him not, 2 But in him that sought me.
he undoubtedly after he is once found, will not withdraw himself. He that
has drawn me Drew me.
out of the shadow of death, to the participation of light, he will not suffer
me to be thrust out to the former darkness.

4 The gifts and calling of God are unchangeable Vnchangably.
of the part and will of God: I would that I my self also were unchangeable in
that which is good: that treasure is always present, but the hand that lays
hold on it, does sometime languish.

5 But I shall be able to lay hand on Christ, Christ gives promise.
who as he has revealed himself in his Word and promises, so he will grant
most benignely, that I may give credit to his word and promises. Credence.
With the help and safeguard of prayer Help of prayer.
I will guard my faith, neither will I let the Lord out of the chamber of my
heart, before salvation come unto me. I shall be able to be kept by the power
of God to salvation, the power of the Lord does lift me up 4 Gods power lifts
up.
and comfort me, but mine infirmity does cast me down, and make me sad.

6 Yet the power of the Lord will be brought to pass in mine infirmity, he
will strengthen Strengthens.
me, from whom comes all the strength of faith. The grace of GOD 5 Gods grace.
does lift me up, but mine unworthiness does affright me.

7 But if I were worthy, now it should not be a grace, but a hire: No hire.
if of works, then not of grace: for grace cannot by any means be grace,
unless it be every way free. But free.
The blessed Spirit of God does lift me up. Mine own spirit does cast me
down with sad sighs and groans. But the Spirit of God does help me, and in
the midst of my sighs that would cause me sink, lifts my sighs to God,
as to my Father, with greatest assurance. Therefore I do not look unto my
works. He will correct Correct.
that which is amiss he will supply Supply.
that which wants, he will abolish Abolish.
that which is sin: that which he will not impute unto me, is even as if it
were not: my salvation therefore is only in God, and thereupon sure.

Saturday, Evening Prayer.
Saving us from our enemies, and from the hands of all that hate us, what do
thou require of us, merciful and gracious God: but that we should serve thee
in holiness and righteousness, all the days of our lives? Which, that we
may the better do, thou have given us thy Word to be the square and Line by
which we should walk, and furnishing us with many rules of godly living,
command that we walk according to these rules, and promisest a blessing to
us, if we so walk. Give grace therefore, O thou fountain of all grace, that
observing all good precepts, and following all good rules, I may learn and do
these things especially, namely, love thee my God only: follow the holy
example of the life of thy Son: have a care of my conscience in all mine
actions, to keep it pure and undefiled: keep the fire of charity ever
burning on the Altar of mine heart: take heed of all fleshly pollution and
uncleanness, that so I may possess my vessel in honor: take up and bear my
cross with all patience, and rely always on thy grace and favor, nothing
doubting of final perseverance in thy Son Christ Jesus, our Lord and
Savior, to whom with thee, and the holy Ghost, be all praise, honor, glory,
dominion, power, now and evermore. Amen.

Sunday, Morning Prayer.
THis is the day, O Lord, that thou have made for thy self, that it should be
kept holy unto thee, wherein abstaining from all servile labors and works of
the flesh, thy servants should hear thy Word, praise thy Name, and meditate on
thy Works: unto which godly exercises, that I may be more religiously
inclined, strengthen me, O Lord, with thine assistance, that in thy power I
may thrust out of the house of my heart, all evil and strange ghests, shake
from my hands all wicked and unlawful works, and put off from my feet the
shoes of mine own affections, that so I may prepare a clean and quiet
lodging for thy spirit in my soul, that so I may be the better fitted to
compass thine Altar, having beforewasht mine hands in innocence, and to tread
within the Courts of thine house (O my God) where the ground is holy. O thou
that have the key of David, that openest and no man shuts, and shuttest, and
no man opens; open mine eyes this day, that I may behold the wonderful
things in thy law, thy wonders in the world; shut them, that they behold not
vanity, to have pleasure therein, or to seek after leasing. Open thou mine
ears, that I may hearken to the Word of Truth; shut them, that I hear not the
lying words of wickedness, nor the songs of sinners. Open thou my lips, and
my tongue, that they may speak to thy praise; shut them, that no corrupt
communication proceed out of my mouth. Open my heart, that it may receive the
instruction of life: shut it against all wickedness, arising from mine own
corruption, or proceeding from the devils suggestion, that it enter not to
lodge deep in me. Defend me, O Lord, this day from evil thoughts, from evil
words, from evil works, and grant that I may keep it holy unto thee,
meditating therein on thy Word, on all thy benefits, and on all thy goodness,
and deliverances, studying therein, as also in the whole course of my life,
holiness, and applying my self wholly thereunto, that so leading here an
vncorrupt and holy life, and doing that which is right, I may be thought
worthy hereafter to dwell in thy Tabernacle, and to rest on thy holy hill,
enjoying there thy blessed presence, and living in the light of thy
countenance, everlastingly partaking of thine happiness, O blessed and
everliving God.

Cum Christo surgere vita est. It is life to rise with Christ.

47. Meditation. Of the spiritual Resurrection of the godly.
THe Resurrection of Christ does not avail thee, unless Christ also rise in
thee. Christ rise in thee.
As Christ must be conceived, borne, live in thee, so he must also rise
again in thee. Death First death
goes before all rising again, because nothing but that which has fallen,
rises again: so also is it in the spiritual resurrection, Christ does not
rise again in thee, unless Adam Of Adam.
first dye in thee: the inward man does not rise again, unless the outward
man be first buried. Then rises new life.
The newness of the Spirit will not come forth, unless the oldnes of the
flesh be first hidden. Neither is it sufficient that Christ rise again once
Not once.
only in thee, because the old Adam cannot be extinguished in one moment, the
old Adam will daily But daily.
begin to live again in thee: therefore daily extinguish it, that Christ may
daily begin to live in thee.

1 Christ did not ascend into heaven, First rise.
neither did he enter into his glory, before he rose again from death: so
thou can not enter into the glory of heaven, Then enter heaven
unless Christ first rise again in thee, and live in thee. He is not a part
of the mystical body of Christ, in whom Christ lives not, neither shall any
be brought of Christ to the Church triumphant, To triumph.
but he which has been a part of his body in the Church militant.

2 Betrothing Rising, a betrothing
goes before marriage; the soul shall not be brought unto the marriage of the
heavenly Lamb, which is not betrothed to Christ by faith in this life, and
sealed with the earnest of the holy Spirit. Therefore let Christ rise again,
and live in thee, that thou may live with him for ever.

3 This is the first resurrection: blessed and holy Holy.
is he, which has part in the first resurrection, on him the second death
shall have no power.

4 If in the resurrection of the bodies thou will come forth to life; To life.
Christ must every day rise again in thee in this life. When Christ did rise
again, the Sun did rise: 1 Sun rose.
so if Christ do rise again in thee spiritually, the light of the saving
knowledge Knowledge rise.
of God, will rise in thy soul. How can there be the light of the saving
knowledge of God, where as yet the darkness of most grievous sins has
place? The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, how then can there
be heavenly wisdom, Wisdom
where the fear of the Lord has never had place? But he which is destitute of
the light of the knowledge of God in this life, how can he be made partaker of
the eternal light Light.
in the life to come? The sons of light only pass to the eternal light:
the sons of darkness to the eternal darkness.

5 When Christ rose again, he triumphed 2 Triumphed.
over death: so he in whom Christ rises again spiritually, has passed from
death to life, To life.
neither can he be overcome of death, in whom lives the conqueror of death.

6 Christ rising again, has brought with him perfect righteousness: 3 Christ
brings righteousness.
for he dyed for our sins, and rose again for our righteousness. So also he
in whom Christ rises again spiritually, is justified from sin. For how
should sin have place there, where the perfect righteousness of Christ does
live and flourish? To live and flourish.
But that righteousness of Christ is applied unto us by faith.

7 Christ rising again brought back the victory from Satan, 4 Satan's.
because in his descent into hell he destroyed his kingdom, he spoiled his
palace, he broke his weapons. Weapons broke.
So also against him in whom Christ rises again spiritually, Satan can not
prevail, neither can he be overcome Cannot overcome.
of Satan, in whom lives the conqueror of Satan. When Christ rose again,
there was a great earthquake: Earthquake.
that spiritual resurrection with Christ, goes not without serious commotion
and contrition Contrition necessary.
of heart.

8 That old Adam cannot be extinguished in thee, without striving Strive.
and resistance: therefore also Christ cannot rise again in thee spiritually,
without great commotion. There is no spiritual resurrection with Christ,
unless there be an abolishing of sin: For the abolishing of sin.
there is no abolishing of sin, unless there go before an acknowledgement of
sin: there is not as yet true acknowledgement of sin, unless there be a
serious contrition By contrition.
of the heart: therefore there is no spiritual resurrection with Christ,
unless there go before an inward contrition of the heart.

9 Holy Ezechiah As Ezekiah.
said, he has broken all my bones in pieces like a Lion: see a great
commotion. But by and by he adds: O Lord, so they shall live, and in such is
the life of my spirit: thou shall rebuke me, and quicken me, thou have cast all
my sins behind thy back. Rose from sin.
See the spiritual resurrection from sins. 6 Angels come.
Christ rising again, the Angel of the Lord came down from heaven, and sat
upon the sepulcher: so if Christ rise again in thee spiritually, thou shall
enjoy the society For thy society.
of the Angels. Where the old Adam lives, as yet, and reigns, there is an
acceptable Chamber for the devil: but where Christ lives and reigns, there
the Angels rejoice to dwell for it is written that there is joy in heaven on a
sinner that repents.

10 But where there is true repentance, No rising, no grace.
there also Christ rises again spiritually. Where Christ has not yet risen
again spiritually, there is not as yet the grace of God. But where there is
not as yet the grace of God, there also is not the custody of the Angels. Nor
Angels.
Where Christ has not as yet risen again spiritually, there as yet reigns
the old Adam: but where reigns the old Adam, there sin But sin.
reigns: where sin reigns, there the devil reigns: And Satan reigns.
but what communion can there be of the Angels with the devil? Christ rising
again, appeared 7 Appeared.
to his Disciples, and showed himself to them alive: so if thou be made
partaker of the spiritual resurrection by faith, To appear in thee.
show thy self a lively member of Christ through love. A man is not judged to
be alive, if he do not manifest the works of life By life.
outwardly. Where Christ is, there is also the holy Ghost: where the holy Ghost
Of the holy Ghost.
is, there he drives and sets forward to every good work: because they which
are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God. As a son.


11 If therefore we live in the spirit, let us walk also in the spirit. The
light of the Sun does disperse the brightness of his beams every way, the
light of faith Faith spreads.
does diffuse the heat of charity round about. Take away light from the Sun,
and thou may separate charity from true faith. Sins are dead works: Sins
works dead
if thou walk in dead works, how do thou live in Christ, and Christ in
thee? Sins pertain to the old Adam: Pertain to the old man.
if the old Adam reign as yet in thee, how have thou risen again spiritually
with Christ? Sins pertain to the oldnesse of the flesh: Flesh.
if thou walk in the oldnesse of flesh, how does the new man live in thee?
Raise us Raise us.
up, O good Jesus, from the death of sin, that we may walk in newness of
life. Let thy death kill the old Adam By killing Adam.
in us, let thy resurrection call back our inward man to life: let thy blood
wash us from sins: let thy resurrection put upon us the garment of
righteousness. After thee, O true life, do we sigh, Sigh for life.
that are dead in sins: after thee, O true righteousness, For righteousness.
do we sigh, that are turned away through sins: After thee, O true salvation,
For salvation.
do we sigh, that are damned for sins: quicken us, justify us, save us. Amen.

Sunday Noone.
Psalm. 84.1, 2
OH how amiable are thy dwellings, thou Lord of Hosts! My soul has a desire
and longing to enter into the Courts of the Lord: My heart and my flesh rejoice
in the living God.

For one day in thy Courts is better then a thousand.

Psalm. 27.4.
One thing have I desired of the Lord, which I will require, even that I may
dwell in the house of the Lord, all the days of my life, to behold the fair
beauty of the Lord, and to visit his Temple.

Christi re uerere tribunal. Reverence the throne of Christ.

48. Meditation. Of the last Judgment.
THe Father judges no man, but has given all judgment to the Son. I know,
O Lord Jesus, that thou which art to come a severe Judge Christ the Judge.
of all men, wilt bring to light All come to light.
the hidden deeds, words, and thoughts of men. Above us will be the severe
judge, Every way fearful.
beneath us gaping hell, within us a gnawing conscience, without us burning
fire, on our right hand our sins accusing us, on our left hand the devils
affrighting us, there will be the good Angels driving us from heaven, and the
evil drawing us to hell. Refuge.
O Lord Jesus, in these my distresses, to whom shall I fly? I fear all my
works, knowing that thou do not spare any one that sins.

1 I shall be set between time and eternity: the time is past, the infinite
spaces of eternity Eternity.
do yet remain. The evil spirits Evil spirits drawing.
will search out the evil works which they have persuaded: in the most severe
judgment they will bring forth all things, that they may draw my soul as a
fellow with them to their torments.

2 All the power of the heavens shall melt Heavens melt.
away, and the heavens shall be folded together like a book: Stars fall.
their whole array shall fall away, even as a leaf falls away from a Vine or a
Fig Tree. The Sun shall wax red, Sun red.
and the Moon shall be confounded. But if these the works of thine hands,
Where the sinners.
which never have committed any evil, fly from thy sight, how can I a
wretched sinner, appear before thy face? The heavens of heavens are not clean
Heavens unclean.
before thee: how should then wretched I which drink iniquity like water? But
if the just shall scarce be saved, where shall the sinner appear? whither
therefore shall I fly? to whom shall I turn me, The Judge our refuge.
but to thee. O Lord? Thou shall be the judge of my sins, which have dyed
for my sins: Which dyed for us.
for the Father judges no man, but has delivered all judgment to the Son.
The Father has delivered Delivered by the Father.
the judgment to the Son, but the Son again was delivered for our sins:
for so God loved the world, that he did give Ioh. 3.16. Given.
his only begotten Son, not that he should condemn the world, but that the
world might be saved by him.

3 How therefore will thou judge me, O Lord Jesus, whom thou art sent of the
Father that I may be saved by thee? thou have performed the will of thy Father
in all things: how therefore shall thou not perform it in saving In saving.
me a poor wretch? It is not the will of thy Father, that one of the little
ones The little ones.
perish: I also am a little one in thy sight, a little one also in mine own
sight. For what am I, but dust Dust.
and ashes? and not only dust and ashes, but also too little and small in the
proficience Not proficient.
of piety: perform therefore in me a little one, the will of thy Father.

4 Thou came, O Jesus, to save that which was lost, how therefore can thou
judge him that desires to be saved? Desiring salvation. Accusers. Sin.
Christ takes sin away.
My sins will accuse me, and require the severe sentence of the Judge: but
thou have translated my sins on thee, thou take away the sins of the world:
how not mine also? How shall thou condemn me for my sins, which dyeest for
them? Thou dyedst for the sins Dyed for sins.
of the whole world, how not for mine also? yea, O Lord Jesus, if thou would
judge me severely, what had constrained thee to come down from heaven into the
flesh, to death, Causes of his humility.
to the Cross?

5 The devils will accuse me, and require the works of my soul, Satan.
which they have persuaded her unto. Judges Satan.
But the prince of this world is judged, neither has he any thing in thee. But
if he has not any thing in thee, neither has he any thing in me: for I
believe in thee, O Lord, therefore thou abidest in me, and I in thee.

6 He will accuse me thy friend, That accuses. Friend.
he will accuse me thy brother, he will accuse me the most beloved Son Son.
of the eternal Father. How therefore will thou severely judge thy friend,
Then do not judge him. Moses accuses.
thy brother, and thy son? Moses will accuse me in that judgment, he will
say that I am cursed, because I have not kept all those things that are written
in the Book of the Law.

7 But thou, O Christ, were made a curse for me, that thou might free me
from the curse Free from the curse.
of the Law. By desiring a blessing.
I shall be cursed of Moses, but blessed of thee: for I desire to hear that
voice; Come ye blessed, possess the kingdom of my Father. Moses will accuse
me, Christ accuses not.
but thou will not accuse me with my Father, but wilt make intercession for
me. Therefore I do not fear the curse of Moses, because thou have taken away
the handwriting Handwriting cancelled.
which was against me.

8 The damned 4 Damned
will accuse me, and proclaim me guilty of the like fault with them. I
confess, O Lord Jesus, that guiltiness does join me together with them: but
the acknowledging of that guiltines: and the saueing knowledge of thee does
disioyne Disioyned by knowledge,
me from them.

9 He which hears thy Word, and believes him which has sent thee, has life
eternal, neither shall he come into judgment. I hear thy Word, O Lord: I
believe in thee with a weak faith but yet with faith. I believe, Hearing.
Faith. Weak. Yet faith.
Lord, but help mine unbelief. I believe, Lord, but increase my faith.
Although I am not free from the sins of all the damned: yet from incredulity
alone thou will free me, O Lord.

10 All those accusers Accusers fearful.
affright me: but thou the Judge do confirm me. To thee the father has
delivered all judgment, Al Christ's
he has given all things into thy hands: but again he has delivered thee
for us all, Christ for all.
thou also have delivered thy self for thy Church, that thou might
sanctify it, and cleanse it in the bath of water in the Word. How shall thou
judge them with severe judgment, Judges not his.
for whom thou have delivered thy self to death, even the death of the cross?
Thou will not hate thy flesh, we are members of thy body, of thy flesh, and of
thy bones. Flesh and bones.
Think, O devout soul, of this refuge and assurance at the last judgment.
And O sweet Judge, every day assure me of my justification that I may lift up
my head at thy glorious coming, because it shall be the day of my redemption.
Amen.

Semper men's respice sursum. Soul ever look aloft

49 Meditation. Of the desire of eternal Life.
O Devout soul, thou ought not to love the fading life, but rather the
abiding. Ascend Ascend to Youth. Life, Joy.
thither by desire, where there is youth without age, life without death, joy
without sadness, a kingdom A kingdom.
without change. If beauty delight thee, Beautiful as the Sun
the just shall shine as the Sun. If swiftness or strength, Strength of
Angels. Life eternal. Fullness of glory. Melody of Angels.
the elect shall be like the Angels of God. If a long and healthful life,
there is sound eternity, and eternal soundness. If fullness, the elect shall
be filled when the glory of the Lord shall appear. If melody, there the
Quires of Angels sing together without end. If cleanly pleasure, Pleasure.
God will make his drunken, out of the river of this pleasure. If wisdom,
Wisdom
the wisdom of God will show it self unto us. If friendship, Friendship
they shall love God more then themselves, they shall love one another as
themselves, and God will love them more then themselves.

1 If concord Concord.
delights us, all there shall have none ill. If power, all things All things
shall be easy to the elect, they shall desire nothing that they shall not be
able to do: nay, they shall desire nothing but that which God will have them
will and desire. If honor Honor.
and riches delight thee, God will appoint his faithful servants over many
things. If true security, Security.
there they shall be certain that that good will never fail them: Good
fails not. By loss.
as they shall be sure that they shall not leese it of their own accord:
neither that God that loves them, will take it away from those that love him
against their will: Taking away.
neither that any thing mightier then God, shall separate God and them,
Separation.
being unwilling.

2 Whatsoever the Elect can desire, Desires.
there they find, because they behold him face to face, which is all things.
Infinite.
So great are the good things of that life, that they cannot be measured: so
many, that they cannot be numbered: so precious, that they cannot be esteemed.
There will be eternal soundness Soundnes.
of bodies: there will be the greatest pureness Pureness.
of minds: there will be the fullness Eulnesse.
of Gods glory and pleasure: there will be perpetual familiarity
Familiarity.
of the Angels and Saints: there will be an admirable clearness Clearnes.
of their bodies.

3 The Elect shall rejoice for the pleasantness of the place, Rejoice in the
place.
which they shall possess: for the sweet society Society.
in which they shall reign: for the glorification Glorification.
of the body which they shall have: for the world World.
which they have contemned: for hell Hell.
which they have escaped

4 The least crown Excellent Crown.
of eternal life shall be more excellent then a thousand worlds: because that
is infinite, but these all are finite: Neither is the envy No envy.
of unequal brightness, there to be feared, because the unity of charity
shall reign in all, by reason of that greatest charity and love. Whatsoever
happens unto one of the Elect, All joy.
shall make the rest so joyful, as if it were given to themselves.

God possessed.
5 There is no greater good in heaven and earth then God, therefore also there
can be no greater and perfecter joy then to see God, to possess God:
Incomparable joy.
therefore also to see God but for one moment, will overcome all joys. For we
shall see God in himself, God in us, and our selves in God. In the way of this
life we have Christ with us, but covered under the veil of the Word and
Sacraments, but we do not know him by certain knowledge: in the life to come
we shall behold him face to face, 1 John 3. See Christ
when he shall distribute unto us the bread of eternal sacietie: even as the
Disciples did not know Christ in the way, but at last in the house, when he
did break bread unto them.

6 That heavenly Jerusalem has not a Temple made with hands, neither the Sun
nor the Moon, because the temple thereof for ever is God, the brightness God
brightness.
and light thereof. Vision shall succeed faith, comprehension hope, perfect
fruition Perfect fruition.
love.

No noise.
7 In the building of the Temple of Solomon, the voice of an axe and hammer was
not heard: so in the heavenly Jerusalem, neither is pain nor tribulation felt:
No pne.
because the matter of this Temple, that is to say, the spiritual stones, were
prepared All prepared.
now before in the world by tribulations.

Soul a Queen.
8 The Queen coming to Solomon, is the Soul going to Christ into the heavenly
Jerusalem: she goes in with a great troop of holy Angels, with gold and
precious stones of diverse virtues. She will wonder at the wisdom of Christ
Wondering at Christ's wisdom.
the King, and at the order of his Ministers, the Angels and Saints. The
fullness of the meat of his table, Table.
that is, of eternal refection: the preciousnesse of his garments, Garments
that is, the glorification of our bodies: the fairness of his house, House.
that is, the greatness of the heavenly Palace: the multitude of his
Sacrifices, Sacrifices.
that is, of divine praises. She will confess, being stricken into
amazedness, that she could not believe those things, which she now sees with
her eyes. Into this most glorious, and most desired presence, the soul is
brought by the most comfortable and heavenly Spirit, with seven burning bright
Lamps, that will reveal to her all the secrets of this blessed kingdom
formerly not manifested, that hereby the soul shall look no way, whence
unspeakable glory shall not make the soul shine with glory.

9 Therefore let the faithful soul lift her self up* and consider Consider.
the good things that are provided for her: thither must we direct the spirit,
Direct the spirit.
whither it is sometime to go. Go.
We must strive to go thither in time, where we must abide for all eternity.
He shall not enter into this glory of his Master, With desire.
which does not desire to enter.

10 Thou hopest to appear sometime before the face of God, therefore thou must
study holiness, Then study holiness
because he himself is holy. Thou expectest the society of the heavenly
Angels, Beware of sin. Desire not temporal.
see therefore lest by thy sins thou drive their ministry from thee. Thou
hopest for eternal things, wherefore then do thou so greatly desire
temporal? Thou seek a city to come, wherefore then do thou desire here a
continuing place? Thou desire to come unto Christ, wherefore then do thou
fear death? It is his part to fear death, Desire not to be here.
which would not go unto Christ. Thou desire to enter into the heavenly
Jerusalem; Fear no death. Defile not thy self.
wherefore then do thou defile thy self with so many and so great sins?
when as yet it is written, that nothing defiled shall enter into it. Thou
desire hereafter to enjoy the tree of life, thou must first lay hold on
Christ Lay hold on Christ.
the true tree of life, in this life, by true faith, because it is written:
Blessed are they which wash their long robes in the blood of the Lamb, that
they may have power on the tree of life, The tree of life.
and may enter through the gates into the City. Without are dogs Without are
dogs: Murderers.
and sorcerers, take heed therefore of uncleanness: without are murderers,
take heed therefore of wrath: without are those that serve Idols, Idolaters.
take heed therefore of covetousness: without are liars, Liars.
take heed therefore of all the malice of sin.

10 If thou desire to enter into the marriage of the Lamb, desire the
coming of the Bridegroom: Desire the Bridegroom.
the Spirit and the Bride say, Come. If thou have not the earnest of the
Spirit, by which thou may cry, that the Lord come, the Bridegroom will not
lead thee into the heavenly wedding: thou art not the Bride, Else thou art no
Bride.
if thou desire not the coming of the Bridegroom. Will thou have a place in
the new heaven, and the new earth, why then do thou cleave unto these old
things? Cleave not to old things.
will thou be made partaker of the Creator, why do thou cleave to the
beggarly creatures? Creatures.
Do thou look for a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal
in heaven, why then do thou not desire that the earthly house Earthly house.
of this our habitation be dissolved? do thou desire to be clothed upon?
why then do thou not look that thou be not found naked? Be not naked.
If in this life the holy Trinity does not dwell in thy heart by grace, it will
never dwell in thee in the life to come through glory. Begin here.
If in this life thou do not taste the beginning of eternal felicity, thou
shall never perceive the full complement thereof.

Coelestis curia nostra est. Christ's Court is ours.

50 Meditation. Of the most sweet company of the Angels in heaven.
IN the resurrection of the dead, they shall neither be married, neither shall
they marry wives, but they shall be like the Angels Like Angels.
of God in heaven. Can any man set out this dignity Great dignity.
of the blessed, with worthy praises? Into what man's heart has this glory of
the blessed ascended? The elect being renewed by the glory of the resurrection,
without any fear Without fear.
of death, without any spot Spot.
of corruption, shall enjoy the saving vision Saving vision.
of God.

1 I saw the Lord face to face, Face to face.
and my soul was made whole, cries out the holy Patriarch. Now if the
momentany vision of God could bring so great an heap of joy; what may his
eternal Eternally.
vision do? If the beholding of God, appearing in the shape of man, brought to
the soul health and life, then undoubtedly the sight of him face to face will
bring eternal life and beatitude. Blessed.


2 What then can happen further to this felicity? what can the elect desire
besides the sight of God? yet nevertheless they shall enjoy the most blessed
and sweet society of the Angels. Society of Angels. Similitude
Neither shall they only enjoy their fellowship, but they shall also be like
unto them in the agilitie, clearness, and immortality of their bodies. Of
clothing.
We shall be clothed with the same garment as they, in white robes standing
before the Throne of the Lamb: we shall sing Sing.
an everlasting song to the Lord: we shall shine Shine.
in the same crown of virtues: we shall rejoice Rejoice.
in the same privilege of immortality.

3 Manoah cries out, we have seen the Angel of the Lord, and we shall dye:
but we shall see a thousand thousand, and ten thousand hundred thousand
Angels, and shall live for ever. And live ever.


4 Now if we shall be like unto the Angels, then it is no more to be feared,
lest we may be separated Never separated.
from them by the dissimilitude of sins. We shall put off the ragged coat of
our sinful nature, and our nakedness shall be covered with the garment of
salvation, and we shall be clothed Clothed.
with the most bright Bright.
robe of innocence. No evils.
None is hurt there, none is angry, none enuies, no covetousness inflameth, no
ambition of honor or power provoke. We shall not be burdened with the
weight of our sins, Burden of sins.
neither shall we be compelled to bewail the blemishes of our sins with
penitent tears. Tears.
Neither are the deadly wounds Wounds.
of the soul any more to be feared: for the Lion of the Tribe of Judah has
overcome the world, and we have overcome in his strength, and our wounds are
healed by his happy victory.

5 Again, if we shall be like unto the Angels, then shall there be no desire
of meat No meat.
or drink. God will be our meat, in whose delight we shall be satisfied. God
will be our meat, who alone refreshes and fails not. The blessed shall
neither hunger No hunger.
nor thirst: the heat No heat.
and the Sun shall not smite them: because he that has mercy upon them shall
govern them. God shall give them drink Drink.
at the springs of waters, there the streams of living waters shall flow out
of their belly: Flows out of the belly.
there is prepared a banquet of fat things, full of marrow, a banquet Banquet.
of the pure vintage.

6 We shall feast, Feast.
and we shall rejoice, and we shall triumph, by reason of the joy of our
hearts. O Lord Jesus, these things shall be performed in Spirit and Truth: In
spirit and truth.
of the fruit of the Vine shall we drink in the kingdom of thy Father, but
in Spirit and truth. For the words which thou have spoken unto us, are spirit
and life, And life.
and in the words of this word thou do declare the joys of the life to
come. Again, if we shall be like unto the Angels, then the fear of death No
death
shall be taken away, death shall be swallowed up in victory, death shall be
cast down headlong for ever: and God shall wipe away all tears Tears wiped.
from the eyes of his people.

7 Therefore there shall be joy Joy.
without sadness, which contains everlasting gladness: there shall be health
Health.
without grief; life Life.
without labor; light Light.
without darkness, love Love.
shall never wax cold, joy shall never decrease, groaning shall not be heard:
neither shall grief No grief
be felt, no sad thing shall be seen, rejoicing shall always be had. There
shall be the chiefest and certain security, Security.
secure tranquillity, quiet pleasure, pleasant felicity, happy eternal
blessedness, the blessed Trinity, Blessed vision of the Trinity.
the unity of the Trinity, and the Trinity of the unity, and the blessed
vision of the Deity.

8 Lift up thy self, O my soul, and weigh more deeply the honor Weigh the
honor.
that is bestowed upon us of Christ. We shall be associated to the troops of
Angels, Society of mighty Angels.
and Archangels, to Thrones and Dominions, to Principalities and Powers.
Neither shall we only be associated unto them, but also we shall be like
unto them. Like them. The Angel that kept us.
We shall there know the Angel appointed to keep us in our life, neither
shall we want his ministry, but we shall rejoice in his sweet society. We
shall not desire his protection, No need of his protection.
but we shall be glad in his sweet company, and we shall behold his
brightness with eyes that are made bright. Again, Behold him.
if we shall be like unto the Angels, then our frail weak mortal bodies
shall be changed, and shall be made spiritual, Spiritual bodies.
nimble, immortal. They shall be bright, Bright.
because they are near unto God, which dwells in the light that no man can
attain unto, and is clothed with light. They shall be incorruptible,
Incorruptible.
because they shall be like unto the Angels: nay, unto the glorified body of
Christ: like I say to Christ Like Christ.
at his transfiguration, when he appeared in his glory, where his face did
shine as the Sun, and his garments were whiter then any Fuller can make, even
glistring as the light. Here Saint Peter confessed it was good being, and such
shall be the glory of the Saints. They are sown here in corruption, they
shall rise again in incorruption: they are sown in dishonor, they shall rise
again in glory: Glorious.
they are sown in weakness, they shall rise again in power: Powerful
it is sown a natural body, it shall rise again a spiritual body, which
shall shine like the brightness of the firmament for ever. Come, Lord Jesus,
and make us partakers of that glory. Amen.

Sanctorum patria Coelum. Heaven the country of Saints.

51. Meditation. Of the most blessed vision of God in Heaven.
IN the house of my Father are many mansions: Many mansions. Ioh. 14.
they are the words of our Savior. I desire to see the place, I desire to see
mine.
O Lord, in which thou have prepared for me an eternal mansion. I am a
stranger and a pilgrim here, as were all my fathers. The days of my
pilgrimage are few and evil; Banished desires. In heaven
therefore in the banishment of this world, I desire the heavenly country: for
my conversation is in heaven, I desire to see the good things of the Lord in
the land of the living.

Short days.
1 This life passes away in an image, my days may be measured, and my
substance is as nothing before thee, what therefore is mine expectation? Expect.
is not the Lord? O Lord Jesus, when will it be that I shall come unto thee?
when shall I appear Appearing
before thy face? Even as the Heart desires the springs of waters, so my soul
longs after thee, O God.

2 O true and perfect, and full joy! Full joy.
O joy above joy, ouercomming all joy, without which there is no joy! when
shall I enter into thee that I may see my God To see God.
which dwells in thee? Thou shall fill me with joy, with thy countenance.
His countenance.
O Lord, at thy right hand there are pleasures Pleasure.
for evermore: I shall be satisfied with the fullness of thy house, and thou
shall make me drink out of the river of thy pleasures. With thee is the
fountain of life. O desired life! Life.
O blessed felicity! in which the most holy trinity Trinity seen.
shall be the perfection of our desires, which shall be seen without end,
shall be loved without lothsomnesse, shall be praised without weariness.

3 It will overcome all joys to see God, to see Christ, God Christ.
to live with Christ: to hear Christ will overcome all the desires of our
hearts.

4 O Jesus Christ, the most sweet Husband of my soul, when will thou bring thy
Bride As a bride
into thy kingly palace? what can there be wanting? Wanting nothing.
what can there more be desired or expected, where God shall be all in all?
God, fair Sweet.
He shall be fairenes to the sight, honey to the taste, an harp to the hearing,
balm to the smelling; a flower to the touching.

5 God shall be all, and shall distribute good things to every one according
to the desire of his heart: Giving all desires.
if thou desire life, if health, if peace, if honor, God will there be all
in all.

Knowledge of mysteries.
6 The Mysteries which are now sealed up to the chiefest Doctors in the Church,
shall there be-plaine to little children. The blessed humanity of Christ will
be present with us, By Christ's preaching
and will preach in a most sweet voice of the hidden Mysteries of our
salvation. His voice is sweet, Full of grace
and his face is comely, grace is powered forth in his lips, he goes on crowned
with glory and honor.

7 But if God shall be all in all, then he shall be fulness of light Light:
to the understanding, multitude of peace Peace.
to the will, continuance of eternity Eternity.
to the memory. The son will fill the understanding with most full knowledge,
the holy Ghost the will with most sweet love, Love.
the father the memory with the secure remembrance of both.

8 Thou, O God, shall be light, in whose light we shall see light, that is,
thee in thy self, in the brightness of thy countenance, Bright countenance:
when we shall see thee face to face. Neither shall we only see See.
thee, but we shall also live with thee: neither shall we only live Live.
with thee, but we shall also praise Praise.
thee neither shall we only praise thee, but we shall be also partakers of thy
joy: Partake thy joy.
neither shall we only rejoice with thee, but we shall be also like unto the
Angels: neither shall we be like to the Angels Like Angels.
only, but shall be renewed to the Image of the most glorious Son of God, Like
God.
yea to God also himself, which is blessed for ever.

9 Let the faithful soul be here amazed, and adore the mercy Adore the mercy:
of her Savior. He does not receive us his enemies only to favor: but he
remits of sins: but he gives us righteousness: Remission Righteousness.
but he brings us to the heavenly inheritance. Inheritance.
This inheritance is immortal, and continues for ever undefiled, without all
blemish, It ever grows green, and withers not. It is heavenly* and has
nothing in it of the earth.

10 O most blessed City! Blessed city of God.
O heavenly Jerusalem! O holy seat of the most holy Trinity! When will it be
that I shall enter into thy Temple? The Temple of the heavenly Jerusalem is the
Lamb: The Lamb is the Temple.
the Lamb which takes away the sins of the world, and was slain for them
from the beginning of the world. When will it be that I shall worship my God in
that temple, that is to say, God in God? Worship God in God.
when will that Sun rise unto me, which enlightens that holy City? I am a
banished man from my country, but the inheritance that is laid up for me is
large. Power is given by Christ to those that believe to be made the sons of
God. But if we are sons, then are we also heirs, heirs of God, and coheires
of Christ. Coheires in Christ.


11 Lift up Lift up.
thy self, O my soul, and aspire to thine inheritance. The Lord is the
portion of mine heritage, and mine exceeding great reward. What could the most
merciful bounty of God give besides this? he gives life: Gives life:
he gives his Son: His Son.
he gives himself: Himself:
and if he knew any greater Nothing. greater.
thing in heaven and earth, he would give that same unto us. We live in God,
we are the temple of God, we possess GOD. Here truly in the Spirit, and in a
mystery, but there in truth, there our spes shall be res, our hope shall be
the substance of our hope: there we shall not only abide. but we shall also
dwell for ever. The Spirit and the Bride say, Come even so come, come, Lord
Jesus, that my soul may come and enjoy thee. Amen.

Sunday Evening Prayer.
What should I meditate on in the day of rest, but on the everlasting rest?
what should I think on in the end of this Sabbath, but on the endless
Sabbath? My soul longs for that day (O Lord) when delivered from the
troubles of this life, the burden of this body, it shall enjoy thy blessed
sight, and be blessed in thy sight, when for the company of sinful men on
earth, it shall enjoy the sweet society and company of the blessed Spirits,
Angels, and the souls of just and perfect men in heaven. There (O Lord) is mine
heart and there is my treasure, there art thou, and there would thy servant be
also. Unto which place of happiness, thy glorious Kingdom, that I may come,
Give grace (O dear and loving God) that while here I live, I may walk in good
works, which are the way of thy Kingdom, to which holy society that I may be
joined, give me the grace while here I live, to study holiness, that so I may
rise from the death of sin to the life of righteousness, and casting off the
sin that hangs on and presses down, aspire with all earnestness to that
eternal life and blessed company. Make me while I live here in the world,
always to think of the Judgment that shall be in the end of the World, that
my conversation may be such, that when thou shall come in the last day to
visit the World, I may be of the number of thy sheep, standing on thy right
hand to whom the comfort of that Word shall be addressed: Come, ye blessed of
my Father, receive the Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the
world. O Christ, the Way, the Truth, and the Life: the Way, in precepts and
example, the Truth in promises, the Life in reward, grant that I may so walk
here after thy precepts and example, and so lay hold on thy promises, that by
thee I may obtain the reward of the eternal and neuerfading life, Amen.

A Prayer for a woman in travail of Child.
Help, Lord, thine Handmaid in her heaviness, strengthen her in her
weakness, sustain her that she faint not in her bitter pains, give her
patience to endure power to overcome, hold thou her up with thy merciful hand;
loose the bands of her sorrows, give an happy issue of this her labor and
trouble, and mercifully looking on her in these her sufferings, put an end to
her affliction, and in thy good time make her a joyful mother, and give unto
her to behold the fruit of her body with great gladness, for thy dear Sons
sake, Christ Jesus, Amen.

The thanksgiving of a woman after the birth, and her deliverance.
THou (O Lord) which have promised to be with thin in trouble, have performed
thy promise to me thine Handmaid, wherefore my heart is glad, my soul
rejoices, and my tongue shall speak of thy praise. O Lord, the help was
thine, and thou have given the issue: though I wrastled long with pain and
sorrow in my heaviness, as Jacob with the Angel in the night, yet at last thou
gave the blessing, a blessing in my safe deliverance, a blessing that I live
to behold the fruit of mine own body. Now my mouth is filled with laughter, and
I will rejoice; all that hear it, shall rejoice with me. Be thou pleased which
art my helper and deliverer, to manifest thy mercies yet further on me and mine
infant, in continuance of thy wonted favors toward us, and addition of all
blessings further needful and expedient for us: visit us, O Lord, and
remember us evermore with thy mercies, and make me also to remember thee with
praise, which have done so great things for me, whereof I do rejoice. Amen.

THE DIVISION OF THE LORDS PRAYER.
The Lords Prayer is thus to be divided, 1. The proeme, Our Father. 2. The
petitions, Hallowed, etc. 3. The Thanksgiving, For thine is.


AN EXPOSITION ON THE LORDS PRAYER.
Our Father]
Act. 17.28.
1. NOt in name only, but of our life and being also. Granaten in Orat. Dom.
2. In affection, and 3 In effect and deed. For thou have 1 Created us, 2
Adopted us, and 3 Ministrest all good things unto us,

Which art in Heaven,]
1. Of greatest majesty. 2. Of perfect happiness. 3. Of everlasting
continuance. For 1. Thou art higher then the highest. 2. In thy presence is the
fulness of joy. 3. Thy years shall not fail.

Hallowed be thy Name,]
1. While believing, we do after thy Word and commandments. 2. While we speak
reverently of thy great name and titles. 3. While in our hearts we religiously
regard and think of thy power, wisdom, mercy, justice, judgments, etc. For
so 1. Shall we glorify thy name by our works. 2. Shall we praise it in our
words. 3. Shall we hallow it in our thoughts, etc.

Thy Kingdom come,]
1. In the preaching of thy Gospel. 2. In the power of thy Spirit. 3. In the
appearing of thy glory For it 1. Will inform us in thy truth. 2. Will subdue
us to thy scepter. 3. Will bless us with thy sight.

Thy will be done in earth,
1. On us, in all that thou shall think good. 2. In us, in all that shall be
good. 3. By us, in all that our hand shall find to do. For 1. All that comes
from thee, works together for the best to thy children, Romans 8.28. 2. This is
thy will, even our sanctification, 1. These. 4: 3. Thus it behooves us to
conform all our actions to thy rule.

As it is in Heaven,
1. By thine only Son. 2. By thy holy Angels. 3. By thy blessed Saints. For
1. He does all thy will. 2. They obey the voice of thy Word. 3. They walk in
thy sight.

Give us this day our daily bread,]
1. For our present necessity. 2. Further commodity. 3. Future ability. For so
1. We shall be kept in life. 2. We shall have all needful comforts for our
life. 3. We may also be helpful unto others.

And forgive us our trespasses,]
1. Sinning of ignorance. 2. Falling of infirmity. 3. Offending of set purpose.
For 1. We know not good from evil. 2. We are unapt to good, and prone to
evil. 3. Our hearts are oft-times hardened in evil,

As we forgive them that trespass against us,]
1. Not retaining their injuries. 2. Not returning their injuries. 3. Doing
them good moreover for their injuries. Though 1. Enuiously they hurt us. 2.
Maliciously they hate us. 3. Extremely they do mischief and endanger us.

And lead us not into temptation,)
1. Withdrawing thy grace assisting, from us. 2. Stirring up storms and war
against us. 3. Laying baits and blocks before us. For 1. Thereby we shall be
unguarded. 2. Therewith we may be overwhelmed. 3. Thereat we may offend.

But deliver us from the evil,)
1. Of our own concupiscence. 2. Of that wicked adversary. 3. Of the examples
of this naughty age. For otherwise 1. We shall serve sin in the lusts thereof.
2. We shall be led captive of the devil after his will. 3. We shall be carried
away with the current of the times corruptions.

For thine is the
Kingdom, 1. Over all excelling. the power, 2. Al ruling and disposing. and
the glory, 3. Always brightly shining.
1. Whereto none man (...) ^^mpared 2. Which cannot be withstood. 3. Which
shall not be obscured.
For ever,)
1. In all ages past, 2. At this present, 3. In all times to come.
Amen: So shall it be.)
1. As thou have said, 2. As we have prayed. 3. Hereupon our faith is staid. We
believe, Lord, help our unbelief: even so, Lord Ie^^s, Amen, Amen.
FINIS.

