A Treatise against the preuee Mass in the behalf and furtheraunce of the
most hylye communyon, made by Edmund Gest

Read gentle reader and then judge.

M.D.XLVIII

Cum Priuilegio ad Imprimendum Solum.

Imprinted at London in saint Andrews Paryshe, In the Waredrop. By Thomas
Raynald.

Fautes escaped by ye printer, read in the second side of ye first leaf and,
xiiii. line of b, exhibitiue for exhitiue, and in ye third leaf and second
side and fourth line read, not bread for bread, and in the fourth leaf and
last line of ye second side, read and for er, and in the fyft leaf and first
side and.xviii. line read giving sacraments for sacraments given and in the,
vi, leaf first side and second line, read lest for est, and in ye second side
of ye same leaf and.x. line read of for if, and in the.xiiii. line seable for
feeble, and in ye.vii. leaf first side and xvii. line, read avouch for which,
and in the last leaf and side, read Baptism for baptize, and in ye.xiiii.
line termed for turned.

To the right worshipful master Cheke, scole master to the Kings majesty,
and provost of his worthy college in Cambridge, Edmund Gest wysheth enteir
health both of body and soul.
NOt wythstandynge (right worshipful) I have attempted an enterpryce in
proving each parcel of the pryuye mass to dysplease god, which I can neither
word, matier, ne reason accordynglye, and so am rather dyslyked then lyked of
many for this my doing, rather heady then heedy as they suppose: Howebeyt in
case the said persons woll with me earnestly respect my bounden deutie in the
said doing, they (I doubt not (woll be rathere contented then disconte^ted
with me for the same. For why? it is gods oppen will that not they alone, whom
he has mercifully delivered ten or five talentes unto, Mat. xxv.
but they also, who have freelye received at his mercy hands, but one talent,
should occupy the same, to his most advantage, and not enwrappe it (to his great
hinderance) in a napkyn. Less he would therefore withdraw it from them, and
deliver it to the well occupyers, either of the five or ten talentes heretofore
especyfied (A clear ensample whereof is for our learning recorded i^ Math. xxv)
By reso^ whereof, albeit I am but sle^derly knowledged i^ scriptur matters in
respect of others, whose knowledge is ten or five talentes too mine one, and so
am not hable to auale and gane therewith any thing so much, as they with there is,
who ar passingly skylled in the mattiers before said: This not withsta^di^g I
must occupy my talent and auantage so much thereby unto ye lord, as I can
possible, to the full discharge of my bonden dew herin, otherwise straitely
charged with all. luke. xvi.
For we must all become accomptable to ye dreadful lord for our receipt and
stewardship. luke. xvi
Who so says Christ, Math. 14.
is not faithful in a little is not trusty i^ much. We must al be busely
occupied till he come, each man in his call accordyngly No man must attempt to
appear before him whithoute his offer, Deuteronomy. xvi.
more or less, according to his hablenes herein, which he estemeth, and not ye
value and bygnes of the offredge. luke. 21.
Though the sely poor wydowe offered but two mytes in to ye lords cheast, yet
was she no less regarded of him therefore, the^ the great rych men, who offered
in to the same much more. Each man (says Hierome) offreth in to the lords
house what he can, Some gold, silver and precious stone, Some either
goteskinnes, or ye hears of the same. For ye lord needs all these, And he is
egally pleased with them, who have vnegally offrede. In respect whereof I have
offered unto him, this my simple poor myte or goat hear, trusti^g he wol of
his mercy, both accept ye same, and occasion hereby others, to write more
groundely and clerkly in this matteir, which I have chosen rather then an
otheyr too e^treate upon, In respect ye treat thereof is both right avaylable
and needful to his church, and so ava^tageable to him selue, In yt it
enforces much to ye discontinuance and owerthrowe of ye pryuat mass, wherein
we are most piteously blinded, to ye great dysworshipe both of our savior and
his most holy communyo^. This mine attempt (which as ye se, not of pride but
of mere conscience I am e^forced to) not wythstandynge I have offered to the
lord: Houbeit I ensueng ye praise worthy usage of offerers herein do offer ye
same to some other beside, namely to your worshipful mastership, not ye I
adiudge it a present, worthy your worship, but yt I would hereby open my poor
heart toward your maystershyp, trustyng ye of your wonted unspeakable ge^tlenes
wol take it in good part, not respectynge so much the vylenes thereof, as the
good mind of the presenter of ye same, who (undoubtedly) has presented, not
all what he willyngly would, but what him hably could theyrin. And thus I
betake ye to god, whom I most enteirly beseech to enuiron you with his grace so to
tread ye Kings majesty i^ all virtue, wisdom, and understanding, as shall be,
first to the high contentacion of god selue, and furtherance of his truth,
secondly to the Kings honor and weal of his realms, lastelye too your
great worship name and furtheraunce Amen.

To the christian Reader everlasting gretynge in the Lord.
Would god (dear reader) soch a person had attempted, and attempted, had
perfected, and perfected, had openly publyshed ye worthy disclose and disprove
of the insufferable abhominatio^ of the popysshe private pryuye mass, an
enterprise no less nedeful than auayleable at al seasons, and for all
persons, and namely at this present, which is, thank be unto the lord God,
so favorable and benefyciall to the furthera^ce of the gospel truth, and so
prejudicial and hurtful to the hinderance of the same: who for his worthy
knowledge perfectly knew, worthily and conninglye, for his hearty zeal would
earnestlye, for his boldenes durst openly, and for his eloquence would
eloquently, and accordingly handel, and discover the said ungodliness, and
workemanly paynt the same before thine eyes. For why as it is right conuenable
and behoueable that as each ungodly, and exchueable vice, so the hertofore
mencyoned ydolatrie, or image worship must of force be known, and sensyblye
dysclosed, not only for that it is a doying both haynouse and wicked, but by
reason it is also pretensed and cloked, wtyh the pretense and usurped name of
the Eua^gelicall truth, and recompted in manner of each man, (thee more pytye)
for the worthyest virtue, and for a worship not to man alone, but to God also,
most serviceable and acceptable. To murder a gyltlesse person, is a
defaulte full greuouse, and thy self beside, much more greuouse, but not thy
self alone, and an other but a great compaignye of innoce^tes wythall, that
is most greuouse of al. What said I most greuouse? No not so. For thee
said murder compared with the slaughter of one poor seely soul, is in
respect thereof, nothing greuouse at all, By reason as one soul
sourmounteth, and passes in worthiness an infynite number of bodies, so the
slaughter of one soul is more greuouse, tha^ the murder of an innumerable
sort of bodies: Howbeit the murder of sondrie souls is more greuouse tha^ of
one, and so consequently the slaughter of an infinite sort is passinge
greuouse In respect whereof, Oh what a greuouse cruel deed is our solytary and
alone massinge, which does murder not the bodies alone (a wicked and a cruel
deed), but which is most greuouse and wicked of al) the souls also, not for a
time, but for ever: not to be without pleasure and greuance, but to be in
endeles wofulnes, not of certain of the worshippers and mainteners thereupon,
but of each one without restraynt, unless he in time become repe^tant, whether
he be a pryue masser or a pryuate mass helper, whether he be an hearty hearer
or proctour of the said mass, Roma. 1
so that in effect he be a solytarye mass worshipper, for as S. paul
avouches not evil workers alone, but their approuers and maynteyners, for
that they be like minded, shall be like punyshed, If the eating of an apple in
paradyse did worthily and meritoriouslye slaye as questionles it did not bodily
only, but ghostely also, not Adam alone but his wife also, and not the^ alone
but al their posterite, and that not for a time, but euerlastinglye, for yt it
was directely against the express commandemente of god, otherwise being
nothing derogatorye to God or prejudicial to man: Certaynlye then our alone
massynge, for so much as it is not only a breach of gods open and holy
commandment, as the eating of thee inhibited forbidden apple was, but an
open image worship also, and a forged made service of god, which is a default,
no less haynouse than the said breach, yea, and more too: does much more
murder, as well ghostely as bodily, not only the doers and kepers of thee
pryuate Mass, but thee vpholders also, and worshyppers there upon, unless
they hartelye, and that in this present life repent them selves for the same.
For a double fault, deserves a double death a double dampnatyon as well of thee
as agreers and favorers thereof, as of the authors, and doers, of the same, Is
it not a wicked doyinge to endamage an innocente body? and is it not a mysdede
much more wicked, to murder the same? yes verily. Tha^ remedyles here upon
gatherable, it is our alone massing is a wyckednes incomparable, By reason
therein Christ's body, which passynglye surmounteth all bodily creatures,
both in worthynes dignity, and in acceptance with Godde is assayde day by
day of thee alone Massers, to be mortefyed and done to death. In consideration
(whereof) good Christian reader, I beseech thee by the precyouse death of our
alone Savior Jesus Christ embrase low and frequent only, the most sacred
communion christ's own ordinance the true mass, the true sacrament
exhibitiue of christ's body and blood, the very ghostely nurryture and food
both of our bodies and souls, into life everlasting, and utterly eschew
avoid, and deteste the pryuate mass, thee usurped and false named communion,
or mass, the prete^sed and conterfayte sacrament, man's ordinance and
tradycyon, the present poison both of our bodies and souls, into death not
temporal alone, but eternal also. What is sacrilege that vnsyttyng haynouse
and abominable vice, but an embecilmente and stelthe of an holy thing out of
an holy place, which is adiuged the more vnle^ful haynouse and abominable in
respect of thee more holy thing embecilled, and stolen out of the more holy
place whereupon it formally argues our pryuate massing is a sacrilege most
vnsytting, haynouse and detestable. For asmoch as it is a stelth of holy
things, not of the basest suit as candelstickes sencers, crosses and chalices
be, but of the holiest and chiefeste kind, namely of christ, of the holy
ghost, of true relygyon, of faith, of godlynes, reposed and placed not in a
stony temple or altar but in a christian and faith, full heart which is justly
esteemed more preciouse and holy than a thousand stone te^pels or aulters which
after thee report of paul is the temple of the holy ghost and the mansyon
place of the blessed trynitie, i, Cor, v^, Johan, 14
as christ him self witnesses in Ioha^. The more preciouse marriage, ye more
haynouse default is the breach thereof. What marriage is in worthynes to be
compared with the spiritual marryage, that is between christ and us? Verily
none at all, By reason whereof our alone massinge must remediless be a most
haynouse trespace, For that it disseuereth the said marriage and enforseth us
to whore with false gods against christ the lyuinge God our spiritual
husband. Oh Lord what an unspeakable and incomparable vice is thee Pryuee
Mass. In case she did but murder men's souls and bodies she were to wicked,
but sithe she atte^pteth thee, slaughter of the blessed body of christ, sithe
she embecilleth and takes out of our hearts christ the holy ghost, and their
body and soul saving fruits, sith she fo^dereth and diuorseth the marriage
between christ and us: she must no remedy be vncomparably and vnspekeably
wicked. Is it not a lamentable fight, to behold how hyghly men esteem this
pryuate mass which mothereth so manyfolde and haynouse vices? Is it not great
pytye to see how she is suffered and frequented emongeste us? Is it not a
deadely remorse to respect the worthy clerks in this realm, and ye great
number of them, and yet not one to write against her? Who if they would, could
handle and utter her accordi^gly? Yeas truli. Well sithe they (who perfectly
ca^) will not write against the said mass, sithe it is needful, that her
synfulnes to long dyssembled, should be openly uttered, sithe sithe I am
enforced in conscience in this great unseasonable silence among ye great
dyuines in this behalf, to declare my stomach again here, I will by gods
grace undertake to write against the hertofore mencyoned mass,
notwithstanding I am nothing fyt or suffycient to the full perfourmaunce of so
great an enterprise occasyoned so to do, luke. 23
through this the saying of christ, if my dysciples will hold their peace the
stones shall speak whereby he does us to wit yt, it is his will and providence
that when the learned refuse to set forth his truth, the unlearned should
further and promote it? Better it is somewhat to write and enueyghe against the
Popyshe mass, and that grossly tha^ not so godly nothing at al. Better it is
that the rude ignorant people should by my talk perceive somewhat of the
sinfulnes of the said mass, than through my silence nothing at all, Better it
is that the said people should be somewhat wythdrawe^ from their received mass
error, tha^ that they should wholly after their accostumed wont endure in thee
same. In respect whereof that what I ca^ possible devise to the vttera^ce and
reprofe of the faults incide^t to thee pryuate mass eue^ now by gods
assistance do I write. Therefore good reader give heedy attendaunce thereto:

PRyue mass after the doctrine of the Popish book entitled Antididagma is
facyoned of four parts, namelye of thee Sacryfyce of Christ's body and
blood, of the receypt of the communion of prayer, and of doctrine. These
parts orderly will I declare and confer them with gods written word, upon
the conference and trial whereof it shall (I doubt not) appear full true that
each parcel of the pryuate mass is ungodly, and so consequently the mass
self, exceadynge ungodly.

The first part of the said mass is thee sacryfyce whereunto be incydente
always consecration transubstanciation and the worship of Christ's body and
blood. And by reason consecracyon for goethe transubstanciation, and
transubstanciation the sacryfyce, and the worship aftergoethe them all: I
will first talk upon consecratyon, and them orderly upon the remnaunte.
Co^secracyon is that percel of the mass, wherein thee priest presumes, to
consecrat and hallow Chrstes body and blood. The which, as it is an attempt
too unreasonable and unable so passing wicked presumptuouse and detestable.
For how can it possible be that christ's body which cannot be made holyer and
perfecter tha^ already it is: should or might be consecrat of the priest? This
must needs be that / that is hallowed was before his consecration, either
thoroughly profane and nothing holy at al, either else not so holy, in
consyderacyon whereof, whiles the pressed do presume to consecrate christ's body,
needs must they acknowledge and grant by that their enterprise not so godly as
presumptuouse that the said body was before the consecration, either nothing
holy at al, else not so holy, which grant as it is erronyouse and vnbeleueable
so ungodly and exchuable. In case the prestes presumed only by their
co^secratio^ to hallowe christ's body, that their co^secratio^ were not so
haynouse a deed, but for asmoche as thereby they contend not so learnedly as
stoutly not so truly as falsely, Christ's body to be forged and made of the
chosen bread, and therefore endeavor the^ selves thereby, to forge the body of ye
purposed bread, it is exceeding haynouse, for there is no creature so worthy
puissa^t and entier, as ye said body is, which thing could not be true, if ye
priest or any man else did or could make the same. For the often making of any
thing as of christ's body, is an vndeceyueable proof of the vnperfytenes,
unworthiness, and feebleness of ye same There is no man, be he never so much
priested or byshopped ye ca^ make the feblest basest, and vnperfytest creature
in this world, much less christ's body the perfytest and noblest creature,
there is no creature, be it never so imperfyte that is often made, how tha^ can
christ's body be often made, that is the most perfyte. These words take, eat,
in these words of ye institution of the lords supper, take, eat this is my
body, be no words of making of the lords body, but of presenting and
exhibiting the same to the receauers of the right supper of the lord. So that
it is full open that the priest can nether consecrate Christ's body, neither
make it. Howbeit, this is always grant able, ye minister both co^secrateth and
makes, though not christ's body and blood, yet thallotted bread and wine, ye
sacraments exhitiue of the same. For where as ye bread and wine used at the
lords supper were profane and unholy, before the words of the institution of
the said supper were duly reported upon them, Now after thee due report, and
vtteraunce of thee said words by thee mynister, upon the before named bread
and wine, they be consecrate and made of profane the holy sacraments
exhibitiues, of Christ's body and blood. Thus also meaned the fathers by these
words, consecration and making in this sacrament. Now to transubstantiatyon,
or tornekynde, thee next entreatable matter, which is no less disallowable,
then deceaueable. How can this stand with our faith that Christ's body (whose
creatyon is vnrenuable) should be again made of the bread a (vile creature)
through thexchaunge of the nature thereof into his? How were it true yt the
blessed wine: and broken bread were bred and wine, as Paul termethe the^, if
their natures were throughlye altered into christ's body and blood? Can they be
bread and wine still, without they reteygne their natures still: Can they be
rightly named bread and wine without their own proper matter and substance in
respect, where of they were so named: do they not still appear to our senses,
bread and wine, not withstanding, they are become ye sacraments exhibitiues of
Christ's body and blood: who ever saw the excha^ge of any substance without the
alteracio^ of his accede^tes and outward shape? when christ turned
marvelously water into wine, it had not only ye nature of wine, but the
external form also, taste color and facto^ of wine, and no semblance of water
at al, Aaro^s rod being altered into an adder, had not only ye substance
thereof, but also ye outward fassion of ye same and no similitude of a rod at
al. The water which moses changed into blood, as it was i^ nature blood, so
outwardly it seemed blood. Eue^ so questionles should ye bread and wine leave ye
outward shape with their inward substance, if they were altered into christ's
body and blood, By reason, whereof sithe they reteygne still their accidents,
needs must they also reteigne their wonted substance, can there be any sacrament
as S. Augustyne says, without therein ye due eleme^t, and fyt word of god
belonginge there unto, be ioyntlye coupled togethers: No verily, How than? can
the outward apperaunce of bread and wine without their inward substance be ye
sacraments of christ's body, and blood, for ye outward apperau^ce of bread and
wine be none eleme^tes, but only thexternal shows of the same. Eleme^tes be
substance and not accide^tal shows. Is it not true, that in thee consacrate
bread, there are worms both engendered and fosterd which could not be, if there
endured the bread like natured, after as it was before ye consecracion? For
each worm is a substance, and none accydent, therefore cannot be engendered or
fed of an accydente, but of a substance alone, In respect whereof, sithe the
worms bread and feed, not in Christ's body, but in thee consecrate bread, we
must remedyles acknowledge in the same bread to continue thee very proper
substance thereof. The bread and wine be sacraments of Christ's body and
blood ordained of him purposely to enstructe our senses outwardelye, what is
wrought inwardly by ye said body and blood in the soul. For their use is to
declare too our outward senses assuredly, ye as the received bread and wine
norishe, strengthen and glad our bodies, so christ's body eaten and his blood
dronken accordyngly do our souls. How could the bread and wine serve to his
purpose, if they were utterly diuoided of their accostumed nature? Verily no
manner wise. For why? it is the alone substance of bread and wine, and not ye
color taste facyon of the same, that fostereth and cherysheth the body.
Sacraments (says Augustyn) unless they have certain lykelyhode with the
things whereof they be signs, they be no Sacraments at al. What semblance I
beseech you is there betwyxte the natureles bread and wine, and christ's body
and blood? questionles none at all. For the said body and blood, and that
after papysshe doctrine be not presented and exhibited at the communion
accide^tally but substa^cially only. In respect whereof needs must we grant
either the consecrate bread and wine be not the sacrame^te of Christ's body and
blood, which we ought not to do, either else thee said bread and wine reteygne
still their own natures, which is grantable. I marvel me much that many of
the^, who stand in ye defense of christ's corporal presence at his supper, have
in earnest meyntenaunce tra^substa^ciation, for as me semethe, it does much,
what hinder and prejudice, the said presence of christ in ye said his supper,
by reason the broken bread and blessed wine be institute purposely to resolve
and ascertayn our senses that we as materially and truly, though not
grosselyer sensyblie, but ghostly receive and eat Christ's body and drink his
blood as we do the foresaid: In consideration whereof if we take, eat and
drink, but the accidents of thee foresaid bread and wine, and not the very
substaunces of the same the^ gatherable it were, christ's body and blood be
not truly, but faynedly presented and given at his supper. For why* if the
sign be cou^terfayt and feigned, the^ needs must the thing be in semblable
sort, which is betokened thereby a true matter must remediles have his toke^
also true. In respect whereof the broken bread being ye sign given of the said
body, is material and not mattierles, this thensuyng saying, which gracia^
reports, and fathereth upon Austyne de co^secrat distint. ii, cap. qui
manducat, enforces much to the dysproue and dampnation, of
transubstanciation, That is seen, is bread, and the cup whereof the eyes also
make evident proof, but that that faith demands to be instructed in, is,
that ye bread is Christ's body, and the cup his blood. These therefore be
named sacraments, for that in them one thing is se able, and another
understand, that is, s^ne has bodily form that is understand has ghostly
fruyt^ What can be more effectually and expresselye spoken against tornekynde,
then this the rehearsed Englysshed sentence of Augustyne? First he avouches
therein the seable matter to be bread, secondelye, for an vndeceaueable
argument and trial thereof he alleges the testimonye of thee eyes, Thyrdly
he says not that is seeable is a bodily form, but has a corporal form,
lest any man should here be occasyoned too adiudge the mattier to want in
this element and so to remain nothing else but thee outward and accydentall
shape of bread. For in that he says that, that is seen has a corporal
form, he grants in thee elemente two things to be remaining, thee
thing had and thee thing having, thee outward fassyon which is seable and
the subject and matter thereof, it is to wytt the bread substance and the
excernall apperaunce of the same. The sacrament of Thankesgeuynge, says
Irenee consystethe upon two matters or substaunces, thee one earthely, thee
other heavenly, If bread substance were departed the^ could not Irenee
leyfully call ye one part of the sacrament a substance but an earthlye
accidente. The worthy counsayl of Nece writes to the disalowau^ce of
tra^substa^tiatio^ in sort thus, Let us not grossly behold the bread and
wine proposed and set before our eyes, but in faith consider the lamb, if god
in that his sacred table having our hearts eleuate and vplifted, lo, here the
worthy counsel names the feeble portyon of the sacrament after the consecration
bread and wine, and not the forms of the same. Gelasius in open and express
words impugneth the said transubstanciatio^ as erronyouse and vncredyble in
sort as follows. The sacraments of ye body and blood of christ, which we
receive ar sureli godly matters therefore through and by the^, we are made
partakers of the godly nature, and yet do they not cease to be the substances
of bread and wine, but continue in ye properties of their own natures, where as
Austyne says, ye lord doubted not to say this is my body, when he gave a sign
of his body: he meanethe not that christ's body is absented from his supper,
but that the consecrate bread is not the said body or turned substancially in
to the same, and is but the sign of christ's body, notwythsta^dinge it be
named his body. Notwithstanding Tertullian, Ambrose, Jerome, Chrysostom, with
others which expressly in their wrytynges the consecrate bread to represent
Christ's body, and to be a sign thereof, howbeit in those and soch other,
semblable their speeches, their meaning is not that the said bread is deuoided
of Christ's bodily presence and presentment, but that the consecrate bread is
but thee sacramental sign of christ's body, and not christ's body selue,
though it be termed sacramentallye the said body. Now will I assoyle
certain objections, and gayn sayings facyoned of the catholics, against ye
premysses. If say they) ye bred, nature were not tornekynded into christ's
body: why did he name it his body? Can it be his body, onles it be exchaunged
into it? Ca^ I be you without I become your substance? No verily. No more can
thee bread be christ's body without the exchau^ge of the matter thereof into
the said body, As for the accidents of thee said bread, it is not requisite,
ne needful that they should be together changed with their substance,
because christ in this his saying, this is my body uses the article
demonstratyue this, not in ye masculine, but in the newtre gendre, which
implies but the alone matter of the bread, and not accidents of thee same
therwyth, as the masculine does, Whereby christ does us tunderstand that the
bread nature is only altered and not his accide^tes i^ like manner To this
objection, soche is mine answer. Christ in this his saying, this is my body
does institute the sacrament of his body and blood, therefore he speaks upon
the same, sacramentally it is to wit, he terms the sign by thee name of thee
matter thereby sygnyfyed. He names the consecrate bread his body, for yt it is
resembled and presented thereby baptyse, is named the founteyn of our again
birth, and ye renuinge of the holy ghost, yet is it nether our new birth,
nether thee renuyng of ye holy ghost, ne changed into the^, but so called for
ye thereby the said birth and renewing be not only represented but also wraughte
presented and contributed unto us, Gene, 15
Circu^cisto^ was not in very deed the covenant made unto Abraham, ne altered
into it, howbeit, it was so turned in consyderatio^, it did both represent,
and present the same covenant to Abraham and his posterity: Christ's breathe
was called ye holy ghost, not that it was the very holy ghost, or turned in to
him, but in respect of the said ghost therwyth both resembled and exhibited
semblably albeit ye consecrate bread is named Christ's body, yet is it not the
laid body ne changed into the same, mathe, 26 luke, 22
but so called in consyderacio^ therwyth the said body is both sygnifyed,
presented and exhibited. The cup is termed christ's blood and the new
testament: Yet that his so calling the^, notwithstanding, no man will depose
thereupon, the cup either to be christ's blood or his testament: Termed
notwithstanding you said blood and testament, for that it is you sacrame^tal mean
wherwyth they be applied and conferred unto us, Upon semblable consyderacio^ is
the bread named christ's body. Where as it is thought and credited the bread
substance only and not his accide^tes also to be tornekynded into Christ's
body: By reason he uses in this his saying this is my body, the article this
in the newtre and not in the masculine gendre: If this were formally argued is
our bonden duty so to do. Yet it is replied and said. Paul calls the
consecrate bread and wine, this bred, this wine. Why should he so term the^? In
case ye one were not turned into christ's body the other into his blood?
Verily the consideration thereof is to have us put a difference thereby betwyxte
the consecrate and vnconsecrate and common bread and wine, acknowledging the
former bread and wine to be sacraments exhibitiues of christ's body and blood,
and these (I mean the common bread and wine) to be nothing less the^ like
co^dicioned. The last argument that is alleged for tornekynd is this. If
christ's body be in thee bred (as undoubtedly it is) the^ it is enbreaded and
his blood enwyued, which was always taken for a great heresy, In respect whereof
transubstantiacion needs must be granted as right true and beleueable. To
this I answer in sort thus. Notwythstandinge christ's body be presented in
thee bred (as questionles it is) not placely as there placed spaced, and
mesured, but ghostly: as there vnplaced vnspaced and not measured: Howebeit, it
is not enbreaded no more then the deytie is recompted, enfleshed for that it is
substancially in us, No More then the said god head is demed e^breaded, for you
it is entierly in each bred. No morothe^ the holy ghost is accounted
enbreathed, for that he was presented in christ's breathe? No More then the said
holy ghost is adjudged enbodied or enharted, for yt he is wholly in us and in
our hearts. Christ's body is adjudged of no man to be accide^ted
notwythstanding it is presented in the accidents of the bread. Why then should
it be adiuged e^breaded for his presence in ye bread. The one is as reasonable
'as gatherable, as the other is. Some are fule deceived in the meaning of these
words thimpanacion of Christ's body, which is not in simple any presence
indefere^tly of the said body in ye bred: No More the^ ye incarnation or
enfleshing of christ's godhead is indifferently any presence thereof in ma^s
flesh and nature: But only soch a presence of christ's body in the bread
wherwyth they both should be vnseuerably personed and have al their co^dicions
and properties common and mutual betwixt the^. Soch a presence is the personal
presence of christ's Godheade in his manhood. Soch is ye presence of ye soul
in ye body. In respect whereof as christ's body is not enpersoned i^ us,
notwithstanding it be enbodied to us: Semblable though the said body be
presented in you bred, howbeit, it is not become one person therwt which is
properly termed ye impaning or enbreding thereof? If ye bred and wine be not
exchaunged in ye communion, Some will demand of me, why ye au^cie^t doctors
make so often report upon thalteracion of ye bread and wine. To who^ this mine
answer. The consideration why ye forefathers so often report an exchau^ge to be
wrought in the sacrament of christ's body and blood is. For yt they believed the
chosen bread and wine to be turned from a profane to a godly use, to become
no more common, but special bread and wine, and to be made now exhibityues
sacraments of christ's body and blood, where as before their hallowing they
were nothing so. And not yt they believed the said bread and wine to be torn
ki^ded into ye lords body and blood This is the exchange whereof ye doctors
make report, and none other do they acknowledge here beside, Thus I have
argued effectually both consecration and tra^substantiacion construed, after ye
catholic doctrine to be directly repugnau^t against gods written truth. Now
will I try whether the mass sacrifyce in semblable sort empugneth the said
truth And for so much as this mass sacryfyce is taken here both for a
satisfaction of syn and thankesgeuinge I will discuss first whether it be a
clensing and satisfactory sacrifice. This done the^ whether it be an acceptable
and serviceable thankesgeuing to god or no. Concerning ye clensynge sacryfyce
falsely given to ye mass, (...),
Paul writes in sort as follows: With one offering has christ made
perfyghte for ever the^ that are sanctified. There is not one word in this
paul's saying diligently and depely considered ye enforces not much against
the before specified sacrifice. In respect whereof I will report orderly, and
wayghe each word of the said saying severally by it self. Paul says not with
a manyfold or renewed but with one offering has christ made perfect for ever
the sanctefied, In consyderacion whereof they be foul deceived, who auouche
Christ's sacrifyce ought to be revived and multiplied to the full pardon and
contentacio^ of our sin, otherwise unpardonable. And therefore repete the said
sacryfyce day by day to the same effect. For why that, that is often offered
cannot justly be reco^pted to be offered but ones: By reason a repeted and
renewed sacrifice is not merely syngle and one, but manifold and diverse. If
christ had often died notwithstanding he were the selue same Christ, that does
so often dye Howbeit ye his often dyeng should not be adiuged one single but
sundry deaths. Though it be yt self same body ye dies by ye second death,
which died through ye former death Yet is ye twyse dyeng of ye body reco^pted
not one but two dethes (as witnesses Ioha^ in his Apo.) Even so: 2^,
if christ were often sacrificed though he were the same and none other christ
that is so offered. Yet were that often sacrificying of him no syngle one, but a
many fold and multiplied sacrifyce. In consideracion whereof, sithe by the one
otferinge of christ, our sins be thoughly pourged (as paul records):
Sithe an often offer is not an ones, but a manifold sacrifyce, though it be ot
ye selue same matter: Christ's bodi nether may ne ought to be again sacrificed
either bloudely or vnbloudely to ye doing away of our defaultes Now to ye
entretable text of paul By one offering has christ, etc. By ye ones offeri^g
of christ. Paul means his paynful and blood sacrifice, ones done upon the
cross for ever, else could not ye his sacrifice pourge our sins. For no
sacrifice without bloodshed cle^seth syn. According to this saying of paul without
bloudsheding there is no remission of syn to be atteigned By reason whereof right
oppen it is, they grievously err, Hebr^ 9.
who hold opinion yt our faults ar pardoned through their insufferable and
unbloody sacrifici^g of christ's bodi otherwise vnprodonable. With one offri^g
has christ made perfyte etc. Note this paul says note in ye persent tence
does make perfect, as though christ now does perdon our syns vnperdoned before,
but in the preterperfyt te^ce has made perfyt: Purposely to do us herby to wit
yt we are already redeemed and cle^sed by ye ones offering of christ never to be
reuyued either sufferablye or vnsufferably bloudely or vnbloudely to purge our
sins with al In consyderacion whereof our catholics be in a foul greuouse
error, Hebre. 10.
for their auouching (enforced questionles so too say not so much of a good
ground as of a good intent) our sins clearly to be cleansed with their
insufferable, and vnbloudye sacryfyce of christ. For where remission of syn is,
there is (says Paul) no more a sacryfyce for the same. By one offering has
christ made perfyght forever the sanctified. Note this paul says not, Christ
has made perfyght for a time, but for ever the sanctefyed. Certes if christ
were to be again sacryfyced to the full contentacion and clensing of sin,
the^ did he not through his once offering perfyte for ever, but for a time
the sanctefye^* For why the sacryfyce that is remediles to be revived to the
co^tentatio^ and satisfaction of syn conte^teth god for the same, not for ever,
but for a time. By reason whereof our catholics are to be blamed, who rather
ernestly then godly will and contend that christ's body should be again
sacryfyced to the satisfaction and purgynge of syn, otherwise after their
judgment unpardonable. An error no less deragotorye to the entiertee and
fulness of christ's ones sacrifice then prejudicial to the maynteyners thereof.
For why to renew the said sacryfyce is utterly to vnperfyt, and disable it
quite, fully to cleanse and do away syn. For so paul argues to the Hebrews, the
sacryfyces of the old law did not remyt syn, for that they were daily
repeted, else not to be renewed If this be formallye argued of paul (as out of
question it is) the^ it argues that christ is not to be again offered less
his first offering being entier and sufficient to purge syn be through the
repeti^g and reuiuinge thereof vnperfyted and dishabled to the full conte^tatio^
of syn. (An issue utterly with al possible endeavor too be exchued.) With one
sacryfyce has Christ made perfect for ever the^ yt ar holy made. In ye paul
avouches her christ through his one sacrifice to have made perfyt for ever
them yt ar sanctified, He does us herby tundersta^d, yt the saints ar none
otherwise redeemed and saved then through ye one offering of ye said christ upon
the cross, and so co^seque^tly no man ca^ be otherwise saved. For they be
sai^tes yt be saved: In respect whereof it is nothing answerable to ye truth yt
you catholics not so godly as styfly maynteyn, it is to wit we be redeemed
through the again sacrificing of christ otherwise vnperdonable. For if ye
mass sacrifice be a conte^tacion and satisfaction for syn, the^ is ye once
sacrifice of christ utterly to be abandoned and disauthorized, Hebr. viii
For why to institute a new sacrifice of christ is tabrogate and adnul thold.
Yea if christ must be again offered to the conte^tation of syn, then must he
be also woefully payned and done to death again. For (as the said paul says
there is no conte^ting sacrifice without it bebloudy. In consideration whereof,
Hebre. 9.
he argues if christ should be often offered, needs must he often suffer often
dye. Wherefore (most gentle reder) sithe of the aforesaid it appears full open,
yt the mass mercy worki^g offredge dyrectly gaynsayeth not only.ii. or.iii,
but sundry scriptures, and the^ not doubtful but plain and not only scryptures
(which symplie to contrary is a sin full greuouse): but endeuourethe it self
also to mourdre christ, which is more greuouse): and not only yt, but utterly
to adnul and abolishe christ's most preciouse and entier sacrifice, done upon
the cross (which for too do as it is a defaulte most greuouse, so most
insufferable): I beseech the heartily judge and esteem the said one sacrifice
accordingly, that is to wit to be the alone sacrifice wherewith our syns be
cleansed and done away. And think and depose upon the pryuate mass sacryfyce
as thou ought to do, namely to be nothing less then a clensyng sacryfyce,
But here will our catholics say they do nothing less then uphold the
mass offeringe to do away sin, For that they acknowledge with us (the
protestauntes) belongethe to Christ's passion alone. God be praised therefore in
our redubted sovereign lord the Kings majesty, Who by a worthy act of
parlyamente, has enforced the^ to the outward acknowledge thereof, otherwise
openly maynteyning the contrary But in case the foresaid persons, meaned that
inwardly in ye heart, which with the tongue they outwardlye grant and profess:
They would not defend each parcel of ye Mass canon to be godly and beleueable
as they do. For why there it is plainly said, the mass sacrifice enforces
effectually to the redemption and ramsoning of the souls. The very words of
the said Canon be these. Remember lord thy servants etc. for the which we
offer unto the, or the which do offer unto the this sacrifice of praise for
the^ selves, and to thee ramson of their souls. Lo, here it is open, ye
priest sacrifici^g of christ (which is here termed a praise sacrifice) is
purposely purposed and wrought to redeem and ramson souls withal Which thing
does apperteigne alonelye to christ's sufferable and bloody sacrifice. Well not
withstanding, this thalleged sayng out of the canon were not plain and
sufficient enough to prove the said canon testablishe the mass sacrifice to
content god: Howbeit there is an other ye questio^les argues the same, which
the priest always reports and prays in the poost common Then ^lysshe whereof
is this. O holy Trinite perform that this sacryfyce which I unworthy have
offered unto theyes of thy majesty may be acceptable to the and be also
through thy mercy propiciatory, that is to say mercy working both to me and al
the^ for who^ I have sacrificed it. Lo hear in manifest words ye pressed
sollicieth god purposely to obteyn of him, this his sacrifice to be
propiciatory and to appease his wrath. In consideration whereof grantable it is
yt the pryue masters acknowledge i^ very deed their mass sacrifice to be mercy
worki^g whiles they conte^d the canon thereof to be throughely true and godly,
notwithstanding their mouth saying to the contrary. What an insufferable
mockedge is this as well of god as of our soueraygne lord yt king, to acknowledge
with the^ ye mass sacrifice to be nothing propiciatory, and yet in the canon
(otherwise named ye mass secret) to grant it offered to redeem us wythall,
and to pray it might be propiciatorye, If we heartily thought with god and our
prince ye Mass sacrifice were not propiciatorye: We would not throughlye
mayntene the Mass Canon, We would not say there with we offer Christ's body
to our redemption, We would not instant God as we do, to enforce our
sacrifycing of christ to purchase his mercy. But here it is replied the
foresaid Canon is misconstrued. For it means no thing less the^ that the
mass sacrifice is satisfactory in very deed, but in name alone. So termed in
consideration it is a resemblau^ce or memory of christ's propiciatorie
sacrifice executed and perfyted upon the cr^sse ones for ever. To this replial
thus I answer, In case the said sacrifyce were not to be taken, to be
satisfactory, Why is it in ye heretofore me^cioned Canon avouched, We of fre
the said sacrifice to the rede^ptio^ both of our souls and others? Why pray we
that the sacryfyce might be made satisfactorye? If we would not it should be
taken for satisfactory? If it were not to be taken for a satisfactory
sacrifice, and that after the true meaning of the^, who fathered the Canon:
They would never have so written upon it, as they have done. Again if we thought
not heartily that it were soch a sacryfyce: We would not affirm, we sacryfyce
it to redeem us and others withal. We would not ne durst solicit god to
enforce it propiciatorye: dredyng ye dredeful saying of christ thou shall be
justified by thy words, mathe, 13
and by thy words you shalt be co^de^pned. Let us hedely beware lest christ
judge us by our mouth as he did ye wicked servant. For the mouth vttera^ce as
of godly matters makes to salvation, mathe. 25 Roma, 10
as witnesses Paul: So of ungodly to dampnation. Let us therefore conde^pne,
as of bonde^ duetye we right) the therefore saying of thee mass cano^, Which,
as they plainly, and directly withstand gods written word, so the kings
statutes: lest we through our allowaunce and prayinge of the same incur and
deserve y^ just wrath both of god and of our prince. Here I cannot but disclose
the insufferable subtlety of our catheloques in this purposed matter. Therefore
good reder, earnestly respect the same to thy aduoydance of their trayn. They
having in consyderatio^ that now lefullye they cannot: in respect of the pe^
evidence of gods written word against the^, which to gaynsay were not
sufferable: Ne dare any longer uphold their mass sacrifice to be mercy
workyng. For that it emplieth notable repugnaunce to an act of parliamente
which not to obey and approve, as it is vnsyttinge, so right punisheble:
Consydering also if their Mass canon were to be understand after his gramer
sense (as doubtless it is) it must remedeles be condemned and canceled out of
the mass book, as heresye to god, and disobeysaunce to the King: Whereupon
happily might consequencly ensue the utter decay and confusion of the mass
selue, (an issue no less perfourmable the^ reasonable and ensuable): Have at ye
last qual^fyed and bla^ched the said canon in the heretofore alleged places
thereof after this sort. To offer the sacrifice of praise for the redemption of
our souls means nothing else, but toffre the said sacryfyce for a
remembrance of Christ's sacryfyce, ones wroughte upon thee cross to redeem
our souls with all. To pray that the mass sacrifyce might be
propiciatorye is to pray, it might be a memory of the propiciatorie
sacrifyce. Jesus what a far fetched meaning of the foresaid is this. Which
cannot well be ymagyned much less gathered of ye same. If they who fathered
the Canon, meaned the mass sacryfyce were not offered purposelye to redeem us
wythal, but to record the satisfactore sacrifice: Their words undoubtedly would
rather have enforced for ye pressed sacrifice to be a memory of the satisfactory
sacrifice the^ to be it it self. Therefore ye said fathers so did write the said
Cano^ as they might easily be understood what they understood thereby, And so
wrote it so openly as they possible could devise. By reason whereof sithe ye
before me^cyoned sayings of the canon make al togethers for the priest
sacryfyce to be propiciatory Question les their meaning is that ye said
sacrifice appeaseth gods ire and indignation and cleanses syn. Howesoeuer
ours catholics now take the^. Though say our catholics) the before
especyfyed allegations seem targue the mass sacrifice to be satisfactory yet
ar they to be construed as we take them, And never were they other wise taken
either of us, either else of others learned and catholic me^. Lo the
shameless vanity of our catholics, they do not only lie in mystakinge the
Canon, but in misreporting the minds of sondrye writers. So that the common
proverb is veryfyed one leasyng does accompanye another. Is not Master
doctor smyth of Oxe^ford a great clerk and much traded in ancient writers
(as it appears by his doyinges)? Yet he in the hundereth and one, and twe^tye
leaffe of his book entitled the defense of the said sacryfyce of the mass
writes, for ye said sacrifice to be propiciatory in sort thus. Does not this
place prove the mass to be a sacrifice propiciatorye, Sith by the offeringe of
christ's body in sacrifice at it gods wrath toward this man, and his
servants conceived for their sins (whereby the devil had soch power on the^)
was pacyfied and appeased? Again in the next leaffe ensuing thus he wrytethe.
Nothyngt can be more evidently spoken for the sacrifyce of ye holy mass yt it
is a sacryfyce prepiciatory curing man's wounds (that is to say, his sins)
and that also by the ordinance of christ commanding it to be done for a
remembrance of his death and rysynge a^ (...) ^to master Smyth? Whereby it is
right evident that he thought the mass sacryfyce to be proprciatory, and I
doubt not understood the tofore named canon as I do. Cocleus a man hyghely
esteemed amongeste our catholics partly for his right judgment in scripture
matters (as they suppose) partlye for his learning, writes in his former reply
all to Bullyuger in the syxt chapter thereof for the pryeste sacryfyce to be
propiciatorye in sort as follows. We after ye accostumed manner of speaking in
ye Church name not the supper but the mass, a sacryfice not only of praise
and thankesgeuynge, but of mercy workyng also, wherwyth we endeavor our
selves to praise god instaunte him and appease him. For we offers the Mass
mass sacryfyce not for the alone pourgyng of sin,) which thou falsely do
charge us wythall, but for sondrye other skylles also and needs. As it is
euydently known of the holy Canon. Cocleus words in Latyne be these Nos
autem inxtu cousuetum in Ecclesia loquendi modum non caena^ sed missam dicimus
sacrificium non solum laudis and gratiarum actionis, sed etiam propiciationis.
Quo deum laudare inuocare and placare satagimus Non enim pro sola peccatorum
expiatione (quod tu falso imputas nobis) sed pro aliis causis and
necessitatibus permultis Missae sacrificiu^ offerimus, Quem admodum exsacro
Canone liquido cognoscitur and ex multiplici diuersarum collectarum titulo
verboru^ q^ contextu conspicitur. Here it is right manyfeste and plain that
Cocle both well learned and godly iudgeme^ted after ye opinion of our
catholics does not only say that yt mass sacrifice is satisfactorye, but
appealeth to the Canon therein as answereable there unto after his judgment.
Freer Hofmaster (who was so worthily esteemed of the catholics as they allotted
him to be one of the reasoners against the protestants in ye emperors last
diet kept at Ratyspone) writes in his book entyteled the exposytyon of the
mass prayers and ceremonies in the behalf of the mass satisfactory sacrifice
in manner following. Now that our sacryfyce is named a praise sacryfyce I suppose
it offends no man. For our adversaries acknowledge also the mass, for ye
prayers lauds and tha^kesgeui^g therein accostumed to be made, may be called a
sacrifice of tha^kesgeuing and praise, But that we auouche it to be also a
propiciatorye sacrifice this do they steadfastly deny and disaffyrme. Hol
masters words in Latin be these. Iam quod sacrificiu^ nostru^ appelletur
sacrificium laudis nominem opinor offendit. Nam et aduersarii fatentur missam
propter preces, lauds and gratiarum actiones inibi fieri solitas sacrificium
dici posse eucharisticium hoc est gratiarum actionis et laudis. At quod nos
asserimus preter cetera etia^ esse pr^piciatorium sacrificium hoc constanter
negant. Lo, here hofmayster not only in his own, but in the person also of thee
catholics (otherwise termed papists) as full according with him herin
avouches contrary to our catholics the mass both to be a tha^kesgeuing and
contentation and pardon for our sin. This wrote the said Hofmayster in his
before named Book for the defense and allowance of this saying of thee canon
Pro quibus tibi offerimus. etc. for ye which we offer unto the, or ye which do
offer to the this sacrifice of praise for the^ selves and al theyrs for the
ramson of their souls etc. Whereby we learn it is not ye faith only of
Hofmaister, but of ye foren catholics also, ye the mass sacrifice is mercy
workinge and that thee words also of thee mass canon, ye ^mporte y^ same,
ought so insimple to be taken without any far fetched gloss. Whatsoever our
English catholics for a time do hold to ye contrary. Well sith it is both
acknoleged of our catholics and gro^dely I trust argued yt ye mass offredge
is not satisfactory or full co^te^ti^g. The next entretable matter is yt ye said
sacrifice is nothing auailable either for ye quick or the dead Our catholics
co^te^d it is profitable for the^ both, but how much or i^ what mesure it
lies not in the power of man to lymit: But this their opinion can not stand
with Christ's satysfatorie sacryfyce. By reason it is a full co^tentacyo^ and
satisfactyon for sin, and so ye Mass sacryfyce awaleth nothing at al to the
clensyng thereof. For if it auailed any thing thereto: The^ wete it
propyciatorte aparte though not entierly: The^ were christ's sacrifice
satisfactore but aparte and not wholly: The^ were ye Mass sacryfice no less
satysfactore then Christ's, For yt it should make partly for ye satysfactio^ of
sin as thristes does: Which is a blasphemy to think much more to speak:
Then were our catholics deceived in disaffyrmynge the mass sacryfyce to be
propiciatorye. But what need I to argue thee said sacryfyce to be unfruitful,
The catholics them selves in conclusyon grant the same, while they auouche
the full and entier fruit and virtue of the pressed mass to consyst in the
appliall of christ's merytes unto us, otherwise utterly diuoided of ye same
ones merit^d upon the cross in general for alme^. Which is ye sacrament and
not the sacrifice, For in thee sacrifice there is nothing applied and rendered
unto us, but to God alone, otherwise no sacrifyce at al It is the sacrament
alone, and not the sacrifice that gives to us, according to the right
definitions of the^ both? In consyderatio^ whereof sithe the mass fruit
consysteth, not in the pressed sacrifice, but in the apply all and gift of
christ's body and blood, not as sacrifice of the pressed (which is but a
cou^trefeiture and resemblaunce of thee true sacrifice) but as offered of
christ him self upon the cross ones for ever: It must needs argue that the
mass fruit consists in the sacramet alone and not in ye sacrifice also. For
why ye appliall and deliuere of thee fruits of christ's death and again rising
to us, is gods gift unto us and not ours unto him. So yt it is the sacrament
and not the sacrifice of ye mass yt is available. For a sacrament is defined
to be an holy token, whereby god gives us fre pardon of syns, A sacrifice
contrary wise is defyned to be that whereby we render somewhat unto god. In
respect whereof our catholics be much blame worthi, who yield to the mass
sacryfyce which is apperteyninge only to the Lords supper, I mean the apply
all and render of the benefyghtes of christ is death and resurrection. Which
did as it is a grounded proof of falshode so of ye vnauaileablenes of ye
mass, as otherwise vnfrutful, Though (wilsom say) the mass sacrifice applies
not, ne renders to us christ's merytes, Howbeit without that they cannot
possibly be presented and delivered unto us. And so ye said sacrifice must no
remedy be auayleable. That is not so. For ye said merits begyuen us both in
baptism and absolutio^, yea and in the communion to without the pressed
sacryfyce as shall here after be declared, And so the said sacryfice in this
respert is fruytles. Yet do our catholics replye, the foresaid sacryfyce
say they, though it makes nothing to the applial of christ's merits to us
ward: Howbeit in that it is a tha^kesgeuing it must needs be available In
this replial first this is denyable, yt the pressed sacrifying of christ's body
and blood is a tha^kesgeuing. For ye merely and nakedly respected as nothing
but an offredg nothing is thanked thereby, and so no tha^kgeui^g: In deed the
prayers incident thereto be a thankesgeuinge. But beit the said sacrifice were a
thankesgeuinge. Yet it shall not orderlye here upon ensue that it were an
acceptable and available tha^kesgeui^ge For there be two sorts thereof, ye one
good and proffytable, thee other naught and unfruitful? And if the pressed
sacryfyce be a tha^kesgeuing it must needs be both ungodly and unfruitful,
and so of the badsort of thank render, By reason it is institute beside gods
written words and so contrary to the same, in that it is a putting thereto.
For if it were fonded upon the said word it should by all lykelyhod be gronded
upon christ's words concerning his supper. But ye it is not And so it is a
forged worship and tha^kerendre, For christ at his supper neither offered him
self ne enjoined others to sacrifice him to his father. Orderly examine each
word of the institution of his supper and ye shall well apperceaue this to be full
certain. Christ at ye said supper tuke bred, mathe. 26 Luke, 22
But that is not to sacryfyce him selue. Else he sacryfyced him selue to his
father so often, as he did eat. He gave thanks, but that is not to offere him
selue, Else he sacryfyed him selue to his father, what time he encresed five
barelye loofes and fed therwyth five thousand men. He broke it and gave it to
his disciples. But that is not to re^dre it to god, which is behoueful in each
sacryfyce. His disciples took and eat the bread and his body, so do ye lea me^
in like manner, Yet they offer the^ not The which is given for you, herby he
means not to be here sacrifyed, Else should he offer him selue often, and not
ones, Else would not our prestes ouerhipped those words in their co^secratio^.
The disciples were enioned to do this in his remembrance and so they did: What
then? So do all Christianes and the faithful lealtye perform ye same. Yet
offer they him not. As there is not one word touching this former part of ye
lords supper, ye enforces for the priest sacrifice: Even so is there none in
this latter ye makes for ye same, For yt I have spoken of ye same, is
reducible and appliau^t to the latter portion of the said supper. Thus it
appears plain christ nether offered him selue in his supper ne commanded
others to offer him in the same to his father. In respect whereof paul spoke the
selue same words unto the vnprested Corinthians 1. Cori: 11.
which Christ reported to his disciples. And bad the^ also perform all those
things which Christ demanded to be performed of his disciples, which thing
be would never have done, if ye vnprested Corin. might not accomplished and put
in execution al matters concerning the lords supper. Thus it is plain the
mass sacrifice is not grounded upon Gods written word, and so nether
acceptable or serviceable to God ne fruteful to man. For why, whosoever worshippeth
god without his special word for ye same worshippeth him without faith. By
reason true faith issues only from gods written word as witnesses S. Paul.
Faith comes by heari^g and yt hearing by gods word. Roma. 10
And who so worshippeth god without faith, synneth. For as Paul says
whatsoever thing is not of faith, Roma. 14
is syn. So that hereby it is full open the said sacrifice is synful and
consequently not to be freque^ted or used. Our catholics in that that they
acknowledge their priest sacrifice not to be mercy workyng suppose it so taken,
may well stand both with gods word and christ's honor. But in so demeng they
be foul deceived. For why to attempt to offer christ as it is an enterprise
toto bold and presumptuou^e: so insufferable and blasphemouse. For this is the
state and condition of leyfull sacrifyces before god, that they sacryfyced be
not merelye of the^ selves, but in respect of the offerers godlynes regarded
and his synfulnes dyslyked of God. The sacryfyces of Abel and Cain, not
wythsta^dyng they were not much what unlike in the^ selves: Gene. iiii,
howbeit they were dyuersly respected of god in consyderatio^ of the sou^orynes
betwixt ye offerers. For the one god regarded for Abels sake, the other he hated
and abhorred for Cain sake. The lord looked unto Abel (says moses) and to his
offering. But to Cain and his offeringe he looked not. Mark this, First he
looked upon Abell ere he respected his offeringe. First he dyslyked Cain or he
dislyked his sacryfyce, Whereby we do understand that the offering is lyked or
dislyked of god in respect of ye offerer. So yt here upon it grondelye arguethe
that the offerer is both worthyer and better esteemed of God then his offering.
For that, that god regards merely for it selue is better and more esteemed of
him, tha^ that which he regards but in respect of another. In consyderation
whereof if christ were to be sacrificed of thee priest, then were the priest
both worthyer and better accepted before god the^ christ him selue, as it is
gatherable of the before said. By reason whereof thee priest sacryfyce as it
most hyghly empayrethe christ's honor and majesty so vncomperablely
offends god the father and so most exchueable. Would you further know why ye
pressed sacrifice is unsitting and disalowable? The^ diligently note the
sequeles, and after sayings, Who so be autorised and appointed to sacrifice
Christ body must be prestes after the order either of Aaron or Melchisedech, But
our offerers ought not to be prested after Aarons order. For that his presthode
is quyte repealed and done away. Sith the priesthode says Paul is translated
of necessite must the law be translated also, Hebre, 7
The^ remediles must the foresaid sacryfycers be priested after Melchifedech
order, else are they vnprested. But they cannot be prestes as melchisedech was:
By reason who so is a priest after his order is an everlasting priest
according to this saying of david Psalm: 14,
Thou art an everlasting pressed after ye order of Melchisedech, but we be al
immortal and but for a time, therefore not eternal and consequently none
everlasting prestes, Whereupon it formally argues yt our usurped prestes
usurp and take the authorite to sacrifice Christ's body, which is granted
neither to the^ ne to any man else. By reason whereof they be blame worthy for
yt their vsurpatio^ of soch autorytee. Hebre. 5
Let no man says Paul take honor to him selue but he yt is called of god as
was Aaron To proceed further in ye disproufe of the pressed sacrifice, How can
it possible be yt our prestes could sacrifi christ's bodi and bsoud? With out
their due sacraments ye said body and blood nether ca^ be presented ne
sacrifyced, as the prestes them selves acknoledge as most certain. For ye
sacrified bred and wine nether be ne ca^ be sacraments of christ's body and
blood: By reason they be otherwise used the^ christ selue ordained thee
sacraments of ye same to be. Can the baptism water be justly reco^pted a
sacrament where it is transposed to other vsages the^ it is prepared for of
christ by his word and ye right ordinance of ye same, namely to be gaised
upon, too sprynkle and wash me^ with al, to christian belles to wash our clothes
with all? No truly. Can the circumcision or of pare which the Jews and turks
now use, be rightly demed a sacrament? No verily. Certes no more can the
sacrificed bread and wine be justly accounted sacraments of ye lords body and
blood. But here our Catholics replye saying the words of consecration be
reported upon the bread and wine ere they be sacryfyced, In consyderation
whereof, needs must they be sacraments. This there replial is nothing formal
ne forceable and yt by their own doctrine. Be it that alayma^ reported the
consecration words on the bread and wine or the pressed uttered the^ not
purposing ye making of christ's body and blood. The said bread and wine were
after our prestes doctrine nothing less the^ giving sacraments of ye above
named body and blood, notwithstanding the report of the consecration words
over the^. So that it stands with catholic doctrine yt in simple the bare
report and naked vtttrance of the consecration words enforce not the
sacrament. So that the foresaid replial is nothing effectual, being neither
true ne catholic? Now to ye before mentioned sacrificed bred again, I put ye
case, there were soch adueuout priest who were so devoutly disposed as he would
eat none other bread and drink none other drink at meals but sacramentally
consecrate bred and wine and would in consideracio^ hereof for each his dinner
and supper purposely report day by day at his mass, the consecration words
over his bread and wine y^ he would use at ye said meals: I suppose noman be
he never so catholiq^ and old fashioned wyldepose yt said bred and wine to be
geui^g sacraments of christ's body and blood notwithstanding the report of ye
co^secratio^ words over the^, And verily the consecration hereof is the
dyrecte and oppe^ abuse against the right institution and usage of ye
sacraments of thee said body and blood: No More be the sacryfyced bred and
wine sacraments of christ's body and blood, notwithstanding ye rehearsal of the
consecration words over the^: For why christ instituted at his supper his
body not to be sacrificed but ete^. In respect whereof he says not take
sacrifice, this is my bodi: but taken eat, this eat my body. There be three
matters right needful and be houeful to the natural being of a sacrament, The
due element the due word ye especial commandment of god directed thereto. Where
any of the aforesaid want, there can be no sacrament. By reason whereof the
sacrificed bread and wine ca^ be no sacraments, notwithstanding they be the
due eleme^tes consecrate with due words. In consyderation there wa^teth gods
special commau^deme^t so to autoryse us and able us to sacrifice the^ as to
take the^ and eat the^. So that they be but pure eleme^tes and no sacraments.
Therefore christ's body and blood cannot possibly be sacrifyced in and by the^.
Whereby it appears evident, ye pressed sacrificing is of nothing less the^ of
christ's body and blood. Thus (good reder) I have argued (I suppose forceably)
the priest sacrifice to be nether propiciatore ne available, nether godly ne
approueable but sinful and insufferable. Therefore I beseech y^ utterly renounce
it and detest it enbracing and using in the stead thereof the most holy
communion. But happily thou art loothe so to do till I have soyled the reasens
fetched out of scriptures which colourably seem to ratefy the said sacryfyce,
By reason whereof I will address me to the full answer and resolution of the
same. Whereas it is argued christ in respect he is pristed after Melchisedech
order offered him selue bodily under the form of bread and wine, for yt
Melchisedech offered bread and wine. This reason holds not because it is
false that Melchisedech sacrificed bred and wine. For Moses says not
Melchisedech offered but brought forth bread and wine. To bring forth is not to
offer, He says not he brought forth bread and wine for a sacrifice but without
any mention of sacrifice at al. He says not he brought forth the said bread
and wine to god, but to Abraham as it is right gatherable of ye History to
who^ to do sacrifice were an image service, and therefore Melchisedech
sacrificed not bread and wine. Here it is objected if Moses meaned not yt
melchisedech offered bread and wine: Why adioned he immediately thereto this? he
being the pressed of the most highest god blessed him? Mary not because he
sacrificed the bred and wine but for y^ he blessed Abraham, doing us hereby to
wete, as Melchisedech declared him selue to be a king in employing upon
Abraham bred and wine: So in blessing him to be a pressed. For as the employing
of bread and wine, was a kingly function, so the blessing a priestly ^ffyce. In
consyderatio^ whereof the foresaid Moses thus writes. And Melcheledech thee
King of Salem brought forth bread and wine, Gene. x^iii
and he was a priest of the most highest God and blessed him. The meaning
whereof is this as me seems) because Melchysedech was a king he played the
king he employed upon Abraham high chere, because he was a priest also, he
played the priest he blessed him. In that he was a King he chered Abraham, in
that he was a priest he blessed him. But here some will say Abraham was
already greatly enriched with kyngly spoils and had no need of
Melchisedechs chere, therefore by all lykelyhod he proffered him not the bread and
wine. To this I answer, not wythstandynge Abraham neded not Melchysedech
cheringe, yet he chered him in fuile proof of his hospytalyte and humanytie
toward both him and his. ^hus both Chrysostom and Josephus think. But be it
Melch^sedech offered bread and wine, and in so doyinge fygured christ Shall it
follow there upon, that Christ offered him selue bodily infourmes of bread
and wine? No verelye. Was not Aaron a figure of Christ, did he not figure and
resemble him selue in sacryfycyinge of a got? Yeas certainly. Yet no man will
or ought to gather, because Aaron who was a fygurer of christ sacrificed a
got, Therefore christ offered hi^selue corporally in or under thee shape and
kind of agote. If the before mentioned doying of melchisedech were applied to
christ after this sort following I could not but acknowledge the application
thereof both sufferable and godly, As melchisedech the king of Salem proffered
bread and wine to Abraham, and his sodiers, not for the^ to sacrifice, but to
eat to their relief, and blessed the said Abraham and in him al his posterite:
Right so christ our king, the king of spiritual peace and righteousness,
presents at his supper to al us his communers both bread and wine
(sacraments exhibitiues of his body and blood) not to be offered but the one to
beeate^ and the other to be dronke^ to our comfort, and blesses us al, and in
us al our offspring. The next alleged reason for ye mass sacrifice is this
deduced out.i. and.iii of ye prophet Malachie, I have no will to you says the
Lord of hosts and I will not receive of your hand a sacrifyce. For from the
rising of the son unto the gowing down myname is great among the people. Lo
her (say our catholics), ye prophet prophesies of the utter refusal and
repeal of the Iewyshe sacrifyce and of the succession chose and acceptau^ce of
a new, which is to be vnderstande^ of the mass alone. This there understanding
is nothing answereable to the prophets meaning. For why he speaks only of
soch sacrifice which is offered in all places of al men and from the morninge to
night. The mass sacrifice is not sacrificed in each place, but in ye church
alone, not from the morninge to night, but from the morninge to noonetyde, not
of each man indifferently, but of the priest alone. The alleged reason out of
thee eight and twelve of Daniel enforces nothing to the pressed sacrifice For
daniel as it appears plain in the nynthe chapter entreats of the
abolishme^t of the Iewyshe daily sacrifice, which is discontynued for certain
years through the tyran Antiochus. This sacrifice was offered twyse on the day
in the morning and at night. The Mass sacrifice is sacrificed but ones on the
day, and that in the morning, the other was offered but in the temple of
Hiercusale^, this is sacryfyced in each church. Yea the most learned
catholics cannot endure thee foresaid Prophecye should be so taken as it
concerns thee quyte abolishement of their Mass sacryfyce. For that they
believe that as Christ's church is euerlastable so their said sacrifice
always endureable. It is expressly written in, xiii. of thee Acres of the
Apostles (say our catholics) that they sacrificed to thee Lord. Therefore by all sembleaunce they sacrificed his body and blood. What a misfashioned
argumentation is this? ^he Apostles sacryfyced to the Lord, ergo they
sacryfyced his body and blood. Could they sacryfyce nothing but the said body
and blood? Might they not preach, pray, gather almouse for the nedy and
mynystre the Lords supper? Be they not al seuerably serviceable and acceptable
sacrifyces? Be not also the full executours of the same justly named
sacryfyers? Yeas verily, Then it is nothing ensuable, because thee Apostles
sacrificed, they sacrificed Christ's body and blood. And Luke says not they
sacryfyced christ's body and blood, but in simple they sacrificed. Therefore this
saying of luke they sacrificed imports necessarelye no sacrifyce of christ's
body and blood, but rather of ye beforesayde. That here Erasmus names
sacrificinge, y^ old tra^slator terms ministering Chrysostom takethe it for
preachinge, so does Erasmus also. The greek word say y^ Parisia^s betokens
to execute and minister a public office, and it is here taken to preach gods
gospel, Thus the Pariliaus in their annotacions upon the new testament. Thus it
is evident the before alleged argume^tation is both wrong framed and disproued
both of christostome Erasmus and Parisians ye head maynteyners of the mass
sacrifice. Another reason that the catholics allege for thee mayntenaunce of
their sacrifice is this The thing fygured must agree with his figure. Christ
was fygured by the pascal la^be, therefore as the said lamb was first offered
ere it was eaten: Exodi. xii
Even so christ (the true lamb) was offered ere it was eaten, at his maundy.
To this I answer after this sort. It is right certain that ye matter figured
and the figure both do and must accord in some point, otherwise there can be
neither figure ne thing fygured: In co^syderatio^ whereof the pascal la^be (for
ye sygneth christ) it must and does resemble him in somewhat and so it does.
For as the pascal la^be was slain and offered, so was christ. As the pascall
la^be (slain and offered) was a mean whereby the Israelites were delivered
from their slavery of Pharao, So christ mourdered broken and offered was the
mean wherwyth we be fredomed from ye thraldom of our spyrtual Pharao ye
devil. As ye pascal lamb was not only offered but eaten also: so Christ was
both eaten and sacryfyced etc. But yt ye thing fygured should be thoroughly
ordered as his figure in all points, it is neither nedeful ne possible Else
should Christ have been offered but of others alone and not of him self also.
In co^sideracio^ ye pascall lamb was so Else should he have been roasted ere he
were eaten, because ye pascall lamb was not eaten raw but roasted. Else his
bones should have been bre^t, for yt the said lambs were, Else his blood should
have been springled in ye Jews houses as ye la^bes was, Else he should not have
been eaten whole and vnbroke^ un sufferably but by pecemele and sufferably as
the lamb was Wherefore right as Christ is fygured trueli by the pascal lamb
notwithstanding his foresaid disagreme^t therwyth: Eue^ so though christ is
first eaten and the^ sacrificed yet yt is none hindera^ce why the said christ
should be fygured by the pascal la^be, Now to ye next reason yt is adjudged to
enforce for the mass sacrifice. Ye cannot drink of the lords cup and the
devils to? Ye cannot be partakers of the lords table and the devils also Here
S. Paul co^pareth the partaking of the lords supper with the communion of the
meats of fred to the deuyls, i. Cori. 10
which thing certainly he would never have done oneles he demed christ's body
and blood first to be sacryficed ere the one is eaten the other dronke^ as the
meats dedicate to deuyls be. For else yt his comparison were nothing semblable
ne formal. To this is mine answer: Paul's said comparison betwixt ye said body
and blood, and the meats and drinks consecrate to devils consists only in
mutual receipt and comunyng of them, and noothing at al in the sacrificing of
ye same. Therefore he mencyonethe only ye partaking and not their offredge also:
I meruel me much what our catholics mean to auouche thee before mencyoned
comparyson not to be formal with out it implied the offredge also both of the
said meats and drinks. May not two things be justly compared togethers and
yt but in one simple matter? Do they not know that each comparison halteth and
in some matters discordeth? If they will have ye heretofore named comparison so
thoroughly answerable and sembleable in all conditions: The^ it is to be argued
after this posycyon, and decre that whensoever christ's body is eaten, his
blood dronke^ and that accordinglye, yet they stain and embrue us in
consyderatyo^ the image meat and drink, eaten and dro^ke^ so do. The^ do they
always dysplease god, for that ye meats and drinks offered to ydols so do,
The^ they be grossly sensybly and sufferably eaten and dronken for yt the
meats and drinks offered to Idols be after that sort both eaten and dronke^.
Al thees in co^uenie^ses be no less gatherable of the foresaid comparison then
that Christ's body and blood ought to be sacryfyced. In consideration the
ydol meat and drink be offered. Is it not in express words in Paul.v. to ye
Hebrews (say our catholics) that each Bishop or priest taken out of the
nombre of me^ is ordained for me^ in those things yt do appertei^gn to god
that he should offer gifts and sacrifices for sin? whereby it is full open
that our priests do offere a sacrifyce for our sin? What can that be but
Christ's body and blood? Fayn would our catholics have their mass sacryfyce
to be authorysed and founded upon gods written word, but it would not be. I
beseech the what enforces ye alleged text of Paul to the maynteyning of
prestes sacrifice? Verily nothing at al. For why it talks only of the Aaroni
call order of priesthode, as it does well appear by this the after saying of
Paul, let no man take unto him honor (he means the foresaid priestehode)
without he be called of God there too as Aaron was, and compares thee office
of thee said priestehode with Christ's as it is right euydente by this thee
next after speech which begins in sort thus. Even so likewise Christ etc.
And he speaking but of the leuiticall priesthode ought in nowyse too be
understand of our mass presthode, according to the general rule. Each man
saying must be taken after the intended and entreated matter. Well though ye
foresaid allegatio^ of Paul were to be construed of our Christian priesthode
and of our christian p^iestes. Howbeit, it ought so too be taken that it
implies no more one christian the^ another, no more ye spiritual the^ the leame^
notwithstanding some be ecclesiastical ministers) which other be not)
according to this saying of peter, ye be a kingly presthod, But beyt there be
certain allotted and chosen to a special sort of presthode, i. Pet. ii
which the remnaunte of Christians, be not allotted to, Iet should the
heretofore alleged scripture argue nothing for the^. By reason it entreats
of soch prestes who ar wonted to offer not one gift, but many and diverse, not
one sacrifice, but sondre, and the^ to the full contentation of syn, our made
priests offer but one gift, if they offer that but one sacryfyce and not
diverse, and that not to the satisfaction and purging of sin but for a
thankesgeuing, as our Catholics the^ selue now at the last acknowledge. Yet
thee said Catholics replye for there said sacrifice in sort thus? Christ said
to his apostels (as Luke.xxii. makes hereof report), This do for my
remembrance, which this his saying autoryseth the^ to sacrifyce christis body
and blood as he him selue had the^ done at his supper. This their replicationis
nothing effectual or true, Was not S. Paul an apostle not of yt basest but
highest sort? howbeit he did not understand the said saying of christ after
that sort. For he spoke the very selue same to you vnprested Corinthia^s, i.
Cori. xi.
and ye not of his own head, but by the motion of the lord. I have (says he)
received of the lord, Which I have delivered you, whereby it does well appear
that it is not only Paul's, but the lords also and consequently al his
apostles mind, that this his saying do this in my remembrance, is spoken
as well to the vnprested as to the prested christians. By reason whereof if the one
be through the said speech autorysed to sacryfyce christ is body, the other is
in like manner. If the one be not, the other sort can not be? In respect whereof
our Catholics acknowledging the vnprested not to be autorised through ye
said speech auctorysed to sacrifice christ's bodi, the other is in like ma^er. If
the one be not the other sort cane not be. In recspecte whereof our Catholyques
acknowledgynge thee vnpreysted not to be auctorysed thoroughe the above
alleged scripture to offer Christ's body and blood: must no remedy grant
thee preystede not to be lycenced by ye said scripture to sacrifice ye same
This partecle this in this christ's saying this do in my remembrance as it
is a pronou^e relatyue so demonstratyue, therefore reports declares and
respects his antecedent, which was not to sacryfyce his body whereof he
forspoke never word ne did any thing co^cerni^g ye same but only ye tha^kful
receipt and eating of his body and drynkyng of his blood, there purposeli
me^cioned. Which ymplie no manner sacrificing of ye same at al, This is granted
of all me^ as well of the catholics as ye protestants as a truth most
undoubted, yt ye lay and vnpriested man receaueth the co^munyon unworthily,
what time soever he take it not recording therwyth the precious death of the
lord. But how could the said man receive yt said communion unworthily for
his receypte thereof without myndefulnes of christ's passion and death, if for
to so take it, were not a punishable defaulte? For why the vnworthenes herein
issues from sin alone. But how were it sin, if it were not directly
repugnaunte against Gods oppen commau^demente? For there is no sin which
is not a breach thereof. But what commandment is there for the lay men to
remember christ's death at their receypte of the of his supper, if this do in
my remembrance be not it, if it touch the^ not? Certainly none. By reason
whereof needs must we recognize and acknowledge either that the vnprested
persons receive not unworthily the said sacrament when they take it in
forgetfulness and syle^ce of christ's passion, which is nothing grau^table,
either else that this saying of christ, this do in my remembrance concerns,
and charge ye said persons as well, as the prestes, which is right certain. In
consideration whereof, this do in my remembrance purporteth not to sacrifice
christ in his remembrance but to record and declare openly his death (as Paul
says) who exponeth the said saying, (...) 11.
in this wise. As often as ye eat this bread and drink this cup, ye shall show
the death of the lord till he come. Yet are not our Catholics contented but
further they proceed in their replial. We have an altar whereof they may not
eat which serve thee tabernacle: Here say they. Paul meanethe thus. They who
keep the ceremonies of Moses law have none authority to eat of christ's
bread his very body consecrated and offered in sacryfyce on the altar which
we christian men have set up in our temples. If Paul had not meaned this he would
have made no mention of an altar which is made for sacrifice to be offered
thereupon to God. See (good reder) how foul deceived be the herfore named
persons. Is it not right euyde^t that Paul speaks of an eateable altar? We
have an aultare (says he) whereof they may not eat, He^ (...)
and not of thee mass stone altar which is not eatable. If y^ said aultare
were to be taken for a stone altar Then were they who trusted in the
ceremonial law in better case then we Christians be For that they moughte
not, we must eat ye said altar, The^ should Christ's body and blood the one have
been eaten the other dronking in Paul's time at the aultare and not at the table,
1. Cor: 10,
The^ would Paul have termed the eating place of thee lords supper not the
lords table, but the lords altar, Then would not the Apostles have gone from
house to house to mynister the co^munyon, Art: ^
for that there was none aultare. Then do our mynystres trespace who exhibit
and mynystre the said communion to the dyeng men at home, were wantethe an
aultare. Christ is only the eatable aultare heretofore especifyed, whom both
we must and do eat unto life everlasting otherwise spyrytuallye dead for
ever, as we may learn the same in Ihon: vt The which christ is named an
altar, for yt upon him alone we lay and power our spiritual sacrifices namely
our prayers and broken hearts, otherwise not acceptable to god ye father
according to this saying of Peter. 1 Petr: 2
Offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to god for Jesus christ sake. Hebre.
1^
By christ says Paul we offer ye sacrifice of praise always to god, yt is to
wete the fruytes of those lips which confess his name This is the last
argumentacion of them that be deduced and fetched out of the scripture which
seems any thing forceable for the pressed sacrifice. As touchi^g this place of
Matthew. v. When thou offerest a gift at ye altar. etc, Notwythsta^ding it
me^cioneth expresli both an altar and an offredge: Howbeit for so much as it
was the^ uttered when the ceremonial law of Moses stood in his wounted
effect and and force which commanded the^ both to be used, and spoken also to
the^, who were the^ obliged and bound to obey the said law: For yt the^ the
new testament was not full institute and ratified: It enforces nothing at al
for like offering and aultare to be freque^ted and used among us christians. By
reason the heretofore named law is through the ordinance and establyshment of
ye new testament utterly abandoned and repeled. ^
In that says Paul he says a new Testamente he has abrogate the old. And as
touchi^g this saying of Paul. (...),
And they which wait at the altar ar partakers of the altar, it imports
nothing at al in ye behalf of mass sacrifice, whereof there is no mention made.
It is but the fourmer part of a symylitude fetched out of the ceremonial law
of Moses and (...) thus* As in moses law, whosoever served the aultare (as thee
Leuytes did) lived thereby: Right so (now in the new Testament) who so
preaches the gospel shall have his lyuinge through ye preachment thereof. For
Paul in his the alleged text and others incidente hereto, endeavors
hymselue to argue a lyuelyhode to be deiu and payable to the gospel, preachers
of their auditors for there euangelical preacheme^t. Consider (dear reder) well
the entier and full saying of Paul, and you shall easily perceive he means
thus Do ye not (says he) understand how that they which minister in the
temple have their finding of the temple, And they which wayt at the altar ar
partakers of the altar? Even so, also (note the application of the form two
symilitudes) did the lord ordeyn that they which preach the gospel, should
live of ye gospel. If the former part of ye said symylitude were so to be taken
yt it should mean ye now there be certain ministers who should serve ye aultare,
it is to wete should mass it, then the gospel preachers should not mass it at
al. For that by Paul's doctrine to serve the aultare and to preach be soundrye
and seuerable offices and ministeryes, Which thing accords not with our
catholic doctrine, which teaches yt the gospel preachers must mass it
also. But wat mean I to be so much in the soylyng of these two last recited
scryptures, which if they had been any thing effectual for the proof of the
priest sacryfyce, as the before alleged seem, Master doctor Smythe would
have pleased them with in his book made for the defense of thee said
sacryfyce, as he has done thee remnaunte, and not in the margente thereof.
Thus have I at full both declared and argued that Christ's body and blood
ought not to be sacryfyced of the Massers in their mass, either to cleanse our
sin, either else to thank and serve god wythall, and that the reasons which
the catholics deduce out of the scripture to the mayntenaunce thereof enforce
nothing for the same. But say our catholyques the aunciente and holy
Doctors as Austeyne Chrysostom and others expressly auouche thee Lords
body and blood to be offered of the ministers, which thing they would never
have affyrmed oneles they were offered so in very deed, and that according
too Gods word In deed it is fulle certain that the said Doctors auouche both
thee LORDS body and and his blood to be sacrificed but not after our
Catholics meaning. For why they understand by the sacryfyce of christ's body
and blood done by the minister only the resembleance and memory of the true
and bloody sacryfyce of the said body and blood which is the communion and not
any real and true sacrifice of the same executed by the priest as the
catholics mistake the^. We often use to say (says Austen to bonifacius) when
eastrr approaches nyghe that to morrow or the next day is the lords passion
and yet it is many years sithe he suffered and ye passion was never but ones:
And upon ye sunday, we say this day he did again rise, howbeit, it is many
years sense he rose. Now is there no man so folisshe to reprove us as liars,
for so saying, because we name those days after the similitude of those, in
which these matters were done, so that is called the same day which is not the
very same day but by course of time like it. And it is said to be done thee
same day through mean of the celebration of the sacrament which is not done
the same day, but long tofore. Was not christ ones sacrificed in hymselue?
and yet in the sacrament is sacrificed for the people not only each ester
holy day, but each day? And he lies not who being demanded answers he is
offered For if the sacraments have not some sembleaunce of the matters whereof
they be sacraments, they were no sacraments at all. Of this sembleau^ce often
they take the names of the things by the^ sygnyfyed. Lo there it does full
well appear that by Austeynes mind the sacrament of christ's body and blood is
so named thee sacryfyce of the^ both as esterday is named the day of the lords
resurrection and good frydaye his passion day, But the said days benot termed
fsr yt the lord in very deed again ryseth in the one and resuffreth in the other,
but by reason his passion in the one his resurrectyo^ in the other is represented
and signified. Therefore the communion is called ye sacrifice of ye lords body
and blood not ye they be sacrificed verily i^ ye same, but in co^sideracion
their sacrifice is both recorded and resembled in ye said communion or
sacrament. The celebrating of the communion says Ekius in the tenthe chap.
of his fourmer book of the mass sacrifice (dedicate to the king of Pole) for
ye it is an image resembling Christ's passion (ye true sacrifice) may be named
always a sacrifice. As Austeyn says to Simplicius, Images ar wont to be called
by ye names of those things whereof they be images, Example, when we vteu and
behold a painted table or wall we say this is Cicero, this is Salust, this
Caesar, Here we se both by Austeyne and Ekius judgment the communyo^ is named a
sacryfyce of Christ's body and blood for that it is a resembleaunce and image
of the same sacryfyced. By reason whereof needs it must argue, as the image of
a thing is not thee thing selue: as a painted man is no man in deed, as
Cesars image is not Caesar ne Salustis Salust selue: So thee Mass or Communyon
being but an image and memory of ye true sacryfyce of christ's body and blood
is not thee very true sacrifice of the^ both, And as the communion is named
the sacrifice of ye foresaid body and blood, in consyderatio^ the said
sacrifice is there in both recorded and resembled Right so the ministering and
ce^ebrating of the said communion is upon like respect termed ye sacrifyinge of
christ's body and blood. Thus meaned our forefathers by the sacryfice and
sacrificing of the said body and blood. Now to the last matter incident to the
mass sacrifice which is the worship and instans of whole christ both man
and god, in and under the fourmes of bread and wine. A deed no less vnsytting
and repugnaunt too the Eua^gelical truth the^ the premises be. The pryue mass
worshyppers hold opinion that Christ ought of congrue^ce to be honored and
prayed after the consecration as being in the prestes hands for that he is
the^ there both god and man and so there no less honorable and prayable the^
in heaven, But this their argumentacion is nothing dialectical or formal. For
yt the presence of Christ in a place imports not the honor and prayeng of
him in the said place. Is not god the father essenciallye in each creature? Yet
he is reverenced and solicited, but as resident in heaven and not in his
creatures. Is not the holy ghost in each faythefull person? Howbeit no man
worshippeth him as present in ye faithful, but as in heaven. Christ is present
in each religiouse assemble assembled faithfully in his name, y^
notwithsta^di^g noma^ does honor, and pray unto him as resyant in the
religiouse assemble but in heaven alone. Is he not as god each where and
consequently at the mass? Howbeit no man adiudgeth him there to be worshipped
and called upon, if his body were thence utterly abse^ted, The experie^s whereof
is plain in that part of the mass that forgoeth consecration. Why the^ should
his bodily presence enforce us to honor and solicit him in the said mass?
For his body is not honorable ne prayable merely of it selue but in respect of
his godhedde personally alyed and coupled therwyth. Christ both god and man with
his father and the holy ghost is present at yt baptism of faithful infantes
where they become enbodied and incorporate thereto, it is to wete where they
eat his body and drink his blood as reallye as we do at his supper: Howbeit
no man worshippeth either his body as present at baptism there no less
presented the^ at his supper, either else his godhed, either for his own or for
ye presens of his said body, Why the^ should either his body be honored as
present in ye mass after the consecration or else thee presence thereof cause us
to honor his godhed in the same, there otherwise dishonorable? As in ye old
testament (as we learn in the.vi. of Daniel) the Godly fathers in their
exileme^t wa^dering in farre^ co^treis far from whom did in all their prayers
made unto god dyrecte both their hearts and their eyes toward Jerusalem, and
where so ever they came, did solicit god as inhabitant in ye same: right so we
being as pelgrimes i^ this world, exiled as were from heaven our Jerusalem and
natyue country where god dwells must honor and pray unto him always as
resya^t in that heavenly Jerusalem and not else where It is written in the canon
of thee most worthy counsayl of Nyce in sort as follows. Let us not grossly
behold the bread and cup proposed and set before our eyes but in faith,
consydere thee lamb of of god in that his sacred table with our minds eleuate
and vplifted Here we se the most worthy co^sayl inhibiteth and diswade the us
from gaysing and tootinge upon the bread and wine, aduertising us in faith to
respect christ in his supper, having our minds erected up into heaven, In case
the said co^sayl had esteemed it sitting and leyful to worship the bread (as the
most part of the lealtye, I had almost said of the clergy to does, an
ydolytre detestable), or christ in the bread (as in manner all christiando^
does a lamentable case) it would not have forbidden us to to ote upon the bred
and advertised us to vplift our hearts into heaven. Does not the pressed him
selue at his mass say a little before elevation or sacringe? We have our
hearts above to ye lord? How either ought or can christ be reverenced and
oncalled as present in the sacringe if we, as ye masser and quere do singe,
have and ought to have (through the decre of the church) our hearts and eyes
two (for where our hearts be there must our eyes be fastened also) above
erected up into heaven to the lord For if he were to be considered and
honored in ye mass, the^ we should have our hearts beneth and not above
downward and not upward to ye lord, the^ we should at that instante worship him
in the prestes hands and not in heaven. Christ prescribing us an exact trade
and perfyt form to pray wythall, enioyneth us in the same to instant and on
call God the father in heaven where he him selue is resydent on his ryghthande
(as Paul says) and not else where notwithstanding he be each where, Our father
says christ which is in heaven, he says not which art each where. In respect
whereof both ye father and ye son be to be worshipped and prayed to i^ heaven
a ^one and not else where, For to pray otherwise (says Cipria^) the^ christ
tought us is not only an ignorance but a vice also, mathe. 15
sith he says why do ye infri^g and break gods iniunction purposely to
establesh your tradicio^. Chrysostom i^ his exposicio^ upon ye lords prayer
writes as follows, where as Christ says God is in heaven he does not by yt
his so saie^g co^clud and heme^ hi^ there but with draws hi^ who makethe his
prayer to him, from ye earth and fastneth him i^ heaven Ite^ in his homely upon
the said prayer he writes after this forte Se where ye call upon the father,
verily in heaven upon consideration whereof we cry at thee vicu of thee
sacryfyce, our hearts above, where our confession is bound, let our
hearts be represe^ted. Hitherto Chrysostom who in these his sayings that
Christ is not to be honored and prayed to in the earth and so not in ye
massinge place (apart thereof) but in heaven Further ca^ there be made to god at
any time an effectual prayer with out an vplyftinge of our hearts, unto him?
No verelye. Why the^ pray we to christ in ye mass sacring? Where ca^ be none
vplifti^ge but a downliftinge of our hearts. In so much as the places where
christ's supper and the mass, be celebrate (as al other places under heaven)
be beneth and not above. Austeyn in ye behalf of the premises writes, super
lectione^ eua^gelii co^fite or tibi pater etc, in sort thus, Faithful
perfetly know where and when it is said, let us re^dre thanks to ye lord our
god. For noma^ re^dereth thanks to the lord, who has not his heart upward to
the lord. Note, this he says not who has his heart downward but upward,
beneth but above, dyrected but erec^ed, in the earth but in heaven to the lord.
Did not christ selue alw^ye pray to his father his eyes erected up into heaven,
as it appears in Ihon. xvii? Why the^ do we not direct our prayers to the
Trinite, not as being here there or else where, but in heaven alone? But here it
is objected ye many did worship and instante Christ as being seably conversant
^monge the^, mathe. 8
namely Thomas Peter and the le^rouse person and therefore we may in like
manner honor him and on call him in the mass or communion. To this I answer,
albeit christ was worshypful and prayeable as being emonge us, while h^ was
sensiblye co^uersaunt with us: By reason he as god and me^ was the seable among
us and vnasse^ded to heaven: How beit for so much as he is now become both
unvisible among us, and resyde^t in heaven, on his fathers ryghtha^d, he is
both honorable and prayable but i^ heaven alone and not in ye earth, and
consecrate bred and wine. For whi to worship hi^ in under or before ye said
bread and wine: is to worship ye same bread and wine. As to worship god in
under or before an image is to reverence thee image selue, which is an
insufferable ydolatree and also disalowed by ye kings majesty's proceeding.
Ionn: 4 Collos: 3.
Christ is truth spirit and the body, as Paul says, In respect whereof he is
not to be honored much less called upon, in or under shadows and carnal
things soch as the bread, wine, pyxe and other earthlye things be. But in
spirit and verity without figure shadow or any other carnal thing as he
him selue says in Ihon iiii. The Catholyques the^ selves grant it ydolatre
to worship christ body under ye bread, if there were remaining the substance
of the said bread, why than worship we the fore said body under the bread
sithe as I have heretofore argued the bread substance is not altered. Well
though it were, yet why should it not be ydolatre to honor christ's body under
the accidental and outward fourmes of bread? For in this manner as well the
accide^tes of bread be worshipped as in the other thee substance thereof. Now
does he show (as the father and the holy ghost do) his glory and majesty but
in heaven alone, notwithstanding he be each where. In respect whereof he is to
be adored and solicited in heaven alone and not else where. For honor and
prayer importe the presence of his glory and majesty where they be exhibited
to him And as a king renou^ceth to be honored as a king where he dyffynneleth
his person age and majesty royal. Right so Christ dyssymuling his Majesty
renoume and godly personage here among us refuses to be reverenced and called
upon as he is amongst us. He is as meat received and eaten and as drink
taken and dronken at his supper: and thee mass also (if he be there received at
al). By reason whereof he is to be honored and oncalled nether in the one ne in
the other, because meat and drink be nether honored ne instanted. This it
appears euyde^t yt the worship and praying to christ at the mass, his supper
or else where, heaven exempted is dissonante to the sacred scripture worthy
counsayll ancient doctors good reason and the nature and c^nditio^ of true
prayer and so discommendable. But here wolsome say God is too be honored and
prayed to in all places and so consequentlye in the priests hands at the
elevation or else where. To this I answer notwithstanding we ought to honor
and solicit god each where, howbeit our prayers and worshippes made unto him
here or there must tend and be directed to him as inhabitant and resiant in
heaven and not as here there or else where in the earth. Why then wolsome say does
Austeyne yt worthy clerk write to the contrary? He says noma^ eats
christ's flesh onles he first worshyppeth it and synneth it, he worship it
not? Well though Austeyne says Christ's must be worshipped, yet he gayn says
not me, because he says not noma^ eats christ's flesh without he worship it
as in his supper or ye mass in or under the bread, but in simple without any
soch like gloss worshippeth it. Yea though he were to be understand to talk of
soch worship which implies the honor and instaunce of the said flesh. By
reason he makes no clear mention where the same should be worshypped, he is to
be taken to entreat of ye worshipping of ye before me^cioned flesh in soch
place wherein it is not doubted but certainly known it is worshipped, yt is of
heaven and not of any earthly place. But Augustyn means by ye worshippi^g of
christ's flesh no soch worship as, honoring prayinge crowchinge or knelinge
thereunto, but only the worthy reverent and wholesome receypte and eating of the
said flesh. For the honor due and requisite to the said flesh or sacrament
thereof, is to receive the^ as christ instituted the^ to be received, yt is to
wete with pure fyeth cleansed conscience with unfeigned repentance charity and
thankesgeuing with full desire and purpose to be fed with christ's flesh to be
therbye mortefyed too syn and sanctified, to be enbodyed to christ and not to
crouch before ye bred to his flesh or to worship invoke and solicit him as
present in or under ye bred. The right usage of gods word and his sacraments
is reco^pted their due honor as their abusion dishonor. The word Baptism
and absolution through mean of true and obedient faith, and cleansed
conscience be condignely and accordingly received without either crouching or
kneling either worshippinge or prayinge to God as present in ye same. So thee
lords supper is worthily and ryghtely celebrate and received with out thee
foresaid crouche worship and insta^ce. Thus have I at full spoken of ye first
part of the mass, Now to the second which consists in ye receypt of the
lords supper which wether it be in very deed as it is named it happily may be
well doubted upon. Yea as me seameth it is not in deed. For sith at the preuy
mass there is none to suppli ye roumth and office of christ in ministering the
supper it cannot be the lords but ye priests supper. For without christ or his
minister his supper cannot be made ne distribute. Without christ's words
touching the institution of his supper be duelye reported at the recepte of
the bred and wine there cannot be his supper. How then can the mass supper be
the lords? sith there wants his mynyster, who should report the said words?
If the pryest presume to pronounce them they be the priests and not christ's,
for that they be the words not of the gyuer which is Christ, but of thee
taker which cannot be he. If it were thee Lords supper that the Pryeste
takethe at his Mass he he should receive it of the lord and not of him selue.
But how can he possibly receive it of the lord, since there is none present to
exhibit the priest it in christ name? But some wol say the priest may supplye
ye person, both of the institutour exhybitour and receyuer of thee mass
supper, therefore it is ye lords. If this yt is objected were true, then might
one baptysme him selue, assoyle him selue, confyrme him selue, marrye him
selue, annoint him selue, which no man be he never so catholic wol grant, By
reason as they be thought al to he institute of christ so they must all be
executed in his name and autorite Which cannot be, when there is none to supply
his r^um^he. For the receyuer of thee premises cannot possibly play both the
part of the geuer and of the taker. By reason they be two several persons. To
this the catholics also condisce^de as most certain. Therefore as in the
heretofore especified ceremonies (some of the^ truly but al catholiqueli termed
sacraments) one man alone cannot receive the^, for want of a second person who
should mynyster the^ unto him in the lords name and autorite notwithstanding
that one man has used for ye receypte of the same each word requysit and
behoueable thereto: Right so the pressed endeuouryng him selue to receive the
lords supper cannot receive it without christ's minyster an othere person
ebesyde him selue, notwithstanding he reports all thee words apperteyninge
to the right and full institution of the said supper. For as the above me^cioned
sacraments the receyuers report of the words belonging to the consecration
of any of the said sacraments enforces not the sacraments? Example, his
reporting of the baptism words over him selue, in washi^g him selue, or his
rehearsal of the absolution words upon him selue, makes nether baptism ne
absolutio^: Eue^ so the pressed being but the receyuer that is to say, he who
would receive the lords supper, cannot through his own report of ye words
apperteyning to ye full institution of the said supper, institute or cause the
same There is no sacrament which has not for his ordinance and essensiall
being both his deputed element word and co^ma^deme^t. Where is there any
commandment, yea or suffera^ce to take or institute ye lords supper alone?
Certes not in ye holy scripture. Can there be instituted ye lords supper
without the due rehersall of the words concerning the same? Can the said
words be iustlye esteemed christ's not construed as he meaned them? No
verelye, Therefore let the masser report them in his pryuate Mass so often as
him list, they be not the lords words. For that take ye, eat ye drink ye,
implye both a commau^demente and a second person to the receypt of the Lords
body and blood, and to the consecration of the sacrament of the same, Which
both want in thee Pryestes supper, and so it is not the lords. Wherefore as
it is falsely so presu^ptuously and blasphemously termed ye lords supper, But
let it be ye same yt the masser takethe in his mass, yet it is there
haynouslye abused, for yt it is celebrate contrary to his commandment and
otherwise then he instituted it. luke. xxii
He bad us sever the consecrate bread charitablye among us and not each of us
to reserve it to him selue, and to eat vncharytablye al alone, as ye pressed
does. Math. 26
He bad us take and eat his body and not to worship it and vplyft it as the
pressed does. 1. Cor: 10,
He bad us at the celebratio^ and receypt of his supper, receive and eat his
body in his reme^breau^ce and tha^kfully to show his death among the
congregation which the priest pretermyttethe and not to sacrifice his body and
blood as the pressed does: Math. 26
He bad us say not only take eat this is my bodi but also which is given for
you (a clause most fruyteful and needful) Which the pressed as vain and
superfluouse ouerhyppethe. He bad us take and eat his body for our selves
alone and not for others also in that he commands us to eat it, for noma^
can effectualli eat it for another, But the pressed does not only eat it for
him selue, but for others also, both quyck and dead. Which as it is impossible
for him to do effectuallye so to attempt is a superstition. Can another man's
eating releife mine hunger? Can his drinkinge release my thyrste? Can another
man be baptized assoyled, priested, married, co^fyrmed or anointed for me? How
then can the prestes receypt and celebratinge of thee communion be mine or
auayleable to me? Chrysostom upon the.xv. chap. of the first to the
Corinthians writes to the mayntenaunce of the premises in sort as follows.
As one man cannot be christened for an other specially being dead, so noman
can receive the body and blood of christ for another namely being dead. Hereto
agrees Antididagma. but be it it be so that the priest may receive and eat
the lords supper for others, whether they be quycke or dead. Yet for as much
as he cannot possibly believe for another (the just man says Paul shall live
by his own fayeth (it must no remedy be that he both takes and eats the
Lord is supper to thee dampnacyon of them, Roma. i.
whatsoever they be good or bad dead or quycke for whom he takes and eats
ye same. By raso^ he takes and eats the said supper for them unworthily
for want of his beleuyng for theyme, which is merelye needful to the wholesome
and worthy receypte and usage of thee before mencyoned supper. Well though it
were so that the preyst both could at the Lords supper for others, and
believe for them also: Howbeyt in so much the said pryste vsyth in his massyng
the said supper, otherwise then Christ him selue instytuted it (as is
heretofore declared) needs must he receive it both to his own dampnacio^ and
others, Because (as S, Ambrose writes upon ye leauenth of ye first to thee
Corynthia^s) who so uses ye Lords supper otherwise the^ he him selue ordened,
receives it unworthily and co^seque^tly to his da^pnatio^ as paul says. 1.
Cori: 11.
Thus it is plane yt ye private mass supper is to be disco^tynued and surcesed
as blasphemouse to God and annoyous to the practycioners thereof, and the
deuocyo^ and holiness, that is supposed to be in the usage thereof, is mere
ydolatrye and superstycion, and so both dampnable an^ excheuable. Wherefore
they w^ (...) deem it both reasonable and (...) ^ly, that the masser might
(...) it alone, when others refus^ (...) ^ctlye to mass with him (...) no man
ought to be a st^ (...) and hinderaunce of an other (...) ^uocyon, be no less
deceived the^ thee Jews, who adiuged their conde^pning of the eua^gelical
doctrine and persecuting of christ and his disciples both a sufferable and
serviceable service too God, in consideration it was done of deuotyon. Now to
prayer the third part of the solytarye mass, which is for soundrye
consyderatyons blame worthy. First for that therein those saints be on called
as aduourers and ayders who be not here presently conversant emonge us but ar
fare soundred and distanted from us in place namelye in heaven. For though we
might pray unto ye said saints as being presentlye and conuersaunt with us
as we do one to another assembled togethers, howbeit for asmoch they be far
placed from us (they in heaven we in ye earth) we ought not to instaunte the^.
For why that were to attribute and render to the^ the honor dew and incidente
to God alone, it is to weete ye knowledge of our hearts and the hearing of the
far absent, In case I being at Cambredge did desire either you, either any
man's the^ being not present with me, but either at york or London to pray
for me, (whom otherwise present with me I might both well and wisely): would not
each man depose that my desire both vaynelye and indiscreetly made of me?
Because no man being at that present, either at york or London, what time I
pray to him in Cambredge, either hears or vnderstandethe yt my prayer? Yeas
truly, How the^ can our prayers be fruyteful and effectual which be directed
to the heaven saints who be farrer distanted or sound red from us then either
London or york from Cambredge? But the heaven saints w^l some say being
conversant or present with God espy in him as in a glass, all the secrets and
entendeme^tes of our hearts, and so orderly perceive what we pray for and to
whom, This sophistical cauil or objection is nothing answerable, to Gods
word wherein it is expressly written in sort as follows. ii. para. vi
Thou alone know the hearts of the sons of men How could this be
veryfyed and justified that god alone understands men's hearts, if the heaven
saints know the^ also? Abraham says Esaye.lxiii. knows us not, Israel
knows us not, So may we say, Paul knows us not, Peter knows us not.
For why they were asmoch pryueledged and regarded as Peter and Paul. It is
written in thee.ix. of thee book named preacher, that the dead know the
nothing any more, upon the which text Hierome says thus. There is no
knowledge after death, ne any sense after the dissolutyon of this life.
Wherefore as it is an ungodly so an untrue saying the heaven saints knows
our hearts not wythstandynge their conversation with God. It was notably
inhibited in the counsayl of Carthage that any saint should be called upon at
thee altar, that the priest should utter this or like prayer. S. Paul or Peter
pray for me, Why then contrary both to the scripture and the said godly
counsayl do we instant supersticiousli the heaven saints at our massi^g? But
enough hereof. The second consyderation, why mass prayer is to be
discommended is by reason therein, it is prayed for the dead, not so much too
declare thereby our charity toward them in wishinge the^ saved (which purpose
ware no less sufferable then charitable) as through our prayers too redeem
them out of pur- of purgatory or at lest to enlessen their pains in the same.
Which for to think well done as it is an intolerable error so for to
attempt is a synneful superstition. For who so does depart out of this
world, dies either in ye lord or without him, If he die without him the^
incontinent remedyles he is condemned. For without christ there is no mercy to
be achyued or had, ii. Corin.
al promises says Paul be in christ, yea and amen. But if he die in the lord
he is both blessed and enfranchised from al trauayl as S. Iho^ writes in,
xiiii. of his revelation. In that Johan avouches the departed in thee lord to
be blessed, he does us to understand they be not payned in purgatory else were
they cursed and not blessed, In that he pronouncethe the^ quyte delivered from
al labor, he does us to were they be no more molested or tormented either in
purgatory or else were, else should they endure in labor, For to be payned in
purgatory is a grievous trauayl Again whosoever dies in the Lord dies in faith,
whosoever dies in faith, escapes both death and judgment and so consequently
purgatory also, which is a payneful judgment after our catholic doctrine.
Johan, v,
Verily, verily I say unto you says christ, He that hears my words and
believes on him that has sent me, has everlasting life and shall not come into
judgment but is escaped from death to life, As concerning the other dead sort
as it dies without christ so without faith, therefore it is euerlastinglye and
so not pardonably in purgatory, but vnpardonably placed in hell. Where upon it
formally argues there is no purgatory. Thee dead says Solomon in ye.ix. of
of his book entitled, ye preacher, have no more a reward. Which his saying were
not true, if they might be through our prayers sacryfices or otherwise
delivered out of purgatore. For their delivery were a great reward. If any
should come to purgatore it is very like and colorable yt the thief which was
hanged with christ, should have been for a season placed and payned therein. being
soch a synful liver as he was till his dieng hour, but he incontine^t after his
hence departure, went with christ to paradise. In consideration whereof it is
right certain that purgatore is but an ymagyned and feigned place, by reason
whereof ye prayers and sacrifices institute to release and redeem solles out of
the same (otherwise called ye third place wherein they be payned) be both vayn
and stuperstitious. The place of ye Machabees which ye catholics allege to
the mayntenau^ce ^, mac, 12
of ye said place is not aute^tical or received for scripture, as Hierome
Gregory Ruffinus record. The canones which the catholics father of ye
apostles, the canons of the last co^sayl of Leedes and Aphricane regestred ye
bible books without any mention made of ye Machabees at al, which argues yt the^
the books of Machabees were vncanonised It is wryte^ in ye heretofore alleged
place of ye said Machabees ye Judas caused both sacrifice and prayer to bemade
to purge and do away ye syn of ye murdered Jews wtal, and is in the said book
co^me^ded for yt his so doing which is an vndeceaueable argument yt the said
book is not aute^tical or canonical. For the leuiticall sacrifices did not do
away syn before god. It is impossible says Paul to the Hebrews yt the blood
of oxe^ and gottes should take away sins. Hebre. x
Again there be no sacrifices or prayers commanded of god in the behalf of the
dead. Therefore the before me^cioned book is nothing less the^ canonical In
consideration it approves matters added to gods word contrary to his express
commandment, Deuteronomy, 20
Here iucide^tly by the way we may learn yt sith god in the old law (the time
of vnperfection) enjoined neither sacryfyce ne prayer for the dead, it is not
bys mind that now in the new testament (the time of perfection) he being also
now much more merciful the^ before christ's incarnation there should be made
either sacryfyce or prayer for the dead to redeem and release them with al (as
otherwise vnredemed and payned) Forther if the foresaid book were thoroughly
written by the enbrethinge of the holy ghost (otherwise vncanonised as Peter
says) the^ this ensuing clause should not have been interplaced in the end
thereof, ii, Petr, i,
ii, mac, 15
And if well, and as it is co^uenable for a storye, I wyshe the same, if not
worthily, I must be pardoned, Which wysshe or iayenge is utterly unworthy the
profession if the holy ghost, who says and writes al matters both well and
godly, and so needs no pardon for the same. If the place of Paul which the
catholics allege for purgatory were to be vndersta^de^ of the same, i.
Cori. iii
the^ questionles were ye Apostles first placed and vexed in the said
purgatory, ere they came to heaven. For why Paul talking in ye same place
namely of preachers avouches that the fire shall try each man's work what it
is, and co^seque^tly the apostles, for yt they were both me^ and preachers. So
yt Paul was not incontinent after his hence departure with Christ as he
wysshed to be For to be placed and tormented in purgatore is not to be with
christ So y^ Lazarus and ye thief were not immediatli upon their decease, luke
16.23
tho ne in paradise the other in Abraha^s bosom, places of pleasure, and not of
wofulnes (as purgatory is. If Christ's talk in Matthew.v. concerning the
extreme emprisonme^t of certain, enforsed for purgatore the^ neither soul
masses sacryfyces ne prayers could enforce any thing to the ransom and
deliverance of them, who ar payned in the same. For their christ swereth they
shall not come out thense, till they paid the uttermost farthinge. What can
prayer, sacryfyce or mass avail her, sithe christ so exactly demands the
full paymente of thee dett, as without it the emprysoned shall not be
fredo^med and delivered? He speak the of a place where justice is executed and
not mercee, that is hell and not purgatore. Out of another saying of Christ
in the said Matthew.xii. our catholics do argue for purgatore but expuris
negatiuis and therefore their argumentation being not formal is nothing
effectual. The cause why our aunciente writers say, they sacrifyce and pray
for thee dead, was not to deliver the^ out of pain thereby (For they sacrificed
and prayed for ye patriarchs prophets apostles also who the^ were perfect
already in heaven, and had no need of their prayers or sacrifices) but partly
too declare thereby their charitee toward the hence departed, in well wysshinge
them and rendering god thanks for their salvation and endeles blessefulnes,
partly to assure and warrant the suruyuers at the remembrance of the good and
blesful estate of the deceased, both of everlasting life and bodily
resurrection: To sacryfyce Christ's body and blood either for the dead, or
quycke, after the true meaning of the foresaid writers, is namely to recite and
pray for the said persons in those our prayers which we make at the receypt
of the lords supper, called otherwise of the^ the sacryfyce of the lords
body and blood, in consideration it is a resemblau^ce thereof and not as ye
solle massers mistake it, to up offer the said body and blood in very deed to
cleanse thee quycke: and too redeem and ransom the deadde out of purgatory
wythal. For after this life there is no purging ne ame^deme^t place. Therefore
says Cipria^ in the first treat against Demetrian when we hence depart there
is no place of repe^tau^ce. here life is either forfetted or atteigned. While we
be here says Chrysostom in his second homeli of Lazarus we have good hope,
but so soon as we shall hence depart, we shall not either repent or do away
syn. The same Chrysostom in ye two and twe^tye sermon to the people says,
there be none occasions of meriting after this life. Who so (says Ambrose in
the ii. chap. of his book concerning the goodness of death) has not here
received remyssyo^ of syn shall not receive it there. There is no place, says
Austeyn in his Epistle to macedonius, of correcti^g our demeinour, but i^ this
life. For after this life each man shall have that which he procured to him in
this, What can be more openly and dyrectly written against the popysh
purgatory, the^ the alleged auctoritees? why the^ do we mayntayn purgatory
contrary both to ye scripture and ancient writers? But beit there were a
purginge place wherein the hence departed solles be a mockedg and blaspheming of
god is this, for the masser to pray in ye lords prayer let thy will be done
in earth and yet contrary to gods will to pray for the erectio^ and
acceptaunce of his sacrifyce to ye great hinderau^ce and derogation of
christ's, which was perfyted and wrought at his maiestyes appoyntmente? What is
to take the name of god in vain, if yt be not? and so sinful What is to
flock and despise god if that be not? In respect whereof mass prayer is
reprocheful. Now to the fourth and last part of ye mass named doctrine, which
in consideration it teaches and ratifieth thee damnable synfulnes of the
before mentioned parts of this solitary ^^sse exhorting and occasionyng the
lay people both to enbrace and w^rship the same is fautie as they be. For the
doctrine of a synneful matter is synful as the matter selue. Not only to riot
is sin, but the doctrine also thereof and the allure to the same, To steal
and to teach or exhort to steal be both defaultes, Too sin and to teach
or move to sin be both sinful. Even so to pryuat mass it and to teach
and motion so to do be both defaultes exchewable, Here am I demanded wether I
suppose the epistle and gospel interplaced in the mass to be godly and
approueable or no To the whyth demand thus I answer. The gospel and
epistle if they were not abused and misplaced were both godly and commendable
But for so much as they be i^serted and placed in the pryuee mass to the
furniture worship and comme^dation thereof, and for a couerte or cloak of the
ungodliness in the same, they so misused must needs be synneful. Meat and
drink be good and receyueable but enpoysoned, they be naught and
vnreceaueable, and poison their eaters and drinkers, as the pure poison selue
does, wherwt they are poisoned: Right so gods word merely of it selue is good
and frutful but abused ungodly, displesing god and e^pechi^g man, as the syn
abusion does, where with it is corrupted. An example and evidence whereof we have
both in our massing, and co^iuring wherein gods words be haynousli abused.
There is no service ne worship which god so highly estemeth or so straytly
inioyneth to be observed, but being misused is not only not serviceable and
acceptable, but much displesau^t also and hateful to hi^ Because it is
executed, not after but contrary to his will and therefore sinful and detestable
before him, who co^man^ded only ye right usage and not ye abusage (as of al
other matters) so of ye premises. Notwithsta^di^g god commanded both ince^se
to be used and holy days to be observed, howbeit he openly by his prophets
avouches he has the^ in hate and detestatio^, not i^ respect of the^ selves,
for he bad the^, but in consideration of their abusio^ which he inhibited I
hate says he by his prophet Amos, and abhor your holy days and where ye
se^ce me when ye come together I wol not account it. And further by his
prophet Esaias.i. he says thus, I abhor your ince^se I may not away with your
newmones your sabathes and sole^pne days. etc Note this diligently, god says
not I abhor ye for your abusyng of the holy days nor he says I abhor your
abuse of ye holy days, but I abhor your holy days, he says not I abhor
ye for your abusio^ of ince^se newmoones sabbathes and sole^pne days, nor he
says I abhor ye abusio^ of your ince^se new moons sabathes and solemn
days, whereby he does us to wete yt he does not only hate and detest ye abusers
with there abusage of his commanded service and worship, but ye service also
and worship selue as an inhybyted sin practysed of man, and forged of ye
devil, and not as an honor enjoined approved, and devised of him, and through
his grace put in practice of man. In consideracion whereof god names ye
foresaid holy days new moons sabbathes not his, but youres, it to wete ye
Jews whom he spooke unto. For nothing ye is sinful (as each abused matter is)
ought to be fathered of God the fountane and authore not of sinfulnes but of
goodness only. Jacob. i
Which matere is by ye mean of his abusage not a part only, but thoroughly
faulty. i. Corin. v
A little leaven (says) Paul sowreth yt whole lump of dowe. Whereby he does us
to understand yt as othere abused matters be not a part only, but entier^y and
thoroughly vicious and synful, so the pressed mass is in like manner as well in his
doctrine, as in ye other his essential parts. Sethe (good reader) there is no
portyon of the popysshe pryuat mass that does not hyghly displease god as ^e
pugnant to his written word and derogatorye to his honor, and ^nnoy man as
noyous both to his ^ody and soul: I beseech the with ^ll possible endeavor
exchewe it and ^o manner wise, accept it as either ^pproueable either else a
suffera^le matter. If gods honor cannot ^ccasion and move us to the utter
^efusal and auoydau^ce thereof, let ^s well respect the great benefyt and
commodytye that redounethe ^her upon. If nether gods glory ^e our profyt, can
enforce us to ye premises, the^ we be worse tha^ brutish beestes, which,
though not for gods glory, yet for their own, profyt, ar led willingly
hither and thither. We resort to ye church purposely to serve god therein, not
with ma^s service, which he i^hibiteth and dislyketh, but with his own alone
which he commands and accepts. So yt in the congregation no manner service
ought to be freque^ted, bu^ that alone which is both openly and truly fonded
upon gods written word. Why then is not the^ priest pryuee Mass abandoned and
abolished quyte out of the congregation which is not quadrant but variant to
the said word, wh^che does not ratify and establish bu^ inuert and subvert the
right institution and usage of ye sacrament of chr^stes body and blood (as is
heretofore argued at full). And in ye romt^ thereof why is not the communion
frequented? Is not the said communion a new Testament, as christ selue says
in Luke.xxii* Can a man therefore not synfully but leyfulli alter the order
thereof? No verelye. For as S. Paul says it is not leyful to excha^ge ma^s,
Gala. iii
much less gods will legacye and testament. Why the^ do we reteygne accept
and use solytare mass? Which is an unsitting exchange of the communion (the
lords Testament and legacye). Is not the said communion a Sacrament of
charity and love? In consyderation whereof it is not to received of one alone,
but of many at ones. For charytye co^systeth in many and not in one alone. Why
then use we still thee priest mass? which is rather an union then a
communion and an argument rather of hate and dissension the^ of love and unite.
For therein the priest uncharitably fondereth him selue from the congregatyon,
as one severed not in place alone, but in heart also from the same. It is no
marueyl that ye priest is had in great hate and conte^ptme^t among his
parishioners seith he so vncharitabli takes, eats, and drinks al alone,
disseuering and sequestring him selue from his accompanable parrishioners, lest
they would communycate (as charitable godlynes requires (with him. It is a
lamentable sight to behold the great and unto ^lerable uncharitableness which
our pryuate massing prestes show toward their partishioners. Verily (as me
seamethe) their pryuate massyng is no small occasyon thereof. By reason as the
communyon engendereth orderly low, so thee pryuate massynge hate in the
frequenters of the same: For why as they be contrary in nature, so they be in
effect and operation. Wherefore the said massinge is not be freque^ted of any,
but is to be disvsed of each christian. Who ought to endeavor him selue to be
charitable and not uncharitable. i. Cori. 10
We ought (says Paul) to eat al of one lofe, i. Cori. 10
and drink al of one cup, we ought (as the same Paul wolleth us) assemble
togethers to the receypt of the communion, 1. Cori: 11.
and one to take it orderly after another: These premises cannot be
accomplished and veryfyed in the pryuate mass, where the priest severally all
alone has his loofe and eats it alone, where there is none assemble assembled
togethers to receive thee communion, but to gase upon the prestes receypt and
doing, where none receaueth the said communion orderly one after another, but
unorderly one alone. Wherefore thee said mass is to be discontinued and
aba^doned. For whi he is accursed who so teaches either in word, deed or
ioynctlye in both, another doctrine in relygion, then that which Paul learned
us, Gala. ^
as he him selue records the same. We must not do what we list, but what
god co^maundethe us, as it is written in Deuteronomy.xii. For why our carnal
reason and entendeme^tes be merely repugnau^t, both to his sayenges and
doings, and so displeasau^t and hateful to him. The sense of ye flesh (says
Paul) is enmytee against God. Roma. 8.
In case we moughte worship god as we list, Why did he appoint and prescribe us
a prescripte order to worship him withal? If we might sittingly honor him
after our will and fantasy: The^ each made worship were syttinge and ieyful, and
so consequentelye there were none ydolatree at al, the^ were there no dyfference
betwexte ours and thee Turks, Jews Paynymes, Ethnikes, and other miscreantes
religion, For they be only differenced by Gods written word. If we moughte
order christ's supper after our arbitrament, then why did he institute and
prescribe us a trade and order to be observed in the celebratio^ thereof? 1.
Cori. ^^.
Why did Paul reprove and blame thee Corinthians for their disorder and
abusage of the same? Are not we named christians for that we ought to profess
and give full credence to his sayings and practyse, and enbrace his doyinges,
as followable and beleueable? But how do we answer to our name and
profession in our solitary massing? wherein we do not only, not ensue christ's
practyse and order, but thoroughly subvert and inuerte the same concerning the
administration of his supper Are we not called faithful for that we ought to
ground al our religion upon our faith? which faith issues only from Gods
written word, as Paul records, Roma. 10
otherwise no true faith. But how can we be indede as we be named, if we admit
and frequente as we do, to thee great and insufferable empechemente both of
Christ's honor and our solles salvation, the pressed preuye mass? which is
variant to gods word. Therefore as it is an unfaithful, so as synneful misdede
For that which is wrought without faith is sin, Roma, 10
as Paul says: Ace we not straytelye enjoined of God utterly to abandon, and
avoid all ydolatrye? How do we observe and accomplish this his iniunction,
while we enbrace and accept the said mass? which is a made worship of God,
and so ydolatrye. For the worship of any phantasye intent conceypt and image,
or of any other matter else, forged of man's brain without gods written word,
is questionles ydolatrye? Hereto accords Hierome (who upon the last of
Hieremye on this verse And they put their ydols in the house. etc, wrytethe in,
sort thus) not only the^ Judas reposed in Gods temple an ydoll image, whereof
we read in the first of Ezechtel, but now still in gods house (which by
interpretation is the congregation) or in the heart of ye beleuers, is placed an
ydol, whensoever any new doctrine is forged, and after the law adored and
worshypped in the secret. And upon the twentye of Ezechyel the said, Hierome
calls the inue^tio^s and deuyses of the philosophers and herytyques, the
Egyptia^s ydols. Ancient usage in other matters of relygion seems to be of
much force and importau^ce to ye accepta^ce and establishme^t of any soch
semblable matter, but her in our pryuate mass matter the said usage is no
thing esteemed (To sure an argument I fear me of our parcialitee in scripture
matters) Was not christ's own administration of his supper the first original
usage thereof? Mat. xxvi
and so the auncientest? wherein none alone but soundrye ioinctly togethers did
communicate? In the prematiue church it was both observed and enacted that all
the whole congregation assembled should communicate with thee priest or
minister, as it does well appear in Gracian de consecra. distinct.i. in the
canon de^s, which is fathered of the Apostles, in thee Canon Episcopus
fathered of Anacletus, and de consecra. distinc.ii. in the canon peracta,
Calixtus thus wryttethe when the co^secratio^ is done, let each man the^
present communicate, and then who woll not to be excommunicate. This thee
Apostles enacted this does the Romyshe church hold and observe. Note this that
Calixtus does not only declare that it is his will and commau^deme^t al they who
be present at the communion time should communicate, else to be excommunicate,
But the apostles decree and the usage of the Romish church also. There be
(says Erasmus upon the Psalm, Quam dilectabernacula) who require in thee
Mass a communion, In deed I grant so it was instituted of Christ and so it
was in thee old time observed Albert in his book of thee Mass mysteries,
records it was first in wont that all the togethers assembled persons in ye
church did communicate each day, when yt could not be observed, it was decreed
that on each sunday all the hole congregation should communicate, when this
neither could be observed, it was decreed that thryse in the year, at Easter,
Whytsondaye, and Christmasse, the communion should be received of the whole
congregation. And when this could nether be observed it was enacted that ones
in the year the said communion should be received of the whole congregation.
Here we may learn of Albert that in the primative church all thee whole
congregation did communicate each day ioynetly togethers. Further in case we
would well and earnestly respect the consyderatyon of our repair to the church,
and what also is of the masser reported out of his mass book at thee
celebration of thee communion: We might well understand that the said
communion should always be received of a compaygne and not of one alone. Do we
not (I pray ye) repair to the church, as to the common place, wherein we
should make common prayers nothing excuting pryuatly but all commonly? Saint
Paul avouches, i. Cori. 14
nothing ought to be executed in thee church, but that which redowneth to ye
edyfying and behoue of the whole congregation, so that as the church is a
common place, so the prayers therein should be common, so the celebration of the
communion must be common, and not pryuate, as the words of the mass canon
reported after the communion do well declare, which be thees followynge. That,
that we have received by the mouth, lord grant we may receive with heart
purposely that there may be made unto us an everlasting remedy of the body and
blood of our lord Jesus christ. It is not said I, but we have received. The
priest as here so in other places says not I but we eue^ while he
co^municateth all alone, whereby it is gatherable ye masser should co^municat not
severally alone but iounctlye with others. For we imports a multitude and
not a singularitee. Some there be who deem the solitary massing an indifferent
and consequently a sufferable matter. Well though it were so, as questionles it
is not: Howbeit for so much as we have utterly renounced the Romsshe bishop with
al his usurped autorite, we ought of co^grue^ce aba^d on there with the pryuate
mass, which he forged and fathered, less we through reteygneme^te and usage
thereof, be occasioned to resume and again enbrace the said bishop withal his
vnsytting and prete^sed authorite. For upon semblable consyderation, leui. xviii
God inhibited the Israelites the usage of the Egyptyans ceremonies, wherewith
they had heretofore been enfected, albeit sou^dry of the^ by all lykelyhode were
indifferent. Notwithsta^di^g (gentle reder) Ihertofor have much what vehemently
gaynsayd the preuie mass and condemned here as detestable erroneouse and
blasphemous: Howbeit I trust you wolste accept this my labor, enbracing and
ensuing my doctrine therein, as ensuable and credible, sith it te^deth not to
gods dishonor but to his honor, not to thine empecheme^t but to thy great
comodite, not to the hindera^ce and ouerthrow^ but to the redress recovery and
furtherance of ye true mass, otherwise named the communion, which cannot be so
highly esteemed and so often frequented as of necessytye it ought, without the
priest mass be hated and detested. For both it and the communion cannot be
iounctly regarded. Whosoever loves thee one must needs hate the other, for why they
be mere contraries. But how can thee priest mass be had in worthy hate? if
her abominacyon were not at full dysclosed? In respect whereof, thou see how
nedeful it is yt she should be both gain said and condemned as heresye, and
abandoned as ydolatrye. God of his mercy grant us all to learn, love credyte
and maynteyne his truth and live thereafter.

AMEN.

