GERARDS PRAYERS; OR, A DAILY PRACTICE OF PIETY: Divided into four parts.

1 Of Confession of Sins. 2 Of Thanksgiving, for benefits. 3 Of Petitions for
our selves. 4 Of Supplicatio^s for our neighbors.
Written (originally) in the Latin Tongue, by John Gerard, Doctor in
Divinity, and Superintendent of Heldeburg.

Translated and revised By Ralph Winterton, Fellow of Kings College in
Cambridge.

Whereunto is added a Morning and Evening Prayer, for a Family.

Printed in ABERDENE, by Edward Raban, 1638.

To the Reader.
DIstressed soul! if thou conceav'st what it is
To mount unto the tower of endless bliss,
Embrace this Work: It reaches to the Sky;
And higher, if beyond it ought does lie.
Man's dull capacity, weak humane sense;
Wide worlds expansion, stars circumference,
Can not it comprehend. Prayer passes even
To GODS Pavilion, to the imperial Heaven.
That is the Golden Chain, fixed to Gods ear*
Knock, and He Will open: Call, and He will hear.
This, surely; this is blessed lakobs Ladder,
On which our souls climb, by CHRIST, to CHRIST'S FATHER.
Faith is Prayers chief Attendant, CHRIST the Way:
GOD'S Sprite both moves, and help? us (...) to pray.
True love admittance gayn^, humble confession
Both helps Devotion, and procures Remission.
THE FIRST PART. Of Confession of Sins.
THE ARGUMENT.
The Meditation of our Sins, comprehends in it these two heads; Of
original and actual sins. Actual sins, are committed in thought, word,
and deed; By the committing of evil, and by the omitting of good* Against GOD,
our neighbor, and our selves. The offenses of our youth are many, and our
daily infirmities many. We are often tempted of the flesh, and we do often
yield unto it. We partake, many times, in other men's sins: and in many
things we are defective our selves. We are convicted of our sins, by all
the creatures: and we behold the sexeritie of GODS anger against our sins,
in the Passion and Death of CHRIST.

PRAYER I. He weygheth, and considers, the grievousnesse of original sin.
Holy GOD, and just Judge! I Psalm. 51. 5
know that I was conceaved and borne in sin: I know that I was formed (...)
24, 4
of unclean seed in the womb of my mother: That poison of sin has so
corrupted and putrified my whole nature, that no faculty of my soul is free
from the contagion thereof: That holy pledge of the divyne image, which was
committed unto me in our first father, is perished in me: There is no power
at all in me, to begin to come unto the saving knowledge of thee, the fear of
thee, confidence in thee, and love of thee: There remains no sufficiency in
me, to perform obedience unto thy commandments: My will is averse from thy
law: And the law of sin in my members, Romans 7, 23
being repugnant to the law of my mind, makes my whole nature become corrupt
and perverse. I wretched and miserable man, do feel the power of sin
cleaving fast to my members: I do feel the yoke of wicked concupiscence
grievouslie pressing me: For although I am regenerate, and renewed by the
spirit of *Titus ^. 5
grace, in the laver of baptism; yet am I not as yet wholly free from the
yoke and captivity of sin. For that root of bitterness, which lies hidden
in me, does always desire to put forth new branches: The law of sin
reygning in my flesh does strive to captivate me: I am full of doubts,
distrust, and desire of mine Matt. 15, 19
own honor: Out of my heart proceed wicked cogitations: Filthy thoughts
defile me throughout in thy sight: Out of that poisoned fountain flow forth
rivers of poison. Psalm. 143. 2
Enter not, therefore, into judgment with thy servant, O LORD; but Psalm. 51. 1
be propitiou^ unto me, according to thy great mercy: The deep of my
misery, calls upon the deep of thy mercy: Psalm. 42. ^
For this uncleanness and filthiness of my polluted nature, I offer unto thee
the most sacred conceptio^ of thy Son: For me he was borne: Isai 9. 6 1
Cor. 1. 30
For me therefore he was conceaved. For me he was made sanctification, and
righteousness: For me therefore he is become purification and cleannes. Through
him, and for him, thy Son, have mercy on me, O thou most highest: and set
not in the light of thy Psalm. 90. 8
countenance that hidden corruption that cleaves to my nature; but look upon
thy beloved Son, my Mediator, and let his most holy and immaculate
conception succor my misery*

Amen.
PRAYER II. He recalleth to our memory the sins of our youth.
Holy GOD, and just Judge! Remember not the offenses of my Psalm. 25. 7 ^et.
31, 34
sins that are past* How many venomous fruits has the vicious root of
concupiscence, that is inherent in me, brought forth! In my chyldhood what an
innumerable brood of actual transgressions has the evil of original sin
hatched! The very thoughts of my heart are Ge^. 6, 5
wicked and perverse, even from my chyldhood* yea, even from my tender
infancy: For when I was an infant but of one day, I was in no ways innocent
before thee. As many as the days of my life are, so many offenses do burden
me; yea, many more by far in number, seeing that the just man falls seven
Pro^* 24, 1^
times in one day: But if the just fall seven times in one day, then I
wretched and unjust man, without doubt, have fallen seaventie times seven
times. As my life has increased, so has the web of my sins increased: and as
much as has been added to my life by thy bounty; so much has been added to
the course of my sins, by the wickedness of my corrupt nature. I examine my
life that is past: and what else do I behold, but a filthy stinking cloak
of sin? I attend unto the light of thy precepts: and what do I find in the
course of my years that are past, but darkness and blindness? The tender
flower of my youth ought to have been crowned with virtues, and offered to thee
for a sweet savor: The best part of my age past did owe it self unto thee,
the best Creator of nature: But the dirtie filth of my sins has most
foullie polluted the flower of my age, and the stinking mud of my offenses has
in a wonderful and miserable manner defiled me. The first age of man is
amongst all the rest the fittest for the service of GOD: But I have spent a
good part thereof in the service of the devil. The memory of many sins,
which the unbridled looseness of my youth has committed, is set in my sight:
and yet there are many more which I cannot call to memory. Who knows how
often he Psalm. 29, 12
offends? cleanse thy servant from secret faults. For these offenses of my
youth* I offer unto thee (holy Father) the most holy obedience, and perfect
innocence of thy Son, Phil. 2. 8 Luke ^, 42
who was obedient to thee unto death, even the death of the cross. When he
was but a child of twelve years old, he performed holy obedience unto
thee, and began to execute thy will with great alacrity. This obedience I
offer unto thee (just Judge) for a price and satisfaction for the manifold
disobedience of my youth.

Amen.
PRAYER III. He reckeneth up our daily falls, and slips.
Holy God, and just Judge! There is no man innocent in thy sight, no man free
from the spote of sin: And I am bereaved of that glory, which I should bring
with me to judgment: I am stripped of that garment of innocence, with which
I ought to appear arrayed before Prove. 24, 16 Matt. 26. (...)
thee: Seven times, yea, and oftener every hour I fall: seaventie times
seven times I sin every day. The spirit indeed is sometimes ready; but
the flesh is always weak: The inward man flowrisheth, and is strong, but the
outward man languisheth, and is weak: For I do not the good Romans 7. 1^
that I would, but the evil that I would not. How often do vain, wicked, and
impious cogitations arise in my heart: How often do vain, unprofitable, and
hurtful words break forth! How often do perverse, wicked, and ungodly
actions pollute me! All my righteousness Isai. 6^* 6
is as the cloth of a menstruous woman: Therefore, I dare not plead for my
righteousness before thee: But I humbly prostrate my self before thy most
just tripunall, and out of the deeps do I cry unto thee: Lord, if thou shall
decree P^^^. ^30. 3
to impute sin, who shall abide it? If thou will enter into judgment, Psalm.
143. 3
who shall stand? If thou will call me to appear according to the severity of
thy justice, how shall I come before thee? If thou will exact a strict Job. ^. 3
account of my life, I shall not be able to answer thee one for a thousand:
Therefore my mouth is stopped, and I* acknowledge before thee, that I have
deserved eternal torments; and withal I confess with tears, that thou
may justly cast me into prison for ever. Therefore, for these daily
sins of my life, I offer unto thee (holy Father) the most precious blood of
thy Son, which was poured forth on the altar of the cross, which washes me
from all my sins. My sins which lead me captive, are many in number, and
most powerful: But the ransom of thy Son is much more precious, and of more
efficacy: Let that most perfect, plenarie, and holy price paid by Christ,
obtain for me remission of sins.

Amen.
PRAYER IV. He examineth our life, according to the rule of the first table of
the Commandments.
Holy God, and just Judge! Thou. Exodus 20, 1
gave unto us thy Law in mount Sinay, and thou would have it to be the rule
of all our actions, words, and thoughts: That whatsoever is not squared by it,
should in thy judgment be accounted sin.

As often as I look upon that most clear glass, I perceive mine own
filthiness, and tremble every part of me. I ought to love thee (O my God)
above all things.: But how often do I love the world, and forget the love of
thee! I am bound to fear thee (O my God) above all things: But how often do I
consent to sin, and let thy fear slip out of my memory! Thou requirest,
that I should trust in thee (O my God) above all things: But how often in
adversity does my soul waver, and anxiouslie and carefully doubt of thy
fatherly goodness! I am bound to obey thee (O my God) with all my heart: But
how often does my refractarie flesh resist the resolution of obedience, and
lead Romans 7. ^
me captive into the prison of sin! My cogitations ought to be holy. my
desires pure and holy: But how often is the quiet state of my mind troubled
with vain and impious cogitations! I ought to call upon thee (O God) with all
my heart: But how often does my mind wander in prayer, and does anxioustie
doubt, whether her prayers be heard or no! How often am I remiss in prayer,
and demisse in conceaving confidence! How often does my tongue pray, and yet I
do not worship thee in spirit and in truth! How John 4. 23
profound oblivion of thy benefits does seize upon me! Thou do daily pour
thy benefits upon me in a loving manner; and yet I do not daily return unto
thee thanksgiving. How cold is my meditation of thy immense and infinite gifts
bestowed upon me! What slender devotion is there for the most part in my
heart! I use thy gifts, and yet I do not praise thee who art the giver. I
stick in the rivers, and come not to the fountain. Thy word is John 6. 5^
the word of spirit and life: But I through sin and corruption have destroyed
the work of thy holy Spirit within me. The sparks of a good resolution often
inkindled, I as often extinguish: and yet I do not sue to thee for increase of
thy gifts. For these and all other my sins and defaults, I offer unto thee (O
my God) the most pure and perfect obedience of thy Son, who loved thee in the
days of his incarnation, most perfectly with his whole heart, and cleaved
unto thee most firmlie with all his soul: in whose deeds, words, and thoughts,
there was found no blot of sin, nor spot of the least Isai 53. 9
offense. That which I want, by faith I draw from his fullness: Therefore for
this thy wel-beloved Sons sake, have mercy LORD upon thy servant.

Amen.
PRAYER V. He considers our life, according to the rule of the second table
of the commandments.
Holy God* and just Judge! It is thy eternal and immutable will, that I
should honor with due Exodus 20. 1^
respect my Parents, and the Magistrates: But how often do I think too
meanly of their authority! How often do I in heart refuse to obey them! How
often do I traduce their infirmities! O how often do I omit by serious
prayers to further their safety! I often cherish anger conceaved against them,
whereas I ought with patience to submit my self unto them. Thy sacred will
requires, that I should do good to my neighbor in all things, to my power:
But how often does it irke me to do him good! How does it go against my
stomach to forgive him? How often am I solicited by my flesh, to anger,
hatred, envy, and brawling! how often does the fire of my angry heart burn
within me, although contentious words be not heard without! Thy holy will,
requires that I should live chastely, modestly, and temperately: But how
often has the love of drunkenness and lust, made my soul captive to sin?
How often do fires of lust flame within me, although my outward members be
restrained! He that looks upon a woman, to lust Matt. 5* 28
after her, has already committed adultery with her in his heart, says the
Text: How often therefore in the sight of GOD do we commit adultery! The
inordinate and immoderate use of meat, drink, and wedlock, often steals
upon us, and makes us appear guilty before thee* if thou would enter into
judgment with us. Thy holy writ requires, that in bargaining I deceive not
my neighbor in any sort; but that I rather further, and procure his good;
that I traduce not his faults, but rather cover the^ with the cloak of
charity; and that I do not censure him rashly and vnadvisedlie: But how
often do I seek mine own profit by injustice! How often do I spend my
judgeme^t rashly upon my neighbor! Thy holy will requires, that my spirit,
mind, and soul be free from concupiscence: But how often does my flesh
solicit me to sin, and contaminateth my spirit with wicked concupiscences!
As a fountain does abound with continual bubbling of water: So does my
heart always swell with evil concupiscence. For these, and all other my
sins and defects, I offer unto thee (most holy Father) the most perfect
obedience of thy Son, who loved all men with perfect Isai 53, 9 1 Pet, 2, 22
love, and in whose mouth was found no guyle, in whose words and deeds no
aberrations, no corruption in nature: To this propitiation I flee with true
faith, and by faith I suck out Rom, 3. 28
of his wounds, as much as is sufficient to justify me, and save me: Have
mercy on me my GOD, and my Father.

Amen.
PRAYER VI. He shows that we often partake in other men's sins.
Holy God, and just Judge! Thou have committed unto me, not only the care of
mine own soul, but also the care of my neighbors: But how often does my
neighbor through my negligence suffer great loss of godliness! How often do
I neglect freely and boldly to chyde him, when he sins! How often do I,
being hindered either by favor or fear, reprove him for his sins more
slightlie than I ought! 1 Timothy, 2, 1^
In pouring out prayers for his salvation, I am too remiss; in reprehending
his sins, I am too-too timorous; in furthering his salvation, I am too
sloathfull: insomuch that thou may justly require at my hands Ezekiel. 3, 21
the blood of my neighbor that perishes. If there were in me a perfect and
sincere love of my neighbor, surely from thence would proceed freedom in
reproving of sin. If the fire of sincere charity did burn in my heart,
surely it would break forth more clearlie into the spiritual incense of
prayers, to be made for the salvation of my neighbors. For a man to pray for
himself, it is a duty of necessity: But to pray for the salvation of his
neighbor, it is a deed of charity: As often therefore, as I neglect to pray
for the salvation of my neighbor, so often I condemn my self for the breach
of the commandment of the love of my neighbor. My neighbor dies the death
of the body, and sorrow fills all with lamentation and mourning; when as yet
the death of the body brings no hurt to a godly man, but rather gives him
a passage into a celestial country: My neighbor dies the death of the
soul, and behold, I am nothing troubled at it: I see him die, and grieve not
at all; when as yet sin is the true death of the soul, and brings with it
the loss of the inestimable grace of God, and eternal life. My neighbor
delinquisheth against the king, who can only kill the body; and behold, I
seek by all means his reconciliation: but hoe sins against the King of all
kings, that can cast both body and soul Matt. 10. 28
into hellfire: and yet I behold it in security, and consider not that this
offense is an infinite evil.

My neighbor stumbleth at a stone; and I run presently to save him from a
fall, or otherwise to raise him up, if he be fallen: He Psalm. 118 22
stumbleth at the corner stone of our salvation; and behold, I securely pass
by it, and labor not with care and diligence to lift him up again. Mine own
sins are grievous anough: And yet I have not been afraid to participate in
other men's sins. Be propitious (O God) unto me, great sinner, and
overburdened. To thy mercy I flee in Christ, and through Christ promised unto
me, I come unto this life, being dead in sin: I come unto this Way, having
gone astray in the path of sin: I come unto this Salvation, being by reason
of my sin guilty of damnation. Quicken me, guide me, and save me, thou
which art my Life, my Way, and my Salvation, for ever and ever,

Amen.
PRAYER VII. He shows that we are many ways convinced of sin.
Holy God, and just Judge! If I look up to heaven, I think with my self,
that I have many Luke 15, 1^ 19*
ways offended thee, my GOD and Father: I have sinned against heaven and
before thee, I am not worthy 19
to be called thy son. If I look down upon the earth, I think with my
self, how I have abused thy creatures by my sins: I have infinitely abused
not only the darkness of the night, but also the light of the day, to work
works of darkness. If I look upon the examples of sinners, upon whom thou in
thy just judgment have inflicted punishment, I find that the weight of my
sins will counterpoise theirs. If I look upon the examples of the Sayncts, I
find that I come far short of them in my holy service of thee. If I think
upon the Angel my keeper, I find that often I put him to flight by my sins.
If I think of the devils, I find that I have often given place to their
suggestions. If I weygh with my self the rigor of thy law, I find that my
life is many ways irregular. If I look upon my self, I find that the very
cogitatio^s of my heart do accuse me before thy judgment. If I think upon
the hour of death to come, I find that it is the just reward of my sins,
and (unless Romans 6, 23
thou of thy mere mercy for Christ his sake shall receive me) the gate and
entrance into everlasting death. If I think upon the judgment to come, I
find my deserts such, that thou may justly call me to the most exact
account, and punish my sins according to the strict severitie of thy law. If
I think upon hell, I find that I have deserved by my sins the most just
punishment there, If I think upon eternal life, I find that I have by my
sins justly fallen away from all hope of attaynment. All things therefore
convince me of my sins: Only thou thou, O my God, be not thou extreme
against me! To Christ thy beloved Son my only mediator I betake my self:
By him I most firmlie believe I shall obtain thy grace and remission of my
sins. Thy creatures accuse me; the book of my conscience accuses me; both
the tables of thy divyne law accuse me; Satan accuses me day and night: But
take thou upon thee my patronage. O sweet Jesus! To thee the poor man is left
bereft of all solace of the creatures. All my refuge is placed in thy
satisfaction for my sins, and in thy inte^cession at the right hand of the
Father for me. My soul, take thou the wings of the morning, and, like a dove,
hide thy Cant. 2. 14
self in the clests of the rock, that is, in the wounds of Christ thy
Savior. Hyde thy self in this rock, till the anger of the LORD be passed
by: and thou shall find rest, and thou shall find protection, and thou shall
find deliverance therein.

AMEN.
PRAYER VIII. He by the effects of contrition argues us to be convicted of
the haynousnesse of sin.
Holy God, and just Judge! My heart is contrite and humbled* my spirit is
heavy, and in a great strait, by reason of the burden of my sins where with
I am oppressed. The cowrage of my heart has failed, and the sharpness of my
eyes is decayed. My heart is pressed, and from thence gush out tears: My
spirit is oppressed, and I forget to take my bread: My heart is wounded, and
from thence gusheth out blood, and Psalm. 18* (...)
a fountain of tears. Who knows how of thee offends? Who knows the
sorrow of the heart, that is in a great strait by reason of offenses? My soul
is dry and broken in pieces, and thirsts after the fountain of Psalm. 4^. ^
life: O Christ feed me with the dew of thy Spirit of grace. My heart that is
in a great strait sigheth unto thee: O thou true joye, give unto me peace and
quietness of heart, Romans 5. 1
that being justified by says, I may have peace with God.

My heart condemn^^h me: But do ^Iohn 3, 20
thou absolve me, who art greater tha^ my heart. My conscience accuses me:
But do thou absolve me, who have fastened to the cross the handwriting Col. 2,
14
of my conscience. I offer unto thee (o my God) my contrite and humbled heart,
for a most acceptable sacrifice: Psalm. 51. 17
I offer unto thee my sighs as the messengers of true and serious co^trition: I
offer unto thee my tears as abundant witnesses of my unfeigned grief. In my
self I despare: In thee is my trust. In my self I faint: In thee I am
refreshed. In my self I feel straitness: In thee again I find Matt, (...).
28
enlargment, I am troubled and burdened overmuch: Thou shall refresh Psalm. ^30.
^
me, and give rest unto my soul. One deep calls upon another: The deep of
my misery calls upon Psalm. 230, 1 Mic. 7* 19 Psalm. 38. 3
the deep of thy mercy. Out of the deeps do I cry unto thee. Cast thou my
sins into the deep of the sea. There is no soundness in my flesh, by reason
of thy anger: neither is there any rest to my bones by reason of my sins:
For mine iniquities are gone ^ver my head, and become too heavy for me. Cure
my soul, thou heavenly Physician, that I be not swallowed up of eternal
death. Take the burden of my sins from me, thou that have taken it upon thy
self on the cross, that I despare not under the intolerable burden thereof.
Have mercy on me, thou fountain of grace and mercy.

Amen.
PRAYER IX. He declares the number and greatness of Gods benefits unto us,
and the grievousnesse of our sins.
Holy God, and just Judge! By how much the more benefits thou have bestowed
upon me, by so much the more I grieve, that I have so often displeased thee,
so loving a Father. As many gifts as thou have heaped upon me, so many bonds
of love have thou sent over unto me* Thou would have bound me unto thy
self: But I have forgotten thee and thy beneficiencie, and linked sin unto
sin. Father, Luke 15, 19
I have sinned against heaven, and before thee: I am not worthy to be called
thy sin: make me as one of thy hired servants. I am altogether displeased
with my self: Make thou me altogether to please thee. Thy large bounty, and
wonderful patience, Romans 2, 4
have often invited me to repentance: But hitherto I have been backward to
come. Thou have often called me (O most Bountiful GOD) by the preaching of
thy word, by the teaching of thy creatures, by the punishment of the cross,
and by inward inspiration: But I have stopped the ears of my heart altogether
at thy call. All the faculties of my soul, all the members of my body are thy
gifts: I ought therefore, with all the powers of my soul, and parts of my
body, be ready to do thee all holy service, which is due unto thee: But I
have made them (the more is my grief) the weapons of iniquity and
unrighteousness. The breath which I fetch is thine; the air which I suck in
is thine; the su^ne, whose light I see daily, is thine: All these ought to
have been unto me as furtherances and instruments to sanctity of life: But I
have abused them, the more is my grief, to the slaverie of sin. Thy
creatures I should have used to the glory of thee the Creator: But I have
wickedlie abused them to thy dishonor. In the light of the sun I should have
put on the armor of Romans 13. (...)
light: But therein have I committed the works of darkness. How much soever is
added unto my life, comes all from thy bounty: Therefore my whole life ought
to be employed in thy service, on whom it does wholly depend: And yet I have
scarce bestowed the least part thereof in thy service. As many good
inspirations as I have felt within me, so many hand-maydes of thy grace have
thou sent as ambassadors to invite me most lovinglie to return unto thee by
true repentance: But alace, how often have I stubbornlie refused to give them
audience! But yet receive him, who now at length returns unto thee with
sighing and a contrite heart. Sprinkle me with the blood of thy Son, that so
being 2 Cor 7. ^
purged from all the pollutions of the flesh and the spirit, I may become Psalm.
5^. 7
whiter than snow, and with all thy elect praise thee in the heavenly
Jerusalem world without end.

AMEN.
PRAYER X. He considers the severitie of GODS anger against our sins, in
the death and passion of CHRIST.
Holy God, and just Judge! I behold thy Son hanging upon the cross, and
pouring forth plentiful rivers of blood: ^ behold him; and behold, for very
terror, I ^aint altogether. My ^innes are those iron nayls with which I have
boared his hands and his feet. My sins are those pricking thorns with which
his most sacred head (which is to be rever^^ed of the Angelical powers) was
crowned. My sins are those stinging tho^gs, with which his most pure body
(the proper temple of Divinity) was scourged. Genesis (...). 33
A cruel wild beast has torn in pieces the heavenly Joseph, and embrued
his coat with his blood: I miserable sinner am that wicked beast: for my sins
did make an assault, and rush upon thy most beloved Son. If thy most obedient
Son is so vexed and Isai 53. ^5
troubled for other men's sins: What cause has the undutiful and disobedient
servant to fear in regard of his own sins! The wounds of my soul must
needs be great indeed and mortal, when as thy only begotten Son is so
miserably smitten for to cure them. The disease of my soul must needs be
great indeed and mortal, when as the heavenly Physician, and life it self,
does die upon the cross to cure it. I see the torment of his most holy
soul: I hear the miserable exclamation of my most holy Savior upon the
cross: For me it is he is so vexed: it is for my sins that he
complains, that he is forsaken Matt. 27. 46
of GOD. If the weight of other men's sins does so exceedingly press the
Almighty Son of God, that it wringeth from him a bloody sweat: How
intolerable shall the anger of God be, and how unmeasurable shall be his
wrath against the unprofitable servant! O thou dry and unhappy wood, that
have always served as a slave the everlasting fire of hell! What must thou
fear, when thou see these things come to pass in the green wood! Christ is
the green tree: In the root of his divinity, in the love of his humanity,
in the boughs of his virtues, in the leaue^ of his holy words, and in the
fruit of his good works. He is the cedar of chastity, the vine of
joyfulnesse, the palm of patience, and the olive of mercy. But if the fire of
the divyne anger inflameth this green tree of life: How much more shall it
consume the sinner like dry wood for his unfruitful works! In what capital
and bloody letters are my sins engraven in the body of Christ! How
conspicuous (O thou most just GOD) is thine anger against mine iniquities! How
strait must that captivity needs be in which my soul was held, when so
precious a ransom was paid for her delyverie! How great must the staynes of my
sins needs be, when rivers of blood flow down from the body of Christ to
wash them away! O thou most just God, and yet most merciful Father, consider
what indignities thy Son has suffered for me* and forget the wicked works of
me thy unworthy servant! Behold the pro^unditie of his wounds; and overwhelme
my sins in the profound sea of thy mercy*

Amen.
THE SECOND PART. Of thanksgiving for Benefits.
THE ARGUMENT.
The Meditation of Gods benefits, does gather out of the garden of nature, and
of the Church, sundry, and those most fragrant (...) of divine gifts: and
recreating it self with the odor thereof, offers again to God the
s^crifices of the lips, for a savor of sweet smell. Now the immense and
innumerable benefits of God, may be divided according to three articles of our
Christian faith; God has created, redeemed, and sanctified us. He heapeth his
benefits on us in this life, and has promised greater unto us in the life that
is everlasting. He conferreth upon us the gift of the mind, of the body, and
of fortune, which we ca^^ external goods. He preserves us from evil, and
conserveth us in good. That which is p^^t he covers, that which is to come
he governs. His privatiue blessings are more than his positive. In brie^e,
woe can neither in word express, nor in though^ conceive, the number and
dignity of Gods benefits, which will afford unto us hereafter, in the world to
come, most plentiful matter of eternal praise and thanksgiving.

PRAYER I. He gives thanks for our forming in the womb, and for our
nativitie.
Almighty, eternal GOD, Father, Son, and holy Ghost: I give thanks to
thee, I praise thee, I glorify thee: because thy Job 10, 8
hands have fashioned me, and made me wholly round about. Thou formedst me
like clay in my mothers womb. 9
Thou did draw me like milk. Thou 10
did curdl^ me like cheese: With 11
flesh and skin have thou covered me, and compacted me together with bones
and sinews. Thou have given 12
me life and mercy, and thy visitation has preserved my spirit. This thy
great mercy bestowed upon me, I will celebrate with perpetual praises. Thy
goodness I will sing of in continual songs. Psalm, 1^9
Thou did protect me in my mothers womb. I will confess unto thee: 13
For I am wonderfully formed: Marvelous 14
are thy works, and that my soul knows right well. My bones 15
are not had from thee, which th^n did make in secret, and deckedst me* (...)
with diverse members in the lower parts of the earth. Thy eyes saw me yet
being imperfect, and in thy book were all my members written, which day by
day were fashioned when as yet there were none of them. How precious 17
unto me^ are thy thoughts O GOD! How great i^ the sum of them! If I 18
go about to reckon them, I find them multiplied above the sands of the sea.
Thou did show thy mercy unto me before I understood it: Thou did prevent
me with thy blessings before I did desire them: Thy bounty did embrace me on
every side, before I could give thanks for it. Thou art he who not only
did form me wonderfully in the womb, but also did take me out: Thou art
my hope even from my mothers breast: Out of my mothers womb I was cast upon
thee: Thou art my GOD from my mothers womb. As often as I think upon many
that have been extinct* and never came to the light of this life: so often I
admire and praise thee for thy mercy, which brought me out of that prison
into the theater of this world safe and sound. How many years are past in
which I was not, and yet thou did erect for me this house of my body, and
did bring me out of that bottomless pit, and the darkness of my mothers
womb! Thou gave unto me a reasonable soul: Thou made me a man, not a
stone, or a serpent. To thee (O my God) for this thy mercy be honor and
glory for ever.

AMEN.
PRAYER II. He rendereth thanks for our sustentation.
I Render thanks unto thee, Almighty and merciful God, for that thou have
sustained me from the very first days of my life. Naked I came into this
world, and thou coveredst me most graciously. Hungry I entered into this
world, and thou have hitherto fed me most bountifully. In thee I live, move,
and have my being: Without thee I fall again into nothing, and die. Through
thee I ^owe, and move my members: Without thee I can neither be partaker Matt.
5. 44
of life, or motion. Thine is the sun that gives me light, which I see
daily with mine eyes. Thine is the air which I draw in with continual
breath. The night is thine, and the day is thine, whose entercourses serve for
my labor and rest. Thine is the earth, whose fruits do nowrish me most
plentifully. Every creature in heaven, air, earth, and sea is thine, and is
appointed for my use Hag. 2. ^
and service. Silver is thine, and gold is thine. Whatsoever is necessary for
the sustentation of this my present life, all that I receive from thy most
liberal and bountiful hands. O GOD, how liberal art thou to mankind! All
things thou createdst long ago for the use of man: All things thou do as
yet preserve for the good of man. Whatsoever thou, of thine infinite goodness,
affordest to the other creatures, thou affordest also unto me; for as much as
thou do wonderfully form, furnish, and conserve them for my sake. Some of
the creatures serve to obey me; some to nowrish me; some to cloathe me; some
to cure me; some to chastise me: But all of them to teach and inform me.
Who can reckon up those diverse kinds of nutriments, which thou have created,
and do as yet produce out of the earth unto this day to nowrish us? Who can
enumerate those diverse species of herbs, which thou do every year cause
the earth to bring forth to cure us? Who can in words comprehend those
sundry kinds of living creatures, which were made for man's use, and do yet
all serve him? To thee be praise and honor for ever, who art the Creator and
Conserver of all things! Without thee the true sun, I should vanish away as
does the shadow: Without thee the true life, I should presently depart out of
this life: Without thee the true being* I should suddenly fall to nothing. To
thee only is due, that I live, move, and have my being. Therefore to thee
alone will I live and adhere for ever.

Amen.
PRAYER III. He rendereth thanks for our redemption wrought by Christ.
I Owe unto thee (O eternal and Almighty GOD) most hearty thanks, for that
thou have created me when I was nothing: But much more for that thou have
redeemed me when I was lost and condemned. I did hang in the jaws of hell:
And thou did pluck me out by Colos 1, 14
the blood of thy Son. I was the slave of Satan: but thy grace has delivered
me out of the power of the devil, and translated me into the kingdom of
Christ, I owe my self wholly unto thee: because thou createdst me wholly.
My tongue ought always to praise thee* because thou gave it unto me. My
mouth ought always to set forth thy praise: because the air and breath which
it draws is thine. My heart ought always to cleave unto thee with perpetual
love: because thou did form it. All my members ought to be ready for thy
service: because thou did wonderfully frame them, how many and how great
soever they be. But if I owe my self wholly unto thee, because thou createdst
me: What shall I repay unto thee for redeeming me out of slaverie and
captivity! The lost sheep thou have delivered out of the claws of the
infernal wolf. The fugitive slave thou have plucked out of the prison of the
devil. The lost great thou have sought out Luke 15. 8
with great carfulness. In Adam I fell, and thou have erected me: In Adam I
was captivated in the bonds of sin, but thou have set me at liberty: In
Adam I was lost, and again thou have saved me: What am I worm, that thou
should be so solicitous for redeeming me? What am I worm that thou
should be so prodigally bountiful for saving me? If thou had
altogether cast off our first parents after their fall, and had thrown them
with all their posterity out from the presence of thy glory into the lowest
pit of hell* there is none of us could justly complain of any wrong done
unto him: For they had received, and we had received for our deeds a just
reward. What else could we have desired or expected from thee, who createdst
us after thine own image, and furnishedst us with power and sufficiency to
have kept our innocence. But in this thou did manifest thy incomprehensible
and unspeakable love toward us, in that thou did promise unto our first
parents after their fall, thy Son for their Redeemer, and Gal. 4* 4
in the fullness of time did send him unto us, to call us from death to
life, from sin to righteousness, and from the infernal pit unto celestial
glory. O thou lover of man, whose delight is with the sons of Prove. 8* 3^
men, who can worthily set forth the praise of thy love to man? Yea, who can
in mind conceive the worthiness thereof? These are the incomprehensible
riches of thy goodness: This is the infinite treasure of thy gifts, which the
slenderness of our capacity and understanding cannot conceive. Was a servant
so dear unto thee, that thy Son must be delivered to death for his
redemption! Was an enemy so much to be beloved, that thou should appoint
thy most beloved Son to be his redeemer! My soul is astonished with the very
consideration of this thy goodness, and does wholly turn and dissolve it
self into the love of thee.

AMEN.
PRAYER IV. He rendereth thanks for the inc^rn^tion of the Son.
I Render thanks unto thee. Ies^ Christ, thou alone Mediator, and Redeemer of
mankind* for that thou have in the fullness of time personally Gal. 4, 4
united unto thee the true humane nature, and have vouchsafed to be borne of a
Virgin. How great Isai 7. 14 Heb. 2, 16 1 Timothy 3. 16
is thy love to man, in that thou d^^^^ not assume the nature of Angels, but
the seed^ of Abraham! How great is the mystery of godliness, that thou being
very GOD* would be made manifest in the flesh* How great is the
inclination of thy pity, that descending from heaven for my sake, thou have
endured to be borne of a Virgin! For me, most vile creature, Creator
Almighty, thou art become man. For me, most abject servant, most glorious
Lord, thou have put on the shape of a servant, that by taking flesh upon thee,
thou might set my Isai ^. 6
flesh at liberty. To me thou art borne: Whatsoever celestial good therefore
thou bring with thee in thy Nativitie, shall* be mine. To me^ thou art
given: And therefore all things with thee. My nature in thee is more
glorified, than it was in Adam dishonored: For thou do assume it into the
Unity of thy Person, whereas it was weakened with accidental corruption
only by Satan. Thou art flesh of my flesh, and Ephesians 5. 3^
b^^^ of my bone. Thou art my brother: And what can thou deny unto me,
seeing thou art most nearlie joined unto me in the same flesh and affection of
brotherly love* Thou art the brydegroome, who according to the good pleasure
of thy heavenly Father, have coupled unto thee by a personal league, the
humane nature, as a spouse: To the joy of those n^^tials I do proclaim and
Matt. 22. 2
thankfully acknowledge that I my self am invited. I wonder now no more that
the heaven, the earth, the sea, and all things that are in them were made for
man by God, seeing that God himself would for man become man. Thou can not
utterly divorce me, and cast me away from thee, seeing that thou can not
deny that thou art a man, and therefore my brother. Thou can not altogether
forget me, because thou have grave^ me in thy^e ^w^ Isai 49* 16
hands: For the very communion of the flesh does daily and continually put
thee in mind of me. Thou can not altogether forsake me, seeing that it
has pleased thee to con^oyne unto thee tire humane nature, in a most near
bond of personal union. Although therefore my sins do hinder me, yet the
communion of nature does not repel me. I will adhere wholly unto thee,
because thou have wholly assumed me wholly.

Amen.
PRAYER V. He rendereth thanks for Christ's passion.
HOw great thanks do I owe unto thee. O most holy Jesus, for that thou have
taken upon thee the punishment of my sins, and have endured hunger, thirst,
cold, weariness, reproaches, persecutions, sorrows, poverty, bonds, whips,
pricking of thorns; yea, and that most bitter death of the cross for me
sinner! How great is the flame of thy love which forced thee of thine own
accord to throw thy self into that sea of passions, and that for me most
vile and unthankful servant! Thy innocence and righteousness made thee free
from all sufferings: But thy infinite and unspeakable love made thee debtor and
guilty in my room. It is I that trespassed, and thou make satisfaction. It
is I that committed rapine, and thou make restitution. It is I that sinned,
and thou vndergoest the passion. O Jesus most benign, I acknowledge the bowels
of thy mercy and the fiery heat of love. Thou seem to love me more than
thy self, seeing thou deliverest up thy self for me. O most innocent Jesus,
what have thou to do with the sentence of death? O thou most beautiful
amongst the sons of me^, what have thou to do with spittings upon thee? O
thou most righteous, what have thou to do with whips and bonds? These things
belong not unto thee: They are all due unto me: But thou of thine unspeakable
love did descend into the prison of this world, and take upon thee the shape
of a servant, and most willingly undergo the punishment that was due unto
me. I was for my sins to be adjudged to the lake that burns with
everlasting fire: But thou by the fire of love being burnt upon the altar of
the cross, do free me from it. I was to be cast away for my sins from
the face of my heavenly Father: And thou for my sake complainest that thou art
forsaken of thy heavenly Father. Matt. ^7, 46
I was to be tormented of the devil and his angels for ever: and thou of thine
infinite love do deliver thy self unto the ministers of Satan to be
afflicted and crucified for me, As many Instruments as I see of thy passion, so
many tokens do I see of thy love toward me: For my sins are those bonds,
those whips, and those thorns which afflicted thee, al which of thine
unspeakable love thou enduredst for me. Thy love was not yet satisfied with
taking my flesh upon thee: but thou would make it as yet more manifest, by
that most bitter passion of thy soul and body. Who am I, most mighty Lord,
that for me disobedient servant, thou thy self would become a servant so
many years? Who am I, most beautiful Brydegroome, that for me the most
filthy vassal of sin, and whore of the devil, thou have not refused to
die? Who am I, most bountiful Creator, that for me most vile creature, thou
have not been afraid of the passion of the cross? I am to thee, most loving
Brydegroome, the true spouse of blood, for whom thou do pour forth such
plenty of blood. I am to thee, most beautiful Lilly, a thorn indeed that
is full of prickles. It is I that laid upon thee a heavy and sharp burden,
with the weight whereof thou wast so squeezed, that drops of blood did distill
abundantly from thy sacred body. To thee, Lord Jesus, my alone redeemer and
Mediator, for this thine unspeakable love will I sing praises for ever.

AMEN.
PRAYER VI. He rendereth thanks for our calling by the word.
Unto thee, O Lord my God, is most due, all praise, honor, and thanksgiving,
for that thou would by the preaching of thy word make manifest unto us that
thy Fatherly will and determinate counsel concerning our salvation: By nature
(...) Ephesians 5. 8 Luke 1. 79
are darkness; we sit in darkness, and in the region of the shadow of death:
But thou by the most clear light of the Gospel do dispell this darkness.
In thy light do we see light; that Psalm, 36* 11
is, in the light of thy word we see true light that lighteneth every one
John 1, 9.
that comes into this world. What use were there of a treasure that is hid,
and a light that is put under a Matt, 5. 15
bushel? I do therefore declare with thankfulness that great benefit, in
that thou have by the word of thy Gospel revealed unto us that treasure of
benefits in thy Son. How Isai 52 ^ Nah* 1. 15
beautiful are the feet of those that bring good tidings, and tell of
salvation! This peace of conscience, and salvation of the soul, by the
preaching of Romans 10. 15
the Gospel thou do yet declare unto us, and call us unto the kingdom of
thy Son. I was led into the bypath of errors, as it were a weak and
miserable sheep: But thou have called me into the way again by the preaching
of thy word. I was condemned and utterly lost: But thou in the word of thy
Gospel do offer unto me the benefits of Christ; and in the benefits of
Christ, thy grace; and in thy grace, remission of sins; and in remission of
sins, righteousness; and in righteousness, salvation and life everlasting.
Who can sufficiently in words express those bowels of thy mercy? yea, who
can in mind conceive the greatness, and the riches of thy goodness? The
mystery of our salvation Romans 11. 25
kept secret from eternity, by the manifestation of thy Gospel thou do lay
open unto us. The counsels which thou had concerning our peace before the
foundations of the world were laid, thou do reveal unto us by the
preaching of thy Psalm, 119 105
word, which is a lantern unto our feet, whiles we go through this
darksome valley into light everlasting. What had it profited us to have been
borne, unless by Christ thou had delivered us when we were captivated
through sin? What had it profited us to have been redeemed, unless thou
had by thy word declared unto us the great benefit of our redemption? ^^ai
^5, ^ Revel 3* 20
Thou do spread foorththy hands unto us all the day. Thou knockest at the
ga^^ of our heart every day, and call us all unto thee by thy word. O Lord
most benign, how many thousand thousands of men do live in the blindness of
Gentilisme, and in errors, and have not seen that light of thy heavenly word
which thy bounty has granted us of all men most unthankful! Alace, how often
through our contempt and unthankfulness do we deserve that thou Revel ^, 5
Wisd* 11. 1^
should take from us the candlestick of thy word! But thou of thy long
patience do make as if thou saw not our sins; and of thy unspeakable
mercy do yet continue unto us that most holy pledge, and most precious
treasure of thy word. For which thy great benefit we render unto thee
eternal thanks, and we humbly beseech thee to continue it still unto us.

Amen.
PRAYER VII. He rendereth thanks unto God for the expectation of our
conversion.
I Render unto thee, most merciful Father, immortal thanks* for that thou
would with so great patience and long-suffering expect my conversion; and
have brought me out of the path of sin, unto the fellowship of thy kingdom.
How great is thy long-suffering, that Romans ^, 4
thou have not cast me away from thy face, and thrust me down into
everlasting torments, whereas I have deserved it a thousand times! How many
thousands has death prevented before they could attain unto true repentance!
How many sinners has the devil made obstinate, that they might not obtain,
forgiveness of their sins! There was no distinction in nature between me
and them; only thy goodness and long-suffering: My offense was no less than
theirs; but thy grace did abound. Thy mercy strove with my misery: I went on
in my sin; and thou did go on in thy mercy: I differred my conversion;
and thou did differ my punishment: I went astray and thou did call me: I
refused to come; and still thou did expect me. This thy goodness, most
indulgent Father, I cannot extol with sufficient praises. This thy long
patience, most merciful GOD, I cannot recompense with any merits. Thou did
preserve me from many sins, whereinto the corruption of the flesh, the deceat
of the world, and the persuasion of the devil, would have thrown me headlong
as well as others. Neither have thou only kept me from falling into sin;
but also have most graciously expected my conversion from sin, into which I
had fallen. I find thee more merciful than I am sinful: I sinned; and thou
made as if thou did not see it* I contained not my self from wickedness;
and yet thou did abstain from punishment. I Bernard. in his 2 Sermon. of the
seave^ lo^us.
did long time prolong my iniquity, and thou did prolong thy pity. What
were then my deserts? Surely evil, and the worst of evils, to wit, my
sins, many in number, most grievous for weight, and detestable for variety.
Therefore to thy grace and bounty alone do I attribute it, that thou have so
long expected my conversion, and delivered my soul out of the s^ares of sin.
To thee, O Lord, be praise, honor, and glory, for ever and ever.

Amen.
PRAYER VIII. He rendereth thanks for our conversion.
I Render thanks unto thee, my God, for that thou have converted my heart that
was hard, and knew not how to repent; and for that thou have taken from me my
stony heart, and given me an heart of flesh. I had of my self power to
sin: But I had not of my self power to rise again to repentance. I could
go astray of my self: But I could not return again into the way without
thee. For even as he that is borne Gra^at in the 2 book of the life of Chr.
cap, 2
crooked from his mothers womb, cannot be made straight by natural means,
but only by divyne and supernatural power: So my soul being by nature
crooked and prone to sin, and the love of earthly things, could by no humane
power, but thy grace only, be rectified, and lifted up to the love of thee*
and heavenly things. I could deforme my self by my sins most foullie: But
thou only could reform me. As the Ethiopian cannot change his Ierm 13, 23.
Skin, nor the Leopard his Spots: So neither can I do that which is good,
being by nature addicted unto the love of that which is evil. Thou my God
did convert me, and I was converted; and when I was converted, Ierm. 31.
(...)
then I repented; and when I was instructed, then I smote my Ephesians 2, ^
thigh. I was dead in sin: And thou did quicken me. As much power as a
dead man has to raise himself: So much had I to convert my self. Unless
thou had drawn me, I had never come unto thee; unless thou had stirred
me up, I had never watched unto thee; unless thou had illuminated me, I
had never seen thee. My sins were more sweet unto me than honey and the
honey comb: But I am to thank thee, that now they are sharp and bitter unto
me; for thou have given me a spiritual taste. The works of virtue were more
bitter unto me than gall and aloes: But I am to thank thee that now they are
become pleasant and sweet; for thou have by thy Spirit changed the corrupt
judgment Isai 53. ^*
of my flesh. I went astray as a sheep that is lost, and declined to the way
G^anat* out of Aug^^^ines Medications*
of iniquity: But thou, which art the good sheepherd, have found me out, and
brought me again unto the flock of thy Sayncts. It was late ere I knew thee;
for there was a great and darksome cloud of vanity before mine eyes, which
would not suffer me to see the light of the truth: It was late ere I saw the
true light; because I was blind and loved blindness, and walked through the
darkness of sin, into the darkness of hell: But thou have illuminated me;
thou soughtest me, when I sought not thee: thou calledst me, when I called not
upon thee; thou convertedst me, when I was not converted unto thee; and thou
saydst with a most powerful voice* Let there be light in the inward parts of
his heart, and there was a light; and I saw thy light, and I knew mine own
blindness. For this thy immense and infinite benefit, I will praise thy Name
for ever and ever.

AMEN.
PRAYER IX. He rendereth thanks for the forgiveness of sins.
I Owe and render unto thee, eternal and merciful GOD, great thanks, for
that thou have not rejected John 6. 37
me when I came unto thee, but did most readily receive me, and most
mercifully forgive me all my sins. I was that prodigal son, most
indulgent Father, I was that prodigal son, that by living Luke 15. 13
ri^t^usl^e wasted his fathers substance: For I have defiled the gifts of
nature; I have refused the gifts of grace; I have deprived my self of the
gifts of glory, I was naked and destitute of all good things: and thou
coveredst and enrichedst me, with the robe of righteousness: I was lost and
condemned: and thou of thy free grace have bestowed upon me eternal
salvation. Thou of thine ardent mercy did embrace me and kiss me, in
sending John 1. ^8 C^^^* ^* ^
thy most beloved Son that is in thy bosom, and thy holy Spirit, which is
the kiss of thy mouth* as ample witnesses of thine infinite love: Thou
cloathedst me with my first robe, in restoring me my former innocence. Thou
gave me a ring for my hand, by sealing me with thy Spirit of grace. Thou
did put shoes upon my feet, by arming me Ephesians 6, 25 Luke ^5. 23
with the Gospel of peace. Thou killedst the fat calfe for me, by delyvering
thy most dear Son to death for me. Thou did cause me to feast and make
merry by restoring the joye of heart, and the true peace of conscience unto
me. I was dead; and through thee I was restored to life: I went astray; and
through thee I came again into the way: I was consumed with poverty; and
through thee I entered again into my former possession. Thou might in thy
just judgment have rejected me, seeing that I was polluted with so many
sins, covered with so many offenses, and corrupted with so many iniquities:
But thy mercy did abound above my sins; Romans 5, 21
thy goodness was greater tha^ mine iniquity. How often have I shut the gate
of my heart when thou did knock! Therefore when I knocked thou might
most justly have shut the door of mercy against me. How often have I stopped
mine ears, that I might not hear thy voice! Therefore when I sighed unto
thee, thou might most justly have stopped thine ears, and not hearkened
unto my voice. But thy grace was more abundant than all my sin and
transgression. Thou did Isai 65* ^
receive me with thy hands spread forth, and put away my iniquities as it
were a cloud, and cast all (...) Isai 38* (...)*
sins behind thy back. Thou remembrest my sins no more, but receavest me
into the most ample bosom of thy mercy. For this thy inestimable benefit, I
will give thanks unto thee for ever.

Amen.
PRAYER X. He rendereth thanks unto God for conserving us in that which is
good.
TO thee, LORD, be honor* and Reve* 6. (...)
glory, and blessing, and thanksgiving: for that thou have not only in mercy
received me upon my repentance; but also have enabled me to abstain from
sin, and live more reformedlie. What should it profit a man, to be free from
his sickness, and presently to fall into a worse relapse? What should it
profit to be absolved from sins past, unless grace be conferred to lead a
godly life? Thou, God most faithful, have showed all the parts and offices of
a faithful and skillful Physician in the cure of my souls wounds. My wounds
were deadly, and thou did cure them by the wounds of thy Son: But there
was cause to fear, that the wounds that were healed might wax raw again:
And thou by the grace of thy holy Spirit, as it were a fomentation, have
hindered it. How many be those, that after remission of sins obtained,
return again to their former* course of life, and reiterating their sins,
more grievouslie offend GOD! Alace, how many do we see, that being freed
from the yoke of sin, return to their former captivity, and being brought
out of the spiritual Egypt, look back again to the pots! They 2 Pet. 2. 20
have fled from the pollutions of the world, by the knowledge of CHRIST, and
do wallow again in the same, by 22
repeating the former conversation of their most wicked life. They were freed
out of the bonds of Satan by their conversion, and again are held entangled in
the same, by the delusion of wicked spirits: Surely, their latter end is
worse than the beginning: And it 2 Pet* 2. 21
had been better for them never to have known the way of righteousness, than
having known it, to turn away from the path of the holy commandments, which
were delivered unto them. These 22
are the dogs that return again to their vomit; and sowes that after their
washing, wallow again in the mire. Whatsoever has happened unto them, might
have happened unto me; but that it has pleased thee by the grace of thy power,
and the efficacy of thy holy Spirit, to enable me to continue in that which
is good. The same wicked spirit that vanquished them, assaulted me: The same
world that seduced them, enticed me: The same flesh that overcame them,
allured me: Only thy grace protected me against their assaults, and
furnished me with power sufficient for victory. Thy strength 2 Cor 12. 9
was powerful in my weakness: From thee the strength of the Spirit descended,
with which I was enabled to bridle the assaults of the flesh. Whatsoever good
there is in me, it descends all from thee, who art the fountain of all
good: For in me by nature there is nothing but sin. Therefore, as many good
works as I find in me, which notwithstanding are impure and imperfect, by
reason of my flesh; so many gifts they are of thy grace, I must needs
confess. For this thine inestimable gift conferred upon me, I will give thee
thanks for ever.

Amen.
PRAYER XI. He rendereth thanks for all the gifts of the soul and body, and
for external goods.
I Render unto thee, eternal and merciful God, as it is most due, eternal
thanks: for that thou have not only made me a body and a soul; but
moreover have furnished me with sundry gifts of the soul and body, and also
with external goods. Thou which art wisdom it self, teach men all
knowledge: If Psalm. 94. 10
therefore I know any good, it is a demonstration of thine abundant grace,
toward me. Without thy light, my mind is darksome: Without thy grace, my
will is captive. If there be in me either any wit or prudence, it is all to
be attributed to thy clemency. Wisdom is the eye of the soul, and divyne
grace is the eye of wisdom. Whatsoever we know, we know either by the light
of nature, or by the revelation of thy word: But from thee, O thou light of
eternal wisdom, does the illumination of nature spring: From thee also
does the revelatio^ of the word come: Therefore whatsoever we know, descends
unto us as thy gift. Thou, O indeficient fountain of life, art my life, and
the length of my days. Thou, O eternal health it self, art the strength of
my body, and the vigor of my virtue. Man lives not by Matt. 4. 4
bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of thy mouth: So then man
is not preserved in health and strength by bread only; neither is he preserved
from diseases by Physic only: but by every word that proceeds out of the
mouth of God. Tranquillity of the mind preserves the health of the body:
And true godliness begets tranquillity of the conscience. From thee (O
thou chief good) all true godliness, all tranquillity of the mind without
disturbance, and all wished-for health of body does come. Moreover,
whatsoever external good I do possess, all that I owe unto thy liberality
and bounty. A crust of bread is not due unto my deserts: How much less then
are all these external goods which thou do heap upon me? They are called
indeed the gifts of fortune: But they are in deed and in truth the gifts of
thy grace. There is nothing more blessed than to do good, and to be liberal
to others: And thou have made me partaker of this blessedness, by bestowing
liberally these outward goods upon me. Thou have sowed in me the seed of
thy grace, that from thence there may arise to others an harvest of liberality
and beneficencie. Thou have committed many things unto me, as unto a
steward, that I might have wherewithal to do good to my fellow servants. From
thee the fountain of all good, there descends upon me streams of goods:
Whatsoever I am, whatsoever I possess, whatsoever I bestow, depends all I
confess, upon thy bounty. For this thine inestimable mercy, I will give thee
thanks for ever.

Amen.
PRAYER XII. He rendereth thanks for the sacrament of Baptism.
TO thee, O eternal, and merciful God, Father, Son, and holy Ghost, I
render humble thanks for that thou have washed me in the holy laver of
baptism from all my sins: and for that thou have received me into the
covenant of grace, and made me an heir of everlasting life. I acknowledge it
is thy gift that I was borne of Christian parents, and by them brought unto
this heavenly fount. How many thousands of infants are borne in Gentilisme,
and without this sacrament do die in their sins! There is no difference in
nature between me and them: Only thy superaboundant grace has made a
difference. I was joined with them in communion of sin: But I was separated
from them by participation of thy grace. How great is thy goodness, that thou
did find me, Matt, 7. 7
when I sought thee not, that thou did hear me, before I asked, that thou
did open unto me, before I knocked. This thy mercy exceeds all praise,
yea, and all admiration. I was baptized in thy holy Name, thy Matt. ^8. 19
Name for me was called upon. Therefore, I am received into the heavenly
family, being made the son of my heavenly Father, the brother of Christ,
and the temple of the holy Ghost. This is an holy and heavenly laver: In it
therefore, I am washed and purged from all my uncleanness. It is the laver of
regeneration and renovation: By it therefore I am regenerated and renewed by
the grace of the holy Ghost. Whatsoever Christ my Savior merited by his most
holy obedience, and by the effusion of his most precious blood: of all that
he has left the saving fount of baptism as a pledge. Therefore, the
conferring of baptism, is the besprinkling of the blood of Christ. That
precious ^ John 1. 7 Psalm, 51. 7
blood of Christ does make me clean from all my sins, and makes me
whiter than snow in the sight of God. O eternal God, thou have made an
eternal covenant with me in baptism; unto which I have always recourse by
true and serious repentance. Thou have betroathed me unto Hos^^ 2. 19
thee for ever in judgment and righteousness, in grace and mercy: Thou have
given me an earnest and Ephesians 1. 14
pledge of thy Spirit in baptism: Therefore, thou will not cast me away from
thy face; but being mindful of thy promise, thou will lead me into the
joys of the celestial marriage. As at the baptism of Christ my Mediator and
head, Matt. 3, 16
the heavens were opened: So by the communion of the same baptism, thou have
opened unto me the gate of paradise. As at the baptism of Christ, the holy
Ghost descended upon him, and a voice from heaven did testify that he was the
beloved Son of GOD: So by the same communion of the same baptism, I am made
a partaker of the holy Ghost, and adopted to be a son of GOD. For which
inestimable benefit, I will give thanks unto thee, my GOD, for ever.

AMEN.
PRAYER XIII. He rendereth thanks for the sacrament of the Lords Supper.
HOw great thanks do Iowe unto thee, most high God, for that in the most
sacred mystery of the supper, thou do feed me with the body and blood of
thy Son! What is there in heaven or in earth of more price and excellency,
than that body which is united to thy Son personally? What more certain
testimony and pledge of thy grace can there be, than the precious blood of
thy Son poured out for my sins, on the altar of the cross? The very price
of my redemption thou bestowest upon me, that I may have a most certain
testimony of thy grace toward me. As often as I fall through my sins from
the covenant of baptism: So often by true repentance, and the saving use of
this supper, I am restored unto it again. It is a sacrament of the new
Testament, and it always enricheth me with new gifts of the Spirit. In this
body life it self dwells, and therefore it refreshes me, and quickneth me
unto everlasting life. By the effusion of this blood, satisfaction is made for
our finnes: And therefore by the drinking thereof, the remission of my sins
is confirmed unto me. Christ says it, Truth it self says it; Whosoever
John 6. 54
shall eat my flesh, and drink my blood, has eternal life* and I will raise
him up at the last day, that is, to the life of 50
glory. For this is the bread of life which descended from heaven, that
whosoever shall eat thereof, may not die, but have everlasting life. It is the
eating by faith that Christ so commends. which must needs be added unto the
sacramental eating* that so that which was appointed to life, may be received
by us un* to life. I come therefore with true faith unto this heavenly
banquet, being firmlie persuaded, that the body which I eat, was delivered
unto death for me, and the blood which I drink, was poured forth for my
sins. I cannot in any wise doubt of the remission of my sins, when as it
is confirmed by the participation of the price which was offered for my sins.
I cannot in any wise doubt of Christ his dwelling in me, when he seals
unto me the same by the communion of his body and blood. I cannot in any
wise doubt of the assistance of the holy Spirit, when my Infirmity is
strengthened with such safeguard. I am not afraid of Satan's assaults, when as
this Angelical food does make me strong to fight. I am not Hilar. in his 8
book of the Trinity. page 141
afraid of the allurements of the flesh, when as this quickening and spiritual
food does corroborate me by the virtue of the Spirit. These taken and drunk
do make Christ to dwell in me, and me in Christ. The good sheepherd will not
suffer the sheep that is fed with his own body and blood, to be devoured by
the infernal wolf: Neither will the power of the Spirit suffer me to be
overcome by the weakness of the flesh. To thee (O Savior most benign) be
praise, honor, and thanksgiving, for ever and ever.

Amen.
PRAYER XIV. He r^^nd^reth thanks to God, for preserving us from sundry
evils.
TO thee (O eternal and merciful GOD) I render eternal thanks, for that
thou have hitherto preserved me from infinite evils and dangers, and have
kept me safe by the guard of thy holy Angels. Thy privatiue blessings, by
which thou do keep me from evil, are more in number than thy positive, by
which thou do confer good upon me. As many evils of soul and body as
I see in others; so many tokens do I see of thy mercy toward me: For my
deliverance from those evils is to be attributed as due only to thy
goodness. How great is the power of the devil! How great is his subtlety! As
often therefore as that malignant and most subtle spirit, and our most potent
adversary does labor to do us any mischief; so often by the buckler of
thy benignity and by the guard of the holy Angels being protected, I have
been able to escape his nets. But who can reckon up the treacherous assaults
and invasions of the devil? Who can therefore reckon up the riches of thy
bounty? When

(...)redst, that I may be able to endure and overcome all the violent
invasions of the infernal powers. Let my last word in this life be the same
with which thou did consummate all upon the cross: and receive my Luke 23 46
soul, which thou have redeemed with so dear a price, when I shall commend it
into thy hands. Let a blessed resurrection follow a blessed death: In that
great day of thy severe judgment, delyver me from that cruel sentence, thou
which in my life did with thy ready help protect me. Let my sins be
covered Psalm, 32. ^ Mic. 7. 19 1 Samuel* 25, 2^
with the shadow of thy grace, and overwhelmed in the bottom of the sea. Let
my soul be bound up in the bundle of the living, that with all the elect I
may come into the fellowship of everlasting joye.

Amen.
THE FOURTH PART. Of Supplications for others.
THE ARGUMENT.
The meditation of our neighbors wants and indigencies, concerns the common
good and welfare of the Church and commonwealth, and makes us look upon
others miseries as our own. This is the first of true and sincere charity,
which binds us all together into one mystical body, under one head, which
is Christ; and commends unto us a serious care of the whole Church, and of
all the particular members thereof. That is not a true member of the body,
which labors not, as much as in it lies, to preserve in safety the whole
structure of the body: That is not a true member of the body, which suffers
not with a fellow-member that suffers. And the same reason is of force in the
mystical body of Christ. Whosoever therefore is a true and a living member of
the Christian Church let him daily pray: For the conservation of the word: For
pastors and people: For magistrates and subjects: and For the oeconomicall and
household estate. For these are those three Hierarchies, and holy magistracies,
appointed by GOD for the safety and preservation of this life, and for the
propagation and increase of the heavenly kingdom. Let him pray also For his
kinsfolk, and his benefactors, to whom he must acknowledge himself to be
bound in some special bond of d^etie. Let him pray For his enemies and
persecutors, and seriously desire their conversion and salvation. Let him pray
likewise For all those that are afflicted and in misery, and show himself to
be moved with a fellow-feeling of their calamities.

PRAYER I. He prays for the conservation and continuance of the word, and
for the propagation and increase of the Church.
Almighty, eternal, and merciful GOD, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that
by thy holy Spirit do gather thy Church out of mankind, and in it do
keep the heavenly doctrine committed unto it: In humility I adore and
worship thee, and pray unto thee, that thou would be pleased to continue
unto us the saving doctrine of thy word inviolable, and every day propagate
and enlarge the bounds of thy Church. Thou have of thine infinite mercy
lighted unto us that were in the darkness of this world, the light of thy
word: Suffer not therefore, the clouds of humane traditions to extinguish it,
or to obscure it. Thou have given unto us thy word for the wholesome meat of
our souls: Suffer it not therefore, by the delusion of the devil and the
corruption of men, to be turned into poison. Mortify in us the sinful lusts
of the flesh, that thirsts after earthly things; that so we may taste the
spiritual delicates of thy word which is that heavenly Manna: No man can
feel the sweetness thereof, but he that will taste: and no man can taste,
whose palate is corrupted with abundance of worldly delights. Thy word is the
word of spirit and life, of light and grace. Take away therefore the carnal
affections, and the corrupt senses of our hearts; that it may shine to us
within, and be a light to lead us unto the light of everlasting life. From
the light of thy word let there arise in our hearts the light of saving faith,
that Psalm, 36. 9
in thy light we may see light, in the light of thy word, the light of thy
Son. As in the old time that heavenly Manna descended in the wilderness
with a wholesome dew: So likewise by the hearing of thy word let our hearts be
silled with the fire of the Spirit, that our cold and lukewarm flesh may be
excited, and may be tempered against the boylings of sinful lusts. Let the
seed of thy word take deep root in our hearts that by the dew of thy holy
Spirit watering it, it may bring forth wholesome fruit, and plentiful increase
like standing corn. Protect, O Psalm. 80. 15 ^sai 5. 2
Lord, the vineyard of thy Church in which thy word is as seed scattered, and
fruit is gathered unto everlasting life. Set an hedge of Angelical guard round
about it, that the wild boares and the foxes break it not down: the wild
boares by violent persecutions, and the foxes by fraudulent delusions. Erect up
in it an high tower of thy fatherly providence, that by thy custody it may
be free from all devastation. But if thou shall at any time think good to
press the grapes of this vineyard in the press of the cross, and of
calamities, let them beeripened first by the heat of thy grace; that they may
yield the most delicious fruits of faith and patience. Whatsoever is put into
the root of the vine, is converted in the grapes into the most sweet liquor of
wine: Grant, I beseech thee, that whatsoever shall happen unto us in this life,
whether scoffings, persecutions, praises, or whatsoever else, our souls may
turn it into the wine of faith, hope, and charity, and into the fruit of
patience and humility. Out of this militant Church translate us at length into
the Church triumphant: And let this tabernacle of clay be changed into that
most beautiful and everlasting temple of the heavenly Jerusalem.

Amen.
PRAYER II. He supplicateth for Pastors and their hearers.
O Jesus Christ, Son of the living God, our alone mediator and redeemer, who
being exalted at the right hand of the Father, Ephesians 4, 11
do send pastors and teachers of thy word, by whose ministry thou do
gather together unto thee thy Church amongst us: I humbly entreat thee, the
only true GOD, together with the Father and the holy Spirit, to govern these
thy ministers in the way of truth, and to turn the hearts of their hearers
unto the true obedience of the faith. There is no state or condition of men,
that is more subject to the hatred and treacheries of Satan, than the ministers
of thy word: Defend them therefore, by the buckler of thy grace, and furnish
them with the strength of patience, that Satan by his sleights may not supplant
them. Give, I beseech thee, unto thy ministers, that knowledge that is
necessary for them, and a pious vigilancie in all their actions; that they may
first learn of thee, before they presume to teach others: Govern and
illuminate their hearts by thy Spirit; that being in the place of GOD, they 1
Pet, 4. 11 Acts 20. 28
preach nothing else but the oracles of GOD. Let them feed the flock that is
committed unto them, which thou have bought and redeemed with thy precious
blood. Let them John ^1. 15
feed the flock out of true and sincere love, and not for covetousness and
ambition. Let them feed them Bern. 2 Sermon, of the resurection, Col, ^34,
with their mind, with their mouth, and with their works. Let them feed them
with the sermon of the mind, with the exhortation of the word, and with their
own example; that they may be followers of his steps, to whom the cure of the
LORDS flock was three several times commended. Stir them up; that they may
watch Heb. 13. 17
over their souls that are committed unto them, as being to give a strict
d^eou^^ for them in the day of judgment. Gregor. ^ book of pastoral C^^e, cap.
6
Whatsoever they exhort by the word of their holy preaching, let them
studiously labor to demonstrate the same in their actions: l^st that being
lazy themselves, and loath to work, they labor in vain to stir up others.
Unto what good works soever they stir up others, let them shine by the same
first themselves, being set on fire by the holy Spirit. Before the words of
exhortation be heard, let them first proclayme by their works, whatsoever
they shall speak with their tongues. Thrust forth Matt. 9. last
faithful laborers into thy harvest; that they may gather together many Acts
1^, 14
handfulls of Saints. Open likewise the hearts of the hearers; that they may
receive the seed with holy obedience. Give unto them thy grace; that with a
pure heart they may keep thy holy word committed unto them, and bring forth
plentiful fruit with patience. Let them hearke^ attentively; let them hear
carefully; let them practice fruitfullie: that the word which is preached unto
them, for want of faith condemn John (...). 48 Heb. 4, 2 Isai 55. (...)
them not in the last day. There is a notable promise of thy bounty, that thy
word shall not return unto thee spoken in vain: Be mindful of this thy
promise, and bless the labor of him that planteth, and him that 1 Cor 3, 7
Matt. ^3, 4
waters. Suffer not the infernal crows to pick out of the field of the
hearers hearts, the seed of thy holy word. Suffer not the spinie thicket of
the thorns of pleasures, and Luke 8, 14
riches, to choke it. Suffer not the hardness of the stony ground to hinder
13
the fructification of it: But pour down the dew of thy heavenly grace from
above, and water thy heavenly seed; that the fruit of good works like
standing corn may spring up most plenteouslie. Knit together in a near bond
of love and charity the hearts of the pastors, and of the hearers: that they
may labor together with mutual prayers, and raise up one another with mutual
comfort.

Amen.
(...)holy that Nurserie of the Church and Commonweal. Give unto virgins,
widows, and married persons true sanctity of mind, and pure chastity of
body: Let virgins cleave unto thee without any distraction: Let widows
persevere in ^ Tim 5. 5
prayers and supplications night and day: Let those that are married love one
another with mutual love: Let them all serve thee, with their whole heart in
holiness: Let the marriage Heb. 13, 4
bed b^e vnde^^^ed, and let the minds of them all be vnspoted: Let them be
violets of humility, and lillies of chastity: Let them be roses of charity,
and balsame of sanctity. Tie the hearts of them that are knit together in
holy wedlock, with the bond of chaste love: that they may mutuallie embrace
and obey one another, and persevere in thy holy service. Preserve thou them
from Tobi^ 3. 8
the treacheries of As^^^de^^, that they burn not with mutual hatred one
toward the other. Let the wife be an help unto her husband* and Genesis 2. 20
comfort him in adversity: Let the indissoluble bond of matrimony be a token
and seal unto us of the love that is between Christ and the Ephesians 5. 32
Church. By how much the nearer the society is between the man and the wife:
by so much the more fervent let their zeal be in prayer. By how much the more
obnoxious and subject they are to dangers and calamities: by so much the more
conjoined let their minds be in piety and prayer. Be present by thy grace
with religious parents, that they may bring up their children in Ephesians 6. 4
holy admonitions* and instructions and good discipline: Let them acknowledge
those fruits of wedlock to be thy gift, and restore them again unto thee by
godly and faithful instruction: Let them shine before them by the example of
their godly life, and not become guilty of that grievous sin of scandal.
Bend likewise the hearts of the children, that they may perform due obedience
unto their parents: that they may become sweet smelling plants of the
heavenly paradise, and not unprofitable wood adjudged to the flames of
hellfire. Let them cast forth a most pleasant smell of piety, obedience,
reverence, and all kind of virtue: that they fall not into that most filthy
sink of sin, and so consequently into the pit of hell. Let them remember
the commandment of honoring their parents: let them be careful to
recompense their parents* after the manner of storks: let them remember to
feed them as they have been fed by them, that they precipitate not themselves
into the gulf of sundry evils. Let parents and children with joint desires
study in this life to worship thee the true GOD: that they may bear parts in
consort, and together praise thee in the life to come. Let servants ^^ey their
masters with alacrity, and with fear, and with singleness of Ephesians 6. 5
heart: not with eye-service, or to please men, but as it becomes the
servants of Christ. In like manner, let masters embrace their servants with
fatherly kindness: that they turn not their just government into tyrannical
cruelty. Let their society in their private house be an oeconomicall private
Churce, beloved of God, and of the Angels.

AMEN.
PRAYER V. He prays for parents, brethren, sisters, kinsfolk, and
benefactours.
MOst holy and merciful God* from whom large heaps of sundry benefits
descend down upon us* who have given unto me kinsfolk and benefactours to
be helps unto me in this present life: I beseech thee to bestow upon them in
the life to come everlasting rewards. Those whom thou have joined unto me in a
special bond of nature and blood, I do specially commend unto thy
protection. Those unto whom I do owe special love and respect, with serious
and fervent prayers I commend unto thy keeping. Grant that my kinsfolk may
with joint consent and unanimity serve thee in the true faith, and with true
piety: that they may receive all of them hereafter a crown of eternal
glory. Unto my parents whom thou have made, next after thee, the authors of
my life, and my informers in true piety, I cannot by any means render
deserved rewards: I humbly beseech thee therefore, who art the author of all
good, and the rewarder of all benefits, to recompense their benefits here with
temporal rewards, and hereafter with eternal. Let the example of Christ thy
Son, who about the agony of his death commended unto his disciple the care
of his mother, let his example teach me even to the last breath to take care
for my parents. Let nature it self, by the example of the storke, teach me
that I owe perpetual thanks and rewards unto them for their merits. Unto thee,
merciful Father, I commend the care and tuition of my brethren, sisters, and
kinsfolk: Let them become the brethren and sisters of Christ, and so heirs of
the kingdom of heaven. Let us all be joined together in the kingdom of grace,
whom thou have joined together In the life of nature: And let us all, together
with those whom by death thou have separated from us, and taken unto thy self,
let us all at length be joined together in the kingdom of glory. Make us all
citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem, as thou have made us in this life members
of the true Church. The same likewise I entreat of thee for all my
benefactours, whose health and welfare both of soul and body I am bound to
desire and further even by the law of nature. Receive them into the everlasting
tabernacles of the city which is above, who^ thou have used as thy instruments
to confer upon me so many and so liberal benefits. My heart propounds
unto thee the infallible promise of thy word, that thou will of thy mere free
grace recompense even a cup of cold water: How much Matt* 10, 42
more then will thou be liberal and bountiful to those that with full hand
bestow benefits of all kinds upon those that want! Let not thy graces cease to
run down upon them, that pour forth so plentifully upon others. Let the
fountain of thy goodness always spring unto them, from whom such plentiful
rivers of liberality do flow. Grant, I beseech thee, most merciful GOD, that
they which 1 Cor 9. 11
^ow temporal things so liberally, may reap with much increase things
spiritual. Fill their souls with joy, that feed the bodies of the poor with
meat. Let not the fruit of their bounty perish, though they show it by
bestowing of the goods that perish. Give unto them that give unto others, thou
that art the giver of every good gift, blessed for ever.

Amen.
PRAYER VI. He prays for enemies and persecutors,
LORD Jesus Christ the only begoten Son of GOD, that have prescribed us in
thy word this rule Matt. 5. 44
of charity, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them
that hate you, pray for them that despitefullie use you, and persecute you: I
beseech thee, who art most gracious, and most ready to forgive, to forgive
mine enemies, and the persecutours of the Church. Give unto me the grace of
thy holy Spirit, that I may not only forgive mine enemies from mine heart,
but also pray for their health and salvation even from my soul. Whet not
against them the sword of severe revenge, but anoint their heads with the oil
of thy mercy and compassion. Extinguish the sparks of hatred and anger that
are in their hearts, that they break not forth into the infernal flames of
hell. Let them know and acknowledge that Our life is but a vapor and a smoke
James 4, 14
that soon vanishes away; that our body is but ashes and dust that flies
away: that they bear not immortal anger in their mortal bodies, nor
entertayne into this brittle tabernacle of clay their souls enemy. Let them
know likewise, that inveterate hatred is their greatest enemy: because it
kills the soul, and excludes them from the participation of heavenly life.
Illumiminate their minds, that they beholding the glass of thy divyne mercy,
may see the deformity of anger and hatred. Govern their wills, that being
moved by the example of thy divyne forgiveness, they may leave off and cease
to be angry and to do harm. Grant unto me, merciful GOD, that, Romans 12,
18 Ephesians 4, 4
as much as in me lies, I may have peace with all men: and turn the hearts
of mine enemies to brotherly reconcilement. Let us walk with unanimity and
concord in the way of this life, seeing that we hope all for a place in our
celestial country. Let us not disagree upon earth, seeing that we all desire
to live together hereafter in heaven. We call upon thee our Lord, and our God
which art in heaven: And it is not meet for the servants of the same Lord to
fall out one with another. We are one mystical body under Christ our head:
And it is base and shameful for the members of the same body to fight one
with another. They which have one faith and one baptism, ought Ephe 4, 5
to have one spirit and one mind. Neither do I pray alone for my private
enemies, but also for the public enemies and persecutoures of the Church: O
thou which art truth it self, bring them into the way of truth: O thou which
art power it self, bring to naught their bloody endeavors and attempts. Let
the brightness of thy heavenly truth open their blind eyes, that the raging
madness and desire to persecute, which they have in their minds, may
hereafter cease. Let them know, O LORD* and acknowledge that it is not only
a vain thing, but also very dangerous, to kick against Acts ^, 5
the pricks. Why do they imitate the fury of wolves* when as they know that
the bl^^^ of Christ the immaculate Lambe^^ as poured out for us? Why do they
thirst to shed that innocent blood, for which they know that the blood of the
very Son of GOD was poured forth upon the altar of the cross? Convert
them, O LORD, that they may be converted unto thee from their heart, and so
obtain the fruit of their conversion in this life, and in that which is to
come.

Amen.
PRAYER VII. He supplieateth for those that are afflicted and in misery.
Almighty, eternal, and merciful GOD, which art the 1 Timothy 4. 10 1 Timothy 2, ^
Savior of all men, especially of the ^^ythfull, and by the Apostle have
commanded us to make prayers for all men: I entreat thee for all those that
are afflicted and in misery, that thou would support them by the
consolation of thy grace, and succor them by the aid of thy power. Indue with
power and strength from above those that labor and swe^^ in the most grievous
agony of Satan's tentations: Make them partakers of thy victory. O Christ,
thou which did most powerfullie overcome Satan: Let the cooler of thy
heavenly comfort raise up those, whose bones are become dry with the fire of
grief and sorrow. Bear up all those that are P^al. 145 14
ready to fall* and raise up those that are already fallen. Be merciful
unto those that are sick and diseased, and grant that the disease of the body
may be unto them the medicine of the soul; and the adversities of the flesh,
the remedies of the spirit. Let them know that diseases are the handmaydes of
sin, and the forerunners of death. Give unto them the strength of faith and
patience, O thou which art the most true Physician both of soul and body.
Restore them again unto their former health, if it be for the everlasting
salvation of their souls. Protect all those that are great with child, and
those that be in labor: Thou art he that do deliver children out of the
straytes of their mothers womb, and do propagate mankind by thy blessing:
be present with those that be in labor, O thou lover and giver of life: that
they be not oppressed with an immoderate weight of sorrows. Nowrish those that
are orphans and destitute of all help and succor. Defend the widows that
are subject to the reproaches of all men, thou which have called thy self the
Psalm. 68. 5
Father of the fatherless, and the Judge and defender of the widows. Let the
tears of the widows, which flow down from their cheeks, break through the
clouds, and rest not until they come before thy throne. Hear those that be
in danger by sea, which cry to thee, and send up their sighs unto thee,
seeing before their eyes their neighbors suffer shipwreck. Restore liberty
unto those that are captive: that with a thankful heart they may sing of thy
bounty. Confirm those that suffer persecution for righteousness Matt. 5, 10
sake: that they may get the conquest over all their enemies, and purchase the
everlasting crown of martyrdom. Be present with all those that be in danger
and calamity: and grant that they may possess their souls in true patience,
and denying their Matt. 16. 2^.
own wills, take up their cross. Let them follow him under the cross, on
whom they believe that he died for us upon the cross. And especially I
commend unto thee, most gracious Father, those which are about the gates of
death, and are between time and eternity, and wrestle with all their strength
with that last enemy. Confirm them, O thou most potent Conqueror of death:
Deliver them, O most glorious Captain and Author of life: that they be not
overwhelmed in the waves of tentations, but by thy conduct they may be brought
unto the haven of everlasting rest. Have mercy upon all men, thou which are
the Creator of all: Have mercy upon all men, thou which art the Redeemer of
all. To thee be praise and glory for ever and ever.

Amen.
FINIS.
The sum of GERARD'S prayers, reduced into a form of morning prayer for the
use of an English family.
The four capital words signify the four parts of Gerards prayers, and the
Arithmeticall figures point at every prayer of those parts.
Holy GOD and just Judge! Thy eyes are more pure than the sun, and cannot
behold any thing that is unclean: The Cherubims and Seraphims cover their
faces before thy glorious majesty; The heavens of heavens are not clean in
thy sight. How then shall earth, sinful earth, dust and ashes appear before
thee* We prefume not, O LORD, to come before thy tribunal, to plead for our
righteousness; for all our righteousness is as filthy rags: But we
prostrate our selves with all humility of body and soul at thy mercie-seate,
to make CONFESSION of our sins. Hear, Lord, and have mercy.

We confess that 1 We sinned in the loins of our first parente^, we were
conce^ved in sin; we were shape^ in iniquity. 2 In our chyldhood original
sin brought forth actual: and actual sins have increased in us ever
since, as our days have increased. Who can reckon up the sins of his youth?
Who can tell how often he offends? The just man sins seven times a day:
But 3 We have sinned seaventie times seven times every day. 4, 5 All thy
holy laws and commandments we have broken in thought, word and deed. 6 We
have been partakers of other men's sins. 7 We are many way^s convinced of
our sins: We are convinced 8 By the contrition of heart, and the testimony
of (...) conscience: 9 By the greatness of thy mercy, and thy benefits
b^stowed upon us: 10 By the severitie of thy justice declared in the death and
passion of thy Son our Savior Jesus Christ. Thou art an holle God; and
hear not sinners: Thou art a just Judge; and thy justice must be satisfied.
We are sinners; and the wages of sin is death: Thy justice must be
satisfied; or else we cannot escape death. We have nothing of our own to
give for the ransom of our souls: Therefore we offer unto thee, holy
Father, that which is not ours, but thy Sons: 1 For our original sin, we
offer unto thee, just Judge, his original righteousness, who is
righteousness it self; for our conception in sin, we offer unto thee his
most sacred conception, who was conceaved by the holy Ghost; for our birth in
sin, we offer unto thee his most pure nativitie, who was borne of a pure
virgin. 2 For the offenses of our youth, we offer unto thee his most perfect
innocence, in whose mouth was found no guile. 3 For our daily slips and
falls, we offer unto thee his most perfect obedience, who made it his meat and
drink to do thy will in all things. 4.5 For our often breach of thy
commandments, we offer unto thee his most perfect righteousness, who
fulfilled all thy commandments. 6 For our communicating in other men's sins,
we offer unto thee his most perfect righteousness communicated unto us. 7. 8,
9, 10 For our most wicked and ungodly life, we offer unto thee his most
cruel and bitter death. For ^s was he conceaved, for us was he borne, for us
was he crucified: His blood still cries unto thee in our behalf, Father
forgive them. Accept, we beseech then, the inestimable price of thy Sons
blood for a full and plenarie satisfaction for all our sins: yea* O Lord, we
know that thou have accepted it already.

Therefore with confidence we put up our PETITIONS unto thee. As thou have
redeemed us by thy Son, so also we beseech thee to sanctify us by thy holy
Spirit. 1 Mortify in us every day more and more all sinful lusts and
affections, and quicken in us all saving graces and virtues. 2 Increase our
says. ^ Confirm our hope. 4 Inflame our charity. Teach us to imitate the
life of Christ, the true pattern of perfect obedience, and only true rule of
a godly life: Teach us 5 Humility. 6 Pat^ence, 7 Meekness, Gen^lenesse, 8
Chastity, Temperance* Tea^h us 9 To conte^^e all earthly things, 10 To deny
our selves, 11 To overcome the world. 12 Grant us consolation in adversity,
and true tranquillity of the mind. Grant us 13 Victory in tentations, and
deliverance from the devils treacheries. Grant us in thine appointed time 14 A
blessed departure out of this life, and a blessed resurrection unto life
everlasting.

We pray not for our selves alone, but in obedience to thy commandment we
make our SUPPLICATIONS unto thee for all men. ^ Save and desende the universal
Church: enlarge thou her borders, and propagate thy Gospel. 3 Bless all
Christian kings and governors, especially thy servang CHARLES, our most
gracious Kin and governor: Bless togethe with him our gracious Queen MARIE:
Bless unto them, and us, and our posterity after us, our hopeful Prince
Charles: season him betymes with true religion, that he may be an instrument
of thy glory, the joye of his parents, and the blesing of thy people. Remember
David, and all his troubles, the Lady Elizabeth our Kings only sister, and
her princely issue. Suffer them not still to mourn in a strange land: but
restore them, if it be thy will, to their former inheritance. Bless all our
kings loyal subjects from the highest unto the lowest: Give unto the Senators
counsel and wisdom: 3 To the magistrates justice and fortitude; to those
that are under them Christian subjection and obedience: 2 To the ministers of
thy word holiness of life, and soundness of doctrine; to the hearers of thy
word diligent attention to the word preached* and a care* and conscience to
live hereafter. Bless 4 Every family in this kingdom, this especially and
all that belong unto it. Bless our 5 parents, brethren, sisters, kinsfolk,
benefactours and friends. 6 Forgive our enemies. 7 Show pity and compassion to
all those that are afflicted and in misery: Relieve them according to their
several wants and necessities. Be thou a Father to the fatherless, a
Comforter to the comfortless, a Deliverer to the captives, and a Physician to
the sick: Grant that the sickness of their bodies may make for the good of
their souls: Especially we beseech thee to be present with those that are
at the point to die: Fit them for their journey before their departure: Arm
them with faith and patience: Seal unto them by thy holy Spirit the pardon
and forgiveness of all their sins: And so let thy servants depart in peace,
and be translated from death to life, to live with thee for evermore* Hear
us, we beseech thee, praying for our brethren, hear our brethren for us, and
Jesus Christ our elder brother for us all: We know, O Lord, that thou hear
him always. Hear us likewise, we beseech thee, for his sake, and accept our
THANKSGIVING. We render most hearty thanks unto thee for our Saviors 4
Incarnation, for his 5 Passion, for our 3 Redemption by his most precious
blood: We thank thee for ^ forming us in our mothers womb, for 1^ washing us
in the laver of baptism. for 6 calling us by thy word, for 7 expecting our
conversion, for 8 converting us unto the faith, for 13 strengthening our faith
by the participation of Christ's body and blood, for 9 sealing unto us the
pardon of our sins, for 15 giving us a promise of everlasting life: We
thank thee for all other thy blessings 11 corporal and spiritual, internal
and external, for our 10 continuance in that which is good, for 14 deliverance
from all evil: We thank thee for thy often deliverances of this Church and
kingdom from forreyne invasions, and homebred conspiracies. ^ We thank thee
for 2 preserving us ever since we were borne. for defending us this night past
from all perils and dangers* for the quiet rest wherewith thou have refreshed
our bodies, for thy mercy renewed unto us this morning. Let thy mercy be
continued unto us this day, let thy Spirit direct us in all our ways, that we
may walk before thee as children of the light, doing those things that are
pleasing in thy sight. Let the dew of thy blesing descend upon our labors*
for without thy blessing all our labor is but in vain. Prosper thou the
works of our hands upon us, O prosper thou our handie work: Grant that we
may conscionablie in our callings so seek after things temporal, that
finally we lose not the things which be eternal. We are unworthy, O Lord
we confess, to obtain any thing at thy hands, either for our selves or any
others, even for the sinfulness of these our prayers: But thou have promised
to hear all those that call upon thee in thy Sons name: Make good therefore,
we beseech thee thy promise unto us now calling upon thee in thy Sons name,
and praying as he has taught us in his holy Gospel.

Our Father which art in heaven* etc.

An Evening prayer for a family, gathered here and there out of Gerards
Meditations and Prayers.
MOst glorious LORD GOD, whose* dwelling is in the highest heavens, and yet
beholdest the lowly and the humble upon earth, we blush and are ashamed to
lift up our eyes unto heaven, because we have sinned against thee which
dwell in the heavens: But look down, we beseech thee, from* heaven thy
dwelling place* and behold the humility of thy servants here on earth, which
prostrate themselves at the foot-stooll of thy mercy, confessing their own
guiltiness, and begging pardon for their sins.

We confess, Almighty Creator, that thou made us at the first after thine
own image, thou cloathedst us with innocence as with a garment, thou seatedst
us in paradise a place of all delight and pleasure: But we have defaced thine
image, we have cast off our first covering, we have thrust our selves out of
that pleasant place. We ran away from thee, and were not obedient unto thy
voice: We were lost and condemned before we came into this world: Our first
parents sinned against thee, and we sinned in them: They were corrupted, and
we are inheriters of their corruption: They were the parents of disobedience,
and we are by nature the children of wrath: Sinful and unhappy children, of
sinful and unhappy parents? Thou might in thy displeasure after their fall
have plunged them into the bott^mlesse pit* and made them the fuel of hell,
and sent their posterity after them: And neither they nor we could justly
have complained. Righteous, O Lord, art thou in thy judgments: And our misery
is *from our selves. But great was thy mercy unto us. We came into this world
in a flood of uncleanness, wallowing in our mothers blood; and thou did set
open a fountain for us to wash in: We were washed in the laver of baptism*
and we have returned with the swyne to our wallowing in the mire. We came
from a place of darkness into this world, we lived as children of darkness*
we sat in darkness, and in the shadow of death: Thou gave us thy word to
be a lantern unto our feet, and a light unto our paths* that in thy light
we might see light; that so walking in the way of truth, we might attain
everlasting life: But we have loved darkness more than light, and have not
been obedient unto thy word. We came into this world crooked even from our
mothers womb; and thou gave us thy law to be a glass wherein we might see
our deformity, and a rule whereby to square all our actions, words, and
thoughts: But we have shut our eyes that we might not see, and we have
refused to be ruled by thy law: The law of sin in our flesh does daily
captivate us. The root of original sin which lies hidden in us, does
every day put forth new branches: All the parts and faculties of our bodies
and souls are so many instruments of unrighteousness to fight against thy
divyne Majesty. Our hearts imagine wicked things, our mouths utter them, and
our hands put them in practice. Thy mercies every day are renewed unto us,
and our sins are every day multiplied against thee: In the day of health and
prosperity we forget thee, and we never think upon the day of sickness and
adversity. Thy benefits heaped upon us do not allure us to obey thee: Neither
do thy judgments infflicted upon others make us afraid to offend thee. What
could thou, O Lord, have done more for us, or what could we have done more
against thee? Thou did send thy Son in the fullness of time to take our
nature upon him, to fulfill thy law for us, and to be crucified for our
sins: We have not followed the example of his holy life, but have every
day afresh crucified him by our sins. And now, O LORD, if we shall become
our own judges, we cannot but confess that we have deserved everlasting
torments in hellfire. But there is mercy with thee O Lord: therefore will we
not despare. Our sins are many in number: But thy mercies are without number.
The weight of our sins is great: But the weight of thy Sons cross was
greater. Our sins press us down unto hell: But thy mercy in Christ Jesus
rayseth us up. By Satan we are accused: But by Jesus Christ we are defended.
By the law we are convicted: But by Jesus Christ we are justified. By our
own conscience we are condemned: But by Jesus Christ we are absolved. In us
there is nothing but sin, death, and damnation: In him there is treasured up
for us righteousness. life, and salvation. We are poor: He is our riches.
We are naked: He is our covering. We are exposed to thy fury persuing us:
He is the buckler of our defense, and our refuge: He is the rock of our
salvation, and in him do we trust: His wounds are the clefts of the rock:
Give us, we beseech thee, the wings of a Dove, that by faith we may hide our
selves in the clefts of this rock, that thine anger wax not hot against us
to consume us: Let not thy justice triumph in our confusion, but let thy mercy
rejoice in our salvation. Pardon the sinful course of our life past, and guide
us by thy holy Spirit for the time to come: Amend what is amiss, increase
all gifts and graces which thou have already given, and give unto us what thou
best know to be wanting. Be gracious and favorable to thy whole Church;
especially to that part thereof which thou have committed unto the protection
of thy servant and our Sovereign King CHARLES: Grant that he may see it
flowrishing in peace and prosperity, in the profession and practice of thy
Gospel all the days of his life; and after this life ended, crown him, we
beseech thee, with a crown of immortal glory. Let not the scepter of this
kingdom depart from his house, neither let there be wanting a man of his Race
to sit upon his throne so long as the sun and moon endures. Of this thou
have given us a pledge already, in blessing the fruit of the Queens womb. Let
the Queen still be like a fruitful vine: And let the Prince grow up like a
plant in thine house. Let thy mercy be extended to the Lady Elizabeth our
Kings only sister, and her princely issue. How long, Lord just and true, how
long shall their enemies prevail, and say, There, there, so would we have it?
It is time for thee to lay to thine hand: for they have laid waste their
dwelling place. Arise O Lord, and let their enemies be scattered, and let them
that hate them flee before them. Carry them back again into their own
country (if it may be for thy glory and their good) make them glad with the
joy of thy countenance, and let them rejoice under their own vynes. We
return home again, and beseech thee to be gracious and merciful to the
Kings Council, the Nobility, the Magistracy, the Ministry, the Gentry,
and the Commonalitie. Give unto those whom thou have vse^ as instruments for
our good, rewards temporal and eternal. Forgive those that be our enemies,
and turn their hearts. Forget not those that groan under the cross. Cloth
the naked* feed the hungry, visit the sick, deliver the captives, defend the
fatherless and widows, relieve the oppressed, confirm and strengthen those
that suffer persecution for righteousness sake, cure those that are broken in
heart, speak peace unto their consciences that are tormented with the sense of
their sins, suffer them not to be swallowed up in despare. Stand by those
that are ready to depart out of this life: When their eyes shall be darkened
in the agony of doath, kindle in their hearts the light of saving faith: when
their ears shall be stopped, let thy Spirit speak unto them inwardly and
comfort them: and when the house of their earthly tabernacle shall be
dissolved, them Lord receive their souls. As we have made bold to make our
prayers and supplications unto thee for our selves and others: So also we
render unto thee all possible praise and thanksgiving for all thy benefits
bestowed upon our selves and others. We thank thee in special for our
election, creation, redemption, vocation, justification, for all the blessed
means of our sanctification, and for the assured hope of our future
glorification: We thank thee for our health, mayntenance, and liberty, for
preserving us ever since we were borne, for blessing us in all that we have
put our hands unto this day. Let thy mercy still be continued unto us, we
beseech thee. Let the eye of thy providence which never slumbreth nor sleeps
watch over us, and let the hand of thy power protect and defend us: Cover us
this night under the shadow of thy wings, that no evil happen unto us. Grant
that our bodies may be refreshed this night with such moderate rest, that we
may be the fitter for the works of our vocation, and thy service, the next
morning* Hear us, we beseech thee, for Jesus Christ his sake our Lord and
only Savior; in whose name and words we call upon thee further praying, Our
Father, etc.

FINIS.

