THE PRAISE of a good Name The reproach of an ill Name. Wherein every one may see
the fame that follows laudable actions, and the infamy that comes by the
contrary. With certain pithy apothegues, very profitable for this age, by C.G.

London: Imprinted by John Windet, for Thomas Gosson, 1594.

To some of the best and most civil sort of the Inhabitants of S. Edmonds
Bury. Char. Gibbon wishes all prosperous success.
SCIPIO having a great sum of money sent him from a mighty and magnificall
person, said, he had rather he could rule him that gave it, then receive his
gift: his ungrateful acceptance of so great a present, had almost dismaide me
to offer a piece of paper, but that I presume of you, as neighbors.

That divine Plato says, a man is not borne for his own benefit only, but
for others: and S. Peter wills every one to minister the gift, as he has
received to others: I hope therefore you will not mislike him that does
manifest his good mea^ing unto you, but weigh a well-willer by his mind, as the
wi^^^^ ^^s by her myte.

There are many like the flood Tagus in Sp^^^e, which carry a show without
substance, as that does a gravel like gold, and yet are so selfe-conceited,
that they contemn all other: whose judgments if they come to be tried in
deed, are as far from sense, as the blind man was from sight, when he could
not discern men from trees. Mark. 8.4. A man to perceive he is ignorant (says
Didymus) is a token of wisdom: then what shall we estimate these who think
none wise but themselves, the more learned a man be, the more lowly he should
bear himself says Cicero, they should d^^ well to remember S. Ambrose
wor^es, no man may profit so much in hearing, but while he lives, he shall
have need to be taught.

There be some that stand altogether upon Academicall terms, who account no
writers good but graduates: As all men ought to reverence schools of learning,
so no scholar is to have honor for his degrees, but his learning. Yet we must
not always tie Gods gifts, to means: for he woorketh, when, where, and how
he pleases. To censure men by outward circumstances, when their actions are
sincere: or to think the worse of their attemptes, because they want fronted
titles, are iestes fit for Jews: for when they could find no fault at Christ's
doctrine, they sought to impair it, by his birth and bringing up: Whence
comes this wisdom and great works, is not this the Carpenters son.
Matthew. 13.54. A poor craftes-man instructed Apollos, a very mighty and
eloquent man. Act. 18.27. Yet he disdained not his counsel by his craft.

Tully says truly, Omnes eos contemnunt, de quibus male existimant. Let a
work be never so perfect, a man's enemy will deprave it, he that enuies the
Actor, will never advance his action, be it never so virtuous: such men as
these, are not to be meddled with: for as S. Chrysostom says, they are sooner
vanquished with silence, then with aunsweares: for malice is sooner stirred,
then staid with words: and as for malice, it drinks the most part of his own
poison, and therefore the Philosopher proves the venom of a malicious man to
be worse, then of the serpent: for the venom that serpents have, for the
destruction of men, they keep it without their own peril: but malice,
hurts him most that does retain it.

There be others that like the Jews, value men's works by their weakness, as
they did the blind-mans sayings by his sight: Thou art altogether bo^
^^^^anes, do thou teach (...) John. 9.34. S. Gregory says well, God spares
some here t^ torment afterward, others he does punish, which he will
afterward spare: If thou have not tasted of troubles, I say as Seneca did, I
judge thee to be miserable, that never knew misery. It is good for a man
(says Jeremy) to bear the yoke in his youth. Lament. 3. Yet there is no
reason that any common impediments should impair a credible action: for who
will think the worse of a precious stone, because it is taken from an
infectious toade, or of a bullion of gold, because it is dug out of the
filthy ground, or of Salomons works because he was given to wantonness.

There be others that take no pleasure, but in ploddi^^ for earthly mucke, who
esteem learning to be madness as Fe^us did Act. 26. it makes me remember a
pretty merryment of a countryman, who looking upon an Ape in a Dutch-mans
shop, was mocked and mowed at, insomuch as he rebuked the Ape, and sad his
parents had well brought him up: one which stood by, t^^d him it was no child
but an Ape, good Lord (says he) what ^e things the Dutch-folkes can make for
money: these cynic a^^ersons, are like the countreyman: for I have heard some
of them ^ay of good books, as he did by the Ape, what toys and devises (...)
invented for money, and in deed, do repute them to be nothin^ else, but the
practices of idle wits, these dr^dges do esteem more of a penny, then a good
book, as Esops cock did of a barley corn, better then a pearl, and
therefore may be fitly resembled to the Poets fiction: for their desires like
Danaae, will be pleased with nothing but a shower of gold.

There is an other sort of people that live like wenills by the malt, all upon
the spoil, as delighting in nothing else, but such things as be incident to
these common hacksters. Vain spending, ill speaking, idle living, unlawful
gaming, with whom a good action is as much set by as a sheepekeeper amongst
the Egyptians. Genesis 46.34. If the Romans would punish such as went in the
streets without a badge of their occupation, how are they to be dealt with
that have no faculties or honest trades to take to? If the Statute for
vagabonds made in ann. 14. Eliz. were well looked to, many of these would come
within the compass of it: for they can hardly give account of their living.

There be others that like Hanun, are ready to cross a man with unkindness
for a good turn, as he did David with discourtesie for his good will.
Ingratitude in these days is as common as a dish of snailes amongst the
Grecians, therefore true is that saying of Tacitus, an ill turn is sooner
requited then a good: for thancke is reputed a charge, but reuengement an
advantage. There be few such as Elisha living: for when he had received
kindness of the Shunanimite, he could not rest till he had requited it. 2.
King. 4. very sensible is that saying of Seneca, a good man does all things
well, if he does all well, he cannot be vnknd: it is a dishonest person
(says Plautus) that knows how to take a benefit, and not how to requite it;
Is there any man that carries such a mind (says Tully) that he will be
unmindful of a good turn? For this cause the heathen men made a law to punish
the unthankful persons with death, it was so odious in all ages.

Neighbors and friends, I go not about to beard any man (especially such as
be civil) for I am of this mind, he that offers me the least pleasure, shall
find me ready to requite it, if displeasure without cause, ego illum flocci
pendo. Have you not such amongst you, as make a comment of men's credites, that
malign those that carry not their minds, that jest and iere at others
miseries, that will talk what they please without controlement, that are of no
account, and yet are countenanced. Are there not many whisperers and (...),
that go between the bark (...) tree, which do d^ (...) and exasperate great
men to take away all estimation an^ ^^eing from good men, and make but a sport
of it, and yet S. Hierome says, he that diminishes the love in a man's heart
from his neighbor, more offends then he that pulls the meat out of the mouth
of a hungry beggar: for like as the soul is more precious then the body, so is
the food of the soul of more estimation then the nourishment of carraine.

What greater grief can be to the godly then to see abiectes to insult, and be
most set by, or bad fellows to be secret informers and yet borne with: dwell
not (says Plato) where superfluous expenses do surmount thy revenues, nor
where ill men be more made on then good men. Was there any thing more afflicted
David's mind then to behold the favor and flourishing estate of the wicked
more then others? I can speak somewhat by experience, the time was, when one
being persecuted amongst you (as the best that fear God may fall) it was a
world to see how the malice of the wicked wrought? disgrace him what y^^ can,
says one, drive him out of town says another, with many such impudent
speeches, as ought not once to be conceived amongst Christians: for as one of
the fathers says, that which is sha^^ (...) to utter, is so to think: if the
seely worm will turn ag^ine which is trod on, what cause has this to speak
that was thus spited.

Alexander the Empero^^ ^earing that an old woman was ill entreated of one of
his so^^^^ours, he discharged him out of his service, and gave him in b^^dage
unto the woman, that by his craft being a carpenter, he might get her living
for amends: if all were so served that deserve it worse then the souldior,
there would be less emulation, and better communication amongst men. But as
Cato, inueighing against lewd people, said, it was in vain to talk to a belly
that lacks ears, so it is frivolous to infourme these, whose tounges are
like the poison of aspes, whose ears are as deaf as the adders, whose hearts
are less pittyfull then Jews. Yet this I will say, I never knew any man
unkind and cruel to another, that has not been met with the like in his life
time, vt sementem feceris ita and metes. Boethius reports that one Busyris a
giant, did always use to kill his gestes: Hercules lodging in his house as a
guest afterward killed him, little did Manasses think to have been fettered
in iron chains, when h^ afflicted many good men, or Paul to have been whipped
and impr^soned, when he persecuted the Saints, or Sampson to have been a
laughing-stocke, when he was in full strength: therefore no man knows what
hangs over his own head, but that he or his may become one day a pray or a
proverb to his enemies, as well as others.

There is no gardeine that has flowers, but has weeds: nor any place that
has good-men, but has bad, there was one traitor among the twelve Apostles:
there was Cham as well as Sem in Noah's Arc. If ten righteous men could not be
found in Sodom, which was a great City, you must not think much though there
be some lewd people in Bury which is but a town: These and such as these, I
utterly exempt out of this dedication, but for the best and most civil sort,
as I were loath any way to offend them, so I thought good to bestow this
treatise upon them in testimony thereof; desiring nothing but a friendly
acceptance for my pains, and a good-word in recompense for my good will. So
not omitting any necessary duty I commit you to the tuition of the Almighty.

To the Reader.
THere are no greater enemies to any forward enterprise then Envy and
Ignorance: for as one of malice will not so the other of simpleness cannot,
give learning her due. If such as these shoot their boltes at my book, I
shall weigh their words as Seneca did, when he was rayled on by the like: I
have no reason (says he) to be moved with those, which have their minds
tainted with malice, their mouths vnbrid^^ o^ modesty, their heads vnripened
in judgment, bu^ (...) Lelius, Scipio, (laudable and learned men) should ^o
report, then I had just cause to complain. Such as be public writers them
selves, will speak well, others, if they be wise, will wish well, my desire
is to please the better sort, as for the rest I respect not: whether it be for
scornefulnesse to voutchsafe reading, or for sparingnesse to save money, or for
idleness to bestow time, there was never so many books among so few Readers:
for my part I am indifferent, if my labors be ouerlooked, they will imp^rt my
good meaning, if they be not, they shall minister less misliking. Farewell.

(...) good ^ame. Is set forth by the singularity: for it is more excellent
then Any riches. Prou. 22.1. Precious ointments. Eccl. 7.3. Length of days.
Eccl. 41.13.
Consists in learned and laudable actions. included or compassed by
Dexterity Actiuitie Integrity Ability
or such like. Must be had in great regard for the effects that follow: it
makes the Name renowned the Memorial blessed
Pro. 10. the preventing of infamy and impiety that procure it. Deuteronomy. 28.37.
May be blemished by Many presumptions of evil and yet innocent. Genesis 39.12.
Means of flanderous and malicious reports. Nehem. 6.13. Occasion of
ign^minious and notorious crimes and acts.


The Praise of a good Name.
EVery one by nature is desirous of a Name, and so desirous, that many rather
then they will have it buried in oblivion, will pretermit no practices be they
never so impious to procure it.

In Heathen Histories it is reported of one that burnt the Capitol of Rome,
who being dem^^nded why he did so? ^unsweared, because he would be spoken of.

In the divine Scriptures it is recorded, that Nimrod and his ^ompany
enterprised that presumptuous bui^^^^g of Babel to no ^ther end, but that they
might get them a Name. Genesis 11.4.

The practice of Polygamy, was used of many of (...) fore-fa^hers, that they
might have a large posterity, no doubt (...) preserve their Names.

The Daughters of Lot, were loath their fathers Na^^ should ^erish: this was
one cause to procure that incest^^^^ a^^ t^ ^e^erue his seed. Genesis 19.32*

The memorial of Names, has of antiquity been had in ^uch reverent
estimation, that our Auncesters provided poli^^call Laws to preserve their
Names.

By the old Law, none (...) to a stranger, but to s^^e ^f his own stock, to no
other (...), but to pres^rue their Names. Deuteronomy. 25. For this cause d^ Boar, a
(...) of great wealth, take Ruth a poor woman to his wi^e, beca^^^ he was her
next kinsman. And for this cause was Onan cut off, because he would not ^oo the
office of a kinsman to Tamar after his brothers death. Genesis 38.

By the same Law, none might (...) his Inheritance but to some of his kindred,
because it might stir up the Name of the dead, Ruth. 4.5. It was this that made
Naomi and Ruth, come out of Bethelem, because they might not sell their parcel
of land to a stranger: and for this cause was Naboth unwilling to part from
his Vineyard (though it was requested by a king) because it was his Inheritance
1. King. 21.

So common a principle of experience has it been in all ages, and amongst all
estates, that rather then they would have their Names extinct, they omitted
nothing that might be a mean to maintain them.

The Romans (as Boethius makes mention) had a Table of brass, in which the
Names of famous and noble men were used to be written for a perpetual fame or
memory, and if any of them afterward were convicted off felony, or any
egregious offense, he was presently struck out of the Table, and that was
called the death of prescription.

Some for want of issue, build glorious habitations, and call their Lands by
their Names. The Psalmist observed, that in his time. psalm. 49.11. Absalom
erected a pillar and called it by his own Name, because he had no son to
keep it in remembrance, 2. Sam. 18.18.

Some build or buy whole Cities and Towns, and call them by their Names. The
Israelites did so. 1. Chro. 6.65. or by their childrens Names as Caine did, who
built a City and called it by his sons Name, because his vile act was an
utter coinquination of his own Name. Genesis 4.17.

What exceeding joy was there at the birth of Obed, the text says, because the
Name of the dead should be continued in Israel. Ruth. 4.14. hereof many are
de^^rous of children, because by their offspring their Names are after a sort
reduced from death.

Many Monarchs, Kings, Princes, and persons of renown, have sumptuous
Sepulchers, and costly Tombs upon their graves, pro memoria mortuorum: not so
much for the royalty of their estates, as for a remembrance of their Names.
Iaacob set up a pillar upon his wives grave, and it is called the pillar of
Rahels grave to this day.

There be others that have ^^i^^phes and Epigrams eng^^uen upon their
Graue-stones, for no other cause, but that their Names might be remembered when
they are read.

Then seeing there is none but is desirous of a Name, how blessed is he above
other, that deserves a good Name: for Solomon says, the memorial of the just
shall be blessed.

A good Name is to be accounted a great blessing: for God promises to the
godly, that he will exalt them in Praise, in Name, and in Glory. Deuteronomy. 26.19.
Amongst many other blessings bestowed on Abraham, the Lord said, he would
make his Name great. Genesis 12.2.

A good Name, post funera viuit, it does not only revive the dead, but rejoice
the living by remembering, it adds a comm^ndation to the deceased, and a
consolation to his successors: S. Augustine says, if a man lead a good and
honest l^^e, it is profitable to himself, but a good Name or report is
profitable to others: For there is nothing more excellent of an earthly
blessing, then a good Name.

A good Name is better then Riches*
WHat more estimable amongst (...) Riches? I have read of some, as Anaxagoras,
(...) having sent him from king Alexander thirty thousand tallents of go^d, he
refused it, returning (...) swear, that it was for kings to use mon^y and not
for Philosophers, and Constantinus a mighty monarche had riches so much in
contempt, that he thought (...) rich ^h^ough by governing such as had th^^,
though be possessed none. This iron age of ours affoordes not many so affected,
but it is true that Tully says, maxim admira^^ur cum qui pec^mia non monetur:
for money is such a ^^^tall, as most (...) des^re (...) sure, and no man can
w^^t without misery, absque pecunia mise^e viuitur says Terence.

Tantum quantum habes sis, a m^ns credit is according to his wealth: does not
experience teach this, that the gentleman carries many a give that has
nothing but his birth to brag on, the scholar takes many a skoffe, that has
nothing but his books to boast on, the soldier is little set by, that has
nothing but his buckler to shield him.

Quid non pecunia potest, silver aunsweareth to all, says the Preacher.
Eccles. 10.19. and true it is: for by it all other wants whatsoever are
supplied. Is not the fool thought wise if he has wealth, and the wise
foolish if he want it: who will reject an Ass, if he come laden with gold,
when few will accept a man if he has nothing but his wit. Do not riches
oftentimes prefer men to honor, for that cause Labans sons envied Jacob,
because he had got honor by their fathers goods. Genesis 31.1. Do we not see
that such as have been much renowned when they had riches, have lost their
dignity when they decayed, who was more reputed of in prosperity then Job, but
when his goods were gone, he could say. Job. 19.9. that he was spoiled of his
honor.

Therefore Riches are of great price and praise, they were one of the gifts
God gave Solomon, yet he possessing as great plenty of silver as stones, could
say, A good Name is to be chosen above great Riches, Prou. 22.1. A Philosopher
yields a pretty reason, Riches may be recovered when they are lost, but a
good Name can never: for as Plautus says, the infamy of a man is immortal,
she lives when you think her lost.

A good Name is better then precious ointments.
WHat more sovereign for many uses in Physic then ointments, daily
experience approoues it.

In the time of the old law, ointmentes were so costly in compounding, so
artificial in composing, so precious in account, that they were called holy
ointments. Exodus 30.23. because they ^^serue for certain uses of the
Tabernacle.

It is said that Mary anointed the feet of Christ with a pound of ointment of
spikenard very costly, the savor whereof filled the whole house.

Queen Saba brought precious odours and oyntmentes, for a present to king
Solomon: for ointments are part of a kings treasure, therefore Solomon had men
of purpose appointed to that office. 2. King, 20.13. and so had Hezekiah.

Love is an excellent thing, yet the love of brethren is likened to the
precious ointment that ran down Aarons beard, as appears in the Psalms.

The Church is greatly to be exalted, yet the Church resembles her good Name
to ointments, as appears in the Canticles.

Ointments in respect of their necessity in use, efficacy, in operation, and
odoriferous savors, are to be accounted very precious and profitable, Yet
says the Preacher, A good Name is better then a good ointment. Eccles. 7.3.
and it stands with reason: for ointments may preserve and pleasure such as
live, but they cannot benefit a man when his body is dead.

A good Name is better then long life.
WHat more desired amongst men th^^ length of days, vita incundissima, a (...)
all he has to prolong his life, a^ app^ by the diseased wom^n, which sp^nt all
thi^ (...) ^tions, Mark. 5.26.

And certes although the (...) ashes, Ice congealed of (...) convert to (...),
and man made of earth must dissolve (...): for omni aetati mortem esse communem.

And albeit the best Pipp^^ (...) then the Crab, the sweetest flower, sooner
(...) the (...), and the better man shall sometime sooner die th^^ (...)
desp^rate, Abel was cut off when Cayn was permitted (...) live to his reproach.

Yet commonly in the S^riptures, the benefit of a long life is accounted a
great blessing: (so a man's deeds be aunswearable to his days, otherwise the
more old, the more ^^ible Prou. 16.31. there is nothing more reproachful says
Seneca, then an old man, which has none other argument to prove he has lived
long, but only his years:) for it is said of the godly, he shall go to his
grave in a full age, as a ricke of corn comes in due season into the barn,
Job. 5.26.

The Lord promised the people of Jerusalem this blessing, there shall yet old
men and old women dwell therein, and every man with his staff in his hand for
very age Zach. 8.4.

It is said of Abraham, he died in a good age, an old man, and of great years,
Genesis 25.8. Isaac, he died, and was gathered unto his people being old and
full of days, Genesis 35.29. David, he died in a good age, and full of days, 1.
Chron. 29.28. Job, he died being old and full of days, Job. 42.17


Now it is said concerning the wicked, that he shall not live out half his
days, Psalm. 55, 23. but shall be cut off before his time, Job. 15.32. We have
example in Saul, when he killed himself, and in Judas when he hanged
himself: the Lord lays this as a judgment upon Ely, there shall not be an
old man in his house, 1. Sam. 2.31.

Yet a good Name is better then a long life, the Wiseman shows a reason. A
good life has the days nombred, but a good Name endures for ever. Eccles.
41.13. the common state of life, as David says, is 70. or 80. years, but say
(that none living ever saw) any should attain the age of Methushelah 979.
years, yet his days are definite and determinable, but his Name remaynes
memorable to all posterities.

A good Name better then a Friend.
WHat man can want the society and solace of a true friend: the Whale must have
his fish to direct him, and man his friend to delight him.

Without a friend to participate withal, there is nothing so delightful to the
eye, so delectable to the ear, so joyful to the heart, that could procure us
any pleasure.

What more necessary then a friend, in wealth to accompany, in woe to comfort, in
any estate to communicate with.

David was often in danger of his life but for Jonathan: Onesimus was a great
friend to Paul in his distress: the wounded man had been dead but for the
Samaritane.

What is comparable to a true friend, if we search into all sects and sorts of
people.

Amongst the common sort.
THeir love is more light then loyal, in crosses like the Marigold, which
close with every cloud: in wealth like ye Drone, which draws from the Be: in
both like the P^lipe, which change with every object, such as gave Christ good
entertainment at his coming to Jerusalem, could cry Crucif^^ to have him to
the cross.

Amongst neighbors.
THeir friendship is more (...) then faithful: if they be rich, they can
hardly d^ell together. Lot could not away with Abraham, because their riches
were so great. If rich and poor dwell together, then the (...) to the w^ll.
Dives could not abide Lazarus because he was poor. If artificers and tradesmen
dwell together, then they be (...), according to the common saying, Figulus
figulum odit.

Amongst kinsfolks.
THere goodwill is as commonly cold as kind, like the Colewort, which flees
from the vine, though it be planted never so near: for the common proverb is
verified, Many kinsfolks few friends: Saul could not abide David for all he
married his daughter, nor Laban loved not Jacob.

Amongst Brothers.
ALas it is lamentable, that those which be nighest in blood should be
furthest from benevolence: some carry malice till opportunity may effect it, as
Esau did toward Jacob, because his father was living. Genesis 27.41. Some conspire
death as Joseph's brethren did against him, because his father loved him best:
some commit murder, as Cayn did to Abel, because his sacrifice was better
accepted of God. Genesis 4.4. such is the love of brethren, that it may well be
true that Solomon says, A friend is nearer then a brother. Prou. 18.

Amongst parents and children.
IT is horrible to express the unnatural practices of such, whom nature has
appropriated so near: was not Senacherib slain by his own children: and did
not Nero murder Agrippina his own mother.

Between man and wife.
THis of all other is the nearest conjunction, and yet a man is crossed with a
collop of his own flesh. What a torment was Jobs wife to him in his trouble,
was not Ahab brought to confusion by Iezebels counsel, did not Delilah seek
Sampsons destruction when he satisfied her desire.

I know there be many (else God forbid) that perform all the duties of love
and nature within the former described kinds, but they are used and executed,
not by those which are enemies but Friends: for a friend says Solomon loves at
all times. Prou. 17.17. and without love there is none so near ingraffed by
nature but live disseuered and at discord by enmity, therefore a friend is most
to be preferred.

What is he will do so much as one friend for an other. Some brothers are very
natural. Joseph did kindly nourish his brothers in their age, which would
cruelly have killed him in his youth. Genesis 50.21. and Judah did offer to stay
in a strange country as a pledge for his brother Benjamin, and was in great
danger of displeasure. Genesis 44.23. Yet one friend has done more for another
then this. I have read of Damon and Pithias, how the one being condemned to
die, and craving some liberty to see his country before his death, the other
staid behind as a suertie for his safe return, and to receive his punishment
if the other broke promise.

Some children are very duetifull, yet they will sometime do as much for their
friend as their father. Jonathan loved Saul well, yet he loved his friend David
as his own soul, though his father could not abide him. A friend will sometime
do more for a man then his own child. Was not Hushai David's friend true to him
when Absalon his son was a traitor to him.

A man loves his child well: yet he had rather sometime have his children
iniuried then his friends. Lot had rather have his daughters defloured then his
friends abused. Genesis 19.8.

Some women love their husbands so intierly, that they had rather die then
depart with them. Admetus having a disease running upon him which could not be
cured without the death of an other, could find none that would gladly dye for
his sake but his wife Alcesti Arthemisia did drink the ashes of her husband
after his death, because she would have her own body (...) be her husbands
grave. In the country called Getica, the we^^n desire to die on their husbands
bodies and to be buried with th^^, and because their custom is to marry many
women, there is great striving which shall have the preferment and pr^^se
herein. Yet one friend has done for another as much as this. I have read of
Orestes and Pylades, how Orestes was con^e^^ed to dye, and the Judge not
knowing one from another, Pylades said his name was Orestes to save his fre^^^s
life. Tanta est vis amicitiae, that as Tully says, a true friend is tanquam
alter idem.

Quod difficile dulce, as a (...) rare to find, so it is a great treasure to
attain one, as no doubt a true friend is the (...) of earthly joy. Yet a good
Name is f^r better then the best friend: for the best friends of all will
forsake us when we dye, but a good Name will remain after death: Post fatum
fama triumphat.

Sithence a good Name is more excellent then any thing: We must not look to
get it by sinister, but by singular means, not by vile, but by virtuous
actions, not by vain, but by valiant attemptes. The Philosopher says well.
Nec vero clarorum virorum post mortem honores permanerent, si nihil eorum
ipsorum animi efficerent, quo diutius memoriam sui teneremus: for it is the
commendable actions of a man in his life that makes his Name renowned and
memorable after death. As for example, if a good man die what will the people
report of him.

If he be a godly Maiestrate.
THey will thus commend him. He was in the common wealth like Joseph, provident
in foreseeing, in giving judgment like Samuel: just without bribes, in cases
of counsel like Solomon, prudent in aduising, amongst his inferiors like
Saul, little in his own sight: He stood not upon the countenance, but
accomplishment of his office: he was full of piety, much pitiful, nothing
parciall, he was obeyed more for love then fear, his blessed death bewrayed
his godly life, and our bad deserts were means to abridge his days.

If he be a good Minister.
THey will report of him, He was a good Physician? for he not only fed our
souls with many good sermons, but he refreshed our bodies with many good
meals, he was beloved and honored of all, not so much for his title, as
integrity. He was right Paul's successor: for he was plain in his habit
without pride, painful in his calling without repyning. A pastor for dividing
the word, A pattern for direction of life, He might boldly reprove us for our
sins, because he lived blameless in our sightes.

If he be a virtuous rich man.
THey will thus describe him, He was not only rich by reason of his wealth,
but well doing: his house was an Inn for the stranger, an hospital for the
poor, a repast for his neighbors: his purse was prostrate for every good
purpose: he imitated Job for integrity, Abraham for hospitality, Moses for
humility: he was loving to his equals, lowly to his inferiors, liberal to all
men: We might well forbeere many misers that be about us, but we have a great
miss of such a man to live amongst us.

If he be any other of what practice, profession, faculty or function so ever,
he must expect like commendation according to his conversation, observing the
dignities, degrees, gifts, and graces of every one: for as the Cedar tree is
further seen then the shrub, so the higher a man be in place, the greater is
his report: the more noble the more notorious is the Name, like a lamp which
is further seen upon a tower, then in a trenche.

I will (for breuity) omit millions of worthy men whose Names are famosed by
their apparent works and writings, and because (as Cicero says) the acts and
not the same should first be considered, I refer you to their actions, to
judge the worthiness of the Authors.

If I should enter into authentical examples, how many have left renowned
Names to the world, as it is recorded in the word, it were too prolixious, and
needelesse, because they be very perspicuous, yet I will infer a few as an
introduction to the rest.

It is written of Joshua, that he was (...) through all the world. Josh. 6.27.
Samuel, that he (...) and n^^e. 1. Sam. ^.26. David, that his Name was m^^e
gr^^^, (...) unto the Name of the great (...) 2. Sam. 7.9. Solomon, that he
(...) 1. King 10. Job, th^^ there was (...) like him i^ the earth. Job. 2.3.


If I should (...) of such as (...) worthy Names in this (...) them. Yet
amon^^^ many ((...) then any, resp^^^^^g (...) ^^bility of the sex) what a
rare report has our Souer^^^^^ Lady Queen Elizabeth deserved? Whose patience
in (...) crosses, whose piety in mainetayning the Gospel, whose providence in
foreseeing for her Countries, whose pity dispersed to all her subjects, has
made her Name so renowned, that it is not only carried into the South for Saba
to wonder at, but into most parts of the world, for all to admire at.

Her fame makes forrayners to stand in fear of her: her Majesty makes the
Pagans to be amazed at her: her Regiment makes all nations to marvel at her.
Blessed is she that has so many blessings: happy are we that have so rare a
Phoenix: Accursed be they that wish ill to such a creature. As she has
deserved an admirable Name by her life: Sic tandiu laudabitur dum memoria rerum
Anglorum manebit.

If a good Name gotten by laudable means does magnify a man: an ill Name
proceeding of misdemeanor, must needs infamize him. For as the same tallow
which does cherrish the light, does extinguish it, if it be turned downward:
so the same mouth which does praise one, does deprave him if his actions be
odious: as for example, if an ill man die, what will they say of him?

If he be an ungodly Governor.
They will thus report: The Town has a happy turn by his death: for it had
no d^^^^te by his life: he did convert the public commodity privately into his
own coffers: he was ready to hang a man like Haman, for bowing of a knee or
moving a cap: he stood so much upon his Magistracy, that he clean forgot
himself to be a man. In his Office he would many ways be corrupted, sometime
for fear of offending others, as Pilate was, who condemned Christ for fe^re
to d^^please Caesar: sometime with love he bare to his friends, like Herod, who
to please the love of a damsel, condemned John Baptist to death: sometime with
hatred, like the chief Priests, who of malice condemned Paul to be smitten as
stoned without (...): sometime with gold and present^s, like the children of
the Prophet Samuel: sometime with letters, as the Elders and Nobles of Izreel
were by the means of Iezabel.

If he be a lewd Minister.
What will they say: The Church has been rather troubled then taught by him,
he was called by the Name of the Rephaims, but he might well be counted in the
number of the Zamzummins: he was a dumb dog that could not bark, a blind
watchman that could not see, a wandering good^, that could not direct: he played
the Fox under the shadow of a Pharisee: he was no pastor but a powler, no Paul
but a Saul, no pillar of the Church for his virtue, but a pillar for his
advantage: Happy is he if he died well: for wretched are they that have a
worse.

If he be a wicked wealthy man.
They will set him forth after this sort: The Country is well rid of a
catterpiller: for he was a great incroacher of commons, a grievous inhancer of
Rentes, ap^tte^^e of oppression to all men: his buildinges were more sumptuous
then his benevolence: for he cherrished the poor with his meat, as the catt
does the mise: he was in ability like the rich man that enlarged his houses,
in liberality like Nabal in refreshing David's soldiers, in charity like Dives
in relieuing Lazarus, in his diet like Diogines for his gross feeding, he ever
had abundance, yet lived like a beggar: but now he is become a banckerout: for
the world strives for his mucke, the worms for his flesh, wheresoever his
soul be.

If he be any other, of what calling or condition so (...), he shall be sure to
have like same according to his s^^tes, such properties such report, every man
at his death shall be spoken of after his desartes. Some will speak of
experience: many, of spite: most, of report: all, as they be affected or
informed. Besides, we are to consider the callings and countenance of men: for
as the higher object is furthest in sight: so the more high, the more heinous,
the more mighty the more miserable is the fall, and as the whiter lawne has
the deeper mole, so the more holy man, the more horrible is his offense.

I will descend into a few examples of the ign^^^ny of an evil Name, that
their terrible (...) might de^erre others fr^^^ the like.

For cruelty, what a Name has Pharaoh and Herod left behind them? if but in
this one, in willing all the male Hebrews to be slain by the Midwiues at
their birthes: the other in commanding all the male children to be slain in
Bethelem from two years old and under.

For treachery, what a Name has Absalom and Judas deserved; one for working
treason against his own father; the other for betraying his own master?

For unnatural dealing, what a Name has Cain and Sanecheribs children left in
record, one in killing his own brother, the other in murdering their own
father.

He that says, The memorial of the just is blessed, does add this: The Name
of the wicked shall rot. Prou. 10.6. as we have experience by these which are
expressed: for as rotten fruit does cast a stinking savor when it is applied
to the nosthrils: so a lewd man does make his Name very loathsome, when his
opprobrious actions are called to memory.

We commonly say, that he which has lost his Name is half hanged: and certes,
to have no Name or an ill Name, is to be accounted a great cross: the Lord
imposes this as a punishment upon the wicked, His Name shall be put out from
under heaven. Deuteronomy. 9.14. and 28.20. as he did by Amalek: and shall be no more
remembered. Job. 24.20.

Some carry a Name throughout the word, an other throughout a Realm, some
within a County, many within a town, most within a street: but to have no
Name, not so much as in a street, as it is the least report, so it is the
greater reproach: therefore Job speaking of the wicked, says, His remembrance
shall perish from the earth, and he shall have no Name in the street. Job.
18.17.

An ill Name is so odious, that Moses made a law for the slaunderer, that he
should pay one hundred sickels for bringing up an ill Name of a maid. Deuteronomy.
22.19.

An ill Name (whose consistence is in contemptible actions) does cause reproach
and shame, which be so burdenous to flesh and blood, that David in diverse
places of his Psalms, does not only desire to have rebuke and shame taken
from him, but also be prays for no worser plague to light upon his ennemies.
Fill their faces with shame. Psalm. 83. Socrates could say, it was better to die
honestly then to live shamefully, it is such an abhorrency in nature, and no
marvel: for it is an argument of Gods indignation: after the Lord (by the
mouth of the Prophet) had revealed all the Judgments he would afflict
Jerusalem with, he does aggrauate the punishment by this Epiphonema. So thou
shall be as a reproach and shame. Ezekiel. 5.15.

An ill Name does not only disparage and impeach the Agent, but such as be
allied to him; not only the party, but his progenitors, and such as belong or
be any way derived from his lineage.

The reproachful deeds of the child does somewhat impair the Name of his
parents: the Wiseman says, an evil nurtured son is the dishonor of the
father, Eccl. 22.3. Therefore it is written in Leuiticus, that if a priests
daughter fall to play the whore, she poluteth her father, Leuit. 21.9. The ill
report of Eli his sons was some disgrace to himself.

The infamous acts of the father must needs be some blemish to the child,
that fruit can hardly flourish on the tree which is rotten at the root, that
pestiferous act of Cain was a discountenance to all that came of his loins.

It is no paradoxe (the more is the pity) to see the fault of the father cast
as an obloquy in the teeth of the child, and the parents to be often twitted
and vpbrayded for the escapes of their children.

There is many a blasted branch that comes of an ancient house, that
supposes his ill Name may be famozed by the renowned factes of his
forefathers, and to cover his impiety by his petigree: but such are vainly
seduced. What auayles (says S. Chrysostom) noble lineage to him which is with
villainous manners reproched. Salust has a sensible saying to that effect, The
more honorable the life of the Ancestors is after esteemed, the more
reproachful is the vice of the lineage that succeed them. It has been an old
saying, that it is a good stock where there is neither whore or thief spring
out of it, and yet (such is the efficacy of iniquity) that some flagitious
crime is many times a stayne to a whole stock, some that are co^^^cted of
egregious and capital offenses, are a taynting to the whole progeny, as
rebels, traitors, and such like. The son of Syrach says, that if children be
proud with haughtiness and foolishnes, they defile the nobility of their
kindred. Eccl. 22.9. It makes me call to mind that pretty aunsweare of
Iphicrates that valiant captain, who being imbraided by his base birth,
being but a Shoomakers son) by Hermodius a noble man borne, yet of bad
behavior, gave him this glike, my blood takes beginning in me, and thine her
farewell at thee: noting thereby that a poor stock is no reproach to him which
is with good manners adorned, when gentry may be disparaged by some obscene
action in the generation.

It is not the Name, but the quallities, not dignity or descent, but the
disposition and good demeanor, that makes any renowned and famous.

S. Jerome says, the chiefest nobility before God is to excel in all virtue.
Chrisost. says, he is honorable which disdayneth to do service to sin.
Seneca says, he that will esteem a man truly, must behold him naked laying
aside possessions, authority, and other fables of fortune, and see what he
has beside of himself. One aduising Bias to convey away all his goods and
treasure before the ennemies sacked the Town, Sic ago says he: nam omnia
mea mecum porto: esteeming his inward gifts to be his goods, and all the rest
to be but ludibria fortunae, which are most fortunate to fools, fortuna fauet
fatuis.

Necessary objections.
It may be objected, that there was never Chrisolite so pure, but that it would
stayne, or fruit so fair, but that would infect: or Iron so bright, but that
it would rust; or man so rare, but may do amiss: For in many things we sin
all. Insomuch as none can be accounted so absolutely good, but may leave behind
him as well an evil Name, which proceeds of his infirmity, as a good Name
which follows his conformity, as for example.

Though Abraham was the Father of the faithful, yet he was a Forger of lies.

Though Noah was the Preacher of righteousness, yet he was impeached with
drunkenness.

Though David was famo^^ for his piety and exploites, yet he was defamed for
his adultery and homicide.

It may also be alleged on the part of the reprobate, that there is no soil
so barren, but may yield some corn: no try so bare, but may afford some
fruit: nor any man so bad, but may leave some matter worth the memorial.

Though Pharaoh was a wicked rebellour, yet he provided for the Priests in the
time of famine.

Though Saul was a notable Idolatour, yet he put away the Sorcerers and
Southsayers out of his land.

Though Judas deceived his master by treason, yet he might win many souls
with his preaching.

These objections are frivolous: for it is our usual manner of phrase, to
reuolue a man's fault in revealing of his fame.

If he be a godly man, he is set forth with his defectes thus: he was a grave
man for government, but very hasty: or thus, he was a learned man in the
pulpit, but somewhat insolent: or thus, he was very wise, but too too wanton.
David is praised with his impedimentes in the 1. King. 15.5. It is written of
him that he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, and turned from
nothing that he commanded him all the days of his life: hitherto he is
commended, but it follows, Save only in the matter of Vriah the Hittite, here
appears his imperfection.

If he be a lewd-man, he is commonly phrased out thus, he would once a year
feast the poor, but all the year after oppress them, or thus, he erected a
brave b^^^ding to the eye, but the stones in the wall may cry for violence: or
thus, he was a proper man to sight, but we may see his oversight: Experience
offers plenti^ull examples of such persons.

So that now we are to consider the difference between the reformed and
dissolute man.

The godly sometime shall not differ from the wicked in fa^^^^g but in rising:
for we see that David committed murder as well as Cain: and Paul idolatry, as
w^ll as Saul.

The godly shall sometime add s^^^e to sin with the wicked, as David did in
homicide after adultery, and insec^^ity after h^th till Nathan reproved him.
And as Peter did in forswearing his Master after many denyals: yet we must not
balance a bad man with the better: for one sin of weakness with
repentance, the other of malice with perseverance.

The wicked have their lives as full of spots as the Leopard, so the best have
their blemishes: but what then? who will compare Noah with notorious dronkards:
or David with common adulterers: or Peter with common periurers: or some poor
sinner with every profane offendour: or him that takes but one trip in his
life, with those which always tread awry?

Though the rose be cancker-eaten, it is not to be cast away, though lawne
have a little stayne, it is not to be deemed starcke naught: no more must the
best man, although he has a fault, be straight accounted infamous: for as the
brightness of the Sun does blemish the light of the Moon, so the fame of
his good actions does obscure the folly of his escapes. The Apostle calls
Lot, just Lot, though he committed incest: and Noah, the eight Preacher of
righteousness, though he sinned in ebriety: because most of their actions were
good and commendable.

A good observation.
Respice finem, it is wisdom to be sparing of speech. and not to be too
censoriall of any man, either in primordio, or medio, but to praise the end,
remembering this pithy period of Pliny, one day deemeth another, but the last
gives judgment of all that is past. To obtrect him rashly, whom we may have
cause to commend, or to exalt another vaynely, where we may have cause to
recant. infipientis, non sapientis est, I take it to be a point of folly.

Many a good man may have a bad beginning, and yet have an excellent end, so
had Paul, at the first he was a grievous persecuter, afterward became a
glorious Apostle, so was Manasses: at first he was a monstrous Idolater,
afterward beecame a miraculous convert.

Many a godly man may have a good entrance at the first, but a great fall
afterward, and yet prove laudable at the last: so had David, at the first,
who more godly, afterward who more graceless in that matter of Vriah? so had
Peter, at the first, who more ready to follow Christ? afterward he fors^^re
him: yet in the end their penitency exceeded their impiety.

Many an evil man may have a good beginning and yet come to a shameful end:
so had Amaziah: for in the beginning of his reign he carried an external show
of sanctity, afterward he became an Idolater and adored the Idols of the
Idumeans: so had Rehoboam: for during three years he did well, afterward he
fell to all wickedness: so had Judas: for at the first he was chosen for an
Apostle, in the end he was convicted of treason.

So that it is distance of time that does distinguish the deeds of men, and
the end of their days that gives just p^^^e of reports. Plato calls him
happy that may attain in his last age so wisdom and good life.

Comparatiue considerations.
Is a good Name so excellent, that it is better then any riches, more precious
then costly oyntmentes, more estim^ble then length of days, more durable then
the best friends? then let us e^^er into this comparatiue consideration.

What is he that will leave any pains undertaken that may make to his
enriching? Suauis est odor lucri, the scholar will employ his art, the
souldior his arms, the merchant will cross the seas, the Lawyer will toss
his books, the tradesm^n be ^^^peth his travel, and most men their time to get
earthly treasure.

What is he that would not seek all the best oyntmentes (...) they never so
precious, all the best salues be they never so so^eraigne, both of them, be
they never so dear, to (...) g^d, if he were in danger?

What is he that were at the point of death, that (...) not give all his mucke,
use all the means, su^^^r any misery to prolong his life? we read of Asa and
Ahazariah, how in their (...) sought only to Physicians, (...), the other to
witches, and forsook God, because (...) ^^th to dye.

What is he that has ^^ther h^manity or (...), that (...) not do much for an
unfeigned fre^^? a man (...), yet he will not let to give th^^ to do his (...)
precious, yet he (...) it for hi^ friends sake, as appeeres in Damon and
Pithias.

Then if riches, oyntmentes, life, and friends are so precious, who would not
practice all the ways, apply all the best means, and adventure all he has to
purchase that which is far better then any of them, A good Name?

How to get a good Name.
It is an easy matter to get a Name, to be spoken of. Traitors, rebels, and
most malefactors are not without a Name, as Absalom and Judas for treason:
Corah, Dathan, and Abiram for rebellion: Achitophel, Simon Magus, and many
other for their pestiferous Actions. We have had lamentable experience of the
disloyal practices of too many within this land, whose Names are not yet
forgotten, though the Crows have devoured their carcasses. But as their deeds
were detestable, so their memorial does not turn to their praise but reproach.

There be many that think it a credit to kill a man, a matter of
commendation to carrouse well, a brave grace to blaspheme, a great glory to
boast of their beastliness: but as they take all their pride in impiety, so
they shall be spoken of, but how? not to their glory, but disgrace: not to
their credit, but shame, as the Lord threatened the people in Hoseas time, that
(for their iniquity) he would change their glory into shame. Hosea. 4.7.

But to get a good Name as it is hard, so it is honorable: as it is rare, so
it is renowned: as it is most precious, so it is most worthy of praise.

Things of great price are not got without much pain: the scholar must turn
many leaves ere he become learned, the soldier must suffer many conflictes ere
he return conqueror, and he that will have a good Name must use all
industrious means to attain it, vt tales nos esse putamus, vt iure laudemur.

There is no man (says the Heathen man) in whom there is not this desire,
rather to be praised then ill spoken of. Then let us practice such things as
deserve praise: for as Tully says, vera gloria radices agit atque etiam
propagatur.

The worst wretch that is, does wish to be well thought on, though he neglect
the means to manifest it. Then if we will obtain glory and a good Name, let
us follow that n^table saying of Socrates, who teaches this to be a direct and
(...) course: Si quis ageret, vt qualis haberi vellet, talis esset, ^^^ry one
should labor to be indeed, that which he loves to be accounted, and that is
commendable.

He that will have a good Name, must stretch his talent on the tayneters, and
make his gifts glister like gold in the eyes of other: for the greatest praise
consists not in possessing, but disp^nsing them.

If thou have been trained up in good litterature, let thy profit appear to
others: for as Plato says, we are not only borne for our selves, but partly
our country, partly our friends claim an interest in our nativity: and we have
examples of many who have consumed the whole course of their lives in the
distribution of their learning. Diomedes wrote six thousand books concerning
Grammar, as Plutarch reports. Origin wrote seven thousand books of many
matters. S. Augustine wrote so many books, that no man is able either to read
them or come by them, as Tritenhemius believes: many heathen men have been so
affected that way that some thought all their time lost that was not spent in
learning as Scipio did, others would rather starve then leave their study, as
Chrysippus did.

If thou have wealth in abundant measure, let thy saciety supply an others
misery. Lend money and corn to thy distressed neighbors, as Nehemiah did when
the people were oppressed: give half thy goods to the poor as Zacheus did,
entertayne strangers as Lot did, Live uprightly as Job did.

Give to the mainetenance of schools of learning, be a furtherance to the
forward Ministers of the word, erect Hospitals and Almeshouses for the relief
of the impotent, Resist not auctority, persist in the truth.

It were too long to dilate all the means that may pertayne to the purchase of
a good Name, considering it is got by every laudable act, by perfection in any
good profession, whether he be learned or lay man, martial or mechanical,
artist or artificer, having this distinction. 1. that the more exce^^^nt the
practice is, the more famous is the report: multo maiora sunt opera animi quam
corporis says Cicero, the gifts of the mind are far more excellent then
the actions of the body: caedant arma togae: although the valorous soldier is
highly to be advanced: yet the Poet says, he must give place to learning, and
good reason: for without experience and learning the best Soldier shall have
bad success. For this cause, Alexander that valiant warrior would never go
into the field without Calisthenes a learned Philosopher. 2. That as there be
many exquisite practitioners in this age, so he that does more excel, is most
to be exalted above others. Every dunsiuall must not have equivalent
commendation with a Doctor, though both have learning. Every coward must not
have equal praise with a Captain, though both can fight, nor every bungler
must not have the like report as a good woorkeman, though both can work: but
he that is most rare in perfection, should be more renowned in Name. David had
many valiant men of war, and did divide them into nombers according to their
deeds and dignities, yet some were more honorable then other: for it is said
of Benaiah that he had the Name among the three woorthies. 2. Sam. 23.22. 3.
That the more singularity any has in sundry gifts, the more illustrate is
his glory. David deserves to be dignified for many things: being a king for
regiment: being a prophet for predication: being a warrior for prowess:
being a man of small stature, for his miraculous killing of the monstrous
Philistine. There are many amongst us that are worthy to be memorized for many
things (seeing natural and litterall gifts were never more resplendent in
any age) but because it were meeter for Mercurius to imblazon their actions
then Battillus, I will omit them.

What a good Name and Fame is:
There are some that think many things to be famous, which in the own nature
are but ignoble and nothing worth. The Syrians do take it for a praise to eat
their parents when they be dead, rather then worms should: the Jews to marry
in their own Tribe, the Tryualles to kill their father when he is three score
years old and bren him, the women of Getica to be interred with their
husbands.

There are some that suppose a good Name dependes only upon outward dignities,
titles and terms of honor and renown, without virtuous actions: the
Philosopher does refute this: honor comes not to virtue by dignities, but
it comes (...) by virtue of them that use the dignity. The very (...) of
honor does confirm it. Honor (says Aristotle) is a reverence given to an
other for a testimony of his virtue. Therefore Catullus a virtuous man in Rome,
seeing Nonius a very viti^^^ man sytting in great dignity in his iuditiall
seat, called him a swelling full of corruption, because he knew his inward
habit of the mind (...) oppugnant to his outward honor he had amongst men.

There are some that think to purchase a same by setting forth fair
buildinges. Ornanda est dignitas domo, non ex domo dignitas tota quaerenda est,
says Tully: for, It is not the glorious show of the house, but the godly
actions of the (...) that makes him renowned. If he be an ill man, wh^^ s^^^h
Solomon? The house of the wicked shall be destroyed: Prou. 14.11. then what shall
become of all his glory?

There are some that think they are famous only for ^^ti^ity sake, because
they issue from nobles or gentiles. High (...) ever been esteemed. 1. Samu.
18.18. but yet if any degenerate from his progenitors, his birth cannot
beautify his base conditions: it is not the grafting of a Crab upon a Pippin
stock (...) make it prove a good apple, this is more fully refelled in the
former part of this book.

There are some that think they are famous only to be accounted wealthy:
the Rich man was of this mind, in Luke 12.19. They boast themselves (says
David) in the multitude of their Riches. Psalm. 49.6. They gather goods and hope
to leave them to their children to mainetaine their Name: but what says Job to
wicked worldlinges: he shall neither have Son nor Neph^^ amongst his people,
nor any posterity in his dwellings. Job* ^8 19. so that shall be verified which
the Psal^i^t s^^^h, He shall ^^ue his Riches for others. Psalm. 49. etc. and
shall h^^e no Name at all. Job. 18.17.

A Poet says, that Fame is nothing but a great swelling and filling of men's
ears. This may be true, for (as Boethius says) many have often had great fame
by the false opinion of the people, as Herod had when the people gave a shout,
saying, the voice of God and not of man. Act. 12.

I take this to be a more perfect definition. Fame is a knowledge of men's
actions and deeds, as well far off as nigh.

The word Fame, as it is simply a substantive, is as well indifferent and
incident to bad men for their misdemeanor, as to good men for their merits:
but if Fame be taken in the better part, the adiunct good must be connexed
withal, and so it is called a good Fame: yet this adiunct is not always
usual, but the Fame is sometime setfoorth by the effects, as in this place,
Queen Saba hearing the Fame (good is left out) of Solomon (but it follows by
the effect) concerning the name of the Lord. 1. King. 10.1. came to prove him
with hard questions.

Fame is a certain kind of knowledge, but not always properly of experience,
but commonly upon report, as may be gathered out of the 1. King. 10.
therefore if we hear one praised and well reported, we must not altogether
believe our ears but our eyes, as Saba did, who trauayled of purpose to try
the truth of the report she heard of Solomon: for a fool believes all
things. Pro. 14.15. and it stands with reason. First, because there may be
more or less reported then is true. Lo (says Saba) the one half was not told
me: for thou have more prosperity and wisdom then I heard by report, or as it
is in the 2. Chro. 9.6. thou exceedest the fame that I heard. Secondly, to
confirm our Judgments: for as Boethius says, I do not think the favor or
praise of the people worthy to be remembered, that comes not by wise and just
Judgment.

What should be meant by a good Name I can hardly apprehend, unless it be by a
Metonymy, the Name put for the man or the actions of man: as the Name of Moses
and the Prophets are put for their writings in Luke 16.29. for we cannot
properly say that a Name is ill, because in the beginning the first Name Adam,
was given by God: therefore a good Name imports as much as praise and
report, which arise by reason of the valiant and virtuous actions of men.

It is recorded of Mordecai, that his report went through all the kings
provinces. Nehe. 9.4. Demetrius, that he had good report of all men 3. Epist.
Ioh. verse. 12. Many of our forefathers, that they ob^^yn^d a good report. Heb.
11.39.


All these good Reports were grounded, and did grow of the precedent and
laudable deeds of the Actors: and because reports are such as do commonly
touch the Names and credites of men, the scripture wills us to practice such
things as be of good report. Paul wills the Philippians to think of
those things that be of good report Phil. 4.8. and the same Apostle himself
was approved by good report and ill report. 2. Cor. 6.8. So that here is to be
considered these three things. First, that a wi^^man must not measure his good
Name and Fame altogether by the rumor of the people, but by the truth of his
conscience, least if he appear otherwise then he is in deed, he be easily
deprived of his glory by his effects and deeds. Who but the Scribes and
Pharisees were exalted for a time? but when their deeds came to be tried by
the touchstone, then they proved painted sepulchers, to their shame. One
falling into a Tyrants hand, took upon him the Name of a Philosopher (more
for vaineglory then virtue) the tyrant told him if he were a Philosopher, he
would patiently suffer injuries and ill speeches, and therefore would try him:
and in deed did urge him to the uttermost, and so far, as the Philosopher
was vexed, and said he was not well dealt withal, because he was a
Philosopher, the Tyrant gave him this aunsweare: I had taken thee for a
Philosopher, if thou had held thy peace. Noting hereby, what a ^^ine thing
it is to appear to be otherwise then we prove to be. I hate such men (says
Pacuuius) which in their acts be f^^les, (...) words Philosophers. Secondly,
that no man (...) ^ally insult of his own actions, as the Scribes (...) did.
Laus proprio sordescit in ore, says the (...) Let an other man praise thee and
not thy own mouth, says Solomon. Pro. 27.2. For be the act never so
excellent, a man's own praise does but impair it. Laudet fucatas qui vult
extrudere merces, men use to praise their reffuse ware, when they put it away.
If it be good, the thing needs no praise: the perfect Chorall needs no
coloring. Thirdly, that he which is so famous and renowned, must not forget
himself, but observe one wise point of Plato, that he be not proud when he
is praised: and an other point of Tully, that he set not too light by that
which men deem of him: for that is a point of folly. The Philosopher which was
led but by the light of nature could say thus: if thou be fair, thank
nature: if thou be noble of blood, thancke thy parents: if thou be rich
thancke fortune: if virtuous, praise God: and certes if we have an eye to him
that gives all good gifts, we shall have no cause to glory, if we think
upon God.

How dangerous it is to keep a good Name.
SVch things as be precious cannot be kept without great peril. Abraham
feared Sara, because she was fair, Genes. 12.11. For true it is that
Theophrastus says, that which many desire, one can hardly keep safe, beauty is
a great blissing, but a good Name is far better: for one flourishes, when
the other fades, therefore there is the more circumspection requir^^: the Poet
says, non minor est virtus quam quaerere, parta tueri. the Philosopher says,
to get wealth is the gift of fortune: but to keep it, is a point of wisdom:
then what is it to keep a good Name, which is far better then wealth? Common
experience does teach us this, that a good Name is like a merchants wealth,
gotten in many years, but lost in a moment.

The fairest blossom is soonest blasted with the wind, the forwardest spring
soonest bitten with the frost, and the best Name is soonest blemished by the
maligna^t. He that is famous and in better favor above others, shall be sure to
have many means wrought to deface him (...) the Star Hesperus does follow
the Sun, and the flies the honey: so does en^^ and ill tongues such as be in
honor and reputation. I need not go far for examples, because we see it
daily with our eyes: yet because it shall appear to be no new practice, I will
repeat some examples out of the Scriptures. Tobiah and Sanballat much envying
the credit of Nehemiah that godly man, they hired one of purpose to prouo^^
(...) to (...), for no other cause, but that they might have an ill report
(...) him, to reproach him. Nehe. 6.13. Daniel was the (...) favor with king
Darius, and was in great estimation (...) many: which the Rulers and Governors
perceiving, it so (...) spited them, that (although they could find no just
occa^^^n (...) him. Dan. 8.4.) they sought all possible means to disgra^^
(...), yea and to destroy him.

So many ways as malice may work, so many (...) may be used to reproach and
impeach a good Name.

Have we not had experience of some vicious (...), that have yielded their
vessels to villainy to one, and have (...) their ^^^thin^sse upon an other? Now
by the reason of the d^s^r^t^^^ a^th^rity given to Magistrates for putatiue
fathers, the (...) has been brought in question and disgrace, and yet without
cause of desert; and when he has received either criminal or corporal
punishment, and has proceeded in his purgation in Co^rtes for criminal
causes, the wretched women afterward have (...) the contrary without coaction,
that either they were persuaded or hired to nominate and accuse the innocent,
thereby to excuse and clear the Actor from ignominy: or that they did it of
policy to name such a one as was well able by his living to satisfy the law,
or at least might bear them out with less rebuke then the offendour. It is no
marvel Solomon said, I have found one man of a thousand: but a woman amongst
them all I have not found, Eccles. 7.30. For what will not a wicked woman in
her malice imagine? How impudently did Putiphars wife forge lies of Joseph,
because he would not lie with her? Genesis 39.12. How boldly did the harlot lay
the death of her child to an other, when she had ouerlayne it her self? 1.
King. 3.19. A whoare makes no conscience of a lie, an oathe, or any thing so
incredible to (...) horrible to hear: the reason is because (as the Prophet
Jeremy) says. Iere. 3.3. she has a forehead that will not be ashamed.

It is as dangerous to travail through a wild forest without fire, as to
keep a good Name without foresight. Let a man but frequent his friends house
upon neighborhood or necessary occasions, or be but conversant with a woman
upon some honest intent: you shall have some or other that (measuring others by
their own motions, and censuring others of suspicion by their own
disposition) will be ready to raise an ill report to hinder his good Name: which
being once bruted, will not be beaten down in have, because most are ready and
rejoice to hear leasinges. I confess as there be too few men like Joseph, to
resist the flattering assaults of the flesh when they are allured: so there
be not many women that can truly say as Bilia did, whom S. Hierom makes
mention on. Duellius her husband had a stinking breath, who being ^^^rayded for
it by one that fell out with him: he rebuked his wife because she did not tell
him of it, that he might have found some remedy for it. She said, she would
have told him, but that she thought every man's breath smelled so: yet God
defend (how few good soever there be) any should be rashly reproached, where
there is no pretense of ill.

Therefore I would wish every one to avoyde the very occasion of evil, if it
be possible. Venien^^ occurrite morbo, to prevent the worst. S. Augustine would
never dwell with his sister in one house, for he would say, it was enough to
see a woman, worse to speak with her, and woorst of all to touch her. Cato the
elder banished Gaius Manlius out of the Senate house, because he kissed but
his own wife in his daughters presence. King Hiero condemned the Poet
Epicharmus, because he used uncleanly words in a great sum of money.
Lycurgus made a law that the women of Lacedemonia should cover their faces when
they went abroad, because they might neither look, nor be looked upon.
Augustus Ca^sar commanded no women should come to see the wrastlers, because
they did use to wrestle naked: all these I rehearse to note how necessary it is
to avoid the occasion of evil for fear of inconvenience: now if the occasion
be so dangerous, the very action of evil must needs be detestable and
hurtful to the Name: for although some may commit some odious crime, and may
have it concealed for his credit, or not spoken of for his calling, or not
regarded for his countenance, or bolstered out by freendship: (for the common
proverb is true, A man's matter is ended, as he is frended, and Some may better
steal a horse, then an other look on. Modestinus could say in (...) time of
Transgressors, that some were grievously punished, others scarce touched. For
this cause Anaxagoras likened the laws of (...) to Cobwebs, which do tie
little flies fast, but break with the great.) Yet as one kernel of
Colloquintida will make the best br^^h very bitter, and one dead fly will
putrify a box of ointment (...) evil action will disgrace many good. I will
use one exa^^^^ ^nsteed of many: so long as Vzziah sought the Lord, he
pr^^^^ted, and was so valiant, that it is said, his Name spredd far a^road:
but that one act of his in usurping the Priests Office, (...) defame all his
former, and so much diminished his Name, that he which before lived as a king
in his palace at Jerusalem, did dwell as a Lepar in an house apart. 2, Chro.
26.

Although a good Name may be recovered again in time: for Tempus edax rerum:
Yet it will be long ere it be worn out of men's mouths and memories: Yea and
when the best is done, as it is hard to cure a wound so well, but that a skarre
will appear in the skin, so you shall as hardly recover the other, but it
will be a blot to the Name.

A general application.
COnsidering the excellency of a good Name surpasses all other terrestrial
blessings, there is specially to be observed two things?

1. In the Speakers. 2. In the Hearers.
THe Speakers must take heed how they use their tongues, Nature has lent us
two ears and but one tongue, that we might not utter all we hear: this
tongue is reared and hedged in with a double fence, to the end we might speak
without offense.

The tongue is ianua vitae and necis: it is no small virtue to bridle the
tongue says Cato: Solomon says, He that has a naughty tongue, shall fall
into evil. Prou. 17.5. S. James says that man's religion is in vain, which
refraineth not his tongue. S. Peter says, If any man long after life and to
see good days, let him refrain his tongue from evil. Esop being bid to buy
the best and worst meat in the market, brought home nothing but tongues: noting
thereby, that the tongue was good and evil as it is used. The Psalmist kept
silence even from speaking good things, much more ought we from evil. If we
must give account for every idle word, much more for lewd and lying speeches.
Therefore you must take heed how you blemish the Name of your brother, either
by carrying of Tales, Thou shall not go about with tales. Leuit. 19.16. or by
raising flaunders, He that inuenteth slander, is a fool. Prou. 10.18. Tales
and slanderous speeches says David, are as the sharp arrows of a mighty
man. Psalm. 120. For as a strong man shoots far and does much harm with a
sharp arrow, so a slanderer defameth far and does much mischief with his
viperous tongue.

Tales and slanders are by the Psalmograph likened to the coals of Juniper.
psalm. 120. Pliny writing of the nature thereof, says, that those coals do
yield the greatest heat, so a lewd tongue does procure the gretest hurt. S.
James likeneth the tongue to fire: we all know how great a thing a little fire
will kindle, and so it is with the slanderer, one spark of ill speech may
cause a flame of defame amongst many: for as Cicero says nothing flees more
swiftly then an ill word, nothing goes sooner forth, nothing is sooner taken,
nor brother spread: it was this ye made David complain, Thou make us a
reproach amongst our neighbors etc. concluding thus for the voice of the
slaunderers. Psalm. 44. Tales and slanders well impeach the best Name: for the
most part are apt to believe that is ill, say^h Ovid, and therefore says
Solomon, The words of a Talebearer are as flatteringes, and they go down into
the bowels of the belly, Prou. 18.8. do we not see many times amongst us,
that if an ill speech or tale be uttered and bruted (though but by one base
person of no reputation) how ready a multitude will believe it? these are they
that cause such idle expense of money, and debate amongst friends, for who
can abide to be evil spoken of? therefore says the wiseman, Without a tale
bearer strife cease. Prou. 26.20.

Qualis vir, talis oration. A good man is discerned from a wicked by his talk:
for the godly man of love will cover some offense, but the wicked of malice
will exclaim without cause. Hereof says the Scripture, A righteous man hates
lying words, but the wicked cause slander and shame. Pro. 13.5.

A caveat for Talebearers, Backbyters and Slaunderers.
THese men, or rather monsters amongst men, should consider two things. First,
in their neighbor. Secondly, in themselves.

In their neighbor, they are to weigh the worth of a good Name: which they
shall the better perform, if they reason with themselves by way of comparison,
thus: If it be a grief to a man to have a wound in his body, what is it to
have a main in his Name? for art may cure the one, but nothing will recover
the other. If it be a grief for a man to loose all his goods, which he has
been long in gathering together, what is it to loose his Name which he has
labored for all his life? For one may be restored in time, the other is
stained for ever.

In themselves, they must weigh the reward of their wickedness: they are
abhorred both of God and Man. God detesteth such kind of men, as appears by
many pregnant places in his word. Him that privily slaundereth his neighbor,
will I destroy. Psalm. 101.5. the backbyter shall not be established upon earth
Psalm. 140.11. he that speaks lies shall perish. Prou. 19.9. The Lord
punished Ely and his posterity, because his sons ran into a slander, and he
stayed them not. 1. Sam. 3.13. he punished the two Judges for slaundering
Susanna: the leprosse was laid upon Gehazi, because he made a lie: and Ananias
and Sapphira were punished with present death, because they made an horrible
lie. Act. 5.

A godly man does balke backbiters, slaunderers and such like. The just man
says Solomon cannot away with a lie: much less with him that uses it: he
says in an other place, that a busy body is hated. Prou. 14.17. the
Philosophers could not abide them: therefore Pithagoras wills us not to
receive a swallow into our houses, meaning bablers, clatterers and such like
companions. The Cretians were never accounted on, because they were common
liars. Moses made a law to punish the slaunderer with loss of money, for the
misdemeanor of his mouth. Deuter. 22. Now to the second point.

For Hearers.
THe Hearers must regard how they listen too, and believe reports: for we
commonly say, the receiver is as ill as the thief: if there were not so many
to give ear to lies and believe them, there would not be so many to devise
tales and tell them. Therefore the Psalmist does not only condemn him which
raises, but him which receives a false report against his neighbor Psalm.
15.3. For this cause S. Barnard doubted whether it were a greater sin to
invent, or listen to a slander: therefore such as receive reports and ill
speeches by hear say, must remember many things. First, that if Saba would
not believe a true report of Solomon till she had tried out the truth, much
less ought any to believe a false report of their neighbors too rashly.
Secondly, that there be some that take all their pleasure to deprave others,
and do nothing but invent lies and lewd speeches. Thou geuest thy mouth to
evil, and with thy tongue thou forgest deceit, thou sit and speak
against thy brother, and slanderest thy mothers son. Psalm. 50.19.20. He that
will not let to slander his mothers son, so near bound by nature, what will
he do to his neighbor? These for the most part are the offscummes of a
Country: The abiectes (says David) assembled themselves against me, they tare
me and ceased not. Psalm. 35.15. His meaning is, that the very reffuse people
did most rail upon him: and true it is, when Alewormes are quaffing on their
tippling bench, then men's credites go to wrack with their cups, and as
Sampson when his eyes were out, did not care on whose head the house might
fall, or as the Drone will hinder the Be of her wings, when he has lost his
own: so do they seek to blemish their betters, when themselves are of no
account or estimation. Thirdly, there be some that repine at their neighbors
good Names, and therefore use all means to detract it, as appeeres by Tobiah
and Sanballat against Nehemiah, and the Rulers and Governors against Daniel:
the examples at large are a little before: When such as these can no way work
their will, they wish the death of the godly, that so their Name might pearish.
Mine enemies speak evil of me (says David) saying, when shall he die, and his
Name perish. Psalm. 41.5. Saul would have slain him because the people ascribed
the greater Name to him, in that David had slain ten thousand, and Saul but
a thousand. 2. Sam. 18.8. the people of Judah would have destroyed Jeremy, that
his Name might be no more in memory. Ierem. 11.19. Fourthly, you must reprove
such lewd detractors, and no way bewray any credulity, not so much as by a
favorable countenance: for as the Northwind drives away rain, so does an
angry countenance, the slaundering tongue, Proverb. 25.23. and if no
approbation may be given by any outward appearance, much less must you adhibite
any credit to such detractors: for that is an argument of impiety: hereof
says the Wiseman, The wicked give heed to false lips, and a lier harkeneth to
the naughty tongue. Prou. 17.4. Fifthly, It is the point of a wiseman to
consider all circumstances seriously, that touch the Name of his neighbor, and
not to be too credulous: for such commonly as be light of belief, are so in
their lives: Therefore says Solomon, the foolish will believe every thing.
pro. 14.15. It is the part of a Christian to do as he would be done to: then,
if you would be loath to have an other hear evil of your self and sooth him,
the like do for an other. If the Apostle wills that one should not speak
evil of an other, he will not allow one to hear evil of an other, but that
the rule of charity should be observed in both. Sixthly, it is the part of a
wicked man when he hears his neighbor ill reported of, to dispearce it to
others whisperingly, when he should charitably inform him. David complained of
this, Al they that hate me, whisper together against me. Psalm. 41.7. Of such
kind of whisperers we have too many at this day: for by this means, a man
shall have a rumor and crime raised of him, and yet never come to know either
accusor or author of it: Veritas non quaerit angulos, it is the rather to be
suspected to be a vile envious invention, The Apostle Paul condemns
whisperers and inuenters of evil, as appears in the Romans 1.29. Seauenthly,
you must beware how you believe a Tale or ill report, though there appear
great presumptions: allthough there can be no smoke without a fire, yet there
may be most smoke when there is least fire: Omne simile non est idem. Violent
presumptions may induce much, as appears by Solomon in handling of two
harlots: 1. king. 3.27. but as his wisdom was extraordinary: so I take it to
be an act rather of admiration then imitation. God forbid that every ordinary
presumption should be of credit to convince. The two Judges devised a
suspicious matter against Susanna: yet their grievous punishment in the end
does discover their egregious impiety in the act, and her innocence from
offense. Putifars wife could pull away Joseph's garments, and tell a very
suspicious tale against him: (as the wicked care not in their malice what they
imagine) but if you read the story, it will appear her tales were false, and
she in all the fault. Eighthly, you must not altogether credit speeches, though
there appear some proof: for false witness of malice may be suborned for
money, and men in their malice care not what weapon they use, so they may
massacre. Our Savior Christ without subornation of witnesses could never have
been condemned by his adversaries. The Libertines and the rest of that
Synagogue could find no coulor of cause to stone Steven, but by suborned
witnesses. The Elders and Nobles could never have condemned Naboth but for two
wicked suborned witnesses. 1. king. 21.13. Therefore you must have a respect to
the reputation of the persons, and believe not every bare and beggarly
testimony. Ninthly, you must not peremptorily always believe every matter
though sentence be passed: there be many reasons for it: May not right by
might be ouermastered, as many poor men are oppressed when they are in suite
with their superiors, or buckle any way with their betters? May not the Poets
words be verified in some Judges? Sic volo, sic iubeo, stat pro ratione
voluntas. We have a Law, and by our Law ought he to die. John 19.7. May they
not be corrupted of malice, because they cannot effect their own minds, as
the two Judges were against Susanna, because they might not have their filthy
desires on her. May they not be blinded with bribes to pervert Judgment, as
Joel and Abiah were? 1. Sam. 8.3. May they not be carried with letters to deal
injuriously, as the Elders and Nobles of Izreel were by a letter sent from
Iezebel? 1. king. 21.11. May they not deal partially either for fear of
offending their friends, as Pilot dealt with Christ to please Caesar, John. 19
12.13. or for love of their friends, as Herod dealt with John Baptist for
Herodias daughters sake? We have many good Judges at this day (God continue and
increase them) but I am the more ample in this matter, because we may not only
see what corruption has been in all ages and estates of persons, but that we
may perceive how we may be deceived in censuring him that has received
sentence.

For Scoffers, Scorners, Mockers, and such like monsters.
IT is a strange thing to note the iniquity of these times, if a man fall into
some cross (as the best has his procliuity to prauity) how ready the light
and lewd people are to reproach him. Job complained of this: Thou have made me a
byword of the people, and I am as a tabret before them, and now I am their
song and their talk. Job 17. When his own friends and kinsfolks came to
visit him, they did nothing but vex him. If a man were derided only by his
ennemies (yet Periander wills to hide our misfortune, that our ennemies
rejoice not) his might the better bear it: but oftentimes such as profess
great friendship and be familiar with him, will abuse him behind his back.
David had experience hereof, for he says, Mine enemy did not defame me, for I
could have borne it, but it was thou O man, even my companion, my guide and my
familiar. Psalm. 55.13. Yea my familiar friend, whom I trusted, which did eat
of my bread, has lifted up the heel against me. Psalm. 41.9. Job and David
were godly men: yet they were subject to the burden of obloquy. As the
troubles of the righteous are many, so they are most spighted and afflicted
when they fall: many profane persons shall be countenaunced and supported in
their faults, be they never so criminal, as the children of Ely were, when
the more reformed man shall be persecuted, and reproached in his fall, be it
never so light: but if so rare men as these, were mocked, their inferiors must
not think much, although mocking and derision will penetrate the most patient
man. It is so repugnant from nature, that many more regard it, then Gods glory,
as Zedekiah did. Iere. 38.19. It is so importable, that it is termed
persecuting in the Galathians: When Sara was mocked by Hagar: it is so
intolerable, that the Children were devoured by bears for mocking Elisha.
Good God, where is this unity of brethren, and concord of Christians become,
when in steed of love they use laughter, mocking in steed of mourning,
despising in steed of pitying, exclamation in steed of consolation? When
Abraham the most religious man in the land had sinned (whereof might have
ensued many evils) Abimelech did not twit him either by his religion, or cast
him in the teeth with his lying: but he was so far from deriding him, as he
pitied him, and so far from hurting him, that he bestowed many presents upon
him: this heathen king will condemn many Christians at this day. When the
Jews brought the Adulteress woman before our Savior Christ, he was so far
from vpbrayding her for her fault: that he reproved them for reioycinge in her
fall: He bode him that was free from sin, to throw the first stone, and her
to depart and sin no more. Tristitia dissoluit cor, says S. Augustine:
trouble strikes a terror into the mind of a good man, and is sorrow enough of
it self, without this miserable torment of mocking: and therefore we ought to
comfort and not cross such as be corrigible in their fall, but to be
fellow-feeling members in their afflictions: Paul wills the Romans to weep
with those that weep, and Job says, Did not I weep with him that is in
trouble? Job. 30.25. What if thy brother offend of infirmity? is he the first,
or like to be the last? or art thou thy self free, or may thou not fall?
consider thy own case, and thou shall have small reason to be rigorous to an
other. If we sin all in many things, Iam. 3.2. art not thou culpable in some
thing? then rather take warning by an other, then wonder at him. Is his sin
made notorious by the malice of enemies, and thine concealed by the means of
friends, or had in suspicion or speech by many violent presumptions? Si non
cast, tamen caute: or have thou not someway deserved reproach by thy life,
though it be not brought to light? howsoever it be, say the best of thy brother
without scoffing or scorning, least he from whom nothing is hid, does bewray
thy sins to thy shame. There are difference of misdoers: some are but
touched, others taineted with notorious crimes (although taineting is not
common to every transgressor) many sins are private, others more public: yet
we ought to have this respect, that we measure some not according to the
quality of his offense, but the disposition of the offender: therefore says
Jude, Have compassion of some puttinge difference Iud. 22. and because the
penitent ought to be pitied S. Paul wills the Galathians to restore such as
have fallen by occasion into a fault, and least any should insult and rejoice
at his fall, he put in this memento by the way, as a perfect reason drawn from
humane imperfection, Least thy self be tempted. Gal. 6.1. What should move
thee to deride thy brother when he falls? Do thou take him for an abject?
then I account thee a reprobate: for the best that ever were (being but men)
have fallen: Search throughout the whole course of Scriptures, and how many
shall you find, that were ever so high for their calling, so holy for their
conversation, so renowned in Name: that have not offended either privately or
publicly. If thy brother rise by repentance, as his predecessors have done,
why should thou think his fall more infamous then theirs, or his soul
less precious then thine, seeing whom God crosses here, he crowns in
heaven? What should make thee disdain the company of thy brother when he
falls? Is it thy integrity? If thou stand, remember Paul's counsel to the
Corinthians: Take heed thou do not fall: yet thy contempt cannot excuse,
but rather accuse thee of evil: for those which did say, Stand apart come not
near me, I am holier then thou, Esaias 65.5. they were no better then
hypocrites, and so may thou be: but say thou art as clear from sin as
Christ, yet take ensample by thy Savior: for he disdained not the company of
Publicans and Sinners, which in those days the Jews accounted the very
ofscummes of the earth.

A very special Note.
HE that will be strickt in reproouing, must not be stained in his living: for
Tully says, it is the property of a fool to spy faults in other and forget
his own. He that does register others escapes, should not be rechlesse
himself: and to twit one by that which either he or his have been touched
withal, is a mere point of impudency. With what force can thou utter in
disgrace of thy penitent brother: There goes a drunkard, when many can tell
thee, thou have been overtaken with drink? With what boldness can thou
say: There iets a proud person, when thy gate, gesture and government, are
great presumptions of pride? With what credit may thou report, There goes an
Adulterer, when thou thy self art accounted an incontinent liver? With what
countenance can thou say, There goes an Usurer (which takes but ten in the
hundred for money) when thou take after thirty in the hundred in thy trade?
With what shame may thou publish, There goes a blasphemer, when thou thy
self have been touched with heretical blasphemy? I speak not to the
mainetenance of any obstinate and incorrigible sinner, but to cross these
cauilling spirits, which spend their mouths in spighte against others, when
their own works may accuse them of vanity in their words. The Apostle does
not exclude them, when he reprooueth him that speaks against stealing, and
yet plays the thief? To. 2.21. It is not inuaighing speech can varnish a
vicious man, nor a hi^^ look can cover a dishonest life, nor a brazen face can
hide a bad fact: but he that respects no person but his piety, no titles but
integrity, no excuse but simplicity, will not only reveal such as be evil,
but revenge it here or in the world to come. Some will object, they have not
fallen into the like offense their brother have: what then? has he sinned by
incontinency? you by covetousness: he in pride? you by oppression: he by
bribing? you by blaspheming: he one way? you an other: yet ye be both liable
to a like verdite: for he that says the one shall not come in heaven, will
not suffer the other to inherit without repentance. Gal. 5.20. etc. Some are
crossed with loss of their goods, as Job was: many with untoward children, as
Eli was: and with death of their children, as the woman of Sarepta was: others
with diseases of body, as Naomi was with leprosy, some with loss of their
Name, as Cain was, who lived to his reproach: although God does not infli^t
these in like manner and measure to all, yet sithence few or (...) are free
from these afflictions, one ought not to applaud in an others misery: For he
that rejoices at destruction, shall not go unpunished. says Solomon Prou.
17.5. Every one should square his speech by the rule of charity, and weigh his
desartes in the balance of equity, and then he shall find, that if his own
faults were branded ^n his forehead, he shall hardly escape without a blemish
on his face, if he pull not his hat somewhat low over his brows. Sibi quisque
proximus, every man can look forward to his neighbors faults, but has not an
eye to his own, such as these can strain a gnatt but swallow a camel,
stomble at a straw, but leap over a block like hypocritical Jews, who could
tith minte, but ouer^^ip great matters. If some of them did examine and compare
their own actions with others, they might say as Judah did of Tamar, She is
more righteous then I. Genesis 28. and many of them may offer sacrifice every day
with Job for their vicious and volupt^^^^ ch^^dren: they may hear many ill
reports of them, as Eli (...) of his sons, but they can suffer them to
proceed ^n without punishment, when an other shall be persecuted in the l^^st
trip of his life.

The Conclusion.
LEast he that has a good Name should be too glorious, or he that has an ill
Name, should be too much disgraced, I thought good to ad this conclusiue caveat
by the way. A good Name although it be excellent, yet it is earthly: though it
be memorable, yet it is momentany: though it be committed to Rolls of record
by Chronologiers, or engraven in brass as they use in some country, yet both
the Actors wrytinges and all will wear away in time: the Philosopher could say
Quam multos clarissimos suis temporibus viros scriptorum inops deleuet obliuio?
Such as be experienced by age can tell, how many men that in their time were
noble and famous, be now clean forgotten and out of memory. Whereby we may see
the frail fruition of every temporary thing, which is soon decided with the
circle of time, so that no perpetuity in this life can be presumed of the most
precious thing. A good Name: therefore we must not labor or look to eternize
our Names upon earth, but rather covet and crave that we may be in the number
of those whose Names are written in heaven: for as the Lord says in the
Prophet Esaias, that is an everlasting Name which shall not be put out Esaias 56.5.
and albeit many shall have their Names blemished in this life, blessed are they
if they be not blotted out of the book of life.

The Merchant will barter his reffuse ware with his best, the Vintner will draw
his decayed wine with his better. If thy brother of infirmity fall, actiones
cum fama expendito, thou art to consider not only the offense which procured
il report, but by how many other actions he is worthy praise, and so balla^ce
one against an other, for this course is commonly used in the Scriptures. You
shall find Abraham's folly to be recorded as well as his faith, Noah's ebriety
as well as his integrity, Salomons wantonness as well as his wisdom, Paul's
persecuting as well as his preaching, Peter's perjury as well as his penitency:
yet their eu^ll factes be not applied to their infamy but infirmity, neither be
their Names extinguished but eternized.

If Princes, Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles have their faults, marvel not
so much at their inferiors if they fall: and therefore as we term not that
tree to be ill, which is many times blasted, so it bears good fruit to the
end: so we must not take that man to be infamous, which many times falls, so
he rises by repentance to his death.

Certain pithy and profitable Apothegues, directing men to thrive, not so much
by their goods as government.
WHen the Lamb is by the Lion, there is no fear of the Wolf. He that is
shrouded under his superior, is in less danger of displeasure: for he shall be
sometime spared, when others are spighted, many ways pitied when others are
oppressed. Joseph could never be in ^^^et, until he had got in favor under
Pharaoh.

2 The spundge will be full of water and not s^^ne: If thou have satis, insult
not, least thou be plagued with non putaram: for we are here in this world
among men, as in a wilderness among beasts, not so ready to turn any away as
to be torn. He that has Cressus wealth, had need have Argus eyes.

3 The leaking vessel will hold no lyquor, nor the riotous man any living: for
whole mines will not mainetaine a prodigal mind. It is better to spare with a
care of increasing, then to spend without cause in consuming. The Prodigal
son by his great riot came to ruin.

4 That lamp is best that keeps light longest. He that will come to
preferment, must keep his patrimony: for we see the course of the world, that
riches bring many to renown, when poverty makes any of no account. Naboth
would in no wise depart from his inheritance.

5 Seneca says, if thou will live after (...) be poor: if after thy (...).
True it is, the (...) of Alexander are not fit for Codrus, it is good to be
frugall in our fare: for he that loves banqueting, shall soonest die a beggar.
Christ was content with broyled fish, then order your diet by him that died for
you.

6 The sheep yields her fleece to defend us from cold, not to inflate us
with pride. Let every one cut his coat according to his cloth: for the end of
bravery is beggary. Adams loins were but clad with leather: then let your new
fashions take pattern of your first father.

7 Our forefathers used no other drink but water from the creation until the
inundation of the world. Use wine more for weakness then wantonness: for it
is not made to confound the wits, but to comfort the memory, not to inflame the
liver, but to refresh the heart. Timothy by taking of a little wine preserved
his health.

8 One demanded of Diogenes when it was best to marry: for a young man (quoth
he) it is too soon, for an old man ouerlate: His aunsweare is good: for to
marry, it is too soon without maintenance, and to tarry, it is a sin without
chastity. He that will please his eye for love, must not impair his estate
for living. Iaacob had gathered living under Laban, before he married his
daughters.

9 Demea in Terence says, I have married a wife: what misery have I seen
therein? Have respect to your choice, least your marriage breed your misery. It
is a grief to a good man, to be troubled with a scold, like Socrates, when he
would be quiet: or with a devil like Job, when he is in distress: or with a
whore like Sampson, when he bewrayes his secrets.

10 Eschew the company of Curtisans: for their bodies are made of Adamant to
draw their eyes of Easiliske to blind their words of Sirens to inchaunt: as
Salomons wisdom was first tried by whores, so his overthrow was at last
wroght by whores.

11 He that has been singed in the flame will take heed of the fire: he that
will be sure must hate suertyship, an honest denial may satisfy an hurtful
demand, yet thou art bound to benefit thy brother, so thy duty be used with
discretion. Syrach says, an honest man is suerty for his neighbor.

12 Lend to thy better for a benefit, but to the poor for a blessing: she one
borrowes to increase his wealth: the other to supply his want. In all thy
actions be circumspect: for simple dealing is soonest undone without foresight.
Trust not words: for Laban deceived Iaacob with fair words, but take a
pledge: for Tamar would not trust Judah for a trifle without a pledge: or else
take some specialty: for Gabael had the handwriting of Raphael when he received
money.

13 Shake not thy head when thou should stretch forth thy hand to the poor,
like churles who commonly give anod, when they mean to give nothing: the poor
are the Altars to lay the sacrifice of our goods. Cornelius alms came into
remembrance before God.

14 The spanyell never fawneth but he wage his tail. Many can pleasantly
personate with fair speech, O my good friend etc. and shake one by the fifte.
But as the liquorice lease l^^eth most dry when it is most moist: so these do
mean most deceipte, when they seem most merry. Cain was very kind in speech
when he meant to kill Abel.

15 He that touches pitch shall be defiled: Converse with the godly, so it may
be for thy good: for the wicked being sociable with them, speed the better for
their sakes: Laban prospered the better for Iaacob, and Putiphar for Joseph:
when David directed the bands, Saul had good success in his battles.

16 The highest Towers are most subject to tempests, a cottage with
contentment is better then a palace with controlement: wisdom consists not
in wealth, but in contempt of the world, nor wealth in abundance, but in
content of the mind. Diogenes did better esteem of his tub, then Alexander of
all his treasure.

17 Timely pricks the tree that will prove a g^^d thorn. Take thy ease
according to thy estate, if thou be poor, put thy pains to Gods
providence: for his blessing makes rich. Jacob carried nothing over Jordan
but his staff, but he returned rich. Joseph was an abject of his brethren,
but he became a governor in Egypt.

18 Let thy neighbor be thy war of man and not the law: for he that will
contend for every trifle, shall make the Lawyer rich with his silver, and
himself poor by his suites. Abraham had rather resign his right, then be at
variance with Lot.

19 Use some exercise more to prolong thy health, then to procure thy
hinderance: avoid play, for it is a privy thief to thy thrift. Thereof
proceeds for the most part loss of time with treasure, cause of care with
cursing, breach of credit amongst men, and blemish of conscience before God.
Solomon says, He that loves pastime shall be poor.

20 Let the Cook be thy Physician, and the garden thy Apothecary: for he that
will to physic for every infirmity, shall be sure to have his body never
without maladies, and his purse ever without money. Yet we must not neglect the
means for the maintenance of health. If Asa had depended most upon God, he
should not have been reproved for seeking to Physicians.

21 Store is no sore, plenty ought to be dainety, make no wast of that which
an other does want: for there is nothing may seem at any time so impure, but
at sometime may be thought precious. Alexander thought the puddle most
pleasant in his thirst, and the Prodigal son thought the swines husks m^st
dainety in his hunger.

22 The bird will nurrish her brood till they can fly, so m^st parents their
children, till they be able to shifte. A good Science is far better then an
Inheritance: he that has no wealth to leave them, may do little if he teach
them not some trade to live on. Phitarch reports that Solon made a law in
Athens, that the child should not be bound to succor his father, of whom he
had received no manner of doctrine to live by.

23 The little hare has his shadow, and the simplest man his soul. Let not
the better contemn the baser. Call not the husbandman clown: for tillage is
of most antiquity, or the sheapherd d^lt: for sheepekeeping was most usual
with our auncesters. Noah was a husbandman and yet a Patriarch, David a
sheapeheard, and yet a Prince.

24 Avoid idleness as the nurse of all evil. Antonine the Emperor (...)
their (...) that there was nothing (...) then such to (...) devour the weal
public, which with their labor nothing increased it. The Romans durst never
go abroad without a badge of their occupation.

25 It is good to bear alowsayle in a high wind, in prosperity be not proud.
It is best to cast a strong ancre in a great storm, in poverty be not
impatient, it is better to live here in misery then to die without mercy.
Whatsoever you aim at, have an eye to the end: then you shall be sure, though
you live with grief, you shall die with glory, and be saved by grace.

FINIS.

