Christiana-Polemica, OR A PREPARATIVE TO WAR. Showing The lawful use
thereof. The just causes that may move thereunto. The necessity of Preparation
for it. The duties of those that wage it. Together with Diverse instructions
concerning it.

A Sermon Preached at Wooll-Church in London, before the Captains and
Gentlemen that exercise in the Artillerie-Garden upon occasion of their solemn
and general meeting. April 14. 1618.

BY Abraham Gibson, Bachelour of Divinity, and then Preacher to the Temples.
Aug. Epist. 205. ad Bonif. Pacem habere debet voluntas, bellum necessitas.

LONDON, Printed by Edw. Griffin for Jacob Bloome, at the sign of the
Greyhound in Pauls-Church-yard. 1619.

To the right honorable FRANCIS Lord VERVLAM Lord Chauncellor of England his
very singular good LORD: A. G. wishes all happiness and felicity, external,
internal, eternal.
Right honorable,
AS is the nature of war, so is the state of this dedication. No war is
held lawful, which has not a special reference to peace. And this discourse
of war has nothing in it commendable, but that it is devoted to your
Lordship, the State oracle of Counsel, and Preserver of peace. In which case I
have been more bold to make you the Patron of my endeauours, because you have
deigned already to be the Protector of my person. Not knowing to whom more
fitly I might nuncupate a Sermon of GOD and GIDEON (the two Supporters of every
Soldiers arms, the ground upon which every field is to be pitched) then to
him who represents both mediately the person of GOD, and immediately the
person of GIDEON. I humbly therefore beseech your Honor to accept it heartily
according to the model of the Offerer, not the magnitude of the Receiver,
whose Patronage I shall account the best title to it, and the comeliest cover
your countenance, and the only cum priuilegio your approbation. Which whilst
your Honor shall vouchsafe, I in the mean time shall not cease to enlarge
this little schedule by greater volumes of continual Prayers for your
Lordshippes welfare, that the LORD would please to be your Keeper on earth,
and seal you among the number of them that have the mark of the Lamb in
heaven.

Your Honors most devoted Chaplain, ABRAH: GIBSON.

TO THE WORTHY and well-deseruing Citizens of LONDON, that practice Arms in
the Artillery Garden.
GENTLEMEN,
THis short Sermon heretofore preached before you, finding better acceptance
then either it merited or I expected, I was importuned by diverse of you to
commit it to the Press. Which though I withstood stiffly at the first, yet now
at length upon these late rumors of wars I have with an unwilling
willingness yielded to your suit, not doubting but it will have the same
effect of encouragement in others when they read it, as it had in many of you
when you heard it. For this is one advantage which writing has above
preaching, that the benefit thereof is more diffusiue, extending the fruit of
that doctrine to a whole kingdom, which when preached was impaled in the
breasts of a private auditorie; and so does more conform us in this particular
to the Apostles times, that though our charge be special, yet our labors may
be universal. And this is my only aim at this present, the furtherance of
the public good, by a discourse small in it self as a drop of water or a
spark of fire, yet such as by Gods blessing may grow to a pleasant fountain
to satisfy the souls of the thirsty, and increase to a pillar of fire to
enlighten those that sit in darkness: water, to cool the courages of our
Country hotspurs that will fight in no cause but a bad; and fire to inflame
the hearts of all trusty subjects that they do fight in no cause but a good,
to wit (as Tullie said, aut pro fide, aut pro salute) for the peace of Sion, or
prosperity of Jerusalem; for the quiet of the Church, or defense of the Common
wealth. Ye see how these times make good our blessed Saviors prediction, that
we should hear of wars and rumors of wars: Matthew. 24. 6.
I pray God we may only hear the rumor of them, and not feel the smart.
Howsoever, let us not be troubled or fear, seeing we have both a gracious God
to fight for us, and a princely Gideon to lead us. Let every man gird his
sword upon his thigh fast fixing his heart upon God, and his eyes upon Gideon,
our hope in the name of the Lord, and our prayers for the safety of our King,
beseeching God who is the King of Kings, that after a full reign on earth, he
would translate him to the kingdom of kingdoms in heaven. Amen.

Yours in all Christian duties and services, A. G.

Christiana-Polemica OR A PREPARATIVE to War.
IVDG. 7. 18. For the Lord, and for Gideon.
THe lawful use of War amongst Christians (howsoever the Anabaptists deny
it, thus sowing the seeds of discord under a pretense of peace, and stirring
up war in the Church, whilst they would exclude it out of the Commonwealth)
though it had no Political reasons to back it, yet wants it not arguments
both Physical and Theological, fetched both from the light of Nature which
dictates so much, and from the authority of Scripture, which warrants and
allows so much.

For Nature. The necessary use of war appears,
Indeed created Nature abhors nothing more then discord and dissension. 1.
By nature.
According to her prime perfection there had been no iarres, either in a man's
self, or with other things.

Not in a man's self; the Elements and Humors had lien at peace in our bodies,
the Iraseible and Epithumeticall faculties had bowed at the beck of reason in
our souls: Nor with other things; the creatures had all been subject to man's
dominon, there had been no litigious Pronounes (no Meum and Tuum) to set us by
the ears together. The original of war is from original sin.
So then the original of discord is from original sin; war it is a branch
of that accursed tree: had there been no fall of man, sure no falling out
amongst men; our nakedness as it had needed no garments to cover it, so nor no
weapons to defend it. And therefore for corrupted Nature, war is a necessary
concomitant of her condition. It must needs be that strifes should arise
amongst men, and by consequence wars to decide those strifes, when law and
equity cannot take place. That as it was with the tongues at the confusion;
Genes. 11. 7.
they had an ill beginning, but an useful propagation: So is it with war in
this state of corruption. It is (...), a necessary evil, adeo nec cum illo nec
sine illo, we can live neither with it, nor without it. Because it is the
destroier of nature in indiuiduo, but the defender of it in catholico: the
daughter of justice as well as peace, Genesis 29. 17.
though Leah like it have a harder favor and a more waterish eye, Genesis 25 25.
more red and rough-handed with Esau. That howsoever naturally (Simile generat
simile) like begets like, yet Politically we see eftsoons one contrary to
beget another, (...). War, it is as the sister, so the parent of peace, and
yet what so opposed to peace as war? a good end of a bad medium, and an
happy daughter of a disastrous mother. Repugnant indeed to the foecunditie of
nature as an enemy to her numerositie, but consonant to the prescript of
nature, as a preserver of her propriety; the causa sine qua non, and final
arbitratour of all general important controversies.

Thus for Nature. 2. By Scripture.
Now for Scripture, we have God himself commanding it, Joel 3. 9.
Joel 3. 9. the Angel of the Lord cursing the neglect of it, Judge. 5. 23.
Judge. 5. 23. Quibus propriu^ stipendium sufficere debere praecepit, militare
vtique non prohibuit. August. epist. 5. ad Marcellinum.
John Baptist directing soulders in it, Luke 3. 14.
as a lawful calling, Luke 3. 14. And lastly the examples of Gods Saints
practicing it, as Abraham, Moses, Joshua, and so many others, that the time
would be too short to recount them, and withal to tell of Barak, and of
Sampson, of Iephthah also and of David: we need go no further then Gideon
here in the Text, whom God elected by the ministry of an Angel to destroy
the Host of Midian, confirming his courage by diversity of signs, and
directing his course by a most famous stratageme, Gideons war accompanied
with stratagems.
whereof there are five most notable parts.

First, 1. In reducing the 32000. to 300. verse 6.
that he should reduce the two and thirty thousand to three hundred,
(Trecenti, sed viri, sed Lacones) Who so is fearful and afraid, let him
return, verse 3. And this we read to be the policy of Epaminondas, when he
saw many of his Army faint-hearted, he caused to be proclaimed, (...):
Whosoever would feign be gone, let him straight be packing. Likewise of
Iphicrates, who to rid his Army of whiteliuered Soldiers, he made the Crier
proclaim, (...): If any man have left his heart behind him, let him return.
Lastly of Chabrias, who commanded his Soldiers (...): if they were not well at
ease, to put off their armor.

Secondly, In taking the advantage of be night.
that he should take the advantage of the night, verse 9. for as Aurora Musis,
so Nox Martis amica: any stratageme will take best in the night, which is the
fittest time to plot, and the best curtain to conceal: (...), says the
Greek proverb.

In giving eue^y man a lamp.
Thirdly, that he should give them every man a Lamp, verse 16. And this policy
likewise Iphicrates that excellent Captain used against the Barbarians: he
made his horsemen every one to take ardentem facem, a burning lamp in their
hands, at the unaccustomed sight whereof the Barbarians horses fled back And
the like trick it was that Hannibal put upon Fabius Maximus.

4. In putting a Trumpet into every man's hand.
Fourthly, every man with his Trumpet in his hand, as it is in the same verse.
And this project Mnasippidas is said to have used, when having but a small
company of Soldiers, he made his light horsemen in the dark ride about the
enemies, every one with a Trumpet in his hand, the sound whereof bred in the
enemies a supposall of a huge multitude.

5. In the use this watchword For the Lord and for Gideon
Fifthly and lastly, that he should use this famous watchword in my text, For
the Lord and for Gideon. You know what was wrote in Constantines Ensign,
(...), in this sign shall ye overcome. And Attalus when he fought with the
French had this poesy, (...), the Kings victory. And here in my Text you have
both these included: both in whom we should overcome, that is, the Lord, in hoc
signo vinces; and under whom we should overcome, and that is Gideon; (...)):
both from whom victory comes, and for whom it is got, God and the King, For
the Lord and for Gideon.

So that you see the text it is Theandricall; The contents of the Text.
it has as it were two natures; it consists as it were of God and Man, God
and the King.
Deus and Rex: He that is God essentially, and he that is called God
metaphorically, Psalm. 82. 6.
God and his Viceroy, the Lord and Gideon.

Which if you examine by Analysis, The two ways for a Warrior to walk in.
it sets down, first the two ways which every Soldier must walk in unto the
battle: 1. Via sacra.
via sacra, the Ecclesiastical way, he must fight for God and holy Church: ^.
Via regia.
via regia, the Political way, he must fight for the King and his Country.
The persons upon whom the suc^esse of wars depends.
Secondly the Persons upon whom the success of wars depends, God and Gideon:
God as Captain, Gideon as Lieutenant: God as the Efficient, Gideon as the
instrument, and so we may learn hereby to give God what belongs unto God,
Matthew. 22. 21.
and to give Caesar what belongs unto Caesar: thus harmonically joining
together religion and policy, Church and Commonwealth, God and the King. For
the Lord and for Gideon.

There are some translations that read it, the sword of the Lord and of
Gideon: but because the particle Sword is not in the original, I rather follow
those which read it thus, For the Lord and for Gideon.

Two things to be handled.
In the words observe two things. First the parts of the distribution; both for
God and for Gideon. Secondly the order of the parts. First for God, and then
for Gideon. 1. The parts o^ the distributio^
First of the first, the parts of the distribution, where the first clause is,
For the Lord.

That war is not warrantable, The first clau^^ For the Lord
which is not grounded on a just cause. For as it is not the death but the
cause that makes a Martyr, non simpliciter mori, sed pro Christo mori: so it
is not the fight, It is not the figh^ but the cause that makes a Soldier.
but the cause that makes a Soldier, non simpliciter pugnare, sed pro Domino
pugnare. If a war be begun without cause, it shall end without comfort: for
God is an impartial spectator of all these actions, August. de c^^ Dei li. 17.
ca. 1
and partem quam inspicit iustam, ibi dat palmam, says Augustine. So then a
Soldier may not fight, as a Sophister may dispute, in vtramque partem, pro and
contra, his limits are not so large as those of the Logicians, de omni themate:
Nay he is absolutely confined to aequum and iustum, licitum and honestum: it is
equitis that makes a good cause, and a good cause that makes a good Soldier.

Now what better cause can there be, ^o better cause ^^en the cause of ^^rd.
then that which concerns the Lord, who himself is prima causa, the first
mouer, and sole doner of whatsoever we have? ^^m. 11. 36.
For of him, and through him, and for him are all things. Let us therefore
return the honor of all to him. Of our selves we have nothing, we are not so
much as our own men; our eyes, and Psalm. 12 4.
tongues, and arms, and legs, they are not our own; we have no true title
either to body or soul. Wherefore let us glorify God both in our bodies and
souls, Cor. 6. 20.
for they are Gods. There is no peace you know to the peace of God, nor no
war to that which is for God. Hence (bella Iudaeorum, bella Dei) the wars
of the Jews were called the wars of God, vel quia pro ipso, vel quia ab
ipso: either be cause God fought for them, or because they fought for God. God
is every w^^^^ the cause of war.
For God, he has the relation of every causalitie in this kind peculiar and
proper to him. 1. The efficien^ cause.
He is the efficient cause thereof, By me Kings reign, and Princes bear
rule: Prou 8. 15.
the great Centurion, that says to every creature, Matthew. 8. 9.
Go and he goes, Come and he comes, Fight and he fights. He is the
formal and exemplary cause thereof: 2. The formal cause.
He teaches my hands to war and my fingers to fight, Psalm. 144. 1.
says David, Psalm. 18. 39.
He girdeth me with strength unto the battle, and subdueth mine enemies under
me. He is the isntrumental cause: 3. The isntrumental cause.
my rock, and my Fortress, says David in another place, Psalm. 18. 1.
my shield and strong tower, and a buckler to all them that trust in him. And
therefore it stands with good reason, 4. The final cause.
that he should be the final cause too, Prou. 18. 10.
in whose name all battles must be begun, Psalm. 115. 1.
and to whose glory they must be devoted.

And hence it was that the Jews never went out to war, unless they first
offered sacrifice: and we in our Baptism do take Sacramentum militare, ^
Baptism we ^^ceiue our presse^oney to become ^hrists soldiers.
an earnest penny, or pressemoney, to become Christ's Soldiers. And to this end
we wear his colors, and are attired in his liuerie, with a solemnevow to
fight for him, and that not only in the spiritual warfare, where we put on
the armor of God, but even in the corporeal also, where we put on armor for
God

Not that God stands in need of any help of man: Not that God ^eedeth it.
he requires no Champion, he can vindicate his own cause without us, nay
against us, but because the law of subordination and retaliation does exact so
much. ^ut our duty re^uireth it.
We are his vassals under him, Mal. 1. 6.
to whom we own suit and service; we are children begotten and created by him,
to whom we owe fear and reverence: and therefore must think our selves
obliged in a double bond to defend his cause, who does himself plead ours; to
die in his quarrel, Acts 17. 28.
by whose providence we live: whose gracious goodness it is to turn that to
a blessing, Romans 8. 28.
which at first was a curse; Genesis 2. 17.
so sweetning death which is a punishment, as to cause us to die for his name;
so sweetning life which is a warfare, Job. 7. 1.
as to cause us to fight for his sake. In which quarrel though a man die in
war, Luke 1. 29.
yet does he also depart in peace: in conflict with men, but in peace with God,
because he puts on as a military habit, so a peaceable mind. Good
Christians go to war (says Bernard) both meekely and courageously: Very
profe^^ Israelitae pro^^cedunt ad be^^ pacific etc.
and agnis mitiores, and Leonibus fortiores: innocent as Doves because they
imitate Christ, Ber. ser. ad m^ Tem. cap. 4.
and bold as Lions because they fight for Christ.

And to this end the Christians in their ensigns, For this cause t^^
Christians bea^^ the Cross in their ensigns.
they bear the Cross to show they fight in Christ's behalf. And hitherto
allude all your ancient orders of Knighthood, as Knights Hospitallers and
Templers: Knights of S. John of Jerusalem, and S. James of Compostella; and
Knights of the holy Ghost, which Henry the third of France instituted: whose
ensign was the Dove in the midst of a Cross; intimating that they were not to
fight, but either in Gods cause implied by the Cross, or in a just and
innocent cause signified by the Dove.

The Pope, The cruelty and ^mpiety of the Pope of Rome.
he would feign be accounted Master of this order. For as though he were
elected Gods immediate Vicegerent above Caesar, and Gideon, and all Princes:
he takes upon him to institute wars at his pleasure; against Infidells and
those whom he calls Heretics, or whosoever dare but mutter at his usurped
authority. ^mulata san^itas.
And this he calls by the name of a Croysadoe or holy war, the mark
whereof is a red scarf, which the Soldiers wear in their Troops. Such a
war Pope Innocent decreed against the Valdenses; and Pope Martin the fourth
against Peter King of Arragon. And it is a miserable thing to consider how many
hundred thousands of men have bin consumed throughout all Christendom by those
voyages into the holy Land at the Popes appointment. The zeal of this journey
has eaten up Christians and enlarged the Popes territory, who took this
opportunity to send Emperors and Kings afar of, that he might wrong them at
home without control. What? This is not to fight for Christ.
Is this to fight for Christ? to spill the blood of Christians as it were in a
humor for his own gain? Is this to be called a holy war? Neither can it be
called a holy War.
Sure, as improperly as he a holy Bishop, or that a holy action, whereby he
has diverse times given away the Kingdoms of England, France, Sicily, Naples,
and the rest to those that could get them: or Palestine the holy Land, which is
rather to be accounted an accursed Land (as the Jews were sometime Gods
people, but now are an accursed people) a Land of it self not worth the
recovery were it not for the rescue of some Christians there in thraldom, and
for the expelling the Turk out of the Christian confines. Yea and all such
proiects as these, they were never derived from heaven but hatched in hell.
This is not to be Gods Vicar but Satan's Liefetenant: not Successor to Peter,
but Predecessor to damnation. This is to fight against God and man, against
the Lord and against Gideon, not to cry with the people here, For the Lord and
for Gideon. Christians must not war without a calling from God.


But for us (Beloved) let us be sure as in all our actions, so especially in
war cases to take God along with us. For as there is no Captain to be
compared to the guidance of his Spirit, no policy to his providence, no aides
nor allies to his assistance, so on the contrary no sword wounds so deep as
his desertion, no Foe like his frown, Romans 8. 32.
no danger like his displeasure. As if he be with thee no man can be properly
against thee because all things work together for the best of those that are
his: Romans 8. 28.
So if he be not with thee all men may be said to be against thee, because all
creatures bow at his beck, Esai. 10. 5.
and become as rods of his indignation to take vengeance on those that do
evil.

You know how in the old Testament they still asked counsel of the Lord, Judge.
20. 27.
before they went up to fight against any people: 2. Sam. 5. 19.
and the Heathen themselves used in like manner to ask advice at their
Oracles: so let us be sure that we have the Lords call and the Lords allowance.
Otherwise we shall have the same success that the Israelites had, when they
fought against the Amalakites contrary to the Lords will. Numb. 14. 45*
Numb. 14.

Wherefore as Barak said to Deborah Judge. 4 8. Judge. 4. 8.
If thou will go with me, then I will go; but if thou will not go with me,
then I will not go; so must we to God. Let his cause awaken us, let his
presence prepare us, let his glory provoke us, let his Spirit possess us, let
his name go before us, and then no enemy can annoy us. Stand we for the Lord,
and the Lord will stand for us. If we fight with Gideon for the Lord, the Lord
will fight with us for Gideon. Which is the second part of the first general
branch. The second clause. For Gideon.
As they cry for the Lord, so also for Gideon.

Gideon is added for further encouragement to them, Added for encouragement to
them, and terror to the enemy.
and further terror to their enemies. For we daily read how that the very name
of some valiant Captains, Caesar, Alexander, and the like have daunted the
enemies without striking a blow. That as it is said of the swords of Hazaell, ^
King. 19. 17.
Iehu, and Elisha, 1. King. 19. 17. Him that escapes the sword of Hazaell
shall Iehu slay: and him, that escapes from the sword of Iehu shall Elisha
slay: So here of God and Gideon, He that will not be affrighted at the name of
God, why yet that man shall tremble at the name of Gideon, though he but Gods
Liefetenant.

Now Gideon has a twofold consideration. First, Gideon a mean man. Secondly,
Gideon a single man.

First, Gideon a ^eane man.
Gideon a mean man, his Family by his own confession was poor, Judge. 6. 15.
in Manasseh, and he the least in his fathers house as it is in the former
chapter.

He was not trained up in feats of arms, Not trained up in arms.
or facts of chivalry; more skillful in tilling the ground then pitching a
field; in handling a flaile then tossing a pike: yet when God had made him
their Prince, appointed him their Captain, presently they follow his
direction, and forgetting all sinister respects they cry out, Psalm. 115. 1.
for Gideon, for Gideon, Non nobis Domine, non nobis, sed nomini tuo, and seruo
tuo: not for our selves, our wives, our children, or our estates, but for
Gideon.

A good Captain is aequipollent to the whole Army. A good Captain is
aequipollent to the whole army*
Plus in Duce repones quam in exercitu, says Probus of Epaminondas. Me vero
Ducem tuum pro quot nauibus aestimas, says Demetrius in Plutarch: Whence it
was said, better have an army of Stagges and a Lion Captain, then an Army of
Lions and a Stagge the Leader. The hazard of all stands in the hazard of the
Prince, In vnius salute salus omnium: in Imperatore vniuersorum periculum.
or Captain. And therefore neglecting both themselves and the meanness of his
beginning; they cry for Gideon for Gideon.

To teach us, The weakness of the means not to be regarded when we have Gods
warrant.
when we have Gods warrant not to regard the weakness of the means, the
weakness of God being stronger then men, 1 Cor. 1. 25. 26.
1. Cor. 1. for though Gideon was not a trained Soldier, yet the Angel of the
Lord calls him a valiant man because the Lord was with him. The Lord is with
thee thou valiant man. Judge. 6. 12.
Judge. 6. 12. As Christ cured, so God saves without means, nay against
means. Howsoever therefore the instrument seem weak which God sets over
us, yet we must not intertaine distrust and diffidence, but join the respect
of our Governors with our repose in God. For the Lord and for Gideon. 2.
Gideon a single-man.


Secondly for Gideon a single man, and this confirms that Polemicall rule,
Better in wa^re to have one General then many.
In bello magis expedit Principatus Monarchicus quam Aristocraticus; better in
war to have one General then many; one singular then many good. (...), many
Captains lost the City. Whence the Romans in time of war did always choose
them a Dictator, which was above their Consuls: Malo vnum Zopyru^, quam centum
Babilonios capere.
and Scipio in Iustine, I had rather (says he) take one Zopyrus then a hundred
Babilonians. A dangerous thing to have Corriuals in war, as well as in
loue-matters, because that envy and emulation will nourish discord and
faction. But I ^resse not this point, because it is more Polemicall then
Theological, ^^tter to be discoursed in Gideons ^ent, then in Moses chair.

Only for our instruction you ^ee, Note 1. the people content with the
Captain whom God set over them.
the people here are content with the Captain, whom God set over them, they
labor not to set up any Anti-captaine. They dispute ^ot his inexperience or
insufficien^ie, as did Nabal to David, 1 Samuel 25. 10.
1. Sam. 25. Who is David, or who is the son ^f Iesse? what portion have we
in Gideon, or what inheritance in the son of Ioash? but in a holy submission
whatsoever he commanded them, that they put in practice, for the Lord and for
Gideon. Where God is honored, there Gideon will be obeyed.
For certainly where God is honored there Gideon will be obeyed: where the
fear of God is, there will be reverence of the Magistrate. There is no
Parenthesis betwixt God and Caesar in Christ's speech: no medium twixt the Lord
and Gideon in the people cry. For the Lord and for Gideon.

And from these two persons jointly arises a necessary condition requisite to
every war; It is requisite that every war be grounded either on religion to
God, or loyalty to the Magistrate under God.
namely, that the cause be just grounds either on religion to God or loyalty
to our Prince. For it is religion that makes a man truly valiant; the
righteous are bold as a Lion. Prou. 28. 1.
If they live, they know by whom they stand. If they die, they know for whose
sake they fall. Hence it is that Thomas requires three things in the
undertaking of any war, Th: Aqu: 2. 2 2ae qu. 40. Art. 1.
Authoritas Principis, causa insta, intentio recto a lawful commission, a just
occasion, an upright intention. Otherwise to wage war, where a man is not
fully persuaded of the justness of his cause, be it just or unjust, he sins
mortallie, says the School.

Then what shall we think of all your Duellists, Against Duellists, whose
combats have no just ground or warrant.
who being private persons upon every triuiall occasion will be pointing field:
The taking of the wall, or giving of a disgraceful word is quarrel just
enough: as though either of their honors were of more worth then both their
souls. Such men certainly know not what it is to live, and care not how they
die. If there were any fear of God, or reverence of man, any respect of life
or death, they would never give themselves over to this highest pitch of
madness. It is hard to determine in this kind of quarrels, who escapes best,
whether the party killing, or party killed.
In which it is hard for a man to determine who scapes best, he that kills or
he that is killed. For a man is pressed with an unanswerable Dilemma on both
sides. If he be killed, he hazardeth with his body his soul, because he dies
in passion and distemper. If he kill he hazardeth with his soul his body,
because he fights both against God and against Gideon. Against God, whose
image he extinguisheth, and against Gideon, Genesis 4. 10.
whose law he contemns. And therefore both the wrath of God follows him,
Leuit. 24. 17.
and the sword of Gideon ouertakes him: he must answer it both to the Lord
and to Gideon. And so much for the first thing, the parts of the distribution,
both for the Lord and for Gideon. 2. The order of the parts.


Now a word or two of the second thing, the order of the parts. First for God
and then for Gideon. First for God and then for Gideon.
And because for God therefore for Gideon, because Gideons authority is from
God. So then, for the Lord and for Gideon, that is, simply and absolutely for
God: subordinately and dependantly for Gideon: primarily for God, and
secondanlie for Gideon.

A good lesson for all Soldiers and military men: A threefold caution to
Soldiers.
to direct them both in the beginning, continuance, and end of their battles.

For the beginning we must first look to the cause of God. 1 Give not Gideons
cause the predominancie before the cause o^ God.
Give him the upper hand: give his quarrel the pre-eminence. Yet is not a
subject always to dispute whether the cause be just if his Prince command,
because he is a Minister of the law, not a Judge: Aug. lib. 21. contra
Manichaeos.
Belli susceptio penes Principem, executio penes Militem, says Augustine.

For the continuance of our fight we must take heed of relying more upon Gideon
then upon God. 2. Rely not more upon Gideon then upon God.
Take heed of trusting to the arm of flesh before the outstretched arm of
God. Psalm. 118. 8.
It is better to trust in the Lord, then to put confidence in Princes, says
the Princely Prophet.

And lastly in the end of the fight, 3. Ascribe not more to Gideon then to God.
take we heed of ascribing more honor to Gideon then to God. For Gideons
power is from God. Romans 13. 1.
Omne regnum sub regno est. Psalm. 82. 1.
God is King among the Gods, Reges in ipsos imperium est Iovis. For every King
is the Minister of God: Romans 13. 4.
(...), and though they be Gods with men, Psalm. 82. 6. 7.
yet they are but men with God, Revel. 19. 16.
who is Rex regum and Dominus dominantium, King of kings, and Lord of lords,
Revel. 19.

Hence it was that King Henry the fifth of England, The royal and religious
disposition of KING Henry the fifth.
that good and valiant Prince, after his conquest in France would not suffer
his Helmet, which was full of blows and dintes to be brought over into
England with him, nor to be welcomed home with any songs of the success, but
would have all the glory ascribed to God. Because the key of victory God
keeps in his own power: Psalm. 144. 10.
It comes neither from the east, nor from the west, Psalm. 75. 7.
nor from the north, nor from the south. Unless God hold up his hand, Gideon
cannot prevail. Not the people without Gideon, nor Gideon without God. For the
Lord, Application of the Text to the Gentlemen assembled.
and for Gideon.

And now (beloved brethren) that I have ripened my discourse and brought it as
it were to a head in it self, I come in a word to show you, how it fitteth and
suiteth this present solemnity. And therefore for you Generous Gentlemen and
Heroicke spirits, that have an exemplarie Camp in your company, and a
College of Soldiers in your society: it will serve both as a warrant for
your profession, and an acquittance against all discouragement, in that ye know
assuredly, in whose name, for what end, to whose service, you have dedicated
your selves and all your endeavors. Exhortation.


What though some go about to slander your society, To contemn a slanders
raised against them.
and discountenance your undertakings, speaking evil of all because some few
miscarrie? It will be your glory to contemn the cavil, Prou. 20. 3.
and forgive the wrong, remembering that he will never endure a blow, who cannot
concoct a word: he is not likely to overcome an enemy, who cannot vanquish
himself: he is unfit to fight for equity, that has not learned to pass by
an injury. But if there be any such disordered persons crept in among you, who
are lead with the spirit not of fortitude, but faction; not of conscience, but
of insolence; not of zeal, but ambition; (milites non tam emerti, quam male
meriti) expel them your lists, ^o expel all fa^tious spirits from among them.
let them not march under your colors, ^ Thessalonians. 3. 6.
that so you may stop the mouths of your opposers, and open the hearts of men
in place and government to advance your intendments, both with countenance and
maintenance, if need so require.

In which duty if they shall be backward, we may well account them as base
and ignoble Caitiffes, neither good servants of God, nor trusty subjects of
our King, seeing neither in conscience to the one, nor allegiance to the other,
they will give due respect, nor lend assistance to you, who by your continual
practice (both for Gods sake and for Gideons sake) do preserve intemerate that
honorable form of military discipline, which in times of peace uses to grow
obsolete and out of use.

Howsoever, To go on with an undaunted spirit in that honorable exercise.
go ye on happily in your courses, your memory shall survive in a second age,
and your names shall be had in everlasting remembrance, those that are yet
unborn shall bless you, and bless God for you. Yet withal be informed that
this your daily exercise is but a medium to a further end, a preparation to a
greater performance. You do but now spend your pains and your purses: To
prepare for worse, and harder times.
time may require your persons. You now use rather (fulgentibus armis quam
fortibus) weapons defensive then offensive, and fight gloriously without an
enemy: Time may make trial of your courage in hotter skirmishes, and more
bloody opposition.

Indeed for the present it may be said of us, 1. King 4. 25.
as of Israel and Judah, 1. Kings 4. every man dwells safely under his own
vine, and under his own figtree, there is no leading into captivity, Psalm.
144 14.
no complaining in our streets, Psalm. 122. 7.
but peace within our walls, and prosperity within our palaces. And long may
it be continued to us, to the glory of God, and quiet of our Nation. We
cannot promise to our selves perpetual peace.
But we cannot promise to our selves any perpetuity of this felicity; the
hideousness of our sins may give us good cause to expect a change. Therefore
it is your parts to reserve your selves chiefly for worse times, whenever God
shall send them; lest you be thought like those doubtful companions, whom
Diogenes is said to affect in Laertius, (...). etc.
that would still be about to marry, and yet did not marry; and that would
still be about to rule, and yet did not rule. (I may add) (...), that would
still be about to fight, and yet did not fight.

Wherefore I say no more but as Saul to David, 1. Sam. 18. 17.
1. Sam. 18. Be valiant for your King, and fight the Lords battles: And as Ioab
to the people, 1. Sam. 10. 12.
2. Sam. 10. Be of good courage and play the men for the people and for the
cities of your God.

In the mean time all true Subjects will pray to the God of peace to gird you
with strength unto the battle, Psalm. 18. 39.
to teach your hands to war and your fingers to fight, Psalm. 144. 1.
that so being well appointed, Ephesians. 6. 11.
both with the spiritual armor of a Christian, and the corporeal armor of a
Soldier (intus fide, Bern. ser. ad mil. tem. cap. 4.
foris ferro muniti) you may be able both to defend your selves against the
siege of Satan, and your Country against all foreign invasions, and I doubt
not but all true-hearted Subjects will say Amen.

Wherefore we humbly beseech thee O Lord God of Hosts, Psalm. 80. 14.
look down from heaven, and behold and visit this vine, and the vineyard
which thy right hand has planted amongst us. Let not the Bore out of the wood
destroy it, nor the wild Beasts of the field eat it up, but forgive the crying
sins of the same, remove thy judgments that hang over us, Luke 19. 42.
and teach us to know the things which belong unto our peace. And because there
is none other that fights for us but only thou O God, plead our cause (O
Lord) with them that strive with us; and fight against them that fight against
us. And thou that art a man of war, whose name is Ichonah, (...)
oh teach our hands to war and out fingers to fight, ^sal. 144. ^.
that the Heathen may never come into thine inheritance, ^sal. 79. 1.
and make this our Jerusalem an heap of stones, but that thou may still
bless us with peace within our walls and prosperity within our palaces,
^sal. 122. 7.
while the Sun and the Moon endures. These things we beg at thy hands in
the name of thy beloved Son and our blessed Savior, to whom with thee and
the holy Spirit be ascribed all praise, honor, and glory, now and for
evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

