A Godly Inuectiue in the defense of the Gospel, against such as murmr and
work what they can that the Bible should not have free passage, very
necessary to be red of every faithful Christian.

The abundaunte grace of the holy ghost may daily provoke, tempt and stere up
the heart of our most noble and virtuous King EDWARD the.VI. king of
England, France and Irelande. Defendour of the Faith, and in earth the supreme
head of the Churches of England and Ireland: earnestly to promote the Gospel
of Christ, to the mayntenaunce of true religion and virtue.
WHEN I had considered and weighed often with my self that the lest part of
amitee faithful love and duty, which every man owes toward his native
country. (My most gracious and drad sovereign lord) is not showed in the
gentle admonyshyng his country men of such faults, perilles, and dangers,
which either be eminent or else plainly apparent: yea, and especially to
attempt this thing when he sees that there is given some great and plentiful
occasion. Even now therefore I thought it good to set forth this Inuectiue in
the defense of Gods holy word, against all cou^terfaited Christians wilfully
minded, which stubburnely resist the promoting of Christ's blessed Testament.

I trust well therefore that your highness especially, and all your nobilitee,
with other your true and faythefull subjects, that have earnest hearts to
promote Gods glory, and to seek for his heavenly kingdom, will take in good
part this my enterprice. Wherein although there want fine handling, liuelye
colors, the conueighance of Rhethoricke, and also quickness of Wit: yet for all that, there has wanted no jot of good will, for though I may most justly
confess, I give place unto all men in good learning, yet I may truly say, I
am inferior unto few in good affection toward the same. Therefore after this
my rude and base style of Inueiynge, I have here set forth the mind and
pleasure of GOD, things very commodiouse and fruitful for the weal of this
noble realm, profitable to avoid contencion and to set amongst us a lovely
society of living. Now in as much as I entreat of causes so necessary (most
noble and victoriouse King) I conceive no small hope, that no man if godly
exhortacio^ may have place in his heart, will refuse accordingly to note and
print the same most firmly in mind: especially such as the holy Prophet
speaks against, they have eyes and cannot see, they have ears and hear not,
for they shall well and easilye perceive that stubburnnesse of mind, hardness of
heart, the contempt of Gods holy word, the forgetfulness of the great
benefits and Godly goodness of GOD, to be things most grievously condemned
in holy Scripture. Again those that be already bent and kendeled in affection
to attain the knowledge and due obedience that apperteine to Christ's holy
will and Testament, shall perceive manifestly them selfs to know the sum
and effect of their creacion. Whereof we should al be fully taught, and often
admonished also that we are not borne to spend our time in pastime and vanities
of this miserable world: but to be busied in all seriouse and Godly matters,
chefely desiryng to be instructed in Gods holy religion, to live innocently,
yea and to excel in all kind of virtues. For who so desires not to live well
(as Diogenes writes) lives vainly. That is to be called a vain life, when
men rather show them selfs beasts mortal, then men Immortal, regardyng
altogether the body that vile and beastely part of man. But now (the
pamperyng of it laid apart) if we would considre the great and exuberant glory
of the spirit or solle of man: if we would weigh what strength power and virtue
remain in the mind, we would be sone persuaded to follow Godly things and
flee the wicked. But more it is pity, such is the miserable misery of the
world in these days, that according unto the saying of the holy Prophet: Woe
is me, al is full of sinners, which offend of purpose and malice. Esaie
the.xxiiii. These wilful offenders (my sovereign Lord) be such as
maliciously spurn against the lively word of GOD, and envy at your graces
pore subjects enbracing and readyng the same: using subtle and wicked
persuasions to discorage men from the readyng thereof, which thing forsooth both
requires correction and spedye confutacion for the noryshmente of the young
and tender knowledge that GOD has sent amongst us. Undoubtedly the
maliciouse and cankered stomachs are so plain and plentiful in diverse places
against the word of God, that no tongue can be still, ne yet heart permit with a
dissemblyng countenance to wink at the great ignorance and subtle
co^ueighaunce, especially of such as have taken on them to be the light of
the world and guides over the simple to conducte them to the true word of
GOD. This thing is so euydent, that every honest heart would sorrow to see
it, and take peine to amend it, and we ought to be earnest in this. For who
so regards the will of GOD, will openly defend the truth of his Gospel, and
labor all that he can to win men's hearts to it. Yea, and to attempt this
thing, the virtue of Gods word gives wonderful strength and boldenes.

Even now in consideracion of this. I as one hyghly reioysyng to see the
glory of GOD so lively set furthe amongst us, but sorowyng again in my
heart to behold the supersticyouse and ignorant sort so little amended,
thought it full time to set forth this Inuectiue, trusting that after the
readyng of it, such as have wit, reason and judgment, will remember them
selfs, arise and most reverently mete the truth face to face, and be no longer
disceiued with counterfaited, coulered, and cloked things, but from hens
forth ioyeouslye take in their hands the holy Bible, and esteem it as the
most divine and Godly thing that ever came amongst us: yea and labor with
hand and foot vsyng sobre and catholic exhortacions to allure me^ unto it.
This should be a mean to set for ever amongst us a public quietness, true
love, sure and faithful frendshyppe. By this mean forsooth we should banyshe
Ypocrisie and ignorance, which be ever brawlyng and stand in contencion for
every cold Ceremony and tryfelyng tradicion. For trewely where Ignorance,
Disdain, the contempt of Gods word gooe at their liberty, there must
needs arise contencion, brawlyng, sedicion, and controversy in Opinions. Yea
where an obediente and humble heart wants toward the truth, there for every
light occasion, thus men contend. Thou art an Heretic says one, thou art a
Papist says an other, by this forsooth the word of GOD is sore endomaged, by
this mean Godly and brotherlye exhortacion is put out of place, yea by this
mean Satan works his will and pleasure and hardens men's hearts toward
the shining light to their own condempnacion and utter confusion. Now therefore
(my dear sovereign) who would not lament? and for very pity tender the poor
simple people ready to perish or rather thus perishing for lack of true
erudicion, and brought into such amassed dulnes through the contrariety of
preachers, that they know not well whom to trust. It is therefore necessary to
set truth forward, and to exhort all men to cleave fast unto the word of
GOD, yea, and to admonish them not to contend for small tryfles and light
occasions: but to use sobre and familier communicacion in matters of our
religion, for if they pondre well how GOD abhors contencion and discord,
they will be sore ashamed to enter into it.

And that it so long contineweth amongst us, (most prestant prince) many are
much to be reproved, especially such as be profound in eloquence, expert in
tongues and great in science, for they shine and show gloriouse to the world
and do nothing, but bear lumpyshe hearts toward the truth.

They might compass things to avoyde all contencion, and find mean to frame us
al to be of one mind in the word of God. And in thus dooyng they should
appease the Ire of GOD, and work most strongely in the defense of this noble
realm. For this cannot be denied, that weal public is made sure and
perpetual, where the word of GOD is thanckfully received, and the King
faythefully obeyed of his loving subjects. This thing cannot come to pass
(most redoubted King) till there be a restraint against such as use outrageous
words against the readers of the Bible, nor till the hearts of your graces
subjects be made more agreeable unto the truth, no nor til the Clergy be
brought also in such love and acquaintance with the holy Bible, that they will
show them selfs as ready to sow as they be now to reap, and forgeat to trust
so much as they do to the sails of their prosperity and worldly dignity:
reme^bryng this that they are not to be esteemed as head rulers of the world, but
as ministers appointed to dispose those things that they ar charged withal,
not the offices of men but of GOD. This office wherewith they are so
streightely charged is to feed the people with the word of God, wherefore
(most gracious King) now to conclude. Although I am not so able as willing to
put men in memory of their duties in these things, and to refourme their
folysh and wicked contencion, yet I trust your grace will so gently considre
my pretense, that this rude Inuectiue may find favor in your graces sight to
gooe forth, to the encourageme^t of al your graces loving subjects unto the
word of GOD. Unto who^ most humbly with heart and mind we ought to pray, both
that your highness may spedely follow virtuous king Joshua, which most
gently exhorted his people, willing them to be exceadyng diligente to take
beede unto all things that were written in the law of the LORD, making also
hearty request unto them to cleave fast unto the Lord their GOD, and also
that all the nobles and commons of this your realm may answer your grace
again, (as the people did Joshua) God forbid but that we should serve the
Lord our GOD. The Lord will we serve and his voice will we obey, that is the
holy Bible and Christ's blessed Testament. If God give them grace thus to do,
then this your graces noble realm shall always be most strongly warded and
defended, and the Lord (according to his promise) shall give your highness
prosperous success in all your affairs, whose merciful hand may always
defend your noble estate.

Your Majesty's faithful and humble servant Philippe Gerrard yeoman of the
Chamber unto your grace.

To the reader
I Thought it requisite (most gentle reader) to admonish the of two things:
the one is, that in alledgyng S. Paul I follow the Paraphrasis of Erasmus that
famus and renoumed clarke, for he follows the judgment of the doctors and
declares things at full, yet swarueth he not from the text. The other is,
where as I was once determined to have inueighed very vehemently with diverse
quick sentences and thonderyng places of holy scripture, I have gone from my
purpose in that behalf as one some thing abashed to write and put to light
things that I might justly have stand unto: yea, and very loath that any man
should report, that either in this or that I have dismeasured, my pen.
Wherefore (good reader) I desire the to take in good part this lame and base
Inuectiue, I should rather have said rude and simple exhortacion. And although
it be not framed according to thine expectacion, hold the content: My traueile
in this, is only to win men. For I have heard say, that sharpnes in writing
has been so noisome to some, that they have straight cast al underfoot and
looked no further, which never syns could bide any handelyng ne yet co^fourme
the^ selfs to any kind of truth or things justly spoken, whose stubburne and
wylfull intentes I trust will be remedied, that I shall not need to set forth
the vehement Inuectiue which I have in a redines to come forth, if I perceive
hereafter just occasion to be given. Thus fare well.

THE INVECTIVE.
How faithful hertes we owe unto GOD for his evident tokens of love toward
us most vile and miserable sinners S. Paul shows in the.v. to the Romans.
(Christ says he) willyngly for our sakes suffered death and puts away our
offenses with his blud His benignite and gentleness here toward us was exceadyng
great, if we diligently note and po^dre, that he the creator of all things,
would die for us most sinful creatures: That he innocent, fauteles, and most
pure, would suffer such Passion to remedy and healpe our wickedness: yea and
brefely, that the God Immortal would suffer most cruel and greuouse
tourmentes for the love of men mortal. O hard hearted that will not be
thankful for this great gentleness and high benignity, calling to memory the
wonderful Iuell and treasure of his death? For true Innocence and perfect
salvation (says saint Paul) be given freely by it, the.v. to the Galathians.

O faithful Christians, was not this a preciouse reward? for this most high and
heavenly gift our duty is tendrely again with heart and mind to love him:
by his Godly merits and love toward us, we should be quickly provoked, for
through his death we be all dedicated unto him and sanctified in his most
holy and preciouse blud, let us therefore obey unto him. This obedience forsooth
is chefely required at our hands in following of his doctrine, for it is not
enough (as witnesses S. Paul) to be dipped in water, neither to profess
Christ, except all our hole life answer unto his doctrine: from which not to
swerve one jot we have professed in Baptime and have made there an earneste
promise to be of this band and holy religion, yea and always to humble our
selfs unto his heavenly doctrine. Even now therefore, for the perfourmance of
these things, let us offer a mete and worthy oblacio^, for this our Godly
profession, that is a living sacrifice pure and holy, pleasant and acceptable
before God, a reasonable sacrifice, which is the sacrifice of the mind: For
God is a sprite and his favor is gotten by the gifts of the sprite the.xii.
to the Roma. The Evangelist witnesses also that Christ is fully satisfied
with a faithful heart, saying, give me thine heart and I ask no more. Now
truly no man gives his heart unto God, but he that forsakes the pleasure,
po^pe and vanities of this vile world and with a sincere mind bent only on
heavenly wisdom seeks to know the scriptures of Christ: for Godly wisdom
(as says S. Paul) deliteth in Godly and simple minds: and therefore none of
the princes of this world have atteigned it: Neither Pilate, neither Annas nor
Cayphas, nor the Pharisees ne yet the deuelles although they were learned in the
knowledge of worldly things, pufte up and proud because they knew the law,
neither proud princes deserved to know this, no nor yet the curiouse and haute
Phylosophiers. The.ii Corinthi. This Heavenly wisdo^e is the Gospel of Christ,
which brings quick and spedy salvation, as thou may read in the.x. to the
Romans: by the strength and power of it al things have their being both in
heaven and earth. This heavenly wisdom which is the very will and testament of
our savior Christ, puts power, efficacy, and virtue, in the holy
sacraments. By this heavenly wisdom which is the mystical, holy and
gloriouse scriptures of Christ our solles live and have their spiritual
norishmente. Yea, and in receuyng this heavenly wisdom, which is the blessed
word of God, we receive the body of Christ: here does appear by these
words an excedyng grace and virtue of the lively word of God. Therefore
whosoever will consider the effects thereof and way with himself the pith thy
puinctes of our christian religion, desiryng to find favor, grace, and mercy
at the hands of God, he must obediently (al supersticion, false and
intermingled doctrine and wilful ignorance utterly set a part) enbrace now
Christ's Gospel, which reconcileth all men to God, as thou shall find in
the fourth to the Galathyans: this reconciliacion love and favor he that would
not gladly have if he might, is to be thought both mad and miserable, for
it is a thing far above the benevolence of high kings and mighty princes,
it is therefore most gredily to be desired. Now truly this grace and favor al
poor men may well and easily atteigne at the hands of God, which with simple
and obedient hearts read his blessed Testament and seek forth his scriptures,
and all that be thus occupied are openly pronounced to be very acceptable in
Gods sight. According to this saying of the holy Prophet. Blessed are they
that seek forth thy testimonies and require thy law with all their hearts.
By this it does apere that it is requisite for all christen men either poor
or rich to study the holy Bible and diligentely to search forth the will and
pleasure of God. Thou can not deny but that thing is pleasant and
acceptable in the fathers sight that causes him to give his son
benedictio^: for as much as we see daily that benediction is not given but
unto such children as follow their fathers mind and pleasure? And that it is
very needful, that all men should be perfectly taught in the holy
Scriptures. Esaie the Prophet plainly declares. It is a people (says he)
without understanding and therefore he that created them shall not favor them
and he that made them shall not be merciful unto them, the xxvii of Esaie.
By these words it is easy to be judged. That who so ever is not diligente to
read the word of God, falls into his indignacion and fearful displeasure
and wandereth on ignorauntly as one void and destitute of al grace to whose
perverse mind God will show no mercy: surely this is the greatest plage and
misery that can chance unto men. Now to avoid this wicked estate, who would
not be circumspecte and willing to take in his hand the holy Testament?
Undoubtedly he that through the deuell and ignorance is so seduced that he
has it in mean estimacion, and to read it him self is neither couragyouse ne
yet of good will to have it set forth by other, is in a miserable case, Yea,
the misery of such a man no tongue can sufficiently express, and yet to see how
wickedly many nowadaies be confederate together in a Deuelyshe conspiracy
against the promotyng of it, is a thing soore to be lamented. And all that be
of this perverse and stubburne judgment, be more abominable in gods sight
then were the wicked and gross people of Geresa, which could not away with
Christ's doctrine, regarded not his coming unto them, no nor would in no wise
be acquainted with him, whose familiarity and acquaintance every christen
man ought desirousely to seek. And this is plain that there is none so good
a mean to be thoroughly acquainted with him as to be busied in his holy
scriptures, and always to have a delyghte there, following the holy Prophet,
which said unto god, thy commandments Lord, be my joy and delectacion.
This holy man beatyng always a faithful heart unto God and ever diligent to
set abroad the laws of his Lord, said unto his dear and best beloved son
Salomo^ and unto all the people. Keep and seek for the commandments of the
lord your god that you may enjoy a good land and inherit your children after
you for ever. This was Godly counsel and worthy commendacion, this counsel
should all Christen men follow and gladly learn the sincere law of Christ, for
it is spiritual and the giver of life as thou art taught in the eight to the
Romans. And in this doing we must needs prospre and go forward in all our
affairs. As it is showed in the.xv. Chapyter.ii. of the Chronycles. Believe his
Prophets and so shall ye prospere: How wonderfully I pray you did king
Iosaphat prospere because he forsook Baals ways and walked vpryghtely in
Gods commandments, obeyed the holy prophets, and utterly shoke of all the
wicked dooeynges of Israel, even for the earnest heart he had unto the
truth. God always defended him and stablyshed his kingdom in his hands, and
so has he promised unto all kings and princes, whose hearts are couragiouse
in the ways of the Lord. This noble Prince was nothing forgeatfull to call in
memory his loyal dewtie and faythefull obedyence toward GOD his creator
and gouernoure. He was the truest hearted King unto GODS word that ever was
anointed or had charge over Christ's congregation, for he was inflamed with
such zeal and faithful affection of heart to set abroad the lively word of
GOD. That he sent forth diverse of his Lords, Priests and Leuytes and
caused them to carry the book of the Law with them and commanded them to
teach the people in all the Cities of Judah. His couragiouse and Pryncely
heart, for this his dooeyng cannot have sufficient lawde and commendacion. For
this (a man may well say) O most noble Iosaphat, most woorthily by this
act thou haste gotten perpetual memory and also the Heavenly kingdom, where
thou reygnest now in wonderful joy and felicity.

O happy Lords, that in those days obedyently went on so Godly a message,
and like true Subjects showed your selfs earnest and faithful hearted to
accomplish the Kings commandment, which amongst all acts of high kings
and princes is most woorthily celebrated and had in renoume, as thou may
read in the notable history of Iosaphat, set forth in the Bible: yea this act
was so wonderful unto men and so pleasant in the eyes of God, that by the reason
thereof al kings and princes feared virtuous Iosaphat. For he wrought most
nobly folowi^g his guide and capitain the holy ghost which makes all men
fervent in the fear of the Lord, Esaye the.xi. Yea, always be considered the
great kyndnes, gifts and benefits of God He knew right well that who so
deliteth in the law of the Lord, and exercises him self therein both day and
night must needs prospere and do things acceptable before God. Furthermore
he being ever te^dre over the weal of his subjects, and pretending most nobly
to defend equity and Justice appoineted judges in every City and straightely
bade them: Fear the Lord, do Justice, regard not one man more then another,
take ye no rewards of them, be couragiouse, for the Lord will be with the
good. Harken to noble Iosephat all christen princes whom God has appoincted to
guide and conduct his people in his holy testimonies and Godly precepts: And
also other inferior powers may take exaumple and learn of him as of the
comliest and noblest Prince that ever bare renoume. His virtuous acts would
God they would humbly receive, and set before their faces his wonderful
Godly doings, yea and learn now to promote the Gospel of Christ and to
stere the^ to this so godly a work the saying of Esaias is a strong persuasion
and a great encouragement to read the gospel, as soon as thy judgments are
known unto the world then the inhabiters of the earth learn rightwisenes. Esaias
the.xxvi. which undoubtedly is a thing as necessary to be learned at this day
as any one thing under heaven. If men would weygh the handelyng of things and
how pitiefully the poor be oppressed of the rich, and for amendment of
this thing: Let us all pray with the holy Prophet Esaias (Oh Lord) now healpe,
for thou art the poor man's healpe, a strenghte for the needful in his
necessity. Esaias the.xxv. and to encourage us all to minister unto the nedye
we read a Godly saying in the Prophet David, whereon rests the sum and
effect of our christianity. That is, blessed is he that has a respect unto
the poor, and considers his necessity, in the ill day the Lord will freely
deliver him. Here forsooth is a wonderful Godly promise unto such as be
pitiefull and tender over the poor. And who so will not with heart and mind
give unto them things necessary, but tourneth his face from them and hautely
over looks them, not willing to offer unto those lively Images of God, meat,
drink, raiment with other needful things he shall then be appoincted into
everlasting punishemente of Hell, a place for the merciless ordained of God.

Verily this shall be full judgment and perfect sentence spoken of Gods
own mouth in that terrible day away ye wicked and merciless creatures into
everlasting fire. Then shall honor, pomp and dignity nothing avail, then
shall these great possessours of goods pitiefully cry alas, and bewail their
infelicitie and great lack of grace: But now this to considre their hearts
be over hard. Who does not see how pitiefully the poor be despised in every
place, be not most men more ready to devour them, then to healpe them, be they
not hastyer to make them stark beggars, then to succor and to relefe the^ in
their necessity? truly over all that thus do there hangs the vengeance of
god, wonderful Plages and myseries, even such as hanged over the wicked Dives
spoken of in the Gospel, and let all of his confederate feloweshyppe (whereof
forsothe the number is great) be fully persuaded in this, that it is not
possible that these impoueryshers of the poor should always prospere, but
that either they or their heirs should fall in some myserye and sudden
decay and most commonly to spread abroad their euel gotten goods as thou
may plainly read in the xij. of Job. Aand how to use the poor all christen
men may now learn of that virtuous man whose charitable saying should never
out of our memories, that is, I delivered the pore when he cried and the
fatherles that wanted healp, the.xxix. of Job. Job considred full well that God
was none of them that used parcialitie, no nor yet any acceptour of persons
and that made hi^ so plainly to affirm that god regards not the rich man
more the^ the poor, Job.xxxiiii. but verily the cause that many pass so litel
to tread the^ underfoot and with wicked oppression utterly to undo they care
not how many, is a certain greedy desire to accumulate riches, to maintain
worldly pomp and dignity, and to have the blind praises and vain
commendacions of this deceiptefull world, as to be esteemed very rich, and as
the common saying is, he is one if he live that will prove a great rich man,
by his wit and policy he has purchased thus much. Where this sensuality
reigns, virtue and Godliness must needs be put a side. And by none other
mean most commonly these great riches and vain tytles be attaigned but by
vsurye, gifts, brybes, and in disceauing the poor. O thou most miserable and
unfortunate man that by this mean waxest rich? Hear what a wonderful plage
hangs over thy head. The fire shall consume such as be greedy to receive
gifts, for they bear mischefe in their bodies and bring forth deceipte.
The.xviii of Job. Oh Lord, does not I pray you eue^ now the state of this
woorlde declare, (if you mark well) that the sore threatenynges of God, the
reward of sin as death, Hell and eternal dampnacion to be things nether
thought upon ne yet feared in me^nes conscience? For if they feared God and had
the strength of his spirit, all the riches and glory of this world could not
move them to think the contrary, but that it were much better for them to
help the poor, and to be confourmable unto Gods commandment, then
deuelyshely to tread them under foot for wicked Mammon and filthy lucar
sake. Suffer not your eyes thus to be blinded with vanities, it is seen daily
that misers and vile abiectes, even such as be brutyshe both in mind and body
for their riches sake to be highly esteemed and pufte up in pride. The rude and
gasyng multitude judge all such men to be in high joy and felicity, for
their uncertain and transitory richesse, think thou them never a deele the
better. But sorrow and be careful in thine heart, that Avarice and insaciate
covetousness reign so soore amongst them, that to do almose they have
clean forgotten, for the common relief that they bestow upon the needy be
fair words, colored with Hypocrisye, as, alas good man, God healpe the, god
healpe the. O counterfaited Christian, god commands the to healpe them: and
cursed art thou of what degree so ever thou art, that wylt not succoure thy
poor neighbor in his necessity. Be penitent therefore in time, for
dampnacion hangs over thy head. I suppose thou see plainly enough what
miserye and myschefe reign every where The poor be despised and Gods word
so little regarded and thought upon, that that soore and lamentable saying of
Esaye may justly be spoken unto us in these days. It is an obstinate
people, vnfaithefull children, (says he) children that will not here the law
of the Lord, the.xxix. of Esai.

O noble England this law of the Lord thou have most plainly set forth unto
the and as yet thy miserable state is soore to be lamented, for through thy
obstinate blindness thou prouokest God to stryke still with durable strokes,
thou dooest not so humbly submit thy self unto his blessed will and testament
as thy duty is. Thou art neither so ioyouse, ne yet so earnestly bent to
have it go forward as God has given the occasions within these few years. It
seems thine heart is settled on fantasies most fond, and kepest old dotyng
dreams foo fast under lock, yea, and sauerest so much of ancient custom
that the pure word of God in thy spirit has small taste. But hear a while
and give ear and thou shalt know more of thy duty, and determine thy self
lowely to follow such histories as shall be rehearsed unto the gathered out of
the law of the Lord. First considre when that holy man Esdras Preached unto
the people their ears were so wonderfully enclyned to the book of the law,
and their hearts so enamored for the singular delight they had to hear the
sweet words and pleasant promises of god, that they could not but weep
the.ii. book of Esdras the.viii. chapter. Forsothe it was a great token of
grace to weep for the feruente zeal and love of Gods word. They also made
great myrthe because they understood what was declared unto the^.

O happy people that so reioysed in knowledge. What man is he dissendyng down
into himself that would not rejoice also to remember what joy and felycitie
these people had in the word of God: and mourn now for compassion to behold
what spite and evil will many bear toward the holy Bible? whose miserable
blyndnesse is much to be lamented, truly such is the pestilent malice of
ignorantes, such be the deceiptes and wyles of Ipocrites, the one in league
and full consent with the other, labor with all subtilitie to wrappe the
people in blyndnesse still, and yet openly they faigne them selfs glad and
ioyouse that the truth is come out, but sorrow and sigh in their hearts to
have it go forward. Great pytie it is that any manne should go about to
endomage Christen men in the word of God: For the greatest compassion that we
ought to have on any one thing under Heaven is on the rude multitude of
Chrystians lackyng the true knowledge thereof: for Christen men's hearts
should always be enclosed in that high and heavenly wisdom of God,
considering that Ignorance is the most pestilent poison that can reign
amongst men. And to learn how to abbolyshe the great and wonderful
blyndnes, which has had a long course and continuance amongst us, thou
haste the holy Bible plainly set forth unto the: and if thou have a hoole and
a clear heart, thou may sone learn to follow the trace of virtue, thou
shalt learn also to be strong and quiet to bear al afflictions, yea, and
shalt be able to enstruct such as thou haste nouryshed to live together in an
amiable conversation. But alas there be many both temporal and spiritual that
will never take the testament in their hands, they pass light of it, and care
not how little it is spoken of amongst them, but and if it come by chance
unto the^ they esteem it as a geast nether welcome ne yet looked for. Of what
spirit they learn this of, I much marueil, if one call them counterfaited
christians right scribes and Phariseis, they set up their brystels and fall in
a rage. Oh Lord such are nothing mindful of the saying of Elephas unto Job,
receive the law at the Lords mouth and lay up his words in thine heart
and he shall give the an harvest with such plentiful abundaunce that it shall
exceade the duste of the yearthe, and look what thou take in hand it shall
prospere. Now England this Godly saying should steer up the and all thine
to show your selfs most humble and meke in setting forward the word of
GOD: Surely thou deserueste great glory and high estymacion, if thou be
agreeable unto his truth. And therefore show thy self ever couragiouse to
promote his blessed testament, and cease now to be styffenecked to desende thy
supersticion and wilful ignorance, for this is plain, no man shall be
excused by ignorance, ne yet shall escape to give account of his bailywicke.
Thou should therefore obedientlye enbrace the lively word of God, which is a
thing most mete and requisite for all agees and degrees of men. Thou should
study the same both day and night, and give thy self wholly to know the
Euangelion of Christ, for the eyes of the Lord behold all the earth to
strenghthen them that are holy with him, the.xvi. Cha. the.ii. Chronicles.
This kind of study is most conuenable for the professors of Christ, and thus
to do is the chefest puincte of our profession in Baptime, whereunto if you
answer (as says saint Paul.) He that is most abiecte amongst you, is
better then they that be taken to be of highest authority amongst the
ungodly, the.i. to the Corinthians. Let us now therefore plant surely in our
hertes the law of God. Let us show our selfs ioyouse to hear the eternal
testament of Christ spoken of amongst us, Let us remember well the saying of
Samuel unto Saull. Thou haste cast away the biddyng of God, and therefore the
Lord has cast the away also, This should be no less fearful unto us now,
least the Lord cast us away, which may and will not drink of the well of the
water of life, freely, that is the holy Bible most godly and syncerely set
forth in our English tongue. For the which we ought with reioysyng
hearts to say. O the lot of our felicite most luckely changed. For where as
of late we offered sacrifice unto Idols, now we be taught to offer the sacrifice
of Justice unto our heavenly father. Of late we were obedyent unto al damnable
rites and wicked supersticion, now we be taught to obey only the Gospel
which is salvation unto al them that believe it. It is not long sythen we called
on Saints for diseases and all folyshe fantasies, now we be taught, that in
all our extreme miseries we should flee unto Ihesus the only appoincted
mediator betwyxt God the father and us: Once we were not ashamed to ru^ne
barefooted and barelegged, and to bow our selfs unto Images, before whom we
committed wonderful Idolatrye, a thing most cursed and dampnable in the sight
of god. And if men would justly weie and pondre, the maruelouse Ipocrisy,
Idolatry and dampnable supersticio^ which of late days were stiffly defended
and maintained of the Clergy, for pomp and dignity, vain glory and
advantage sake, they cannot but triumph for this so Godly a change, except
they be privy enemies unto England and shameful rebels unto christ's holy
religion: for by this change we have light for darkness, true religion for
supersticion, remission of our sins by the blood of Christ in stead of
Papisticall and deceitful Pardonnes. And if we would call to memory how
imperfecte and corrupted our faith was by the reason of poperye, how
ignorantly we walked, yea, and what disobedyence reigned amongst us, then
surely if we be not shameless and destitute of all grace, we cannot but give
hearty thanks for this most gloriouse chance. And even now is full time (if
the state and value of things be well considered) to show our selfs reverent,
devout and simple to receive the gloriouse testament of christ, yea, and to
repent and make our eyes sore with sobbing and weeping that ever we were so
disceiued with popery, Ipocrisie and such other pelf. And how to use our
selfs in readyng the bible, let us all take our exaumple of virtuous king
Josias, which was a man endued with such a singular grace and of so fervent
zeal toward the word of God, that after he had once read the book of the
lord, he so lamented al wiked doings and false doctrine that he rent his
clothes and said. The wrath of God is kendeled on us, because our fathers have
not hearkened unto the words of this book to do in all puinctes as it is
written therein. O happy people of England, if your dull understanding would
reach to consider how worthy words these were for so noble a king, would god
the minds of al kings and princes were so stable in the law of the Lord as
his was, for he ceased not with all his power to throw down al kind of
idolatry, as temples, hi laulters, and groves. the.xxii. chro. and co^trarily
again, wicked Manasses and his son Amo^ observed dismael days, made Images
and bowed unto the^: what vile estimacio^ this brought the^ unto ye holy
scripture witnesses in the book of the kings. Where thou may read also
of diverse kings whose high glory and worthiness is turned into shame: for
that they refused the word of God and gave them selfs unto Idolatry and
utterly cast away the commandments of God. And for an example, How
pitiefully I pray the did the lord smite king Iehoram? he was invaded of his
enemies and lost al his goods, he was plagued with diverse diseases, his end
was most miserable and greuouse to behold, for his bowelles rotted within him
and fell out of his bealy, yea, and to be brefe, for his mischefe he was not
buried in the sepulcres of the kings, but is left unto us as a memory of
wickedness, the.xxii. Chronicles. This king was thus wonderfully plaged for that
he forsook the word of god, and defiled himself with Idolatry against the law
of the Lord And be ye well assured, that he and his people were not worse defiled
in those days then we were of late with Romyshe doctrine. Our trust was (as
all men know) in masses of Scala celi. we enbraced blind pardones and louyngly
buried them with us: we kneled, bowed and becked unto Idolles: false doctrine
bare the hole swaie, the truth clean shut up, it was kept under lock and
could have no liberty.

What Godly mind would not abhor to thyncke on this? With these and many mo
abhominacions we were sore and deadly wounded. And none so good a mean can now
be found to cure our old diseases, as to flee unto the blessed testament of
Christ, which will quickly healpe such as desire remedy, confessing their
greefes and lamentyng their miserable blyndnesse. The great grace and benignite
of god is now so priest that thou may if thou will, drink a draughte
freelye of the sincere word of God that most pure fountain and wholesome water
of life, which will cause the to spewe up all that thou have drunk of that
foul, stinkyng and Papistycal podel. And if thou now give no ear to it, but
fondly will follow other by paths which commonly be thick, thornie and
cu^bersome to journey in, and have a desire to straie abroad thus wilfully thou
know not whither, dysdainyng to follow the doctrine of the Bible, where God
shows how and which way al his should walk, the^ forsooth it is an evident
token and significacion, that thou art the child of wrath a counterfaited
Christian, yea, and a right inheritour to Hell. And if thou be minded to tarry
still in Ignorance, and will not be moved from thy miserable condition
which so blyndeth the that thou haste no grace to discern the contrariete of
these.ii. doctrines, do no more then but read Sermones discipuli, Legenda
Aurea, vitas Patrum, and the old Chronicle of Romyshe Bishops, afterward
read the Testament. Then thou shall soon epsy how the glory of God has been
defaced, and what abominable lies and fables have been taught in the stead
of the Gospel. This shall be a mean if any mean be, to make thine heart
relente, this shall make the to cry out upon all false doctrine: yea, this
shall alter the from a styffe and a stubburne ignorant to be a pleasant
sacrifice before GOD. That is thou shalt be pourged in conscience from
Idolatry, Ipocrisie, supersticion, men's constitucions, new kinds of
worshyppynges, this and that form of living, cold ceremonies, and such other
pelf as has been added of late unto Christ's doctrine, then thou will
quickly refuse the shadows of the law of Moses and follow the Testament,
which is the light and full perfection of Christ's holy religion, for there
thou shalt find all things plainly set forth unto the, which apperteigne
to get everlasting life. And if thou will now endeavor thy self to attain the
knowledge of it, then forsooth thou trauelest for pure orname^tes, treasures and
iuels and laborst to a purpose, for in comparison of it al other studies be but
vain vanities and fa^tasies most fond. And that thou may be more spedily
provoked to the word of God, consider, how sore saint Paul as a true and
faithful minister was charged with thoughts for the Congregation.

He was so earnestly bent to have it go forewarde, that he could not suffer
in no wise to have it hyndered or put back, but would have it known unto all
kind of men as it shall apeare unto the by these his words unto the
Romans. I know well (says he) there be many which be against the Gospel
of Christ, by who^ Sathanas goes about to let the salvation of men, the.xii.
to the Romans. And if saint Paul were now amongst us, he would say some
thing. It is to be thought he would break out with a vehement sprite and say.
O minysters minysters blinded with you know what, through you the word of God
cannot have free passage, you stand gapyng for high and frail things of the
world, and be nothing myndefull that the Preaching of the Gospel far
surmounteth baptyme Mass and all other virtuous things under heaven. I say
unto you, the preaching of the Gospel is the most pleasant worship and
sacrifice that can be unto God, the first to the Romans And for a farther trial
of this, reuolue all the bible and thou shall find this plain that the
glorioust life that can be for a minister is to preach, and the shamfullest
again to be daintely nouryshed and live in idleness, for of this (witness all
ancient writers) arise all other mischefes. Now therefore, who so has grace
to remember his duty and has also a clear understanding in the holy
scriptures, will say no less then saint Paul did. Woe be unto me if I preach
not and set out the glory of God. By this mean it should be easy for all
ministers of the church to take away the great grefe and hatred out of all
me^nes stomakes. The cause truly why many report so euel of the Clergy, is
their manifest sluggyshenes and styffenes of mind whereby they show them
selfs salse and faint hearted toward the word of God. This (I say) is the
cause of their great infamy, this is the cause that they are had now in such
disdain. It is much maruail they do not perceive their own perdicion.
Wonderful it is that they can not smell why they are so despised: Let them
weigh the matter well and they cannot but confess that it is no small infamye
for them which should be of great knowledge and expert in the Scryptures to
be found as many are, who so lysteth to put the thing in proof and due
examinacion very Ideottes and of no knowledge, and the occasion of this is,
they are so choked with wilful ignorance, that they will not once look on the
bible. They so persuade the^ selfs, that they say al is well enough and remayn
still even hard hearted Pharoes toward the shinyng light, and as deefe as any
door nail, if a man will them to study: pity it is, that any such
miserable miserye should reygne amongst them. But alas such is the vain
vanity of this world: They think still, that pomp and dignity bring
estimacion, but the people have now such a sight that every manne perceueth
virtue to be a treasure worthy commendacion: and that for virtues sake every
minyster is worthy double honor and not for his dignity. And many perceive
right well also that honor po^pe and dignite were the bryngers in of the
Bishop of Rome and such as Preach intermyngled doctrine for the
mayntenaunce of any such like dignity and worldely estimacion, the people can
soon epsy, their flattery in Preaching can not now be cloked: There can no
covert shadow their crafty conueiance especially before such as have busied
the^ selfs in the doctrine of saint Paul which writes thus. They that would
persuade you contrary things unto those that I have taught you follow not
GOD but men's desires and serve their own vauntage, glory, and tirannye, and
by all means possible beware of such. The fyfthe to the Galathians. Forsooth
it would make men to wondre and to be sore amassed, if they would search forth
old ancient histories, to note what myschefe men have wroughte for their
own advantage, and especially to atteine fame and glory either by hoke or
croke they passed not whether. Glory as a thousand histories make mention,
has ever been a stay to keep in the truth. It is plain that it has
called many a man from the study of the Bible, and whosoever is given to
maintein glory after his wicked will shall never agree with the Gospel of
Christ. Did not the Jews I pray the to maynteygne their law, which was
pomp, dignytie and supersticion, slaye the aucthour of life and ryghtewysenes?
The eyghte Chapyter to the Romans. Yet forsooth they saw the light, but
malice blinded their eyes, they heard the Gospel but rancoure of heart
stopped their ears. The.x. chap. to the Romans. They were people of Gods
first election but they refused his doctrine and for their incredulity they
were afterward reiecte and cast of for naught. The cause was, they were so
given to cold ceremonies, that they could not brook the Gospel. It was the
hardest piece of work that ever Saint Paul had to frame them unto Christ,
they stood ever so styffe in the defense of their ancient customs, cloked and
fained religion, yea, they feared so much the fall of their gloriouse kyngdo^e
that as ye may read they were soon confederate together in myschefe and
agreed all on this quickly to make away Christ and al his disciples. They
perceived well enough, that if his doctrine had free course, they might then
take leave of honor, pomp and dignity, wherein rested all their present
comfort, joy and felicity. They knew well also, that if the truth were once
known they could then no longer delude the poor simple people as they did,
witness Saint Matthew. And even now there be as styffnecked children as ever
were they. Attempt the thing who lusts, and he shall have his handful to
bring some rooted in supersticiouse doctrine to credit the Gospel by the
reason they give such confydence and are so stayed with lewd persuasions of
unlearned preystes which under the color of sheperdes play the right wolfes:
on whose ignorance the holy scripture cries out very terribly in diverse
places, yea, it plainly pronounces all such to be cursed and dampnable in
the syghte of GOD, which have taken on them the office of mynisters and
promotours of the gospel, and now subtilie with their policies would keep
it in stay. Would God all such would graciously bear away the saying of
saint Paul. I have labored (says he) with all my power to satisfy the
office commanded unto me, the fourth to the Corint. If men had harkened unto
S. Paul in this poinct, christen kings and princes should never have been so
corrupted and defiled with Romish doctrine as they were, for the neglecting of
preaching, desire of glory, and subtle wresting aside of the scriptures in the
beginning, caused ignorance to bear such a stroke amongst us, by litel and
litel the clergy wrought their feit, turning true things to false virtue to
lucar, purest and best to the worste. Till the minds of men were blinded
altogether with wicked tradicions. And now because such as should preach, be
stubburne to restore again true discipline, it stereth up me^nes hearts more
and more against them It is requisite to pray for the amendment of this and
that they would vouchesafe to read the English Bible, if the zeal of it once
enter into their hearts, they will sone forget al peynes and travel taken in
appliyng the same. Who is ignoraunte? he that studieth the bible deserves
great praise and is honorable before God. And co^trarilye the prayer of him
that grudgeth at it is abominable. theight cha of the Proverbs. Would God
therefore that you would read the Prophets, for there you shall find evidently
that the contemnours of the Bible be hated of God, abominable before his eyes,
children of Sathanas and enheritours unto hell. This is a miserable and terrible
state for any manne to think on. This would make any christen conscience to
tremble and quake. This dilygently pondered who would not lament with sobbyng
and weping eyes the great calamity and myserie of many a one amongst us? it
seems forsooth, that they be clean destitute of grace or else they would soon
confess that the fittest thing that can be for Christen men, were to know
the gloriouse testament of Christ, for in it be conteigned words of life,
sentences spoken of Gods own mouth, his assured and faithful promyses,
whereby we have our just title to inherit his heavenly kingdom. Woe be unto
him whosoever he be that would not have this so godly a thing known and taught
unto all agees and degrees of men. Great pity it is, but that al men baptized
in the blessed blud of Christ, should know his last will and eternal
Testamente. And forasmuch as chief Learning and virtue is to surmounte all
other in good deeds, and this is in no place so fully taught as in the Bible
where thou shalt have plentyfull instructions how to work after Gods will
and pleasure, and how to find remedy against al evils and accustomed vices,
what English heart true unto god and faithful unto the king would murmr at it?
It seems that such men be past shame or else depryued of their wits, that
will not provoke, tempte, and stere all men to study it. May not a man
therefore with good reason, be bold to write against such slouthefull
sheapardes as stubburnely stand now a days and care not for knowledge? The
froward ignorance of such is a great blot and shame unto other honest
mynisters, whom forsothe we ought to have in great price, estimation and
honor and not in contempt or derysion for the offenses of the wicked, (as
some have them now) for if we thus do we offend god grievously, and to loode
the worste of them with checkes and tauntes is no way forsothe to win them:
christen charity will rather desire that such ministers as have no knowledge
in the Latin toungue, as few of them have: would give them selfs some hour
in the day to read the English Bible, and will them gentely not to be
ashamed to learn. By this mean they may recover their estimacion again. This
would be a quiet life for them and a full restraint to stop men's
toungues. For so long as they which should be the light of the world,
will willyngly walk in darkness, disdainyng the light, men will ever have
them in suspect and let them not think the contrary but that they must needs
suffer infamy, disdain and other great strokes of Fortune. Therefore frankely of
their own courage if they have grace, they will busy them selfs in the
English Bible, as men nothing forgetful of this, although in times paste
they lived blyndly, swarued from God, and did service under Romish tradycions,
yet may they now in studiyng it learn to be discrete ministers. God grant
that they would incline unto it with faithful, earnest and couragiouse hertes.
Surely it were a token of great grace and a comfortable hearing, that this rumor
might be spread abroad every where. In token that all the Clergy of England ar
penitent of false doctrine, and with one mind will and voice all fully bent to
set abroad the word of God every one of the^ in his pulpyt exhorts the
flock committed unto his charge to read the English Bible and make a great
show that they would have it go forward. How acceptable and pleasant this
were in the eyes of God, the holy Prophets bear witness. And also how
commodyouse it should be for the weal of this noble realm it needs no
probacion. For who will deny his? the greatest glory for any realm is, when
the prince is couragiouse to set forth the gospel, and his subjects obedient
to receive and promote the same. Our late king and dear sovereign Lord that
was, as one very graciouse and tender over the weal of his subjects and
again nothing forgetefull of his duty toward God: For his part commanded
the Bible to be had in every church. His grace sent it out amongst us in
token and testimonial of his faithful and obedient heart unto god. Yea, and in
this doing he did but even his bounden duty and the office of a christen king.
For saint Paul witnesses in the first to the Romans, that the law is not
given only to preistes, but indifferently unto al kind of men. May not a man
then with a sorrowful heart, greatly lamentyng the frowardness and obstinacy
of the people, vehemently cry out (as the prophet Esaye did) they have made
the eternal Testament of none effect? Esaias the.xxiiii. O wicked generation
which in those days regarded no better the will and pleasure of their god. O
shameless wretches that so lightly cast away their god. For their disobedience
unto the truth they have left now in memory a fair iuell eue^ perpetual
shame. Compare us and them together and you shall find that we be their cosen
germains and confederate friends. We follow a trade as wicked as ever did
they: We suffer the bible to lie in many Churches all dustye here, untouched
there, raze in this, and turn in that. Not one curate amongst a great number
exhorts men unto it. The sheperdes forsothe esteem it very light: for when
they find men feedyng gredily on it because it is of a sweet leare and a ground
most plesau^t they chase them from it, it seems such sheaperdes seek the
destruction of their sheep. Alas good men they are so blinded with worldly
wisdom, rancoure and supersticion that it is a death unto them to see other
men read the scriptures. And yet they them selfs will never take Bible nor
Testament in hand, but sorrow and sigh with greuouse gronynges, when they
consider their great loss: for once they lived like Epicures and had al
things at their wills, with their Images, pardones and Purgatory they illuded
many a seely pore solle. They dusked and defaced the glory of God and made
the^ selfs rich. They ruled kings and nobles at their pleasures and kept the^
underfoot, yea, they were ever check mate with the king, and ruled him at
their pleasure, who so withstode their deuelish doctrine did not long endure.
The earnest mainteners of Gods word felt always their spiteful cruel and
bluddy hands. And to think wherefore many honest me^ have suffered we should al
rejoice, co^sidryng that loss of life is an high felicity where perpetual
memory comes in place. They that have enterprised and employed themselves to
do their duties best toward God, have been sonest snapt up, iniquity
has often so ruled the roste. Read ancient histories and you shall find
this plain. And now especially, great maruaill it is what unfaithfulness the
minysters find in the bible. Sins their dreams were taken from the^, they have
seldom said where art thou Lord? They follow lyghtnes and vanity and think
it inoughe to stand at the aultre, although you stand at the alter, it does not
follow that you ar nerest to christ, for you are nere Christ and stand worthelie
at the aultre, when you show your selfs willing to promote his holy Gospel.
Cast of slouthe and sharp your wits all blunte and dull with Ignorance.
Have ye not read the words of the holy Prophet? I will delyghte (says
he) in thy commandments as one that has found great spoil and riches,
This holy Prophet reioysed so in his heart at the lively word of God, that
he said with a sighe, Oh Lord, how sweet be thy words in the roffe of my
mouth: yea, they be swetter in my mouth then the honicombe. He said
furthermore, the law of thy mouth Lord, is better to me then thousands of
gold and silver. Esaias the Prophet also as one some thing offended with the
ministers, because Gods word was not thankefully received, but esteemed very
lightly amongst them, for they made falsehode their refuge and vanity their
guide. Hear the word of the LORD therfyre (says he) ye mockers which rule
the people of Jerusalem. Esaye the, xxviii. Chapter. Their vayn confyde^ce
miserable blindness and wilful ententes engendered vexacio^ and brought continual
vnquietenes unto these ministers, yea, it so sterred up the ire and indignacion
of God, that they were altogether trodden underfoot as miserable abiectes. The
lord devised a mete handelyng, a worthy and convenient intertainmente for such
sheaperdes as would not harken unto his holy word. The Lord again himself
perceauyngful well the stubburnnesse of the people in rejecting his word, and
also sore offended to see their ready willing hertes sone enclyned unto
Idolatry, speaks thus. O ye people look upon the word of the Lord, Jeremy
the first. Moreover the Lord very desirouse to have his statutes promoted, and
especially that his sheperdes should se well unto and noryshe their flock,
speaks thus. O ye sheperdes hear the word of the Lord. Ezech. xxxiiii. in
the same chapter he most pitiefully lamented over his seely pore sheep, he saw
they were daily robbed and most cruelly devoured of all wild rauenyng
beasts of the field, they run blyndlye on what mischefe they lust, for the
sheperdes which should have been their guides and conducters, fed them selfs
only with most dainty delycates and never regarded which way the flock
went. The lord willing to have his word that well of grace and singular comfort
most highly promoted, said, he would clean rydde and utterly deliver his
people from Idolatry: for the wicked Prophets vsyng unclean sprites, false
doctrine and deceiptful garments, should be confounded as detestable
deceiptours. And for the spedie perfourmaunce of this, he commanded his swerd
to arise, and plague as well the Ignorant people reiectyng his word as the
evil and superstyciouse sheperdes. Zacha. the.xiii. In another place also, the
Lord most greuousely offended with disse^blyng mynisters, which wroughte
altogether for lucar and gain. I have (says he) no pleasure in you, for
which of you will kyndle fire on mine Aultre for naught? The Lord affyrmed
that they unhallowed his Aultre, in that they said it was not to be regarded,
they only thought not scorn and made light of it, but they regarded much
less what vile trumpery they offered unto it, Malachie the first. The English
Bible forsooth may well be compared unto this aultre for such as should
promote it and esteem it most, labor for gain: they had rather work a
trentall of Masses and sing in a few Dirige grotes, then bestow an hour in
readyng the Bible to their paryshiners. Again, Nabuchodonozor a prince of high
dignity honor and worship, whom all people, kynredes and tongues wonderfully
feared, was for his proud stomach and stiff heart against god and his word
clean deposed from his kingdom and so plagued, that he fell from that most
renowned dignity and estate of a king to the fellowship of beasts: he refused
the company of men and became beastly hearted enclining himself altogyther to
company with Asses: and in stead of his sumptuous and pryncely dishes, was
very glad to feed most gredily like an Ox on fair grene grass. Daniel.v.
Furthermore when God saw that the people followed the filthiness of their own
imaginacion, trusted in this and that, and claue not fast unto him but walked
altogyther in miserable blyndnes, and appeared wondrous wilful: for the
rulers were cruel, the Judges were wolfes, and the preistes were light
persons, did much injury and utterly refused the ordinance of God, and cared
not how little the law was spoken of: with this the Lord greuousely offended,
spoke unto them most vehemently. Woe unto you abominable filthy and cruel
which will not hear nor be reformed, Sophonie the third Chapter. David the
holy Prophet also, which could full well judge the strength of Gods word,
for he made it always his refuge and used it as his trusty anchor (says unto
the Lord) wherewithal shall youth cleanse his way? even by rulyng himself
after thy word. This Prophet spoke often full fair vsyng most plesaunt
words as a mean to atteigne his request and peticion, wherein he desired
only this, the Lord to teach him his statutes, declaryng that he would set
all his delight and council in them: yea, and continually talk of his
wondres, making answer unto all blasphemers, my trust is in thy word lord.
This holy man whose words and works no man is able to improve, said also unto
god. I have more under sta^dyng then all my teachers, for thy testimonies are
my study. Psalm. Cxix. these places be sufficient to encourage all men to read
the Bible Who would not hearing this apply his understanding in high things?
Who would not leave his vanities and self study and give signs of a new
life? who would not lamente to see what ignora^tes guide the flock of Christ?
who would hearing this, appear a scoler to tradicions and a persecutour of the
word? who would not hearing this, submit his idle and supersticiouse head to
the obeysaunce of the Bible? Who would hearing this, follow his own blind
seemyng and opinion? Pythagoras says, he that knows not that he ought to
know, is but a brute beast amongst men. Who would not then with this Godly
saying be drawn unto the Bible? they that mark well sentences of gravity and
worthy notacion, will not put reason under foot, and be so mad as to
stretche their hand against the promoting of the gospel. It is a token of a
pestilente and wicked heart to murmr at such as read it: For the time of
them is gloriouse that gloriously spend it, and cursed are they that live
ignoraunte as brute beasts. It seems that such esteem the hight and supreme
wisdom of god to be vanities, surely we ought to celebrat those days with
high joy when we once here tell that the ignorant sort give over their envious
trauails against the Bible. For then they shall be greatly desired, beloved and
well named amongst al men, the^ shall sedicion and discord take their leave
and enter no more in place. Pity it is that their ill intentes should condemn
the Godly things that have been written to win them: they ought to yield and
give great thanks to God, that they are delivered from Romish authority. If
they would now shake of their old and dusty tradicions, and abate their depraved
malice, they might restore again their glorious fame and have estimacion, love
and favor in stead of infamy, shame and disdain. Surely it were a thing most
pleasant in Gods sight, to see the^ and the rude multitude flourish in his
word, for in some places yet as great is the neclige^ce of the people as the
ignorance of preistes And that they thus continewe, weak wits be not the
cause, but very slouthe and malice, which cause them to follow the corrupcion
of ancient custom and to set their hearts altogyther on pleasure and
idleness. They thus following their own wilful intentes pulle down still the
estimacio^ of preistes. And if they would leave the wyles of the world that
now flock together styffely in blyndnesse, appliyng their wits to e^domage
other and with their restye lives cause sedicion and sclaunder unto good
ministers: then might England auaunce it self and say. Now shall I florishe
and have favor in gods sight. Now shall I be valiant in virtues and
worthy great fame. For now there be none to troble and vex the poor sort
peceable people bent to the gospel. Now shall science augmente and men will
draw to the bible. Truly I could never hete Antique history alleged that
men should not know it. Now I shall weaken the hertes of mine enemies and make
the^ stand in dread, they will fear me more for my knowledge, the^ for all my
valeaunt conquestes. Now the heard hearted that were in credit and spread
abroad the trains of supersticiouse doctrine, and with blind flattery begiled
the simple sort, will do service for my common weal. They will remember that
men are but beastly by nature, and Godly by their cunnyng and knowledge. And
yet to say further I have often desired to have vices restrained and virtues
augme^ted and that it will now come to pass I have a full trust, for my drad
sovereign lord and supreme head King Edward the sixth begins to be stable in
the Lord and couragiouse in his word, and all his people within this his noble
realm like loving subjects be obedient unto his grace and perfectly taught
their duty and obeisaunce. Often England has been in peril and daungier,
when the people were weak faint and dull of understanding, by whose mean it
sometime has lost the supreme head and governor to it great sorrow and care.
But the pytiefull loss of noble King Ihon should perse every man's heart
most sore, and by what traitorous trains through false pretense he was cast
away, it is necessary to be known, whose noble and valiant virtues worthily
to extol, I suppose no tongue is able. That noble King was so brought up
in virtuous and Godly books, and took such great travel in the scriptures,
that thereby he espied how the glory of God was shamefully dusked and defaced
with wicked tradicions, supersticio^ and Idolatry things most intolerable.
Then he quickly like a prince of courage and noble heart, spoke openly he
would redress the pomp and glory of the clergy, the gospel should have free
passage let them al say what they lust The^ they like a multitude of traiters
turned themselfes from natural subjects into beastly rebels. They were
soon confederate together like vile and detestable wretches to bluddie their
hands on Gods holy anointed their dear sovereign Lord and governor, and
al to maintain Romysh authority. And to their dampnable intentes there wanted
no trayterouse traynes, for when they could not devise how to kill him
neither with sword nor dagger, they invented policy. Their daily ragyng and
maliciouse hearts were never at quietness till they had encouraged with their
pestilent persuasions a sturdy black Monk to take say unto his grace of a
poisoned cup, when his highness valiauntly came into a certain Abbey where
he stood in doubt and suspection of no man, for all the brethren received him,
and like Ipocrites feigned the^ selfs merry and ioyeouse outward, but were
sorowefull within. They used ioyeful words but bare wicked hearts. They
sorowed not for repentance, but at the sight of his graces presence which
grieved their hearts full sore, then the Pryour archetectour of this heinouse
treason and father of al mischefe espiyng oportunite of time brought in the
Monk with his poisoned cup. Oh Lord I marvel that his intrels did not break
to offer so fylthy a draughte to so noble a King. I maruayl how his maliciouse
hand for terror and sorrow could hold the cup from falling. Wonder it was that
fear of god, speech of people and shame of the world did not restrayn his
propensed and wicked heart from that terryble draught deeathly unto the King
and dampnable unto himself. A wickeder deed and a more miserable myschefe
has not been heard of.

O maliciouse and unhappy Monks. O wretches I dare say hearder hearted then
Pharaoo and falser then Judas, or else the intestyne of their hearts would
have trembled and quaked to betray their dear souerain lord. O wicked
subjects and beasts unnatural, I say again. O cruel wretches, that sought
to make away him for whose sake they should have spent the best blud of their
hearts, if these shameful villaynes had red the notable histories of the
Bible, they would have restreigned their cankerd stomachs from consent to
murder their king. If they had read the historye of king David and Saul, and
noted well what reverence and loyal obeysaunce David showed unto Saull,
although he knew that he was a king utterly cast of and refused of god. If
they had marked also the wonderful words and high displesure that king David
took with his servant, which came unto him (either lokyng for herty thanks
orels some great reward) and said he had killed Saull. The gentle heart of
David arose so at his words, and grudged so sore at that heinouse deed, that
straight he promoted his servant even to as good a death as the gibet or
galowes. I think they would then have stopped their wicked and most pestilent
purpose. O Lord, and if they had known or at the least would have known what
reverence subjects ought to show to their hedes, they would have tre^bled and
quaked to have conspyred or thought any euel against their dear souerain lord.
But these holy fathers ever as full of fables as false religion. Quickly
invented how they might craftily cloak their wicked doings and to stop the
murmuring of the people, they raised this rumor that the king said if he
lived one twelmonth an half penny loofe should be worth.xl. d. amongst them.
Who does not smell this to be a shamfull and a detestable lie? for his grace
was tender over the poor and loving to his subjects, and never pretended
nether to them ne yet to the publikewelth any such damage He was in deed
earnestly bent and very courageous to set forth the will and pleasure of God,
and for this cause only they wrought his confusion. Alas these fathers were
men sworn to obedience, yet they neither preached the trace of it, ne yet
followed ye same, they should have been full of good graces, but they employed
themselves to wicked vorage and tirannie, they studied so soore to augme^t
their liuelod, that they had never leisure to think on the high and supreme
wisdom of god. Whereof whosoever has tastedfully will never grudge against his
king or Prince, for the knowledge of it adiuigneth the hertes of al subjects
most straightly unto their dear souerain lord, the strength and virtue of it is
such yt it will never suffer any spark of treason to dwell in a subjects
heart. It pla^teth such love and faithful obedience where it goes, that ye
corrupcio^ of treason can find no place to enter. Treason is a thing so horible
unto it, that it cannot endure to think on the plagues that it justly
deserves Yea, it is of this nature, that al sin and wickedness is noiso^e
unto it, but of al other treason is the noysomest, for it causes riotouse
wits repugnau^t to reason and public quietness, to steer up co^mocions,
to slaie innocents, and to follow wicked disobedience, things most detested in
Gods sight. And if we prudently weigh what danger it has often brought
unto this noble realm, and how it has perished the memory of honorable
houses, yea, and especially how it has blotted the estimacio^ of many noble
me^, disherited their sons, shamed their progeny, and troubled the sprites
of al other their friends. The^ we will not suffer no such folly to enter into
our heads but gladly endeavor our selfs to read the Bible, for this is the
way to purge and cle^se al treason from every man's heart. O Lord what
obedience it has taught amongst us within these few years, Who does not
know now what power God has given a King over his people? Who is ignorant
what obeisance is to be showed to Gods holy anointed? who so had marked the
cumming of our dear sovereign Lord king Edward the.vi. from the Tower unto
Westmi^ster should have seen and hard ple^tiful tokens of true and loving
hertes. for all the noble citieze^s and people of the country which came far
of on every side were there wonderful ioyouse to se yt day, yea, to se the
hope glory and comfort of al true English hearts. The citizens studied forsooth
very sore how to receive his majesty most triumphantly as people willing to
declare tokens of their obedient hearts. They made themself, very gorgeouse
and stood in humble order to receive their dear lord and supreme head, his
towardnes in virtues much spoken of amongst them made them wonderful ioyeouse
his highness also appering personally before them al, a child of cumly, sobre,
and modest countenance, sweet visaged and of face most beautiful, in who^ also
there wanted neither godly educacion nor yet any acquired virtues, but in all
things most perfectly framed, streighte so allured and drew unto him al their
hertes that it was wonder to se the joy they made, to behold their governor
the peace and tranquillity of the wealth of England so triu^pha^tly pass
through amongst them, which again with gentle and valiant countenance looked
on the^ his people standing round about him on eueryside, whose presence every
man so desired standing in goodly order, that their eyes daseled with long
lokynge for that most gloriouse sight, their hearts also aked to be deferred
from it which passed so pleasantly by. Then they sta^dyng still, prayed that
his highness might surmou^t al other in virtue and nobility, and that god
would give him grace especially to walk in the way of good deeds and in
virtuous acts as he had entered, so to persevere, and that God would give him
an heart to love us his poor and faithful subjects and work for the common
weal: yea, and that he may be no acceptour of persons but to regard the poor
as well as the rich. This Godly peticion and other things there showed were
evident tokens of their faithful hearts, which are very much to be regarded
for the love of subjects is the safiete of the king and the defense of the
realm: Yea, he that has the love of his subjects has a wonderful
treasure. For I remember that I have read an history of Antique felicity of
the world past worthy to be noted. There was a certain right high and mighty
prince, a man of excellent and profound understanding, whose felicite was set
altogether to have the love of his subjects, desiryng rather their weal then
his own private commodity. It chanced that certain Princes watered against
him, he then made neither act nor statute, but sent his loving letters
amongst his subjects, desiryng them to healpe him with money, then they
consyderyng full well his noble and tender heart toward them, and weere a
people taught but only by nature to obey their gouernoure, for they knew
nothing of the law of GOD, spedily brought into the treasure house so much
money as served the king.vii. years, and yet when the wars ceased there
remained great plenty. Forsooth these men's gifts were of great price, but
their good wylles were of greater. O gloriouse time. O realm most happy
where the king and his people were so knytte together. And contrarilye there
was one Tyberius the son of August a destroyer of the people and very
spytefull toward the Romans, light of his dooeynges using outragyouse
words unto all good men, yea, and of such foolysshe presumpcion and
boldness in his realm that he thought he might do what he lust in
following his own wicked and naughty ententes. This Emperor was also proud
and furiouse, which thing filled his subjects hearts full of sorrow and
brought unto him self much eyuell will and light estymacion. And that well
appeared. For after his death all the aunciente fathers and nobles of Rome
with the rest of the people made great Sacryfice and earneste peticion. Unto
the GODS to send Tyberes solle into the furies of Hell, he had wrought them
so much sorrow, that they would him no joy nor yet any part of the Gods
glory. O the infelicite and dangerous estate of Rome in those days when the
King and his people murmured one at another. For no man that has reason will
repugne unto this, but that realm is well warded, where the king and his
subjects be of mutual love and fidelity. Now therefore utterly to avoid
all contencion and dyscorde and to plant for ever amongst us a stable and
lovely society of living, there is no better mean then to arm our selfs
with unity and concord drawyng al in one line to promote the Gospel of
Christ, and to enlarge our hearts to receive Godly and gentle persuasions as
men very wyllyng to present them selfs to the Bible, and to flee unto it
as unto our most trusty port, and gladly receive that heavenly treasure. If
we thus do all strangers shall fear us as they did the sons of Jacob, and
(according unto the holy Prophet) our purpose shall prospere and come well to
pass: yea, and such show will appear of us that men will not suffer our
memory to peryshe, but to renoume us as people of virtue and worthy
commendacion. Wherefore most humbly we ought now to pray the lord, that he
would put away all lettes from their stomachs that grudge secretly at his
holy word, and make light of the bible that heavenly treasure set to show
amongst us in every church. Whereunto if we bear faint and sturdy hertes, let
us be well assured, the Lord will blaste and blot our doings with evil
fortune and enuiouse mishap, for as far as I have read, there was never
Emperor, King nor yet Prince that prospered, which took part against it,
thou may find in diverse notable places of the Bible how God often punyshed
with greuouse plagues and durable strookes many regyons which rejected and
made light of his word. Again there is nothing neither in heaven above nor in
earth underneath so pleasant and acceptable in God the fathers sight, as to
have his lively word that heavenly treasure most thankefully received and
honored amongst us. O then thou counterfayted Christian, what spirit of
error moves the to murmr at such as read thenglyshe Bible? Wonder it is
that thou art not ashamed to account thy self any of Christ's fellowship, for
in contempnyng and making light of his gospel thou declarest thy self a right
Paganime or rather a Jew, yea, I say thy long prayer often fasting and
almose deeds and all good works that thou can devise, shall nothing
prevail the: But appear plainly in Gods sight as things most vile and
detestable, so long as thou bear a supersticiouse heart toward his
blessed Testament. Alas suffer not thy self no longer to be begiled, set before
thy face what doctrine Moises taught the people in the.vi. of Deutro He
straightely charged them to keep the law of God in their hearts, and willed
them also to teach it unto their children and talk of it unto their family,
this place should wake the out of thy dootyng dreams. Sterevppe thy heart for
shame unto Christ's gospel and reverence it whersoeuer thou go, whereunto
be al honor and praise. Amen

FINIS.
Imprinted at London in the parish of Christ's Church within new gate by
Richard Grafton, Prynter to our sovereign lord King Edward the.VI.

1547.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


