A special Treatise of Gods Providence, and of comforts against all kind of
crosses and calamities to be fetched from the same. With an exposition of the
107. Psalm.

Heerunto is added an appendix of certain Sermons and Questions, (containing
sweet and comfortable doctrine) as they were uttered and disputed ad Clerum in
Cambridge.

By P. Baro. D. in Diui.

Englished by I. L. Vicar of Wethers-fielde.

Imprinted by John Wolf.

bookplate MVNIFICENTIA

GEORGIVE D.G. MAG.

BR FRET ^^^ REX F.D.

REGIA. 1715.



REuerendo in Christo Parri D. Joanni Mullinsaeo SS. Theologiae D. and
professorinec non Archidiacono Londinensi dignissimo: Joannes Ludham in
perpetuam grati obseruantissimique animi memoriam hanc suam qualemcunque
opellam dicat consecratque.

Ad Lectorem Decasticon.
I In wisdoms School who so does take delight,
O Of sacred lore to taste and feed his fill:
H Him I account the only happy wight,
N None like to him, let men say what they will.
L Lo then the way who so that list to walk.
V Unto the haven of happiness I say,
D Drive no delay, spend not thy time in talk.
H Have forward fast, here wisdom sage does stay.
A Attend unto her sacred lore divine,
M Mark that, and then, thou shall be blessed in fine.
I. L.

A Treatise OF THE PROVIdence of God. And of comfortes against all kind of
dangers, to be fetched from the same.
With an Exposition of the Psalm (after the Hebrews. 107
That effectual consolations may be derived and drawn only from Divinity,
and especially from the knowledge of Gods Providence.

Chap. 1.
GLorious doubtless, and which may vehementlye move the minds of all men, is
the promise and warrant of humane Philosophy: for by it (they say) men are
perfected, and brought to the knowledge of the sovereign truth: by it men are
taught how to frame best their manners and conversation: by it men's minds are
armed against all assaults of fortune either subtly fawning or enuiously
insulting: finally, by it is showed a way, whereby a man may attain unto happy
life and immortality. But it we weigh the matter indifferently, we shall find
that only from our Divinity all these things may exactly be performed. For
why? each one perceives, that natural men, by whom all those things are
gathered together that are set to sale under the name of Philosophy, do all
err and fail in many things: but unto God, who has written and put forth
divine matters as only best known to him self, no such thing may possiblye
be ascribed. Whereby it comes to pass, that in the writings of the
Philosophers, wherein they labor to set out the truth, a man may find every
where mixte opinions very absurd and contrary one to another, where upon arises
greater doubtfulnes then certainty. A witness hereof I have that notable
Philosopher M. Vario, who has left in writing, that as touching the ends of
good and evil, there were extant at once, two hundredth fourscore and eight
sundry sects and opinions.

But when they would frame and order a City, a family, or the manners of
every private man, good God, what cold stuff, and oftentimes how ill agreeing
together have they broached and put forth? To say nothing, that by some have
been propounded such things to be brought into Commonweals (the Communion
of Socrates and Plato amongst other things is well known) as from the which
all men endued with any common sense of nature do worthily fly and abhor.
But if at any time they covet to comfort a man stricken with adversity, even
here also they go very confusedlye to work, whilst some of the^ labor to
remove the very name of calamity, as though it were a thing not to be
accounted off, will some men to imagine I cannot tell what senselesnes, or want
of greef, clean contrary to manifest experience: other some again set before
men eyes (painted in colors after a sort) a certain image of fortitude, such
as never was, nor never shall be: and yet in the mean time they are never able
to drive away care, fear, and the sense of sorrow and grief from their
minds. Now as touching the blessed life after this painful and troublesome
life to be looked for, judge ye, whether any thing certain be by them brought
and alleged, of whom the greatest part count those things for fables and
trifles to be laughed at, which are brothed and set forth of men like to
themselves, concerning the rewards of good men and punishments of the evil,
calling even into question, whither there be any life at all remaining in the
soul, or no.

But truly, Divinity is such a thing, as may fully satiffie the minds
(desirous of true wisdom) of all these things. This, in a few sacred books
(for so are they called not without a cause) comprehends clearly and without
any error, what-soeuer is necessary to make perfect and bring the whole man to
true happiness. In these books is the knowledge of the first and sovereign
truth (which is God him self, and whose only word is the truth) so much as
is expedient to be known of men in this life, plainly and substantially
opened. In these the short tables of the laws do declare and set forth all
the whole rule of good living, and the same in all respects so absolute and
answerable to Gods will, that the prince of Prophets Moses most justly gloried,
that there was never any people or nation, that had their Common weal so
wiselye ordered and established (whither we consider the rites appertaining to
religion, or the judicial form of laws, or the manner of contractes and
bargains, and other things of like sort needful and necessary for the common
use of man's life) as had the people of the Jews, taught and instructed in all
things by God himself. In these are expressed and set forth most perfect and
present remedies, which avail not only to the easing and helping of outward
evils, but also to the pacifying and appeasing of men's consciences, which
being stricken with the fear of Gods most severe judgment should otherwise
be driven into desperation: of which matter Philosophy has touched no one jot
or title. To be short, in these only books, has God him self declared (which
cannot be deceived) what a happy and blessed life is, in what points it
consists, where, when by what means, and to what manner of persons it
belongs. So as he that will bestow any diligence at all in learning of these
books, by the guiding of the holy Ghost, that man (whosoever he be) shall well
perceive and see these things to be true as we have said.

For-so-much therefore as Divinity shows her self a very excellent Mistress
in all these things, and perfourmeth so much in deed as any man can possibly
desire, yet in comfortes and consolations to be fitly ministered against all
greefes and calamities that can happen, she is beyond all measure rich and
bountiful, even the mighty Apostle Paul himself bearing record, who doubted
not to say, that whatsoever things are written aforecime, are written for our
learning, that through patience and comfort of the Scriptures we might have
hope. For so does God seem for this cause especially to have sent into the
world at sundry times his Prophets and Apostles to be witnesses of his good
will toward us, and further to have put in writing their Sermons and dooinges,
to the end that men of all ages might have amongst themselves everlasting
monumentes, out of which they might provide plentiful matter of consolation
against all euentes and occasions, and certainly learn, that they should never
utterly be forsaken of God. And who I pray you) could either better or more
effectually heal our maladies, then God him self by his word? who as he is
the only searcher of the hearts, so he soon percetueth, where our sore
greeueth us: and as by his determinate purpose, though unknown unto us, he
oftentimes sends calamities for some special benefit of ours so he only
and alone knows, after what sort and how long it is meet and convenient for
us to be afflicted.

Wherefore, I being desirous at this time, wherein all things are full of most
greeuo^^ and rare dangers (for in what histories readett thou that ever at any
one tune there have been such bitter iarres and dissentions in the cause of
religion, so many monstrous heresies, so cruel persecutions of the godly, such
horrible wars without ceassing in all ye provinces of Europe, so many
tumultes and vprores, captiuities and eriles of most mighty kings and Princes,
such ouerflowinges of the Seas and waters, so many sudden and unlooked for
fires whereof some is supposed to have fallen from heaven, other some to have
brast out of the earth: such cruel hunger and scarcity, so universal a
plague and pestilence, so many strange kinds of diseases far surmounting the
skill and cunning of ye physicians, as in our time and that of late years to
speak off, we have seen, (alas poor wretches that we are) with our eyes? I
being desirous (I say) to gather some furnitures of comfort and consolation,
and that as well for the behoof of all men in general, to whom we are bound
in the band of Christian Religion and mutual charity, as also in especial
for the godlyes sake, whom we now see, as gazing stocks and of-scourings of
the world, to be laid open to the injuries of all men, as by tirants to be
spoiled of their goods, to be condemned most unjustly, to wander here and
there in exile and bannishment, and thereby to taste of wars, famine,
pestilence, and other innumerable discommodities: Verily I supposed, that I
could not more conuemently draw them from any other place, then out of the
most plentiful storehouse of the holy and sacred books And that for sooth
not only, because there can no kind of danger be devised, against which
there be not extant in those books many remedies provided: but also for
because that whatsoever things are brought from else where, we know assuredly
they shall never obtain so great weight and credit with the Godly, neither yet
so speedily, nor effectually prevail and go for payement. For why? look how
much divine things excel humane, and so much also is it necessary that we
prefer divine comfortes before all Philosophical consolations.

But for as much as in the holy Scripture many things are sundrilye every
where set forth, which may very much avail to ye comfort of afflicted minds
(for some where are found places teaching the vanity and contempt of all
earthly things: some-where are rehearsed most large and ample promises touching
the dignity of heavenly benefits to be looked for after this life: some where
are recounted the examples of holy men, who after they had been exercised with
great and continual conflictes of trialls and temptations, at the length were
wonderfully delivered out of all their distresses: some where is Christ him
self in the books of the Prophets and Apostles painted forth, humbled and
cast down, but afterward again lifted up and exalted: some-where are the
common calamities of the Church (at all times hanging over it) fore-tolde and
declared, and promises added as touching deliverance never to be wanting:
some-where are sprinkled exhortations to the pacient bearing of the Cross
after the example of Christ and the holy Fathers, we least we should
confusedly and unorderly heap together many matters, have chosen one place
especially, which in my judgment is notable above the rest, and very fit to
minister plentiful matter of all fortes of consolations, to the which also as
a fountain and well spring all the other places before specified may be
referred. This same is the place Of Gods providence, which whosoever shall with
some diligence peruse and consider, unto him verilye, we suppose, nothing can
be wanting, that belongs to the matter of comfort and consolation. This place
therefore we have thought good for the cause aforesaid, so much as shall be
convenient for our purpose, to stand upon and handle And to the intent we may
reap the more plentiful crop of consolations, I suppose it will be for our
behoof, if we unfold it somewhat the more at large.

Being about therefore to speak of Gods providence, we deem these principal
points following, as most requisite to be handled.

First, that we open and declare, what is to be understood by the name of
Providence, adding ther-unto the testimonies of Scripture, whereby it may
appear plainly both that there is a Providence, and that also such a one, as
we have defined it to be. Then will we deal against those men, that being
moved with certain considerations dare be so bold as to deny it.

Secondly, wherein it differs from Gods predestination, foreknowledge and
wisdom: and that the Providence of God is not only universal, but also
particular: dispatching some things, which are wont to be alleged to the
contrary.

Thirdly we will prove, that neither chance nor fortune, nor destiny, nor
haphazard can rightlye be maintained, where there is due knowledge of Gods
Providence, and the same woorthily esteemed.

Fourthly, we will breefly discuss, whether Gods Providence imposes
necessity upon things provided, or no.

Fifthly, we will diligently declare, how out of all those things that have
been spoken of Gods Providence, godly minds ought to fetch matter of
consolation, and so to reap most ample fruit by the knowledge of divine
Providence.

Sirtly to the intent we may the more largely and ordinately teach, that
against all sorts of dangers there are certain remedies also appointed by
Gods providence, we will interpret and expound the 107. Psalm. which is
altogether spent in the praising and setting forth of Gods providence.

All which things being thus declared, we will add a few words touching the
general comme^dation of the knowledge of Gods providence, and the right use of
Divine consolations, and so will we make an end of our present discourse.

What Providence is: and testimonies of Scripture, whereby is proved that it
is, and likewise also the definition thereof more fully opened. Then against
those that have denied providence.

Chap. 2.
BEfore we determine whether there be a Providence of God, or no, it is
requisite to know, what is understood by ye name of Providence. We call Gods
Providence, a perpetual and unchangeable disposition and administration of all
things that be.

And that Providence is such, and the same also most mighty, vnweriable, and
continually woorking, it is no hard matter to declare out of the Scriptures.
Esa. 43. I am the Lord, and beside me there is no Savior. I have declared, and
I have saved, and I have caused you to hear, when there was no strange God
among you: and you are my witnesses, says the Lord, that I am God. Yea before
the day was, I am, and there is none that can deliver out of my hand. I will
do it, and who shall let it? And every where are places to be found, in which,
what notable and wonderful things soever are said either to have or shall
come to pass, are only and alone attributed unto God. There is no place
almost but thou may hear these sayings: I will be with thee, I will be thy
protector and defe^der, I have stricken Pharaoh. I have brought you out of
Egypt, I will wound and heal, etc. A man may find also very often
exhortations made to consider as well the great and usual things that happen,
as also that succeed by natural course and order, done and procured by God
him self. Joan. 5. Christ says plainly: My Father works even until this
time, and I also work. Ephesians. 1. By his power come all things to pass
according to the purpose of his own will.

Behold therefore in general God continually woorking, and no less
wonderfully preserving and governing, the things so wonderfully by him made
and created.

But now also in special manner, proceeding thoughout the parts of the whole,
it is showed by many places of the Scripture, that God has even of these also
a diligent care and consideration. Certes, that the perpetual administration
of heavenly things is ascribed unto God, we see it throughout the whols Chap.
37. of Job, where amongst other things he says: Consider the wonderful
works of God, know thou not how God prescribes an order unto them, and
lighteneth the clouds with his brightness?

The care in like manner that God has in the earth and in the waters is every
where commended and set forth. Psalm. 147. He covers the heaven with Clouds,
and prepares rain for the earth, and makes the herbs to grow upon the
mountains.

Now again, that God cares for men's matters, Job declares at large
throughout his whole Chap. 34.

Likewise the whole Psalm. 23. The Lord feeds me, therefore shall I want
nothing. Iere. 10. I know O Lord, that the way of man is not in him self,
neither is it in man to walk and direct his steps. Proverb. 21. A man's
goinges proceed from the Lord, and how then shall he dispose his own way?
Act. 17. By him we live and move, and have our being, Math. 10. Even the
hears of your head are all numbered.

Yea and further, that God cares also for things far inferior to the state
of man, it is plain and manifest. Psalm. 145. The eyes of all things look up
and trust in thee (O Lord) and thou give them their meat in due season.

Thou openest thy hand and fillest every living thing with thy good blessing.
Psalm. 147.

He gives foder unto the Cattle, and feeds the young Ravens which call upon
him.

Math. 10. Are not two Sparrowes sold for a farthing? and not one of them
shall fall on the ground without your Father.

All the things therefore universally that are and shall come to pass as well in
ye heavens as in the earth, and not only those that belong unto man, but also
the things that are far beneath the degree of man, and are esteemed of us to
be vile and base, God as he first made and created them, so does he still
care for them, nourish and govern them, every where setting forth his
wisdom, goodness and power to be seen: which Providence of God also toward all
things is very notably painted forth in ye Psalm. 104. again likewise Psalm.
148. wherein all Creatures are invited and stirred up to celebrate the praises
of GOD.

And out of these so many and so manifest festimonies may abundantly appeer the
truth and integrity of the definition which we before alleged. We said that
Providence is a certain disposition and administration, coveting (undoubtedly)
by these two words to show and declare, that even before any things come to
pass, and likewise also when they are accomplished and brought to pass, the
divine power is gravely and seriously occupied (so far forth as is beseeming
to his Majesty) about them For we may not so take the matter that God does
only once determine with himself, how every thing ought to be ordered, and
then afterward commit ye business unto some other inferior causes, to prosecute
the things that he before ordained, and to bring them to their end: but we must
understand that he does continually put to his hand, until that which is most
wisely ordained, be most mightily absolved and thoroughly accomplished.

Otherwise Providence should be no whit more excellent then bare
foreknowledge: and the title indeed of admmistration might be attributed unto
God, but the thing it self should seem not greatly to belong unto him. Like
as many things are done in the name of Kings and Princes, and are said to be
dispatched by their commandment, which notwithstanding they scarce know or
understand, how and after what sort they come to pass, because they are done
by other ministers. But the case stands not so with God. He alone not only
purposes and ordayneth all things but also orders and administreth them.
Neither yet ought he to be understood so to administer things, as one suddenly
or at adventure doing this or that, like as those men are wont to do yt are
distracted with many matters and dealinges: but he with a certain purpose and
determination, and to ends lawful and good, like unto men wisely and long
time deliberating of things to be done, finisheth and accomplisheth all
things. Otherwise all things should be carried headlong with a certain
blind and doubtful motion, and Providence should little differ from chance
and fortune: and if any thing succeeded well, or came to good pass, it might
seem to be attributed to chance: as it is wont to be done, where without any
deliberation before had, some Captain suddenly and at a wild venture breaking
upon his enemies, obtayneth yet the victory: which doubtless is said to come
to pass rather by haphazard then by any direction of the will or wisdom. But
of God undoubtedly, whose wisdom reaches mightily from one end unto an other,
and disposes all things sweetleye and comfortablye, we may not so speak. We
suppose therefore that this last property may plainly and fitly be expressed by
the word Disposition, and that other by the word Administration, and so that
no small force of Gods providence is opened in those two words. We said yt it
is a perpetual administration, intending to signify, that as Gods power and
wisdom are never idle or unoccupied, so neither that the care and government of
things created, is ever at any time rast aside or removed from him. For why?
God woorketh not by turns or fittes, as one that is sometimes weary and
requires the enterchangeable help of a deputye, unto whom he might commit the
office of sustaining and keeping all things upright: but he works
continually without ceasing all in all, and only and alone brings all
things to their appointed end. We said that it is unchangeable, to show, that
in all things that come to pass, yea even in base and inferior things, the
ordinance of God is certain and sure: in as much as it is necessary that we
attribute unto God an everlasting decree, stable purpose, and infallable
wisdom, for why? God is not changed, neither does he only purpose and begin,
but also perform and accomplish: yea and look what he has once decreede it
shall come to pass, whatsoever is said or done to the contrary. As touching
the forces of man's will, whither they be able to do any thing in this behalf,
we will declare in place convenient. Last of all we said that it is of All
things, to the end that it might appear that all things both great and small
are subject to Gods Providence. For if in case any thing could be conceived in
mind, that might spring or be disposed from any other where then from the
providence of God: we should of necessity either imagine some other beginning
equal to God him self, from whom that thing should come and proceed: or else
at the least that the same thing so sprung up of it self, and standing by his
own strength, had a hidden power of Divinity in it, and were even a new God:
which once to think or speak is abominable. But this particle shall be
declared more at large, when we come to speak of particular providence. In the
mean season where all ye parts are in this wise more deeply weighed and
examined, doubtless there is conceived a certain wonderful majesty of Gods
providence, and men's minds may secretlye be stirred up to woorship and adore
the same. And hitherto, whither there be any Providence of God, and next what
it is, I suppose it be sufficiently declared.

But we have yet to deal against those men, that being provoked with I wotte
not what persuasions of man's corrupt reason, dare presume to deny providence.
These men's reasons we will bring forth, and least any man's mind should be
moved by them to err, we will clearly confute them. Then will we add other
arguments also of man's reason, which may confirm every man in the right
knowledge of Gods providence. These are the arguments of the deniers of it.

1. That is only to be attributed unto God, which is beseeming to his
Matestie, and wherein his dignity is extolled and not depressed or obscured.
But if the care of humane things be attributed unto god, his majesty in this
point seems not a little to be hurt, and very much to be detracted from his
dignity and woorthines. For what is this else, the^ to thrust God from his
celestial glory, and to draw him down into this filthy mire of worldly
things? Therefore it is not to be thought, that God cares for men's matters,
and least of all for those that are more vile and base the^ man. Which argument
is recorded for the most part in Plime, where he speaks in this sort: It is
a thing doubtless to be laughed at, to say, that the thing which is cheifest
above all other, cares for men's affairs. Should we not believe or doubt that
he is defiled with so heavy and combersome a ministerye? And it flowed from
out of the school of Epicurus, which denied not God indeed, as did Diagoras,
Melius and such like: but yet notwithstanding he imagined, that if he would be
happy and blessed in deed, he must be altogether idle, and void of all care.
For so Epicurus being vanquished with the weakness of his own brain, thought
that providence could not be established, but with the great trouble and
vexation of God, as though God were after the manner of men subject to
affections, and could be grieved and oppressed with troubles.

2. If God regarded things humane, then all things should be done in due
order, according as were convenient to the justice and goodness of God. But we
see openly and almost commonly that all things are boon most confusedly and
out of order, and that with evil men it goes well, and contrariwise with good
men, ill. Therefore there is no providence of God, and god regards not humane
affairs. Which argument also is confirmed with a certain similitude. Like as
neither a house nor Commonweal is said to be established in due order and
discipline, if in it there be neither rewards appointed for good deeds, nor
punishments for defaultes: so seems the world not to be governed by divine
moderation. And this argument is of most weight and has moved very much the
minds even of wise men, For seeing most vile and wretched persons, tirantes,
traitors and such like, to enjoy good success, and to live long in happy
state and condition, and contrarily all things to fall out unhappily to the
good and virtuous, and oftetimes to be very despitefullye handled of the
wicked, and to be dispatched out of the way, at the least to come very seldom
to any good point or issue: they could judge no other, but that God in very
deed was not acquainted with men's matters, and much less had any care of
them: according as it is reported that Diogenes Cynicus was wunt to say, that
Harpalus (who in those days was counted a very happy and fortunate thief)
bare witness against the Gods, because he lived so long time in that estate
and condition. Yea the Saints and holy men have been moved sometimes by this
consideration, to suspect, that they had utterly been forsaken of God, and
that God had no manner of care of them. As touching which thing Psalm. 72. the
godly man David being afflicted and in heaviness complains, saying: How does
God know it? or is there knowledge in the most highest? Lo these are the
wicked, yet prosper they always in the world, and increase in riches.
Certainlye I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my handes^n innocence,
etc. Psalm. 74.75.

3. If God provided for men's matters, it should cheefely appear by this, that
he has given unto man reason, which in very deed seems to be as a certain
testimonye of Gods divine power and goodness always conversant and abiding with
men. But this way it appears not sufficiently that man is provided for.
Therefore God passes not for men's matters. The minor or second proposition is
proved. For from the reason which God has given unto man, there arise daily
more evils and inconveniences unto him the^ benefits or good turns. Therefore
either God cares not for men's matters, or it had been much better if man had
not had reason given unto him at al, then to be given with so great
discommodities. This proof is confirmed by a similitude: like as wine because
it sildome times helps, but oftentimes hurts sick folks, is better not to
be ministered unto them at all, then to be dangerously taken: even so reason, in
as much as it seems to procure more hurt unto man then good, it had been
better not to be given unto him at all, then so bountifully and largely to be
given.

These are the chief arguments, being of greatest weight and moment: out of
which all other, if any be alleged, do for the most part flow and proceed.
These then we will in few words dispatch.

To the first it is answered by denying the Minor or second proposition. For
why? Gods Majesty is not here diminished, but rather becomes more famous
and notable. The mo things that God does, the more shines forth his power
and goodness in the^. And God is no more defiled with the care of things
earthly and vile, then the Sun is defiled by shining even upon foul and
filthy places. Neither must we imagine that God is proud, and a contemner of
the things that he humselfe has created, as though he should despise the^, as
unworthy of him self: and much less that he seeks his ease, as though he
should at any time be wearied with labor. Wherefore it is no strange matter for
God, to take unto him self ye care of things earthly. But if any reply and
say, yt even Kings regard not all things, specialy such as are of least
account, and therefore deem it a thing very unmeet, that the care of inferior
matters should be attributed unto God: doubtless these men are much deceived.
These men will take upon the^ to judge of divine matters by things humane. But
this similitude is of no force. For why? Kings are compelled to commit many
things unto other, because in very deed they are not able to do all things of
themselves: but the case stands not so with God. He needs not the help of
a substitute or deputy: he is able to bring to pass whatsoever he will
Neither is any thing unworthy of God, that is turned unto good. But whatsoever
is done by him, is turned unto good: if not unto good in respect of us, yet
certes unto good in respect of God him self, that is to say, to the
illustration and setting forth of his power, goodness and wisdom which is
sufficient. But of this thing more at large, when we shall entreat of
particular Providence.

To the second it is answered by denying again the Minor: because that in this
is the judgment of man's reason deceived, for that it cannot discern the
causes, for which God ordains these things so to come to pass in the world.

First, reason cannot judge, that all men indifferently are sinners before God,
and that none can be found so holy, but that he has deserved the wrath of God.
This if reason could perceive it might understand that it is by no means
against order or justice, that even good men alare afflicted in this world.

Secondly, reason fails in this point, in that it supposes al these evils
to be sent from God being angry, and to ye destruction of men: when as
notwithstanding the Scripture manifestly teaches, that scourges are oft-times
tokens of Gods good will (for whom the Lord looueth, them he chastizeth: Heb.
12. Proverb. 3) and likewise for the behoof and profit of the good that are
afflicted. For ye godly by this means are excercised and grow forward in
faith, they are stirred up to invocation of God, to patience and charity
toward their neighbor, they are strengthened in hope etc. But contrariwise,
benefits and happy success do turn for the most part to men's destruction.
For by them men are estranged from God, they conceive boldenes and contempt
against their brethren, yea they are blinded by little and little, until at
length they come utterly to confusion.

Thirdly, albeit God sends evils and calamities unto good men as punishing
the^ and being angry with them, yet he does it, whilst they live here in
this world, least after they be departed, they should be compelled to suffer
in an other world ( we are chastned of the Lord, says the Apostle, 1. Corinthians. 11. to the intent we should not be condemned with the world) and so be
subject to everlasting torments. But to the wicked and ungodly, he grants
all things prosperous here in this life, to the end that afterward they may so
much the more justly be damned, and severely punished. Of which thing we have a
testimony in the Euan gelicall example of Lazarus and the rich man.

These causes I say, wherein both the righteousness and goodness of God does
appear, the holy Scripture propounds unto us: but reason being destitute of
the word: cannot see or perceive them. Wherefore it is manifest, in this
behalf, to wit, in that the godly are punished here, and the wicked not so,
that we must not say, that therefore things are here disorderly done: when as
all these things are for certain profitable causes, and unto just and lawful
ends directed by Gods dispensation. But as touching the fore said similitude,
we answer that all things are not here alike. For why^in the Commonweal,
it is a thing necessary in deed to be observed, that to the evil punishments
should be inflicted, and rewards to the good: because that without this
consideration neither could public peace and tranquillity stand, neither any
order be kept and retained. But in the administration of the world, albeit the
godly are afflicted, and the wicked escape, yet remain all things still in
good order, and God turns that inequality unto a good end and purpose.

To the third argument it is answered, that God indeed has adorned man with
that excellent gift of reason, whereby he might not only surmount all other
creatures, but also have in him self a certain testimonye of the divine power
always present and woorking in him. For in this respect man is said to be
created after the likeness of God, and to bear the image of God about him. But
in such wise did God give it to the first man, that he put it in his choice and
power, to use the same freelye either unto good or evil. When therefore man
turned it unto evil, and also to his own destruction, doubtless the fault
was to be imputed unto him self, who so shamefully abused so great a benefit.
Wherefore it follows not that it had been better not to have been given unto
man, then to be given with so great discommodities: for it was given to a good
end, and he might have used it well if he had would: in which behalf
doubtless God had abundantly provided for man. But after the fall of man,
albeit all men are carried more pronely unto evil then unto good, and that
there remains scarce one little spark of man's liberty, yet for all that
reason abides still not so far forth in all respects depraved and
perverted, but that it is a very evident mark of Gods image, and testifies
that God has even still a care of mortal men, according as we may see a
number by the guiding thereof to be led and prepared (after a sort) unto
good. More-ouer God does still govern the mind and reason, secretly stirs
them unto virtue and goodness, woorking al in in all: as touching which thing we
have often and many sentences in the Scriptures, and some we have cited before.
It is evident therefore, that God does provide for men's matters. Now without
any business may other reasons be answered that are wont to be objected, of
which sort is this: If God, say they, have provided for man in giving him
reason, then for those only has he provided, upon whom he has bestowed good
reason, which undoubtedly are very few, and almost none at all. But it is an
absurd thing to say, that God provides only for some few, neglecting or
excluding others: It follows therefore, that no man is provided for. We say
that God would indeed provide indifferentlye for all men, like as he has
indifferently given to all men the benefit of reason: but in that some do use
it better then other some, it consists for the most part in the men
themselves But if they yet proceeding further will infer, that even God him
self also is to be blamed, who has given reason unto these, whom he knew
would use the same peenishlye and peruersly: like as that Physician is not
without fault, that grants to his patient wine, and yet knows well enough
that if he take it without mixture, it will soon turn to his bane and poison.
Here the consequence is denied. For albeit God knew before that man would
abuse the benefit of reason, yet was it convenient in the mean time for Gods
goodness, to deck and adorn man with most large and ample gifts, to the
intent that afterward the whole blame might so much the more justly be laid
upon him, in whose choice it was to use the commodity received either well or
ill. Furthermore considering that God also foreknew, how and by what means to
succor and provide for man again being fallen, and how greatly his glory,
power and goodness ought to be advanced and set forth by his restoring again:
considering likewise that God was by no law bound unto man, to keep him from
falling: certes he cannot be judged to have done either unwisely or unjustly,
in adorning man with reason that was afterward to fall, and in suffering him to
slide.

But against these arguments now propounded, we will set other again much more
strong and forceable, proouing the providence of God to the intent that if any
be offended any way with the former, the same may have reasons fetched even
from nature it self, by the which they may again strengthen and confirm their
minds, for although the Scripture ought to be of such account with all men,
that look what the same has once pronounced, should be received with all
diligence: yet notwithstanding either by reason of the adversaries, that
embrace not the Scripture: or for ye weakes sake, whose reason evermore still
strugleth and strives, neither willingly submits it self to the authority
of the word: It is profitable sometimes to bring forth ye arguments of
reason, not verily to the end that by them that which is expressed in ye word
of God should be confirmed, but to the intent that they should serve and wait
upon Gods word. For otherwise in very deed they are not to be received. Let
this therefore be the first reason.

1 If there be a God, it is necessary and requisite that he be occupied, and
that truly about somewhat very excellent and worthy of God. But there is
nothing more excellent and more beseeming unto God, then to govern ye world
which himself has created. Therefore ye world is ruled by Gods providence.

2 If the world be not governed by God, the^ by some other thing that is endued
with a greater force and wisdom, whatsoever a man list to imagine it to be. But
there is no such thing to be foud, that is either more mighty or more wise then
God, for otherwise God should not be almighty and most wise. Therefore is the
world governed by God himself.

3 If God in no wise governs all things, then it is either because he
knows not how, or because he cannot, or because he will not. But neither of
these is to be spoken of God. Therefore God regards and disposes all things.
That he knows not how, how can it agree unto him that is the sovereign
truth, whereby he seeeth and perceives whatsoever is any where to be found,
and from which also al knowledge and understanding flows unto men? That he
cannot, is as false as the other, for so much as he is the highest power, whereby
he accomplisheth whatsoever he will. And that he will not, it must of
necessity be furthest off from him, which is ye sovereign goodness it self.
But if he could save any thing, and did neglect it, then doubtless he should
worthily be spoiled of the title and dignity of the sovereign good. And this
argument is very forceable, proouing of necessity the providence of God.

4 We see a most beautiful and perpetual order of all things amongst
themselves, but especially of the Sun, the Moon, the Stars: we see the
appointed times and seasons of the year to follow successively one after
another: we see other such like things always to come to pass most decently
throughout the whole world, by the which there redoundeth an incomparable
commodity and benefit to all mankind. Therefore the world is governed by
Gods providence.

5 In the Elements (as they call them) this order is observed, that by the
course and interchangeablenes of them, the nature of the world is continued:
likewise in the earth and in all those things that come of the earth, as by an
everlasting order and for an infinite space of tune are procreated Trees,
Fruits, Vines, Beasts etc. and that truly so comely, and so profitablie are
all these things disposed and set in order, that better or more wisely they
could not be. Therefore God governs the world, yea and rules these inferior
things by his providence.

6 If we look upon things most worthy of admiration as well in the nature of
celestial bodies, as also interrestriall, but chiefly on the creatures,
amongst which there are very many brute beasts found adorned with a certain
vnperceiueable force of nature secretly woorking in them: yet man, as well for
the excellent powers of the soul, as also for the inestimable frame and
feature of the body, does easily pass and surmount all other, and therefore is
called not unworthily, microcosmos, a little world: these things I say, if we
more nearly consider and look into, doubtless our senses must either be very
senseless and sottish, orels they will enforce us to confess, that with a
certain soueraign providence (such as cannot be perceived but in God alone)
the world with all and singular the parts thereof is incessantly governed and
preserved.

7 The experience of great and mighty successes, especially in heroical
personages, which contrary to the hope and expectation of all men have
accomplished those things that every man judged to be far above humane
strength and ability, (of which sort many things are reported of Alexander,
Julius Caesar, and others) does plainly prove, that there was present with
them a certain divine power, and therefore that all things among men come to
pass by Gods ordinance. Which thing seems to have moved the Poets to
attribute unto worthy men Gods for their parents or defenders.

8 The common consent of all men, naturally engraffed in them, whereby they are
wont to ask and look for all good things from God: further the love and
likement of rites belonging to the woorship of God, semblably ingenerate in all
men, do manifestlye prove that men cannot otherwise think and be persuaded,
but that God regards our affairs, hears our requests, sends both
prosperity and adversity, and to be short, has a care of all our matters and
proceedings whatsoever.

And thereupon it appears it came to pass that Pliny somewhat sondely
entreating of Gods providence, shamefully ouershot and spoke against him self:
for when he had said that it was a thing ridiculous, that the chief and
sovereign thing whatsoever it were should have a care of men's matters, he
added not long after: that it was to be believed by the use and experience of
man's life, that ye Gods had a care of men's matters. Which truelyare contrary
one unto an other, unless we so take it, that by that chief and sovereign
thing is understood God regarding only things heavenly, as Aristotle
imagined: and by the Gods to be meant many and diverse inferior powers as
substitutes, unto whom it belongs to care for these things here below.

But hitherto to prove the providence of God, and to open what it is, I fear
least it may seem over much.

Wherein the Providence of God differs from his foreknowledge*
Predestination, and wisdom: and that Gods providence is not only universal,
but also particular.

Chap. 3.
Now the matter requires that we declare more at large what this Providence
is, and how far the force thereof extends. But before we do that, it is
requisite to show wherein Gods providence differs from the foreknoweledge,
Predestination and wisdom of God: least in proceeding we rashly confou^d the
properties that belong unto them: For why? we have not to determine alike of
these things, although in many points they may seem to agree together.

Predestination properly is the everlasting decree of God, wherein he has
determined with himself, what shall beco^e of every man as touching either
eternal salvation or damnation, for so did God also before the foundations of
the world were laid decree that among men Peeter should be saved, and Judas
destroyed: and so likewise of every one, whether they were to be saved or
damned according to that saying of Paul Ephesians. 1. He has chosen us in him,
before the foundations of the World, that we should be holy, and unreprovable
before him through love: who has predestinate us, to be adopted into children
through Jesus Christ in him self, according to the good pleasure of his will.
And as touching ye signs or marks and also effects of predestination, we have
some things written Romans 8. For those which he knew before, he also
predestinate (or preordeyned) to be made like to the Image of his son, that
he might be the first borne among many brethere^. Moreover whom he
predestined; them also he called: and whom he called, them also he
justified: and whom he justified, them also he glorified.

Now, Foreknowledge is that, whereby all things as well forepast, as to come are
by them selves known unto God, and that in such sort as though they were
present and before his eyes. For God foreknoweth all things, not verily as
foreseeing only what shall become hereafter of this or that, as men sometime
are said to foreknowe certain things, or at the least presume as though they
foreknew them: neither yet as one conceiving a naked form or figure only in
his mind, like as there is wont to wander in our imaginations, a certain
shape and image of those things which either we have seen before, or look
to see afterward: but viewing and beholding al things whether they be past or
to come, as though they were present, and that truly with singular certainty
and most perfect knowledge. Wherefore also it is rather called Foreknowledge
then Foresight. For why? in God there cannot be seen or discerned any
proportion of the time past or to come (for he surmou^teth all times, being
him self set far abooue all measure and quantity of time) wherefore it is
necessary that we conclude, that all things are known unto him as though
they were present: and further that no new or strange thing happens unto
him, when the things which he foreknewe come to pass: as who should say, he
then received the knowledge, of those things, of which before he had only the
foreknowledge, according as we are wont to say of a man: but we must avouch al
and the whole Foreknowledge to be in God simply as knowledge, like as Augustine
wittily writes to Simplicianus Book 2. Quest. 2. And albeit Cicero does deny
the Foreknowledge of God in his second book of Divination, where disputing with
his brother Quintus he labors to take away all foresight or fore-iudgement
of things to come as well from God as from men: that makes no great matter. He
truly is contrary to him self, who after that he had in one place very
gravely determined of providence, here he most childishly denies
foreknowledge, when as that without this can by no means be understood in God.
But he that coueteth to know more against this vanity of Cicero, let him read
Augustine de Ciuitate Dei. Lib. 5. Cap. 9. throughout which Chapter there is a
very apt disputation set down as touching this whole matter.

But Wisdom, whereby God is said oftentimes in ye scriptures to have created
and to govern al things, is taken to be a certain power more largely
stretching it self, whereby he foreknoweth, predestinateth, and provides or
administrateth all things rightly and ordinarily to his own glory, to our
profit, and the utility and ornament of all things created: and is said to do
all things wisely.

And that we may contract all things into a sum, predestination is occupied
cheefely about the eternal salvation and damnation of men, which is to follow
after this life: providence is occupied in ye administration of those things
which by an everlasting and infallible succession come to pass, throughout the
whole world, and through the whole life of men. Predestination tends
directlye to the last end: providence directs the means that belong
ther-unto. Foreknowledge does nothing else, then most aduisedlye consider all
things that are to come, paste, and present: Finallye, wisdom may be weighed
as a certain several faculty and most largely spreading it self, usually
applied unto all things that GOD does. Predestination cannot be without
foreknowledge, but foreknowledge may well be without Predestination.
Providence also is not without foreknowledge, nevertheless foreknowledge may
stand again without providence. But without wisdom, neither foreknowledge,
nor predestination, nor providence, no nor any thing else that God does, can
stand or consist. Therefore, that predestination, foreknowledge, and wisoome
do differ one from another, and also from providence, it is heerby plain and
evident.

Furthermore these things being thus declared, a way is after a sort opened
to enquire, what manner of thing Gods providence is, what it does? what power
it is of, and how it is occupied in the administration of all things? But we
will allege in this behalf the diverse opinions also of the Philophers, to the
intent it may appear how man's reason even here likewise in examining of
providence has unhappily bewrayed her blindenes: then next, the judgments of
those that have embraced our religion, and what things especially are to be
followed.

1 Some Philosophers there be that have thrust providence into too narrow a
room, allowing in deed that God looks down upon all things from above, and
further granting that there is an infinite power adioined, whereby many things
do on every side come wonderfully to pass: but the full power and authority
and daily administration of things, or to speak more grossly, the very
handling and ordering of matters they have separated from him, appointing all
these offices unto other inferior Gods or potestates, I know not to whom,
unto whose government and direction all things that here are accomplished,
ought to be ascribed. But this what is it else, th^n with Epicurus to imagine a
certain fantastical God, unto whom the glorious title of providence is
given, but the thing it self utterly taken away? It is indeed granted by this
means that there is in God knowledge or foresight, but such as in no wise
intermedleth it self with the doing of things: there is granted also unto
him power, but such as is idle, and in very deed utterly impotent. which
things since they are very far off from God, certes against these men as those
that deny principles, we have not to dispute.

2 Other some, of whose number is Aristotle with his followers, have somewhat
more largely stretched the compass of Gods providence, although enclosed yt in
certain limits, attributing (as who says) unto it ye administration of
supernall and celestial things, which are next to ye house of God, which
house all men acknowledge to be heaven: but that he should pass any further,
descending to things below, where he might peruse and set in order the earth
and earthly things, that they suppose to be unbeseeming so great a majesty. In
the mean season they judged these things to be governed of the heaven and of
the stars, and also of the parts next adjoining unto them, in which they
suspected a certain secret power and virtue to be, which they named destiny
and a necessary connection of all causes and effects together. For they
imagined, first a certain most large and ample virtue to be conneighed from
the divine nature by one and the selfsame simple motion into the things
which are next unto it, that is to say the heavens: then from these likewise
to flow a new force and virtue unto those things which immediatlye follow,
and and so forth on by a long course and order even unto the lowest, so long
and so far forth as all things feel in themselves any part of the divine
moving. The matter may be made more clear by a similitude. If a man take and
draw the first link or ring of a chain that is rolled together and laid
upon an heap, it is necessary that eue^ forthwith the second link also should
be moved, and so forth all the rest, until the whole chain do follow whither
soever he will: so judge they Gods providence to deal in the administration of
things, first forsooth in woorking upon heavenly things next adjoining, and
then in passing by many things set between, to come by little and little even
unto the lower also. But if a man demand of them, why God moves not by like
reason all inferior things also: they answer, that it is not seemelye even for
Kings themselves, to know and understand all things: neither meet to be
spoken, that God should have the charge of such labors committed unto him, as
a vile slave or scullion in a Princes Court would scarce undertake to do. But
we also say, that for him that rules and coueteth to order all things aright,
it is not only not unseemly, but also dangerous, to neglect wittingly even the
least things that make to that purpose. Wherefore this reason may serve, to
prove also that some things do seem fit for Gods providence, though the
judgment of divine matters should be drawn from things humane, though God
could not stretch forth his power further then to the next heavens, though
such a knitting together of all the parts of the world could be proved: and to
be short, though it could be tried that God abhors small and feeble things
as one that were either proud or peevish.

3 From these differs not much the opinion of others which have likewise
subjected to the providence of God all incorruptible things, that is to say
heavenly and elementary, then also things corruptible, but not all after one
manner, as of which they supposed only the kinds, but not the particulars to
be preserved by Gods providence. But further they made exception of man, by
reason of his excellency from this common law of corruptible things, whom
they affirmed to be ruled and governed of God by a special and peculiar care.
In this opinion were certain men endued with the Jews Philosophy,
especially Rabbi Mose, (moved as I take it) to except man by those places of
Scripture, which do most plainly testify, that the holy Fathers were in all
their works, peregrinations, wars, marriages, provision of things
necessary, singularlye halpen of God, and adorned with happy successes.

4 Plato, as Gregory Nissene reports, has otherwise yet divided the
functions of providence. For first he has fourmed a certain providence of the
high or sovereign God, cheefely-occupyed in governing of things heavenly and
incorporall, and further also in the universal administration of the
principal parts of the whole world, to the intent that the kinds and
specialties of things might by an everlasting order and succession be
maintained and preserved If Plato had stayed here, this opinion might have
seemed tolerable, as agreeing with those that have attributed unto God an
universal providence. But he as one distrusting the power of God, or as though
he feared that God would be angry, if in case the charge also of small and
trifling things should be committed unto him: framed a certain second
providence, intentiuely occupied even about all several and particular things,
which are engendered throughout this whole world. This charge and function he
took to be assigned to certain inferior Gods, governing especially the motions
of the celestial bodies, and then pouring a convenient force into all inferior
things. By means whereof it came to pass, that the blind antiquity feigned
many Gods, whom they called Tutelares, preferring Saturn to Corn sowing,
Mercury to Merchandise, some over the waters, othersome (to be short) over
other things. As touthing which government of inferior and select Gods in the
world, thou may find some things in Augustine de Ciuitate Dei. libr. 7.
chap. 2.3. Last of all he established also a third providence, occupied in
ruling of men and their actions, assigned again unto other Gods, whom the
Greeks called Dmones, and of their office, diopous, that is to say orderers or
overseers and our men Angels and familiar Spirits. Wher-upon prevailed an
opinion with all men, yt unto every man immediately after his birth is assigned
of god a good Angel, which governs his actions, helps him with secret
suggestions of counsel and advice, and to conclude) directs all things to a
good end and purpose. Many things there are extant in the old writers,
touching the familiar spirit of Socrates and likewise of Pythagoras. But how
much this doctrine of Plato strayeth from the truth every man though we hold
our peace can judge, if by none other matter, yet at least by inducing the
plurality of Gods.

5 I come now to those that have embraced our religion, whom also it is evident
to have judged of providence not after one and the selfsame manner. The most
of them indeed do willingly attribute unto God the government of things, but
if we look more nearly into the matter, it will appear to be only yet confuzed
and out of order. For albeit they grant the whole world with all and singular
the parts thereof to be by a general motion stirred and governed of God: Yet
notwithstanding they attribute unto every creature his peculiar strength and
liberty in certain actions, as though that every one were not peculiarly
governed and directed of God. They acknowle^g that all creatures are moved at
haphazard, and that man is carried whither soever he lusts after the liberty
of his own will: No otherwise then if God should have a sufficient share given
him, in that he formed in his creatures certain organs or instruments (of
which sort in man are the mind, reason, will, and such like powers) which in
deed might according to the inclination of their nature take the beginning of
their moving from God: but further Gods power might not stretch it self.
Therefore this providence they called universal, wherein truly the power of
God does trimlye appear youred abroad into all creatures, but not by a
continual dispensation and administration. And they were moved thus to
determine, by a desire they had of preserving the liberty of man's will so
greatly praised and commended of many: and further, because they would by this
means avoid an inconvenience, to wit, least God should be counted the
author of sin in men. for which causes many and the same great learned men
have unto these things given their consent.

6 Some again have confessed that all the actions of men whatsouer are
especially governed of God, but yet only of the godly sort, and so far forth
as they labor to a good end. These, in as much as their purpose is holy, they
say, are diligently helped of God, so as they may accomplish that which they
have conceived in their mind, and that God turns away whatsoever might he a
let or hinderance unto them. In which respect God promised in the old
testament that he would be a God especially unto some, that is to say, their
gouerner, patron and defender. But this opinion seems to detract the praise
of goodness from God, as though he were not alike desirous of the salvation of
all men, or as though he favored some, and envied other some, besides it
diminishes ye power of God, as if he were not able to induce evil men unto
goodness, or to use them to the perfourmance of some good thing: to conclude, it
seems to slander God with the note of injustice, as though for sooth he
dealt not uprightly, in that he leaves sometimes the wicked to their own
perverse will, and withdraws his helping hand from them.

7. Wherefore now we will reckon up the last opinion, which we our selves also
embrace, and desire to be received of all men. That is this, that Gods
providence governs the world and all the things therein contained, and that
truly in such sort, as by an appointed order he administreth every thing, yea
even those that are esteemed least, and also directs the actions of every
thing to their appointed end. Whereupon we name it the special or peculiar
providence of God, and we avouch it so much the more diligently, by how much it
is more cleerey inculked in every leaf of the holy Scripture: by how much also
it is more applied to illustrate and set forth the power, goodness, and
righteousness of God: and to be short by how much it brings more weight and
importance to the comforting and confirming of our minds in all doubts,
streightes and dangers. For why? I suppose no man can in such sort be afflicted
with troubles, but that he may by this knowledge of the particular providence
of God, abundantlye reap and receive, wherewith to satiffie his wayward and
unquiet conscience, and wherewith to repress all the assaults and occasions of
impacience.

And albe it we have before, where we defined providence, showed it after a
sort to be such, yet seems it good still to confirm the same with many and
more evident arguments. And first forsooth the waightiest testimonies were to
be drawn out of the Scriptures: but because we have before set down not a
few, whereby we have proved and made plain, that God has a special care of
all men's matters and actions belonging as well to the mind as body, so far
forth that he guides, moves and aduaunceth, the judgments, wills,
enterprises, and endeavors of men, whither they be good or evil, unto what
part or purpose soever it pleases him: whereby moreover we have declared, that
even those things that are far beneath the state and condition of men, as
most vile and abject creatures, are governed by Gods dispensation and ordinarye
assignement, not only in general, but also in particular: it is not needful
we should spend the time either in repeating of them, or in searching out of
new. Only this I will say, that it is marvelous, how in so great light of the
Scripture some should be so blind, as not to see Gods peculiar providence, or
being seen not to acknowledge it. Doubtless the fathers have not slenderly
avouched it: of whom we will allege some certain sentences, to the intent
we may by some means satiffie froward wits, which carpe and condemn every
thing, that they hear pronounced by men of their own age.

Origin writing against Celsus book 4. says: As the husbandman according to
the diversity of the times of the year does sundry works of husbandry, and is
occupied either in tilling the earth, or in purging the weeds that grow up in
it: so likewise does God dispose and moderate all times as it were certain
years (that I may so speak) heerby executing every thing in special, that
the regard of the whole requires in general, so as these things being by
themselves only (as it is in truth) most apparently and eftsoon
comprehended, he directs to their end. Semblablye in his Commentaries upon
the Epistle to the Romans. on these words Chap. 1. I have oftentimes purposed
to come unto you but have been let hitherto: he shows that God governs
by his providence all the actions and enterprises of men. Again in his 1. Book
of Commentaries upon Job. he enterpreteth those usual phrases of Scripture
which sound, that God speaks to the devil, to the firmament, to the gourd,
to the morning woorme, to the fiery or burning breath: to signify nothing else,
then that all these things are by the secret power and providence of the
creator turned and moved hither and thither according to his will and
pleasure, and do at all times the commandments of God.

Gregory Nazanzen in his Apologetico, According, says he, as in man's body some
members there be that rule the body, and govern all the motions thereof,
othersome that are ruled and yield obedience to the gouerners: so likewise in
the church has God established such a law of equity, as thereby through his
divine providence he disposes and orders all things, yea and moderateth
matters in such sort, that he has or deyned some to be ruled and governed,
othersome he has given to be pastors and teachers. But the said Gregory does
entreat yet more clearly of the same matter in that most learned Oration of
his, which he made touching the care of the poor, and enuaieth very gravely
against those that would not allow providence to stretche unto us and to these
inferior things: and teaches in many words, that what things soever do
happen unto us in this life, whither they be prosperity or adversity, riches
or poverty, sickness or health, are sent by the determinate purpose of Gods
providence, howsoever it be unknown unto us.

Chrysostom a very grave and holy author, as well in other places as also
especially in that book which he entitled of Gods providence to Stargirius
the Monk, says plainelye in this wise: That God has a care not only
generally of all things, but also specially of every one, thou may hear
him saying: It is not the will of my heavenly Father, that one of these little
ones should perrish: speaking of them that believe in him. He is indeed
desirous that those also which believe not, should be saved, and be changed
into a better state, and believe as Paul says: who would have all men to be
saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth, And he him self says to the
Jews: I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. and I will
have mercy, and not sacrifice. But now if after the fruition of so great care
and providence they will not become better, nor acknowledge the truth, yet he
leaves them not so for all that: but for as much as they have willinglye
deprived themselves of the participation of eternal life, he yet at the least
gives unto them all the benefits of this life, making his Sun to shine upon
the good and upon the evil, and rayning upon the just and unjust, yea and
ministering other things that belong to the course of this present life. But if
he provides for his enemies also with so great care and providence, how shall
he neglect his faithful ones, and those that serve him with their whole heart?
No, no, he will not do it, but he cheefely favors and embraces these in
all things. For even the hears of your head (says he) are all numbered. Lo
he manifestly affirms and proves that God cares as well for the wicked as
for the good, and that every one do receive daily large benefits from the
providence of God.

Now Augustine in very many places commends and sets forth in like manner
the largenes of Gods providence. In his first book of Order, he has a number
of things agreeable to this present purpose, when as throughout that whole
woork he labors cheefely to this end, to teach that all things are
administered most dulye and orderlye by the providence of God in this world,
albeit many things appear to be disorderly done in men's matters. Again
writing upon Genesis ad literam. Book 5. Chap. 20.21. he commends Gods
providence for that the father, as christ says John 5. works until this
time, and as it is 1. Corinthians. 15, unto every seed he gives a body at his
pleasure, to every seed his own body, for that also he moves every creture
continually by his secret power: and because according to the Psalm. 140. the
fire, hail, snow, ice, stormy winds and tempests, do the will of God: to
be short for that he clotheth the Lillies and grass of the feelde, and
governs not only this universal part of the world, deputed to things
mortal and corruptible, but also the most vile and abject parcels of the same
corruptible things. The said father expounding Psalm. 103. where it is said.
That God brings forth fodder for the cattle, and herbs for the use of men,
takes occasion to commend Gods providence, and amongst other arguments
propounds also that most grave and weighty one, which Christ Math. 10. uses
where he says, that the Father has respect to a cup of cold water given to
one of the least (of his Disciples) and not only has respect, but also
bountifullye rewards it. But upon those words also of the Psalm. 148. Fire
and hail, snow and vapors, and stormy winds that fulfill his word, he
proves at large, that even the least and vilest things that be, as ye members
of a Flea or Gnatte, are not only first formed of God, but also fashioned
without ceassing, and stirred with a convenient motion. Further in his book 12.
Chap. 4. de ciuitate Dei. he wills us to consider with great aduisement, even
those things that we judge to be blamed as faulty and hurtful in creatures
corruptible and void of all sense, and to look narrowly upon the secret power
of Gods providence in them. And in the 10. book and 14. chap. of the same
woork, he has these words. All things that either Angels or men can
perfourm unto men, are only and altogether in the power of the Almighty:
whosoever believes not this, is mad. Certainly Plotinus the Platonist
disputing of providence says, that it reaches from the highest God, whose
beauty is unspeakable and past all understanding, even unto these earthlye
things here below, and he proves it by a similitude taken of the beauty of
leaves and flowers: all which things, as vile and most quickly perrishing,
cannot (says he) retain the most comely features of their forms and
fashions, unless they were there formed and made, where that incomprehensible
and unchangeable beautye having all things abides and continues. This the
Lord Jesus shows there, where he says: Consider the lillies of the feeld,
how they grow they labor not neither do they spinne, and yet I say unto you,
that even Solomon in all his royalty was not clothed, like one of these.
Wherefore if god so clothe the grass of the feeld which though it stand to day,
is to morrow cast into the furnasse, shall he not do much more unto you, O ye
of little faith? which words of Augustins we thought good even for this cause
to note, that also by the testimony of Plotinus the Platonicall philosopher
they might be convinced, whosoever they be that do hardly admit particular
providence. That therefore which this Gentile could find the means to draw
not only out of the puddels of his master Plato, in which the selfsame
confession touching particular providence is found very clearly expressed, and
cheefely in his book of Laws the 10. again in his Epinonio, that is to say an
appendix of laws, (whence undoubtedly even Proclus also drew his opinion in
all respects like and semblable in the books which he wrote of providence) but
also out of the fountains of holy Scripture, as of whom the fame goes (by
the report of Theodoretus) that he was sometime an hearer of our old father
Origin in the school of Alexandria, and tasted the secret mysteries of our
learning: that I say which this Gentile has put in writing as touching Gods
providence, let us not be ashamed to embrace: but rather let us be ashamed on
the other side, if we be slack to follow and endeuer to that knowledge unto
which he easily mounted and ascended.

It would be convenient by examples drawn out of the books of holy Scripture
to have this thing confirmed more at large, to wit, that the Lord woorketh
upon men and upon all things created by his determinate counsel and present
administration: but these things for this time I suppose to be sufficient.

The objections against particular providence confuted, where also is entreated
of fortune fate, destiny, end or haphazard.

Chap. 4.
But now let us see what it is that stays some men or what they are able at
length to pretend, whereby they should not with us grant this particular
providence, where through as well all the counsels, studies, enterprises, and
actions of men are ruled and governed, as also the powers, and operations of
inferior creatures ordered and directed.

And it is to be thought, they are moved most cheefely with these reasons.
First, that seems by this assertion of particular providence, that the
freedom of man's will is utterly subverted, and man made like unto a senseless
block, that cannot do any thing of him self, no not so much as move, but
whither the Lord drives him.

2 Where if so great weakness and imbecilitie of man be granted, and on the
other side so great power and authority of providence as to work and do all
things, it appears now that sin also, if any be committed by man, must be
imputed to God him self: which truly once to conceive in the mind, were a
heinous offense.

3 By this means are excluded universally all second causes: whereof
notwithstanding that some regard is to be had, there is no man but willingly
grants.

Moreover there arise also other waightye questions, and very troublesome
doubts. For by establishing of this particular providence, there seems again
to be induced and established the Stoikes fate or desteny: further that all
casual things are overthrown, and such as by an usual custom, are said to
happen by chance: again that contingens or haphazard is taken away, in
defense notwithstanding whereof there be excellent divines that do yet at this
day labor with great consent.

For these causes I suppose, and the same doubtless not slender but marvelous
perplexed, it appeerethe that a number are moved to yield unto those that
allow only universal providence, which it seems expedient to defend, least
they should be enforced to grant so many inconveniences and absurdities, as we
have now rehearsed.

It shall therefore be our part and duty, if at least we covet to have special
or particular providence remain safe and inuiolate, to entreat of al these
things, and so far forth as we may and necessity shall require, declare
that those things hurt either not at all, or else not so much, as some do
suppose.

Wherefore as touching that first reasons concerning the liberty of our will,
we will conclude the matter in a short sum. As often as there is any question
made of the power of our will, they are wont so to distinguish men's actions,
that some are said to be of things spiritual and internal, which namely
belong to God and his Kingdom, and to the salvation of souls: and some of
things earthly or external, which do appertain to the common course of this
life, and without the which the same can by no means be passed over.

To be wort, some have appointed mean or middle actions. In every of these
what man is able to do, we will breefly consider.

Therefore in spiritual or internal actions, which are occupied about the
knowledge of God and of his will toward us, also about the ordering of our
life aunswerable to such knowledge, there is no man but confesses that man is
able to do nothing by his own natural strength: but if so be he do any
thing in this behalf, that it ought to be ascribed to the holy Ghost, who in
the regenerate woorketh effectualy, by enclining, governing and directing their
minds and wills unto those things, that may be pleasing and acceptable unto
God. This doctrine is thoroughly and every where approved in the holy Scriptures.

Hiere. 21. I know Lord, that it is not in man to guide his own way, nor in
the son of man to direct his steepes. Hiere, 30. I will dispose him, and he
shall come unto me: for who is he that has made his heart so willinge, that he
can come unto me? says the Lord. Psalm. 36. It is the Lord that must direct the
steps of man.

Psalm. 119. Incline my heart unto thy testimonies, and not unto covetousness.
Turn away mine eyes, least they behold vanity. etc.

Many things to the same effect are further noted in the said Psalm. John.
3. A man can receive nothing except it be given him from Heaven. John 6. No man
comes to me, except my Father draw him. John. 15. without me ye can do
nothing. 1. Corinthians. 2. The natural man perceives not the things that belong
to the spirit of God. 2. Corinthians. 3. We are not able of our selves to think
any thing as of our selves: but if we be able to do any thing, it comes of
God, who has made us able ministers of the new Testament. To be short
innumerable are the places that confirm this doctrine, and none of those whom
the Church acknowledges for divines, have ever at any time taught otherwise,
except peraduentur^ that the Pelagians or their followers have attempted
something differing from it.

Now in earthlye or external actions, of which sort are the exercises of
politic and household affairs, of the liberal arts likewise and
handycrafts, howsoever a man may seem to be able of himself to do any
thing, and after his own fancy and likement to bring it to pass, yet
notwithstanding, all men do grant this again, that he is often times let
and hindered in this behalf, whether it be of God, or of the devil (whom God
uses ever and anon as his minister and instrument) or of his own reason and
judgment, which is very much blinded, and causes him often times to stumble, so
as he prefers evil things before the good. Hence it comes to pass by
Gods disposition, that some magistrate does one while govern the Commonweal
as becomes him, and an other while the same changes his purpose, or else
peradventure, some wicked and ungodly Tirant succeeds him in his place.
According to that of the Proverb. 21. As the rivers of waters, so is the Kings
heart directed by the hand of the Lord, and he enclyneth it whether soever he
will.

Job. 34. The Lord sets up the hypocrite to reign, because of the snares of
the people.

Proverb. 16. A divine sentence is in the lips of the King, therefore his mouth
shall not transgress in judgment. A true weight and balance are the judgment
of the Lord, and all the weightes of the bag are his woork. In the same
Chapter: The Lord has made all things for his own sake, yea even the wicked
for the day of evil. Lo, that the Maiestrate deals wickedly, that the
Subjects deal ungodly, it comes so to pass by the Lords ordinance.

That riches, wife, childre^n, contractes or bargains, knowledge of arts and
sciences, the use or abuse of ye same, that al these things (I say) do succeed
or not succeed after the only will and pleasure of God, it is more manifest
then that it needs by heaping up of witnesses to be proved.

Finally if we look into mean or middle actions, such namelye as tend both
to a good and evil end, and are done of all indifferently as well good as bad:
even here also nothing comes to pass, be it right or wrong, but so far
forth as it seems good unto the Lord to dispose it. The mind, body, members
and whatsoever else is necessary to the doing or accomplishing of any thing, is
especially moved by the Lord him self. It seems a matter of no great
weight, to speak, to lift up the hand, to hold up the foot, to eat, to
drinck, to stand, to sit, to go any whither or not to go: and yet even
these things the Lord disposes in all men, neither can we do any one of them,
but by his inclination and direction. Pro. 16. It is in man to prepare the
heart, but the answer of the tung comes of the Lord. Act. 17. By him we live,
move, and have our being. Wherefore even in these actions also the attemptes and
enterprises of men are seen oftentimes to be let and hindered, and that by
God him self. What seems to be of less account, the^ in civil matters to
join thy self in company with this man or with that? And yet 1. Sam. 10. They
only follow Saul, whose hearts the Lord had touched, as for the wicked men
they could not follow him. Every man thinks it an easy matter either to sit
still, or to rise up: but Hely could not sit so still, but yt he fell out of
his seat, brake his neck and died, because the Lord had so ordained it to come
to pass before. 1. Samu. 4. To stretch out or pluck in the arm, to speak
words likewise and preach unto any, no man would judge but that it were very
free and left to every man's choice: and yet for all that was Jeroboam let
that he could not pull back his arm: 1. King. 13. Herod was forbidden to hold
the people any longer with talk. Act. 12. Whilste he was suddenly stricken by
the Angel. Neither is there cause why any man should alleadg, that these
things ought to be considered as miraculous and more then ordinarye, when as
all these things do teach and enstruct us also abundantly touching the
ordinarye dispensation of God, and further do most gravely admonish us, that
in all our actions which we take in hand, we should always have the Majesty
and power of Gods providence before our eyes. What shall we say to this that we
read even the elect also to have been stayed from their godly purpose, and
that by the Lord him self? Paul had oftentimes purposed to visit the
Romans. and was let. Romans 1. The same. Act. 16 prepared with his companions
to go into Bithynia, but he was not suffered by the spirit. And for the same
cause James in the 4. Chap. of his Epistle does wisely teach us in all our
attemptes and purposes, to say, If the Lord will. To conclude, neither in
spiritual or internal actions, neither in corporal or external, neither in
mean or middle can we do any thing at all, but so far forth as the Lord by
his providence does govern and direct us.

What then? are we able to do nothing by our own will? nothing by our own
choice? Yes, I grant. Man has his choice, in man there is a will, as in him
also there is reason and judgment. For who would go about to take these
things from him, when as the Scriptures also do propound many things
touching the will of man, whereby he turns him self one while this way,
another while that way? But the matter comes to this point, that choice and
will of his is very sore wounded, weak and feeble, so as it scarce deserves
so much as the bare name, neither can it proceed further in doing of any
thing, then the Lord prescribes. Thus then woorketh Gods providence, and
withal woorketh man's will. If the providence of God has determined any thing
to be done by man, the^ is man's will also carried to the selfsame thing,
applying it self wholly unto it, and waighting upon it, no otherwise then the
horse, who as the rider turns the bridle, so does he turn him self into
this or that way. Which similitude Augustine also used, and in my judgment
very aptly. For like as the Rider in very deed rules the horse, and
nevertheless the horse is he that goes forward by his own motion: even so
God directs man also, and yet never the later man does of his own will,
that which he does. For why it follows not, that because the Lord rules and
moderateth the actions, therefore man woorketh not of his own will: for indeed
the very will woorketh together with Gods providence, yea and such a will is
brought forth, as the Lord ordained before should be. Howbeit in the mean
time the will or choice does not every where and after the same manner confirm
it self to Gods providence. For although it be true, that the will by a
certain necessity does serve the divine providence, yet does it not serve
it by compulsion: which if we would wisely distinguish from necessity, many
offenses and cuntrouersies might easily be taken away: concerning which thing
Augustine has said some what in his 3. book and 4. Chap. of Free Will. When
therefore Gods providence ordains good to be done by us, then has the will it
self also respect unto good, and is after a sort inclined thereunto, so long
as by the stirring of the holy Ghost (of whom also it is secretlye certified,
of the divine ordinance) it receives strength, and proceeds to the woork,
and accomplisheth it: albeit at the first the will does hardly agree, and for
a time deuiseth ways, how it may kick against it. But where the Lord ordains
not good to be done, there the will likewise is estranged from good, and (as it
is always prone unto evil: Gene. 8.) so it runs freely to that which is
naught, yea and feeling (as it were) the bridle somewhat loose, it enterpriseth
something which it supposes to be in it own power, and so obeying corrupt
affections by little and little executes evil according to it own desire.
Hitherto belong all the places, whereby it is signified, that the Lord him self
does harden, Exodus 4.7.10.11.14. Romans 9. Deuteronomy. 2. Esa. 63. John. 12. out of
Esaias. 6. makes blind, gives or takes away the heart, gives the spirit of
slomber, Romans 11. out of Esaias. 6. delivers into a reprobate sense, Romans 1.
leads into temptation: again the places wherein is declared, that men also do
aggrauate and harden their own hearts, that they will not see, that they will
not understand. As in Exodus it is often repeated, that the Lord hardened
Pharaos heart, and by and by also is added the like thing of Pharao him self.
Pharao returned (says he) and went again into his house, neither did he set
his heart at all unto this thing. Exodus 7. But more clearly in the 8. of Exodus
Pharao seeing that he had respit given him, hardened his heart and would not
hear them. Which words being there and in the 9. Chap. repeated, are very
worthy to be observed.

So also Esa. 50. The Lord God opened mine ear, and I was not rebellious,
neither turned I back. John. 1. As many as received him, to them he gave power
to be the sons of God, even to them that believe in his name. John. 7 If a
man will obey his will, that man shall know of his doctrine. Math. 23.
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thy children together,
even as the Hen gathers her Chickens under her wings, and thou would
not? Act. 13. So many believed as were ordained to eternal life, etc.

Therefore not to tarry upon many places, we are by Gods providence lead or
drawn to all kind of actions whatsoever, and yet nevertheless there
remains a certain choice or will in us, which conformeth it self to the
divine providence, and is obedient even of necessity (to wit because it is
necessary that that should be performed which god has decreed) and yet not
by compulsion: so as namely, if it be helped by the holy ghost, it inclyneth
unto good: but if it be not helped, it falls unto evil, whereunto it is of it
self prone and ready. And so stands fast (after ye mind of the scripture)
Gods particular providence, busily occupied in and about all and singular the
actions of men: so also stands fast man's choice or will, is not in all
respects bond, so not in all respects sound or free. To this effect has
Augustine some things in his 2. book and 2.3.4. Chap. of Free Will.

Now this doctrine is profitable, not only to put us in mind, that so often as
we take in hand to do any thing, we should look for all power and success of
our doing from ye Lord: but also that we should enter into a more diligent
account, to conform our will to Gods will, and always to be careful, to
embrace that which is good and acceptable unto God. And this that it may ye
better come to pass, we must pray continually unto the Lord with the Prophet,
saying: Incline my heart, o Lord, unto thy testimonies, etc.

Where in the second place it was objected against particular providence, that
namely it should seem thereby to follow, that God is the author of sin, and
that the evil which is committed by man, is to be imputed unto God, that
matter now we have to consider off.

It cannot be denied, but that this one reason has great force in it to ye
abandoning of particular providence. And who is he that would not tremble and
quake to allow of any thing (though but in outward show) whereby it might
appear that the divine goodness should be diminished, and the glory of God
never so little defaced? But defaced it must needs be, if we say that he which
is the sovereign good, and that neither will nor can do any thing but good,
does now degenerate from goodness, and becomes ye author of sin. And surely
by yt assertion of particular providence, and by those places which we lastly
touched to th'establishing of it, expressly declaring that God hardens,
blinds, gives the spirit of slumber, delivers into a reprobate sense,
leads into temptation, etc. It seems most clearly that so much is
granted, and man's reason does eftesoones heerupon, catch matter of cauilling.
If it be God, says it, that hardens and makes blind, what man is he that
can resist Gods will? how may be withdraw him self from that, unto the which
the Lord by his ordinance does (as ye would say) thrust him forward? But if in
case a man cannot choose but do that which the Lord has preordained to be
done by him, it must needs follow that he sins by the will of God. Which if
it be granted, then cannot he be called to account, or pleaded guilty, and
much less be subject to any pains or punishments for the doing of it. For to
lay punishment upon such a one, is eue^ as much an effect as to draw the
innocent into danger, to rage against the guiltless, yea and to oppose him
self against the ordinance and will of God. These things therefore least to
the great and intolerable offense of many they should be uttered and minister
occasion to the wicked to take carnal liberty, and to excuse their own
peruersenes in the sins which they daily commit, it is very requisite to
prove, that God is by no means the author or cause of sin.

But how and after what sort this may be done, it is not so easy a matter to
discuss, and especially because the places of Scripture before rehearsed do
put us to some business. As coveting therefore to avoid so many inconveniences
as do seem heeruppon to follow, first some have presumed to deminish Gods
providence, in saying that God does by no means regard these inferior
things: for it were a very unseemly thing, that so great a Majesty should be
entangled with our sins and uncleanness. For which cause also they have
deuized Chaunce-medley or haphazard, whereof we will speak also in fit place.
Othersome have thought this course to be best, namely, to extol man's will and
to make the same most frank and free, doing and perfourming with full power
and authority, not only evil things but also good, so as it may deserve even
eternal life by it own proper force and strength.

And therefore that the causes of all actions ought unto this most frank and
free will to be ascribed. But with these men we think it not good to dispute
any further, seeing we have sufficiently declared, both that all these things
here below are cared for of God, and also how far forth our will is able to
work or do any thing whatsoever. Now othersome more religious then the
former have sought out other helps, and some of them have referred all those
places, (whereby it seems to be me^t that God does work together unto
sin) unto foreknowledge, saying, that God indeed foresaw and foreknew that
men would sin, but provided not, that is to say, disposed by his
incomprehensible counsel, that such actions should be done by men. And so
seeing foreknowledge alone does work nothing at all to the committing of
sin, neither by any means enforce it, they think that God is aboundantlye
excused, and far from being the cause of any sin. Some liked better to use
a distinction, whereby they determine some things to be done simplye by the
absolute will of God, and some things only by his permission, and wincking at
them (if it be lawful so to speak.) After the opinion of these men, when it
is said that God hardened Pharaos heart, the Hebrew phrase is so to be
expounded, as that the sense should be, that Pharao was in deed hardened not by
the effectual will of God, but only by his permission and sufferance. And as
permission has no blame in it self, especially where it is not bound of
duty to let evil, so that the cause of sin can by no means be laid upon
God. And this reason has prevailed with a great number. But if in case we
consider well of the matter, we shall perceive that these interpretations as
they be far fetched, so are they neither necessary, neither can they very well
hang together for as touching foreknowledge first by this reason the force of
providence is excluded from many things, and is pent up in too narrow a
room. Secondlye there remains yet something, for which God may by wicked
reason be accused and found fault with. For if God has foreseen evil, and
not let it (since it was in his power to do it) the^ has he not done well,
insomuch as he prevented not that in time, which he foresaw should come to
pass. And so is God again made the author of sin. For permission does
attribut such an inlenes in a manner unto God, as Epicurus dreamed off. Certes
it would be a thing not very seemelye or commendable in God, when a man
attempteth to do any thing by his own natural inclination, to dissemble the
matter in such sort, as to suffer him to run headlong into perdition and
destruction. For what father could abide to see his little child near unto
some certain danger, and would not by and by help him and pluck him from it:
Further it is an absurd thing, that God should permit any thing which he would
not have to be done, as who should say, that any thing could come to pass
without his knowledge or against his will. And how shall we know yt God
permits a thing, but because he wills it? How much more truly the^ may we
say, that God does simplye will a thing, the^ permit or suffer it? I know
there be some that defend this interpretation of permission by bringing forth
certain places of Scripture, as namely these. Act. 14. God in times past
suffered all the Gentiles to walk in their own ways. Again Psalm. 81. My people
would not hear my voice, and Israel would none of me. Therefore I gave them up
into the hardness of their heart, that they might walk in their own counsels. 1. Corinthians. 10. God is faithful, which will not suffer you to be tempted above
your strength But hereby it is not meant, that God does generally give over
unto themselves, all that are about to fall into sin, but rather that he
does then in deed sometimes forsake the wicked and suffer them to perrish
with their own devises, when after sundry and often admonitions they will not
be brought to repent: or that he does now and then leave even the godly also to
the devil for a time to be tried with diverse troubles and temptations. Which
thing that it comes to pass by the singular providence of God, and by his
just judgment, it is in it self clear and manifest. And these things are so
far off from being done without the determination of Gods wisdom, that even
the singular providence of God does shine and show forth it self in them.
Moreover, since these places are very few in comparison which seem to allow
permission, it were a very unmeet thing, to wrest innumerable other places
(wherein is cleerelye and without ambiguitie ascribed unto God his work in the
hearts and wills of men) and (in steed of discovering the native sense and
meaning) to draw them with violence into the compass of those places.

Wherefore we must stick fast to ye plain and simple meaning of the holy
Scriptures, and hold fast the true and natural signification of the words,
auouching for a certainty that God does all in all, not by permission or
sufferance, but by his ordinary dispensation and providence: that is to say,
that he does truly and by his determinate purpose harden, make blind, give up
into a reprobate sense, lead into temptation, and every other thing like unto
these. Such phrases of speech are more oftener found in the Scriptures, then
that any other way of expounding them is rashly to be devised: which thing
Augustine also noted in his fifth book and third Chapter against Iulianus. And
yet for all this it follows not here by, that the sins of men so by God
hardened, blinded etc are to be imputed unto him. Which point we by certain
substauntiall reasones will make plain and manifest.

First: Although it be God that does move and incline the heart either unto
good or evil, yet there remains in man, as we have before specified, a will,
which is no doubt the sin guler gift of God bestowed upon man. Now whereas man
does shamefully abuse this will of his, doutles he does it by his owns
default. For whilst by his own will he adicteth himself to the filthy
affections of his corrupt nature, laboring with his whole heart after evil,
and therein not a little delighting himself: in this case I say, whilst he
obayeth himself rather then God (whom it would especially please and delight,
if man would crave his aid and holy spirit) who either will or may excuse man
so doing, and lay the fault or blame upon God? As touching this matter, we
have a notable example in Judas, who albeit he were by Gods ordinance appointed
to betray the sonns of man, as Christ himself does manifestly declare: yet
notwithstanding could he not so escape, but that the guilte and condemnation
lighted upon his own head. For whereas he harkened unto the devil, prompting
him to enterprise so heinous a fact, and he bent his whole will and study to
accomplish so horrible a treason, by going of his own accord to the
adversaries the Priests consulting about the matter, by requiring a reward for
his labor, by seeking occasion and opportunity to commit that mischeuous deed,
in craving the aid of armed soldiers to assist him, in prescribing the time,
place, manner and token unto them, and finallye in delivering him into their
hands: Heerin undoubtedly he sinned most grievously, and made him self guilty
of eternal damnation, even Christ him self also giving testimony thereof, when
he says: Woe unto that man by whom the son of man is betrayed: it had been
good for that man, if he had never been borne: Math. 26. Whither belongs also
the confession of Judas him self, saying: I have sinnen in betraying the
innocent blood. So ought we to judge in like manner of Peter, unto who^e the
very ordinance of God was also made manifest by Christ, to wit, that he should
thrice deny him. Which thing he did, and that not simply, but by adding too of
oaths and cursings for so far did the will put forth it self.

The same man being admonished by the sign of the Cock crowing, acknowledged
his sin, and confessed him self guilty, bewailing his offense with many
tears. Therefore it is man's own will and not Gods ordinance that makes sinners
guilty. Neither is there any cause why a new action should be commensed
against God, as though he were to be blamed in this, that he gave unto man a
will, which he foreknew he would abuse. For why? albeit he fore-knewe that he
would abuse it, yet he gave it not to this end that he should abuse it, and
besides he gave (at what time man was first created) a most noble freedom of
will, whereby he might (if he had listed) even by his own strength and power,
rightly have used his will. Yea and God foreseeing that he would abuse if,
foresaw withal by what means he might raise him up again being fallen, and
how by doing of it he might illustrate and set forth his power and goodness.
And whilst he is occupied in the execution heerof, he cannot be judged to
deal otherwise then iustlye and well. Wherefore also when God provides that
any man shall fall, he does well notwithstanding, inasmuch as he disposes al
things by his certain and profitable counsel: but in the mean season,
because man commits evil, not in respect of Gods providence, and as one
executing the will of God, and desiring to honor God by that means, but rather
to satisfy his own will and pleasure, therefore (I say) is God exempted from
all spot of blame, and man only found guilty of sin.

Secondly: It seems that this also may not be said amiss, that like as Gods
foreknowledge is not deceived, so neither in like manner can his providence be
deceived. Whereby it comes to pass, yt God does provide and ordain such
things, as unto the which he foreknoweth man's will (so far forth as in him
lies) to be most vehemently inclyned and dispozed. But since God is in no wise
so bound unto man, as that he should let his will, and draw it perforce
(striving to the contrary) unto good: he is not to be accused or found fault
with, in that he leaves him to his own counsel, and permits him to fulfill
his own perverse will, which he foreknew would so come to pass. But if so be a
man will still reason the matter with god, and say, that he does not
sufficiently regard man his creature, and for that cause think him worthy to
be accused of neglecting his mercy, even here it may be answered, that God
does by this means show forth his justice, whereof he is to have no less
consideration the^ of his mercy. For God deals uprightly, whilste he leueth
even him that is void of all actual sin, in those dregs of uncleanness
wherein he is borne. Neither has man any thing in him self, for which he is
worthy to be helped.

Thirdly: Albeit God and man do put their hands hoth together to one and the
selfsame thing, yet because God does it far otherwise and to a far other end
then man, it comes to pass that man therefore is taken tardy, and God free
from all blame, yea, he procures to himself thereby, praise and glory. God
woorketh and ordains some notable wicked men to escape all danger for a time,
which persecute the Godly, and exercise all manner of cruelty against them: but
he does it to the end he may make afterward as well his power, as his goodness
and justice to become the more glorious: his power (I say) and goodness, in the
wonderful delivering of them afterward whom they afflicted: and his justice,
in destroying eftsoons the wicked tirants themselves. Again such men work,
but bending all their will and endeavor unto evil, and studiously hardening
their own hearts, to the intent they may every way, against all right and
equity oppress the godly and innocent. An example of this thing we have in
Pharao, whom God stirred up to this end and purpose, as it is said. Romans 9.
that he might show in him his power, and that his name might be declared in
all the earth. And of Pharao we hear every where in Exodus, that he hardened
his own heart, that he fought diverse ways to hinder the people of God, etc.
Neither is that much unlike unto this which we find reported of the Kings of
Babylon, whom God in like manner stirred up as his instruments to punish the
Israelites, but they in the mean time fulfilled their own lust in their
tirannious enterprises, and did many things in despite of God for which cause
also they were by him suppressed and overthrown. It would be over long to
recite all the examples that tend to this purpose. And this is a certain
truth, that God, as he does fashion, sanctify, and prepare some, even in
their mothers womb, to the execution of some notable exploites, like as we
reed of Jacob, Jeremy and John Baptist: so also he prepares othersome to other
works, and stirs up their wills afterward, to perform that which is
appointed them to door but all to good and profitable ends, which they look not
after, and which man's understanding cannot attain unto, further forth then
they are expressed in the Scriptures. So Esau, before he was borne, was hated
of the Lord, and by him ordained to forgo the blessing. Likewise God woorketh,
and some he casts up sometimes into a reprobate mind: but in in this point
whilst he punishes their former malice, whereby they would not acknowledge the
truth offered, or being known would needs set it at naught, nay violentlye
oppress it, certes in this case he deserves the praise and commendation of
justice. Again on the other side, such men woork, but heaping one sin upon
an other, and greeuing continually the spirit of God by their obstinacy in
evil doing. Touching this woork of God, and likewise of evil men, it is thus
written Romans 1. Therefore because that when they knew God, they glorified him
not as God, neither were thankful, etc. God also gave them up to their own
hearts lusts, unto uncleanness, to defile their own bodies between
themselves, etc. Where is to be observed this particle, to their own hearts
lust, because thereby is noted the proper malice of those men, for yt which
they are worthily blamed. Romans 11. out of Esa. 6. God has given them the
spirit of slumber: eyes that they should not see, and ears that they should
not hear unto this day. 2. These. 2. The coming of that man of sin, is with
all deceiuablenes of unrighteousness among them that perrishe, because they
received not the love of the truth that they might be saved. And therefore God
shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe lies, that al they
might be damned which believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness. To be short, God woorketh, but yet so as he tickeleth the mind
of him whom he moves, to the intent that so soon as he perceives himself to
be any way provoked unto evil, he may have occasion to acknowledge his own
weakness, to crave and call for Gods help, and (at a word) to believe
undoubtedly that he shall obtain it. So Paul, when there was given unto him a
prick in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet him, 2. Corinthians. 12. he
took occasion thereby to pray often: and when he obtained not the same to be
taken from him, he was taught thereby that it was sent unto him for his great
profit, to wit, that he should not be exalted out of measure through ye
abundance of revelations. God woorketh, but yet moderately, and least a man
should be tempted above his strength, that so he may be helped in due time. God
works, but so as he may the more gloriously lift him up that is fowly fallen,
heal him that is wounded, and exalte him that is humbled. God woorketh in the
Chaldies. Job. 1. and in Semei, 2. Sam. 16. but it was to prove the manifold
strength as well of Job as of David, and that does both Job and David
confess, the one saying, I he Lord has given, and the Lord has taken away,
the other forbidding ye party to be hindered, and expressly adding, That the
Lord had given Semer in charge, so to curse and blaspheme. God woorketh in the
thief and man slayer, but it is to the intent to deliver the party wrongfully
troubled or slain out of far greater miseries, and to translate him into
eternal life: to the intent also that the Prince or Judge may have just matter
and occasion to punish the malefactor with due pains and penalties of law,
that many of the common people which have not offended in like sort, may take
example by him that is punished, to beware of the like enormities: to conclude,
for other good and profitable causes, which all we in no wise are able to
discuss. In sum, God does all in all even in evil and wicked men, yet
justly and to a good end. But the things that in these self same actions are
comnitted of men, or else of the devil (for that we may note this also by the
way, it is not absurd, if we say that God, men, and the Devil do work
together to one and the self same thing: which thing is to be seen in the
betraying of Christ, where the Lord had appointed it so to be, then Satan
entered into the heart of Judas, and Judas waiting his opportunity committed the
deed, likewise in Job, where the Lord woorketh, then next Satan and the
Chaldeans do egregiously play their parts: whereby it comes to pass, that
as God is said to harden, so is the same power attributed unto man to wit,
that he hardens himself. Psalm. 94. Harden not your hearts. and again the
devil is said to woork in the vnbelleuers, 2. Corinthians. 4. Ephesians. 2 whither we
have respect to the manner, or to the end, do savor of nothing else but
evil, they tend to no other purpose then evil, and they do all things every
where (if not openly, yet at the least privily) against the glory of God and
against the profit of their neighbor Which things seeing they stand thus,
doubtless the blame and blemishe of all evil reboundeth upon man and the
devil: and God does evermore retain and keep the praise of justice,
goodness, power, and other such like excellent virtues. And howsoever God
woorketh in these matters, yet has man no just cause of mourning, neither can
he pretend the just and good ordinance of God to cover his own malice and
unrighteousness. To this point we must of necessity come at the length and
confess, that because God so wills, and because he wills nothing but good,
therefore he cannot deal or woork otherwise then well. Hence is that Romans 9.
Why does he yet complain? For who has resisted his will? But, o man, who art
thou, that pleadest with God? Shall the pot say to the potter, why have thou
made me of this fashion? etc.

Fourthly: Sin can in no wise be imputed unto God, but it is imputed unto
man: because god is subject to no laws against which he might be convicted to
offend: but unto man there is a law always prescribed by the which he is
reproved of sin and brought to the knowledge of sin. And so, although God
be after his manner author of the work, yet is he not author of the sin.
Now then it is a very easy matter to answer to the other cauillations, as
namely, wherefore man should be punished, and drawn (as it were) to the place
of execution. Doubtless seeing be commits evil of his own will, seeing
that as well all the matter of evil is found to be in him, as also that he
has respect to an evil end in his actions, and seeing also that he
transgresses the law prescribed unto him: worthilye is he drawn before the
Judge (being the minister of Gods justice, and the instruement ordained of God
for the preservation of public peace in the fellowship and society of men)
who is to punish him according to the quality of his offense. And thus much
for the second objection against pecultar or particular providence may suffize.

In the third place we are to entreat of secondary causes, which it appears
to be all clean wiped away, if every of these inferior things here below
be done and dispatched by the will and providence of God himself: and yet that
they should be removed out of ye way, neither is it a thing usual, neither
does any reason permit or suffer them so to be. We answer e breefely that as
touching secondarye causes, which are otherwise called inferior causes, we
will set them in their right place: but according as both the manner of the
word and the nature of the relation does require, we must of necessite reduce
them to an other first and higher cause, which is God himself, so that, albeit
they may seem to work and serve to our use, yet we must understand that they
cannot do or effect any thing, but so far forth as they receive and
participate their whole force from the first cause, which alone and in very
deed obtains of right the name of cause. (Whereupon also it has pleased some
to term it the cause infinite, and cause of all causes.) For as the hammer of
it self can in no wise make in ye iron any certain print or fashion of a Key,
saw, or such like thing, unless the Smith him self do put both the hammer and
the iron to the Anuile and often times strike upon it: so must we persuade our
selves, that neither in the second causes efficient, nor in the things hoped
to be effected by them, any thing can follow or be brought to perfection,
except God him self does stir up, temper, and bring al things to their
right and appointed end. And look what account we make of tools or
instruments, which we use to apply to the woorkmanship and making of any thing
whatsoever: and ye self same regard is to be had with God of second or
secondary causes, (as we call them.) For why the instruments of themselves are
nothing else then idle and unprofitable, and scarce worthy (if we consider them
well) the name of causes: unless peradventure as the hanuner or saw may after
a sort be called causes, which yet are not so to be taken for causes, as if a
table or form or any such like thing be well and artificially made, any praise
or reward should return unto the^ as the which all men do know that they
neither can work or are able to do any thing, but what and how much the
craftesman him self will have or cause them to do. And so are we to judge of
all other things. For take me an herb also or any other like thing that is
good for physic, and albeit it may seem to have especial virtue against some
certain kind of disease, and being used may peradventure help the sick
party, yet in very deed it comes to pass by the woorkmanship of God, who
does woork effectually by the herb. For proof hereof this may serve, that
the same herb otherwise heeing applied, unto some other that is infected with
the like disease, does no good to the^ curing of it: and whence comes this,
but because the Lord there refuses to woork by it? So far forth is a
medicine never holesomely applied, but when it pleases the Lord him self to
woork with it. Whereupon also it comes to pass, that ofttimes a man
recouereth his health, by that thing that he least thought off, and all because
the Lord woorketh with it, howsoever otherwise it seems in no wise to be
prepared for that use. So where the Lord Jesus spitted upon the ground, and
made clay, and put it to the eyes of the blind, that clay of it self did
nothing toward the restoring of the sight: for who ever used such a medicine?
but yet there it did good and prevailed, because it pleased the Lord to add
his strength to that outward sign. And in like manner we see other oftetimes
to be healed, by taking this or that thing, which yet was never thought to have
any force or strength in it against the present disease.

Therefore all secondary causes are in very deed only (as ye would say)
certain tools or instruments, yet such as are never forcible to woork, but
when the Lord him self gives strength unto them. But this is to be marked of
us, that secondary causes are not in euery^ respect like unto tools: for these
are such, as without them the artificer can do nothing. For why, except he
have his hammer, saw, chip-axe, and such like instrueme^ts he is compelled to
cease, as never able with his fingers or nails alone to heawe the timber, nor
to plain the boordes. But God for his part, can without the help of any
second causes, bring to pass at all times whatsoever it pleases him. For
hence it is, that so many things happen which we account for miracles, because
that in them, whither it be the healing of the sick, or any other unusual
thing be done, we can see in no second causes to concur, as otherwise among
men are commonly used. Hence likewise it is, that so many great things come to
pass soddenly and besides the expectation of men: as for example, when we see
all things in a readiness to war, and now the banners to be displaied, the
standerds erected, and the battles fully bent to join together, yet
(behold) no man once dreaming of any such matter, peace is suddenly proclaimed,
the arms on either side dismissed and sent away, etc. Again on the other
side, when there appeered most certain hope of peace to be continued, even
then have risen up, and no man knowing how or by whom, horrible stirs and
tumultes. In all which things the only providence of God woorketh all in all,
and that without the help of any secondary causes appeering unto us.

Therefore what things soever come to pass throughout the whole world, it is
certain, that they are done and accomplished by God him self: and if at any
time secondary causes do soeme to work any thing at all, yet are they naught
else but unprofitable tools, without strength, and of no force in them selves.
And verily when God uses the ministry of them, he does it (doubtless) more
for our cause, then for his own. For why, that he is able to bring to pass
without them whatsoever it pleases him, there is no man that can deny. But for
this cause his pleasure is oftentimes to work by them, to wit, that his
divine power woorking in things visible, may put forth it self the more
clearly to be seen and that we might be admonished thereby and driven (as
manifestlye convicted) to confess, that the divine aid is diverse and sundry
ways and at all times present with us, and that there is nothing in the whole
world so small, or albeit, created in vain, but that from every thing that is,
there flows one commodity or other either unto man, or unto other things,
according as the divine providence of God has appointed and ordained. For our
sakes therefore it is, that in secondary or inferior causes the force of Gods
power and goodness does utter and declare it self, and not for Gods cause him
self, who does at no hand stand in need of their aid or help. For like as
when any piece of work cunningly and artificially made is set forth openly
to be seen, there the craftesman him self is praised and commended of all the
beholders, and not this or that tool or instruement which he used in making of
it: so in all things that come to pass here below, albeit they may seem to
be accomplished by secondary causes (as they are usually termed) yet if there
be any goodness and excellency in them, the providence and goodness of God him
self ought especially to be considered and commended, yea and all the praise
and thanks giving is to be ascribed unto God him self, and not unto any
second or inferior causes. Wherefore we do not willingly grant unto secondary
causes ye room and authority which they deserve: but in the mean season this
we would have to be granted again unto us, that whatsoever seems to be
wrought or accomplished by them, may be ascribed unto God alone as to the
chief and principal author: inasmuch as they with out him can do nothing,
but contrariwise he without them is well able to do all things. And thus is
concluded that which was said of us at the beginning, namely that God does all
in all in every thing, and that his providence necessarily stretches it self
even to the least things that are brought to pass in this lower part of the
world, and not simplye stretche if self unto them, but also exactly governs
and administreth every thing. But I thought good to ad heerunto certain words
of S. Augustine as touching second or inferior causes, and touching the force
of Gods power woorking in all things, for so much as they do wonderouslye
well agree to this present treatise of ours. Thus therefore in his 7. book de
Ciuitate Dei, Cap. 29. disputing against the^ that would refer the causes of
all things to the world it self and the parts thereof, and also to certain
peculiar and chosen Gods, amongst other things he says. We woorship that God
(says he) that apointeth to the creatures by him created both the beginnings
and ends of their being and moving: which has in him self, knows, and
disposes the causes of things: which has made and created the virtue of
seeds: which has put areasonable soul, which is called the mind, into what
living creatures it pleased him: which has given them the power and use of
speech: which has imparted to what spirits he would the office of telling
things to come, and by whom it pleseth him he foretells things to come, and
by whom he pleseth he ^^iueth away diseases: which rules the beginnings,
proceedings, and endings of wars also themselves, accordingly as mankind is
to be corrected and amended: which has both created and also rules and
governs the most vehement and violent fire of this world, according to the
temperature of his unmeasurable nature: which is both the creator and governor
of the waters throughout the whole earth: which has made the Sun the
cleerest of all corporal lights; and has given unto it answerable power and
moving: which stretches his rule and dominion even to hell it self and the
internal spirits: which ministers seed and nourishment both moist and dry
according to the several natures and dispositions of his creatures: which
founded the earth and makes it fruitful* which gives the fruits thereof both
to men and beasts: which knows and orders not only the principal causes
of things but also the subsequent and inferior: which appoints to the Moon
her course and motion: which discovers the ways of heavenly and earthly
things by the interchanginges of places: which has granted to the wits and
capacities of men that he has made, the knowledge also of diverse and sundry
arts to the adorning and beautifying of life and nature: which has ordained
the conjunction of male and female, to the better propagation of issue and
posterity: which has fauourablye granted to the companies and societies of
men, the benefit of earthly fire, which they might apply to most easy uses,
as to warm them in their houses, to give them light, etc. according to their
several necessities. Hitherto are the words of Saint Augustine.

Hereby it may appear, how fond and shameful the cauillations of some men
are, whereby they go about to subvert and overthrow particular providence. If
it be so (say they) that all things are ordered by Gods providence, then in
vain shall we labor and take pains in any thing, and in vain shall our
counsels and consultations be: which yet that they are both necessarily and
profitably used, very reason and nature it self does teach us all. If it be
appointed of God (say they) that we shall have good success in any matter, it
shall not be needful for us to take any care, neither to bestow any labor or
diligence in providing such things as we think to be necessary for us* but if
it be decreed that we shall have no good success, then here again shall all
things be attempted in vain of us. Wherefore he that perceives any dangers to
hang over his head, shall not take counsel, how he may avoid them: he that
hears tell that the way is beset with thieves, shall not enquire after any
other way wherein he might walk, neither tarry for any to bear him company: he
that fears the danger of some contagious sickness, wherewith he seeeth others
to be infected, shall not refrain the company of the diseased, neither shall
he take any preservative by the counsel of the physician: he that seeeth his
house on fire and ready to fall on his head, or a gulf of waters breaking
through the banks with great force to rush upon him, shall not look which way
he may escape: he that is already set in the midst of dangers, and either
taken of his enemies, or atteynted with sickness, shall not provide for his
deliverance, neither crave the help of physic. Nay further God shall not be
called upon by prayer, nor sought unto, to the intent we might obtain any
thing of him, when as we are sure yt nothing can come to pass, but that which
he has once decreed. In sum, it shall be sufficient for a man once in all
his life to commend him self wholly unto God: and then with hault and bold
courage to look for whatsoever he shall send: for why in this case there
remains nothing else for man to do. With these and such like cauils (I say) a
sort of ignorant men seek to suppress particular providence: but he shall
easily overthrow the^, that will heedfullye consider of those things that have
hitherto of us been said. But over and besides, we will add certain reasons
clear and manifest, whereby we will show, that even secondary causes (when
the case so requires) are in no wise to be contemned or neglected, and yet
nevertheless that God woorketh all in all in them.

First: We must persuade our selves, that those causes and all other helps and
remedies besides are given us of God him self: and look by what providence it
is ordained, that we should fall into dangers, and stand in need of many
things, and by the same also it is appointed, that we should use secondary
causes, and be helped by them. For as it is ordained of God, that we should be
pined with hunger, pinched with thirst, frozen with cold, distressed with
diverse diseases, and oftentimes fall into, sundry perrilles and perplexities:
so is it appointed again of God, that we should sow and mow our lands,
provide water or other kinds of drink, get skins, lether, linen, and woollen
for apparel, give diligence to learn physic.

Secondly: It serves to this purpose, that God has instilled into every thing
yt he has created certain secret and peculiar virtues, which we cannot
perceive in like manner to be in other things. So we see corn or grain properly
to qualify hunger, water to quench thirst, this herb for this use, an other
for that, etc. in most excellent order provided. But all especially to serve
the use of man, as Lord and King appointed over al creatures: whose part it is
in such wise to use the^, as yt he may apply every thing to those special
purposes, for yt which they were properly made, and not out of one and ye self
same thing to be in hope yt he shall get all things: that is to say, that he
shall not with meat go about to quench his thirst, nor take drink to slake his
hunger, etc. Now the^ if every thing be in this wise created unto proper and
peculiar uses, what avails it yt they should be so created, if a man use the^
not to ye same ends and purposes: Thirdly: this also is to be observed, as
worthy of admiration, namly, yt there is no land or cuntry any where extant, with
brings not forth what soever things are necessary, to maintain the life of
men, and of other creatures, whereof there is greatest use. Again no living
creature so small, whereunto God has not engraffed a care to preserve it self,
and also some sense and feeling by one means or other to avoid the things
that it seeeth to be against it. And wherefore is it thus (I pray you) but
because man should understand, that he is altogether left without excuse, if
(as often as necessity so require) he use not the helps that are provided, and
strive not to help and further him self by them?

Fourthly: For the selfsame cause has God given unto man wit and reason,
whereby he might discern between things to be eschewed and things to be
desired: he has bestowed upon him the knowledge of many things, diverse and
sundry excellent arts, the observation and experience of manifold acts and
exploites. Finally de has ministered unto man all necessary furniture, whereby
to procure good things, and to ^^^o^^e the contrary. Wherefore then should he
not (by applying the commodity of those seco^ndarye causes to himself) make
use of these notable gifts of God?

Fifthly, It is to be observed, that God him self does often times (when as
strange and unaccustomed perrilles (...) happen, whereby man is made amazed and
perplexed) priu^^ye and (as it were) by secret inspiration minister convenient
and rare, likewise strange and unaccustomed counsels and instructions by
which the worfull wight being almost past hope of recovery is yet still
delivered and continued. Which when it so falls out, it is a plain case that
this is Gods will, that we should use aright (and when need is) secondary
causes, inasmuch as he orders and dispozeth them all at his pleasure.

Sixthly: This also is the cause, why God would have man to be ignorant of
things to come, and not privy to his dinine counsels, namely that he being
plunged in same present peril, and not knowing what the issue of it will be,
may learn to fly to the remedies provided of God, and so in due time by says
to wait for Gods help effectuallye woorking in them.

Seventhly: And thus forsooth will God have man to have recourse unto second
causes, wherein he him self woorketh, and which he has appointed to certain
uses for all events and purposes, insomuch that he accou^teth him selfs to be
tempted with great reproach when a man in present perrill refuses to use such
proper and peculier remedies as are ready and at hand for the nonce. So if thou
runnest not away, when thou seeest thy house at the point to fall upon thy
head, (thou at least wise being able, and God having given thee strong legs
and feet to that end) doubtless thou make thy self guilty of sin.

It is evident therefore, that secondary causes (since they are ordained of God
him self, and the necessity of man's life requires them) are in no wise to be
neglected or despised: and yet in the mean time, not further forth auailable,
then it pleases God him self to woork in them. And so we may see oftentimes,
that being used in time they do much good, as when one escapes by flight,
another is helped by taking of medicines, another defended by armor and
weapon, another obtaining his desire by praying unto God, to be short, some
other escaping by some other means from danger either present or imminent, and
all because it pleases the Lord to work together with those secondary
causes. Again on the other side, we see oftetimes other to attempt all the
like things, as namely to endeuer to save themselves by flight, to call for
the Phifition and carefullye to obey his precepts, to take up armor and
weapon, to entreat God for his help, finally to leave nothing unattempted, and
yet notwithstanding to stick continuallye in danger, and at the length
miserably to perrishe: and that for no other cause, then for that the Lord
does not put to his helping hand. Again we may see some set in the midst of
the flaming fire, compassed about on every side with the outeries and dead
coarses of sick and diseased persons, beset with naked swoordes flashing about
their ears, and lastly destitute of all outward help, and yet (when they
least thought of any such matter) to be delivered: and all this forsooth
because the Lord (even without the ministry of secondary causes) woorketh and
accomplisheth whatsoever it pleases him. Wherefore let us so esteem of
secondary causes as they deserve, and by no means refuse them: but yet withal
we must hold this, that God disposes and dispatcheth all in all.

That neither Fate or desteny can stand, nor chance or fortune, nor contingens
or happe-hazard be granted, where there is due knowledge had of Gods
providence, and the same esteemed according to the dignity thereof.

Cap. 5.
NOw the order of teaching requires, that we proceed unto other questions,
such namely as do rise about Fate or destenye, about Fortune and chance, and
about Contingens or happe-hazard. And first we will speak of Fate or desteny.

We are to know therefore, that some when they hear us to commend providence
and to affirm it to be so busily occupied about every thing, do by and by
(that they may the better defend their universal providence which they rest
upon) very disdainefully exclaim against us, that we set abroach the self
same things, and (as ye would say) fetch them back from hell into Christian
Churches, which the idle philosophers are wont to handle as touching fate or
desteny in their schools and cloisters. Augustine in his work against the
two epistles of the Pelageans, Book 2. Chap. 5. makes mention, that there was
on a time so much as this comes too objected against him, for because he
affirmed ye grace came not by woorks or merits, but only by the good will and
pleasure of God, who has mercy on whom he will and whom he will he hardens.
Neither is it obscure to know, what the things are that the Philosophers have
put forth touching Fate or desteny.

First of all they have defined fate, as Cicero reports in his 2. book of
Divination, to be an order and course of causes, when one cause begets
another in it self. And there in the fame place Cicero intending more
expressly to describe the force of Fate, adds, That it is an everlasting
truth flowing from all eternity. Which since it is so, there is nothing done
that was not to be done: and in like manner nothing to be done, whereof nature
contains not effectual causes to bring it to pass. Whereby we are given to
understand, that it is not Fate which superstitiously, but which physically is
said, to be the everlasting cause of things why both the things that are
past were done, and the things that be present are done, and things that are
to come shall be done. And so it comes to pass, that by observation it may
be marked, what thing for the most part follows every cause, although not
always, (for that were very hard to affirm) and that the selfsame probable
causes of things to come are seen of those, that either in madness, or in sleep
do behold them. Hitherto Cicero.

There is extant also a definition of Fate, in Gellius in his 6. book and 2.
chap. put forth by Chrysippus a principal pillar of the Stoicall discipline.
For he desires it to be, A certain natural course or order of all things
following one an other from eternity, and the same folding and wrapping
together of things remaining unchangeable. In which two places undoubtedly
there seem some things to be contained, which do not agree amiss to Gods
providence, as it has of us also oftentimes heretofore been described. But
besides there are two other opinions rehearsed of Cicero in his book de Fato,
of the Philosophers touching Fate. The one of those that thought all things to
come to pass by Fate, so as that Fate should bring necessity: in which
opinion were Democritus, Heraclitus, Empedocles, Aristotle. Whereupon came this
to be in the mouths of many, Ineuitabile fatum. The other of those, unto whom
it seemed that without any Fate the motions of men's minds are voluntary. With
whom also this distinction was usual: that in some things it might truly be
said, when the certain causes were gone before, that they are not in our
power, but that they must of necessity come to pass whereof they were causes:
but in some things, though the causes were gone before, yet that it is in our
power, that they should otherwise come to pass, and that those things
forsooth do properly come to pass by Fate or fatally, but from these that
fate is absent. Further of these two opinions all for the most part do
especially condemn the former: but the latter (inasmuch as it makes the
motions of minds voluntary and free, exempting the^ from the power and
jurisdiction of Fate) they do the rather approve: and we which acouch
particular providence (they say) do intend again to establish ye former
assertion, and as for the liberty of will (which yet that they might keep
safe, it pleases them only to allow of universal providence) that we utterly
take it away: and that so our meaning is again to justify and uphold that
philosophical doctrine touching fate, which has already been rejected of all
men. Moreover in the word Fate and in the sundry names thereof, especially
among the Greeks, the whole force (in a manner) of Gods providence (such as we
affirm it to be) seems to be expressed of the ancient writers: so that now
nothing is thought to let, but that as well in opinion as in flat terms we do
fully agree in all points with them.

For first they will have Fatum to be derived from the Verb Fando, to speak,
as witnesses Varro in his 5. book de Lingua Latina, and so by the word Fate
they plainelye insumate into all men's minds, that it is nothing else, then that
which is decreede in the mind of God, and (that it might unchangeably come to
pass) as ye would say by express voice declared and pronounced.

And this is the very same in effect which we call providence. The word Fate
seems not to differ much from those phrases of Scripture every where extant,
God spoke the word, thus says the Lord, and such like: by all which the sense
and meaning of Gods providence and power is made manifest unto all men. But of
the Grecians Fate or Desteny is adorned with many tytles, whereof every one
does after a sort set before our eyes somewhat, whereby the dispensation and
power of the divine prouinence is more ceerly laid open unto us.

Crysippus interprets it to be Pepromenen, called as you would say
Peperasmenen, (that is to say) limited and brought to an end, because that by
it all things are finished and determined. Peratoo, is as much to say as
termino, to finish or conclude. And Eimarmenen as ye would say Eiromenen, that
is to say, knit and folded together, because the causes are knit between them
selves. Whereupon also they have termed it Eirmon, that is to say, an order or
connection. Eiro, is necto, to knit. Moreover it is called Ananke akinetos, yt
is, immovable necessity, because that whatsoever is decreed by Fate or
Destiny, is of necessity to be accomplished without any change or alteration.
Also Nemisis, because that it distributeth every where as well good things as
bad. Nemo, is as much to say as distribuo, divido, to distribute or divide.
Likewise Adrastein, for that no man can escape or disappoint it. Didrasco, is
fugio, to fly or escape. Then also Moira, for that it deuideth or parts unto
all. Meiro and Moiras, divido, is to part or divide.

Wherefore also they have termed Moiras, the same which we call Parcat, or
Ladies of Destiny, forasmuch as they are Memerismenai, that is to say
distributed or divided particularly unto every one: which also are three in
number, according to the three parts or portions of time, to wit, present,
past, and to come. And Lachesis, forsooth (being the name of the first) having
respect to the time to come, wills every man to expect his lot and chance.
For Lankano, is as much to say as Sortior, to give or take lottes. Atropos,
(the name of the second) being as you would say irreuertibilis, or
vnreturnable, has regard to the times past, which cannot be revoked or called
back, Propao and Prepo, verto, to turn. Chlotho, (the third) is attributed
unto things present, which are by a perpetual order rolled and whirled about.
Clotho, circum volo, to turn about. These things (I say) and many more beside
are uttered of the philosophers, as touching Fate or desteny, and the same seem
not to be a little convenient to the setting forth of the dignity of
providence whereof we speak: whereby it comes to pass, that some go about to
persuade the unlearned, that we have drawn those things, which we allege of
Gods providence, especially particular, for the most part out of the books of
the Philosophers, or at least wise that ours do not much differ from their
sayings, and that so the doctrine of the Stoikes touching Fate is by us
thoroughly broched again and revived. But we will show by certain very
substantial reasons, that there is no agreement between us and the Stoikes,
either as touching their opinion, or as touching their terms and titles.

1 And first in general this we say, that the place concerning Gods providence
is one of those, that the Philosophers have most filthily defiled and
corrupted, as they have done all other in a manner wherein the chief points of
our religion are comprised. Wherefore albeit they have put forth some things
aright touching Gods providence under the name of Fate, yet have they again
devised many more (after their manner) utterly disagreeing from the truth, for
which cause we will by no means have any fellowship or society with them. For
how should they do otherwise that are destitute of Gods word, from which
alone ought to be fetched a right judgment touching high and heavenly
things? But we through Gods goodness have that word of his, wherein is
aboundantlye revealed as well all truth as also the nature of his divine
providence, and this word of his we safely follow.

2 If we have weighed the matter aright, the Philosophers have separated their
Fate from God, and have propounded it to be considered as an odd thing without
God and a part by it self: but we do in no case sonder God and his
providence, but affirm it to be in God, yea and even God himself, no
otherwise then in the holy Scriptures God is called the life, ye truth,
wisdom, etc. for they place ye connection or course of causes far off from the
seat of God, and by it self, of it own proper motion, and of it own peculiar
strength perpetually, (and as far forth as may be) very orderly woorking
upon these inferior things: God in the mean time not once putting forth his
hand unto them, as he that is occupied only in and about heavenly matters as in
his own proper seat and mansion. Neither that there is any great need, why he
should trouble his majesty about the things here below, since it cannot be
chosen but that all things shall fall out for the best, after that the whole
care and administration thereof be once committed to those connexed causes. For
in as much as they do their office very well, and also observe the order once
prescribed them of God, it cannot be, but that according to their force in
woorking, appointed effects must follow: as when in clockes cunninglye made,
the waightes are once drawn up, the little wheels by and by are turned about
of their own accord, and the Gnomon by little and little is moved to the point
where it ought to be. But we being taught out of the Scriptures, do teach that
God himself woorketh every where, and reaches forth his hands (if we may so
speak) even unto every thing that is: and that all things do in no case so
depend upon the labor of connexed causes, but that without their helps and
ministerye very many notable things are wrought and accomplished by God in
these inferior matters here below.

3 There are many other things touching Fate broched afterward by the
Philosophers which agree not with the pure doctrine of Gods providence, neither
can they by any means be reconciled together. Of which sort is that
especially (to omit the rest) which was before cyted out of Cicero, namely that
it may be observed by the unwearied actions of causes connexed or knitte
together, what thing for the most part does follow every cause. This thing
doubtless in this dispensation of things by Gods providence cannot be
perceived, forasmuch as many things come to pass very oftentimes, in yt which
man's reason sees no causes at all either principal or accessory: and of many
great and mighty works there can no other cause be rendered, then the good
and unreprovable ivill of the Lord. As no man knows the counsel of God, so
are the causes of many things unsearchable, and good reason, since in very deed
it were not expedient for a man al ways to know them. In like manner, whither
Fate woorketh in all things or whither man's will be exempted from the decrees
thereof, the Philosophers could never certainly determine, and that as well
because they were hindered by the darkness of the flesh always erring in such
matters, so as they could not discern the light of the truth: as also for
because they had not the rule and squire of Gods word, without the which it is
impossible that any sound and certain judgment should be given. Whereupon it
came to pass, that the Philosophers also themselves laughed one another to
scorn in disputing about that matter: which thing Eusebius in his 6. book
touching the Preparation of the Gospel reports of Oenomaus the Cynick, who
contemned and disdainfully reproved both Democritus and Crysippus, yea and
Apollo Pythius also him self: the one forsooth, because he made the most
excellent part of man altogether bond and servile, the other, for that he made
it self bond or half servile: and Apollo, for because when he knew al other
things, yet was he ignorant of what things we are the woorkers and authors, and
what things depend upon the execution of our will. The same man further
derideth the Philosophers, for that they could not agree among themselves,
whither Eimermene or Pepromene, that is to say, Fate or Destenye were of God,
or no, the one affirming, the other again denying: Epicurus at the length
(full wisely) concluding, that the same is confected and made ex atomis
errantibus, that is, of wandering motes, passing too and fro by the way, and
flittring here and there on every side. It would be ouer-long to recount and
confute other things, wherein the Philosophers striving about fate did most
shamefully ouershoote themselves. S. Augustine refelleth some of their errors
in his work de Ciuitate Dei, Lib. 5, Cap. 8.9.10.11. and else where.

4 Neither again is it heerby concluded, that we are of one mind with the
Stoikes, for that some of them have confessed that by the name of fate they
understand God him self, and the will of God. In which sense Aristotle as well
in other places as in his book de Mundo, says, that the only high God is
called by diverse and sundry names, by reason of the diverse and sundry effects
which he woorketh, and amongst other names he attributes unto him also the
titles of anankes, eimarmenes, pepromenes, adrasteias, etc, that is to say, of
necessity, fate or desteny, vengeance or reuengement, etc. And Seneca in his
book of Epistles 18, out of Cleanthes the Stoike recites these verses.

O Mighty Father ruler of the Sky,
Lead and conduct me whither that thou please:
No cause of stay shall let me but that I,
will thee obey, behold I come with ease.
But put the case I were unwilling, yet
I follow must, although it grieve me sore:
And being evil I must not stick nor let, to do the thing that lawful was
before:
Even for the good t'accomplish evermore.
The fates do lead the willing wight always:
The Unwilling eke they draw to all assaies.
Where in the last words (as S. Augustine interprets them) Seneca most
evidently calls by the name of Fates, that which in the first verse he had
termed the will of the almighty Father. The same Seneca in his 3. book de
Beneficijs, speaking of God. This same says he, (meaning God) if thou shall
call him fate or desteny, thou shall not do amiss. For fate is nothing else
then an inwrapped course of causes, and he is the first cause of all things,
of whom the residue depend. Albeit therefore the Stoikes have in this wise
transferred the name of Fate unto God him self, yet that it is neither fitly
done, nor after that manner that we place providence in God, it is proved even
by their own assertions, as they that do separate their connexed or fatal
causes far off from God: besides that they devise many other things touching
Fate, which to apply unto God, were heinous wickedness. Heerby therefore it
plainly appears, that the Stoikes doctrine of Fate can by no means be
compared with the Eu^^gelicall doctrine of Gods providence. We will add a
further matter, that enen the very name of Fate is to be shut out from amongst
us hereafter, if we covet to retain our religion in her natural purity. For
seeing that as often as the name of Fate is heard, many absurdities do
forthwith seize upon the minds of all that hear it, and such as are clean
contrary to the principles of true Divinity, doubtless we are of that mind,
that the same can in no wise be admitted into our congregations, without great
fear of dangerous infection, let it be reicited amongst those profane and
baine ianglinges, which the Apostle 1. Timoth. 6. wills to be avoided as also
we see the holy Fathers, especially Augustine, carefally to have shunned it.
Let us imprint in our minds the saying of ye same Augustine against them which
out of the place of John. 8, No man could lay hands on him, because his hour
was not yet come: would thereupon infer, that the Lord Christ was under Fate
or desteny. If thine heart, says he, were not fond, thou would not believe
Fate. And that which Nasianzen in his oration touching the care of the poor,
says. That their hap is miserable and their devises frustrate, that will
take upon them to teach chance, or Fortune, or Fate. And thus much hitherto
touching Fate.

Further the place admonishes us to show that neither chance nor fortune has
any place, where the force of Gods providence is in some sort weighed and
considered. There is no need here of any long disputation, specially since
none have over much labored to oppose or admixe fortune or chance with the
divine providence of God. It is apparent enough, that the things falling out
by fortune and chance are said to be those, that do sometimes happen
accidentlye and besides man's expectation, which otherwise never or very seldom
are wont to come to pass. And that which after this sort happens unto a
man, that may deliberate and deal by advice, they will have it said properly
to be Fortuitum, or a thing happening by fortune: as if a man digging in the
feelde to set or sow, finds a treasure: and that which happens to some
other thing void of reason, they ascribe to chance: as if a stone falling
from ye house top, kills a Dog that passes by. Wherefore curious men have
endeavored to search and seek whence these things should come, and why they
should rather be thus then otherwise, when yet there is no doubt but they might
have happened otherwise: and when they could not find what causes to allege
in such euentes, they being overcome with admiration judged, that it must of
necessity he some divine matter, and that called they fortune or chance, by
little and little also making it a Goddess, by whose beck and will the
greatest part of men's affairs might be guided and governed. Whereupon also we
read that she was woorshipped and honored with divine honors like unto ye
other Gods: and the matter came to this point, that whatsoever prosperity or
adversity befell, men ascribed it only and alone to fortune, yea and it grew
to be an usual speech, that then any thing was to fall out either well or ill,
when it pleased Fortune so to have it. Hence sprung those speeches. If Fortune
list and pleased be, I shall, attain to hye degree. etc. But we being taught
out of the holy Scriptures, touching the Providence of God, and knowing that by
it even the least and vilest things that be are dispensed and accomplished,
do ascride nothing at all either to chance or fortune, nay we are of this
mind, that there is not so much as any chance or fortune: but do attribute
all things universally whither they be joyous or grievous unto God him self,
who adorneth whom he will with benefits, and to whom he will sends
contrary calameties. Of all which things whilst he has the true and
certain causes in a readiness, and the manner of woorking by them, it is enough
and sufficient: neither for that we are ignorant of the causes, or of the
means, ought any thing in them to be accoumpted Fortuntum, or falling out by
fortune or chance. Heerupon we see in the Scriptures, that al things both good
and had which may happen, are propounded and set forth by the names of Gods
blessings and cursinges, and likewise of promises and threatninges: to the
intent verily we might dearly learn, that no such matter is to be ascribed
unto fortune (whither we list to call it good or evil) but all things to God
alone, who says expressly by his Prophet, that it is he that created good end
evil, that makes light and darkness, etc. There might I grant many things,
which happen so upon the sudden and unlooked for, be said after a sort to fall
out by Fortune in respect of us, and after a certain manner of speaking (from
which it must be abandoned the fond imagination touching any such several
power of Fortune as gives and bestows all things upon whom she will) but
yet in respect of God, we has (as it is evident) pressed and ready causes of all
things that come to pass, nothing can be said to happen by Chance or Fortune.
Yea and to say the very truth, neither ought we in respect of our selves to
grant any thing unto Fortune: ^ith of what things soever come to pas, our
mind, albeit it perceives not the outward causes, and which we usually term
next or nearest, yet has it at all times in a readiness and understands the
principal woorking cause, to wit, the providence and good will of God.

For this is a most certain role to answer directly unto every question
touching the causes of those things that are seen to come to pass, namely,
that they are all wrought and accomplished by Gods good will and providence.
Whither belong those godly wishes and desires of the Saints in things
doutfull and to come: The Lords will be done: likewise in consideration of
things done and past: So has it pleased the Lord, his will be fulfilled. And
to this effect Augustine de Ciuitate Dei, lib. 5. chapter 9. says, That the
causes, which are called fortnitae, that is, casual or working by fortune, are
not altogether none at all, but such as lie hid in secret, and therefore to be
ascribed to the will of God. But it shall not be amiss to illustrate and set
forth the matter with some examples. And first touching Chance. Is it not a
thing likely to be done by chance, that a Ram being caught by the horns
stack fast in the briars, when Abraham was about to offer by his son in
sacrifise? But Abraham had said before, that The Lord would provide him a
sacrifise, being assured by faith that the Lord would do whatsoever was
expedient: and the same Ram became there a figure of Christ: Genesis 22. Again
that the Casket wherein Moses was put, should slote near to the place, where
Pharaohs daughter was gone down to wash her self, appears to have happened by
chance: but for what great and weighty causes the Lord disposed it so to come
to pass, all the holy books of ye Bible do most plentifully witness: Exodus 2.
Further we would say that it was by chance, that the iron of the Are wherewith
one of the scholars of Elizeus hewed timber, fell into the water: but thereby
took the Prophet occasion to work a miracle, whereby he testified his
incomparable faith to Godward, and his lou^ toward his neighbor: 2 Kings. 6.
To be short it may seem to come by chance, that a Viper creeping out of the
fire caught Paul by the hand at Melita: but that thing was the cause forth
with, why the barberous people magnified the Apostle as a God: and acknowledged
him to be most deer unto god. Act. 28. We might adioy^^ yet more examples, but
that we have to speak in like manner touching the events of Fortune. Wherein (I
pray you) does it seem that any thing may more justly appear to be forcuitum
or happening by fortune, then in lottes? and yet the Scripture does apparantlye
teach, that while The lotte is cast into the lap, the whole disposition thereof
comes of the Lord: Pro. 16. And by this means, the Lord himself ordering
the lotte, was Saul found out to be anointed with oil, and so to be declared
King: 1. Sam. 10. Jonathan was found to have tasted honye: 1. Sam. 14. Jonas
was bewrayed, for that refusing the charge enjoined him of the Lord he fled an
other way: Jonas 1. Mathias was called to the office of Apostle: Act 1.

May it not be thought also worthily to fall out by Fortune, that Rebecca
rather then any other should give drinck to the unknown servant of Abraham,
and afterward add that she would in like manner draw water for his Camelles?
But surely the Lord would have these things to be for a sign, whereby the
servant might know what manner of one she was that his Masters son should
espouse: Gen 24 would not all men likewise say that Fortune hare a great
stroke, when David being thrice pursued of Saul with a spear or Iauelin to
have thrust him through, escaped yet safe and sound? But we must mark, how often
it is mentioned there that the Lord was with David. and that David gave thanks
to God alone for his deliverance: 1 Samuel 18.19. And who would not judge Absolons
fortune to be strange and marvelous, who whilst he rode upon a mule in great
haste, was caught by the hair of the head and hanged upon the bough of an
Oak, where also being thrust through by Ioab, he was foorth-with slain
outrightes of his servants, and cast into a pit in the wood, and without all
honor covered with a heap of stones? But there in that place the Lord
himself is said to have compassed about the men that lifted up their hand
against the king and to have judged for David: 2 Samuel 18.

Therefore to conclude, what things soever do happen so upon the sudden and
unlooked for that there appear no causes why they should so come to pass,
when yet they might fall out otherwise, must be referred to the will and
providence of God as unto the chief and principal cause. But if thou will
still term them Fortuita or falling forth by fortune after the usual manner
and custom of speaking: yet must thou needs grant this, that except the Lord
him self do dispose and direct them, they can never come to pass nor attain
to any perfection.

And whilste thou do this, thou thy self by rendering some cause (and the
same certain) of the fact, do now plainly subvert the nature of Fortune,
since verily there can fall out nothing by Fortune, but whereof the cause is
unknown.

Therefore whosoever judges aright touching Gods providence, he perceives full
well that Fortune or chance is nothing. As also the Stoikes in like manner (who
contended that all things came to pass by Fate or Destiny) are reported
wisely to have taken away Fortune and Chance, from whose sentence or judgment
the Satyricall Poet cries out.

Thy Godhead fails, if wisdom once
take place: but Fortune we
Do thee a Gods make, and eke
in heaven do harbor thee.
Signifying that Fortune was so highly^ esteemed and exalted, only and alone
by the foolish persuasion of men.

Wherefore to the end the studious may learn to observe, how they may speak
truly and without offense touching things happening by Fortune, (as they use
to call them) I will add touching that matter the words of S. Augustine out
of his first book and first Chapter of Retractions. In my books against the
Academiks, says he, it greeueth me that I have so often used the name of
Fortune. Albeit my meaning was not to have any goddess understood by this
name, but a chanceable event of things either in respect of our bodies, or in
respect of outward benefits or calameties. Whereupon also came those words,
which no religion forbids to speak: Percace, Perhaps, Perchance,
Peradventure, By fortune. Which all notwithstanding is to be revoked to Gods
Providence. This also I concealed not there, saying: For peradventure that
which is commonly called Fortune, is ruled by some secret order: and we call
chance in things nothing else, then that whose course and cause is hidden from
our eyes. I said this indeed, but yet it repents me, that I so named
Fortune there, especially since I perceive men to have taken up a very evil
custom, that where it ought to be said, Thus would God have it: they say,
thus would Fortune have it. Hitherto Augustine. Certes those aduerbs, Perhaps,
Perchance, etc. do serve more to signify doubtfulnes, the^ affirmation: or
if not doubting, then declare they rather some thing to be done beyond our
reach, then without any certain cause, which we must always presuppose to be
settled in Gods will. And Basilius Magnus in a certain place says, That
Fortune and Chance are heathen words, in the signification whereof, it
beseems not godly minds to be occupied.

It remains that we speak of Contingence or Haphazard. To the removing
whereof albeit there be a way after a sort made already, whilst we have
sufficientlye showed, that there is no more place left unto Chance and
fortune, where there is due regard and consideration h^d of Gods Providence,
and that it seemed not necessary to stand long here after entreating of it: yet
(...) because we see some men labor very stoutly to justify and defend it, we
will handle this place somewhat more largely, then otherwise we needed to have
done.

But first there is a certain difference to be set down, which seems unto
me meet to be observed between Contingence and fortune or chance. For chance
and fortune of which we have sufficiently spoken (if I be not deceived) are
referred cheefely to things external, corporal, and indifferent or mean, and
likewise to such as happen besides the compass of our expectation or
deliberation: but Contingence is extended of the Divines even to things
internal and spiritual, concerning the salvation or damnation of the Soul,
yea and to those also whereunto is admitted both deliberation and choice. So
when one walking or beholding ye stars, faleth into a ditch or sink: that they
say is Fortuitum, but when a man is inclined rather to this side then to that,
and sins or sins not, they say that comes to pass by Contingence.
Wherefore they have defined Contingence or Haphazard to be that, whereby things
created in actions subject to reason are oftentimes changed and altered, and
do fall either into these actions or into those according to the choice and
liberty granted of God. From which difinition we may clearly gather, that the
cause and fountain of Contingence is the free will of man, whereby he is moved
to this or that as seems good unto him. Which liberty as it were a sin
utterly to take it away, so deem they it necessary to establish Contingence.
Albert they are moved also with an other cause, and the same much greater and
waightier. For in case it be not granted, that things fall out Contingently
by man's free will, it will come to pass that sin shall be imputed unto God
himself, as by whose providence man shall so be holden bound and fettered,
that he cannot choose but sin, although otherwise he should strive to the
contrary. Hereupon straightwaies was brought into Christian schools out of
the Philosophers dark dens, a distinction of necessity, whereby one is said
to be Necessity absolute or of the consequent (otherwise according to
Aristotle called Determinate, according to Cicero, Simple) whereby things stand
at such a stay, as that nothing there can be changed: as Luke. 24. It is
necessary that al things should be fulfilled, which are written of me in the
Law and the Prophets: another Necessity of ye consequence, whereby many things
are prepared to be done, and no man judges but that they ought to be done in
their time, and yet notwithstanding are not always brought to effect: as Ma^h.
18. It is necessary that offenses should come. For so does man's blind reason
determine, if all things should come not to pass by absolute necessity, then
by some other necessity, which namely may be changed when God shall otherwise
dispoze. This necessity therefore they call necessity of consequence. But
verily we will show how needlessly these things are concluded, and how much they
detract from the dignity of Gods Providence, besides that they are not
grounded upon any sure foundation, co^futing every thing in the selfsame
order wherein they are of us rehearsed, and then with some reasons and examples
establishing our opinion and assertion.

But first and foremost me may say this in general: that if we did so
religiously as were convenient honor and embrace the providence of God, on
every side turning and conuaying it self, and procuring and determining all
things, yea the least and vilest things, even to the numbering and
consideration of every the hairs of our head: and that we did moreover
seriouslye weigh and consider, how small or none at all our liberty and
freedom is, how often our will is let and hindered even in outward and
trifling matters (for indeed the consideration and acknowledgement of these two
things is very requisite and necessary, as also most profitable to illustrate
and set forth the glory of Christ) and lastly if we called to mind, that it
may be proved many other ways, that God is in no wise the author of sin,
neither that it follows ever the more by the assertion of particular
providence, as we have before specified: Verily I would suppose, that every man
might easily perceive and see, that there were no need or necessity at all to
avouch Contingence or Haphazard. But that shall become more plain and evident,
if we bring forth our reasons unto these things that are already breefely
said touching Contingence.

1 First therefore even by the difference that we noted between casual things
and Contingence may after a sort our assertion be confirmed. For if not so much
as casual things are to be granted, but that all such ought to be reduced to
the prescription and determination of Gods providence: how much less may it be
granted, that any thing comes to pass contingenter or by Haphazard? It is
not like that he that regards and disposes the lesser matters, will omit or
neglect the greater: by the administration whereof his praise also and glory may
be increased. And from whose providence it is not lawful to exempt so much as
the fall of one poor sparrow upon the ground: it were very injurious to think,
that of the same are not provided and governed likewise the several actions of
every one. But if so be that by the same are directed those actions also, which
by an usual manner of speaking are called Casual, and which we acknowledge to
be mean or indifferent, neither serving at all to any principal cause (so
farrefoorth as we can conceive) as being not (even then when they are done)
premeditated and forethought off by man: there is no doubt, but that by the
selfsame wisdom are ruled and governed other actions, which are far more
grave and waightye, and such especially, as whereof depend the salvation or
destruction of souls, and in which oftetimes does more appear and may be
seen the mighty and wonderful woorkmanship of God him self, then the power
and ability of man's strength. Wherefore as by the providence of God Fortune and
chance, so also Contingence is subverted and overthrown.

2 Neither is there any cause why they should say that Contingence or
Haphazard does not reach to the internal or spiritual actions, wherein is
handled the matters of the soul. For seeing Contingence is occupied about such
actions as are subject to reason, doubtless they cannot be excluded from the
order of these, by which a man incurreth the guiltines of sin, and for which
he is arraigned as guilty before the tribunal seat of God: inasmuch as these
actions are done and accomplished by reason, which does always also eg and
inuit rather unto evil then unto good. And these foresaid actions are
truly interuall and spiritual (for why they proceed out of the closet of the
heart) and do defile the soul before God, Christ expresselye witnessing it
Math. 15. wherefore the power and dominion of Contingence stretches it self
even to spiritual actions also. For further proof whereof it appears that by
reason of these said actions especially sinful and vicious, I say, and
sauouring of damnation, because they are done besides the will of God, neither
may God be esteemed the author of sin, the occasion was taken of granting
and auouching of Contingence. It remains therefore that Contingence reaches
to spiritual things, and chiefly to the actions of sin. But from hence good
God, what horrible inconveniences do immediately follow? If we sin by
contingence: it appears that we do well also by co^tingence and this
doubtless so much the more, by how much the less it is in our power, and
falls more seldom that we do well then ill. But if this be granted, then
shall also the eternal salvation or damnation of man be reduced to
Contingence, and then when any is saved or damned euerlastinglye, it must
forsooth be ascribed to Contingence. Which if it be true, then shall
predestination also be in danger, neither shall any thing be accomplished for
and by it, but so far forth as men themselves shall contingentlye or at all
adventures direct their own actions. And there is in very deed between
Predestination and providence great affinity and resemblance, so that the one
does as it were supporte and fortify the other. For why, Predestination
bears it self as respecting the ends or effects: and providence as
intentiuely bent to the causes or means. Whereupon it comes to pass, that as
he that takes away the means or causes, the same takes also the effects: so
he that detracteth from the dignity of Providence, must also of necessity
impare the authority of predestination. But rather then we should thus admit
Gods Predestination or providence to be any whit lessened or diminished, let us
stop both our ears, and as for that Contingence or Haphazard, so foolishlye
invented by man's reason: let us never suffer it to come in presence, but with
all possible diligence and common inforcement let us endeuer utterly to banish,
abandon and abolish it for ever.

3 Moreover that foundation, where-upon the whole poize of Contingence lies,
namely free will, every man may easily perceive and see how weak and unstable
it is. If this should algates be true, that the will or choice of man were in
all respects so free, as ye Philosophers have defined, and man's
reason-lab^^^eth to persuade even unto this days: then indeed were Contingence
or Haphazard to be granted, yea and it would seem to appear, that man should
do or not do every thing after his own likement, God in the mean time
keeping him self close, and intermedling as little as is possible with our
affairs, but seeing it is plain and evident (for we have before entreated of
this matter) that we can in no kind of actions (whither we respect external
and corporal, or internal and spiritual, or mean and middle actions) begin
or proceed, further forth then the Lord him self or deineth, disposes, and
leads: our own conscience compels us to confess, that there is nothing
done of us contingently, but that all our works and enterprises, have their
beginninges, proceedinges and endings, after the Lords ordinance and good
pleasure, which can by no means be by us changed or inuerted. We verilye for
our parts consult and take counsel, we seek for help and aid, we are
careful for all the ways and means, whereby we may bring that to an end,
which we have once conceived in our mind, and at length also we have all
things at hand which we long desired: yet we see oftentimes, even when all
things are in the best wise provided, that our driftes are disappoynted, and
that it is upon the sudden most vnhappilye broken off, which we supposed to be
most happily begone and set forward. And why is this: Doubtless for no other
cause, then for that the Lord ordained only such beginninges to be, but
determined to let and hinder the proceedings. So in the Prophets are declared
the counsels of the Jews touching the calling of the Egiptians and other
foreign powers against the Babilonicall enemy at hand, as also in the books of
the Gospel their devises are opened touching the way and mean how to obscure
and darken the noble same of Christ's resurrection, and to suppress his whole
doctrine: but those driftes of theires attained not their desired ends,
because forsooth the Lord, when he ordained them to devise such fetches, did
withal ordeine them to be disappointed of their expectation, and all things
to fall out clean contrary. And in these cases nothing in the mean time
without most just and profitable causes. For men's attempts and endeuers being
made frustrate and void, do cause Gods power to appear notable and famous,
they stir up and confirm the Godly (who are delighted more with spiritual
things then carnal) to reverence and embrace the will of God: they enforce
commonly the wiched to acknowledge Gods power, goodness, righteousness, and to
submit their proud and lofty necks* ^^^^^y innumerable other good things d^^
^^^e and podceed out of these and such like ordinatances of God. We have
produced and alleged ^o examples, according to the diverse kinds of actions
agreeable to this present purpose, when we entreated before as touching the
liberty of man's will. Wherefore hereby it is concluded, that there can no
other Contingence be found out in actions subject to reason, their is the
liberty of man in the self same actions* and soeing this is very small and
almost none at all, it follows that such also must contingence be esteemed:
yea and so little regards is to be had of it, even when to the doing of
things our will either inclines or inclines not, that the Lords providence
is always at liberty and remains ever firm and stable, as by the which it
is as well provided as foreseen, that we shall apply our will (when time is)
or not apply it.

4. Further where they suppose that Contingence is most wiselye and necessarily
established, least if it be granted that all things come simplye to pass by
the divine ordinance, we should be enforced to grant, that ye cause of sin
rests in God, and that he is the anthor of sinue: we have before clearly
showed and that not by one reason alone, that the cause of sin can in no wise
be imputed unto God, but to men only themselves that are the committers of
it: and yet nevertheless that this truth stands fast and sure, That God
woorketh all in all by his Providence. For why unto ^ne and the selfsame thing
woorketh together God and man, yea and the devil also: but because he does it
by an other mean and to an other end and purpose then these, it comes to
pass that the blame and guilte of sin reboundeth upon their head, and his
goodness and justice appear even most clear and excellent. And in the mean
time Gods providence ordaining, and every where putting to his helping hand,
the whole matter is brought to pass and accomplished. It were to no purpose to
repeat those things which we have altearedy more at large declared. Every man
may easily perceine, that it is in vain and superfluous to bring forth
Contingence, where the inconvenience that is objected may so many ways be
avoided.

5 Now touching that distinction, whereby one necessity is said to be absolute
or of the consequent, and an other of the consequence, that we may add
somewhat: Cor^^^ be (...) that it ought even for this cause wordhily to be
suspected, and abandoned, for that it comes out of the schools of the
Philosephers and Sophisters, we will also by some reasons make it plain and
manifest, that it is in like manner devised beside the purpose, and sertheth
nothing at all unto this present cause.

1 First let us see from whence it came. It sprang from a false suppositio^,
namely that the liber it is of man's will is so great, that be^^^^ thereby effect
something besides the ordinatances of God: to wit sin, or at least wise do
some such thing, as is subject to the rule of reason. But we have sufficiently
proved, that this is in no wise to be granted: wherefore also this distinction
is vain and frivolous.

2 This distinction does not so prove any thing to be done by necessity of
consequence, but that it leueth it still whole, that all things are
accomplished by Gods prouidences* through necessity absulute. Which point
also we will easilye prove. For the things which are said to be done by
necessity of consequence, are so for forth judged and in such wise to be
accomplished by man, as also the causes are seen to be in a readiness: as,
either the express word of God, after which sort necessarily by necessity
of consequence the dead shall rift again, whilst it must vncha^geably he
fulfilled, whatsoever is established by the voice of God: or to co^^ causes
going before, in which respect, whilst some are in the Church very pro^^, be
^^^o^s of (...) shinges, and willingly disagrieing ^r^^nt ^e opini^ us of other
men, it cannot be but that heri^^es and offenses should arise: these things I
say are said to be co^tingent and necessary by necessity of consequence,
because forsooth they are not necessary by nature, out only by reason of these
causes propounded.

But wher^^ man, through his imbe^lit^^ and weakness, cannot difeerile these
things to come to pass otherwise, which are not^^ his judgment necessary by
nature, but so far forth as he sees such manifest causes going be^^^^: what
does this avail, I pray you, to prove, that all things are not always extane
with God, and that by an absolute necessity all things are not wrought and
accomplished by and through him. Vndoubledly of those thoughes which must unto
come to pass, there is nothing done, but so far forth as God (...) has
ordained it to be: and whatsoever ^e has ordained, that must of necessity us
accoplished. Whereby it comes to pass, that in God, who is abone all second
causes, and above all time, there can no were, (...) cause, (...) change or
alteration of will be enquired, as ^ought after: but euely and al^^^ the
everlasting (...) ought to be considered, according to the which that must
beimpu^^^ ably and necessarily be fulfilled, which (that it should on^^ be
fulfilled) was ordained even before the cre^^^n of the world. Neither makes it
any watter in the mean season, whither God has op^^^^^ unto man his will,
^^decr^^, by enpresse (...) by exhibiting of second causes, (...) only his
determination must of necessity (...) accomplished. For wher^s God does
sometimes either by his express word, or by app^^^an^e of second causes (...)
any thing to be done: be does not that doubtless because it was not determined
before with him (...) how and after what forte it should be done, much l^sse
that without these causes going before itco^^ld be done but because it was
deree^ from ever lasting that the same should in any wise (...) done, and then
before it was brought to p^ss^ that it should also be declared by such a (...)*
Ther^^^e that which among men and in the opinion of men, and by a certain
usual m^^^^ of speaking, comes to pass contingently an^^^^ly by necessity
of consequence, with God undoubtedly it comes to pass necessarily and by
necessity absolute. For if those things that happen, were duly considered in
them selves as they are done of God, then verily is there nothing Contingent,
nothing falling out by necessity of consequence: but only Gods eternal
decree is of force, and absolute and vntha^geable necessity.

3 Seeing those things are said to be contingent, whith are not necessary by
nature: it is to be determined, that there is nothing of us to be esteemed
contingent and not necessary by nature, but that the same is with God necessary
by nature, if so be he has once decreeed, that it shall be accomplished. For
why? Gods decree is in tread of nature, nay it is more then nature, and is able
to do more then nature.

Wherefore the resurrection of the dead, although in respect of us it be not
necessary by nature, yea rather seems more truly to be impossible: yet with
God it is simply and absolutely necessary; and that because it was d^creed of
him from everlasting. Neither can it be but yt the same shall be fulfilled, yea
and it shall be more certainly and effectuallye be fu^^lled. the^ the things
which amongst us are thought necessary by nature to be fulfilled: especially
seeing experience does teach, that the order and course of nature is often
times let, as namelye when miracles are apparantlye wrought) as in the
standing still of the sun, in the time of Joshua: and the going back thereof,
in the time of Ezechias) but that the ordinance or decree of God should be
prevented or interrupted, no man's mind dares once to conceive.

4. It is necessary by absolute necessity, that God should be most chiefly
good, and that from God being good all good things should proceed, neither is
it possible that any other thing then good should come from him. And necessary
it is by the like necessity, that all those things should be accomplished
which are of him decreed, whither the same be accounted in our judgment
Contingents, or impossible by nature, or (I will add also) evil: but of all
the things that he him self has decreede, there cannot possibly be any, but
that out of it should be derived some commodities either to the profit and
utility of men, or to the illustratio^ and setting forth of his own glory.
Wherefore whatsoever things of this sort come to pass, for so much as they are
good, and not wrought but of God, we must needs understand them to be done by
absolute necessity. Thus much I think sufficient for this present.

5 But if some men more vehementlye provoked to defend and maintain as well
Contingence as also the necessity of Consequence, shall oppose unto us the
places of Scripture, whereby it seems to be proved, that ye thing is not
always fulfilled which God has decreed: as for example where God is brought
in moved with repentance, yt he had made man, Genes. 6. that he had made Saul
King, 1. Sam. 15 also where his decrees are declared to be abrogate or
changed: as when after death most certainly denounced to King Ezecchias. his
life was again prolonged to more years, Esa. 38. likewise when to the
Ninevites was fortolde most certain destruction to follow within few days,
and yet again they were spared, Ion. 2. where if I say by producing of these
and such like places they shall go about to wring from us, that some things
come to pass contingently or by Haphazard, and that al things fall out by
absolute necessity: we will answer them breefely as follows.

1 First to those places touching repentance, we say yt there are there mere
human affections, such as in the scriptures are every where attributed unto
God, necessarys for the cause of teaching, to wit that our understanding
might be brought from ye observation of men's matters so much the more
conveniently to the knowledge also of Gods will. And it is signified by those
phrases, that God will have some things changed toward us: not that he will
any way alter or transpose his own purpose or will, but that he will most
simply prosecute and pursue that which was decreed from everlasting to be
diversely accomplished: yea so decreed I say, that first it should so come to
pass, and afterward that it should fall out otherwise, even altogether as we
see the whole matter dispatched and brought to an end. There is no other thing
therefore meant, then that as the work was decreed diversely to be done, so is
it diuerslyed fulfilled: and so not Contingently, but in truth necessarilye
and even by absolute necessity are al these things wrought according to the
immutable sentence of Gods decree.

2 In like case may it be said of the abrogation or alteration of the decrees
touching Ezechias and the Ninevites. For it was decreede from everlasting, that
this cause should be handled with such beginninges, and also that destruction
should first be denounced unto the^, then that it would come to pass yt they
should acknowledge their sins, earnestlye implore the mercy of God, obtain
pardon and forgiveness, and so by this means should not perish. Wherefore in
this turning away of their destruction, there was not made any change or
alteration of Gods ordinance, but simplye ye execution of his eternal decree:
neither did any thing there come to pass Contingently or by Haphazard, but by
Absolute necessity was ye whole business brought to an end. As God in these
causes provided such beginninges, so provided he the proceedinges and success
which we see did follow. And nothing verilye without most great and just
causes. For by that denuntiation of destruction behold how many and great good
things followed. As well Ezechias as the Ninevites were brought to the
accknowledgement and confession of their sins: then they became careful to
repent: the faith and fear of God were forth with kindled and stirred up in
them: they were throughlye moved to call upon God for mercy, to the amendment
of their lives afterward: and (to be short) their whole posterity has a
notable example of repentance in them propounded and set forth. Again by
their marvelous preservation, the power and goodness of God is exceedinglye
declared, and a document given to all ages for the confirmation of faith and
hope. And since there was nothing done there in vain, nothing without most grave
and weighty causes and great profit and utility, it is plain and evident that
it cannot be said, that any thing came to pass by Contingence and (as a man
would say by Gods woorking at or dissembling the matter.

In like manner God provided the treason or betraying of Judas and the denial
of Peter, but he provided withal the success of either of the^ to be far
unlike: namelye that it should so fall out that the one being led with
repentance should crave pardon and obtain it, the other that he should fall
into desperation and perish. And in either of them, since they seemed alike to
be grieved and to be touched with repentance, if necessity of consequence were
to be regarded, it might be thought that they both obtained pardon: and every
man might say, seeing the outward sorrowing of Judas, that he also of
necessity became pertaker of forgiuences But that was not so, in as much as it
was otherwise determined of God him self from eeuerlasting. And of so great a
difference God had most just causes and considerations, so as he can by no
means be accused either of negligence or partiality. And so of al other things
which albeit they may seem in our opinion to come to pass most cheefely by
Contingence or Haphazard, yet must it be determined, that they fall out in very
deed by the appointement and disposition of Gods providence.

Wherefore that we may once dispatch and make an end of this disputation
touching contingence, it shall be much better for us to speak simply and plainly
of those things that happen (since it is certain that nothing comes to pass
without the will and dispensation of God) using those forms of speaking, which
we see to be usual in the holy Scripture, and so sincerely to yield over to
the divine providence the honor and dignity which it deserves, then by
strange subtilties of words, and vain and superfluous distinctions, to
minister occasion of brauling, and also of doubting of the power and goodness of
God. And seeing the Scripture does every where and very apparently testify
and declare, that the Lord moves, inclines exciteth the hearts of men, has
them in his hand, directs, and draws them: also that the Lord caused them
to fall, blinded, hardened, delivered into a reprobate sense: again that the
Lord woorketh in men and by men that which seems right in his own eyes, and
that the will of the Lord is every where done and accomplished: likewise that
the goinges, wills, and actions of men are ruled and governed by the Lord:
further that the Lord gives power, strength, and might, either to do or not
to do any thing: Item that the Lord punishes the wicked, and approves the
godly, by sending of sundry and variable successes unto them: to be short that
he does all things after his own goodness, power, and instice, and wills and
disposes to be done whatsoever is done, neither that any thing is so vile and
base or (in our judgment also) hurtful, out of the which he draws not some
good: moreover that we see all these things, and the Holy Ghost to speak
simply in this wise. It cannot be but that offenses shall come: Math. 18. It
cannot be avoided but that off^nces will come: Luke. 17. Again The Scriptur^s
must needs be fulfilled, etc. Luke. 24. And: There must be heresies among you:
1. Corinthians. 11. Last of all since in other places these and such like proper
phrases of speech are often times met* withal, and all of them most apt to
celebrate and set forth the glory of God with such reverence and devotion as
is most fit and requisite: Let us learn and inure our selves to use such and
the same also, and as often as we speak of Gods providence, let us sprinckle
them in our speeches and communication utterly abandoning all monstrous words
and vain and friuelous distinctions. Certainly as for the holiest and
learned of the fathers we see them to have been contented with a very simple
and plain manner of speaking. Chrysostom expounding that of John. 18. It is
necessary that offenses should come: It is necessary, says he, that they
should come: but to perish, it is not altogether necessary. A little after he
adds: He foretells for a certainty that offenses should come, and so much
is expressed in other words of Luke. 17. It cannot be avoided but that
offenses will come. Albeit that in yt place some things are spoken, which may
seem doubtful unto him that is not very attentive, as that it is not
signified by the Lords words, that the life of men is subject to the
necessity of things (perhaps he understands by the word Necessity the
Philosophers Fate or desteny, and then speaks he most truly) yet are many
things propounded also most worthy the reading, and to this present purpose
very fit and convenient. But in the mean time he makes no mention at al of
contingence or of necessity of consequence. Augustine de libero arbitrio lib.
5. cap. 3. doubts not to affirm, that all things come to pass by
necessity, which come to pass in the creatures of God: and that because God
has already determined it, according as may stand best with the order of that
university of things which he has created. For he does not alter his will and
purpose in the government and administration of things. And in the mean
season he does most clearly teach in that place how it is to be be understood,
that we sin voluntarily by our own will. Again De ciuitate Dei lib. 5. cap.
10. he says, That there is a certain necessity called ours, which is not in
our power, but although we be unwilling yet it works what it may, as is the
necessity of death: and a certain necessity whereby we say that it is
necessary, that a thing should so be or should so come to pass, as it is
necessary that God should ever live and foreknow all things. So says
Augustine. Neither do I yet see any thing that may make to the establishing of
Contingence or Necessity of Consequence: albeit I am not ignorant, that the
same destinction is attributed unto Augustine him self quest. 23. Can. 4.
Nabuchodonosor. I fear least it be taken out of some counterfeit woork foisted
in amongst his. No less soberlye in handling of such places have the residue
of the Fathers spoken, of whom the greatest number made conscience in
borrowing so much as one word out of the Philosophers school, that might cast
any suspicion or scruple of error into godly minds. Neither is there extant in
any (whose authority at least is of any account in the Senate of the Doctors
of the Church, especially the more ancient) either the word Contingence, or
that distinction whereof we have spoken. Which thing seeing it is so, we
understand yt is our parts and duties studiously to avoid the perilous
innouations of words, and vain destinctions: and on the other side to use
plain and usual phrases, such especially as are contained in the holy
Scriptures. And the^ doubtless will all men judge, that we think reverently
of divine matters, when they shall perceive us to speak of the same properlye
and without offense.

But to the intent we may as well yet more evidently confirm, that all things
come to pass by the necessity of Gods providence, and nothing contingently or
by haphazard: as also that we may set before all the godly as it were in a
table, how and after what sort it behooves them to use the places that entreat
of Gods providence, and the phrases wherein the same matter is handled, in
reading of the holy Scriptures: We suppose it will be athing worth our labor,
if we propound certain historical examples out of the Scriptures, and
consider in what points the force of Gods providence does utter and declare it
self. Now there is extant great plenty of such examples, but it shall be
sufficient for us to have produced only twain: the one shall be of Joseph sold
of his brethren: the other of Absolon rebelling against David his father.

Intending therefore to speak of Joseph, we are to consider first and foremost
what ye Lord by his Providence determined inespeciallye to make known in him.
He had determined to prefer him at the length to the government of the land
of Egypt, to the end he might there become a help and comfort to his Father
Jacob and to al his brethren, in providing things necessary to live withal in
the time of an universal famine: and yt by the same occasion also the
posterity of Abraham might pass into Egypt, there to serve in bondage and
thraldom, as God had foretold long before unto Abraham it should come to pass
Gen^s. 15. But now behold (I pray you) by what means God determined to bring
this thing to pass. First it is written Genes. 37. that Joseph was beloved of
his Father above all his brethren, and that he was clad also in a party
colloured coat, and for that cause became very much hated of his brethren.
Behold a certain beginning or entry into the matter, though appeering only a
far off, from the which afterward it came to the platform touching the
selling of Joseph: and which (although it were evil) God intended to use to
the procuring of much good. Heerupon Joseph has dreams in appeerance and
outward show very absurd, but in truth most certain prognostications of great
and most weighty matters to be accomplished in him.

As for Dreams they might seem (if any other thing at all) to fall out
especially by contingence or haphazard, as yt which are accounted for light and
vain things: and yet that they were sent of God, the very sequel of the
matter did declare. Doutles it is marvelous to behold the majesty of God
occupied even about the disposing of men's dreams. And for the same cause were
these dreams very much suspected of his brethren, for they privily feared,
that it might one day so come to pass as the dreams did portend, their
conscience no doubt telling them somewhat touching the power of Gods providence,
wonderfullye ruling and ouer-mastering men's matters. And concerning his Father
it is expressly added, that he kept this saying diligently in his heart. By
which testimony the holy ghost declares, that he was a most reverend regarder
of the divine providence, and that he considered right well, that those dreams
were not sent at all adventures, but by the will of God, yea and for great and
weightye causes. But how came Joseph into Egypt? God put into the mind of
Jacob, to send Joseph into the fields to seek up his brethren. Neither in
deed was this very thing done without the determinate puppose of God.
Joseph being departed stays in ye feelds, where he finds one that sets
him the right way, and besides tells him tydinges of his brethren, where
they are. As yet there was nothing done without cause. For if this man had not
been met withal, perhaps Joseph being weary would have returned home, and of ye
business should not have gone forward. Wherefore albeit it may appear that these
things came to pass by contingence or haphazard, yet is it plain that
nothing was done without the dispensation of God And lo, Joseph was no sooner
come into the sight of his brethren, but that they all eftsoons conspire his
death. They conceive in deed a detestable fact, but yet such as the Lord will
immediately alter, and out of which shall come a singular good. Only Ruben
does constantly entreat, persuading rather to have him cast into a pit, and
hoping by that means that he might privily conuaye Joseph safe unto his
Father. And this thing was procured by the Lord, least their minds being as yet
on fire they should forthwith defile their hands with their brothers blood.
Albeit neither did this counsel of Ruben prevail according to his desire. It
was in deed good and godly of it self, as that which would have been very
joyful to the Father, wholesome to Joseph and no whit discommodious to the
brethren, and therefore in our judgment God ought of right to have helped
forward the attempts of Ruben. But in vain is man's counsel let against Gods.
As the counsel of them that would have had hun destroyed could not take the
effect, so was it not expedient that his counsel that coueted to save him
should go for payment: seeing they both were indifferently against the
immutable decree of the Lord touching the promoting of Joseph in Egypt, which
was altogether necessary to be performed. Joseph therefore is cast in to a
pit, as who should say to be killed with hunger. In the mean time that
outragiousnes of mind and boiling wrath in the brethren is for great good by
little and little slaked and waxen cold. What then? Marry besides all
expectation comes me Ismalitish merchants that way. But think not that any
thing came to pass by haphazard. God himself had very fitly drawn them to
that place. For why, by this occasion the brethren changing their sentence,
consult about the felling of Joseph to the Ismaelites. And here a man may see
the principal mean, which the Lord had preordayned for the conuaying of
Joseph into Egypt. Wherefore this last devise of the brethren the Lord would
have to take place: and Joseph now is sold unto the Ismaelites, he acompanieth
them directly into Egypt where he must one day bear the chief sway. By the way
I admonish, that here was propounded and set forth a wonderful token and
mysterye of Gods dispensation toward the first springing Church, in that
Joseph was rather sold for the price of money, then by any other means (which
might easily also have been devised) cast out. For in this behalf there ought
to appear in Joseph a type and figure of Christ to be sold afterward in
like manner. Joseph being sold, his party-coulored coat dipped in blood is
sent unto his Father, least ye old man should come to the knoledge of the
sin committed, and might think the Child to be torn in pieces by some wilds
beast. But behold why God would have Joseph to be adorned of his Father with
such a garment, verily to this end that by this sign he might be induced to
believe, and be thoroughly persuaded of the matter. And the Lord would therefore
have this conceit to be inverted by the brethren, and the Father to be
persuaded, least the old man should be careful afterward to make any further
inquiry for his Son: who undoubtedly would have labored even to his
exceeding cost and charges, to have fetched him back out of the midst of
Egypt, if he had known him to be there. So far forth was that necessary
to be fulfilled, which the Lord had already determined touching the going of
Joseph into Egypt. That which follows Genesis 38. belongs not to Joseph,
nevertheless it contains notable instructions concerning Gods providence.
For that we may add this also as it were by the way, it is declared how Thamar
taking the matter grievously, for that after the death of her husband Er the
son of Judah, his other son Sela being promised unto her, was yet given unto
another, she in trim apparel, and fashioned in a manner after the guise of
Harlots, went into a common way: and that Juda came hastilye thither the self
same way, and companied with her, who^ he suspected to be a Harlot, being in
very deed his daughter in law, and gather with child, giving her for a pledge
or token (inasmuch as he had no reward in a readiness to bestow on her) his
ring, Staff, and cloak. Now in this history many things, nay every thing
might seem to fall out Contingently or by Haphazard, (for what might be said
to be more Contingent, then to be clad in this or that garment, to go to this
or that place, to resort to a woman with a will to be naught with her, to give
a pledge or not to give it?) if we were not taught by the Evangelists (Math, 1.
Luke. 3.) very clearly and manifestlye, that every thing was so disposed and
ordered by the Lord him self, unto whom it seemed good by such a mean to
amplify the stock and family out of which Christ was to be borne, and to use
the lewd and naughtye will of Judah unto good. Furthermore Joseph being entered
into Egypt, what does he? Is he raised by and by to the administration of the
common wealth, or does he hastily thrust forward him self to intermeddle with
hard and difficulte affairs? No verily. The Lord would have as yet many things
to go between. Joseph was already before once sold, Genes. 39. and not to
any of the common sort, but to Potiphar the chief steward of Pharaoh, who
beholding him to be adorned with excellent gifts of body and mind, betaketh
unto him the charge of his whole house and of all his goods. And thus would the
Lord, (as it were) prepare Joseph after a sort to undertake great and weighty
matters afterward, and to live in such a place, as where occasion might be
given both to hear and learn many things. Which that it might the more
conuenientlye be accomplished, the Lord made such signs to appear in Joseph,
as whereby al men might understand, that every of his actions were especially
governed by the heavenly providence. Whereupon the Scripture there in that
place, provoking us undoubtedly to the consideration of God providence every
where woorking, does sometimes repeat, that God was with Joseph, and made all
things to prosper that he took in hand. Now come we to those means which it
pleased God to use, in aduauncing Joseph to so excellent a dignity. Doubtless
to man's reason they might be though very fond and foolish, yea and some of them
such, as by which we might gather, that Joseph was rather forsaken of God then
helped. For why? he must fetch his beginning here from the foul and filthy
prison, and must tread his first step to glory through the path of extreme
shame and ignominy. Potiphars wife burning in lust, and feigning lies touching
force to be offered unto her by Joseph, was the cause, that he being guiltless
and innocent was cast into prison. But certainly Gods providence fleapt not in
the mean time, as busilye disposing, how out of the sin of a shameless
harlot, and the mysteries of his servant wrongfully vexed he might raise and
procure many good things. First he brought to pass, that Joseph was very well
liked and accepted of the ruler of the prison, and in that respect was so muh
the better provided for. For thus says the Scripture expressly: But God was
with Joseph, and gave him favor in the sight of the master of the prison.
Heerupon the ruler committed also unto Joseph the charge of all the prisoners.
And so Joseph even in bonds, yet ye Lord so ordaining, bears ruler: so truly
might it be said, that he all the time he was in Egypt, did nothing else then
exer cile a perpetual kind of government, and play the part continually of a
master, yt was sold to be a bond servant. He had borne authority in
Potiphars house, he bears authority in the prison, and every where happily:
it remains only that he be preferred over all Egypt, to govern it with like
felicity. And to this dignity he was advanced by this occasion. There were in
the prison at that time Pharaohs Butler and Baker, as it is written Genes. 40.
These men, as it happens sometimes; had Dreams, wherewith they were not a
little troubled. But note here again, that dreams are induced of God and that
not without a cause. Joseph as he was taught of God (for so he says there: Are
not interpretations of God?) declares the signification of the dreams,
saying, yt they are most certain fore demonstrations touching the issue of
either of their cause After three days the thing it self approved the truth
of the interpretation, whilste the one (as Joseph had foretold) was hanged
upon a tree, and the other restored to his former office. But when two years
were expired after that, King Pharaoh him self (Genes. 41.) is vehemently
troubled with strange and unaccustomed dreams, neither desired he any thing so
much, as to hear of some one, that could tell him the meaning of them, and what
they betokened. See here the counsel and purpose of God. When as there could
none be found among all the wise men of Egypt (of which sort there were the^
many) that could say any thing (in effect) to the matter, the Butler, (not
doubtless continge^tly or at al adventures, but God plucking him (as it were) by
the ear,) remembers Joseph, and shows Pharaoh of his dexterity in
expounding and interpreting of dreams. Pharaoh forthwith commands him to be
brought out of prison unto his presence, without any delay tells him his
dreams, and requires him to declare the meaning of them. There Joseph
referring all things (as was meet and convenient) to the providence of God:
Not I, says he, but God shall give answer for the welfare of Pharaoh. And a
little after: Both Pharaohs dreams are one, and God has showed unto Pharaoh
what he is about to do. Again: And this is the thing which I have said unto
Pharaoh, that God has showed unto Pharaoh what he purposes to do. And again:
And because the dream was doubled upon Pharaoh the second time, behold the
thing is established by God, and God will make haste to perform it. Then the
which what could be spoken more grauelye? or how could it be more cleerelye
expressed, that all things that are, come to pass by Gods ordinance, and that
they must of necessity be accomplished, which he has once determined? God
forbid therefore, yt either in Pharaohs dreams, or in Joseph's deliverance, or in
any other actions whatsoever, we should give any place to Contingence. Certes
Pharaoh him self and al his Courteours acknowledged Gods providence so
effectually woorking in Joseph, and extolled the same with praise. For having
heard the most wholesome counsel and advice of Joseph, touching the gathering
up of the fruits into the barnes during all the space of the seven fruitful
years, Pharaoh said unto his servants: Can there be found any such man as
this, in whom is the spirit of God? Then said he to Joseph: Forasmuch as God
has showed thee all this, there is no man of wisdom and understanding like
unto thee. Thou shall therefore be over mine house, and at thy commandment
shall all my people be armed, and only in the Kings throne will I be above
thee, etc. Then Pharaoh called Joseph's name Zaphnath Paaneah, as a man would
say, the searcher and expounder of hidden mysteries. Behold how that now is
performed in Joseph, which God had already determined: and how that
whatsoever things are hither to done, were procured by the singular providence
of God, and especially directed to this point, namely that Joseph might be
advanced to the government of the whole Kingdom of Egypt. What man pondering
al these things in his mind, would not marvel at the providence of God, so
intentiuelye watching and careful even in the least things for man's
salvation? But we make not an end here as yet: there remain some things in
the historye of Joseph most worthy to be observed. Whilst the famine raged and
ranged through out the whole world, Jacob hearing Genes. 42. that there was
Corn to be sold in Egypt, sends ten of his Sons thither to buy food:
who when they were conie thither, they worshipped the Lord of ye land,
suspecting nothing less, then that he had been their brother Joseph. Where it
is straight ways added: And Joseph knew them to be his brethren, but they
knew not him. And Joseph remembered the dreams which he dreamed of them.
Behold Joseph a diligent marker and obseruer of Gods providence weighs with
him self, that it fell not out by Chance or Haphazard, that he being a.
child long before had dreamed, that he should one day be woorshipped of his
brethren For he sees now the selfsame thing to be fulfilled indeed. Yea and
they also, when it was laid unto their charges, that they were crafty spies,
and for that cause were drawn into prison, they construed that they were not
brought into danger rashly and without cause but by the just judgment and
ordinance of God, for thus it is in the text: And one of the^ said unto
another, verily we have sinned against our brother, in that we saw the anguish
of his soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear him: and therefore is
this trouble come upon us. For so did extreme necessity wring this confession
from them touching the care and government of God in and about men's matters.
Albeit it appears that therefore also was this confession made and brought to
light, to wit, that thereby Joseph him self might far more vehemently be
moved, and that from thence forth he might conceive such devices in his mind,
as whereby he might draw as well all his bretheen, as his Father also into
Egypt. For why? hitherto tends all that now does follow. For it behooved of
necessity to be fulfilled, not only whatsoever was determined touching the
aduauncing of Joseph to the highest top of dignity, but also in like manner
what soever God had once decreed from everlasting touching the bondage and
servitude of the Israelitish people in Egypt by the space of four hundred
years together, whereof also he had how long before (Genes. 15.) certified his
servant Abraham. To this thing therefore will the Lord from henceforth direct
the drifts and counsels of Joseph: neither yet by any humane consultations
(though even of the holy fathers themselves, which had heard no doubt of it by
Abraham, and if we behold the judgment of man's reason, they ought worthily to
have fled from it) might that eternal decree be let or hindered. Let us see
therefore what means the Lord used to the accomplishment heerof. Joseph
dismisseth not the men whom he called spies, but upon this condition, that one
of them should remain in bonds, and the residue make promise, that they would
bring with them their youngest brother also, of whom they had made mention.
Furthermore he provided that ye monye which every one brought, should privily
be conueighed into every of their sacks There is nothing done here
Contingentlye or by Haphazard. For by these means it behooved them to be
constrained to keep touch, to the end they might hasten their return into
Egypt, to know more neerelye the Lords will and pleasure in time conuement.
Verilye they finding their money in their sacks, could not otherwise judge but
that God caused it so to be What is this that God has done unto us? say they.
Wherefore their Corn being spent, partly to restore their suspected money, and
partly to deliver Simcon out of captivity, they are compelled to go again
into Egypt, and to carry Benjamin their youngest brother with them, as they had
promised: Genes. 43. neither could they procure corn to be brought them by any
other means. But whilst they going away the second time, their father Jacob
prays and wishes well unto the^ in this wise, God almighty give you mercy in
the sight of the man, that he may deliver unto you your other brother, and this
Benjamin: the godly old man gives a notable testimonye, that he does ascribe
only unto God alone, whatsoever should happen or betide, neither believes he
that any thing could fall out Contingently or without cause. But neither is it
in vain, that at their fathers commandment they carry gifts with them also.
This was convenient for those, that should not only by a vain and long custom
in a received kind of gesture, but also verily and in deed give reverence and
woorship. And in that Joseph, when his brethren were come, commands them to
be brought into his house, and great cheer to be prepared for them, afterward
also makes merry with them, it avails to this end and purpose, that they
beholding so great a dignity and power, might be moved to the greater
reverence: which thing they them selves do after a sort confess, when (as the
Scripture makes mention) they said they were brought in, to the intent that
being circumuented they might be brought into bondage, and for fear of so
great a mischief, they declared to the steward that they had brought the money
again without frat^de that was found in their sackes. And afterward the silver
cup by Joseph's procurement, being bestowed in Beniamins sack, Genes. 44. was a
mean most fitly devised, whereby they might be admonished to yield themselves
willingly to Joseph into bondage: as the words of Judah do not obscurely
signify. God, says he, has found out the wickedness of thy servants: behold
we are servants to my Lord, both we, and he with whom the Cup is found. To
which end appertains the long oration made there touching that matter. At
the length when the brethren had now so oftentunes woorshipped him, so
oftentimes saluted him as their Lord and Master, Joseph seeing the true meaning
of his dreams to be fulfilled, opens him self Genes. 45. unto them,
signifying that he is the very selfsame Joseph, whom they long before had
sold to the Ismaelites travailing into Egypt: and to the end he might rid them
of fear, he eftsoon repeateth, that he was not sent thither of them, but of
the Lord, and that verily to the safety and preservation of them all. And
certes with so many sundry events and dangers coming between, growing in no
wise by Contingence or Haphazard, ought that once to be performed, which the
Lord had preordained touching Joseph: and by what mean God provided in the
cause of Joseph such an end, by the same also provided he all things which he
knew would be necessary and fit to the same end. Last of all, when the old
father Jacob (Genes. 46.) goes with his whole familye into Egypt, that it came
to pass by Gods disposition, every man may understand even by his words unto
Jacob in the same Chapter set down: Fear not, says he, to go down into
Egypt, for I will make thee a great nation, I will go down with thee into
Egypt, and I will also bring thee back again. And by this occasion not only is
brought to an end that which Joseph (taught of God by a dream) had foreseen
should be fulfilled in him self, but also that which God two hundred years
before had foretold unto Abraham, to wit, that it would come to pass that
his posterity should soiourne and serve in a strange land. Very wonderful
doubtless and joyful it is to consider, by what means and proceedinges God
brings his determinations to pass.

And hither to touching the History of Joseph: whereupon (inasmuch as it does
most cleerlye teach, that nothing though never so vile, and abject, in
appara^ce, to man's reason, comes to pass contingently or by haphazard) we
have so much the more willinglye written all these things at large, for that
our hope is, that godly and well disposed minds may heerby take an example,
how in other holy Histories also they ought to observe and mark the force and
power of Gods providence every where busily occupied.

Now to the other History touching Absolon seeking by fraud and force to
invade his Fathers Kingdom. We will dispatch the matter in few words. How God
diuersely punishes sins, neither suffers he any to live so securely, but
that he afflicts them oftentimes with grievous distresses, although otherwise
excellent men and deer unto God, we may behold it even in David alone: who
after he had committed adultery fell also into manslaughter, and therefore he
was to see his own house plagued with ye infamy of most shameful whoredoms
and murders: with whoredom, when his daughter Thamar was defiled with her
brother Ammon: and with murder, when Absolon slew his brother Ammon at a
banquet. But that that follows, is far more grievous.

The same Absolon after three years banishment by reason of the murder which he
had committed, being returned home, and received into favor, atempted most
wickedly to thrust his own father from the Kingdom, and to get it to himself
by force. Wherefore in this history let us see first of all the scope and drift
of Gods purpose. God had determined to bring these things to pass, as we may
easilye gather by the very order and course of the things done: first and
principally to exercise and humble David with sundry battayles, to the end he
might afterward advance him to the greater glory: secondly to destroy proud
and subtle Absolon: and thirdly by the same occasion, in bringing a great
slaughter upon ye people for their sins, to reduce them into the right way. Now
let us weigh and consider, by what means God ordained these things to be
accomplished. Certainly ye beginnings are wonderful. Absolon first and foremost
provided him Chariotes and horss-men, also a company of men to ga^d his body or
to go before him: 2 Samuel 15. further by saluting and embracing privately every
man that he met withal, and likewise by taking up all men's matters and causes
to himself, he did most shely get and procure the good will and favor of the
whole people. For why, by this glittering show and glorious furniture,
together with a counterfeit kind of incompatable courtesy, it behooued the
poor ignorant people to be deluded, which should afterward clean unto him. In
which behalf there appears a sensible argument of Gods wrath. For look
whom the Lord will destroy, those first he blinds, that soeing they may not
ses, (...) and embrace false good things for true. Where furthermore he
feigneth, that he must pay his vow and offer sacrifice in Hebron, and for that
cause obtayneth leave of his father to go thither, suborning and sending
forth some before, that in giving a sign by the sound of a Trumpet, should
spread abroad and give out speech on every side, yt he reigned as King in
Hebron: this doubtless was a very fit occasion to bring the matter to pass,
then the which could not be devised a better or more convenient: and that the
same was so provided of God, we will eftsoons make plain and manifest. To let
this pass, how yt the crafty For gave a notable testimony of Gods providence,
when he said, that what time he remained in Geshur, he vowed to the Lord (if at
any time he should bring him back again to the City) a sacrifice or peace
offering in Hebron. For why he acknowledged that he was banished by the will of
the Lord, and again that he was restored by the same will. Further David
having heard of the tumulte raised by Absolon and of the rage of the people,
being in great heuines and perplexity escaped by flight, accompanied with a
huge multitude, wherein also were the Preests bearing with them the Arc of the
covenant. But that all these things were done by the ordinance of God
himself, and from the same all manner of success was to be looked for, David
very plainly confessed, when as sending back the Preeste and Levites unto
Jerusalem, he spoke in this sort unto them: Carry the Ark of God again into
the City, if I shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me
again, and show me both it, and the tabernacle thereof: But if he thus say, I
have no delight in thee, behold, here am I, let him do to me as seems good
in his own eyes. A notable confession of a mind judging all things to be
governed by ye only providence of God. Not long after, when David heard say
that ye great wise man Ahitophel was revolted to Absolon, what says he?
Turn, I pray thee O Lord, the counsel of Ahitophel into foolishnes For why it
is a certain truth, that all our thoughts, wills and councels are moved and
directed every kind of way by the Lord himself. Moreover when he persuades
Hushet, to convey him self also with speed to Absolons camp, supposing that he
might conveniently bring to naught the counsel of Ahitophell: It is an evident
argument, that second causes may indeed do some what, but neither more, nor
less, nor furtherfoorth then to him that is the first cause yea and the cause
of all causes, shall seem good and expedient. Whereas in the 16. chap. wicked
Simei comes forth cursing and reuiling, keeping a quoyte, and casting stones
also both at David and at those that were with him: godly David interprets
even this thing also to be done by Gods ordinance, and therefore forbiodeth him
to be stricken by Abizai the son of Zeruiah, or by any means to be let or
prohibited. In that he so curses, says he, he does it, even because the Lord
has bidden him curse David: who dare then say, wherefore have thou done so?
Thus verilye that this thing ought to be accomplished, not continge^tly, but
necessarily, he willingly acknowledges. And he adds: Behold my son, which
came out of mine own bowels, seeks my life: then how much more-now may this
son of Iemini? He lays alike both the wicked attempts of Absolon, and
desperate saucynes of Simei upon the providence of God. It follows in the
same place: Suffer him to curse, for the Lord has bidden him (note that he
says, bidden) It may be that the Lord will look on my affliction, and do me
good for his curssing this day. By which words it plainly appears, that
wicked Simei brast forth to so heinous a fact, by the very will and impulsio^ of
the Lord himself: but yet that the Lord can, when it pleases him, turn the
malice of Simei to David's good.

Now how in like manner, through the disposition of Gods providence, ye
counsel of wise Ahitophell was overthrown by Hushai, according as David had
desired, may out of that long narration Chap. 17. be sufficiently understood:
but chefly out those words of ye scripture which are added afterward: The Lord
had determined, says he, to destroy the good counsel of Ahitophell: and the
cause is added, comprehen ding a reason of the whole matter: That the Lord
might bring evil upon Absolon. Therefore the Lord governs men's minds and
wills, yea and inclines them after a sort, so as they are carried after
evil: and whatsoever is heers done by Absolon, is done by the Lords
disposition. By like reason it came to pass, that Ahitophell was so fierce and
cruel against his own life, that he went and hanged him self.

In that behalf it pleased the Lord to revenge his treachery, and to bring to
pass, that evil counsel (according to the Proverb) might be seen to fall
out worst to the counselor himself. Further touching them that were sent
unto David, to show him the counsel of Hushai and likewise through what
policye they were saved from their enemies hands by a woman, it were long to
declare: yet in the mean season that all things were done by Gods providence,
it may sufficiently appeer by those things, that are spoken of Hushai, which
fled at David's commandment. For look from whom the end flows, and from
the same also (without question) must be derived the means tending to the same
end.

Now the things that follow Chap. 18. touching the conflict of both the armies,
touching the twenty thousand that were slain of Absolons part, and touching
the miserable end of Absolon himself, that they can by no means be referred
to contingence or haphazard, the very words of the Scripture do abundantly
testify, whereby whatsoever came to pass, is ascribed only to Gods
providence. For so we heard before, That the Lord would bring evil upon
Absolon. And in this self same Chap. 18. Ahimaaz says of David: The Lord has
delivered him out of the hand of his enemies. Again the same man to David:
Blessed be the Lord thy God, who has shut up the men that lift up their hands
against my Lord the King.

And immediately after Chusi also says unto him: The Lord has delivered thee
this day out of the hand of all that rose up against thee. We see clearly they
all do confess, that every thing was done by the will and dispensation of
God, and that it cannot be said without the great injury of Gods name that any
thing came to pass casuallye or by chance-medley. Thus much of Absolon, and I
think, enough. For in that David after a sort did bear here a type of
Christ, and they that cleaued to him a type and figure of the Church: on the
other side in that Absolon with his adhearents shadowed out the persecutors and
enemies of the gospel, and that by the divine providence so ordaining as in
many other actions of the holy Fathers, we know a type and figure of things to
be accomplished by Christ apeered, there is no cause why we should enter now
into this field. Verily I suppose that these two examples are of us in such
wise discussed and declared, as that every man hereafter may easilye without
any difficulty, by himself find out and determine in other holy discourses
also by like occasion the places commending the force and power of Gods
providence: especially seeing there is scarce any narration to be found in the
holy Scriptures, wherein are not some such places intermixed, and that almost
appeering manifest to sight. And it behooves us to judge, that it was procured
by the singular purpose and counsel of the holy ghost, that such and so many
places do every where come to hand. For why, they do not only preach and set
forth Gods providence woorking al in all things, which in truth can never
sufficiently be blazed and displayde as it deserves: but also further they
comprehend manifold and the same most sweet and wholesome doctrine. For they
will us especially to acknowledge our own weakness and misery: they admonish
us to learn to depend wholly upon God alone, to commend all our actions all our
life long unto him: they stir up faith in us: they inuit us to continual
invocation of the grace and help of God: they counsel us to take in good
part, whatsoever happens amongst men, and so they move us to modesty.
patience and long sufferance: finally they propound unto us in all things that
come to pass, the divine power, goodness, righteousness, attentively to be
marked, and ever more to be praised. Seeing therefore these places are such, let
no man be of this mind to think yt they are carelessely to be passed over.

Wherefore by all these things we have sufficiently and clearly enough proved,
that neither to Fate or Destiny, nor to Chance, nor to Fortune, nor to
Contingence or haphazard may any place be given at al in our sacred
philosophye, where just regard is had of Gods providence, and the same worthily
esteemed.

Whither the Providence of God imposes a necessity to things provided.

Chap. 6.
NOw some men may say: If nothing at all comes to pass Contingentlye or by
Haphazard, nor nothing by necessity of Consequence, then it follows, that
all things come to pass by necessity (as they call it) Absolute, yea and
that all things that happen, are accomplished by a certain unchangeable and
unavoidable necessity, so as they cannot possibly choose but be done. And is
this in any wise to be granted? To this obieicton or question we will answer
in few words.

1 First, if we list not to strive about words or sentences, but are content
to use those, that we see oftentimes to be met withal in the holy Scriptures:
nothing forbids but that we may say simplye, that all things come to pass
by necessity, and that it is impossible but the things should be accomplished
which the Lord has ordained to be done. For after this sort Christ him self
says simply, It is necessary that offenses should come: It is impossible but
that offenses should come: again, All things must be fulfilled which were
written of him by the Prophets. And thus it was necesserye, that Judas should
sell and betraye Christ to the Jews for money: it was necessary, that Peter
should deny Christ thrice: it was necessary that Christ should suffer, etc. So
we see Christ spoke plainly touching the things that might be thought indeed
to come to pass Contingently or by Haphazard, and yet ceuld they not otherwise
choose but come to pass: yea it was as necessary that those things should be
accomplished, as it is necessary that God should be most good, just, mighty:
inasmuch as it behooved them all to be done to the manifesting of Gods goodness
power and righteousness What need is there then to fetch fond and fantastical
phrases of speech or distinctions out of the store houses of the philosophers,
when as the Holyghost him self (whom we must confess to be the best master
of speaking in Divinity, and whom to follow is most safe) has squared out
unto us such as are most proper and exquisite, and to the business we have in
hand wonderfully concorda^t and agreeable? Thus much therefore touching the
manner of speaking to the question propounded.

2 But as touching the thing it self inasmuch as we have sufficiently proved,
that nothing can possiblye come to pass without the dispensation of Gods
providence, how vile or base soever that apeereth to man's reason that is
brought to pass: Further that by the same are governed and directed even the
very minds and wills of men, yea and turned too and fro, whither soever that (as
the Shipmaster) shall move them: again that providence can by no means,
seeing it is eternal and immutable, be disapointed of determinate effects:
out of all these things is gathered no doubtful or perplexed conclusion,
namelye that it must of necessity be accomplished, and that it cannot be but
accomplished, whatsoever Gods providence has once ordained to be brought to
pass: neither shall it be any offense to say, that all things come to pass by
necessity of Gods providence.

3 Some, when they hear speaking of this matter, seek starting holes, saying
that there is no such necessity brought upon things by Gods providence,
especially that any should do evil, but that God only foreknewe and
foresawe the^ so to do: and that some are such, not because God foreknew they
would be such, but rather yt he therefore foreknew the^, for that they should
beco^e such of their own accord, but this verily is nothing else, then to reject
ye cause of providence, and to take up an other touching foreknowledge. So must
we in no wise do. If we shall first speak of foreknowledge, we must
doubtless be well resolved, and conclude (as is meet) that God fore knew all
things that are or ever shall come to pass, neither may we think that any
thing can come to pass contrary to his foreknowledge. But from hence we must
also proceed to providence, and determine with our selves, that according to
this, God, over and besides that he knew before the sequeale and successes of
things, does also further by this insearcheable wisdom order and dispose all
things, as we have already oftentimes and with effectual and substantial
reasons proved and declared: neither that there is any thing among thecreatures
either so vile or glorious, which may justly be exempted from the jurisdiction
of providence. Which seeing it is so, it is plain and evident, that God as he
foreknew all things, so also he provided them, yea and even then when they are
accomplished, does still rule and govern them: and therefore they are simply of
necessity in such a state and condition, as they are perceined to be in, and
that because through the worcester king already of providence they cannot otherwise
be. And foreknowledge doubtless seems after a sort to depend upon
providence. For the Lord knew before how and after what sort he would deal
with every man, yea even before he had made any man: but he therefore foreknewe
it, because he had even then also preordained, how and after what sort he
would have every man to be dealt withal. Foreknowledge therefore and providence
ought to be considered severally and apart, and that verily as woorking most
cheefely once, and discharging her office before the creation of things: and
this as working in and throughout all time, and removed from none of those
things which are made.

4. Neither is there any cause in ye mean while, why the Lord should be blamed
in anything: seeing we are sure, that whatsoever is done of him, is done
either to declare his power and to set forth his glory, or to commend his
justice, or to extol his goodness: albeit these causes are not always so easy
to be seen of us, and they do oftetimes altogether escape us. For who has
known the counsels of the Lord? Not withstanding the rule of faith remains
undoubted and infallible, That whatsoever God does, he does it for the best.
For why, the fall of our first parents, ye hardening of Pharaoh, and the
falsehood of Judas, were prepared as well to good ends and purposes, as the
constancy of Noah in faith, the humility of David, the repentance and
confession of Peter. Yea Paul's persecution brought some fruit with it as well
as his preaching, and his cruelty that went be fore made the things that
followed after to become more famous and notable in him. And certes that those
things should be accomplished which do manifestlye prove God to be most good,
most mighty, and most just, it is very necessary, neither can they or ought
they by any means to be intermitted: therefore, all things that come to pass,
whither they be good in themselves, or in our judgment evil, inasmuch as they
are such, there is no cause why we should be afraid to say, that they come to
pass by necessity, no more then we will be afearde to say, that God is of
necessity most good, most just, and most mighty.

5 And least of all may hence be taken any occasion of pretending, that we are
innocent whilst we sin, as those that could not do otherwise then the
divine providence had ord^ined, and so to lay the cause of our condemnation
upon God himself. This reason might indeed stand in force, if so be we
committed sin by compulsion and against our wills, and in no wise give any
consent thereunto. But it is a plain case, that our naughtye will is at, all
times so wholye carried unto evil, delighted with evil, and accustomed in
evil, that what soever evil there is in any action, that verily comes
altogether from us: insomuch that by us is defiled and made evil, even that
which otherwise the Lord (as touching that which he woorketh in it) had
appointed to good, yea to many good ends and purposes. Whereby it comes to
pass, that albeit we do all things by the disposition of Gods providence: yet
nevertheless we do evil by our own defaulte, and euidentlye declare that
the matter and cause of our perdition is in our selves. For unto one and the
selfsame action both the Lord puts to his hand, and we also do woork: but
considering that he does it far otherwise and to a far other end then we,
it follows, that unto him redoundeth the whole praise of power, justice and
goodness, and we purchase to our selves eternal destruction. Concerning which
matter we have spoken elsewhere.

To conclude therefore, seeing Gods providence is the perpetual and
unchangeable disposition and administration of all things: and from this the
will of God can in no wise be separated (for whatsoever God provides, it is
certain also that he wills the same: and again whatsoever he wills, it is
certain that he provides) which is it self also perpetuallye one and the
same and immutable, and that whatsoever the Lord wills, is of necessity
accomplished: doubtless al Godly minds do see and perceive, that as all
things are administered by Gods providence, so also come they to pass by
necessity: to which effect Augustine also De Libero arbitrio lib. 3. Cap. 3.
is not afraid to say, That the Lords will is our necessity.

Howheit least I should altogether pass in silence, what the Schoolmen have
judged concerning this present question, as being desirous to conceal, if any
thing make against us: certes I find that Thomas Aquinas, one of the cheef
ringleaders among them, does unfold himself with this distinction in quest.
22. articulo 4. of ye first part of his Summary look, says he, to what
effects God has prepared necessary causes, they must of necessity come to
pass: and to what effects he has prepared contingent causes, they must
contingently come to pass. And again in the same place. It comes to pass
infallibly and necessarilye which the divine providence disposes to come to
pass infallibly and necessarily, and it comes to pass contingently, which
the divine providence will have to come to pass contingently. But upon what
foundation I pray you are these distinctions grounded? Again, is not this to
teach ignotum per ignotius, and to put forth one obscure thing by an other? For
how can thou tell, what causes are necessary, or contingent with God? and
what he has ordained to be done either by the one or by the other? Last of
all, what else is as yet said, then that howsoever at length any things come to
pass, the same come to pass by Gods dispensation, and by his immutable will?
Thou see therefore plainly, that these distinctons are certain snares of
words, wherewith the unlearned are entangled and caught, in such wise as they
cannot look over nearly into ye truth, and refer all things only unto
God, giving all glory to him alone. How much better does Cardinal Caietanus
weigh this cause who in the Commentaries which he put forth upon the Summary of
his great master Thomas does sufficiently signify, that these reasons do not
satisfy him: and among other things he says expressly, that that which is
once ordained of God, is of necessity inevitable touching God, and therefore
also of necessity inevitable simply, as well as touching God. And we may
gather out of those words which he adds, that he would have said much more
to this purpose, but that he feared other men's judgments touching himself.

Wherefore he that is wise, will hold and defend that opinion, which he sees
to be most agreeable with the phrases of the Scripture, and to avail most to
defend the dignity of providence, and to set forth the glory of God.

That the things which have hitherto been declared touching the Providence of
God, avail very much, as well to many other spiritual commodities, as also
especially to the fetching of comfortes from thence against all perilles and
dangers whatsoever.

Cap. 7.
HItherto I suppose all things in a manner which are necessary to be known to
the judging and speaking aright of Gods providence, have of us been discussed:
and certes our treatise is drawn to a further length, the^ we thought it
would. Now the matter requires, we turn our speech, to that thing which we
cheefelye intended throughout this whole work: that is to say, that we begin
to show, how a more plentiful matter of consolations cannot from any other
place be ministered to aflicted minds, then out of the diligent consideration
of Gods divine providence. And verily it is not either for vain ostentation,
or for the exercise of the wit, neither to stir up contentious and tragical
disputations, and much less to feed or nourishe fond curiosity, whereby a
number delight to devise many things touching high and mystical points,
which they themselves do in no wise understand, that a godly mind must be
conversant in the inquisition of these divine and therefore difficult matters:
but either to increase in our selves and other of our brethren wholesome
doctrine: or to gather fruitful exhortations, which we may apply as occasion
shall serve, to the slothful and dull: or to the reproving of those, that are
unhappily fallen into wicked opinions or mischeeuous deeds: or (to be short)
to the drawing forth of comforts and consolations, whereby their spirits that
are troubled partelye with inward and partelye with outward distresses, may in
time bequickened and revived. For unto these ends as to the right scope and
mark that all our knowledge of divine matters is to be directed, we are taught
by the Apostle Romans 15. and 2. Tim. 3. If for any other causes knowledge be
gotten, it is then fit, not to edify, but to destroy only, and becomes
pernicious both to the teacher himself and also to the scholars. And albeit
out of this present treatise touching Gods providence, might be drawn
manifold as well doctrine, and exhortations, and reprehensions, as also other
very profitable and necessary instructions: yet nevertheless accordingly as
we undertook to do at ye beginning of our woork, beer in cheefely shall our
speech be spen^, even to declare and show, that it is most available to the
procuring of comfortes against all perrills and dangers whatsoever: only we
will promise a few things touching the excellency of this doctrine. Wherefore
that this may the better be done of us, if shall be convenient breefly to call
to remembrance the principal heads, of those things which we have discoursed
touching providence, and to draw them all as it were into a summary conclusion.

1 First therefore we have defined, the providence of God to be a perpetual and
vnchangeble disposition and administration of al things that be. Which
definition we did eft^ones with man^ and forcible testimonies of the holy
scripture make both more clear and certain, rendering a reason besides of
every word put therein, so farrefoorth as the matter seemed to require.

2 But least any man deceived by the subtle persuasions of man's reason, or by
the craftye snares of Philosophers flowing from man's brain, might think that
the force of Gods providence could not stand, and so suspect it to be a thing
of nothing: we brought forth certain arguments, which the deceivers are wont
to use, and forthwith convinced them, bringing in stead of them both many
other and of far greater waighte, which proved moie clear then the light at
noone days, that God has a special care of all things created.

3 Next for orders sake in teaching, and least we should unadvisedly or
confusedly intermixed any thing taken from any other place, not agreeing to our
preset purpose: we thought good to note in few words, how and wherein
providence differs from the foreknowledge, predestination and wisdom of God.

4 Which things being declared, we came more neerelye to search of what nature
Gods providence is: that is to say, what it does, what it can do, how and
after what sort it is occupied in the government and administration of all
things: And here again not unwillingly we recounted the opinions of the
Philosophers touching that matter, covering even by this means to set before
all men to be observed, how unsure a thing it is in examining of divine
matters, to follow the judgment of foolish reason, and to determine any thing,
with out consulting with the treasorse of the Holyghoste, that is to say, the
sa^^^^ Scriptures. Then next we added, what mu^^es also our men, that is to
wit, such as professed sound and sincere religion, were off. And inasmuch as
some of these acknowledged only and universal providence of God, ruling and
moderating all things by a general motion, leaving in the mean time to every
creature a certain force and power of woorking, after the inclination of it
own nature: and othersome also granted that the actions of men are governed
of the same, but yet only of a few and especially the elect: we taking a
better course, have observed and marked what we thought to be most agreeable to
the holy Scriptures, and to be most clearly expressed in them, further we
considered what was allowed by the consent of the best and most ancient
Fathers, and this resolution we gathered and gave forth to be unbraced, namely
that Gods providence does not only universally govern the world and all the
things therein contained, but also especially and particularly dispose, procure
and moderate every thing, yea and direct the actions of every thing to their
appointed ends. Which sentence to show that it was approved of the Fathers,
we noted some things of it gravely and godlily avouched by them.

5 But because I was not ignorant, that many would be ready with tooth and
nail (as they say) to rise up against this doctrine, especially such as were
overmuch addicted to the judgment of reason, when they hear the providence of
God bruted abroad to be so farrefoorth occupied and distracted in and about
every thing, they by and by imagine and cry out, that a number of absurdities
do hereby follow: and first forsooth that the freedom of man's will is
utterly overthrown: 2, yt God seems to be the cause of sin and of our
condemnation; 3, that all second causes are universally excluded: 4, and by
this means that the damned opinion of ye Stoikes touching Fate is again
established: 5, that Fortune and Chance are disanulled and taken away: 6,
that Contingence or Haphazard is denied, for auouching notwithstanding whereof
some deuines of this age think they may strive with might and maine: for these
men's sakes I say, we are compelled in order to speak more larglye touching
every objection, and what we thought to be most safe for the behoof of
Christian consciences, and for the dignity of sound doctrine, franklye and
freelye to utter and declare. Therefore what and of what sort the freedom of
our will is in every kind of actions, and what it is able to do without ye
help of Gods providence, we have faithfullye opened. Again yt God is in no
wise the cause of sin, neither that our damnation is to be imputed unto him,
besides that laws are not made without good cause, and the guilty punished, we
have with proofs and reasons not of the meanest sort made plain and
manifest. Likewise second causes in what acount they are to be had, how
farrefoorth they are of force, and when they may rightly be used and applied,
we have not let to tell.

6 Further that the doctrine touching special or particular providence does
in no part agree with the Stoikes doctrine touching Fate or Destiny: also that
Chance or Fortune has no place in our Philosophy: lastly that Contingence or
Haphazard cannot truly be avouched, where the due knowledge of Gods providence
is extant and the same worthily esteemed: we have with no fruitless discourse
(as we trust) declared at large. And this is the sum of those things which
have of us been taught as touching Gods providence. Now we will speak of ye
fruits that are from thence to be gathered.

First as concerning the doctrine: doubtless this knowledge is notable and
necessary, and right w^^thy to be diligently taught and jet forth in
Christian congregations, namelye that God as he once most excellently and
orderly made and created all things by his only power and wisdom, so does he
still rule and govern them, committing his authority to none, neither standing
in need of any secondary help. Again that in these inferior things here
below, and che^felye in men's matters, there is no place to be given to Fortune
or Fate, neither comes any thing to pass by Chance or Contingence. But to
what end do I repeat these things in this order? whatsoever has of us
hitherto been declared touching the providence of God, and sufficientlye
approved by the testimonies of holy scripture, all that may and ought to be
taken for excellent doctrine, and such as flows from ye fountain of Gods
word. I will add a few things touching the excellency and necessity of this
doctrine.

1 Verily I dare be bold to say, that among many places of heavenly
philosophy, though otherwise right notable and rich, there is none extant so
commodious and plentiful, whereby the glory of almightye God may be enlarged
and illustrated amongst us, as is this place which we have handled touching
Gods providence: and specially if it be showed (in such sort as we have done)
that this providence is not only universal, but also special and particular.
For to take a charge and have a care of every thing, and not of men's affairs
only, but of every creature also, far beneath the state and degree of men:
besides to have such a care and regard of men's matters, as even their minds
and wills also are directed to certain actions and determinate ends: this
doubtless must be acknowledged a very divine work, and that surely such a
one, as wherein the power and glory of God are seen most cleerelye to shine
and appear.

2 And what shall we say to this moreover? that look in what account and
regard that confession of faith is had, whereby we acknowledge God to be God,
and the same almightye, and in the self same (if we weigh every thing aright)
is this doctrine also of Gods providence to be accepted and taken. For it is in
deed the very ground and foundation of our faith. For why, be that
acknowledges in God his providence, especially particular (whereof we have
principallye entreated) he undoubtedly it is that does rightly comprehend
that principal article of our religion, and confesses, what is in very deed
to be ascribed and attributed unto God: on the other side, he that re^^cteth
providence, sins no less nor otherwise, then if he denied God to be
almighty.

But to proceed how shall a man fully give unto God this praise, that he is the
creator of heaven and earth, unless we do grant in like manner, that the
same is the most wise administrator and conseruator of all things in them
contained? since in very deed it were most strange and absurd to think, that
he that is best of himself, should neglect, or by any means cast from himself,
and commit unto others, the things that he has once created: and that he that
is almighty should not be able to sustain and bear the burden and charge of
all those things. Breefelye therefore, by this doctrine touching Gods
providence we are instructed and confirmed in the true acknowledgement and
confession of faith: and if so be we count and desire to be taken and accounted
in the number of those, that consent and agree with the universal Church in
sound and true faith, believing in one God almighty maker of heaven and earth:
then doubtless is it requi^^te and behouefull, that we confess in like case
the providence of God effectually woorking all in all.

4 In as much as it is very necessary and expedient to have the will of God
always before our eyes, and that we ought as well in the first creation as in
the perpetual conservation of all things to consider the same, have it in
admiration, and extol it with praise: there is no man but sees, that we can
no other ways be brought to the doing of this, then by the exact
understanding of Gods providence, by the which alone all things come to pass,
and amongst them all nothing in vain or with out cause. Neither is there any
douubt, but that the Lord himself would have us to be stirred up to the
continual beholding of his providence, when as by his son he taught us to
pray duly, that his will might be done in earth as it is in heaven, for why, to
pray that Gods will may be done, what else is it, then to attribute and commit
all things to his providence?

5 And by this consideration of Gods will we learn to judge most truly and
rightlye of all things that come to pass, and not otherwise to determine of
them, then that they do altogether fall out to the illustration of Gods glory,
and to the procurement of the salvation of the godly. For whatsoever it be that
comes to pass, the Lord undoubtedly turns it to some good, although we can
by no means perceive, how or after what sort the same is accomplished. For
like as the providence of God has always his omnipotency joined with it,
even so is his excellent wisdom, never removed from the same. And again, where
all things fall out by his singular wisdom, it cannot be thosen but that the
same do fall out and are disposed to many good ends and purposes.

6 Last of all, since the first way to salvation is, to humble our selves under
the mighty hand of God, to acknowledge our own weakness, to depend wholly and
alone upon God, to look for all things profitable and commodious from him, and
to ascribe all things that happen and come to pass to the same: and further
are most clearly taught by this treatise of providence, how all these things
ought to be done and accomplished by us: it is a plain race, that without the
knowledge and confession of providence, we can by no means attain unto
salvation. To conclude (that I tarry not long) he cannot truly profess his
faith in God, he cannot pray aright, he cannot behold and acknowledge the good
will and pleasure of God in all his works: he cannot ascribe unto God the
glory of his excellent power, wisdom, goodness, etc. as he deserves: he cannot
humble himself (as is meet) before God, to crave his mercy or aid, that
imbraseth not the doctrine of Gods providence, or does not purely understand
the same. And thus much touching the excellency and necessity of this
doctrine.

Now concerning the comfortes, whereunto we would have especially to be referred
all that has been spoken touching providence, we must entreat more fully and
at large. Before all things, it is no hard matter to declare, that as well the
definition of Gods providence as also those proofs, whereby we have proved, ye
providence is necessaryly established against the swinishe brood of Epicures
and others (whose minds being deeply drenched in the quagmire of carnal
opinions, can by no means be lifted up to the contemplation of spiritual and
heavenly things) do minister most large and ample matter of comfortes and
consolations.

Certainly fith the whole life of man is continually subject to innumerable and
the same very pernicious dangers, either open or secret, there is no cause why
we should think, that any man can be in safety one minute of an hour unless he
be preserved by the special providence of God. Whither soever a man turns
himself, doubtless he is of all creatures the most woeful and miserable,
except be perceive himself to be environed and vpholden with the aid and
assistance of Gods providence.

Consider I pray thee (whosoever thou art) a little more diligently, the
things which we shall breefelye rehearse touching this matter. If thou have to
do with any persons, as thou ranst not shift but thou needs must: yet behold
how doubtful and fearful all things will be unto thee, where the mind
rests not in the providence of God. Some man embraces thee very freendly to
outward appeerance, and also entertaineth thee with a kiss: but on der the
color of this flattering gesture Amasa is thrust through of Ioab, and our Lord
and master Christ is of Judas his disciple betrayed into the hands of his
enemies: 2. Sam. 20. Luke 22. Some body calls thee forth to walk into the
feelds: so was godly Abel circumuented by his brother Cain, and killed: Genes.
4. Thou art bidden to some great feast or banquet: but by this means Absolon
entertainde his brother Ammon, and slew him: 2. Sam. 13. That I say nothing of
other horible mischiefs, as of braulings and contentions, of poisoned pickles
or sauces, of the hurt of health by excess, and such like, which (alas for
sorrow) we see too too often to arise by feastinges. Thou visitest thy firke
free^d to help him or comfort him as thou ^ast: but thou know whilst Thamar
did so (...) very dutifully, she was defiled by her brother Ammon: 2 Samuel (...)
thou know further that the contagion of the dicease does by this occasion
oftentimes pass unto others also, whilst one is sick of the plague or
pestilence, an other of the Leprosy, an other of some other dicease, whereby
the place wherein the sick party lies, and even the Air it self incorrupted
and made hurtful. Thou have occasion to bargain with some body: but there is
no kind of contract or bargain, whereunto are not adjoined a thousand feats
of derit: and to the hindrance whereof (least it should fall out according to
thy desire) are not devised infinite crinks and cauilations.

Here of may Laban be a witness, that so offe* times contrived new shifts and
delays against his son in law Jacob: Genesis 20.30.33. ^ik (...) Saul, who
cast into most gre^^ous daunge^^e, that noble preserver of his country David,
before he would give him his daughter to wife as he had promised: 1 Samuel 18.
What should I stand long what (...) thou do (...) in what state or condition
soever thou live, thou can^^ never be free from perrilles and danngers (...)
thou have many kins-folkes and friends: yet is there cause why thou should
fear especially some danger to proceed even from them, which thing to be
true the examples even now rehearsed do teath, and that memorable saying (yet
too too true) of the prophet Micha: A man's enemies be they of his own house.
Micha. 7.

Contrary wife, if thou have no friends: then shall thou be despised of all
men, and abused by every knave without controlment. If thou be single, there
lies in the wine some shamlesse drab to entrap thee, such as was Poriphars
wife the Egiptran, and for her cause (though thou be innocent) thou art drawn
into danger of thy good name, of thy substance, of thy health, yea and
sometimes of thy life too. If thou be disposed to marry a wife, what if thou
lightest upon such a one, as will do nothing else but continually forment thee,
adding one veration unto an other: as we read the wife of Job did, and know
that many other procured inevitable destruction to their most honorable
husbands. If there come no children by manage, no man is able to tell, what a
huge heap of evils does follow this barrennes: hatred vnquenche able, and
domestical discord, pensiuenes for goods to be left unto strangers and
unthankful persons, do even kill a man before his time. But if there be
Children, certes the notable Patriarchs Noah and Jacob, Heli the high priest
and the famos King and prophet David, being oftentimes grievously bested by
reason of the wicked prankes of their Children, do put thee in mind also of
thy lot. If thou be rich, as being advanced to great honor and dignity,
having gotten the favor of ye King or Prince: yet how soon all this glory may
be defaced, and a man cast down from the highest to the lowest, only Haman
may be a witness: Hest: 7. If thou be poor: thy very poverty alone is a most
heavy cross, as for the which sometimes some have wished to make exchange of
life with death. To be short, in what condition soever thou dealest, and for what
matter soever it be, so long as thou have to do with men, thou find no
doubt this common saying to be verified, Homo homini Lupus, one man becomes a
Wolf to another: neither can thou judge any thing to be thoroughly sure, or
to be well and rightly done of thee, except thy mind be refreshed with the
remembrance of Gods providence, and so thou determine for a certainty, that
thou art by the same defended and preserved from all perilles and dangers
whatsoever.

But go to let us see further, whither in those things which a man
enterpriseth by him self alone and far off from all fellowship and company
of men, any thing may be found void of displeasure or inconvenience: or
whither any man's life may be so framed and fashioned in this world, as that he
may live free from all troubles and perturbations. Certes no such matter shall
thou find, whither thou look upon things with life, or without life, or
any other creatures whatsoever, from the which at least may not come some
occasion of hurt or damage, if so be Gods providence does not help and provide
for us and for our affairs. If thou hiddest thy self in a house or Cotage,
one pin or nail broken or out of square may cause the whole building to fall
and so ouerwhelme thee. A silly Spider slipping from her web into thy bosom
whilst thou sleep, engenders there some hidden sore that greeueth thee.
The Cat, being otherwise a domestical and tame beast, vsuallye kept to kill
mice, in the night flies in thy face and all to bescratcheth it. Thy Dog
becoming mad, will no more forbear thee then a stranger. If thou will
seethe or roste any thing for thee to eat (as doubtless thou can not live
without doing of these and such like actions) a little fire perhaps may
consume the whole house: some piece of a weed being put unawares into thy
pottage pot, will procure unto thee either sickness or death: the knife wherewith
thou choppest thine herbs or any thing else, by a little trice, will wound thee
and perhaps without recovery. If thou drinkest, although it be very clear
water: yet it may be, that the well whence thou drewest it, some venemos worm
has infected with her poison. But if it please thee to go out of the house,
one tyle fallinge down may break thine head and peradventure thy brains: a
little stone lying in the way eauseth thee to stumble and fall, and so
grievously to hurt thee. Sometimes the air being gross of it self, or
otherwise for the time corrupted, will hurt and impair thy health. How many
beasts thou meetest, so many euemies may thou think thou meetest withal,
which some way that thou weenest not may overcome thee, or at the least hurt
thee. If thou go in to thy garden, which thou carefully keep, either to
delight thy mind, or to gather some things needful to be eaten: there lies
in a wait some scorpion, or other woorm as had to bite thee. If thou so west
or plantest any thing there, besides that thou art uncertain of the increase,
even then when greatest hope does appear, sodeinly either beasts breaking in,
or the hail falling, or the frost, or some other tempest destroys all that
ever is, and so thou art ready to sterue for any thing there is left. The
birds which fly to and fro in the ater, are as it were so many traitors,
sharping their beakes and talons, to put out thine eyes. Certainly the waspe,
the Hornet, the Be, nay the Ant, or if there be any creature less then this,
it will put thee to trouble, at one time or other. If thou go to the waters
take heed that whilst thou labourest to take up any, thou thy self be not
taken: whilst thou walk or stand upon the bank thy foot slip not and
so thou fall into the water. If thou betakest thy self to a ship on the Sea,
know thou there is no moment, wherein (though there appeer never so great a calm)
thou may be bold to make unto thy self any certain warrantize of life. If
thou searchest for any thing on the earth, coveting to fetch somewhat from the
depth beneath: whilst thou sweatest much a long time in digging, the ground
above suddenly falling, or part of the pit chinking or eliuing, will
peradventure smother thee. If thou go down into a den or dungeon; even here
likewise whatsoever is above thee, leans upon thy neck and threateneth to
fall-vpon thee. If thou clime up a steep hill, the tripping of thy fa^te will
cast thee down headlong. If thou wandrest in the valley, look warily about
thee, least some hidden guife or whirlepoole do swallowe thee, or at leastwise
put thee to thy plonge. If thou art to iourneye through the wood, every tree
stands as a clubbe lifted up aloft to kill thee.

And that I may once draw unto an end, there is nothing extant in the nature of
things, though otherwise necessary, and for many causes profitable to mankind,
from the which ought not again some damage, yea and sometimes great
displeasure, continually to be feared. The most beautiful Sun, and lightsom
stars, without the which man's life, is to be accounted no life at all, do
yet for the time bring some discommoditie with them: as when the Sun with his
vehement heat does debilitate and enfeeble men's brains, or when together
with him other celestial bodies also by their obscurations and defectes, and by
their standing motions, do procure unto things below (over which they bear no
small swaye) the causes of many alterations, yea and do now and then diversely
affect and move the very bodies and minds of men also.

But omitting all these things, let us look la^t of all upon the only mass of
man's body, and peruse the same by parts: and there is no doubt but we shall
perceive, that it is nothing else then a public receptacle, nest and hostrye of
miseries: and that how many small members there be in the body, so many kinds
there are of dangers and diseases. What said I, how many members? I might more
truly say, that to every member are procreated innumerable sorts of
diseases. The eye doubtless is a very small part in the head: but with how
many maladies think thou this is encombred? There are engendered in it the
pin and web, the blearenes of the eyes, the dry itch in the eye, the wart
in the eye lid, the grauel in the eye, the dazeling of the eyes, the filme of
the eye, the staring of the eyes, the falling of the eye lidde, the dimnesse of
the eye, the poorblindnes of the eyes, the knob in the eye, the pricking in the
eye, the dropping of the eyes, the squint, the swelling of the eyes, the
turning of the eye liddes, the unnatural standing of the eye liddes, the
pimple in the eye, the pearl in the eye, the scurumes of the eyes, the
swelling and grossenes of the eye liddes, and who is able to reckon up all the
impediments of this sort? Now by the greeuantes of the eye alone, which yet we
have not all set down in account, consider thou with thy self, how many and
how great may be the diseases of the other members, which are far greater and
larger then ye eye. It pitieth me doubtless, yea it pitieth me for man's estate
and condition, as often as I enter into the consideration of these miseries,
which man carries about with him in his little body, neither can he ever shake
them off. Will we or nill we, we must grant, that there is nothing created
amongst all living creatures more wretched or vile then man, if (I mean) the
weak disposition of the body be considered in it self. Which thing that we
might the more easilye acknowledge, and often call to mind, it is ordained by
God the author of nature, that we should fetch the first beginninges of our
life immediately from crying and weeping, and again that we should lay down the
same with great sorrow and grief.

Seeing all these things are thus, from whence I pray thee, or from what
matters shall wretched man have comfort in so great distresses, if not from this
knowledge, that God takes care of us and of our affairs, and delivers us
continually out of infinite dangers? Which of us can so much as breathe when we
list, nay which of us shall be able to do that, if we be not certainly persuaded
of the Lords help that governs all things, and he give us power so to do?
For seeing there is just nothing any where, in the which are not most certain
annoyances and perilles prepared at an inch, and our whole life hangs by a
twine thread, nay by a silly hair, so as a thousand (I say not diseases but)
deaths do continually hang over our heads and wander before our eyes:
doubtless we must not think, that we can abide in safety so much as one
minute of an hour, except the Lord by his wise providence and gracious good
will and pleasure does deliver us from al hurtful and noysom things. In that
being borne thou wast not strangled between the Midwiues hands: that in the
time of thine infancy thou perishedst not by fire or water, or by some other
mean through the negligence of thy parents: that in thy childehoode and young
years thou becammest not blind or lame of thy lims through thine own folly
and rashness: that being afterward grown in age thou wast not slain by some
body that met thee and saluted thee, or that feigned freendship with thee, or
that eat and drank with thee, or else by one that professed himself to be thine
open enemy: that now thou art not beguiled, or any other way cast into danger
by some one that bargaineth with thee: in that thou art not molested by thy
neighbors, nor iniuried by strangers: in that thou art not troubled with
discommodities in marriage, which are wont to spring partly from ye wife, partly
from the children, and partlye from the cares of household affairs: in that
thou art not stripped of thy goods: in that the might ye rage not against thee,
and thrust thee from thy seat and dignity: in that thou art not killed with
the fall of thine house: in that thy meat and drink do not hurt thee: in that
thou art not wounded with the edg-toole, which thou handlest: in that no beast
does violence unto thee: in that thou art not drowned in the waters: in that
the earth does not open her mouth and devour thee: finallye in that thou art
wonderfully delivered from innumerable inconveniences, which do daily and
continually hang over thine head, and proceed as well from men, as from the
devil, and from other creatures, which the devil also indeuoureth oftetimes
to turn to our destruction: in all these things I say, which we know are wont
ever and anon to come to pass, and therefore ought to judge that they may also
take effect and be accomplished in us, thou ought to admire and blaze
abroad with praise the only providence of God, yea and to ascribe thy whole
safety and preservation only and alone hereunto. And this is that which the
Psalms do teach, and all the sayings of the holy fathers in the sacred
Scriptures every where extant, wherein the Lord is celebrated as the helper of
the afflicted, and the deliverer of his out of all dangers: further also wherein
those that are delivered, do give God thanks for his benefits received: as
Psalm. 18. declares, how even in the midst of tempests and other dangers the
Lord yet saves the godly. The channels of waters, says he, were seen, and the
foundations of the world were discovered at thy rebuking O Lord, at the
blasting of the breath of thy displeasure. He has sent down from above and
taken me: he has drawn me out of many waters. He has delivered me from my
strong enemy, and from them that hate me. Psalm. 23. does wholly tend to this
effect, but especially these words are to be considered. Albeit I should
walk through the valley of the shadow of death, yet will I fear no evil, for
thou art with me. Psalm. 27. Though an host pitched against me, mine heart
should not be afraid: though war be raised against me, mine heart should not
be afraid: yet will I trust in thee. Psalm. 30. O Lord thou have brought up my
soul out of the grave, thou have revived me from them that go down into the
pit. In the same place: Thou have turned my mourning into joy, thou have put
off my sackcloth, and girded me with gladness. Psalm. 31. My times are in thy
hand, deliver me from the hand of mine enemies, etc. Psalm. 33. Behold the eye
of the Lord is upon the^ that fear him, and upon them that trust in his
mercy: to d^liuer their souls from death, and to preserve them in the time of
dearth. Psalm. 34. The Angel of the Lord pitcheth round about them that fear
him, and delivers them. There also: Many are the miseries of the righteous,
but the Lord delivers them out of all. Psalm. 37. the Lord knows the days
of upright men, and their inheritance shall be perpetual. They shall not be
confounded in the perilous time, and in the days of famine they shall have
enough. Psalm. 40. Innumerable troubles have compassed me: my sins have taken
such hold upon me, that I am not able to look up: yea they are more in number
then the hears of my head, therefore my heart has failed me. Let it please
thee, O Lord, to deliver me, make have, O Lord, to help me. Psalm. 41. By this
I know that thou fauourest me, because mine enemy does not triumph against me.
And as for me thou vpholdest me in mine integrity, and shall set me before thy
face for ever. Psalm. 57.59. David does ascribe his deliverance unto the
providence of God, in that he flying Saul withdrew himself into a den, and
when his house was beset by the commandment of Saul, that he might have
been taken. Psalm. 66. The Lord holds our souls in life, and suffers not
our feet to slip. There also: Thou have caused men to ride over our heads:
we went into the fire and water, but thou broughtest us into a wealthy place.
Psalm. 71. Thou have given commaundment to save me: for thou art my rock and my
fortress. In the same place. By thee have I been sustained ever since I was
borne, thou art he that tookest me out of my mothers bowels, etc. Psalm 73. As
for me, I was always with thee, for thou have holden me by my righthand. Thou will guide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive me to glory. Psalm. 91.
is wholly spent in this, that it teaches most cheerelye that the Lord does
every where take care for us, and provides that we fainte not under the
troubles which do on every side assail us. He shall deliver thee, says he,
from the snare of the hunter, and from the noisome pestilence. he will cover
thee under his wings, and thou shall be sure under his feathers: his truth
shall be thy sheeld and buckler. Thou shall not be afraid of the fear of the
night, nor of the arrow that flies by day: nor of the pestilence that walks
in darkness, nor of the plague that destroys at noone day. A thousand shall
fall beside thee, and ten thousand at thy righthand, but it shall not come nigh
thee. And a little after: There shall none evil come unto thee, neither shall
any plague come near thy tabernacle. For he shall give his Angels charge over
thee to keep thee in all thy ways. They shall bear thee in their hands, that
thou hurt not thy foot against a stone. Thou shall walk upon the Lion and
Aspe: the young Lion and Dragon shall thou tread under thy feet, etc. The like
shall thou find in many other Psalms, especially the 104.116.124.139. (this
is wholly applied to this purpose) 144.147. And in the prophets there are very
many confessions and thanks giuings of this sort, that do wonderfully commend
the perpetual care and providence of God toward us in all perils and dangers.
It would be ouerlong to repeat them at this present, and some places shall
afterward in the exposition of the 107. Psalm. be fitly produced: Wherefore as
now we omit them.

It is manifest therefore, that by this doctrine of Gods providence there is
much comfort gotten throughout the whole life: and as there is no time in man's
life free from dangers, so ought every one without ceassing to lift up and
strengthen his mind with the remembrance of Gods providence: inasmuch as by it
even then when we would least suspect, we are every moment delivered from some
dangers: which as they are to be seen in some, so there is no doubt, but that
they may also happen unto us.

Furthermore comfortes do not heerby only, come unto us, in that we are
taught, that by the providence of God continual calamities are kept from us:
but heerby also ought we to gather matter of consolation, that by the same are
ministered unto us whatsoever good things are necessary to this life. For if God
disposes all things, and with singular care fououreth, aduanceth and
defends us and our matters, as we have sufficiently at large and plainly be
fore proved, when we taught that Gods providence was not only universal, but
also special and peculiar: then doutlesse are we to look for all good things
from him also. Neither may we think, that any thing shall be wanting unto us, so
long as we have him favorable that cares for us: and much less that we can
procure unto our selves any thing by our own devises, industry, art,
strength, unless be of his mercy ministers it unto us. For he alone is
almighty, and endued with a notable philanthropie or love toward mankind:
wherefore undoubtedly he both can and will give whatsoever seems good unto
him, and our necessity requires. As for us, howsoever we may seem to do any
thing by our own industrye, or also by the help of others, whither it be of
men, I say, or of any other creature: yet are we enforced to confess, that the
thing is far less which we do (though it be never so small a matter) then
that it can without him be brought to pass as we desire. It appears in deed
that we do somewhat, when we plough up the land with our handy-labours, sow
seeds in the fallowe ground, reap down the ripe Corn, grind the same at
the mill, bake bread in the oven: when we lay baits for fishes, set snares for
birds, tend our cattle and flocks: when to accomplish greater matters, we
seek for the aid of others that are better able to perform them: when we
procure friends: when we minister help one to an other: when we learn and
have the knowledge of sundry arts, as the craft of Tailors, Carpenters,
physic and such like, and apply the use of them to necessary purposes: when we
call upon God by prayer and supplication etc. but all these things if we weigh
them aright, are nothing else then certain instruments and means, ordained and
granted of God himself, by the which it pleases him to woork in us, and to
set forward our affairs, insomuch that if any thing be once well done and
rightly accomplished, although we have swet for it, yet it is necessary that
the whole praise of the wel-dooing of the thing do redound to him alone as the
principal author and woorker of the same. For neither is the seed fruitful of
it self: neither do Fishes or Fowls wittingly and willingly come into our
nets: neither does fodder given to our Cattle profit them: neither is their
strength auayleable, whose help we crave: neither is every man straight ways
moved to freendship: neither do they always requite good turns, of whom we
have well deserved: neither are arts and sciences by and by learned, nor their
force and efficacy forthwith bewray it self: neither is the mind kindled
unto prayer: except the Lord himself do secretly in all these things begin to
work by his unsearchable power, and prosecute that which he foreseeeth will
be profitable and wholesome unto us, and fit to illustrat and set forth his own
glory. Vain and frivolous are all those attempts, whereunto he puts not his
helping hand. And most true is that saying of the Prophet Psalm. 127. Except the
Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build it: and except the Lord
keep the City, the keeper watches but in vain. It is in vain for you to
rise up early, and to lie down late, and cate the bread of sorrow: but he will
surely give rest to his beloved. And doutlesse if we should not be pertakers of
our desire before we could bring our wished enterprises to pass by our own
strength and power, how might we ever conceive hope or comfort in our minds:
especially since we daily find it true by experience, that our attempts and
endeavors, though otherwise right honest and virtuous, are oftetimes easily
let and hindered, and that we cannot stretch forth so much as our little
finger, nay nor direct the thought or cogitation of our mind, but so
farrefoorth as he shall turn and dispose it. And hitherto belong the things
which we have before specified touching the freedom of man's will, and touching
secondary causes: so that every man may cleerelye see and perceive, that
nothing has been taught hitherto touching Gods prourdence, which is not very
fit matter for comfort and consolation.

If thou have need therefore of anything, ask it by faith of the father of
lights, from whom alone comes down every good gift, as well spiritual as
corporal, and though al^obtein it. Thou desire a garment to cover thee:
there is extant through Gods benefit the craft of dressing of skins, the
art of weauing of linen and woollen: God will move the hearts of the rich to
bestow upon thee some part of their store: or else he will provide for thee by
some other mean. He has a thousand ways to give whatsoever he knows to be
necessary for us, which to rehearse lies not in our power to do. Let this
suffice thee, and take it for a certainty, he that did show eftesoones to our
first parents a way how to make garments he yt we so many ages covers all
kind of creatures, some with feathers, some with hairs, some with wool, some
with seals, some with leather: he that adorneth the lillies and the grass of
the feelde, and that no less gorgiouslye then rich Solomon was arrayed: he that
kept the garments of the Israelites wandering in the wilderness by the space of
forty years, from wearing: the same will give unto thee also, wherewith to
cover thy naked and cold carcass.

Thou would have something given thee wherewith to slake thine hunger: he
that gave man authority over al his cretures, to use the^ with thanksgiving:
he that ordained a way, and mean of tylling the earth for the gathering in of
the fruits: he that provided for Abraham and Jacob during the time of famine in
Egypt: he that rayned down Manna and delicat flesh in ye desert for the
Israelites: he that gave Ruth favor in the eyes of Booz, so that he lycensed
her to gather up the scattered ears of corn in his feeld: he that sent
forth Zeba the servant of Mephtboseth with Asses laden with bread, grapes and
figs unto David wearied with his train in the wilderness, when he fled from
Absolon: he that stirred up the heart of Abdias, to feed an hundredth Prophets
with bread and water, that lay hid for the tyranny of Iezabel: he that
vouchsafed to minister bread and flesh both evening and morning to Elias by
Ravens: he that to feed the same Elias again afterward, did wonderfully
increase the meal and oil of the poor widow of Sarepta: and the third time
ministered to the selfsame Elias whilst he fled, fine Cakes and a pot of
water by an angel: he that nourished Jeremy in the pit: he that at one time
with five, at an other time with seven loaves refreshed certain thousands of
people, and gave in charge that the scraps should be gathered up, which many
baskets were scarce able to hold: he of so many means why may he not succor
thee also by some one or other? Thou art tormented with thirst: he that showed
Agar flying in the wilderness a pit of water: he that by his goodness in favor
of the Israelites made the bitter waters potable unto them: he that out of
ahard rock brought the sweet and pleasant water springes: he that opened unto
Sampson w^^cied with ouercomming of his enemies, (...) co^duit out of the
iawhone of an ass: he that matereth continually the whole dry and thir^^y
^arth: he will in no wise suffer thee to dye for thir^^. Thou have no house or
mansio^ place: he that provides for the snailes their shelles: (...) that has
taught the Swallows to make the^e nestes most cunninglye of the earth: he that
has given wit and discretion to Foxes and other beasts to provide themselves
dens and caves: he that preserved the Israelites in their perigrmation so
many years from all hurt of heat and cold: he that stirred up the (...) of
Abraham and of other holy Fathers ^o the exercise of hospitality: he will
undoubtedly provide thee a place where thou may safely rest. These are the
things which we stand most in need off in our common course of life, and with
the which he that courteth nothing beyond the laws of nature touching a sober
and moderate life, may content himself: after which sort also the Apostle
spoke full well of himself and of all that profess Christ, 1. Timoth. 6.
Godliness, says he, is great riches, if a man be contented with that he has.
For we brought nothing into the world, and it is certain that we can carry
nothing out. Therefore having food and raiment, let us therewith be content.
Now these things will God have us to look for from him, and we find by
experience, that howsoever we bestow al our labors and travails about them,
yet we attain not unto them but by his liberality. True it is indeed, that
these things are bestowed upon some more ple^tifully, and upon other more
sparingly: but it cannot be denied, that there is given unto all so much, as is
sufficient for the natural sustentation of life. But if thou see more given
to one then to another, yet thou ought to think, that there is nothing done
without certain advice and just causes.

Thou maruellest perhaps why he has not given unto thee great riches. But
behold how wisely the providence of God deals with thee. Thy poverty
keeps thee in an humble and thrifty estate of life, and so thou art brought
to embrace other virtues also, which spring out of these: whereas otherwise, if
thou flowedst in riches after thy desire, then becoming dissolute through
immoderate superfluity, thou would apply thy mind to all manner of vices,
and which is yet more grievous, thou would draw others also together with
thy self into shameful ruin and destruction. Thy poverty is the cause, why
thou imployest thy study in learning and supernatural philosophy, which
otherwise thou should never, I believe, have tasted so much as a far off.
Thy poverty causes thee, to behave thy self modestly toward all men, and
diligently to embrace freendship and peace: who if thou could challenge to
thy self but so much as the name or title of a rich man, thou would become
grievous and intolerable to all. Further he that would have thee to be poor,
the same provides in the mean time, that nothing shall be wanting unto thee,
I say, for thy necessary preservation. He moves others, for the virtues which
they perceive in thee, to favor thee, and to eudeuer to do thee good. Yea and
thy wife and Children (if thou have any) by reason of thy poverty, become more
strong and lusty, and are stirred up to diligence in doing of their duties
and following of their labors, which otherwise thou were like to have
slothful and unthrifty, and rather burdensome unto thee then profitable.
Besides what a benefit is this, that poverty exempteth thee from many great
and grievous annoyances, the which rich men, will they nill they, are enforced
to go under: and how great they are, no man can easilye tell, but he that has
had experience of them. But it shall be good, for thee to weigh more exactly the
spiritual benefits also, which do come unto thee by thy poverty. It gives
thee occasion continuallye to call upon the Lord, whilst thou requirest of him
things necessary for thee, and know them to be looked for from him alone.

It causes thee from time to time to commend thy self and all thine to him
only, and willinglye to depend upon him alone. It makes thee to become
resolute, so as the word of God which thou have heard is not choked, through
the thorny cares of richesse and voluptuousnes in the feelde of thine heart. It
takes away also the nourishmente of such temptations as the devil is wont to
stir up in the rich men of this world. It ministers a manifold exercise of
patience. It increases and strengthens thy faith. It provoke thee to the
contempt of pride, ambition, vaineglory, and of all earthly things, and
persuades thee to meditate and aspire only after beauenlye things. Finally
for many causes it is better for thee, when thou art in this sort poor and
needye, then if thou had plentye and abundance of all things.

It would be over long torehearse all the causes that might be reckoned.

Thou understand therefore that it was ordained by the singular wisdom of
God, and for thy incomparable benefit, that thou should live contented with
this thy poor estate and condition. Contrariwise thou maruellest again, why
God would have this thy neighbor or any other man to be rich. But to omit
this, that no man can fearch out the causes of Gods will in these things: yet
will I demand of thee, how thou can tell, whither the great riches wherewith
thou see him to be adorned, will he beneficial unto him, or rather
pernicious. Either of them doubtless may come to pass indifferently, but yet
this last far more commonly then the other. For where one peradventure among
many that are endued with riches of God may be seen, that understands them
to be as a certain instruement of well doing, yt namely he might be stirred
up by them to thanksgiving, that he might perceive himself to be rather a
steward over the^ then a Lord, and impart them to his needy brethren, feed the
hungry, clothe the naked, comfort the sick, succor the captive, aid ministers
of the word, and to be short lay them out to Gods glory and the help of his
neighbor: yet may thou see again very many on the other side, unto whom it
appears plenty of riches to be given, that being unthankful for their
benefits received, are despised of God, and being despised are by little and
little blinded, and being blinded do abuse the benefits granted them for a
time, and abusing them purchase to themselves eternal damnation. Of these
things we have most manifest experimentes and examples in the holy
Scriptures. Poor Lazarus is commended, the poor Apostles are praised, and
they also that contemptuouslye rejected their riches not to be conte^ned: which
all seemed so much the more ready to take their passage into heaven, by how much
the less they were hindered with the fardels of earthly things. We read also
of certain rich Patriarchs, Judges, Kings and other holy fathers: but these
in the midst of so great riches continued notwithstanding poor in spirit,
and so used things present, as they would not greatly have cared if they had
been absent. Whereto it belongs that Jacob going into Mesopotamia, prayed
unto God, yt he would give him especially bread to eat, and raiment to put
on: Genes. 28. Godly Jacob was not careful for any more benefits: and the Lord
(we see) gave unto him even more then he desired. Likewise Abraham is reported
to be rich, but yet so as he never bought ground, nor builded house. But we
read of other rich men, who through their great riches were brought to extreme
destruction: of which sort was that rich glutton clothed in fine linen and
purple, and faring deliciously every day: and an other who hears, that after
his cofers and barnes were fraughted to ye full, his soul should immediately be
taken from him: likewise the young man which had rather forsake Christ then his
riches, for whose cause also Christ took occasion to treat of the infelicitie
or poverty of rich men, and amongst other things said. That it is easier for
a Camel to go through the eye of a needle, then for a rich man to enter into
the kingdom of heaven: and other mo also, whose names the Holy-ghoast voucheth
not safe to mention in his sacred books. And such are always the greatest
number of rich men, and this our age has (alas) too too many routes of such as
these.

Therefore by these thou ought to judge, that it is neither hurtful to thee,
that the divine providence has appointed thee to be poor: neither again that
it would be greatly to thy profit, if it should even now command thee to be
rich. True indeed is that saying of the wise man, that as well riches as
poverty come from the Lord: but we may say that this also is most true, namely
that it comes likewise from the Lord, that a man use them well and as he
ought. And no man ever uses them well and as he ought to do, but he whose
mind respects the will of God, submits him self thereunto, and rests in
the determination of the divine providence. And since in the common course of
our life it is a great safeguard and help to the appeasing of the greefes and
vexations of the mind, to be able, as Paul speaks of himself. Philipp. 4.
to be content with the estate wherein we are, to be able for the time to be
abased and to excel, to be able for the time to be full and to be hungrye, to
abound and to suffer want: this also is a most sure and certain consolation,
even to wait upon the Lord at all times by faith, for the things that he has
decreed to be requisite and necessary for us. And hitherto belongs that
notable Sermon of Christ. Math. 6. Luke. 12. Be not careful says he, for your
life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink: nor yet for your body, what
ye shall put on. He adds immediatlye an evident reason touching the
providence of God, which is perceived in the creation of man: Is not the life,
says he, more worth then meat, and the body more worth then raiment? as
though he should say: He that has created and yet still preserves both thy
soul and body, the same doubtless will provide also these lesser things, I
mean food and raiment. There is added also another reason, where an argument
is drawn from the less to the greater. Behode the fowls of the aier, for they
sow not, neither reap, nor carry into the barnes: yet your heavenly Father
feeds them. Are ye not much better then they? Where are couched many
comfortable reasons. You are much better the^ the fowls: there is no doubt
therefore but he will much less forsake you then them. Further he provides
for the birds that take no pains at all: how much more will he provide for
you that labor lustely in your callings for whom is prepared the use of second
causes? Again, he is your Father: wherefore you ought to make this certain
account that he is endued with a fatherlye affection toward you, and that the
same heavenly Father, will omit none of those things, which we see to be
performed and accomplished by earthlye parents. And least any man should
persuade himself, that he could with his own labors provide things necessary
for his life, Christ by an exquisite prevention puts the matter cut of
doubt, saying: Which of you by taking careful thought, can add one cubite to
his stature? that is to say, Albeit ye bend all the force of your wit, and
exercise all manner of arts and sciences, yet shall ye not be able to bring
the least thing to pass, if ye be not helped hy the divine aid, and if the
Lord give ye not increase. For thus in Luke it is expressly added: If ye then
be not able to do the least thing, why take ye thought for the remnant?
There follows a more full exposition: And why care ye for raiment? Consider
the Lillies of the feeld, how they grow: they labor not, neither do they
spinne. Yet I say unto you, that even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed
like unto these.

Our labor or wisdom are able to do nothing, no more then the Lillies are
said to do any thing of themselves, while they grow: but the Lord procures
all things as well in us as he does in the plants or other cretures, which are
utterly void of reason and industry. And he amplifieth exceedinglye the
greatness of the benefits which we are to look for from God, and wills us to
be of a confident mind, whilst he says that the native beauty of Lillies is
greater, then that which art (though otherwise a resembler of nature) can ever
be able to express: yea then that was of Solomon himself, whose sumptuous
apparel not withstanding did easily surmount the glory of all other princes,
as the Scripture does witness.

Wherefore we must also look constantly for things necessary for this life from
God, seeing he gives those things largely to Lillies that are not necessary,
but serve in a manner for no other purpose the^ for beuty only. If so be the^
he gives more then needs to the very Lillies, which stand not in need of any
such beuty, neither are they greatly benifited by it: why will he not much more
give unto men the things which this life cannot want, and with the which it is
so necessary that men should be helped, that without them they cannot but
perish?

And again he confirms this matter with another reason from the lesser to
the greater: Wherefore if God so cloth the grass of the feeld which is to day,
and to morrow is cast into the furnace: shall he not do it much more unto you, o
ye of little faith? In which comparison he extenuateth the nature and
condition of grass, that the vileness thereof being considered, our minds may
conceive hope, that God will far more willingly and carefully regard our
affairs, since we be far more excellent creatures, then are the senseless
grass. But it has the force of a rebuke, in that he calls them that are so
careful for ye things of this life, holigopistous, that is, of little faith.
For the sense is this: If you were endued with true faith, such as became them
to have that are called into the fellowship of Christ, ye would not dout of the
goodness of God: but would determine with a steadfast faith that God would
liberally provide for you. And this is it yt he means in the words following
Therefore take no thought, saying: what shall we eat, or what shall we drink,
or wherewith shall we be clothed? for after all these things do the Gentiles
seek. Behold a vehement dehortatory or disswasory reason. It is the property
of the Gentiles says he, which are without God, without hope, without faith,
Ephe. 2. to be careful for earthly things: and all because they being not as
yet renewed nor as yet adorned with the Holy Ghost, are given only to earthly
things, and cannot comprehend things spiritual. Wherefore if thou will not be
counted such a one, look back unto better things, that is to say, to heavenly,
learn to depend altogether upon God alone, and to commit thy self wholly to
his providence. Whereupon follows an other reason drawn from the providence
and knowledge of God. Your heavenly Father says he, knows that ye have need
of al these things. If he knows it, then in vain do thou consume thy self
with so many cares: and as he knows what thou want, so knows he how to
provide for thee. Again if he be thy Father, see thou behave thy self toward
him as a son, looking for all things at his hand: and thou may be sure, he
will not suffer thee to pine away for want of help. But rather seek ye first
the kingdom of heaven, and the righteousness thereof, and all these things
shall be ministered unto you. Man's reason does all things after a preposterous
manner: in the first place it looks after earthly things, it wills men to
lay for temporal commodities, and then secondly it thinks of virtue, as full
well expresses the Satyrist:

O Citizens o Citizens,
first Coin must come in place:
And after money once obtained.
then virtue next embrace.
But Christ clean contrariwise: First, says he seek the kingdom of God and
his righteousness. And in truth so it is: he that in this order does first
regard the matters of his soul, the same obtains whatsoever is necessary to
the nourshing of his body: according to that saying of the Psalmist, Psalm. 33.
Behold the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, and upon the^ that
trust in his mercy: to deliver their souls from death, and to preserve them
in famine.

Again Psalm. 34. Fear the Lord, ye his Saints, for nothing wants to the^
that fear him. The Lions do lack and suffer hunger: but they which seek the
Lord, shall want nothing that is good. Psalm, 37. The paths of man are directed
by the Lord, and he makes his way acceptable to him self. Though he fall, he
shall not be cast off, for the Lord puts under his hand. I have been young
and now am old: yet saw I never the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging
their bread. Christ therefore concludes very exactly, saying Care not then for
to morrow: for to morrow shall care for it self: as though he should say, God as
he provides for thee to day, so will he provide for thee also to morrow, and
the days following. Whither also it belongs that Christ in the prayer which
he prescribes unto us al, taught us to ask, our daily bread to be given us
this day. For indeed we cannot iustlye require bread to be given us any
longer, then we are sure to live. If we be uncertain of life, why would we be
certain of living? Therefore let us from him alone look for living, yea and
whatsouer else is necessary for our daily use, from whom we look for life.
Hitherto the breef and short, if we look upon the words only: but if we
regard the doctrine, the long and rich sermon of Christ, which all our life
long ought to be prefixed before our eyes and minds, and to admonish us of the
goodness and providence of God, ministering all necessary things unto us.

Howbeit God by his providence ministers, not these things only which are
required to the daily use of life: but also all other kind of helps and
comforts, which according to the unusual and unlooked for success of our
affairs (as indeed the change and alteration of men's matters is marvelous) may
any way be desired. There cannot so many troubles and adnersities at any time
creep upon us vnbewares, but that it is in the Lords hand and will, to a^scord
us many mo and more effectual remedies to the recovering of our health and
safety. There falls out some dangerous controversy with one or other
wherein thou have need of present resolution, occasion is sought and wiles are
wrought to infer open violence, many sworn enemies do slock together against
thee, thou art set in ye midst of swoordes and spears in all these things
the Lord him self for his part woorketh somewhat, and ceasseth not to have a
care of thee. Thou art to co^mence suit in law, thou art destitute of
faithful advocates: thou art vexed in thy mind by reason of the suspected
iniquity of the judge, ye power of thine adversaries and other causes:
judgment is very hardly pronounced against thee, neither is there any place
given for delay or appeal: thy goods are immediately seared upon, and thine
adversaries are entitled unto them: perhaps thou art cast into prison,
torments are devised and used against thee: by thine own confession wrested
from thee by violence thou art brought to be infamous, thou art driven into
bondage, orels by some other means thy body is afflicted, thy life also
stands in hazard. Lastly thou art so dealt withal as it were much better for
thee to dye, then to live any longer. Besides this thou art sent into exile,
and thou must with sorrow and heuines wander through unknown cuntreies, where
thou know no body, of whom thou may hope either for comfortable word or
for any other succor. Sometimes also thou art to make thy passage by water,
which when it happens thou art more in danger then be fore. Yet being
escaped and bearing a few things about thee, thou go to such a place, as
where there arises open war, and so all things again become most woeful
and desperate unto thee. After wars thou art entertained by a public famine,
no less fearful then the former, by means whereof thou can hardly get any
thing wherewith to buy bread, to ease thy gnawing and hungrye stomach withal.
Immediately after this rages the pestilence: and here thou must either provide
for thy self by flying away afresh, or else thou must ^^^^se thy self to most
certain death and destruction. Being delivered from the infection of the
plague, thou fallest into an other disease, (...) le^se gr^euous, wherewith thou
art long and ^^^che tormented, and the same wipeth thee quite and clean of all
that thou have. If any thing be yet le^t, at length a fire flaming upon the
sudden denoureth in a manner both thee and thy whole house. There are besides
very many kinds of dangers daily and continually happening, which are by no
means able to ^umber. But certes against all these matters the mind shall
singularly well be fenced, that will diligently look into those things, that
have of us been taught touching Gods providence. And howsoever every of them
might afford plentiful matter of consolation, which thing, but for the time,
we would easilye approve: yet notwithstanding this will especially avail to
that purpose, if we show that even all crosses also and calamities are wiselye
and for some profitable considerations sent of God: secondly that as he has
sent them, so by him they must al again be taken away, when and as often as he
shall see good and expedient. Of this thing therefore we will now speak.

It eases indeed somewhat the greatness of the pains, in that the afflicted
persons are persuaded, to hope for deliverance at all times out of their
distresses from God: but I wot not how it comes to pass, their patience is
very little helped by this means at that very time, wherein their pains do
still disquiet them. For inasmuch as hope respects things to come, and of
these there remains always some doubtfulnes, at the least this can never
fullye be plucked away: the mind cannot by reason of the greatness of the
calamities present, so look into the commodities absent, but that the assaults
of impatience will ofttimes return a fresh, and by little and little waxing
strong, will at the length prevail, in such wise that he which is distressed
with anguish, shall suppose himself to be utterly neglected of God, and again
he also for his part shall neglect all duty unto God. To the which point when
a man is once come, what hope can he have any more? Least any man therefore
should fall into this extreme miserye of all miseries, it shall be very requisite
for him to know, that even troubles and afflictions also are sent of God
himself, and that as well for just causes and considerations, as also for our
health and preservation rather then for our destruction. Which knowledge, is in
very deed ye fountain and welspring of al consolation. For why, except ye
mind of every distressed person be persuaded, and that thoroughly, that it is
so: there will scarce appeer any way of recovering either patience or comfort.
There is no doubt, but the holy Fathers, as often as they seeing the ungodly well
dealt withal, and themselves to have ill success in all things, suspected
that they were forsaken of God (for there are in the holy Scriptures such
complaints extant) did against these temptations fortify and confirm
themselves against distrustfulnes with this doctrine of Gods providence.
Wherefore the same also ought to be common unto us, and in the like troubles we
must gather from thence the like comforts and consolations.

1 To declare therefore, that even the crosses and calamities which do encomber
us are sent of God, those things especially are very available, that have been
discoursed against Fate, Fortune, Chance, Contingence or Haphazard. For seeing
it is plain and evident that nothing at al comes to pass by the means of
these. and yet we think that calamities otherwise are derived especially from
these: certainlye it is expedient, that we refer all things that befall us,
both generally and particularly, whither they be good or evil, to the
providence of God, and to acknowledge all things to be ordered and disposed by
God him self. And this reason does straightwaies so teach and inform men's
minds, that they can by no means be persuaded, that they shall ever be
neglected of God, but yt they are governed by his most wise counsel alone, and
in no case or affairs to depend upon the b^cke and assignement of
unappeasable Fate or Destiny, or foolish and blind Fortune, or unadvised
Contingence or Haphazard.

2. But if in case the providence of God be so busily occupied in all things,
and that even in the least and most bile, as we have in a clear discourse
proved before, when we entreated of peculiar providence: doubtless we cannot
without great injury withdraw the adversities which we see daily beyond our
expectation to arise, from the power and jurisdiction of the divine
administration. For inasmuch as he has a special care of al and singular
things, neither is any creature able to do any thing without his will and
ordinance: certes whatsoever comes any where to pass, whither it be by men,
or by the egger unto all evil the Devil, yet is it without all controversy,
that it falls out by his appointement and commandment.

3 Moreover, who is he that would wish the praise of wisdom and justice to be
taken from God? But undoubtedly as well Gods wisdom as justice do especially
shine even in these calamities, which we mort all and miserable creatures do
suffer here below: wherefore even these also shall not without cause be judged
to proceed from God. Yea and it is so necessary to attribute these things to
God, as it is necessary to determine him to be verilye most wise and indeed
most just. And for so much as of the evils which we see to come to pass, nothing
comes to pass in vain, or without cause, truly we must refer the very
same to the wisdom of God yt orders all things, persuading our selves that
the ends and causes of calamities are prefixed and appointed by the selfsame
wisdom. Again, seeing it is fust to punish the guilty, and to inflict pains
unto those that deserve them, and that no discommodities do arise, but we by
our sins Have justly deserved greater: it is not absurd, if we ascribe our
calamities unto God, as instly punishing us for our offenses. And like as we
never at any time fail to commit sins, so there is no cause why we should
challendge to our selves this prerogatine, that we ought at any time to be free
from dangers. God is evermore just, and thou art evermore a sinner: worthily
therefore art thou punished by God at all times, through the minislerie of
whatsoever creatures it pleases him to proreede against thee.

4 But since moreover from the evils wherewith we are distressed, God takes
occasion to illustrate and set forth his glory and power, (which is then
verily done, when both he won derfully and besides their expectation
delivers the godly out of trouble, and on the other side overthrows their
adversaries, which seenied before unconquerable) why should we not grant, that
our nuseries, of what sort soever they be, are tempered and qualified by him,
whereof this is the appointed end, that his goodness, power and glory may be
made the more famous thereby, and be spread far and nigh?

5 The things out of which many benefits do come unto us, and cheefely
spiritual, there is no man but judges it meet, that we redu^e them unto God
the bottomless fountain of all goodness. But adversities, and those that in the
opinion of carnal men are counted evils, do oftetimes bring great advantages
to the godly, and God is wont so to dispense them, that they always serve to
some commodity: wherefore it is to be holden for a certainty, that they are
sent of God himself to a good end.

And in all these things the force of the divine providence does wonderfully
advance it self, and in the mean time all things far above all that can be
said, are full of comfort and consolation. For they serve to the intent we may
understand, that whatsoever calamities are sent, and how or by what means
soever, and whither of the devil or of men, or of any other creature, yet that
they proceed from the just and good pleasure of God: and that also we should
bear them so much ye more patiently, whilst they are present, by how much we
know a more certain utility to be reaped by them, and further also help and
succor by the selfsame God to be provided for we.

And albeit all these things be plain and manifest enough, especially for
because many particulars from whence these do flow, have of us been declared
already: yet to the intent a more plentiful furniture of co^solatiens may he
had in a readiness, and may the more deepelye he imprinted in the minds of all,
we will approve and confirm the same by certain places of Scripture, which
that it will be good for us to call to remembrance, as often as aduerfities shall
lie heavy upon us, the very use and expertence of things, I am sure, will
declare.

As touching the two former reasons, whereby it was said, that nothing is done
by Fate, Fortune, Chance, or Contingence: likewise, that the prouidenee of God
is particular, and occupied in every thing: it is not needful that we repeat
the arguments already producod and alleged. It shall suffize us to show in
general, that the evils (which in our judgment I mean are thought to be
such) are in the scriptores attributed to God, and that it comes to pass^ by
his wise and good ordinance, that we are oftimes afflicted with calamities.
For thus we find it in Esaias chap. 45. I am the Lord, and there is none other: I
form the light and criatedarknes: I make peace and create evil: I the Lord
do all these things. And Icremy. 21. I have set my face against this Cittle,
for will and not for good, says the Lord: it shall be given into the hand of
the King of Babel, and he shall burn it with fire. The like we have Iorom. 39.
And the same prophet in his Lamentations chap. 3. Who is he the that says, and
it comes to pass, and the Lord commands it not? Therefore out of the
mouth of the most high proceeds there not evil and good? Amos. 3. Shall there
be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it? Job. 2. Shali we receive
good at the hand of God, and not receive evil? And a little before^ The Lord
^ath given, and the Lord has taken away: blessed be the name of the Lord.

Further that the Lord does use one while the devil, an other while man,
another while other creatures, in bringing calamities upon mankind, as his
instruements, he shall easily perceive, that has but meanly tasted the holy
scriptures. Concerning ye devil it is manifest out of the notorious hestorie of
Ioh: as chap. ^. where the Lord says unto the Devil: Lo, all that he has is
in thy power, only upon himself shall thou not stretch out thine hand. And
chap. 2. Satan departed from the presence of the Lord, and smot Job with sore
boyles, from the foale of his foot to the crown of his head. Judge. 2. God
sent an evil spirit (undoubtedly the devil the disturber of peace) between
Abimeloch and between the men of Sichem, and the men of Sichem despised
Abimelech. 1. Samuel. 16. an evil spirit sent of the Lord vered Saul. 1.
King. 22. The Lord said, Who shall intise Achab, that he may go up and fall at
Ramoth Gilead? Then when a certain spirit had offered himself, saying, that
he would be a lying spirit in the mount of his prophets, he hears of the
Lord: Thou shall entise him, and shall also prevail: go forth, and do so.
And it is added: Now therefore behold, the Lord has put a lying spirit in the
mouth of all these thy prophets, and the Lord has appointed evil against thee.
Neither does God use only evil Angels to inflict punishments upon men, but
also good and elect: s^ing^al indifferently are ministering spirts orde^^ed to
execute his divine commandments. So Exodus 12. that night wherein the (...) tes
(...) eat the Passover, by the good Ang^^ of the Lord were slain the first
begotten of the Egiptians. 2. Sam. 14. by the Angel of the Lord having a naked
sword were destroyed certain thousands of men, after that David had sinned in
cemmaunding ye peoble to be numbered. 2. King. 19. one Angel in yt boast of
Sennachar^^ slew a hundred four score and five thousand men Act. 12. of the
Angel of ye Lord wicked Horod was suddenly stricken.

Now that the Lord uses in like manner the service and ministry of men, it is
not obscure. In the prophets the Babilonians, Assirians, and others are
oftetimes described and expresselye called the instruments, by the which the
Lord will punish his disobedient people. Esa. 10. Assure in called the rod of
Gods wrath, and staff of his displeasure. And it is added: I will send him to
a dissembling nation, and I will give him a charge against the people of my
wrath, to take the spoil, and to catch the pray, and to tread them under
feet like the mire in the street. But he thinks not so, neither does his
heart esteem i^ for but he imagines to destroy and cut of not ^^^ewe nations.
In which place that is worth our marking by the way, namelye where it is
expresselye signified, that the Lord sends evils to one end, and men infer
them to an other end: and that he forsooth in the same woork exercises the
office of justice, and these of wrath, pride, inordinate lust, and thereby it
comes to pass, that unto these sin is imputed, and unto him redoudeth no
small praise and commendation.

Again Esaias. 13. They come from a far country, from the end of the heaven:
even the Lord comes with the weapons of his wrath, to destroy the whole land.
Lo the Lord and his weapons, that is to say, the instruments of his wrath. Also
in the same place: Behold I will stir up the Medes against them, which shall
not regard silver, nor be desirous of gold, etc. Ierem. 22. God says that he
prepares destroyers: And I will prepare destroyers against thee, every one with
his weapons, and they shall cut down thy chief Cedar trees, and cast the^ in
the fire. And many nations shall pass by this City, and they shall say every
one to his neighbor: Wherefore has the Lord done thus to this great city? We
have the like almost Ierem. 25. But in Ierem. 27, the Lord calls the tirant
Nabuchadnezer his servant: Wherefore now I have given all these lands into the
hand of Nabuchadnezar King of Babel, my servant, etc. and all nations shall
serve him, and his son, and his sons son, until the very time of his
land come also, etc. Ezechiell. 17. He calls the Babilomans his net and
dragge. I will spread says he, my net upon him, and he shall be taken in my
dragge or great net, and I will bring him to Babel, and will enter into
judgment with him there for his trespass, etc. To the like effect there is more
chap. 26. And oftentunes shall we meet with such things in the prophets, so yt
it is not needful to repeat any more. But as we have said of Angels, so is it
requisite also that we understand it of men, namely that not only evil men,
but good also are the instruments of the Lord woorking whatsoever it pleseth
him. For so has the Lord very often by good and holy Judges, Kings, and other
subdued wicked people and kingdoms, yea and sometimes utterly overthrow them.

Of Angels and men we have spoken: it remains that we add some things
touching other cretures. By she, and that falling down from heaven from the
Lord, as the Scripture speaks, five Cities were consumed, Genes. 19 Afire by
the will of the Lord running along the face of the earch desiroyed sourteene
thousand and seven hundred seditious persons: Numb. 16. and not much before
that time the sons of Aaron, Nadab and Abihu: Leuit 10. Two Captains either
of them with fiftye Soldiers being sent by King Ahaziah to Elias the prophet
were devoured with fire: 2, King. 1.

The waters of Egypt were turned into blood, and so became unfit to be drunk,
and pernicious to fishes: Exodus 7. A little after the waves of the red Sea
swallowed up an innumerable multitude, and even King Pharaoh himself with all
his host: Exodus 14. The garth opening devoured Korah, Dathan and Abiram with
their confederates, and their whole families: Numb. 16. The same now and then
denies the fruits groodilye gaped for, the Lord procuring the causes of
barrennes either open or secret: as in the days of Achab he restreyned the
firmament and clouds, that they should not rain upon the earth: King. 7.

The air oftetimes by the Lords commandment is infected, and becomes
hurtful not only to the fowls and brute beasts drawing it in, but also to
men provoking pestilent and deadlye diseases in them: as 1. Chron, 21* We read
that the Lord sent a plague among the Israelites, and that there died of the^
seauentie thousand men. And in the prophets we hear often of the wicked and
ungodly, how some were smitten with the pestilence, and othersome threatened to
be smitten. The hail, the rain, engendered in the air, do procure dearth and
scarsitie of vittayl, when and as often as the Lord will have it so. Exodus 9.

Next by brute beasts what great hurtes and dangers are we subject unto? By
Frogs, Flies, Lice, and Locustes all Egypt was miserably vexed: Exodus 8 9.10.
Many of the murmuring Israelites were ^lung of Sarpents and died: Numb. 21. Two
Bears stirred up by the Lord tare in pieces two and forty Children for
mocking and railing upon Elisha. 2. King. 2. Certain people of the Babilonians
being sent by King Salmanazar to inhabit in Samaria were destroyed by Lions
sent of God: 2. King. 17. And the man of God sent to Jeroboam, is said to be
delivered of the Lord to the Lion that slew him: 1. King. 13.

And what should I stand to rehearse any more? By diverse and sundry means
dangers do ensue: but we must confess them all to be sent by the Lord
himself, who does use the creatures that he has made freelye and to what
purposes it pleases him as instruments prepared to every work and business
whatsoever. Neither in very deed are all the creatures to be accounted any other
then the tools and weapons of the chief woorkmaister God, and second causes.
And God doubtless, as he is almighty and the woorker of all in all, can out of
those things, which are reputed of themselves to be good, and so are indeed,
when be seeeth cause raise up discommodities unto us: and again on the other
side, cause the things that are evil, and which we fly and abhor, to turn
to our no small profit and commodity. It appears therefore by these things,
that even all distresses and adversities are sent of God himself.

Wherefore seeing it is in no wise lawful to resist his will, and that we are
to take in good part, whatsoever he ordeineth by his providence: we ought from
hence to draw some portion of comfort, in that we know assuredly that all
perils and dangers come from God* And so much to the two former reasons, whereby
we have proved that crosses and calamittes are sent of God.

As touching the third reason, consider the sayings of the holy fathers, weigh
the examples which propound unto us any that have been afflicted, whither of
the godly or ungodly, and undoubtedly thou shall find, that there by does
redound unto God the praise either of wisdom or justice, or rather of both of
them together. Touching the wisdom of God appeering in our adversities, it is
notably said of Esaias. chap. 31. Woe unto them that go down unto Aegipt for
help, and stay upon horses, and trust in Chariots because they are many and
in horsemen, because they be very strong: but they look not to the holy one of
Israel, nor seek unto the Lord. But he yet is wisest: therefore he will bring
evil, and not turn back his word: but he will rise against the house of the
wicked, and against the help of the^ that woork vanity. Where the prophet
reproves those that were overmuch given and addicted to humane or carnal
wisoome, and admonishes them to look rather into Gods wisdom, who does
nothing without certain advise, and with like wisdom both sends and
remoneth adversities. For before the Lord does afflict any man with
calamities, he resolves with himself, what great good will grow of it either
to him that suffers, or unto others, and likewise how and when it is
expedient to deliver the afflicted, to the great admiration of all men. Job.
11. Oh that God would speak, and open his lips against thee* that he might
show thee the secrets of wisdom, how thou have deserved double according to
right: know therefore that God has forgotten thee for thine iniquity. Can
thou by searching find out the secrets of God? or can thou find out the
Almighty according to his perfection? They are the words of Zophar the
Namathite, signifying that when God most wisely orders all things, yea even
in sending of crosses also, yet we cannot attain the causes of his counsel.
Psalm. 147, Great is our Lord, and great is his power, and his wisdom is
infinite. The Lord releeueth the meek, and abaseth the wicked to the ground.
Behold the wisdom of God in debasing and punishing the ungodly. Ecclesiast.
chap. 8. the wise man does greatly wonder at the wisdom of God in beholding
the things that are done upon earth, as touching the sundry events and
success of men. But we shall better and more clearly behold in some one
example the order of the divine wisdom. Doubtless the history of the
destruction of Egypt does many ways declare the force and power of Gods
wisdom. God would not at the first destroy them immediatlye after the contempt
of his word, which yet he justly might have done: but it pleased him first to
try them diverse and sundry ways, whither by scourges they might be softened
and brought to the acknowledgement of his will: insomuch that as often as new
signs were sent against the Egiptians, so often the Lord declared, that he
earnestly sought their repentance and salvation. But in the mean while where
in the midst of the universal ruins of all Egypt, the land of Goshen, which
the Israelites did possess, remained safe and sound, that verily auayled not a
little to move as well the Egiptians as the Israelites: those I say, that they
might acknowledge the will of God, and submit themselves unto it: and these,
that they might wait with an unremovable faith and patience for a wonderful
deliverance at Gods hand. And therefore also would the Lord have Pharaoh to
persist and continue so long in stubbernes and unbelief, that he might so much
the more iustlye afterward destroy both him and all his. And in all these
things the wisdom of God does wonderfully bewray it self. To say nothing
that these things were thus ordained of the Lord, to the end posteritic might
have profitable examples both of the punishment of incredulity and rebellion,
and of the commendation of faith and obedience. It would be ouerlong to make
mention of all other things, that do extol the divine wisdom of God in that
history. And who is he that knows for a suretye the Lords purposes and
determinations? Who is able to say, why or wherefore, when he could many other
ways have delivered his people, yet he would this way especially bring it to
pass? Certain it is in the mean season, that nothing was done in all this
basines without great and just causes, but the nature of Gods wisdom will more
fullye open and displaye it self, whilst other causes of afflictions also are
seen into, and especially the commodities, whereof we will speak anon. And as
we (by the way) in this one example do propound these works of Gods wisdom
to be observed, so will it be an easy matter for eueryman to find out the
like in other examples Wherefore it is manifest heerby, that the wisdom of God
shines most cleerelye in our afflictions and dangers, and therefore that the
calamities also which are laid upon us, are rightly to be ascribed only and
alone to God And from hence great comfort est sons ^riseth. for we ought to be
persuaded, that nothing can ever come ill to pass, or at least wise be void
of fruit; that God by his incomparable wisdom has ordeind to be done in and
about our matters and affairs. And thus verily ought every one, as of^^ as
sickness, trouble, captivity, or any other calamity, either public or private,
does come upon us, to say with himself: The Lord has sont this misery: But
because he is wise, and even wisdom it self, he does it not without great
and weighty causes: doubtless his rod and staff will fall out to be a comfort
unto us, and there will follow some f^^ite of hurtes, if not straight ways or
in this life, yet after a while and in the life to come. Now that the justice
of God is declared in our miseries, it is better known then yt it needs to be
proved any whit at large. Gods justice is every where commended in the holy
Scriptures, and it is set before us to be considered all our life long.
Hitherto belong all the places that make mention of the fear of God. For
therefore is God to be teared, because that according to his justice he severely
punishes transgressors.

Likewise all the places wherein the Lord is described to exercise judgment and
justice on the earth. Add also all the threatninges which are most plentifully
extant in the law and the prophets against the transgressors of the Divine
precepts. Yea and so farrefoorth is this knowledge of Gods justice necessary,
that unless the same be diligently taught, men cannot, such is their
pronenesse and headstrong boldness to sin, be kept and retained within the
compass of their duties. Nay without this knowledge God should not be known
to be God, neither would any man stand in awe of his divine maiestic. For this
is the first honor and dignity of the hiest and eternal God, and his choose
and principal office, which also al men do in the first place consider and
call to mind, namely that he recompenceth good things to the good, and evil
things to the bad: which is in very deed the true property of justice. And
that this is so, not only the promises and curses set forth in the holy
Scriptures by the commandment of God do abundantly teach, but also that
common knowledge engraued in the minds of all the Gentiles touching the
rewards of the good and punishments of the wicked.

But now if any man will say, that it is true indeed, that Gods justice does
notablye appear in this, that the wicked are punished for their sins: but
yet that it seems in no wise that God deals justly then, when he suffers
the godly also to be oppressed with common calamities, whom he ought with
good right (to man's judgment) to keep in safitie under his protection by
reason of the prerogative of their election and excellent holiness: this carnal
and trifeling objection shall easily and with small adoo be answered.

First, this word Justice comes to be considered, not altogether alike in
God, as it is in men, that namely God should then only be acknowledged to be
just, when after ye rule of man's judgment, and according to ye rigor of the
law (as they call it) he requires like for like (for otherwise ye praise of
justice should never properly belong unto God, since he never in such wise
either gives rewards or inflicteth punishments, but that in these he
recompenceth beneath measure and desert, and in those above measure and desert)
but God does justly, as often as he performs that, wherein his wisdom,
goodness and power do appear: inasmuch as there is no man but understands yt
it is most just, that these virtues (if at least it be lawful so to call them)
should at all times be made known and set forth. But certes in the
afflictions of the godly the wisdom, goodness and power of God do wunderfully
declare and show forth them selves: wherefore there is no cause why we should
think that the godly are unjustly punished. Neither verily can wisdom or
goodness as they are discearned in God, be separated from justice, for they
stick fast together and help one an other, and can never be severed in time
or duties. For why? God does at all times work wisely, mightily, well and
justly: and whatsoever is done wisly, mightily or well, the same also must be
done tustly: and so on the contrary.

Secondly, how can thou say that the god ^y are wrongfully punished, when
there is no man endued with such a singular sanctimonie, but that, if we
believe the Scripture (as dout less we must believe it) he does not only
fall once but also seven nay infinite times in a day, yea and now and then also
he commits most grievous enormities at least wise in mind and will (which
only and alone makes men guilty before God, and is reputed and taken for the
deed done) further there is no sin so light and worthy of pardon to man's
thinking, which yet were not to be recompensed with most horrible and eternal
pains, if so be God would straightly examine every thing, and sist it after
the rule of his most severe judgment: For we are all by nature the children of
wrath: Ephesians. 2. All have sinned and are destitute of the glory of God: Romans 3.
And Psalm. 130. If thou Lord wilt mark our iniquities, who shall be able to
stand? Howsoever therefore it falls out unto those that are accounted in the
number of the godly, it behooves them certes to be persuaded, yea even whilst
they are distressed with strange and innumerable perplexities, that they are
yet louinglye and fauourablye dealt withal. The Lord even the^ when he strikes
is pitiful and forgets not his mercy.

Thirdly: If in case thou have experience daily of the Lords liberality, why
should thou not sometimes also feel his rod? This thing no man will judge
to be unequal, which at least would not incur the reproache of ingratitude,
or take upon him to control Gods justice. So Job willingly confessed, that he
was justly afflicted with mi^^^es and stricken of the Lord, who before had had
the use of most large and ample benefits. Shall we receiu^ good at the hand of
God, says he, and not receive evil?

Fourthly: What shall we say to this? that it is meet and convenient that
parents should sometimes correct their Sons, whom they would have to become
good men. And except they do this, they shall be thought to have small care or
regard of their childrens welfare. After the same manner God also, the common
Father of us all, does most iustlye, in that he ever and anon somewhat
seuerelye chastises the godly, whom he accounts undoubtedly as his own
Children, least they should by overmuch cockering become careless and secure,
and being corrupted through long prosperity fall to sinning, with the wicked,
who have all things for the most part according to their desire. Hitherto
belong that saying of the wise man Pro. 3. Whom the Lord loves, him he
chasteneth. Apoca. 3. Whomsoever I love, I rebuke and chasten.

Fifthly: Why should thou think much to be afflicted here for a while, if
after thou be gone from hence, thou know assuredly that eternal life is
prepared for thee, and that thou shall be blessed with joys everlasting? Nay
it is just and to be wished, that thou should suffer here and be molested,
that thou might hereafter enjoy perpetual rest and felicity. For why it
cannot be, that all things should fall out alike, after thy desire both here
and there. For God has so ordained. 2. These. 1. It is a righteous thing with
God to render unto you that are troubled rest with us, when the Lord Jesus
shall show him felfe from heaven. And Luke 16. Abraham says to the rich man:
Son, remember that thou in thy life time receiuedst thy pleasures, and
likewise Lazarus pains: but now is he comforted, and thou art tormented, etc.
1. Corinthians. 11. When we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, because we
should not de condemned with the world.

Seeing therefore the afflictions that are sent, do commend Gods justice unto
us, we are to be persuaded that they come not from God without cause. And
hereby shall all adversities become the more easy to be borne, in that we
understand them to be justly laid upon us, and that none so grievous can
befall us, but that we have deserved far more grievous, if so be God should
weigh the greatness of our sins according to his justice.

Touching the fourth reason to speak in few words, namely that God by the
calamities which he sends unto men, takes occasion to illustrate and set
forth his own power and glory, that becomes manifest by the words of the
Lord. Exodus 9. where a reason is rendered, why Pharaoh was so exceedinglye
hardened, and so oftentimes most greeuouslye scourged with his people the
Egiptians, for so says the Lord by Moses unto Pharaoh: Let my people go, that
they may serve me. Otherwise I will at this time send all my plagues upon thine
heart, and upon thy servants, and upon thy people, that thou may know that
there is none like me in all the earth. And a little after: And in deed for
this cause have I appointed thee, to show my power in thee, and to declare my
name in all the world. Which words we see to be repeated. Romans 9. But will thou have me tell thee more plainly, how the glory of the Lord was advanced
by the afflictions of the Egiptians? Then consider with thy self, whither this
thing does not make greatly to the celebrating of the name and power of the
Lord, that he shook so mighty a people, so quicklye, and by strange means
that were never heard the like, and at the length together with their King and
his whole armies utterly destroyed them almost in a moment: Who would not here
honor and reverence the wonderful power of God, and acknowledge him to be the
only God almightye reigning in heaven and in earth? But much more on the other
side does the power of God show forth it self in that so sudden and
unlooked for deliverance of the people of Israel, which were so greatly
dejected and cast down: by reason whereof the Lord also would afterward
always challenge to him self most sovereign praise, repeating this oftetimes
to Moses and other of the Fathers: I am the Lord, which have brought you out of
the land of Egypt. In like manner, if now also the Lord does one while erect,
and an other while deiect Kings and Kingdoms: or if so be he draws thee at
the last, who art in respect of thy body in very good health, and increased
with large possessions and honors, into sickness, or spoyleth thee of thy goods
and dignity thou ought to judge, that all this is done to this end and
purpose, that the Lord has appointed in thee to set forth to the world his
power to be seen, which again he will make to appear more glorious, when al
things being now past hope of recovery, and all do utterly despair of any
help, he shall restore thee again to thy former health, riches and dignity,
to the incredible admiration of all men. So in Job, so in many others would the
Lord have his power to be seen, and daily still does he procure the like
examples to be set before our eyes, that it might always be found true which
the blessed Virgin sang: The Lord has showed strength with his arm, he has
scattered the proud in the imagination of their hearts. He has put down the
mighty from their seat, and has exalted the humble and meek. He has filled
the hungrye with good things, and the rich he has sent empty away. Hitherto
must it be referred, that holy men being plondged in perilles and dangers have
been wont to pray unto God, that he would deliver them for his holy names
sake: that is to say, that his glory and power might by their maruailous
deliverance be advanced, and celebrated of all people.

Now the fifth reason stretches most largelye of all other. The Holy ghost
does every where in the sacred Scriptures signify and declare the great and
manifold vtilities which come by adversity, which also the godly do with
deep and advised consideration mark and observe, and cheefely they hold a true
and right opinion of Gods providence. It is not (I grant) every man's case to
perceive and see by and by, how and after what sort crosses and calamities are
sent for our good: but it behooves us to be enlightened in the spirit of our
mind, and the clouds of carnal cogitations to be scattered and driven away,
before we can understand and know the spiritual commodities that are settled
in our miseries. For why: flesh and blood or our reason cannot otherwise judge,
the^ that afflictions are signs of Gods wrath, and that God when he strikes
seeks our destruction and confusion. Whereupon the wicked can very hardly in
this behalf receive any comfort, as the which, when they perceive nothing but
the anger and displeasure of God, do rather curse and detest God as a cruel
and inflexible judge, then humble themselves under his mighty hand in
acknowledging their sins. Whereby it comes to pass that at length falling
into despair, whilst they continually toss to and fro in their mind the
signs of their inevitable condemnation, they do nothing else being drowned in
the depthe of all evils, then perpetually heap one mischeef upon an other. We
therefore will gather the commodities of afflictions out of the Scriptures, not
all verily, but so many as we commonly meet withal, and are most apparent,
and which even the ungodly for the most part, if they were touched with any
care of their own salvation, and not utterly blinded, might be able to perceive.

1 First: It is profitable that men should sometimes be scourged of the Lord, to
the end they might be humbled, and contained in the duties of modesty and
temperance, and in no wise lifted up by the reason of their other commodities,
if they have any. Psalm. 119. It is good for me, that I am brought low, 2. Cor.
1^. And least I should be exalted out of measure through the excellency of
revelations, there was given unto me a prick in the flesh, the messenger of
Satan to buffet me, that I should not be exalted above measure. For this thing
I besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart from me: and he said unto me,
My grace is sufficient for thee.

So also ought thou to judge of thy self. Although thou be rich,
although thou be descended of noble parentage, although thou be learned,
although to be short thou art adorned with many other notable gifts: yet he to
very good purpose applies unto thee some steine of dishonesty, or lays some
loss or damage upon thee, and all because thou should not be extolled
above measure, and despise the rest of thy brethren.

2 By afflictions the Lord proves them that be his, and look whom he finds
valiant and constant, he crowns And to be proved of the Lord is so far off
from being hurtful unto us, that we ought rather to take it as an argument of
his love and good will toward us. Hither to belong these places. Proverb. 17. As
is the fining pot for silver, and the furnace for gold, so the Lord tri^th the
hearts. 1. Pet. 1* Now for a short time ye are in heaviness through manifold
temptations (if need require) that the trial of your faith, being much more
precious then gold that perishes (though it be tried with fire) might be
found unto your praise, and honor and glory, at the appeering of Jesus Christ.
Iam. 1. My brethren, count it exceeding joy, when ye fall into diverse
tentations: knowing this, that the trying of your faith brings forth
patience. And again: Blessed is the man, that endures tentation: for when he
is tried, he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord has promised to
them that love him. Let no man say when he is tempted, that he is tempted of
God: for God cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempts he any man. To wit
unto evil. For the devil and our concupicence do tempt unto evil, and to
the destruction of the soul: but God tempts or tries to salvation. After
which sort he tried Abraham, Genesis 22 and other of the Fathers, Exodus 16. Deuteronomy.
8. Howbeit look whom he tries, to them he gives strength, whereby they may
be able to stand fast and overcome in the midst of their conflictes,
according to that saying. 1. Cor. 10. God is faithful, which will not suffer
you to be tempted above your strength, but will together with the tentation
make a way, whereby ye may be able to bear it.

3 Troubles and adversities do cause thee to set thy mind upon things
profitable, they make thee more wary and wise, they provoke thee to ensearch
and learn those things that are good and wholesome. Esaias. 26. Also we, O Lord,
have waited for thee in the way of thy judgments: the desire of our soul is
to thy name, and to the remembrance of thee. With my soul have I desired thee
in the night: and with my spirit within me, will I seek thee in the morning.
For seeing thy judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world
shall learn righteousness. Psalm. 119. Before I was troubled, I went astray, but
now I have kept thy word. And in the same place: It is good for me, that I
have been in trouble, that I might learn thy statutes.

4. Afflictions bring those that are exercised with them, especially ouerlong,
to the contempt of earthlye things, and kindle the desire of heavenly.
Phillip. 1. As always, so now also Christ shall be magnified in my body, whither
it be by life or by death. For Christ is to me life, and death is to me
advantage. And immediately after: I desired to be losed, and to be with Christ.
2. Cor. 4. For our light affliction which is but for a moment, causes unto us
a far most excellent and an eternal weight of glory: while we look not on the
things that are seen, but on the things which are not seen. For the things
which are seen are temporal: but the things which are not seen, are
eternal. And straightwaies: For therefore we sigh, desiring to be clothed with
our house, which is from heaven. More things are there dispersedlye to this
effect. Some there be also Romans 8. For I count that the afflictions of this
present time are not worthy of the glory, which shall be showed unto us. For the
fervent desire of the creature waits, when the sons of God shall be revealed.
It follows immediately: For we know that every creature groneth with us also,
and trauaileth in pain together unto this present: and not only the creature,
but we also which have the first fruits of the Spirit, even we do sigh in
our selves, waighting for the adoption, even the redemption of our body.

5 By thine afflictions thou have a certain proof, that thou art entirely
beloved of God, and art numbered amongst his dear Children, being graffed into
his house and family. Pro. 3. My Son, refuse not the chastening of the Lord,
neither be grieved with his correction. For whom the Lord loves, him he
corrects, even as the Father does the child in whom he deliteth. Whereunto
as a faithful interpreter the Apostle adds Heb. 12. If ye endure chastening,
God offers him self unto you as unto sons: for what son is it whom the
father chasteneth not? If therefore ye be without correction, whereof all are
partakers, then are ye bastardes and not sons. Seeing then we have had the
fathers of our bodies to correct us, and we gave them reverence: should we not
much rather be in subjection to the Father of spirits, that we might live?
Deuteronomy. 32. The Lord will judge his people. Ezech. 9. The Lord commands the
smiters to begin at his Sanctuary. 1. Pet 4. The time is come, that judgment
most begin at the house of God. And for this cause is the Lord said oftentimes
in the scriptures to visit his people, whilst he strikes them: namely for
that a fatherly chastisement though it be somewhat sharp and severe, is a
token of good will and care for the safetye and welfare of the children.

6 Thou have also this profit and commodity. If thou be afflicted in this
present world, it is a sign, that God will bless thee, and free thee from
all pain in the world to come. Of which matter we have also spoken somewhat
before. To the which may be added that saying of Christ John. 16. Verily,
verily I say unto you, ye shall weep and lament, but the world shall
rejoice. And ye shall sorrow, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy. A little
after: And your joy shall no man take from you, etc.

7 It is good even for this cause sometimes to suffer the cross, that
afterward prosperity may become the more sweet and pleasant, and also that the
mind might be instructed how to behave it self as well in prosperity as
adversity: in the one, that it be not lifted up above measure: and in the
other, that it be not cast down more then is meet. Hitherto belongs that
moderation of the Apostle, whereof he speaks. Philip. 4. I have learned in
what estate soever I am, therewith to be content. I know how to be abased, and
I know how to abound, every where and in all things I am instructed, both to
be full, and to be hungrye, and to abound, and to have want. I am able to do
all things through Christ that strengthens me. Also 2. Corinthians. 4. We are
afflicted on every side, yet are we not in distress: we are in poverty, but
not left destitute: we suffer persecution, but are not forsaken therein: we are
cast down, but we perish not.

8 By afflictions God would have thee to feel in thy self, what the state and
condition of others is that are afflicted, and how and after what sort they
may be affected in their minds: to the intent thou may take occasion thereby
to do good unto them, as time and opportunity shall serve. Whereupon the
Apostle commends the Phillippians, telling them chap. 4. that they had done
well, in that they had communicated to his affliction, and were careful for
him: of whom he had said before: chap. 1. that they suffered for Christ,
having the same sight, which they saw in the Apostle, and even then heard to be
in him. Certes they that felt the like discommodities, were no doubt so much
the readier to put to their helping hand. Neither can he judge what it is to
suffer adversity, who has him self never suffered any.

9 God brings thee by many tribulations to the amendment of thy former life,
for some are found to be of such a nature, that they cannot be reclaimed and
brought to a better course, but by stripes. 1. Pet. 4. For as much as Christ
has suffered for us in the flesh, arm your selves likewise with the same
mind, which is that he which has suffered in the flesh, has ceased from
sin, that he hence forward should live (as much time as remains in the
flesh) not after the lusts of men, but after the will of God. And in the end
of the same chapter: Wherefore let them that suffer according to the will of God
commit their souls to him in well doing, as un to a faithful creator. In the
Prophets we read oftentimes, that the Lord strikes to the end he might heal.
Esaias. 19. The Lord shall smite Egypt he shall smite and heal it: and they shall
return unto the Lord, and he shall be entreated of them, and shall heal the^.
Hos. 6. The Lord spoyleth us, and he will heal us: he wounds us, and he will
bind us up. After two days he will quicken us, and in the third day he will
raise us up, and we shall live in his sight. And we shall have knowledge, and
inde^^er our selves to know the Lord.

10 It is expedient for thee now and then to be scourged, that thou might be
moved to entreat the Lord for his help, to sing praises unto God, and that
thou might be occupied in other such like spiritual exercises, who other
wise, if all things should fall out always according to thy desire, would
scarsely so much as think of calling upon Gods name In the Psalms there are
extant inumerable testimonies: and in the histories we may see every where how
the Israelites, whilst they enjoyed peace and prosperitye, became careless
and negligent: but afterward when they were beset with their enemies round
about, or otherwise greeuouslye scourged of the Lord, they were stirred up to
call upon God for help, to to praise God, etc.

11 God has appointed thee to be vexed with miseries and calamities, to the
end that in thee might shine and appeer patience, long sufferance, experience,
hope, and many other such notable virtues, which for the most part are knit
together, and do mutually follow one another. Romans 5. We rejoice in
tribulations, knowing that tribulation brings forth patience, and patience
experience, and experience hope, and hope makes not ashamed.

12 Add heereunto, that there redoundeth some commodity by thine afflictions
even unto others also, at the least there is derived unto them thereby an
occasion of well doing. In which behalf doubtless the providence of God
deserves no small commendation. God would therefore have thee, to be grieved
with pouertye, sickness, captivity, or any other adversity, to the end that
all thy neighbors and kinsfolks might have matter to exercise the duties of
charity, and to help thee and such as thou art by all the means they can.
Which woork is full of spiritual profit and commodity. And for this cause the
Lord foretold, that we should never want the poor. Hither to tend all the
places touching liberality toward the poor, the sick, the naked, fatherless
children, Widows, Wanderers, and others by what means soever afflicted and
distressed. Which if they were not, there should be taken from them to whom
the Lord has given great wealth and substance, all matter and occasion of well
doing. Therefore even for this cause perhaps would God have thee to be pinched
with adversity, and to stand in need of other folks help.

13 This spiritual fruit also do others reap by thine afflictions, namelye
that so long as they perceuie thee to be humbled by the Lords rod, they
conceive no slender fear of ye Lord in their minds: and this fear brings
forth sptrituall wisdom, whereby they beware by all means possible that they
fall not into sin, and so be cast down into the like dangers. For even
immediately, whosoever sees an other to be any thing sharply afflicted, he is
enforced to conclude with him self, that the like troubles abide for him also:
and that whatsoever befalls unto any one to day, the same is to be feared of
him to morrow. And this doubtless is a singular spiritual benefit. For so
does Christ propound unto others the end of those that were killed with the
fall of ye tower in Siloe, Luke 13. and he threatens that all unless they
repent, shall be be destroyed in like manner. So the Apostle 1. Corinthians. 10.
propounds the example of those that were plagued of God, as namely the
woorshippers of images, committers of fornication with strange women, murmurers
against God, which all he says were severely punished of God for a warning and
admonition unto us. And he adds to very good purpose: Let him that thinks
he stands, take heed least he fall.

14 What if so be God (to conclude) when he sends adversity, when likewise
he gives unto thee being set in the midst of many calamities, strength,
patience, long sufferance, hope, etc. will have thee to be set forth as an
ensample, for others to follow and imitate in their afflictions? For why, by
this means, thy miseries shall not only become very profitable to thee alone,
but also unto others. To this effect we read Iam. 5. Take, my brethren the
Prophets for an ensample of suffering adversity, and of long patience, which
have spoken in the name of the Lord. Behold we count the^ blessed which
endure. Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have known what end the
Lord made. For the Lord is very pitiful and merciful. 1 Thessalonians. 1. And ye
became followers of us and of the Lord, receuing the word with much
affliction, and joy of the Holy Ghost. So that ye were as ensamples to all that
believe in Macedonia and Achaia. Again in the same Epistle chap. 2. Ye,
brethren, age become followers of the Churches of God, which in Judea are in
Christ Jesus, because ye have also suffered the same things of your own
cuntry-men, even as we did of the Jews, etc. Lo the fortitude, patience, long
suffering, and other virtues of the Saints are set before the eyes of the
afflicted to be followed. Thou therefore whosoever thou art, that can judge
rightly of Gods providence, consider with thy self in most earnest wise, what
becomes thee to do in adversity, remembering that God has appointed thee at
this time to be an example of patience and suffering unto others. Neither truly
is it sufficient, that the notable virtues of those that have been famous this
way certain ages past should be laid before the afflicted: but it is very
behouefull also that some liuelye examples of the time present should be set
before their eyes, whose actions being thoroughly marked by our eyesight have
much more force in them, then the shadowing out of other men's deeds by what
speech or eloquence soever. But who is able to comprehend in words all the
commodities, which do grow out of afflictions? As we can by no means search
into the counsel of the Lord, why namely he does every thing after this or
that manner: so neither can the weakness of man's mind attain unto all the
commodity, especially spiritual, that come by crosses and calamities. Every
man may to his power at times convenient by the continual reading of the
Scriptures, and by the sayings and dooinges of the godly, especially when they
are afflicted, gather and note other things, which are agreeable to this
purpose. It suffiseth us to have declared these things, to confirm that which
we purposed, namely that out of calamities great commodities do come unto us,
and therefore that we are not without cause to be resolved, that afflictions are
sent of God himself: which we suppose to avail greatly to the commendation of
the divine providence, and likewise to the matter of comfort and consolation.

But now the matter required, that we should reckon up on a row the sundry
sorts of calamities and afflictions, and gather out of those things that have
hither to been said, comfortes and consolations from the consideration of Gods
providence, by the which we have proved crosses and calamities to be sent to
declare the wisdom and righteousness of God, to illustrate his glory and power,
and for our manifold profit and commodity: but partlye because that were an
infinite lahour, and partlye for that the comfortes which do^ heal any one
affliction, may all fitly he applied likewise against ye other miseries not
greatly unlike, at the least all one in this, that they do exceedingly grieve
and torment men: therefore we will draw the discommodities and principal
perplexities of man's life as it were into certain heads or fountains, and will
also compose certain consolatory reasons, as occasion and opportunity shall
serve. And this thing how may we better or more conveniently accomplish, then
if we follow the way and order of teaching foreshewed by the Holy Ghost him
self? whom whoseuer follows, cannot go astray, and with whom a man in
speaking a few words, is deemed to have uttered many things abundantly. For
where the Holy Ghost speaks, in greatest breuity, is greatest length and
prolixitie: and under the speciallest want of words, lies hid most large
plentye of spiritual doctrine. And this virtue of the Holy Ghost we may
behold as well in many other places, as also in the Psalm 107. wherein there
are breefely indeed, but truly if we look more neerlye into the matter, most
plentifully described certain adversities, into the which wretched men do
fall sometimes by the will of God, and from the which they are again by the will
of the same God wonderfully delivered. And certes it is wholly occupied in the
commendation of Gods providence, so that there could not be found any in all
the books of the Bible more fit and agreeable to our purpose. Wherefore we will
undertake to expound the same now at this present: which if we shall do, not
to so good a purpose as we desire, yet at the least we hope to some fruit and
commodity of the godly. And first forso^the we will premise some things
touching the argument of the Psalm, that all things may become the more clear
and evident.

Who was the author of this Psalm, it appears not, since there is no name
prefixed unto it. Certainlye that it is a work of the Holy Ghost, and put
forth by some notable man of God, it is out of controversy. It might be
reckoned amongst the Psalms of David, as many will have all those that have no
title prefixed unto them to be counted for such, except peradventure it may be
thought to be of the number of them, that were used to be sung after the
return from Babylon: of which sort that some are extant, it is easy to judge.

But neither has this present Psalm any title among the Hebrews, whereby may
be gathered any certainty either touching ye occasion or use of it. Though
indeed the Greek books carry prefixed Alleluia, which word offreth it self often
times in the Hebrew in manner of a title set before, and it shows yt such
Psalms were amongst other chosen out to praise Gods goodness, mercy, power, and
to give him thanks. For the word (...) in Hebrew signifies as much, as when
we say, Praise the Lord. It is compounded of the word (...) which signifies,
to praise, to rejoice, to shine, to illuminate, and of (...) which is one of
the ten notable names of God, and it signifies the Lord, derived, as many will
have it, of (...) or (...), which is to be, applied unto God because he gives
unto all things their being. Augustine reports, that Alleluia is twice
prefixed, and he adds an interpretation, why it is so: but since thou see
that it is not so much as once found in the Hebrew, thou perceiuest that his
labor is in vain, and that Augustine was deceived by some impudent persons,
which durst of their own heads now and then foiste in or pluck out some
things, clean contrary to the truth of the Hebrew, when yet there was no
need, neither was it expedient.

Now what is contained in this Psalm, or how many parts there he of it. It
teaches especially, that in all things that come to pass here bylowe, the
providence and mercy of God do mightily prevail, and therefore that it ought
of all men diligently to be considered, that they might take occasion thereby to
praise God and give him thanks. And to the end he might declare and show, how
and after what sort we ought to observe Gods providence and goodness in all
things, he propounds certain evident examples, to wit how some men are seen
oftentimes by the will of God to be pressed down with most grievous
calamities, and the same again, when they have called upon God for help, to
be mercifully delivered out of their miseries. By means whereof doubtless men
may throughlye he persuaded touching Gods providence and mercy, and ought all
to be moved to praise and magnify God. Full well says Rabbi David Kimhi the
Hebrew that in this Psalm it is taught, that nothing is done among men by
Chance or Fortune, but that the wicked by Gods providence are afflicted for
their sins, and again that the same by Gods mercy are set at liberty, that
so they might necessarily sing praises unto God. But much more clearly will
this whole matter be perceived, if we shall breefelye unfold the number and
order of the parts of the whole Psalm. In the first place is put the
proposition, and even a brief sum of the whole Psalm, wherein he inuiteth
all people to praise God for his singular goodness and mercy. This proposition
is contained in the two first verses. Then follows the confirmation, wherein
he proves, by certain memorable examples, and drawn for the most part out of
the common course of life (for why these are most apt and fit to teach) how the
providence and mercy of God are apparently to be seen in all things. The first
example is touching those that are pressed with poverty, and being driven out
of their native cuntry are enforced to wander, and to suffer bannishment: whom
yet the Lord by his mercy succoureth in providing them a place where they may
rest. This example is accomplished in five verses, whereunto is added a
conclusion hortatorye, consisting of two verses, wherein all men are invited to
sing praises unto God for such a work. The second example is touching them
that for some great offenses or other causes are cast into prison, and yet
nevertheless are by the Lord in his good time set at liberty: handled
likewise in five verses, with a conclusion hortatory also, as before, annexed
in two verses. The third example is of such as for their wicked and ungodly
life are punished of God with sundry diseases laid upon them, but are again
through Gods mercy restored to health. It is comprised in four verses, with a
distichon added in steed of a conclusion hortatory. The fourth example
propounds the dreadful dangers of Sailors and Seafaring men, and how God yet
in the mean time does mercifully save and preserve them. There are of this
eight verses, with a distichon added in steed of a conclusion hortatory. The
fifth proof is va^iable and mixed: for it propounds examples of great
alterations in cuntries, commonweals, noble men and commons, and heerby (for
because some region or cuntrye is made now barren, now fruitful, and again
clean contrary of fruitful barren: likewise some people becomes one while
strong and mighty, and again in the turning of a hand weakened and cast down:
further Princes are even now placed in the highest dignity, and within a while
after are thrown down headlong to the ground: also the commons being before
oppressed are set free) declares that the providence and goodness of God are
highlye to be magnified and extolled. These things are discoursed in ten
verses, without any hortatory conclusion following: and so ends the
confirmation.

Lastly there is one verse added to be taken for a Conclusion of the whole
Psalm, and that so much the more rightly, because that in one word it
repeateth the sum of all that has been said, yea and answers most finely
and sitly to this proposition. By these things every man may easilye judge of
the matter and parts of this Psalm.

If thou would know the kind of the action or cause, then seeing that both
in the beginning and end, and oftetimes also in the mids we perceive open and
manifest exhortations, and that all things tend to this purpose, namely that
men might be stirred up to praise God for his excellent goodness, shining most
clearly in all things, it is a plain caco that this present Psalm
appertains to the kind deliberatiue.

The state or proposition is general: that God is highlye to be praised,
because he is exceedingly good, and makes his goodness to surmount in all
things.

The use of the Psalm is manifold, accordingly as may be observed in it
sundry places fraughted with excellent doctrine: as: 1. That calamities are
sent of God himself: 2. That in sending of plagues to the wicked God shows
his instice: 3, That by afflictions we are stirred up to prayer and invocation,
to faith, hope, etc. 4, That such as call upon God for aid, are not forsaken
of him, but at yt length are helped: 5, That God as he does without difference
correct all sorts of men, whither they be good or bad, so also he helps
them: 6, That the providence of God may apreere on every side wonderful, as
well when we are afflicted, as also when we are delivered from afflictions.
Many other places will we discover in the discourse it self. But to this end
chiefly do all these things tend, yt they minister great store of comfortes
and consolations: which thing was the cause that moved us to take in hand the
interpretation of this Psalm. We will there fore now give the enterprise to
expound it.

1 Confess unto the Lord because he is good, for his mercy endures for ever.

2. Let them speak whom the Lord has redeemed, and delivered from the hand of
the oppressor.

This is the proposition of the whole psalm by way of an exhortation. God,
says he, is good, and his mercy is every where excellent: therefore confess ye
unto him, praise him, give him thanks. And they are the words of the
Holy Ghost speaking by the prophet to every company and assembly of the godly,
whersoeuer and by what occasion soever they shall be gathered together. Whither
it be in ye School or in the Temple that any of the godly meet together in
the name of the Lord, there is the Holy Ghost in the midst of them, and
inkindleth the hearts of every one to praise God. Let us therefore so take these
things, as though the Holy Ghost sounded them in our hearts: and as though we
felt his power secretly woorking in us, let us the more cheerfully sing
praises unto God. Thus then he says: Confess unto the Lord. Amongst the
Hebrews to confess unto the Lord, is to praise, celebrate, and with all
carefulnes to commend the Lord, and to give him thanks for his incomparable
benefits.

Because he is good.) The reason why and wherefore God ought to be praised of
us, and it contains the sum of this whole Psalm. Neither in very deed is
any other thing handled throughout this Psalm, then that it is showed that the
mercy and providence of God may be sensibly seen and perceived in all things.
Further (...) is all one with good, fair, comely: whence also comes the name
(...), signifying many excellent virtues worthy of God. Wherefore the Greck
interpreter translaketh it Krestos that is to say, good, profitable, peaceable,
gentle, tweete: after which sort also Augus^^ reads it Suams Sweere. The
mind therefore hearing that the Lord is good, ought in^n^taflye to conceive
many things of God, which may commend and set forth his dignity, and
especially his notable love toward mankide. And this is it which the Prophet
means, when as not contented to have called God good, he adds also: For his
mercy endures for ever. By this addition, it beseems al men to be the more
inslamed to the praising and landing of God. For if to be we have oftetismes
heretofore had experience of his mercy and goodness, and besides do court
still to feel and taste of them hereafter, then have we great occasion of
praising and maginfying him, especially ^^th we can no other way deserve his
favor, and goodwill, nor do any thing more pleasing and exceptable unto him.
And if incace his mercy shows it self to be seen at all times and in all
ages, then also ought our confession of praise and thanks giving to be heard
at al times and without ceassing. After which manner also Christ taught us to
pray without intermission, and to crave this especially, that the name of his
heavenly might be sanctified.

Let them speak which are redeemed of the Lord, whom he has redeemed from the
hand of the oppressor.) Let the^ speak, to wit, praise or a song of thanks
giving And whereas it is the part of al men and at al tunes to sing praises
unto God and to give him thanks: yet is this duty cheefelye required of them,
that have tasted of his liberality and goodness, and have of him been delivered
from most grievous perilles and dangers.

All sorts of men do indeed feel daily and continually Gods goodness and
bountifulnes even in this yt they live, inasmuch as it is of God that we have
our being, live and move, as he says Act. 17. likewise that they do daily
and continually behold his Sun shining: that they recetue from him the rain
in due season, and the fruits of the earth wherewith they are sustained. But
these things inasmuch as they are usual and ordinary, are in such wise
accounted off, as though the hand of God were not greatly occupied in them, at
the least as though there were not herein so plain a proof and demonstration
of Gods goodness. But we deem them most cheefely to seele in themselves Gods
bountye and liberality, which are fore vexed with diverse temptations and
dangers, and afterward notwithstanding wonderfully delivered. For why when we
are in dangers we call upon the Lord for help: and we can then at the length
judge what it is, to be either helped of God or forsaken of God, when our
hearts have sometimes been smitten with the smart of trials and afflictions.
And as no man knows how profitable a thing physic is, but he that has
sometimes been sick, and has been eased by it: nor of what valewe faithful
friends are, but he that has been brought to extreme need, and tasted of
their help: so none can sufficiently comprehend, how great the goodness of God
is, but such as have been tried, and delivered by God out of the dangers of
temptations. Wherefore to those especially does this Psalm belong, that have
been in ieopardy through sundry trialles, and they can indeed judge rightlye
touching the use thereof. We are wont to call upon God: and after that we have
obtained his help, it behoneth us to praise God, and to give him thanks For
this cause therefore he says: Let the^ speak which are redeemed of the Lord.
The word Redeemed, notes, that they were whollye come into the Lords hand and
power by reason of the greatness of benefits received, no otherwise then bought
servants: and so all such are admonished, that they are debtors un to God,
neither can they pretend any excuse, why they should not sing praises to God:
nay unless they do it, they shall incur the blame of most shameful
ingratitude. They that before were in the hand and power of the oppressor or of
affliction, are now by the Lord delivered, and they ought to be humbled under
his mighty hand, and to give him thanks, yea and to dedicate them selves wholye
to God their deliverer. All things therefore are trimly disposed in this
beginning and proposition of the Plasme, and we may gather from thence no
single or slender doctrine.

3 And gathered them out of the lands, from the East and from the West, from
the North and from the South.

4. They wandered in the wilderness out of the way, and found no city to dwell
in.

5 Hungrye [they were] and thirslye, their soul fainted in them.

6 So they cried unto the Lord in their trouble, and he delivered them from
their distress.

7 And led them forth by the right way, that they might go to a city of
habitation.

Now after the proposition follows a plentiful confirmation, as in the which
it is proved by many plain and pithy reasons, that God does liberally show
his goodness in mortal men's matters, and most wiselye govern all things by
his wonderful providence, and therefore most worthy to be exceedingly praised
and magnified of al men. This is the first reason proving Gods goodness to shine
cleerelye in all things, taken from an example, as also all the rest are in a
manner that follow. And certes it is drawn from yt example of a thing boon
not only once and about one person only, but often times and in many persons
vsuallye seen: so that thou may rightly say, that all these proofs are
drawn out of the common course of life and from the use and experience of
things daily happening. Which kind of proofs doubtless are most fit to move
affections withal, and besides they make that to appear most plain which is
intended. And it is to be thought, that no man, whatsoever he be, can possibly
read this Psalm, but that he shall sinde some thing touching himself, and
whereby he may gather, that he also has been partaker of the bottomless
goodness of God in some one necessity or other. Neither truly is it an easy
matter to find such a one, as has not felt in himself, some part of the
miseries which are here mentioned: and that, whilst he is delivered from
them, ought not to ascribe his preservation only and alone to God. Yea and
there can no discommoditie or danger almost arise, which is not comprehended
under some one or other of the things that are here described, at the
leastwise it will be like it or not much unlike: wherefore also whosoever is
distressed with any adversities, shall here have some remedy of comfort, and
shall find matter of hope for the recovering of his safety.

This is also further to be marked, that every of the proofs are so disposed,
that they may fitly be divided into two parts: whereof in the former are
described the perilles which happen unto men, in the latter is declared how
they are by the mercy of God delivered from the same: again in the former
part the perils are very exquisitly and almost after a poetical manner
expressed by increasments, amplifications, and representings of things: and in
the latter part the deliverance being sodainlye and without any adoo obtained
is laid soot the more breefely, yet having now and then those things
interlaced which do not a little beautify and illustrate the matter. And so
are all things ordered, that a man aduisedlye marking them may out of every
member in a manner gather variable and most wholesome doctrine.

This first proof therefore is drawn from the example of those that for any
cause whatsoever being driven from their dwelling places are constrained to
wander up and down, and to seek a place else where wherein they may rest. And
very properly is the ieopardy of these men described by their journey in the
desert, then the which doubtless a greater could not be devised. For why? a man
would hardly believe (except he be one that has had trial of it) how greatly
they are grieved that wander in the wilderness, where there appears no humane
help or succor, and nothing to be looked for but death and destruction. And
therefore it is to be thought that certain of the Greeks were moved to make a
law touching a penalty of death to be laid upon him that would not she we
the way to one that went astraye, because they saw undoubtedly how sore they
were tormented that wandered out of the way. And oftetimes into these dangers
do men fall in Palestina and the cuntries next adjoining, in as much as all
Asia for the most part has many deserts and obscure places, as the holy
Scripture and books of the Geographers do testify.

Their soul fainted (or failed) in them.) Here thou see the manner of an
enlargment gallantly observed. First even to straye out of the way, is full of
wearisomnesse, though it be in a Cuntry well known. Then to go still forth on,
and not to find a place where to rest, is much more greetious. After ward also
to be pinched with hunger and thirst, who sees it not to be the extremity of
all miseries, and that now nothing remains but cruel and woeful death: And
this is it which he adds: Their soul fainted in them. We have a certain
resemblance of these calamities pictured in Abraham's bondmaide Agar, Genes. 16.
in the people brought out of Egypt through the wilderness, where they murmured
for meat and drink, Exodus 16. and 17. in David flying from Saul, Sam. 23. and
25. again 2. Sam. 15.16, when he fled by reason of the tumult raised by
Absolon: likewise in Elias flying for the threats of Iezabell, 1. King. chap.
19. which all in their flight through desert places were almost dead for
hringer and thrist.

But it is not without cause that the Holyghost does so lively painte out
these perilles. For we ought thereby to gather some instruction.

First therefore it is done to this end and purpose, that we might learn how
to behaus our selves toward those that are in misery, and to pity them whom
we see to suffer bannishment to wander through unknown cuntries, and to have
no friends to succor them.

Secondly, that we might so much the more exactly weigh and consider the power
and goodness of God in the preservation of them that are delivered by him out of
so great distresses. How much greater the dangers are, so much more fully does
Good mercy thew it self in deliverance from them.

And they cried unto the Lord) The second part of the proose touching their
deliverance. And this verse is put between in manner of a parenthesis, as that
which is oftetimes repeated, almostin every of the proofs following. So is
this in Virgal: Begin my pipe with me to sound Menalian verses. And this: Lead
Daphnis from the city home, my verses, lead him home.

And we learn out of this verse: 1, That afflictions sent of God do stir us
up to invocation and prayer unto God. Concerning which profit of adversities we
have spoken before. 2. That God willingly hears those that pray in their
afflictions, and grants their tequests. Hitherto belong all the promises of
God every where extant: like wise the exhortations unto prayer: also the
ex^imples of such as, whilst they have prayed, have been made pertakers of
their desires.

And he led them forth.) Then is it the Lord him self that leads them. The
thing then is not done by chance or fortune, neither is it by haphazard that
a man strayeth or returns into the right way: but all things come to pass
by the only will and dispensation of the Lord. That thou go out of the
way, that thou art in hazard and danger, it is the will of the Lord. He would
be entreated of thee, and seeks occasion to deserve well at thine hand, yea
and to show his goodness and mercy toward thee. Therefore all these things
fall out for the best unto thee, and for thy comfort, neither ought any
distrustfulnes at all to come into thy mind.

8 Let them therefore confess before the Lord his loving kindenes, and his
wonderful woorks before the sons of men.

9 For he satisfied the thirsty soul, and filled the hungry with goodness.

This is the conclusion of the first proof, wherein he exhorts all people,
to sing praises unto God for such and so great goodness of his, showed and
exhibited unto men endangered after that manner. And here also the former
verse is interlaced or put between. And the other verse expressly sets
down ye cause flowing from the premises, whilst namelye it opposes the
benefits received, as saciety and refreshing, to the miseries endured before
in the desert.

And we learn from this place: 1, That our safety and preservation ought to
be ascribed only and alone to God, not to our own wisdom or to any man's
help. 2, That being delivered from dangers, or any other way whatsoever helped
of God, we ought to give him thanks. 3, That we must so much yt rather do it,
least if we remain unthankful, we should by the just vengeance of God be
plonged again into the like perrills. 4, That when and howsoever our estate be
bettered, yet must we still bear in mind the distresses that before were upon
us, and they ought always after to be feared of us. Which consideration is
very profitable to the moderation of our minds, that we use to carry our
selves in an even course as well in prosperity as adversity.
For this is in deed perfect wisdom: for a man so to be have himself in
adversity, as he may hope for better things: and again so in prosperity, as he
may fear the contrary. Further since the Holy ghost has not expressed any
certain cause of their flight and wanderings through desert places, neither
has treated specially and by name either of the godly or ungodly: it is a
token and argument, that this proof belongs indifferently to all, men as well
good as bad, which for any kind of cause are compelled to provide for the^
selves b^ flying, and to taste of the perrills of perignination. Some are
forced to fly away and to wander abroad for the trueltie of their adversaries
which seek to hurt them: as Jacob did for Esau, David for Saul. Othersome for
the defense of righteousness. and the study of restoring true religion: as
Elias, and at this day many godly persons are constrained to fly out of diverse
tuntries. Some for common famishment and scarsitis of vitaile: as Abraham
Jacob, Elisha. Some for their sins God being angry, are forced to feel the
miseries of rouinges and wanderings: as Cain. Some for refusing to obe^^ Gods
will, and to execute their function and calling: as Jonas. Some for this cause,
that some man has threatened to spoil or kill them: for which cause Paul
escaped from Damascus through a wall, and Christ taught his Disciples, that
when they were in danger for the confession of the truth, they should seek to
save themselves by flight. Some for the tumultes and vprores of wars: as the
Jews did oftetimes, but especially in the tune of the captivity of Babylon,
and in the auerthrowe of Jerusalem under Titus the Roman. Some for the
inundations and eruptions of the Sea. Some for fire and burning. Some for the
spoiling of their goods, or for the loss of them by what means soever either
honest or dishonest: as they that being over head and ears in debt do betake
themselves to their legs and run away. Some for great offenses committed
are bannished by the magistrate. And who is able to reckon us all such causes
as these: Notwithstanding all these and such like dangers may well be reduced
to this present place, and whosoever are afflicted any of these ways, may
fetch from hence some solace and comfort. Only let them call upon the Lords
name by faith, and patiently wait for his help, and they shall vn^oubtedly at
the length feel some succor from God: yea and he that is described here to
have brought the wanderers into the right way, and to have given them a city
where they might rest, even he also will provide a place for these wherein they
may safely live.

10 They that sit in darkness and in the shadow of death, being fast bound in
misery and iron.

11 Because they rebelled against the words of the Lord, and abhorred the
counsel of the most High.

12 He also handled their heart through heaviness, they stumbled and fell and
there was none to help them up.

13 So when they cried unto the Lord in their trouble, he delivered them out of
their distress.

14 For he brought them out of darkness, and out of the shadow of death, and
brake their bonds in sunder.

They that expound this Psalm as a prophecy touching ye mercy that is offted
through Christ, and touching the redemption of the afflicted made by Christ in
the time of the Gospel manifested to the world, do so expound this part, as
that they say that God is therefore to be extolled and praised, because he has
delivered men out of the prison and captinitie of sin, death and the devil.
For why, under these tiranes d^o^e all men held captive, as appears Romans 7.
^^ce an other law in my members rebelling against the law of my mind, and
leading me captive unto the Law of sin, which is in my members, etc. And Romans
6. they are called the servants of sin. And Zacharias Luke 1. Through the
tender mercy of our God, whereby the day spring from an high has visited us:
to give light to them that sat in darkness, and in the shadow of death, and to
guide our feet into the way of peace. And therefore came this captinitie upon
them, because they were all rebels against the word of the Lord. As for the
Gentiles they did universally reject from the word and law of the Lord. And
the Jews amongst whom seemed yet to remain some signs of Gods people, slew
the servants of God and the prophets that were sent unto them, as Christ also
him self casts in their feeth.

But this is not all: for even after the gospel was revealed, wherein it was
propounded that they should repent, and believe in Jesus Christ, and through
him obtain remission of sins, they despised this counsel of the Lord. And
therefore also the Lord humbled their heart through heaviness, whilst namely he
permitted them to fall into greater sins and abomination, and to be vexed
and abased by their hypocritical works, and that truly without any fruit
at all. For why by their most painful and laborious observations of the law
and traditions they were so far of from receiving any reward, that they also
the more offended: and so they stumbled yt they fell down, and there was none
able to help them up. Not Moses, not Elias, no nor any mortal man living. And
yet if any of them were pricked in their hearts at the preaching of Peter or
Paul, so as they asked what they should do, as we read Act. 2. that some did:
and if they craved mercy through Christ, God then no doubt had pity on them,
he delivered them from the captivity of sin, death, the devil, and restored
them into the liberty of faith, life and the Holy-ghoste.

Howbeit we may not understand these things of the Jews alone, as though
they only had sustained spiritual captivity, and were delivered from the
same. Augustine interprets it of every one that feels himself bound, so as
he is let from well doing. He cries out, says he, in this necessity to
the Lord The Lord delivers him out of his necessities, he breketh the bands
of difficulty, and sets him a work with equity: it begineth now to be easy
unto him which before was hard and difficult, as to abstain from evils, not to
commit adultrye, etc. The Lord could give us this without difficulty: but if
we had this without difficulty, we should not acknowledge the giver of this
benefit. For why if he could do a thing so soon as he would, and felt not his
affections striving against him, neither his soul ouerburthened with bands to
be wounded and hurt, he would attribute to his own strength, that he felt
himself able: and so the Lord should be abridged of the praise of his mercies.
So much says Augustine. But we doubtless will expound it grossly, after the
same way that we have begun, of ye outward perils and dangers which are wont
oftetimes to fall out in this life, and from the which all men through the
Lords goodness are delivered.

This is therefore the second proof to declare that the Lords goodness and mercy
shuts in all things, borrowed from the example of those that for any cause
whatsoever are drawn into prison, where infinite miseries are to be endured*
fith they live there in very do ^e as persons now quite cast out from all
fellowship of men, and bannished the whole world: and yet in the mean time
cannot tell whither they shall ever be delivered or no. Which adversity
doubtless is not without cause accounted one of the greatest miseries that can
happen unto man. And therefore would the Holy Ghost express and declare this
woeful state and condition with most choice and picked words.

First he says, That they sit in darkness And this no doubt is a case most
hard, to be barred from the sight of this common light. Secondly, In the shadow
of death: he means that that state of life does not much differ from death,
yea and that even death sometimes is to be wishes in comparison of such
miseries. Who adds yet further, Being fast bound in misery and iron: he
gives to understand that many other miseries are annexed to imprisonment: as
iron pinching and wringing hard diverse parts and members of the body, as the
neck; the hands, the feet: likewise hunger, thirst, cold, lack of lodging,
want of s^eepe; the lothsomnes of vermin and filthy savors, diseases, the
company and counsel of men remeued, their help and succor denied, finally
all things taken away that might serve for any manner of solace or comfort. And
so are all things here set down in these few words; as that they might
move us the more willingly to take pity of them that are kept in prison, and
that we might the more nearly be acquainted with their miseries.

Because they rebelled) The cause of the calamity s^it of God is by ye way put
in. There are indeed diverse and sundry causes, for the which men are brought
into captivity: but here is one: named as chief, to wit the contempt of
Gods word; or disobedience against God, which sin is in truth the original
and wel-spring of all evils. They that contemn the word of God, it cannot be,
but that they fall into many other horrible sins also, for the which they are
at the length drawn into prison. And so howsoever a man deal, it behooves him
to refer all other sins to the contempt of the word as to the first
principal cause, yea and the penalty also which is incurred thereby, must in
like manner be referred to the contempt of the word We learn out of this
cause after this sort declared: 1, That calamities are sent from about, and
that by the just and good will of God. 2, That they are sent for our sins,
that in our punishment Gods justice may appeer. 3, That God does grievously
punish the contempt of his word: touching which matter there are many
testimonies extant in the Scriptures. 4. That God does most severely punish
those that do not only contemn the counsel of the Lord and his known
truth, but also abhor it, handle it dispitefullye, and besides seek to
suppress and extinguishe it
But if so be we would look, when we are afflicted, as well into our sins, as
into Gods justice, which does too too lightlye punish us in respect of our
deserts certes there might be raised from hence no small matter of comfort.

And he humbled their heart.) An amplification of the miseries wherewith captives
are overwhelmed, from the greater effect of Gods wrath. As though it were not
enough for wretched men to be tormented through-out their whole body, the Lord
will have them also to be vexed in their heart and mind, that now there may be
no part of man left free for to feel any ease or comfort. So then all hope of
help and succor is described to be taken from these men, and nothing to
remain but utter desperation. And although the heart be grievously tormented
with sorrows and heaunes for outward and temporal things, as for the loss
of house, goods, wife, children, etc: yet is it most of all perplexed, when the
mind and conscience is shaken with the greatness and horror of sins, and
with the contemplation of the most severe judgment of God. For why? an unquiet
mind and a troubled conscience, is a most cruel hangman and tirant. But thou
see that it is most cleerelye said here, that the Lord himself humbles
their hearts: wherefore we learn again here in this place: 1, That miseries of
all sorts are sent of the Lord. 2, That miseries are sent for sins, and not
only external, but also internal, wherewith the conscience is troubled. 3.
That no help or succor can do us any good, but so far-foorth as the Lord
has ordained. 4. That in seeking first and before all things for help, we
must seek it rather from the Lord, then from any creatures.
First seek the Kingdom of God, says he, and all these things shall be
ministered unto you. And: Except the Lord build the house, they labor but in
vain that build it, etc. Psalm. 127.

And when they cried.) The second part of the proof touching their
deliverance. And the verse is interlaced. It is to no purpose to repeat the
things that have been before declared.

For he brought them out.) Behold again the Lord does all in all. He
wounds, and he heals: he makes the heart sorry, and he makes it merry.
Albeit it may seem that second causes do somewhat to the deliverance of the
afflicted: yet ye matter comes to this point, that all things ought to be
ascribed only unto the Lord, to whom it seems good to woork effectually by
second causes as by fit tools or instruements. So Peter Act. 12. was indeed
by an Angel brought out of prison, and yet afterward being returned to the
brethren he tells them how the Lord had delivered him.

15 Let them therefore confess before the Lord his loving kindenes, and declare
his wonderful woorks before the Sons of men.

16. For he has broken the gates of brass, and brast the bars of iron
asunder.

A conclusion hortatory, as in the proof before going, with a repetition of ye
cause drawn from the premises, for the which all men ought to ^ing praises
unto the Lord. But inasmuch as h^ ^^^eth here inespeciallye with those men,
that are endangered for the contempt of the word: this place is diligently to
be noted for the time that now is. For undoubtedly we ought to judge, that as
imprisonments, so also all other public calamities whatsoever, happening thick
and threefolde to men in these days, have been sent for the contempt of Gods
word Wherefore it behooves us to be awakened (as out of a dead sleep) to
esteem more reverently of the word of God, that we may willinglye hear it,
and indeuer to live after it. Nevertheless, though it be said here that the
wicked suffered imprisonment for the contempt of the word, yet is it not meet
to judge by and by, that al those are wicked or contemners of the word, whom
we see to be cast into prison. For even the Godly also do fall oftentimes into
the like danger, which also comes to pass for those causes which we have
noted before, when we proved that calamities are sent of God justly and for our
great good and benefit. But for this cause especially speaks he of the
wicked, that thereby we might be given to understand, that ye comfort touching
deliverance from such a danger to be looked for, belongs indifferently both
to the godly and ungodly. For if so be God ^^liuereth the wicked out of
ad^^^^^ti^^, how much more will he deliver the godly and elect? And there is no
doubt, but that the Holyghost would therefore paint out the wicked punished for
their sins, and afterward delivered, rather then the godly, that namely by
this occasion Gods mercy might be enlarged, and appear to be the more famous
and notable. For seeing he vouchsafes to hear graciously even the enemies of
his glory, and such as have deserved nothing but wrath and eternal damnation,
when they have called earnestlye upon him for his mercy, and delivers them
from the miseries wherewith they are oppressed: this doubtless is a token of rare
and singular clemency (if we shall speak after the manner of men) and Gods
bountiful goodness is by this means more ennobled and renowned then can
possibly be vttred or expressed. For why this is the proper and peculiar woork
of God.

Wherefore all sorts of men indifferently as well the godly as the wicked, and
for what cause soever coming into the peril of imprisonment, ought to be
partakers of this present comfort, and to draw unto themselves the things that
are here spoken as touching Gods providence and goodness. If a man therefore
being falsely accused and void of all blame be cast into prison; as Joseph
was: if any man be so ill dealt withal only to satisfy the lust and pl^asure
of a tyrant, as Herod held Peter in prison to corry favor with the sickle
multitude: if any man suffer as much for reproving over sharply of sin and
for his constancy in defending the truth, as Micha, Jeremy, John Baptist, and
many of the Apostles were dealt withal: finally if any man for offenses
committed (as Pharaohs baker, and daily marry malefactors are) be subject to
the like danger: let him call upon the Lord with his whole heart, and there is no
doubt but by faith he shall obtain mercy, as this proof plainly testifies
that the conte^ners of the word were delinered.

Further when he speaks of imprisonmen^^, it seems convenient that we
understand such other miseries also to be meant, as are annexed to imprisonment,
or as are wont for the most part to follow it: as great and grievous
accusations, torments, the iniquity and cruelty of the judge, reproaches and
reuilements, pains or penalties set, and to be short the most bitter sentence
of shaw full death: which things undoubtedly dover and torment the mind more
then can in words be expressed. But because to stand particularly upon every of
these, would be an infinite work: we think it sufficient for us, if by the way
we admonish, that against all those crosses in like manner as against the
discommodities of imprisonment, manifold consolations may be drawn out of
those things which have hither to been declared.

17 Fools by reason of their transgression, and because of their iniquities
are afflicted.

18 Their soul abhorred all manner of meat, and they were brought even to
deaths door.

19 Then they cried unto the Lord in their trouble, and he delivered them out
of their distress.

20 He sent his word and healed them, and they were delivered from their
diseases.

They that expound this Psalm touching sprituall dangers, only appertaining
to the soul, say that it treats here of such, as after they have been once
glutted with ye word of God, where before they wandered in the wilderness and
were long pyned with h^u^er, and where the impediments which let the^ from
well doing, are taken away and removed, do yet begin again to loathe and
contemn the word of God their spiritual food: neither do they pass any
more for the word, but are st^^k and remiss in well doing, yea altogether
cold and frozen. An example of which matter was to be seen in the Jews, which
had the law and divine oracles, and yet they lived not there after, but as
dogs returning to their old vomit, as though there had no law at all been
given unto them, they led a most soul and filthy life. In like manner may it
be judged of those that received the gospel in the beginning of the preaching
of the Apostles, and that in our time have taken upon them to reform Churches.
Certes the Apostle 1. Corinthians. 4, seems to vpbraide them with such a like
thing, when he says: Now ye are full, now ye are become rich, without us ye
have gotten a kingdom etc. For even now began they to despise ye Apostle, as
though they had no more stood in need of his do^trane. But more clearly of
such a lothing of the word we may read 2 Pet. 2. And by this means in very
deed are men brought to deaths door or to the gates of death. Wherefore such
menace again healed, when the Lord vouchsafes to send again his word,
Christ I mean to the Jews, or sound doctrine, which is at all times by chosen
Prophets and ministers revived. to the and that all that beleene, might be saved

But that we may return to our simple manner of interpreting the Scripture,
and expound this place of outward perils and dangers: this is the third
proof, proouing that the mercy and goodness of God is to be feene in all
things, drawn from the example of them that fall into diverse and dangerous
diseases, and also are in hazard of life, and yet notwithstanding when they
call upon the Lord for help, they are again restored to health. Such examples
we may see daily. Who is he that has not felt great greefes and heauinesses in
his body, and been at one time or other at deaths door especially in the
time of some common plague, or of other noysom and contagious diseases: And yet
we see them to be delivered and to live still, though not greatly thankful to
God therefore. Therefore it behooves all men so much the more dilgently to have
an eye unto this present Psalm, because there is none almost, that has not
felt some of the miseries at least which are here mentioned, and some
wonderful deliverance out of the same.

And he deals again with the ungodly punished for their sins and delivered,
for the selfsame causes which we noted in the proof next before: namely that
both by this occasion Gods mercy might be amplified and made more famous,
whereby he does good even to his enemies: and also that the godly might
thereby be assured, that they likewise, when they are in like manner afflicted,
shall be delivered by Gods bounty and goodness.

Fools by reason of their transgression.) first he sets down the cause, why
calamities are sent of God, saying, that for sins men are afflicted: that is
that Gods justice might be commended, whereby the ungodly are worthily punished:
secondly, that men being plagued for their transgressions, might have cause to
repent, and to abstain from sin. So there is a double utility here to be
considered, and either of them wonderfullye auailing to comfort. Neither does
he simply say, that men are afflicted for their sins: but first also he
premiseth something, saying: Fools because of their transgression. Where it is
to be noted, that there is some difference between the Hebrew and the
translation of the Septuaginta. For these have it thus: He took them out of
the way of their iniquity, for by reason of their transgressions they were
humbled. And the sense is, that men are humbled and afflicted for their sins,
and that because the Lord will by this means withdraw them from sin, and
call them home from their wicked and ungodly life. Which sense is sound and
godly, and it teaches, that men are punished, to the intent they might
bethink themselves of repentance, and be brought by afflictions to amendment
of life. And in the Hebrew it in reed thus: (...): and thus: (...) the sense
whereof is this: That men are made fools, and blinded through sin, and
therefore are worthily punished of God for sin. Whereby we may note here, that
the contempt of the word which was described in the example aforegoing, has
blindenes and foolishnes following it, altogether after the same manner that
the Apostle Romans 1. describes them that despised the truth offered, to be made
frustrate in their imaginations, and their foolish heart to be darkened. When
they professed themselves to be wise, they became fools, etc. From whence we
learn here out of the sense which is in the Hebrew, that this is the effect
of sin, namely that by it men are blinded, made fools, and at length become
brute beasts. Which effect of sin ought woorthily to fray all men from evil
doing. And they are said to be fools, because they refuse the most excellent
counsel of God, which he has propounded unto us in his word. And this
foolishnes follows, very orderly the contempt of the word, whereof has
been spoken in the proof before going. For the word is indeed first offered,
that no man should be able to allege any excuse: But when they reject and
abhor that, it is of necessity that they fall most fondly and so be plundged
in perpetual folly.

Their soul abhorred all manner of meat.) Now he describes another kind of
danger laid upon men by reason of sin. And he names no one certain
contagious and perilous disease, by the which it might be proved that sins
are punished: but he generallye discribeth the extreme danger, that grows out
of every disease: insomuch that in truth this present place may serus to
minister comfortes against all fortes of sicknesses, yea even when men are
brought to the uttermost hazard. And there is no disease so little, which in
time will not grow to this point. For this cause undoubtedly it is that the
Holy ghost has so framed and fitted together this present place. Wherefore he
cunningly painteth out one that is in extreme danger through the rage and
cruelty of his disease. Their soul, says he, abhorred all manner of meat.
Then do we despair of the health and recovery of the sick party, when he
not only desires no meat, but also loatheth and abhors it. When he is
once come to this pass, there is no likelyehoode at all of any longer life.
And therefore he says: All manner of meat, that is not only that which
nourishes, quickens and confirms the members to the prolonging of life,
but also that which pleseth and delights the taste. For otherwise some things
are wont to to be prepared for sick folks, which though they do not greatly
nourish, yet are they prositable for this cause, that by their strangenes and
sweetenes they might provoke a queysie stomach. And he adds.

They were brought to deaths door,) In one word and by a Rhethoricall
similitude he describes the most certain peril and hazard of life. And it is
a phrase of speech proper and peculiar to the Scripture, such almost as are the
descriptions of death in the Poets, whilst they feign that death has his
mates and companions, etc. And the Latinistes, when they would signify any
thing to be very near at hand, they say that it is in or praeforibus. at or
before the door. Therefore such are described beer, as differ little or nothing
from death it self: and by the greatness of the dangers, is propounded the
greatness of Gods goodness and mercy to be considered.

And when they cried.) The second part touching their deliverance in a verse
interlaced.

He sent his word.) The formal cause of their curing or healing, which also
argues the power of God to be most mighty and marvelous. For it notes, that
when men have applied diverse and sundry remedies to their diseases, and do
nothing prevail, God by his only word and beck restores them to health. To
which effect also the Centurion Luke 7. said unto Chist: Only speak the
word, and my servant shall be whole. And Christ elsewhere with his only word
cured many sick persons. To the Leaper he said: Be thou clean, Mat. 8. To the
Deaf and Dumme Mark 7. Ephata: which is to say, Be opened: albeit he did there
put his fingers into the deafes ears, and with spittle touched his tung. And
Marks. he raised a damzell from death, taking her by ye hand saying: Talitha
cumi; that is to say: Damsel, I say unto thee arise, But what need we any more
examples? Touching the creation of the whole world of naught it is said Psalm.
32. He spoke the word, and they were made. Therefore the word of god
signifies simply his beck, will and commandment.

They that expound this Psalm touching spiritual and internal dangers
appertaining to the mind or soul, by the word sent will have to be
understood the Son of God Jesus Christ. And rightly. For he is the word of
the eternal father, his very substance and power, and by him are healed our
spiritual diseases: of which matter we may read every where in the prophets
and in the sacred Epistles.

And they were delivered from their diseases.) He rightlye uses the plural
number to amplify the goodness of God, which delivers the diseased, not from
one distress onley, but from many, whereof every one were able to bring death
and destruction. And truly so it is. As often as any man is sick unto death, he
might not only by the force of his desease, but by other the least
discommodities also annexed unto it, be extinguished. For why? the s^^mack
cloyed but a little with meat or drink, the inconvenient lying upon the side
or chest, yea some unsavory smell or air breaking forth, might kill and
dispatche the wretched wight. O woeful calamity of mankind, subject to so
many miseries, and yet never departing from pride and most pernicious
affections.

21. Let them therefore confess before the Lord his loving kindenes, and his
wonderful woorks before the sons of men.

22. And let them offer sacrifices of praise, and declare his works with
rejoicing.

The conclusion hortatory by a verse enterlaced, having a more full exhortation
added to thanksgiving for the benefit of health received: wherein he has
respect unto that which was usually for the most part among the people of old
time, who namelye besides their private giving of thanks did also publikelye
offer sacrifice, as often as they had received from God any not able and singular
benefit. Touching which kind of sacrifices and rites who so list may look
Leuit. 7. And how king Hezechia the third day after his sickness went up into
the house of Lord, and sung praises unto the Lord, we may see, 3. King. 20. and
Esaias 28. And he adds very elegantly a partickle touching the true use of
sacrifices, and as touching that kind of sacrifice, which it becomes us also
at this day to use. And that is to declare the works of the Lord with
rejoicing. For by this means especially do we offer a most acceptable
sacrifice to God, if so be we praise his goodness (which we have found by
experience in our selves) to others, and stir them up in like manner to
praise God with us. For why? this is in very deed to provide, that by true and
spiritual sacrifices the name of God may be truly sanctifled and hallowed.

And albeit it be said before that God heals them that are near unto death,
by his only word: yet must we not gather heerby, that they are not healed of
God, which are cured by taking of simple medicines after the prescription of
the art of Physic. For since we prove ^aylye by experience that the vie and
ver^ue here of is very great, it behooves us to hold, that ye power of God
woorketh in these things, and that they can in no wise do any thing of
themselves, but so far forth as it pleases God to woork in and by the same:
accordingly also as we see oftetimes that although many and good simple
medicines be given to some sick folks, yet is it without any fruit or effect
at all following: and 2. Chron. 16, King Asa is grievously reproved, who
regarded more the skill of the Physicians, then he did the goodness of God. But
touching this point more was said of us, when we entreated of second causes.
Therefore by whatsoever mean and from whatsoever sickness any be restored to
their former health, it is meet and convenient that we understand them to be
healed by God, and his word: that is to say, by the good will and pleasure of
God. For why? all simples are created of God, and do receive from him their
secret virtue: Physic is given by God unto men, as witnesses the wise Hebrew
Eccle. 38. and the Church received from God the gift of healing, 2. Corinthians.
12. Wherefore which way soever a man recouereth his health, whither it be by
miracle or by ordinary means, he ought to give all thanks only to God, and
to offer the sacrifice of praise unto him alone. Therefore also al they that are
now sick, and with what diseases soever they be afflicted, whither with the
plague or pestilence or with any other contagious or less dangerous sickness,
let them know, that the things which are here spoken do belong unto them,
and let them not only thereby take comfort, but also learn how and after what
sort they ought to behave themselves toward God, after they be delivered.

23 They that go down to the Sea in ships and do their work or business in
great waters.

24 They see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep.

25 For he commands, and raises the stormy wind, which lifts up the
waves thereof.

26 They mount up to the heaven, and deseend to the deep, so that their soul
melts for trouble.

27 They are tossed too and fro, and stagger like a drunken man, and al their
cunning is gone, or they are even at their wits end.

28 Then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble, and he delivers them out of
their distresses.

29 For he causes the tempest to cease, so that the waves thereof are still.

30 So when they (the waves) are quieted, they rejoice, and he brings them to
the haven, where they would be.

Some do expound this part of all the godlly in general. For whosoever
endeuering after true holiness go down to the sea, that is, into this world,
intending to work in great waters, that is, to teach the people (for water
signiffieth the people) by word and example: such men see ye works of the
Lord, which the world leeeth not. In the mean time they are shaken with great
temptations, so as now they are even as it were hoysed up to the heaven, whilst
ouercomming their aduersarye they fix their hope on high in heavenly things,
and are strong in faith: and again they descend into the deep, whilst through
the rage of their adversary the tempter, and the greatness of troubles, they
sinck down as it were into desperation. And a long time do they continue in
these dangers, so that there seems now no refuge or succor to be left unto
them* But at length they call upon the Lord, who allayeth the tempests of
temptations, sends them help and comfort, raises them up again and
strengthens them in faith, until at length they be brought to the haven of
eternal salvation. It likes others to expound it only of the gouerners of
Churches, to whom is committed the ship of the Church to be governed: such
ship men were the Apostles, being made ye fishers of men. And such do a work
in deed great and difficult, whilst they labor in many waters, that is to say
in a great and mighty people to procure the things that belong to all their
welfares and safety. These do most deeply search the works of the Lord, and
observe his wonders. But immediately the aduersarye the devil stirs up the
hearts of the wicked, which move mighty tragedies and tempests, raise up
heresies, offenses, dissentions and hurliburlies, so as the ship of the Church
may seem to be as good as drowned, and the godly ministers themselves driven
almost to despair. Thus the whole ship is shaken, but especially the gouerners
of the Church are so troubled, that there remains no way or mean, whereby
they may preserve the doctrine, which with great labor and travel they before
had planted. But even then the Lord being called upon hears both the
Ministers and the Church, he commands the tempests to be still, he
extinguisheth the waves of persecutions, the winds of heresies and vain
doctrine, he scatters the threatening storms of stumbling-blockes and
offenses, finally he gives to the Churches and their ministers desired peace
and tranquillity, and brings them all to the happy haven of salvation where
they would be. And as these things are spoken of the Ministers of ye word
which rule and govern the ship of the church, so may they not be unfitly taken
of the godly Magistrates, which labor with their great perilles and dangers
to maintain sound and sincere religion. Yea and it is the common calamity of
many: for why the Ship-men and Ship being in danger, it follows of necessity
that al they are in danger likewise that are carried in in the same Ship.

But we for our parts will take all things simply, and content our selves with
a baser sense. This is therefore the fourth proof declaring the goodness and
mercy of God to be preeminent in all things, borrowed from the example of those
that sailing by sea, have the perilles of shipwreck and drowning every hour,
what say I hour? nay more truly every minute of an hour before their eyes.
Neither is this misery a matter of small importance or a thing rarely
happening, but greater in very deed and more commonly seen then can either be
expressed or believed, but of such as have had trial of it: and therefore it is
not without cause reckned here amongst the greatest and most grievous dangers.

And the former part touching the dangers is here more plentifully discoursed
then in the other proofs before going: which appears especially for this
cause to be done, that such as have had no experience of them, could otherwise
hardly be brought to understand what they mean. For such men it was meet that
the matter should the more largely and plainly be described. I dare be hold
to say this, that in the Poets are extant notable descriptions of tempests and
ship-wrackes, but yet in so few words there is none more plain and pithie,
then this same of the Prophets is. And he profixeth a proposition, wherein he
generally prepoundeth, that such as sail by sea, do oftentimes try by
experience how great the good^e^ and power of God is. They that go down to
the sea, says he, etc. In Rivers doubtless, especially such as are nauigable,
the boats sometimes rushing against a rock or block sticking fast in the
bottom, are burst in pieces: sometimes also cunning swimmers through the deep
gaping of the earth whereby the water turns il self round about continually
are swallowed up: but these things are nothing to the perils of the sea.
Therefore he says: They that go down to the sea in ships. Neither talks he
of those, that have sailed perhaps once or twice in their life time and no
more, and that in a choice time and season of the year, when the pleasant
western winds have blown: but of such as work and follow their business in
many waters, that is to say, who exercise themselves there continually, and who
by travailing on the sea, carrying and recarrying of marcha^dize, fishing etc.
provide for their necessary living and maintenance. Such therefore see the
works of the Lord and his wonders in the deep: they see, I say, what the Lord
will and can do both in afflicting and delivering, also how wonderful a
worke-man God is, what and what manner of thing his providence is in the
condition and conservation of all things, specially such as are seen in the
sea. Hitherto belong the things that are mentioned of writers touching the
meruailes of the Sea, as of beasts, stones, monsters, and such as are daily
found a fresh, which we cannot now conueniently^ stand upon.

For he speaks the word, and the stormye wind arises.) The proof of the
proposition, draween from this that God himself raises up incredible
tempests on the Sea He speaks (says he) to wit God, bids, commands,
wills. He speaks spoke the word, and they were created. And he raises up
the wind, the blustering blastes: such as the Philosophers and Poets report
Boieas and his companions the Northern winds to be. And-heer we learn again:
First, That storms and tempests and such like things come not to pass by
Contingence or Haphazard, but be procured for certain causes by God himself.
he will have men to be dismayed with fear and to be humbled, he will have them
to be mindful of repentance and of death, he will be inuocated and called
upon of them. Secondly, it is most cleerelye said here, That calamities are
sent of God.

Which lifts up the waves thereof. They mount up to the heaven, and diseend
to the deep) A trim description and liuelye representation of a tempest raised
by the winds, wherein both by the violence of the waves the ships are lifted
up above measure, and again by the sincking down of the waves, they are as it
were most deeply drowned. For why ye Ships are continuallye tossed to and fro,
hither and thither, none otherwise then a tennis ball is tossed by the hands of
the players.

Very strange it is doubtless and wonderful, to behold such huge and massye
ships to be so forciblye driven as they are, and further in the falling down
to be so overwhelmed on every side with waves, that thou would verily think
thy self to be enwrapped in the midst of the waters. And all these things
the Lord does, who has both sea and winds at commandment: and therefore in
the song of the children even the stormye winds also and waves of the sea are
provoked to praise the Lord.

So that their soul melts, or is dissolved, for trouble.) He adds touching
the affections of them that are endaungered through the tempest, that so the
greatness of the danger might the more clearly appear: and by increasement he
heapeth up all things, that by the greatness of the danger might be valued the
greatness of Gods goodness and mercy, whereby they are delivered from distress.
Their soul melts, says he. He first set^eth before our eyes the mosts
grievous ^^^tio^s o^ affections of their min^es. For it behooves them to be
vehementlye troubl^ (...) and the dangers to be very great, where the minds
are so immediatlye affrighted and shaken. Secondlye he describes also the
motions or affections of their bodies, by a certain Rhethoricall resemblance
or similitude. They are toss^d to and fro, says he, and stagger like a drunken
man. And this is a most apt similitude. For by reason of the centinuall
tossinges of the whole Ship, they always reele to and fro and cannot stand
upright on their feet, but are swayed with their whole bodies, one while this
way, another while that way. Thirdly he adds by encreasment or amplification
that which notes their extreme fear or desperation, saying by a fine
metaphor, that all their cunning is gone: that is to say, that there remains
no direction in them* and that they ^^eme also to be deprived of common sense
and feeling. This is therefore a most apt description of dreadful and
desperate dangers. And this so great a perturbation of their minds comes by
the consideration of things so right strange and wonderful: to wit because they
see the wondrous works of the Lord in the deep. Whereby we learn here: 1,
That the power and providence of God is wonderful, woorking every where and in
all creatures. 2, How great the misery of man is, and how utterly unable he
is to h^lde out in any dangers. 3, The vanity of carnal wisdom is offered
especially to be considered, which in great dangers corporal and external (I
say nothing of spiritual and internal) is able to do nothing at all.

Then they cry unto the Lord.) The second part touching their deliverance,
again set down by a verse interlaced.

For he causes the tempest to cease.) Trimly again is the power and goodness
of God here illustrated and set forth, whilst by a new hypoty posis or
representation of things he describes the tempest to be alayed, their minds
that were in danger, to be cheered, and they brought to their long wished for
haven. The waves are still or silent, is a metaphorical speech: for because
that in a tempest the Sea through the iustling together of ye waves makes a
kind of bellowing, and horrible noise. And he proceeds in the self same
order here speking of their deliverance, which he had proceeded in the former
part touching the dangers. For first he describes the stilling of the
tempest, next the joyful hearts of the sailors, and thirdlye he notes their
happiness in ariuing at their ^^^ged for haven. And as he said before, that the
tempest was raised by the word (...) beck of the Lord: so here again^ he
says, that the tempest is stilled by his commandment. Whence we learn
again, that nothing comes to pass by happer ^^^paiz^ in these matters, and
much less by Chance or Fortune, but that all things fall out by the singular
providence of God: and that perilles are procured of God, and again men by God
delivered out of them: further that it depends not upon our will, to go to
any place, wh^rsoeuer we would be, but upon the will of God: as Iarnes also in
his Ep^^tle chap. 4. teaches us to add always, as often as we purpose to do
any thing: If the Lord will, and if we live, we will do^ this or that.

31 Let their the (...) ^^nfesse before the Lord his loving kinden^^, and
declare his wonderful woorks before the sons of men.

32 And let them exalte him in the congregation of the people, and praise him
in the assembly of the elders.

The conclusion hortatory by a derse interlaced, having a more full exhortation
added to praise and celebrate the goodness of God, much like as in the proof
before going. And truly so it is wont to come to pass, that they which have
escaped a tempest or ship wrack, do delight afterward to tell it unto
others, and that with a certain pleasure, and taking as it were thereby a kind
of a comfort in their calamities: as he also (to wit Eneas) said vnte his
company.

Perhaps these things another day,
Will pleasure be for to displaye.
But they seldom so report them, as to refer thein deliverance to the
work of the Lord, and so to procure glory unto him, which was indeed their
special duty to do. Wherefore the Lord would have our evasion out of dangers
to be so declared, as that not only we our selves might seem to prase the
Lord, but that others also together with us might be stirred up to the
selfsame duty. With which thing God is so delighted, as with no sacrifice the
like: yea and we cannot show a more notable token of our thankefulnes then by
so doing.

And it contains a prittie partition, wherein of the multitude of believers,
he calls some the people, and othersome the elders, or superiors: and of the
people he makes a congregation, and to the elders he attributes an assemblye:
noting thereby (...) certain difference of degrees, and understanding the whole
multitude of believers, of whom it is requisite that the Lord should be
praised for the daily benefits which he bestows upon them. And as we have
here a form of consolation for those that are delivered from fearful
tempests on the Sea: so may they fetch comfort from hence, which having made
shipwreck, and lost peradventure their goods and merchandise, have yet
themselves escaped safe and sound. In which behalf also the goodness and power
of God ought to be considered. In like manner are we to think of them that are
delivered out of the hands of thieves and robbers, also out of the public
peril of fire (...) burning. For these calamities are almost a like, and the
selfsame reasons of comfort may rightly be applied to all of them
indifferently.

33 He turns the floods into a wilderness, and the water springes into dry
land.

34 A fruitful land makes he barren for the wickedness of them that dwell
therm.

35 Again he turns the wilderness into pooles of water, and the dry land into
water springes.

36 And there he places the hungry, and they build a city to dwell in.

37 And sow the feeldes, and plant vi^^ards which bring forth fruitful
increase.

38 For he blesses them, and they multiplye exceedinglye, and he deminisheth
not their cattle.

39 Again men are diminished and brought low, through tirannycall oppression,
wickedness and affliction.

40 He powers contempt upon princes, ^^d causes them to wander in desert
places out of the way.

41 And he raises up the poor out of misery, and makes him families like a
flock of Sheep.

42 The righteous shall see it, and rejoice, and all iniquity shall stop her
mouth.

All these things put in the last place, it has pleased some to expound
touching the calling of the Gentiles, succeeding in the place of the Jews,
that they might be the people of God. Among the Jews doubtless were first of
all the floods, that is to say the gifts of the Holy Ghost, the doctrine of
the Law and the Prophets, which whosoever drew, had life: there was amongst
them the Kingdom of God: but afterward it was taken away, and given to an
other nation, that brought forth the fruits thereof. The branches were broken
of the right Oliuetree, and grassed into the wild Olive: Romans 11. And verily
this reiection of the Jews came to pass for the wickedness of the
inhabitants, for their sins, and cheefely for their unbelief: or as Paul
speaks, for because they would establish their own righteousness, the Lord
blinded them and hardened them. Again on the other side God turned the
wilderness into pooles of water, when the Gentiles were brought and received
into the Kingdom, and became the people of God, receiving the gifts of the
Holy Ghost, and the Baptism of wholesome water. Moreover God placed there the
hungry: that is to say, sinners acknowledging their necessity, hungring and
thirsting after righteousness. Which prepared a City to dwell in: that is to
say, they grew up into the Church of God. And they sowed, with the seed of Gods
word the feelds of their hearts. And they planted Viniardes, they gathered
Churches in diverse places, or they became the true branches of the true Vine,
which is Christ. And they brought forth fruit of spiritual increase, whilst
every man brought forth according to the measure of his gifts, spiritual
fruits, some thirty fold, some sixty fold, and some a hundred fold. God in
the mean season blesses them: for as much as true godliness has the promises
both of this life and of the life to come. Their cattle, that is to say, their
weak and simple brethren, are not diminished, that is, with adversities or
^^i^ked doctrines cast down, seduced, or destroyed. But afterward the same are
again diminished and brought low, when namely they being now full, begin
again a fresh to neglect and to loath the word of God. Few are found to be
truly godly, few to have faith and charity. There entered in pride and vain
glory, corrupt doctrine, hypocrisy, sects and schisms among themselves, and
so their Kingdom being divided could no longer endure. Further the Lord
pours contempt upon princes, that is to say, bishops and doctors: For whilst
the world sees them gaping after riches, pomp, pride and vaineglory, it
begins also to despize both them and their doctrine. Experience teaches us
this. And so they themselves wonder in desert places, out of the way. They are
addicted to Philosophy and to their own canons and traditions, but as for the
word of God they have utterly neglected it, I will not say oppressed it.
Nevertheless in the mean time the Lord lifts up the poor here and there
scattered, out of misery, to wit that they should not be troubled or
molested with the calamities of the Church: and makes them families, little
Churches and dispersed, as a flock of sheep, accounting them for lawful
assemblies, nay for his true and lawful Church, acknowledging in them his
sheep, as they also acknowledge his voice. After this manner certes may the
Psalm not vnaptlye be expounded, and indeed certain excellent doctors of the
Church have expounded it, as Augustine and Pomexan. In the mean season Hierome
and Arnobius, from that place wherein it is said, And again they are diminished
and brought low: have a little otherwise prosecuted the sense, namely as
touching Martyrs, by whose afflictions the number of the faithful is
diminished, whilst for fear of pains and torments many shrink from the faith
and from ye church. But afterward the tiranto and persecutors being again
humbled by God and brought into contempt, the poor are again delivered, that
they may freely and without fear praise God in the Church. But the former
exposition is much better in my judgment. After this sort therefore do many
interpret this part of the Psalm touching the calling of the Gentiles and
state of the church gathered of the Gentiles, insomuch that they have also
prefixed this title to the whole Psalm, namelye that it sings of the mercy
of God offered through Christ, and of the calling of the Gentiles: and that not
amiss, as we have already said. It has liked others to affirm, that this
Psalm preaches of Christ and of the people by him redeemed, and of the
Synagoge to be converted unto Christ.

Let every man be wise, but unto sobriety, and so far forth as is
profitable to edification. That which ye Lord reuealeth not to one, it is
certain, he reuealeth to an other. But we as we have hitherto done, will
proceed to draw out the plain sense and meaning of the words. Therefore we
have placed here the f^^th proof, wherein it is showed, that the goodness and
providence of God does shine most clear in all things. And it is variable and
mixed, comprising diverse examples serving to ye purpose. Of which the first is
derived from great and memorable mutations or changes, which do ofttimes happen
in cuntries and provinces, by reason of fertility or barrenness, which is
induced not through the time or season, nor also by the weather or such like
cause, but as to endure continually, and not lightly to be changed or amended.

Howbeit where these things should be done, the Scripture mentions not: yet
have men by observation and experience found the^ out. We may gather some
things out of credible Historiographers. Aristorle shows, that in the times
of the Trojans Hellas (a part of Greece) was all overflowed, and therefore
barren, and Mycenea marvelous good and fruitful: but afterward clean
contrariwise it fell out that this last became a standing poole, and that other
dried up and manured. And that sometimes lands have issued out, and the same
begun to be inhabited, where before were waters: again ye waters have
ouerslowed and possessed all things, where before were habitable cuntries, it
is no hard matter to prove out of the Philosophers, Historians and Poets. Our
Tertullian in his Apologeticus and Book De Pall^o has many things agreeable
to this present place. Rhodos and Delos two Islands in ye sea came sodeinly
forth to light. To the Cyclads were adjoined Islands by little and little now
some and then some. Homer in his book 4. of Odyssea records, that from the
Island Pharos into Egypt was the distance of a night and days sailing, all
which space is now annexed to the firm land. Touching which thing also
Pomponius Mela writes in his book 2. and Lucan in his book 10. If we may
credit Herodotus, the Sea sometimes from above Memphis to the mountains of
Ethiopia went all oouer. The same testifies, that it flowed very nigh to the
Temple of Diana of Ephesus. On the other side, whatsoever is between the town
Rhegium and Cicelie, that was once champeon ground, now it is a great and large
Sea, many Authors witnessing the same: as namly Tertullian in his Apologeticus,
Solinus, Iustine in his book 4, Virgill in his book 3. of Eneidos, Sylius
Italicus book 14. Philo in his book De Mundo writes, that the three cities
Egira, Bura, and Helice, were by the violent rage of the Sea swallowed up. Yea
and the Island Atlas (as Plato mentions in his Timeo) with a certain portion
of Asia and Aphrica, through Earthquakes and strange floods continnuing by the
space of four and twentye hours, sanke sodeinly down and was overwhelmed of
the sea: Which sea by that misfortune became very rough and dangerous and in
no wise afterward passable or saileable. By these things we may easilye
understand, that such not able and memorable alterations as are here spoken
off, do not seldom times come to pass.

And there are five metonymies or denominations, when as to signify barrennes,
he puts the desert, a thirsty place, the dry land and salt licour. For in
such places nothing is wont to grow. Where the fresh water runs not, nor
the rain conveniently mo^^ieneth, there doubtless is neither sowing nor
reaping: as in fandy places, on the shore, and on the tops of hills is to be
seen. Likewise where the earth is salt and brackish, or Salt is dug, there
does not lightlye grow any thing. Phynie in his book 31. chapt. 7. says,
that all and every place wherein salt is found, is barren, and brings forth
nothing. Whither it seems to belong, that Judges 9. Abimilech, when he had
subverted the city Sichem, did sow salt there, signifying that he would make
that place from thence-foorth utterly barren and void of habitation. To the
like effect there is extant a threatening in Jeremy 17. Cursed be the man that
trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, and withdraws his heart from the
Lord. For he shall be like the heath in the wilderness, and shall not see when any
good comes: but shall inhabit the parched places in the wilderness, in a
salt land, and not inhabited. Blessed be the man that trusts in the Lord,
and whose hope the Lord is. For he shall be as a tree that is planted by the
water, which spreads out her roots by the river, etc. In these words of the
Prophet thou see in like manner fertility to be signified by wateringes, and
moystures, as also in this place are put floods, water springs, pooles of
waters.

For the wickedness of them that dwell therein.) The cause why such alterations
are b^ought upon lands as also upon the soil and upon the Sea. The Lord, says
he, does it, purposing to punish by bis justice the sins of the inbabitants.
And so commonly comes it to pass, where a Cuntry is fruitful and plentiful
in all things, there the inhabitants for the most part through the plenty of
things fall to idleness, from idleness to wantonness and the vices that flow from
thence. Which when it comes to pass, the Lord being provoked to wrath,
sends barrennes and many other adversities, till as by little and little they
either repent, or else are utterly destroyed. Such alteratio^s of cuntries,
cities, and commonweales, we may see daily. Examples we have at this day most
chiefly in Italy, which is a most happy and fruitful cuntrye: but with how
great calameties have we seen it battered and shaken, though it has not been
utterly overwhelmed with waters? And here fall to the ground the causes of
alterations, which the Philosphers are wont to bring and allege, saying, that
through a certain necessity, and force of the superior bodies governing these
inferior things hoere below, the lands and ^eas (...) keep^ this order of
nature, that b^acertain interchangeable course and compass they are (...)
while better, another while worsse, even like as we see man also to be dealt
withal, who first of all in his infancy and child ho^de is weak and without
strength, but afterward growing in years he gathers strength, and comes at
length by little and little to great perfections but then again when age
comes on he droupeth and decays. Thus I say, they suppose the case to stand
generrally with waters and lands through a certain force (...) power of the
superior bodies ruling al interior things, and of this opinion was as well
Aristotle in his Metcorologiks, as also Strabo in his book 17. and other more
disputing of these matters. But in this place it is expresselye said, that al
these things are wrought by the Lord himself, and even then verily, when it
pleases him to revenge the sins of men the inhabitants, or otherwise to
declare and s^t for^h his justice, power, and goodness. Therefore whether such
changes and alterations do fall out sodeinly, or slowly and more leisurely:
and whither by hidden causes, or by open and manifest (as if earthquakes,
inundations of waters, or such like means go before) it behou^th not to
determine by and by, that they come to pass by a certain intercourse of
things or contingently, but by the determinate will and purpose of the Lord,
which yet notwithstanding men cannot always perceive and see. Wherefore we
learn again here very clearly, that all things which happen in this world,
are ordered and disposed by Gods prouidences and that crosses are sent for the
sins of men and benefits given freely through the only mercy and goodness
of God: again, that God will always illustrate and set forth his justice,
power and goodness. And al these things ought we in the like events, whilst
namely through tempests, through caterpillars and other vermin destroying the
fruits we have a barren years and scarfety of victuals, or are in danger
through infection, or distressed by any other means not much unlike, to turn
them ^o our comfort and consolation.

And there he places the hungry.) The second example proving Gods goodness,
and providence to be preeminent and to bear swaye in all things drawn from
the alterations and sondrye successes which are perceived to be in the
Land-dwellers themselves and peoples or commonweals. The former example
concerned the very lands or cuntries themselves, this the dwellers or
inhabiters of them. And it painteth out the poor and needy, who first of all
begin to dress and manure a place that lay before unhusbanded, to build
Cities, to sow the fields, to plant Viniardes, in such wise that they are
eftosoones increased, made rich, and raised to great power and dignitye. But
shortly after they are again suppressed, their power and glory is by little
and little diminished, until at length they fall to utter ruin and decay. An
example hereof we may see after a sort in the people of God, who were before
few in number, and had a very small and base Commonweal, what time they came
first to the land of promise. But afterward in process of time the dignitye
of their Commonweal grew up and increased, insomuch that in the days of
David and Solomon it was advanced to the highest point of honor and renown.
Notwithstanding after a few years their Commonweal again decayed, and was
miserably defaced: yea and at length they were all carried away captive, and
their whole Cuntry destroyed, so as from that time forward they could never be
restored again to their former dignity. But more clearly may such events and
successes be seen in the beginninges, proceedings, and subuertions of
Monarchies and Kingdoms, which have been famous and notable. Amongst all
other, and specially of the Babilonicall and Roman empire the first
beginninges and originals were very base, namely such as in barren and desolate
Cuntries were first enterprised and taken in hand by a Hunter and a Shepherd,
who immediatlye gathering strength by violence and oppression of the next
borderers found the means in some sort to increase their own estate:
insomuch that afterward their power grew exceeding great, having vanquished and
subdued even many and mighty nations: but when they had now no ways or means
left to climb any higher, they fell down as fast, and were by their own
proper poize and weight overwhelmed and oppressed: so that we may well say,
there were indeed such mighty Monarchies, but they are gone and their place no
more to be found. In all these things therefore ought the power, goodness, and
providence of God deeply to be considered of us, and highly to be praised and
commended.

And with apt and fit words has the Prophet expressed his meaning. He calls
ye poor and needy, and such as were obscure persons, and destitute of all
succor, Hungry: such as we may say the Isralites were, when they entered into
the land of promise, likewise Nimreth the Hunter, and the Shepherds that
builded Rome. And these prepare a City to dwell in Poverty is the inuenter and
mistress of arts. Nocessitie compels men to devise and attempt many
things which otherwise should never be attempted nor taken in hand. Therefore
the hungrye and needy, are painful and diligent to provide things necessary
for this life, to increase riches, and in process of time to acco^plishe great
and mighty matters. Yea and all things are disposed in an apt and very good
order: 1, they provide a City and dwelling places: 2, they sow the feeldes:
3, they plant vi^i a^des: 4, they gather in ye fruits: 5, their flocks and
Cattle are increased and multiplied. And this is the way and manner even in
nature it self, and perteining to good husbandry, whereby wealth and substance
way be increased: and this distribution comprehends all apt and orderly
means, which are required to the increasing and enlarging (after an honest
sort) of the Commonweal.

Again in the other part touching the decay or decreasing of ye same
Commonweals the parts and members are with like elegancy, and in an
excellent order disposed.

Again, says he, they are diminished and brought low: this he utters
generallye in this sort. And he adds the causes or mean, For their imperious
government, says he: that is, for their oppression, when namelye God stirs
up others to oppress them. As the Jews were oppressed by their next
neighbors and by nations a far off, and the Babilonians, by the Persians,
the Persians by the Medes, the Medes by the Grecians, the Grecians by the
Romans, the Romans by the Goths, Vandals, and other peoples, which brought
destruction to the Roman Empire. So also all other Commonweals though never
so flourishing in prosperity, are by wars and violence of other that are
stronger and mightier battered and overthrown. By or through evil, that is to
say calamities publicly sent: such as are contagious diseases, the plague or
pestilence, whereby great and populous Cities become void and empty, and such
like evils as diminish the number of the people. By affliction, that is to say,
sorrow and heaviness of mind, which even kills and destroys men by reason
of ye calamities which they see and feel. And so there is here a certain
form of enlargement to be considered, and these things touching decreaseme^t
ought to be opposed and conferred with those that are put before in the former
part touching encreasement.

And we have here in this place no few enstructions of piety and godliness.
First, in that he says, And he places there: we learn, that we are directed
by the Lord whersoeuer we become, and that people are by the Lord conueighed
and translated whithersoeuer it pleases him.

2 In that he says, He places the hungry: we learn, that the Lord has
regard of the poor and needy, and therefore that we must not despair though
we be distressed even with extreme necessity.

3 That poverty is rather a provocation unto virtue, then a let or hinderance,
and that all men become more diligent and cheerful by it then otherwise.

4 We learn that it is no sin, to build houses, to plough the feeldes, to
plant Viniards, to provide Cattle: but that we may freely by honest and
lawful means increase our substance, so long as we do it without the hurt or
prejudice of our neighbor. And we know, that thus the holy Fathers did
institute their household matters, and encrese their possessions.

5 We learn, that the Lord has a special and peculiar care of all things,
yea even of our beasts and Cattle and of most vile and abject things.

6 We learn, that in all these things our endeavors take no place, except the
Lord vouchsafe to help us with his blessing, and to give an increase. And
therefore if any thing come well to pass, it is to be ascribed only to the
Lord, and we are to thank him for it.

7 We learn, that it falls out again by the good will and pleasure of God,
that our goods and substance do decrease: and therefore that we are patiently
to take in good part, whatsoever the Lord shall determine of us.

8 We learn, that God has diverse and sundry ways and means to punish and
humble us for our sins. And if at any time we perceive our goods to waste,
and yet cannot find out the manner of causes of it: again when we apply all
our driftes and devises to the better restoring of our decayed estate, and do
nothing prevail: let us conclude that we are let and hindered by the good
will and pleasure of God, and that he would so humble and abase us, and perhaps
work some spiritual good things in us and by us, or at least will again in
his good time restore all things double and treble unto us.

And from hence it behooves us also, whilst we are tossed and turmoyled in
this world with diverse and sundry perils, whilst after happy issues and
successes we are grieved with many and great, and as well with public as
private distresses, to fetch manifold comfort and consolation, and to apply
all and every the things here discoursed to our pesent estate and condition.

And he powers contempt upon Princes.) The third example, drawn from the
alterations and sundry successes in diverse degrees of men, namelye of Noble men
and poor men, which two orders or degrees he expresselye mentions in stead
of al other. We may ^f^times, says he, behold princes, which are set in
sovereign dignity, either sodeinly or by little and little beyond al men's
expectation to be cast down in great extremetie, to be contemned of all, and
to be driven to fly even the company of men with whom they were before
conversant and acquainted. Again on the other side some poor obscure person,
and one that is vexed with many distresses, God wonderfullye delivers,
increases with riches and honors, and finally aduaunceth to a great and
notable familye. In which things doubtless there is no man that perceives
not the po^^^er, justice, goodness and providence of God to be exceedingly
apparent, and therefore also worthily to be extolled and magnified.

And he very trimly expresses that which makes especially to the direction of
Princes or Potentates, namely contempt. For why? neither grief of body or
mind, nor penury or scarscitie nor power or might of the enemies, does so
much daunt and call down great estates, as contempt. He that is deerelye and
well-beloved of his own, whither it be his subjects or kinsfolks and
accquaintance, that man does as yet safelye ride in harborough, and these will
stick to him in sickness, in the times of necessity, and against his enemies:
but he that is now despised and contemned of his own, has no refuge left in a
manner whereto he may trust any more, neither will a man's enemies lightly set
upon him, but when they suppose him to be forsaken of his ^rands. We might
allege some examples even of our time, but that if would be thought an odious
matter to touch by name ye misery and infelicitie of any. And Saul and such
like did then first of all begin to quail, when as becoming irksome to every
one, they grew into contempt, and were forsaken of all their subjects, as
Saul also himself, i. Sam. 22. complained, that all men had conspired against
him, and clinged rather to David then to him. But finelye to the amplifying of
the contempt, it is said to be powered upon them, that is, largely and
manifoldely to be sprinkled or cast. Likewise to express the greatness of the
miseries, which such princes contemned and despised do taste off, he adds
that which is the uttermost of all calamities, and even the winding up of all the rest: namely that they wander in the wilderness out of the way, and
withdraw themselves from the company and society of men known unto them.

And he does no less gallantly in the other part lay forth every thing
touching the deliverance and exaltation of the poor. And it is a very fine
resemblance or similitude, wherein he says that he makes them families, like
a flock of Sheep. He signifies by this similitude, that they which were
lately abiects and outcasts, are now promoted and enlarged, and not only they
themselves advanced to honor, but also that their whole familyes do grow up
and spread abroad, no otherwise then flocks of sheep are wont to increase,
which continually through one supply of young ones following an other are
multiplied and increased: which encreasement and multiplication ought to be
numbered amongst the excellent blessings of God. And what thing more notable
or glorious can be spoken of any, than that a man by his own proper virtue
mounteth to high estate, and besides makes his whole house and family more
noble and famous: as David ennobled and commended to his whole posterity the
family of Iesse and tribe of Judah, etc.

And there is also manifold doctrine propounded unto us in this example.

1 We learn that riches, power, dignity, principality, and whatsoever else
is of this sort, is given only and alone of God. 2 That none are placed in so
high a degree, but that they be in danger of falling, and are at all times to
fear and suspect the same. 3 That we are never at any time to stay upon the
unstable things of this world, but only upon God, in whose hand are all
things and who wisely rules and orders all things. 4 That the first step to
ruin and overthrow in great men is, if they begin once to be contemned of their
subjects or allies. 5 And certain it is, that this very contempt comes to
pass by the will or procurement of God for sin, God so moving the hearts of
men, as he moved the hearts of the Israelites to forsake Saul. 6 That there
follow this contempt many other dangers and discommodities, as flight.
bannishment, etc. after which sort also we have seen princes to be cast out by
their subjects, compelled to wander and straye to and fro, to live of other
men's devotion, etc. Finally also to despair. 7 Wherefore that princes and great
estates ought to labor and endeavor, that they may rather of their commons be
beloved, then feared. 8 In the mean time subjects ought to know that they are
not for small causes to contemn or forsake the Magistrate, until by the
singular dispensation of God they feel themselves to be moved, by yt which
lightly always some great and weighty causes are first made known and
manifest.
The righteous shall see it, and rejoice.) There is not here a conclusion
hortatory by a verse interlaced or put between as in the proofs before going,
but only a grave concluding sentence, which does admonish all men touching
the true use and right observation of the works and determinations of the
Lord in such examples. For the Prophets meaning in this verse is, that all
sorts of men as well good as bad should be stirred up by the consideration of
such alterations in men's matters, to take thereby some wholesome doctrine to the
profitable instruction of their consciences. And he will have the godly to
rejoice, but the wicked to be terrified and induced to humility. He says all
iniquity, for all ye woorkers of iniquity, by the figure a^tonomasia.
Whereupon we learn here.

1 That all things which are done and accomplished here in this world, are
ordained by the singular providence of God to some profitable and necessary
uses. 2 That the same ought of all men diligently to be considered, and so to
be taken as that they may understand and acknowledge them to be done for their
en^truction and admonition. 3 That the godly ought to take occasion of
spiritual joy and comfort by the things which they see wrought and
accomplished by the will of God. 4 And specially, when they see the proud and
cruel tirants cast down from their seats by the beck and assignement of God.
5 Not that it is the part of a godly man to rejoice at ye calamities of other,
which doubtless might seem to proceed from an envious and malicious mind:
but for because the subnertion of the wicked serves to the setting forth of
Gods power and justice, secondlye to the deliverance of ye godly, by whom also
God shall then more franklye and freelye be praised and magnified then before.
6 That God does oftetimes work diverse signs and wonders, and thrust the
mighty from their seats, that the rest of the ungodly might have an example
whereby to be terrified, and provoked to amendment of life: at the least that
their wicked enterprises might be dashed, and come to naught.
All which things do as well admonish us touching the observation of Gods
providence and wonderful dispensation of and in all the things that are
brought to pass here bylowe, as also make not a little to the matter of
comfortes and consolations. And like as the Prophet adds these things to the
present example, so ought they by us to be applied to all and every the events,
which are daily seen to come to pass, and in which the power, justice and
goodness of God are plainly discerned and made manifest. And thus much touching
the confirmation of this Psalm, stuffed and replenished with sundry and most
beautiful arguments and examples.

Who that is wise, will observe these things, and they shall understand the
loving kindenes of the Lord.

The conclusion of the whole Psalm, as touching the true use of those words
which have hitherto been declared, inuiting all men to the diligent
consideration of all the wondrous works, which through the providence of God
are daily seen ordinarilye to come to pass, and chiefly of those (and such
like) which have hitherto throughout the whole confirmation been discoursed,
in the which the goodness, power and righteousness of God do most clearly
shine. And trimly does this conclusion answer to the very beginning. For in
the deginning all men were provoked to praise and celebrate the Lord for his
notable and great mercy, and for his infinite goodness apparent and conspicuous
in all things: and now in the conclusion he breefly prompteth unto ye minds of
all men, that by the things which have hitherto been declared, it may
abundantly be perceived, how great the mercy and loving kindenes of the Lord
is, and therefore yt it is the parts of godly wise men diligently to observe
and mark these things, that thereby they may learn, that they ought at all
times to praise God for so notable and excellent works. 1.

And there is here in the Hebrew a changing of the number, when as in the
former part of the verse it is said in the singular number He will observe, and
then immediatlye in the plural They shall understand. An usual phrase of
speaking in the Scriptures. And we learn in this conclusion:

1 That there are none truly wise, but the godly: and on the other side that
all the wicked and ungodly, are fools: touching which thing 1 Corinthians 1 and 2,
and Psalm. 14. 2 That the true and spiritual wisdom consists chiefly in the
observation of the wonderful works of the Lord, and in the understanding of
his goodness. 3 We learn by the beholding of outward and visible things, which
are daily seen in the world, that we ought to climb up to the comtemplation
of spiritual and heavenly things, especially of the power, goodness and
righteousness of God: touching which thing Rom, 1. 4 That by all the things
which come to pass, we ought to take occasion of well doing and of praising
God.
And seeing these last words have respect to all the things which are
declared in the confirmation, it follows that even in the evils that are
sent as well as in the deliverance from evils, the mercy of God ought to be
considered. They shall understand, says he, The mercies or loving kindenes of
the Lord. For whether it be so, that God sends afflictions, or whither it be
so that he delivers from them, yet that he deals mercifully, justly and
wisely, we have before sufficientlye and at large declared. But to know, that
even crosses and calamities also do come to pass by the mercy of God, and
that the mercy of God shall not be wanting to those that are afflicted with
them: this is in very deed the fountain and wel-spring of all consolation. For
which cause seeing it was our purpose to entreat of Gods providence and of the
comfortes to be drawn from the same, we think we have not done amiss, in that
we have taken upon us at this present to expound this Psalm before the rest.
It was meet indeed, that we should better and more fully have performed our
duty in this behalf: but when we both saw the book to increase beyond our
expectation, and also that having set down the chief and principal heads we
supposed that we had given forth plentye of things sufficient, wherein the
godly also by continual meditation might exercise and solace themselves, we
conceived good hope in our mind, that thus labor of ours (whatsoever it be)
would be allowed and accepted of all modest and well meaning men. Wherefore
this shall be the end of our exposition upon the Psalm.

The epilogue or conclusion.
THese things had I in a readiness against the infinite ranks of evils and
calamities that now range openly in the world, to minister by way of comfort,
to all the afflicted, but especially to the godly and such as fear God. And
forsomuche as we saw the place touching Gods providence to be most profitable
for the raising of fit matter and furniture of comforts, we have taken in
hand to unfold this, utterly omitting all other of the same sort whatsoever.
And first of al we have declared by way of teaching, what is properlye to be
understood by the name of Gods providence: and that there is a providence, we
have proved by many clear and forcible reasons, confuting those things that
might seem to be brought to ye contrary. Next we have showed wherein Gods divine
providence differs from the foreknowledge, predestination and wisdom of God:
and likewise we have proved that providence is not only universal, as many
suppose, but also special and particular, again dispatching all those things,
which we suspected might be objected by the defenders of the contrary part.
Then from hence we proceeded to teach and declare, that neither fate or
destiny ought to be avouched, nor chance or fortune nor contingens or
haphazard to be granted, where the due knowledge of Gods providence is, and
the same woorthilye weighed and esteemed. Lastly also we have discussed this
question, namely whither Gods providence does bring necessity to things
proved or no. Which points thus handled and discoursed, we came to the second
part of our work, and showed at large, and as far forth as the method of
our matter seemed to require, that all the things which were taught by us of and
concerning Gods providence, auayled very much as well to many other spiritual
matters, as also especially to the fetching of comfortes from thence against
all kind of perils and dangers whatsoever. Last of all we have added also a
Psalm, preaching most plainly and plentifully as well of Gods providence, as
also of the comforts to be looked for from the same. It remains that you my
good brethren unto whom these petie matters of ours shall come, do rightlye
use them, and apply them, as much as is possible, to your benefit and
commodity. I doubt not, but many might have put forth better things: and I
dare be bold to say this, that we also could without any great difficulty
have brought many other things fit for our purpose: but these same things I
hope, I had almost said I am sure and certain, will minister great and
exceeding profit to godly minds, and I trust will satisfy all those that
being carried with no curiosity, have learned at least to be contented with
mean and measurable matters.

And to the intent that all men might embrace these things with the more
cheerefulnes of mind, it were convenient to add too some things touching the
profitablenes and necessity of the knowledge of Gods providence: but for the
godly I am persuaded this thing is not greatly needful: and as for the rest it
is better ye experience should persuade this matter unto the^ (whilst they
shall perceive in the time of their troubles that by the consideration of Gods
providence, woorking all in all, they are somewhat eased of their greefs) then
yt they should be brought to confess it by a certain eagernes of speech. This
can I say breefly with our Psalmist. He that is wise, and rightly enstructed in
the knowledge of Gods providence, will observe and mark all those things that
he sees to come to pass in this world, by the will of the Lord: and
undoubtedly he shall understand, that even in all the adversities which are sent
the singular mercy and goodness of God do shine and appear* which doubtless
is such a thing, as the mind may safely rest upon it. In sum, I dare be
bold to say, that the true blessedness, so farfoorth as may be obtained in
this life, is settled in the knowledge of Gods providence: on the other side
that he that is ignorant of this, can never have any thing wherewith assuredly
to comfort himself, and therefore is plundged in extreme misery. Nay he
scarsely perceives himself to be a man that is not carried with the care of a
more near knowledge of it.

But it behooves, before I make an end of speaking, to add in two or three
words (as they say) somewhat touching the true use of such divine comfortes,
as we have heaped together in this place. So ought they to be taken, as that
they may procreate and beget in us other spiritual fruits also: that is to
say, we must in no wise be made secure by them, so as we should utterly shake
off al fear: and much less must we be hardened in our hearts, and conceive as
it were a Stoicall indolency in our minds, or through a long custom in
euilles be brought into a forgetfulness of God: but we must be stirred up to
patience, whereby we may take in good part Gods good will and pleasure toward
us: we must be stirred up unto faith, whereby we may praise him, and call upon
him for his help for our deliverance, and at length being helped give him also
thanks. This ought to be the tiue and lawful end of all divine consolations,
to the which end we also have put forth these things. And heewithall shall be
closed up our present discourse, only this will we repeat with the Apostle,
and let us imprint it most deeply and continually in our minds, 2. Cor. 1.
Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the father of
mercies, and the God of all comfort, which comfort us in all our
tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them which are in any affliction by
the comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted of God.

God will provide, Genes. 22.
The end.
Four Sermons and two Questions.

As they were uttered and disputed ad Clerum in S. Mary's Church and Schools
in Cambridge.

By that learned Frencheman P. B. D. of Diuinitye.

And Englished by I. L.

Imprinted at London by John Woolfe.

REuerendo in Christo Parri D. Joanni Mullinsaeo SS. Theologiae D. and
professori nec non Archidiacono Londonensi dignissimo: Johannes Ludham in
perpetuam grati obseruantissimique animi memoriam hanc suam qualemcunque
opellam dicat consecratque.

Ad Lectorem Decasticon.
I In wisdoms School who so does take delight,
O Of sacred lore to taste and feed his fill:
H Him I account the only happy wight,
N None like to him, let men say what they will.
L Lo then the way who so that list to walk,
V Unto the haven of happiness I say,
D Drive no delay, spend not thy time in talk*
H Have forward fast, here wisdom sage does stay.
A Attend unto her sacred lore divine,
M Mark that, and then, thou shall be blessed in fine.
I. L.

Sermon. I.
ALbeit in respect of mine office and function in this University, I am now
and then to preach here in this place (Right dear and well-beloved Brethren)
yet notwithstanding is this charge fallen to my lotte sooner then I was aware
off, by reason of ye absence of a certain singular learned man, whose turn
and course I am now to supplye. And this that I may do, I have chosen from
among the Psalms the hundredth and thirty three, to be expounded unto you:
which first, to the end the things, that shall afterward be spoken of us, may
the better be understood, I will read throughout. The tenor of it is this.

1. A Song of degrees of David. Behold how good, and how iovfull a thing it is
brethren to dwell together in unity.

2 It is like the precious oyntement upon the head, that runs down upon
the bearde, even upon Aarons bearde, and went down to the Skirtes or border
of his garments.

3 And as the dew of Hermon, which falls upon the mountains of Syon, for
there the Lord promised his blessing and life for evermore.

Before we come to the explication of this Psalm, we must speak a few
words touching the title of it: Wherein is contained both the title of the
Psalm, and the name of the Author. For by these two reasons, to wit of the
Adiunctes and Causes, it is also commended unto us. The title is common to it
with fourteen other: namely twelve going before, and two following after. For
these fifteen are termed Psalms of Degrees. Of which title notwithstanding
the reason seems to be ^^^^^^en^ (...) therefore diverse allege diverse
couiectures. But this seems to me to be the more likelye, that they were so
called, for that they were wont to be sung in a more higher tune or note. For
there are in Music certain degrees of notes or tunes: there are the baser,
mean, and higher. This Psalm therefore with those other soureteene, was wont
to be sung in the Temple of Solomon, with a most high and loud voice, to the
intent the people might so much the more be stirred up to the woorship and
service of God. Now the Author of this Psalm is David, who was the second King
of the Israelites, and the Prophet of God, endued with singular piety and
god^ines, and therefore most acceptable unto God, as of whom God had said, That
he had found a man after his own heart. If so be then things carrye
commendation from their first Authors, and that effects are illustrated by
their causes: this Psalm being so notable a man's as David was, is woorthye of
all commendation, and therefore diligently of us to be considered, what he
says in this Psalm, and what his meaning is, that we may by him understand
and know, what it behooves us especially to do. Albeit we must clime also
higher, namelye to God who is the very true Author of this Psalm. For the
Spirit of God it self taught this unto David. Therefore God was the Author of
this Canticle, and David the writer. In regard whereof it is yet more
commended unto us, and we ought to be the more prompt and ready to hear and
obey, when God himself speaks, and admonishes us of our duty. And thus
much touching the title of the Psalm.

Concerning the Psalm it self, first we will lay before your eyes the drift
or scope of David, to the which, all that is contey^ed in this Psalm, is to be
referred: and to the which, least we should wander and go astraye, woe ought
to aim throughout our whole discourse. For so it will come to pass, that all
shall with much more ease perceive and see the things that shall be spoken.
There is none so meanelye exercised in the holy Scriptures, that knows not
that David, after he was called from the Sh^^p-foldes, and appointed King of
^^^ell, was plundged in most great perils and dangers. And the first contagion
of this evil, grow upon that victory, which he gat of Goliath. For Saul not
brooking the praises, that then were openly ascribed unto him, as appears ^.
Sam. 18. (...) from thence-foorth often seek opportunity to t^rust David
through, whilst he was in the Court; and committed that business effesoones to
certain other to be dispatched by them. Notwithstanding he was sa^ed and
delivered from all those dangers by God, whom (...) sincerelye woorshipped. But
when Saul h^^ killed himself, and David was or^eyned King, then sprang up
christ and veri^ grievous wars. For Abner Captain of the Host of Saul,
laboring to ^d^^a^^^^ Is^baseth Saul's Son to the Kingdom, had many of the
Tribes agreeing together with him in that matter. And therefore he sought to
assail David with force of a^^ges: neither had it been so hard a matter for
him to prevail, if God taking pit of that people, and perfourming his
pro^^^es to David, had not quenched the Wars and restored peace. Now then
David, being mindful of so great a benefit of God both toward him self
and all Israel, composed this Psalm, wherein extolling Peace and brotherlye
love amongst the Godly, he exhorts all men to the careful embracing and
keeping of it, and to the abandoning of Wars and discordes. For this (if I
he not disceyued) is the drifte or scope of the Prophet David.

This place then is very profitable, to moon us to praise and celebrate Gods
goodness for the benefit of so long a peace, granted to us in this Realm, and
to cause us carefullye to tender and make much of the same. For this seems
no less to belong unto us, that have enjoyed so happy and continual a peace,
in this Kingdom, then unto David and the people of Israel. The reasons
therefore wherewith David goes about to prove this, are to be weighed of us,
and in every ^^^nt^ diligently to be observed. Now there is one only heers
the chief and principal (for the Psalm is very brief) but yet such as is
enlarged with certain other proofs.

And that is contained in this Enthymime.

An Enthymime is anv^perfit reason or argumentation consisting but of two
propositions.
Upon such as embrace and retayn peace, granted them of God, God pours his
blessings, that is, enricheth them with his benefits.

Therefore, how good and joyful, nay how wholesome a thing is it, for us, as
Brethren to live and dwell together in unity.

The Conclusion goes before; the Assun^ption follows: whereunto if this
proposition be added, the Syllogism will be perfect, in this wise,

That company of people is blessed, which God enritcheth with his benefits.

But God inricheth that company of people with his blessings, that imbraceth
and reteyneth Peace.

Therefore, it is good to embrace and reteyn Peace.

And this conclusion David illustrateth or enlarges by Comparisons, and that
in double wise, first by taking a similitude from precious ointement, and
secondly from the dew, as we shall see afterward: the King by this means
inuiting and alluring his subjects, and (in them) all and every of us to
tender and embrace Peace.

Sithence then it is cheefelye entreated here of Peace, as may appeer by that,
which we have already said: First least we should stray from the purpose, we
are to know that the name of Peace is diuerselye taken in the holy Scriptures.
But most commonly it is taken for that peace of mind or conscience, whereby
was being reconciled with God through Christ, do rest in him, persuading our
selves that God is a friend and father unto us for Christ's sake, with whom we
are joined through a true and liuelye faith. Of this Paul speaks Romans 5.1.
We being justified. says he, by faith, are at peace with God. But of this
peace it is not properlye meant in this place: but rather of a certain effect
thereof, that is to say, of that concord and agreement of minds, wherewith the
faithful being tied and linked among themselves do live, not hurting, but
desiring always to profit one an other: and declyning all occasions of
Wars, braules, and strifes, which do spring from the lusts of the Flesh,
and studying continuallye for peace and concord. The persons that are thus
disposed and affected, Christ Math. 5. says, they are blessed, and the Sons
of God. Blessed are the peacemakers: says he, for they shall be called the
Children of God: and David says that upon this kind of men God is wont
abundantly to pour down his blessing.

Whereupon that is inferred, which is in the beginning of this Psalm, Behold
how good and joyful a thing it is, brethren to dwell together in unity.

But this first word, Behold, is emphaticall or forcible, and seems to
conteyne a certain opposition of things disagreeable. For the Prophet would
show openly to the people both the states: namely, that troublesome estate,
wherein the Israelites had long lived: and the peaceable condition, which they
then enjoyed. For the things that are thus compared together do become more
clear and evident. Therefore when he says, Behold how good and how ioyefull
a thing it is, brethren to dwell together in unity, the King calls his
subjects to remembrance of the former wars and the inconveniences thereof,
wherewith they had now a long time been tossed and turmoyled, and exhorts
them to compare the same with the peacible state and condition, wherein they
then lived. For why? none do know better the commodityes and discommodities
of Peace and War, then those that have lived in both estates. Preferring
therefore peace before war, and showing the commodities thereof as it were
with his finger, he says, Behold, how good and pleasant a thing it is, to
enjoy peace and tranquillity.

Such a like thing is it, if a man would compare the troublesome time past of
this kingdom, with this so quiet and pearible a state: or, if so be we would
compare this Realm with the Countries next adjoining, wherein so grievous
broiles are abroche: of which thing France especially, and Flaunders also may
be wisnesses. If any man therefore would compare those Cuntries with this, he
might worthily break forth into this voice, Behold, how good and how ^oyfull
^^t^ing^^^s, brethren to dwell together in vni^e. Thus then David being
mindestill of the benefit received from God, inuiteth and exhorts his people
to embrace Peace. Which thing it behooves us also to do, least i^ we despise
so great a benefit of God, we be oftesoones enwrappes in the miseries and
calamities of wa^re.

But this Place to the end he might the more commend and set it forth, first
in this verse he adorneth if with two Epithets or titles, to wit that it is
good, and that it is pleasant. Good we all desire, and that by the direction of
nature: but oftentimes being deteiued with the outward show of good, in the
stead of good we choose evil. The Prophet, whose judgment is incorrupt,
testifies, that Peace is a good thing, and that does also the experience of
things teach, especially at this day, wherein we may see most f^orishing
Kingdoms and cuntries and towns and cities so wasted and consumed with
wars, that we may truly say that Peace is a hundred times better, yea and
more pleasant, then war. For why? the prophet joins both together. For
oftentimes that which is good, is not so pleasant, but bitter and sharp. But in
Peace and brotherly concord, this has no place: for this is both good and
pleasant. And what is there I pray you, which is either good or pleasant in
war, or in strifes and braulinges? Verily nothing: but Peace and brotherlye
love, that is to say, Charity comprehends both good I say, and pleasant. And
yet notwithstanding here is not commended every Peace and concord, but that
which is established and confirmed among brethren. Therefore the prophet says
expressly, that it is good and pleasant, for brethren, which acknowledge and
reverence one God their father, to embrace and keep peace among them selves.
Never thelesse there is a kind of peace also among the infidels: but because
the unbelievers do measure all things by their profit: and do keep peace
only to serve their own turns: it comes to pass, that, if the hope either
of profit or pleasure, which they gape after, do fail, they fall by and by to
flat blows. And therefore, because they serve not God in tru^th, that peace,
which is among them, is not the right peace, neither the true conjunction of
minds, since every man seeks only himself, and his own commodity.
Therefore the peace, which is here spoken off, is ye peace, which has place
among the brethr^^ of one and the self same Father, that is to sape, the very
true children of God. For God, though he be the author of all mankind, yet he
counts them only for his Children, that woorship and fear him as their
Father, and love all other, as themselves, for his sake: because they know that
this is a thing acceptable unto him.

Now this peace among these kind of men, that is to say, the true and sincere
w^rshippers of God, is a thing most excellent, most profitable, and most
pleasant upon earth, which David so commends first of the Adjuncts: and then
following it more at large, he illustrateth it with a double similitude:
whereof the former is contained in the second verse, and the latter in the
third. This agreement, says he, among such men, is like precious ointment,
poured so plentifully on the high Preests head, that it ran down to his beard,
yea even to the border of his sacred garment, wher-from there issued a most
sweet smelling savor and perfume. We are to note that howsoever David here
names Aaron, who was dead long before: yet it is taken for the high Preeste,
because Aaron was the first high preeste among the Israelites: even as the
Latins of Caesar, do call all their Emperors Caesar's, that is to say,
Emperors.

But it is well known out of the holy Scriptures, that the high Priests in
times past among the Israelites were anointed with Oil, when they were
consecrated, as says Moses Exodus 29. And that external oil, was a sign or
token of the heavenly gifts, wherewith God adorned them to the executing of
their function. Which oil, being most precious, was in such plenty poured on
the head of the high Priest, that it ran down to his beard, yea even to the
skirtes of his clothing, insomuch that he was al over besineared and perfumed
with it. And so great was the smell, and so pleasant the odor of so precious an
ointme^t, that all that were present, were after a sort also perfumed
therewith. Nay further this belonged to the whole people of Israel, whose
Priest was anointed in the behalf of all the people, to the end that he being
accepted with God, might reconcile the people unto him, and consecrate them by
his ministry. And all these things were a certain shadow and figure of
Christ, and of all Christians. For Christ was anointed, not (perdy) with that
external and visible oil, but with an other, to wit, a Heavenly, and the same
by infinite degrees more precious then the former. Therefore David, Psalm. 45.
says, that he was anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows. For
why? he was endued with the Holy Ghost above measure: Yea the fulness of the
Godhead dwelte in him verily and indeed, and, in him are all the treasures of
knowledge and wisdom, as Paul says to the Coloss. of which gifts he makes
all those partakers, that draw ny unto him by faith. For to this end received
he those things of the Father that he might communicate the same unto us, which
also he most willinglye does, as being most desirous of our salvation. This
Oil therefore runs down from Christ the head, first to the beard, that is
to say, to the Prophets, Apostles, Pastors, teachers, then also to the whole
body, so as there is no part or member thereof, which is not watered and
moistened with it. For it goes down even to the very border of his garment*
For why? he endueth us with his holy spirit, to the end that being made one
with him, we might be partakers of all his benefits, and especially of his
righteousness, which he bestows on us, in pardoning and forgiving al our
sins, that being freede and delivered from Satan, the world, and the lusts
of the flesh, we might serve him purely and sincerelye all the days of our
life. And from hence does spring that Peace and concord, which is entreated of
in this place. For why? if we be so engraffed into the body of Christ, that we
are his members, how should we disagree among our selves? how should there be
broils, hatreds, and contentions amongst us? And if there be any, that are
delighted with wars, braulinges, and disagreements (as doubtless there are
over many such in these our days) then since it manifestly appears that they
do contemn this most precious ointement, nay they tread Christ himself, and
his blood, wherewith they were washed, under their fate, we ought in no wise to
follow their example: but among us there ought to be one mind, one will, and
one consent, because we are all sprinkled with one ointement, and members of
one Christ. Which if we do, there will flow so sweet a smell, out of this
concord and agreement of ours, and so gracious a savor both to God and men,
and so pleasant to all good people, and to our selves especially so wholesome
and good, that we shall find it to be true by experience, that concord
embraced and retained among brethren, is like unto that most precious ointment,
wherewith the high Priest was perfumed: so as we may iustlye cry out with
David, How pleasant a thing is it for Christians to hold and entertain Peace
among them selves.

The other similitude is taken from the Dew, wherewith the mountains, and
barren feelds are moistened, which by this means are made batsome and
fruitful. As therefore the heavenly dew, which falls upon the mountes of
Hermon and Syon, makes them fruitful: so this same Peace and concord among
the godly, makes them fit to every good work. The chief fertility of
mountains comes from the heavenly dew, wherewith they are watered: which
has place cheefely in Judah, especially if it be compared with Egypt. ^o^
Moses speking of Judah, says, that it is not like unto Egypt, which is watered
and made fruitful by the river Nilus: but Judea says he, wa^teth daily for
rain from heaven. The former similitud taught us, that concord among ye godly
is a thing pleasant, and exceptable, both to God and to all good men, as a
precious ointement. But this other tells us further, that concord is
fruitful, profitable, and good, because that it makes men, otherwise barren,
to become fruitful: even as the dew by watering the hills, causes them to
bring forth fruit. Therefore by these two similitudes is declared and set
forth, that which was said in the first verse, that peace and concord is a
good and a pleasant thing, to the end we might be the more stirred up to embrace
it, and evermore to hold it fast amongst us. As therefore the hills destitute
of moisture, except they be watered with the dew of heaven, must of necessity
wither and wax day: even so, unless men do woorship God according to his
will, and do nourish peace also among themselves, it cannot be but that they
shall be like a feelde that is withered, and destitute of all moystenes. For why?
except this thing be propounded as a principle in the first place, the whole
life of man must of necesitie, become wretched and miserable. For by discordes
all things are masted and consumed. Nay this Similitude declares, that
unless we do with all care and diligence, labor and indeuer after peace, we
cannot do any thing, that is pleasing to God, neither discharge our duty to
men. And therefore, if so be we would please God aright, if so be we desire to
profit our cuntry, from whence we are, and the Church, and to live a godly and
pleasant life, we must labor to come to this point, that being watered with
this heavenly dew, we may seek and ensue Peace, which will bring all these
commodities with it. Except therefore we will be content to be as fruitless and
barren grounds, and to leave off the execution of our charge and function, let
us love and make much of peace.

There remains now the reason, which is the foundation of the whole Psalm.
For God says he, pours plentifullye his blessing upon those, that tender and
regard Peace, and rewards them with eternal life. For why? if the ^ace
stand thus, that is, if God heap all manner of good things upon the peace
makers, and gives life also unto them: then, how good and how joyful a thing
is it, for Christian men to keep and conserve peace among themselves?

For this is even like to the most precious ointement, where with the high
Preeste was in times past perfumed: and to the heavenly dew, wherewith the
mountains and feeldes, being other wife barren, are made fatt and fruitful.
Where or who is the man, I pray you, that would not be glad to have his part in
plenty of blessings, so as ye same were not frail, and transitory, but sound
and perpetual? but by this means every man may obtain his desire. Who is he,
that would not long for life, and the same permanent, yea everlasting, so as
the selfsame were also blessed and happy? but this is the way, whereby all the
godly do atteine unto that life, worth^ly wished for of all men, as the high
and sovereign good of man: If so be they fearing God, will cherish and
maintain peace, and hold fast the same, as it were with tooth and natle: and
if it offer to slip from them, will the rather follow hard after it, that
they might keep it still: and as for discordes, braules, strifes, tumults, and
wars, will endeuer to avoid the^, as David himself did, and admonishes
them to do especially in this Psalm. For on such kind of men, as upon David,
God is wont to pour his plentiful benefits, and to bless them.

Notwithstanding the good things, whereof mention is made here, as also long
life, seem in this place to be understood of those things, which a man may
enjoy in this life. For David says that such persons, as will make much of
peace as becomes them, shall be blessed in this life, which he promises to be
prolonged unto them. True it is indeed: but yet these good things wherewith the
gooly, whilst they live here, are blessed of God, are as a certain paune or
pledge of the eternal benefits, which they after this life, shall be partakers
off: and this long lasting life, which God promises to the^ that fear him, is
as a certain earnest penny of the life eternal. Whereby it appears, that God
will become gracious to good men that do diligently procure peace, whilst
they live here, both in this lift, and in that which is to come: that is to
say, he will evermore be a God, and a Father unto them. For Godliness has the
promises, not only of the life to come, but even of this life also. Wher-upon
David Psalm 17. says, that he was oftetimes vpholden with this hope in the
midst of his dangers, namely for that he was persuaded, that he should before
he died, enjoy the good gifts of God, even in this life. And therefore, if so
be, we will, without ye loss of the life to come which is eternal, live
commodiously here upon earth also, and enjoy the benefits, which are here to
be had, then this is the only ways, that we serve God sincerelye, and keep
peace among our selves. Many there are, when being deceived with the pleasures
of this short and transitorye life (if at least they be to be taken for
pleasures) do utterly forget the blessed life to came, and so, that they may
live at ease here for a small time, loose the best and most singular
benefits. We by treading in this path, may both enjoy these here bylowe, and
yet not forgo those that are eternal. Let us tender and embrace peace, and
God will bless and enrich us with his benefits, both in this life, and in the
life to come.

Wherefore go to, my dear brethren, let every one of us be persuaded, to
maintain peace among our selves, and by all means possible to hold it fast,
yea though it were ready to be gone from us. For why? it is meet and
convenient for us so to do, if we wilbs the Children of God, seeing God, who
is the author of the true peace, does in so many places of the holy Scriptures
commend the same unto us: seeing Christ himself does urge it: My peace,
says he, I give unto you, my peace I leave with you, and heerby shall all men
know that ye are my disciples, if ye be at peace among your selves: since David
being so notable both (...) King and Prophet of God, does in this place
require it of us: and shows, that it will be a thing most profitable,
commodious, and pleasant for us, as we have already seen. Paul to the Ephesians.
4. exhorting the Christians to this purpose, sets down many things whereby
we are tied and linked among our selves. Study, says he, for peace, and keep
it. For ye are one body, there is one spirit, one hope of your calling, even
eternal life, which ye al ensue, one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God
and Father of all. All these things, which are rehearsed of the Apostle here
in this place, are certain bands of peace among Christians, the which if any
man violate peace, he does utterly break in sunder. And therefore contentious
persons, and such as are given to quarrelling and brauling, do tear in sunder
that sacred body whereof we are all members, and subvert our hope, they separate
Baptism and Faith, they break the unity of the spirit, and are injurious, and
Paul says here, against our Lord Jesus Christ, yea against God, even the God
and Father of us all.

Therefore God, the author of all peace, to the intent he might the more commend
the same unto us, and draw us by all means possible unto it, would have some
resemblance of peace and concord to shine forth in every thing, and nothing
in this whole world to stand fast without it. So are things above with things
beneath, heavenly things with earthlye, by a certain freendlye agreement
joined and knit together. The heanens do shed forth their wonderful force
and power into this low region wherein we dwell. The Sun also and the Moon
with the rest of the Stars d^^ serve to the uses of men: the Earth tempered
with the heavenly dew and heat of ye sun, brings forth her fruits
yeerelye unto us. Where is there greater contrariety or disagreement, then
between moist and dry, cold and hot? and yet the Elements, wherein these
things be, do freendly communicate one with an other, and are by this means
preseruch, that should otherwise shortly perish. The sower humors in our
natural bodies, are very repugnant one to an other: but again they agree so
well together, that of them, being conjoined and well disposed among themselves,
depends our good and perfect health. If any of them do at any time vanquish,
and consume other, then immediately from thence do discases issue and come
forth. And therefore being at odds between themselves, they yet agree
together to our health and welfare. So in Cuntries, Commonweals and Cities,
there are diverse and sundry degrees, whereof some seem to be opposite, and
clean contrary to other, and yet without them could not the Commonweal stand
or endure. For all of them together preserving every one their several
estates, are the cause of the welfare and continuance of the Commonweal. The
like is to be thought of the Church of God, wherein there are diverse functions
and offices. For there are Apostles, says Paul, Prophets, Evangelists,
Pastors, Teachers, and others. The selfsame also is to be said of this
University, where there be some yt govern and bear rule in every College,
yea in every Chamber: other some, over whom there do rule and govern: there are
some that do teach, and some that are taught: some that serve, and some that
are served. These seem to be contrary one to an other and opposite: but yet
in this opposition and contrariety, there is a marvelous consent and
agreement, whereof depends the state and dignity of this University. And
this if I might stand further to prosecute, should be found true every where,
that By Concord small things do increase. For God, who is the author of peace
and concord, will have it thus, and has appointed it so to be, to the end we
might have a certain representation of his divine nature in every thing,
whereby we might the rather be allured unto peace. But if it fall out
otherwise, and that this most sacred agreement of things among themselves be
interrupted and broken, then will follow forthwith a horrible confusion and
dessolation of all things. If the Heaven answer not the expectation of the
Earth, if the Earth tilled by man's labor, should disapoint ye husbandman of
his hope, we must of necessity perish for hunger. If any humor prevailing and
superabounding in us, should destroy and consume the rest: thereby would
diseases first, and then death immediately follow. If in the Commonweal the
poorer be oppressed of the richer, the weaker of the stronger: or if such as be
in subjection, refuse to bear the yoke of government: if in the Church, if
in the University they that rule, rule not well: or, if others suffer not
themselves to be ruled by reason, as in a household or family, then will there
follow forthwith of necessity ruin and destruction. For no less true also
is this, that By discord great things are diminished and brought to naught.
Which saying Christ himself cenfirmeth, when he says: Every kingdom divided
against it self, and every house divided, shall be desolate. For as by Concord
small things do grow, so by Discord great things decay, and at length come to
naught.

Since then these things are thus, right deer and well-beloved brethren (for there
is none of us all that makes any question of the truth of this matter) it is
our parts and duties always, and with all care and diligence, as much as in
us lies, to keep and retain peace both among our selves, and with all men.
This thing does the mighty God require of us, even he that is the prince and
governor of this world, whose Children we glory to be called, looking for
eternal life and glory from him. This does Christ require, whose members we
are: this does David, this does Paul earnestlye crave at our hands: unto
peace and concord all things both above and beneath do inuit us: this thing
the good estate and prosperity of the Commonweal: this the safety of the
Church: this the honor and dignity of this University, which is as your dear
mother, do require: this the Founders of your Colleges, who have erected unto
you these so sumptuous and stately buildings, and enriched them with such ample
revenues, that there are scarce any in all Europe, to be compared with yours,
do crave of you, if ye would hear their voices, being now dead, wherewith
they exhort you all together, with one consent to peace and concord For by
this practice and exercise of peace and concord amongst us, shall the dignity
of this University always exceedingly flourish, to the glorious increase of
this kingdom, and Church of almighty God: which end they propounded to
themselves, when they provided these so commodious places for you. Goo too
therefore, my brethren, and like as in musical instruments, we see the strings
of a Harp or Lute distincted one from an other by diverse sownes, according as
they are either greater or lesser, and are more or less streined or stretched,
to make sundry notes and tunes: but yet so, as all do very well agree among
themselves, and yield a most sweet and pleasant harmony to the hearers: Even
so let all, as many as have repaired hither for learninges sake, or that have
charge over other, either privately or publicly apply all possible diligence,
that standing in awe of God our heavenly father, and of Christ his Son our
Lord, they may so nourishe peace and concord, that from hence may issue forth
a most sweet savor and perfume, which to God especially, which to the Prince
and Nobles of this Realm, which finally to all good men may be gracious and
acceptable, and to us all healthful and wholesome.

Sermon. II.
Psalm: 15. 1 A S^ng of David. O Lord, who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle? and who
shall rest in thy holy Hill?
2 Even he that walks vprightlye, and woork the righteousness, and speaks
the truth in his heart.
3 He that standreth not with his tung, not does evil to his neighbor, nor
receives a false report against his neighbor.
4 In whose eyes a vile person is contemned, but he honoreth them that fear
the Lord: he that swears to his own hinderance, and changes not.
5 He that gives not his money unto Usury, not takes ^eward against the
innocent, he that does these things shall never fall, or, shall never be
moved.

Having changed courses with the woorshipfull M. Doctor Chaderton, I have taken
upon me the charge of this days Sermon wherein God so assisting, I am to
expound the 15. Psalm, which you, my deer brethren, have heard me now to read.
The author of this Psalm, as appears by the title, is David, a man in
Israel, that is to say in ye Church, most famous and excellent, as he that was
King of Israel, and a notable Prophet of God, and in many other respects
also, a tipe and figure of Christ himself. And therefore this Psalm is
worthily commended unto us by the Author of it, to the end we might be the more
heedfull to understand the things, that shall be propounded by so rare a man, and
to transfer them to the use of our life: especially since he, being taught by
the Holy Ghost, had and wrote these things for all our enstruction. There is
also an other special cause, where through we ought no less to be moved, to
show our selves attentive and teachable, namely for that David in this place,
does of purpose handle and unfold a question, which of all, that ever could
be handled, is the weightiest and most profitable: and that is, by what ways
or means mortal men, may after this miserable and transitory life, atteine to
the happy and blessed life eternal.

We do all naturallye covet life, and that not of every sort, but blessed: and
blessed it cannot be, except it be eternal. For if so be a man should live a
life here sequestered from all evils, and flowing with all manner of good
things and delights, and yet death continually hang over his head, whereby he
might be deprived of all those things, how could he be blessed, being in a
perpetual fear of most weighty matters? And this so vehement a destre of
eternal life, being graffed into men by God, declares the immortality of our
souls, and that there is another life, after this life, to come: for otherwise
it should be settled in men in vain. And therefore in this point almost all have
always agreed, as appears by the books of the Philosophers and Poets, which
have spoken and devised many things, of the other life after this: but as
touching the way, that leads unto it, there have always been great and
grievous contentions among men, some affirming one way to the wood, and some an
other, and every one with tooth and nail maintaining their several opinions.
And from hence have hatreds, debates, persecutions, wars, and so many
horrible slaughters of men, both often been broched in times past, and at this
day are broached in many places, whilst each man will enforce other, to embrace
his opinion touching this matter. If there be any therefore, of so great credit
and authority among all the rest, that candecide this question, touching the
way to eternal life, which all do so much covet, so as he may put an end to
murders, wars, troubles, persecutions, and lead men to the life, which they
long for, without error: doubtless he may seem to be the only odd man of the
world well worthy to be heard of al with most diligent attention. But David
seems to be such a one, since it is manifest, that he was so notable a prophet
of God, and a man so dear and acceptable unto God. If so be therefore he has
at any time, or in any place, vttred his mind and given sentence touching this
controversy, it ought to go for payment, and no more doubt to be made of it,
then of a heavenly Dracle. But surely he in this Psalm, meddling with an other
matter, takes upon him of purpose to ha^^^ls this only question, and being
taken in hand does so exactly decipher and unfold the same, as that no man,
unless he will himself, if he mark him well, need to err or he deceived
about it. Therefore let us with clear and resolute minds hear him,
expounding this matter unto us.

In the first verse of this Psalm, he propounds the Question: and being
propounded he then after unfolds in the verses following, and finallye
concludes it in the last Thus then he puts it forth, O Lord who shall
dwell in thy Tabernacle? and thus by and by with a greater vehemency, he
repeateth to the greater attention, though in words somewhat altered, saying,
Who shall rest in thy holy Hill? And this thus propounded he lays out
afterward by many effects, in this sort: Even he, says he, that walks
uprightly, and woorketh righteousness and speaks the truth from his heart: he
that slaundereth not with his tung, nor does evil to his neighbor, nor
receives a false report against his neighbor: he that sets not by a vile
person, but honoreth them that fear the Lord: he that swears, and carefullye
performs his oath: he that neither gives his money to Usury, nor peruerteth
iudgementhy taking reward. Thus the question being decided he concludes. He
that does these things, says he, shall never be cast out of the house of God.
Now the^ it is manifest, which we said, that David in this place undertakes
of purpose to handle, and unfold this Question. Therefore it remains, that we
harken unto him with all diligence, to the end, we may perceive what he says,
and what his meaning is: for which cause, we will now prosecute every thing
somewhat more at large.

The Question he propounds first of all with a certain exclamation, to the
intent, he might bewray ye greater affection of his mind and stir us up the
more to attention: but he propou^deth it (which might seem very strange) not to
men, as he ought to have done, but to God. O Lord, says he, who shall dwell
in thy Tabernacle? because men pervie in this case are blind, and God is only
the fit judge. And therefore that this so weighty a question might with the
greater authortrie, be determined, David would dispute it in the presence of
God himself, and before his judgment seat, that we might be given to
understand, that the thing which is here uttered, is the certain, undoubted
Oracle of God. For this cause therefore, letting men go, who are too too much
blind-folded, especially in this matter he calls God him self to witness, or
rather to be the judge of this controversy, as if he should say: O God, I now
appeal unto thee, that thou being my witness and judge, I may teach men, which
is the certain and undoubted way to eternal life, touching the which all men
upon earth do so greatly strive among themselves, all generally coveting to
have it, but ye gretest number going astray from it. And we are to mark, that
in both the members of this first verse, David sets before us the heavenly
and blessed life in the Tabernacle, and in mount Syon. For he does not
demand, who shall one day enjoy everlasting life in heaven: but who shall
dwell in the Tabernacle, that Moses had erected among the Israelits: and abide
in that holy Mountain. But all is one in effect. For why? that Tabernacle, and
that mount Syon was a figure of the heavenly Tabernacle, and of eternal life,
as appears by infinite places of the holy Scriptures. And that this is so to
be understood, may appeer by that, that, if he had meant only of the outward
Tabernacle and Mount, he would not have asked, who should dwell in them: For
they were appointed to the Jews, and it was lawful for all, as well good as
bad, to be conversant in them. But David putting a difference between the good
and the evil, and respecting the end of the Tabernacle erected, and
considering mount Syon after a spiritual manner, demands who shall rest and
abide there. For he that by faith frequented that Tabernable and mountain, was
sure to be partaker of the life eternal and heavenly, whereof these were tipes
and figures on earth. Therefore it is all one as if he had expressly demanded,
who should be partaker of eternal life.

Which Question afterward he expounds at large, that is to say, by eleven
sundry effects drawn from him that earnestlye endeuereth after the same
blessed life. Every of which are of us to be weighed, but yet so, as, having
regard of the place and time, we may breefelye teach them, which otherwise if
the time would suffer, were well worthy to be longer stood upon.

In the first verse therefore, wherein he begins to unfold the question, he
says, that he shall be partaker of the heavenly life, that so long as he
lives, this short and transitory life here upon earth, does so behave
himself, that he becomes sound and upright, and imbraceth continually
righteousness and truth. Which words are general, and have a very large
signification, insomuch that they may contein even the whole perfection of the
Law. That may be called sound or upright, and is so in deed, which cons^steth
of al his parts and members, and has no one jot of them wanting. So that man
shall be of a sound and incorrupt life, which every where and at all times,
whatsoever he says or does, so behaueth himself, that for Gods cause, whom
he entirelye loves and fears, he never departs from his duty, that is
from the duty of a good man, so that he is,

Integer vitae, Scelerisque purus. In life unattained, and with sin
unacquainted.

And therefore God, who loves this integrity, making a covenant with his
servant Abraham, requires of him, that he be perfect before him. And that the
word righteousness is general, it is well known to all, because righteousness
contains in it self all virtues, and the whole nature of upright dealing and
of the law of God. Which also may be said of verity and truth. But yet in
this place, these things seem rather to be refered to those duties, yt we ought
to exercise toward men, as appears by the whole sequeale of that that
follows. David therefore says, that he, which aspireth to the heavenly life,
ought to frame and lead his life sincerely, and to behave himself without all
fraud and guile toward others: and so to exercise just dealing, that he hurt
none, but profit all, rendering to every man that which is his: to be no
dissembling or craftye person, but to speak ye truth in his heart, that is, his
tongue to consent with a pure and sincere heart, and to do nothing subtelly or
deceitfully. For in this wise must they behave themselves, that march toward
that heavenly and blessed life.

Now in the verses following, he passes on to some more special points,
least this, which he had said in general, were not sufficient and plain
inough-to teach us, and to bring us to the scope of his intended purpose.
Therefore he adds, that he shall dwell in the house of God, that hurts not
the good name or fame of his neighbor, nor that does, or suffers to be done
any evil or reproach unto him. For here of things diverse and disagreeing,
things also disagreeable are to be understood. As therefore in the verse next
before he declared, with what virtues he should be adorned, that would dwell
with God: so now he tells us, from what vices he must be free, and decked
with virtues, contrary to these vices: as that he must not only not hurt any
man with his tongue, but must carefully tender and further every man's credit:
he must do evil to none, but good to all: slander no man, nor aid him that
does it, but rather resist him.

The first thing therefore that is spoken off, is touching Detraction or
slander, which is not lightly to be passed over, because we do so easilye
fail in this point. For the good name of a man, as says Solomon, is a
precious thing to every one, and to be preferred before much treasure, insomuch
that it is no less grievous, to hurt a man with the tongue, then with a
sword: nay oftetimes the stroke of a tongue, is greeuouser then the wound of a
spear, as it is in the French proverb. And therefore the tongue must be
brideled, that we hurt not in any wise the good name of our neighbor: but
preserve it unto him safe and sound, as much as in us shall lie.

That which he adds, touching evil or iniurye, not to be done to our
neighbor, is like unto that which we have seen already, concerning ye working
or exercising of righteousness. He would have us therefore so to exercise all up
right dealing, that we might be far from doing any damage or wrong to our
neighbors. And by the name of neighbor, is meant every man and woman, as it
is plain and evident. For we are all created of God, and placed in this world,
that we might live uprightly and sincerely together. And therefore he breaks
the law of humane society (For we are all tied and bound by this law of
nature) that does hurt or iniurye to an other.

The third member of this verse is, nor that reprocheth an other, or, that
mainteineth not a false report given one against an other: which latter
particle seems to be the better, since he had spoken before expressly,
touching the good name of an other, not to be hurt or wronged with our tongue.
To the which fault this is next in degree, wher-with we are too too much
encombred, and which we scarce acknowledge to be a fault, when we further and
maintain the slanders, devised and given out by an other, against a man,
either by hearing them, or by telling them forth to other, as we heard them.
For why? it seems for the most part to be enough for us, if we can say,
that we feign not this or that, nor make it of our own heads, but only tell
it forth, as we heard it of others, without adding any thing of our own
brain. But as often as we do this, we fail in our duty doing, in not
providing for our neighbors credit, as were requisite for the things, which
being vttred by others ought to be passed over in silence and to lie dead, we
gather up, and by telling them forth disperse them abroad, which whither it be
a sin, or no^ when as we ought by all means possible to wish and do well
unto our neighbor, all men do see. And therefore thou that trauailest toward
eternal life, must not only not devise false reports, and slanders against
other men, but also not so much as have them in thy mouth being denised by
others, neither by any means assist or maintain them in slaundering: but by
all honest and lawful means, provide for the credit and estimation of thy
neighbor, so much as in thee lies.

The two effects that follow, to contemn the wicked, and to honor the
godly, are opposite the one to the other. But the former may seem not to be
sufficiently beseeming to a godly man. For why should he contemn or despise
others, that is commanded by all means to care for the credit of others, as
we heard even now? Nay a godly man, letting others go, ought to search into
himself, and to accuse himself, but not to judge of others. But this saying
of the Prophet, is to be under stood, rather of the faults then of the person.
As every man therefore is to be loved, so are the faults of every man to be
hated of the godly. For so is God himself, whom we desire to be like unto,
that we might dwell with him, affected and disposed. For why? he hates no man,
nay he hates nothing at all in this whole universal world, but only sin.
For he is the author and preserver of all things, that be: and therefore does
good, and wishes well to al: only of sin he is not the author, but the free
and vnconstreigned will of man and Satan. Notwithstanding God does so greatly
hate sin, that by reason thereof he does sometimes neglect and forsake men,
yea and have them in contempt. So then a godly man hates no man, nor
contemns any: but yet notwithstanding he dislyketh sin in sinful men, and
that he slicketh not to let them perceive, either by reproving them, or by
shurming their company, or by doing of some other thing, whereby they may know
that they are misliked of good men for their enormities, and see themselves to
be contemned of others, for their wicked and ungodly life. A good man therefore
must not flatter the ungodly in their ungracious attempts, but must freelye
declare, that he disaloweth their course and conversation.

Again on the other side, he must honor them that fear God, of what state or
condition soever they be, which is no common virtue. For aftetimes it falls
out, that such as will ^^^e Christianly are despised and laughed to ^^^me of
others. If therefore there be any that (...) them worthy of their freendship,
or fa^^^^ (...) of any honor, they are very few: (...) any that account them
for good (...) of commonly show them (...) they should fall in^^^ (...) that is
earnestly affected with the fear of God, says David, and desires to dwell
with him in his Tabernacle, will love, yea and honor good men, though they be
poor and abject, and though they be despised of others, setting before his
eyes the will of God rather then the vain glory of men. For so is God himself
affected toward the Godly, whom the world despises, and which are many times
destitute of things necessary, whereof others have plenty: and Christ
himself, who is the image of his Father, showing that be has no less care of
the^, then of him self, says of them, That which ye have done to these, ye
have done to me: making account of it as of his own, whatsoever is do^n for
the godlies sake, that are here wronged and oppressed.

Next he adds, That he will also keep touch, or perform that which he has
sworn. But this has some difficulty: for some translate the words of David
thus: he that has sworn to do hurt, and changes not, and they expound it,
He that has sworn to do any thing, whereby he is like to sustain loss or
damage, and yet changes not his purpose. But this exposition serves not for
those words, for to swear to do hurt, is not to promise any thing, that
shall be hurtful to him that swears. Rather, to swear to do hurt, and not to
change, were, to promise to do some evil, and to do it: which agrees not to
this place. The translation of the 70, Interpreters, has a most fit sense, He
that swears to his neighbor, that is, to an other, and changes not, but
performs his promise. But the vocal points seem to be against it. For
(...) by Patach, which the Prophet uses here signifies, Evil: but (...) by
Tseri, and Patach, a neighbor. But, if it be true, which learned men, and most
skillful in the Hebrew tung, affirm, and confirm by reasons, that those
vocal points or vowells, were added to the Bible four hundred years after
Christ: at the time, wherein those 70. translated the Bible, in this place were
only these four consona^ts (...) And therefore they well translated it, to his
Neighbor. Wherefore I see no let, but that we may stand to their judgment.
Further, albeit we admit the said points, yet may those two, Tseri, and
Patach, be contracted into Patach so at (...) may stand for (...) which in
(...) oftetimes happens, in stead whereof, we read most commonly (...), as in
Exodus the last chap. verse. 10. where both are read together: and the like is to
be seen in the same Chapter, and else where oftentimes. Yet if any mislike of
this, he may do it for all me. The word (...) may be turned, to hurt or
evil, and then the sense will be this, he that swears unto evil, that is,
to his own hurt or hinderace, and changes not. Which words will have all one
sense in manner with these 70. For whatsoever it be, here is commended unto us
faithfulness and constancye in covenants and dealings, from the which we must
not start though it be to our own hurt and daminage.

The last verse, contains yet two things, whereof the first is, that he gives
not his money to Usury: touching which point, many things were to be spoken,
if the time would suffer: but we must be content with a few. This then is the
meaning of the Prophet, that albeit in the Common weal by reason of the sundry
affairs and dealinges of men among themselves, and the use of money so
manifold, and necessary for the traffiks of men, and that almost in every
contract and bargain: albeit, I say, for these and such other like causes, it
is plain and evident, that all gain, which is gotten by money, is not to be
condemned: yet a godly man must take diligent heed, since there is also so great
and many abuses of money, least he abuse his money, to the hurt of his
neighbor: as it is an usual practice amongst rich men and some of the greater
sort, who by lending, or by giving out their money to usury, are wont to snare
and oppress the poor and needier sort: as they commonly are wont to do, who
sitting idle at home, make merchandise only of their money, by giving it out in
this sort to such needy persons, altogether for gains sake, without having any
regard of his commodity, to whom they give it, but only of their own
gain. For by this craft they easily get many into their snares, whom they do
not only bite, which is meant by the noune (...) nashac, which David uses, but
also devour and spoil. But the true worshippers of God are far from this
wickedness, seeing they embrace others with true brotherlye love, neither will
they do that to any, which they would not have done to themselves. Which rule,
in humane affairs and contractes, is diligently of us evermore to be
observed, if we will live uprightly as becomes us.

Now there is one only remaining, nor takes reward, says he, against the
innocent: that is to say, he is not moved either for favor, or flattery, or
any other cause, to pervert judgment: which I tabe not to be restreyned only
unto Magistrates and Judges, seeing he describes here the life of a godly
man in general. For even all private men also, do sometimes either by request
speak their mind, touching many controversies, risen among their equals: or
else not requested, do give sentence of this or that controversy between
others: and many a one oftetimes through mere envy, hatred, or favor, do
hurt this or that party, and peruerte Judgment. Christian men therefore, whither
they be Magistrates, or private persons, ought never at any time to be won,
either for hatred, or for favor, or rewards, to deface the truth in
judgment, that so judgment might be perverted, but they must evermore give
all diligence, that the truth may prevail, and that judgment be given for
the innocent party.

And therefore are the things, wherein David says the godly do exercise
themselves al their life long, and this one thing they set before their eyes,
even that they may serve and honor their God, of whom they look for eternal
life, in loving and helping their neighbors, as he commands. Therefore
these things being set down, he concludes the question, which he in the
beginning had propounded: He that does these things, says he, shall never be
moved, that is, He shall remain for ever in the house of God, and never be
cast from thence, as Ismael, that mocked Isaac, was cast out of Abraham's house
with his Mother, wherein yet Isaac abode, and obtemed the inheritance. Thus
therefore the godly, which will frame their lives after this rule, shall dwell and
continue in the family of God, and so obtain the heavenly inheritance. For
why almighty God loves such kind of persons, as desire to he like unto him,
and acknowledges them for his own, and blesses them, rewarding them with
eternal and everlasting life: the which if we suppose that there be any, as we
profess in the Creed, that we believe eternal life, if we earnestly endeuer
to come to it, then must we so behave our selves here, as we may be partakers
of it. Yea we must even here begin that heavenly life, and upon this earth,
even now imitate and follow our Father, which is in heaven, and as Christ
himself admonishes, he perfect, even as he is perfect, doing good to all, as
he does, which so mercifully grants the use of his sun, and rain to al,
yea even to his enemies. For, he that does these things says David, shall never
be cast out of the house of God, but shall dwell with him for ever.

Here perhaps some man may marvel, when he shall see David in so few words,
thus to determine this Question, touching the way to eternal life, for the
which there are at this day so many and great controversies among men. But, if
he would heedefullye weigh and consider, that the whole woorship and service of
God, consists in the love of God and of our neighbor, as it is prescribed in
the Law, he should cease to marvel. And therefore this question might yet in
fewer words have been discussed: but for our sake David would stand the
longer: whereas Christ, entreating of the selfsame matter, requires only the
marriage garment. For when he came to visit ye guestes that were bidden to the
wedding, which were now busy in taking their meat, he only ca^r him out from
the banquet, that wanted his wedding garment. And that is nothing else
undoubtedly, then the sincere knowledge of many hard and difficulte matters, as
it is commonly thought to be, to the which Countrymen, women, and poor
people, that get their living by continual labor, cannot attem unto, which
yet, as Christ and Paul do witness* are more apt and near to eternal life,
then the learned for the most part, or mighty and great men. For why? their
poverty and continual travail of their body to get their living, and the
ignorance of many things, which are taught in the Universities and Schools,
is no let, but that they may love God and their neighbor sincerelye, and live
without fraud or guile with others, in the fight of God.

But yet thou will say, there are many things omitted here of David, For there
is no mention here of Faith, which only malieth us righteous, and acceptable
before God, there is no mention of the Sacrifices, nor of the most sacred
Ceremomes, which in the time of David were commanded, and in use nay there
seems to be no mention made here of the first Table, wherein the woorship of
God is contained: and not so much as all the precepts of the second Table of
the Law have here been set down. For, neither of the honor and reverence
toward Parents, and Magistrates, nor of adultrie, and some other things,
have any thing been expressly touched* And therefore it may same that David's
discourse is maimed and imperfect, and that this Psalm is not sufficient to
determine the said Question, touching the controueisie of Religion, and way to
eternal life. These things then, before we make an end, are breefelye at
least to be declared, least any man should think that David has not performed
his promise, and therefore not meet or convenient to rest upon his words.
First therefore it is not to be thought, that so rare a Prophet of God, was to
fond and foolish, as not to see, what question he had put forth to be handled:
or, not to consider of the things, which even now were objected. What then?
could he not, or would he not explane this matter unto us? Neither of both can
be said of him: but rather in very deed he has wonderfully and divinely
resoluen the Question propounded. And therefore, that those things may be
understood, which were objected, this is to be holden for truth, that David in
this place, describes the life of a Christian, and of one that loves and
fears God: of a Christian, I say, that is not in his own opinion, or by the
judgment of other men accounted such a one, but that is approved in the sight
of God. For therefore it was, that David in the beginning of the Psalm,
directed his speech to God himself, that he might declare and show, that he
speaks of such as fear God in truth, and not of hiporrites. If this be
determined and concluded upon, the things that were objected, shall easily be
perceived. And, that we may touch that first, which we said, that there are
here some things left out of the second Table of the Law, it is not absolutely
true. For those things are in the beginning generally set down, in which the
points, that are not specially named, are easily contained. For why? to such a
one, as is sound and perfect, and that sincerelye imbraceth righteousness and
truth, there is nothing wanting to the observation of the second Table of the
Law: no, nor yet of the first if so be we will refer these things also unto
that, as in many places we must do. But why, will thou say, was not every
thing specially and by name reckoned up of him? because, say I, it was neither
needful, nor convenient. (For so there would never have been any end) but
those things are touched, which being set down, if thou be earnestlye
affected with the fear of God, and love him sincerelye, thou can not be
deceived in the rest. For the spirit of God, which shall be given thee, will so
easily and safelye direct thee, that thou shall not go astraye from the right
path, that is, from the glory of God, and love of thy neighbor. And therefore
to a man thus affected and disposed, there was no need, that every thing should
be prescribed, because that divine unction does teach and enstruct him in all
things.

But for all this thou will say, that the first Table ought in no wise to be
pretermitted, wherein faith and the worship of God is contained, seeing the
other without this cannot be observed. For the observation which seems to be
of this, without that, is mere hypocrisy. For if there were any, which
honored and reverenced his Parents and Magistrates, and committed neither
manslaughter, nor adultrie, nor theft, and that neither bear false witness,
nor coueted his neighbors wife, nor any thing that were his: yet except he
loved God cheefely and above all things, he could not be accounted a true
worshipper of God. How then is this foundation omitted? No verily it is not
omitted, as we said before. For David here describes the life and manners of
that person, that fears and loves God. He declares therefore how such a one
ought and is wont to behave himself with others, whilst he lives here. That
then is not pretermitted, but is set down first as the foundation: and in that
very point, does faith consist, or rather that thing it self is the true and
lively faith, which stands not in a naked and bare knowledge of God (for then
were it dead) but the life and efficacy thereof, is that same love of God above
al things, and of our neighbor as of our selves: For except Faith have this in
it, it is dead.

And this is that wonderful Love and Charity, whereof Paul speaks. 1 Corinthians. 13. or, if ye will, that religious piety toward God and men, which
is ye mother of all good actions, and by the which Faith works, which other
wise is dead, as says James. But why was not this expressly mentioned?
because it was not needful. For why? all the Jews professed, as we do at this
day, that they knew and worshipped one God: but the most of them denied it in
their deeds, as it commonly comes to pass. For it is an easy matter for a
man, either by word of mouth, or by outward ceremonies, to profess himself a
worshipper of God: but to be in deed that which thou professess, that is to
say, to deny thy self, and to renounce this world, that thou might
sincerely serve God and thy neighbors, is a thing more difficult and rare.
For So Much therefore as all men and, as in times past the Israelites, so at this
day every where the Christians, are wont with full mouth to make their vasit,
that they are the true worshippers of God, there was a rule to be set down, by
the which all might be tried, least any man should deceive himself, and that
the good might be known of the good and so linked together with a streighter
bond. Now this could not be fetched from the former Table of the Law, which
altogether consists therely in the heart and mind, and requires faith in God
and most high neuerence. But in this case all will say, that they are so
affected, and albeit they cannot deceive God, yet they ofitimes deceive both
themselves and others. That rule then stands in the second Table of Gods Law,
wherein a man cannot so easilye feign or counterfeit. Thou say, that God
almighty is thy God, as the first Cummaundement of the first Table does
require, and thou trustest in him: but I, for my part, do doubt of that
matter, and cannot tell, whither thou plaiest the hypocrize, or no. And
therefore show me, as says James, that faith of thine by thy works, which
are commanded in the other Table of the Law: prove that thou do in this
wise so greatly love God, that thou can willingly suffer and do all things
for his sake, that thou revenge not injuries done unto thee, but wish well from
thine heart, to all, yea even to thine enemies (for so did Christ) because,
whilst they vex and trouble thee, they wotte not what they do. If thou behave
thy self thus, I will believe that you art the man, whom thou make thy self
to be: but if not, how shall I believe it to be true, since all men will not
stick to say as much, but yet deny it in their deeds: Therefore by this rule our
life is to be examined, least we deceive either our selves, or others. David
then made no mention of the first Table, because al say they believe in God,
and worship him: but he touched that, whereby it might appear, how truly they
make that profession. For if it were possible to find fire that were cold, or
ye that were hot, then might also a man be, as many in these days avouch
them selves to be, a true worshiper of God, and yet not love his neighbor as
himself, wherein also notwithstanding consists the worship and service of
God. But that shall never be seen, for it is against nature. Forasmuch therefore
as men commonly vaunte of a vain shadow of Faith, and deceive themselves,
whilst they brag, that they both know God, and believe in him, not considering
aduizedly, what it is to believe in him, nor wherein it consists: therefore
both David in this place, as also Christ and Paul every where, do urge and
require, that this should be showed in the observation of the second Table,
that is to say, in the sincere love of our neighbor, wherein for no other cause
is the whole accomplishement of the Law said to consist. For, except thou be
affected with that fervent love of God, which may draw thee to his obedience,
thy Faith is cold, nay dead, as being destitute of her natural heat. Yea I
dare be hold to say, that this is not faith, but a vain persuasion touching
God, or touching his son Christ, wher-by thou deceiuest thy self. This true
and lively faith therefore, which dwells inwardly in the soul, and cannot be
seen of man, but of God only, who is the searcher of the heart, is here
described by the effects, as it is also in many other places. He that is
endued with this Faith, shall do, says David, the things that are here
prescribed, and shall never be cast out of the house of God, because he
belongs unto him: for he is endued with his Spirit. Like as therefore when the
earth is set directly and diameter-wise, as they say, between the Sun and the
Moon, no man living sees it with his eyes, neither can see it, but God
discearneth it apparantlye: yet we by the effect thereof do easilye and most
certainlye perceive it, by the Eclips of the Moon: for she is therefore
darkened, because that by reason of the Earth put between her and the Sun,
she cannot then borrow her light of the Sun: so neither can any man, except
God, see the faith of another body, but by the effects. And as by smoke
coming forth of a chimney, we gather that there is fire: and, as we
certainelye perceive and know, that a man is endued with life and soul, whom
we see to walk, to speak, and to do those things yt belong unto a man,
albeit we see not his soul neither indeed can we see it (for it comes not
within compass of our sight) even so we Faith by her effects. And on the other
side, as if a man would persuade us, that there were fire, where there is no
heat, or that there were life in that carcass, that in no wise moved, felt,
or breathed, we would steadfastly deny it, and that truly: so, he that says he
has faith without this divine heat, that is to say, seruent love of God, and
without this vital spirit of faith, is deceived, neither is any credit to be
given unto him: for this cause therefore it is, that the Holy ghost every where
in the holy Scriptures, brings men to this point, as David does in this
place that they should not deceive themselves and others: for indeed there
cannot be a more certain testimony of faith, which is not seen with the eye,
and whereof all men do boaste, then by the effects thereof, and good works of
all which she is the Mother: and therefore to her, as the cause, is worthilye
attributed the dignity and glory of righteousness, but yet so as it be such as
we have said, to wit liuelye, and woorking through love. For otherwise neither
it, nor any thing that comes from it, shall any way obtain righteousness:
but shall only be mere hypocrisy, or else a vain knowledge in the mind of
some God. And therefore they are deceived, that think themselves to be
Christians, in what Church or congregation soever they be, except they walk in
the way, that is here prescribed of David.

But what shall we say of the Sacrifices, and Ceremonies, that in the time of
David were in their full force and strength, why does David make no mention of
them? because the godly man knew well enough, that the woorship of God
consisted not in them, neither Faith, but the outward exercise of faith and
Gods worship: therefore Psalm. 15. he says, That these outward Sacrifices and
burnt offerings do not please God, to wit of themselves, but the Sacrifice
acceptable to God, is a troubled spirit, and a broken or contrite heart.
Notwithstanding thou will say, he that takes upon him to describe the way of
salvation unto others, ought not to omit the Ceremonies ordained of God, wherein
faith and religion do exercise themselves. But religiousnes and faith is much
better and more holilye exercised, in the moral duties or actions of the
second Table, that is, in helping and releeuing of our neighbors, then in any
ceremonies, as witnesses Christ Math. 25. And this shall appear most plainly
in the latter day. For men occupied in Ceremonies do commonly mock God, and
work disceit, counterfetting themselves to be other then they be. Which if it
were not so, they did very ill, that set forth unto us, the articles of our
faith, where there is no mention made of Baptism, no mention of the Lords
Supper, nor of the exercising of any other Ceremony. But those holy men,
whither they were the Apostles, or other that next succeeded them, knew right
well, that those things, were used as well of the bad, as of the good, and
therefore that the true and spiritual woorship of God stands not in them,
whereby the good might be discerned from the evil: but in this rather, that
thou by a true and lively faith, apprehending the infinite mercy of God, offered
unto thee in Christ, may so immitate and follow him, that thou may become a
new man, and so seruently love God, that for his sake, thou may bring thy
self to nothing, to the end thou may serve him and thy neighbor, as he
commands. For in this point stands, shall stand, and always has stood,
true and sincere religion: which afterward notwithstanding in diverse and
sundry cerimontes brought in for our weakness, is exercised and put in ure.

But if these things be thus, it is so far off, that this sentence touching the
way to eternal life, should be maimed and imperfect, that contrari-wise it is
to be thought most perfect and absolute, which in so few words sets down
those things, that being set down, and simplye (as every man may) understand,
all things must of necessity be well and as they should be, insomuch that
there is none, that does these things, but he shall also be partaker of the
blessed life to come, or else David is a false Prophet, which no man in his
right mind will say. And if this be so indeed, why do men strive so much
about this matter and one so cruelly rage against another* verily because such
is the curiosity of man's brain, and desire of knowledge, that omitting that,
which was especially to be regarded, they all, for the most part, entangle
themselves in many and most difficult questions, and will enforce others to be
of like mind with them in every thing: and such also is the blockishnes of
many, that being given to a number of Ceremonies, they will drive and compel
others to use and frequent the same. And in the mean season that Wedding
garment is neglected, which notwithstanding, if so be we will feast with God,
and his Angels, and with all the holy Saints in heaven, is especially
requisite. And therefore all men have here, wherein they may safely rest, if
they will, and willing they ought to be, if they think meet to stand to
David's testimony: they have, whereby hatreds contencions, persecutions, fire and
sword, both between Kings and armed Soldiers, and among learned men, may
easilye be quenched. But if neither Kings, by the authority of King David,
nor Learned men, by th'authorite of the Prophet David, can be kept within
compass of their duties: yet have all the godly in this Psalm, where, in this
so great a discord of religion, they may repose themselves, that so they may
never, whatsoever encombrance they suffer of any, be discouraged in their
minds, but constantlye proceed and persevere in the way prescribed them here,
which is the Kingly and Prophetical way, certain and assured to that most
happy and heavenly life.

Goo too therefore, my dear brethren, what complots soever bloody men devise
among themselves to destroy us: whatsoever contentious persons and common
branglers dispute and reason among themselves, let us hold this way to life,
described unto us by David and Christ the Son of God, and let us continue in
it, persisting in the steps of Christ, that being at length made like unto
God, through Christ our Savior, we may with him enjoy everlasting life. Which
that he may grant us (for this is not in our power) we will again most humbly
beseech him. Oeternall God, and our heavenly Father, etc.

Sermon. III.
Epistle of James chap. 2. 14 What avails it, my brethren, though a man says
he has faith, and yet have no works? can that faith save him?
15 For if a brother or a sister be naked, and destitute of daily food:
16 And one of you say unto them, depart in peace, warm your selves, and fill
your bellies: notwithstanding ye give them not those things, which are needful
to the body, what helps it?
17 Even so faith, if it have no woorks, is dead in it self.

THe place touching Faith is most large and profitable among Divines, and very
requisite of every man to be known: for it seems that the true and natural
knowledge and use thereof alone may be sufficient to the atteinement of life.
But the same has been, whither through the ignorance of some men, or
wickedness, I cannot tell, but undoubtedly through the craft and subtilty of
Satan, so enwrapped with many hard and difficult questions, that the same
which was plain and simple, is now become difficult and obscure. We having
regard of this place and time, and omitting the questions, which perhaps may
be handled more fitlye in the Schools, will allege only those things,
that shall seem most profitable, to the better information of life, and
framing of our manners to the will of God.

James in the first of the sower verses, which we have read, propounds a
question, the which immediately repeating, he sets forth by the adjuncts: and
being thus propounded and set forth, he in the three other verses, by an
argument drawn from a Sinulitude, declares and determines it. The Question
is this, What avails it, brethren, says he, If a man says he has faith,
and have no works? that is to say, Though a man says that he believes in
God the Father almighty, or also in Jesus Christ his Son, and does exercise
this religion in rites and ceremonies, and yet has no works prescribed in
the Law, that is, neither loves God above all things, nor other men as
himself: what good, says he, shall such a faith do, wherewith he that is
endued, shall neither love God as becomes him, nor yet men? But, for so much
as there are many profitable uses of Faith, whereof also we receive some in this
life: the apostle repeateth and enlarges the Question. Can such a faith, says
he, save a man? to the intent it might appear, that he demands not the
question here, touching every utility of faith: but of this expressly,
Whither such a faith can save a man. And here is propounded and set forth the
principal and most excellent fruit of Faith, to wit, the salvation of our
souls: which except Faith do minister unto us, it is unprofitable. For the
other uses thereof, if this be taken away, shall be of no account: and
therefore all, that woorship God, do woorship him in manner with this hope,
that they may obtain of him a blessed and everlasting life. For, albeit the
truest and rightest way of woorshipping him is, that we may love and woorship
him, for his own sake, because he is best, and not for any benefit or
commodity of our own: accordingly as we love the things that are fair,
because they are fair, although we reap no fruit at all by them: yet God
applying himself to our capacity, does every where in the holy Scriptures,
and in his divine promises and threatninges, make mention of life and death
everlasting, to the end be might allure us unto him, and fraye us from sin
and iniquity.

Inasmuch therefore as all men, which serve and woorship God, do from him look
for the most blessed life eternal, that is, such a life, as wherein, all evils
being utterly abandoned, there is store and plenty of all good things: and the
only entry thereunto, and way that leads to it, is the way of righteousness,
which is perfectly comprised and declared in the Law of God: and this
righteousness no man can attain unto by his own strength (for by nature we are
all sinners) it remains, that faith alone does give and bestow the same upon
man, or else, that all men should utterly and universally perish. Whereupon also
it plainlye appears, that it is only faith, that delivers wretched men from
all evil, and brings them to the fruition of that high and sovereign good,
so greatly wished for of all. For why? faith alone gives unto man perfect
righteousness, and therefore also eternal life. If so be then faith minister
not this profit unto us, it is verily unprofitable, since men, as I said,
believe in God, to the end they might be saved by him. And therefore, if their
faith cannot perform thus much unto them, they believe in vain. The Apostle
therefore by repeating the question propounded, does profitably and to very
good purpose demand, whither that faith, that is without works, be of such
force, as that it may save men. For if this be true, we ought to be contented
with it: but if it be not, either we must seek another way to life, or else we
must perish. And therefore how profitable, yea how necessary the true
explication of this question is to be known, to all that are desirous of
eternal life, there is no man, that sees not.

Now this does James himself declare unto us in the three short verses
following. Yea the very interrogations, whereby he propounds the question,
seem to contain a secret answer unto it: and, to tell us, what we ought to
judge of this question. For this the common course of questioning does prove.
For why? if I should say to some lewd and desperate knave, professing
Christian Religion with us, in the use of the Sacraments, public prayers, and
sermons, in this manner, think thou that this outward profession of
Christian Religion will do thee any good, when as thou have a filthy and
unclean heart? art thou of an opinion that it will save thee: it is even as
much, as if I denied it, and said, Doubtless thou art not to look, that this
outward profession of thy mouth shall make thee become acceptable to God. So
when James says, What profits it a man to say he has faith, when he has no
works, that is, lives not by Faith: can this Faith save him that so
believes? it is all one, as if he flatly denied it. And if we take it thus,
then by the testimonye and authority of James himself, the question shall in
this wise be determined, and we are to hold, that by faith, without woorks, no
man can attain unto salvation. And we must undoubtedly stand to the judgment
of James, as to that which proceeds, not from man, but from God. For albeit
he was a man, yet because he was the Apostle of Christ, and enspired with the
Holyghost, that spoke this, which also is agreeable with the rest of the divine
Oracles, who, but an unclean person, will call this matter into question?
Notwithstanding, least he might seem willing, to convince and enforce us, by
his sole authority, to believe it, he adds a reason by way of comparison,
whereby he so plainly and manifestlye proves the thing to be so: that now he
leads us, not only by his authority, but also by force of reason, whereunto
they willingly submit themselves that are partakers of reason, as it were by
the hand to the understanding of the question propounded: And his reason is
this: If some poor wretched man were here present, destitute of all things
necessary, naked and hungrye, to whom some rich and wealthye person would
say with all gentleness: Go thy way hence, I pray thee, and take meat, and
warm thy self: and yet gives him nothing for to eat, or whereby to warm
himself: though to outward appearance this speech of the rich man seem to be
honest and kind to the poor, yet what good does it to the poor creature that
is like to sterue for hunger and cold? Nay doubtless it is rather injurious
and reprochefull against him. Thou see a man destitute of all things, naked
and hunger starued, and thou saiste unto him, Go home, take thy meat, and
warm thy self: and yet thou know him to want all things necessary, as
neither having house, to go to, nor meat, to eat, nor clothing, to put on,
nor any thing to warm himself withal. Do thou not mock and deride his
poverty? do thou not alike, as if thou vpbraidest him with his poor estate
and misery? Even after the same manner, says James, stands the case, when a
man professes himself, to believe in God the Father almightye, and in Jesus
Christ his Son. For the speech is honest and good, and in show godly. But,
unless such a man love God with all his heart, and serve him as his Father, and
for his sake, men also, created after his own image and similitude, so as he
may labor to profit all, and tohurt none: this man's external and outward
confession of mouth, shall neither be accepted nor accounted off of God: but
rather be injurious and contumelious against him. He may cry as loud and as
long as he will, O God the father almightye, I believe in thee: and O Christ
Jesus, the Son of the living God, I beleene in thee: when as yet he neither
loves God in good earnest, nor men for Gods cause: this belief; as I may so
call it, shall profit him nothing at al, says James. For this faith, that
wants works, is dead, says he. For hereupon hangs the force of James his
argument, That which is dead, cannot give life,
But faith without works, is dead:
Therefore, It cannot give life, neither is it acceptable to God, but rather
reprochefull unto him: because it makes a show as though it gave honor unto
God, and yet gives none, but will have him to be contented with the smoke of
vain talk and profession, when as he requires the heart of man, and not
words.

This is, if I be not deceived, the true and proper exposition of this place:
whereby it appears (as by many other also) that there is a double or two
fold faith of men: the one, which wants and is without good works: the
other, which flows and abounds with them. The former is said of James to be
dead, because it is barren and unprofitable, but this, for that it is
effectual and painful, is commonly called quick or liuelye. The one
consists either in a certain knowledge of God and in the only skill and
contemplation of his divine mysteries: or else in some certain credulous and
ignorant opinion, whereby a man supposes himself to believe that which he
understands not: and the other resting it self (as ye would say) contented
in a simple and sound knowledge of God in Christ* is wholly conversant in
action, and occupied in well doing. The difference, which is between both, all
or the greatest number are for the most part ignorant of, neither do they
pass much whither they knew it or no, because forsooth they covet to live to
themselves, rather then unto God. And yet this difference not being known nor
regarded, it comes to pass that very many, in stead of the chief and
sovereign good, which they desire, do fall into extreme misery, and all
because they think themselves to be endued with such a faith, as whereby they
may be saved, and so flatter themselves in it, living in pleasure and delight,
where in very deed it is only a vain shadow of true faith, and nothing else:
in regard whereof we are ernestly to endeuer at this time, that both we may
understand this diversity, and also embrace the true and liuelye faith, if so
be we desire to be saved. But thou will say, who would think that ever there
were any, or there were some such in times past, yet that there should be any
at this day so foolish and brutish, to believe, that he shall be saved by such
a faith. Yes verily, say I, there both were some, when the Apostle wrote these
things (for otherwise why should he purposelye have handled this argument
throughout this whole Chapter, yea throughout the whole Epistle, wherein he so
greatly urges works?) and also that there are many in our time, and perhaps
also among us not a few, the saying of Christ being as yet conversant on earth,
and speking of his last coming to judgment, may seem to be a proof: When the
Son of man shall come suppose ye that he shall find faith on the earth? Whereby
he declares, that in the latter days faith will be very rare, and hard to
find: but, if all that say, they believe in God, or in Christ and profess it
outwardlye in Religion, believed truly and in deed, then were there no small
number of believers, but a very great company. It appears then that to the
outward profession of Faith something is required, that it may be true and
justifying. Notwithstanding that this may the more cleerelye appear, we will
endeuer to declare it more at large.

The Jews and Turks do say, that they believe in almighty God, maker of
heaven and earth, governor and persevere of all things: Yea all Nations in a
manner do believe and confess as much. For a man shall find few, that
believe not in one God, through those impressions of knowledge, which God has
engraven in men's minds. And this faith is true, as touching the sense and
meanig of the words. For God is in very deed almighty, maker and preserver
of all things. There faith then is in this respect, not false: no neither is
their faith feigned or counterfeit, for because they believe even so, as they
speak, neither do their mind disagree from their talk.

Therefore their faith is not feigned, as though they spoke one thing, and
believed an other: or as though their tung and heart agreed not together. Nay
their confession which they make of God, is our confession. For we confess in
the Apostles creed, that We believe in God the Father almightye, maker of
heaven and earth. How falls it out then, that if our Faith be true, theirs
should be false and feigned? Shall not then this faith of theirs in God the
Father save them? No, says James: For even the Devils also believe, and
acknowledge that there is one God almightye, maker of heaven and earth: and yet
for all that they are not justified, neither are they apt to eternal life. No
more the^ also can our faith in God the Father save us.

But thou will say, we are to think otherwise touching faith in the Son of
God, in whom they believe not. For, he that confesses Christ, shall be saved,
But all Christians, in what place, or of what sort soever they be, whither they
be Romanistes, or other (for I dare not deny the name of Christians to the
Romanistes, since the learneder writers do confess the Church of Rome, to be
the Church of God, but yet a straying Church) all, I say, do with one mouth
confess, that they believe in Christ the Son of God, who for the sins of
men having taken our nature upon him, suffered, died, and rose again from the
dead, ascended into ye heavens, from whence also he shall come in the latter
day to judge both the quick and dead. And this faith touching Christ is true:
neither is it feigned in them: For they do even so think of Christ, as they
say they believe. Shall this faith therefore save all that do thus believe, if
it want works? No, it shall not, says James. Beleeuest thou that Christ took
man's nature upon him, and therein both wrought and suffered what soever was
necessary for men's salvation thou do well, neither beleeuest thou amiss:
but the Devils know all these things, and they do no less steadfastly believe
them, then thou.

What is then required more? Not, that thou should know or believe any more
of Christ, as the things, which he said or did, and yet were not committed to
writing, the which as John says, were almost innumerable. Neither shall this
stand or go for payment: For why? if thou had even al ye whole Bible by
heart in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, and in thy mother tung: Nay, which is much
more and notable, if thou could tell the true sense and meaning of all
things that are written, and beleeuedst them to be most true: yet shall thou
not thereby be saved. For the Devils understand and know the things that are
written, and which have been done from the beginning of the world for the
salvation of men, and they believe them all to be true: yea and they are in the
knowledge and skill of those things undoubtedly above us: and yet shall they
not for all that be saved, as James says here. What is then further required?
This perhaps, will some man say, that we believe that Christ did not only
suffer, but that every one believe that he suffered also for him. But, what if
we falsely persuade our selves of this, as we are wont to devise and imagine
many things of our selves: what if, I say, some lewd and wicked man an
idolater, or manslear would persuade him self, that Christ died for him, as it
is like that many in Europe do persuade themselves? Will Christ, for this vain
persuasions sake save him? Many, says Christ himself, in that day shall cry
out after this manner, Lord Lord, open unto us: we have prophesied, and cast
out Devils in thy name: but they shall receive this answer from him, Depart
from me all ye woorkers of iniquity, for I know ye not. These men persuaded
themselves that Christ died for the^, and they looked to have had life from
him, but this did them no good. What is it then at the last, which is required?
works, says James, which if faith have not, it is dead: and therefore cannot
give either righteousness, or life eternal.

Notwithstanding, it seems that this faith in God, and in Christ his Son,
comprised in the Apostles Creed, is most perfect and absolute, and that nothing
else can further be required. So, say I, likewise does a painted man seem to
consist of all his parts and members, and yet is he nothing else, but a painted
man, or the picture and shadow of a man: which also in effect) is to be said
of this faith of thine. Or, that we may tarry in the example of James, the
carcass of a man has all the parts and members of a man's body: and yet for
all that it is not a man, because it lacks a spirit says he in the last
verse of this Chapter. So that same faith, says he, without works, is dead,
though he understood and believed the foresaid Creed of The Apostles, yea and
the whole Bible besides.

But thou will say, these things seem to be clean contrary to the doctrine
received amongst us, and to the writings of Paul, No verily. For why? they
that judge rightlye of justification by faith, do not disagree from James,
neither is Paul contrary to James. Yet Paul says, that we are justified by
faith only, without the works of the Law. Paul indeed has not the word,
Only: but yet when he says, that we are justified without the works of the
Law, I have no doubt of it, but that it follows by the true exposition of
Paul, that a man is justified by faith only. But I say, that it came never
into Paul's mind, to affirm, that faith, which is without works, does justify:
(for so he should indeed have been contrary to James) but he attributes the
power and praise of justification, to a true and lively faith which is never
void of good works, and not to the woorks themselves: which is spoken by him
not only wittily, as every thing else, but also truly and Christianly.

But Abraham thou will say, by the testimony of Moses and Paul, in that only
that he believed God, promising him a plentiful posterity, was accounted
righteous. Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness.
But, will thou know, Ovaine man, says James here, that Abraham was not
justified by faith, without works? Did he not offer up his son Isaac on the
altar? Abraham's faith then was not that fruitless and barren faith, which
consists in the knowledge or in the ignorant belief of some certain points
of Divinity: but that effectual and woorking faith, which frames a man to
the obedience of God: for this appears plain by the life and deeds of Abraham.

But yet, some object, that the same cannot be said of the Thief, that was
crucified with Christ. For when he had spent his whole life in evil doing,
and had said unto Christ being now at the point of death, Remember me when thou
come into thy kingdom: he heard forthwith, This day shall thou be with me
in Paradise: and immediately after he died. Yea but, say I, the faith of this
Thief was very lively and effectual. For the effects of a lively faith are
these, an ernest fear of God, which Solomon the wisest of all other affirms,
to be the beginning of wisdom: secondlye the invocation of Gods name, For
whosoever calls upon the name of the Lord, shall be saved: the acknowledgment
and confession of sins: love and dutifulnes toward our neighbor. And all
these things, in that little space of time, did the lively faith of that Thief
utter and bring forth. For that he was affected with an earnest fear of God,
it appears by this, in that reproving the other Thief, which reviled Christ,
he said, Fear thou not God, that raylest upon this man? We are indeed here
for our misdeedes, and are worthily punished: but this man has done nothing
amiss. He called earnestly upon God, Lord, says he, remember me, when thou
come into thy kingdom. He acknowledged and confessed his sins, we are
justly punished, says he, to his fellow: whereby also it appears, that he
suffered patiently, so cruel and shameful a death: He discharged his duty
also toward his neighbor: when being desirous to do him good, he admonished
him, that he should not rail upon Christ, but consider earnestly of his own
sins. And therefore his faith was not dead, but living and affectuall. It is
no marvel the^, though through it, he obtained life: which by a dead faith,
no man ever obtained, neither shall at any time obtain.

But, seeing this dead faith knows and acknowledges God to be almighty,
maker of Heaven and earth, and Christ also his Son to be sent of God for our
redemption: what is required more, or what is wanting unto it? Even the Life or
Soul, as James declares in the last verse of this Chap. Whereby it might be
quickened to well doing. For as a dead carcass consists of all and singular
his parts and members, and yet for all that neither month nor lives, because
it wants a Soul or Spirit, which might give it power to move and live: even
so faith, though it understand, whatsoever is necessary to be known of God,
and of Christ our Savior: yet if it be destitute of a Soul or Spirit, it
cannot give life. But what is then this Life or Spirit of faith? It is even
that, as appears by James, without the which the said knowledge of God in us
is dead: seeing that, beside the bare knowledge of God, there is nothing which
may carry us to love God more then our selves, and all other things: coveting
to be like his divine nature, which we know to be best and most blessed:
fleeing from sin, because it is contrary to the nature of God: desiring to
do good unto all men: that we might be perfect, like our heavenly Father,
says Christ himself, the master of all piety. And therefore it seems to
be that same virtue, of which Peter speaks 2, Epist. 1. And you, says he,
give all diligence, that you may join with your faith virtue: Or, that which
of Paul 1. Corinthians. 13. is called agape, commonly translated Love, but in
Latin it is rather piety toward God, and toward men. For there Paul says
plainlye, that without this virtue our faith, whatsoever we believe, yea though
we understood all secrets and prophesies, shall be vain and unprofitable. And
this virtue has wonderful effects. For albeit that former part of faith,
which consists in the knowledge of God and in the contemplation of heavenly
mysteries, has always been highly accounted off, yet is it not to be
compared with this, that is a virtue only of the mind, but this is a virtue
also of the will: that of knowledge, but this of practice or experience. For so
have the ancient Philosophers distinguished Virtue. Faith then endued with this
heavenly and divine Virtue, produces and brings forth marvelous effects
in us, even to the reforming and changing of us. For when it has once fullye
entered and possessed our will and mind both, then staying (as it were) upon
these two pillars, it makes us new men, or, as Scriptures speak. New
creatures. For why? there grows in us so fervent a heat and love, and so
burning a desire of the known good, that we cannot now lie still or keep at a
stay any longer. Insomuch that, detesting our former wicked life, we desire and
endeuer to live a godly life: that we might be like him, whom we exceedingly
love. And therefore, we deny our selves, as Christ wills us, the teacher and
author of this life: so that, we seem not now to live any longer but Christ in
us, as Paul says, and we in him. For he does then through faith verily dwell
in our hearts: so as we are, indeed, and not in word only, the temples of the
Holy Ghost dwelling in us, and directing us after his will, contrary to our
own will, so that now we will not our selves, but he wills, speaks, and
woorketh in us. For so does Christ himself, teach us to pray and to crave,
that not our will, but Gods will may be done in us, as it is in heaven. Thus
being moved and affected, we do not now only know God the father to be
almighty, maker of heaven and earth, but also having thoroughly seen his great
goodness, we love him hartilye, and rest in him, as in our Father: so that, as
infantes and children take no care for the things pertaining to this life, nor
do not enquir what they shall eat, or wherewith they shall be clothed, but cast
all such care upon their parents, whom they know and are sure they will provide
for them: and therefore do receive with thanks giving, the things provided
for them by their parents: even so also ought we to be, if we have a true and
liuelye faith in God the Father almighty. Cast all thy care, says David, upon
God, and he will bring to pass, that which shall be for thy commodity. Christ
teaches the selfsame thing: What good, says he, shall your cark and careful
thought do you? For why? though ye take never so much care for the matter,
yet can ye not add one cubit to your stature: no, nor make one of your hairs
either white or black. Why are ye then careful for this life, and for your
body? saying, what shall we eat? or, what shall we drink? or, wherewith shall we
be clothed? For all these things are abundantly ministered of God to them that
are endued with a true faith. First therefore, says he, seek the kingdom of
God, and all these things shall be given unto you. Behold, says he, the Fowls
of the aier: they sow not, neither do they reap: and yet God does most
commodiously seed them. Consider the lilies of the feelde, how preciously they
are apparelled? but God has a far greater care of you, then of birds, or
then of lilies. To be short, if God has given you the body it self, how should
he not give thereunto both life and clothing For he has given you the greater,
and therefore also will give you the lesser: as though he should say, Only this
I require, that ye put your trust in me, that ye depend upon me, that ye love
me with all your heart, and that ye thank me for my benefits received, and
woorship me and then I for my part will not fail in my duty, I will easilye
minister all things unto you. They then that are endued with a true and lively
faith in God the Father, are thus affected. As for other worldly men, they are
inquisitiue about these matters, and are careful, What shall we eat? what
shall we drink? wherewith shall we be clothed? How shall we provide for our
selves and our children? and therefore give themselves wholly to gather and heap
up riches, neither do they make any end or keep any measure: howsoever they
hear Paul say, that those, that will be rich, fall into temptation and snares,
and into lusts, which do drown men in perdition. For the love of money,
says he, is the root of all evil, and the cause, why a great number do
wander from the true faith: and thrust through themselves with many sorrows.
If so be then the Gentiles do these things, as Christ says, that is to say
men that are estranged from the faith: hereby we may gather, how few there be
at this day, even amongst us, that do truly believe in God the Father, seeing
they honor him not, as their Father, resting, as were meet and convenient, in
him. Therefore the saying of Christ seems to be most true, that Faith will be
very rare in the world, when he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.

But what shall we say of the faith in Christ, may the same be verified of
that also? Yea even the very same. Many there are indeed every where at this
day, which will not stick to say, that they believe in Christ crucified for
the sins of men, and they are of that mind, but they are greatly deceived.
Which that it may be understood, let us hear Christ himself, speaking of this
matter in the end of the Gospel after Mark: Go, says he, preach the Gospel
to all creatures. He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved: he that
believes not, shall be condemned. And these signs shall follow them that
beleene* In my name they shall cast out devils, they shall lay their hands on
the sick, and they shall recover: they shall speak with new tunges, and if
they drink any deadlye thing it shall not hurt them. Now if I should ask you,
whither you believed in Christ or no, the question would seem very absurd.
For there is no man that makes any doubt of that matter. For why? there is none
that will not say he believes in Christ. But if I shall demand of any,
whither do the signs that are here mentioned of Christ, follow thy faith?
do thou heal the sick: do thou speak with new tunges? what answer will
he make here? For the words of Christ are plain. These signs, says he,
shall follow them that believe: neither does Christ lie, neither will he be
found false. If thou beleuest truly and indeed, these must follow thy faith:
but if not, thou supposest thou beleeuest in Christ, and yet do not believe.
Here then thou see that virtue or power of faith, which is the life or
spirit of faith, to be wanting in thee: and therefore thy faith is dead.

But miracles are ceased, neither are they required any more. Thou say well,
those corporal miracles are ceased, either, for men's unbelief, or, for that
they were appointed only to those first times of the Church. Notwithstanding
thy faith must not want virtue, for if it do, it is dead. There are then even
at this time also other miracles, in the woorking whereof our faith must
exercise her power, if it be true and lively. There are many devils still in
us, which are to be cast out, if we will have Christ to dwell in us: the
devils, I say, of covetousness, ambition, envy, evil speaking, reuengement,
and such other lusts of the flesh, which fight against the soul: from the
which, if thou be once free, thou shall afterward lay thy hands upon other,
and they shall be whole, that is, thou shall teach them the true knowledge of God
and of Christ, and they shall be freed from the errors and vanity of this
world. They shall speak also with new tunges, that is to say, where before
they were blasphemers and all their words vain and unprofitable, nay
hurtful and pestilent, now as though they were endued with a new tung, they
shall speak nothing, which shall not be referred to the glory of God, and the
profit and salvation of men: and this is to speak with new tunges. And thus
if we be disposed and affected, although we shall drink any deadly thing, yet
shall we not be hurt by it. For why? neither shall the world, nor the flesh
with the lusts thereof, no nor Satan himself rising up against us, be ever
able to thrust us down from this good and happy estate, and all because, we
shall cleave fast unto God by this true and liuelye faith, yea we shall be one
with him through Christ.

Now may every one prove himself, and weigh and consider with himself,
whither he has a living faith, that is to say, whither he casts these devils
first out of himself, and secondly out of others. For except we do this, we
deceive our selves, and have not that faith indeed, which might join and
couple us with Christ. For why? this power or virtue is of the nature and
substance of true faith, for with out this it is dead. So that, like as, if the
soul or spirit should return again into a dead body, that were going to the
grave, the same would immediately wax hot, stir, move, and do all other
humane actions, and men would marvel at so great a miracle: even so likewise,
if that dead faith, whereby a man professes himself to know God and Christ,
have this new virtue adjoined to it, the man shall begin forthwith to flame
with a divine love, and that so fervently, that he shall frame him self wholly
to the obedience of God, and shall choose rather that his will may be done in
him, and by him, then his own: he shall trust in him, and stay wholly upon him:
and if it be so, that he must suffer even extreme torments pains for his
glories sake, that is, either loss of goods, or honor, or credit, yea or life
it self, he shall willingly and gladly do it. And as touching his neighbors
(by the name of neighbor all men are understood) he shall love them no less
then himself, and that not with a humane affection only, but with a heavenly,
for Gods cause, whom he knows to require it at his hands. And therefore
thou shall never covet to hurt any, but to profit all: thou shall be ready to
take wrong, rather then to do wrong: to be beguiled, then to beguile: because
that other men are also the sons of God, that is to say, of thy heavenly
Father. For albeit there be some reprobates, and too too many: yet can not
thou discearne them from Gods elect nether is it thy part so to do: but,
seeing al do bear the image of God, thou ought to love al, but especially
ye godly with a sincere affection: all, I say, yea even those of who^ thou have
been hurt or iniuried any kind of way, and shall pray also for them that curse
thee: for they are blind, and wot not what they do. It is thy part and duty
therefore, to pray, that they may have a new heart and the eyes of their mind
purged by faith: yea to further the^ also with all manner of dutifulnes,
gentleness and deserts, and to allure them, if it be possible, to repentance.

This is that same true and liuelye faith, which differs much from that idle
and unprofitable faith: whereupon it follows, that this, seeing it is dead,
is the cause also of most lamentable death and mourning unto men: and that
lively faith justifies and saves man because it is not dead, but endued with
exceeding great force: not such only as whereby it remoueth mountains, or
woorketh some miracles, but whereby it loves God sincerelye, and his neighbor
also for his sake. Whereof Paul, to conclude, speaks thus, 1. Corinthians. 13
Though thou could speak, says he, not only the Latin, Greek, and Hebrew
tung, but with all the tunges of men, yea and of Angels also: though thou
had the gift of prophecy, and knew all secrets and al knowledge: yea, if
thou had so great faith, that thou could remove mountains from one
place to an other and yet had not love, that is to say, Conscience and
Duty both toward God and men, thy faith were nothing, but as a sounding
brass, and a tinkling Cymball.

By these things I suppose it appears sufficientlye, what the true faith is,
and how far forth it differs from the dead. It remains therefore only,
that we labor and endeuer, that not being contented nor deciued with this, we
may embrace and hold fast that, and use and exercise it as long as we live:
that when Christ in the latter day shall give sentence of all men, and of
their faith and woorks, we may hear him, saying. Come ye blessed into the
Kingdom, which was prepared for you of my Father, from the beginning of the
world. For I was a stranger, and ye took me in: Naked, and ye clothed me:
Hungry and thirsty, and ye gave me meat and drink. For in as much as ye have
done it to the poor, and to such as wanted those things for my sake, ye have
done it unto me.

But, because we are not able to do these things, as we are men, we must
here againt entreat and besoeche God, that he would both give us that faith,
and strength also to obey him. We therefore O almightye God and heavenly Father,
do most humbly beseech thee, etc.

Sermon. IIII.
Psalm. 23. 1 God is my Shepherd I shall never want any thing.
2 He makes me to rest in green pastures* and leads me to the still running
waters.
3 He restores my life or soul, and leads me in the path of righteousness
for his names sake.
4 Yea though I should walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will
fear no evil: for thou art with me: thy rod and thy shepherds staff
comfort me.
5 Thou shall prepare (that is, thou do prepare, the Future tence for the
Present) a table before me in the sight of mine adversaries: thou do anoint
my head with oil, and my cup runs over.
6 Thy loving kindenes shall follow me all the days of my life, and I shall
dwell in the house of the Lord for ever.

THat this Psalm is David's, it appears by the title of it. It is therefore
commended unto us, from David, as from the author thereof, who was a man endued
with great faith and zeal toward God: but yet especially from the matter and
argument which if bandleth. For beer is celebrated by David, the singular
providence of God toward his, which he had both already tried, and even then
also, when he wrote this, had good experience off. He declares therefore that
God has such a continual care and consideration of his, that is to say, of
faithful and devout men, that he will never forsake them, nor leave them
destitute of any thing. For first of all, he will minister unto them
aboundantlye whatsoever is necessary to this present life. Secondly he will put
from them evils and discommodities. Thirdly he will follow them with this so
singular loving kindenes of his, not for a day or a year, but for ever.
Finallye, which is the sum of all, he will have a regard not only of their
bodies, but also and especially of their souls: neither will he embrace them
with this his favor being separated from him, but he will take them into his
own family, where they shall worship him purely and sincerelye, so long as
they live here: and afterward departing from hence he will reward them with a
most blessed and happy life together with himself in heaven. This is that same
care and singular providence of God touching good and godly men, the which
David having proved by experience sings and celebrateth in this Psalm, first
by a certain Allegory and similitude taken from the Shepherd of the Sheep in
the first 4. verses, and then also simply and without a figure in the two last.
And whatsoever he vttreth here touching ye loving kindenes and favor of God
toward him, stands upon one groundwoork or foundation, which is in the
beginning of the Psalm, where he says: God is my shepherd, I shall want
nothing: which verily is a most certain and sure reason: but yet such a one as
will be more manifest, if to this Enthimeme, the proposition which is wanting be
added, in this wise:

He, whose shepherd God is, can never lack any thing.

But God, says David, is my shepherd.

Therefore, shall I never want any thing.

The proposition of this argument is so well known and certain to all, that
there was no need to set it down. For who is he (if he acknowledge and believe
that there is a God) that knows not that is the only fountain of all goodness,
and almighty, and therefore can by no means be let, but that he will make
the^ whom he loves from his heart, to become most happy and blessed? And
therefore this being omitted, whereof David was most certainly persuaded, David
assumeth, But God is my shepherd: and concludes, that he shall never want any
thing. But because this assumption might be doubted off: to wit, whither God
had taken David into his flock, that is to say, into his protection and
tuition, that he might become his Shepherd, that does David confirm by the
effects of a good and diligent shepherd. For he continuing the similitude
borrowed from the Shepherd of the sheep, rehearses five things, whereby he
proves it. What is therefore the duty of a good shepherd? This was very well
known to David, though he were a King, for he himself had sometimes been a
Keeper of Sheep: he might then easily describe the office of a good Shepherd:
and this is first required of a good Shepherd, that he provide his sheep of
sweet and pleasant pastures for meat, and of wholesome and commodious waters
for drink, and that renewing or restoring their life, he may drive them too
and fro both to the Pastures from the soldes, and to the foldes from ye
pastures, not through dangerous places beset with Briers or Flint stones, but
through plain and smoothe paths, least either they hurt their bodies with the
briers, or their feet with the stones. Finallye that he may diligently defend
the^ from wild beasts and from all hurt and danger. But David shows that
God had so been affected toward him, in the three verses next after the
first: God, says he, my shepherd, leads me his sheep to the green
pastures: that is, to fruitful or pleasant pastures, and such as are commodious
to feed sheep, wherein I may both conuenientlye rest, and also be defended
from the heat of the Sun and from other discommodities. Then he leads me
to the pleasant pastures, where I may satisfy my self with wholesome herbs at
my pleasure: and afterward to avoid the over great heat of the Sun and other
hurtes and annoyances, he causes me to rest in the foldes or coats.
Secondlye, the same my Shepherd leads me to the waters, not violent and
boisterous like a stream, for such kind of waters were nothing fit either to
assuage the thirste, or the heat, but to the still and calm running waters,
with the which I may both satisfy my thirste, gotten with feeding and with the
heat of the Sun, and also cool and refreshe my self. Thirdly, he
restores, says he, and renueth my life. Which may be referred to that that
went before: so when he leads me to such fruitful Pastures, and to such
commodious running waters, he recreateth and refreshes my life: or to that
also which follows. He restores my life, in leading me along through smoothe
and plain paths, or certes to them both, How does God restore the life of
David his sheep? even by leading him to the pleasant Pastures, and to the
commodious waters to drink, and whilst he conuaieth him not through rough
places, but through fair and plain ways. And all this, says he, he gives
unto me for his names sake, that is to say, freely, and without any duties or
deserts of mine. For what should a poor Sheep do, whereby she might hind
her Shepherd, to have so great a care of her? and yet since he treats here of
good men and of God their shepherd, ye similitude does somewhat hault. For ye
shepherd keeps his sheep, to make his gain of the^. For when he is disposed,
he may either sell them, or otherwise convert them to the use of him self and
of his Family, But God seeks no gain by us: no commodities: as he that
needs no manner of thing, but refers all things to our benefit, nothing
to his own, which he respects not, seeing he is most perfect, and
replenished with all good things. How then should a wretched man, or with what
duties should a woorm of the earth bind that most blessed Spirit unto him? but
God, seeing he is best of all, does not want till he be provoked by us, for
that he is of his own accord most ready and willing to do us good. And
therefore says David, God bestoeth al these benefits upon me, for his names
sake: that is for his own sake, and for his great goodness sake. In the fifth
place he says, Though I should walk in the midst of the shadow of death,
yet will I fear no evil: in the which his speech seems to be changed. For
if he had continued in that kind of speech which he used before, describing
his shepherd by his effects, he would have said, He delivers me our of
danger: but if the thing it self be attentiuelye marked, he says both thus
much, and somewhat more, as we shall see anon. Further David might seem here
in this place to comme^d, not the diligence of his shepherd, but his own
virtue and strength, I mean his constancye and couragiousnes of mind: Though
I should walk in the midst of the shadow of death, says he, yet will I
fear no evil. Notwithstanding it is not so, but he refers all this to the
praise of his shepherd as may appear by the reason following, for thou art
with me, of which we will speak strait ways, David therefore in this place
says, that God has so great a care of him, that he takes and delivers him
out of dangers, and that he will always use the selfsame favor toward him
hereafter. And therefore if any thing happen unto him otherwise then well, to
wit, if he wandering like a lost sheep shall fall into any great danger, and
even into the very shadow of death it self, yet he says he will fear nothing
at al. And because that this was a strange assertion: for before he had said.
He leads me to the pleasant Pastures, and to the quiet running waters, in
this wise restoring my life, also he leads me in the plain paths, all
which things he had already proved by experience, but now he says, that in
what perils soever he be plunged, he shall continuallye be delivered by God,
of which some doubt might be made: this then he fortifieth with a new reason,
For thou, says he, art with me, thy rod and thy shepherds crook comfort me.
That is to say, thou by thy special good providence and love toward me, art
always present with me, and withal so gracious and merciful, that therefore I
need not to fear any evil, in what dangers soever I am set: but he still
persisteth in the similitude erewhile taken from the Shepherd, and he
imagines that God is armed for his defense, and as it were some shepherd
ready prepared with his sheep hook, that is, his shepherds staff to defend
his sheep, and therefore Though I should walk says he, in the shadow of
death, or be in the very dens of wild beasts, yet will I not be afraid,
because God being merciful is always present with me, prepared with his
sheephooke to save and defend me. If the proposition which is here also
wanting, be added, it will be more apparent in this wise.

He, for whose defense God as a shepherd is prepared as it were with his
Shepherds staff has to fear nothing, in what perils soever he be placed.

But God, says David, is as a shepherd prepared with his staff to defend me.

Therefore, though I should walk in the midst of the shadow of death I will
not be afraid.

This reason is plain and manifest, whereby also appears that, which we said
before, to wit, that David does not commend here his own virtues, but the
excellent providence of God both toward him and his: and it is to be noted
here: that he does not say, That he shall not taste of any evil or distress
hereafter: for he knew well enough, as he was a wise man, the sicklenes and
mutabilitye of men's estate: but this he says, that he shall have God always
merciful and favorable unto him in dangers, and therefore avouches that he is
not to fear any thing: and besides he pronounces that it will never come to
pass, that by reason of the perils wherein he might be plunged, though the
horror and fear of death it self were present before his eyes, yet that he
shall need to fainte or be discouraged, seeing he has in a readiness such a
Shepherd and defender.

And these are the things which he propounds and lays out in that
continued Metoephor borrowed from the Shepherd of the Sheep: which selfsame
afterward he repeateth without a figure: adding also some things over and
besides: and he repeateth the^ when he says, Thou shall prepare, that is, thou
do prepare, the time to come for the time present, which is usual among the
Hebrews: thou preparest therefore my table before mine adversaries or
persecutors: thou annointest my head with oil, and my cup runs over. For
this is it which he had said before, thou leadest me to the pleasant pastures
and to the still running waters, and that through plain and smothe ways, so
restoring my life. Notwithstanding in the first, there is further to be noted
the circumstance, which he added: before mine adversaries. For they are wont,
that are godly in truth, to have many enemies, which are desirous of their
overthrow, and to have the^ spoiled of all their goods, and that do they
diligently seek, and always devise one thing or other against them: but God
in despite of the^ protecteth his, and is wont bountifully to nourish and
bring them up, even in ye sight of their enemies, wherein the singular grace and
goodness of God toward his is to be seen. This is it therefore that David says
happened unto him.

Now that which he adds touching Oil, or precious Ointment, he speaks
according to the fashion of the Country. For there was a custom, that if their
Feasts or Banquets were any thing costly, the Guestes were perfumed or
anointed with Oil and precious Ointment: as here amongst us both before and
after such banquets the hands commonly are wont to be washed with sweet
water. And this betokens the abundance and plenty of things, whereunto also
belongs that which he adds, My cup runs over. For by these phrases of
speech David signifies, that God of his goodness had not only ministered unto
him that, which was necessary for the main tenance of this life: but also he
says that he had given him so great plenty of al good things beside, that over
and above his necessary uses he had also (wherein considering Gods bounty and
liberality toward him) he might recreate and refreshe himself: God is not
sparing toward his, but very bountiful, ministering even those things that are
more the^ sufficient, that so having experience of his great goodness toward
them, they might the more willinglye and cheerfully serve him.

But, that which he sets down in the last verse, is especially to be
marked. For he prophesies even of the future and perpetual benefits of God
toward him, when he says, He shall follow me with this his favor all the
days of my life: and I shall dwell in the house of the Lord for ever. For he
signifies that this grace should be eternal, and much more continual,
wherein he declares, what he looked for at Gods hand. For if so be a Prince
should make some one of a poor man rich, or of base degree noble, and advance
him to great honor to the intent he might shortly after thrust him from it and
cast him down headlong, this were not to be accounted a benefit, but rather
an injury. But God is not wont so to behave himself toward his, that do
sincerelye woorship him: this David confirms, when he says, that he is not
to fear any such fall, but rather, says he, God will always pursue me with
his liberality and loving kindenes. Declaring that the chances of Fortune (as
they are called) though they be sundry and uncertain, yet are not to be feared
of those, who have God to be their God.

And in the last place he says, that he shall dwell in the house of God a long
time. In the which place there is something more also contained, then in the
former, where he entreated of the happiness of the body and of the lif^ present.
For David had said, that all thinge^ necessary for this life, should be
ministered unto him of God, and that he should also be defended and preserved
from all evil. Thirdly, that these benefits should so long continue, as his
life did last: but these things though they be great, yet were they not
enough, except also regard might be had, and that principallye, of the soul,
and of the heavenly life, which is to remain for ever most happy and blessed:
of this therefore he speaks in this verse. And first David says, that he
shall not only enjoy so many benefits, appertaining to the commodious passing
of this life, and live honorablye at home in his own house: but which is much
more, that he shall abide, in the house of God, to wit, in the Church: that
is to say, that he being endued with the sincere knowledge of God, shall
always purelye and reuerentlye woorship him in the Church: wherein consists
the food and life of the soul. And where he makes mention of the continuance
of time, there is no doubt but that in these words, is concluded the hope of
the heavenly and everlasting life. For that Church or Temple of Jerusalem was a
figure of that heavenly and celestial Temple not made with hands, into the
which Christ having made an eternal expiation and satisfaction for sins, is
said to be entered. Heb. 9. So then there is no question, but that David lifts
up his mind to that most blessed life, when he thus speaks, and that he
pictureth out that life in these words, which was represented by the Temple
and the divine worship, and begun already upon this earth.

And therefore this is that singular and certain Providence of God toward his,
which David having experienced in his own person, commends and describes in
favor of all the godly. For doubtless in this Psalm seems to be described
the highest happiness and felicity, and the way that leads unto it: so that
this Psalm has a pattern in it of all that ever is to be desired For why?
if, for examples sake, then had liberty given thee to wish what thou
would, what could thou better or more desire to have, then that al things
which are necessary to the commodious passing of this present life, might be
richlye and plentifully ministered unto thee by the hand of God, even in the
despite of all thine enemies and evil willers. Secondly that God himself
being the governor of this whole world, would so receive thee into his
custodye and protection, that he would perpetuallye put away all evils from
thee, or if at any time any adversity befall thee, that he would always be so
present with thee, that it might nothing at all hurt and annoye thee. Further,
that he would follow thee with this his so excellent favor, not for one year
or two, but during all the whole course of thy life. Finally, that having
always a special care, not only of thy body but also of thy soul, that is
to say, of thy chief and principal part, he would enlighten it with the true
knowledge of his will: and not suffer it to wander in errors: neither grant
thee only to live so commodiouslye at home in thine own house, but also
translate th^^ into his own palace, that thou might dwell and abide with
him. Last of all when the soul shall be loosed from the hands of the body,
that he would translate thee to the heavenly and most happy life, where thou
may live with him most blessed for ever. Then these things there is nothing
more to be desired: neither seems any thing to be pretermitted, that is of
any weight or moment. And therefore this Psalm contemeth a most perfect pattern
of al things that are to be wished and desired.

Now then, we al covet that which is good: and good, the greater that it is,
the more it is to be counted: we should all therefore covet to be in the true
and undoubted possession of so great felicity. For who would not wish that he
might both be partaker of all good things, and utterly void of all evil, and
that he might perpetually abide in this estate? again, that being endued with
ye true knowledge of God, he might live peaciblye here, and after th^^ life be
translated to the Kingdom of heaven and life everlasting? this is the thing
that all that are of sound judgment do most cheefelye desire. But so great a
happiness is offered to all mortal men, yea and all are invited unto it of God
himself. For albeit David speaks but of himself alone, and says that he was
already come unto it, telling it forth in such wise, as though being out of all
danger, he were now in sure and certain possession of it: yet notwithstanding
he allureth us by his example to the same thing, who may, if we list be happy
in like manner, for that is in our power.

For why? though so great happiness and felicity come not from man, but from
God (for it is altogether divine and heavenly) yet is it offered by him unto
us, and of us only to be accepted and entertained. We may therefore, if we will,
be blessed: but sure it is yt we would as before is said: for all men seem
greatly to wish and desire, that they might be in that estate and condition,
that David says here he had atteined unto: that is to say, that they might
have God so favorable unto the^, that all things necessary for this life, so
long as i^ endures; might be ministered unto them: that his help and succor in
all dangers might evermore be present with them: that their minds might not be
blinded with errors, but might perfectly know god, and not doubt of him to be
their Father, but daily try him to be so: Fially, yt when they die and depart
this life, they might be translated to life eternal. How is it therefore that
so great blessedness and felicity, being so exceedinglye desired of all, is
not atteyned of all? This seems right worthy to be diligently enquired:
least when all men do earnestlye desire this thing, yet missing of the way
that ledeth unto it, they fall into extreme misery and distress.

Here David does not only by his example brawe and allure us thereunto, but
also he shows and points out the way, which if we would diligently keep,
we might easily atteine unto it. And the whole description of this happiness,
stands, as we said in the beginning, upon this reason, That God is David's
Shepherd: for thereby he gathered, that he should never want any thing. And
this conclusion, if it be generally taken, will be no less true, then if it be
applied unto David alone. For as David concludes: God is my Shepherd:
Therefore, I shall not want any thing: the same may every one conclude, that
will follow David's example and godliness. To wit in this wise:

No man, that has God to be his shepherd shall ever want any thing.

But God is the shepherd of all good men.

Therefore, no good man shall ever want any thing. This conclusion is no less
true and undoubted, then that particular, whereby David applied unto himself,
that which is common to all the faithful. And therefore, that we may attain
unto this happiness, it stands wholly in this, that God may be our Shepherd:
For if this be obtained, then he leading us along to the pleasant pastures, and
to the still running waters, through plain and commodious ways, will restore
our life, and that for his holy names sake: yea he will always be merciful
unto us and present in all dangers, ready prepared with his Shepherds crook
and rod to defend us, so that we shall never need to fear any thing, no,
though we were so near unto death, that we were already under the shadow of
it. He will prepare a table for us in the sight of our enemies he will anoint
our head, he will fill our cup full of pure wine, and will always follow us
with his so great and singular favor: neither will he nourish us only at home
in our own houses, but he will conueigh us also into his, that being addopted by
him we may dwell and abide with him, and when this life shall have an end, he
will reward us with a better, that is to say, with a heavenly and everlasting.

And therefore we are to labor with all enforcement, that we may attain this
one thing namely, that God may be our Shepherd: for if so be he will become
our shepherd, we may safly commit our selves and our lives unto him, he will
never fail in his duty doing. How then shall we atteine unto this, that God
may be our Shepherd, as he was David's: For there must of necessity be a
certain way unto this thing, seeing God, who calls us thither mocketh not nor
beguileth any man, that God the^ may be our shepherd, which thing he cheeflye
desires, for to that end has he created us, it is necessary that we become
his sheep, for these are so mutually affected between themselves that the one
cannot be without the other* We must therefore take diligent heed, that the
fault be not in us, for in him we are sure it will never be. What it behooves
us then to do, or what manner of persons we ought to be, Christ himself the
good Sherheard of the sheep declares Ioh. 10. My sheep, says he, hear my
voice, and they follow me: but they know not the voice of a stranger, neither
do they follow him, but fly from him. Two things are here to be noted, that
we hearing the voice of God or of Christ, and acknowledging it, may follow
him, whither he calls us and goes before us: secondly that we neither know
the voice of a stranger, nor follow it, but fly from him: in which words
there is no doubt, but that the strength and nature of faith is contained, and
declared: that we hear not only and understand the voice of God, and
acknowledge it to be heavenly and most true, but also that we follow it: again,
that we neither acknowledge nor follow the voice of a stranger, but fly from
him. But who is this stranger? Satan, the arch-enemye of our salvation and of
Gods glory: and our senses, and lusts of the flesh, which entising us with a
false pretense of goodness, do carry us away from the true good indeed. But
first and principallye this is to be considered: that we hearing the voice of
the shepherd, may immediately follow him: for if this be done, the other will
follow, that we shall not follow a stranger but fly from him. First heerby it
appears that faith consists not in this, that we hear the word of God, or
also understand it, and acknowledge it to be the voice of God our Shepherd: no
nor though we give him this honor, as to judge that to be most true which he
speaks: but besides it is necessary that we follow him: For faith is not
only in the understanding, but also in the will, which is the principal part:
neither is God contented with one part of us, but he requires us wholly that he
might make us wholly and altogether blessed. Faith then ought to occupy and
possess the whole mind of man, that is, both to enlighten the understanding,
and also to draw the will to the love of that good, which the understanding
discerns. And therefore if any man's understanding only be enlightened with the
true and infallible knowledge of God, so that he knows Christ to be the
Savior of the world, and can good skill of all the mysteries of the Christian
faith, and yet will not follow the voice of God or Christ his Shepherd, he is
not to be accounted faithful. For why? the understanding albeit it be a great
and undoubted faith, yet is it not that whereby we are justified, but it may be
a certain preparation unto it: for unless he that hears the voice of God,
will follow it, it is manifest that he has no fruit in him. For why? since we
al covet ye cheifest good thing and most sovereign felicity: and God offreth
the same unto all in his word, and shows the way that leads unto it, if we
follow him not, whither he calls us, it will proceed from hence, that we have
no trust in him. For seeing we would be happy and he is desirous to make us
happy, if we would harken unto him showing us the way, we should undoubtedly
come unto that, which we long for: wherefore the whole mischief springs from
hence, that we not believing him in so great a matter, do seek another way,
whereby we might come to that, that we covet and desire. This point I will
illustrate and make plain by examples. Let us put ye case that thou were in
some grievous sickness and most willing and desirous to recover thy health,
there are present two physicians, whereof the one prescribes a most certain and
present remedy, and the other a most present poison: he advises thee very
carefully and earnestly to take his wholesome potion, and diligently to beware
of this deadly drink, and thou beleeuest that Physician to be very skilful in
his art and a right honest man: if for all this thou take not that medicine
prescribed by him, but this pestilent pickle proffered by the other, may it not
necessarily be concluded, that either thou would not be healed, or else that
thou had no trust or confidence in him but that thou would not be healed,
it cannot be said in truth: for we have already presupposed thee to be very
desirous of recovering thy health: and therefore even heerof it comes, that
thou beleeuest not him, but the other. Or if, a man, being desirous to go from
hence, that is to say from Cambridge to London, would ask the way of thee,
whereof he is ignorant, and thou should tell him the right way, naming all
the towns and villages, through the which the trauailers from hence to London
must go: and further should admonish him, not to take the way to the
Castle ward, for that would lead him quite to an other place, neither could he
ever come to London ye way: if he notwithstanding (being forewarned by thee)
would go by the Castle, and follow that way, might thou not truly say
that either he had no purpose to come at London, or else that he had no credit
in thee: But to London he meant to go: for that was agreeed upon. Then, this
one thing remains, that it be said that he gave no credit unto thee. For
albeit he thinks and speaks honorably of thee, yet the thing it self
testifies that he had no trust in thee touching this matter. Now least that
these things might seem strange or far off, let us take examples but of the
holy Scriptures, whereby this selfsame thing may be proved and confirmed. Of
Adam and Abraham: for he is the father of all men, and this of all the
faithful. What then shall we say of Adam? God had created him after his own
image, he had appointed unto him, if he would have harkened to his voice and
followed it, that is to say, if he would have continued in obedience, a most
blessed and eternal life: of which divine and heavenly glory, which also he
beheld and saw with the eyes of his mind, he was most hartilye desirous. Now
there were two trees in that Paradise, by the which he was admonished what he
should do: the one perdy of life, whereby he understood that he should live
perpetually with God, if so be he continued in obedience: the other of the
knowledge of good and evil, of the fruit whereof he was forbidden to taste,
that so he might shun death and misery. How happened it then that he so
strayed from the sovereign felicity? whereof both he was most desirous to be
partaker, and God most willing to be the bestower of it on him? forsooth
because he mistrusted God, and heard the voice of a stranger, and followed it.
For God was willing to bring him to happiness, therefore his only duty was this
to suffer himself to be brought by him, to repose all his trust and confidence
in God, to do nothing more then this one thing, even to obey God: not to covet
to know more then was lawful for him to know: but to hold out and persevere in
obedience. But Satan persuaded him (which was indeed partlye true) that if he
did eat of the true knowledge of good and evil, he should be a knower of good
and evil, and therefore like unto God, so that he should not need afterward
to depend upon God, when as knowing both good and evil, he might sufficiently
provide for himself, and not hang at an others beck, nor acknowledge any
superior, as God himself neither depends upon any other, nor acknowledges
any to be above him: and that by this means he might easilye get to him self
as great happiness and felicity as possiblye he could wish or desire: the which
he could never attein or come by, except he believed and trusted in himself,
and not in another: for to hang and depend upon an other, were to serve and not
to reign. And therefore Adam being deceived and circumue^ted by this speech of
the Serpent, judged this to be a more ready way unto that felicity that he
desired, then to wait for it from elsewhere, and to frame his life after the
will of God. He tasted therefore of the forbidden fruit, and his eyes were
opened, and then he saw both good and had, where before he had only known
good, to wit, that God was to be obeyed: and he knew more then he did before,
but this fell out unhappily for him, yea he swarued utterly from his purposed
conceit, that is to say, from the heavenly happiness, that he had longed and
gaped for, because that he had tasted of the tree of knowledge of good and
evil, and would needs know more then was expedient for him. As for Abraham
he did not so behave him self, but being endued with great faith, he
determined to obey God, and to commit the government of his whole lite unto
him. Therefore when God commanded him to depart out of his Cuntrie: he,
leaving his kinsfolks, friends and native soil behind him, was ready to go to
another place: though indeed he knew not as yet whither he should go: he
went forth says the Apostle, not knowing whither he should go. And therefore
he would not eat of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, nor consult with
flesh and blood, for that tree would have persuaded him, that it had been
better and more commodious to tarrye in his Country, then by leaving of it, to
seek strange and unknown dwelling places, and such as were possessed by
others. He therefore believed God, because he did not only hear his voice,
or beleene God to be true, but also he followed him as his Shepherd: and so
behaved himself, as though he had been notelesse, and out of his right mind.
For who would not have judged him to be foolish and beside himself, who for
because he heard Gods voice in the aier, or otherwise, left by and by his
native soil, and all his kinsfolks, allies, friends, and commodities, and not
knowing whither to go, went forth notwithstanding to the place, whereunto that
voice directed him. But this is the chief and divine wisdom, for a man to
yield greater credit unto God, then to himself: nay altogether to believe and
trust in him, and not in himself. And therefore he would not taste of the tree
of knowledge of good and evil, but judges, and that truly, this one thing to
be enough for him, even to obey God: and that all happiness consisted herein,
because that God never fails nor forsakes them, that trust in him. And
therefore when he was commanded to kill his Son without delay, he prepared
himself also to go and to commit so horrible a fact: and therefore God made
so great account of this faith of his servant Abraham, that he swear unto him,
that because he was ready to do this thing, be would never forsake him, but
enrich him with all kind of blessings and benefits. And therefore Abraham in
these and such like things expressed the nature of a simple and kind sheep,
which hearing the voice of her Shepherd follows it by and by. Thus therefore
it vchoueth us to be affected, that we may think the way to happiness which we
desire, to consist not in much knowledge, but in mighty obedience: that we may
evermore be in a readiness even with closed eyes to follow God our shep^eard,
who is both more desirous of our happi (...), and also more skillful of the way
that lea^^^^ unto it without error, then all the sort of (...) ^f so be
therefore we do all covet the chee^^^ happiness, as doubtless we do covet it,
(...) would gladlye atteine unto it, let us be^^^ God, and follow him, and let
us not hear the voice of a stranger, neither hearlien (...) our own sensual
lusts and appetites. Would thou aspire to sovereign felicitye: would
thou attain inunortall glory and honor? would thou abound in all riches
and treasures, and live continuallye in sound and perfect pleasure?

Thou have here two Counselors, which seem to promise thus much unto thee:
God on the one side, and Satan and the lust of the flesh on the other. Satan
and the flesh do pronoke thee to the foul and filthye pleasures of the bodies,
in meat and drink and such other like: but the spirit of God says, Do not
these things: for this way, thou shall never come to the true and sound
pleasure: nay they will be unto thee most sure and certain causes of great and
extreme miseries. Here to whither of the^ thou give credit, it will easilye
appear by the eue^t. For if thou follow after pleasures, whatsoever thou
speak or think of God and of his Son Christ and Christian religion, and
albeit thou profess thy self with thy mouth and outward ceremonies, in
Baptism, and the Supper, and other exercises, to be a Christian, yet it is
manifest that thou beleeuest not God, but thy self. Again the flesh and the
devil do provoke thee continually to the heaping up of abundance of riches,
that by this menes thou may provide for thy self and thy family: therefore
as many as give credit unto the^, are wholye employed in gathering of riches,
spending and consuming not a day or a year in that exercise, but their whole
life time, as though nothing else were to be cared for during their life: but
the Holy Ghost to bids that thou should not so gape after riches: and
Paul says, that such as desire to be rich, fall into the snares of the
devil. If so be then thou would have provision to be made for thee and
thine in this life, the^ even of those things, that are given thee by Gods
providence, give to the poor, and, as the prophet Daniell admonishes, redeem
thy sins with almes-deedes. And Christ says: Make you friends of the
unrighteous Mammon, that is to say, of your riches, that they may receive you
into everlasting tabernacles. The flesh also and the lusts thereof do persuade
thee, that thou should aspire unto great honors, and to provide, that thou
might be highlye accounted off, as long as thou live. But the Holy ghost
advises thee, to despise this vainglory, and to labor continually for the
true and eternal. Here that it may be perceived to whither of ye twain, God
or the Devil thou have given credit (for this thing is hidden and secret,
inasmuch as al men do profess that they believe in God, as all Christians will
say, they believe in Christ) we must come to the way. For if thou be a
voluptuous person, if covetous, if ambitious, in which three all sins and
enormities may seem to be comprehended: thou neither beleeuest God, nor
Christ, whatsoever thou say, know or beleeuest, in what outward Church or
congregation soever thou be conversant, and in what rites and ceremonies soever
thou exercise and busy thy self. For even thy Circumcision and thy Baptism
is turned into uncircumcision, and thy Passover and thy Supper into a profane
banquet. For seeing God describes, and as it were with his finger points
out, the very true way unto happiness, thou must of necessity say, that either
thou will not be happy, or else that thou beleeuest not God. But it is out of
all question that thou earnestlye desire the true, eternal, and most assured
happiness. For why? all men are of this mind, that they desire such felicity
to befall them. It is a plain case therefore that thou beleeuest not God how
soever he counsels thee for the best. For otherwise neglecting the said
pleasures, delights, riches and honors, thou would suffer thy self to be
wholly governed by God, thou would not credit thy self, thou would not
taste of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou would follow God as
it were with closed eyes, if so be thou did truly trust in him. Finally
thou would deny thy self, as Christ warns thee to do, the good Shepherd
of the sheep, and Master of all piety, who professes himself to be the way,
the truth, and the life. And this is it that was said to Adam: See thou taste
not of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, but only obey thou me. But we
are too too wise and cunning, we have tasted over much of that unhappy tree,
and have altogether in manner devoured it: therefore we cannot betake our
selves to God, nor suffer him to have the whole government of us, for we fear
least he would not so well provide for us or for ours, as were convenient.
Therefore knowing him to be both true and most excellent, we wish indeed that
he would give us life and happiness: but because we do not altogether trust in
him, we will use also all our own wisdom and industry, which the more that we
do, the more also we depart from him. For we ought in such wise to deny our
selves, as though there were no jot of this wisdom, or prudence in us, being
most fullye persuaded of this one thing, that we ought perpetuallye to obey
God in all things: since God every where affirms, that all they that will
thus do, shall undoubtedly be blessed. For this is the very true way to the
most blessed life, the which it behooves us continually to keep. We are
perhaps unwilling, yet we may if we will be blessed. But go to, since we deal
here either about our cheifest felicity or extremest misery, and our time is
so short, that after it be once gone, there will be no more place left for
repentance: what lets us to try, whither this be true, or no, that is to
say, whither God will take a man, that shall so deny himself, that refusing
to taste of that deadly tree, least his eyes thereby might be opened to worldly
vanities, will in such sort repose all his trust and confidence in God, as that
he will wholly depend upon him? whither God, I say, will so take such a man into
his custody and protection, as that he will never suffer him (because he
denies himself for his sake) to want any thing, either in this life, or in
the life to come? Let us, I say, make a trial of the divine Oracles, the
which do advise all these things to be done: this if we shall do, there is no
doubt but that this matter will fall out very fortunately unto us. At least wise
let us imitate that Naaman the Syrian, who when being desirous to be healed, he
was admonished by the Prophet to wash his body sire times in Jorden, he not
believing the Prophet, refused at the first to do it: what, says he, are the
waters of Israel better or more wholesome then our waters? notwithstanding
being advised by his servants, to make a trial, and to wash his body, which
was an easy matter for him to do, he washed it, and immediatlye recovered his
health. Let us therefore in like manner prove, whither we may this way, which is
prescribed unto us of God the Prophets and Apostles, atteine so great happiness
so much besired and songed for The way it self is easy, not hard or
painful, as that is which we follow, wherein we vex and disquiet our selves
whole days and nights, in greedy gaping after pleasures, riches or promotions,
in which point how greatly we are deceived, we find daily by experience, but
then especially shall we feel it when we must dye. But as for this way that
leads unto life it is peaceable and quiet, free and exempte from al these
combersome cares of worldly things, teaching us to fruit only and alone in
God. cast thy care* says David upon God, and he will bring thy purposes to
pass: neither (to say the truth) is it the part of the Sheep, but of the
shepherd, to be careful for the pasture. This is the duty of the sheep, to
follow the Shepherd. And therefore Christ reproving ye vain pensiuenes of men,
says: Why are you so careful for meat, drink, and apparel, saying, what
shall we eat or drink, or wherewith shall we be clothed? Shall not he, says
he, which has given you life and body, give you also all these things, if you
trust in him? Seek ye therefore first, says he, the kingdom of God, and all
these things shall be ministered unto you. And therefore to conclude, This I say,
and it is not my saying, but the Oracle of God: if we be the sheep of God, if
we will hear his voice, and follow him, and neither acknowledge, nor follow
the voice of strangers, we shall never want any thing either in this life or
in the life to come: and we may no less truly and certainly break forth
into this speech, then David did, and say, that For because God is my
Shepherd, therefore I shall never want any thing. And that we may continuallye
walk this way, for as much as it depends upon Gods grace, it remains, that
we labor to obtain it at his hand by prater. O almighty God and heavenly
Father, we most humbly beseech thee, etc.

Two Theames or Questions, handled and disputed openly in the Schools at
Cambridge, in the Latin tung, by P. Baro, Doctor of Diuinirye and Englished by
I. L.
For as much as we are at this time to dispute of the most sacred truth of
Christian religion, men and fathers, right worthy, I see not from whence we
should better fetch our beginning, then from the very author and defender of
the Truth. Wherefore, O almighty and everlasting God, the only fountain of all
truth and knowledge, we crave peace and pardon at thy hand, and pray thee
most humblye that thou would nor suffer us, searching the secrets of thy
heavenly wisdom, to wander from the true and right way: but would open the
true sense and meaning of them unto us, our hearts and minds being wholly
dedicated unto thee: to the honor and praise of thy great goodness and
majesty, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Questions, which I have propounded to be disputed off, are these: Gods
purpose and decree takes not away the liberty of man's corrupt will: and, Our
conjunction with Christ is altogether spiritual: which have indeed much
difficulty in them, but yet more profit, if they be rightly understood. These
therefore, according to the custom of this famous University, we have
determined this day, first breefelye to expound and lay open, that the truth
and proper sense of them both may appear: secondly to defend them as true,
dissoluing the doubts which shall on the other side be objected. But we,
entering somewhat fearefullye into this kind of reasoning, and renewing again
these scholasticall exercises after a long season intermitted, make this
request, that ye would, with freendlye patience, hear us, as ye are wont.

Question I.
The former theme contains a question of all, that ever have been debated
in philophie, or Christian religion, the greatest: and of which first the
Philosophers, then also the Divines, have, both in times past and now also in
these days, almost infinitely disputed. We will say somewhat of them both, and
first of the Philosophers. It has been enquired therefore of them, whither
all things in the world come to pass by fatal destiny and by a certain
necessity of nature: or whither there were some contingents, that is, things
happening by chance, and such as proceed not from necessary causes: but
cheefelye whither man's will be free, or fettred with the necessity and bands of
Fate or Destiny. For when some, given to the study of Astrology, perceived,
so great stabilitie of the celestial bodies, and their so great force and
efficacye in and upon all things here below: and where othersome thought,
that there was a certain near conjunction or touching of things one with
other, whereby the upper most were coopled with the middlemost and the
middlemost with the lowermost: Finally when both parts understood, that al
things to come were already certainly seen and known to God: they concluded
that al things came necessarily to pass, and left no manner of possibility,
nor likelihood of any thing: yea they judged yt al true things fell out of
necessity, and yt al false things were meerelye impossible. With which error
the Poets being infected, they bring in even Jupiter himself complaining,
that, though he would never so feign, yet can he not withstand the Fates.

An other sort there were that disliked of this opinion, and set themselves
manfullye aagainst it, and granting that the opperations of the Stars were
great, and that the force of the cuniunction of nature was able to do many
things (we will speak afterward of Foreknowledge) yet they defended, that the
power of man's will was greater, then that it might either by the Stars, or by
the conjunction of nature, be vanquished or overcome. For these things (as they
commonly speak) do enforce the will only, but not of necessity. From thence
also they taught that slothful and sluggish trade to grow, which of them is
called (...), vain or idle talk: because, that if all things come
necessarilye to pass, there is nothing at all lest for us to do in our life
time: but necessity bringing in slothfulnes, all manner of exercise (...) all
utterly be taken from man's life. Finallye they showed euidentlye, that there
were neither virtues nor vices, neither just praises nor dispraises, neither
preferments nor punishments: in which notwithstanding all the well ordering of
a Common weal does consist.

And this controversy among the Philosophers has been perpetual For whilst
either party defended their own opinions, and withstood other men's by such
reasons, as the contrary side could scarselye answer, neither parties would
ever give place to other, but have on both sides always stood to their
taikling and maintained their own as most true. Hereof may Cicero be a witness,
who, being a man wholly employed in the administration of civil affairs, and
seeing that the state of the Common wealth could not stand, nor the course of
man's life be continued, except there were Freedom and Liberty, he resolved to
defend the same against Fate and Destenye. But when he was urged with this
principle of Logic, Every Proposition is of necessity either true or false:
and could not solute yt which was thereby concluded: namely that there can
nothing to come be pronounced, albeit it may seem to be contingent, which is
not necessarilye true, or necessarily false: and therefore that all things that
are to come are of necessity true, or impossible: he answered, that he would
rather take this foil, to deny the said principle (which yet is most true)
then to grant, that man is not free or at liberty* In which point also Ciciro
bewraied his ignorance. For why? he ought not, by denying of a principle,
which, by reason of the most apparent and necessary truth of it, is called the
principle of principles, to have taken that foil: considering that the
necessity of things uttered, depends not upon the necessity of that
principle. Cicero shall either plead to morrow, or not plead: it is a necessary
proposition, if you consider the form of it (for it is a disjunction of
contraries without a mean) but, if you look upon the substance, there is no
necessity, since the cause of it is free, and not necessary. And therefore when
they strove thus on both stoes, without resolution of the objections
propounded, it came to pass that neither party would give place to other, but
either side with tooth and nail maintained their several opinions: whereupon
the controversy remained undecided and undetermined.

Next to the Philosophers in this controversy succeeded the Divines,
challenging it of right unto themselves, as a parcel of their own proper store:
amongst whom there was no less sharp bickering in times past: and even at
this day there is a controversy touching this matter, not only betwixt the
Romain^s^s and the Protestants, but betwixt the Protestants themselves, and
professors of the purer religion. For some of them, to the end they might
ascribe the sound and perfect glory of all things, and especially of our
salvation, and of all good actions, unto God alone, they seem to establishe
the eternal decree of God, that it only affects and accomplisheth all
things. And yt it is in such wise the proper and next efficient cause of all
things, without any exception, that there can nothing at any time come to
pass, which was not from all eternity purposed and decreed, and whatsoever is
purposed and decreed, must necessarilye and absolutely come to pass: which
sentence also some strengthen and confirm by the divine prescience or
foreknowledge. For so much as that, which is foreknowen, must of necessity
come to pass, both in that order and manner, wherein it is foreknowen, seeing
the knowledge of God is most certain and sure, neither can God in any wise be
deceived.

But othersome do reject this opinion touching ye absolute necessity of all
things, as being contrary to Gods glory. For that being established, they
suppose it follows necessarily, that God is the author of all sin, or else
that there is no sin at all. For why: seeing God cannot sin, there will be
no sin, if so be by his own proper force and power he works and disposes
all things: or, which is all one, if by the force of his decree all things be
carried after one and the selfsame manner, and enforced to do that, which they
do. And therefore they save that this necessity is no less to be improued,
then that which is said to proceed either from the Stars, or from the
conjunction of things among themselves: nay much more: For it would be
better^* more tolerable for mankind that there were a fatal kind of
destenie, which depended of the Stars and conjunction of things, so that God
might be said to be above it and free: and which might be moved by our
prayers, and dispense with Fate at his pleasure for the behoof of his
servants: then by rejecting the name of Fate in show, to establishe such a
kind of purpose and decree of God, as whereby God himself should be so tied
and bound, that he neither would, nor could change any thing in it. For by this
means is overthrown, as they say, not only all good order and government of
the Common weal, but also Religion: which stands cheefely in the invocation
of the divine majesty. For in vain is entreaty made to that, which is
vnintreatable.

And therefore that they might shun and avoid these inconveniences, they
embrace the liberty of man's will, and every where defend it: because (as says
Augustine,) that as without grace there is no salvation: so without liberty or
freedom Gods justice is not seen in punishing of men. And in this contention
(which doubtless is very great) either part has oftetimes received grievous
wounds of other, and many things are objected on both sides, which are not
sufficientlye in all points answered. To be short, the matter is come to this
pass, that it seems there can no way be found whereby it may be determined.
For as long as both parts are persuaded, that they strine for Gods glory and
the salvation of men against leasing and falsehood, neither side will give place
to other: neither indeed (howsoever either of them may be vanquished by reason)
will there ever want matter for them to object: so perpetual and everlasting
seems this contention like to be.

What shall we say then? that this question so long debated of the
Philosophers, most wise men, and yet undetermined, cannot even of Deuines, and
men endued with heavenly wisdom, be discussed and decided? and that God has
in this case laid a cross upon learned men, wherein they might perpetually
torment themselves? I cannot so think. But if there be any way of appeasing
this controversy, it stands of necessity in this, that one of the parties
may for a while yield and give place to the other: or, that either side would
so far forth relent touching the stiffnes of their opinion, till as at length
the matter might be throughlye agreede betwixt them. But it is like, that
neither of both will give place to other, because that as well the one as the
other do persuade themselves that they strive for ye truth against a lie, and
for God against the Devil. And therefore this seems to be the only way of
composing this strife, it so be the opinions of the striuers might by any
means be compared together. And this course has Agustine long ago, the
prince of Divines, followed and kept, in his Book 5. de Ciuirate Dei, Chap. 9.
where he reproves Tully, for thinking, that if the Foreknowledge of God
should stand, which they call divination or fore-deeming, all things must
needs come to pass of necessity, as they were foreknowen or fore-deemed: and
therefore that the difference of things necessary and contingent, should
utterly be taken away. Wherefore when he judged yt if Foreknow-ledge should
stand in force, man's liberty would fall to the ground: he choose rather to
disanull Gods fore knowledge, then to let go Liberty or Freedom: and
therefore Augustine says of him, Whilst he coueteth to make me free, he has
made them sacriligious Thieves, or, robbers of God of his honor. But let us
hear Augustine himself confuting so great an error of Tully, And I will recite
his words out of my noting tables, which are these: What is it then, that
C^^^^ ^eared in the foreknowledge of things to come, that should labor to
destroy it by his detestable disputation? Forsooth, because, that of all
things to come be foreknowen, they must come to pass in that order, that they
are foreknowen to come to pass: and, if they shall come to pass in that order,
then is the order of things certain to God that foreknoweth them: and ^f the
order of things be certain, then is the order of causes certain, (For why?
there can nothing come to pass, that some efficient or effectual cause went
not before.) But if the order of the causes be certain, whereby every thing
that is comes to pass: then fall all things out, says he, by Face or
Destiny: which if it be so, then is there nothing in our power, and then is
there no freedom or liberty of will: which thing if we grant, says he, then
is all the life of man quite overthrown: the^ in vain are laws given: then
in vain are rebukes, praises, reproves, and exhortations used: neither by any
justice can rewards then be allotted to the good, o^ punishments to the wicked
Least then these indignations and absurdities should follow, w^^ch are so
hurtful and per^itio^s to men's aff^nes, he will not have any foreknowledge of
things to come: and into these streightes does Tully enforce a religious
mind, that he must choose one of the two, either that there is some power in
out will, or else that there is a foreknowledge of things to come: for he
supposes that both cannot stand: but, if the one be granted, the other is
disanulled: if we choose the foreknowledge of things to come, the liberty of
will is taken away: if we choose the liberty of will, the foreknowledge of
things to come is subverted and overthrown. He therefore, as a mighty and great
learned man, and as one very much and most skilfullye tendering man's life,
chose of these two, the freedom and liberty of the will: which that it might
be granted, he denied the forknowledge of things to come: and thus whilst he
would make men free, he makes them Church-robbers. But a devout and religious
mind chooses both, confesses both, and with a godly faith, approves both.
Hitherto Augustine.

Out of this place we see, first the gross error of Tully, the which was also
in Aristotle, who when he had truly said before, that Every proposition is
either true or false (for this is necessary, that every thing should either
be or not be) yet afterward in his Book De Interpretatione, disputing de
Futuris contingentibus, that is, of things that may happen or not happen,
fering, least, if he should say that they were either true or false, it would
follow, that they were also necessary or impossible: he said not, that the
truth of the^ was as yet unknown unto man, but known unto God, as he ought to
have done: but, That they were as yet neither true, nor false: by which saying,
he took from God the Fore-knowledg at the least of things Contingent: as also
did Carneades, who said, That even Apollo himself could not tell of things to
come, furtherfoorth then of such whose causes were necessary.

But as the error of Tully, the chief Orator and Philosopher, was confuted by
Augustine a chief and principal Divine: so the fault of Aristotle a most
sharp witted Philosopher, and therefore also of Carneades, was found out and
corrected in our time by Petrus Ramus a Philosopher of Paris. Whereby it
appears, that some of ye ancient Philosophers, and Divines at this day have
been deceived with this conclusion: If it be to come, and of God foreknowen,
it must necessarilye come to pass: for this is false. It must come to pass
indeed, but not necessarilye: because it has the efficient cause, not
necessary, but free and Contingent, whereby it may either be or not be. And yet
notwithstanding this is no let, but that God may foresee that which is to come,
as Carneades supposed, because that so great is the quick-sightednes of the
Divine providence, that it knows the end and issue, even of things
contingent, and which may fall out on either side: yea unto God there is
nothing, neither past nor to come, but all things present. For the knowledge
of God is a sight or vision, comprehending al things (as it were) with one
look or view of the eyes. The foreknowledge therefore of things to come is not
repugnant to man's liberty, or to the nature of things contingent. For, like as
it is necessary that all things that are past should already be fulfilled:
and yet notwithstanding some of them had necessary causes, and therefore could
not choose but be: and some had free and contingent causes, and therefore might
either be or not be: even so likewise, the things that are to come, shall al
come to pass: but some of necessary causes, and cannot but be: othersome of
free and contingent causes, and may fall out not to be. For the maker and
Creator of this world would not have all things to come to pass by necessary
causes: but some to proceed of free and continge^t causes: wherein chiefly his
glory does appeer. For those things only, that are free, are capable of
divine power and of the heavenly and blessed life.

And therefore some things are done, which might not be done: and some things
are not done, which might be done. Wherefore Adam, when as (by the consent of
all Divines) he might have stood, he fell: and Christ said, That he could
pray unto his Father: and that his Father also could send twelve legions of
angels, whereof notwithstanding neither came to pass. As therefore it is
necessary that all things already past should be done, and yet that
necessity is not absolute: but in respect of the cause, that is, by reason of
the circumstance of the time already past: so the things that are to come,
after a sort it is necessary that they should be, not absolutely indeed, but
in respect of the cause: namely, for because it is determined that they shall be:
so likewise is it necessary that all things that are present be in esle, as,
it is necessary for him that writes to write, as long as he writes, and for
him that speaks to speak: and yet nevertheless not absolutely, as when we
say, the fire burns, or the Sun shines for it may be that he writes
not, and that this holds his peace) but in regard of the cause, that is, by
reason of the circumstance of the time present: forasmuch as Every thing when it
is, it is necessary that it be, says Aristotle.

This therefore first we understand by that place of Augustine, that certain
Philosophers being deceived in this point, have groeuouslye erred. Secondly we
perceive by ye same place, what the way is of quieting so great a discord. For
as Augustine reproves and confuteth those, that of the foreknowledge of God,
concluded the necessity of all things, and took utterly away all liberty
and freedom from man, declaring that Gods foreknowledge agrees right well
with man's liberty: A religious mind, says he, chooses both, confesses
both, and with a godly faith approves both. So we also, supposing this to be
the only way andmean to end and determine the controversy by us propounded,
have undertaken to defend, That the liberty of man's will is not taken away by
the purpose and decree of God, least any man should think Gods purpose and
decree to be such a thing, as whereby men might be forciblye carried, as the
dust of the wind: or by whose force and power alone, and not by their own,
they may speak, like Balaams Ass, and do whatsoever they do. For he that
thus thinks, is in a very great error. Neither again do we attribute that
liberty to man, whereby he may do every thing (for so should be taken away
not only Gods purpose and decree, but mortal man should be taken for a God)
but whereby he may work and deal at liberty under the decree and
determination of God, which is the property of that nature, that God has made
free and capable of power and life eternal.

And so far is it off, that this our sentence ought worthily to displese any of
sound judgment: that even they also, which strive and struggle together about
this matter, if their meaning were throughlye seen into, are just of this
mind. For it was never the intent of these learned and singular men, to
establishe such a purpose and decree of God, as whereby alone all things
should be carried and done without a mean, as who should say men, were
nothing but blocks, and passible instruments: for if they had been of this
mind, they might woorthily have been gainsaide. Neither the other sort, if
so be we will indifferently construe their meaning, do grant unto man that
liberty, whereby, as he may purchase death and extreme misery, so also he may
procure to him self life and sovereign felicity (for this would utterly
abolish ye grace of God: which they say was Pelagius his error) but whereby a
man may in such wise be and be said to be the Lord and master of his actions,
as that he now alone may be deemed the author of sin, and God in no case
charged therewith. But this opinion will some man say, induces free will. But
what divine ever denied, that man has indeed over much will to sin? For this
saying of Augustine (if I be not deceived,) as it is most famous, so also it is
most true: To do a thing freely, is the property of man's nature, and so
coopled with reason, that it cannot be separated from it: by doing freely to
choose evil, is the property of corrupt nature: but to choose good, is the
gift of grace. And therefore, to conclude, God the creator and Gouerner of all
things is not the destroyer of the order by him appointed, but the preserver.
For he would that in the nature of things there should be diverse and sundry
causes, namely some, Necessary, and othersome also free and contingent: which,
according to their several natures, might work freely and contingently, or
not woork. Whereupon we conclude, that secondary causes are not enforced by gods
purpose and decree, but carried willinglye and after their own nature: for
because that God is the preserver of the order by him set and appointed, and
not the destroyer: who woorketh by Satan and the wicked, not as by a stone, or
brute beast: but according to the quality and disposition of that nature,
which he has put into them.

And thus much touching the first Question.

Question. II.
Our conjunction With Christ is altogether spiritual.
THe second follows. Our conjunction with Christ is altogether spiritual.
Out of which also there have risen in this age, not only cruel and bitter
conflicts of the learned among themselves, but also hatreds, persecutions,
burnings and tormentinges of a number of men, yea wars and desolations of
Countries, neither has this so deadly a controversy been between the
Romanists and Protestants only, but between the Protestants also
themselves, and that most eger and sharp, and which as yet is not thoroughly
quenched and brought to an end. Of this therefore we also will speak
somewhat, but breefely, and according to the time, which we suppose to be
remaining unto us. This Question we have given out, to diminishe that error,
whereby it is defended, That we are corporallye joined and coupled with Christ,
and it is thought that no fruit can otherwise be reaped by him: for both these
I suppose to be false, and do understand it thus* That we are not corporally,
but spiritually, and yet verily and indeed joined with christ: and made
pertakers of him, and of all his benefits. They that maintain that gross
conjunction, are of this opinion, that, whereas they had rightlye conceived in
their minds that to the atteynment of salvation and eternal life, it was
necessary, that we should be joined with Christ, to the end we might be
partakers of his life and death, and of his merits and deserts: they supposed
that this joining together could not otherwise be, except he were there bodilye
present where we are: and so might be joined with our bodies and minds, which
is false and absurd: neither, though it were true, could it yet perform that
which is sought for, that is to say, it could never the more give either
righteousness or eternal life unto us. We will therefore endeavor to show, that
there is no such conjunction of us with Christ our head, neither, if there
were, would the same be wholesome or profitable for us: and therefore that we
have need, if we would be saved, to be spiritually joined with him.

But that we may go plainly to work, we are to know, that those, that
maintain the opinion, which we impugn, are many and sundry. For some, that
they might have Christ corporally present with them, affirm that the bread and
wine in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, do turn and are changed into the
very body and blood of Christ, in so much that after consecration, it is not
only Sacramentally, but also sensibly handled and broken by the hands of the
Priest, and even wasted and consumed by the teeche of the faithful: for that
this might be granted, Berengarius was enforced to confess it by Pope
Nicholas, and the general Council, wherein were present 114. Bishops: as it
is had in Gracians Decree, Distinct. 2. chap. Ego Berengarius. But other some,
who disliked of this opinion, devised another way, whereby they might
corporally be coupled with Christ. They said therefore that the bread and wine
do remain: but that in them and with them the body and blood of Christ is
really and corporally present: and that this comes to pass by the force and
efficacy of Christ's words. But it fell out with these as it did with those
that were first mentioned: namely, that, when they could scarcely or not at all
defend and maintain their opinion, some revolted also from them, who devised
yet a new way, whereby, holding fast that, as it were with tooth and nail,
which they judged necessary to be done to salvation, namely, that we must
corporally be joined with Christ, they might maintain and defend it: and they
lay this as a foundation, That the body of Christ is every where, and that
not by the force of the Sacramental words, as the rest do: but by force of
the personal or substantial union: and therefore that we are corporally
conioined and coupled with him. Such a like thing is Osiander said to have
dreamed of, who, that he might derive the essential righteousness of God,
which consists in Christ, unto us, he would have us in such wise to be
joined with him, as that there might be a real application of one substance to
another. This therefore is that which we disallowe, and do thus go about to
prove it false.

That such a conjunction and presence might be established, it is necessary,
that the body of Christ be at once, either in many places (wherein the first
and second sort do agree) or in all, as the third sort do hold, who of their
opinion are called Vbiquists, or Euerywheremen: but either of them is repugnant
to the humane nature of Christ, and does utterly destroy it: therefore
neither of both can be true.

For, that we may speak of that first, one body, though it be great, so long
as it remains one, can be but in one place only at one time: as for example,
This body of mine, is wholly contained in this space of air, which compasses
me about: and whither I stretch forth mine arms, or my legs, or pluck them
in, yet will it be always but in one place: howbeit in a greater, if it be
stretched out: in a less if it be plucked in. But if (to continue in one
example) it be divided into a hundred parts, and every part be put severally
in his own proper place: then my body, which now is one, and in one place,
shall be in a hundred places: but not the whole in every one, but every of
the parts thereof in every of the places. And, forasmuch as every part of
my body, is a body: a body, I say, consisting in proportion of length,
breadth, and depth: now shall not one body be in a hundred places, but a hundred
bodies in so many places. Therefore, they that judge, Christ's body to be in
many and diverse places at once, must either of necessity divide it into
parts, or make Christ to have many bodies: but either of both is false and
absurd: and against the human nature of Christ, and a destruction unto it.
For why? Christ's body is not to be divided, that it might by parts be in
many places: neither are his whole and entire bodies in many places, but
remaining one and undivided it is in one place: in a greater place if it be
greater, as, if it be extended from the very heavens to the earth: or in a
less if it be less, as, if it be enclosed in the bread. For that greatness of
the body does not require many places to be in, but only a greater place:
as also the multitude of bodies does require a multitude of places. This thing
is so certain and true, that even the Godhead it self (though it be every
where) yet cannot it be in diverse and sundry places. For otherwise it were
necessary, as we said before, that either it should be divided into parts,
or that it should be manifold: whereof neither is true. For, albeit to be
every where and in all places, may seem to be the very same that to be in
many places is: yet is not the very same. For to be every where, or in all
places, is not to be in many and in diverse places, but in one place, agreeable
to the greatness thereof. And therefore God; seeing he is infinite, is forsooth in
one place, but yet in an infinite place, that is to say, every where: and not
in many and sundry places: for then he should not be somwhere or in some
place: and besides he should either be divided or manifold. But he is simple
and undivided, filling and replenishing all things, every where wholly, and
without any distance of place in all and every place.

These things perhaps when the Vbiquists or Euerywhere men saw: but durst
neither divide Christ's body, nor multiply it: and yet would still stiffly hold
that corporal presence: one thing that remained they said, namely that Christ's
body is not manifold, nor in sundry places, but euerywhere and in all places,
by reason of the personal or hypostaticall union yt it has with the Word: as
who should say, that because they might have it corporally present in some few
places (to wit, where the Lords Supper is celebrated upon earth:) they
supposed that it must be every where. To the confuting of which opinion, this
saying of Augustine is sufficient, Take away the spaces from bodies, and they
will be no bodies: which if it be true, the^ these men, laboring with tooth
and nail to keep Christ's body really present, have utterly deprived
themselves of that body. And, who seeeth not, that to be every where is the
property of God alone? And therefore (that, we may conclude that which we
propounded at the beginning) this opinion and the two former, do destroy the
humane nature of Christ, either by dividing it, or by multiplying it, or by
infinite stretching of it. And therefore they cannot be true: yea, and though
they were true, yet cannot that be truly concluded, which they intend,
namely, That we are corporallye coupled and conjoined with Christ. For, when
thou say that the faithful are corporally joined with Christ: thou say not
only that they are joined together (which no christian man will deny) but thou
determinest also the mean, whereby that comes to pass and thou say that it
is corporal or bodily: touching which point only is the question and
controversy. For it follows not by and by, though the body of Christ be in
many or in all places, that therefore it is corporally, that is to say, after a
bodily manner joined with us: seeing the Godhead, which is every where, cannot
yet be said corporallye to be joined with the Creatures: though that in it we
live, move and have our being. And therefore the body of Christ, is neither in
many places, nor yet euerywhere, for this is against his divine nature:
neither, if it were every where or in many places, would it yet by and by
follow, that we are corporallye coupled and united with him.

Moreover every of these opinions have their several and sundry faults:
whereof yet we need not to repeat every particular. For the first says, That
the bread is changed and transubstanciated into the body, and the Wine into the
blood of Christ: which is a very absurd thing to be thought. For why? if thou
beleeuest that, which we confess in the Creed, namely, that the body of Christ
was made of the substance of the Virgin Mary: how is it that thou contendest
that the same is yet still made: and that of some other matter then of the
substance of the Virgin Mary: to wit Bread, whose substance is changed into
the substance of the body of Christ? it had been more tolerable to say, That
the bread is abolished and utterly brought to naught, and that Christ's body
does stay it self in the place thereof: and therefore the subtiller sort, which
write in these days of this matter, do reject the device of
Transubstantiation, not expressly in deed, but they conclude upon that, with
the which it can by no means agree: for they place Christ not corporallye, but
spirituallye, and so, as he occupies no place, in the Eucharist. The second,
offers violence to Christ's words: This is my body: that is to say, in this
or with this, is my body: this is a forced exposition, if at least it may be
called an exposition. The third destroys the Sacrament, whose dignitye it
would seem to defend: when as, that it might have christ's body really present
in it: it affirms that the same is also every where out of the sacrament. And
heerby I think it may sufficiently appear, that there is no such corporal
conjunction of Christ with us: no nor yet can be: since neither Christ's body,
nor the manner of conjunction, which is set down, can by any means bear it.

But now we must show, That even this real and corporal conjunction, if
there were any, cannot give or procure salvation: which I prove thus: If there
were ever any corporally conjoined with Christ, then was it the most holy
Virgin Mary his Mother: for she was bodily, substancially, and naturally joined
with him, because that being conceived by the power of the Holy ghost, of her
very substance, she bare him nine months in her womb, and afterward being
borne she gave him suck, held him in her arms, and brought him up. But the
virgin Mary's salvation was so far off from depending upon this couiunction,
that, unless an other more near and streighter conjunction had come between,
she had never entered into the Kingdom of Heaven: which thing Christ declares
to a certain woman crying out, Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the
pappes that gave thee suck, making this answer, Yea rather blessed are they
that hear the word of God and keep it: and to them that said, Thy Mother and
thy brethren seek thee without: who is my Mother and my brethren? says he:
whosoever does that that God commands, he is my brother, my sister, and my
Mother. The like may be said of Simeon, who took Christ up into his arms and
embraced him: and of John that leaned upon Christ's breast. But, that this gross
and corporal conjunction is not of it self profitable and healthsome; Iu^^^
may be a witness, who was no less corporally joined with him then the rest,
when he betrayed him with a kiss: and the Jews, which buffited him with
fistes, and scourged him with rods: so that, if so be they had wholly devoured
that sacred body, and drunk the blood that flowed from it, yet could they not
have obtained salvation thereby: and even so, no more could we neither be
saved, though we did in such wise devour his flesh, as that it might be
corporally and indeed present in us. My flesh profits nothing, says Christ,
namely being so taken: The words, which I speak unto you, are spirit and
life. Finally the conjunction, whereby the faithful are here joined with
Christ, shall one day be perfected in the heavens: but not that corporal
conjunction (for every man shall have both his own body and his own soul,
separated from others) but spiritual, of which we will speak anon. To what
purpose is it then so greatly to urge this bodily conjunction, whereupon yet,
if there were any, our salvation depends not: and we were always still to
seek an other, which alone is properly necessary to salvation? for otherwise,
what shall become of the fathers that died before Christ was borne? for why?
they could not corporally eat the body of christ which was not as yet come into
the world, neither could they bodily be joined with him: and yet they did eat
the same meat that we do, and dranck the same drinck, as says the Apostle:
and they were truly and healthfullye joined with him. Why therefore do we not
rather enquire after this streighter and wholesome mean?

And that we may speak somewhat also of this, as we promised, it is thus to be
understood. First that this whole controversy is as touching the mean or
manner of the conjunction: For concerning the thing it self there is no
question: that is, no man ever doubted, who has at least been any thing at
all acquainted with the holy scriptures, but that the faithful are truly and
indeed joined with Christ their head, considering that it does and may every
where appear. Let this therefore be ratified, and out of all controversy,
That the faithful ought verily to be joined with Christ, to the intent they
may become partakers of his righteousness and life, and of all his benefits.

And therefore when it is demanded, whither we be corporallye or spirituallye
joined with Christ, this is demanded by those that do already understand,
that we are joined with him: but after what manner or by what mean that is
done, whither by a corporal or spiritual, they stand in doubt* For the
Grammarians (that I may add this) as they have certain Aduerbs, of Place,
Time, Likeness, etc. so have they some of the mean or manner of doing: of
which sort are these, Subtly, Strongly, Corporally, Spiritually, etc. And
therefore the Logicians do commonly call the Maximees, whereunto these
Aduerbs are put, Modalls: whereby it is declared, not that they Attribute is in
the subject: but how and after what sort it is in it; as, when I say, Aristotle
disputes subtly: by this Aduerb I express, not that Aristotle disputes,
which is signified by the other two words: but how and after what sort he
desputeth. Therefore, this proposition may of him be denied, who yet must
grant, that Aristotle disputes, because he denies not the thing, but the
manner only. So therefore, they that at this day deny, the faithful to eat
Christ corporallye, or bodilye to be joined with him: do not yet deny them to
eat the flesh of Christ, and to drink his blood, or to be joined with Christ:
but they deny the manner expressed in that Aduerb: and because they deny that
manner, it is requisite that they appoint another, seeing they confess the
conjunction or joining together: and for so much as it is in no wise corporal,
as we have showed before, it remains that it be spiritual. And certes, so
mighty in this behalf is the Truth, that she draws all men unto her to
take her part. For why* all for the most part do confess, that we are
spiritually and by faith joined with Christ: but yet what the mean or manner
of this conjunction is, it is not ^o well perhaps understood of all. And
therefore this is also breefly and in few words to be opened.

Two bodies are joined together after their manner, that is to say; bodily,
when the one is put to the other by the mutual touching of either of them
both, without any distance of place coming between them* and they are
disioyned and separated one from an other, by distance of place. But of
Spirits, which can neither touch nor be touched, the reason is far
otherwise: for the joining or disioyning of them, the neerenesse or fa^^esse of
places does nothing avail. They are joined together then by Love: not feign
dry, but most truly: as also they are again by Hatred sundred and divided.
For this we understand all the blessed Spirits, in what place soever they are,
to be joined together among themselves: and the unclean and wicked Spirits to
be divided from them, albeit they remain among them. So likewise we say, that
the faithful are joined together ^n^ with an other and this is the communion of
Saints (...) but sundred from the wicked, although they be mingled with them.
Therefore Luke in the Acts says, That the multitude of them that believed,
were of one ha^t and of one soul, which is the greatest (...) in^^tion that
can be, the which Sam. (...) is expounded; The soul of Jonathan says (...)
was ^^^^^ith the soul of David: for Jonathan loved David as his own soul. So
man are wife* even without copulation, are o^^ and the one is said to be knit
unto the other in what place soever they be: and this similitude, to expound
this mystery, ye Apostle uses Eph^. 5 And therefore with this kind of
conjunction, though with a streighter hand, are the faithful joined with
Christ their head: which also in an other place Paul declares, when he says,
The bread, which we break, is the communion of the body of Christ, and, for we
that are many, are one bread and one body. And thus is this conjunction of
ours with Christ wrought and accomplished: when as the godly mind being
enlightened with the divine Spirit, has atteined to the clear knowledge of
God in Christ, and to the beholding of him as the fountain of all goodness, and
as a Father of mercy to it self: so great a love is forthwith enkindled
thereby, that it is wholly ravished with the desire of him (for a good thing, the
greater that it is, and the more apparently seen, the more vehemently is it
longed after: as, if the mind does plainly perceive and see the cheifest good
thu^g and most sovereign felicity, it cannot be th^^^ but that it will be
surprise^ with a most seruent love of it) and love has a continual de^^^^ to
be joined with and to enjoy the thing ^^lou^^, insomuch that it cannot rest
before it obtein i^t and when this is grau^^ted to the lover, then he cleueth
thoroughly to the thing beloue^, he is turned into it, and becom^^^th one with
it. And this power of enjoying him God gives most willinglye to all, that
(...) him, that is to say, to so many as he stirs up unto his love by his
holy Spirit: yea, he comes to them, that he may also dwell with them, as
says Christ, Ioh. 14. If a man love me, my Father will love him, and we will
come to him, and abide with him. Hence it is, that Paul, being after this
manner joined with Christ, says: Now is it not I that live, but Christ lives
in me: and the faithful do pray, Let thy will be done with us, and in us, as
it is in heaven. For why^ this is so effectual a conjunction, that it joins
the Louer^ together verily and in such wise, that th^^^ (...) but one mind,
and one will in ^^aine, insomuch that the lover may truly and from his heart
say unto Christ, Not what I will, but what thou will, be done. Finally this
divine lou^ is wonderfullye celebrated throughout the whole book of the songs
of Solomon, wherewith the Church being caught and surpripe^^, is so greatly
enamoured, (...) so ex^^ding^y^e in love with God, that it can book (...) r^^^
but in the embracing of ^ind* This is th^^ (...) that spiritual and deui^^e,
and (...) wholesome conjunction, that the faithful have with Christ: which is a
hundred times better and more effectual then the corporal, (least any man
should think it to be vain and fantastical) for of this follows by and by,
the putting away of all evils, and the participation of all good things: for
why^ it is meet that God should free him, whom he takes into his favor, from
sinn^ and from all enormities, and adorn him with grace and al good things.

Thus therefore by the lively and sincere knowledge and faith of God in Christ,
is kindled an incredible love in us, which God, who is the very cause of it,
never leaves destitute; but rewards it with himself, and with will hi^ good
blessings, in Christ. Thus therefore is God offered to be received in Christ,
^^ld* Christ in the mystery of the Eucharist, not with the mouth of the body,
but with the faith of the soul.

This our conjunction with him, Christ, applying himself to our capacity,
does every where illustrate, with many similitudes (...) bodies, and from the
manner (...) them, whom also the Apostles followed, as, when by ^he word of
God, re^^^^ed by faith, Paul says, That the faithful (...) members of
Christ, bone of his bones, and fles^^ of his fles^ (...) and, that in Baptism
they (...) Christ ^lare graffed in him: and that in the Supp^^ they eat his
flesh, and drink his blood, and (...) made one with him: when yet
notwithstanding that holy body of his, abides always whollye in the heavens,
sitting at the right hand of his Father almighty: neither is it at any time
intermixed with ours. But these things are figuratively spoken, and are to be
transferred from the body to the soul: since the soul whereof he is the meat,
has neither mouth, nor teethe, nor throat: and this figure being not
vnd^^st^^d of some, was expounded by Christ him self, The flesh profits
nothing, says he, The words, which I speak unto you, are Spirit and life.
For hereby it plainelye app^^reth, that this meat is not of the belly, but of
the mind: and that the flesh of Christ is to be eaten of us, not with the
teeth of the mouth, but with the says of the so^^e: and his blood to be dra^
(...) with ye (...) of the throat, but with the spirit of de^otion. Which thing
may even here by ^e percei^en, for that neither the hi^g^r ^orthi^^^ for the
asswaging whero^, (...) holy banq^^^ was ordained, is the (...) blood, which
were (...) imaginations of some: (...) the (...) and ^^ath of Christ, that is,
of the pardon and fo^gi^^e (...), mercy, etc. which all (...) obtained of God
through the heath (...) pa^^ion of Christ. Therefore with those tropes (...)
figures Christ and his Apostles, have expressed the same our spiritual
conu^^ction with Christ out head. (...) as the Apostles of Christ* (...) also
the fa^h^rs, have retained and frequented the figures of Christ and of the
Apostles, as appears by their writings: yea and sometimes proceeding further
they have used more bold figures: as when they attributing the names of things
signified to the signs, do say, that Christ in the Sacrament is seen with
the eyes of the body, handled with the hands, broken, chewed with the mouth and
teeth, daily fashioned and created, and that he falls from the table to the
earth, that the blood of Christ boyleth up in the bowels of the faithful.
Exuperantius Bishop of Tholous (says I^rome to Nepotian) carried the Lords body
in a wicker Basket, and his blood in a Glass. But if they seem now and then
to proceed yet further, and to affirm, that we are properly and without a
figure, corporallye (...) with Christ, this is to be thought to belong unto
that, that our bodies also are partakers of this benefit: for it will come to
p^^sse^ that, we shall not only be united with Christ in our souls, and so
enjoy eternal life, but also in our bodies, not, that there shall be (as ye
would say) one mass of all the bodies and souls of all the faithful, with
the body and soul of Christ: but for because we shall follow the Lamb,
whither soever he goes: and with him enjoy everlasting life.

This is the true exposition, if I be not deceived, of this Question, and so
consequently of them both: to the unfolding whereof, not an hour, but a year
were needful. And this so manifest a truth of either proposition, I was
persuaded in the beginning, when I choose and propounded these things to
dispute upon, that I could defend and maintain against all men living: but
since I came into this place, and whiles I beheld your countenances, and
especially theirs, with whom I am to try this conflict, I fear exceedinglye.
And therefore, as I did at the first, I pray and beseech almightye God, to give
me strength and ability, fit for the defense of his truth. Also I desire the
reverend Mediator of this School and disputation, if at any time he shall
perceive me to doubt or waver, to put to his helping hand: and mine
adversaries, that having regard of the truth, they would remit somewhat of the
vehemencye of their arguments, when need shall require. Finallye, I crave
earnestlye of you all right woorshipfull brethren, that if at any time I shall
not so aptlye, as were requisite, answer to the objections propounded, ye
would yet therefore never the more doubt of the truth of these propositions:
but rather impute all that matter to my slothfulnes and ignorance. I have said.


