THE ONLY RVLE to walk by: Guiding Christ's Ministers, and all his members, how
to frame their conversation in the way to salvation.

A Sermon preached at a Synod, or meeting of Ministers in S. Michaels Church in
Couentry the second of October. 1615.

By S. GIBSON, Preacher of the Word, and Pastor in the same City.

GAL. 6.16. As many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them, and
mercy, and upon the Israel of God. LONDON, Printed by George Purslowe for Ralph
Mab, and are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Greyhound.
1616.

To the right Worshipful Si^ ROBERT COKE, son and heir to the right
honorable, Sir EDWARD COKE, Lord chief Justice of England, and to the noble
and virtuous Lady, the Lady THEOPHILA^ COKE his Wife.
SIR,
WHen I had resolved to publish this Sermon, which I lately preached to a mixed
Audience and thought whose name (...) should use in the forefront for
protection and countenance of it, I considered that to your right Honorable
Father I ough^ most duty; who (when I was dejected, for the loss of two noble
Lords, both deceased in (...) short space, which acknowledged me in their life
time,) to supply that want readily at the first motion of a Gentleman, a good
friend of mine, accepted of me, and that with sweet words of singular
encouragement. Since which time (as by special duty I have been bound) I have
used his Honors name, by his permission and allowance, in my public prayers.
But fearing, in regard of his superexcellent worth, and the little value of
that which I had now ready to exhibit to him, it might be thought too great
presumption, to present such an unpolished piece of work to his learned eyes, I
thought it my best way rather to descend from the Father to the Son; and of
all the generation, for peculiar respects, to single out your self, with due
remembrance of your Honorable Lady.

It pleased God after your happy marriage ^o place you both for a time in that
Religious and well-gouern'd City, where I am an vnwor^hy Preacher and Pastor,
and there (your Honorable Father first accepting of the Recordership, in his
love to the City, and in the good opinion he had of the inhabitants for
Religion) your self also took an affection to the people; and their love
being reciprocal to you again, you soon became even a member of the
Corporation, and were elected to be a Parliament Man vnanimi consensu. And for
the time you there continued, thanks be to God, many had comfort of you: The
poor having great relief at your door through your Christian bounty, and all
sorts good example by your diligent frequenting of the public exercises both
upon the Sabbath and the weekedayes. And though my charge lay in another
Parish, yet it pleased you both to take the pains to be partakers also of my
poor Ministry in the other Church. These fruits being found in young
beginners, have given good hope of your further progress in the way to life. I
have therefore now taken an occasion in all duty to be an exhorter unto you to
this end, that ye never abate any thing of your love to GOD and his truth; nor
suffer your selves to be withdrawn from the Christian Faith, which you have
received by any seducers or bad examples, which abound in this licentious age:
But that ye walk on constantly and labor to grow in grace, and in the
knowledge of our Lord Jesus; knowing that this will be your only comfort
another day, when all the world shall not stand you in any stead.

To provoke you forward heereunto, let me but propound unto you your Honorable
Fathers example, whose steps God and Nature binds you most to observe. In the
Faith no man more sound, making the sacred Canon of the Scripture the only
rule of his belief: and in the exercise of his authority, and execution of his
great Office, and in the course of his life, following the holy rules thereof
religiously.

Now as other Ornaments of Art and Nature make him illustrious to them that
know him, so ^t is remarkable, that his religious practices do not any whit
eclipse his reputation, but make him the more to be magnified in the sight of
good men, above others of his rank. As Scholars and learned men in all
Sciences honor him for those abilities which are most in ^equest with them, so
for better things the Church of Christ takes comfort in him, the Tribe of Leui
blesses him, and the GOD of ^eauen crowns him with multiplicity of his
mercies. In the race therefore that you have to run (Right Worshipful) like
a good Son, follow a good Fathers steps. Now let time be precious with you,
and dum vires annique sinunt, while strength serves, be studious, and
industriously labor for knowledge and true wisdom. Remember your Creator in
the days of your youth; and serve the GOD of heaven constantly with a perfect
heart, that the blessings of Wisdoms right hand and left may be upon you
here, and that you may find mercy and salvation in that great Day; when
neither birth, nor blood, nor riches, nor any worldly privilege, but only a
good conscience shall be regarded. And so I humbly take my leave, praying GOD
to knit your hearts firmly one to another, and more firmly unto God, that
loving and living together in his fear for the time you have to spend in thi^
world, you may both be partakers of the grace of life together in his heavenly
Kingdom.

Your Worships ever to be commanded in the Lord, SAMVEL GIBSON.

To the READER.
GOod Reader, as hitherto I have, upon good considerations, been bashful^
backward to publish any thing i^ these learned times: so neither a^ I now
grown to any settled resolut^on, to trouble the Press often with my worthless
l^bours. But being of late somewhat earnestly solic^ted, to bestow one of my
Sermons this way; I hau^ for some competent respects condescended to the motion
this once: If upon what reasons I have done it, any be desirous to know, I will
reveal to him (...) part, what in my own mind I have opposed again^ the
discouragements occurring. First, my own d^fects I acknowledge (...), and
ingenuous^ without dissembling, and I am not so simple but know the manner of
many conceited Youths in the age, rashly to give their disdainful censures, of
(...) most whatsoever comes to their view: yet I (...) withal, that even in
these times, scribimus i^ ^octi doctique; all sermons that come forth are ^ot
excellent, and though some Readers be curious, others are not, and even printed
Tractates are ^ot without their operation; and therefore who ^noweth whether
this (by the blessing of God) though (...) be regardless with some, may not
prove altogether ^ruitlesse to others? and howsoever the envious and ^ainer
sort may hence take advantage to carpe and ^eward me for my pains, with
nothing but words ^f disgrace, yet I expect better measure from better men, and
consider withal, that I shall hereby ^aue opportunity to gratify those
friends, to whom (...) most desire to give contentment; and this has not ^een
of least force to animate and embolden me to that which I have done, even in
contempt of arro^ancy. I see also that unsound members, though of ^o credit or
worth for learning, have both tongues and pens against the truth; and this
has exci^d me the rather thus to diuulge, what I have late^ spoken for the
truth, in the common cause of the church and of Religion. Now, if passing
abroad through many hands, it find approbation amongst those that be sound
hearted and orthodoxe, I pass not ^r the rash and unjust judgment of such, as
be either contentious or corrrupt, what face soever they carry. The argument
that I have light upon, is very necessary for these times, of any other: be
content (good Reader) with the single and naked truth, vndeckt with the
ornaments of art. The matter being good, bear with the manner; curious and
exact discourses I leave to our rare preachers that come seldom into the
pulpit. These (I trow) may very well preach every time in print; but of us it is
not to be expected, that are exercised so often weekly, throughout the year:
and for my own part, as I can have but little time usually for any of my
ordinary sermons, so for this, my warning was exceeding short: if I should say
I had two days to provide for it, I might be disproued by some that know the
contrary, and it falling to my lot altogether unexpected, it gave impediment to
all provident forecast. Yet it pleased God to give me some good success in
the delivery of it, and after, no small encouragement from the most religious
and learned hearers then present Since which time, I have perused my notes, and
hau^ added a little in the margent specially. Of some it may be, it will be
contemptibly rejected, because (...) use so many quotations of Scripture, and
so few of Fathers, and Schoolmen, and other Authors: but am of mind that it
were good for these that set light by divine authority, in respect of humane
that they had less learning, and more grace. For my own part, were my reading
and ability sufficient to do it, I affect no such course in the Pulpit as they
delight in, as sauouring too much of the flesh, and of no use to the hearers;
if by others that distaste any thing but English in a Sermon, I be excepted
against for that little liberty I have taken above some others, I think they
also are in the extreme, and that a mean between both these would do well.
Freely to deliver my judgment and affection, touching this matter, thus I
conceive as yet: That our maine aim being at the glory of God in the
administration of his word, and our care to that end not to hinder the
understanding of the illiterate people in that which concerns them to mark:
Doubtless a man may lawfully have some respect al^o to the learned auditors,
when the congregation is ^ixt; and now and then use a few words in another
language, which they understand as well as ^imselfe: and yet I reverence those
worthy Prea^hers, that use to follow their Text and matter ^undly, and
substancially and profitably, though ^hey altogether forbear what they are
well able to ^e in this kind. Which way soever thou inclinest in thy opinion
concerning this point, judge not me, I judge not thee. God give us all grace,
that we may ever seek that, for which chiefly we are set on work by our
heavenly Master, to wit, that transgressors may be taught his ways, and
sinners converted unto him; and, good Christian Reader, pray thou for us, that
the will of the Lord may prosper in our hands.

Thine in the Lord Jesus, Samuel Gibson.

The chief Points handled in this SERMON.
1. That we all owe Canonical obedience unto God, and are to walk by that
rule which he has given us in his Word. 2. That the Canon of the Scripture is
the only rule of the Church, which Christians are to walk by. 3. That there
ought to be correspondency in judgment amongst us, as well as in affection,
specially amongst Teachers. 4 That the lives of Preachers and professors ought
to be answerable to their doctrine and profession, and they ought to be
examples in all goodness.
The first of these points is applied against all irregular persons, that will
have their own way, and not frame themselves to do what God and Christ Jesus
requires of them.

The second against our adversaries of the Church of Rome, that magnify their
Church with derogation from the Scripture.

The third against all that hold paradoxes, and affect singular opinions, some
particulars are touched by name.

The fourth and last against scandalous Preachers, which deliver good doctrine,
and give bad example to their flock.

THE ONLY RVLE to walk by.
PHIL. 3.16.17. Nevertheless, whereto we have already attained, let us walk by
the same rule, let us mind one thing. Brethren, be followers together of me,
and mark them which walk so, as ye have us for an ensample.


THe words are exhortatory, and the exhortations contained in them are very
pertinent to the present assembly; the former is to unanimity, the latter to
conformity: the first is not barely propounded, but withal the way is declared,
how we may attain to it. Let us walk by one rule, that is the way to be of one
mind: and whereas the imperfections of some, in comparison of others, might be
a great means to hinder this unity and harmony in judgment; some excelling,
some being far short of others in knowledge. Nevertheless, says the
Apostle, though there be such difference, and some are weak and very
defective in respect of others: yet so far as we have attained, whether to
more or less, let us walk orderly by one rule or Canon, (...) est ver^
militare, ^tur mili^ (...) cu^ ^e proce^ iuxta ca^m sibi ab ^ratore ^xum.
which is, the word of God and doctrine of the Apostles, which teaches us to
aim at the glory of God, and the peace of the Church, so shall we grow to
consent in one, and be of one mind. To this exhortation to unanimity or
agreement in opinion, he adds another in the seventeenth verse, to
conformity, or imitation of good examples, where he makes himself the form
or type, (...).
to which he would have them conform: yet does he not propound himself alone
for an example, but he joins others with him, (...) etc.
whom he would have the Philippians to imitate also, wherein they walked as
he walked. In the first exhortation there are diverse things worthy to be
observed and considered of: of which, I desire to speak rather profitably then
plausibly.

walking by rule: That we (...) Canonica^ ^bedience God. (...)
and thence we are taught this point, that we are not left to our selves, to
follow our own way, and do what seems good in our own eyes, but we have
our rule given us of God, which we are to follow constantly and religiously,
neither turning to the right hand nor to the left. Let us walk by rule. From
the beginning it has bin thus. God never left man to himself to do his own
will, but at the first Adam had his rule given him by lively voice, Genesis 2, 3.
and 4.3 Heb. 1.1
and after, the Lord declared his will to the fathers in visions, and at length
delivered his mind in writing: he gave his word unto Jacob, his statutes and
his judgments unto Israel, Psalm. 147.19. Psalm. 147.1^
and that both for their direction in the worship to be done to himself, and
also for the well ordering of their conversation, to his will. First, briefly
and summarily in two tables, Deuteronomy. 10.^
written with his own finger. Then more largely and amply in other
Prophetical books, where he has set his people a course, Micah. 6.^
and showed what he requires of them. And cursed be he, says the Lord, that
continues not in all things written in the law to do them. Deuteronomy. 27. Deuteronomy. 27.
And as in the old Testament, so in the new we have our rules, Gal. 3.10.
as for the worship of God both inward and outward, (...). 24 (...). 10.28
(...). 6.6 (...). 11.12 (...) 21.34 (...) 6 30. etc. (...). 7.12
so we have our rules also of sobriety and charity, and righteousness toward
men; both together make one complete and exact rule for the whole catholic
Church to walk and order their steps after: as the Jews under Moses, so we
under Christ are under rule still; and great reason we should be so: for made
us, and Christ that has redeemed us, exercises his authority and dominion
over us, and we, our obedience and subjection unto him; whilst he gives us
our rule, we yield our selves to be ruled by him, and to do whatsoever he
commands us, and not what pleases our selves. rule should be given us of God
to walk after, in regard of our natural blindness and folly, and unaptness
(of our selves) to do that which is right in the sight of the Lord. We see,
when in the worship of God men have followed their own devices, and not walked
by rule, in stead of honoring the most high God, they have vilified him with
their base manner of serving of him; as the Apostle says, Romans 1.21. They
glorified him not as God: (...). 1.21.23
1. with worship suitable to his Majesty, but turned the glory of the
incorruptible God into the similitude of a corruptible man, and of birds and
foure-footed beasts and creeping things: and the Israelites swaruing from their
rule, offended in a high degree, Exodus 32.10.
and provoked the Lord to great wrath against them with their idolatrous
service: and as in the worship of God, so in their conversation and carriage
toward men; all are subject to err and do amiss. It is not in man to walk,
and to direct his steps aright without a rule: and therefore, necessary it is
to have direction from God, and to follow that, that we may do well, and have
comfort of our ways in the end, when we have run our race and finished our
course. Which makes against all unruly and lawless persons, sons of Belial,
that will not submit themselves to be ruled by the word of God, but cast off
the yoke, Psalm. 2.3.
and rebelliously break out of all compass, following their own way which is
the way of sin and error, as if they were their own men and had no master.
Christ shall be no Lord of theirs to appoint them what to do, they hate to be
directed and restrained by any. I would these knew it, that according to their
works, ^om. 2.6
so shall it be unto them in the day of judgment: vengeance shall be rendered
unto them by Christ, ^. These. 1.8
for their rebellion. ruled by him here, they shall not be saved by him
hereafter. Others in some things are content to follow the rule given them, but
(withal) in other things they will have their own way: 1. In the matter of
Gods worship; none more presumptuous this way then our adversaries of the
Church of Rome, ^xod. 20.4 ^ee popish Ca^ech. ^n^ituled: The Christi^n
Doctrine, (...) manner of a Dialogue, be^ween the Ma^er and the dis^iple. God
^eepe the chil^ren of Chri^ians from ^^ch masters.
who in every part will have their own inventions, and thereby have mard all.
Our rule is, not to make to our selves any graven image. But first, they have
broken this rule, and then they have put it out of their Catechismes, and will
not have it mentioned with the rest of the commandments; great image-makers,
and image-worshippers they are, after the manner of the heathen they have
turned the glory of the incorruptible God into the similitude of a corruptible
man, and of birds, picturing God the Father like an old man, the holy Ghost
like a Dove: under Nihil f^lsius, ^uam licere obis omnia ^cere, que ^eus facit
V^^n in L^^^. 166.
pretense of such appearances, and Christ Jesus is counterfeited as it pleases
the Painter; and before an image, that goes under the name of Christ's Image,
though nothing like him, they Greg. de Valent. Tom. 4. disp. 1. Gretserus and
alij.
teach men to bow down and worship. I am sure they have no rule for this,
from God; but rather for the contrary: Scriptura v^ (...) da^nat, sic (...)
laudat, Fest. Hom. p. 229. disp. 37. de imag.
in the Sacrament also they are as audacious, to do contrary to the
institution. Substantial bread they have turned to little round wafers of
vnsolid frothy stuff, and wine they have taken from the Lords people, Licet
Christ^ instituerit sub utraque specie, and licet in primitiua ecclesia
reciperetur a fidelibus sub vtraque specie, etc. Council. Constable. sess. 13
notwithstanding the rule of Christ, Drink ye all of this, which the primitive
and ancient Churches constantly kept. Thus likewise in other things they are a
rule unto themselves, and will not do Christ that honor, as to be directed by
him in all things. No, Antichrist is mounted up too high to stoop so low, as
to let Christ only reign over his people. But that proud Usurper is not got
so aloft, but he shall be brought down low at the length: whom the Lord
shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, 2. These. 2.8
and with the brightness of his coming. Even so come, Lord Jesus, Reu. 22.20
come quickly. In course of life: it is the sin also of many of our own
people, they obey the Lord JESUS but by halfes: in some things they are content
to follow him, in other things they will have their own way; some given too
much to their pleasures, and to the pampering of the flesh, pass beyond the
bounds of sobriety: and others carried with passion in cases of wrong are very
irregular, and will not be kept within compass, by the good rules that our
Savior has given to all Christians of patience and meekenes: Math. 5.39.44
Romans 12.21 Col. 3.12
but specially in things that concern their profit: we see many professors
break square, though otherwise of note for Religion.

Hence much falsehood and deceit in bargaining, among those that should give
better example; hence Usury grown so common, though in the Exodus 22.25 Leuit.
25.37 Deuteronomy. 23.19. Psalm. 15.5 Luke 6.35 Philip. 4.8
Word of God there be much against it, nothing for it; and hence sacrilegious
withholding of the goods of the Church from the right owners thereof: but this
cannot stand with that integrity which religion requires, neither will it
serve the turn in some things to be conformable and obedient to the law of
Christ, but we are to order our steps thereafter in all our occasions.
Wherefore, to dra^^ to a conclusion of this point, let all of us, as we would
be sure to go the rig^ way, which leads to life, Psalm. 119.6
learn to have due respect to the Canon and rule given us of God in all
things: in the service and worship we perform to God; and in our carriage
toward all sorts, whether superiors or inferiors, rich or poor, frie^^s or
enemies, in our words and in our w ^kes, in those things that concern o^
profit or pleasure, as well as in other things: in all things let us have an
eye to the rule which is given us. For he only walks safely, that walks by
rule, and he that follows his own way, Esaias 53.6
goes out o^ the way: out of the way to heaven, o^t of the way to Everlasting
life. And ^hus much for the first point, touching ^he Canonical obedience we
owe to God.

Apostl^ speaks not of rules, but only of one ^ule, which he would have all
to walk by. And thence this doctrine arises, that there is but one rule only
for ^^e whole Church of Christ and all Ch^istians to follow: one rule of faith,
ar^ one rule of life; let us walk by the same rule. And this point is
plentifully set forth in Scripture. To the law and to the testimonies, Esa.
8.20. Isay 8.20
They have Moses and the Prophets, Luk 16.29. Luke 16.29
and it is written, says our Savior, when he contended with Satan, Mat. 4.7.
Matthew. 4.7
and when questions were asked him, What is written, how read thou? Luke
10.26. Luke 10.26
and we may not presume above that which is written, 1. Corin. 4.6. Cor. 4.6.
Hence has the Scripture the honorable title of Canonical appropriated to it:
and proper it is thereunto to be given by inspiration; Tim. 3.16 Pet. 1.21.
and so, that alone is the sure rule that cannot deceive us. Neither is there
any need of any other rule, this is so perfect and complete of it self, and
will bring the religious follower thereof directly to eternal life, ^h. 5.39
as 2. Tim. 3.15. Tim 3.15
It is able to make us wise to salvation, and is profitable to teach, to
improve, to correct, to instruct in righteousness, that the man of God may be
absolute and perfect to every good work. What use then is there of other rules?
Let us walk by the same rule: and hence let all be warned to take heed of the
false and counterfeit rules of our adversaries, which they have brought in, to
the dishonor of the divine Canon and of the author of it. Regulae monasticae
nihil aliud sunt, quam stultae, and inanes hominum superstitio for u^^
praescriptiones circa res l^dicras etc. Festus Hom. disp. 29.
Not to speak of their ridiculous Monastical rules, which several sects
keep so precisely, which are nothing but foolish and vain prescriptions of
superstitious men about idle matters, which are adverse to Gods pure service
and to Christian liberty.

That which is most intolerable is, that they make the Scripture imperfect and
defective, and so but partialem regulam, Bellarm. de verbo D^i no^ scripto c^p.
12.
a piece of a rule, and magnify the Fathers, and Councels, and Traditions, and
the Church specially, and the Popes definitive sentence ex cathedra, making
that to be the maine infallible rule of Faith.

But alas, if we should harken to them herein, we could never be at a
certainty for our Faith. For 1. As for the Fathers, they agree not amongst
themselves, but are one opposite to another in many things, and amongst many
Truths have some great Errors. Origin was an Allegorist; an unsound
Interpreter. Tertullian a From who^ he held that prodigious error against
second mariag^ his argumen^ answered by Beza de poly
Montanist, Justin Martyr a One that dreamed of a golden worl^ to continue
1000. years after the res^rection, wh^ in Christ should reign^ with the Sai^
on earth.
Chiliast or millenary; Eusebius half an Arrian. And others had their several
errors. And therefore there is no building upon them.

2 As for Councels, they were not only subject to err, but did err, and of
the best and most eminent of them: as the 1. Nicen Council in a point of Canone
19. (...), iubent (...) and Can. 12 pro^ibent eos re^ire ad militia^, qui
cingulum ^biecissent, quod est co^tra Luke 3.14.
Anabaptisme, and another foul Error they had like to have committed, had it
not been for Absque Paph^anxissent, nenini Ecclesia^icorum pronissum esse
^ormire cum ^xore, quam ^um Laicus es^t, duxisset, ^elas. test.
Paphnutius.

3 As for Traditions, they are uncertain, many of them are forged and
counterfeit, as our adversaries confess.

4 As for Popes, their own stories show, how some of them have been
Haeretikes, and how they have crossed one another. As what Pope Formosus
decreede, Pope Stephen the sixth abolished. After, John the ninth disanulled the
acts of Stephen, and established again what Pope Formosus had done. After,
Sergius the third disanulleth what Formosus and John had done, and
reestablished the acts of Stephen. Here Is Pope against Pope, and one contrary
to another: He were a wise man therefore, that would build his faith upon the
Popes judgment.

5 As for the Church; the Catholic Church sometimes is invisible: and as for
any particular Church, it is subject to err and fall away, as did Israel,
where the chair of Moses was, Revel. 2, and 3
and the Churches of Asia, to which the Spirit spoke, and Christ wrote by his
servant John. And as for the Roman Church, there is great difference between
the old, and the present.

1 In the Apostles time there was no praying in an unknown tongue there, as
now there is, he flatly condemns it. 1. Cor. 14. 1. Cor. 14


2 In the Apostles time the people were not forbid to read the scriptures, as
now they are: the Beraeans are commended for it, Acts 17.11. Act. 17.11
and Timothy was brought up in them from a child. 2. Tim. 3.15. 2. Tim. 3.15


3 In the Apostles time Marriage was honorable among all men, Heb. 13.4. Heb.
13.4
and Peter himself had a wife, Luke 4.38. Luke 4.38
Math. 8.14. Math. 8.14
But now a Concubine is fitter for a Priest then a wife: and disgracefully they
speak of the Ministers of reformed Churches, because they marry; for which,
by the way, Epist. ad Ocean.
they may be answered, as S. Jerome answered a dissolute adulterer that
condemned Carterius a married Bishop. For us it is written, Marriage is
honorable among all men, Col. 2.18 Reu. 21 8, 9
and the bed undefiled: but for them it is added, whoremongers and adulterers
God will judge.

4 In the Apostles time they worshipped none but God: now Angels, Saints,
Images.

^. Cor. 11.25.28
5 In the Apostles time they had the Communion in both kinds, all the Lords
people both eat and drunk at the Lords Table, according to the order appointed
by the Lord of the Sacrament: now, only a little w^fer is pop't by the Priest
into their mouths; but to drink of the sacramental cup they are not allowed.
In these, and many other things there is great difference between the old
Roma^e Church and the present.

Wherefore it remains, that the scripture is the only sure infallible rule
that we can trust to. error. opposition, but a sweet harmony between Moses and
the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles. without any alteration: though Churches
vary, that is ever the same. questionable, which is the Church; whether the
Greek or Latin, or Protestant, every one challe^ging the name. scripture is
the Word of God, is out of question amongst us, and all agree that that
contains the Truth, and nothing but the Truth. And therefore, let us walk by
this rule: it is wisdom for us to make that the only rule of our faith, and
to cleave fast thereunto; it is the safest course to preserve us from error:
and so many as walk after this rule, Gal. 6.16
peace shall be upon them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God. And hitherto
of the counsel of the Apostle tending to unity.

Now of the maine exhortation, to which the former was but subordinate, Be
of one mind, or, (...)
Mind one thing: which (as appears by the former verses) is rather to be
referred to the judgment then to the affection. For, he desired before their
consent in opinion, and still he urges the same thing: he saw there was
difference amongst them, and some were in an error, of whom notwithstanding he
speaks like himself in the spirit of meeknes favorably, charitably,
hopefully, God will reveal: Verse 15
yet still calling upon them to leave their private opinions, and to join with
the Church of God in the truth without opposition or dissent. Be of one mind.

agree in points of religion: as there should be correspondency in affection,
so likewise agreement in judgment amongst us. This he most instantly and
vehemently persuades the Philippians unto with all sweet terms of love, Cap.
2.1. etc. If there be any consolation in Christ, Philip. 2.1
if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the spirit, if any bowels and
mercies, fulfill my joy, that ye be like minded, having the same love, being of
one accord, of one mind: and 1. Cor. 1.10. ^. Cor. 1.10.
There Is his most earnest request unto them for the same. The thing there
desired, is unity, and it is threefold, Verbal, Real, and Mental. 1. In
word, That ye speak one thing. 2. In deed, That there be no dissensions
amongst you. 3. In mind, That you be knit together in one mind and in one
judgment. Then mark how affectionately he desires it of them. 1. Using a
lowly obsecration, I beseech you. 2. A loving compellation, Brethren. 3. An
earnest adiuration, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. I beseech you
brethren by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye speak one thing, and
that there be no dissentions amongst you; but be you knit together in one
mind, and in one judgment.

And in his second Epistle to the same Church, Chapter 13. Verse 11. 2. Cor.
13.11.
when in conclusion he gives them the Vale, he gives them a special charge
for this, to be of one mind, and live in peace. All which shows, that it is
a matter of great importance, that there should be concord in judgment: and
sure the contrary is of dangerous consequence. For first, specially when
teachers differ in opinion, it is an occasion to make ungrounded hearers to
start aside, and become to be of no religion. Of old this turned many from
the true faith, Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 16.
(...), the dissonancie and diversity of opinions that was amongst learned
men, was the cause that many would not (...), embrace the Christian Religion.

And such pretenses at least have bin made by some, that have forsaken our
Church, and proved Roman Proselytes: they have pretended that the hearing of
one Preacher, to contrary that which another taught, was the cause of their
turning. Now, though herein they have done foolishly, not considering that this
is not peculiar to our religion, but has ever bin in the Church of God, A
noble challenge is made them by Dr. White, p. 154. where he offers to prove,
that there is no point wherein they differ from us, but they differ among
themselves.
and that in the Church of Rome there is great diversity of opinions, as well
as in ours; yet woe be to them, by whom the offense comes. They have much to
answer for, that have given the occasion by their opposite doctrine. Well,
this shows, there had need be great heed how we differ. 2. Upon difference
of judgment, ordinarily follows difference in affection, and so contention
arising between the Pastors, much mischief must necessarily follow.

In ancient Churches there have been prodigious quarrels hereupon, Niceph. lib.
14. cap. 47
and sometimes murders have been committed, as we may see in Ecclesiastical
Histories. And therefore there had need be great care in every one to maintain
unity, and to forbear opposition. This then is to be applied against all of
what sort so ever, that affect singularity in opinion, and love to be in
oppositum, and so cause division and contention. The sin of many yet made a
light matter: some are of such strange spirits, that they make a tush at the
peace of the Church. Whereas the Scripture bids us, not only live in peace,
but make peace, 2. Cor. 13 11 James. 3.18 Psalm. 34.14 1. These. 4.11
and follow after it, and seek and ensue it, and study to be quiet: they study
to be unquiet, and to disquiet themselves and others. And whereas Augustine
held the sin of scisme greater then the sin of idolatry, Aug de bap.
contra Donatistas lib. 2. ca^ and omnia bo^ pacis and vni^tis toleranda lib. 6.
cap. 22
they make nothing of it. Nay, some even place Religion in making a breach and
a rent, and think therefore to be magnified for their zeal. Sometimes,
amongst the people, we shall see some that love to be singular (and not
contenting themselves to differ from the Church, in such things as some of the
grauer and learneder sort contend about) they will be sure to have some trick by
themselves above all the Ministers in town and country, of one sort or other,
and in that they will be open too, that the congregation may take notice of
them: this argues a great deal of vanity in their minds, and is against that
modesty which the scripture commends to Christians, and which is to be found
in men better sanctified. Quis ego sum (says learned Zanchius) qui quod tota
Ecclesia approbauit, ^anch. confess.
improbem? Who am I, that I should disallow that, which the whole Church has
allowed? A worthy pattern of humble modesty, and may make more ignorant ones
ashamed of their malepert insolency. Against this rule of the Apostle it is
directly, if men do not their endeavor, not to dissent from the Church, but if
it be possible, to be of one mind. Be of one mind.

But the greatest blame will lie upon those Teachers that transgress this
Apostolical rule, and with their Paradoxes and singular opinions trouble our
Israel, and are instruments of evil. I will now deal particularly, only
against those that hole and broach errors, tending to Popery or profaneness.
For these are the most pestilent members: to some the Pope is beholding; for
they would prove that he is not that Antichrist, and justification by works,
Artie. 11. Of the justification of man.
is not only taught in Rome, but in the Church of England also by some corrupt
Rabines, though it be against an article of our Religion. These would either
be made to be of one mind with our Church, or else it were to be wished they
were sent to Rhemes, or S. Omers, or Valladolyd in Spain, or some such
pesthouse, which they are fitter for, then to be teachers in Israel.

Others speak disgracefully of preaching, specially of often preaching. There
is an idle position of late set on foot, which the drones of the Church are
very ready to harken to, that forsooth reading is preaching; I deny not but in
a large sense it may be so termed, and so may receiving the Sacrament also,
wherein we show forth the Lords death till he come, (...), 1. Cor. 11.2
and as it were preach Christ crucified thereby. But what should any go about
to confound those parts of Gods service, which the holy Ghost and the Church
has ever distinguished? In the Scripture, where preaching is required of the
Minister of the Gospel, 2. Tim. 4.2
it is meant he should open and apply the Word aright. ^an. 45
And the Canon requiring preaching every Sabbath, requires expressly,
^nswerable to ^at, 1. Cor..3
that we sincerely divide the word of truth to the glory of God, and to the
best edification of the people, showing us that that is meant by preaching.

As for the disgracers of diligent preaching, they also are against the Church
in this: for in the Church-booke of Common Prayer, as we are appointed to call
upon baptized Christians to hear Sermons, as if they could not hear too many:
^ollect on ^^ers day.
so in one of the Collects we pray, that God would make all Bishops and
Pastors diligently to preach his holy word; and that prayer is excellently
grounded upon that triple pas^^ of our Savior to Peter, (...). 21.15
John 21.15, 16, 17. Feed, feed, feed.

Thence are we taught to pray, that those which have the place of spiritual
Shepherds and Pastors in the Church, may diligently feed the flock of Christ.
But this diligent preaching (they think) would hinder learned preaching, and
they rather ascribe diligence to themselves that come with elaborate
discourses, and show much reading, and impute negligence to them that take
less time for a Sermon.

I answer, Quorum aemulari exopto negligentiam, potius qua^ ist^ rum obscura^
diligentiam, vt in prolog. Heauton. Te^
it is better for the poor people that a man preach to them often and plainly,
then seldom and obscurely: and I am sure a great deal of pains is taken by
some to preach unprofitably, and they should have more comfort in the day of
Christ, if they would condescend more to the capacity of the simpler sort, and
seek themselves less, and Gods glory more, in the handling of the Scripture.
Wherefore, let them not scornefully inueigh against those that are profitable
instruments in the Church, for that which is rather to be commended in them,
and wherein they are to be imitated. It were more credit for Preachers to bend
their speech rather against loyterers, then against religious and industrious
men, 1. Tim. 5.17
that labor in the Word and Doctrine faithfully and fruitfully.

The last most impious paradoxe that I will now name, is concerning the
Sabbath: some think the day may be changed, and some give out that men may take
their pleasure, and have their pastimes upon that day, and the sanctifying
thereof is not necessary. But where now is Zanchies modesty? Quis ego, etc.
quis tu? Who art thou, whosoever thou art, that thou should presume to call
that into question, which was never before called unto question by any
orthodoxe, Vide Sprint of ^^e Sabb.
Church, or Father? With what face dare any speak against that, which has ever
been religiously observed by good men since the Apostles times unto ours, and
to what end, and with what meaning is it? ^he Sabbath (...) great anti^ity,
Genesis 2 3
except to overthrow Religion, and bring in ignorance, and Atheism? for from
the beginning of the world, the hallowing of the Sabbath has bin the vpholder
of religion and godliness, and once take away the Sabbath, and the sanctity
thereof, and farewell all solemn worship of God, and never look that Piety
and Religion can go forward: give men but leave to break this commandment,
and the rest will be poorly kept: but if no other considerations will prevail
with the Antisabbatist; let me put him in mind, that as herein he is against
the Catholic Church in all ages, so also against our own Church, which still
vpholdeth the sanctifying of that day, and to that end appoints, as all the
Commandments to be read continually, In the book of Common. Prayer.
so that Commandment also of keeping holy the Sabbath, without leaving out one
word; and withal has added a prayer for the people, that presently upon the
hearing of their duty in that respect, they should lift up their hearts and
voices to heaven, that God would incline their hearts to keep that law. Now
what odd dealing is this with the people, when a Minister in his lower pue
shall bid them remember to keep holy the Sabbath day, and require their prayer
for the same purpose, and in the pulpit teach them that they need not do it?
here is saying and unsaying, teaching and vnteaching by one and the same man.

These are dangerous errors, and as you see, not only against the Scripture,
and against the Truth, and against Gods ordinance, and against Religion, but
against the Church also, whereof we are members: that of justification by
works is against one of the Articles of our Religion; that likewise of
reading, against diligent preaching, against one of the prayers of the Church,
and against one of the late Canons: that against the Sabbath is against one of
the ten Moral Commandments, and against the Commandment of the Church, that
appoints that Law to be read with the rest; and to be received of the people
with a special Prayer for the keeping of it.

Such therefore are not to be suffered as maintain such points, but either they
are to be reformed or made examples; this should be the care of those in
authority, that according to the rule of the Apostle, we should be of one
mind. And those that hold singular Opinions, are to be censured. I speak not
this, as if I desired rigor to be used to every one that in any thing
dissenteth from the Church. That is not the way to make peace, and to make all
of one mind; it is necessary that there be discretion and moderation in
government, and a difference put between the errors held, and the persons that
differ, between sober men and turbulent spirits, else it may mar all. Georg.
Cass. consultatio^e de relig. ad ^erdinand. 1. and ^aximil. 2. ^^p. cap. de.
^cclesia.
Cassander spoke to the purpose, when he told his great masters before the
Council of Trent, that the chief cause of the destruction of the Church in
his time, Nullam ecclesiae firmam pace^ sperandam puto, nisi qui Ecclesiasticae
gubernationi praesunt de nimio illo rigore aliquid remittant, ac multorum
piorum votis and monitis obsequentes manifestos abusus ad regulam diuinariu^
literarum and veteris ecclesiae, corrigant. haec ille.
was to be imputed to them that being puffed up with their Ecclesiastical
power, proudly and disdainefully contemned and repelled those that modestly
admonished them. And he was persuaded that there would never be firm peace,
till they remitted somewhat of their extreme rigor and reformed manifest
abuses. There must be yielding even by those in authority, as well as by
others, ere there can be firm concord.

But when the Opposition of any is prejudicial to Religion and Piety; and
there is contumacie too, then they are not to be tolerated or favored. Rulers
in Church or commonwealth may have comfort in severe proceedings against such.
Call. in 1. cor 11. verse. 16. Nunquam co^tentionum eri^ finis, si certan^ do
velis hominem pugnacen^ vincere, quia^ centies victus^ nunquam fat^ gabitur,
lege ^tiam prude^ti^
Calvin well judges peevish and froward persons: Authoritate magis
compescendos, etc. ought rather to be schooled by Authority, then with long
disputations to be confuted; for some are of that spirit that centies victi,
as he says, if they be convicted an 100 times, they will not yield. Some
rougher course therefore is to be taken with them.

I speak now in season of these matters. This is one special use of Synods.
Nazianzene spoke bitterly, Nazianz. in Epist. ad Pro^op. Nazian. (...). Danaeus
de po^estate ecclesiae ^ap. 36.
when speaking of greater Synods then these, he said he never saw any good
end of them. I will suppose with Danaeus, that he is to be understood of the
Councels and Synods of his time, when they did all to please the Emperor and
the most potent Praelats. Good use (no question) there is of such meetings of
Ministers, as that those may grow to knowledge and acquaintance one with
another, that be under the same jurisdiction, and to maintain Love and amity
amongst us, so specially to end such controversies as arise by any stirring
heads, or contentious persons. If this be put in practice, no doubt we shall
see good come of Synods. Well, let every one in his place do his part that
this Apostolical Rule may be kept. And we specially that teach others concord,
let us look that we agree among our selves; the way the Apostle has taught
us, let us walk by the same Rule: And then, ^sal. 133.1.
ecce quam bonum, etc. a joyful sight it is to GOD and men and Angels, when
brethren in the Ministry live together in unity, it is the ornament of the
Church, and the honor of Religion. And thus much of the first exhortation to
Unanimity.

Now a little briefly give me leave to add concerning the other part, because
it does much also concern us. In the next place the holy Apostle would have
all to be followers of him, and of such as walked as he walked.

Doctrine was sound, so his example was also good, so was it with others also
of the same Faith. Whence our lesson is, that the life and practice of teachers
and professors ought to be answerable to their doctrine and profession: it is a
thing much pressed upon al Christians, Ephe. 4.1. Philip. 2.15. 1. Pet. 2.12.
that they walk worthy of their vocation, Ephesians. 4.1. and that they have their
conversation honest and unreprovable, 1. Pet. 2.12. and specially of Ministers
of the Gospel, we find it required: Be thou an example in conversation, etc.
says Paul to Timothy, 1. Tim. 4.12. 1. Tim. 4.12.
And show thy self a pattern of good works, to Titus, Chapter 2.7. Tit. 2.7.


And of all Elders this is required, 1. Pet. 5.3. 2. Pet. 5.3
to be types or examples to the flock: necessary this is; because the common
sort look as much, if not more, to a man's doings as to his doctrine, and to his
practice as to his profession. For they know it is an easy matter to talk of
holiness and righteousness, and to make a profession of great matters: but
when they see a show of zeal and forwardness this way in any, and yet the
life ungodly, and the practice unjust, it makes them conclude, that their
profession of such strictness is but in hypocrisy, and in stead of being
drawn to religious courses, they are the more hardened, and moved the more to
abhor the way of godliness to their own destruction. Though it be but the
sin of some particular persons to give this scandal; yet from particulars
the world is apt to conclude a general, and the worst way ever; because some
that are forward in religion are unreprovable, and without exception, they
will not conceive that all the forward sort are good, but if they see one do
evil, they will conclude peremptorily they are all naught, and there is no
heed to take what any of them say or profess. And therefore it is necessary,
that he that is a Teacher of righteousness, be also a practiser of it, and that
those that seem more holy then others, live without offense, that so the
mouths of the ungodly may be stopped, and the Gospel adorned, Tit. 2.10
and their calling approved to be of God, and so they may further the
conversion of souls to Christ.

For this cause it concerns both Preachers and Professors to look to their
lives. The application concerns all, but my exhortation at this time is
specially to my brethren of the Ministry, that they would have a religious
care, that they make not their holy Doctrine of none effect by their
mis-liuing. As we teach godliness and sobriety, and condemn all excess and
vanity, so let our practice and example be answerable: let us neither despise
that holiness in any which we teach others, nor give encouragement to any to
do what they ought not to do, by our example, lest it be thought that we
understand not what we say, or that we believe not that which we have
written. Far be it from us to make so light of the Script^^^ or of any thing
there taught. The word which we preach, is no fable, nor device of man, but
given by inspiration from heaven; and necessary it is to salvation both for
Preachers and Hearers, to do what is there required, and to eschew what is
there forbidden. Nay, God give us repentance if idle words proceed out of our
mouths. Mat. 12.36.
For, of every idle word men shall give account in the day of Judgment. So
CHRIST has taught us, so we teach others: according let our example be, that
so we may give testimony of our Faith, and of the reverence we bear to every
part of Gods word. This was the holy care of the Apostle, as his doctrine was
pure, so his life was such, that he durst propound himself for a pattern to
all Christians.

Then let not us be like those statues or posts that are in some ways, that
point the right way to passengers, but stir not one foot with them; we must
not think we have done all that belongs to us, when we have taught others
the way of the Lord; but as good guides we are to go before them, and lead
them on the way to life, that we may with our obedient hearers be rewarded in
the day of CHRST, and be partakers of the grace of life together with them. And
this is the way to draw reverence from the people to our persons, and to make
our Ministry fruitful.

It is said, that Herod himself reverenced and feared JOHN, Mar. 6.20. Mark
6.20
Why was that? Not so much because he was a good Preacher, as because he was a
good man. Herod feared John, knowing that he was a just man and an holy, and
reverenced him, etc. And this made him be more honored of the people, though
homely attyred, Mat. 3.4
then all the Prelates of Jerusalem, with all their pomp and Ornaments.

Whereas if a man preach well and live ill, it causes contempt of all: 1. Sam.
2.17
As Elies sons by their wicked courses made themselves and the Lords
sacrifice to be abhorred. It is not well done of those that contemn the
ordinance of God, for the unworthiness of him that does the service: the word
is pure, though the preacher be impure, and the Pharisees sitting in Moses
chair were to be heard, and their good Doctrine was to be followed. But few
are come to that degree of grace, as to carry themselves as they ought in this
case; and therefore we are carefully to look, that we be examples also to the
people of that we teach them, that so they may have no stumbling block, but
that they may reverently attend to what the Spirit says in the word, and
readily do the will of the Lord, and walk in his ways, unto their salvation.
I should in the next place show how good examples being given, are to be
followed and imitated, that the Apostle requires in this exhortation, Be
followers, etc. But the time being past, I must here break off. The Lord give
a blessing to that which has been taught.

FINIS.

