THE ORNAMENT of WOMEN. OR, A description of the true excellency of Women.
Delivered in a Sermon at the Funeral of M. ELIZABETH MACHELL, on Easter Monday
being the 15. of April 1639. By Stephen Geree, MINISTER of Gods Word at
Wonnersh, near Guildford in SURREY.

PROVE. 12.4. A virtuous woman is a Crown to her Husband. Proijciamus ornamenta
terrena si caelestia optamus Tertul. de Cult. Foemin. LONDON, Printed by T. B.
for L. F. and S. G. and are to be sold at the Sign of the Brazen Serpent, in
Paul's Churchyard 1639.

TO the Right Honorable, Gerard LORD Angier Baron of LONGFORD all true Honor
and happiness both in this life, and that which is to come.
Right Honor:
IT was a tart and yet true censure of the Popes Clergy, Bonifac. Episc. In
Triburensi council: Quando Sacerdotes habuimus aureos, (...) vasis ligneis
uteba^tur, nuno eum ligneos sacerdotes habemus, aureis vasis utuntur
That they had golden Chalices, but wooden Priests. The like may not unfitly
be affirmed of some women, who have golden garments, and gilded bodies, but
wooden, or leaden souls. Ber. Epist. 113.
For as St. Bernhard said of some. Induuntur purpura and bysso, and subinde
conscientia pannosa iacet. They are clad with Purple and silk, but the
conscience in the mean while lies torn and tattered. Fulgent monilibus; sed
sordent moribus, (says the same Author) they shine and make a brave show with
bracelets and Jewels, but are base and sordid in their manners and conditions.

But it was farreotherwise with your Honors worthy kinswoma^, whose adorning
was not outward in wearing of gold, or putting on of apparel, 1 Peter 3.3, 4.
but the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is much set by in the sight
of God. Therefore I have the rather presumed to prefixe your Noble name to this
discourse of mine (how mean soever) hoping of Your Honors acceptance, in
regard of the relation that it has to that most worthy, and (in mine opinion)
matchless Gentlewoman, of whose rare virtues, and singular graces Your
Lordship has often been an eyewitness, and admirer. So that I am assured you
will think it no prejudice to Your High and profound studies to cast your eyes
upon such an heavenly body, and sublimated soul, as she was, but rather
account it as a means to refine Your deep contemplations, and make them
ascend above the Stars and al inferior Orbs even into the third Heaven, 2 Cor.
12.2, 4. (...).
where the Apostle heard unspeakeable words, which is not possible for man to
utter, which all Arts and Sciences are ignorant of, save that which is called
Ars artium, and Scientia scientiarum, to wit, Divinity.

For this blessed Gentlwoman was the mirror of her time, considering her Age,
and Parentage, and may be a Pattern to Posterity, both for admiration, and
Imitation, Because she so seriously bent her best endeavors to the best
things. For having once found that Pearl of greatest price, Matthew. 13. ver.
45, 46.
she was willing with the wise Merchant to part with all for the purchase of
it, as being the only ornament of men and women, surmounting al other pearls
and precious stones. She was able to discern of thing; that differ, and did
approve the things that are excellent, so that she became, wiser than the
ancient, because she kept GODS precepts, Psalm. 119.100.
whereby she was ripe for heaven, before others of her age, and quality, begin
so much as seriously to set themselves toward that holy place. She could not
satisfy her self, as most do, with that which went for Religion in Salvians
time, Genus quod (...) sanctitatis, minus esse vitiosu. Salv. De Guber. lib. 3.
page 88.
when it was counted some kind of Sanctity to be less sinful than others.
Phil. 3.13, 14.
But forgetting that which was behind, and reaching out to that, which was
before, she pressed toward the mark, for the high calling of GOD in Christ
Jesus.

Therefore I had two special motives which induced me to wenter this little
labor into the light in this curious, and critical age.

First, worthy to be had in everlasting remembrance.

Secondly, Your zeal has provoked very many, 2 Cor. 9.2.
That by her zealous and Heavenly Example J might (if it were possible) waken
and quicken the dead, and drouzie hearts of men and women, who in the worst
things want the bridle, but in the best the spur. J know that the best men or
women, want warmth and heat in this old, and cold age of the world, therefore
I thought so lively, and sparkling a spirit as she had, might be of much
force to make many, either blush for shame, or burn with zeal for the glory
of God.

Thus Noble Lord having had often experience of Your rare humility and
courtesy, as also of your approved piety and charity; I was willing by these
lines to let the world know, how much J honor you, and your choice learning,
mixed with singular modesty, and ingenuity, which is indeed true Nobility But
being persuaded that you had rather do things praisworthy than read your own
praises, Facere laudanda qua^ audire laudata maluisses.
I. rest, and humbly take leave, with all due respect and service to your Noble
self, and much honored Lady, beseeching the Almighty to drop down his best
blessing upon you both.

Your Honors to be commanded in Christ Jesus. STEPH: GEREE.

TO The truly Noble and Pious SISTERS Mist. Elizabeth Machell, and the LADY
Letice Holcrofte, Grace and Peace be multiplied.
Much Honored, etc.
I Make bold to join you both in this Epistle, whom GOD has lincked with those
firm bonds of Nature, Affection, and especially true Religion, which is a
threefold Cord not easily broken. I know you both would be heartily glad to see
her Picture, for whose sake I have set Pen to paper at this present. But I am
consident, that no Limner could draw her to the life, because she was all
glorious within, Psalm. 45.13.
and her life hid with Christ in God, Col. 3.3.

Therefore seeing she must be represented rather by a Pen than a Pensil, I
have endeavored to set before your eyes such a rude draught, as my present,
and urgent occasions would suffer me to make at her Funeral. And because those
Pieces please the judicious best, which are rather true than rich, or gaudy, I
have studied to set her forth in her own proper colors, not with garish
Eloquence, and gaudy words, but in that language, which she best liked.

Now that I may speak a word in season to you in several. First, for you her
dear Mother, in the midst of all your mourning let this solace your soul
and spirit, that you were not only the Mother of such a daughter, but had an
hand in making her a daughter of Abraham, yea of Almighty God. Your good
instructions, and example, in frequenting the house of God, etc. were a maine
motive, (no doubt) to make her in love with that good Word of GOD, which
wrought so effectually, and in a manner miraculously in her, therefore you have
much more cause of joy and gladness, than of grief and heaviness. If all
Parents would but give such example as you have done, both at home and in Gods
house, o what holy and happy houses, and congregations should we have! what
thronging and crowding would there be in most Churches, which now are almost
empty oftentimes! But when most Parents provide rather for their Childrens
bodies than souls, making much of the Carkas, neglecting the Conscience, no
mervaile that there is so little hope in most of their Posterity.

Go on therefore with good success as you have begun, and still do more and
more worthily in Israel. GOD has given you an heart, not only to be a
Favourer, which is easy, but a Follower, yea, and a Furtherer of those that
he has sent into his Vineyard: the same Lord multiply his mercy, grace and
spirit upon you and yours, that you may still prove Noble patterns unto others.

And now good Madam, to return to your Ladyship, I know you bare no small
share of sorrow with your beloved Sister in this business, because you have a
long time loved your deceased Kinswoman, as if she had been your own
daughter: witness those affectionate words of salutation, which you usually
inserted into the Letters your Ladyship sent to her Mother, which ever had a
special accent, and emphasis, when you came to her. Insomuch as I dare boldly
say, you desire nothing more to your dearest daughters than such a dowry of
grace and goodness as her heavenly Father had bestowed on her.

For you knew her far different from the disposition of other Gentlewomen,
who make their souls slaves to their bodies, and both soul and body, drudges
to the world and the Devil, Because, whereas other women trouble themselves
with many things like Martha, she set her soul upon that one thing necessary,
choosing with Mary that better part, which could not be taken from her, Luke 10.
last ver.

She was never more diligent than when she was to deal with GOD in his holy
Ordinances, and in nothing so negligent, as in the world, and things of the
world, and yet she complained on her death bed, that she had been too
worldly, Alas! what cause then have we to complain of others, who dote so
much upon the dross and dung of the world, and make it no better than an Idol!

That precious time which other Gentlevvomen wickedly wast in tricking and
trimming the body, she specially spent in decking and adorning the soul, for
whatsoever was to be done, the soul should not be forgotten. And whereas
others are taken up with fair buildings and stately houses, etc. she mainely
minded to beautify her house, not only with the Form of godliness, which
many families have, 2 Timothy 3.4.
but most of all with the Power of godliness, which few regard. And hence
was it that she so much desired to have the special care of Families
commended unto others at her Funeral. For she set up her resolution with
worthy Ioshuah. Let others do what they would, Josh. 24.15.
follow the world, or serve their lusts, and the times. She and her house would
serve the Lord.

Neither was she afraid to own Christ as many are, who think it more
generous; to set up sports and pastimes, and follow pleasures etc. than set up
Christ and his ordinances in their houses.

Moreover her charity did notably second her Piety, for not only the loins of
the poor but their bellyes, Job 31.20. She was willing to heal their sores,
and help their souls giving them good instructions as well as plasters.
and backs did bless her, as Job speaks, yea, their legs and hands, their
eyes and cares, did pronounce her blessed. So that we have great cause to give
God thanks for her work of faith, and labor of love, as the Apostle speaks, 1
These. 1.3. There be some, that have Piety, but want Charity, such are but as
sounding brass and tinckling Cymbals, 1 Cor. 13.1. And some again have a
kind of Charity; but care not for Piety, they give much Alms, but do not
give themselves to God, nor give over their sins. Such Saint Ambrose says,
Multi sunt qui faciunt eleemosyna^, and tamen peccare non cessant tisti quasi
sua^ offerunt Deo and seipsos Diabolo. Amb. Ser. 12.
give their goods to God, and themselves to the devil. But your worthy
Kinswoman was none such, for first she gave her self to God as the Macedonians
did, and then to Gods Messengers, and to the Saints, 2 Cor. 8.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

What then though she dyed a distasteful death by reason of her disease? Yet
she left a most sweet smell and savor behind her, even the precious ointment
of a good Name, so that the day of her death was much better than the day of
her birth, as Solomon says, in the same place, Eccles. 7.1. Whereas many
others, that die of fair discases leave a noisome and unsavory sent behind
them, going out like the snuff of a Candle.

This was that which made her so ready to resign her will to Gods in greatest
extremities, and toward her latter end, so much to long to go home (as her
words were) for she made no more of death than a departing home, so that we
saw her something troubled, when those that were about her labored to preserve
her life, saying, Why will you not let me go? as if they did hinder her
happiness. Thus with my singular respect to you both, and those that be most
near unto you, commending you, and all yours to the grace of our God, Ephesians.
3.20.
who is able to do exceeding abundantly above all we can ask or think, I
rest

Your Honors much obliged Stephen Geree.

THE ORNAMENT of Women.
PRO. 31.29, 30. Many daughters have done virtuously, but thou excellest them
all.

VER. 30. Favor is deceitful, and beauty is vain, but a Woman that fears
the Lord she shall be praised.


THis last Chapter of the Proverbs, contains certain singular lessons, which
Lemuel, or Solomon, learned of his loving and religious mother Bathsheba, as is
gathered from the first and second verses.

Whereby we may justly confute the folly or rather blasphemy of those, Papists,
and Atheists, that cannot endure Women should meddle with the Scriptures or
Word of God. For if the words of a Woman were thought fit to be made the word
of God, not only by wise Solomon; but also by the Holy Ghost, then surely Women
may very well meddle with Gods holy word, that following this holy and royal
example of Solomon's Mother, they may instruct, at least, their child: in the
old good way according to GODS Word. Ier. 6.16.


The truth is, many women do shame a great many men, that are ignorant, idle,
or profane, and hence they seek to fright them from the Word of God, that
they might be as bad as them, or that themselves might not seem so bad as they
be.

In the body of this Chap. we find two maine things considerable, the 1.
Concerning Man, the 2. Concerning Woman.


The first, declares how a Prince or great man may, and ought to be, a good
man, from the beginning of the third unto the 10th verse.

The second shows the praises and properties of a great and good woman
especially. Her praises are set down first and last, her properties are in the
midst. Wherein we may see her behavior.

First, As she is a Wife, ver. 11.12.

Secondly, The properties of a good woman.
As a Mother and Mistress of a Family, verse 13.14. etc. to 28. In all which
we may take notice of her singular faithfulness and helpefulnesse, her
painfulness and providence, her prudence and watchfulness, and that which
seasons all her Piety and Charity, Rare virtues in a man, much more in a
woman, who is the weaker vessel. 1 Pet. 3. Her praises


As for her praise (to come more punctually to that, because the Text is a part
of it) we may consider. First, Her rareness, hard to be found, intimated in
the interrogation. Who can find a virtuous woman? That is, they are rare
birds, and even almost black Swannes, not every where nor easy to be found.
Secondly, Her incomparablenesse, her price is far above Rubyes or the most
precious Stones. Ibid: not only above, but far above Rubies. So much for her
praise in the first place. In the second you shall find

First, Of whom she is praised, namely those that best knew her, to wit, her
husband and child: Her children arise up and call her blessed, her husband
also, and he praises her, ver. 28.

Secondly, quality of her praise, Ver. 29. (...)
which is set down first to be superlative, far surmounting all other in the
first verse of the Text. Many daughters have done virtuously; but thou
excellest, or go beyond, and above them all, as the Hebrew has it.

Secondly, Ver. 30.
Comparative in the latter verse, Favor is deceitful and beauty is vain, or
vanity it self: but a woman that fears the Lord she shall be praised.

Thirdly, Ibid. v. 30
to wit, for her fear of God, that is for her grace, true Religion, and piety
toward God.

Lastly, place where she should be praised, Ver. 31
even in the Gate, that is in the most public place of concourse and meeting,
for in the Gates were there public meetings and assemblies, for rewards or
punishments.

And here it is to be observed, Continet encomiu^ mulieris alphabetico ordine
exaratum. Iun. Ibid.
that all this is set down in an extraordinary order, even Alphabetically in
the Original, both according to the order and number of the Hebrew Letters,
there being just so many verses as letters, to wit, twenty two concerning this
great and good woman. Which is seldom used in the Scripture: and always upon
special occasion, to signify the choicenesse of the matter in hand, and to
persuade them the rather to read, and learn those select lessons.

In the Text then we have the praise of a Wife or Woman in print, (as I may
say) a woman far more worth than her weight in gold: whence the first and
maine point, that I will observe shall be this.

Grace and godliness are the most excellent Ornaments of Women. Or thus, The
fear of God and true Religion make most excellent women and wives.

There is as much difference between a gracious Woman and one that wants grace
and true Religion, Ye were sometime darkness but now light in the Lord. Ephesians.
5.8. Vide. 1 These. 5.5.
as between the light of the Sun and the light of the Moon and lesser
Stars. While the Sun is out of sight, the Moon makes a fair show, and the
lesser stars do shine, also till the Sun begin to show himself in the
Horizon, then the Moon does as it were lose all her light, looking wan and
pale, and the less stars vanish, and appear not at all: Rotten wood will
shine in the night in the dark.
So a woman that wants grace may make great show in the night amongst the
lesser stars, and seem glorious, she may exceed others and shine much in
wealth, and beauty, and comlines, yea and in moral virtues, as discretion and
diligence, etc. which make a fair show in the world, 1 Ioh. 5.19.
that lies in wickedness, and so in darkness; but when a true religious
woman comes in place, that is adorned with the fear of God and the graces of
Gods Spirit, then the other is quite obscured and darkened, in the eyes of
those that can discern of things that differ. And that which is here spoken of
women, you may likewise all along apply unto men. For grace and GODS fear make
as great a difference among men as amongst women.

Hence David calls the Saints the excellent of the earth, in whom was all his
delight, Psalm. 16.3. And wise Solomon his son says. The righteous is more
excellent than his neighbor Prove. 12.26. for he found by experience, (who
tried more than any man) that all was vanity, yea vanity of vanities, that is
superlatively vain without the fear of God, The main thing that makes a man.
and keeping his Commandments; which, he said, was Col haadam; the whole man,
or the whole duty of man, Eccles. 12.13.

This will easily appear to a spiritual eye, (...) Omnis homo. Arias Mont.
Totu^ Homints Jun. (...) Sep.
that grace and the fear of God makes the most excellent women and wives,
because such as be truly gracious excel all others in all those things that
are most commended in a woman.

As first to begin with their Birth.

It is greatly esteemed in man or woman to be nobly borne, The gracious Woman
does excel in Birth.
and honorably descended, and many make a great show, and carry themselves
high, because of their great birth, and it breeds estimation in others. But now
every gracious woman exceeds in her birth, Ioh. 3.3. and 1. and 13.
because borne from above, even borne anew of God, and therefore most nobly
borne, yea most royally descended: It is a great matter to be man's first borne,
and therefore the first borne was called the excellency of dignity, and the
excellency of power, See Exodus 4.22. Jsrael is my son even my first borne.
Gen 49.3. Now all those that fear God aright, and have true grace, are Gods
first borne, both men and women, Heb. 12.23. And therefore are the excellency
of Gods dignity, and the excellency of his power, who is omnipotent, even
El-shaddai all-sufficient, Genesis 17.1.

Next to birth that which commends a woman is Beauty, 2. Beauty.
wherewith men are much taken, and even bewitched as it were, sometimes to the
loss of their wits and lives also, if they cannot obtain. Now there is no
beauty to the beauty of holiness, which is the blessed Image of God, Ephesians.
4.24. and makes us like our Lord and Savior, who is altogether lovelie, Cant.
5.16. All other beauty is but blackness to this, which is the true beauty of
every gracious woman fearing God, and which she most of all prizeth, and seeks
after.

The next thing that commends a woman is favor, 3. Favor.
to be well favored is amiable in the eyes of men, yet the text here will tell
you, that as Beauty is vain, so favor is deceitful, being compared with the
fear of God. For the fear of the Lord makes us well favored in the sight of
God: this is that therefore which makes men or women excel all others who are
foully deformed, by reason of sin and wickedness. These are chief things
that make a woman praiseworthy in regard of the body. Wherein you see Religion
and the fear of God has gotten the pre-eminence.

Now for the things that commend the soul, The godly woman excels in the
inward qualities, as first in her judgment and understanding.
we shall see the same difference. As first for Judgment and understanding, A
woman wanting grace may have a nimble wit, and quick apprehension in earthly
things, so that she may be able to discourse discreetly on such matters, but
as for the best things, she must come far short of the gracious woman, as not
being able to discern of heavenly things aright, or approve the things that
are excellent, as the Apostle has it, Philippians 1.10. Because she has but a
naiurall wit, or moral at the most, whereas the women that has grace has a
sapernaturall understanding, Mat. 13.11.
given her of God, as all his children have. He reveals unto all such that
which he hides and conceales from the wise and prudent of the world. Mat.
11.25.


A second thing that inwardly commends a woman 2. In Love.
is her love. But if she be without grace, her love is little better than lust,
because not set upon the right object, not upon God, nor the things of God, but
on the baser things below, therefore is base in comparison of that love of
excellent things, which is exceedingly sweetened and seasoned by the sanctified
objects.

Herein therefore, the gracious woman goes far beyond such as want grace,
because her affections are right set, Mat. 6.33.
seeking first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, preferring the Image
of God before all outward beauty, esteeming it dung in comparison.

A third inward quality that commends man or woman is their mind and spirit,
3. In spirit. Saint Paul does make a great difference between the spirit of
God, and the spirit of the world. 1 Cor. 2.12.
herein she that has grace and Gods fear, does far exceed all other, as
Daniel did all the Presidents and Princes, because an excellent spirit was in
him. So in every one truly Religious there is a more excellent spirit: even
the spirit of GOD. For if any one has not the spirit of CHRIST, he is none of
his, Romans 8. ver. 9.

You see then how grace makes men and women excel, because it makes them,
though never so mean, of a more excellent mind and spirit: And the wiser
Heathen could say, Men's cujusque is est quisque. Cicere.


The mind or spirit of a man is the maine man, and they did not reckon of a man
according to his riches or honors, or any outward ornament, but according to
his mind or spirit. He that was base minded was counted a base man, though
nobly borne and greatly advanced otherwise with wealth, etc. And he that was
brave spirited was counted a brave man, though meanly descended, Great
difference in regard of their actions. 1. In general. Even as a sick man must
first be made whole yer he can do the deeds of a whole man, and as the blind
must first have fight given him, yer he can see. Mr. Tindals Parable of the
wicked Mammon p. 63. Col. 2.
and of low estate in the world.

Thus much for their persons, wherein those that have grace every way exceed.
Now come we to consider their actions, and we shall find no less difference.
For first in general, All the actions of the unregenerate are polluted with
sin, Matthew. 7.18. A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a
corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. Till we be good we cannot do good, as
the tree must be good before it can bring forth good fruit. And it is grace and
grace only, and the fear of God that makes us good before God, All the
pruning, dressing, digging, dunging, in the world, will not make a swore
Crab-tree stock bring forth good Apples, unless it be grafted with a graft of
a good tree, you cannot gather grapes of thorns nor figs of thistles, Matthew.
7.16. So all the pruning or dressing of man or woman by art and education will
not make them bring forth acceptable fruit unto God, unless they be grafted
with grace from above. Those other things may make them civil and sober, wise
and well reputed of in the world, but they cannot make them holy, and pleasing
in Gods sight.

And their best and most glorious works of piety and charity, which in some
sort they may, and do perform, are but glistering sins. Splendida peccata,
as Saint Austine has long since truly termed them. For such offer to God a
body without a soul, because grace is that which gives spirit, and life to all
our actions, without which all we do must needs be, Heb. 6.1. and 9.14.
but dead works, as the Scripture calls them, Heb. 6.1.

Thus much for their actions in general, 2 In regard of particulars, as 1
Prayer.
the same may be said of particulars; we shall see the excellency of the one
above the other to be notable. As for example, first in prayer. Both those that
have grace, and they that want grace and the fear of God, may set upon this
holy duty; but not with the same success. The Prayers of faithful women, as
well as men pierce the clouds, and pull down Gods blessings, upon themselves
and others. As we may see in Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.12, 13, and 15. See Genesis 30.
ver. 1. and 20.
who by her prayers became of barren fruitful, and as barrenness was then
accounted a great curse, so fruitfulness was esteemed a great blessing.

And before and above the rest she obtained a Samuel, one that had the print of
his mothers prayers set upon his Name, for Samuel signifies as much as one
asked or begged of God. See 1 Samuel 1.20. This Samuel, this son of prayer,
proved a worthy servant of the Lord, a Judge in Israel, 1 Samuel 3.
and a Prophet of the Lord, to whom God revealed Himself betimes. She powered
out her soul before the Lord, 1 Samuel 1.15. and he powered down this great
blessing upon her, which was the joy and rejoicing of her self, and her
husband, and the staff and stay of all Israel, as appears at large in the
first book of Samuel.

And how came Solomon to be so famous, and to be preferred before his elder
brethren to the kingdom of Israel? It is more then probable, that it came to
pass by his holy mothers prayers, and instructions, and therefore she calls
him the son of her vows, Pov. 31.2. vows and prayers being sometimes taken
for the very same.

Thus good women are wonderful helpefull to their husbands by their prayers,
and also to their children: And indeed the whole family fares the better for
them. But those that want grace, Gods fear, and faith, cannot pray so as to
prevail with God. They may say their prayers, (as we use to say) but pray
properly they cannot. For how shall they call on him in whom they have not
believed? Romans 10.14. If we ask not in faith we cannot receive any thing of
GOD, Iam. 1.6, 7. we may receive something by Gods ordinary providence, that
is extended to man and beast, but we receive nothing by our prayers, that
proceed not from grace. The prayer of faith is that which heales both soul and
body, Iam. 5.15, 16.

Therefore those men and women that want faith and the fear of God, their
praying is mere prating or babbling, as our Savior says of the prayers of
the heathen, Mat. 6.7.
(...).
mere Battologie, and bare repetition of words.

Hence when Saul (that became Paul) was newly converted, who had made havocke
of the Church before, Christ signified the same to Ananias in these words.
Behold he prays, Acts 9.11. Saul we read, was a strict Pharisee, Acts 26.5.
And the Pharisees used to pray standing in the Synagogues, and in the corners
of the streets, just as the Papists and other hypocrites, to be seen of men,
Mat. 6.5. And for a pretense made long prayers, Matthew. 23.14. yet behold, now
he prays, says the Lord, he never prayed till now, till he was brought
home humble to Christ, and had his heart changed by grace from heaven, Behold
now he prays indeed, now his prayers are to purpose.

Likewise as her prayers are most excellent that has grace and the fear of
God, 2. Al other speeches.
so are her other speeches. A woman that has grace speaks so, as to minister
grace unto the hearers, Ephesians. 4.29. She opens her mouth with wisdom: and
in her tongue is the law of kindness, Prove. 31.26. But it is far otherwise
with those that want grace, they speak so as to minister rather sin to the
hearers. Witness the fond, frivolous, unsavory, and malicious discourses of
most women, when they meet together. Not a word of grace comes out of their
lips in a long season, they savor no such discourse.

Likewise, Great difference in the end of their actions. 1 Cor. 10.31.
they differ as much in the end of their actions, gracious women aim at Gods
glory in all their actions: which is little regarded of those that want grace,
and therefore GOD regards not their actions in any measure, as he does theirs
that seek his honor. For those that honor me I will honor, says the Lord,
and they that despise me shall be lightly esteemed, 1 Samuel 2.30.

Come we a little further and consider these 2. Differences in regard of some
special relations.
sorts of women in regard of some relations, and other adjuncts, and we shall
find a vast difference that grace makes between them.

First, 1 In their heads.
a godly and gracious woman is a lively member of Christ, whereas without grace
women are no members at all, or else unsound, rotten, and corrupt members, yea
in (...) limbs of Satan. And (...) the members partake of the honor or
dishonor of the head, so it is here. The lively members of Christ participate
of his honors and dignities. For in him they are more than conquerours, Romans
8.37. And to him that overcommeth says Christ, I will give power over Nations,
and he shall rule them with a rod of iron, etc. even as I received of my
Father, Revel. 2.26, 27. And he has made us all Kings, Revel. 1.6. See also,
The one sort shall sit upon the bench and the other stand at the bar.
Revel. 3.21. To him that overcommeth will I grant to sit with me in my
Throne, etc. This honor have all his Saints, men and women. Know ye not that
the Saints shall judge the world, 1 Cor. 6.2. whereas all others shall be
judged by them, and sentenced with the Devil and his Angels, Matthew. 25.41. The
Saints shall sit on the Bench, the other shall stand at the Bar.

Secondly, 2. In their Husband.
The excellency of a gracious woman appears, in her husband, for every
Christian soul is espoused unto the son of God, even matched unto Christ.
Hence the Apostle said that he had espoused the Corinthians unto one husband,
Virgins in a spiritual not Popish sense.
that he might present them chaste Virgins unto CHRIST, 2 Cor. 11.2.

And you know that the wife partakes of her husbands honors and excellencies.
Viri radijs coruscant mulieres, as the Lawyers speak. Women shine with their
husbands beams, as the Moon with the light of the Sun. If he be a Lord, she
is a Lady; if he be a King, she is a Queen, etc. Therefore in like manner
every woman that has true grace, whereby she is matched to the most excellent
husband must needs be most excellent; whereas those that want grace, and the
fear of God, are matched and lincked by sin unto Satan, and so shall partake
of his shameful miseries, according to the sentence, Mat. 25.41. Depart into
everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his angels.

Thirdly, 3 In their portion.
Portion is an adjunct that makes a woman much set by and sought after. And
even in this the gracious woman has got far the better, more than Benjamins
mess exceeded his brethrens, though the other has many thousands. For she
has God for her portion, as David had Psalm. 16.5. and others, Psalm. 73.26.
Lam. 3.24. And accordingly she has the most excellent jointure, she is joint
heirewith Christ Jesus, Romans 8.17. So that she has many Jewels, even those
exceeding great and precious promises, 2 Pet. 1.4. To such the Apostle says,
All things are yours, whether Paul or Apollo, or Cephas or the world, or life,
or death, or things present, or things to come, all are yours (he says it
twice to make us the more sure) and ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods, 1 Cor.
3.21, 22, 23.

The same difference is here as was among Abraham's Children, Genesis 25.5, 6.
as between Isaac and the sons of the Concubine. Abraham gave all that he had
unto Isaac (says the text,) but unto the sons of the Concubine he gave
gifts, and sent them away. Even so it is in this case: the wicked who are but
sons and daughters of the Concubine, bastards indeed and not legitimate
Children, have only portions, to wit, the poor things of this life, more or
less, which are mean pittances, with which they are sent packing; when as
they that fear God, being lawful children, have the whole inheritance, for
they are Children of the promise as Isaac was.

Lastly, 4 Apparel.
Apparel is an adjunct that sets out a woman, and makes her seem excellent.
And herein the gracious woman does far outstrip her that wants grace, because
she has put off the rags of corruption which the other still retains and
hugges. And she has put on the armor of light, and consequently has put on
the Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 13.12, 13, 14. which is royal apparel indeed,
more rich than all the world. Such women as have this apparel, are like the
Kings daughter, Psalm. 45. who was all glorious within, and her clothing of
wrought gold, ver. 13. Every gracious woman is daughter to the great King, her
clothing of wrought gold, even of that gold, which was tried by fire, which our
Savior commanded the Laodiceans to buy of him, Revel. 3.18. which can no where
else be had. All the Gold in Ophyr or the Indies is but dross to this.

In a word every gracious woman is arrayed like that woman, Revel. 12.1. Who
was clothed with the sun, Mal 4.2.
and the Moon under her feet. So she that fear God is clothed with the Sun
of righteousness, and tramples all sublunary and earthly things under her
feet, as too base and mear to be advanced in her judgment and affections.

And if Solomon in all his glory was not clothed like one of these Lillyes of
the field, Cant. 2.2.
how surpassing then is the glory of these Lillyes among thorns, that are
clothed with him, who was far greater than Solomon? Mat. 12.

By all this then it is as clear as the sun, that Grace and true Religion
are the most excellent ornaments of women, and the fear of God makes the most
excellent wives in every respect. Now let us see what use and application may
be made of this.

It may first of all serve to condemn the corrupt judgment of the bleareeyed
world, and true holiness, so much approved by God, and extolled by the Holy
Ghost, these are scarcely named, the world looks asquint at them, and cannot
endure them, especially in women, yea they be cried down and condemned as
folly and madness. Ioh. 7.48, 49. and 10.20.
What may be the reason of this? but because the world wants eyes to discern
the worth and excellency of the best things; for these things are spiritually
discerned, 1 Corinthians. 2.14. The Kings daughter is all glorious within, the
world wants the spectacles of faith, to look within the veil, and to see
things aright, and looks through the false glass of the Devil, whereby they
are deluded: and hence it comes to pass, that that which is highly esteemed of
men is abomination in the sight of God, Luke 16.15. and on the contrary, that
which is highly esteemed of God is abomination in the sight of men.

Secondly, that rather match for money or beauty, etc. that for grace that is
the only beauty, and brings the greatest portion, yea which brings a true title
to all the promises and kingdom of heaven it self, which are rare and rich
Jewels.

A man will not be so mad as to buy an horse merely for his shape and color,
but he will have a special eye to his pace and strength and mettle, that he
may be serviceable, and yet in this maine matter of seeking Wives many are so
senseless, as to be carried away with the painted sheath, like children, more
than the blade, which is especially for use.

3. Rubyes, or the richest stones, and which make men and women as much differ
from others as Stars do in glory.

When the wiser Heathen were demanded the difference between Philosophers and
those that were unlearned, they concluded the difference, as much as was
between a man and a beast: and Solomon says, that wisdom excels folly as
far as light excels darkness, Eccles. 2.13. But Grace makes a far
greater difference, even as much as is between heaven and earth, yea as
between heaven and hell, as plentifully appears in the former proofs.

Again, make most excellent men and women? then learn we hence to become
truly excellent, by laboring most earnestly and zeaously for grace and the
true fear of God. If we could as clearly show you how to excel in woe ldly
wealth, or strength, or beauty, etc. I doubt not, but we should have
followers flock after us, as fast as they go to faires and skillful
Physicians. Why should you not much more hearken unto us in that which will make
you far more excellent, both in soul and body, even excellent in the eyes of
God, and amiable in the sight of his dear Son.

Covet earnestly (says the Apostle) the best gifts, Vide D. Sclat. in locum.
and yet I show you a more excellent way, 1 Cor. 12.31. (...) it is the
superlative in the Original the most excellent way They were ambitious and
covetous of praise in the Church of Corinth, therefore he shows them the only
way to be ambitious and covetous without crime or sin, namely by coveting
most earnestly the best gifts, which he calls the most excellent way.

Wherefore let other be more wealthy, so you be more worthy; and let others be
more eminent and glorious in the world, and things of the world, so you be
most excellent and glorious in the best things, in spiritual and heavenly
gifts.

But, may some say,

us, so long as it has been the lot of the most excellent servants of God. For
even Elias the restorer of religion in Israel, was so faluted by wicked Ahab,
who sold himself to work wickedness, Art thou he that troubles Israel? 1
King. 18.17. when it was Ahab himself and his fathers house, that were the
troublers of the land, in that they had forsaken the commandments of God, and
followed Baalim, as the Prophet replied, verse. 18. And S. Paul a singular
Apostle, that excelled all the rest in zeal, unwearied watchfulness and
diligence, was not he also accused to his face, and that before the Governor
Felix, for a pestilent fellow, (...). Acts 24.5.
indeed a very plague, a mover of sedition among all the Jews thorowout the
world, and a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarens, for even so they
miscalled the true Christians in those days, Acts 24.5. who shall never want
one nickname or other to make them odious, though they be the excellent of the
earth, of whom the world is not worthy. Therefore our blessed Savior bids us
rejoice and be exceeding glad, Hab. 11.38.
when men revile us and persecute us, and say all manner of evil for his names
sake falsely, because even so persecuted they the Prophets that were before us,
and great is our reward in heaven, Matthew. 5.11, 12.

The Apostles that were the most excellent, yet were esteemed as the filth of
the world, and offscouring of all things, 1 Cor. 4.13. The excellency of those
that have true grace is out of the reach of humane reason, and this makes many
despise that which they cannot discern. And who would not rather be
excellent, and yet esteemed vile, as Christ himself and his Apostles were,
than being base and vile, by reason of sin, to be highly esteemed and
extolled in the world?

Wherefore I say again, covet earnestly these best gifts, to wit, of grace and
the true fear of GOD, which is the most excellent way, notwithstanding all the
ignominy and reproach, all the derision and disdain, that the wicked world can
cast upon it. And know this withal, that nothing is excellent, but it is also
difficult. You must not look to excel, and yet live as you list, as the most,
especially great men and women use to do. The kingdom of heaven (which is the
most excellent kingdom) suffers violence (says our Savior) and the violent
take it by force, Mat. 11.12. You must therefore be violent for grace and Gods
kingdom, if you mean to be excellent.

See therefore that with diligence you set upon the most excellent and
difficult duties, as selfe-denyall, serious examination of your own hearts and
ways, frequent praying, reading, hearing, and meditating in the good word of
God, Acts 20.32.
the word of his grace, Conferring and keeping company with such especially as
fear the Lord, Psalm. 119.63. and excel in virtue, Psalm. 16.3. Ephe. 5.15,
16.
Walking circumspectly, or exactly, redeeming the time because the days are
evil; perfecting holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1. For God has
commanded to keep his precepts diligently, or very much Psalm. 119.4. And
cursed is the deceiver, that in his flock has a male, and sacrifices unto
the LORD a corrupt thing, for I am a great King says the Lord of Hosts, and my
name is dreadful among the heathen, Mal. 1.14.

Lastly, stand with their state, and place or birth and the like. For this in
the Text was spoken by a worthy Queen written by a famous King, to wit, wise
Solomon, and that concerning the commendations of a great woman especially, as
interpreters observe, And owned by the Holy Ghost, for part of Gods pure word,
given by inspiration from GOD. Yea let them know, that Grace and true Religion
sincerely followed, is the Crown of greatness, and the fairest flower in
their garden, or Garland that sit upon the highest thrones. As it was far
greater honor for David to be styled a man after Gods own heart for
devotion, and zeal, than when the women sang Saul has slain his thousands,
and David his ten thousand, 1 Samuel 18.7.

And so I come in a word to the last words of my Text. But a woman that fears
the Lord she shall be praised. Hence we may observe. It is our bounden duty
to praise those that be praiseworthy, especially such as excel in virtue.

The reason is ready, notable and eminent virtues and graces.

debt to those that do virtuously, and especially to them that excel in
grace, and in the fear of God, then let none be so cross and opposite unto
God as to condemn those, whom the Lord commends, let none be so base minded as
to cry out upon such as follow fastest after grace and true Religion. For he
that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just, even they both are
an abomination to the Lord, Pro. 17 15.

Secondly, and Gods holy fear. For some are more desirous to have wicked men
and women flattered, and soothed in their sinful, and graceless courses, than
to hear the praises of such as be holy and heavenly minded, because they are
like to the former, and most unwilling to tread in straight steps of the
latter. But woe be to them that call evil good, and good evil, Isa. 5.20. He
that thus blesses his friend, rising early in the morning, it shall be counted
a curse to him, Pro. 27.14. To bless and praise men or women without desert,
is no blessing, but a curse, and on the contrary, to bless and praise where
there is just ground, will be a means to bring a blessing. And thus much shall
suffice for the Text. Now may we seasonably proceed to the occasion.

Concerning this most worthy Gentlewoman, The occasion.
for whose sake we are here assembled; I may safely say without strayning, as
my Text leads me, Many daughters have done virtuously, but thou excellest them
all. I speak it without dispraise to any, take her every way, and she goes
beyond all, that ever I knew, in my apprehension, and that especially in these
three respects. 1. If you consider her age, 2. The time of her standing, and 3.
Her rank and parentage.

For her age, For her age.
She was but full three and twenty the last month, and yet so grown in grace,
that she might seem rather threescore and three, for gravity sobriety and
modesty, matching the eldest matrons. She had but a short time to run her
race, and God gave her an heart to make haste, for she ran so fast, that she
not only overtooke, but over-ranne all her fellows.

For her time of standing, Her time of standing
she served an Apprentiship, and was therein so true to her heavenly maker,
that he thought her fully fit to be made free, not only in the kingdom of grace
but of glory. She was so good a scholar in CHRIST'S School, that she was called
to take her highest degree, to wit, in heaven, long before the usual time, as
some do in the University propter excellentiam, for their excellency above
their fellows. For in seven years she learned more, than many, (and those
true Christians too) in 7. times 7. years.

And for her rank and parentage, Her rank and parentage.
She was descended of no mean family, she came of some very honorable
ancestors, yet so humble, and lowly was she, and denied her self so much for
her Saviors sake, that she would be familiar with the meanest that made
conscience of their ways, and had the fear of God before their eyes,
preferring such as were rich in faith, Jam. 2.5.
far before any other, though never so gay, and glorious in the world.

Yea in all these three respects she was one of a thousand, nay one of ten
thousand, and therefore the fitter to be fully matched with him, that is
chiefest of ten thousand, Cant. 5.10. So that I may very well apply all those
former excellencies unto her, wherein women truly fearing God far exceed all
other women.

And first for Birth, Her birth of the best.
she was most nobly borne most royally descended, being partaker of the new
birth, borne from above, and begotten of God, who of his own will begat her by
the word of truth, Iam. 1.18. which she most evidently expressed, by that great
respect and reverence which she ever after bare to that blessed instrument of
her heavenly birth, Gods holy word, making it her delight and counselor, as
the Prophet did, Psalm. 119.24.

Secondly, birth, Her beauty
so she obtained the most excellent beauty, even the beauty of holiness, the
blessed image of God, which made her most amiable in the eyes of all those that
were well acquainted with her, and could discern the things that be excellent,
and even dazzled the eyes of others. So beautiful was she in this best kind,
that she did much grace and adorn the Gospel, and beautified her profession,
whereas some are a blot and blemish unto it.

And therefore in the third place she must needs be well favored, Her favor
for her parts were well proportioned. She was a true Elizabeth, walking in all
the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord blameless, like that Elizabeth,
Luke 1.6. And was not like those women that have many good parts, but withal
some such foul infirmities, that they stain and spoil all that is good in
them, so that they cause the name of God, and his word to be blasphemed.

Fourthly, Her understanding.
she was able to discern those mysteries which are hid from the wise and
prudent, for she perceived an excellency in things above, which made her so
ready to run the ways of Gods Commandments, when others scarce go in them.
She was able by an heavenly instinct, to distinguish the voice of Christ from
the voice of a stranger, Ioh. 10.4, 5.
which made her esteem all other things dung in comparison of the excellency
of the knowledge of Christ Jesus, Philip. 3.8.

Fifthly, For her Love, Her Love.
it was truly excellent and of the best stamp, for it was set upon the right
object, upon God and the things of God, in the first place, so that she could
say with the Psalmist, whom have I in heaven but thee, and I desire none in
earth besides thee, Psalm. 73.25. And with the Martyrs. None but Christ, St.
Peter and John Lambert. Mart.
Nothing but Christ.

Her charity also was toward all, even her utter enemies, for she could do
good against evil, but her special love was to the Saints, in whom was her
delight. She well understood and made much use of that Article of the Creed,
which few conceive, (The Communion of Saints) being very open-hearted and
open-handed to such as she thought true members of that blessed society. And if
she seemed sparing at any time, it was to spend the more liberally upon the
lively members of Christ, in which regard she did match the Macedonians, whose
grace Saint Paul much commended, because to their power (he bare record) yea
and beyond their power, they were willing of themselves. Herein where most
Christians come short she exceeded. Their love is less than their means, hers
above her abilities.
And so was she, as many can bear record, and this because she had first given
her self to the Lord, and then to others by the will of God, as they did, 2
Cor. 8.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

In a word her love to her dear and familiar friends was like the love of
Jonathan unto David, wonderful, passing the love of women, 2 Samuel 1.26. She
was indeed a true Jonathan being Iah-nathan a special gift of God.

Sixthly, Her spirit. Ruach jattira, Dan. 6. and 3.
for Her spirit she might well be called the Daughter of Daniel, because Ruach
Iattira as the Chaldee has it, an excellent spirit was in her: Though the
weaker vessel, yet had she a masculine, heroicke, and invincible spirit, to
resist Satan and his instruments, whenever she was set upon to be hindered
from Gods service. O how courageously would she break through all impediments,
that might any way hinder her from holy duties, even as Samson snapt asunder
the cords and withes! Judge. 16.

With what an holy indignation did she skorne the wealth and pleasures of this
present world, as dross and scum in comparison of the true treasure! And how
undaunted in defending the truth and those that stood for the same! She was not
ashamed of Christian any company, as many cowardly Christians are.

Thus much for those things that were applied to the person of woman in the
proof of the point. Next for her Actions, first in general.
Now come we to her actions, which were like her self, sanctified and
singular. For Religion was her masterpiece, 1 King. 18.12.
as this worthy woman's in the text, she was one that feared God from her youth
and therefore her actions proceeded from a right root, and clear spring ^he
was no hipocrite, I dare boldly say, for she was not so much in show as in
substance, not more in words than in deeds but as God had given he^ 2. hands to
one tongue, so her deeds doubled her words, and though thus double handed in
all her doings, contrary to the course of the world yet most single hearted.

In particular for her prayers, In particular for her prayers. Hos. 12.3, 4.
they were not cold, lazy, and lukewarm, but such as pierced the skies, like
those of Cornelius, Act. 10.4. O how would she wrestle with God in prayer! how
would she fly to the throne of grace as it were upon the wings of faith! And
how often has she bin observed to rise from prayer, with tears in her eyes,
on her cheeks, and dropped down before her! and that without any ostentation,
which she was as free from, as any that ever I observed. I speak by experience.

As much may be said for her diligent and dutiful hearing (to add an instance
or two more.) And hearing Gods Word.
For she delighted not in houses of play, and pleasure, as most young
Gentlewomen do, but the houses of praying and preaching were her chief joy.
Psalm. 137.5, 6.
So that whatsoever pains she was able to take she was willing to undergo,
to come to those places where she might hear God most lively speaking unto
her, and she again most powerfully like Hannah, power out her soul unto the
Lord. Mourning for nothing more in time of her sickness, than the want of Gods
house and ordinances, for nothing but Necessity could keep her from them,
which is far otherwise, with a great many especially of her rank, who are but
too easily entreated to keep from the Church, even when God himself, their
own, and the Churches necessities call upon them.

And while she was hearing, how mavelous attentive! even as was said of the
people, that heard our Savior, Luke 19.48. (...) they were attentive to him,
or rather hanged upon him as the margent has it in the last translation; So
she hanged upon the mouth of his messengers, as Chickens hang upon the mouth of
the Hen, (as some open the phrase) that are ready to catch whatsoever she
shall break for them, or let fall unto them.

Even so her coming to the Sacrament was admirable. And receiving the holy
Sacrament.
How solemn and serious would she be in preparing for that holy Supper,
setting apart sometimes days of fasting and humiliation (which were days of
Iubilee to her sanctified spirit) that she might come the more hungry and
thirsty, and so be more fully satisfied with the fat and sweet of this most
heavenly Table.

Seldom did she receive this bless. Sacrament with dry eyes, as I have bin
often an eye witness (though she carried it covertly, and yet how often did
she frequent this holy Feast! never missing the monthly Communions, if she
were able to come to the Church, and that I think for 7. years together, after
once it had pleased the Lord to let the light of his countenance shine upon
her, wherein she followed a good pattern given her at home.

These are strange things, you will think, but I can assure you, not so strange
as true, for I do not speak, as we must do many times by hearsay, but I speak,
what I have seen and known.

And now for her words and speeches she had learned the language of Canaan, Her
words. Jsa. 19.8. Neh. 13.24.
and did not mingle it with the speech of Ashdod, she was not double-tongued
but spoke the words of soberness and truth. She loved that pure language,
Zeph. 3.9. and hated lying, and swearing, yea she abhorred all rotten speech
and corrupt communication, as filthy vomit, laboring to have her speeches
always with grace, Col. 4.6.
seasoned with salt as the Apostle commandes.

And for the end of her Actions, The end of her actions
She exceedingly aimed at Gods glory, preferring that before all, so that she
would often say. If she could but glorify God she cared not. For she had
learnt by heart that hard lesson of Self deny all for Gods sake.

Now in the last place to come to those relations, and adjuncts of excellency.

First, Honorable in her Head. (...). She had conquest upon conquest, one
victory after another.
and therefore most honorable in Her head. Witness those worthy works before
related. She was in Christ her head more than a Conqueror, Romans 8.37. she did
over-overcome, as one well renders the words. For she conquered the corruptions
of youth, of her place, of the times and places wherein she lived, and
therefore now no doubt is gone to wear the crown of righteousness, having
fought so good a fight of faith, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8.

2. Husband than in her head, In her husband.
which are the same, for she was espoused unto Christ, her heavenly husband,
with whose beams of grace she did shine brightlie while she was here, and
therefore now she glisters gloriously as the Sun, with his most orient beams
of bliss and happiness.

3. For her Portion, no corruptible thing, In her Portion.
as silver or gold, but even the Lord of heaven, whose mercy endures for ever,
in comparison of whom she esteemed al earthly treasure but dross and dunge.
And therefore now she is gone to take possession of that goodly jointure, the
kingdom of glory, being joynt-heire with Christ Jesus. Romans 8.17.
For on earth women do not enjoy their jointure, but the time of life after
their Husbands death, but it is otherwise in heaven, for they go to take a
fuller possession of their spiritual jointure by death, which is the door of
eternal life to them that die in the Lord.

Lastly, In her Apparel.
even the Royal Robes of Christ's righteousness, which she had put on by faith,
Phil. 3 9.
renouncing her own righteousness, as rotten rags in comparison, often
complaining of her own unrighteousness. And yet whereas other Gentlewomen are
much taken up with providing for the body, tricking and trimming that painted
sheath, for it is no better oftentimes, See Dan. 7.15. in the Chaldee. Vestite
vos serico probitatis. byssino sanctitatis purpura pudicitia. Taliter
pigmentatae Deum habebitu amatorem, Ter. de cul. foeminarum.
she mainely minded the trimming and decking of her soul, by her daily
devotion, wherein she excelled, hating the fond and flaring, fantastical and
new fangled fashions of the world, as fit for none but idle brains, vain and
wanton women, that want eyes to look into their precious soul, and see how
needy and naked, tattered and deformed they are within.

She therefore now (no doubt) is arrayed like those in the Revelation, that
had long white Robes, and Palms in their hands, in sign of victory, Rev. 7.9.
For she came out of great tribulation, and had washed her Robe, and made it
white in the blood of the Lamb v. Ver. 16.17.
14. So that now she shall hunger no more, nor thirst any more, all tears
being wiped from her eyes, See Isaiah 57.1, 2.
though not from ours. For we have great cause to weep and mourn, not for
her, but for our selves. The greater her gain is, the greater is our loss,
and not ours only, but the whole Church of God.

Thus much for her life. Of Her death.
Now concerning her death, I must say something, because she gave me as it were
a charge, entreating me to speak that which I shall briefly declare unto you.

The first day that she fell ill, I went unexpectedly to see her, wherein she
acknowledged Gods special providence. I found her indeed something sad, yea
more than ordinary, not for fear of Death, but because that her disease was
likely to be such as would deprive her of her friends, hence those tears. To
wit, the small Pox
I told her she was in the hands of a wise and tender Father, who knew best
what was fit for us, and therefore she needed not so much to be troubled at
that. After we had commended her case unto God in Prayer, She desired to be
buried before the Sermon because of the disease.
she entreated me that after her buryall (for she made full account to die) I
would make a Sermon, and therein persuade the hearers to these two things.

The first was, Her first desire.
that you would hearken to the Word of God better than she had done. To which I
presently replied (as well as I could for tears being much affected with her
words) I would they would hear but so well as she did. Yet, beloved, my desire
is as hers was, that you would hearken better then she did, which if I could
persuade you all unto, I should think my self the happiest man in the world.
For herein she did excel, as I said before, howsoever in her humility and
zeal to Gods word she thus spoke.

Therefore let me entreat you to grant this her holy desire. If it be possble,
hearken to Gods holy Word better than she did. But if this be impossble, as
almost it is, yet hearken so as she did, and you shall undoubtedly be blessed.
For as she had a very good memory, for good things especially, so had she a
most artentive ear and heart, even like Mary that chose that good, part which
should not be taken from her, Luke 10.42. And like those Noble Bereans, Acts
17.11, 12. Who were said to be (...) more generous than those of Thessalonica,
first in that they received the Word with all readiness of mind, and secondly,
in that they searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things were so,
therefore many of them believed; also of honorable women, and of men not a few.

Yea so hungry was she after Gods holy Word, that she feared no famine, but
that threatened by the Prophet Amos. Not a famine of bread, but of hearing the
Word of the Lord, Amos 8.11. Oh therefore that you could but equal, if not
exceed her in this! Then might you find that most ravishing comfort in hearing,
The last Lords day save one as she told us at that time. The second request.
which she confessed she found a little before she fell sick.

The other thing she desired to be commended unto you was this. That you would
have a special care to look to your Families, She meant in regard of
religious orders, which are so much neglected in most places, men living athome
more like heathens and Infidels than true Christians. For though she did more
than most in this kind, yet was it a great grief unto her, that she could not
do better. Oh that you would let her have her desire in this also! you would
find the blessing above measure, if you did but once set up the power of
godliness in your families, that you might be said to fear God, with all your
house as Cornelius did, Acts 10.2. For by this means this good Gentlewoman was
truly said to be a prop, or pillar in the house.

So that her Husband, and Children, (if they were of years) might join in her
praises, as they before the Text. Her Children might arise and call her
blessed, Some refer these words of the Text to the Husband.
her Husband also might praise her, saying; Many daughters have done
virtuously, or valiantly; but thou excellest, and go above them all, etc.

Indeed her ways so pleased Pro. 16.7.
the Lord, that her enemies were at peace with her, as Solomon says, And what
I speak a cloud of witnesses will testify. Therefore I need the less fear
to be accused either of False hood or Flattery, which I have always abhorred
in every place, especially in the Pulpit, and so did she, which made her
sometime say, that she would desire nothing might be said of her at her death,
because she had with sorrow heard, some sainted at their death, who were little
better than devils in their life.

Let none therefore take that with the left hand which I have reached out with
the right, as Saul did the due and deserved commendations given to David, For I
speak that truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience also bearing me witness,
Romans 9.1.

Nay, if I should reckon all the rarities of this right religious Gentlewoman,
that I have been an eye, and eare-witnesse of, from her first to her last,
Dies me desiceret, The day would fail me, my spirits would be spent, and I
should tire your patience, and it might make most of us blush and be ashamed to
see how far we come short, and all of us admire and stand amazed, and
astonished at the goodness and grace of GOD so plentifully powered upon her.

Therefore to conclude, Happy was (yea, and still is) the Mother of such a
Daughter. Happy the Husband in such a Wife, and happy children of such a
Mother, who has laid up many prayers, better than portions for them. And
happy were all her acquaintance in such a friend, And yet more happy they and
we in following her heavenly steps. But most happy she, that led so holy and
heavenly a life. Because blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, even so
says the spirit, that they may rest from their labors, and their works follow
them, Rev. 14 13.

FINIS.
Imprimatur.

Thomas Weeks.


