Englands WAY TO VVIN Wealth, and to employ Ships and Mariners: OR, A plain
description what great profit, it will bring unto the Commonwealth of
England, by the Erecting, Building, and aduenturing of Busses, to Sea, a
fishing.

With a true Relation of the inestimable wealth that is yearly taken out of
his Majesty's Seas, by the Hollanders, by their great numbers of Busses,
Pinkes, and Line-boates: AND ALSO A discourse of the Seacoast Towns of
England, and the most fit and commodious places, and Harbors that we have for
Busses, and of the small number of our Fishermen, and also the true valuation,
and whole charge, of Building, and Furnishing, to Sea, Busses, and Pinks, after
the Holland manner.

By Tobias Gentleman, Fisherman and Mariner.

LONDON Printed for Nathaniel Butter. 1614.

TO THE RIGHT NOBLE, LEARNED, AND TRVELY HONORABLE, HENRY, Lord HOWARD, Earl
of Northhampton, Baron of Marnhill, Constable of the Castle of Dover, Lord
Warden, Chancellor and Admiral of the Cinque Ports, Lord Privy Seal, Knight
of the most Noble Order of the ^arter, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
SEeing that by Nature our Country challenges a greater interest in us, then
our Parents, Friends, or Children can, and that we ought for preservation
thereof, oppose our lives unto the greatest dangers: It is the part of every
Native to endeavor something to the advancement and profit thereof, and not to
affect ^t, for that we possess in it, but to love it for it self, as being
the common Mother and Nourisher of us all. For mine own part, albeit my short
fadome can compass no such great design as I desire, yet from a willing mind
(as he that offered his hands full of water to great Artaxerxes) I am bold to
present this project of my honest and (...); beseeching your L. whose (...)
truly enobled you, to take the (...) your protection: And prefer it to the
(...) of our most Royal Sovereign, recommending the good effecting thereof to
his gracious favor and ^rtherance. Doubtless: your ^tions and endeauours
having all been full of virtue and goodness, are not the least prevailing
motives whereby his Majesty has so endeered you unto him. In this then you
shall not think your self disparaged, the matter being both honest and
commendable, and in true value of as great substance, as the offer of Sebastian
Cabota, to King Henry the seventh, for the discovery of the West Indies.

Humbly at your Lordships commandment, Tobias Gentleman.

ENGLANDS WAY TO WIN WEALTH, AND TO IM ploy Ships and Mariners*


NOble Britains, for as much as it has pleased the Almighty God to make us a
happy Nation, by blessing and enriching this Noble Kingdom with the sweet dew
of his heavenly word, truly and plentifully Preached amongst us; and also in
cytuating our Country in a most (...) Clymate, and stored with many rich and
(...) Treasures for our (...), which also yields in abundance all things
necessary, ^o that we do not only excel other Nations in strength and
courage, but also a^ other Kingdoms (...) are by our English (...) and
cherished. It seems (...) the (...) of ^ur gracious God, has (...) us (...)
gemme unto himse^ (...) Country with the plenteous (...) and (...) of us from
the whole Continent (...) the rest of the inferior world, by our rich and
commodious Element of water, which in due seasons yields to us in abundance.
For altho^gh o^r Champion Soil, by the (...) of the Husbandman, be plentiful
unto us: yet does these watery Regions and Dominions yield yearly, great
variety of all kind of most whole^ome and (...) fishes: so that it may seem
(...) and ^table, and hard to determine, (...) of his Majesty's Dominions of
the Land or Seas, be richest. My self being the most (...) of all, in that I
am no Sholler, but borne a Fishermans son by the Seaside, and spending my
youthful time at Sea about ^isher affairs, whereby now I am more skillful in
Nets, Lines, and Hooks, then in Rethoricke, Logic, or learned books: yet in
those few which I have read, besides the instinct of nature, which makes me
to know that every one should endeavor himself the best he is able to be
beneficial and profitable to the Kingdom and Commonwealth wherein he is
borne, which was a forceable motive to incite me to think of this present
discourse, the penning whereof was thus occasioned.

It was my fortune, some two years past, to be sent for into the company of
one Master John Ke^mar, who is a man very well deserving of his Country, and
he knowing me to have experience in Fisher affairs, demanded of me the charge
both of Busses and Line-boates, after the Hollanders fashion, and showed unto
me some few notes that he had gathered and gotten from other men of my trade,
which he seemed greatly to esteem of: for that himself was altogether
vnexperimented in such business, and further, I delivered to him certain
principal notes which he seemed greatly to esteem; for that he said that
he did mind to show them unto the right Honorable Counsel, whereupon I
entered into the cogitation of writing this true relation out of my own
experience and knowledge, touching the Inestimable sums of money taken
yearly for fish and herrings out of his Majesty's Seas by strangers, whereby
they have not only maintained their wars many years against the Spaniard,
both by Land and Sea, he being one of the great Monarkes of the world, and at
length, they have not only wearied him in the wars, and brought him to good
terms and reasonable composition; but also it is most apparent not
withstanding the huge charge of their wars so long continued, which would
have made any other Nation poor and beggarly, they to the contrary are grown
exceeding rich and strong in fortified Towns and beautiful Buildings, in
pl^ty of money and gold, in trade and traffic with all other Nations, and
have so increased and multiplied their shipping and Mariners, that all other
Nations and Countries in the world do admire them.

Moreover, whereas one Haven in one of their Towns did in former times
contain their ships and shipping with infinite cost, now they have cut out two
Havens more to a Town, and at this present, are all three Havens scarce
sufficient with room enough to contain their Ships and shipping, and by
reason of their industrious Fisher-trade, not one of their people are idle, nor
none seen to beg amongst them, except they be some of our own English
Nation.

And what their chiefest tr^de is, or their principal gold-mine, is well
known to all Merchants that have used those parts, and to my self and all
Fishermen; namely that his Ma^ies Seas is their chie^st, principal, and only
rich Treasury, whereby they (...) so long time maintained their wars, and
have so greatly prospered, and enriched themselves.

If that their little Country of the united Provinces can do this, as it is
most manifest before our eyes they do, then what may we his Majesty's Subjects
do, if this trade of fishing were once erected among us, we having in our
(...) Coun^ies sufficient store of all necessaries to (...) the (...). For the
Hollanders have nothing growing in their own land for that bu^esse, but they
are compelled to (...) their wood* timber, and planke, wherewith they build, and
make all their Ships of, out of diverse Countries, and their iron out of other
(...)* their (...) and Cordig^ out of the (...)* their Hoopes and Barrellboords
out of Norway and Sprucia, their breadcorne out of Poland, and East parts,
their Malt, (...) and (...) d^inke from England, and also all their fish (...)
we^lth out of his Majesty's S^s.

The which they do transport unto the foresaid (...), and (...) for the (...)
of (...) and (...), the (...) commodities, whereby their Ships and Mariners
are set on work, and continually multiplied, and into their countries is
plentiful store of money and gold daily brought, only for the sails of fish
and herrings.

And their Country being, as it were, a small plot of ground in comparison of
great Britain, for two of his Majesty's Counties, Suffolk and Norfolk, do
equal, if not exceed, in spaciousness* all their Provinces, and yet it is
mani^t, that for shipping and (...) ^ring men, all England, Scotland, France
and (...), ^or quantity of shipping and Fisher men cannot make so great a
number.

Howsoever this may (...) unto many that do not know it; yet do I assure my
self, that a great number besides my self know I (...) nothing (...) the
(...).

Wherefore seeing the great (...) business by the Busses, (...), or ^ships, by
(...) of this profitable (...) trade, which will bring plen^ (...) ^iesties
(...), and be (...) the (...) good of the Commonwealth, in setting of many
thousands of poor people on wor^, (...) now (...) not how to (...), and (...)
the increasing of ships and (...)-men, which shall be employed about the
taking of fish and (...) out of his (...) own (...), as also ^or the employing
of ships, and (...) of M^riners, for the (...) o^ (...) Kingdom against all
(...), and for the enriching of Merchants with transportation of Fish and
Herrings into other Countries; and also for the bringing in of gold, and money,
which now is grown but scarce, by reason that the Dutch and Hollanders have so
long time been suffered to carry away our money and best gold for fish and
Herrings, taken out of his Majesty's own streams, which his Majesty's own
Subjects do want (and still are like to do) if that they be not forbidden for
bringing us of Fish and Herrings: And this worthy Commonwealths business of
Busses fostered and furthered by his Majesty's Honorable Council, and the
Worshipful and wealthy subjects, by putting too of their helping Adventures
now at the first: for that those that be now the Fishermen, of themselves, be
not able to begin.

Those poor Boats and sorry Nets that our ^ishermen of England now have, are
all their chiefest wealths, but were their ability better, they would soon be
employing themselves: for that it is certain that all the Fishermen of
England do rejoice now at the very name and news of building of Busses, with a
most joyful applaud, praying to God to further it for: what great profit and
pleasure it will b^ing they do well understand, and I will hereafter declare.

First, I shall not need to prove that it is lawful for us that be his
Majesty's own Subjects to take with all diligence the blessings that Almighty
God do yearly send unto us at their due times and seasons, and which do
offer themselves freely and abundantly to us, in our own Seas and nigh our
own sho^s.

S^ondly, to prove that it is feacible for us: for what can be more plain
then that we see daily done before our eyes by the Hollanders, that have
nothing that they use growing in their own Land, but are constrained to fetch
all out of other Countries; whereas we have all things that shall be used
about that business growing at home in our own Land, Pitch and Tar only
excepted.

Thirdly, to prove it will be profitable, no man need ^o doubt, for that we
(...) the Hollanders have long (...) their wars, and are nevertheless grown
exceeding ^ich, which are things to be admited, in so much that themselves do
call it, their Chiefest Trade, and principal Gold-mine, whereby many thousands
of their people of Trades and Occupations, be set on work, well maintained,
and do prosper. These be the Hollanders own words in a Dutch Proclamation, and
translated into English, and the copy of that Proclamation is her^ annexed
unto the end of my book.

And shall we neglect so great blessings: O slothful England and careless
Countrymen, Look but on these fellows (...) call the plumpe Hollanders, be
hold their diligence in fishing, and our own careless negligence.

In the midst of the month of May does the Industrious Hollanders begin to
make ready their Bu^es and Fisher fleetes, and by the first of their June, are
they yearly ready, and s^ne to sail out of the (...), the (...), and the Vly,
a thousand (...) together for to catch (...) in the North seas.

Six hundred of these Fisher-ships, and more, be great Bu^s some six score
Tons, most of them (...) a hundredth Tons and the rest three score and
fifty Tons, the biggest of them having four and twenty men, some twenty men,
and some eighteen and sixteen men a piece, so that their cannot be in this
Fleet of people no less then twenty thousand Sailors.

These having with them bread, butter, and Holland-cheese, for their provision,
do daily ly get their other diet out of his Majesty's Seas, besides the lading
of this Fleet three times a p^ce, commonly before S. Andrew with Herrings,
which being sold by them, but at the rate of ten pound the Last, Fl^te unto
much more then the sum of one million of pounds Sterling only by this Fleet
of Busses yearly: no King upon the earth did yet ever see such a Fleet of his
own Subjects at any time, and yet this Fleet is there, and then, yearly to
be seen: A most worthy sight it were, if they were my own Countrymen, yet
have I taken pleasure in being amongst them, to behold the neatness of their
ships and Fishermen, how every man knows his owneplace, and all laboring
merrily together, whereby the poorest sort of themselves, their wives, and
children be well maintained, and no want seen amongst the^.

And thus North-west and by North hence along they steer, then being the very
heart of Summer, and the very yoalke of all the year, sayiing until they do
come unto the I Will of Shotland is the greatest I Will of all the Orcades, and lies
in the height of 60. degrees of Northerly latitude.
Shotland, which is his Majesty's Dominions, and with these gallant Fleet of
Busses, there have been seen twenty, thirty, and forty ships of war to waft
and gaurd them from being pillaged and taken by their enemies, and Dun^ kars:
but now the wars be ended, they do save that great charge, for they have not
now above four or six to look unto them for being spoiled by Rouers and
Pirates.

Now if that it happen that they have so good a wind to be at Shotland before
the 14. day of their June as most commonly they have, then do they put all into
Shotland, nigh Swinbornehead, into a Sownd called Braceies Sownd, and there
they frolic it on Land, until that they have sucked out all the marrow of
the Malt, and good Scotsh-ale, which is the best liquor that the Island does
afford: but the 14. day of June being once come, then away all of them go, for
that is the first day, by their own Law, before which time they must not lay a
Net, for until then the Herrings be not in season, nor fit to be taken to be
salted.

From this place, being nigh two hundred leagues from Yermouth, do they now
first begin to fish, and they do never leave the Skoales of Herrings, but come
along amongst them, following the Herrings as they do come, five hundred miles
in length, and lading their ships twice or thrice, before they come to
Yermouth, with the principal and best Herrings, and sending them away by the
Merchant ships that comes unto them, that brings them victuals, barrels,
and more salt, and Nets if that they do need any, the which Ships that buyeth
their herrings, they do call Herring-yagers, and these Yagers carry them and
^ell them in the East Countries, some to Revel, and to Rye, and some so far as
the Narue, and Russey, Stockhollume in Sweathen, Quinsbrough, Danske and
Eluinge, and all Poland, Sprucia, and Pomerland, Letto, Burnt-hollume, Stateen,
Lubicke and Youtland, and Denmark.

Returning Hemp, Flax, Cordige, Cables, and Iron, Corn, Sope-ashes, Wax,
Weinskot, Clapholt, Pitch, Tar, Mastes, and Spruce-deales, and Hoopes, and
Barrel-boords, and plenty of silver and gold only for their procedue of
Herrings.

Now besides this great Fleet of the Busses the Hollanders have a huge number
more of smaller Burden only for to take Herrings also, and these be of the
Burden, from fifty Tons unto thirty Tons, and twenty tons; the greatest
of them having twelve men a piece, and the smallest eight and nine men a piece,
and these are Vessels of diverse fashions, and not like unto the Busses, yet go
they only for Herrings in the season, and they be called some of them,
Sword-pinks, Flat-bottomes, Holland-toads, Crabskuits, and Yeuers, and all
these, or the most part do go to Shot-land, but these have no Yagers come
unto them but they go themselves home when they be laden, or else unto the best
Market: There have been seen and numbered of Busses, and these, in braces
sound, and going out to Sea, and at Sea in sight, at one time, two thousand
Sails besides them that were at Sea without sight, which could not be numbered.

It is Bartholmew-tide yearly before that they be come from Shotland, with the
Herrings so high as Yermouth, and all those Herrings that they do catch in
Yermouth Seas from Bartholmew-tide until S. Andrew the worst that be the
roope-sicke Herrings that will not serve to make barreld Herrings by their own
Law, they must not bring home into Holland, wherefore they do sell them for
ready money, or gold, unto the Yermouth-men, that be no Fishermen but
Merchants and Ingrosers of great quantities of Herrings, if that by any means
they can get them, so that the Hollanders be very welcome guests unto the
Yermothian Herring-buyers, and the Hollanders do call them their Hosts, and
they do yearly carry away from Yermouth many a thousand pound, as it is well
known but; these Hollanders with their ladings of the best, which they make
their best brand herrings to serve for Lenton store, they send some for
Bordeaux, some for R^chell, Nantes, Morliax, and S. Mallaus, Cane in Normandy,
Roan, Paris, Ameance, and all Pickardy, and Callice, and they do return from
these places, Wines, Salt, Feathers, Rossin, Woad, Normandy Canuise, and Dowlas
cloth, and money, and French Crowns, but out of all the Archdukes Countries
they return nothing from thence but ready money, in my own knowledge, and
their ready payment was all double Iacobuses, English twenty shilling pieces. I
have seen more there in one day: then ever I did in London at any time, for at
Ostend, Newport, and Dunkirke, where and when the Holland pinks comes in,
there daily the Merchants, that be but women, but not such women as the
fishwiues of Billinsgare, for these Netherland women do lade away many wagons
with fresh fish daily, some for Bridges, and some for Brussels, Iper, Dixmew,
and Rissels, and at Sasse, by Gant. I have seen these women Merchants have had
their Apornes full of nothing but English Iacobuses, to make all their payment
of, and such heaps and budget-fuls in the counting-houses of the fish-brokers,
which made me much to wonder how they should come by them; and I have seen^ a
small Haddocke sold there for two ^hillings six pence: and a Turbut for a
Iacobus.
also I know that Capons are not so dearly sold by the Poulters in Gracious
Street in London, as fresh fish is sold by the Hollanders, in all those
Roman Catholic, and Papisticall Countries.

And whereas I have made but a true relation of their Fleetes of Busses, and
only the Herring-fishermen that be on his Majesty's Seas from June until
November, I will here also set down the fishermen that all the year long, in
the seasons, do fish for Cod and Linges continually, going and returning laden
with barreld fish.

And these be Pinks and Wel-boats of the burden of forty Tons, and the
smallest thirty Tons, and these have some twelve men a piece, one with
another, and their is of this sort of fisher-boates, beginning at Vlushing,
Camefere, Surwick-sea, the Mase, the Tessell, and the Fly, and the other sandy
Islands, about five hundred or six hundred Sail, which all the year long are
fishing for Cod, whereof they do make their barreld fish, which they do
transport in Summer into the East parts, but in Winter all France is served by
them, and all the Archdukes Countries before spoken of, both of barreld fish,
and fresh fish, which they of purpose do keep alive in their boats in Wells;
and to us here in England for love of our strong Bear, they bring us barreld
fish in Winter, and carry away our money and gold every day in great quantities.

Besides all these Pinks and Well boats, the Hollanders have continually in the
season, an other Fleet of Fisherman, at the North-east head of Shotland which
be of an other quality, and there is more then two hundred of these, and these
be called Fly-boats, and these do ride at ankor all the season at Shotland, in
the fishing grounds, and they have small boats within them which be like unto
Cobles, the which they do put out to lay and hale their lines and hooks,
whereby they do take great store of Lings, the which they do not barrel, but
splet them and salt them in the Ships Bulk, and these they fell commonly for
four and five pounds the hundredth, and these go by the name of Holland-lings,
but they are taken out of his M^iesties Seas, and were Shotland lings before
they took them there, and for these Lings they do carry away abundance of
Englands best money daily.

Now having declared according unto truth, the numbers of their Fishermen of
Holland, for (...) upon his Majesty's Seas, and also of their Pinks, and
Wel-boates, and their courses for taking, and venting and selling of their
barreld fish, and fresh-fish and also of their Flie-boates at the North-east
head of Shotland, for Shotland-lings: I think it now best, truly to show the
true number of our English Fishermen, and how they do employ themselves all the
year long, first beginning at Colchester nigh the mouth of the Theames and so
proceed Northward.

I can scarce afford these men of that water the name of Fishermen, for that
their chiefest trade is dreggin of Oisters; yet have they in the Summer some
eight or ten boats in the North-seas for Cods, which if that they happen to
spend all their salt, and to speed well, they may get some twenty pound in a
Summer clear: but here by the way, I will make known a great abuse that is
offered to the Commonwealth, and especially to all the herring fishermen of
England, only by those men of Colchester water.

For these men from S. Andrew until Candlemas, and some times longer, do set
forth stale-boates, amongst the sands, in the Theames mouth, for to take
sprats, with great stale-nets, with a great poake, and they standing in the
Swinn^ or the Kings channel on the back of the Gunfleate, they do there take
in steed of sprats, infinite thousands of young Herrings, smaller then Sprats,
and not good to be eaten, for one Sprat is better worth then twenty of those
Bleakes, or young Herrings, but because they do fill the Bushel at Billingsgate
where they do sell them for Sprats, the which, if that they were let live,
would all be at Midsummer a Fat Summer full He^ring, and a pecke is sometime
there sold for 2. pence which number of herrings at Midsummer, would make a
barrel of Summerherrings, worth 20. or 30. shillings.

If that rhey could take the Sprats it were good, for they be good victuals for
the City, but for every Cart-load or Bushel of Sprats, they take a hundred
Cart-loads, or Bushels of these young herrings, which be the very spawnes of the
Skoales of the herrings that comes from Shotland every Summer, and when as
they come into Yermouth Seas yearly about S. Luke, and sometimes before, if
that it do blow a hard Easterly wind, do always at that season become
Roope-sicke and do spawne and become Shotten betwixt Wintertonnesse, and
O^fordnesse, and those frey of that spawne, those young little creatures, by the
wisdom of the great Creator, seeks into the shore, and shallow places,
there to be norished, and also into the Theames mouth into the sweetest waters;
for that the water nigh the shore, and in the Theames mouth is not so brine
salt, as it is farther of into the deep water, where these Bleakes yearly
seeking to be nourished, they be always at that season taken and destroyed: but
if that these men will needs use their stale-boates and nets, let them go where
the good Sprats be, they must then stand at Orfordnesse, and in Donwich-bay,
where there be cellent sprats, and for the good of all the Herring-fishermen of
England, I wish that they might be prohibited to sell that which is not
wholesome to be eaten, which is as much as to sell hemlocks for perseneps.

The next to Colchester, is Harwich water, a royal harbor, and a propper
Town, fit for the use of Busses, no place in all Holland comparable, for their
is both land and strand and dry beach enough for four hundredth Sail, but the
chiefest Trade of the Inhabitants of this place, is with Caruiles for
New Castle coals, but they have three or four Ships yearly that they do send
to Isle-land for Cod and Lings, from March until September, and some years
they get, and some times loose, but if that they had but once the trade of
Busses, this would soon be a fine place. but those Caruiles and Ships which
they now have be all their chiefest wealth.

Six miles up Harwich water stands Ipswich, which is a gallant Town, and
rich; this Town is such a place for the Busses, as in all England and Holland
I know no place so convenient: first it is the best place in all England for
the building of Busses, both for the plenty of Timber and Planke, and excellent
workmen for making of Ships, there is more there, then there is in six of the
best Towns in all England: Secondly, it is a principal place for good
Huswiues, for spinning of yarne, for the making of pouldauice, for there is the
best that is made: which Town with the use of making of Twine, will soon be
the best place of all England for to provide Nets for the Busses.

It is also a most convenient place for the wintering of the Busses, for that
all the shoares of that River is altgether oose and soft ground, fit for them
to lie on in winter.

Also the lpswich men be the chiefest Merchant This Town is a most fit and
convenient place to make a staple town for corn, for all England, for the
return and sail of the (...) herring from (...), and Poland.
Adventurers of all England for all the East-lands, for the Suffolk clothes:
and they have their Factors lying all the year long in all those places where
the Hollanders do vent their Herrings, and where the best price and sail is
continually. And although that yet there be no fishermen, yet have they store
of Seafaring men, and for Masters for the Busses they may have enough from
Yermouth and Sowld and the Sea coast Towns down their River, from Nacton, and
Chimton, Holbroke, Shotly, and Cowlnes, they may get men that will soon be
good fishermen with but a little use, for understand thus much, that there is a
kind of emulation in Holland between the Fishermen that goes to Sea in Pinks
and Line-boats, Winter and Summer, and those Fishermen that goes in the
Busses, for they in the Pinkes make a skorne of them in the Busses, and do call
them Koe-milkens, or Cow-milkers, for in deed the most part of them be men of
occupations in winter, or else Countrymen, and do milk the Cowes themselves,
and make all the Holland Cheese, when they be at home.

This place is also most convenient for the erecting of Salt-pans, for the
making of Salt upon salt, for that the Harbor is so good that at all times
Ships may come unto them with Salt from Mayo, or Spanish salt to make the brine
or pickell, and also the Caruiles from New Castle with coals, for the boiling
of it at the cheapest rates at any time, may come thither. To the North-east of
this place, three or four leagues is Orford-hauen, and the Towns of Orford
and Alborough especially, be many good Fishermen, and there is belonging to
those Towns some forty or fifty North sea boats, that yearly goes to Sea,
having seven men a piece, and ten or twelve Island Barks, which sometimes get
something, and sometime little or nothing; if that these men's wealth were in
Busses and Nets, and had but once the trade, they would put down the
Hollander, for they be great plyers of any voyage that they do undertake.

About three leagues to the Northward is Sowld-hauen, and in the Towns of
Sowld, donwich, Donwich in ancient times, ha^h been the seat of the Kings of
the East Angles, but now all ruined.
and Walderswicke be a very good breed of Fishermen, and there is belonging
unto those three Towns, of North-sea Boats some 20. Sail, and of Island
Barks some fifty Sail, which yearly they send for God and Lings to Island:
This Town of Sowld, of a Sea coast My father lived in (...) Town (...) he
was (...) of age, and gave these Composition Lings seventy years, (...) foHre
(...), viz K. (...), Q. Mary, Q. ^lizabeth, and until the (...) year of the
reign of our most (...) Sovereign, which (...) to much more then one thousand
pound, f^r one man of that Town.
Town, is the most beneficial unto his Majesty of all the Towns in England,
by reason all their trade is unto Island for Lings, and his Majesty's Seriant
Cater has yearly gratis, out of every Ship and Bark, one hundredth of the
choysest and fairest Lings, which be worth more then ten pound the hundred, and
they call them Composition fish: But these men of this place, are greatly
hindered, and in a manner undone, by reason of their Haven is so bad, and in a
manner often stopped up with Beach and Chingle-stone, that the wind and the
^ide and the Sea do beat thither, so that many time, in the season, when they
be ready to go to Sea, they can not get out when time is to go to Sea, neither
can they get in when they return from Sea, but oftentimes do (...) away their
goods and themselves: This Haven if that it had but a South peire built of
Timber, would be a far better H^uen then Yermouth Ha^n, with one quarter of the
cost that has been bestowed on Yermouth Haven, they be now suitors unto his
Majesty, God grant they may speed, for it is pitiful the trouble and damage,
that all the men of these three Towns do daily sustain by their naughty
Harbor.

To the Northward of Sowld-hauen, three leagues is Kirkley and Layestof
decayed Towns, they have six or seven North-sea Boats, but them of Layestof
make benefit yearly of buying of Herrings of the Hollanders, for likewise
these Hollanders be Hosted with the Layestof men, as they be with the
Yermothians.

To the Northward 2. leagues is the Town of great Yermouth, very beautifully
builded, In all his Majesty's Kingdoms not any Town comparable unto it for
brave buildings.
upon a very pleasant and sandy plain of three mile in length, this Town is a
place of great resort of all the Herring fishermen of England, for thither do
resortall the Fishermen of the Cinque Ports, and all the rest of the West
Countrymen of England, as far as Burport and L^ne in Dorcetshire, and those
Herrings that they do take they do not barrel, because their Boats be but
small things, but they sell all unto the Yermouth herring-buyers for ready
money, and also the Fishermen of the North-countries beyond Scarborough and
Robin-hoods bay and some as far as the Bishopric of Durham do thither resort
yearly, in poor little Boats called five men Cobbles, and all the Herrings
that they do take they do sell fresh unto the Yermouth-men to make red
Herrings. Also to Yermouth does daily come in to the Haven, up to the Key, all
or the most part of the great Fleet of Hollanders, which before I made relation
of, that go in the Swoard-pinks, Holland-toads, Crabskuits, Walnut-shels, and
great and small Yeuers, 100. and 200. Sail at one time together, and all their
Herings that they do bring in, they do sell them all for readdy money to the
Yermouth men: And also the French men of Pickardy And Norman^y.
some hundred Sail of them at a time do come thither, and all, the herrings
they catch they sell fresh unto these herring-mongers of Yermouth for ready
gold; so that it amonnteth unto a great sum of money, that the Hollanders and
Frenchmen do carry away, from Yermouth, yearly, into Holland and France, which
money does never come again into England: This Town is very well governed by
wise and ciuell Magistrates, and good orders carefully observed for the
mainetenance of their Haven and Corporation, and this Town, by reason of the
cituation, and the frech Rivers that belongs to it: one up to the City of
Norwich, and another that runs far up into Suffolk, a butter and cheese
country, about B^nga and Betkels; and a third that runs far up into ^legg, a
Corn Country, by reason whereof this Town of Yermouth is always well served
with all kind of provision at all times plentifully, at good and cheap rates,
whereby they of the Town do relieve the strangers, and also do benefit
themselves: To this Town belongs some twenty Island Barks, which yearly
they do send for Cods and Lings, and some hundredth and fifty Sail of North-sea
boats, they make a shift to live, but if that they had the use of Busses, and
also barreld fish, they would excel all England and Holland, for they be the
only fishermen for North-seas, and also the best for the handling of their
fish that be in all this land.

The Herring buyer of Yermouth does pro^ite more then does the Fishermen of
Yermouth, by reason of the resort of the Hollanders, for that they are suffered
to sell all their roope-sicke Herrings at Yermouth, to the Merchants there, and
also the barreld fish that the Flemmings do bring in Winter to London, (...),
(...)* and (...).
do also gale them, but for that our Fishermen may, if they please, make
barreld fish themselves, and therefore I will not moan them.

The Merchant herring-buyer of Yermouth that has a stock of his own, so long
as he Yermouth Haven is the only refuge, in (...) whether, for all the
Fishermen of the Cinque ports, and all other that (...), and it is (...)
timper, against the violence of the (...) sea* It is now in great danger to
come to ruin, if they have not help in time.
can make his gains so certain with buying of Roope-sicke herrings of the
Hollanders, will never lay out his money to build or set forth Busses, and the
Fishermen be now so poor, by reason that they only do bear the whole charge
of that costly Haven; the Merchant herring-buyers being not at any charge
thereof, but all that great cost comes out of the Fishermens labors, for the
maintenance of that wodden Haven, which amounts to some five hundred pound a
year, and some years more: so that though they be willing, yet there ability
will not suffer them to do it, neither can they forbear their money for to
adventure their ^gs into the East Countries where the best sails always be.

To the North*wards of Yermonth eight leagues, are the Towns of Blakney and
Wels, good Harbors and (...) for Busses, and they have good store of
fishermen, and these towns have some twenty Sail of Barks, that they do
ye^ely send unto Island; but these Towns be greatly deca^ed, to that they have
been in the times passed, the which places, if that they had but 20. Busses
belonging to them, would soon grow rich Towns in short time.

Then is there Lin a propper gallant Town* for Seafaring men, and for men for
Island; this is a rich Town, and they have some twenty Sail of Island ships,
that they yearly send for Cods and Lings, and I am in hope to see them fall to
the use of Busses as soon as any men.

To the Northward is Boston, a propper Town, and like unto Holland soil for
low grounds and sands coming in, but yet there is but few Fishermen, but it is
a most fit place for Busses, if that they had but once the taste of them they
would soon find good liking.

Next to (...) some 20. leagues to the Northward, is the great river of Humber,
wherein there is Hull, a very proper Town of Saylors and Shipping, but there
be but few fishermen but it is a most convenient place for to adventure Busses.

There is also Grimsbey, Paul, and Pat^ington: in all these places now there is
great store of poor and idle people, that know not how to live, and the most
of all these places be decayed, and the best of them all grow worse and worse,
which with the use of Busses would soon grow rich Merchant-townes as is in
Holland, for (...) these places would be transported out of the East-lands all
manner of commodities, for the use of Busses, and houses, and worke-yards
erected for Coopers, and Rope-makers, and great numbers of Ne^akers, and with
the recourse of the Ships that shall bring salt and other commodities, and
ships that shall lade away their Herrings and Fish, these places will soon
become populous, and money stirring plentiful in these places returned for the
procedue of fish and Herrings which places now be exceeding poor and beggarly.

In all these fisher Towns that I have before named, as Colchester, Harwith,
Orford, Alborough, Donwich, wa^derswicke, Sowld, Yermouth, Blackney, Wels, Lin,
Boston, and Hul: These be all the chiefest Towns, and all that uses the
North-seas in Summer and all these Towns it is well known be ^inated.

In all these Towns I know to be o -- o Island Barks, and o -- o North-sea
Boats, and all these Fishermen having o -- o men a piece, amounts to the
sum of o -- o. But admit that there is in all the West Country of England of
Fisher-boats, tag and rag, that brings home all fresh fish, which seldom or
never uses any salt: say that they have o -- o men a piece, which make the
sum of o -- o in all England; but in all these I have not reckoned I (...)
pardon, for that I omit the particular numbers and (...) sum, which I could
here (...) down, if I were commanded.
the Fishermen, Mackrel-catchers, nor the Cobble-men of the North-country,
which having o -- o men a piece, comes to so any men in all England.

But so many in all England, and I have truly showed before, that the
Hollander has in one Fleet of Busses twenty thousand Fishermen, besides all
them that goes in the Sword pinks, Flat* bottomes, Carbl kuits, Walnut-shels,
and great Yeuers, wherein there is not less then 12000. more, and all these
are only for to catch Herrings in the North seas.

Besides all them that goes in the Flye-boates, for Shotland Lings, and the
Pinks for barreld fish, and Trammell Boats, which comes unto 5000. more.

So that it is most true, that as they have the sum of o -- o Fishermen more
then their is in all this Land: and by reason of there Busses, and Pinks, and
Fishermen that set their Merchant Ships on work, as that they have (...)
Fishermen more then we have, so have they o -- o and o -- o ships and Mariners
more then we.

Now in our sum of o -- o Fishermen, let us see what vent have we for our
fish into other Countries, and what commodites and coin is brought into this
Kingdom, and what Ships are set on work by them, whereby Mariners are bred,
or employed, not one: It Is pitiful.

For when our Fishermen comes home, the first voyage from the North-seas,
they go either to London, Ipswich, Yermouth, Lin, Hull, or Scarbrough, and
there they do sell at good ^ates, the first voyage, but the second voyage,
because that they which be now the Fishermen have not yet the right use of
making of barreld fish wherewith they might serve France, as does the
Hollanders, they be now constrained to sell in England, for that it is staple
fish, and not being barreld the French will not buy it.

But if that our Fishermen had but once the use of Pinks and Line-boats, and
barreld fish, then they might serve France as well as the Hollanders, which by
this new trade of Busses being once erected, and Pinks, and Line-boats, after
the Holland manner, there will be Fishermen ^now to manage the Pinks for
barreld fish, from November unto the beginning of May, only the most part of
those men that shallbe maintained by the Busses, for that when the Busses do
leave work, in the Winter their men shall have employment, by the Pinks, for
barreld fish, which men, now, do little or nothing, for this last Winter at
Yermouth, there was three hundredth Idle men that could get nothing to do,
living very poor for lack of employment, which most gladly would have gone to
sea in Pinks, if there had been any for them to go in.

And whereas I before said, that there was not one Ship set on work by our
Fishermen, there may be objected against me this.

That there does every year commonly lade at Yermouth 4. or 5. London Ships
for the Streights, which is sometimes true, and the Yermouth No more English,
but two small Ships, this year lad^d there.
men themselves do yearly send 2. or 3. Ships to Bourdeaux, and 2. or 3.
Boats laden with herrings to Roan, or to Nance, or S. Mallaus, whereby there
is returned, Salt, Wines, Normandy Canuice, whereby the King has some custom,
but there is no money returned into England for these Herrings, which cost the
Yermothians ready gold before that they had them of the Hollanders, and
Frenchmen, to lade these Ships, and therefore I may boldly say not one.

And this last year, now, the Hollanders themselves have also gotten that
trade, for there did lade twelve Sails of Holland Ships with Note here how
the Hollanders employ themselves and th^r Ships, first in taking of the (...)
quick, and yet are not content but catch them again (...) they be dead, and
do (...) both their ships and Mariners on work, and English ships (...) up a
rotting.
red herrings at Yermo^, for (...), Ligorne, Genoa, and Marsellis, and (...),
most of them being laden by the English Merchants, so that if this be suffered,
the English owners of Ships shall have but small employment for theirs.

Now to show truly, what the whole charge of a Busse will be, with all her
furniture, as Masts, Sails, Ankors, (...), and with all her Fishers
implements, and (...), at the first provided all new, is a great charge, she
being between 30. or 40. Last, will (...) some five hundred pound.

By the Grace of God the Ship or Busse will continue twenty year with small
cost and reparations, but the yearly slite and wear of her tackell, and
war-ropes, and Ne^s will cost some eighty pounds.

And the whole charge for the keeping of her at Sea for the whole Summer, or
three voiages, for the filling of a hundred Last of Caske, or Barrels.

100. Last of Barrels -- 72. A huudreth Last of If any will know. all the
perticulars of weyes of Salt, or barrels of Beer, or ^dreths of Biskets, I
will willingly resolve them, but here is all the whole charge, and with the
most.
Barrels, filled and sold at 10. pounds the Last comes to one thousand pound.
For salt 4. months -- 88. Beer 4. months -- 42. For bread 4. months -- 21.
Baken and Butter -- 18. For pease 4. months -- 03. For billet 4. months -- 03.
Herrings 1000. li. For men's wages 4. M. 88. The whole charge 335. -- -- -- --
-- -- 335. gotten. 0665.

Here plainly appears that there is gotten And I have rated the herrings but
at 10. pound the Last, which is with the least, for they be commonlysoid by
the Hollanders at Danske, for 15. and 20. pounds the Last.
665. pounds (...) one Summer, whereout if that you do deduct one hundredth
pounds for the wear of the Ship, and the reparations of her Nets against the
next Summer, yet still there is 565. pounds remaining for clear gains, by one
Busse, in one year.

The Hollanders do make the profit of their Busses so certain, that they do
lay out their own childrens money, given them by their deceased friends in
aduenturing in the Busses, and also there is in Holland a Treasury for
Orphants, opened and laid out in aduenturing in the Busses.

The Hollanders do make both a profitable, and a pleasant Trade of this Summer
fishing, for there was one of them, that having a gallant great new Busse of
his own, and he having a daughter married unto one which was his Mate in the
Bu^e, and the owner that was Master of this Busse did take his wife with him
aboard, and his Mate his wife, and so they did set sail for the North*seas,
with the two women with them, the mother and the daughter, where having a fair
wind, and being fishing in the North-seas, they had soon filled their Busse
with herrings, and a Herring Yager comes unto them, and brings them gold and
fresh supplies, and copeth with them, and takes in their herrings for ready
money Ready (...) or Tallyes, which are as bills of exchange to be paid at first
sight.
and delivers them more barrels and salt, and away goes the Yager for the
first Market into Sprucia, and still is the Busse fishing at sea, and soon
after again, was full laden, and boon home, but then another Yager comes
unto him as did the former, and delivering them more provision of barrels and
Salt, and ready money and bid them farewell, and still lies at Sea with the
mother and daughter so long and not very long, before they had again all their
Barrels full, and then they sailed home into* Holland, with the two women, and
the Busse laden with Herrings, and a thousand pounds of ready money.

If that any man should make any question of the truth of this, it will be v^ry
credibly approved by diverse of good credit that be now in the City of London.

Now to show the charge of a pinke of eighteen or tweene Last, the Pinke being
builded new, and all things new unto her, will not cost two hundred and sixty
pounds, with all her Lines, Hooks, and all her Fisher appurrenances.

And 15. Last of Barrels will cost -- -- 10. Five weyes of salt upon salt -- --
15. For Beer and Caske -- -- -- 07. For bread -- -- -- -- -- 03. For butter --
-- -- -- -- 01. For the Petty tally -- -- -- -- 01. For men's wages for 2 mo. M.
and all toge:* 20. -- -- -- 57.

Fifteen last of barreld fish at 14. pound, and 8. shillings the Last, which
is but 24. shillings the barrel amounts unto two hundredth and sixteen
pounds, whereout if that you do deduct fifty and seven pounds, for the charge
of setting her to sea, their is still resting one hundredth fifty and eight
pounds clear gains, by one Pinke, with fifteen Last of fish for two months.

Wherefore, seeing the profit so plainly, and by the grace of God so
certain, both by the Busses and Line-boates, whereby the Hollanders have so
long gained by, Let all Noble Worshipsull, and wealthy Subjects, put too their
aduenturing and helping hands, for the speedy lanching, and floating forward of
this great good Commonwealth business, for the strengthening of his Majesty's
Dominions, with two principal pillars, which is, with plenty of coin brought
in for fish, and herrings from other Nations, and also for the increasing of
Mariners against all foreign Invasions, and also for the bettering of Trades
and Occupations, and setting of thousands of poor and idle people on work,
which now know not how to live, which by this Trade of the Busses shall be
employed, as daily we see is done before our eyes by the Hollanders. And as
always it has been seen, that those that be now the Fishermen of England,
have been always found to be sufficient to serve his Majesty's ships in former
time, when their have been employment, which fellows, by this new trade of
building, and setting forth Busses will be greatly multiplied and increased in
this Land; which fellows, as we see the Hollanders, being well-fed in Fisher
affairs, and strong and lustier then the Sailors that use the long Southern
voyages, that sometimes are greatly surfeited, and hunger-pined* But these
courageous, young, lusty, fed-strong yonkers, that shall qe bred in the Busses,
when his Majesty shall have have occasion for their service in war, against
the enemy, will be fellows for the nonce, and will show themselves right
English, and will put more strength to an Iron Crow, at a piece of great
Ordinance in traversing of a Cannon, or Culuering, with the direction of the
experimented Master Gunner, then two or three of the forenamed surfeited
Sailors, and in distress of wind grown sea, and foul Winters weather, for
flying forward to their labor, for pulling in a tops^ile, or a spret sail, or
shaking of a bonnet in a dark night, for wet and cold can not make them shrink
nor stain, that the North-seas, and the Busses, and Pinks have dy^d in grain,
for such purposes.

And whosoever shall go to Sea, for Captain to command in Marshall affairs,
or take charge for Master in trade of Merchandise, (as in times past I have
done both) will make choice of these fellows, for I have seen their
resolution, in the face of their enemy, when It is not unknown, that this last
year there was a general press along the Coast of England, from Hull in
Yorkshire unto S. Michaels Mo^nt in Corne-wall, only for Sailors, to furnish
but 7. Ships, for the wafting over of the Count Pallatine, and his most Noble
Princes, but 28. leagues.
they have b^^^ l^g^^menta, and frolic, and as forward as about their
ordinary labors, or business.

And when his Majesty shall have occasion and employment for the furnishing of
his Navy there will be no want of Masters, Pilots, Commanders, and sufficient
directors of a course, and keeping of Computation, but now there is a pitiful
want of sufficient good men. to do the offices and labors before spoken of,
all which, these men of the Busses and Pinks, will worthily supply.

And to the Art of Sailing they may happily (...), for (...) it has been com^
seen, that those men, that have been brought up, in their youth, in Fishery,
have des^ued as well as any in the land for artificial Sailing; for at this
time is practiced all the proiections of Circular and Mathematical skales and
Arithmeticall sailing, by diverse of the young men of the Seacoast Towns, even
as commonly amongst them as amongst the Themse^.

Besides all the Hollanders before spoken of, the Frenchmen of Pickardy have
also a hundred Sail of Fishermen, only for Herrings, Some of these be 3. and
4. score Tons the burden.
on his Majesty's Seas every year, in the Summer season, and they be almost
like unto the Busses, but they have not any Yagers that comes unto them, but
they do lade themselves, and return home twice every year, and find great
profit by their making but of two voyages every Summer season.

And it is much to be lamented, that we having such a plentiful Country,
and such (...) of able and idle people, that not one of his Majesty's Subjects,
are there to be se^ne all the whole Summer, to fish, or to The Hollanders do
yearly take so many, as they do make more th^n two millions of pound Sterling.
take one Herring: But only the North-sea boats of the Seacoast Towns, that
goes to take Cods, they do take so many as they do need to bait their hooks
and no more. And we his Majesty's Subjects do take no more then do. bait
our hooks.


We are daily skorned by these Hollands, for being so negligent of our profit,
and careless of our fishing, and they do daily floute us that be the poor
Fishermen of England, to our faces at Sea, calling to us and saying, Ya
English, ya zall, or cud scoue dragien, which in English is this: Yon English,
we will make you glad for to wear our old shoes.

And likewise the Frenchmen they say we are apish, for that we do still
imitate them in all needless and fantastical iagges and fashions, as it is
most true indeed, for that they have no fashion amongst them in apparel, nor
Lace, Points, Gloves, Hilts, nor Garters, even from the spangled Shoe-lachet,
unto the spangled Hat, and Hat-band, be it never so idle, and costly, but after
that we do once get it, it is far bettered by our Nation.

Wherefore, seeing that we can excel all other Nations, wastfully, to spend
money, let Us, in one thing, learn of other Nations, to get thousands out of
his Majesty's Sea, and to make a general profit (...) the benefits that Al
mighty God does yearly send unto us, in far more greater abundance then the
fruit of our trees, which although they be more chargeable in the gathering
together, yet is the profit far more greater, unto this Kingdom, and Common
wealth of all his Majesty's Subjects, increasing the wealth of the adventurers;
as also for the enriching of Merchants, and maintaining of Trades Occupations,
and employing of Ships, and increasing of Mariners, which now do but little or
nothing: as also for the setting of poor and idle people on work, which now
know not how to live, and to teach many a tall fellow to know the propper names
of the ropes, in a ship, and to hale the (...) The (...): The Sea (...) the
Gallows refuse none.
that now for lack of employment many such, by the inconvenience of idle
living, are compelled to end their days, with a rope by an untimely death,
which by the employment of the Busses might be well a^oyded, and they in time
become right honest feruiceable and trusty Subi^cts.

Here since my book came to the (...), I have been credibly certified, by
(...). (...), M. (...) To^, and (...) others of the Company of Fishmongers.
men of good worth (being (...)) that since Christmas last, unto this day,
there has been paid to the Hollanders, here in London, only for b^rreld fish,
and Holland Lings, the sum of twelve thousand pound.

And (...) of all, if that there be any of the Worshipful Adventurers, that
would have any di^ for the building of these Busses, or Fisherships, because I
know that the Ship^ of England, be not yet skillful in this matter, wherefore
if that any shall be pleased (...) to me, I will be willing to give them
directions, and pl^ine proiections, and G^icall demonstrations for the right
building of them, both for length, breadth, and depth, and also for their mould
under water, and also for the (...) of their rooms, and the laying of their
g^, And for providing of their Cordige, and Nets, after the most ^est and
cheapest rates.
according to the Hollanders fashion, any man shall hear of me at M. (...), a
Stationers Shop at Saint (...) g^ in P^ Charch-yard: Farewell this (...). of
February.

FINIS.
The States Proclamation, Translated out of Dutch.
The ^ates (...) of the United Pro^ of the low (...) all those that shall see
(...) these presents (...), (...) let to (...) that (...) it is ^ell (...),
that the great ^ing, and (...) of he^gs is the chiefest Trade, and (...)-mine
of these United (...) many thousands of (...)* (...), (...), Trades and (...),
are (...) work, well maintained, and (...); e^ally the Sailing and (...), as
(...) ^thin, as without these (...), is (...) great esteemation: Moreover (...)
of ^ey, with the increase of the (...) ^yes, ^stomes, and (...) of these
Countries are augmented thereby (...), and for as much as there is (...) to
(...) good Orders conseruing the (...), (...), and beneficial uttering of the
said (...), to the end to preserve and maintain the (...) Trade, in the United
Provinces; which Trade, by (...) encounters, of some that seek their own ga^,
is envied, in respect of the great good it brings to the United (...): and ^e
are informed that a new devise is put in practice to the pr^ of the Trade, to
transpor^ out of the United Countries, into other Countries, Staves for
herring-barrels (...), and ha^ ^ing barrels, put into other Ba^els, and Nets:
to cross the good Orders and Policy here intended to them of these (...), for
the catching, salting, and selling the ^ings, dressed in other Contries, after
the order of these Countries, whereby this chief Trade should be decayed here,
and the ^habitants of these Countries damnified, if that we make not pro^on, in
time against such practices, therefore ^ee, after Nature Judgment, and
Deliberation have Forbidden and Interdicted, and by these Presents do forbid
and interdict, all, and (...) one, as well Home-borne and Inhabitants, as
strangers frequenting these parts, to take up any herring-barrels, or half
ones prepared, or any kind of Nets* in any Ship, Town or Haven, of the united
Provinces, to be sent into other Countries, or Places, upon pain of
confiscation of the same, and the Ship also wherein they shall be found,
besides a penalty of (...). of Netherlandish (...) Royals, for the (...) time,
and for the second time above (...) of (...) and (...), and 400. of the (...)
of (...), and for the third time, (...) of (...) and goods, and 600. of the
said (...) of (...), and corporal (...), and penalties, shall be (...) third
(...) to the (...) of the (...), (...) third part to the poor, and one third
part of the (...), where the (...) shall be demanded: and not only they shall
(...) this penalty, which after shall be taken with the deed, but they also,
that within one year after the deed shall be con^ted, and that (...) may
pretend ignorance, and that this order may be in all places duly observed, and
the offenders punished according to Justice, We will and require, our dear
and well-beloved Estates, Governors, Deputies of the council, and the Estates
of the (...) Provinces of Gilderland, and the county of Satfill (...) Ho^,
(...) Freesland, Zeland, Vtricts, F^d, (...), the Town of Groyning, and the
(...) places, and to all Justices and Officers, that they cause to be
published in all places, and (...), where the usual Proclamation and
Publication is made; (...) do charge also the chancellors, and Provincial
co^cell, and the counsel of the Admiralty, the Aduo^, and the (...) general,
and all other Officers. Judges, and Justices of these united Provinces, and to
all general colonies Admirals and Uice-admirals, captains, Officers, and
commanders, to perform, and cause to be performed, this Order and
commandment; and to proceed, and cause to be proceeded against the Offenders,
without grace favor, dissimulation, or composition: because we have found it
necessary, for the good, and benefit, of the said United Provinces, dated in
Hage this 19. of July.

FINIS.

