THE TRVE TRIAL AND Examination of a Man's own self.

Wherein every faithful ^hristian, by looking into his conscience, may most
plainly behold his spiritual deformity by Nature, described: his actual
rebellion by disobedience detected: his promisebreach at Baptism, by ordinary
transgression apparently proved: his lamentable estate through sin
discovered: his wilful obstinacy by da^ly disorder displayed: And lastly how
by earnest repentance, and faith in Christ Jesus, he is from all the same
clearly pardoned, forgiven, released and reconciled.

Done in English by THO. NEWTON. Imprinted at LONDON by JOHN WINDET 1587.

TO THE RIGHT noble and excellent Lady, the Lady LETTICE, Countess of
Leycester.
SVCH persons of Honor, Woorship and Wealth, as in respect of unfeigned
goodwill, and ^owed duty, present unto your renowned Ladyshippe the glorious
gifts of glittering gold, precious pearls, or other rich and sumptuous
furniture, although thereby they gratefully testify their cheareful hearts
and loving minds to your Honor, yet do^ they therein bestow none other
thing, then that which by nature is perishing pelf, and transitory tra^h,
subject to casualtie, liable to change, and remoueable by chance: and withal
also, such, whereof your Honor (through Gods especial good grace, and
bountiful favor) stands already most richly stoared, magnificently
possessed, and abundantly furnished, But as my slender estate and base
condition enuieth me the hap, and forestalleth me the possibility to send
abroad such flourishing fairings: so again, on the other side, has duty
vehemently incited me to devise one course or other, how to notify my zeal,
and loyalty toward your excellent estate and dignity. Hereupon it has pleased
God to make this small Treatise, the ininstrument of my wished desire, and the
faithful messenger of my willing heart. Small it is (Madam) and compendious (I
confess) both in volume and words: but yet such, as shall (I doubt not)
minister abundant stoare of spiritual direction and comfortable counsel, for
any Christian conscience, that shall advisedly read, and attentively mark the
godly documents, and sound aduertisements therein comprised. For herein are
there briefly, plainly, familiarly, and methodically laid open, ripped up,
displaied, anatomized and unfolded (in effect) all the secret corners and
starting hoales of the inward man: together with the stinking Camerine of all
the other particular enormities, offe^ses and transgressio^s outwardly also,
through thesway of sin, bursting out in us into action. Whereupon, the
conscience being by most plain and apparent evidence, endited, arraigned and
convicted, is driven to disclaim al help, merit, righteousness, condignity or
worthiness in it self, and prostrately to sue for pardon at the merciful hands
of God thorough Christ. The which, as I most heartily (for the vowed duty, and
unfeigned loyalty, that I bear unto you, and unto that rare Mirour of
Nobility, the Earl of Essex your Son, my singular good Lord and Master) do
here offer unto your Honorable patrocinie: so do I no less humbly beseech
you (right renowned Lady) to afford thereunto the benefit of your favorable
protection: as I during my life, shall remain a true and continual petitioner
unto almighty god, for the prosperous health and glorious success of that
Noble Earl your husband, with all the honorable, worshipful, valiant,
faithful and true hearted Englishmen now under his charge and government: of
your good Ladyshippe, and all your Christian household: Wishing the blessed
grace of Christ still to keep you, his holy Spirit to lead you, his mercy to
nourish you, his counsel to direct you, his peace to comfort you, his rich
gifts to adorn you, and his heavenly blessing in honor to continue you, to
the glory of his holy name, the comfort of your own consciences* and the
common wealth of this our flourishing Realm and Country.

From my poor house at Little Ilford, in Essex the 6. of October* 1587. Your
Honors most humble THOMAS NEWTON.

1. January called of the Latins, Ianuarius. Grecians, Gamelion. Hebrews,
T^besh, and is their 10. month. has 31. days.


1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
A b c d e f g A b c d e f g A b c d e f g A b c d e f g A b c
Calends. Nones of lan. 4 3
Day before the N. Nones of January. Idus of January. 8 7 6 5 4 3
Day before the Id. Idus of January. Calends of February. 19 18 17 16 15 14
13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3
Day before the Calends of Feb.
The first day of this Month Christ was circumcised, Luke, 2. 21. The tops of
the mountains appeared unto Noah, Genesis 8. 5. The Israelites put away their
wives, Ezra. 10. 16.

The 5. of this month word was brought unto Ezechiel the Prophet that the
City Jerusalem was smitten, Ezech. 33. 21.

The sixth of this Month Christ was worshipped of the wise men, Mat. 2. 1. etc.
baptized Mat. 3. 15. turned water into wine, Ioh. 2. 1. etc. as testifies
Epiphanius.

The 10. of this Month Nebuccadnezzar King of Babel, moved thereunto by the
rebellion of Zedechiah, besieged Jerusalem most fiercely, as may appear, 2
Kings, 25. etc Ierem. 52. 4. Also Ezechiel was willed to utter his parable,
Ezec. 24. 1. etc.

Paul called, and converted the 25. of this month, Acts, 9. 3.

Festiual days in this month be Circumcision, the first Epiphanie the sixth
day.




2 February, called of the Latins, Februarius. Grecia^s, Elaph^bolion.
Hebrews, Shebat, and is their 11. month. has 28. days unless it be the vere
Bissextile and then 29.


1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
d e f g A b c d e f g A b c d e f g A b c d e f g A b c d
Calends. Nones of Feb. 4 3
Day before the N. Nones of Februar. Idus of February. 8 7 6 5 4 3
Day before the Id. Idus of February. Calends of March. 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10
9 8 7 6 5 4 3
Day before the Calends of March
The first of this Month Moses repeated the Law unto the Children of Israel,
Deuteronomy. 1. 3.

The second of this month our Savior was presented to the Lord, and Mary
purified, Luke. 2. 22.

The ninth of this month, Noah, 40. days after he had seen the tops of the
mountains, sent out of the Arc a Raven, and afterward a Dove, which returned,
Ge. 8. 6. etc.

The 15. of this month, the Jews spend merrily together, for that the Spring
of the ^ere does enter then, as they think.

The 16. of this month, Noah the second time sent out a Dove, which returned
with an Olive branch in her bill. Genesis 8. 10.

The 24. of this month, Zechariah was commanded to prophecy, Zecharie 1. 7.
Matthias was elected into the the number of the Apostles, Act. 1. 26.

Festiual days in this month be the 2. called the PVRIFICATION of SMARIE. the
24. which is Saint MATTHIAS day.



3. March called of the Latins Martius. Grecia^s, Mo^^chyon. Hebrews, Adar: and
is their 12. month. has 31. dais.


1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
d e f g A b c d e f g A b c d e f g A b c d e f g A b c d e f
Calends. Nones of M. 6 5 4 3
Day before the N. Nones of March. Ides of Ma. 8 7 6 5 4 3
Day before the Id. Idus of March. Calends of April. 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9
8 7 6 5 4 3
Day before the Calends of April.
The temple of Jerusalem was finished the third day of this month, Ezra. 6.
15. in the ^ of Esdr 7. 5. it is said to be the 23. of the month.

The 10. of this Month, Christ was advertised that Lazarus was sick, Ioh. 11.
3.

A feast was celebrated among the Jews for the overthrow of Nicanor, the 13.
of this month 2. Mac. 15. 37 Also upon the same day all the Jews under
Ashuerosh were comanded to be put to death, Esth. 3. 13. upon the same day the
Jews had a priuiledg given the^ to slay al their enemies, Est. 8. 12. this day
al-the Jews sole^nized for their ioiful deliverance. ^st. 8. 17

The 14. day of this month was called of the Jews (...) docheus day, 2 Mac.
15. 37. also Purim, as may appear. Esth. 9. verse. 21. 26.

The 15. also is another day of Purim, Est. 9. 21.

The 16. of this month Lazarus was raised from the dead John. 11. 43.

This month has one festival day called THE ANNVNCIATION of Saint MARIE,
celebrated the 25. of this month.



4. April called of the Latins, Apri^^^. Grecians, Th^^gelion. ^b^ues (...), or
N^s^n, and is their 1. month has 30. days.


1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
g A b c d e f g A b c d e f g A b c d e f g A b c d e f g A
^ lends. Nones of April. 4 3
Day before the N. Nones of April. Idus of April. 8 7 6 4 3
Day before the Id Idus of April. Calends of May. 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9
8 7 6 5 4 3
Day before the Calends of May
The first of this Month Noah uncovered the Ark^, and saw earth, (...). S.
13. Moses ^eared the Tabernacle, Exodus 40. 2. 17. the Temple began to be
sanctified, 2. Chr. 29. 17.

The 10. of this month the children of Israel passed thorough the river Iorda^
on dry foot, Iosu, 4. 19. the paschal Lamb was chosen, Ex. 12. 3.

The 13. of this month the edict of king Ashuerosh came out for the murdering
of the Jews, Esther. 3. 12.

The 14. of this month the Passover was kept, Exo. 1. 2. 6. Leuit. 23. 5 Los.
5. 10.

The 15. of this month the Israelites departed out of Egypt, Numb. 33 3.

The 16. of this month Hezekiah made an end of sanctifieng and purging the
Temple, 2. Chron. 29. 17.

The 18. of this month the children of Israel walked on dry land thorough the
midst of the red sea, Exodus 14 19.

The 24. Daniel saw his vision, Dan 10. 4.

The 25. of this month the feast of S. Mark is observed.



5. May, called of the Latins, Maius. Grecians, Scrirophorion. Hebrews, ^^ar,
which (...) their 2 month. has 31. lays.


1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
b c d e f g A b c d e f g A b c d e f g A b c d e f g A b c d
Calends. Nones of May. 6 5 4 3
Day before the N. Nones of May. Idus of May. 8 7 6 5 4 3
Day before the Id Idus of May. Calends of June. 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7
6 5 4 3
Day before the Calends of June.
The first of this Month Moses was commanded to number the children of Israel
Numb 1. 1 etc.

The 5. of this month Christ is thought to have ascended up into heaven, Mar.
16. 19 ^uk 24. 51. Act. 19.

They which could not keep the Passover at the day appointed by the Lord, were
willed to celebrate the same the 14. of this month, Nu. 19. vc. 10. 11. so did
the Israelites at the commandment of King Hezekiah, 2. Chron. 30. 15.

The 16. day Manna rained from heaven, Exodus 16. 14.

The 17. day Noah entered the Arc, and the flood began, Genesis 7. 11. 13.

The 22. fire from (...) consumed such as murmured against the Lord, Numb. 11.
1.

The 23. the Israelites with great joy triumphingly entered into the castle of
Jerusalem, 1. Mac. 13. 51.

Noah the 27. the waters being dried up, came forth of the Arc, Genesis 8. 14.
etc.

The first of this month is usually celebrated for the Feast of Philip and
lacob.



6. June called of the Latins, Iunius. Grecians, ^katomuaion. Hebrews, S^nan,
which is their 3. month. has 30. dais


1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
e f g A b c d e f g A b c d e f g A b c d e f g A b c d e f
Calends. Nones of Iu. 4 3
Day before the N. Nones of June. Idus of June. 8 7 6 5 4 3
Day before the Id. Idus of June. Calends of Iulie. 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10
9 8 7 6 5 4 3
Day before the Calends of July.
The first coming of the children of Israel unto mount Sinai was the 1. of
this month, where they abode 11. months, and 20. days, in which time all
those things were done, recorded in Exo. chap. 19 1. etc.

The sixth of this month Alexander that mighty Monarch of the world was born of
whom Dan. chapter 11. 3. does prophecy. Also on this day that famous Temple of
Diana in Ephesus, numbered among the 7. wonders of the world, was set on fire by
He^ostratus* The Jews likewise kept their feast of Pentecost on this day.

The 23. of this month the first edict came out for the safety of Gods people
the jews, against Haman, and the rest of their enemies, Esther. 8. 9.

The 29. of this month the Arc of Noah thorough the increase of waters was
lifted up from the earth, Genesis 7. 17.

Festiual days in this month are the 24. which is the Feast of S. JOHN
BAPTIST. 29. which is S. PETER'S.



7. July called of the Latins, Julius. Grecians, Metageitnion. Hebrews, Tham^^,
being their 4. month. has 31. dais.


1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
g A b c d e f g A b c d e f g A b c d e f g A b c d e f g A b
Calends. Nones of July. 6 5 4 3
Day before the N. Nones of July Idus of July. 8 7 6 5 4 3
Day before the Id. Idus of July 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3
Day before the Calends of August.
The 5. of this month Ezechiel saw his visions. Ezech. 1. 1.

The 6. of this month the Capitol of Rome, counted one of the 7 wonders of the
world, was burned: and the mirror of Christian Princes King Edward the sixth
died the sixth of this month, An. 1553.

The 9. of this month lerusalem, after it had a long while been besieged by
Nebuccadnezzar, was taken, Ierem. 39. 2.

The 12. of this month Julius Cesat, the 1. Roman Emperor was borne. Of him
is this month called July

The 18. of this month the Egyptians begin their year, Plin. lib. 8. cap. 47.

The 25. of this month is the feast of S. JAMES the Apostle.



8. August called of the Latins, Augustus. Grecians, Loedromion. Hebrews, Ab,
which is their 5. month. has 31. days.


1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
c d e f g A b c d e f g A b c d e f g A b c d e f g A b c d e
Calends. Nones of August. 4 3
Day before the N. Nones of August. Calends of August. 8 7 6 5 4 3
Day before the Id. Idus of August. Calends of September. 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12
11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3
Day before the Calends of September.
The first of this Month Aaron, 40. years after the children of Israel were
come out of Egypt, died on mount Hor. Numb. 33. 38. Also on this day Ezra with
his company came out of Babel unto Jerusalem, Ezra. 7. 9.

The 7. of this month Nabuccadnezzar burnt the house of the Lord, and all
Jerusalem, 2. King. 25. verse. 8. 9.

The 10. of this month some think Jerusalem to have been burnt by the
Babylonians, Ierem. 52. 12. Josephus ( lib. 6. cap. 26.) said it was burned
afterward by the Romans the same day. Therefore do the Jews on this day
observe a most straight fast, and go bare footed, and sitting on the ground,
read twice over the Lamentations of Jeremy.

The 24. of this month is usually called S. Bartholomewes day.



9. September, called of the Latins, September. Grecians, Maimacterion, Hebrews
El^l, which is their 6. month. has 30. days.


1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
f g A b c d e f g A b c d ^ f g A b c d e f g A b c d e f g
Calends. Nones of September. 4 3
Day before the N. Nones of September. Idus of September. 8 7 6 5 4 3
Day before the Id Idus of September. Calends of October. 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3
Day before the Calends of October.
The first of this Month Haggei the Prophet began to prophecy, Hag. 1. 1.

The sixth of this Month Ezechiel saw another vision Ezech. 8. 1.

The 7. of this Month our most noble Queen Elizabeth was borne at Greenewich,
An^^, 1532.

The 8. of this Month, An. 73. Jerusalem was utterly with fire and sword (...)
by Titus the Emperor, Joseph. lib. 7. cap. 26.

The 25. of this Month Nehemiah finished the walls of Jerusalem, Nehem. 6. 15.

Festiual days in this month be the 21. S. Matthew. l. e. 29^ S. Mich




10. October called of the Latins, October, Grecians, Pianepsion. Hebrews,
Thisri, and i^ their 7 month.
has 31. days.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
A b c d e f g A b c d e f g A b c d e f g A b c d e f g A b c
Calends. Nones of October. 6 5 4 3
Day before the N. Nones of October. Idu^ of October. 8 7 6 5 4 3
Day before the Id Idus of October. Calendes of Nouemb. 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10
9 8 7 6 5 4 3
Day before the Calends of Noue^b.
The 1. of this month the Jews celebrated the feast of trumpets, Leuit. 23.
24. The latter Jews call this day the beginning of the new year.

Jerusalem after it had been possessed of Christian Prince, 88. years, through
mortal dissension came into the hands of the Saracen., Anno 1187.

The 3 of this month some think the Jews fasted for the death of Gedaliah:
whereby occasion was offered to bring them again into the miserable servitude of
the Egyptians, 2. King. 25. 25. Ierem. 41. verse 1. 2. etc.

The 10. of this month the feast of reconciliation was kept, ^euit. 23. 27. So
did the year of Jubilee every fifty year begin as on the same day, ^euit.
25. 9.

The 15. of this month the Jews observed the feast of Tabernacles 7. days
together, in memory of the Lords protecting them in the desert, Leuit. 23. 34.

Festiual days in this month are 18. day S. LVKE. 28. SIMON and IVDE.



11. November called of the Grecians, Anthe sterion. Latins, November. ^ebrues,
Marhesuam, their 8 month. has 30 days.


1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30
d e f g A b c d e f g A b c d e f g A b c d e f g A b c d e ^
Calends. Nones of No. 4 3
Day before the N. Nones of Nouemb. Idus of November. 8 7 6 5 4 3
Day before the Id. Idus of November. Calends of December. 18 17 16 15 14 13
12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3
Day before the Calends of December.
The third of this month Constantius the Emperor, son to Constantinus the
great departed out of this world, An 364. Hist. tripart. in the end of the. 5.
book.

The tenth of this month An. 1483. D. Martin Luther was borne in Islebia.

The 15. of this month was made a new holiday by Jeroboam without the
commandment of God, whereupon he committed most wicked idolatry in Dan, and
Bethel: but he remained not long unpunished, nor his people vnplagued for the
same, as may appear, 1. Kings, 12. verse. 32. 33. 1. King. 13. 1. 2. etc.

Queen Elizabeth (...) luckily to reign for the ^^uauncement of the Gospel of
o^r Savior Christ, the 17. of this month.

The 18. of this month Titus the Emperor most cruelly executed to death a
great number of the Jews, Joseph. lib. 7. cap. 10.

Festiual days in this month are the first day, the Feast of Al (...) The
30. and last day, Saint Andrew the (...)



12. December called of the Latins, December Grecians, Poseideon. Hebrews,
Sos^^n, and is their month. has 31. daie^.


1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 31
^ ^ ^ ^ d e f g A b c d e f g A b c d e f g A b c d e f g A
(...) No^^s of December. 8 7 6 5 4 3
Day before the Id. Idus of December. Calends of Ianuaric. 19 18 17 16 15 14 13
12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3
Day before the Calends of lanuarle.
(...)

The 20 of this month (...) dias exhorted the I'ra^lites to put away their
strange wives 1. Esd. ^. verse. 5. 6. etc.

The foundation of the secon^ Temple was laid the 24. of this month, Hagg. 2.
verse 11. 19.

The 25. of this month our Savior Christ was born of the Virgin, the year
after the worlds creation. 4018. On which day also Antiochus Epiphanes entered
into Jerusalem with a mighty army and spoiled the same, loseph. li. 12. ca. 6.
On this day he profaned the altar of the Lord, 1. Macc. 1. 62. which day also
the Jews kept holy, because there on the Temple was purged from Idolatry, 1.
Macc. 4. 59.

The 28. of this month Herod caused the poor Innocents to be murdered,
thinking thereby to have slain Christ, Math. 2. 16, etc.

Festiual days in this month are, the 21. Thomas apostle 25. The nativity of
Christ. 26. S. Steven 27. John the Euang. 28. Imiocents, called commonly
Childertnas day



A rule to know how many days be contained in every month in the ^eare.

Thirty days Has Nou^^ber. Ap^^l, ^une, a^^ ^^pt^mber* The rest (...) (...)
Which always h^^h (...), When it is no (...), or leap year*

A note of the Months, weeks days, and hours, throughout the whole ^eare.

The year continues Months. 12. Weeks. 52. Days. 365. Hours. 8766.




Day Natural Artificial has
24 12

hours.

An Almanacke for ten years.

The year of our Lord. The Prime. The Epact. Sondaies letter. pe year.
Ashwensday the first day of Lent. Easter day Rogation week. Whitsonday. 1587
11 1 A Mar. 1. April. 16. May. 2a Iun. 4. 1588 12 12 G F Feb. 20. 7 13 eL Ma.
26 1589 13 23 E 12 Marc. 30. 5 18 1590 14 4 D Mar. 4. April. 10. 25 Iun. 7.
1591 15 15 C Feb. 17. 4 102 Ma. 23 1592 16 26 B A 8 Marc. 26. 1 14 1593 17 7 G
28 April. 15. 21 Iun. 3. 1594 18 18 F 13 Marc. 31. 6 Ma. 19 1595 19 29 E Mar.
5. April 20. 26 June. 8 1596 1 11 D C Feb. 24 11 17 Ma. 30.

THE TRIAL AND examination of a man's own self.
CHAP. 1.
What the true trial and examination of a Man's own self is: and how
generally necessary to all manner of persons, having care and desire of their
salvation.
Briefly (in deed) and in very few words is it said by the Apostle, Let a
man examine himself: 1. Cor. 11. 28.
but in that brevity, and in those few words, he effectuailie comprehends
the whole office and duty of every such an one, as does earnestly desire to
be reconciled, and to be at one with God; yea, therein he summarilie sets
down, and compendiouslie prescribes all and whatsoever is needful or
expedient, for each true Christian to do and perform. For, to examine a man's
own self, is nothing else, than for him thoroughly to try, narrowly to
search, and diligently to prove, who and what manner of person he is; and in
what case he inwardly feels his own conscience. To the same effect, purpose
and meaning does the Apostle in an other place say, Gal. 6. 4.
Let every man prove his own works: 2. Cor. 13. 5.
And again, Prove your selves whether ye be in the faith: examine your selves.

He therefore is to be understood, rightly, duly, and truly to examine
himself, which diligently and carefully searches out, tries, groapeth, and
inwardly rippeth up every corner of his conscience, and so narrowly fifteth
both his works, actions and faith, that he leaves nothing in his whole man,
either outwardly or inwardly, whereof he makes not a true and perfect
presentment unto his Conscience, and (as it were) strictly enditeth and
iudicially arraigneth at the Bar, as before a most severe Judge. And look
how necessary it is for every one that has sinned, (and by sinning
disfranchised and banished himself from the kingdom of heaven) to bend his
whole care and study, how to come into favor again with God, king of the
same heavenly kingdom: so necessary is it, that before he go about the same,
he diligently try and examine himself.

For, no man can rightly acknowledge his sins, no man can truly confess his
faith, no man can duly use the Sacraments, that does not first carefully try
and examine his own Conscience. Furthermore, in vain does a man either hear,
read, or learn any good lessons touching sound doctrine and pure religion;
in vain does he labor by study to attain the knowledge of matters divine
and heavenly, unless he have withal, a full and resolute purpose, to apply
the same unto the trial and examination of himself. So greatly does it stand
us upon, to make this trial of our selves, and so greatly material is it for
us, diligently to exercise our selves therein, as in the which the whole sum
and effect of our salvation consists,

And doubtless, unless we speedily, and while we have time, try and examine
our selves, and by earnest and hearty repentance turn unto the Lord, it is to
be feared, least God being angry with us, do for our hardness of heart
harden us more and more, as he hardened Pharao; least for our wilful
blindness, he blindfolde us altogether; least for our wicked, filthy,
licentious and reprobatelike life, Romans 1. 28 and 11.
he turn us up, and give us over unto a reprobate mind; and least in his
heavy displeasure he deliver us up unto our own vile affections and lawless
lusts, to wallow still in the filthy mier of our abominations and filthy
devises, never to be able so much as once to think of our salvation, or once
to raise up our cogitations toward heavenly things. Than which evil and
mischief, what can be more grievous, more heinous or lamentable in this
miserable and wretched life of ours?

Let therefore every one speedily, and while he has time, frame himself to
make this trial, that he may be received of God into favor again. Let us now
at length awake out of this our deep letharge and sleep of sin; let us once
renounce, defy, and cast away the works of darkness, Romans 3. 12.
that we may walk comely and honestly as in the day, garnished and apparailed
with the works of light, as lively members of Christ's Church in the holy
fellowshippe of faithful believers.

Now, in what sort and manner this Trial and examination of our selves is to
be made and performed; how and which way we may come into favor again with
God; how also after our reconciliation we must demean, and bel^aue our selves,
and how we ought to frame our lives and conversation, that we may always have
a clear conscience toward God, Act. 24. 16
and toward men, we will endeavor the best we can (according to that proportion
and measure of skill wherewith the Lord has endued us) plainly and familiarly
to declare: beseeching the eternal and blessed Spirit of God, who was sent
down from heaven, from the Father and the Son, to teach us all truth, so to
direct our understandings, and to further our endeavors, that we may set down
nothing, but that which shall be meet, wholesome, and profitable to instruct
Christian consciences withal: and moreover so to move and inflame the hearts
and minds of all such as shall read these our doings; that as we simply and
with a desire to profit them, have taken this travail in hand; so they with
the like singlenes and meaning may read the same, and apply all things herein
comprised to their godly furtheraunce and edification.

CHAP.2.
The examination and trial of our own selves must first begin at the
consideration of our own corrupt nature,
Whosoever thou be, that art inwardly touched with any care of thine own
salvation, and do inwardly groan with earnest desire to stand in the
favor of God, and to be at one with him; first of all and before all other
things, (I pray thee) enter into thy self, descend into thine own
conscience, and make a true surueye of thine inward man; and thou shall
quickly find (I warrant thee) what a subtle crafty Fox, (ever having
recourse to his peevish nature) thou fosterest and keep within that same
fulsome stinking breast of thine. The first step to get help, and the chiefest
way to recover health, is, for a man to know himself. In vain is the medicin
ministered, where the disease is dissemblingly covered and kept unknown.

Will thou therefore that I shall plainly tell thee what manner of person thou
art, and what disease thou have? I say, thou art nothing else but sin; thou
art (every whitte of thee) a wretched sinner, and guilty of everlasting
damnation. Never go about to deny it, seek no shifts or euasions to gainesay
it, neither take any exception against it. The very word of God himself does
convince thee, the pricks of thine own conscience do overthrow thee, and
daily experience does detect thee.

For, first, the word of God says Romans 5. 12.
By one man sin entered into the world: Ibid.
By the offense of one the fault came on all men to condemnation. Again, Psalm.
51. 5.
Behold in iniquity was I borne, and in sin has my mother conceived me.
Again, Genesis 8. 21.
The imagination of man's heart is evil, even from his youth. Isai. 9. 17.
Again, Every man is a liar. Again, Romans 7. 18.
I know that in me, that is, in my flesh, dwells no good thing. Ephesians. 2. 3.
And, By nature we are the children of wrath.

Romans 7. ^3.
Feel thou not another law in thy members still rebelling against the law
of thy mind? Thou feel, thou feel (no doubt) the cumbersome suggestions
of sin dwelling in thee, continually drawing thee away from doing good, and
still egging thee forward to commit evil. Thou feel (I say) the woeful
effects of original sin, even a mind void of the fear of God. Thou
feel thy self not to love God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and
with all thy strength as thou ought to do, and as thou art bound to do.
Thou find in thy self and proouest by experience, that thou art besieged
and besette with sorrow, grief, heaviness and infinite other like vexations
of thy soul.

these our bodies are subject to innumerable miseries: thou see the number of
diseases assaulting us: the extremity of famine pinching us, the ramping rage
of hunger afflicting us: the miserable plague of thirst distressing us: thou
see death with his gryping pawe, daily catching, haling and making havoc
of us. And all these are punishments appointed of God for sin original,
Through sin death entered into the world. Romans 5. 12.


To be short, thou feel and find penalty or amercement for original
sin. Genesis 3. 17.
Cursed (says God to the first transgressour Adam) he the earth for thy sake:
in sorrow shall thou eat of it all the days of thy life: thorns and thistles
shall is bring forth to thee, and thou shall eat the herb of the field: in
the sweat of thy face shall thou eat thy bread.

Now therefore, as well by the authority of the word of God, as by the sense and
feeling of such calamities and miseries as every man evidently sees and
finds in his mind, in his body, and in the outward things of the world, I
think thou art sufficiently persuaded; yea too too plainly convicted, that
thou can not but (will thou, nil thou) thou must needs confess thy self to
be a sinner born, and that thou art guilty of everlasting damnation, even in
this respect, for that thou art a man, issued and descended from that first man
Adam: yea although thou thy self in all thy life had actually committed none
evil.

When all these things are well imprinted in thy mind, and that thou art
thoroughly resolved, and persuaded that all this before spoken is true, the best
and next way for thee to take, that desire and meanest to examine thy self,
is, diligently to consider these points following.

First, to bow the knees of thine heart Whenever (says he) you shall eat
thereof, ye shall die. Genesis 2. 2.


Then, as often as thou feel the and that in the mean while, we ought
patiently to suffer all miseries and calamities, since we our selves were the
cause thereof, and by our own fault have deserved the same.

As by the offense of one, the fault came on all men to condemnation, Romans 5.
18.
so by the instifieng of one, the benefit abounded toward all men to the
justification of life, etc. These and the like reasons, drawing thee to the
acknowledgement of thy sin, to repentance, to true invocation of the name of
God, and humble imploring of his fatherly mercy, thou may well think, thou
have laid a good foundation, and made a good entrance into the trial and
examination of thy self.

CHAP. 3.
He that will profitablie and rightly try and examine himself, must
diligently consider his promise made at Baptism, and how well m every point he
answers the same.
BUT it may be, thou comfortest thy self and waxest bold, for that long ago
thou wast baptized: and thereupon make thy reckoning that all thy sins,
as well original as actual before committed, were then remitted and forgiven
thee: and that therefore there is no cause to charge thee, or lay before thee
any thing touching original sin; and that thou can not for that sin be any
more called into question, and drawn into judgment.

Here (lo) is there offered unto thee an occasion of a new, and altogether a
more severe and precise examination. For certainly, if thou purpose earnestly
and effectually to try thy self, it is thy part and duty, exactly and
diligently to search (as has been said before) every corner of thy
Conscience, whether in every degree and respect thou have used thy self and
dealt according to that solemn vow and profession which thou made and
vnder-tookest at thy Baptism. Whereby it shall most plainly appear, whether
there be any of those remnaunts of original sin and old Adam yet remaining
within thee, or no.

That thou may the sooner, the readier and the reuerentlyer bring this to
pass, it shall be good for thee first diligently to weigh and consider such
special things and material points as are commonly used and solemnized at the
very time that Baptism is ministered: namely what each several action means,
together with each circumstance and necessary branch thereunto belonging.
And this being done, orderly to proceed to the thorough search of each corner
of thy inward conscience.

Mark well therefore what was done, at the time that thou wast Baptized and
solemnly received into the Church, in the sight of God and his Angels, and of
godly believing brethren.

FIrst there acknowledging thy self Ephesians. 2. 19.
and that thou would serve God alone in all synceritie and godliness of
life. Act. 2. 38.


Thou did the^ also presently make in the self (which were none at all)
but thorough the mere mercy of God, Tit. 3. 5.
by the blood of Christ, and by the lauer of regeneration.

Mar. 16. 16
and are baptized: He that shall believe and be baptized, Joel. 2. 13.
shall be saved. Amend your lives, Act. 23. 8.
and be baptized every one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ for the
remission of sins.

Word of God was pronounced forth, having virtue after a marvelous sort to wash
and take away thy sins by the bloudsheads of Christ. The Word was added to
the Element, and so was it made in thee a Sacrament: eue^ a Sacrament and Seal
of the righteousness of faith. Romans 4. 11.
Of that faith (I say) which thou even a little while before did profess;
and of that righteousness, which God promised unto thee. And it is (as it
were) an Indenture of Covenants, or mutual handwriting obligatory between God
and thee. For in this action of thy baptism there passes a certain mutual
bond or obligato^ between you; even much like as between Barterers and
Bargainers: but most aptly, properly, Ephesians. 5.
and specially between the husband and the wife. For, the covenant, promise
and bond here made, is not for any short while, but even for the whole space
of thy life: and so long as thou continuest in this world, the memory of this
promise and covenant by thee made, ought surely to be imprinted in thy mind:
yea still, eue^ so long as thy life lasts, it behooves thee (all that ever
thou can) to endeavor thy self to accomplish and perform thy promised
covenants. Thou art now in this sort engraffed into Christ, and incorporated
into his holy congregation, Romans 6. 4.
being the Church, Ephesians. 2. 13.
and thou art received into the number and fellowship of the faithful.

Moreover the very form, manner is a perpetual witness of thy vowed
promise, and admonishes thee of thy duty all the days of thy life. Namely
first, when thou wast put down into the Font, dipped into the water, or
sprinkled therewith, there was signified unto thee, the mortification of thy
self and all thy members, in that thou did there openly and solemnly
profess, that thou would die unto sin. Again, thy raising and lifting up
again out of the water, betokened thy resurrection and rising again to newnes
and amendment of life. And it did represent unto thee, that like as Christ
died, was buried and raised up from the dead for thee, Romans 6. 4.
so should thou continually walk in righteousness and true holiness.

and forgiven thee. Sin ceased there to be imputed unto thee, and a new
righteousness eue^ the righteousness of Jesus Christ) was bestowed upon thee. 1.
Cor. 6. 11.
The force and strength of that sin which naturally dwelt in thee, Tit. 3. 5.
is broken and vanquished that now it should not be able (as before) to reign
any more in thy mortal body, Romans 6. 12.
neither that thou should obey the lusts thereof. Our old man is crucified
with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should
not serve sin. For indeed, sin is in Baptism remitted and done away, but
not so, as that we should for ever after be clear and void of it, but that it
should not be any more laid to our charge, or imputed unto us, and that it
should not reign in us, or bear sovereign rule and domination over us. As
Augustine does very well note in his Epistle to Julian, and in his exposition
of the 102. Psalm: but most excellently and plainly is it set out and
explaned by the blessed Apostle Paul in his Epistle to the Romans: Romans 5.
and 7. 22.
I delight in the law of God, concerning the inner man: but I see an other Law
in my members rebelling against the Law of my mind, and leading me captive unto
the Law of sin, which is in my members, etc.

There is also the holy Ghost given unto thee in Baptism, and that partly, to
be (as it were) an earnest-peny of undoubted assurance to thy conscience,
Romans 8. 16.
for all those good and special benefits which thou art to receive, Ephesians. 1.
14. and 5. 26.
specially after this life: and partly to be (as it were) a cooperator in
their sanctification, and to assist us in resisting all the evil suggestions
of the wicked spirit, and of sin naturally bredde in us. The spirit (faith
Paul) helps our infirmities. Romans 8. 16. 27.
For it cannot otherwise be, but that whosoever receives the Holy Ghost,
receives also many other most singular gifts and excellent blessings. For as
he is a gift himself, so is he likewise a bountiful bestower, and a liberal
disposer of gifts heavenly and spiritual. He strengthens our faith, he
enkindleth in us love, he fostereth hope, he stirs us up to show forth the
fruits of good works, Romans 12.
and (to be short) he sanctifies and directs the whole man. 1. Cor. 12.


These six most notable and excellent things, Gal. 5.
were at the time when thou did receive Baptism, fully concluded,
effectually professed, and autentically sealed, partly in thee, and partly
through and by thee: and ought therefore of thee to be borne in memory, and
never to slide out of thy daily and hourly remembrance.

Now does it stand thee upon, yea it is thy bounden duty, and an especial part
of thy chiefest care, diligently to consider in what case thou stand: thou
must (I say) now enter into thine own Conscience, and there make a true survey
of all thy dealinges, how thou art, how thou have been in life and actions
answerable unto the same, and after what sort thou have performed thy promise,
and observed these thy sealed covenants. God for his part does (doubtless)
stand to his promise: for he is true and faithful, and never starteth from
his word, nor changes his purpose. And therefore gave he to thee then, and
from that time forth, his holy spirit, as a pledge of his faithful promise
and assured good will toward thee.

Now, if thou on the other side, wilt for thy part exactly sift out, and search
thy self, how thou have discharged thy vowed covenants, and performed these thy
faithful and solemn promises, thou shall without all doubt find thy self
many and sundry ways guilty. Confess the truth (I pray thee) and speak
unfeignedly, whether thou have not since that time fallen into thine old byas,
and turned back to thine old crooked nature and corrupt manners? Whether the
law of thy members, and the relics of sin, naturally still cleaving unto
thee, have not many times provoked, allured, moved, yea enforced thee to
attempt and practice some thing against the law of God? Whether thou have not
sometimes listened, given ear and place unto Satan (who always lies in
wait to catch theee) and hearkened to his wicked temptations, allurementes,
counsels, and suggestions? Whether thou have so entirely continued dead unto
sin, that thou have hitherto lived only unto righteousness? Alas, it is too
plain and true, that thine own Conscience herein accuses thee, and within
thee with open cry testifies against thee, that thou have most hainouslie
many times revolted from thy bargain, falsified thy promise, and carelessly
run headlong into manifest iniquity.

If this then be true, (as (alas) it is most true) there is no shift but thou
needs must acknowledge and confess thy self to be a creature most vile,
wicked and miserable. For first, thou must needs yield, that thou art a
leaguebreaker, a falsifier of promise, a despiser and open violatour of thy
covenant made unto God the father: then which, what can be more horrible? Thou
have frustrated the wholesome effects of the death and resurrection of Jesus
Christ, wherein thou have with no less contumely reproched Christ, then they
which nailed him on the Cross. Thou have grieved the holy Ghost, Heb. 12.
and displaced him, who had made a choice of thee, Ephesians. 4.
as of an house to dwell in. 1. Cor. 6.
The Angels of God, whom before by thy repentance and mortification thou
causedst to rejoice over t^ee, now by thy new fall and lewdness thou have
brought to sorrow for thee. The whole Church, which reioiced, and was glad
when she received thee for one of her dear new Citizens, and conceived good
hope of thy Christian towardnes, thou have now shamefully deceived, and drawn
into sorrowful lamentation. To be short, thou have despoiled and bereft thy
self of those gifts, which with the holy Ghost, and by the holy Ghost, were
bountifully and liberally bestowed upon thee.

What shift or mean therefore remains, if the Lord being a just and
righteous judge should strictly deal with thee for thy misdeedes, and
narrowly look into thy transgressions, but that before his Tribunal seat in
the heavenly consistorye, God the father, God the son, and God the holy Ghost
(accompanied with infinite legions of blessed Angels, and in the sight of the
whole Church beho^ding and approving it) should pronounce thee for one, that
have worthily deserved eternal death, and everlasting punishment, as a
perjured caytife, as a treacherous recreant, as a faithles promisebreaker as a
false hearted wretch unto God the father, as a bloody cutthrote, haling and
drawing Christ unto the Cross anew, as an enemy to the Holy Ghost, as a mocker
of the blessed Angels, as a Traitor to the whole Church, as a shameful
runne-away from the holy congregation, and finally as a cruel manqueller of
thine own self?

What can thou now do? What way will thou take? What hope or trust can thou
have? What land, what ground can patiently bear the burden and weight of thy
wretched Carcass? What heaven, what sun, what planets, what stars can
quietly look on thee, or willingly give shine unto thee? Or what eyes rather
can thou, or dare thou lift up unto heaven?

The time was, when thou wast in excellent good state, and wast adorned and
endued with right excellent gifts: but now through thine own fault and
wilfulness, thou have altered thy case, and caused those things which of
themselves were good, wholesome, and to thee most profitable, to turn all to thy
harm and confusion.

Truly it had been better for thee never to have heard of the will and
promise of God: never to have been washed and cleansed by the blood of
Christ, then after all these, 2. Pet. 2. 21.
to forsake the holy commandments, and like a filthy swine to return to thy
wallowing in the mier, and as a dog to lap up his old vomit.

Behold now (wretched creature that thou art) unto what a dangerous stay
thou have brought thy selfe^, and with what manner of gaping gulf thou art even
ready to be swallowed. If the Lord God vouchsafe not in time with mercy to
relieve and succor thee, it will come to pass, that thee by wicked and
unclean spirit, which was once banished and cast out of the washing of thy
new birth and by the holy ghost, will come and take up his lodging again in
thee; and not he alone, but having with him seven other spirits worse then
himself, (...) 11. 26 Lu
whereby thy case will be far worse in the end, then it was in the
beginning. O woeful case, O wretched plight, O most miserable estate.

Look well to thy self therefore I beseech thee, and consider what thou art,
acknowledge thy grievous sins and manifold offenses; remember the lamentable
end whereunto they will bring thee, and therefore bethink thy self night and
day, and in time seek for remedy.

CAAP. 4.
The (...) not be any better way for the true trial and examining of our
selves, then the diligent and exact consideration of our dealings by the 2.
tables of the laws of God, commonly called the ten Com^eundements.
IT is not enough for thee, to confess thy self in a generality, to have
grievously offended, to have lewdly violated and broken the covenant and
promise made with God, to have consented to the suggestions of the Devil and
thine own flesh: but it is most expedient for thee (if thy mind and purpose
be thoroughly and fully to try and examine thy self) to rip up all thy
actions and dealinges to the very quick, and precisely to examine and discuss
all those sundry ways and means, whereby thou haste any way offended either
God or thy neybour.

Here (be thou sure) there will be laid open before thee a large volume, and
a big book, in the which thou shall prefectly see all thy detestnble sins,
(which be infinite) plainly set down, clearly written, and apparently
discoucred. Herein shall thou see store of witnesses against thee: and hereby
being brought to thine answer, and drawn to the bar of Trial, thou shall
be enforced and (will thou, nill thou) driven, to yield accounts for every
several fact in particularty. And therefore, so much as hitherto hitherto has
been yet spoken, may well seem small and of little account* if we well weigh,
and diligently compare the same to that, which yet remains untold, and which
now shall be (by Gods good grace) particularly handled.

This trial or examination cannot any way be so commodiouslie and orderly
made, as by exactly calling unto our consideration the written law o^ God,
with all and singular the members, branches and circumstaunce^ thereof. For
the law of God (otherwise called the Decalogue or ten Commandments) is as
it were ^ clear and bright Glass, wherein we may by and by, and at a blush
perfectly behold our spiritual deformity. And of this law, the Scripture
sets down unto us three special uses.

1. Tim. 1. 9.
The law is given to the disobedient, to the ungodly and sinners, etc. Psalm.
119. 33.
Teach me O Lords the way of thy commandments.

down before our eyes, our manifold sins and transgressions, and works in
us a sorrowful grief, and earnest repentance for the same. Romans 3. 20.
By the law comes the knowledge of sin. Romans 7. 7.
And again, I knew not sin but by the law. For I had not known lust,
except the law had said, Thou shall not lust. And a little after: O wretched
man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this sin? And in the
same Chapter: Verse. 9.
When the commandment came, sin revived, but I dyed.

Thirdly, the law (conuincing us of the curse due unto us upon himself. Gal.
3. 13.
And again, Verse. 24.
The law is our schoolemaister to bring us to Christ.

LET us now therefore in order run over the whole precepts and commandments
of the law of God, and let us pause a while at each, falling thee to thine
answer for every particular Commandment; 1. Commandments.
how careful thou haste been to keep them, and how truly thou have
discharged thy bounden duty in observing and performing them: that when thou
haste thus sundry ways found thine infirmities, and thoroughly considered thy
manifold transgressions, thou may certainly know, that unless, the
Mediator Jesus Christ vouchsafe to cloth thee with his righteousness, and to
impute unto thee his obedience and performaunce of the Law, there is no remedy
but that thou must needs be eternally damned.

The first Commandment therefore is this:
I am the Lord thy God which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, Deuteronomy. 5.
6.
out of the house of bondage: Thou shall have none other Gods before my face.
HEre first, I wish thee well and thoroughly to consider, what inward sins of
mind and conscience, lodging only within the secret corners of thy heart, be
directly committed against this commandment. Then, the outward sins, such
(I mean) as openly break out into action, and engender many times great
disorders and offenses. And last of al, enter into diligent consideration of
all such sins, as seem to proceed out of that trade of life, wherein thou
live.

Sins Inward.
COnsider well with thy self, whether thou have not now and than conceived
some erroneous opinions in thy mind of the only true and eternal God,
whereby thou haste been drawn and moved, either to some godless doubting, or
to some curious questioning.

Whether thou be ignorant, or unready in any of those chief points of
doctrine, Faith and Religion, which al Christians are bound to know and
understand.

Whether thou have secreatly in heart, or otherwise privily assented to any
manner of justly condemned heresy.

Whether, when thou have seen the wicked to floorish in their ruffling
devises, and to have the world at will, whereas (on the contrary side) the
godly have been and are commonly afflicted with adversity, and when thou have
seen many things to come to pass in the world disorderly, thou have
thereupon doubted of the providence or wisdom of God.

Whether thou have been always certainly persuaded in thy conscience, that
as well adversity as prosperity; and trouble as well as quietness is sent by the
good will of almighty God; and whether in all seasons thou have thou have put
thy whole trust and confidence in him only.

Whether thou have patiently suffered all dangers that have come unto thee,
without any murmuring against God, or kicking against his fatherly
chastisement: and whether thou have entirely therein resigned thy will to his
divine pleasure, accounting and confessing thy self worthy of those and
greater scourges,

Whether when thou have been in great dangers and perils, thou have had any
distrust, that god either would not, or could not deliver thee. By the ^ne,
thou have derogated from the goodness of God; by the other from his power. But
both the one and the other be directly against his promises.

Whether thou have been puffed up with pride and arrogancy, for the gifts
that God has bestowed on thee, glorying therefore in thy self rather than in
God, and for the same have disdained thy brethren. For, all pride tends to
the hinderance of the glory of God.

Whether for the obtaining of salvation, thou have ascribed any part thereof
either to thine own or to any other man's merits, and have not depended wholly
and only upon the merits of Christ and his divine mercy.

Whether thou have addicted thy mind to any manner of thing then to God. For
that thing is to every man his God, which he chiefly loves, and specially
delights in, whether the same be Angel, or man, or what creature else soever.

Whether thou have done such things as serve for the honor of god, syncerely
and simply for the l^ue thou bear unto God himself, and not for any other
ends: and whether thou have done such things unfeignedly, with all thy heart,
with all thy mind, with all thy strength. For without a sincere meaning, thy
service and obedience is hypocritical, and being imperfect, it makes thee
guilty.

Sins external and outward.
THese sins do proceed also, all of them from the heart. For they are first
inward and internal: but when they burst out into act, then are they also
outward and external: and the more heinous and grievous are these in this
respect, for that thereby our neighbor is hurt as well as our selves, and by
our evil example is moved and brought to sin.

Call to remembrance therefore and consider, whether thou have ever showed thy
self by any sign or token, to have favored and allowed any unsound opinions
concerning God, or matters of Faith; and whether thou have ever gone about by
persuasion to draw others to the same, thy erroneous conceits and wilful
assertions.

Whether in the causes and points of Christian religion, thou have at any time
spoken otherwise with thy tongue, then thou have inwardly thought and believed in
thy heart: as though thou thoughtest it enough (so that thou keep thy
conscience a right to God) that otherwise it mattereth not at all, what thou
saydest or vnsaydest, confessedst or deniedst before men, as time and place
occasioned thee. This is an horrible offense, and a plain preferring of men
before God, and this is a sin against the holy Ghost.

Whether thou have ever and in every place so framed thy life, and directed thy
actions, that all men might perceive and know that thine earneste purpose and
intent was to sanctify the name of the LORD GOD.

Whether for the avoiding of any evil, or obteyning of any good, thou have
trusted to the help, protection and furtherance of Aungelles, either good or
badde, or of men, or of any other creature what-soeur; as though they were
able to have helped thee as well as God. For there is none to be inuocated and
sought unto for help, but God only.

Whether for the procuring of any thing either good or badde, thou have used
any unlawful means, or superstitious and damnable helps. Of which sort be
the observation and choice of days, of Planetarie hours, of motions and
courses of stars, mumbling of profane prayers, consisting of words both
strange and senseless; adiurations, sacrifices, consecrations and hallowinges
of diverse things, rytes and ceremonies unknown to the Church of God, toyish
characters and figures, demanding of questions and answers of the dead,
dealing with damned Spirits, or with any instruments of phanaticall
divination as basins, ringes cristals, glasses, rods, pricks, numbers,
dreams, lots, fortunetellinges, oracles, soothsayings, horoscoping or marking
the hours of natiuities, witchcraftes, enchauntments, and all such
superstitious trumpe^^. Hereunto is to be referred the paustring mawmetrie and
heathenish worshipping of that domestical God or familiar Angel which was
thought to be appropried to every particular person: the enclosing or binding
of Spirits to certain instruments, and such like devises of Satan the Devil.

Whether thou have wilfully and willingly thrown thy self into any dangers,
when as no necessity drove thee thereunto: whereunto: wherein thou did
directly tempt God.

For thy trade of life.
IN every man's peculiar trade of life, he does many and sundry kinds of
ways transgress this first commandment; as namely:

He that has taken upon him the charge and oversight of the Church of God, let
him well weigh and consider, whether he have carefully discharged his duty,
both in doctrine and life, so that the glory of God by him thereby has been
the rather favored and propagated, and the consciences of many effectually
stayed and comforted.

Whether in matters touching God and Christian religion, he has set forth
and uttered in the Church, any thing doubtful and uncertain, in steed of
certain truth, and undoubted verity.

Whether he be spotted and infected with any heresy, or unsound opinion.

Whether he have at al times to the vttermoste of his ability and skill,
endeavored to beat down and confute all corrupt doctrines.

Whether he have patiently winked at, and quietly suffered any rytes wherein
has been either apparent superstition, or otherwise any notable offense and
inconvenience: As gadding and raunging about with procession, conuenticling in
corners, superstitious usage of holy water, pilgrimages, and vows to be
performed in some certain places, and with certain appointed solemnities and
ceremonies, whereby there are commonly committed sundry lewd attemptes and
many lamentable enormities.

Whether he have admitted any to be teachers in the Church, which were either
unmeet or unable syncerely and discreetely to deliver the word of God: or any
corrupt and unsound preachers, that willingly deprave the texts of the
scriptures, and purposely misconstrue the words of truth, to confirm and
establish their own fantastical, or rather phanaticall, opinions.

He that is called to government in the common wealth, Magistrate*
be he Prince or Peer, Judge or Lawyer of high calling; let him look well
about him, whether he have with all his endeavor and care, labored to promote
true religion, and to maintain and defend the sincere worship of God.

Whether he have countenaunced, abetted or maintained any heretics,
Schismatiks, Jews, or any false and wicked teachers in any thing against the
sanctifying of the blessed name of god.

Whether in giving sentence and judgment upon any matter, and in all other
grave consultations about the affairs of the common wealth, he have nuer
remembered that God is the high Lord and Judge, and him self to be but his
Minister.

They that bestow their time in Schools of learning, which be the seed
plots and Seminaries both of the Church and commonwealth,

Doctors, Teachers, and Masters: Whether they have carefully trained in the
fear of God, ^tudents (...) teachers
the youth committed to their charge, and syncerely delivered unto them the
principles and chief grounds of faith and Christian religion.

Scholars: ^^holers.
Whether by reading of the books of Philosophers and heathen Poets, they have
learned to hold any wicked opinions of God.

Whether they have in their custody any wicked Pamphlets, or bestow any study
in books of curious arts and superstitious skill, as magic, divination, and
such like.

Whether they read any books of Heretics, justly condemned by the Catholic
and universal Church.

Physician: ^hisition.
Whether being with the sick, he have especially and before all things
exhorted them to have a firm, and vndoubting faith in God, without whom no
medicine is available and wholesome.

Whether for recovery of his bodily health he have advised and prescribed to
his patient any things that be hurtful and dangerous to the health of his
soul, as all those things are, that be not warranted by the word of God, but
directly against the remedies which the Lord has ordained. As when they
prescribe unto them superstitious obseruaunces, peevish calculations and
childish mawmetries, etc. Also when they bear their patient in hand or make
him to think that some certain Saints have power to send and also to take
away this or that disease: as though God were not the only governor of all
things did not depend on him*

Apothecarie, Apothecarie.
Whether he have superstitiouslie observed or fondly stayed for choice days or
hours, or any other ceremonious rytes in gathering his herbs or other simples
for the making of his drouges and receiptes.

Merchants, poor people, Merchant. Chapman. Artificer.
and handicraftesmen. Whether they have procured, gotten and made any thing, or
otherwise furnished others with any thing, thereby to make them the better able
to oppress or hinder Christian religion, and the true worship of God. As
they do which either aid the Turks, or crave aid of them against their
christian brethren. And as they do, which sell to the Jews or to treacherous
and hollow hearted Christians any manner of stuff or instrument, 2.
Commandment.
whereby to profane and dishonor the name of God: or which do any manner of
way minister occasion by theit devise and slight, to compass and bring to
pass any thing to dim and empeache the glory of God on earth.

The second Commandment.
Thou shall make thee no graven Image, neither any similitude of things that
are in heaven above, neither that are in the earth beneath, nor that are in the
water under the earth. Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them.
etc.
Sins inward.
COnsider well, whether thou have not sometime thought, that God either would
or might be worshipped, otherwise then in spirit and truth.

Whether thou haste not been persuaded that the invisible power of God, might
by some visible Image be the better known, and so the sooner honored.

Whether thou haste any time believed or thought, that the honor due unto God,
was any way bestowable up on any creature; and whether thou have thought any
creature able of his own proper power and ability to bring this or that to
pass.

Whether thou haste ever thought that miracles have been wrought by Images, or
that any virtue and power has been in them.

Sins outward.
WHether having ever secretly conceived in thy mind, any wicked opinions about
the service and worship of God, thou have apparently and openly by any token or
signification made public the same: that is, whether thou have built, founded
or dedicated any Chapel, closet, oratory or grove to any creature, either
dead or a-liue, for worship.

Whether thou have assisted any that have so done.

Whether thou have erected, and set up any Images, altars, representations, or
purtraitures: whether thou have secretly worshipped or given divine honor to
the image of any Saint, whom thou have made special choice of to be thy
patron and advocate, or set up the same either in thy House, in thy Garden, or
any other place: using thereto either bowing, crow ching, kneeling, censing,
lighting of tapers, offering of gifts, or adorning it with garlands, and
presenting unto it the firstlings of thy increase, as corn and grain, and
other oblations: with solemn words and reverent rites saluting it, adressing
thereunto usual prayers, hoping thereby to receive some benifite, or to see some
miracle: and to be short, whether thou have egged and procured any other to do
the like.

For thy trade of life.
CAruers, Grauers, Painters and Image-makers. Caruers, Grauers, Painters,
Image-makers.
Whether in the making, grauing or painting of any Image or picture either of
man or any other creature, they have showed all the skill and cunning that
possibly they could, in hope thereby to bring men in love with their
workepeece, Handi-^^aftesmen, ^^rtificers.
and so to worship it.

Handy-craftsmen. Whether they have made or or sold any such things as they
well knew their buiers would convert to superstitious uses and Idolatrous
worshippings. 3. Commandments.


The third Commandment.
Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord will
not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain.
Sins inward.
WHether so often as thou heardest the name of God used in earnest and serious
matters, thou did with a religious and reverend mind think on the
ineffable majesty of God, and with thy whole mind devoutly honor the same.

Whether when thou haste been commanded or requested in a necessary and
lawful cause, to swear and take an oath, thou have framed thy self thereunto
with such Godly zeal and reverence, as became thee.

Whether, in the time of prayers, giving of thanks, lauding and praising the
name of God, and hearing the sasacred scriptures recited and alleged, thou
have reverently and godly bent thy self to that holy exercise, attentively and
religiously listening to that which was said.

Sins outward.
WHether in taking a solemn oath for any matter, thou have done it in any other
sort, then by reverently calling on the name of God, and citing him to witness
and record of thy speech and dealing. For by him only and by none other ought
we too swear. And therefore great is their fault and grievously do they
sin, that swear by heaven, by earth, by the members of God, by Saints, by
the cross and such like.

Whether thou have constantly affirmed any thing to be true, whereof thou
did not then know the certainty, or at least, whereof thou stoodest in
doubt.

Whether thou have sworn to do any thing, which thou did never mean to
do.

Whether thou ever procuredst any man to swear, knowing that he should thereby
take a false oath, and swear untruly.

Whether thou have ever in vain used the naming of the wounds and death of
Christ, or other like things or actions of Christ to evil and lewd purposes,
or to wicked cursing and banning.

Whether otherwise at any other time thou have rashly, that is to say without
just and urgent cause, abused and taken in vain the name of God.

Whether thou have used thus to do of a certain peevish and wilful custom:
which (certainly) is a very wicked and horrible thing.

Whether thou have not performed and done that, which by solemn vow and oath
thou promisedst to do.

Whether thou have bound thy self by vow or oath, to do any thing that has
been unlawful and wicked.

Whether thou have misspent and abused those gifts, wherewith God has endued
thee, to any other purposes then to the advancement and setting foroth of Gods
glory. Whether (I say) thou have abused those gifts, either to the contumelye
and dishonor priuilye or apertly of God, or to any hurt and hindera^ce of thy
neighbor: For in the gifts that God bestows upon us, there shines out the
great dignity and Majesty of God his blessed name.

Whether thou have applied to vanity such things as properly and rightly are
appertinent to God, and of him only are truly said and spoken. And whether in
thy familiar talk with others, thou have spoken of God and heavenly matters,
vainly, scoffingly, lightly, ridiculously or irreverently.

Whether thou have misused the holy Word of God, contained in the sacred
Scriptures, either by wresting it violently to other sense than it was meant,
spoken and uttered, or in applying it to such matters and purposes as it ought
not to be applied unto, as namely to guming, jesting, balletting, singing,
slanderous libelling, pasquilling, etc.

Whether thou haste adjured or enforced any man to swear, to do or confess
any thing, having no authority so to do, or for no necessary matter, or cause
of importance, but rather about some trifling toy and frivolous conceit, or
some such drift as tended to the danger of such as be good, honest, and godly.

Whether thou haste coniured Devils, or used the damnable art of Negromancy,
seeking help of wicked spirits, or desiring to have some thing by them brought
to pass, as though they had been fit Ministers for such offices and purposes.

Whether thou have adjured or enchanted any creatures unreasonable, even such
as be brute and dumb, or any herbs and plants or such like things, hoping
and meaning thereby to work some strange feat and wonderful practice.

For the kind of life.
WHether, entering into any function or College, or into any other kind of
life: Magistrate Officer.
and solemnly promising by oath to observe, maintain, and keep the laws and
orders thereof, thou have accordingly so done and discharged thine oath. As
namely, when a Judge, an Advocate, an Attorney or such like, is first nominated
and admitted to his place, let him consider how he discharges his oath, 4.
Commandment.
whereby he then solemnly promises, justly and truly to exercise his office.
So likewise a Graduate when he takes his degree in Shooles. A Scholar, when
he is admitted in a College, a Citizen, when he is enfranchized or elected into
any office: A Soldier, when he is sworn to his Captain: a Craftes-man, when
he is made free, and received into the society and fellowship of those of the
same trade, mystery, or occupation. etc.

Buyers and Sellers. Whether the sooner to vttet their wares, Buyers and
sellers.
they have used oaths to their chap-men in bargaining and dealing with them,
affirming and protesting the same wares to be good and faultlesse, which
(notwithstanding) they knew well enough to be defective, naught, deceitful,
and faulty.

Whether they have sworn that they paid more for their wares, then in truth
they did: or that they would not sell the same any better cheap then the price
they pitched, and yet afterward have done otherwise.

Suitors for marriage. Suitors for marriage.
Whether the sooner and easier to win the good will and consent, the one of the
other, they have used oaths and asseuerations faithfully to do this or that,
and to be those persons which they pretended to be, and yet in truth have bin
found and proved otherwise.

Soldiers. Soldiers.
These of all other sorts of people are found the readiest commonly to abuse
irreverently the name of God, and wilfully to make custom of perjury.

Finally, whether in committing any of these aforementioned, thou have been thereby
the cause of offense to others, and ministered unto them occasion to commit the
like. For being the cause of offense, either in word or deed, to others, thou
make thy self guilty of their sin, over and beside thine own.

And whether when thou have seen others disorderly to commit any of these
outrages before expressed, thou have plainly showed thy self to be ^n utter
misliker thereof, reproouing and reprehending them also for the same, when time
and place served. For in not doing this, thou consen^est unto them in their
folly, and so ^y consenting, entanglest and wrappedst thy self in other men's
sins, and broughtest their evils upon thine own head.

The fourth Commandment.
Remember the Sabbath day, that thou keep it holy. Six days shall thou
labor, and do all thy work: but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord
thy God: In it thou shall not do any work; thou, nor thy son, nor thy
daughter, thy man servant nor thy maid, nor thy beast, nor thy stranger that
is within thy gates. For in six days the Lord made heaven and the earth, the
Sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: therefore the Lord
blessed the sabbath day and hallowed it.
Sins inward.
COnsider here, whether thou have at all times reverently and honorably thought
of the ministry of the word, of the administration of Sacraments, of the
ceremonies and al exercises necessary, expedient, and profitable to the Church
of God, both for the increase of Godliness, and also of Discipline, order and
decency: and whether thou haste at all times willingly and dutifully framed and
submitted thy self thereunto.

Whether thou haste been careful and diligent, earnest and painful to
search out and know the true use of all such things as are taught and
practiced in the holy assemblies and congregations: and whether thou have for
the attaining to the knowledge thereof, used that industry and diligence which
God requires at thine hands.

Whether thou have secretly allowed and approved any wicked rites or
ceremonies: and whether thou haste thought them in thine heart by any means
worthy to be retained.

Sins outward.
WHether thou have Christianly exercised thy self at times convenient in
meditating on Heavenly things, to thy souls health: thereby testifying thy
desire and willingness to invoke and call upon God by faith, and to the
uttermost of thy power, to frame thy life after that knowledge, wherwithal the
Lord has endued thee.

Whether every day, morning and evening, after dinner and after supper, thou
have humbly and dutifully commended thine estate and welfare to God, somwhile
craving at his merciful hands all things necessary for thy life, both
corporally and spiritually, and somewhile yielding thanks unto him for the
benefits which thou haste already received.

Whether upon contempt or negligence thou have foreslowed to go to divine
service, and place of holy assembly, on days appointed by the church, for such
purposes.

Whether in those holy assemblies thou have openly showed thy self from thy
very heart attentively bent unto those things which were there said and done:
so that it might be well understood and perceived, that thou came and
resortedst thither for none other purpose, then only to serve God and
religiously to learn thy christian duty

Whether, when thou did receive the holy Communion, thou use thy self so
as became thee, in diligent noting and considering the true use and right
effects of the same.

Whether thou bestowedst those days wholly in Godly and virtuous exercises
as well at home as abroad, namely in reading the scriptures, in distributing
alms, in visiting and comforting the sick, in trayning and instructing with
Godly doctrine, thy family and folks: and in such the like commendable duties:
Or whether rather thou have abused, misspent and profaned the same, in
banqueting, tippling, gaming, filthy talking, dissolute dealing, etc.

For the trade of life.
MInister of the Church. Minister.
Whether in doctrine, in administration of the Sacraments and other holy rytes
and vsages, thou haste added, taken away or altered any thing, contrary to that
which the holy Catholic. Church by authority, and warrant of the sacred
Scriptures does witness to be alowable, and pleasing unto almighty God, and
consona^t unto his divine word.

Whether in the delivery and administration of those things which are
certainlye known to be instituted and propunded according to the will of God,
thou have executed and celebrated the same with a devour, religious, willing
and undaunted mind, and also with a seemly grace and comeliness. And whether
thou have been very circumspect and heedefull, least thy negligent and remiss
dealing therein, should bring the same into contempt among the people, and not
to be regarded and esteemed according to their worthiness.

Whether thou have approved, and observed any ceremonies or traditions
against thy conscience. Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.

Whether thou have bidden any superstitious holy days, or appointed any other
observations, whereby might grow any danger, either for corruption of manners,
or finally of offense to others.

Whether thou have permitted and suffered, Games, Plays, Enterludes, Pageants,
or Sights to be showed, frequented and kept in the Church, Churchyard, or
other place appointed for holy exercise. And whether thou have suffered the
vessels, instruments, furniture and goods of the Church, serving for
ecclesiastical purposes to be loosely converted and put to any profane uses.

Whether thou have admitted any notorious wicked livers, to the blessed
Communion: and whether thou have debarred and put back from the same, any whose
sins are hidden and not manifestly known.

Whether thou have at any time abused the severity of Ecclesiastical
Discipline, specially and namely Excommunication, or the power of binding and
loosing, only to serve thy corrupt affection, using the same (in da^dlyng
wise) with too much lenity: or whether when thou ought at any hand
severely to use it, thou have altogether neglected and omitted it.

Whether thou have either preferred, wincked at, or suffered any such within
thy charge, as negligently deal in matters of religion, or be remiss and
secure in their offices, and by who^ the quiet state and good order of the
Church is disturbed.

Whether thou have sought all possible means, and every way diligently
endeavored thy self to plant in the hearts and minds of all persons under
thy charge and cure, the cheef points and principal grounds of religion,
namely the Catechism, which every Christian is bound to learn and know
perfectly.

Whether thou have labored and done thine endeavor to redress such disorders
and faults as are crept into rytes and ceremonies, whereby the good ordinances
and constitutions of the Church, do generally grow into contempt, or be quite
abolished.

Governors of the commonwealth, Prince, Peer, Judge. Magistrate.
Whether thou have assisted the Ministers of the Church, desiring to remove and
banish errors and superstition, and been willing also and ready to advance and
establish godly orders, for the good and quiet government of the same.

Whether thou have any ways infringed the right of the Churches, or violated
and taken away their privileges and immunities,

Teachers, and schoolmasters. Schoolmasters.
Whether, thou have suffered the younger sort to be absent from the Church, or
have discouraged, dissuaded or called them away from reading the Scriptures and
books of Godliness, specially on the Sabbath days.

Whether on the same days thou have given them leave to use games, plays, and
exercises, for the time and quality, either unmeet or indecent.

Whether thou have dissuaded any from the study of divinity, and from the
Ecclesiastical ministry, which were meet and fit thereunto, and would
have profitablye proceeded therein, had not thou by counsel drawn them
from their good purpose.

Scholars. Whether on the holy days and other set days and hours, they
reverently give themselves to the reading of Godly and holy books, and to other
virtuous meditations and exercises.

Scriuener or Notary. Whether he have endited, drawn, or written, or caused
to be endited, drawn, or written any bills, bonds, or other writings
whatsoever, on the Sabbath days.

Whether he have made any such, whereby Religion or the dignity of the Church,
might any way be empaired and diminished.

Tauerner. Whether on the Sabbath days, and especially in the time of divine
service, he have suffered any disorder in drinking and tippling within his
house: and whether he has made a common practice or custom at such times and
on such days, to sell his wines, etc.

Merchant. Merchant.
Whether on the Sabbath day he has bartered and bargayned, cast up his
reckonings, and written his accounts.

Chapman. Chapman.
Whether on such days and times, he has set open his shop, or set his wares
to sale.

Stage Player. Stage-plaiers.
Whether by his Enterludes and Stage Plays, he have drawn the people away from
spiritual exerercises, and godly meditations.

Musicion and Mynstrel. Musicion. Minstrell.
Whether he have been the author and occasioner, of wanton dancing, or other
unseemly pastimes.

Craftes-men of any trade whatsoever. Artificers.
Whether they have wrought on the Sabbath and holy days, when no necessity
enforced them, but only for lucre sake: or whether they have caused their
apprentises and servants the same days to work, without either going to
church or giving themselves to godly meditations: as the Tailor or Botcher to
sow a garment: the husbandman to hedge, ditch, plowe, garden, cleanse his
Stable, etc. whereas at these times these things, and so of others might and
ought to be forborne.

Whether any person whosoever he be, have enticed and procured others to any
vain games, unlawful sports, or other light and lewd exercises, as
dice-playing and such like.

House-holder. House-holder.
Whether as specially on the Sabboths and festival days, so also sometimes on
the work days he have propounded or caused to be propounded and taught to his
children and family, the chief heads of Christian religion, namely such as be
taught and contained in the Catechism.

Finally, whether any person by committing any of these aforesaid faults, have
thereby given occasion to others to commit the like: and whether he have been
a stumbling block and cause of fall unto others, either in word or deed.

And again: whether in seeing others to do ill, thou have not let them
understand thy great mislike thereof. For, thine assenting to others sins,
loadeth thee a new with mo sins, and makes thee a partaker thereof. 5.
Commandment.


The fifth Commandment.
Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days may be prolonged upon the
Land, which the Lord thy God gives thee.
Sins inward. For the trade of life.
Son, Daughter, Orphan, Orphans.
and Ward. Wards.
Whether thou have at all times reverently thought, and had a good opinion of
thy parents and governors, wishing well unto them and praying for them, and in
all things to their good liking, showing thy dutiful obedience.

Whether by reason of their base degree and condition, poverty, affliction,
misery or any such like respect, thou have had them in contempt, or made the
less account of them.

Whether because they have at sometime somewhat sharply chastised thee; or
because of some wrong which they have done unto thee, or because thou think
they have not had that care of thee which they ought, thou haste therefore
withdrawn thy duty, and alienated thy mind any ways from them.

Parents and Gardians. Whether they have borne a right fatherly mind and
affection toward their children: wishing their welfare and well-doing, and
providing the best for them that they possibly could in all things.

Lay people. Whether of the spiritual fathers and Parents that feed thy
soul, that is to say, the Ministers of Gods holy word and sacraments, and of
their office, function and calling, thou haste reverently and religiously
thought.

Whether thou have willingly received and heard their doctrine, exhortations,
reprehensions and ecclesiastical discipline by them deservedly inflicted upon
thee, either publicly or privately, and that without murmuring, resistance or
gainsaying.

Minister of the Church. Whether as much as in thee lay, thou have earnestly
and heartily labored to bring unto God, and to the knowledge of their
salvation in Christ, those that were committed to thy charge and oversight:
ever remembering that God would one day require an account of them at thy hand.

Scholar. Scholar.
Whether thou haste carried the same good mind and affection, toward thy
Masters which took pains to train thee up in virtue and learning, as thou
ought to bear toward thy parents.

Schoolmasters, Schoolemasters.
Whether thou have carried a Fatherly mind and affection toward thy
Scholars, carefully devising and seeking all ways and means to profit them.

Subjects Subjects.
and Inferiors. Whether thou haste esteemed the Magistrates, which be the
common parents of the country, defending us, our wives, children and goods
from injury and oppression, and procuring unto us peace quietness, and
tranquillity, as the lawful Ministers of God; unto whom thou owe honor,
fear, tribute, custom, and all things else, Romans 13. 1.
even for conscience sake: 1. Pet. 2. 13
knowing that thou art bound to obey them, yea, though they were wicked.

Magistrates. Magistrates
Whether they considering and remembering that they must make an account, and
give a reckoning of their government, and that they being Deputies here on
earth under God, ought to minister Justice, and to judge in all things
according to right, have accordingly endeavored themselves at all times to
seek the quietness and tranquillity of their subjects, and carefully in
singleness of heart to provide for their commodity and welfare.

Servants and Hand-maydes. Servant. Ha^dmaids.
Whether they have been obedient, and submitted themselves to their Masters
and Mistresses, with fear and trembling, serving them heartily in singleness
and simplicity of mind, every where and at all times, rather wishing their
furtherance and profit, then their loss and hindraunce.

Masters Masters.
and Mistresses. Mistresses.
Whether they knowing themselves to have a Master in Heaven, with whom there
is no respect of persons, have dealt justly and equally with their servants,
Ephe. 6. 9.
showing mildness unto them, Collo. 4. 1.
and curtesy, not rigor and threatening.

Sins external and outward.
Sons, Daughters, Orphans, and Wards. Children. Wards. Orphans.
Whether they have showed toward their Parents in every place, all tokens of
honor, reverence and goodwill.

Whether they have willingly obeyed their commandments, and every way taken
heed, least they should provoke them to anger.

Whether they have spoken or done any thing, whereby to bring them into
heaviness and grief, as either by wishing evil unto them, by threatening them,
by complaining on them to others; neglecting the studies and business
whereunto by them they have been enjoined, unthriftily spending their time,
shamefully and wastfully consuming their money, excessiuelie royoting away the
wealth and charges, which their careful Parents, (to help them withal) were
willing to bestow on them: or else by any other way or mean whatsoever.

Whether they have dutifully helped, succored, and relieved them, when they
have been sick, driven into poverty, or thrown into danger.

Parent and Guardian. Parent. Guardian.
Whether thou thy self with all diligence have trained up and instructed thy
children in godliness, in the fear of the Lord, and in holiness of life, and
also caused them by others to be instructed and trained.

Whether thou have been an example of virtue and godliness unto thy children,
committing nothing before them, unseemly, filthy or uncivil, either in word
or deed.

Whether thou have fondly and dandlingly cockered them, not chastising and
correcting them, but letting the^ have their own wanton wills, winking at
their faults, and so with too smooth countenance and familiar gesture,
utterly marring them.

Whether thou have from time to time fed thy children with money and other
things, or suffered the^ to have the same to abuse, mispende and commit wastfull
folly withal.

Whether thou have laughed, allowed, and rejoiced in thy young little ones, when
thou have seen them use pretty sleights, crafty devises, sly shifts, vain
songs, wanton daunces, and unseemly gestures, yea to utter filthy terms
beastly words, and odious deeds: and have not for the same corrected them, not
given out any sign or token of thy mislike thereof.

Whether thou have discouraged and provoked thy children, either by words or
deeds, to be of a desperate mind: and casting away all hope to run headlong
daily from worse to worse.

Whether thou have gone about to persuade, or else have compelled thy children
to take that trade of life, whereunto they felt and confessed themselves
unmeet and unapt: or which otherwise without great danger of sinning, they
could not follow and betake themselves unto.

Whether thou have been careful to provide for thy children according to
thine ability, some reasonable portions of wealth, or have let them forth to
learn some honest trade or occupation, whereby another day to be able to live
in some certain stay of life, and honestly without blame or shame to earne
their liuinges.

Layty. Layman, or parishioner.
Whether thou have yielded honor and reverence unto the Ministers of Gods
word, together with alcurtesies, duties, tithes, and other things whatsoever,
in right due unto them or by law appointed and allotted unto them, in such
sort as Justice and equity requires, and as it is meet to do.

Whether, either in malepartly reuiling them, in spightfully snarring and
barking against them, or in wranlingly cauilling and quarrelling either at
their doctrine, or actions, words or deeds, thou have purposely intended and
gone about to deface, discou^tena^ce discredit, displace, or disease them.

Whether thou haste been the author to procure others, either to think speak,
do, or deal hardly and unfriendly against the ministers, or the ministry it
self.

Minister of the Word. Whether thou haste employed thine whole endeavor to
win the souls of those that have been committed unto thy charge, as well by
delivering unto them wholesome and sound doctrine, as in showing good example
of honest life, and blameless conversation in thy self.

Whether thy care has been over every particular person under thy cure and
charge, in diligent teaching of him, and mildely requiring of him a confession
of his Faith, and of the principal points of Christian doctrine: since it is
the office and duty of every faithful shepherd perfectly and readily, to know
every sheep in his flock.

Scholar. Scholar.
Whether thou have obeyed thy Masters rules, directions, and commandments.

Whether thou have despised and conte^ned him, or made a jest at his wholesome
and godly admonitions, and either in reproching him, speaking against him,
backbiting or hindering him, haste procured his hurt and detriment.

Schoolmaster. Whether thou haste godly instructed and virtuously trained up,
those Scholars that have been committed unto thee, in sound religion and good
learning: And beside, in integrity of manners and honest example of life, haste
gone before them, and been a pattern unto them.

Whether thou haste rebuked them when they have done amiss, and corrected them
after the quality of their fault, and by gentle treating stirred up and
encouraged those that go forward in doing well, to continue and proceed therein.

Subject. Whether thou haste disobeyed the laws, statutes and commandments,
enacted and set forth by the Magistrate.

Whether thou have contemned the lawful Ministers and under-officers of of the
high magistrate, and whether thou have evil entreated them, or showed to them
any wrongful dealing.

Whether thou have devised any wra^gling shifts, or sinisterly of purpose
misconstrued the laws, statutes, acts, ordinances, proclamatio^s, iniunctio^s
or other decrees whatsoever, published, en acted and authorized by the
Magistrate.

Whether thou have refused to do such things as thou haste by the Magistrates
authority been commanded, as for example, to pay tributes, assessementes and
subsidies, and to bear other common charges with others of thy neighbors.

Whether by uttering lewd speeches, practicing treason, stirring up rebellion,
moving sedition, exciting malicious enemies, or by a^y like means thou have at
any time, gone about to annoy and put in danger the Magistrate.

Whether thou have patiently borne the lewd and corrupt manners of the evil
disposed magistrate: and the hard commandments coming from him: thinking
thus with thy self, that it is oftentimes through the fault of the Subjects,
that God sets over them, rigorous, cruel, and wicked rulers.

Magistrate and governor.. Whether thou haste made any laws, enacted any
degrees, given out any commandments, practiced any subtle devises or
pronounced any sentences to the overthrow and decay of religion, to the
emblemishing of the honor, majesty and authority of Kings and Princes, or to
the disgracing of the dignity and state of any civil society.

Whether thou haste contemned the censures of the Church, the rescripts or
decrees of thy superiors: and whether thou haste wrongly interpreted them,
craftily by delusion defeated them, or by any other way whatsoever gone about
to empeach, reject, or adnihilate them.

Whether thou haste by any means derogated the right or jurisdiction of any
other, either by pulling unto thee matters which thou had not to deal
withal, or by procuring means and stoppes, that they, to whose deciding and
judgment in right they belonged, should not have the trials brought before them.

Whether thou haste devised or commanded any new impositions, and
unaccustomed payments, thereby to gratify and in rich the Prince, or to fill
thine own coffers, to serve thine own private gain, or moved thereunto by
any other corrupt affection whatsoever.

Whether for Counsailors to direct and advise thee, thou have made special
choice of such as be crafty and cruel persons, whose minds thou well knew
so spightfull and envious, that they cared for nothing less, than either the
advancement of the public state of the Country, or the welfare and quiet of
the subjects: only using their crafty devises to the oppression of them that
were honest.

Whether thou have labored to the uttermost of thy power, to redress wicked
persons, and to banish such vices as thou perceiuedst were crept into the
common wealth, or otherwise committed by private persons.

Whether thou have winked at, and looked through thy singers at any public and
notorious crimes, as in suffering usury, brothell houses, unlawful games, and
such like enormities: whereby both the people be infected in manners, and their
wealth also miserably d^uoured.

Whether thou have taken pains to protect and defend the causes of the good
and innocent, namely the fatherless, the widow, and other persons, called
miserable and comfortless: especially since as of all in general, so of these
in special, thou did solemnly undertake the guard and protection.

Servant Servant.
and Handmaide. Whether they have honestly, faithfully, and to their masters
profit, done their work and business.

Whether to their masters children, kinsfolk and friends, they have been
dutiful and serviceable, in such sort as became them, and as they have been
commanded.

Whether with mumbling, murmuring, mocking, mowing, replying, and saucie
aunswering, they have gone about to provoke their masters and mistresses to
anger, or any other way offended and hurt them.

Master and Mistress. Master and Mistres.
Whether they have commanded and enjoined their servants, to do more work
than they were able, or in reason ought to have done.

Whether they have been toward their servants over bitter, churlish, and
hasty, either in words, as in cursing and banning them, furiously raging at
them, and contumeliously misnaming them; or else in deeds, by allowing the too
small pittance in meat and drink, by keeping from them convenient clothes, and
reasonable lodging; by cruelly bounsing and beating them; or in denying and
nipping their wages and hire, etc.

Finally, whosoever thou art; call to remembrance whether, either by word or
deed, thou have any way given occasion of offense to any other by thy
example, to contemn thy superiors, or to damnifie thy inferiors. For the
sin of him that thus through thee is brought to offend, will be imputed and
laid to thy charge. Every man or woman in general.


Whether, seeing others committing any of the forenamed offenses, thou have
either secretly or openly liked thereof: For thus also, thou chargest thy
self with the guilte of another man's sin.

The sixth Commandment. 6. Commandment.

Thou shall not kill.
Sins inward.
WHether thou have bor^ an^ envious mind an spightfull stomach toward any
man, an^ through thy churlish way wardnesse given men occasion to deem thee
worthy the odious nam^ of a deadly hater of all men,

Whether to any man in the world* either friend or foe, thou have wished harm
and hinderaunce, either in body or goods, in kinsfolk or friends, or in any
other thing belonging unto him: and again, whether thou have been at any time
sorry for the good speed, and prosperous success of another.

Whether thou have borne hatred and malice to any man. 1 Job. 3. 15
He that hates his brother is a manslaier.

Whether thou have borne long malice to any man, with a stiff, wilful,
implacable and obstinate desire of revenge, and so still continuest.

Whether thou have refused to be at one with any that has offended thee,
being sorry for his fault, and craving pardon of thee for the same: showing thy
self utterly unwilling of reconciliation, for that peradventure thou watchest
thy turn to cry quittaunce with him, and to work him (when thou can epsy
opportunity) the like shrewd turn and displeasure.

Whether, when thou have outwardly pretended thy self, clearly to pardon and
forgive any that has offended thee, and that thou would not seek any
revenge for things passed, have yet (notwithstanding) secretly nourished
malice, and kept hatred in thy heart against him.

Whether thou have purposed and meant not to pardon at all, him that has not
come to thee, to ask pardon for his fault.

Sins outward.
WHether either by word, iesture, countenance, or any other manner of way
whatsoever, thou have showed forth any churlishe behavior, or blockish
discurtesie, whereby it might be thought thou meantest any harm to any man.

Whether thou ever soughtest matter of quarrel, or occasion of hatred and
disagreement against thy neighbor.

Whether thou have yielded thy self over to thine own wilful affections,
inwardly moving thee to wrath and rancour.

Whether thou have conceived anger against any man for any cause, yea, though
the same in show seemed on thy side to be right and just.

Whether in rage and anger thou have said to thy brother, Racha; or (which is
worse) Fool: that is to say, whether thou have showed forth any signs of
hatred and wrath; as cursing and wishing ill to another, contemptuously
threatening, railing, misnaming, chiding, scolding, judging amiss, taking men's
deeds and words otherwise than they either meant or speak, wresting al things
to the worst, deriding, flearing, mocking, taunting, frumping, crosse-cutting,
checking, ouerthwarting, skoffing, backbiting, gibing, undermining, and such
like.

Whether thou have in spite bewraied, discovered, and published, the faults
and infirmities of thy neighbor: wherein and whereby a man is wounded, worse
tha^ either with sword or knife.

Whether by thus doing thou have given cause of new brawling, discord, hatred,
and falling out among thy neighbors, which before loved and agreed well
together.

Whether, as much as in thee lay, thou have cut off the causes of all
wrangling, debate, discord, and quarrel.

Whether thou have been diligent to the uttermost of thy power, to reconcile
and set peace and quietness between them that have been at variance.

Whether thou have in all places showed thy self to bear an envious,
enemilike and implacable mind toward him that has done thee displesure,
without any token either of forgiveness or reconciliation.

Whether thou have denied to pardon him that has craved it at thy hands, and
confessed his fault: showing thy self inexorable, and desirous rather of
revenge, than to have former friendship renewed and continued.

Whether thou have prayed to God for the repentance, amendment, welfare, and
salvation of thine enemy, and been ready also any way thou could, to do
him pleasure.

Whether either secretly or openly thou ever soughtest means, or imagined to
hurt and damnifie any man in body.

Whether ever in act thou wentest about in any respect to hurt him, whereby any
harm in his body has insued; as either by ouerlabouring him, or by
surcharging him with too heavy burdens, or by nipping him of his victuals,
and withholding from him requisite food, or by giving unto him unwholesome
meat and drink, or by driving him into sickness, or by sending him into any
contagious and infected place, or by any weapon, instrument, tool, or mean
whatsoever, either by thy self, or by any other through thy consent, will,
and procurement.

Whether either privily or openly thou have any manner of way done any
thing, whereby another is brought to his death, either speedily and hastily,
or lingeringly and piningly.

For the kind and trade of life.
Ecclesiastical Minister. Minister.
Whether he have delivered in his Sermons and readings, any dangerous
doctrine, whereby dissensions, braules, contentions, sects, or (which worse is)
seditions have been stirred up, and moved among the hearers.

Whether he have been the author and ringleader of any faction, or mutiny
either against the governors of the Church, or the civil Magistrates, or
against his own brethren and fellowlabourers.

Whether for any desire of revenge, or any other corrupt affection
whatsoever, he have put any back from hearing the word of God preached, and
receiving the Sacraments; or have pronounced any excommunicated, or caused any
so to be, to the great harm, coffeehouse, and discomfort of the party.

Whether under pretense and color of requiring an account of they, faith, he
have accused any godly christian of heresy, or any such crime, whereby the
party accused is either imprisoned, or otherwise grieuouslie punished, and
perhaps also (as in some places it is seen) put to death.

Whether he have admitted any to the Supper of the Lord, that was out of
charity with his neighbor, and not willing to be agreed and reconciled with
his enemies, or whom he knew had shed the blood of his brethren, ere he would
leave his malice and hatred.

Whether he have allowed and approved wrongful wars, or unjust and corrupt
judgments, given* and pronounced, either by the Prince or by any others,
which some even in open pulpits have not been ashamed to do.

Governor of the common wealth. Civil Magistrate.
Whether he have commanded or committed any to prison without just cause,
where either for hunger and famine, or with stench and fulsome smellys, or some
such like means they have been lamentably dealt withal, and miserably handled.

Whether he have denied to any, their lawful right, to plead and answer
for themselves, and defend their cause.

Whether he have upon corrupt affection, either secretly in prison, or openly
abroad, commanded any to be cruelly handled, racked, tortured, bound,
beaten, or any other way hurt, and punished in body, or deprived of life.

Whether such as he could not rightly and lawefullie oppress and make
dispatch of, he have caused and procured by others to be trecherouslie
accused, apprehended, wronged, hurt, or by any manner of mean, brought within
the compass of danger.

Whether he have ever seemed to favor, countenance, or protect any
murtherous, cruel, and bloody persons, or have at any time willingly joined
in counsel with them.

Whether in punishing those that have hurt, wounded, or slain others, as
thieves, ruffians, cut-throates, and such like, he have been remiss,
negligent, and careless, either in not willingly finding out the offenders, or
in refusing to bestow the charges, for their due punishment and repression, or
by any other way whatsoever.

Whether in punishing offenses he have at any time exceeded measure, and
either devised new kinds of tortures, or taken delight in such as have been too
too terrible, painful, and rigorous; or have inflicted more grievous and sorer
punishment, than the nature and quality of the offense deserved, or required.

Whether sitting in judgment and hearing the case effectually and
substantially, with all proofs debated, he have condemned and given judgment
against him, whom he found and we^^ knew to be innocent.

Whether he have been careful to defend from wrongful oppression poor
widows, fatherless, and other distressed and comfortless persons, and them
when they have been in danger, relieved and assisted.

Whether he have set forth or caused by others to be set forth, any games or
disportes, in the which sometime men have been wounded, maimed, yea, many
times slain and killed outright.

Whether he have made war without just cause, or given either counsel or
aid to others that have so done.

Whether he have inhibited and forbidden any from helping and relieuing the
afflicted, from defending the cause of the innocent and accused; from selling
such things as be necessary for the mainrenance and sustentation of this
life, and from helping to rescue those that were oppressed, or violently
assaulted.

Whether he have rightly and duly kept the times of truce agreed upon.

Whether he have procured and caused any that have been delivered unto him as
Pledges and Hostages, or any that have been sent unto hint as Ambassadors
and Agentes, to be ill entreated or brought into any danger.

General of wars, Captain and Soldier. General, Captain, Soldier.
Whether being General and Chieftaine, he have commanded any thing to be
done with more cruelty and rigor, than the law of arms required* thereby
contemning and overthrowing all military discipline.

Whether for his private affection he have conducted and lead his Soldiers
ours to other places than were convenient and requisite, or whether he has
endamaged and hurt any, whom his commission and duty required not to deal
withal.

Whether knowing the war to be taken in hand upon unjust cause and wrongful
quarrel, he have (notwithstanding) served in the same.

Whether he have suffered his Soldiers disorderli^ to use outrage and
cruelty, otherwise than either was given them in commandment, or the custom
of war required and allowed.

Whether he have used any cruelty either in body or goods, toward such
persons as were innocent, as namely, old men, young children, ministers of
the Church, poor widows, women, (specially being great with child,) or lying
in child-bedde, virgins, and such like.

Whether the same were done with swoorde, with glaiue, with fire, with spoil,
or any other way. Infinite be the ways and manners of cruelty, in
soldiers many times usual.

Whether they have sought by any strange, uncouth and unusual way to annoy,
supplant and damnifie their enemy, as in devising new Engines and sleightful
inventions, new and strange kinds of munition and weapons, and poisoning the
same, whereby the wounds therewith made, become incurable, and such like.

Whether they have caused any treason to be wrought, or any politik stratageme
to be practiced, whereby greater slaughter was made, and more bloodshed, than
otherwise would have been.

Lawier, Attorney, Proctor, Scribe. Lawier, Attorney, Advocate, Scribe.
Whether being retained on the behalf of the one party, accusing, he have for
ill will or affection, so aggreuated the case of the other side being accused,
that thereby he has either been the sooner overthrown, grieuouslyer
punished, or otherwise worse handled and dealt withal, either in body or
goods, than otherwise he would have been.

Whether he have kept back his aid, or denied his help to the poor, or any
other distressed weaklinges standing in need of his advise, and craving his
fauoutable furtheraunce, either for defense of their cause, or for the drawing
of their pleas and books: and whether he have done the same in such good form
as he ought, and as he could have done if he had been disposed.

Physician, Apothecarie. Physician. Apothecary
Whether he have intermedled, or presumed to deal in the art of Physic, and
preparing of medicines, being not furnished with sufficient skill thereunto.

Whether he have prescribed, directed, appointed, made or given to his patient,
any receipt or medicine, whereby the disease has rather increased than
decreased, or death perhaps there upon insued.

Whether he have been negligent in helping the sick, when he has been
requested, and whom he could have cured and helped.

Whether he have proved any thing at randon, as doubtful, and not knowing
whether it were good or no.

Whether he have given any instruction, or any kind of help or counsel to
women to make them barren, to procure abortion or untimely birth, to destroy
the child conceived in their womb, to bring upon them unnatural coldness,
or to compass and bring to pass lewd and dishonest loves, etc.

Rich man. Rich man.
Whether he have denied to the poor and needy, that has asked him such
convenient relief, as was necessary to him for the sustentation of his life,
as meat, drink, etc. Knowing that the poor party wanted the same. In that
thou have not fed thy hungry brother (says one) thou have murdered him.

Merchant, Workman, Artificer. Merchant, Artificer.
Whether he have made or sold any strange and new invented instruments, to
spoil and hurt the body of man withal.

Whether, to furnish any that make unjust wars, without good cause and
reason, he have sold to them armor, weapons, or other things.

Butcher, Fishmonger, Baker, Brewer, Cater, Vitaler, Cook, Vintner, Tauerner,
Butcher, Baker, Brewer, Fishmo^ger, Vitailer, Cook, Tauerner,
etc, Whether they have sold, uttered, retailed or d^essed corrupt flesh, fish,
or any other meat or drink, whereby the eaters thereof, have caught sickness,
infection, or any other harm in their bodies.

Husband. Hu^band.
Whether he have stricken and beaten his wife, either else put and enforced her
to such labors and works, whereby she has been brought a bed before her time,
or hurt the child in her womb.

Wife. Wife.
Whether by medicines, or labor, or dancing, or any other means, she have been
the occasion of untimely birth, or otherwise of hurting the child within her.

Whether she have carefully tendered and cherished her babe being newborn,
looking so diligently and so te^derly unto it as her duty required. There be
many women that may justly be charged with great negligence in this behalf,
and that many ways.

Whether laying the babe in the same bed with her in the night, she have
crushed and bruised it, or by ouer-lying, smoothered and killed it.

Whether by her adulterous life, or by her scolding and brawling with any
other, or by making complaint to her husband of others, she have been the
cause to set her husband and the other party together by the ears. whereby the
one has violently assailed, wounded, or killed the other.

Nurses are liable to the same faults that matrones and wives. Harlots and
strumpets, Nurses, Harlots, Strumpets.
drabs, curtizans, queanes, and such as have nothing of virgins but the name
only, are likewise infamous for procuring their barrenness, untimely births,
and killing their children. They therefore in this behalf have great cause
diligently to examine their consciences.

To be short: it is every particular man and woman's duty to look about, Every
man particular.
and it stands each man in hand to consider with himself, according to that
trade, function, or kind of life wherein he lives, whether he have any manner
of way ben the cause either of the hurt, or of the death of an other. As for
example: The Master, when he commands his servant to lift or carry such
great burdens, whereby he is hurt in his body, or peradventure catches that
harm, whereof he can never be cured. Likewise, he that wills another to go
before through a deep foord or water, over some bridge, rotten planke, timber,
or ladder, where there is great appearance of present danger. He also that
hurleth a stone, or shoots an arrow into such place, where others do usually
haunt and assemble. Also he that lends or lets to hire to an other a
horse, which he knows to have naughty tricks, as oftentimes to have
overthrown and cast his rider, to flou^dre in the mire, to lie down in the
water, etc.

Infinite be the ways, whereby the body of our neighbor may be put in
danger, and wronged. Let every one therefore enter into deep consideration
with himself, and remember how and which way he has offended, and brought his
neighbor into any hazard* peril, or danger.

Finally, whether in committing any of these aforesaid, thou have given thereby
occasion to others to do the like: that is to say, whether either by word or
deed against this commandment thou have been a stumbling-blocke, or the
cause of fall to another. And also, whether seeing others committing any of the
same, thou have secretly assented unto them, neither staying them, nor
reproving the^, neither yet showing any token of thy mislike thereof, when time
and place served thee well, so to have done. The accessarie and consentour is
as well culpable, as the party that does the deed. 7. Commandment.


The 7. Commandment.
Thou shall not commit adultery.
Sins inward.
WHether, in any place or time when thou haste been idle, and unoccupied, thou
have had any thinking of filthy and unchaste matters, and whether in the same
thou have fixed any delight, or dwelt in any pleasure: so that thereby thou
feltest thy mind and flesh stirred, provoked, and occasioned to sin.

Whether, seeing any woman or maid, thou have burnt inwardly in lust toward
her. Whether thou have ever devised any practices, or laid any plots, whereby
to compass thy desire in such filthy purposes.

Whether thou have taken any delight in reporting, and remembering thy former
lewd life or filthy acts this way committed: and whether thou have had any
desire to return to the same sin again.

Whether, thou have immoderatlie been in love with thy self, either for thy
beauty, or for any other gifts whatsoever, as though for the same thou
deemedst thy self a Paragon, able to allure and draw others to commit filthy
folly with thee.

Sins outward.
WHether, through bravery in apparel, simpering looks, smooth countenance,
gallant decking, curious trimming, wanton glances, nice behavior, and other
like vanities, thou have given occasion of semblable looseness, and opened a
wide gap for others by imitatio^ of thy follies, the sooner to commit filthiness
and dishonestie.

Whether thou have been addicted to idleness, banqueting, tippeling, and
drinking, whereby thy libidinous lust has been (...) and thy desire of lechery
(...).

Wheth^^ (...) wanton eyes and learing countenances, beckes, signs, greetings,
serviceable salutations, gifts and rewards, amorous songs and Sonets, delicate
instruments of Music, nightly walkinges up and down the streets, purposely
appointed daunces, set banquets, messengers, or by any wicked practices, thou
have gone about to bring thy dishonest desire, and lecherous love to pass.

Whether thou have willingly kept company, or been familiar with such persons,
by who^ thou might be egged and entised, helped, or furthered, o^ any way
drawn and moved to commit this filthiness.

Whether, to compass thy dishonest desire* thou have at any time resorted
unto, and frequented secret corners, gardens, or any other such places as
might well be suspected. It stands thee upon; and thou ought with all
diligence and circumspection to avoid and eschew all such persons, all such
places, all such times, and al such other circumstances as may draw thy mind
to infection, thy body to villainy, or thy name and credit into question.

Whether by any secret slight or ^unning, as drinks, drugs, medicines,
charmed potions, amatorious Philters, figures, characters, or any such^like
paltering instruments, devises, or practices, thou have gone about to procure
others to doat for love of thee.

Whether by kissing, groping, touching, or handling any parts of the body,
thou have gone about to stir vp^ lust and lechery either in thy self, or in
any other.

Whether thou have used any ribal^ talk, or raskallie words of scurrilitie,
tending to the praise of lust, and provocation of lechery; or whether thou
have willingly heard and given ear to others that have so done, or provoked
others to any such talk.

Whether thou have unlawfully had carnal copulation with any, and with what
manner of person. Whether with a single woman, thy self also being single and
unmarried: or whether with a married person, which is adultery. Or whether
(...) that is (...) of kin or assi^^tie to thee, which is called Incest: or
(...) with any, (...) and against their will, which is called Rape or
rauishment.

Whether thou have abused thy (...) by carnal dealing in any other sort, or
with any other persons or creatures, than by the law of nature is ordained.
As by Sodomitrie, or by Buggarie, termed by some, the dombe sin; and as I
think, for this cause so termed, for that it is of such horror, that it is
not once to be named or spoken of among men.

Whether thou have long time continued in that kind of sin, whereof thou
know thy self guilty.

Whether thou have given any aid to others ^n their filthy dealings, or
whether thou have bestowed any time, labor, or diligence in procuring and
bringing about any dishonest, lustful, and lecherous loves.

For the kind or trade of life.
Governor, or Minister of the Church. Whether he have admitted and winked at,
Bishop, Pastor, Minister.
or tolerated any, being by others admitted to the ministry of the Church,
who^ either he himself, or any others did know to be whooremongers, or to
keep Concubines, and harlots.

Whether he have suffered any to be partakers of the holy Supper of the
Lord, notoriously known to be Adulterers and Whooremongers.

Whether, (when he has seen sins manifestly reigning, and grieuouslie
prevailing, against this seventh commandment, or stews and brothelhouses to
be suffered and to go unpunished) he have been negligent and remiss, (as
occasion and opportunity has served) to reprove and inueigh against it: and
whether he have zealouslie advised, and earnestly admonished the Magistrate
to look to his duty in this behalf, in repressing and redressing these
enormities.

Whether in joining any persons together in Matrimony, specially them of the
lighter sort, he have been too ready, rash,and inconsiderate, as namely, in
not propounding unto them the ends of Matrimony, for which it was by God
ordained, and instituted, in not declaring unto them such points as appertain
to the dignity of Marriage, in not earnestly examining them, what reasons moved
them to enter into this holy estate. The negligent looking unto these and such
like points. is one special cause of so many ill agreeing matches, so many
lamentable diuorses, etc.

Whether he have suffered the patrimony, treasure, substance, and goods of the
Church to be bestowed in alms upon any such persons, as for their lewd life
and filthy living were infamous.

Whether, when women have resorted unto him for his advise, and spiritual
counsel, he have felt himself any way moved to unchastity, or otherwise
inkindled and assailed, with any lecherous cogitations.

Finally, whether in the Church or else where, or by domestical usage,
familiar custom* or any other means whatsoever, either by immodest
countenance, or indiscreet iesture, he have given others occasion to conceive
of him ill opinion, and sinister suspicion.

Magistrate and public Officer in the common wealth. Prince. Magistrate
Officer.
Whether in his Realm, Country, Dominion, Precinct, and jurisdiction, he have
suffered any dens of baudrie, open brothel-houses, or Stews, from the which
there mu^^ needs grow and flow full seas of much mischief.

Whether he have been remiss and negligent to reform and bring to amendment
of life, or else to punish and banish out of the common wealth, all such as for
lewdnes and impuritie, are generally infamous, as baudes, pandars, filthy
loue-makers, adulterers, whooremongers, strumpets, and all others whomsoever,
giving offense in this behalf.

Whether he have at any time, or by any means so used and demeaned himself,
that he has been thought to favor, support, and bear with this kind of
filthy life; which suspicion commonly arises, when men in authority do
familiarly admit to their acquaintance and company, those that be lechers. and
whooremaisters, and such as be foul mouthed, and baudilie languashed. O^ when
they make much of such persons, and delight in their fellowship: or advance and
prefer them to dignities and honors: or suffer them to enjoy public offices
in the common wealth, whereas other good, honest, and virtuous persons, are
unregarded, and not accounted of.

Whether they have suffered any Enterludes, Stageplaies, or games, wherein have
been showed, uttered, or done, any filthy feats, unchaste words, or lewd
actions. Which kind of shows and plays are in many places seen, not only
at times of profane iollyties, but now and then also even at the solemn
assemblies, of some such as by profession should be deadly haters, and
vehement disswaders thereof.

Soldier. Whether in the time of war, he have constuprated and defloured
any virgins or matrones; thinking himself (as it were) to have lawful
interest over the body of those seely creatures. being by force of arms of him
conquered, taken, and subdued.

Physician and Apothecarie. Physician. Apothecary
Whether he have given counsel to any person, for the preservation and
recovery of his health, to commit whooredome, or some other vile act, to
become dronken, etc.

Whether he have ministered and made any medicines or drugges, to inflame lust,
provoke lechery, or procure dishonest love.

Whether in delivering medicines to any woman or maiden, he have wantonly and
unchastly either handled or beheld her.

Schoolemaister. Schoolemaister.
Whether he have read to the youth in the school, any wanton writers, or
unchaste Authors, whereby their minds might catch infection. And of such sort
are there certain Poets Comicall, Elegiake, and Epigrammatarie.

Scholar. Scholar.
Whether he have privately taken delight in reading such Authors, and whether he
have been thereby induced to sin.

Whether, not only by familiarity with women, and damsels of ill report and
fame, but also with ietting the streets by night with instruments of Music,
he have procured dancing, and occasioned misrule, whereby he might seem (as
it were) to seek opportunity, and to find fit time to compass his unclean
conceits, and fleshly imaginations. And if over and besides this, he have at
any time carried weapons, causing therewith braulings and fraies, to the
hurting or wounding of any, or which is worse, of the murder and death of
any. In this doing. he has sinned also by manifest brech against the sixth
commandment, whereof we lately treated.

Husband and Wife. Husband, Wife.
Whether they have faithfully kept the one to the other, their bed undefiled,
and their faith unspotted.

Whether to the actual knowledge, allowed between them, they have showed
thymselues the one to the other, (without lawful and necessary cause)
waiward, churlish, and unwilling, whereby might have grown danger of
scortation, uncleanness, and filthy offense.

Whether there has been between them any bitter words, or brawling iarres,
breeding an hatred the one to the other, and peradventure occasioning them, or
the one of them to commit sin with some other party.

Whether the love between them have been hemmed in within the bounds of such
christian sobriety and decency, that they have not (as it were in a beastly
sort, and overmuch dotage) loved the one the other, yielding themselves to
immoderate, yea, unchaste, and (as I may say) whoorish lust and love. He
commits adultery with his own wife, that in this filthy sort loves her,
and doteth over her vnmeasurably.

Whether they entered into the estate of wedlock, for any other ends. than
those for which God ordained, and instituted Matrimony.

Whether they have exceeded the lawful bounds and measures (in any respect or
circumstance) of matrimonial love.

Whether they have used or showed any signs of wanton and lascivious
behavior, in the sight and hearing of others, namely of young children and
maidens.

Whether they have in their house any vtensiles, furniture, instruments, or
stuff, that may allure either them or others to any vanity, wantonness, or
dishonestie, as Pictures, Tables, etc.

Whether they have been careful and circumspect to see their whole household,
that is to say, their children and servants, chastely and shamefastly brought up
in all good nurture and honesty.

Artificers, Painters, Tailers, Painters,
Caruers, Grauers, Hucstars, Retailours, etc. Whether they ^ue made or sold
any wares, garments, or instruments which the buyers do abuse, Scmsters, and
other Artificers.
convert, and occupy, for filthy purposes, and paltering devises. Some make
and sell painting for faces, some cerusse and pomadoes: some staring ruffes,
garishe Cawles, etc. all which are toys arguing the vanite, folly,
uncleanness, and nicitie of meicockes and wantons.

Whether they have painted any counterfaites, engraven any images, or made any
picture in tables, in hafts of knives, in pots, in Arra^, in Tapestrie,
hangings, or any such like, representing filthiness, baudrie, unchastity, or
any way inducing and drawing the beholder too vile and unchaste cogitations.

Inholders, Vintners, Tauerners, Vitailers. Inholder, Tauerner, Vitailer,
Whether they receive or keep any harlots, and misliuing women in their
houses, or any other infamous persons whatsoever, living by the* shameful
practice of baudrie.

Musicians, Stageplaiers. Musicians, Mintirels, Stageplaiers.
Whether by singing or playing on instruments of Music, or in showing any
actions or iestures of scurrility, they have moved the beholders and hearers,
to lascivious dancing, wanton thoughts, or unchaste actions.

Finally, whether in committing any before named offenses, thou have given
any occasion unto others to do the like: that is to say, whether either by
thy filthy words, or dissolute deeds, thou have ministered offense and cause
of stumbling to other weak ones.

Again, whether when thou haste seen others committing any of these faults
aforesaid, thou have secretly consented unto them, neither stayinge and
hindering their evil, neither reproving it, neither yet giving any token or
signification of their mislike thereof, whereas upon occasion and
opportunity, thou both might and ought so to have done. Consent, as well
secret as open, makes thee guilty of trespass.

The eight Commandment. 8 Commandment.

Thou shall not steal.
Sins inward.
WHether thou have carried a mind desirous every kind of way, or any kind
of way, either by hook or crook, to increase thy wealth, and enrich thy self.

Whether, thou take such inward joy and pleasure in thy goods, that thou can
not find in thy heart willingly to depart with any of them.

Whether, when thou have suffered any loss, or received any hinderaunce in thy
goods, thou have taken overmuch sorrow and grief for the same. For this to
do, is an evident token of notable avarice.

Whether thou have devised in thy mind, how and which way thou might catch
into thy clouches and possession, any other man's living, lands, inheritance,
goods, wares, furniture, vtensiles, or stuff.

Whether thou have ever laid any plottes, or devised any shifts, to intrappe
any man in his dealings, or to prevent and hinder him of his commodity.

Whether thou have been agrieued, and sorrowful at another man's prosperous
success and welfare: as though another man's commodity had been thy
hinderaunce and discommoditie And heereunto are to be referred all the tricks
and points of secret spigh and hollow envy.

Whether thou have imagined wit! thy self* how thou might hinder an other
man, either in fame, credit, honor, or estimation.

Whether thou have even unwillingly and as it were, with grief of mind, yielded
that to another, which in right was his own: and whether thou has not ben
willing to depart, even wit^ somewhat of thine own. These and many such like,
being but thought and conceived, even in the mind, do make us guilty before
God, yea, although actually they be not done.

Sins external and outward.
WHether either privily or apertly, with the owners knowledge, or without it,
and whether against the good will of the proprietarie, whosoever he be, whether
he be kins-man or friend-man, neighbor or forrainer, friend or foe, thou
haste raked and hailed his goods unto thee.

Whether when thou have found any thing by chance lost by another, thou have
kept it still to thy self, and have not sought means and occasion to restore
it to the right owner.

Whether when thou have borrowed any instrument, tool, or other thing, thou
have used it to other uses, than it was purposely agreed upon, and lent thee,
and that without either the thinking, opinion, consent, or will of the owner.

Whether thou have omitted to restore back any thing that has been lent thee.

Whether, as it were in the way of jest, thou have gotten and received any
thing from another, not minding to restore it, and do still detain and keep
it to thine own use.

Whether thou have ever practiced theft, or committed any robbery by the high
way.

Whether thou have practiced pyracie on the sea, or associated thy self with
pirates and rouers.

Whether thou have fired, or any other like way spoiled thy neighbors house,
substance, or goods whatsoever.

Whether thou have wrought any hinderance, and procured any loss to others,
either by hurting their Cattle, Fishes, Fowls, Trees, Corn, Gardens,
Orchardes, Children, Servants, etc.

Whether thou have purloined and taken away any Church furniture, serving for
the Ecclesiastical ministry, which kind of sin is commonly called
Sacrilege, and is deemed worse than theft.

Whether thou have given or lent to any person that which was none of thine
own, and wherewith thou had nothing to do.

Whether thou have not faithfully kept such things as have been upon trust
committed unto thee, in such sort as honesty and conscience required.

Whether thou have refused justly to pay the hirelings, and them that have
labored with thee and to thy use, their wages and hire;and whether thou have
defaulked, nipped or abated any part or parcel thereof.

Whether thou have refused and denied to bestow thine alms upon the poor,
asking the same of thee, or desiring to borrowe some thing of thee: or whether
thou have more than half unwillingly bestowed and lent the same.

Whether in making division of things to be shared between thee and others,
thou have fraudulently, and either secretly or openly catched more for thy
portion and share, than thy part amounted unto.

Whether thou have given ill words, or been any way offended with him that
has required and demanded his right, and that which was his own, at thy hands.

Whether, when thou have seen an other like to fall into any danger, trouble,
trouble or hinderaunce, thou have given him warning before hand to take heed.

Whether thou have subtly practiced with others to crosse-cut thy brother in
any bargain, or to prevent him of his commodity, or whether thou have
attempted or done any thing to that end.

Whether thou have bereft, or by any means empaired any ma^s good name and
fame, which all honest men do more esteem (and that worthily) than either
money or any other worldly treasure: and whether thou have done it secretly
and closely, by undermining his credit with lewd speeches; or by affixing and
setting up infamous and slanderous libels or pictures, or by openly charging
him with some crime not committed; or if it were committed, yet secret and not
known: or by exaggerating another man's fault; or through thy silence and
dissimulation soothing a matter as though that were committed, which in very
deed was not committed: Or by accusing of him before a Judge, and that not so
much for any love thou bear to justice, as for malice and spite to the
party, and for desire to do him a shrewd turn.

Whether thou have lent out thy money, corn, wine, or any other thy goods,
with condition to receive again more than thou lentest and gave out, whether
the same be in money, or in ware, or in any other thing whatsoever.

Whether for lending any thing, thou have taken to pawn, apparel, horse,
house, ground, etc. Which pawn thou have in the mean while used and worn,
without allowance or abatement of any part of the principal sum.

Whether, when thou have lent unto Merchants, Occupiers, and Artificers, any
money, thou have done it in hope to partake with the^, in the gain which they
make with the money borrowed of thee.

Whether thou have bought land or any other thing, at a higher price than it
is well worth; but yet with this clause and condition, that the party which
felleth it, shall be bound to buy the same of thee again, and thou in the
mean space till he redeem it, take and enjoy all the profit and commodity
arising and growing thereof to thine own use: This cunning shifte is termed
Cloaked usury. For they cleanly cover it with the honest names of buieng and
selling, whereas being well considered, it is nothing else but plain mutuation.

Whether thou have borrowed upon usury, when thou had no need, but
only to lend out the same money again to others, for greater gain, and
bigger usury: or whether thou borrowedst it to spend and consume unthriftily.

Whether any person have wastfully spent his wealth, or lewdly and in
dissolute company made havoc of his thrift, whereby he has afterward bin
driven to be burdenous and chargeable unto others.

For the trade of life.
MInister of the Church. Clergiman, or Minister of the Church.
Whether he were preferred to any spiritual function, or whether he himself
have preferred any others for reward and gain, or upon any other such
considerations, to and fro had and concluded, as might well be reckoned in
lieu of reward or money. This foul crime, (because of Simon Magus, who desired
with money to buy the gift and power by laying on of hands, Act. 8. 19
to give the holy Ghost, is now called Snnonie.

Whether for doing his duty in celebration of the Sacraments, and other
offices appertinent thereunto, he have purposelie respected gain and reward.

Whether he entered into the office of the ministry for gain, ease, and
commodity, rather than for any other cause.

Whether he have left one Church, and gone to another, in hope of bigger
commodity and greater gain, or any way thereby, seeking with more wealth to
enrich himself.

Whether he have suffered the goods of the Church so to be imbezilled and
wasted, that thereby the Ministers and poor people having their maintenance
and living by that Church, are nipt and skanted, and cut short of necessaries
for their sustentation.

Whether he receive and take the profits of sundry Churches without a just
and necessary cause. I mean that to be a just and necessary cause, when of
the prosites of that other Church, a Minister cannot maintain himself; or
when as at that time there cannot another fit be found, able to take the
charge of the same.

Whether he have caused the goods and revenues of the Church, whereof he has
charge and gouerement to be bestowed and employed to those uses, which in right
they ought to be: namely, to the maintenance of the Ministers, exhibition to
poor scholars, relief of aged persons, widows, Orphans, fatherless
children, etc.

Whether in disposing and bestowing of the goods of the Church, he have given
more than meet was, to those that had less need, neglecting those, whose
necessity and want in all equity and conscience, ought to have been specially
releiued.

Whether he has converted the stipend and maintenance which he has received
of the Church, upon necessary and honest uses, namely in keeping and
nourishing an honest and well governed family, and in relief of the poor,
not consuming the same in riot, in banqnetting, in bravery, or among harlots,
etc.

Whether he have pulled or taken to himself, any thing as annexed to his
Church, which in truth is not annexed unto it.

Whether he have received the prosite and stipend of any Church, whereon he
has no care to bestow any travel or diligence in teaching.

Whether of those things that belong to the Church, he have translated any
thing to other uses, than he ought to do, and have committed and referred the
use thereof, to any such as do no manner of good to the Church.

Whether he have admitted or allowed any fantastical opinions, or pickpurse
rites, whereby the Minister and such as serve in the Church, do make private
gain: of which sorts be, the dreaming opinions, and superstitious rites, of
delivering souls for monye out of Purgatory, of merits and satisfaction for
sins, of pilgrimages, of kissing and offering to carved Images, and relics of
the dead, etc.

Governor of the Common wealth. Whether he attained the dignity, Civil
Magistrate.
pre-eminence and power, whereunto he is advanced truly and justly, that is to
say, without fraud or deceit, without force or violence, and without wrong to
any manner of person.

Whether he have so behaved himself toward his superior Magistrate, as he
ought to have done, yielding unto him all due honor.

Whether he have offered or done wrong to any other, being placed in
dignity and office, although somewhat his inferior, denying unto him his
lawful right, authority, fees, relieues, services, and appertenaunces to his
place and calling appendant, and also so have affoorded unto him assistaunce,
aid, defense, and such like.

Whether he have incroched upon any other man's right, or challenged to
himself that which belonged to others: forciblie wresting and drawing that
within the compass of authority, wherein he had no interest, prescribing laws
and orders to them, over whom his authority stretched not.

Whether he have omitted and foreslowed, to help and de end such as were
committed (in trust) unto him:insomuch that through his careless and wilful
negligence or malice, they have suffered harm, and incurred inconvenience.

Whether he have enjoined and assessed those to paiments of money, taxes,
tribute, custom, and impost, over who^ he had no authority, and then also
when as no need was, or otherwise than was ever before time, either used or
heard of,

Whether he have given commandment for any manner of things, as having
authority so to do, when as in deed he had none at all.

Whether he have empaired, diminished, or taken away the liberties or
immunities and privileges of the Church, or common wealth.

Whether he have promoted or suffered any being promoted to execute any public
offices, being men ambitious and couctous, pitifully polling the poor people
with their crafty and colorable devises.

Whether he have been remiss and negligent to repress and punish Robbers,
Thieves, and Rouers, and such as any way were given to pillage, rauine, and
pilferie.

Whether he have seemed in any sor^ to favor, defend, and bear with usurers.

Whether he have suffered Palmesters, Fortune tellers, Stageplaiers,
Sawceboxes, Enterluders, Puppitplayers, loiterers, vagabonds, landleapers, and
such like, cozening make-shiftes, to practice their cogging tricks, and rogish
trades, within the circuit of his authority, and to deceive the simple people
with their vile forgery and palteric.

Whether he have suffered false measures, false waights, and excessive prices
of things by little and little to grow up and be used.

Whether he have devised and made any new laws, as traps and snares to catch
the seely people unawares withal, serving for none other purpose, tha^ for his
own private gain and commodity.

Whether when he ought to have punished according to the severity of the
law, he has rather respected money, and received large bribes, thereby
defeating the meaning of the law, and making open sale of justice.

Whether he have advanced any to public offices for money, and whether he
have given false and wrongful judgment, sitting upon the bench of Justice.

Whether he have ignorantly, and unwittingly given wrong judgment, for that he
had not sufficient skill in the laws, or because he took not the advice of
some skilfuller, and more learned than himself.

Whether he have refused to give sentence upon any matter fully trauersed and
effectually pleaded; or whether he have for the nonce, and of some set purpose
delayed, and deferred judgment, whereby even in that respect, any person has
sustained loss and hinderaunce.

Whether he have drawn into question and controversy, any matters impertinent
to the cause, or to the which the party accused is not bound to answer, and
whereby any person is prejudiced or damnisied.

Whether he have had special regard and care of the cases of poor widows,
fatherless children, and such like persons, (which for the sundry distresses
whereunto they be liable, are by the laws ^earmed miserable and whether he
have been very circumspect that they should not any way be iniuried.

Whether he have prohibited or any way stayed such as have felt themselves
wronged and oppressed, from appealing to some higher Magistrate, or to implore
help, and seek for aid at some other.

Captain in wars, Warri^ur.
and Soldier. Whether being a General or Captain in the wars, he receive
pay of his Prince, for mo soldiers than he has indeed under him; and whether
in his Checkroll, or Muster book he set down a greater number then is true.

Whether he have by unjust wars spoiled and ransacked any.

Whether for any private hatred, or other evil affection whatsoever, in those
wars that have been just, he have commanded, or procured any to be
despoiled, whom he ought not to have invaded.

Whether he have conducted and led his Soldiers by such ways and to such
places, as he specially ought, and as were most behoouefull and expedient; and
has not rather for money led, or caused them to be conueighed and led to
other places, than he ought to have done.

Whether he betook himself to the wars, in hope rather of spoil and pray,
than for love to his Country, and care of the public peace and tranquilitic.
There be almost infinite ways, whereby these kind of people do pitifully
transgress and break this present eighth Commandment.

Doctor, Teacher, or Schoolmaster, Doctor. Graduate. Scholemaster. Reader.
Teacher.
Whether he have taught his Scholars more negligently, more seeldome, or not so
faithfully as he ought in conscience to have done; as one that only respected
his stipend, hier, wages, preferment and commodity.

Whether having a public stipend, or fee appointed unto him, and the same
reasonable and sufficient enough, he have exacted or received for the same his
reading, any thing more of his scholars and Auditors.

Whether he have received and gotten the degree of Doctor, or Master, the
rather thereby to procure unto himself the greater gain, and the easier to
dec^iue, than for any honest and godly respects.

Whether in favor of any, (and especially for money) he have defined and set
down that for right and true, which was otherwise.

Whether being greased in the hand with gifts and rewards, he has overmuch
cockered, dandeled and wincked at some of his scholars, not enioyning them to
their ordinary exercises, or not setting them to their wonted scholasticall
taskes, as other of their fellows be, or in not checking and correcting them
when they have been disobedient and done amiss, but suffered them to have
their own will, and to run riote at their own pleasure.

Scholar. Scholar. Student.
Whether he have wastfully and unthriftily spent the money which his parents
disbursed and defraied for his charges and necessaries.

Whether he have misspent his time, which he ought to have bestowed at his book
and study.

Whether he have given his mind to his book, or to any certain trade of
life, chiefly and principally respecting gain and lucre thereby.

Advocate, Attorney, Proctor, Scribe, Lawyer. Lawyer. Attorney. Advocate.
Scriuener. Notarie.
Whether he have taken upon him to defend any cause, as just and right, (which
he knew to be unjust) and again have impugned any cause which he knew to be
just.

Whether for his own gain and commodity, he has caused men to go to law
together, and to be at charges for matters that otherwise might quietly have
been ended, without any great troubles and expenses in law.

Whether he have used any dilatory pleas, or any other course then he ought to
have done, to the hinderance and detriment of either party.

Whether through negligence, unskillfulness, or any other defect and fault in
him, he have lost and overthrown a good and rightful cause.

Whether he have bewrayed any thing to the adversary parti^, whereby his own
Client has been overthrown, and the other party gotten the vpperhande.

Whether he have refused to deal in the causes of the poor, needy and
moneylesse, and only framed himself to the rich and wealthy.

Whether he have taken too large fees of his Clientes.

Whether being a Notarie, he have falsified, forged, depraved or defaced any
instrument or writing, either by rasing, adding, enterlyning, altering, or by
what other way so ever.

Whether he have omitted and left out any thing, concerning either substance or
form, in the penning, enditing, and setting down of solemn deeds,
autenticall instruments and writings of record.

Whether in any instrument he have dissen^bled, omitted, tra^sposed, or forged
any thing contrary to law, or done any other act, whereby another is
afterward damnified.

Whether he have framed or procured any instrument to embolden, harden, and
fortify wicked and wilful persons in their rashness, avarice, and headie
wilfulness.

Whether for making any instrument he have taken money of them, of who^ he
ought not to have had any or whether more than was due to him for the same.

Physician, Apotheca^ie. Physician. Apotheca^ie.
Whether being a Physician; he have extorted, and exacted, at the hands of the
rich, more than the money agreed upon between them, and more than any reason
afforded, for his pains and counsel: and as for the poor (whom he deemed
unable to pay) whether he have utterly refused, or been unwilling to visit or
go unto them.

Whether being an Apothecarie, or Ointment maker, he have confected and made
baggage, corrupt, or counterfeite Medicines, either simple or compounde, and
the same sold at so dear a price, as those that were good, soueraigue,
cordial and sound. For herein is a double fault committed, the one in
respect of the wares themselves, the other in respect of the price.

Merchant, Chapman. Merchant. Chapman. Seli^^ of ware.
Whether he exercise the trade of Merchandise rather upon a covetous desire,
immoderately to enrich himself, and to s^rape together great wealth, than
thereby to gain measurable substance for the necessary sustentation, and use
of his life, or therewith to benefit and help with his travail, the public
society of his Country.

Whether he have conspired and confederated with others of his own trade,
selling the like wares that he does, upon some certain high and great price,
whereby there cannot but ensue of necessity, a great dearth in the
Commonwealth.

Whether entering into copartenership with others, he keep back, and retain
to his own use, some part of the gain, defrauding by concealment, his
Coparcener, of his moytie and portion.

Whether in selling his wares to one that is not able in hand to pay down
ready money or wares, but craves some respit of time for the payment thereof,
he have rated the same wares, in respect of the forbearance, at deerer and
higher Prices, than they were worth.

Whether he have bought aforehand for ready money, wheat, wine, or such like
commodity, to be delivered unto him at a time agreed upon after: but yet
better cheap than the same were esteemed at, even then when the bargain was
made; or like enough to be afterward: as if, for ten crowns, he bought that,
which a little while after he was sure to sell again for twelve crowns, etc.

Whether in barter and exchaung of wares for wares, he have strictly exacted
and hucked wares from the other parti^, which he was well assured were more
worth, and cost dearer, than the wares that he in lieu thereof delivered.

Whether he have bought naughty, corrupt and mustie wares at some small price,
in hope to retayle and sell them again, for good and perfect, and at such
price, as good, sound and perfect wares are sold for: Or whether, knowing the^
to be faulty and naught, he have purposely and wittingly mingled them with
others that were good, perfect^ and faultlesse wares.

Whether he have bought stolen goods, knowing or suspecting them so to be.

Whether he have used any slight, collusion, or deceit, either in word or
deed, thereby the easier, and the dearer to sell his wares,

Whether he have duly paid the impostes, custom and such like charges, where
and when he ought so to have done.

Whether in the exchaunging of foreign and unknown Coin, he have wittingly
committed any fraud.

Whether, for the only and mere exchange he have indented, co^enanted,
bartered and bargained, concerning the price in sorer sort, then has lightly
been aforetime used.

Whether he have practiced any other manner of commutation or exchange, then
that which was publicly, and commonly used, and among exchaungers, for the
most part ordinarily frequented.

Broker. Broker.
Whether he have been a mediator or a driuer of bargains, and contracts,
which he knew to be vnco^scienable and unlawful, as namely, grounded upon
usury, or otherwise any manner of way, for the hidden crafunesse secretly
lurking therein, hurtful and damageable.

Whether he have subtly and craftily procured and egged the one of the
parties to consent, and do that which afterward (when he feels himself
bitten and hindered) he has had good cause to repent. For doubtless, the
common use and fashion of Brokers is, to respect, and specially to favor the
one of the parties contracting, above the other: and also to gape after his
own private gain.

Treasurer, Receiver, Guardian. Treasurer. Receiver. Guardian.
Whether he have at anytime disbursed and laid out the public money, or the
Princes treasure committed to his custody, for his own private gain, as
namely in traffic of merchandise, buying and selling, purchasing, lending
out. etc.

Wife. Wife
Whether she have stolen away, or privily suborned one child in steed of an
other, or laid an other woman's child in the place and steed of her own: Or
whether she have named and affirmed the child whom she has borne in
adultery, to be the lawefull child of her husband. These kind of Children
do sundry times carry away from many rightful heirs, round portions of
their inheritance, yea, and sometimes go away with the whole. And therefore is
this a most grievous and heinous sin.

Whether without her husbands knowledge and consent, she liaue given away,
conueighed, a^ened, or with dainty fare wasted his goods and substance.

Artificers, Laborers. Artificers. Laborers.
Whether they exercise any tricks or feats to adulterato, corrupt, forge,
iumule, mar, mingle, foist, or deprave any thing that they do: or whether
they keep back, or purloigne any thing of that which is committed to them in
trust to do; which the party (bespeaking it to be done) can not easily find
out and epsy. Of which crewe are Taylers, Millers, etc.

Whether when they have been hired to do any work, they have labored
faithfully and as their ductic required.

Husbandman, farmer. Husbandman. Farmer.
Whether he have justly, truly, and faithfully paid his tithes, and other
duties.

Whether he have hindered and iniuried his neighbors in their grounds,
fields, and meadows, by putting in his cattle, or by driving them through that
way, or by making courses, and channels to conueye and get the waters from the,
or any other way whatsoever.

Whether through his negligence or spite he have suffered their ground to be
in any part spoiled, or their Ox^, Kine, Horses, Sheep, or other their goods
and Cattels to be hurt, whereby the owner is apparently damnified.

Monier, Min^er. Monyer. Min^er.
Whether by the art of Alchymie, or any other devise, he have mixed mettalles
together, uttering base coin for perfect and good sterling.

Clothier. Clothie^.
Whether he have sold Clothes made of course wool, in steed of fine and good
woollen clothes.

Whether, knowing some fault in the Dying of his clothes, he have wittingly
concealed, and purposely diffimuled it.

Whether he have sold his clothes for fully wrought, and thoroughly ready,
when they have not been fully, thoroughly, and workemanlike finished.

Whether he have according to bargain and promise, faithfully paid his
worke-folkes, as Carders, Spinners, weauers, Fullers, and others, of whom he
can not but have always a great many.

Vintener, Tauerner. Vintener. Tauerner.
Whether he have sold and retayled his wine, or other his drink whatsoever,
in such plight and sort, and none other, than he received the same: that is to
say, without any mixture of water, or other stuff; and again, whether in
just and true measure, etc.

Butcher. Butcher.
Whether he have sold the flesh of a rotten and infected Beast, in stead of
sound and wholesome. Again, whether by just and true weight. And again:
whether he have uttered and chopped away one kind of flesh insteede of an
other, as Goats flesh for Rams Mutton, etc.

Baker. Baker.
Whether he have used any slight or devise, to make his bread weigh heavy.

Whether he have changed the good Meal and fine flower, that others have
brought unto him, putting worse in the place thereof.

Whether he have put more stoare of branne into his meal, than he ought to
do.

Gamester. Gamester.
Whether he have accustomed to play for money, at any unlawful and forbidden
game, as dycing, etc.

Whether he have been importunate to entice others to gaming.

Whether he have won other folks money by cogging, and false play.

Whether he have played and won money of those that have not any thing of
their own, or in their own power to loose: as Children, servants, prentises,
etc.

Whether he have retained, and kept to his own use, the money and other
things, that he has gained and won at unlawful games: and have not
restored the same according to the very meaning of the law.

Whether any person, whosoever he be, has wasted his goods, and money at
playing and gaming.

Stage Player, Bawd. Stageplaier Pandar. Bawd.
etc. Whatsoever is gotten by these naughty practices, and filthy trades, are
to be understood and deemed as lewdly and fraudulently gotten. And therefore
all such are chargeable and liable to this crime of thest, and are bound in
conscience to restitution.

Beggar. Beggar.
Whether being lusty and sound of lymmes, able to labor and get his own
living, he beg, and seek alms abroad. In which doing, he does rob and
spoil those which are poor indeed, and feeds himself with other men's
labors.

Children, Boys, and Gyrles. Children. Boys. Gyrles.
Whether they have given or accustomed themselves to ^ilch fruit, meat or
any other things, and if they have chanced to find any thing, whether they
have been diligent and willing to restore it to the owner. For, from small
pickinges and filcheries, by little and little they will grow to greater.

To conclude. Whether in committing any of the above remembered sins thou have
given occasion to others to commit the like: that is to say, whether by word or
deed, contrary to the renor and effect of this commandment, thou have been
an offense and stumblingblocke to others.

And again, whether, seeing others to commit any of these aforesaid
faults, thou have secretly thereto assented, not showing any sign or token of
thy great mislike thereof, when as good time and opportunity thereunto served
thee. For, not the actual doers only, but the consenters, either directly or
indirectly accessaries thereunto, be also faulty and guilty.

The 9. Commandment.
Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.
Sins inward.
WHether thou have at any time dissembled the truth, 9. Commandment.
or not uttered and maintained it, when and as often as conveniently thou
might and should: and whether slily and secretly, marking other folks
words and deeds, thou have wrested and construed them to the worst part.

Whether thou have attributed and ascribed to thy self more dignity, credit,
reputation and desert, then there was any cause why: and whether thou have
wished an other man's estimation and countenance to be empaired or disgraced.

Whether thou have envied, maligned or spighted at any others good gifts,
whether they be of the mind, of the body, or (or as we commonly term it) of
fortune. For hereunto belongs all malicious swelling, and envious conceiptes
of the mind, for the welfare of others.

Whether thou have sought any means or ways to discredit, annoy, or
disparage the fame of any other: and by thy sinister reporting of them, have
gone about to bring their credit question, and themselves into danger among
persons of authority and high calling, or any other whomsoever.

Sins outward.
WHether thou have told any untruth or lie, whereby any matter has gone awrie,
or some loss has ensued, or might have ensued to any, whether the same has
bin done in place of judgment, or else in the hearing, and assembly of few,
or in any other place.

Whether by any crafty devise, or peevish exposition, thou have in the hearing
of others wra^glingly wrested any man's words or deeds whatsoever to other
sense and meaning, then they were simply spoken and intended. Things amiss
ought rather with lenity to be mitigated, than with extremity to be
aggrauated and exasperated.

Whether thou have of set purpose, depraved the good speeches, and orderly
doings of others.

Whether thou have provoked any others to do the like, or have seemed to allow,
like well, and approve them that willingly and wittingly have so done: and
neither defended, excused, nor extenuated the matter, when as (notwithstanding)
thou well knew that it was falsely, maliciously, and undeservedly practiced.

Whether thou have contumeliously and reprochfully taunted, mocked, or abused
any person; or as it were skoffingly, gybingly and iestingly so flowted him,
that in the mean while thou both did and purposedst in thy mind, covertly
and poynantly to harm him.

Whether thou have laid any fault to any man's charge, or made report to
others, that he has committed some crime whereof he is clear, guiltless and
ignorant.

Whether in reporting some offense or crime which another has in deed
committed, thou have odiously amplified and by thy words made the fame worse
and greeuouser than it was: either by adding, diminishing or altering,
intending thereby to persuade the hearers to judge and deem the worse of the
party.

Whether thou have maliciously published, discovered and made openly known,
any crime that was secret and hidden.

Whether thou have brought complaint of any crime, being open and known to the
higher power: bu^ yet with a meaning and desire rather to hurt and undo, then
to recure and amend the party.

Whether, being requested, enjoined or commanded, thou have at any time
apeached or accused any, whom there was no need to be accused, and specially
least of all by thee. Understand this chiefly, when as Tirants and
persecutours make inquiry and search for good and godly men, or at least, for
such as be no ways harmefull to the Common wealth, etc.

Whether for flattery thou have extenuated any man's faults, or extolled and
highly amplified his acts and dealings being but mean, and indifferently so
so.

Whether by appeaching, defaming, slandering, and raising odious reports of any
others, thy drift were only to pick a thank at the hand of some great man,
and thereby to insinuate thy self into his good will and favor, with the
overthrow, misery, trouble and calamity of the other, so by thee betrayed.

Whether thou have been careless and retchlesse to defend thine own fame,
credit, and estimation.

Whether thou have any where gloried in thy self, or immoderately boasted and
bragged of thine estate.

Whether, with a kind of glauering dissimulation, and painted hypocrisy, thou
have sought and desired to be accounted an other man, then in truth thou was,
and art.

Whether thou have published, set up, or scattered abroad, or caused to be
published, set up, and scattered, any slanderous and infamous Libel, writing
or picture.

Whether by any man's or woman's written letters, or by their household folks
and familiars thou have ever attempted and gone about to learn their secrets,
to the intent to put him or her to shame and reproach, or to hinderance and
loss.

Whether thou have at length uttered, bewrayed, and discovered the secret
which thy neighbor, or brother would have had concealed, and which meet was
to be concealed.

For the kind and trade of life.
Governor of the Church. Clergy man, or church.
Whether in his sermons and exhortations he have rashly delivered out things
uncertain, for certain: things of small moment, Minister.
for matters of weight and great importance: and perhaps have aduouched that,
not to be sin, or not to be so very great a sin, which (in deed) has been
great and heinous. And again: whether he have approved, ratified and affirmed,
that to be right godly, and true, which has not in deed been godly and true.

Whether either present by word of mouth, or absent by letters, he have
commended, or suffered any to be commended, whom he well knew not worthy. And
contrary wise. Whether he have pretermitted or contemned any whom he knew
worthy of commendations.

Whether he have promoted or suffered any to be promoted, being not before
examined according to the rule of order and decency: and that, least it should
be perceived, how unmeet and unfit they were.

Whether he have given care to any pickthanks, and whispering talebearers, by
whose information and counsel, he has attempted to do any thing, before he
had thoroughly and effectually searched out the very truth of al things.

Governor of the Common wealth. Magistrate. Judge.
Whether, when he has had power and authority to advance and put in office
godly and worthy persons, he has upon corrupt affection, rather preferred
the unworthy and unfit, than the fit and worthy: the cruel and bloody
minded, rather than the merciful and gentle, etc.

Whether he has acquitted and pardoned any felonious and guilty persons, which
by right ought not to have bin acquitted and pardoned: and contrariewise whether
he has condemned any which deserved not to be condemned.

Whether he have expounded the law in any point, contrary to the mind and
meaning of the lawmakers. All captious sophistry, and crafty wra^gling, is
directly against this commandment.

Whether he have so dealt with the rest of the judges and counselors, that he
has either subtelly and deceitfully, caused them to alter their opinions,
being agreeable to truth: or else has so wrought with them, that they dur^*
not speak the truth: or whether h^ has admitted and allowed none, but such as
he knew would yield and consent to his opinion.

Whether he have forciblie extorted any confession from prisoners, and such as
have been brought into question for some offense, or misprision of offense:
using unto the^ either threatening words, or else flattering and glosing terms,
the rather thereby to bring the party to answer to such points, as he needed
not to answer unto.

Whether in judgments he have any way swerued from the right form of hearing
and examining witnesses, as in calling persons to give evidence which were
unfit, challengeable, or suspected to bear il will and hatred to the party.

Whether he have been an accepter of persons in judgment.

Whether in these his hard and injurious dealings, he have pretended or
alleged impertinent matter or ill applied and sinisterly wrested for his
purpose,

Whether he have admitted in judgment, any proofs, either artificial, or
vnartificiall, wherein ill dealing, faulty proceeding, and erroneous practices
might easily be found.

Advocate, Attorney, Proctor, Scribe, Attorney. Advocate. Proctor. Notarie.
Whether being an Advocate, he have craftily and indirectly used any other
kind of pleading, than such as by the laws is appointed and allowed.

Whether he have suborned and brought in, or caused to be brought any false
witnesses.

Whether to the Bill put in, he have cunningly and subtelly added or detracted
any thing, to the blindfolding of the truth, or to deceive and bleare the eyes
of the judges.

Whether he have wittingly, and purposely, alleged for proof of his matter,
any motheaten, counterfeite, or imperfect laws.

Whether the forer to hinder his adversaries cause, he has assumed and applied
things to his purpose, which nothing appertained to the cause in hand.

Whether he have given advise and counsel in an ill case, and such as he knew
to be unjust and wrongful, to overthrow a just, true, and a rightful matter.

Whether being a Notarie or Scribe, he have done any thing amiss in framing
and making of instruments and writings, to the breeding of error, quarrel,
hinderance, and discommoditie to the parties. As when they omit or leave out,
add or put to, dissemble or conceal, doubtfully, intricately, and darkely set
down, or declare any things, and neglect or mistake usual course and
ordinary form, etc.

Doctor, Teacher, Scholemaster. Master of College. Doctor. Teacher.
Scholemaste^. Reader.
Whether he have preferred and promoted, or otherwise by letters commended to
some public degree of honor, as sufficient, learned and virtuous, such as
were not (in deed) accordingly qualified.

Whether to the room of a teacher or Reader, in a College of learned
professors, he have choosen any such as he knew unable and insufficient.

Whether he have persuaded any parents or kinsemen, that their son or cosen
did profit and go forward in his study: was thriftie, toward, and of good
hope, when as he has unthriftily wasted both his time and substance, and
peradventure also with lewd life has run ryote into all villainy and
mischief.

Whether in his lectures he has taught any such things, whereby his hearers
might learn and acquaint themselves how to deny and eclipse the truth, how
with cunning shifts, and deceivable colors to justify a falsehood, and how
otherwise to bleare and deceive men, etc. As among some professors of Logique
and Rhethoricke we see it much practiced.

Whether in disputing, wittingly and willingly, he have s^ffely impugned
truth, and defended fal^ehood, and that because he would not be thought to be
vanquished and overcome, or in some sort to loose part of his credit and
estimation.

Whether upon any corrupt affection, he have leaned to any false dogmatists,
and maintainers of erroneous opinions; or have severed and sequestered himself
from them that have defended the truth.

Whether he have used Sophistry or any fraudulent art, to win credit,
fame and authority to himself in the schools, or to draw unto him many
scholars, or thereby to challenge power over others.etc.

Sch^ler. Student. Sch^ler.
Whether he have procured and gotten, or for money bought the title of Master,
or obtained Letters commendatorie, thereby purposing the sooner to deceive and
blind the eyes of his Parents or others, to whom he meant to go.

There be yet some other driftes, policies, and shifts packed between the
scholar and the Master, which by these before declared, may quickly be known
and found out.

Merchaunts, Artificers, Occupiers, and Workmen. Merchant, Seller of wares.
Artificers. Workmen Occupiers.
Whether they have corrupted any wares, and offered them in sale for perfect
and good.

Whether in their barter and bargayning, they have affirmed falsehoode, and
dissimuled the truth: as when with an oath they do not stick to aduouch that
their wares cost them dearer tha^ in truth they did: that they brought them to
their great costs and charges from places and countries far dista^^ off: that
an other would have given a great deal more: that they loose by their selling
them at so low price: and wish many black curses to themselves, swearing and
staring, if all be not as they say, etc. O Lord who is able to reckon up all
the lies and untruths (even untruly to their own knowledge and consciences)
which these sellers do vainelie lashe and babble out, to those that come to
buy of them.

Whether in bargayning or any other action and dealing, thou have promised to
perform that, which thou had no purpose or meaning to accomplish.

Finally, whether in committing any of these above rehearsed, thou have given
occasion to others to commit the like: that is to wit: whether either by words
or deeds against this commandment, thou have been the cause of offense and
stumbling to others.

Again, whether when thou have perceived and seen others committing the same,
thou have secretly in mind assented unto them neither reproving nor staying and
letting them, when (notwithstanding) time and place has well served thee so to
have done.

The 10. Commandment. 10. Commandment.

Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house neither shall thou cover thy
neighbors wife, nor his man servant, nor his ma^de, nor his Ox, nor his Ass,
neither an^ thing that is thy neighbors,
Sins inward.
THis commandment teaches us, that God forbids and condemns in us, even
all corrupt affections and cogitations. And therefore condemns those sins
which in our very thoughts may be committed against the before* going
commandments, namely those that be of the second Table. Thus we see, that
not our actions only, but our very froward will and corrupt thought, is
sufficient to make us guilty before God. And therefore there be many points
which thou art here^ in diligently and warily to call to thy consideration.

Namely, whether thou have desired the dignity, place, office, authority,
power, glory, countenance, and calling of any other, specially of thy superior
or equal; and whether thou have practiced any ways how to displace him, and
settle thy self in his room.

Whether thou have gone about to hinder from preferment, thine inferior and
underling.

Whether thou have entered into any devise with thy self, how thou might
bring to pass this perverse desire of thine in this behalf. These are
directly against the fifth commandment.

Whether thou have felt within thee such wicked motions arising, that thou have
borne hatred to any, or wished any harm to his body.

Whether thou have long dwelt in anger and malice toward any man, even unto
an earnest and hearty desire of revenge.

Whether thou have had any determination to pursue with effect, these thy
cruel desires. And this is against the sixth Commandment.

Whether thou have felt thy flesh and thy wicked affections inwardly enflamed
to desire unlawful copulatio^ with any person, either present or absent.

Whether thou have entered into devise how to bring to pass these thy filthy
desires. This is against the seventh commandment.

Whether thou have swelled with rancour and envy, at the prosperity and
wealthy state of another, wishing the same to be thine.

Whether thou have entered into any devise, how to obtain thy purpose, and have
thy desire, These are against the 8. commandment.

Whether upon an enuions and malicious stomach, thou have bethought thee, how
to disable, empaire, and diminish any other man's fame, credit, dignity, or
estimation. This is against the ix. commandment.

Sins external and outward.
WHether by any signs, tokens or arguments, as with thine eyes, beckes, etc.
thou have showed thy self to desire and covet any other man's goods, or to
seek means to undermine and deceive him.

Whether thou have any way so to behave thy self, as either by painting,
pranking or garnishing thy body, in bragging, boasting, or making glorious show
and report of thy wealth, house, apparel, furniture, money or such like things,
that thou have thereby occasioned and provoked an other to covet and desire thy
body or thy goods. In this sort and by this means thou art the cause, of
unlawful and forbidden concupiscences in an other.

For the trade of life.
WHether in that trade of life wherein thou live, thou have ever haded any
unlawful thought, will, or desire, to have any of things in the former
commandments expressly prohibited, to be brought to effect, and actually
accomplished. And whereas we do not lightly put any of our actions in practice,
but we first conceive the^ in our mind, here do thou plainly perceive, that
in this Tenth Commandment all those hidden, secret, and lurking cogitations,
desires, wills and affections (for these ever go before the act or deed) are
flatly forbidden, prohibited and condemned.

Finally, whether by any signs of concupiscence, showed by thee, thou have
given offense (that is to wit) occasion of concupiscence to others.

Again, whether having perceived and noted any signs of concupiscence in an
other, thou have in thy secret conceit, allowed and well liked the same.

And thus much generally and plainly spoken of the sins committed, against
the Decalogue may suffice. Now let us see how thou ought hereby to make
profitable try all of thy self, and so to find out what manner of man thou
art.

1 First it behooves thee with all attention of mind to look into these
commandments and tables, and therein diligently to consider, whether thou
find any thing that nearly touches thy conscience and person; that thou
may perfectly see what special crimes and offenses, thou art manifestly
guilty of, before the tribunal seat of God. For to this end properly was the
law by God given, and to this end, have we collected and framed this treati^e,
in such sort and manner as thou see.

2 Secondly, thou shall so thoroughly examine thine actions, that thou must
look well about thee, and consider again and again, whether in one and the
self same action thou have in many sorts highly offended God: that is,
whether thou have by the breach of one commandment, transgressed (...). For
this comes often so to pass, as by example we will show.

If thou have corrupted any wares, or any other thing, which thy neighbor is
to buy, and then sell the^ unto him for good; first of all thou know that
thou herein have sinned against the ix. Commandment, which forbids thee to
give false witness. But if thou did it, with an intent and meaning to rake
and scrape a private gain unjustly to thy self, with the loss and hinderance
of an other, thou art therein guilty of the breach of the viii. Commandment,
whereby is forbidden all theft.

If furthermore in this behalf, thou have deceived any that is thy superior,
or that is linked to thee in blood, as thy Father or thy Mother: the
Magistrate, the Minister of the Church, thy kinseman, etc. therein have thou
transgressed the fifth Commandment. of honoring Father and Mother.

To be short, if this circumstance do also concur, that this cra^tie practice
were by thee done on the Sabbath day, then have thou herein incurred the
displeasure of Almighty God for profaning and not sanctifying the Sabbath
day. Last of all, it may be, that in this bargayning and selling, some such
words might pass from thee, as might make thee further guilty. For if thou
swearest vainly, and without cause, with an intent and meaning to avouch any
thing that thou would have to be believed, then art thou therein guilty of
the third commandment. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in
vain.

Thirdly, we shall do well, in the examining and dicussing of thy actions, to
give thee charge, circumspectly to consider every particular circumstance, to
wit, the time, the place, the person, the cause, the end, the manner, the
instrument, etc. No man will deny, but that the offense is far greater and
hainouser, which is committed on the Sabbath day, or at such time as all men
for some public calamity, are in a general heaviness: again, when it is
committed in the sight and face of many honest and grave persons: furthermore,
when it is done by, or against any man in high authority; moreover, when no
manner of alluring occasion went before, to draw or move thee to that evil.
Therefore we may not slightly pass over, how much, and how greatly these
circumstances do aggrauate and augment thy fault.

4 Fourthly, it stands thee upon, moreover, often and many times to consider
with thy self, and plainly to confess, that thou can never call to memory
all thy sins committed: and again, that thou can never exactly enough
judge, ^ow grievous and detestable those be, which do already come to thy
remembrance. For truly and divinely has the Prophet set down, who can
understand his faults? O cleanse me from my secret faults. Psalm. 19. 12.
For so stands thy case, that even where thou least think, thou there
sinnest most grievously. And the things which thou think well and justly
done, are in the sight of God, and before the tribunal seat of the high
judge, unclean, unrighteous, and de^ectrue. And therefore the Prophet Isaiah
cries out thus: We have been all as an unclean thing, and al our
righteousness is as a filthy clout. Jsa. 64. 6.


Seeing therefore the case thus stands, it is thy part and duty, plainly to
confess, that much ignorance remains in thee, and that the same is in thee
a great sin: for the which, unless God in mercy do pardon thee, he may
hurl thee headlong into eternal damnation.

5 Fifthly, thou must consider that there is cause enough to condemn and
pronounce thee guilty, for that thou have not done those good works which in
the law are commanded. For look how many sins in every particular
commandment are forbidden, so many good works in every commandment are
commanded. To every sin there ought to answer his contrary, and that is,
some good work.

Now if thou thoroughly examine thy conscience, thou shall soon espy, that thou
have not performed, no not the least part and portion of those things which
the law of God requires at thy hands: yea, if thou narrowly search every
corner of thy self, thou shall find that either thou have fulfilled and
performed nothing at all, or if thou have performed any thing, yet shall
thou find it to be imperfect, corrupt, and with some manner of contagion
infected. For all our obedience is maimed, lame, and imperfect. Wherefore thou
must say as Christ has taught us all: Luc. 17. 10.
Although we had done all those things that are commanded us. yet we are
unprofitable servants. Again, Romans 8. 7.
The wisdom of the flesh is enimitie against God, for it is not subject to
the law of God, neither in deed can be. Again in the 7. Chapter. I know
that in me, Romans 7. 18
that is in my flesh dwells no good thing: for to will is present with me,
but I find no means to perform that which is good. And, I delight in the
law of God concerning this inner man: but I see an other law in my members,
rebelling against the law of my mind, and leading me cap^i^e unto the law of
sin, which is in my members.

6 Sixthly, thou must cast in thy mind to consider and record the pains and
punishments, which God threatens and inflicteth upon those that disobey and
transgress his commandments. Of these pains, punishments, and plagues, some
be corporal and external, some spiritual and internal. Of the first sort
are, barrainesse and steriliti^ of the earth, hunger and dearth, dissentions
and wars, diseases, pestilence, banishmentes, shipwrackes, inundations and
ouerflowings, storms, calamities burninges, etc. Of the latter sort are,
ignorance of the scriptures, famine of the word of God, blindness of the
mind, incredulity and unbelief, induration, or hardening of the heart,
delivery and giving up into a reprobate sense, etc. A great beadroll of
plagues are reckoned up in the 28. Deuteronomy. 28.
of Deuteronomie. But when it pleases him, the Lord can and will send many mo
than are there expressed. For he daily prepares and makes ready new
scourges and whips for disobedient men, eue^ as they daily commit new sins
and offenses. For, alas, what misery do we now day by day taste and prove?
what dangers? What diseases? What other incommodities, which as it is to be
thought, were not so much as once known, by the very bare names, unto men in
the old men: nor so much as once by any means spoken of? And withal, thou
shall remember and call to mind, the examples of such as by the just judgment
of God, are read and reported of, in the books of the sacred scriptures, and
others also, to have been plagued with these punishments, either bodily or
spiritually: and it shall also much further thee, to add hereunto such as thou
of thine own knowledge within thy time and memory, have known to have felt
the heavy hand of God.

7 Seventhly, it shall be very behouefull for thee to consider, that for thy
sins and offenses, others linked unto thee in consanguinitie and kindred are
punished, namely thy Parents, thy children, thy brethren, thy sisters,
etc.even as thou also somewhile must smart for others sins. For thus do we
miserable and wretched men draw one an other into danger, and one of us is
guide and companion unto another, in running headlong to the place of torment
and damnation. This does God himself affirm, when as in the beginning of his
decalogue he says: I am the Lord thy God, a ielous God, visiting the
iniquity of the fathers, upon the children; upon the third and upon the fourth
generation of them that hau^ me. 1. Chro. 21. 14.
So for one sin of king David, there were slame many thousands of his
people: and for his adultery committed with Vrias wife, the child which she
bore him, dyed. 2. Sam. 12. 18.
And again; For the sins of the people, Job. 34. 30
the Lord sets over them cruel tyrauntes, and ravening hypocrites. 1. Sam.
2. 31.
Hely the Priest, and all his posterity, was punished for the sins of his
children. Ah, what a sea of mischiefs does even one sin bring with it?

8 Eighthly, there is yet one thing behind, to be considered, which is most
dreadful and formidable. By reason of thy sins, thou art made guilty of
eternal damnation: and after grievous punishments sustained here in this
world, there remain yet behind other torments to be suffered in an other,
and the same much more terrible, bitter, and lasting. For there, both body and
soul together are subjected and adjudged to eternal torments, and fire that
never shall be quenched, which God from before the beginning of the world has
prepared for the Devil and all the contemners of his precepts and
commandments. Now, how horrible a thing it is, and what an unspeakable
punishment it is, everlastingly to be deprived of the presence and face of
Almighty God, and to burn in hell with unquenchable fire, that shall never be
consumed, there is no man that can so much as conceive in mind or cogitation.

Go to now therefore, whosoever thou art, and by this that we have already
spoken of the law of the Lord, learn to examine thy conscience, and to make
perfect trial and survey of thy self. Doubtless, when thou have a little
while continued and gone forward in this way and course which we have here
showed, and attentively considered, such things as have been declared, I doubt
not, but that thou will by and by, and without delay, even wi^^ sighs and
tears, burst out into this confession, O heavenly father, J have sinned
against heaven, and against thee: I am not worthy to be called thy Son, I
am not worthy to lift up mine eves toward heaven. Look how much I being
once in Baptism purged from my sins in the blood of thy son, and
sanctified by receiving the holy Ghost, did in the same please thee: so much,
again, must I needs by reason of my manifold sins, since committed,
displease thee. Now, the sins which I have committed, if I should go about
to number them, they are infinite. For there is not one of thy holy precepts
and commandments, against which I have not committed many offenses, and
sundry transgressions. Many be they, which I have committed in act and deed:
and such as I have not actually brought to pass and done, yet through my
corrupt cogitations, and unclean will, I am as deeply guilty of, as if I in
act had committed them. To be brief, my sins surmount the sands of the Sea,
and if I make diligent search and inquiry of the greuousnesse of my sins, I
truly find them haynouser and greater, than I am able to utter. What say I,
utter? Nay, than I can in mind conceive, or in inward cogitation comprehend.
Certes, so often as I look into, and behold with the eyes of my mind, my
froward heart, cankered stomach, perverse disposition, ever inclined to evil,
which thou Lord most clearly and thoroughly see, together with my desire and
delight to perform the same, the very remembrance of my great and grievous
maliciousness drives me into such perplexity, that I no ways know whither
to turn me. Whither Lord shall I go from thy spirit, and whither shall J flee
from thy presence? Yea this further does merueilously disquiet, torment and
grieve me, for by my sins I have given offense, that is, occasion of fall,
and ruin to a great sort of others, being harmless and honest persons. Will thou Lord as a just and upright judge, require the blood of them also at my
hands? What shall I further do? seeing I have burdened and spotted my
conscience, by assenting also to other men's sins? in not dissuading and
reclaiming them, before they did evil, and in not reproving and rebuking them
after they had done evil? Ah how much better had it been, that being a man I
had never been so familiar among men? What misery is this? I am the cause of
an other man's offending, and an other man likewise to me: and thus do we all,
encumber and load one another with sins, and dragg, pull, hale and draw one
another into the break-necke fall and lamentable gulf of eternal damnation.
If thou Lord wilt strictly look what is amiss. and narrowly enquire of our
iniquities. O Lord who shall be able to abide it? Psa. 130. 3
Moreover, when I do somewhat further consider my sins, I see a great heap
yet behind, and many mo than now come to memory; many lewd prankes
heretofore by me most wickedly have been don, which I then thought had not been
wicked, neither can I at this present hour sufficiently so judge and deem of
them: which ignorance, blindness and infirmity of mine in this behalf, I must
needs confess (will I, nill) to be imputable unto me, for a most grievous and
heinous sin. And herein I perceive, that although I had committed none evil
at all before, yet to have herein again deserved everlasting torments. I had
almost said, why Lord would thou that this naughty and corrupt ignorance
should thus originally be bred in us, and thus still to cleave unto us? Alas, I
have no sacrifice to offer unto thee, to satisfy for mine ignorance.

Now what shall I say of my negligence in not doing those good works, which
thou in thy law have commanded and appointed? Or if I have done any at all, yet
was it not sincerely done, but many ways infected with hypocrisy, and other
vices? For to omit a good work, and to doc an ill work, are with thee
accounted alike. All these things therefore (I confess) do most vehemently,
(and good cause why) disquiet and grieve inee. For my sins are they, for
which, O God, thou justly inflictest grievous punishments and plagues, as well
spiritual and internal, as corporal and external. And whereas I daily find
the same by experience, true, partly in my self, partly in others, yet such is
my blindness and hardness of heart that I am nothing at all as yet moved
thereby unto any repentance or amendment.

To al these aforesaid evils, there is to be added yet another heap of
mischiefs, vz, that for these sins of mine a great many other innocents and
gyltles persons be jointly with me, and for me wrapped in woes, and subjected
to misery, danger and inconvenience. O Lord, will thou thus in thy justice
destroy and make hauoke of thy just, for us being wretched, unjust, and
miserable caitises? Last of all, for these my great, heinous and manifold
offenses, known and hidden, privy, and apert, there is due yet unto me after
this life, and after this temporal death, another death eternal, continuing
everlastingly in never dying torments. Is thy law (O Lord) being good,
righteous and holy, thus become to be unto me death? But I may not, nor I ought
not, (O God) to ascribe and impute these most wretched miseries, and extreme
Calamities unto thy law, but to mine own perverse, froward, and crooked
affections, and to my generally and entierly corrupted will.

To my self, to my self I say, must all this misery be ascribed, and my
self only may I thank for all this heavy plight and wretchedness. O wretch
that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death. Romans 7. 2.


Here now have thou as it were a certain Mirror or glass, wherein thou
may behold thy self, what a one thou art in the sight of God, and in Iawe of
God, accusing thee before the tribunal seat of judgment. In this glass of
the law, thou may behold thy spiritual deformity and ouglinesse, which
thou must understand so long to dwell, remain, ^oiourne, and cleave unto
thee, as thou continuest transgressing the law of God, through thy grievous
and daily offenses.

Of Repentance, and also of Contrition, or Mortification. CHAP. V.
WHen thou have now thus far profited and reaped this benefit by the law,
that thou are thereby brought to the acknowledgement of thy sins: the next is,
with all thy mind, and uttermost endeavor to betake thy self unto an earnest
and hearty repentance, and to flee unto Christ, for succor, pardon, and
forgiveness of all thy sins and offenses. Unless we acknowledge our
sins, and earnestly repent us for the same, we shall (as Christ says)
perish. And the Apostle Peter setting before the eyes of the jews, Luc. 13. 3.
their cruel, obstinate, and wilful sins, when as he spoke unto the^,
saying: This Jesus whom God has made both Lord and Christ, Act. 2. 36.
have ye crucified, brought them unto an acknowledgment of their sins. And
therefore anon after, in the same place, when as they by acknowledging their
sins, were marueilously troubled in mind, and pricked in heart, he replied
unto the^ and said, Repent ye and amend your lives, Therefore it is not
sufficient to acknowledge our sins, but there must follow also an earnest
and effectual Repentance, with all his circumstances and parts.

Now, Repentance is nothing else, but an earnest conversion, and turning to
God, of a sinner, meekely and humbly acknowledging his sins and iniquities.

And it consists summarily in these two points, Contrition, and faith: as
many places of the Scriptures do plainly and cuidently declare. Repent (says
Christ) and believe the Gospel. Mar. 1. 15.
Where the first member signifies Contrition, the second Faith. Mat. 3. 2.
Again, Rep^ntye of your former life, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.
In which sentence there is likewise both Contrition and also Faith included.
Hereunto also is to be referred that, which is cyted and alleged by the
Apostle both in his Epistle to the Romans, Romans 9. 11.
and also to the Collossians, Col. 2. 12.
touching mortification and also vivification.

Contrition therefore sets before our eyes the heavy wrath of God, and the
punishments due for sin: On the other side, Faith sets before us, the
mercies of God, free pardon and forgiveness, and vivification or quickening
again. The one lays open and discovers unto God, our wound and disease:
the other shows forth and receives from God a suppling salve, a mollifying
plaster, and a sovereign recuratiue medicine. The one groaneth under the
burden of sin, and sorrowfully bewaileth his heavy plight: the other brings
easement, and affords refection. Mat. 11. 28.
Come unto me (says our Savior Christ) all ye that labor and he heavy
laden, and I will refresh you. To be short, the one throws down to hell; the
other fetches from thence, and lifts up to heaven.

To draw therefore the effect of all the chiefest and especialest points to
be considered of in this matter, into small room and brief words: Contrition
is a most vehement affliction, troublesome vexation, and perplexed
consternation of the mind, yea of the whole man, caused through remembrance
and acknowledgement of his sins: and also of a fear of Gods heavy
judgments and deserved punishments. So that all this abashment, vexation,
affliction, perplexity, and consternation has his residence and dwelling in
the mind: insomuch that although there appear withal sometimes upon the
sudden, certain outward tokens and external signs thereof, as confession of
the mouth, tears, sighing, groaning, abstinence from meat and drink,
loathing, renouncing or contempt of all worldly matters and external dealings,
with such like: yet because our question in this place is not of counterfeite,
cloaked, dissembled, and imperfect, but of true, sincere, perfect, and
effectual Contrition, we must needs sound the very depth of the heart, and
the very innermost and secretest corners of the Conscience.

And to this end are the words of the Prophet David, where he says: Thou
desire no sacrifice, Psalm. 51. 16.
O God, though I would give it, neither delightest thou in burnt offering. The
sacrifices of God, are a contrite spirit: a contrite and broken heart, O God,
thou will not despise. And again: Heal me O Lord, Psalm. 6. 2.
for my bones are sore vexed, and my soul is sore troubled. And a little after
in the same Psalm: Ver. 6.
I sainted in my mourning. I cause my bed every night to swim, and water my
couch with my tears. So also Peter remembering and acknowledging how
grievously he had sinned in denying Christ, Mat. 26. 7^.
went out and wept bitterly.

Seeing therefore that true, sincere, and not hypocritical Contrition, is a
thing merely internal, and spiritual, there is no man but well understands,
that it is a spiritual gift, and a singular benefit of almighty God, who
only opens the eyes of our minds, to see and confess our sins and
offenses. If then it be the good gift of God, it stands every one of us
upon, incessauntly to crave at the hands of our heavenly father, to endue us
seely creatures, and miserable forlorn wretches with his grace, to understand
and bewail our grievous sins, and wickedness, manifoldly committed. For
whosoever after his transgression and fall, has not this contrite spirit,
this bruised and broken heart, (as the Prophet terms it) and this spiritual
mortification for his sins, to such an one it may seem, that the way to all
recovery and amendment is shut up and stopped.

For Contrition, is as it were a keye, that opens and drives back the
hidden bolt, and opens the door, which kept us back from coming again to
God. Neither can thou allege for thine excuse, that thou lackest time, or
that thou art not able to perfourine, and fulfill so many hard points and
difficult works, whereby to testify and declare thy contrition. For seeing
that it is wholly resident in the heart, and there only consists, it is
brought to pass, and performed in very short space of time, yea in a very
moment: and further, even with the only affections of the mind.

Moreover, which will make thee more to marvel: that which thou once in this
sort faithfully and humbly atchiuest, remains firm, acceptable and ratified
of God for ever after; so that thou have a steadfast and an hearty purpose never
again to return to thy former wickedness. For in contrition, thou must
wholly and altogether die unto thy sins: that is, thou must so renounce them,
as though thou never intedest any more to have any dealing therewith. And such
(doutlesse) was the Contrition of the Publicane, whose words were very brief
and few. Luc. 18. 13.
God be merciful unto me a sinner. Such Contrition was also in the Thief,
which was crucified with Christ, saying: Luc. 23. 42.
Lord remember me when thou come into thy kingdom. He therefore that will
earnestly repent, and come into the favor of God again, must be touched with
such an incomparable grief for his sins committed, that he must resolutely,
and directly confess himself to have thereby justly deserved al those
plagues, which God by Moses and the Prophets has threatened, and thundered out
upon all the despisers of his word, and contemners of his Majesty: and that
if God being by nature most merciful, should not vouchsafe to have mercy and
compassion on him, he must needs (and that presently) incur the grievous
danger, and feel intolerable smart thereof.

We were purposed hereunto, to have annexed some brief and compendious form
of confession, and therein to have made a plain discovery and and anatomy of
all the affections of a corrupt heart, and also to have brought in, the
sorrowful sinner, confessing himself to have justly deserved all plagues and
punishments, as well of this life present, as of the life to come, and as well
corporal as spiritual: and further also to have described him, utterly
denying and renouncing himself, and so humbly standing before the tribunal of
the Lord, his God and judge, submitting himself wholly unto his divine
pleasure and blessed will, waiting for that sentence and doom, which shall
best please him. But because partly in the Chapter last before, we have already
in some sort delivered such a confession: and partly for that in the sacred
scriptures, many good and godly prayers are to be found, set forth by the
ancient fathers, and holy men of God; every godly, zealous, and well disposed
man may therein virtuously exercise himself, and thence take out for his godly
comfort, plentiful examples of Christian meditation.

Of this sort, there be prayers for sins in Exodus, Exodus 32.
in the book of Numbers, Number. 6. 14. and ^6.
in Deuteronomie. Deuteronomy. 2.
Books of Solomon, Pro. 3. 13.
Daniel, Dan. 9.
Ezra, Ezra. 6.
Jeremy, etc. In the Psalms also, there are many fitly agreeing to this
present purpose, namely, these: the 32. 36. 30. 50. 51. 56. 58. 62. 71. 73. 88.
92. 102.

Of Faith: and how sinners are again justified through faith in Jesus Christ.
CHAP. VI.
AFter thou have thus, some space, like a guilty and suppliant suter,
prostrated thy self at the feet of thy just and righteous judge, and art
driven unto such a strait and narrow issue, that thou can not any manner of
ways deny, but that thou have deserved, and art most worthy of all terrible
and eternal punishments, and with the fear of this judgment, art very sore
a mazed, terrified, and perplexed, yea altogether mortified, and brought to
deaths brinke: the next way and remedy for thee now is, by faith in the
mercies of God, to raise up thy self again, meekely and humbly craving
pardon of thy sins and misdeedes. Unto this humble prostrating of thy self,
thou wast both profitably and necessarily driven through humble confession of
thy sins, and meek contrition of thy heart. But now thou must take heed
and beware, that by consideration of the severity of Gods judgments, thou be
not utterly discouraged, and dashed out of countenance, and thereby enter into
any despair, diffidence or distrust of the goodness of God. It shall be very
requisite therefore for thy comfor, and as a sovereign salve and cordial
medicine against this inconvenience, to lay down before thee, some wholesome
and health some doctrine, how thou shall have full remission and foregiuenesse
of al thy sins through faith in Jesus Christ. Genesis 4. 13.
Cain acknowledged and confessed his sin, and being therefore in mind
marueilously troubled, granted it to be most grievous and heinous. Mat. 27. 3.
Judas likewise openly condemns himself for his great guilt and treacherous
crime in betraying his master, publicly testifying and pronouncing Christ to
be just and innocent; and further restores back the money which he had
received. What will ye say, lacked in him here to be done more? And yet
neither of them both obtained pardon of their sins: and why? forsooth because
this free and frank confession of their sins was not accompanied with a
lively faith and undoubted trust in the mercies of God, for pardon and
forgiveness thereof. Mat. 26. 75*
Contrariwise Peter bewailed, and wept bitterly for his sin, Mar. 14. 72.
but yet so, that in the mean while he shru^ke not from his firm faith, Luc.
22. 92.
And therefore within a while after, Joh. 18. 25*
he received a singular comfort and special consolation from the mouth of
Christ himself; Joh. 20. 15.
after his resurrection. Therefore it is out of all doubt, that faith is
altogether and necessarily behoouefull to all true and penitent sinners,
wherewith they may raise up the^ selves again, being thrown down with the
burden of their offenses. And now, how truly sorrowful and repentant
sinners may by faith, again be raised up, we will plainly and evidently
declare.

Faith is a sure and steadfast trust, whereby we assure our selves that god will
perform unto us all those things that he has promised, chiefly and
specially, spiritual benefits, and in them, remission of our sins; and
righteousness in Christ and for Christ. Which is confirmed by the author of
the Epist, to the Heb, Heb. 11. 17
in these words. Faith is the ground of things which are hoped for, and the
evidence of things which are not scene. The interpretation and exposition of
which description (so far as concerns the use and practice thereof) who so
is desirous to know, may see set down in the 4. chap. of the Epist. to the Romans
Wherein after the Apostle had said that Abraham was justified by faith, and
that the inheritance of the world was given to him through faith; he
afterward adds, that this reverend and blessed Patriarch had respect unto
the goodness and power of God, Romans 4. 17.
whereby he quickens the dead, and calls those things which be not, as
though they were: And therefore that above hope, that he should be the father
of many Nations, according to that which was spoken to him. So shall thy seed
be. Genesis 15. 5.
And be not weak in this faith, considered not his own body, which was now
dead, being almost an hundredth years old, neither the deadness of Saraes
womb: Neither did he doubt of the promise of God through unbelief, but was
strengthened in the faith, and gave glory to GOD, being fully assured, that
he which had promised, was also able to do it, and therefore it was imputed
to him for righteousness. etc. Hereby may every one easily perceive that faith
undoubtedly believes that those things shall be performed, and through the
goodness and power of God be brought to pass, which otherwise seem never
possible to be performed; that faith does always look into the promises and
power of God: and finally, that faith is an assured, certain, undoubted, and
invincible persuasion, conceived of the goodness and power of God, whereby
this glory is ascribed, attributed, and entitled to God, that he both will
and also can save us. All which are signified in that usual and accustomed
form of confession, which every one privately undertakes and pronounces
for himself, saying: I believe in God. For in these few words is set forth
and contained the whole sum and signification of faith.

Now hear and mark in few words, how thou art justified by faith. Even as
the Apostle teaches us, Romans 4. 5.
that Abraham was justified by faith, without works, and that his faith and
sure persuasion of Gods goodness and power was imputed to him for
righteousness: so must thou make thy reckoning (whosoever thou be that
acknowledgest thy self a grievous sinner, and that thou art guilty of the
manifold breach of Gods law, and that thou have no good works of thine own
to oppose and set against the severity of Gods judgment) that thou likewise
and in the same sort, shall be justified by faith without works, as the
Apostle in that Chapter evidently and plainly testifies. He says there also
further, that it is not written for him only, that it was imputed to him for
righteousness, but also for us, to whom it shall be imputed for righteousness,
which believe in him that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead: who was
delivered to death for our sins, and is risen again for our justification.
This therefore is required at thy hand (seein thou have no manner of help in
thy self, whereby to obtain thy salvation, either by thine own works or any
others) that thou conceive a sure and undoubted faith, and a steadfast and firm
persuasion of the goodness and power of God: and that thou be fully persuaded,
and thoroughly assured in thy conscience: that God the father, will receive thee
again into favor, that he will pardon and forgive thee thy sins, and that
he will justify and make thee righteous for his son Jesus Christ, as he by
his own express words, by his holy Prophets, and last of all, by the same his
beloved son, has graciously promised. For if from the bottom of thy heart,
thou unfeignedly believe the promises of God touching this matter made unto the
holy fathers of old, be thou assured that thou art in the kings high way to
justification and salvation.

These promises have ever from the beginning of the world hitherto been
evidently continued, and shall to the worlds end be most faithfully and truly
performed. Immediately after the transgression and fall of our first parents
Adam and Eve, this promise of Christ was made unto them, when as the Lord
spoke unto the serpent. Genesis 3. 58.
I will put ^nmitie between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her
seed: he shall break thine head. Afterward he spoke unto Abraham, saying:
Genesis 22. 1.
In thy seed shall all Nations of the earth be blessed. Gal. 3. 19.
Which promise is excellently expounded by the Apostle, to signify and to be
meant of Christ. This promise was likewise made unto David, that of his seed
and posterity, Christ the Savior of the world should be borne. ^. Sam. 7. ^2.
Many others of the Prophets besides did most clearly and manifestly
prophecy and foretell of Christ's coming, Psalm. 132. ^1.
and of righteousness by him only to be obtained. ^say. 9.7.
Isaiah in his 53. Chapter, ^ere. 23. 5.
after many notable speeches of Christ's humiliation and death, Mat. 17. 5.
has lastly these words: Act. 13. 23.
He shall see fruit of the travail of his soul, ^sa. 53. 11.
and shall be satisfied: by his knowledge shall he justify many: for he
shall bear their iniquities. To be short, many figures, signs and types,
acertayned, insinuated and represented unto men's minds, those things which
were to be done and finished by Christ for our justification: Number. 21. 9.
the brazen serpent was set upon a poale in the wilderness, Joh. 3. 14.
and sundry sacrifices by the Israelites used, Exodus 2. 48.
were figures of Christ, Heb. 9. 9.
and foreshewed both his coming in the flesh, and his death which he should
suffer for our instification.

Now that thou may know, how for Christ, and in Christ our sins are
pardoned and forgiven us, and righteousness imputed unto us, thou must look
into his death, which he suffered to pacify and satisfy the wrath of God the
father for our sins. This singular benefit, and unspeakable act of Christ,
together with the most sovereign virtue and efficacy of the same, is in many
places both of the old Testament and of the new, notably described. For this
his death and passion was figured and foreshewed by the types and sacrifices
before expressed. This death and passion of our Savior and redeemer Christ,
was most excellently, pithily, and clearly set out and foretold by the
Prophet Isaiah in the Chapter before recited. Isa. 53.
And Christ says himself: This is the blood of the new Testament which is
shed for you and for many, Mat. 26. 28
for the remission of sins. Mar. 14. 24
By the death and bloodshed of Jesus Christ, Romans 4. 25.
we are said, Ephesians. 1. 7.
in many places of scripture to be sanctified and cleansed from our sins.
Collos. 1. 14
In an other place also the Apostle speaking Heb. 13. 12
of Christ, 1. John. 1. 7.
says: Ephesians. 5. 20.
He gave himself for us, to be an offering and a sacrifice etc. In this sort
therefore, and after this manner, does our heavenly father (being pacified and
pleased with us through the death of Christ) forgive and pardon our sins, and
imputes unto us his righteousness.

But thou will say; how know I, whether this merit of Christ, this
remission of sins, and this gift and imputation of righteousness for Christ,
be beneficial, profitable, and applyable to me or no? For we must ever stand
in fear and doubt, least we be excluded from the participation of those so
inestimable benefits, as Christ brought and wrought. But to answer thee in
this case, and because thou shall not be unfurnished of a stayed persuasion
herein, be thou thus assured, that the word of God does most plainly direct
and point thee to sundry places, and alleges unto thee manifold textes and
reasons, whereby thou may undoubtedly know that thy sins are forgiven thee
for Christ's sake, if thou do earnestly repent thee of thy wickedness, and
withal believe that God the father for Christ his son, will receive thee
into favor, and forgive thee thy sins, in this thy believing, be thou sure
thou shall obtain pardon and remission of all thy sins and offenses, which
the scripture does in many places testify and declare. Genesis 15. 6.
Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness. Which
sentence, the Apostle in his Epistle to the Romans, namely in his fourth
Chapter, uses for his theme, or principal groundwork to his whole discourse
of this matter there by him handeled. Heb. 11.
The author of the Epistle to the Hebrews affirms, that all the holy
fathers, and Patriarchs in the old time, were in this sort justified by
faith. In the Gospel after John; Ioh. 1. 12. and 3. 15. and 36. and 47.
it is in sundry places by express words said, that so many as believe on the
name of Christ, shall be saved, shall have life everlasting, and shall never come
into condemnation. The Apostle Peter also witnesses the same, saying: To him
(even Jesus Christ) give the Prophets witness, that through his name all that
believe in him, shall receive remission of sins. In another place also Paul
and Silas, Act. 10 43
to the same effect, said to the Iailers whom they converted. Act. 13. 31
Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved. Also to the Romans
out of the prophet Abacuc. Romans 1. 17
The just shall live by his faith. H^bak. 2. 4
Again, The righteousness of God by the faith of Jesus Christ, Romans 3. 22
is unto al, and Upon all that believe. Ver. 24.
Again, all are justified freely, Ver. 28.
by his grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus, whom God has
set forth to be a reconciliation through faith in his blood. And again,
Therefore we conclude that a man is justified freely without the works of the
law, Yea, Gal. 3. 7.
in the third to the Galatians, in the second to the Ephesians, Ephesians. 2. 8.
the third to the Philippians, Phil. 3. 6.
and the third to Titus, Tit. 3. 5.
it most manifestly appears, and is most plainly showed, that by faith
only in Christ, without any wo^kes of our own, either coucurring, or
furthering, we are freely justified.

Thomas Newtonus, Cestreshyrius.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE Titles of this book, to be found by the number of the Page, as
follows.
1 WHat the true trial and examination of a Man's own self is: and how
generally necessary to all true Christians.

6 The examination and trial of our own selves must first begin at the
consideration of our own corrupt nature.

13 Whosoever will truly try, and profitably examine himself must diligently
consider his promise made made at Baptism, and how well in each point he
answers the same.

26 No better way for the true trial and examining of our selves, than by
diligent and exact consideration of our deeds, words, and thoughts, by the
precise rule of the Law of God.

169 Of Repentance, Contrition, and Mortification.

177 Of Faith: And how all true penitent sinners are again justified through
faith in Christ Jesu.

FINIS.


LONDON Printed by John Windet, at the sign of the White Bear in Adling
streate, near Bayenards Castle. 1587.


