The Regiment of the Poverty. Compiled by a learned divine of our time D.
Andreas Hyperious. And now serving very fitly for the present state of this
realm.

Translated into English by H. T. minister.

DEVT. XV. Omnino indigens and mendicus non eritinter vos.

There shall utterly be no beggar among you.

PSALM ^LI. Beatus vir qui prospicit egeno, and pauperi. etc.

Blessed is he that provides for the poor and the needy, etc.

Imprinted at London by F. Coldock, and H. Bynnneman. ANNO. M.D.LXXII.

To the right reverend father in God, Edmunde L. Bishop of Rochester, high
Almner to the Queens majesty, Henry Tripp wishes prosperous success of his
labors in Gods Church.
IF the partial affection of Philautia, or self love, and the insatiable
desire or appetite of our own private commodity were once rooted out of men's
minds, and the contrary persuasion settled, to wit, that it is as unlawful to
live as to our selves, not profiting our brethren, as it is to seek our
commodity by an other man's hinderance: me thinks I see (right reverend father)
what a cheerful show and countenance of all things, what mutual love in ma^s
society, what security and quietness to the common wealth should thereby
ensue Sure I am, that neither Plato, Aristotle etc. nor any other that have
travailed most to bring the politic government to perfection, were ever able
to describe or paint out such a liuelike pattern of a common wealth as this
one error once reformed, would restore unto us. Erasmus in Encomie Mariae,
places Philautia first amongst the train of foolish ladies, who does hold
each man's eyes in a preposterous admiration of himself: yea and that in the
view oftentimes of the vvorst part even of the body, while he curiously
seeks to serve the delicacie, and to support the frayltie of the same, to
deck, pamper, and cherish it.

But I would to God we did so consider and vevv our own bodies, that we
might lern there by, and the better conceive what belongs to the common
wealth or the church of God: vvherof the one by the Philosophers: the other
by the Apostle is compared to a body, wherein (as in each of our bodies)
symetria and sympathia, id est, due proportion and right placing of each
member, in respect of the whole body, and a mutual passion or sense of
feeling diffused thorovv every part, must be preserved. For whether soever of
these two shall happen to be empaired or disturbed, forthwith there follows
either grief, or a deformity, or utter confusion to the whole body: as
witnesses the Apostle. Romans 12 1. Cor. 12. etc. For this cause also the
Apostle Romans. 14 says: Nullus nostrum sibi ipsi viuit, None of us lives to
himself etc. The which Plato, and the Stoickes did affirm, whose
assertions are cited by M. C. Officiorum. 1. Non nobis solum nati sumus. etc.
We are not borne only to our selves, but some part of our birth our country
does challenge some part our parents, some part our friends. (What could
have been said more fully, if he had among these reckened the Church of God?
Item: These things which the earth does bring forth, are all created for
man's use, but man was made for man's cause, that they among themselves might
profit one an other. (O that he had added here also, that all should ioyntlye
seek Gods glory:) Again he says: Herein we must follow nature as a guide,
and bring to light that which may serve for the weal public, by
enterchangeable duties, by giving and receiving, and both by our arts,
trauail and faculties, to knit the fellowship of men one with an other. As
often as this assertion of the Philosophers or doctrine of the Apostle is
effectually considered of good and godly natures, it is apparent with what
cheerefuluesse they endeavor to imploye what so ever gifts, or blessyngs,
(corporis, fortunae, aut animi,) GOD has endued them with, to the benefit of
Gods church, their country, and brethren. And truly I am persuaded, and I
suppose also that all men will yield no less) that this only care has so
often assembled all the vvysest counselors and chief magistrates from al
parts of this realm unto one high court of parliamente, there by good advise
prouidently to decree and enact, vvhatsouer might be deemed auaylable for
reformation of enormities, or the establishing of good orders in the common
wealth. Many of these and prosperous parliaments have been assembled within the
happy reign of the Queens majesty: but none of them all, believe me, has
either ben begone or ended with better success tha^ this last session holde^
at Westminster the eight of May, in the.xiiij. year of the reign of our
most gracious sovereign Lady E. etc. Of which it may truly be said, if ever
it might be said of any, that it was holde^ to the high pleasure of almighty
god, and the weal public of this realm. Among the procedings of which
parliament, that, before al things, can not but be approved both by god and
godly men, which is contained Chap. 5. entitled: An act for the punishment of
vacabundes, and for the relief of the poor and impotent. In which act the
whole matter of the Poverty, as serves best for the state of this realm, is
so charitably, vvisely, and prouidently decreed and enacted, that nothing can
in so fevve words be more piththily defined, I say in so fevv words: for as
it seems, because so weight and laborsome a business could not fully be
discussed without a great many more words, therefore the chiefest points
of that business, are only expressed in that act, whereby a way is prepared
to the Magistrates and Justices of the peace, to whose good discretion the
other lighter circumstances are committed. And I pray unto God, that every of
them within their circuites and limittes, may carefully, diligently, and
cheerfully perform and execute not only that which is expressly contained in
the said act, but also whatsoever may seem expedient for the places where
they dwell, as far forth as shall be not repugnant or contrary to the godly and
charitable meaning of the said act, I vvish also most earnestly that each
faithful subject may so account and judge of those proceedings, that not only
there be no murmuring or grudgi^g, but also that each one in his calling, may
endeavor to further them, that a prosperous and luckie effect may ensue thereof.
The which care and charge, when I acknowledged to apperteyne of duty in
sundry respects unto my self also, and that both the church of God and the
common wealth might of good right challenge and exact of me the uttermost that I
am able to do for their benefit, I thought I vvoulde rather offer it
willingly, and of mine own accord in season, than defer til it were after a
sort craved of me, or some other by extreme necessity. Gratia enim (ab officio
quod mora tardat abest, For duty which is slacked is not thankvvorthie.
Therefore I would not conceal that thing which I thought most auaylable to
the acco^plishing of the happy fuccesse intended in that act, but have set
forth in our vulgar tongue, the whole regiment and government of the Poverty,
written in the latin tongue by a great learned doctor of Theology of our time,
D. Andreas Hyperius, no less wisely and orderly, than learnedly and
charitably. A work very necessary for the magistrate, and profitable for the
subject: and as it may serve to direct the one in administering of the said act,
so will it teach the other to think well of the procedings. Which manner of
regiment if any do think impossible to be executed, in such sort as this godly
man has prescribed, they are much deceived. For why may it not (if we vvil
be circumspect, diligent and vvilling) as well be brought to perfection in this
realm, as in any other. Nay why may it not as well be generally followed in all
parishes, towns, and cities within this realm, as it is in one town
corporate, which I vvil for their commendation name: even the town of
Newarke situate upon the river of Trent, in the county of Nothingham, I leave
it to be farther enquired of. Great provision and a large collection is also
made for the poor in this city of London, but yet belike there lacks some
piece of this good regiment. For beggars and diseased people, do both walk
and lie in the streets and other unmeet places, which thing is both lothsom
and lamentable. A redress may easily be accomplished by the order of this
book being assysted by the authority of the said act.

Now, to the end (Right reverend father) that this treatise of that learned
divine might be the better accepted of our country men, I thought it good to
assygne your Lordshippe to be his patron. For to whom could I more safely
commit this learned labor of his, tha^ unto one, which both loves, and
is himself singularly learned? To whom might I better commed so worthy a
minister of gods church, than to a godly Bishop? Who does better deserve the
dedicatio^ of this book, tha^ he that has deserved to be high Almener to so
liberal a prince? Yea who is better able both to defend this treatise, and to
further the poor men's cause, than he whose eloquence has advanced him to so
high dignities, and who for his good affection toward the poor is placed
in the chief office appertayning to that business? These and infinite other
such respect have moved me to offer unto your Lordship this my travail, in
translating this godly treatise, the which if it may be accepted of your
Lordship, and work the effect which I vvish it may among all good citizens,
I have the recompense which I desire: and shall be encouraged hereafter, to
bring to light the more willingly my private labors to the benefit of the
common wealth.

Your most humble orator HENRY TRIPP.

The greatest faults escaped in printing.
Fol. 2. page 1. lin. 15. (...), read (...). Fol. 36. page 2. lin. 11. 2.
Thessa. 13. read. 2. Thessa. 3. Fol. cod and page lin. 22 Prop read Prosper.
Fol. 56 pagin. 1. lin. 15. curious; read ruinous. Fol. 61. page 2. lin. 7. on,
read to.
The Preface of the Author.
TWo things specially do move each jodly and christian man destring the glory
of Christ, and the weal public) to wish that ye public affairs of the
Church, or common wealth where he lives, may be better set in order. The one
is, ye memory and record of the great diligence of our elders in their good
government. The other is, the consideration of the great negligence in the
gouerners of our time, in such affairs. Therefore when and as often as I call
to mind, with how great fidelity and endeavor the holy fathers our
auncesters in times past provided, that the poor people should charitably he
relieved in every parish and City by the common alms. And again I seacute;e
how shamefully in these days the true poverty is neglected, without any care
almost to relieve them.

These two things truly cause me not only to wish and desire heartily, that the
poverty in our parishes and common wealth may better than they have hitherto,
be bereafter provided for: but also I think it be houefull, for me by all
means to labor, as much as in me lies, to set forth some order, whereby we
may at length remedy these present inconveniences.

For if there be yet any remnaunts of the Christian faith (wherein we so much
glory) remaining, if there be any sparkles of charity (which necessarily
follows a true and lively faith) harbored in our breasts, then truly will
we never suffer it to be thought, that either we will not, or can not persist
in those virtues, wherein our auncetours (by report) have always excelled,
when as such as would have their noble towardness, where with they are
endewed, renoumed, must not only endeavor to match, but also if it may be) to
surmou^t their elders in every kind of virtue. It is a shame to boast of holy
fathers, and not to imitate their worthy examples. For which thing Christ
vpbraydeth the Jews, who vaynely gloried that they were the children of
Abraham, when in no point they did express the faith or works of Abraham.
Therefore in all other virtues, but esecially in liberality toward the poor,
it is requisite that we frame our whole study to follow the holy fathers,
whose examples we see committed to writing, and delivered over to us their
posterity.

Which thing, the more readily and easily that we may in our parishes and
common wealth perform, I will assay to gather and set forth certain fit
orders, which partly our aunceffors were wont to use in releeuing the poor,
and partly are such, as may for the time present honestly procure, that every
City may foster their poverty, by their Public liberality. In which
thing, because I shall sufficiently declare, both my great study in setting
forth the glory of God within our Churches (which I wish always most
earnestly to profit yet daily more and more, in the knowledge of spiritual
things) and also shall express my godly desire to help the true poverty,
whom no man does not greatly lament, either that they should shamefully be
neglected, or perish, except his heart be altogether as hard as Adamant.
Therefore I trust this my labor to all honest and godly men, as well governors
of Churches, as common wealths, shall be acceptable and thank worthy. But I
suppose, I may with more fruicte to all good men, of whatsoever degree,
accomplish this which I have taken in hand, if I expounds these titles in
order as they follow.

1 That it belongs jointly both to the Ecclesiastically and politic
governors, to take care for the relief of the poor. 2 How many things there
be, in these wretched times, which ought to move us to healps the poor. 3 That
every parish and City must take advise, how they may best provide for their
poverty, as place and time requires. 4 That certain fit men must be chosen
by voices, to take charge of yt whole business. 5 What belongs to those men's
office. 6 Which way the true poverty may be discerned from the counterfaites,
and how they must be particularly searched and known. 7 How the money and
necessary charges may be raised, without any great grief to the Citizens. 8
How the alms must be distributed to the needy particularely. 9 It must be
provided, that they which be the distributers be known to be faithful and
trusty men, whose estimation may not be empayred. 10 It must be provided, that
the releese appointed for the poor, when it is once well established, be
always after continued.
All the which things when we have explicated, I trust it shall appear that we
have prepared a safe and ready way for all well disposed persons (where soever
inhabiting) whose worthy mind shall be in any wise stirred to exercise
liberality toward the poor, so that they may cherefully and constantly
follow it. And these things we will so evidently discuss by the holy
Scriptures, and commentaries of the ancient fathers, by the Ecclesiastical
histories, Synede, and Canons of Godly Bishops, that such men as are not too
unapt to cenceyue, may (without any pain) learn out of this our co^mentarie,
what is conuentent in this business for every time and place.

Chapter. I. That it be belongs jointly bother to the Ecclesiastical, and
Politic governor, to take care for the relief of the poor.
IF it may liek us to make rehearsal from the old ages, even unto ours time,
of the wortheir sort of devout works, which did shine in the holy fathers
lives: we shall find them (especially such as faithfully governed the Church
of God) very studiously bente to liberality toward the poor, For the
admirable hospitality of the reverend Patriarchs Abraham and Loath, is very
famous in the holy Scriptures. Moses the chief minister of the holy law, did
set forth many wholesome precepts, for relief of the poor in the Churches of
God, at the commandment of God him self. Deuteronomy. 10.15. Leui. 19. etc. The
greator part of the Prophets, as E^^zeus, Esaie, eremie. and other, both in
their Sermons, and in sundry their actions, did evidently declare their
exceeding care for the poor, as long as they erecuted their office in the
Church. But in the new Testamente we have plenty of worthy examples and
precepts. For how many and how sweet Sermons do we read made by our savior
Christ, in which he exciteth all men to minister necessaries to the needy, in
which also he techeth us how to bestow our alms well, Mat 5.6.8. etc? How
often and how many hungry people did he feed? how diligent did he show him
self in healing the diseased? It were too long to reckon in this behalf his
merciful pity, beautiffed by a miraculous power. After Christ, the Apostles
thought that nothing did more appertayn to their office, than to inuente some
good means to cherishe the poor. Acts. 4. and. 6. James, Cephas and John,
after they had conferred with Paul about weighty matters of the Gospel,
required this one thing of him especially, that he would remember the poor
brethren dwelling at Jerusalem, when he came among the Gentiles, among whom he
was purposed to preach the Gospel. Gol. 2. In which thing how greatly Paul
labored in Asia, Europe, Achaia, Macedonia, Galatia, and at Covinthum, Rome,
and else where, his owns writing, Romans 15. 1. Cor. 16. 2. Cor. 8. and. 9. 0695
3 do declare. The holy fathers which suceeded 0695 3 the Apostles in ruling and
oversight of the church, are never found to have rejected the charge of the
poverty from the^. Their commentaries, sermons, and other treatises (whereof we
may mark yt most part of the^ to have been published for this proper use) do
plainly show ye same. Peruse Tertullians Apologeticum, Cap. 39. the third book
of Ciptians Epistles, Epist. 9. and 10 to the Ministers and Deacons, and. Lib.
3. against ye Jews, Gregory Nazanzen his sermon (...) of compassion toward
the poor: Many and very vehement hemilies of Chrysostom, whereof many entreat
wholly of the commendation of liberality toward ye poor: The sum of
Christian doctrine written by Epiphanius in the last part of that work against
heresies: Hicromes epistle against Vigilantius, or his commentaries upon the
third chap. of Malachie the prophet: sundry sermons of Anstine, whereof some
entreat wholly of this argument: to conclude, as many of the holy fathers as
have taken upon them any enarration of any book of the old or new Testament,
when they hytte on any place touching the commendation of liberality, then
they stoutly maintain the cause of the poor. And who would require of us at
this present a rehearsal of such places which are infinite?

Now mark with how great diligence at all times in the Synodes and
Ecclesiastical councels, provision has been made for the help of the poor.
The first general council which was among the Christians, mentioned Acts. 4.
was assembled to choose Deacons to distribute the alms which was gathered.
Afterward in process of time many councels were holden, wherein it is gravely
and denoutly enjoined, that the Church should relieve the poor, help the
widows, orphans, diseased, and impotent people, should erect and maintain
Alms houses, hospitals, burial places, and spittles. Provision also was made
for the due distribution of the goods of the Church into four portions,
whereof the one, and that the greater portion was lotted to the needy people
only, the other portions were bestowed in lodging strangers, burying the
dead, and healing the diseased, and it was straightly looked unto, that the
goods of the Church should not be alienated or converted to any other use. By
which things we may conceive, that the church of God does acknowledge, that
this office of provision for the poor belongs to her, as by a peculiar
commission or charge from Almighty God. Moreover in the Cannon law, very many
Cannons are extant to the same effect, whereof part were collected out of the
Councels which we have mentioned: but the greater part wore borrowed from the
rescriptes and answers of Bishops, out of the learned commentaries of the holy
fathers, and aliunde. as shall further appear in our discourse. In which
Cannons, that is worthy to be observed and noted of all men, which does so
often occur (to wit) that the goods of the church (by a usual kind of
speech) are called the goods of the poor. Therefore these Canno^s do also
declare, that the churches are by a certain right hound to norish and succor
their poverty. The hystories, especially Ecclesiastical, do teach us
moreover, that the governors of all congregations, even from the beginning
(after that religion began to spread it self somewhat at large, and that
Christians might as it were breath, and recover them selves under favorable
princes) did with great care and fidelity respect the case of the needy,
ministering bountifully things necessary to the poor brethren, which received
the faith, and pretermitting none of all those things, which might be required
for the mayntenance of the needy: whereby oftentimes the heathen adversaries
were moved both to receive and embrace our religion. Whereupon the wicked
Iulianus vehemently envying that good report of the christians, willed (as
witnesses Sozomemenus hist. Tripertitae lib. 6. cap. 29.) that his pagane
Bishops should build hospitals, and alms houses, and provide for the needy,
according as our Bishops had done before them. Many Bishops are renoumed for
selling the golden and silver vessels, and other rich ornaments of the
Church, to sustain their poverty when time required. In which number are
reckned by Socrates Constinopolitanis hi^ Tripe. li. 10. ca. 6. Acacius Bishop
at Amidenum, by Possidonius Calamensis, Augustine by Hierome, Exuperius bishop
at Tolossa, by many writers, Ambrosius bishop of Millane, and Germanus of
Alciodeon. and of other writers sundry other. In like manner the Bishops are
reported even to have abridged them selves of many things, and bestowed them on
such as were oppressed with scarcity: which we read is noted by certain
writers, of Ciprianus, Epiphanius, Lupus Senouensis. etc. But wherefore serve
all these testimonies? surely that it may appear manifestly, that all the
heads of the churches have professed always, that the care of the fostering of
the poor does chiefly appertain to them, and that they truly were not
constitute to be possessours and owners, but only stewards and disposers of
the Church goods. Which self things in times paste induced the kings,
princes, nobles, and each rich man to confer and bestow yearly revenues,
lands, and fermes upon the Church, and to bequeath them in their written
testaments. For when they marked, that the alms was faithfully distributed
unto the poor, they chose rather to commit those things which they minded to
deal in alines to the disposition of the trusty officers of the church, who
knew best the state of the poor, than to do it by them selves. So greatly did
that vntyred diligence of the Church in releeuing the poor, heap up great
riches to that same use.

Neither is it obscure or unknown, by how many means the kings, princes and
civil magistrates, after they once began to reverence the christian religion,
and to be haptised in the name of Christ, did deelare that they would with like
endeavor further the cause of fostering and cherishing the poor. For very many
of the^ disbursed royal charges toward the buylding of hospitalles, alines
houses, houses for aged people, and spittles: which Eusebius Hist. Eccl. lib.
9. cap. 10. reports of Constantinus, Theodosia, and Valentinianus, who were
wont (as it appears Triper. Histo. lib. 12.2.) to exercise an admirable
liberality toward ye poor, by Atticus Bishop of Constantinople. But the wife
of Valentinianus (as is declared, Tripart hist. lib. 9. cap. 31.) went from
hospital to hospital to minister unto the needy, taking as much pains as any
hired servant would. The writers have not left in silence but have with great
consent advanced Iustinianus the first, Tyberius the second, Co^stantinus,
who was called Iconomacus, Carolus, surnamed Magnus, Lodouicus Pi' the first,
Otho the first, second, and third, Henricus the first and second, Lotharius the
second, Sigismundus, and other Emperoures, for their readynesse in helping the
poor, and in building, conseruing and vewtissying the common Hospitals of the
needy. But the French kings have seemed to excel in this behalf, and
especially Childebertus the founder of the Hospital at Lions (whereof mention is
made in the council of Aurelian the fifth) Dagabertus, Glotarius, Robertus,
the son of Hugo Capetis, Ludouicus (who did feed daily. 120. needy souls,
and besides builded a noble hospital at Paris) Ludouicus Crassus and others.
The kings of England also did at length not slackly seek renoume by
liberalitis toward the poor. Osvvaldus, Alfredus, Eccarus, Guntho, the
Henry's and Edward's. Among the Boemians, Vuenzeslaus is extolled: In Spain,
Alfonsus the tenth: among the Venetians, Petrus Vrseolus, and to be short,
there is no kingdom, no province, no seigniorie, no common wealth, which does
not even with glory advance their kings, princes, and magistrates, carefully
procuring and decreeing things deemed profitable for the succoure of the
needy. For Christians have always acknowledged, but especially the
Magistrates, ye the charge of the whole civil society, and in it, not only the
rich, but also the poor, (which is the greater part of that society) is
enjoined the^ by almighty God. Whereunto that apertaineth, when we see that
renoumed princes have added many decrees unto the Roman laws, where they
command ye al magistrates should apply their minds wholly to further ye cause
of the poor. For so it is commanded Codicis l^^ de sacrosanctis eceles^s et
earu^ priuilegus. L. priuslegia, L. generali. L. sancim" ei Again, De episcopis
et clericis. L. oi^a priuilegia. L. si quis ad declina^du^. where we may observe
many things wisely and religiously ordained for the common utility of the
poor, ye maintenance of hospitals, alms houses, spittles, and houses for
aged people, and the right disposing of the church goods, Morcouer, ye law
which is exta^t, Codicis l. ii. de validis me^dica^ticus, was made for ye
sustena^ce of the true poverty. In ye Autentikes you may observe certain
things repeted and inculcate to ye like effect. To conclude, we may behold
throughout many colleges of the poor or alms houses endued, not only with
great riches, but also singular privileges (above those which their charters
have given the^) and also defended by all strength of law, right and equity, by
the magistrates in whose circuit they are situate. Which things since they are
such, it is an easy matter to judge, that it most of all behooves such, as do
sit to govern the helm of the common wealth, with all study and diligence,
to forsee how the poverty which are dispersed in their Cities do live,
whether they beg, which might by other means provide for themselves, whether
ye true poverty and feeble people be neglected, and whether the riches of the
alms houses be faithfully disposed or not.

Finally all these tend to this end, and for this intent verily we have in
this present place heaped them together, that before we proceed farther and
co^sult more plentifully of the manner of releeuing the poor, it may be
manifest, to whom chiefly, all our whole Oration is directed, and who be they
whom would have to regard that which we will set forth. For this truly is
a business very necessary and pro fitable, but yet hard and difficile: and
requirethe the furtheraunce not of one or few, but of many: neither of each
man, but of such as are of power and authority: whereof also it comes that
although it be of good intent propounded, yet all men do what they can,
utterly to reject it from themselves. For things are grown to this point, and
(alas) all charity is waxed so cold in men's minds, that as often as the poor
man's case is called to mind, no man thinks, that it is his part to
understand it, but one turns it on an others shoulders. The ministers of the
churches complain, that they can do nothing in so great a business alone: and
in some places the whole right of disposing the church goods is not in their
power, in some places they are not able to rule the multitude, to forbid
valiant beggars, to reduce the idle persons to an order, and to perform other
things of like fort. Contrarywyse the civil magistrates pretend, that this
whole matter was always committed to the Churches, on whom great riches and
large privileges were therefore bestowed, because it is their propre office to
nourishe the poor, and other such things, those which are willing to draw
backewarde, do allege.

But when by this means all men do put from them this godly woork,
innumerable poor people must needs perish, and by neglecting, (or more truly
to be said) contempt of these miserable creatures, or rather of Christ
himself, who has ordained, ye the poor should remain alwais with us in his
stead, in finite evils must needs daily spring up in man's society. But believe
me these men shall never be able thus to satisfy their duties, all such
exceptions are empty and barrain it is but vain to seek such starting
holes. For this cause of the poverty, is not laid on a few men's shoulders
only: but it apertaineth equally to as many as profess ye name of Christ. The
divine promises and preceps of liberlalitie toward the poor, which are
extant in the sacred Bible, yea and the threatenings or punishementes against
those which despise the pouertye, and in them Christ him self, are proposed
to all men which are able to do any thing in that behalf, and are to be
embraced as well of the politic magistrates, as of the Ecclesiastical
governors. And in deed a great and worthy work can never be fynished by a
few. Therefore it behooves all men jointly to lay to their healpe and bands,
and to labor together for the same stoutly, which we wish may redounde to
the glory of God, and to the vtilitye of the whole multitude. That thing
cannot long eudure which is not established by the unity of the minds and
public consent of all men. Finally we see by daily experience that the
godly preachers in the Church do lay their foundation in dayne, as long as
the magistrates do not vouch safe to lay to their healping hands to make up
the rest of the building. Therefore on the one side the elders of the Church,
as if were gauderobearers, on the other side, the governors of the common
wealth must meet in one place, and consulte together, hows they may honestly
prouids for the poverty within their circuites.

Chapter. 2. How many things there be in these vvretched times, which ought
to move us to help the Poor.
BUt I hope that al me^ of what so ever degree, but especially they which have
the chiese rule in the cities, will then more cheerfully take pains in
deliberatyng for the public liberality toward the poor, when I shall have
set before their eyes, how many things are offered in these wretched times
which ought of good right to draw and compel men thereto First I mind to
explicate how needful it is, ye al me but espectaily they ye are of greatest
anthoritie in ye common wealth, be as diligent as possible they may, in
furthering ye poor peoples cause. The Apostle Paul going about to exhore the
Corinthians to send releese to the brethren at Jerusalem which were
oppressed with scarcity, in the latter Epistle Chap. 8. speaks to them in
this wise. Therefore as you abound in every thing, in faith and word, in
knowledge, and in all diligence, and in your love toward us, even so see that
you abound in this grace also. Forsothe the Apostle would signifye, that in them
which are commended for their faith and other worthy gifts and virtues, a
singular liberalytie toward the poor ought also to shine, neither can these
former virtues consist without this wherefore it lyketh me now to use the same
reason almost, and to speak thus to all godly magistrates. There is none of
you all, most worthy magistrates, which doths not profess before all men,
that he reposeth his faith vo his whole heart in Christ Jesus our Savior, and
would be reckened among such as reverence the name of Christ. If therefore you
have faith and desire that other should accoumpte you so, then truly it is
necessary that you declare that faith, in she wing forth al manner duties of
charity, but especially liberalitye toward your domestical poverty. It can
not be chosen, but that such fruits must needs follow a true and lively
says. Beside this, there is no subject, which does not fully account that
you do sufficientely know what you ought to do in the affairs of the common
wealth, which is committed to your trust, and specially in the behalf of the
poor and innocent: and that both you can and will cheerfully perform those
things which appertain to your office, which are both justly commanded and
straightely exacted by the law of almighty God, and whereof you make an
inviolable promise, at such time as by oath and certain usual ceremonies you
are openly admitted to your office. And in the mean time you are not
ignorant, that that servant which knows his masters will, and does it not,
shall be beaten fore with many stripes. Wherefore make your account, that your
iutegritie and diligence in doing your office shall never be approved of God
or godly men, before you have provided a means in your common wealth to
relieve the poor, which are always the greater part in any society. Men may
be deceived and moked, but God will not suffer him self to be deluded. Neither
is there (believe me) any more commodious way, whereby you may (which also of
duty you ought to provide for) withholde from your owns heads, and your
subjects, the punish ne^ts which God offended with our sins daily threatens,
yea and which we do presently see and foele, then if you by yours counsels and
examples, as with a watch word, do excitate al other to a redines to lyghten
the miseries of the poor. Certes, the same counsel which that wise Daniell
gave long since to Nabuchadnezar the king of Babylon, to wit: That when the
wrath of God did hang over him, he should endeavor to redeem his sins with
giving alms, and his iniquities with compassion on the poor, so should his
faults be sauled or healed: Let all magistrates think that the same counsel
is now given them, and if they desire to turn gods wrath from them, then let
them follow that without delay. How many complaints of honest Citizens are
every where daily heard, tending to the same effect? Some complain that they
are molested at their doors with the importunate and shameless petitions, and
perpetual clamors of many beggars. It greatly greueth others that daily
whethersocuer they go or turn themselves, they meet with inunmerable valiant
beggars, feeding themselves plesantly and in felthie solenesse by other men's
sweat. Other report, that in the whole City they cannot easily find them
that will be hired to work with the^ for money and competet meat and drink
when they have need: yea some men doubt, that it will shortly fall out that
ha^dy crafts shall be utterly left and neglected, when such as should and are
able to learn and exercise them, will fall rather to an idle beggin, than to
work and labor. Many observe and mark the horrible and infinite, riches of
such as beg from door to door, and all men almost see that they are
contaminate with sundry kinds of wickedness. Whereby also many good men make a
scruple, and withdraw their hand from giving, while they fear ye there is no
reward to be looked for of almighty God for alms ill bestowed on the wicked.
For they think rather that he synneth grievously, which ministers any thing
to him, whom he judges unworthy, and foreseeth that he will shamefully abuse
it. Moreover certain honest Citizens are sore vexed in their consciences,
when they smell that the true poverty, which either through continual diseases
can not, or for bashfulnesse or some other cause dare not come abroad, do
perish by hunger, yea in some places do rotte in their miserable and loathsome
diseases, whose careless contempt no doubt God will at length sharply reuege.
Therefore on the one side they are moved not to give any thing to those: and on
the other side while the true pouerties case is unknown, the occasion of their
liberality is taken from them. To conclude, the Citizens universally desire,
that beggars, especially valiant and able of body, may be brought in order:
and that the true poverty, that is, such as are deseased by age, sickness or
other casualtie may be provided for and finally that some certain way may be
prescribed for the right expending and disposing of the common alms.

Now let us see, how many things are found in the poverty themselves, which
require some new reformation. Among the poverty some are sound and lusty,
some diseased and feeble: some are of ripe years, and at man's state, some
young, and yet in their childhood: and again, some are of the male sex, some
female. First therefore we see in what sort those valiant persons do live,
whom for years we would judge to be men: but they so pass all their life,
that a man may doubt, whether they be christians, or Jews, or Turks. For they
never set foot within the church, but always lie before the church doors, or
where they may be so suffered, in the midst of the streets, in crosseways, on
bridges, and those places, whither they know there is most co^course of people.
So that they never hear godly sermons, they learn no point of christian
religion, and much less use the sacraments in common with others. And by
reason they seldom stay in one place, and wandering every where do often change
their soil and air, but never their mind, no man examineth their life: no
pastor, no teacher, no deacon, nor any other supposes that he ought to regard
their salvation: and although perchance they carry a woman about with them, yet
is it unknown whether they live in lauful wedlock, or rather pass their time
in the lice^cious lusts of whoordom, in which state of life in the end they
happen to die: is there any cause I pray you why we should judge them better
than beasts? And this which I have here said of men, may likewise be
understood of young women, young men, and children. For they are al equally
vnsiklful in ye articles of religion. And is it not greatly to be pitied, and
with unfeigned tears to be lamented, that almost infinite beggars should thus
perish like brute beasts, without God, without law without al knowledge of
their souls health: whose destruction to whom shall it be imputed, but to the
heads of the church, and the magistrates, to whom it belongs to provide, that
as many as live in any place within their circuites, should profess the name
of Christ, and reverence him, and should declare themselves to be christians
by some confession of the Christian articles, and the use of the Scaramentes?
Moreover, by what practices, deceytes, and suttleties, do the most part of
these get their living?

Surely they make a gain and a fat increase of their begging, whereby they
wring out of the simple liberality of good Citizens, not only sufficient to
preserve nature: but also to lashe out and waste in riot, and stolen banquets,
with feasting quaffing and whore hunting. Which that they may the eastier
atchiue, one fayneth him self to be a stranger and to dwell far off, desyring
relief to help him homeward, that his house and all his goods have been wasted
with fire, or water, or by wrong judgment at the law, or some other casualty.
an other lies saying that he has sick wife, and many small children at home:
one makes a show of new and strange kinds of ulcers, daubing his shins, or his
arms, with rosen, srankensence, pitch, blood, and other corruption: an other
falieth down voluntarily in the midst of ye streate, tearing his body, and
trembling every joint, foming at ye mouth as though he had ye falling
sickness: other cou^terfait halting, lamenesse, maimednesse, deafnes blindness,
madness, do^bnesse, and ye is most to be marueled at, as though it were not
sufficient to use these prac tises and words cuuningly framed to entics and
bewitche men's eyes oftentimes also they show letteas, I know not from whence,
to get credit to their impudentlies whers they are not known. At my being at
Lutetiae now called Paris, I saws one Rooatus a chief deviser of such frauds,
who (by report) was wont to set open as it were a school or shop of the same,
and to teach rules of this wicked art to such as would resort to him: who
also was found to have scraped so much together thereby, ye he gave a rich
dowry with his daughter. Now when these men by these frauds, deceyts and
engines do move al sorts of me^ to pity them, and to give them alms, of me^ to
pity them, and to give them alms, and seeing they be not altogyther
helpless, (for they might, if they would, feed themselves by their own
handy labor) but do willingly and wittingly snatch all the alms from the true
poverty, as it were the morsel out of their mouth: who sees not that they
are guilty of evil practices (which word is not convenient enough for the
unworthiness of the thing) but also of theft and sacrilege? Yet is this
deceytful practice common to men, women, and children. But these, these are but
trifles in respect of those which I will now report. These valiant beggars
have been taken wandering as spies throughout the Provinces and dominions of
kings, to hearken craftily for rumors of peace or war, of the counsels and
devises of kings and princes, to carry letters of treason, and sometime to
play the treators them selves, to show the enemies the hie ways and ports, to
set on fire cities, boroughes, streets and villages: to burn up the ripe
corns fields and woods: to infecte the springs and wells with poison: to
commit rapes, murders, and rebberies in woods and thickes, and through the
whole countries. They accompany one while with one woman, and an other time
with an other, and care not for stable matrimony: the most of the women do
prostitute them selves to who so ever will, and infecte many with the French
pocks, or other more noisome diseases: They think they may without
controlemente steal clothes, meat, or drink out of gardens and houses; and
to the end they may the sooner moan to pity honest and simple matrons with
having children at their tail, they steal other folks children, and cast
the^ off again at their pleasure. Their own children they lay forth, (and it
has been heard that some have drowned them, some have left them in the woods
for wild beasts) they mingle poisons to make bare^nesse, and teach others to
do the like: they play ye baudes between citizens children, and adulterers:
they carry letters, tokens and gifts between lovers. I am ashamed to recke^
these things, and yet they are known to be true, and I have not hitherto
spoken all. So farfoorth is it too true that is said commonly: Paupertas turpia
cogit, poverty forces much wickedness: and Eurip. says, ye poverty and
lack teaches a man much evil. Therefore if we desire to hinder so many
enormities, to stay in time so many outrages, to drive out of the common wealth
this swarm of hopeless men, the^ it is necessary that the magistrates begin
some trade, whereby the whole poverty may at once be brought in order.

I have spoken hitherto of the valiant beggars. Now it remains that we
entreat of such as are not valiant, but may of good right be called the
poverty. Among these, some are broken with age, and bereeued of all strength:
other are tormented with sickness, ulcers, and continual maladies, and lie
lurking in some homely cottage: and in the mean time none attend on them, so
that they wear away by little and little with bunger and penury of all things,
while none come at them. You may see poor wsmen beset with a flock of little
children eue^ perish, being tired with ye daily houlings and tears of them,
while they ask bread or there things, which they have not to give, and
consumed with continual griefs day and night. To these this misery above the
rest may be joined: Certain eue^ as it were born to calamity and wretchedness,
although by ye liberality of other sometime they get some thing, yet they can not
use it rightly, they have no forecast, no knowledge to guide their substance,
they never think of sparing or frugalitie, they are unskillful in ordering of
every thing, they go about what so ever unadvisedly and proposterously, they
have no regard of health, or time, or any thing else: to be short, they are
such as tho they had great wealth, yet in short time they will perish with
penury. So that it is needful that tutours and overseers should be appointed
for these, as well as for Orphans. But how many are there which yet remain
vnknowns and obscure, which deserve right well to be relieved by the common
alms. For oftentimes it falls out, that some which occupying honest handie
crafts, or marchaundise were in good case to live, may contrary both to their
own and other men's expectation of them, be brought to extreme poverty, not
through their own default: but beeting circumuented by subtle creditours, or
deceived by slack detters, or oppressed with vsuries, or spoiled of their wares
in iorneying, or thrust out of their heritage by the force of their adversary,
and iniquity of corrupt judges, or exhaust with many exactions, or consumed
with sudden fire, shipwreck, or other casualties. These men, whereas before
they were had in estimation, and now fearing to come in contempt, they dare not
open their case, but cloak it as much as they are able, and beu^de, being of a
bashful nature, they complain to none, nor crave nothing of any. Therefore at
home they pyne with famine, and for very grief of mind they can not tell what
is best to be done, but surely to live, and with other men to behold the light
is tedious to them. Whose necessity, except it be relieved in time, it can not
be but that they must needs wear away by little and little with misery and
mourning. Lastly there remain innumerable children, creeping and running in
the poor cottahes, which are to be looked unto. But the parents sloth,
ignorance or beggerie, or all these together, do let them from learning in
their tender years the elements of Christian religion, from accustoming honest
and civil manners, and from applying their minds to learn some art and
labor, as years come on. What then? shall we suffer these innocent children
(among whom doubtless some are borne to good destinies, and might in time to
come sit to govern the common wealth with good success) to be corrupted
while they are but blades, and to grow up as brute beasts without all
knowledge of godliness or honesty? That may not be. Therefore the Magistrates
(which are the general tutors and and ouersoers, and I may well say parents,
(for they are called patres patrie, of all that dwell in their city) must know
that these are especially committed to them by almighty God: they must provide
by some means, that these may be well nourtured in godliness, in good manners,
in honest arts, whereby they may get their living in time to come. And thus
hitherto (I doubt least in too many words) I have she wed how needful it is
to take wholesome advise for the relief of the necessities of the poor. It
rests that we show how many commodities shall ensue to al estates, when
that which we propound shall be accomplished. For not only the poor, but all
and singular the Citizens, yea and the Magistrates them selves shall feel no
small commodities by this godly ordinance. For truly the Mastistrates may
well count it a great gain, to acthieue this glory to them selves for ever,
that they by furthering the pouerties cause, have delivered the common wealth
from great and dangerous discommodities and encombrances: that they have
purged it of that sink of desperate men, I mean valiant beggars: that they
have been the mean that many forlorn men do live honesily, godly, and
quietly, undoubted and immorfall praise rests for all such as declare them
selves relous in this behalf. It is also most certain, that whatsoever
travel the Magistrates shall bestow and employ in favor of the poverty, they
shall perceive it at length largely recompensed, as well by god him self, as by
men. Thus shall it be recompensed of men, when as many as shall understand them
selves to be helped by the public liberality, shall always be readic to obey
and please by all means, especially they will commend those devout
Magistrates in their prayers to Almighty God, and pray hartilye for their
safety. The which benefit there is no cause why any should accounte as a
small matter. For God does willingly hear the prayers and cries of the poor,
and there is nothing so high or excellent, but by prayers it may be
obtained of Almighty God, which the Apostle Paul wills al me^ atte^tiuely
to consider, when. 2. Cor. 9. he says. That the poverty do give thanks
continual, and glorify God, and pray for the salvation of those which study
for to relieve their lack, and in the same place wishing to excite all men to
exercise liberality toward the poor, he doubts not to affirm, that God
can bring to pass, that the whole benifite may redound to them that give, ye
having all sufficicucie in all things they may abound in every good grace, as
it is written Psalm. 112. He has dispersed abroad, and given to the poor,
his righteousness remains for ever. Which things, sith they be true (for
who will doubt of the sentence of the holy ghost) all magistrates ought
thoroughly to be persuaded, that they shall not loose that labor which they
bestow in promoting the cause of the poor: but that they shall receive at
Gods hand, who suffers no good work to pass unrewarded, some blessing,
either in spiritual and internal things, or in temporal and external, or in
both. To doubt of the promises of God it were a great wickconesse. But no man
is able to utter how many and how great commodities shall ensue to the poverty
them selves, the matter being so ordered for them as we will after declare.
First they which hitherto were utterly neglected, so that it was not known
whether they were Christians, or of some strange religion, hereafter shall be
present devoutly at the holy assemblies with other godly men, shall here
attentively the sermons and interpretations of holy scriptures, shall learn
the articles and elements of Christianity, shall use the Sacraments institute
by Christ with faith and reverence, shall live henceforth justly, devoutly and
soberly: to be brief, none of all those things which are required to their
souls health shall be withholden from them. But especially those valiant
beggars, which we discried to be contaminate with every kind of wickedness,
shall be brought in order, and being gently admonished, shall renounce their
ungraciousness, and return into the right way, or being constrained by
sharper correction, shall be weary of it. By which means, besides that horible
outrages, as theft, whoordeme, murder, fyrings, and treasons (and who can
reckon the rest?) shall be avoided out of the common wealth: they also which
seemed to be castawayes, and given over to eternal damnation, shall see again
the way to salvation set open to them, and bringing forth due fruits of
repentance, shall undoubtedly obtain eternal life. Those men children also
which partly by the provocation of their parents, parily of their own accord
would conform them selves to beggerie, and to all filthiness incident to the
same, shall in their youth be sent to schole to learn good litterature, and
become civil thereby: such as shall be found unapt to take learning, shall
be put to sundry artificers, to learn their crafts: and thus oftentimes,
they whose parents, yea perhaps, graundfathers, and greate-graundfathers for
many years lived by begging, shall now begin to sustain them selves by
their own art and labor: and that which is more to be rejoiced at, shall trayn
up their children in integrity of life and manners, and in the knowledge of
bonest arts. The maidens, before their chastity shall be envaungered, shall
submit them selves to the rule of honest matro^s, and shall by their diligent
service earne their meat and drink with commendation. If any heretofore have
offended, those being corrected by wholesome reprehensions, or reclaymed, and as
it were lifted up out of their filthiness by gentle admonitions, shall frame
them selves to chastity and honest life. To conclude, the whole poverty,
which lived licentiously, shall be reduced to a newness of life, no doubt to
the glory of God, to the joy of the holy Angels, which rejoice at ye
repentance of one sinner, to the edifying and comfort of al godly men, and the
holy congregation. When thus the salvation of the soul is provided for, the
bodies also and the rest shall be in better case: they which of late went naked,
and in tottred cloutes, now shall go well clad and appareled: they which
fainted we hunger and thirst, shall now be refreshed we co^petent meat and
drink: they which sterued in cotages we cold, diseases, and maladies, shall
now have their bodies cherished we te^perate heat, and shall come abroad,
recovering bodily strength: they which lay weout doors, shall be received into
houses, aged people shall have some to attend on them: they which were
infected with scabbes, ulcers, Hernia, the stone, and other diseases, shall be
restored to health by the public liberality: they that seemed to be consumed
with sorrow and mourning, shall be comforted by other. Moreover they which
are, as it were, borne to misery, and are altogether careless of their
business, negligent, without forecast, making havoc of all things, because
they greatly needs the providence and advise of other, they shall perceive that
their substance is very profitably disposed for their behoof. But such as
hide their poverty, and would not have it known for certain causes, may
now without shame break their minds to some good men, and obtein some
relief of the common box, till they shall be able better to provide for them
selves. Finally, none of all the multitude of poverty may justly complain,
that he lacks any thing which is requisite for the competent mayntenaunce of
the body. Furthermore, all the Citizens shall rejoice, and shall think the
whole common wealth to be beautified with exceeding great blessings. For
first, they shall joy to see the city delivered from that grievous burden of
infinite valiant beggars, whether they be strangers or domestical. For these
must at once (as we will after teach) be prohibited and brought in order.
They shall no more be molested with the clamours and importunate petitions of
beggars, meeting with them at the church doors, and at their private doors,
and in every place. They shall perceive ye they are veliuered from the fear of
those great dangers, which we showed before came by beggars, those outrages
which were wont to be committed, hereafter shall not once be named. Those
monstrous bodies, or deformed with sundry diseases, blood, matter, wounds,
and loathsome filthiness, shall not be set in sight to terrify and dismay
women great with child, or any other, which are soon troubled with the sight
of such ghastly and sudden shows. Besides this, there shall be fewer diseased
people in the city, and contagious diseases shall be clean shut out. If at
any time the Citizens take some to labor or work with them, they shall find
them much more ready than before. For filthy idleness shall after a forte be
banished out of the whole city, the use also of many honest arts, which
seemed before to be neglected, shall now florishe again. To conclude, all men
will endeavor to get their living by some handie labor, which is honest and
acceptable before God. Moreover the citizens will contribute to the common
alms more willingly and liberally, because they know that what soever is
bestowed, is faithfully dealt to such as be poor in deed. And when linen,
or woollen cloth, or made garments, lether, or shoes, and such things
necessary for this life, must particularly be distributed, then doubtless
many of the citizens, of whom those things must be bought, shall gain
thereby, where otherwise they should not. Lastly, all the inhabitaunts of mean
and competente estate will follow their callings with more cheerful and
quiet minds than before, and casting all their cogitations and cares upon God
alone, will conceive undoubted hope, that neither they nor their children shall
want things necessary for this life, although they should be decayed by any
sodayn casualtie. This also shall cause one neighbor with mutual love to
embrace an other: the rich man without offense or disdain will salute the
poor man: and again the poor neighbor will not be ashamed to resalute the
rich, and to wish him well: briefly the whole City shall be as one house, in
which al men are joined together in most perfect frendshippe, and knitte with a
knotte which can not be dissolved: and believe me, the whole state of the
common wealth shall be much more blessed, than Plato or any other Philosopher
in his solitary contemplation can descrybe in paper. But it can not be known
till we have had experience a while, what plentiful commodities will rise to
the common wealth, and the whole civil society, by this godly order.
Wherefore it behooves us to make an end of this Chapter, and to proceed to
explicate how the poor, both may and ought in every city to be provided
for.

Chapter. 3. That every Parish and City must take advise, how they may best
provide for their poverty, as place and time requires.
NO man may suppose that we are able to prescribe such a way for the
releeuing of the poor, as may be applied to every place and time, and may
satistle every man's wit. For that is as hard to be done, as to make one
politic law which may serve in every civil society a like, without any
exception or interpretation, to be construed according to the rule of equity.
Therefore when we have propounded a general example in these matters, then it
is expedient, that the heads of the Churches them selves, and the magistrates
in every their cities do prouide^tly deliverate, how they may ordeine the like
to be applied to their people. For it is meet to consult far otherwise in a
large and populous city, tha^ in one ye is small and little inhabited: one
thing is to be determined where the Church has a rich treasury, an other,
where it is but poor, that counsel may serve where the Citizens are for the
most part wealthy and charges of expenses great, which will not serve where the
citizens are poor, and do live hardely: an order may be taken in the time of a
common dearth, and when all things are dear sold in the land, which may be
altered whon all things are plenty and cheap: to conclude sundry circumstances
do require several considerations: whereunto appertains that which ye
apostle wisely admonishes us of. 2. Cor. 8. That alms should be dealt
according to the ability of the citizens, in due proportion and equality.
Perform you (inquit) that good work as far forth as you can. For it there
be first a willing mind, it is accepted, according to that which a man has,
and not according to that he has not, neither is it that other men should be
eased, and you grieved: but upon like condition at this present time, that your
abundaunce may supplye their lack, and also their abundance may be for your
lack, that there may be equality. As it is written: he yt gathered much had
nothing over, and he that gathered little had not yt less. But it is well
known, that our auncesters in the primative Church had a great care, to inue^t
a certain order, yt every City might feed their needy people. For if ye
apostle Paul did so earnestly stir up the co^gregatio^s of the gentiles
throughout Achata, especially at Corinthu^ in Macedonia, Galatia in Italy and
Rome, and all abroad: to send relief to their brethren whom they knew not but
dwelt far off in Iudaea: who does not conceive hereby, that it was ordained
and ratifyed before in every of these Churches, that they should relieve the
poverty that dwelte among them? And even unto the time of Pelagius the first
the 60. Bishop of Rome, that is, til the year of the Lord. 560. all the
governors of the Churches and the magistrates in every place did labor
diligently in that matter, as may be proved by diverse arguments. For under
Pelagius was holden the second synod at Turon, in which Can. 5. we read it
was decreed, that every city should feed according to their ability all
their poor and needy inhabitants with co^pete^t food: so should they not
need to wander in other cities, and as well the elders of the Church near
adjoining, as the Citizens should relieve their own poverty, those ar the
words of the Cano^. Tyberius the second, that right godly Emperor did greatly
advance that age, whose liberality toward ye poor, is celebrated to be
such, that many historiagraphers have reported, that he was accused of some as
a waster of the imperial treasure: because he bestowed all the revenues and
tribute exactions, which his antecessor Justinius, a covetous man, had gathered
together, and the tresure of Narsetes which were found in a certain well in
Italy, on the poor. Volateranus and other more report no less. John Bishop
of Alexandria was famous at the same time, who for his untired diligece in
helping the poor is commonly honored eue^ to this day by ye name
Eleemosinatius: or Almner, Childebert9 the french king, and German9 bishop of
Paris were incide^t to ye same time, who did not doubt to cote^d together of
liberality toward the poor as the author Fasciculi tempotu^, and certain
other witness. Alter Pelagius 250. years under ye empire of Carolus Magnus
(who governed in the year of our Lord. 814. the pouerties cause was so
diligently looked unto by certain godly men, that it was not only enjoined to
every city and parrishe that they should cherish their poverty according to
the old custom: but also search was made in every family and private house,
and charge given by ye authority of the Emperor, that in every great family
or kindred they which were rich, should honestly provide for the poverty
belonging to that family or kinrede. For when the treasorie of the church, and
the daily allowance of alms was not sufficient to sustain all those, which
sought to be relieved of the common liberality: then necessity enforced the
godly men to bethink them of a new advise, to ease the burden of the parishes
and cities, by inducing the rich men after this forte to relieve them in their
families. We read, that it was decreed of this matter in the synod at Arelas,
holden at the commandment of the Emperor Carolus, in the Can. 14. it is thus
set forth: That every one in the time of famine or any necessity should
relieve acording to his power such as appertayn to them, because it is written:
Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy: and again, Give, and
it shall be given to you: remit, and yours shall be remitted etc. Again in the
synod at Turon, under the same Carolus, Can. 36. It is commonly enjoined to
all, that every one should endeavor to nourish and refresh all the poverty,
appertaining to their family, according to the season of the year, because it
is ungodly, and odious in the sight of God, that they which abound in riches,
and exceed in wealth, should not help the miserable and needy people. In the
mean time the later Canons of this synod the. 10.11.16. do plainly testisse,
that the poor were provided for in every city and parish of the common
treasorie of the church, and the daily collections among the saythfull
Christians. For in those Cannons it is straightly commanded, that the Byshopps
should have a great care and respect to the poor, and should in the
presence of the elders and deacons assembled for to confer of other matters
of the Church, circumspectly, as the ministers of God, dispose and deal them
to the poors of the same parish, as every one has need, according to the
meaning and intent of the Cannon. And without doubt this great fidelity and
diligence of the Church rulers in the pouerties behalf, did move Charles the
great at that time, and many other after him, that partly in France, and
partly in Germany, they did erecte many houses of religion, and many
fraternities (which were no other at that time but harbourehouses for the
poor) and they endued them with great riches. Therefore that order which was
in times paste so constantlye kept for the mayntenaunce of the poor: to wit,
that every city and parish did foster their domestical and home dwelling
poverty: the same would now be well put in ure again: and every City with
one consent, must consulte thereof according to their state and ability.

Chapter. 4. That certain fit men must be chosen by voices, to take charge of
the whole business.
BEfore all things it behooves to choose in every parish and circuit,
certain men of tried honesty, whose fidelity, piety, gravity, and
integrity is well known, by whom it shall be foreseen how all the poverty
ascribed to their civil society or circuits may be brought in order: which
men must be chosen by the common consent, as well of the church gouerners, as
the magistrates: under which name I comprehend al those which are put in trust
in any office in city, borough or village. For it is always meet, ye every of
these in any weighty or godly business should lay to their helping hand.
And it is sufficient if in a village or streate three or four be appointed
for this purpose, according as time and place serves: but in greater Cities
it is meet, that in every Parish or ward, as many overseers be chosen. And
if necessity require, in a populous city it shall be well that four other be
set over the rest, as of a higher dignity, and having the chief rule over
the rest: to whom the other foures which are elected in every parish shall have
recourse sometime to consulte with them, and to open unto them the harder cases
which happen to come in question: to whom also the poverty themselves may
resort, and if they have any complaints may open the^ unto them: by whom also,
if need require, the other overseers may be admonished, and the disobedient
poverty may be corrected and punished: to conclude before them shall be pleaded
and discussed all matters which appertain to good order in the pouerties
behalf. This manner of electing aproued men, to take charge of the poverty,
is set forth in the primative Church by the Apostles themselves. For all the
faithful did by all means labor for that, that none among them might be
seen to lack. So that such as possessed lands and houses, sold them, and
laid the price down at the Apostles feet (which was expedient at that time
to be done at Jerusalem, and not else where, partly for the cruelty of the
ungodly magistrates, who enterprised then echewhere to rob the Christians
good from them violently: and partly because the faithful by the ordinance
of God not long after should fleet from thence to seek other dwellings, and
to preach and plant the Gospel in sundry coasts) which was afterward
distributed faithfully to echo man and woman as they had need. Act. 4. but
when that office of receiving and laying ou again of the daily charges, was so
trouble some to ye Apostles, that for it they did intermitte often times a
better work: to wit, the preching of the Gospel, and besides many
controversies did rise about the daily waiting: The Apostle calling the
multitude together gave this counsel Act. 6 It lyketh us not (inquiu^t) that
we should leave the preaching of the word of God to serve tables: wherefore
brethren look you out among you seven men of honest report, and full of the
holy Ghost, and wisdom, which we may appoint to this business, and we will give
our selves continually to prayer, and to the ministration of the word: and
this saying pleased the whole multitude, and they chose seven men, which are
there named. The Corinthians also. 1. Cor. 16. ar bidden by Paul to appoint
whom they would have to bring their liberality unto Jerusalem: and again. 2.
Cor 8. and 9. he says, that he has sent situs, a worthy and diligent
minister of the Church, and with him an other brother, whose praise is in ye
gospel, (whom some geasse to be Luke, some Barnabas) and a third man also,
who^ he had often proved trusty and diligent in many things: these were
appointed by Paul to prefer to the Corinthians, the cause of the brethren,
which were appressed with extreme penury at Jerusalem. Therefore let it not
grieve us to consider the example and purpose of the holy apostles, and as time
and place will bear, follow them. But whether more or less than we have
spoken of, must be chosen to see to this business, we will not greatly strive:
seeing the regard of the place and number of poverty will teach us what is
needful to be done in it. Much less will we contend of the names of the
officers. For the primative church called them Deacons, which appears not
only out of the Acts of the apostles, but out of Eusebius hist. Eccl. lib. 2.
cap. 1. In the history of D. Laurentius the martyr, they are called Levites.
Therefore whether you do call them by that name, or by any other, the matter is
not great: as if they were called Masters of the poor, overseers, viewers,
visiters, stuardes, or disposers, Almners, etc We will easyly agree in the
name, when we have determined of the thing it self.

But these men must be greatly had in estimation of all men, and also
sometime must be admonished, or rather entreated by the ministers of the
churches, and magistrates, that upon certain set days and hours, they will
willingly ioyn some godly pains with their honorable function for keeping of
orders, not doubting but that they shall receive incomparable and eternal
rewards at the hands of almyghtie God, and we ought to be persuaded, that
that comendation wherwt the Apostle sets forth those three men, which he
sends to Corinthum, to gather the alms, which should be carried to the
brethren in Iudaea, does belong to them also which do take upon them the
office of providing for the poor, and have a care faithfully to perform the
same in these days.

Chapter. 5. What belongs to the office of them which are chosen to ouersee
the Poor.
AS we have said that this office deserves great estimation, so we must all
needs acknowledge, that it is not free from a great toil, for the office of
the overseers is manyfolde and wayghty, which for more playnenesse and order
sake may be fytly brought to five principal points.

First, that they search diligently throughout every city and parish ye number
of those, which desire to be relieved of the public alms, and ye they can
wisely discern the true poverty, and those that deserve to be pitied, from
the counterfets and unworthy.

Secondly, that they wisely can cast, how the money and necessary charges may
be levied and collected honestly, and without ouercharging the Citizens and
inhabitants.

Thirdly, how they should rightly distribute the alms collected, to the
needy, according to the quality of the persons and the rule of equity.

Fourthly, that they be ready to render an accoumpts of that they have received
and laid out: either to the magistrates and certain ministers of the Churches
at a time appointed: or else before all men in a public place and session: so
to maynteine and approve unto all men both their authority, and their trust
inesse.

Fifthly, they shall labor what they can to bring to pass, that the order
for the relief of the poor being once well determined and begun to be
observed, may always after be retained, continued and kept.

To these five points of this whole business they which shall be chosen to this
office shall be wholly bent and shall direct all their cares and cogitations, to
perform them. But to the end they may the sooner, easelyer and without
hindraunce accomplish, whatsoever they shall holsomly determine 07 it is very
needful that as well the Churchs rulers, as the gouernoures of the common
wealth, do without delay, aid and assiste them, and that they redily by
their public authority do charge prohibits, constitute, and publishe to the
whole multitude, what soever are thought necessary and profitable to the
setting forth of the liberality toward the poor. The healpe of many
neighbors, and especially such as be strong, is required at the raising or
erecting of any ample or magnificall frame of buylding. Neither may we hope
that the Deacons, be they never so godly or prudent, can do any thing worthy
of commendation among the rude multitude, which always carpe and murmr
against good laws, except the magistrates also do prudently intermedle their
authority, and declare openly, that they will and decree the same that the
Deacons do. Now we will show in order, how those things which we have
reckned to appertain to this office may be accomplished.

Chapter. 6. How the poverty must be searched, and those that are in deed,
to be discerned from the counterfeiters and dissemblers.
BEfore any certain form to relieve the poor according to the measure of
their necessity be appointed, it is needful (as we have said) that the
number of those which desire to be reckened among the poverty, and to be
norished of the publik liberalite in ye cities or villages, be known. And that
this may be done, it is meet first that the deacons or viewers do diligently
view all places in the City, and that they go into the homely cottages of
the poor, to search narrowly, and to set it down in books made for the
same purpose, how many live under one roof, of what age, ability, or
strength, what charge of children, or diseased persons they have, what store of
substance or householde stuff they be furnyshed with. They might send
Beadles to call them all in order out of every house to some one place, where
every one of the poverty in the presence of all the deacons or viewers might
profess in what state they are: but the other is the safer way for many
causes. For no doubt it may better be discerned by eye sight than by their
talk, how they are affected in bodyly strength, or health, how many, and
what manner children, and what household stuff they have, whether they have any
diseased in their houses, and what their disease is. etc. Neither is it
sufficient to hears the poverty them selves declare their own estate, but it
is expedient afterward to receive the reports and testimonies of the neighbors
that dwell near, by whom also the good conversation of each of the poverty
may be known more narowly.

But in the entrance to this place, I must overthrow the fend cauillation of
certain, which hold, that the poverty ought not thus curiously to be
searched. We may give our alms (say they) to whom we list: so that we
deal it in the name of Christ, it is no matter on whom we bestow it. Yet no
man I suppose is ignorant, that there is discretion to be used in our
liberality, and regard to be had, not only of the matter and causes, but
also of persons. As touching the matter, when it is expedient to give to every
one alike, as we see their need, and not to give all to one: as touching the
persons: because it is certain that we ought rather to give to those that are
honest and godly, tha^ to sinners and evil livers, and one has more need, an
other is content with less. Of which matter both S. Augustine in many places,
and Ambrose in his books of Offices or duties have wisely defined, whose words
we see recited by Gratianus distinct. 86. Neither is that search fault worthy,
which is made to help the poor, not to hurt any man, and which is ordained
to procure the common safety of all, as well such as be poor in deed, as
such as are not so. For their private necessity when it is known, does make
them to be well provided for. The others idleness being found out, does
make them to be brought in order, and restrain them from living by other men's
sweat, which does redou^d to the utility both of them and others. For he
commits a grievous offense, which impude^tly dares crave to live of an other
man's trencher, when he might get his own living with his labor. Moreover it is
evident, that the poverty when they are demanded of their estate, they
dissemble many things slyly, they forge not a few things impudently: in the
end they open nothing, but that which they think may avail to move men's
hearts to pity, and to wrest from them a greater alowance of alms. But all
men know that not every one is worthy to be pitied, which desires to be
thought worthy. And truly if every ones tale should be credited, as they can
set it forth, you should have strayghtway such a number of poverty, as the
welthiest city in a realm could not mayntaine or relieve. Because therefore it
can never be perfectly known by their own report in what state they be, it is
not only lawful but also very needful, to have a more diligent view or
search. But after that it is once known how great a multitude of nedie people
is in ye city, it rests that it be determined, and with judgment defined,
who ought of equity to be relieved, and who to be excluded from the public
liberality. And truly I do not see how we may more speedily and prudently
determine in this behalf, than if we follow the custom and judgment of ye old
church. Let us seek therefore, what they were who^ the old church did esteem
to be poor, and worthy of the common alms.

We see the cause of widows, fatherless children, and strangers, commended
studiously, and in the first place unto al men thoroughout the law, and the
prophets Deu. 14.24. And Christ. Math. 25. reckeneth those which are hungry and
thirsty, not by their own fault or wicked will, but through very penury: He
reckeneth the harborlesse, that is, strangers: he reckneth the naked, the
diseased, the captives. In the Parable of the rich man, Luke. 16. Lazarus is
described to be full of sores, and hungry, destring to be refreshed with the
crummes which fell from the rich man's table. Again. Luke. 14. Christ
speaking of the poor, who should be bidden to the feast, names the feeble,
the half, and the blind. Acts. 3. A certain man that had been lame from
his birth, lying at the gates of the Temple, asked alms of those that went
in, and of Peter, who had neither silver nor gold to give him, but he gave him
strength to walk on his feet. But these are to be reckened among the sick
persons. Paul the Apostle oftentimes commends the poor dwelling at
Jerusalem, but they were such as had been hurt with many and grievous
injuries, and had suffered themselves to be spoiled of all their goods for the
profession of the Gospel of Christ, (as he declares Hebr. cap. 10.) and at
such time as that great famine under Claudius Caelar did oppress many
Provinces, but especially Iewry: which is mentioned Acts. 11. Eusebius hist.
Eccl. lib. 2. cap. 8. Tertullian Apolog. cap. 39. reports that the
collections of the saythfull were wont to be bestowed in releeuing the poor,
burying the dead, ou children and infantes destitute of parents, on men broken
with age, on such as had suffered shipwreck, and if any were set to work in
the mines, or if any were in banishment, or in prison, so that it were in Gods
cause, that is, for the profession of Christian religion. Dionisius the Bishop
at Corinthum writing to Soter Bishop of Rome (as witnesses Eusebius hist.
Ecclesi. libr. 4. cap. 23.) says, that it was the manner of the saythfull men
at Rome from the beginning, to help all their brethren with sundry benefits,
to lot out for many churches in diverse countries al things which they
understood they did lack, to comfort each man's necessity by all means they
could, to minister as need required to the brethren dispersed through the
mines. Therefore you see, that the Churches have been wont to relieve those
which dwelt far off, and were distant from them long journeys, and among them
such as were condemned to the mines. Acatius the bishop of Ameden, (Socrat.
hist. Tripar. li. 11. ca. 16.) was very careful for the redeeming of captives
in the war, for whom saint Ambrose, and after him saint Augustine were so
careful, that for the delivery of them they doubted not to bestow the golden
vessels of the Church. Possidonius the bishop at Calanen. has left this in
writing. But Ambrose in his Offices does yet reckon other which deserve to be
pitied, Age and debilitie (says he) must be considered, and sometimes
bashfulnesse, which is a toke^ of a toward nature, which can not presently get
their own living, and yet either in time to come may, or in time past has. In
like manner debilitie of body must speedily be helped, as also if any man from
riches be come to poverty, and especially not through his own fault, but
either has lost that he had by robbers, or proscription, or by unjust
accusations. And again the same Ambrose in the same work says: Perfect
liberality is commended by says, the cause, the place, the time: first that
it work among them that are of the household of says. For it is a great
fault if any faithful man need, and thou do not supply his lack when thou
know it: if thou know him to be without money, and hungry, and thou feed
him not: if he suffer grief, and thou comfort him not: specially when he would
hide it, and is bashefull to utter it: if he be convicted to the imprisoning of
him self or his children, or unjustly slaundered, and thou help him not: if
he be laid in prison, and extremely dealte withal for some debt, being a
just and honest man, thou art much to blame if thou succoure him not. Which
words are borrowed from him in the Distinct. 86. Cannon. Consideranda, and
Canon. Non satis est. Finally we find, that such as applied the schools to get
lerning, especially stude^ts of the scriptures, whom they call Clerks, were
maynteined by the public liberality, when they were destitute of the help of
friends alied to them. Which Sozemenus (Tripart. histo. Lib. 6. Capi. 7.)
does plainly signify to have begun first in the time of Constantinus the
Emperor, when he says, that Iulianus commanded, that what soever the
maids and widows which for penury were relieved among the clerks, had
received a little before out of the common liberality, according to the
appointment of Constantinus, should be exacted of them again. There are extant
also many cannons, and many rescripts of Bishops, in the which the same is
declared: as in the Council at Braccara, Can. 25. in the council at Calcedon,
Can. 3. and de co^secratione did 5. out of ye book of the five chapters
Cannon, In omnibus, also in the Epistle of Gelatius the bishop, to the bishops
placed through Lucania, Brucia, and Sicilia. Item to the clarks and people of
Brundusium, out of the which Gratianus has borrowed much, 12. Quest. 1. Cano.
4. and Cannon. Concessu. Besides these, the Epistles of Gregorius the first:
one to Auguftine bishop of Cantorburie, the other to Leo bishop of Carthage,
out of the latter of the which, it is read, 16. quest. 1. Cano. Adhuc. Of
which matter we have entreated more at large in our book of Ecclesiastical
schools. I might bring more testimonies of every sort of poverty out of the
commentaries of ancient writers, but I will cease to do it, supposing that
these are sufficient to teach us to judge whom we ought to relieve, as very
poor among the sundry degrees of poverty.

First therefore are commended widdewes and Orphans. 2. strangers and
pilgrims. 3. diseased people, in which number are the lame, the deaf, the
dumb, the blind, the leapers. etc. 4. Aged people, which in deed do little
differ from such as be sick, for age it self (as says one) is a disease. 5.
Those that are spoiled of their goods for the confession of the truth of Gods
Gospel, or condemned to the mines, or banished into strange I lands, or
kept in filthy prisons. 6. Captives in war under the enemies especial of
the christian religion. 7. They which from riches are brought to poverty,
whether it be by shipwreck, or by fyring, or robbing and warlike vprores, or
by proscription or the slander of their adversary, and by the iniquity of
judgment, whereby their cause has been overthrown, or by any such sudden
casualtie, so that it come not by their own faults. To whom we must toyne
(according to the opinion of Ambrose) such as be bashful, borne of honest
parentage, but dare not bewray their poverty. 8. Young children given to apply
honest arts, but especially good litterature and Theology.

But you will say, what a company is there reckned to be relieved? Whence shall
we raise the charges, which must feed so many sorts of men? I would you did
understand, that we have not reckened thus many sorts of men in times past
relieved of the public liberality, to the end to fear you, and to withdraw
you from this godly purpose: but partly that by the worthy examples of the
ancient Churches (whose substance was yet but very small, and ability very
slender) they might excite all men to prosecute this business proposed,
partly that every City may know how to view what poverty they may find
among them to be relieved. For it is certain that we have reckned many such
as are not now to be found among many people and cities. Therefore we means,
that they only are to be deemed worthy of the public liberality, which out
of all sorts that I have reckened, are presently to be found in the City. And
yet not all such, but those of them only which after diligent search, shall
be found to be oppressed in deed with famine and penury. For there are in
every place many Widows and Orphans, there come daily many strangers, there
are many sick, lame, blind, dumme. etc. Many are of rich men suddenly
brought to poverty, many children destitute of their parents aid, and left
poor, whom notwithstanding it is not needful by and by to put in the
number of them which can not live; except they receive their mayntenaunce of
the public treasury. The which, how it should be taken, it is behoouefull
for us to explicate more plainly to the easting of the Parishes and Cities.

First therefore among those which beg and ask alms from door to door,
all such as are valiant, of what sex or age so ever (if, I say, they be able
of body) they ought to be excluded from the public liberality. See, I beseech
you, how much we have diminished in one word, that huge number of those that
profess poverty. Doubtless if a diligent view be taken, of five hundred
roges wandering euerywhere in sight, and begging of every one they meet, there
shall scarsly two hundred be found which deserve in deed to he pitied. Yet
there is great discretion to be used in that behalf, and there ought to be
present good witnesses, and among them some Physicians and Surgeons at the
search of their ability, health and age of every one that lives by begging,
that no man may afterward justly complain, that any thing has been done
otherwise than well. Then must begging be forbidden to all that are sound and
in good state of body, yea and to all other whom soever. The which thing
because it will be novelty, and thought to be harde-dealing, and not only
they which maintain themselves in idleness by other men's sweat, will grudge,
but also many of the citizens will complain that it is great extremity, to
abridge the poverty of that so long continued and harmless trade, to seek
things necessary for this life of well disposed persons (for they have nothing
but that which men are willing to give them.) Of either of these sorts of
men, grievous tragedies might easily be raised in the City, therefore we
must prevent this mischief on this manner. First the Senate or Parliament of
the Magistrates shall diligently intermeddle their authority, and calling the
multitude together, shall by a public Edicte or proclamation, whollye
prohibit all begging, for sundry weighty and necessary causes, whereof some
may well be expressed in the Edicte or Act it self. Consequently the
Preachers, and sometimes also before the publishing of the Edict, shall with
great faith and gravity teach that begging, especially of the valiant sort,
ought worthily to be abrogate: they shall declare first, that it is a
detestable sin to beg from door to door for victualles which by his own
labor he were able to provide, the other being due for the true poverty:
they shall sharply inueigh against filthy idleness and stouth: they shall
pithily overthrow all such cauillations as they understand to be objected by
malicious and ignorant persons against this new and godly edict. For before we
proceed to the utter prohibiting of begging, we must by all means provide,
that the people may be rightly instructed of the whole matter, and may fully
perceive, how godly, how wholesome, how needful it is. And herein the
speaker has a wide field opened to him. It is right well known, that in the
law of God, Deuteronomy. 15. the Jews were charged to foresee, that in their common
wealth no beggar or needy person might be found. Egenus (inquit) seu mendious
non sit inter vos. Where the Hebrewe word signifies one that is so poor, so
beggarly or destitute of all things, that he must needs crave and ask
relief of other. It seemed also that it might redound to the reproach and
opprobrie of the name of God, if in that nation, which was so well trained in
religion, any should be driven to beg for poverty. The Gentiles also in
their common wealths did wifely provide in this behalf, as appears. For
Plato his verdicte was, that beggars and idle persons should be expalsed the
city. Valerius Maximus hereof is witness. That the Massilians did once
forecast, that idle beggars and otherwise unprofitable, might not come among
them, he that has readde any approved authors, will easily acknowledge. That
the most prudent Athenians had a care of the same matter, after whose example
it was decreed and commanded in the Civil law, that valiant beggars should
be searched, and be brought in order by severity, Codice, de validis
mendicantibus, lib. 12. in these words: A few being taken of all them, who by
uncertain begging do make a common gain, let the soundness of body, and
lustiness of age, be searched in every one, and let those which are
stouthfull and wretched, without any cause of debility, be urged, as such as
are of a servile condition, and let some diligent and studious examiner have
authority over them. And whosoever shall bewray, prove and detect such
wickedness, let them be borne out by the noble men, and the whole inhabitants
of the town or city: and the masters may safely have an action against those,
which either help to conueigh fugitives, or give them counsel to practice
begging. In which law you see that begging is not only simply prohibited, as a
thing unlawful, but also punyshed and chastised as of (...) finitie to other
wickedness. Wherefore (...) nothing else, yet truly the offenses and ^kednesse
which we have before reh^ and at al times, and every where ha^^ (...) observed
in many beggars, (for Chr^ also in his time co^plaineth, that they (...)
defiled with innumerable and manifold (...) in his book of the providence of
God. li. 1) ought to lead the magistrate forthwith to prohibit all begging.
For it is evident that both it may and ought to be done, as well by Gods law,
as by man's law. Moreover, how grievous a sin it is, for one that can work
to wish to be fed in idleness by others sweat, and to snatch the morsel out
of the mouth of such as be poor in deed, the Apostle him self mentions.
2 Thessa 13. when he says, that they which do so, inordinate viuunt, live
inordinately, and do pervert all good order in the civil society, and
therefore ought to be compelled to work: or if they refuse to be obedient, to
account them as infidels, and to have no fellowship with them. The Prophet Psalm.
128. does deem them blessed in deed, which get their living honestly by their
own labor. For thou shall eat (inquit) the labor of thine own hands,
blessed shall thou be, and it shall go well with thee. Whereupon Prop. li. 2 (of
a co^te^platiue life) does well gather, that he which can maintein himself by
his own travel, ought not to receive any part of ye which is due to the weak
and impotent. And we read in the Canon: let them only receive the relief of
the poor, which are not able to work. But that goes more hard, which is
borrowed out of lerome: 12. quest. 2. Can. Gloria episcopi: To receive or to
withholde any part of that, which ought to be bestowed on the poor, it
passes the cruelty of all thieves, which is spoken in that place of the
Bishops or stewards of the Church goods, which neglected the poor: but it may
well be understood generally of all such as do challenge or usurp any of the
pouerties goods unjustly: and. 1. quest. 2. Can. Clericos: Item Can. Pastor.
Those clarks are pronounced guilty of sacrilege, which when they may live of
their own, yet they receive of the Church goods, which are the poores. But
valiant beggars are much more iustlye touched with the same sentence.
Furthermore against fylthy idleness how many pretty sayings may be brought out
of all sorts of wrighters? To al mankind was that law given, which does
admit no exception, immediately after man's creation: In sudore vultus tui
vesceris pane tuo, In ye sweat of thy brows shalts thou eat thy bread: Genesis 3
Man is borne to labor, as ye sparks of coals which fly upward, Job. 5.
Chrisost. lib. pri. of the providence of God says: That ma^s nature was
created to nothing less than idleness and rest, and if when we are bent to
work and labor we are not free from sin, but we finne still, to what
wickedness will not our presumption proceed, if God had ordained us to flow
in delights, and idleness. It is trus that one says: Omnia mala docuit
ocium, Idleness has taught us all wickedness. But these may suffice thus
slenderly set forth for the unskillful: to wit, that all men may have
wherewith to confirm both themselves, and other, to think well of the taking
away of valiant begging.

It rests therefore, yt al beggars, which are found sound in body, be driven
by ye authority and edicte of the senate to some handy labor. They which know
no occupation, it is meet they should learn of some artificer. And since
there be so sundry crafts and occupations, among them many are such as may
quickly and easily be learned, and besides may be practiced with small charges.
In husba^dry and tillage, in cloth making, and certain other, many things may
be done of every one forthwith. Wherefore none may make excuse yt he cannot
learn. If he have a will he cannot but obtain the skill. If he can any
occupation before, it is well, let them be occupied earnestlye in it. And they
to whom the business of the poverty is committed shall provide, that being
ready to work they may always have something ready for them to do. Let them
have shops, let them have masters to hire their work, either public or
private, that they may utterly have no occasion left to follow idleness.
And that the same advise and counsel was used in the primative Church and
society of the faithful, it may be easily gathered, out of the Epistle of
Clemente the Pope, unto James the brother of the Lord, where he, speaking of
the care to be had for the poverty, says thus: For such as can no
occupations, seek ye out some honest occasions whereby they may get
necessary victualles. And soon after he adds: But for the artificers
provide work.

Thus much of valiant beggars, and how it may be forseene, that no society
be burdened with their mayntenaunce. Now we will make inquisition of the rest
of the poverty in order, but first of widows and orphans. As touching widows,
it is not needful, that al should have alowance out of the collection. For many
of them and their children can gayn by doing some work. For they can kemb and
card wool, they can dress and scour woollen cloth, etc. hatchell line or
flax from the shyues, spinne, weaue, sewe shirtes, and other linen garments,
make needle woorks, and do all kind of embrawderie, they can make girdles,
and all ornaments for children, laces of party colors, caules for women's
hair, little purses, and such other kind of apparel and furniture, and can
teach the Citizens daughters the same arts. These and many other not unlike,
they are able to do: by which means surely if they will, they may shift for
themselves and their children competently. Let there be gotten husbands for
the younger widows, and let them help after wards as they are able, every one
in their occupation, and so let them jointly earne their mayntenance. So
Clemens in the epistle before mentioned says: Be you in stead of husbands to
the widows, and have a care for them after an honest sort, ministering those
things which are necessary, yet couple the younger wyddowes in marriage.
Therefore if thus the widows be restrained from filthy idleness to honest
labor: or if they be married to artificers, it will come to pass, that either
they shall be competently maynteynes by their ownewoorke, or shall need but
very small allowance to help out, or certainly very few will desire any of the
public liberality.

The Churches and congregations in times paste, with great faith and
diligence, took upon them a fatherlye care for orphans, because GOD had so
commanded: which Clemens in the same Epistle does witness. Therefore all
Orphans, to whom, it shall be found that their parents, or near kinsmen, for
poverty, could not assign tutours, ought to be commended to the overseers of
the poor, who if they be infantes, shall put them to nursso to huswiues, that
are thought meet, and have no great charge of children themselves, who shall
receive their wages out of the collection. The like regard shall be had of
infants that are laid forth in the streates, if none will receive them. For
even these also were norished and preserved by the Church of old time: which
we may mark in the second counsel at Arelas, holden about the year of our
Lord. 320. out of the which Cannon 32. it is alleged did. 87. Canon. Si
expositus (where an error is passed in the superscription which has Ex
concilio Toletano.) Item out of the council at Faseu, which was celebrate,
when Leo ye first governed ye church of Rome, anno. 450. Can. 8. Out of ye
which we may also perceive, yt there were in many cities certain houses, in
which such children were honestly brought up: and where such provision is made
for outcast children, there the stewards of the poverty are delivered of this
care. Neither is this to be let slip, that sometime the rich men, especially
which have no children, if they be gently entreated of some good men, will not
grudge to take some fatherless child, and bring him up, as many in times past
were wont to adopte certain, as testifies often the Civil law.

Now those which do remain, whether they be orphans, or outcast children, if
they have no hope of comfort, either out of some common Orphanotrophie, or
some rich man's benignity, those must be so long maynteyned out of the
public treasury, till they have learned some trade to live by.

Now of strangers or pilgrims, which are of two sorts. Some stay long in the
City, and have as it were, gotten a dwelling there: other do but come as
wayfarers, and journey with speed to some other place. Of these former, it is
meet that search shall be made, upon what occasyon they came first to the
city, what they do, or how they are presently occupied, whereof they live, of
their manners, what good virtues, or notorious vices they are noted to have.
Now if necessity of war, or casualtie by fire, or water, have forced them
to change their abiding, and that they be commended to be of upright life, and
besides are found willing to labor and trade some occupation, then will we
account them worthy to be pitied, and so far forth to be fusteined, and
borne withal, till they can earne some thing again to live by: but if they be
not found such as we have now said, nothing does prohibit (which we know
the old devises of common welthes have also prescribed) that they may not be
thrust out of the city, and be sent back into their own Country, for it is
meet that the devotion be bestowed elsewhere. And to the end it may for
hereafter be avoided, that the City be not burdened with foreign poverty,
the Senate or parliament shall forbid, by an express law, that no Citizen
shall hereafter let out any dwelling house, or harbor any stranger of a
foreign nation, without knowledge given first to the Co^sul, or Mayor, or chief
officer, how soever he be termed, whom it behooves to enquire diligently of
the estate and conditions of them, which come, so that this way it will prove,
that the common wealth shall have fewer poverty. But unto the later sort, I
mean poor strangers, that journey any whether, both lodging, and victuals,
shall be courteously granted lodging in the Hospitals, such as almost in every
place we see our auncesters have builded, whereof mention is often made, both
in the Ecclesiastical histories and in diverse councels: they shall receive
victuals either in the same Hospital, or of some appointed for the same
purpose. It shall not be lawful for them to beg from door to door. For the
which purpose the senate or counsel, shall enioyn some that dwell near every gate
of the City, to salute the poor wayfarers that come by, to ask them
courteously from whence they come, and whether they go? The^ by and by they
shall signify unto the^, that begging is forbidden, and therwithal, shall
show them the way to the Hospitals, or to his house that provides for the
necessities of strangers. Let us proceed to diseased persons. Among these,
because some are grieved with curable diseases, some with incurable, when they
are searched, you must take the counsel and advise of physicians, and
chirurgians, and wisely provide, that as many as may be healed, may be cured
as soon as may be conveniently. But such as have not any hope to recover their
health, they shall go to the spittle house, if there be any such in the
city. If there be none, it is meet to bethynke how they may be helped. The
rest which were joined with these diseased people, the blind, the lame, the
deaf, the dumb. etc. do not all forthwith, if they be sound in other
members, need the publyke liberality. For oftentimes, as much of their
strength as is diminished in one member, so much we see is recompensed in an
other membre.

Therefore in well governed common welthes, we often see that both the deaf and
the dombe having learned honest occupations, have wife and children, and bring
them up honestly. They which lack ye use of their feet, with their hands, did
carue spoones, saltes, little images, and other such things: they sewe
garments, with the needle, pen, and pensyll they did paynte and draw pictures,
and what could they not do with their hands? They which lackt, or had luxatio^s
in their arms, we have seen them able to work with their feet, to blow black
smiths bellows, or ye triers of metals and founders and in the churches to
blow the organs, moreover to serve for messengers in the City, to do
arrants, to carry letters to other towns and cities, to bear burthe^s upon
their shoulders after they were laid on. etc. Neither may the blind be spared,
that they may not accostome to do some work, and to get their victuals with
their own travel. I know some blind men, which being led by a child,
while they were children to the grammar school, by continual hearing have at
length gotten famous learning, and have afterward taught other publicly with
great comme^dation, many also have bin famous by their writings. Perseualdus
Brugensis, and before him Petrus Pontanus, of the same City, Robertus VVancop
Scotus doctoure of Divinity, and of late created Archbishop of Armacan, these
taught at Paras. And who has not heard of Didymus Alexandrinus, whom all
aunciente wrighters do greatly extol with praises. Item Hiodorus the
Stoicke, is celebrated, who taught in Philosophy worthyly, and both played
and soong to the Harp, according to the manner of the Pythagorians. Moreover,
I have seen at Brugis, a college dedicate and serving only for the blind,
in which many are instructed to play well on pipes, of sundry kinds, on
Church organes or instruments etc. But they which are not capable of such
arts, those wind bosoms, and double threeds for the weauers, make baskets and
skepps of offers, or bull rushes etc or work at the wine presses, or the hand
milles: to be short, there are innumerable which making a show of grief or
debilitie of body, do flee for succoure to begging as to the holy anchor: But
if their estate be more nearly examined, they shall be found to have no just
cause to beg. He that does diligently examine how many refuges are offered
whereby he may shoon poverty, shall never be able lawfully to pretend extreme
necessity, or that he must needs beg for his living.

The fourth place we assygned to broken and aged people. Neither need all
these to be sustained of the common collection. Many to their last day will
willingly do one easy work or other, and are occupied in the some shopps, or
other workehouses. But some that are utterly decrepite and crooked, let the
geron^o^omies or houses appointed for the aged cherish such: as by the
ordinance of the old church, may be often found, to this day in many cities:
of the which much is spoken, Codice de episcopis and clericis, some their
children, neuews, or near kinsmen, which are able, shall be commanded to
keep. Therefore a diligent inquisition being made, very few shall remain to
be relieved of the collection.

What shall we say of them, which for the profession of the Evangelical
verity, have been spoiled of their goods, ben condemned to the mines, ben
banisted into Islands, and imprisoned? It is certain, that as touching this
matter, the very same respect is not, which was long ago, fith Ethnik
magistrates do no more now bear rule in the common wealth. Therefore both
seldom and in few places, it chances, that any are afflicted for the
confession of the Gospel, after the manner of the first Chrystians. Yet, if
at any time it appear, that any be iniuried wrongfullye, and be endaungered
for reprehending vices and supersticions boldly, or otherwise, for uttering or
defendyng the the truth constantlye, then truly all good men shall
endeavor, that Christ hereafter may not complain, and lay unto our
charges, that he in his members was neglected of us, and was suffered to lack
all things necessary for this lyse. Neither need any man to doubt, but that
Christ even at this day is persecuted and crucified in many of his members.
The nygher that the world drawethe to an end, the more cruellye will
Antechriste rage against Christ's disciples.

Among the Poverty in the sixte place we put the captyues, especially in
wars which have been made against the ennimies of the Christian Religion.
But since our Kings have not perpetual war with the Turks, or Idolaters,
therefore this burthein of redeemyng captives is seldom laid upon us.

In the seuenthe place, we reckened men of great riches suddenly brought to
be poor, by shypwracke, ouerflowyng of waters, fire, robbyng, and incursions
or hostile invasions, and other like casualties. But all these are such for
the most part, as with a little healpe, and that but for a while, by their
own virtue and diligence, they will wear it out again by little and little,
and I may add, that many times they which are wealthy, do liberally of
their own accord, by lendyng them money, or other ways, succor such as
they know are become poor, not by their own default, so long till they may
rise, and recover again.

Otherwhyles, these kind of men have license from the Magistrate to crave
some relief at every house: which things sithe they be so, either but
little, or for no long season these men shall need relief out of the common
treasury of the poor.

Lastly, we added children, given to lern good litterature, but especially
inclined to the study of the holy Scriptures, but because there are but few
to be found, in whom there may be seen any singular hope, each man can
easylye conceive, that no great charges will rise this way. Admit that in one
mean City six or seven may be chosen which are fit and apt, I beseech
you what is that?

Therefore it is evident by these things, that almost of an infinite number of
men and women, which intrude and mingle themselves with the poor, all are not
verily needy and worthy to have the publyke allowaunce, but that a choice
even with diligence must be had. For if all the sorts of poverty were
rehearsed in order, and thoroughoute every trybe (as I may term it) or ward,
a search might be made, in such forte as I have now expressed, you shall
find, among the valyant beggars none, among wyddowes, and Orphans, sometime
more, sometime less, but never any great number, among the strangers very
few, among the dyseased, those only which are grieved with diseases
incurable, wherein the Phyfltians and Surgeons skyll and art fails: For
those that are curable, shall soon be dispatched, and they set again to
work: among the aged they only that are impotent, and have no children or
other to cherishe them, among such as are afflicted for the profession of the
Gospel, and among the captives in war, in some places none, in some very
few: among those which by sudden casualtie are cast down to poverty,
neither often nor for any long season: among children to be sent to schole,
truly very few that ought to be maynteined de publico, of the general
collection.

Therefore when the viewers or Stewards have in this forte once found out,
how great a number of true poverty is in the city, then they shall soon
conjecture how great charges is requisite to the accomplishing of this godly
devise. And lest any might complain, that exhibition does or may hereafter
lack, and therefore they might cry out that this care for the relief of the
poor must be cast aside again, therefore we will show how sufficient
exhibition may be levied for to bear the charges.

Chapter. 7. How the money and necessary charges may be collected without
any great burden to the Citizens.
WE understand that the holy fathers of ye first church, yea of all ages have
been very careful to inue^t how to increase the allowance which was by them to
be distributed to the poor. In the law of Moses god commanded every one that
possessed lands, vineyards, or olive trees, yt he should not reap down every
corner of his field, nor gather the scattred ears of corn, nor the fallen
clusters of grapes, nor the olives left on the boughs after the gathering:
but what soener hereof remained, should be free for the poor, the widdowe,
and strangers to gleane up. Leui. 19 23. Deuter. 24. He charged the rich men
also to lend unto the poor, as often as their need required, without
oppressing or delaying them, and yet in the mean time they might take no
pledge of them, neither ask again that which they had lent importunately, or
rigorously. Deu. 24.25, Leut. 23. Many other laws to the same effect, were
ordained by almighty God, for the relief of the poor, which it were to long
to recite. In the Acts Apost every one that believed the Gospel brought
their money, which either before they had gotten, or then had received for
things which they sold, unto the Apostles feet, to be distributed to each man
for his daily relief. Acts. 4. But we have showed before, that example not to
serve for every place, and time. That which I will now utter, is rather to be
approved and followed. At such time as Christ taught in the temple at
Jerusalem, and in the Sinagoges of other Cities, there was placed a cheste.
Mark. 12. Luke. 21. named Gazophylatium, into the which all men were exhorted
to cast some money: by the which money, as reports Theophilactus, the
officers of the church, the widows and poverty were refreshed. Which
Chrisost. seems also to affirm, expounding those words Mar. 24. No^licet
mittere in corbonam quia precium sanguinis est It may not be put into the
treasury, because it is the price of blood. The Apostle Paul, desiring to
have the brethren which dwelt at Jerusalem relieved, appointed in the Church
of the Corinthians, that every first day of the week (or some one day in the
week) every man should put aside by him self, and lay up as God had
prospered him, some portion to be afterward dealt to she poor. 1. Corinthians.
16. Tertullianus Apolog. cap. 39. telling the custom of the Churches of his
time, in collecting the alms, says: When we meet in our holy assemblies,
every man lays down a small portion on the monthly day, or when he will, and
if he be able: for no man is compelled, but bestows what he is willing of his
own accord. Haec quasi deposit a pietatis sunt, These are as it were the
pledges of deuotiou. Moreover in the same chapter he testifies, that the
supper called Agape, that is, love, was wont on set and appointed days to be
celebrated at the holy meetinges: and certainly, as he says, to help the
poor with that refreshing: which manner of feasting together was common in all
congregations. But when the Corinthians did soon degenerate unto riottous
feasting, it is in that place abrogate by the Apost. 1. Corinthians. 11. In
process of time vessels, and precious ornaments of gold and silver were given
to the Church, which if any great necessity grew or invaded, were brought
forth by the bishops, and liberally bestowed on the poor moreover and above
their ordinary alowance. For so Cyrillus bishop of Jerusalem (as reports
Sozemenus Tripart. hist. 5 c. 27) when a dearth was in the Province, and the
needy people for necessity of meat looked for succor of him, as of their
bishop, and money there was none to ease their penury, he took the vessels
and sacred veyles to relieve the peoples necessity. Moreover in those times
wherein the Princes themselves began to profess the Christian religion, the
Church received lands, enclosures, vineyardes, tithes. etc. of the frank
liberality of noble and welthie men: as witness the Ecclesiastical
bistories. Item Chrysostom, Hierome, Augustine, and other in diverse places.
For she rich men noting the faith and readiness of the bishops, and other
church rulers in helping the poor, did willingly commit unto them the
disposing of all the treasure. And when they had he aped great riches together,
they then buylte public Alms houses, hospitals, spittles, nourseries,
orphanhouses, houses for the aged, free schools, and whatsoever such, first in
the great and populous cities, and then in the less. At length, whether
because peradventure the Ministers of the churches began in some places to be
slack in the office of stewardship for the poor, or that in some places the
number of poverty incresed, and houses of relief could not each where be
built for them, Cannons were made in diners places, and several times for the
diuiston of the church goods into four portions, whereof the first should
remain to the Bishops and elders, the second to the Clerks and Ministers,
the third to build and repair the Church edifices, the fourth to the
public relief of the poor. I have made mention of these Cannons before.

Finally in such places as the goods would not reach to foster the poor,
many citirens being admonished, entreated, and persuaded by the Ministers of
the churches, have bequeathed something by their testaments, many also have
assigned rentes, and yearly pensions, out of their lands, gardens, or houses,
as is to be seen in the writings, Instruments, and Evidence, which are
kept for the same purpose in the Archiues and Treasuries of the said Churches
and alms houses.

By these means chiefly the holy and prudent men assuredly thought, that in
every city or parish sufficient might be provided for the poor, and the
same trade many ages after was happily observed as long as the dignity of the
Church stood in safety. Now therefore let us see among the examples of the
old fathers mentioned, what devises may honestly be used in this our time,
for to raise a sufficient collection for necessary charges.

1 According to ye manner which was usual among ye Jews, as reports
Theophilactus, there might well be set in every church certain chestes or boxes,
with an inscription or note, declaring that it is appointed for the treasury
of the poor: into which chestes every one may privily cast as much money as
he will, and when he will, being persuaded, that it is much better to lay up
privily there for the poor without desire of vain glory, and so that the
left hand shall not know what the right hand does, two mytes of copper,
or never so small a piece of money, than to bestow certain groates on them
that beg commonly, and at every door.

2 Moreover, nothing lets, why the overseers of the poor, in the name of
all the poverty committed to them, may not once in a week go about to every
citizens house, to receive a stipende of every man, as we see the Corinthians
were admonished by the Apostle to do the like.

3 On such days as holy assemblies are made, and when the people meet al
together at the Church, to the hearing of Gods words, and the participation of
the sacraments of the mystical Supper, then the said Officers may well
receive the oblations of the faithful, either going about the Church, or
standing in some convenient place. For seeing now we celebrate no Agapas, that
is, feasts of lous, after the old manner to refreshe the poor, what may
better supply the place of them, than a godly distribution of alms, which will
no doubt prove as auaylable for the refection of the poor?

And let not the collectours for ye poor be slack or disdain to do this,
since it is most certain that by this labor they shall do unto God an acceptable
service, and a very spiritual worship.

4 And truly to further happily this whole business, the willingness and
endeavor of the Preachers or ministers of the churches themselves will help
very much, to wit if they often appoint to speak of charity and liberality
toward the poor in their public sermons to the multitude, and often in their
private exhortations to them, which ask their advise in doubtful cases. For
nothing can more effectually bring to pass, that the Officers themselves may
cherefully take pains to gather, and al other with prompt and ready minds to
bestow their liberality, tha^ may the grave and learned sermons of ye preachers.

5 The Ministers also of the church shall help not a little, if sometimes out
of the open pulpit, and sometimes privately, when they are called to such as be
sick or otherwise, they advertise them, that such as be minded to make their
wills, do bequeath some thing to the needy people, but especially when their
heirs that succeed them, have no great need, or are perhaps unworthy, or
ingrat, or prodigal wasters.

6 Furthermore, in some places often times are ordained funeral pompes, with
great charges, to provoke mourning, or rather for ostentation, especially at
the burial of some noble or rich Citizen. But who is so gross witted, which
understands not that it would be much more commendable, and more acceptable
before God, if this manner of superfluous funeral charges were abridged, and
bestowed on the naked members of Christ, which almost all the year do mourn and
languish for lack of relief? It is certain that those sumptuous burials and
exequies were utterly unknown to the old Christians. We read in deed in
certain writers that there were offerings and oblations made, to be distributed
to the poor, but of any gorgious preparation or magnifical pomp we do not read.

7 And if after the same manner certain prodigious and unnecessary ornaments of
the churches, such as we see in many places of pictures, tables, of signs, and
many other things, were sold, when the necessity of the poor required, who
would think it any sin, sith in times past so godly Church rulers and
bishops doubted not in such necessity to alienate even the necessary vessels?

8 Neither does any thing hinder, but that there may honestly and ciuilly
inquiry be made as touching the church goods, that they may understand,
whether the fourth part thereof to go to the releef of the poor, according to
the prescript of the Cannons. And in some places the Churches have had of
long continuance a treasury for the poor, into the which not only the Alms
here and there daily collected, but also the money that ryseth of yearly
rentes, and annual pensions is laid up. But this is often found to be so
much, that if all the goods of the said church were valued, they would
amount to be more than the fourth part. Therefore where there is so rich a
treasury, the Magistrates have good cause to endenour to bring to pass, that
thereby due relief may be provided for the poor. Again in some places the
fourth parts of the Church goods is sent to the alms houses, but what
becomes of it? There are to be seen Alms houses, but no poor people are
admitted unto them, or percase only two, or three, or four well fatted hogs
of Epicures heard, which scarsly can bear the ballace of their paunches for
fatness, must be admitted in thither. There are which we term Pospitals, but
none co^mes at them, they are shut up from all strangers. There are
Spittles, and houses for the aged, but they are only frequented with sound and
strong, and people of lusty years, and such as take their pleasure there: so
might we say of the rest. Therefore herein also some diligent labor would
be employed, that according to the Cannons of diverse Councels, (which for
brevity I cease to reckon, and the laws of the Emperors, whereof some are
extant, Codice de Episcopis and Clericis, other are extant in Nouellis, that
all the Stewards of those places should yield an account of the receipts and
expenses, either to the bishops, or their substitutes, or before some other
Magistrates, and let them all take advise for the laying out of the goods for
the use of the poor, for whose sake, each man knows they were first
collected. Neither is there any doubt, but that by this means even abundaunce
of substance may be gathered for the mayntenaunce of the poor.

9 After all these, if so be that in some certain place of the city on set
days, or some appointed season of the year, meat, drink, garments, fuel, or
money be usually distributed, and peradventure to a few, and a certain number
chosen: none may lawfully mislike if the same be committed to be disposed by
the common overseers of the poor, or at the least, that they may have liberty
to nominate, to what poor, or how much they think meet to be distributed.
All the which things do agree very well with the orders of the old Church,
as we could, if it were needful, more fully teach.

10 It were no hard matter to invent many such fit means to raise the
charges, especially at such times as there is great dearthe of yearly
provision, and there seems to be extreme necessity. For then it may be
ordained, and the Preachers them selves for good causes shall speak of such
constitutions, and shall exhort the people to grant unto them, to wit, that
in bargayning, especially in bying and selling, hyring and letting, and in
making of marriages, the people shall use to give somewhat better earnest
pennies than before, and shall forthwith put the same into the pouerties chest
or box, standing ready in the Church, Whosoever do take on them any public
office or function, of their free will shall bestow some thing to the poor
men's box, as wishing thereby of almighty God a joyful success. Moreover when
a mulcte or fine is by the Magistrates set on any man's head for an offense
committed, to be paid either to the Prince or the common wealth, those men
also may well be enjoined to pay some portion of money to the poor. And I
suppose no godly or reasonable man will deny, that these are very fit means
to increase the fruits of godliness, and yet they swerve nothing from the
rule of equity, nor are not very grievous or burthenous. Besides these, in
certain Cities oftentimes there are made public plays and games, (I say not
annered otherwhyles with filthiness or other sins, for which cause christian
bashfulnesse and sobriety does worthily detest them) banquets, and feasts of
brotherhoods and colleges, and very many other of that forte, on the which
great sums of money are yearly wasted. But how much batter were it, ye certain
of these were utterly abo lished, or at the least were kept more moderatly,
that ye superfluous charges might be converted to the necessities of ye poor?
A certain man named Antisseus ye city needing a piece of money to be in a
readiness, what soever might happen, when the feasts of Bacchus were at hand,
which the citizens were wont every year to celebrate sumptuously, and with
great charges, he cou^seled them to omit them, and to lay up the money which
should have been consumed on them. The Lacedaemonians, when the Samians minding
to depart, requested money of them toward their journey, they decreed by
public advise, that they, their servant, and cattle should fast one day: and
that which every man should have spente, should be paid to the Samians.
Moreover ye Ephesians lacking money made a law suddenly, ye women should after
that wear no gold, and should either give, or at the least lend that which
they had at that present, to the city. (these things are reported by Aristotle
Oeconomico. lib. 2.) By these means great sums of money were collected in
short time. Why may we not therefore in like manner, especially by making
certain laws to abridge excessive charges, and to call men to sobriety and
modesty, attain sufficient for the mayntenaunce of the poor? But truly I am
not wise to stay in these things. It is certain that sundry means may be
invented, as place and time requires, and we thought good only to touch the
thing, that we might give you occasion to devise such as shall be thought meet
for your cities and parishes.

Truly he is greatly deceived in my opinion, which fears, that to so godly a
purpose exhibition will be wantyng. To think that things necessary for the
maintenance of the poor can not be gotten, it is the opinion of a man that
plainly distrusteth of the goodness both of god and man. Verily the worldly
wise and covetous men, musyng of their household provision, are wont thus
doubtfully to reason: Whence shall we have to maynteyne this or that thing? and
with such vain cares the wretches torment themselves. But oftentimes these men
are deceived, and are frustrate of their hope, and while having all things,
they can never be faciate, sometimes they fall into desperation.

Contrariwise the godly, although at the beginning of the year, or the month,
they do not foresee how they shall get their necessary charges, yet when the
year, or the monthe is ended, they acknowledge that they have received
liberally al things which they needed, and greatly marvel, and give God
thanks. But so it is truly, only God feeds every one alyke, yet all do not
consider it alyke. Therefore let us put our trust in God, and there is no dout
but that he will by all means further our godly enterprises.

Chapter. 8. How the alms ought ryghtly, and according to the rule of
equity to be parted among the poor.
IT rests that we add some thing of the right distribution of the alms.
And verily this is a labor some charge. For after once the true poverty are
disseuered from the counterfaites, and the certain number of those which must
be relieved of the common charity known, then it behooves wisely to foresee
how to every one of the poor according to their condition, sex, age,
strength, need, health or sickness, the labor which they do, and the gayn
that ryseth to them of their labors: to some bread and meat, and other
victuals, to other linen or woollen clothe, to other fuel, to other money, to
other dwellings, and other things necessary for this life, may be distributed,
that none may appear to be contemned nor neglected, that none may have just
cause to complain, although to say the truth, all poverty (almost) are
naturally wrangling, grudging and disdainful. The apostle. 2. Cor. 8. warns
all the godly to study to relieve the need of the poor, having a regard to
their own ability, or to an equality: How much more then shall they to
whom the case of the poverty is committed, diligently labor in this, that in
so great a company and diversity of poverty, they may part the Alms and
collection, according to an equality, and even a Geometrical proportion. For
therefore doothe the apostle in that place so greatly commend the faith,
diligence, and discretion of those three men whom he sent to Corinthum to
receive the alms, so that he doubts not in the end, to call them the
Embassadoures of the Church for the glory of Christ.

It serves to the same purpose, that in the Acts. 6. chap. the deacons are
described to be men of tried honesty, full of the holy ghost, and of
wisdom. Therefore in the council holden at Thurona, in the Empire of Carolus
Magnus, Can. 10. and. 11. the Bishops are commanded to dispose the Church
goods to the poor with great circumspection, and as they saw each one had
need. But what should I need to bring many decrees of this matter, since
experience plainly teaches us, that great discretion is required to be in
those men, which shall order the allowaunce of so many poor, according to an
equality? And notwythstanding, in that Chapter where we spoke of serching
and viewing the poor, we have expressed not a few things fytte for this
purpose: yet that they to whom this charge is publykely committed, may
execute their office outwardly, it seems good unto me, to add and annexe
certain cautions, whereof some are general, and must continually be used
toward all the poverty: but other are fytte for some one sort or other.
Let this therefore be the first prouiso.

The overseers of the poor, shall once every week, on a set day, and the
same to be thought most conueniente, visit the cottages of all the poor,
which are known verily to have need, and examining the lack of every
household, the multitude or fewness of children which are in them, the health,
strength, labor, art, gain, and such other things incident to every person,
shall only distribute without any rygoure or sharpness either of voice, or
countenance, so much as they think needful. This weekly view will bring
to pass, that the whole estate of the poor shall daily more and more be
known to the overseers, and not only their need, but also their modesty,
faith, honesty, and what soever virtues or vices remain in them.

If any of the poverty be so indiscreet, that whatsoever money they receive,
they are not ashamed straight way to waste and consume it privily with
quaffing, or like dishonest means, it shall be best to give them no money at
all, since it is unto them as a bait or instrument of wickedness, but
according to the proportion of their money allowance, it shall be provided,
that they may have after a certain weight or measure for every day, from one
place bread, from an other meat, from the third drink, and from other places
other things necessary, having a bill or tallie given them for the provision of
every thing, and what soever these do receive in that sort, would be paid and
discharged every week for sundry causes. Let us add this also: it is
necessary that these kind of me^ or women be sharply admonished to repent, and
amend, otherwise that they shall be sure not to escape the rod of correction or
go unpunished.

3 That which we have now said of ye prodigal and such as sin maliciously,
we would have also to be understood of such as are out of measure negligent
and careless of all things, not knowing how to use that which they get, or is
given them, and utterly ignorant how to guide their householde: it is certain
that many such are often to be found. If any do lack the counsel of other,
these truly ought most of all to be under overseers and tutors as are children.
Therefore ye officers shall never suffer any money to come in their fingering.

4 It is also warelye to be provided, that as many as are sustained by the
common alms (except the sick and feeble) always may have some work to
occupy them, which we showed before was needful. Wherefore before either
occasion to work or to gain do fail them, it behooves the overseers to go
unto and to admonish every rich Citizen, and sometimes also the common
counsel, and senate, that they procure them some work, either private or
public: as to dress the walls of the city, to cleanse the trenches, or
ditches, to repair or amend the public edifices which are curiouse, and
such like.

5 Furthermore once every week, or where there is a great multitude, twice,
the vewers or stewardes shall sit together in certain houses in some public
chamber or place sit for the state and countenance of a counsel, to hear
and understand the causes, quarrels, requests, and suites of the poor, which
by their counsel and aid they shall endeueure so to frame and set in order,
that they suffer no man to depart cut of their presence sad, or miscontented.
For otherwhiles some sodein casualtie makes, that a poor man has more need
than he had ere while: one has some of his household tying sick: another has
a wife traueling in child birth or delivered, lacking cherishment: another
lacks some handy work whereof he was wont to be occupied and gain some
thing: in fine, this man is in debte to the Physician, another to the
chirurgian, another to the midwife, etc. Therefore all these must be heard
courteously and be relieved as far as the substance of ye treasury will
permit. In like manner if any be found to abuse the public allowance, to
leese the money which they receive at game, or to wast it at bibbing, to
pamper themselves in idleness without cause, or to refuse to work, to rage
cruelly at home with his wife and children, or to rail and often move
dissension among the neighbors: the overseers shall call for the^, to the
same place, and shall severely rebuke them in ye presence of all that sit
there, shall warn them to amend and return into the right way, and otherwhiles
shall deprive them for a space, of some part of the allowance, which they were
wont to receive. Provided always, that in the mean time it shall be lauful for
the ministers of the church, the Senators, yea and for every citizen, to come
to this session or court of ye viewers as often as it lyketh them, and not only
to mark with what discretion, integrity, and trust, the viewers speak, and
do each thing: but also if they think any thing worthy to be ordained or
changed, aperteining to the commodity of any of the poverty privately, or to
the utility of the whole business, they may modestly and gently declare it,
whereof the vewers themselves at their discretion, may afterward deliberate
and define, or if the matter so require may reserre it to the Senate and
church rulers, to the end that being honest and profitable, it may happily be
finished by publyke authority.

These cautions are general: now we will add certain that are special to
the sundrys sorts of poverty. But because we have explicate many things
belonging heereto in the place where we entreated of searchyng and discernynge
of the poverty, therefore we will here be more brief.

6 As touching widows, especially the younger sort, the vewers shall narowly
examine, whether they live in good name, chastely, and sobrely. If any live
otherwise, those they shall rebuke severely in the open session, whereof we have
spoken, and not without deserts also shall spoil them of the benefit of the
alms for a season. Which thing is therefore expedient to be done, first to
make them abhor and be aferde to sin, and if any have sinned, to make them
repent: and also that the rich men may not complain, that their
liberality is evil bestowed, and report that harlots and all naughtypacks
are maynteyned by the public alms.

7 The vewers shall oftentimes carefully enquire of Orphantes and such
children, with whom and how they are brought up and instructed. The which
thing that they may the more diligently perform, it shall not grieve them
some times at some set time of the year, to vewe one while the schools, an
other while the crafts men's shops to whom the orphants were sent to learn,
that they may judge of their profiting or corruption, and provide betymes how
to remedy those, which have bin neglected or are of themselves stowe and dull.

8 Moreover the vewers must understand, that it apperteyneth to their offics
with all diligence to mainteyne or to further the causes, as well of the
widows as Orphantes, if they have any matter to be pleaded in the place of
judgment before the Judges, beseeching the ministers of the Church to
entreat the lawyers to healpe to maynteyne the cause, the Judges to be
favorable according to the commandment of God: the which office the Bishops
did once take upon them, at such time as they were the general tutors and
overseers of al ye youertie, as witness sundry Ca^nons repeated in diverse
councels, and namely, Can. 12. of the council of Matispon the 2. which was
holde^ about the year. 580. Item certain rescripts of bishops are extant to
the same effect: Distinct. 87. Can. licet omnibus, and in the three other that
follow. And for this cause especially were ye cells and consisteries in times
past granted to the bishops. And first for a certainty, they did hear in
them the causes of the ministers of the church, if at any time any such
matter did rise among them as ought to be referred to the bishops: next they
discided matters, as touching the Churche-goodes and possessions, as letting of
lands, the accountes of the vintage, and harvest, buying and fellying of
fruits and provision of the hospitals, with the which manner of business,
Chrysostom Homil. in Matthew. 86. complayneth, that he was greatly hindered.
Thirdly, they vnderflode the causes and quarrels of the poor, which were
fostred by the church, and took upon them to maynteyne or end them as they
could. But where as Saint Augustine, and perhaps some other bishops, did
sometimes permit the controversies of other men, which are called secular to
be brought before them, to the end that either they might break of the
controversies, or be some means to take them away: we must think that was
extraordinary, and that they did it, rather to cut off contentions quickly
and lauingly, than to prolong them after the manner of the courts. Which is
evidently to be gathered out of the very words of Augustine, Libr. de opere
monachorum cap. 29. when he says. That he is not bound to those troubles
by the precepte of the Apostle 1. Corin. 6. but that he took that pains with
the comfort of the Lord, with the hope of eternal life, and that he might
bring forth fruit thoroughe patience, because there wanted some other to
susteyn that labor.

Hereby I trust it may be known from whence we have borrowed the reasons and
grounds of our counsel, when we persuade the viewers of the poverty, to sit
together once every week in some open place to understand the causes and
quarrels of the poor: soothely herein we would have them to perform the
worthy office of the ancient bishops.

9 We have spoken enough before of such as come as wayfarers. Only it lyketh us
to note this: that it is good sometimes to enquire, whether they have about them
any letters to testify of what behauior they be etc. Which is especially
expedient to be done then, when any public danger either of war, or
sedition, or treason is feared.

10 Those whom the vewers shall under stand to be very sick, they shall provide,
ye they may be led or tra^sserred forthwith to the public spittles, if there
be any in the town or city, where such convenient and discrete lodgyng, the
attendance of women, the counsel of Physicians shall be so redily prepared, that
every one shall seele their present comfort and relief, and shall behold
every one about them very careful for their health and recoucrie. But being
recovered, let him not tarry long there, neither let him color his sleuth
with a counterfeit disease. But in such places as there is no spittle, there
the viewers shall provide, that the diseased lying in their own houses, may
with all charity be looked unto, either of their own wives, or other women,
but especially widows well stricken in age. And that al things that the poor
have need of, may ye better be provided, it behooves especially in great
cities, that a stipend be appointed of the common box, to a physician, an
apothecarie, a chirurgian, a barber, a midwife, and women to give attendance.
etc.

11 The vewers do understand, that it is a part of their office, to send the
aged persons that have need to be cherished in the gerontocomies or houses
appointed for the aged, or to procure otherwise, that they may receive in time
all things necessary for this life, for they only do thoroughly understand
the state of every of the poverty.

12 We may well use the same rule toward them, which are from riches brought
to poverty, if they come to us from other places, which we said was to be used
toward strangers wayfarers. For it is expedient for many causes to exact of
them public letters, by the which they may be credited for the report of
their mysfortune, which did befall them.

But there needs a singular prudence to search out those citizens, which
being borne of honest parentage, dare not for shame bewraye their lack: such
as are often to be found in the city, and many of them deserving no blame,
whom without great sin we may not let pass, so long till either they perish
with famine, or for necessitis be provoked to do some wicked act. Therefore
where any such is suspected, the viewers without delay, shall send for
their neyghbors, or some that are nere in kindred to them, or their creditoures,
of whom they have marked, that they daily have received some things, but never
paying any money, of whom they shall narowly enquire of all their whole estate.

And for these men's sakes, the preachers shall otherwhiles signify out of the
pulpit that this is the godly desire of the vewers, that if there be any
shamefast or bashefull poverty, that they will not hencefoorthe doubt privily
to utter their lack to any of the worshipful ministers of the Church, or to
what trusty friend they please, which may make report after to the viewers.
Moreover, the viewers having intelligence of the matter, shall endeavor, that
such as are privily oppressed with lack, may privily be relieved: Neither
shall it grieve the viewers themselves to visyte sometimes the houses of those
Cyttyzens, not as to distribute Alms, but under pretense to do some other
business: For as much as they blushe to ask any thing openly, so much ought
the viewers blushe to give any thing to them openly.

But who is able to comprehend in words al things which might be here heaped
together for good causes? For there are many crafty and subtle poverty, who
study only how to deceive, and by all means to begyle other, and to wrest
an alms from each man. But when we set forth these things, such as they be,
we are persuaded, that plentiful occasion is given how to invent many other
fit for this business. Neither can these, to say the truth, be so exactly
once discussed, but that it is needful daily to meditate new devises,
according to the diversity of places, times, and persons. Finally, the very
use of things, and the continual practice of the business, does teach by
little and little these things, which none is able before to provide or
explicate in words. But none can justly by any means disalowe this diligence
in serching. True it is that Chrysostom has set forth an Homily, de non
scrutandis curios^ pauperibu^, that the poverty ought not curiously be
searched. But Chrysostom framed his Oration to mollify the hearts of certain
covetous men, which pretended a search to the end they might give nothing at
all, we have propounded a search, not that we might not give any thing, but ye
whatsoever we have once decreed to give, we might give it well, and on such as
have need in deed.

Chapter. 9. Of the examination of the credit and dexterity of the Stevvards,
and of the maintenance of their authority.
Peradventure it greeueth some, that they must put other men in trust with
their alms, and that it must be in other men's hands to dispose it. They will
reason that the benefit of the reward is lost, when it is bestowed by an
other. To the which effect they bring something outs of Chrysostom, who in a
certain Homily to the people. Tomo. 6. counsayleth all men rather to execute
them selves the dispensation of their own substance, than to commit it to
the Church rulers. And that they may seem for more reasonable causes to be
moved thereto, they begin to doubt of the credit of the very Stewardes or
Viewers, as though they might justly doubt whether they do order all things
trustylie or not. And besides, if there be any such things as are apt to
bring the godly Stewards into suspicion and discredit, those these men
dispitefully itterate, and pack together. And truly a man may chance to
hear such complayntes, not only of the rich men: but otherwhyles of the
foolish and doting poverty. But we will stop their mouths with just and
strong reasons, that the authority of the stewardes may remain inuiolate.
First, no man forbids thee whosoever thou be, but that thou may with
thine own hands deal alms unto the poverty, keeping them selves at home, or
also cast into the chest placed in the church, as often as thou will, and as
much as the holy ghost, or thy good devotion does bid thee to bestow. For not
the liberality it self, but the unseemly manner of bestowing the alms, but
the calling of flocks to thy door, which is full of ostentation (which
Chrysts also reproves in the proud Pharisees, who at the dealing of their
alms blewe a trumpet or horn to call the poor together) but the shameful
concourse of beggars is prohibited. And all men ought to be persuaded, that
alms giving is always a good work, and well bestowed, so that it shall have
the reward of almighty God, as far forth as it is expended with a cheerful
heart, and in the name of Christ. But so far is Chrysostom from misliking,
that a man should put other in trust to dispose his liberality, that eue^ in
plain words he commends, and straightway in the same Homily pronounces al
those worthy to be well rewarded, which with good intent minister other men's
alms to the poor, as the holy scriptures witness that Steven did. But this
especially does that blessed father go about in that place. He exhorts,
drives, and pricketh forward those, which are always flow to do well, and
are wont never to give any thing to the poor, before they flock unto their
doors, with great hurlieburlie and importunate and loud petitions and cries.
Those holdefastes would Chrysostom have awaked from their old wont of
covetousness and avarice, that they should not stay till they were provoked by
other which should knock at their gates: but that they should of their own
accord run, even to the waste wilderness, and search in every place, on
whom they may bestow their liberality as they ought. Moreover Chrysostom
means, that every one that will deal alms, must warely provide that he do
it privily, without gazers on, or witnesses, and if it might be, his own hands
not knowing it, according to the counsel of our savior Christ.

1 What should make us I beseech you, so greatly to be grieved about the
credit of the Stewardes? If such men be chosen to this Stewardship, as before
we declared there ought, then all occasion to cavil or murmr is clean taken
away.

2 At such time as the Gospel began first to be preached by the Apostle, all that believed at Jerusalem, did lay down the price of those things which they
sold, at the Apostles feet, to be distributed to each man according to their
necessity, neither did any man then conceive a sinister opinion of the
Apostles.

3 Not long after the Apostles and the whole multitude did commit that office
of distribution to seven Deacons: but it was never herd, that any ever brought
an actio^ against them of ill ordring of the alms.

4 How greatly is the simplicity and true dealing of them to be commended,
which abiding at Corinthum in Asia, at Rome in Europe, and dispersed each where
in Achaia, Macedonia and Galacia, did not stick to credit Paul the Apostle,
and his disciples with all the money that they had gathered together, and yet
(as it appeared) they did then scarsely know of what nation or what
conditioned men they were, who also carried it far off to be bestowed on the
brethren which were unknown. How many things might here have occurred,
whereby wicked men might have taken occasion to slander?

5 Do we not see that kings, princes, common wealths in every place have many
officers, named questors or treasurers, to whom greater matters are committed?
yet in the mean while we seldom hear of any among them deprehended for not
ordering all things with great fidelity.

6 Why then may not we in like manner promise our selves al honesty in the
viewers or stewards of our poverty? especially since there are alwais some to
be found, whose credit has been tried in other weighty affairs, and who
also do understand, and have the same always before their eyes, that they do
not man's business, but Gods.

7 What need I forwarne yt there may be such an order for re^dring of account,
both of receipts and expenses be propounded in every city, that by it it may be
sufficiently foreseen, that none may privily convey or waste unthriftily the
least thing that is? For it may well be appointed. First that the viewers, or
collectors, or stewards. etc. of every parish may reckon with or before the
four chief overseers (such as we said before ought to be chosen in large
cities) and give an account how much they have laid up, or how much they have
taken out, and this must be done in a public or open place, whether as well
the poverty, which take relief, as the rich which bestow it may have free
access, that they may observe each thing, and search whether any fault has
been committed by the negligence of the Vewers in their administration, or
dispensation: in like sort twice in a year in the presence of the Ministers of
the Church, and the whole Senate, and other Magistrates besides, if it please
them, sitting by: yea and whosoever else desire to be present, the sums
collected and laid forth every monthe, shall be recited out of the count
books. And this truly, not only that all men may have better intelligence of
the credit of the stewards, but also of the whole business touching the
poverty, and if the matter so require, profitable deliberations and
consultations may there be had. For in such like meetings of wise men, it
ought to be free for each man to utter what soever he shall think profitable
for this holy institution, and to leave it to be discussed. And that they to
whom this charge, either in ye churches, or alms houses, were once wont after
this manner to render an account of receites and expenses, one while before the
bishops and elders, an other while before other rulers and Magistrates, it may
partly be clearly understood out of diverse Cannons, as Cannon de Xenodochijs,
de religiosis domibus, of hospitals and religious houses. Item at the counsel
of Aquisgrane, Cannon. 141. and partly out of the civil law, but especially
lib. 1. Codicis, ticulo de episcopis and clericis, in the title of bishops and
clerks. But in the mean sesen, while the account of the charges truly cast, to
wit, with the names of those that give, and those that take. Item the sum
expended or laid forth, with the day and monthe, and such usual
circumstances, always diligently noted: and further books which con^eyne the
same things word for word, are laid open before the Magistrates, that they
may see and read every thing with their own eyes, when (I say) these things
are openly rehearsed in the public session, it is expedient, that the names of
al those which did give the alms, or do receive the alms, be kept silent,
and not named, and that partly least the rich men, which have peradventure
contributed often and liberally, while they often hear their names openly
expressed, they take occasion to wax proud, and to glory, and so they lose the
reward of their liberality with God: partly least the poor, especially such as
are of a bashful and ingenious disposition, do interpret yt they are after a
sort openly put to shame, and that that often co^memoration of the benefits
received, is (as it is said in the Comedy) a certain privy exprobratio^ or
casting in the teethe. Although in this behalf as well the magistrates, as the
viewers shall determine as they think profitable, as place and time requires.
For we do not speak these things as making a law, but we propounde them to
be thought upon, and examined as gentle admonitions.

But when by this means the credit of the viewers them selves in their office
and administration is enough and sufficiently examined and tried in all
respects, surely all men conceive, that we may not lightely believe those
slaunderers, which study to accuse them of negligence or false dealing. I
know not how it happens, but so it is, that they are always subject to envy
and slander, that are occupied in any public affairs, especially if it be in
the disposing of money, and matters of charges, and the poor, if there be any
other, will be sure always to complain, they always sharpen their teethe to
backbite and slander. But it behooves all good men to remember, that he which
admits standerers and accusers, hears but the one part only: but he that
desires to know the truth more fully, it is needful that he hear two
parts, to wit, that also which is slaundered. Therefore good men will not
easily hearken to accusers, though many conspire and speak all to the same
effect: but they will indge that which is in deed, to wit, that they cloak
the truth with lies, and that a perverse and malicious affection, not right
reason has the masterie over them. And those also them selves, which are
unjustly accused, when their conscience bears the^ witness that they have
dealte uprightly, shall not esteem all those barkers reproachful words privy
or aperte, not the value of one dodkin: but shall rather make accounte that no
man can possibly satisfy or please every man, and say with Epaminundas the
Ti^e^^n, that it is the token of magnanimity or stoutnesse to contemn evil
reports, and as says Antishenes, it is a princely thing when thou do well
to be evil spoken of. Wherefore when in the city any are found despitefully
to slander those, to whom the charge of the poverty is committed, it greatly
behooves the Senate of Magistrates to repress the^ betimes, and otherwhiles to
punish them more severely: and that truly not only least they should infect
other men's minds with their venyme, but also least those godly men, whose good
name is falsely empaired, being weery, and perhaps also tired with
encomberaunces, to cast from them the office of the oversight of the poor, and
so the whole business begone with joyful success, shall vnluckely be
interrupted, which thing were not only greatly to be lamented, but also were to
shameful. Yet truly except that matter be sometimes advisedly looked unto by ye
magistrates, it can hardly be, that the dignity, estimation, and authority
of ye viewers can safely be preserved. Moreover we are admonished by the
occasion of these words, to add in the latter end, how both it may and ought
to be provided, that this trade of releeuing the poor, whersoeuer it is once
well determined, may there be ratified and established for ever after.

Chapter. 10. By what means it may be provided, th^^ the order for releeuing
the poor once well begun, may not afterward easily be broken off.
THis business whereof we entreat is full of difficulty. For it requires
great charges, it needs the counsel and aid of many and diverse degrees of
me^, and on the one side the Ministers of the Church, on the other side the
Magistrates governing the common wealth, then the stewards, after them the
citizens, especially the welthiest, last of al, almost innumerable poverty
lacking the public relief, al these (I say) do challenge a place, and to play
a part in this worthy act of devotion and charity. Wherefore it can not be,
but that many discommodities and lettes do often occur, some in the
entrance and first beginning, other in the process and when we are entered,
whereby it is a hard matter, first to bring in any certain order for the
relief of the poor: but to retain, and constantly to uphold it when it is
begun, truly that is very laborsome, and more troublesome than can be credited:
yet what soever impediments do cross us, it is needful that al they which
inhabit the same city, do jointly labor with their powers gathered together,
that they shamefully starte not back at any time from their most holy, and to
the weal public most profitable purpose. For the which cause it shall be
expedient, that all and singular these degrees of men do meditate some godly
reasons, and have them always in readiness, wherewith they shall excite them
selves incessantly to maintain so decent an institution, and according to
their duty lay too their helping hands.

Al Magistrates therefore as true fathers of their country, that is, of all the
citizens, but especially as tutors and gardians of the poor, shall with great
providence prevent, least any thing ever happen which may hinder their
purposed intent: or if any thing happen, forthwith to resist and remove it.
Whereunto that they may be the more emboldened, they shall not stick to
bind, and (as I may speak) adjure them selves with a certain godly
conspiracy, that they will rather enjoin them selves some great fine, and
sustain great charges, than suffer this wholesome or dinance to be weakened, or
to decay. But before all things, they shall chiefly declare their good will
toward the viewers of the poverty, them they shall greatly reverence, them
they shall assiste in every difficulty, they shall maynteyne their estimation
by all the means they may. And such as by obloquie, or any other means, do
endeavor to binder this new decree, they shall sharply reprove, and if they
see cause, severely punyshe them by fine, or otherwise.

To be brief, they shall pretermit none of all those things, whereby they may
openly make it known, that this whole business pleases them well, and that
they desire with all their heart, that every member of the common wealth, but
especially the poor might be provided for.

As many as are of the Ecclesiastical ministry, shall first acknowledge,
that it chiefly appertains unto them to further this cause, sith once that
care did wholly lie upon the Churches. Therefore they shall reverence all the
Stewardes, as worthy office fellows, and with holy and devout exhortations
shall encourage them to proceed in that travel, so acceptable to almighty
God. Moreover, they shall often commend this work in their sacred Sermons,
otherwhiles they shall make whole orations unto the people of alms and
releeuing the poor: as we see after the Prophets and Apostles, Chrysostom,
Gregory Nazianzene, and other holy fathers have done, out of whose writings
they may gather plentiful matter to speak of. Furthermore it shall not grieve
them, rather than this worthy ordinance should utterly decay, to grant
part of their Church goods, and if necessity required, the vessels of gold
or silver, the sacred vestures and other ornaments of the church, to be
converted to the use of the poor.

The stuards, and generally all, to whom the charge of the poverty is
committed, shall wisely determine, never to be weary of well doing, or to be
discoraged with any encomberances which may happen. Let them consider often and
attentively the dignity of their office, which is greatly praised evermore in
the holy Scriptures. Let them account, that the natural and supernatural
gifts, wherewith God has endued them, were bestowed on them for this end,
that they should employ them to the glory of God in helping the poor, and
except they do it with a good will, that they shall once render an account
unto GOD. In the mean time, let them not doubt of the liberal reward which
God has prepared for them, though men be never so ingrate.

Moreover let them persuade themselves, yt so many men do daily pray unto God
our heavenly father for their safety, as there are poverty that receive alms
at their hands. Wherefore let them contemn the slanders of wicked whisperers,
and let the^ only have respect to the honest judgments of good and Godly men
touching them. To conclude, let them make their reckning, that nothing so
horrible or formidable can happen, that ought iustlye to withdraw them from
their study to benefit the poor. As long as they please God, and (as far
forth as they may) denout men, all is well.

The Citizens, especially they of the welthier sort, shall to their power
further this institution, and shall declare, not in word only, but also in
deed, that they greatly approve it. They shall willingly hear the
exhortations to liberality which are often made in the Church by the
ministers of the word, and shall often call the same to mind. They shall give
of their goods without grudging, according to an equality. They shall utter by
all means possible, their benevolence toward the Stuardes. For these must
needs be reverenced of all men, as having deserved a far greater reward.
Finally, let every Citizen in all matters, use the poverty with humanity
and courtesye.

The poverty also them selves, which are relieved by the common Alms, must
be content with that estate which GOD has lotted unto them: yea let them
thank God, who has vouchedsafe to move the hearts of godly men to study
earnestlye for their public relief, and to endeavor to practice that which
they thought expediente for the same.

But let none desire at any time to receive, which have not need in deed,
then those small things which are given with a cherefull mind let them
receive also with a cherefull mind, and without grudging, always judging
that to be enough and sufficient, which is sufficient to sustain nature.
For a spare and sober supper, is yet a supper: and the poor man's parsimonye or
frugalitie is much more healthful, than the rich man's excesses.

Moreover, let them comfort one another, and encourage one another to
modestye, sobrietye, and taciturnitie. The rich men's minds are not lightly
more excited to liberality by any thing than with the sight of the frugalitie
and modest civility of the poor.

To conclude, all honest men of every degree, and such as desire as well the
glory of GOD, as the public utility, let them altogether often consider
those reasons, which are expressed by us in the beginning in the two first
chapters. I doubt not but that when those reasons shall be wayed of all men,
but especially of those which excel other in dignity and authority, with
such diligence and judgment, as is requisite, then all men will wyllingly
and cheerfully apply their counsel and travail, to retain and conserve the
order of releeuing the poor, once already well begun. The which yt it may ever
constantly be done, I beseech God our heavenly father to inspire in all places
the chiefest and worthiest men, his elect, with his holy spirit, which may
inform and prepare them ple^tifully to al duties of charity.

FINIS.
printer's or publisher's device OMNIA TE^^ PVS HABENT



Imprinted at London by F. Coldocke, and H. Bynneman.

1572


