BRIDGEWATER LIBRARY
bookplate

The new Jewel of Health, wherein is contained the most excellent Secrets of
Physic and Philosophy, divided into four Books. In the which are the best
approved remedies for the diseases as well inward as outward, of all the
parts of man's body: treating very amplye of all Dystillations of Waters, of
Oils, Balmes, Quintessences, with the extraction of artificial Saltes, the
use and preparation of Antimonie, and potable Gold. Gathered out of the best
and most approved Authors, by that excellent Doctor Gesnerus. Also the
Pictures, and manner to make the Vessels, Furnaces, and other Instruments
thereunto belonging. Faithfully corrected and published in English, by George
Baker, Chirurgian.

ALCHYMYA


Printed at London, by Henry Denham.

1576.

VERO NIHIL VERIVS
blazon or coat of arms

To the Right Honorable, Virtuous, and his singular good Lady, the Noble
Countess of Oxeforde. etc. your humble servant wishes long life, prosperous
health, and daily increase of Honor.
IT IS WRITTEN (RIGHT Honorable and my singular good Lady) that Philip King of
Macedonia rejoiced greatly when his son Alexander was borne, because his
Empire should not lack a governor after his death, but herein he rejoiced
much more, that his son was borne in the time of Aristotle that learned
Philosopher, by whom he was taught and instructed ten years: And in like
manner it fares now with me, as with the King of Macedonia, and no less is
my joy* than the delight of that mighty Prince. Herein I do rejoice, that
this work of Dystillation is now finished to the profit of my country,
wherein great study and long labor has been earnestly bestovved. But I
rejoice much more that it is finished in the time of you my Honorable,
virtuous, and good Lady, to whose learned view and favorable protection I
offer this Book, as a due testimony of my serviceable heart, and as some
fruits of my poor paynfull study and practice, vvishing that it were in
value counteruayle able to the condign demerites of your so Honorable
expectation, so as every line, in respect of my loyalty, might supplye a nevve
Jewel for your Nevve years gift, albeit, you have no need of Gold and
Jewels, abounding honorably in all riches: Notvvithstanding, this book may
be truly termed the nevve Jewel of health, which before this day was never
seen or published abroad by any other man. This nevve Jewel will make the
blind to see, and the lame to walk. This new Jewel will make the vveake
to become strong, and the old crooked age appear young and lustye. This nevve
Jewel will make the foul seem beautiful, and the withered faces shevve
smoothe and fair, yea, it will heal all infirmities, and cure all pains in
the whole body of man. What is it to have lands and houses, to abound in
silver and gold, to be decked with Pearls and Diamondes, yea, to possess
the whole world, and lack health the principal Jewel. Not without cause
therefore Agamemno^ the wise and famous Captain of the Greeks did highly
esteem and reward Machaon and Podalirius, by whose cunning skill in
Chirurgerie, thousands vvorthie Creekes were saved alive, and healed, which
else had dyed and perished. But why do I here name Agamemnon, or the Greeks,
when as no age can be without Physic, no person can live without
Chirurgerie, no country can mysse these noble mysteries. Wherefore I at this
time to pleasure my country and friends, have published this nevve Jewel
under your Honorable protection, that it may more easily be defended against
Sycophants and fault finders, because your wit, learning, and authority has
great force and strength in repressing the curious crakes of the envious and
bleating Babes of Momus charm.

Your honors humble and obedient servant. George Baker.


George Baker to the Reader.
GEntle Reader, although I have given the onset to publish in our own natural
tongue, this most excellent work of Distillation, for which cause, it should
not be the less esteemed, although some more curious than wise, esteem of
nothing but that which is most rare, or in hard and unknown languages.
Certainly these kind of people cannot abide that good and laudable Arts
should be common to many, fearing that their name and practice should decay,
or at the least should diminishe. The intension truly of such persons seems
much like them which gape for all, and would all have, leaving nothing to any
body, but that which they must needs forgo, not considering that we are not
borne for our selves only, as Plato says, but for the profit of our
country. Surely, if that I did not fear to be to long in this Preface, I
would prove how all Arts and sciences may be published in that tongue which
is best understood: as for example, Hippocrates, Galen, Paulus Aegineta,
Aecius, were Grecians, and wrote all in the Greek, to the perfect
understanding of their country men. Also Cornelius Celsus being a Latinist,
wrote in the Lati^e. Auicen and Albucrasis, Arabians, wrote in the Arabicke
tongue. The eternal fame of which worthy men shall never be extinguished or
drowned in oblivion, nor their noble works for ever be out of remembrance. For
what man is as yet alive that ever was able to counteruayle them, yea the best
learned in our days, do most highest esteem of them above all, without whose,
works all Physicians in the world be but blind, and not able to make any
perfect Art. Peradventure some will object and say, that if we were without
their works, there are other of later writers which should suffice. To the
which I will answer, that they have written nothing, but that their ground
was first laid by them, and further, as M. John Canape D. of Physic says, I
will give them this gift, except they first read Hippocrates and Galen, they
shall never understand what they read, nor make any perfect work. Therefore
not without good cause Guido calls Galen the lantern of light. And now in
these our days, we see how other Nations do follow their examples. For what
kind of science or knowledge ever was invented by man, which is not now in
the Italian or French* And what more prerogative have they than we English men
(of the which many learned men have made sufficient proof within th^se few
years, fully to furnish and satisfy our Nation with many goodly works.) For
our English is as meet and necessary for us, as is the Greek for the
Grecians, though in the translation we be constrained to make two or three
words sometime for one. For if it were not permitted to translate but word for
word, the^ I say, away with all translations, yt which were great loss to the
common weal, considering that out of one language into another have been turned
many most excellent works, the which the best learned have both received and
approved to the singular commodity of all men. And among all the works which
have been translated into our native tongue, I do think concerning the
matter, there was never the like to this as yet. For herein you shall learn
the manner to separate by Art the pure and true substance as well manifest as
hidden, the which in Physic is a great help to the taking away of diseases,
hard or rebellious to be cured. And moreover, that by the Chimicall Art,
those medicines which are hard and hidden, their forces and virtues are
plainly manifested and proved, and the gross juice being mingled with the
subtle and fine substance, are thereby digested and separated, as we may see
by the drawing of the oil of Gold, Iron, Copper, or Tynne. Also by
Distillation are corrected the malignitie or venomous qualities thereof, as in
oils of Quicksiluer, of oil of Vitrioll, Antemonie, artificial Saltes, and
many other purging medicines. Furthermore, we see plainly before our eyes,
that the virtues of medicines by Chimicall distillation, are made more
vailable, better, and of more efficacy than those medicines which are in use,
and accustomed. In trial of the which, we do daily prove to our great
credit, and our pacients comfort. For make trial between the one and the
other, and you shall see that the decoctions, Juices, Syrupes, or such like,
shall never come near to the dystilled waters, Oils, Balmes, artificial
Salts, and extraction of Roots, leaves, flowers, and fruits, of wood,
Barks, Gummes, Metals, and such others, so that two or three drops of the
oil of Sage does more profit in the Palsy: Three drops of the oil of
Corrall for the falling sickness: Three drops of the Quintessences of Pe^rle
for the Sincope or swounding: Three drops of the oil of Brimstone or
Turpentine for the Astmatikes: One drop of the oil of Cloves, for the cold
pain in the teeth: Three drops of the oil Ammoniacke for the diseases of
the spleen: One dram of the water of the oil or salt of Guaiacum, for the
French pox. One dram of the oil of Walwort for the gout: Three drops of
the oil of Iron for the Dysenteria, or other white fluxes: Three drops of
the oil of Crystal for the stone: Three drops of the oil of Cloves or Baye
berries for the Cholicke: Three drops of the oil of Antimonium for the
Leprosy, does more than one pound of those decoctions not dystilled. And
another thing is to be noted, that the diseased people, principally those which
are delicate, do detest all things which do not agree to their minds, and
delight not only in the pleasantness of the taste, but also the sight of the
eye, and the littleness of the quantity of the medicine, the which I think,
no man will deny. But this I will say, that through the fire there is some
hot quality in the medicine, but that quality is easy to be corrected, as
in the administering of them are plainlye taught. Peradventure some in the sight
of the furnaces, and other vessels will be loathe to meddle with so busy
matters, as the preparing of the Mettalles, and drawing of Quintessences. For
the which look what excellent medicine any stands in need of, there be in
this City which are most excellent in the preparing or drawing of any of them,
to whom if you resort, they will faithfully deal, among whom none to be
dispraysed. I do know some most excellent, as one master Kemech an English
man dwelling in Lothburie, another, master Geffray, a French man dwelling in
the Crouched friars, men of singular knowledge that way, another named John
Hester dwelling on Powles wharfe, the which is a paynfull traueyler in those
matters, as I by proof have seen, and used of their medicines to the
furtheraunce of my Pacients healthes, and also one Thomas Hill, who for his
excellent knowledge in this Art, is not to be left out, who did also take
pains in this work, but before it could be brought to perfection, God took
him to his mercy: There are yet others excellent men, which for brevity I
leave at this present. so finishing this my simple Preface, desiring God to
further the study of all those which faithfully and truly mean in the
exercise of this so noble an Art, desiring all those which shall find any
fault, that they will friendlye admonish me thereof, or else to note them in
the margent of their own books for their private use and commodity, till
such time as it shall be new printed again, and then if it shall please them
to give me their old Books so corrected, I will deliver them new for them.
And as for those find faults, which will do nothing themselves, I wey them
not, for I had rather be serviceable to my Country, than to please some
particular persons, as the Lord does know, who rules and guydes us all in the
right way. Amen. From my house in Bartholmewe lane beside the Royal exchange
in London, this xxj. day of Februarye. 1576.

The Table containing the chief and principal secrets in this Book, drawn
after the order of the Alphabet.
The.ix. Chapter.
BAlneum Mariae. Folio. 5.25. Balneum Mariae after a new manner. 32.33 The
broth of a Capon. 79 Balm dystill^d. 122 Balm artificial. 123 Balm
dystilled in a Retort. 126 Balm magistrall. 126 Mother of Balm simple. 127
Balm of Rome. 127 Philosophers Balm. 128 Balm of Hermes. 128 Balm
maystriall. 129 Balm ayle marvelous that cures all manner of wounds. eode^
Balm oil singular drawn out of Wax and Turpentine. eode^ Balm oil
singular that forthwith eases and helps the gout. 130 Balm perfect helping
the cold gout. eodem Balm of a certain Empericke. eodem Balm of a certain
Englishman. eodem Balm of a marvelous virtue in tremblings and the Palsy.
eode^ Balm precious helping the Palsy. etc. 131 Balm otherwise after a
certain composition. 135 Balm borrowed out of the secrets of Gabriell
Fallopio. 137 Balm borrowed out of the same Author. eodem Balm voc. Christ's
Balm borrowed out of the learned practices of Theophrastus Paracelsus. eodem
The x. Chapter.
Balm artificial curing all old wounds, and helping dryness of members.
138 Balm dystilled, helping and curing wounds and deep ulcers. 139 Balm
artificial^ for the healing of wounds, borrowed out of the Italian secrets.
140 Balm artificial helping and putting away the scars of wounds. 142 Balm
voc. a Greeks balm. eodem Balmes which are applied and used without the
bodies, of which some are prepared and done by dystillation, and some without
dystillation.
Chapter.xj. Of the Balmes not dystilled.
Balm curing wounds. 143 Balm of many virtues, but it does peculiarly close
and heal new wounds. eodem Balm otherwise made, to the same purpose. 144
Balm otherwise to the same purpose, out of the secrets of Gabriell Fallopio.
eodem Balm otherwise of Tarquinius S^tenellenbergius. eodem Balm receiving al
those which are required to ye true balm. eod. Balm otherwise of the same
man's. eodem Balm serving unto all new and old wounds. eodem Balm not
dystilled serving unto all ulcers and wounds. eodem Balm otherwise not
dystilled. eodem Balm in wounds of the bones, borrowed out of the practices of
Theophrastus Paracelsus. 145 Balm artificial prepared and made without
dystillation, that avails in wounds, and cures them, without ingendring or
procuring of matter. etc. out of a certain Empericks book. 147 Balm
otherwise out of the same book approved. eodem. Balm otherwise of the same
man's not to be contemned. eodem Balm voc. Noble Balm. eodem Balm otherwise
helping members shrunk. 148 Balm otherwise auayling in wounds. eodem
The fourth book The xij. Chapter.
Borace how it is confect, used at Venice as a singular secret. 239 Borace made
by a singular form borrowed out of a french book. eod. Borace at this day in use
with the Goldsmithes. eodem Borace otherwise composed out of the same rule.
eodem Borace made by a perfect way, borrowed out of a Goldsmithes book of fame
with us. 240 Borace another way well lyked, and to be put in use. eodem Borace
in paste a special way. eodem Borace in special manner, and that is made
perfect good unto all judgments. eodem
D.
DIstillation what it is. Fol. 1 Distillation whereof it came. 4 Distillation
and their differences. 5 Distillation with the instruments. 8.11 Dystilling in
the Sun. 23 Distilling by ascension. 24 Distilling in Balneo Mariae. 25.26
Distilling by sand. 27 Distilling by dung. 28 Distillation by discention. 31
Distilling waters out of beasts, etc. 76
F.
FVrnaces. 12 A rare form or figure of the Alcumistes. 31 Fylter and the
distillation. 33
G.
Glasses and the facioning of them. 8
H.
Heat necessary to dystillation. 9
L.
Lute of wisdom. 35
O.
Oils in general. 115 Oils drawn by distillation. 116 An Instrument for
drawi^^ out of oils of herbs, roots. etc. 118 Oils by dystillation of
boy^^^g water. 118 Oils by an Iron or Wood pr^sse. 119 Oil of Cloves. 119
Oil of Spikenarde. 120 Oil of Garden Spike. 120 Oil of Nutmegges. 120 Oil
of Cinnamon. 120 Oil of yelkes of eggs. 120 Oil separated from water. 121
Oils and their use. 122 Oil of Balm. 122
The third book The ix. Chapter.
Oil of Balm drawn out of Wax and Turpentine, which dries and mightily
pierces where the same is applied. 129 Oil or Balm, borrowed out of the
practices of Petrus de Albano. eodem Oil or Balm that the like is not to be
found, against trembling, the Crampe, drawings, conclusions, and the astonying
of parts or members. 131 Oil serving unto sundry diseases having ye virtue of
a balm. 132 Oil compounde, borrowed out of Aristotle. eodem Oil or water,
which is named of virtue, and a drink of youth. eod. Oil vocat. holy oil,
which is very singular unto diverse dyseases. 133 Ointment thin, or a
lyniment, which in virtue may be compared unto a Balm. 134 Oil marvelous and
divine, borrowed out of the practices of Leonarde Fiorauant. 137 Oil preserving
the body in safety a long time, and sharpening or quickening the wit. eodem
Oil vocat. a blessed oil for wounds happening on the head. eodem Oil precious
for worms where ever they be. 138
The x. Chapter.
Oil distillled helping the trembling or shaking of the hands. 139 Oil
effectuous and pr^^^ed for so^tning of ye sinews or Palsy. eod. Oil the best
serving unto all the sinews, and unto the joints. eod. Ointment helping
sinews cut a sunder. eodem Oil for the Canker and Fistula. 140 Oil or water
of great efficacy in healing wounds. eodem Oil voc. a blessed oil for
wounds out of the secrets of Fallopio. eodem Oil of great efficacy and
power in the closing of wounds, singular and experienced. eodem. Oil
singular, helping the grief and pain of the sinews and joints. eodem Oil
or ointment sharpening the wit, and increasing memory, out of Fumanellus.
141 Oil helping the Gout, borrowed out of a written book. eodem Oil
marvelous in the Palsy, and shrinking of sinews, the falling sickness, and
the Crampe. eodem Oil of many virtues, but auayling specially in wounds,
borrowed out of the secrets of Fallopio. eodem Oil having the properties of a
Balm, borrowed out of a written book. 143
Chapter.xj.
Oil supplying the properties of a Balm in the curing of wounds, borrowed out
of a written book. eodem Oil curing the pricking of the sinews, and wounds,
of a practisioner unknown to the Author. 145 Oil compound, proved many
times, helping speedily such as be poisoned. eodem Oil the best for the
helping of scrosses new begun, especially in children. eodem Oil or
certain great lycour of the famous Greek Leonarde Fiorauant. 146 Oil secret
and experienced, that heals the legs vlcered, and all other ulcers as well
old as new, except* etc. eodem Oil precious compared to gold, in that the
same cures all the evils of the legs and sinews cut. etc. 147
Chapter.xij. Entreats of Oils gotten out of Flowers.
Oil of Spyke. 148 Oil of common Spikenard, which is brought out of France.
eod. Oil of flowers of Veruascum. eodem Oil made or drawn of the flowers of
Tapsus Barbatus. eodem Oil of Saint John's worte. eodem Oil of Hypericon
learned of John Tanwyler the younger, a singular Chirurgian in the city of
August. 149 Oil compounde of Hypericon, borrowed out of the wonderful
practices of the Greek Leonarde Fiorauant. eodem Oil of Hypericon otherwise
perfectly invented by a singular surgeon of Padua, named Gabriell Fallopio.
eodem. Oil of Hypericon by mastriall composition right profitable for wounds.
etc. 150 Oil of Orange flowers. eodem Oil of Iasamin flowers. eodem Oil of
Damask Roses. eodem Oil of Roses by sunning. eodem Oil of Violets, how it
is prepared. 151 Oil helping the spots of the face. eodem Oil of the
Rosemarie flowers not distilled. eodem
Chapter.xiij. of the Oils drawn out of seeds.
Oils by distillation drawn in sand, how they ought to be prepared. eodem
Oils out of seeds how to prepare them. eodem and how to distill them. 152
Oil of Annis seeds, how it is prepared. 153 Oil of Fennel helping the
head. eodem Oil of Cummin drawn. eodem Oil of Henbane seeds prepared in
manner as the oil of Roses, by the description of Rogerius. eodem Oil of
compoundes, out of seeds procuring sleep. 154
C^apter.xiiij. Oils out of fruits.
Oil of Juniper berries, how it is dystilled. eodem Oil drawn out not evil
sauouring. eodem Oil boiled in a double vessel by co^fection of Mandrake
aples. eod. Oil out of Bay beries. 155 Oil out of Iuie berries. eodem Oil of
Rape seed. eodem Oil out of the Onyon and Triacle provoking sweat in the
pestilence. eodem
Chapter.xv. Oils out of Spices.
Oil of Cloves, Nutmegs, Pepper, Mace, and Cinnamon. 156 Oil of Nutmegs taught
by a certain Emperic^e. eodem Oil of Nutmegs distilled most pleasant and
sweet. eodem Oil of Mase. eodem Oil of Pepper. eodem Oil of Cloves
prepared, how. etc. 157 Oil of Cloves that is as the Cloves it self, being
hot and dry, in the third degree. eodem Oil of Cloves written another way.
eodem Oil of Cinnamon, read among the barks, Libro.iij. cap. xviij. fol. 163.
cap. xix. and fol. 165.
Chapter.xvj. Of Oils, Gummes, Tears, or lycours thickened or congealed, and
Rosins.
Oil of Masticke, how it is gotten. 158 Oil out of Frankincence and Carabe.
etc. how. etc. eodem Oil of Mirhe that maintayneth the person long youthful,
and even as the natural Balm does. 159 Oil precious of Mirhe otherwise
prepared, helping the aches and pains of the Gout. eodem Oil of Benjamin by
Art made, a most pleasant and marvelous oil to be drawn. eodem Oil of
Benjamin, how it is made. eodem Oil of Benjamin otherwise well commended. 160
Oil by distillation of Storax liquida, how it is made. eodem Oil of Ladanum,
how it is drawn. eodem
Chapter.xvij. Of the Oil of Turpentine.
Oil of Turpentine dystilled. 161 Oil simple of Turpentine. eodem Oil
compounde of Turpentine. eodem Oil out of Turpentine Larigna marvelous
against the shrinking of members, if members be anointed with it. eodem Oil
drawn out of Turpentine with Sage, preuayling against the Palsy of the
members. eodem Oils dystilled of Gummes. 166 Oil out of the ryndes of Nuttes.
eodem
Chapter.xx. Of the Oil of Tartare, which is the dry lies of wine prepared.
Oil of Tartare, borrowed out of Gabriell Fallopio. eodem Oil of Tartar
another way by the same Author. eodem Oil of Tartare auayling against the
pushes or little wheales of the eyes. 167 Oil of Tartare to be calcined on a
sudden. eodem
Chapter.xxj. Oils drawn out of woods.
Oil out of the wood Guaicum. eodem Oil out of the wood of the Ash tree.
eodem Oil out of the Iuye wood. eodem Oil out of the Juniper wood, with the
properties. 168 Oil of Juniper wood rectified, how it is wrought. eodem Oil
out of the small chippes or pieces of wood, which the Germans call
Houelspon. eodem
The.xxij. Chapter.
Oils gotten out of paper, and the lynnen cloth. eodem
The xxiij. Chapter.
Of the oils out of beasts or their parts, together with an Epistle of
Arnoldus de villa noua, of man's blud distilled. 169.170 Oil holy prepared of
d^ade men's bones. 170 Oil of bones helping the falling sickness. eodem Oil
drawn out of the excrements of children. eodem Oil out of man's ordure. eodem
Oil or distilled lycour gotten by discention, out of the Badger or Gray, 171
Oil marvelous gotten out of the Beuer. eodem Oils distilled of eggs, and
experienced in many matters. eod. Oil out of eggs, how. etc. eodem Oil
read out of the yelkes of eggs. 172 Oil out of Honey a Quintessent drawn by
Art of Distillation, which yields marvelous effecte^* eodem Oil of Honey
serving unto the coloring of hears. eodem Oil of fat Wax drawn by Chimick
or Chimistick Art. 173 Oil of Wax that heals the clefts and choppes of the
hippes, and choppes or other soreness that happen upon teates of women's
breasts. eodem Oil of wax miraculous and divine that helps most diseases.
eod Oil of Rosin simple, serving unto sundry uses, how distilled. 174 Oil of
frogs right profitable to such as are payned of ye gout. eod Oil prepared and
made of the red serpent auayling against scroffles. eodem Oil of Scorpions
distilled against poisons, borrowed out of a written book. eodem Oil of Antes
eggs. eodem
The xxv. Chapter.
Oil of Antimonie, how it is prepared. Fol. 175.176.177
178.179.180.181.182.183.
The.xxvj. Chapter. Of the Antimonie prepared, with the judgment of the
learned, and of the use of it.
Of the Antimonie shyning like Glass, with other practices thereof.
183.184.185.186
The xxviij. Chapter.
Oil out of Brimstone alone, as Brassanolus affirms, distilled and gathered,
how, etc. 186.187 By other Practisioners. 188.189.190.191
The xxix. Chapter.
Oil of Vitrioll, and of the making of it, out of Valerius Cordus in a manner.
191.192
The.xxx. Chapter.
Of the true choosing of Vitrioll out of Valerius Cordus. 193
The xxxj. Chapter.
Of the manner of seething the Vitrioll out of Cordus. 193
The.xxxij. Chapter.
Of the manner of calcining of the Vitrioll. eodem
The xxxiij. Chapter.
Of the making and form of the furnace. 193.194
The xxxiiij. Chapter.
Of the distillation of the Vitrioll. eodem
The.xxxv. Chapter.
Oil of Vitrioll infused by separation. 195
The.xxxvj. Chapter.
Oil of Vitrioll rectified. 195
The.xxxvij. Chapter.
Oil of Vitrioll what virtues it has. 195
The.xxxviij. Chapter.
Oil of Vitriol being sour, how y^ same may be made sweet. 196
The.xxxix. Chapter.
Oil of Vitrioll separated. 196.197
The.xl. Chapter.
Oil of Vitriol sepatated, what virtues it has, with sundry other practices.
Fol. 197.198.199.200.201.202.203.204.205.
The.xlj. Chapter. Of Oils out of Mettalles.
Oil of Copper, learned of a French Empericke. 205 Oil out of Iron. eodem
Oil out of Steel. 206 Oil of Litarge. eodem Oil drawn out of Lyme. eodem
The xlij. Chapter. Of preparing of the oil of Amber, by the description of a
singular Physician of Germanye, which freely also described the history of the
whole Amber, as appears in the proper places.
Oil of Amber, what it is. 206
The.xliij. Chapter.
Of Amber what kind must be chosen. eodem
The.xliiij. Chapter.
Of the furnace and instruments necessary unto the distillation of the Amber.
eodem
The.xlv. Chapter.
Of the distillation of the Amber. 207
The.xlvj. Chapter.
Of the Rectification thereof. eodem
The.xlvij. Chapter.
Of the virtue and utility of the rectif^ed oil. 207 and 209
The.xlviij. Chapter.
Oil of Tylestones, or oil Benedick, having in it many virtues, how it is
prepared. eodem Of which there are specified to be xliiij. virtues. 209.210
Oils of the saltes, and of herbs. 238 Oil or ointment of salt mightily
auayling. etc. eodem
The fourth book The.xvj. Chapter.
Oil of Gold singular. 251 Oil of Gold of great secrets. 251.252 Oil of
Silver. 256
The.xviij. Chapter.
Oil incombustible, how it is made. 258
R.
Retort and his furnace. Fol. 30
S.
Sublyming what it is. Fol. 1
V.
Vinegar dystilled. Fol. 40
W.
WAters dystilled of all sorts. Fol. 41 Waters distilled of herbs. 44 Water
of Walwort. eodem Water of Imperatoria. 45 Water of the blessed Thistle. eodem
Water of Pellitorie of the wall. 46 Water of Yarrowe. eodem Water of Angelica.
eodem Water of Nettles. 47 Water of Alkakengie. eodem Water of Barberies. 48
Water of Brionie. eodem Water of Bursa Pastoris. 49 Water of Camomyle. eodem
Water of Honysuckle. 49 Water of Centorie. 50 Water of Cheries. eodem Water of
Cheruill. 51 Water of Germaunder. eodem Water of Stock Gellyflower. 52 Water
of Dragons. eodem Water of Comfrey. eodem Water of Quinces. 53 Water of Dodder.
eodem Water of Elicampane. eodem Water of Eyebright. 54 Water of Beans. eodem
Water of Filopendula. 55 Water of Fumitterre. eodem Water of Garden Clarey.
eodem Water of Cloves. 56 Water of Broom flowers. eodem Water of Gentian.
eodem Water of ioynted grass. 57 Water of ground Iuye. eodem Water of
Cowflippes. eodem Water of herb Robert. 58 Water of Horsetayle. eodem Water of
Hoppes. 59 Water of Henbane. eodem Water of Hearts ease. eodem Water of Juniper
berries. eodem Water of wood Lillye. 60 Water of the Wylding ^r Crabbes. 61
Water of rotten Apples. eodem Water of Peache flowers. eodem Water of Mallows.
eodem Water of Horehounde. 62 Water of herb Mercury. 63 Water of herb Balm.
eodem Water of Bramble beries. eodem Water of Mulberies. eodem Water of Lillye.
64 Water of Hasill nuttes. eodem Water of Walnuttes. eodem Water of Palma
Christi. 65 Water of Cinkefoyle. eodem Water of Saint John's worte. eodem Water
of Pimpernell. 66 Water of Plantane. eodem Water of Ribbewort. 67 Water of
Polipodie. eodem Water of Dasies. eodem Water of Knottegrasse. eodem Water of
wild Tansey. 68 Water of self heal. eodem Water of Okeleaues. eodem Water of
the Willowe. 69 Water of Scabious. eodem Water of Nightshade. 70 Water of
Mullen. eodem Water of Lynde. 71 Water of Tormentill. eodem Water of Valerian.
eodem Water of Veruen. 72 Water of Fluellen. eodem Water of Beeche tree. 73
Water of the Vine tree. 74 Water of Celondine. eodem Water of Strawberies. 75
Water of man's blood and man's ordure. 76 Water of a Capon. 77 Water of Dooues
dung. eodem Water of Swallows. 79 Water for the Fistula. eodem Water against
the Leprosy. eodem Water of Honycombe. 80 Water of Hydromell. eodem Waters
compounded and their virtues, of Leaves, Flowers, seeds, roots, fruits,
gummes, and wood. Fol. 81.82
83.84.85.86.87.88.89.90.91.92.93.94.95.96.97.98.99. etc.
The third Book. The.ix. Chapter.
Water compounde dystilled, called the lycour of youth. 130 Water precious and
marvelous, which avails in wounds, ulcers, and Fistulaes. 131 Water secret
of good account, which puts away spots, whyteneth the skin, takes away
spots, wrinckles, and pimples, causing a clear and most comely face. 142
The xj. Chapter.
Another. 145
Chapter.xviij.xix.
Water of Cinue^on how to prepare. 163.164.165
The xxiij. Chapter.
Waters twain dystilled, of which the one serves to clear and beautify the
face, the other to the coloring and dying of the hears of a man's head.
172.173 Water or lycour prohibiting or letting the ingendring of the stone.
eodem Water or lycour of Honey drawn by distillation. 173
The fourth book The first Chapter.
Water of life how to dystill it. 211
The ij. Chapter.
Water of life having instruments thereto incident, used by the best
practicioners. 214
The.iij. Chapter.
Water of life to be distilled out of the lies of wine, and the instrument
thereto described. eodem and 215 Water of life, having also other instruments.
eodem and 216 Water of life so well simple as compounde, the diverse manners of
distilling it. 217.218.219.220.221.222.223.224.225.226.227.288 Water voc. Aqua
fortis, how it is prepared. 254
The xvij. Chapter.
Wynes with their several virtues and confections, myxed after Art, and the
manner of using them. 256. and also.257
The third book. The xxiij. Chapter.
Juice or lycour press^d out of the hard yelkes of eggs sodden. 172
The fourth book The.ix. and.x. Chapter.
Iuyces, and drawing of Iuyces out of herbs, simples and compoundes.
228.229.230.231.232.233.234.235
The fourth book The xj. Chapter.
Saltes burned out of the simples, and what the use of them is. Fol. 236.237.
and 238.
The fourth book The.xiij. Chapter.
Gold potable, and the dissoluing thereof, by the opinions of the
Philosophers. 240.241.242 Gold potable dissolved, and the properties of the
same. 242.243 With the description of making it. eodem and also.244
The.xv. Chapter.
Gold potable against the Pestilence and all sicknesses. eodem
The xvj. Chapter.
The manner and way of making a potion like unto potable gold, serving to
sundry sickenesses. 245 Gold potable after the manner of the Alchimisters
prepared. eod. Gold potable, a divine lycour. 246 Gold potable, borrowed out
of sundry preparatiues. 247.248 249.250.251. and.352. Gold of life, or powder
of the Sun. 253.254.255 Silver how to prepare by the rule of the
Alchimisters. 255
Finis Tabulae.
The first Book of Dystillations, containing the most excellent secret
remedies for all diseases, with the rare forms of many Vessels and Furnaces,
serving for Dystillations, lively set forth in the same.
What Sublyming or Dystillation is, and what especially in the same ought to be
considered. The first Chapter.
THe Arabians (if we may credit the learned Physician Fumanellus) were first
author^ and inuentors of the Art of Sublyming, which some do name Drawing or
Distilling, and others (as the Chymistes) having regard and consideration to
another end, do term the same, both the Chymick and Chimistick Art: that is,
a sep^rating and drawing of iuyces, and other moystures more subtle, out of
the most kinds of things. And they not only were first inuentors (although the
worthy man Mathiolus be of a contrary opinion, that none of the ancient
Physicians left any monument of this Art) but by their search, diligence, and
long continuance of time, endeavored to increase the same with many worthy
secrets, and other matters right profitable: and those to none other intent and
end, than for the only health and benefit of man. But Dystillation, as writes
Ioannes Langius in his Epystles, is the seperating and running forth of a
subtle moisture. First, by the force of heat into a vapor, which hanging in
the head, and thickeneth after by the cold air, is so caused to fall down to
the Channel or Gutter of the head, and from thence guided to run unto the
nose, does on such wise dystill by dr^ppes, into a narrow mouthed Receyuer
standing under. An other Chemist does report, the Art of Distilling to be none
other, than only a seperating of Elements, as the Air from Water, the water
from fire, the fire from earth, and the pure from the impure, and to bring also
those matters imperfect, to a perfitenesse, through help of this Art. The
le^^ned Cardanus defines Dystillation to be a changing of bodies into a
thy^ner substaunc^, the quality yet remaining, and the commodities of
Distillation to be so great and many, that scarcely any thing can be found^
comparable to it, in that it seperateth the unlike parts, and delivers the
worthyer from corruption: and those matters which are imperfect, this by
attenuating makes perfect: also those which are divided, does this join into
one substance, both in qualities and properties, although the bodies be myxed.
Besides, this Art has invented many profitable and excellent things for man's
l^fe: yea, the same in Phi^^cke has found out rare and marvelous secrets,
and of those greatly to be esteemed, if any prepare them orderly, and according
to Art. This mann^r of doing, do some Chymistes term by another ^ame, to
sublyme, which signifies no other matter, than to separate the parts more
light and thynne, from those heauyer and thicker, and the working of this
requires so to do, that the bodies or matters whose substance is impure and
gross, be (...) pure, fair, and clear, or the earthly parts euilly (...)
and conjoined, or otherwise overmuch confused, and shed through all the
substance of the Bodies, be drawn, gathered, and better fixed together, in
such manner, that those separated by heat, each may abide a part at the bottom
of the Lymbecke.

An other Chymiste (as it should seem of more experience) does define this
manner of working to sublyme, on this wise, that the same (being a second
degree very principal unto the ch^^nging of many natural matters) serves to
separate the thynne and pure parts, from the gross and heavy substaunces, as
Distillation does: so that thro^gh this doing, is the aptest substance of the
grosser Bodies extenuated and fined, that is, the thynnest, lightest, and
purest part, from the superficial matter, being next to the grosser substance
of the Body, raised and drawn up to the head by force of the heat: next to
which, are those parts, that in pureness nyghest agree to the first
substance: so that the third and last matter being both heauyest and grossest,
and containing the earthly parts in it, requires then a mightyer force and
stronger heat of fire, through which, the same so seperateth and sends forth
wholye all the liquide matter or substance yet remaining, which thoroughly
drawn forth, there does after remain none other, than a substance wholly dry
(much like to ashes) in the bottom of the Cucurbite or Glass body: Insomuch
that out of every moist substance, or Body by distillation, there is a
certain crude or raw waterishnesse, or rather Flegmaticke matter, at the
first sent forth, next to which, by diligence, is a substance drawn forth,
rather better digested, and purer: and last, a matter of Oylynesse, drawn
forth by the stronger heat of fire: By which may evidently appear, that not
only out of massy parts, but even out of Bones, by Sublimation, may a like
matter be had and gotten: although certain moyst^ parts there are so light,
and thynne of substance, that these in a manner send up (by the heat of fire)
their whole moisture and strength at the first drawing: Such moist substances
and licours are gotten without aid of the Suns heat, the fire, or any
putrefying, as through the dropping caused by a List, or piece of Woollen
cloth, cut and fashioned into the form of a Tongue, which manner of doing (the
Chymistes name Fyltring) or otherwise by a Sponge, Strayner, Ipocras bag,
fine Searse, raw earthen Pot or Pan, through which any moist substance
may either distill or drop, as the like is thought and has been tried by an
Iuie vessel made of the wood for the only purpose, through which, wine
soketh or distilleth, like to sweating drops, leaving behind only the water
that tofore was myxt with the wine, yet such a drawing of moystures or lycours,
ought not properly to be named a Distillation, but rather the same may rightly
be termed a Distilling, when a Cucurbite or Glass Body filled with Flowers,
and set into Sand, does by the mighty heat of the Sun, yield forth a
lycour or water, by little and little, into a receyuer, fastened or luted
(after Art) to the nose of the Lymbecke, which as Mathiolus writes, sauoureth
near to the smell of the Flowers, through the gentle and easy drawing of that
heat: But if you mind to distill a moist substance or any other thing, in an
Earthen, Tynne, Glass, or Copper Body tynned within, set into a Furnace, then
prepare before fine sifted sand or ashes, for your Body to stand in half
covered (in a manner:) Or thus, let your Body be set into the Sand, that three
parts appear free and above the Sand, and the head to have a long necked
Receyuer, aptly luted or fastened to the Nose, that the same retching a good
distance from the heat of the fire, may thereby yield and send forth the
more plenty of moisture, drawn by force of heat of the fire, which raised of
the same into a vapor extenuated, and this again thickened through the
coldness of Air compassing the head, is on such wise converted into a
lycour, which from thence by drops falling into the Channel or Gutter of the
head, does so distill and run forth by the Nose into a long necked Receyuer
standing under, and this we properly name a Distillation: Or thus, Distillation
(as writes the former Fumanellus in his Book of the Composition of Medicines)
is the drawing or running forth of a thynner and purer humor by little and
little, or drop by drop, by force of the heat, out of the juice or thick
substance contained in the Cucurbite, or other vessel, for the only purpose:
through which, as by a certain Boiling, is a separation and ascension, caused
of many matters mixed together, and the drawing forth sometimes of certain
secret matters and hid properties, into one special substance gathered and
thickened into a water or other thin licour, properly in the head, which,
after distilling down into the Receyuer, serves for the commodity and use of
sundry griefs and sickenesses. Not unlike writes Johannes Mesue, where he
affirms that many matters of sundry kinds contained, and as they were
congealed into one body, in the Cucurbite or Glass body, are by force of the
heat separated, in working, according to the industry of the Chymistes, and
Distillers of Quintessence. And for troth such Ascentions, Distillations, or
Sublimations of Bodies, are not wholly a water, nor thoroughly an oily or
unctuous licour, but a certain substance sufficiently differing from the same
matter, which tofore you had put and mixed together, to be distilled. In this
place it is not to be forgotten, nor ouerpassed, that this word to Sublyme,
may be used in an other signification with the Chymistes: as when they mention
of Mercury sublymed. etc. The signification of which, shall after at large be
taught. And although yt in every Distillation, many and diverse considerations
are necessary to be learned, yet ought these two things to be specially
regarded at all times of every workman (which foreseen at the beginning of the
work, that the industrious Artificer be diligent to compass and bring to an
end the same) the one is the matter which he myndeth to deal withal, as to
find and try out of what condition the same is, and whether of his own
nature it is proper to endure, or do: The other is to such end, that the
work which is pretended, may come to a good and happy success: and then is
required to choose and make ready, seemly and apt vessels. If the Dystiller
will carefully consider and have regard unto these two points (as meet and
right it is) then needs he not to doubt, but that he shall bring his work
unto the same perfection and desired end, which he hops after: For as in the
universal or general nature of things in this world, all Bodies are not
made and formed indifferently of every sort and condition of matter, nor the
Craftesman can indifferently cut out and carue the image of Mercury, of every
wood (as by many and singular reasons the learned Physicians do persuade and
prove to us) but all things are made and formed of a certain matter, apt and
proportioned to receive a form appointed, by the means and aid of many
causes; even so in this Chymicall Art, it behooves him which will draw out
of any matter, Oil, or water, or any other like thing, that he before know the
matter, if the same be such, as he may hope to draw forth of it, a Water or
Oil, or any other like thing: after to search and choose those Instruments
or vessels for the work, which seems apte^^ for the turn, and according
to his desire: That if a man would Distill any matter, which is destitute or
lacking, the same moisture or licour that he searches and hops after: what
is it any other thing (I pray you) than to desire wool from an Asses back, or
to wring water out of a Pummyse stone, (which two, are well known) to be
matters impossible to be attained. Wherefore seeing that all mixed Bodies, be
constituted and formed of the four Elements: and that among those, the one
more partaketh of the Air, the other more of the water, some more of the fire;
others more of the earth, according to the necessity of each compounde
predominant and governing: for which cause it behooves to regard, and
diligently to consider in each Body, what Element surmounteth the other: These
well considered, it shall be an easy matter by force of the fire, to separate
and draw a water out of those substances, which are of nature waterie: as also
with like easiness it is possible to draw an Oil, by the Art of
Distillation, out of others that be of quality Aeriall or fiery: For the
heat of the fire is such, that it gathers together those things which are of
like kind and nature, and separateth such as be disagreeing. There be also
many Bodies or substances that be earthly and dry, out of which, to draw a
water or Oil, is not only hard to be done, but is altogether impossible: yet
are there some Bodies or substances, out of which, a water does easilye
distill, as all such matters which shall be moist and waterie: Others there
are, out of which, an Oil may be drawn, but no water at all, as all those
substaunces or Bodies, which be very tough and hard through dryness.

How often the virtues of certain substantial parts are lost, or changed
in the Distillations, and why that Distillation came but of later time into
use: this borrowed of the learned Ioannes Langius.

The second Chapter.
NO Person needs to doubt, that all Bodies which grow and take increasement
in the earth, are compounded of diverse, and in a manner, infinite small parts
(which ye Greeks properly name Atoms) of the Elements, and that in those rest
differing and contrary virtues: nevertheless, under one manner of form of all
the Bodies compounded: as the like appears, and is confirmed in that root of
Rubarbe, so much regarded and esteemed in all places, which does both loose the
Belly, and bind the same, yet this delivers and opens the obstructions
and stoppinges of the Liver. The same also is known to be in the juice of
Roses, which purges the bellye of Choler, where contrariwise, the distilled
water, and the dry powder of the leaves, do bind and harden the Belly: the
like to this is found in the bitterness of the nails, or white ends of the
leaves, which boiled and applied up in Glyster form (after the mind of the
learned Mathiolus) does mightily stay the flux of the Belly, and by giving it
to drink, this heals the perilous ulcers of the Lunges: The yelowe seeds
within the Rose, and the hears hanging to them, boiled in Wine, and drunk,
does stay (as he affirms) the styllings down to the Gummes, and
marvelously helps the running of the Whites in women. He also reports that
the whole heads of the Rose sodden in Wine, and drunk, helps the flux of
the Belly, and stays the spitting or casting up of blood: the seeds within
the pears of the Rose, are known (of experience) to be astringent, for which
cause, the yelowe, and all the whole Pears sodden in wine, does greatly
profit the flux of the Belly, and such abundance of the Whytes in women,
yea, marvelously stays the tedious Gonorrhea, these hitherto Mathiolus. And
is it not euidentlye seen and known, that the outward part of the Nettle
procures ytching and burning, in that part of the body, as the same touches:
where contrariwise, the juice drawn out of the inner substance, applied on the
arteries of the arms, does refresh and cool the burning of the Fever, or
feuerous burning of the heart: Besides, dried and brought into powder, and
given to a married man to eat, causes him after to love dearly his wife and
children: and the same used, fortifieth the veneriall act, and purges the
Matrix in women, by the daily eating in meat: yea, wasshyng the Body with the
decoction of it, mitigateth all pains caused of cold, and heals scabbes.
And do we not daily understand and see, that out of one ^^per Mine of the
vein under the ground purchased, there (...) ^olten and separated in the
Furnace, diverse kinds of Metals, that is, of Lead, of Silver, Copper, and
Gold, of which always the greater part is converted into Fumes. When therefore
after in the Distillation, the grosser and excrementuous parts abide in the
bottom of the Lymbecke, then do the Aereall vanysh into spirits, and the
moisture thickened through the cooling of the cover or head of the Lymbecke,
fall from the Gutter of the head, and run down drop by drop into a
Receyuer standing under. It is not to be marueyled at, if distilled waters do
not yield their proper savor, taste, and all other virtues, or but little
that they ought, of those matters, out of which they are distilled. For which
cause the learned Physician Mesue reports, that the water drawn by
distillation out of Roses, does greatly comfort and strengthen: yet does the
same nor like loose and purge the body, as the juice gotten out of the fresh
Roses, or the infusion of them done after Art, by reason that their subtle
heat vanishes with the fire. To these add, that the hid or secret
property which proceeds of the form (that the Physicians term particular)
as in the Lode stone, Colocynthis, Scamonie, and others like, equally shed
throughout the whole substance of his subject, insomuch that when the forces
and virtues be lost of the other parts of the subject, it cannot then retain
his proper strength, but that his action and working perysheth: as by a like
the water distilled by a Lymbeck of the Colocynthis, or Rubarbe, cannot then
loose or purge the Belly: where the lycour at all times, or either of them
infused for certain hours, and ministered, will easily perform the like
working. By the same manner, all herbs of a hot and dry quality, do yield
or give forth in their Distillation, the best waters of property, keeping
nevertheless their natural heat and dryness: but the herbs cold and
moist, do not reteyne so well their coldenesse and moisture, by reason they
attain or purchase a certain strange heat of the fire of the Lymbecke,
which abateth and takes away from the waters their proper nature and virtue:
so that the same water, which is distilled, does not any thing reteyne, or but
little of the nature and virtue of that simple, out of which it is distilled.
Whereof it comes to pass, that although the waters of Endyue, Lettuce, or
Nightshade, are accustomed or wont to cool: yet do these always perform
the same but a little: where otherwise, if these kept the proper qualities of
the Herbs, from which they are distilled, would then greatly cool: to the
end that the Herbs, the same which are of temperature (...), may keep their
proper qualities, they ought rather to be ^^yled with a soft fire, and their
decoctions ministered, when ^^ede requires. If at any time, the distilled
waters are more agreeable and pleasanter in taste, than the decoctions of the
Herbs: it behooves to understand, that these loose lesser of their moisture
and coldness (in that they need but a temperate fire) if they be distilled in
the Furnace, named MARI. BALNEVM
Balneum Mariae, whose form is here described to the eye, that commonly is
made long, whereby the same may contain many vessels, and has sundry doors,
that the water may heat together alyke: buylt also of small heygth, to the
end the water may be made hot with a small fire: than if they were distilled
in a dri^ Furnace, as in Sand, or Ashes: of which hereafter, shall further be
uttered, whereas we mind to entreat of the correction of Herbs. By the same
discourse each man may easily conceive and judge, that all forms cannot wholly
resist and do their workings a long time in mixed bodies, if the qualities
abide not perfect and hole. For which cause, it is no marueyle, if the waters
of Plants and Juices, especially those which are distilled, by a dry heat of
fire: do disagree, and sever from the virtues of their Simples: which for
troth more troubled, and moved rather the skillful to be abashed, than the
ignorant Physicians, and caused that a long time after it was, or they any
thing (to purpose) attempted to put in use Distilled waters: yet others, for to
recompense the default, which they knew to be in them, sought out and
practiced many ways, how and by what means these might best retain and keep
their virtues after the Distilling. But among the Arabians, the Noble Mesue
first made mention of Sublimation or Distillation of ye waters of Wormwoode and
Roses. For, says he, water of Wormewoode is distilled after the manner as is
out of Roses, and such like, which are done in vessels of Sublimation. But in
process of time, when Rhasis, Serapio, and Auicen, had taken in hand the
practice of Alchymie: then began these waters to be used in Physic.

Of the kinds and differences of Distillations. The third Chapter.
FOrasmuch as we have sufficiently uttered in the first Chapter, that the
Bodies which we desire to separate by Distillation, are not of one nature and
quality: yet it often comes to pass, that some lightly suffer, and others
resist mightilye, through the action of the causes agent, and these yield not,
but by a great force and violence: so that not without good occasion, the first
inuentors of the Art of Distilling, and their successors, which made a matter
of the said Art, devised diverse kinds of Distilling, according to the
diversity of things proper to be distilled, by the means of which, they might
the more easily come unto the intended scope which they purposed. Again,
seeing it is certain, that for the diversity of the kinds and fashions of
Distilling, there needs diverse instruments proper and commodious to each
fashion of Distilling. Good reason it is (in my opinion) that we entreat of
the kinds of Distillations, before we make mention of the Instruments.

Seeing that every Distillation is done by the resolution and separation of the
substantial parts, through the force of the outward heat: The Chymicke
Authors have purposed two ways, and the rule certain of the said
separation. For they understood and knew by reason and experience, that some
Bodies or substances, with greater pain do yield or send forth a lycour:
and others more easilye, and with lesser traueyle. For which cause they
invented one manner very easy, and another harder, and with greater pain,
according to the necessity and condition of the matter or substance to be
drawn. The one of these they would to be done in the Discending, which the
Latin Chymistes term, per Descensum: the other in the Ascending, of the
Latynes named per Ascensum: so that for each of these, they gave the same apt
names. By this reason we say in general, that every Distillation to be done
in the Descending, or in the Ascending, so that either of these two ways are
to be applied i^differently to these things that a man would distill: and
according as each person may herein be persuaded, after the capacity of his
wit, or by experience. But the oftener Distillation that is exercysed in the
Ascending, is done of the seeds of Herbs, which spread into breadth, bearing
flowers and seeds, as the Annise, the Dill, the Fennel, and such others. In
like manner of the fragrant and comfortable spices, the Tears, Gummes, Rosins,
and lycors. For those which are done in the Descending, or by Discention, are
the oils drawn out of ye woods of Juniper tree, Aloe, Guaicum, Ash,
Tamaricke, Medler tree, Pyne tree. etc. although true it is, that sundry
waters are distilled into the Descending, or by Discention, as those of Roses,
Flowers, and tender Herbs. etc.

Further, although that the Chymisticke Authors do teach and show diverse
fashions of Distilling by Ascension, yet may all these ways and fashions be
brought into three orders, according to the difference of the cause agent or
efficient, which is heat.

The first manner is, when we distill any liquide substance or flowers in the
Sun by force of his heat. The second, when the Distillation is done, by
force of the heat of fire. The third is performed by the heat, which
consists in putrified and rotten matters or substaunces, of which
particularlye, and by order, we shall after entreat.

First, the Distillation that is done in the Sun, when the vessel or
Lymbecke of Glass filled with the matter, which a man would distill, is set
fully in the hot Sun on fine sifted Sand or Ashes hot, to the nose of
which, is a receyuer hanging or fastened: But this manner of Distillyng in
England and Germany, and in cold Countries, cannot so well be performed.
Yet sundry Chymistes are wont to prepare many Oils by Sunning, that is, by
setting them in the hot Sun, which perhaps may more commodiouser be
prepared and done by decoction, to the end that the faculty and property of
the Symples may the better be drawn forth by a stronger heat.

Secondlye, there be many manners and ways of drawing forth waters and Oils
of compounde things, by the vehemency and force of the heat of fire. For
either the things to be distilled, are put up or closed simply in a Cucurbite
or Retort (which are instruments of Glass for distilling, being large at the
bottom) and set over the heat of fire: or the same substance closed up in a
Cucurbite or Glass body, set into that Furnace named Balneum Mariae, or else
bestowed in sifted Ashes, or fine Sand, a desired Lycour is drawn forth, by
force of the dry heat of fire put under. This manner of Distilling, as it is
very excellent, and every where used: even so is the same most at large set
forth, as in the instructions following, shall further be learned.

Thirdly, the form of Distilling by Ascension, is done in Distillatorie
vessels, filled with the purposed medicines or substances, deep set, or
standing covered, in a heap or little hill of new pressed Grapes with the
Kirnelles, or in the refuse of Olyues, after the Oil pressed forth, or in
Horse, or other Cattels dung. For by the rotten heat of any of these kinds,
being one and the selfsame continual for certain days. The Chymistes not
only purge and separate their Quintessences, by a small labor and cost, but
infuse in a Glass body (with a narrow neck and mouth, for a long time)
their singular Medicines and Balmes, with Oil, Aqua vitae, or other Lycoure,
with which they affirm to cure diverse desperate diseases and sickenesses. They
also affirm by the said form of Distilling, that certain waters may be
attained for the restoring of youth, and prolonging of life, and I cannot tell
what manner of Defensatiues, and worthy Drinckes (says Ioannes Langius in his
Epistles) for expelling of the Plague, and all manner of poisons, to which as
they gave the name of Gold, or termed Golden: even so they would those to be
rewarded with gifts of Gold. And these three manners of Distilling, may by
good right be named Sublimations, because these make their vapors to ascend on
high.



The other form and manner of Distilling, which the Chymistes often have in
usage, named of Albertus by Discention, is wrought or done on this wise, a
round hole and deep, must be dygged in the earth, after two Potts prepared,
glased within for the only purpose, the upper Pot, having many small hoales
in the bottom, and that filled with the matter or chyppes of the wood to be
distilled, which after set into the mouth of the nether Pot, standing in
the ground, luting diligently both Po^tes with a strong ^u^e, made with the
whytes of Eggs, after the well drying, cover the nether Pot with earth up to
the bryn^ke or edge, or higher if you will. Which done, make an easy fire at
the first round about the upper Pot with coals, or dry cloven wood, not
smoking (least with too strong a heat at the first, you dry up much of the
lycour or Oil in the Dystilling, therefore increase the fire by little and
little, until the work be ended. For as soon as the wood or thyppes in the
upper pot shall be heated, the Oil or lycour then begins to distill through
the little holes into the nether Pot. And by this manner or way, d^e many at
this day draw out or dystill Oils of the wood^ of Juniper* Guaiatum; and
other woods shaven, as writes Langius. Besides these, we may not be
^^noraunt, that there be sundry other manners or ways of Dy^tilling often in
use, as those which are wrought or done by Fylt^ing, by a Sponge, by a Press.
etc. But of all these shall here no further be mentioned, but only touched by
the way.

Of the Instruments or vessels which serve to the Dystillations. The.iiij.
Chapter.
ALthough that all manner of Dystillations, may diversely be performed, according
to the judgment and industry of the Distillatour, and according to the
pleasure and opinion of each person: yet evermore the workman and Practiser,
how ingeniouser and better aduysed he shall be, so much the more carefully and
diligently he ought to search before all things, the same which he knows to
be necessary for the guyding and perfourming of the work happily. And he
shall in like manner weye, and consider in his mind, what Instruments are for
him more commodious for Dystilling, before that he takes in hand or begins
the work of Dystilling. Now of the Instruments, some are in general, and
for the same cause* require all one manner of Distillation, which is the heat.
But the others are particular, appointed only to certain fashions of
Distilling, which are these, Infusion, Putrefaction, Fermentation, the
Furnace^, of sundry kinds, the diverse vessels of Glass, of Earth, of Tyn, or
other matter, and whatsoever there are of any other.

The manner of cutting your Glasses fit for your purpose.
Now the easy way^ of cutting the necks of diverse Glasses, when need
requires, with the apt Instruments serving to that use, shall hereafter
appear. First with that stone (which the Glasiers use) being set into some
handle, draw about the neck of the Glass, in the same place where you covet
to break it of. After the Instrument formed, having three or four edges,
according to the figure here described) and the same made glowing hot, work
about the raced place unto the time it be through hot. After by dypping your
finger in water, and letting a drop or two fall, the Glass incontinent will
crack in the said place marked: and drawing after that instrument (which we
have above demonstrated) round about, you may lightly break of the p^ece
without danger to the Glass. The like of this have I known to be wrought
with a poynted Diamonde set in a Ring: but a waxed threede was fastened about
that place, by which (the Diamonde guided) should run, for the strayghter
and euener racing of the Glass, which done in such order, and the place heated
hot round about with the flame of a wax Candle, or other Candle, if a man
will, was sodainlye cracked through the falling of a drop or two of cold
water, on the place marked. Another more easy way to cut Glass, have I
known experienced with a bygge Wire wreathed round at the one end (like to a
Ring) which heated glowing hot, and turned often round on the place marked,
caused the Glass (through his heating) by a drop or two of cold water
falling on it, to crack about the said raced place. Some use to break off
the necks of Retorts, with a double waxed threede twisted hard, and made in the
form of a Ring, which put hard on the neck, they heat the same round about
with the flame of a wax Candle, and by pouring a drop or two of water on the
place, the Glass is caused to crack.

And some use other Instruments like to those before descrybed, which heated
glowynge hot, after they draw sundry times about the place of the Glass
raced, and do the rest above taught.

If you covet to seal up or shut close the mouths of narrow necked
Glasses, that no vapors or spirits may breath forth, and that these may
appear to be whole on every part, then prepare a little Furnace (like to this
here descrybed) in whose bottom let a Grate of Iron be coutched, with a hoale
made in the side above the Grate, to thruste in the neck of the Glass, and
retching up to the top of the Furnace, set a strong pair of Tongues, and broad
at the end, which done, and the neck of the Glass made hot, wring with the
glowing Tongues the Glass together, then sweating by occasion of the heat,
which shall so be united at the top, as the same there were whole, or that it
seemed like as it were closed together in the Glass makers shop.

Of the heat being the Instrument in general, necessary to all kinds and
forms of Distilling. The fifth Chapter.
EVery Distillation is especially performed and done by two ways or means:
as the first by heat and Dryness, and the other by heat and moisture. And of
both these, there are three degrees constituted: the first is of gentle heat,
or of quality weak: the second more strong, yet with some mediocritie: the
third heat is mighty and violent. Therefore it behooves to govern the
fire, and to moderate the same, according to the nature and quality that the
skillful may have, of the thing or substance which he would distill: Herein not
neglecting how much and how little the second and third qualities are to be
moderated. Wherefore those, which are of a tender and thynne substance, as the
Lettuce, Endyue, Sorrel, Maydenheare, Hearts tongue, and such like Symples, do
not endure a heat but moderate, and which is of the first degree: those which
are thick and gross, and of a substance more firm and solid, as the
Wormewoode, Mugwoort, Egrimonie, Sothernwoode, the Aromaticke things, the
Spyces, and others like, require a heat more mighty. The Antimonie
contrarywyse, and all kinds of Metals, desire one manner of fire. By the heat
moderate, in the Distillation of Wine, and all Herbs, do the watrie parts
ascend: but by the heat more mighty and violent, do the thynner parts
only show, and the watrie tarry behind. Further conceive, that the flame it
self as well as the Coals, do not a little differ, not by reason only of the
same being greater or lesser, but by occasion of the woods rottenness, or ill
smelling, or otherwise sound and well smelling, green or dry. To these, the
greatness or smalnesse of the Furnace: the form and closing of it, has a
great force in changing or altering of the heat. The Coals also made of
smothered and half burnt wood, yield a certain ill ^auour and strange
quality in the things distilled: as the like in boiling, and otherwise
preparing of matters with them is perceived. For which cause the Coals ought
to be through kyndled, and half burnt, whereby the malignitie or ill savor of
them, may (in the doing) breath forth, before that any matter be distilled
with them, to be ministered especially into the Body, were the same outward
applied, it forces not so much. There is as great a matter to be considered in
the difference of Coals: for that the Coals made of the wood growing in the
valleys are supposed to be woorthyer and far better, than those made of the
wood on the Hlles: and the wood in the valleys is the thynner, for which
cause are the Coals the like, yet does the fire lightly and soon waste all
thynne matters. And in making the best Coals, they ought not to be done under
the Ground (as the custom of many is) but made above the Earth, for that they
burn better, and are more profitable. Also the Coals made of the Beeche,
Birche, and Fyrre tree, are accounted best, for their sweeter and sooner
burning, although Coals of the Juniper tree, do last far longer, as of
experience known: besides, the Coals made of the Oak and Ash tree, are not
in cases of necessity to be refused, especially where the store of the Beeche,
and other trees are not. Moreover, it behooves the Distillatour to have a
special regard and care about the bestowing of fire under his vessels, that
the same be not made of cleft wood half rotten, or evil smelling (as we have
above declared) nor of Coals smoothered within a deep pit or hole of the
Earth, or evil burned, or of Coals gotten out of Caves, whether those be of
Stone, or of Earth, for fear that the vessels of Distilling, and the lycours
be not taynted and infected of their vapor, filthy and stynking. A like
reason may be gathered, that if waters or Oils be distilled with any of those,
they after purchase a savor and quality disagreeing, yea, far unlike the
substances that are to be distylled, as the same may well be perceived and
tasted, by the matter boiled with any of them. Further, the Chambers, Parlours,
Stoues, Hot houses, heated with such wood or Coals, do sufficiently
witness how noyous and hurtful such a vapor and savor is, which not only
brings an intolerable pain of the head, but moves vomiting, and causes
passions of the heart, to those which be conversant and abide any time in such
places: as I the like (says the worthy Gesnerus) have experienced in my
self, to the peril of my health, at the Bathes of Oenosponte, where I abode a
certain season with the Noble Prince Palatine. Of the like occasion Galene
seemed worthilye to reprehende Erasistratus, which perceived that the
inhabitants of his Country to peryshe, through the overmuch subtilnesse or
thyckenesse of the air. He also learned and knew that these came much sooner
to their death, by reason of the exceeding deep Caves and Pyttes of Charon,
which breathed forth pestilent exhalations and vapors: or through their houses
newlye plastered, and whytened with Lyme: or for the evil savor of the
Coals, which sent forth vapors very dangerous: this out of Ioannes Langius.
It is besides reported, that many are molested by the stynking sweat of the
feet, after the shoes newly shyfted of in any close room, whether the same
be Parlour or Chamber: but affirmed to be more dangerous, where Coals burning
in any close room, breath forth a stinking savor: yet some there are of a
contrary opinion, which suppose that neither the fume, nor favor of the
Coals burning, can any thing harm nor alter the matters which a man
distilleth, when the Cucurbite (or Glass Body with his head) is well luted
and stopped round about, according unto Art: but that sooner the vapor may
be annnoyance to the Distillatour, and to those which govern the Distillation,
than to the matters which any distilleth.

Of the other Instruments particular. The sixth Chapter.
THere are other Instruments, by which the quality fierye, is increased, or
diminished in the Distillation, which is the cause that the Dystyllation is
made or done, sometimes by means of the hot vapoure of boiling water, as
Manardus in his Epystles instructs: sometimes through the ^elpe of boiling
water, when as the Glass body stands in that Bath, named Balneum Mariae:
sometimes by a dry means, as by sifted Ashes, fine Sand, small Stones finely
ground, fylings, or dross of soft metals, sometimes by these things mixed
together, as when water is mixed with the Sand. In such manner the Distillation
is not wholye wrought or done in the Bathe named Balneum Mariae, nor yet only
in Sand. There are some which wylleth a quantity of sand to be myxed with
the water of Balneum Mariae, to the intent the heat may be the greater, and
more vehement: for in such a manner of Distillation, may two waters be
obtained, as the first thynne and waterie, the other more read and thycker, as
the learned Mathiolus reports. To these it behooves to note, that the
Distillation which is done with the fine syfted powder of Bryckes or
Tylestones, is the better and more sure of all others, according to the
judgment of some skylfull persons, for that it nourishes and mayntayneth
equally the heat, and breaks not so lightly and soon the Glass bodies:
which two things are very necessary in Distillations: But of all these
varieties, we mind at large to entreat in the particular Distillations, and
to show in what, and when it is needful to use now the one, and now the
other means.

For the Distillation of matters, sometimes the infusion is necessary,
sometimes the Putrefaction, sometimes the grynding of things, and other like
preparations.

The infusions by which the dryer matters are prepared to distill, for the
more easy drawing forth the Water or Oil: are done either in simple water
labored, that is, running by pypes a long way: or in water dystilled, or in
water of Life, or Wine, or in water distilled of Herbs simply, or vinegar, or
in any other lycour: on such wise infused, let them stand and abide in the
hot Sun, or on the fire, for the space of half an hour, or more hours, a
whole night, a whole day, two days, three days, one, or many Months,
according to the nature of the medicine, and diverse intention of the Physician,
and necessity present. We wring out sometimes before the Distillation the
things infused, and distill the lycour wrynged forth, or the same we distill in
a Glass body, or other like Instrument, the infusion altogether, that is, the
same which is infused, and the lycour in which the infusion is made.

The waters and Oils which are drawn forth of pleasant Spyces, ought to be
done by infusion in simple water, not in Wine, nor in Aqua vitae, for that
these do over speedily ascend, and carry not with them the force and virtue
of the Aromaticke Spyces: but the simple water, (in a contrary manner) ascends
not, without carrying with it the Aromaticke virtue. Sometimes we put to
putrify the things to be Distilled, and after that they are putrified, we
distill them: although that sometimes the same putrefaction is a kind of
Distillation, as we have before uttered, and shall after entreat more at large
in the proper place.

The Fermentation of matters, is done after the manner of infusions, by an
outward heat increased, which works into moisture, whereby a certain
common quality with the hot spirit causing bubbles, may be myxed and
extended thorowout the whole body: and this either wrought in the Suns great
heat at the Dog days (if the Suns heat in the mean time, be not
sufficient) or on the Furnace of Balneo Mariae, carefully governed, or in hot
Horse dung. The Fermentation has need of many days, as of four or more: and
how much the better shall the Fermentation and preparation be done, so much the
greater quantity shall a man draw forth of water or Oil.

Of the Furnaces, Cucurbites, Heads of sundrie^formes, Receyuers, and other
Instruments in general. The seventh Chapter.
IT is not our determination nor purpose at this present to declare at length,
but a part of the Instruments material, which serve for Chymistes workinges to
Distill the water and Oils: seeing that many Authors have at large entreated
of all these: It shall suffice us to make mention of some more rare Instruments
in general, and to set forth duers fashions of Distilling; not known to
many, as shall after appear in this first Book.

The best and most commodious form of a Furnace, among all others, is the same
(which within) is round all about: whether the same be buylt into length and
squarenesse, with a convenient breadth, for the better containing of sundry
bodies together, or as many as you will. And after the manner of one, may you
frame sundry furnaces of like condition. For the buylding of this Furnace,
whether it be one alone, or sundry together (to serve as well for Balneo, as
Sand or sifted Ashes) it behooves to choose vnbaked Bryckes and Tyles, yet
those very well dried and hardened in the Sun, for that they are more
tractable and softer than the baked, and that a man may better cut them with
the iron Trowell or like instrument, to frame them into what form he will: the
hollow hole within (reaching to the ground) ought to be so large as the
Earthen Pan not baked, or of Copper, may stand or hang to the bryncke in
it, whose form shall be broad above and narrow beneath (after the manner of
the Iellyflower Pot with us, having a large edge) the bottom of the Pot to
stay or stand on a little bar fixed overthwart in the walls, and in each
corner a little hole for the breathing forth of the fume, as the like in all
Furnaces are made: let the thyckenesse of the walls be framed more or less,
according as you shall think necessary. For how much the thicker the compass
about, or walls shall be, so much the more heat they retain within. The
vnbaked Bryckes ought first to be laid in a moist place, as in a Celler, to
the end that those may more easily be cut and fashioned, with the edge of the
Trowell, or some other apt Instrument of iron. The Bryckes ought so to be
couched and laid one upon another, that the joints (in the lying of them)
meet not, but are unequal, as the end of one reaching to the myddle of
another: for by the same manner couched, the buylding and walls shall be the
stronger. The Bryckes and Tyles shall be joined or couched with Mortar made of
the fattest Cley, myxed with a quantity of Woollen flocks (shoren off broad
Clothes or Carsies) and new Horse dunge well stamped together, and that the
Mortar be tempered in water very saltie, when any will use and occupy of the
same. A certain Chemist teaches another manner of making common Lute for the
strong erecting of all manner of Furnaces, and the Philosophers tower, which is
on this wise. Take of Cley being clammie and tough, to which ^dde or put a
little Sand or fine Gravel, after myxe Woollen flocks and Horse dung, so
much as shall suffyce, and labor diligently the whole together, that the same
may rather be soft, than styffe or hard, and this he names a Lute common,
for all Furnaces. The lute of wisdom, with which the Chymistes dawbe their
Glass bodies, for to resist a mighty heat of fire, shall after be taught in
that Chapter, where we mind to entreat at large of all manner of Lutes for the
distilling Instruments. The form of which long Furnace, behold here under
lively descrybed to the eye.



The description of another Furnace, to be used as well for Oils, as other
Lycours, and Mynerall waters done by Sublimation, which may on such wise be
buylt, that the same^maye be removed from place to place, in any chamber, or
other room of the house: if the foundation of the vnbaked Brycke and Tyles be
cowched on a square thycke Planckeboorde with four feet, (marked with the
letter G.) and the walls (of a sufficient thycknesse) raised two foot high,
with Brickes mortered in the form above taught. After this, that the roumes
within be made, a foot distaunt one from the other. Which done, to make an
Arch door beneath, (marked with A.) where the Ashes falling from the Coals,
may be drawn or gotten forth. Above the same (a foot distant) another door
made, (noted with this letter B.) opening above the Grate, and the Grate
figured with the letter D. on which the Coals ougth to lie, and the entrance
of this door needs to be no larger, than that a man may hardlye thrust in
his hand. Above this, that two small bars of Iron (marked with E.) be fixed
a cross, or but one only, and those to serve for the stronger staying of the
Pan or Pot. Toward the top in each corner above (marked with F.) that
four ventes or breathing holes be made, and into the largest hole in the
middle (marked with H.) a Pan set (being broad above and narrow beneath)
reaching to the cross bar, and the edge about mortered strongly, that no
heat of fire pass forth, between the head of the Pan and Furnace: after
to pour into it water, if a man myndeth to distill herbs, Roots, or other
tender things. But contrariwise, Oils or other matters, yt require a myghtier
heat: then to put in fine sifted Sand or Ashes, and to begin your
Dystilling. The form of this Furnace serving for one Cucurbite or Glass body,
is here lively described.

Also if a man will build a round Furnace, it behooves him to place the vent
holes about, to rise from the bottom of the Pan, and the Cucurbite, of
Glass, Tynne, or thynne Copper well tynned within, to be set half full of
lycour into the Pan, about which two or three narrow bands of lead to be
hanged on with a cloth, that the Body start not up through the moving of the
water. This done, lay two half couers of Lead (cut just in the mids) in
such manner, that these close in the Glass body, whereby the heat of the
seething water may the commodiouser abide, and longer continue. On the body
(being either T^nne or Copper) set on a Glass head (which is accounted best)
for the sight of the lycour, and the same so close about with fine Lynnen
clothes, that no vapors at all may breath forth, and the Receyuer of pure
Glass set to it, that the water Distilling, may run into it, being like
luted to the nose of the Head. And this kind of Furnace wrought with water,
is named Balneum Mariae: but working with a dry heat (as in Ashes or Sand)
there needs no such half couers to guide or stay up the body. The
Cucurbite and head may wholly be made of Tynne, which are more commodious, in
that the Glass body is lightly broken through heat, and to much cold. In
many round Furnaces, the Grate has eight or nine overthwart bars of Iron,
that the Ashes may the co^modiouser fall through: and this Grate ought to be
made according to the proportion of the Furnace, that it may agree most aptlye
to the roundenesse and largeness of the same. The pan (wheth^r the same be of
Copper or Earth) ought to be of a like depth and breadth (although it shall be
commodious, that the depth be somewhat more than the breadth) with a Pype
standing out at the top, by which the hot water may run forth, without
harm to the Furnace. And this Copper Pan ought so to be set into the
Furnace, that it hangs well a spanne distant from the Grate underneath.

The Tower of the Philosophers, is a Furnace that hardlye can be learned by
words, nor by long writing, without full sight of the same in the buylding:
for if any happens to see the whole making of it, yet may he fail to
co^ceyue and understand the secret consisting in it, in that there are many
things in it, framed and made after such manner, that a man may hardly attain
to the knowledge of them. But to declare wholly (and to the end) how the same is
to be made, and that any conceyueth this my writing and demonstration, to his
profit be it, and he that understands not the same, to his harm be it. The
manner of erecting and framing of the said Tower, is on this wise, that the
foundation be laid four square with raw or baked Bricks, on a plain and
even ground, and three foot broad on every side, and that a hollow space
(in cross manner) be left, to the breadth of a baked Brick, and of heygth so
much, as is the heygth of the said Brick in largeness set on edge: and this
Pype or Gutter, is the same, where the fire or flame passes, and over the
mids of the said cross Pype, lay an iron Grate, and above the same build a
round Furnace of a spanne in breadth, and a yard and a half of heygth: and
this is named the Tower, and to the four holes (appearing forth) build and
frame in like manner four little Furnaces round, but lower than the hoales,
and without little Grates of iron in them: that the fire or flame may pass by
those pipes, and enter within the said small furnaces, on which, may be placed
or set Glass bodies, Retortes, or other vessels. When you will bestow Coals,
and make fire in the myddle Tower, do the same after this manner, that is, take
kindled coals, and put them in at the bottom of the Tower, and after fill up
the said Tower with dead or vnkindled coals: and shut close above with a cover
of Iron, the head of the tower, that no air breath forth: for by this dooyng,
the fire shall burn only below, so much as the pypes which extend to the
Furnaces can receive, and no more: and on such wise, in a Tower of this
greatness full of Coals, will the fire endure twelve or fourteen hours,
without putting in of any Coal. With this Tower may a man Distill, Circulate,
dry up, and Sublyme, with great facility: And this is the Philosophers Tower
above named, which serves, and is very necessary in the Art of Alchymie.

Another skillful Chemist, teaches a very ingenious manner of Distilling, by
which a man may with one only fire draw together, and all at one time, both
Water and Oil, besides the commodity of Sublyming, and Distilling by Balneo
Mariae: and this is named a Distillation in the tower, by reason of the form
of the Furnace, or rather named the Philosophers Tower, for great commodities
of the same, which is made after this manner: that is, in any plain and even
ground, let the form of a tower be buylt, either round or square, or fix
cornered, or of some other form, with vnbaked or baked Bryckes, and in heygth
about a yard and a half, or two or three, or so high and large as a man
pleases, in such condition always, that the same may receive and contain a
fire sufficient great and burning: In the said Tower, distant from the ground,
about a handbredth and a half, let be laid a Grate of iron, which may bear
up the Coals, with a wyndowe or square hole, by which the air may enter to
kyndle the Coals. After that done, let be buylt of either side, and round
about the tower, many Furnaces regarding the outward face of the tower, of
such a bygnesse as he thinks good and necessary, and of such heygth from the
ground, as answers aptly to the Grate of iron, which shall be in the mids
of the tower, and on each side of the tower, which shall be in the mids of
these Furnaces, let holes be made sufficient great, and somewhat higher than
the Grate of iron, to the end, that by those the heat of the fire might be
communicated and extended to the Furnaces. These Furnaces ought to be buylt
after the form of the Bulwarks of a warrelike Town: to each of the holes
running and extending within the Tower, before that the Furnaces are set or
joined too, ought a Plate or Register of Iron to be made, boared with three, or
six holes, or more, and those of like greatness and distance, one directly
above the other: to the end, that those may be drawn wholye forth of the
Furnace, when need shall require the same, or thrust down so deep, as the
Chemist would that the force of the fire to extend to the Furnaces without,
whether the same be by two or three, or one only hole, or by the great or
least hole: At the top of the myddle Tower, ought there to be made like to a
vaulte, by which the Furnace or the tower may be exactly closed, to the end
that the ai^e which enters by the lower part of the Tower, may not breath and
issue out by the top: and this after such manner always guyded, that those
may be drawn up, and put down again, according as he shall think needful.
The things on such wise prepared, the holl^we place of the Tower in the mids,
ought to be filled with Coals, and the top close shut or stopped with the
cover, to be strongly luted or mortered round about. At the hole or door
below shall he put in the fire, for by that means the Coals which shall be
nearer the said holes, will be consumed by the fire, and on such wise
consumed, that those which shall be at the top of the Tower, shrynking and
falling down by little and little, kyndle and burn one after the other, and
in the like manner do the others consequently burn, until all shall be
kyndled and wasted. The person which will occupy such a fashion, and the like
Furnaces to distill in, it shall suffice that he visit or look to his fire
once in the day. Such a buylding is not only ingenious and delectable to
behold, but also very commodious and necessary. I have seen sometimes (says
the Chemist) that a Balneum Mariae, has been placed on the said buylding, or
top of the Tower, and a vessel to Sublyme: besides a Furnace for
Reuerberating, and Cymenting, and a Furnace for Melting, according as a man may
learn and know, by the figure herevnder descrybed. Another Furnace I saw of
meaner cost in the building, which had a Tower in the mids, like to this
abouesayd, being four square, and very plain of workmanship, at whose
corners were four vessels placed, as at each corner one, and Registers made
for them, as to the other Furnaces before descrybed: so that little differing in
uses, saving in the form and beauty, for which cause, this Furnace is to be
ordered in all points like to the aforesaid: in governing the Registers, and
heat of the fire, that this may easier be conceived, I have joined it with the
figure before descrybed, as the same may euidentlye appear on the other side
to the eye, borrowed both out of the singular work, entitled Pirotechnia.

The said Chemist in his work of Pirotechnia, descrybeth two other Furnaces,
serving to sundry uses: the one to be built after this manner: That is, a
square Turret to be raised with Bryckes, and the same made round within, the
hole for the drawing forth of the Ashes, to be half a foot from the
foundation, above which (nygh a foot) three or four small Bars to be laid
(in the form of a Grate) well a finger breadth distant one from the other, that
the Ashes may the lightlyer fall through, for hyndring of the fire to burn and
give his heat, on this Grate all about lay Tyles in handsome manner, leaving
but a hands breadth uncovered, for the fire to burn through: after this, about
a foot higher, make your Oven open in the top, but in fashion like to the
Bakers Oven, which leave hollow downewarde to the Grate, that the Coals in the
nether Oven (having a lesser mouth than the upper) kyndled, may burn and flame
up: to the mouth of this nether Oven, must a door be set, whereby it may be
opened for the putting in and taking out of Coals, and shutting the same
again, when need shall require: but the mouth of the upper and greater, must
always be left open, for the flame to pass forth: over the inner mouth of
this greater Oven, must two Iron bars more be laid, so wide one from the
other, that a man may handsomelye set on them a melting Crucible, or other
vessel to calcyne withal, as it behooves: Over the head of this square
Turret remaining open, must so large a slate stone be laid, as may wholly cover
the same, yet may you not make fast the slate with mortar, to the head or top
of the Oven or Turret, in that when need requires, the same is to be taken
of. After all these done, the Oven must (within and without) be well playstred
with fast and strong Lyme, that the same chop not, which performed, the
Furnace is then finished. The Crucible with the matter that you would calcyne,
shall you set on the Iron Bars, and lay down the Slate close on the Ouens
head: after kyndle fire in the nether Oven, that the flame extending up, and
about the Crucible, may so pass forth of the mouth of the upper Oven, for on
such wise, it calcyneth the better, in that the flame must burn about the
matter, before it extends forth of the mouth of the Oven. The uses of these
two Ouens, are for the calcyning of Metalline Bodies, or other Mixtures, which
are like calcyned, as the Saltes, and all manner of stones. And without the like
Furnaces, may a man perform no work, where as calcination needs: for if he
shall attempt to calc^ne Bodies by another means, it will be very hard to bring
to pass: wherefore the Philosophers at the first, invented such a Furnace, for
the like intent and purpose, and named it properly the Furnace of Reuerberation
for calcyning, and cymenting.

The other Furnace made round and hollow to the bottom, differs but little
from the abouesayde, saving that this in the working, is left open and
uncovered at the top for the fumes to pass forth: near to the bottom must
a square hole be formed, and a door to the same, whereby the fire by it may
so be governed, that the same may be increased great or small, as need shall
require. Above this, a Grate of Iron for the Coals to burn upon, and vent
holes round about, for the air to come in, as well as the head remaining all
open for the large passing forth of the smoke: which otherwise would not
burn, for the lack of vent holes to let the smoke pass, that seeks issue
forth, so that nothing seems, nor is more enemy to the fire, than the smoke.
And for this reason, if Furnaces had not their ventes of breathing holes, it
were not possible that they could work or do their effect: and if these in
like manner had not their breathing forth below, the fire with great
difficulty would burn: for which cause, it behooves to have breathing holes
on either side, that the Furnace may work with more easiness. The vessel
standing on the Grate ought to be well defended with lute round about, before
the Coals be poured upon to kyndle and burn: the door of the same requires
to be opened reasonable wide for a time, to the end the fire may kyndle and
burn the freelyer, and the smoke pass forth at the top. The Furnace thus
finished, serves as well for the Distilling of waters and oils (by the help
of a Pan set on the head, and filled with Sand or water) as for Sublyming,
and the melting of Mynerals: for which cause the Aucthour thought good (by
reason of their profitable uses) to place them by the way a part, that their
forms lively descrybed to the eye, might the easier and perfiter be conceived
of all parsons.

A commended Furnace for distiling of the Oil of Vitrioll, and other Oils, is
made after this manner: First, with baked Brickes and Tyles a foundation laid
four square, on which, a wall raised a foot high, or thereabout, and a door
made below for the drawing forth of Ashes: above this (within the Furnace) a
Grate couched of the said heygth, distant from the bottom a foot and a
half, or thereabout. After this, bestow ouerthwarte the myddle of the same, a
long and sufficient strong Bar of iron, mortered with the best Lute, and
that it extends from one side unto another of the Furnace. Between the Grate
and the said Bar of Iron, frame of the one side of the Furnace, a slow
Harrie, even as the figure following demonstrateth: Which ought to be of such a
greatness, that a man may in a manner thrust in his head. The things thus
prepared ready, set forward the building of the Furnace of the Bar of Iron,
unto the heygth of a foot and a half, and leave it on such wise open, until
you have bestowed the Glass, in which the Vitrioll is contained. Here
conceive, that the side of the Furnace toward the flow Harrie, ought to be
left open from the Grate, unto the top of it, until such time as the Glass is
bestowed within the Furnace. The Furnace thus buylt and prepared in a
readynesse, set in the Glass strongly fenced with Lute, and filled with the
prepared substance, of that side of the Furnace which remains open: in such
manner place it within, that the bottom staying on the iron Bar, the neck may
be caused to bend downwarde, so much as may be, in the overthwart standing of
it in the furnace: But not so much downward, that ye substance in the Glass
may spill forth. The neck of the Retorte (if you will draw the Oil of
Vytrioll) ought to lie or extend forth, nigh half a foot, to the end that
it may after be very well luted and fastened with the Receyuer hanging
without. The things on such wise prepared, close up all that part open of the
Furnace, from the Grate unto the top of it, and conioyne with Mortar by the
same means very diligently, the Glass with the Furnace. After that (in this
closing up) you are come unto the top, make a great hole at one of the four
corners, of the greatness of an Egg, and a cover formed to it, that the same
may be set on and taken away, when need requires, at the other three corners,
make in like manner ventes or breathing holes, but those much lesser ((...) so
small) that a man can not put in his thumb at any of the^* (...) this, he must
by little and little close up the Furnace, and fashion the same (from the
holes) narrower and narrower, until he come unto the top, where he must
fashion a round hole of such a greatness, that a man may easily put in
his hand, to which hole prepare in like manner a cover, that a man may
stop and open the hole, when he lusts. After that you have thus buylt the
Furnace, and in the same bestowed the Glass, as is aaforesayde. It shall be
requisite and needful, to have another great Glass, able to receive and
hold eight or ten measures of lycour (to be as the receiving vessel) which he
shall very well fasten with the neck of the Body hanging without, after such
manner, that the neck of this be entered sufficient deep into the Receyuer:
which two on such wise ordered, lute diligently (round about) with the
strongest lute, as the common manner is. But the figure following shall show
to the eye all the said description of the Furnace, and the vessels before
mentioned. In which it behooves to note, that the slow Harrie ought not so
exactly to extend unto, and touch the Iron Grate: but sufficient it shall be,
if the same caryeth the Coals thither, or to the Grate. A. represents the
door, by which the Air enters to nourishe and maintain the fire. B. the
grate of Iron which sustayneth or bears the Coals. C. the slow Harrie, by
which the Coals are poured in. D. the place where is laid the long Bar of
Iron, which bears the Body. E. the neck of the Body lying forth, which
bends downewarde. F. represents the great vessel receiving. G. the vent or
breathing holes, situated in the.iiij. angles or corners. H. the great hole,
which is formed on the top of the Furnace. I. the cover seruinge for the
greater hoale on the top.

After that the things shall be on such wise prepared, let the Furnace be
heated with the fire of Coals, and the slow Harrie filled up with great
Coals: which done, shut or stop close with his cover the upper hole, and
like the other vent holes, except the three little ones before mentioned. At the
same time, shut or put to half the door, which is placed under the Grate,
marked with the letter A. by reason of the air, for to preserve the fire. etc.

The other vessels which commonly serve in the Art of Distilling, and be put
in use every where, as well for matters of Alchymie, as the drawing of
medicinable things, which are all manner of Waters, Oils, Baulmes, Aqua vitae,
Quintessences, and all other compounde matters, shall after be lively
demonstrated: and the manner how to order them in the distilling of things,
with the apt names for each vessel, and the forms, shall in order be
faithfully set forth.

First, this Instrument or Vessel, is named a Crooked Body or Retort: and
where always mention is made of a Retort, there is meant a Vessel of such a
form, whether the same be great or small, according as it shall seem to the
workman, that it is agreeable for the quality, and quantity of the matter,
that he would distill with such a kind of Vessel as this is: And in such a
kind of Vessel, the Chymistes distill matters that are unctuous, which not so
aptly sublyme, or ascend on high: as all the kinds of waters, that are easily
distylled with a Cucurbite and head, because these sublyme with much
easiness: wherefore the things unctuous and heavy, that cannot sublyme or
ascend, but with great difficulty, are distilled with this manner of Vessel,
in that the same has but a short and small rising, before the passing and
falling into the Receyuer, and for that cause, this is a Vessel very
commodious and necessary in such an Art, as to each person may well appear,
by working with the same.



This Vessel is named the Glass body with a long neck, and where at any time
is mentioned of a Body (which in Latin is named Cucurbita) there this Vessel
is understood and meant, whether the same be greater or less, according as
the workman shall think necessary: and this is a Vessel common, much
occupied of them which Dystill diverse matters in the Art: and this is as much
used for Physic matters, as for the working of Alchymie: So that this comes
to occupying often, as a thing most commodious, for the dooyng of all manner of
workinges in a manner, and may as well serve for a Receyuer, as for a Body to
dystill withal: Of which, it may be said, that this is a principal Vessel
in the Art of Dystilling, serving (as it does) for two Vessels, and being
commodious in so many things, so that more needs not to be spoken of it.
Wherefore we will proceed to descrybe herevnder, that Vessel, which (of the
Chymistes) is named a Head, without the which a man can not distill any
matter by the Cucurbite or Body of Glass, as after shall playner appear.



This Vessel named a Head, is well known to most persons, and in the Art of
Dystilling very necessary: Because (as I have aforesaid) it is impossible,
that a man may distill any thing without it: and of such Vessels, the workman
may choose or cause to be made with narrower and larger mouths, according to
the condition of the Body standing under, yet these require to be fashioned
all after one manner, and the like to be made with one manner of Nose: which
Nose requires to be after this manner, that is, fashioned long, and that (put
in) it may reach a good way into the Receyuer, for by entering very deep in
the Dystilling, and the spirits yssuing out of the Body, will not be so apt
to pass forth of the Receyuer: for this cause the said head will be much
better when the Nose shall be formed long: herein considering that it has the
like similitude, with the Nose of the Head, here before descrybed, and being on
such wise fashioned, it is a perfect Vessel, for the Distilling of tender and
Flegmaticke matters.

This Vesselle (the Chimystes name) ye Vrinall, which but little differs
from the Cucurbite (before described) as to the eye, may evidently be perceived:
for there is no other difference, saving that the Vrinall is formed with a
larger neck and mouth, than the Cucurbite has: and this made the like, for
that intent, whereby a man might dystill with more facility: for by this, the
vapors ascend far better on high, through the large head set upon, like to
the same before described. And into this vessel may the workman put his hand,
to draw out the matter remaining, which rests at the bottom, without losing
of the Vessel: when a man dystilleth not those things, which it behooves him
to burn, and to rest cleaving to the bottom, so that when the workman
needs not to dystill those things, which require a drying up: in such a case
(the contrary) may he cleanse the Vrinall, and make it serve for another time,
yea, for many times. In this Vessel may a man dystill Herbs, Wine, Flowers,
Honey, Wax, and all other matters, that he thyncketh may aptly be dystilled:
for the workman may order and apply it, in a manner to all woorkyngs, that he
would attempt to do, as well in Alchymie, as in Physic matters: so that
this Vrinall Body, is a Vessel very necessary, as we have before declared.



This Instrument named the Pellicane, which is a Vessel for Circulating,
serves to none other end and purpose, than for to Circulate the Quintessence,
which by the Art of dystilling is drawn: so that this Vessel on such wise
made, is not apt for the dystilling of any matter, but only serves for the
Circulating of Aqua vitae, and other compounde lycours. Where in any place you
find written to be done in a Pellicane, the same is meant to be wrought in the
said Vessel: and in all the Art, there is no other kind of Vessels, that
are more necessary than these five, which we have before descrybed, although
many other Vessels, and of those diverse are occupied of sundry Chymistes, yet
all consist and serve to the like woorkyng, which the above named do, that is,
the Retorte, the narrow necked Body, the Head, the Vrinall, and Pellicane,
with which a man may do all manner of works that are required in the Art, as
Dystillations, Sublimations, Fixations, Circulations, and other like woorkyngs.
And for that cause I think it not needful to make a long description of so
many strange sorts, as of those long, short, round, square, and so diverse
forms, which rather are occupied to marueyle at, than for utility or profit:
But I this affirm, that these five Instruments to be the fundament of the
whole Art of Distilling, and Alchymie, as I have before declared. Therefore let
it not move you to marueyle at so many sorts of Glasses that many Chymistes
use, which for this respect, I leave to demonstrate in this place.



This is a Bag which the Chimistes make of white Woollen cloth (whether the
same be Pennystone or Karsie) shaped and sown after this manner, and name it a
Fylter. And it is a very necessary thing, in that a man can not work in a
manner, any thing without it, that consists thycke: and in any place
whereas a man finds written to dystill by Fylter, the same is meant to be in
this Instrument, which he shall like do when the matters are dissolved into
water, for to clear them from their Faecies, that they may remain neat and
purified: which manner of Purifying, he shall work and do after this order,
that is, when the matter shall be dissolved, it behooves us to pour the same
into this Bag, letting it pass and run through by it self, which passed
through (by this manner of dystilling) will be most clear and pure, and this is
named the dystillation by Fylter, that also is very necessary in the work
of Alchymie, and the Apothecaries besides do often use this manner of
Dystilling, for to separate diverse matters, as are the Iuleps, Syrupes,
Decoctions, Juices of Herbs, and other Infusions, whereby they might come
purified and neat: and in this doing, there is nothing that may hinder their
woorking: wherefore if such matters were not sufficiently purged, they would
soon fall to putrefying and corrupting: which they do not, being well
Fyltred, and cleared through the Bag: As by a like in that Syrup, which
compounded of the Juice of sour Cytrone, ought first to be dystilled by the
Bag above descrybed, or by a List put into the Lycour: for this otherwise
curdeth, when it shall be cold: and the like does the Juice of Orenges and
Lemmons, being not ordered as abouesayde.

The other Instruments necessary for dystillation, not before descrybed, shall
after be lively demonstrated, and their uses orderly taught, borrowed out of
Adamus Louicerus, of Dystillation. The Instruments (says he) whose use is
required unto Dystillation, are made of diverse matter, as of Glass, Earth, or
Metals. But the Instruments of Glass, do excel all others, and for that
cause are warily to be used: therefore for a more safegarde of the Glass, the
Chymistes will to draw over it, a hose or Cote of vnshoren clothe (which
resists by that means, the stronger heat of Balneo Mariae) and after the
Dystillation it may be drawn of, and the Vessel made clean. Such mynding to
dystill by a dry heat of fire in Ashes or Sand, ought before to fence their
Instruments with the Lute of wisdom, made of Cley, Horsedung, Salt and
Flocks: but of this Lute shall more at large be uttered, in the proper place
hereafter. The said Instruments are to be formed of the best Earth that may
be found in any Country, for these in many causes are much commended, so
that they be occupied with heads of Glass, for they be better, seeing that
through them the matter as it is in ^ystilling, may be seen, as it is before
declared. Wherefore who so is minded to make Dystillation of Arsenick,
Orepment, Cinnaber, Mercury, Sulpher, or any such like Bodies, he must
remember before to buyld a common Furnace for dystilling, round or square,
according to the will of the Dystillatour, and that two round holes of a
finger bygnesse, be made of each side the Furnace, for the venting or breathing
forth of the fire. These done, on the mouth or myddle hollow place of the
Furnace, shall you bestow a deep Earthen pan, filled with fine sifted Sand
or Ashes, for the staying vpryght of the Glass Body: under the bottom of
which Pan, let be cowched an iron Bar overthwart or cross the hole,
retching from the one side to the other, for the stronger bearyng of the weight of
the Pan: and the lyppes of the Pan so stronglye mortered with the head of
the Furnace, that the fire breath not forth, between the Earthen pan and the
Furnace. After this, put in Coals by the myddle door, and kyndle the fire,
which ought to be at the first gentle and soft, unto the time that the Furnace
waxes hot, and that the matter contained in the Body begins to dissolve
and melt. After may a man increase and fortify the heat more and more, for
so long time as that he sees not rising any more fumes, by the mouth of the
Body, otherwise named a Gourde or Cucurbite.

As touching the Copper Vessels, said in an Empericke Chemist, that there
needs no tynning of them within: because the Tynning draws somewhat to it
of the Waters and Oils, which hanging to, so consumes the more, that the
Copper Vessels simply do not.

The Cucurbites or Glass bodies ought sometimes to be very long necked, as
when we seek and covet a purer and subtiller lycour: Which sort of most long
necked Bodies (as writes Cardane) serve for the only turn and purpose of
dystilling the Quintessence, when as we would that the subtiller parts or
spirits, and not the grosser and more earthlye, to ascend from the bottom of
the Cucurbite or Glass Body.

In the time of dystilling any substance, a man must now and then cool the
Lymbecke or head of the Glass, with Lynnen clothes dypped or wette in mean
cold water, and those after the gentle wrynging forth, to lap wittily about
the Head, that the vapors and spirits (through the same doing) may the
sooner thicken and fall down into the Gutter about: But a man may avoid this
labor and traueyle, if he orders the Lymbecke or head of the Cucurbite,
after the manner which the skylfull Louicerus descrybeth in his Treatise of the
Art of Dystilling, under these words.



Choose a Vessel of Copper, having the form of an Helmet, for so it is named
of ye Germans, or of a Limbeck (which is the Cover or Head of a Distillatorie
Vessel) as the same is here marked here with the figure B. Aloft the said
Lymbeck, put another round Cover (having an hoale on the top) of the fashion
which the letter A. here demo^strateth, that it touches nothing at all the
aforesaid Cover or Lymbeck, which fill with cold water, that the compass
about of the cover C. may refresh and cool the neck and gutter of the Limbeck.
The nose of the Limbeck must retch through the neck of this Cover that
cools, as the figure C. playner shows. And if it comes to pass, that the
water contained in the Cover, which compasses the Lymbecke or Head, be hot
through the continuance of time, of the heat of the Lymbecke, draw the same
forth by the Tappe or Cock fastened to the bottom of the Cover, as the figure
D. here demonstrateth, and into it pour other cold water: this so often cool
and draw by the Cock, until the work be ended. Or you may put certain
drawing pypes into the Cover, such as you see here lively descrybed, which
within short time will draw forth all the hot water of the Cover, by putting
the shorter end into the hole of the Cover: after into it pour cold water,
doing the like (when need requires) as above taught. He further sets
forth, another manner of cooling the head of the Lymbecke, on this wise: put an
Ox bladder on the Helmet, which drawn aloft, tie hard and close with a sure
Cord, about the neck of the ^^mbecke: this done, pour cold water into it,
filling the same round about the neck and Gutter of the Lymbecke, which being
come hot by heat of the Lymbecke, empty by the Tappe fastened in the
Bladder: after fill the same again, and do the like, as above taught. Herein
remembering that the top of the Bladder, be fastened with a string, for the
better retayning of the water. Such manner of coolinge profit and avail very
much, when any draws forth by Dystillation of the Symples, pure, and tender,
which are the Flowers, Herbs, Roots, and Fruits, yea, the Aqua vitae, and
separating of the Quintessence. Some there are of a contrary opinion and
mind, which in no manner will agree to the drawing of a Cappe aloft the Helmet,
nor to any outward cooling of the Head, nor Nose of the Lymbecke, because
that such coolinges repulse and put back the Oils ascending on high, and
cause them to fall into the Cucurbite or Glass Body, from whence they
ascended and came, that afterward they can no more be elevated, nor yet
brought into a vapor, but dry and waste away in the Body.

The Beak or Nose of the head, ought not to be longer (for the more part)
than from twelve unto eyghtene inches of the Thumb, before that it touches
the water: where otherwise if the Gutter be longer, as well the Oils as the
Waters should consume somewhat the more.

The manner of Dystilling in the Sun. The.viij. Chapter.
THe singular man Adam Louicer in his treatise of the Art of Dystilling,
sets forth an easy manner of Dystilling by the heat of the Sun beams,
which also may be used (howsoever a man will) in cold Countries: if so be he
myndeth at all times to dystill Flowers, and such like matters, to the end
that those may retain their savor and other qualities. And the same is to be
wrought on this wise: take (says Louicer) a hollow burning Glass, which
directlye place toward the hot beams of the Sun, after (between the
Beams of the Sun, and the burning Glass) set the Glass Body filled with
the Flowers or other like matter (and to stand in a small Earthen pan of
sifted Sand or Ashes) in such manner, that the Beams of the hot Sun falling
into the hollow Glass, may so beat back and extend to the Glass Body
with the proper matter (as to the object standing right against) which so
causes that lighter and purer matter ascending, to Dystill forth, as more
lively appears by this figure here descrybed.

The Italians have invented another manner and way of Dystilling waters in the
Sun, which with them is often used after this manner. They take two Glass
Bodies with narrow necks and mouths, the one being empty, and the other
filled with Herbs or Flowers. This Glass so filled, they close or ^^op with a
fine Lynnen cloth (bound about) through which the lycour may aptly pass or
dystill. After that, they thrust the neck of this Glass, into the neck of
the empty Glass standing under, and then diligently ferment and stop the
passages and ways round about, with Lute or Potters Claye, or other like
matter, to the end, that no vapor nor virtue of the substance may breathe
forth: This done, set these two Glasses on such wise joined and bound
together in the beams of the Sun, after such manner, that the same Glass
which conteyneth the Herbs or Flowers, may seem to be above, and the other
which is empty, to stand under, for to receive the lycour which is heated and
decocted by the Suns force, that so dystilleth down into the Glass. And on
such wise, do the women of Bononie in Lumbardie, prepare and purchase the
water of Bremble flowers, for the benefit and singular comfort of the eyes. As
touching another manner or way of Dystilling in the Sun, read hereafter in
the proper place taught.

The manner of Dystilling by Ascension, and what especially behooves to be
observed in the said working. The.ix. Chapter.
WE have before taught, that the Dystillation, which is a separation of the
subtle parts from the grosser and heauyer, to be wrought and done especially
after two means and ways, as by the Ascending and Descending. Further, of the
same which is wrought in the Ascending, is one way done, in that named Balneum
Mariae: in another manner by Ashes or Sand, another way in Horse dung, and in
another manner, by another mean heat serving between these. This by the way
in every Dystillation ought to be observed (that how often Oils especially are
to be drawn out of substances) that the Dystillation in the mean time, be in
no manner hyndered or stayde. For if this Dystillation begun, be once let,
insomuch that the matter or substance be cooled, the work or Dystillation
after can never be performed, in that the same can no more ascend. For which
cause, it behooves that this woorking or Distillation, be diligently and
carefully followed unto the end.

The manner very commodious, for the retayning without great pain and
impediment, that the Cucurbites flote or swymme not aloft the Kettle or Pan
full of hot water, when any myndeth to Dystill in Balneo Mariae. The.x.
Chapter.
TO do the like, prepare an Earthen Vessel, or deep Pot glased within, and
the same so large, that it may well receive or contain the Cucurbite, which
it behooves you to fill with water (in a manner to the brynke) at ye bottom of
which, within let four Tyles be laid, as the one lying right against the
other, and those formed with certain rysinges boared through, to the end that
by the holes of each of th^se eminencies or rysings up, a cord or string may
pass, after this form in a manner here described: After you have thus put
through the cords in each hole, place the Cucurbite in the mydle of the Tyles,
before that you pour in the water (as before taught) and after the same manner
tie the said Cord round about the neck of the Cucurbite, to which equally
fasten the four small cords tied and retching from the four tyles lying in
the bottom of the vessel, after such manner, that these four cords may be
loosed or stiffned, and fastened shorter or longer, according as the woorkeman
will have, that the Cucurbite or Glass body to stand deeper, or higher in
the Water. And by this means may the Cucurbite be commodiouslye retained,
which otherwise would not so well be stayed under the water. But if the
Cucurbite shall be of Copper, and not of Earth, in the stead or place of that
coarde, which compasses the neck of the Cucurbyte may a man bestow and
fasten a Copper band, having four small Rings hanging equidistant, to which
each Cord retching (from the bottom of the Vessel) may easily be tied: and
on such wise, shall the Cucurbite or Bozia be stayed in the bottom of the
Vessel, as the same figure aforesaid, lively demonstrateth to the eye.

How a great yield and quantity of waters, may with a small cost, few
Instruments or Vessels, and in a very short time, be dystilled in Balneo
Mariae. The.xi. Chapter.
IF the necessity present be such, that any has to make a great quantity
of waters dystilled in Balneo Mariae, he may accomplish the same with small
charge^, little pain, few Instruments, and in short time, such a yield and
quantity as he would have by this means* in preparing a Wooden bowl or
Tubbe, of a sufficient compass and largeness over, and placed on a form or
Benche being like made of wood: in the mids of which Tubbe, erect and set
from the bottom unto the edge or bryncke of the same (or rather above it) a
great Copper Vessel, in the form of a hollow pype, sufficient large, bored
without round about, and all over with little holes. Under the bottom of the
Tubbe, make a Furnace, within which empty part or space, let a part of the
Copper Pype descend, in such sort and manner, that the water be contained
between the outward bored wall of the Pype, and the part within of the
Tubbe: But within that part of the Pype, which descends by the bottom of the
Tub, let the fire be put and kyndled, for the heating of the water, which being
in such wise handled and done, round about the Pype, and in the rest of the
space of the Tubbe which is full of Water, let many Lymbeckes with their
Helmets be placed (after such manner) that the Beakes and Noses may reach
beyond the edge of the Tubbe round about, for the easier and handsommer
setting to, and fastening of the Receiving vessels. The water within the Tubbe
must he cause so long to sees, unto the time all the matters and substances in
the Cucurbites, be wholly dystilled. The form of making the abouesayd Balneum
Mariae, is borrowed out of that skillful work named Pirotechnia, which in
Englysh is called the Art of Fiery works, or working by fire.

The figure of Balnei Mariae, invented by Alb^casis, as the learned Gesnerus
coniectureth. The.xij. Chapter.


THe Letter A. in this figure represents the Furnace where the fire appears
be made and kyndled: the Character B. expresses the Funnell or Chymney of the
Furnace: the note C. declares the Pot set and standing over the fire, in
which the water boylinge is contained: the Figure D. shows the Pype, by
which the water boiling runs forth into a Wooden Tubbe, standing nygh to the
Furnace: the letter E. expresses the Tubbe of wood, which receives the water
heated, within which is set and stands the Cucurbite or Body of Glass: the
letter F. demonstrateth the Bozia or Cucurbite with his Helmet, which
contains the matter to be dystilled: the figure G. represents the hollow
Pype, by which the water runs forth into another waste Tubbe or Pan
standing under: the letter H. shows the Glass vessel, which receives the
water dystilled. It seems undoubtedly (says the worthy Gesnerus) the same
to be the better fashion of all others, for the Dystilling in Balneo Mariae,
but much more commodious, than if the fire were put under the Dystilling
vessels, Consider and mark the other form, like in a manner to this,
hereafter among the Oils.

The Dystillation of the Quintessence, in Balneo Mariae. The.xiij. Chapter.
TAke four or five measures of the best white wine, or of simple water, or of
May dew, or of other lycour pure, according to the greatness and largeness
of the Bozia or Cucurbite, in such sort, that a third part of the Glass body
remain empty: which done, set the Lymbecke or Head on the Vessel, fast
luted about, with the whytes of Eggs Flower or Meal, and water myxed
together, and spread on a Lynnen cloth: the Body of Glass on such wise trymmed
and prepared, let be set into Balneum Mariae, after dystilling by a small or
most soft fire, day and night, until the time that the five measures be come
to the one half, the same keep, that you have thus dystilled for the
extractions: you shall have a sign or note certain of the perfect
Dystillation of the Quintessence, if you cast a hear of the Eye browe into the
same, and that it sinketh or falls to the bottom incontinent: then have you
brought the Quintessence to a perfection, commodious, and apt for other
Dystillations. The like may you bring to pass and do with water ^ymple, or
May dew: In the mean whiles it behooves, that the Bozia be very long, to
the end that the gross vapors o^ earthly spirits, ascend not on high. The
same Dystillation must be repeated five or seven times over, or so often,
until that it be perfect. And such a fashion or way seems very excellent:
for that the sa^^e infecteth nothing at all the extractions (infused in it)
with any strange quality: you shall also obtain a water with expedition, if
on any juice or lycour heated, you set a Goblet or Bowl of Glass, into which
the fume ascended, turns it self into sweating drops, and those drops
gathered together of the sweatings, are on such wise converted into water. By
the like means and way, is the Vinegar easily converted into water: even so
the vapor of Herbs boiled in Wine, is gathered round about the bottom of
Platters or Dyshes covered over: such a Quintescense is very excellent, for the
clensing of spots, and Web or Pearl of the eyes, especially if a man boil
of the Rue, or herb Grace in white Vinegar, us the worthy Physician Cardanus
affirms.

An ingenious manner of distilling by Sand. The.xiiij. Chapter.


Bestow the matter which you will distyll within a Glass body stopping the
mouth with Paste, that no air at al may breath forth, after do the like, as
follows: Set the Cucurbite into a Kettle or Copper pan full of water, and
fresh Oten straw; which cause to sees softly, until the time that the matter
or substance boyleth no more (as the same perhaps may be, at the consumption
of all the water in the Kettell) after remove the Kettle with the Cucurbite
from the fire, and as soon as the Cucurbite is through cold, put the same a
new into another vessel full of Sand, in which let it be compassed about,
and covered with Sand up unto the neck: after bestow the same in a sunnie
place, where the sun all the day shyneth very hot, and in that hot place
let this stand for forty days together, which time expired, take it forth of
the Sand, and set the Glass again on the Sand only, without a vessel, for
the space of eight days: at the time ended, let it run through a new Lynnen
cloth, and wring the substance hard, in a Press for the purpose. etc. This
manner of Dystillation ought rather to be wrought and done in the Months of
July and August.

A form very rare, of Dystilling by Dung, borrowed out of the work
Pyrotechnia. The.xv. Chapter.
THere is also another fashion and manner of distilling (says a certain
Author) much used of the Chymistes, which is wrought in Horse dung, whose heat
is to be increased by the fume or vapor of Boiling water: after this order.
Let a wooden Coffer or Chest be made, of six Flemishe Else in length, (or
not above four yardes and a half of our measure) and of such a breadth, that
the same may commodiously contain of either side the Vrinall bodies of
Glass: and that there be no more left, than a space, by which the Pype may
pass and retch between the rows of the Glasses, standing on either side.
This long Chest fill with dry dung, myxed with short chopped straw: after lift
up and set the same on a wooden Form or Benche, to the end, that it may
stand the higher and commodiouser, for the performance of the work. These
done, it behooves you orderly to bestow the Vrinall bodies, or Cucurbites of
Glass in the Dung, with their heads above it, and regarding (by their heygth)
over the edge of the Chest on either side: to the end the Noses of the
Lymbeckes, may the handsomer be luted to the receiving vessels: In the myddest
between these vessels must a Pype of Copper or Lead, or if you will, of
Wood, be extended and couched, having bored round about many small holes,
and these in order throughout, or all the length of the pype, the one end of
which to bend after such fashion, that it wholye regards toward the
Ground: to this mouth and end of the Pype, let a vessel of the best Earth,
or of Copper be raised and set, having a long neck and narrow mouth, which
must be conjoined so close to the Pype, that no vapors at all breath forth of
it: This vessel or Pot filled with water, set on a Treuet with three feet,
for to be heated by the fire made under, until the water boil: which by the
like means eleuating or sending up vapors, and those carried along the hollow
Pype (by issuing through the little hoales) do heat the dung, causing after
all the Vrinall Bodies standing in the same, to dystill in comely order, and
with a temperate heat: as the figure before placed, does liuelyer represent to
us.

Of the Dystillation to be done by the Ice. The.xvi. Chapter.
This Dystillation in very deed is marvelous, if that any matter putrified of
a Month or two, is set into Ice, and that it comes to pass (as a certain
Chemist affirms) that the flewme settled, and staying at the bottom, will be
frosen, and the part Oily swymme or flote aloft, which may be separated by the
strayning.

Of a Furnace to dystill very artificial, which the Sarrazenes have in often
usage, borrowed out of Vitruuius the Almaine, by ^ualterus Riffius. The.xvij.
Chapter.
TO prepare and build the Furnace artificial, which serves the Macedonians
and Sarrazenes, or that they most often use: In the beginning a man must couch
or lay (in handsome manner) the foundation, and build the furnace up with
Mortar or Earth very strong (like to the same of the Potters) and with glased
or well baked Bryckes, according to the form which is represented by the
letters R.S.T.V. These on such wise prepared in a readynesse, let the Base or
foot of the Furnace be of form round or square, laid with Lyme and Brickes
after the fashion of a wall, as the letter Q. demonstrateth: on the said Base
co^eh the vessels of Glass, disposed in good order, and a like together, with
fast Mortar laid, according to the form which the letter Y. declares: and to
the end that the said heat temperate be not unprofitable, all the vessels
may be disposed both within and without very well defended, being of Glass,
or earth, or Metal, as the letter Z. playner shows to the eye. The vessels
in such a fashion disposed, it behooves to apply ^arefully and with diligence
the receiving vessels* well closed with Lute round about: to the end that
they no where breath forth: as you see here by the letter V. Further, when any
will dystill water or Oil, the matter ought before to be put into the vessels:
as this letter X. insigneth ^o (...): and after, (...) each ^et the receiving
vessel be (...), as we have above declared: In the myddest of the furnace,
must ^ gentle and soft fire ^e kyndled of Coals, to the end that it may not
touch any of the vessels: and on such wise shall you perform your
Distillation, by the means of a soft and temperate heat. In this Furnace
also, shall you dystill together, and at one time fifty or sixty kinds of
waters, as the figure here placed, does playner demonstrate.

The Venetian and Neapolitane Artificers of Dystilled waters, which have
plenty of Glass Lymbeckes with them, do often use this kind of Furnace, in
which they dystill in a day and night, with a dry heat of fire, well a
hundredth kinds of waters: The Furnace is buylt round, like to that before
described, and after the fashion of the Stoues in Germany. This Furnace
contains and has placed round about the compass of it (as is to be seen)
infinite Glasses within fenced with Lute, being of the form of the greater
Vrinall body, and fastened by a careful skyll to the Furnace, with the
strongest Lute: to each of which, must receiving vessels of Glass be set,
fastened with a bygge stryng to the knobbe of the head, that they may seem
to hang, as the Figure pl^^ner demonstrateth: This Furnace then heat in the
same manner, as they do the Stoues between the Mountains toward Italy, and
whiles the fire in the beginning is vehement or very hot, the Vessels in the
mean time they leave empty, until the heat be somewhat abated, least
through the violent heat, the Plants or Flowers, might be burned: After the
close shutting of the Furnace ^oore, that no heat be lost, they bestow the
Herbs, in the Vrinall vessels, and set on the heads of Glass with the
Receyuers fastened to each: which done, they draw forth a great yield and
^uantitie of waters, which are far better than those purchased out of Leaden
Instruments, in that they bring, with them no infection of Metals. This
borrowed out of the learned Treatise of Mathiolus, De facul. simp. Medica.

Certain Instruments to Dystill, of the Invention of the worthy man Gesnerus,
which he refers to the judgment of others. The.xviij. Chapter.
IT behooves to consider, (says the learned Gesnerus) whether a man may
dystill commodiously with such an Instrument. A. the Vessel of Copper tynned
within, for to be set on the fire, in which the matters are: Now the Herbs
may be put in by themselves, or strawed on a quantity of Sand. B. the
vessel of earth which is bestowed within the Vessel A. Or by a contrary manner
and fashion, that one of the Vessels has a skirte or edge, within which the
other is received. C. the Chaplet of Glass or Earth, or of Copper tynned
within: the mouth of which set into the mouth of B. at the top of C. the
vapor ascendyng is converted into water, shall descend into his nether parts,
which regard toward the Base downewardes: and when need requires, you shall
draw or let forth the water by the Cock: as well for the taste sake when any
will, as for the emptying, when it shall be to full of water: unless he rather
desires to make a hole at the top of the head C. to the end that when it
pleases, or that he shall see needful, he may empty or draw out all
consisting in C.D. is the Vessel or Bucket placed aloft, which contains the
cold water, that serves for the cooling of the head.

An other Instrument to be carried about one, in any journey. The.xix. Chapter.


This manner of Instrumente, marked by the figure 1. may be of Copper tinned
within, to the end that a man may carye it whyther he will, for to dystill
the fountains and Springs etc. and he may empty the same by the hole on the
top. He may also make such a Lymbecke, as that Figure noted by the number 2.
does demonstrate, with a Cock, Tappe, or small beak at the top: or like to
that which the figure denotes, marked with the number 3. Moreover, this only
is the portrature or draught of a Lymbecke, which behooves to be set on an
Vrinall or Glass body, as the first Figure declares: of which the nether
part, that is, the Vrinall Glass, may be luted with the strongest Clay myxed
with Floxe, or waxed about twyce or thryce with molten wax, and on such wise
set on the fire of Coals.

A new form of a Retort. The.xx. Chapter.
LEt a Retort be made of such a fashion, as the letter A. demonstrateth, of
good Earth, that is, of broken Tyles, pieces of looking Glasses, and other
Glasses white and clear, of Potters clay, and the sylings of iron, diligently
powdered and wrought together. B. must be thrust within C. which has an edge or
border. D. the Pype sharpened at the end, made of earth, or of copper, to
the end that it may be thrust into any manner of Glass vyoll, or long necked
Glass with a narrow mouth.

For to dystill the water of Sinamon, a man must prepare such an Instrument.
First set ready a Treuet, on which bestow a vessel of Iron sufficient
hollow, filled with fine Sand or sifted Ashes: or having nothing in it, that
requires then a greater fire, and to be bored full of small holes, into which
set a Cucurbite of Glass well luted, you may include the whole with a band
of an iron plate, etc.

A figure very rare of the Alchymistes borrowed out of an ancient book of
Alchymie, in written hand. The.xxi. Chapter.
THe vessels of separation are those, by which the Quintessence, or secret
spirit, is by one only Dystillation attayn^d, and it is a way very formal,
and the like a very much abrydging of the work: which as much avails unto
Aurum po^abile, or Potable Gold, as for the Philosophers Stone.

In this little Furnace having to the right hand three flames, ought to be
filled with fine Sand and sifted, and that the fire kyndled and flaming to
have three Candles: the second Furnace which is in the mids of the two, ought
also to have Sand, and a fire temperate of two Candles, as does the flame
demonstrate in the d^^re of the Furnace: In the third Furnace to the left
hand, is a Balneum Mariae, and the fire or flame of one Candell. These
Fu^naces ought on such wise to be disposed and set in order, that they stand
nigh one the other, whereby a very small space may appear between Furnace
and Furnace, as the figure above playner shows to the eye.

For the same use, have the Alchymistes devised these Instruments following.



A. the Cucurbite which con^ayneth the substance, with his headde. B. the
head, whose Nose retcheth within the neck C. Into the glass C. does the
secret spirit of the Quintesse^ce pass. Into the receiving vessel D. does
the simple wine or Flewme of the Quintessence fall.

The manner and Instruments of Dystilling by Discention. The.xxij. Chapter.
THe manner of Dystilling by Discention, is wrought in a Bozia or Cucurbite
turned vpside down, which is conioined to ye Furnace with the best lute, that
is, of that part which the body of ye Bozia thickest fenced, touches to the
furnace: after the well drying and closing thus of the Glasse^Body to the
Furnace, that no matter fall through, the Coals then are to be laid upon all
about, and on such wise kindled, that the fire be very gentle. For a small fire
suffices in this work at the first, but when it touches and is come to the
Bozia, let the fire be after increased by little and little. Before the
Dystillation, it behooves to thrust and couch strongly together, the matter
within the Bozia, or to dry thoroughly the same, or with the white of an Egg,
or by long running to stay the matter in the Bozia turned vpside down, to the
end that it shed not forth: During the time of the Dystillation, the matter
cleaves to the neck of the Bozia. etc. This manner of Dystilling is so much
the more perfect and excellent, because the matter seems to be sublymed often
and many times, as nygh a thousand thousand times wrought and driven up and
down, a high and below, during the time of the Dystillation: yet may it not
cause that such an agitacion and moving, to render and yield a perfect
Sublimation of the Quintessence of the matter, that is to say, the Elementarie
converted into the name Elementall, and of a corruptible matter rendered an
incorruptible. After this manner of Dystilling by Discention, may a man attain
Oils out of Woods, and half Mynerals: If so be the mouth of the Bozia strong
luted, be close stopped with a Plate of iron tynned, and stricken full of small
holes: That you may the readyer conceive the manner and Instruments of this
Dystillation, behold the Figure here before descrybed, borrowed out of the
work entitled Pyrotechnia.

That singular man Rogerius* has set forth a like manner of Dystilling on this
wise: Let a Bottell of Earth (well glased within) be filled up to the mouth
with Flowers or Herbs, having in the bottom a reasonable small hole, and the
mouth of it diligently stopped, to be set into the mouth of a larger vessel
like glased, standing under: which done, to close and stop with diligence,
the bottom of the Bottell (within the mouth of the other vessel) with good
Lute or mortar of Potters earth, and to bury both the Pottes wholly within the
Earth, leaving these so covered for a year. The year being ended, to draw
them forth of the Earth, and in the nether vessel shall be found a very
clear Oil, which is dystilled by virtue of the heat and fumes of the Earth.

The form of a Furnace for Balneo Mariae, very rare, and highly commended.
The.xxiij. Chapter.


Behold here a manner or fashion of Balneo Mariae, very excellent, of which
the vessel large and great is of tynne, much like to a bygge Vrinall Body,
in length of three spannes, or three great feet long, very bygge below, and
narrower extending upward: the bottom or bellye of the same standing wette,
well two long feet within the boiling water, and the part above retching
quyte without ye Balneo, in height of a long foot, through a round hole cut
out, in the mids of the cover of the Kettell or Pan, being the Balneo. On
this great vessel is a Lymbeck of Tynne set stedily and fast, covered and
compassed of another vessel like of Tynne far larger, after the form of a
Bucket, that receives the cold water which is caused to run by the Pype or
Cock of Copper out of the upper vessel somewhat long, situated and standing in
the highest part of the Column, and the same for cooling, continually the
Tin Lymbeck standing in the mids, to the end that the vapors which are
ascended, may thicken much better, and be sooner converted into water: so that
this causes, that the Artificers may receive the more yield of water: and
where the same cold water contained in the Vessel or Bucket that compasses
the Lymbecke, may be hot within short time by the heat of the Lymbecke, this
in like manner by a Pype, out of which the water ^^^meth, may incontinent be let
forth in the nether part, through a Cock turned, and the Bucket again filled
with other cold water, drawn out of the vessel on high: But to the end a man
may not have so great a labor and pain to empty so often the hot water, and
to pour in of cold, he may dispose the same on such wise: that from the
vessel which is standing at the top of the Column, he may continually draw
out so often of the cold water into the Vessel which compasses the Lymbecke,
as he lets forth of the hot to run out of the same, in opening and
shutting of the Cocks of the Pypes, when need requires: And to the end,
that the Kettell or Pan of Copper, in which the Balneum Mariae is, may
always be full with a like quantity of water, which otherwise is wasted by
the vehement and continual heat of the fire in the Furnace: it is devised
therefore by Art, that another vessel below, or in the nether part of the
Column placed full of very hot water, which may be caused to run
continually into the Balneum Mariae by a Pype governed of his Cock. And this
water is heated within his vessel* with the same fire that the Balneum is
heated: for so much as the wall of the Column is hollow and empty unto the
bottom of that nether vessel. This sort or fashion of Balneum Mariae, is
commended for the dystilling and yield of waters in great quantity, by reason
of the cold water which thyckeneth and conuerteth incontinent the vapors
into water. For a readyer conceyuing of the former taught, behold the Figure
before lively set forth to the eye: Borrowed out of the learned Treatise of
Mathiolus.

The form of another Furnace for Balneo Mariae, to be wrought by sundry
Instruments of Glass at one instant time. The.xxiiij. Chapter.
THere is another fashion of Balneo Mariae, which contains four Limbecks, of
which, ye vessels being large, that are set into Balneum Mariae, may be of
Glass, or of tynne, but their heads only of Glass, for the persiter seeing
of the spirits ascending: Besides these four Bodies with their heads, there
is placed another comely instrument, which stands far higher than the
others, that is heated only by the vapor of the water boiling (arysing from
the Balneo Mariae) which ascends on high by the means of a great Brazen
Pype: and this renders or dystilleth by the Herbs or Flowers contained in it,
the best water of all the other four: All these vessels well joined and closed
diligently, are to be set into round hoales cut out of the Cover, that they
may so be stayed upright, on the mouth of the Kettell or Pan of Copper
sufficient large and capable: the same also covered with Tynne, and closed on
such wise round about, that no vapor of the water of Balneo Mariae boiling,
may breath forth: Moreover, all the Instruments require so to be placed and set
round about, that these seem not but as one Body together: excepting the
heads, which may be separated and taken of, and those set on again, when
need requires for the dystilling of waters: That this description may playner
appear, behold the figure lively set forth to the eye: Borrowed out of the
Treatise of Mathiolus, at the end of his Commentaries upon Dioscorides.

Of the Dystillation by a Fylter. The.xxv. Chapter.
FIll a wide mouthed Glass, or earthen Pot, with thycke water or any juice,
and take a List or piece of Woollen cloth, being two palms or a spanne long,
and fashioned sharp at the one end, like to a tongue which wholly wette in
water: After lay the same into the Glass or Pot, in such order, that the
one half in a manner, may seem to lie wette within the water or juice, and the
other to hang over the edge of the Glass, or mouth of the Pot without: which
on such wise ordered, you shall then see all the lycour to drop forth of the
Glass, within short time: when you see that the cloth begins to furre, and
waxes fowler or blacker, or the drops dystill slower, by reason of the
grounds or grosser substance drunk in, then the Fylter or List shall you
(at such times) wring hard out, and washing it clean, lay again into the
Glass or Pot until the work be finished. Further learn, that the repeating
of iuyces, waters, and lycours, three or four times over by a Fylter, are
caused both the purer and clearer: if so be you (...) out the ^ee^es or
dregs, as often as need shall require the same.

Some Chymistes there are, which ex^rcysing this manner of Dystilling by a
Fylter, do sometimes use (in stead of it) two crooked Glass Bodies, named
Retortes: the one of these filled with the matter, and put into the neck of
the other being empty (and luted close about): place them so, that the same
being filled, A standing higher, with the body, bending up whereby* it might
the easier and speedyer distill into that marcked with the letter B. standing
lower* For by this manner of distilling, is the lycour (dygested before in
Balneo Mariae) caused the purer, neater, and pleasanter of smelling: But this
Dystilling by a Fylter, is oftener exercysed of the Chymistes, than of the
Physicians: and devised by them to separate the subtiller, lyghter, and purer
matter, from the heavy, gross, and full of dregs, as often as need shall
require the sa^^*

Of the same named vulgarly the Lute of ^ysedome, with which the Chymistes use
to parge^ and fence the Dy^^illatorie vessels, and for to stop or c^ose their
Ioy^^^, that no ma^ter breath forth. The.xxvi. Chapter.
FOrasmuch as we have hitherto entreated su^^^cientl^^, of the Instrument^
necessary, for Dystilling of the most matters and subst^nc^^ (...) therefore
(...) this present, that we likewise set forth and t^^ch the manner of the same,
which defends the vessels from the violence and ^^ghtie heat of fire: and
that closes and fast joins them ^^gither in the ioynt^^, to the end, that
the Dystillation may be the (...) performed* And this is the Morte^* of which
the Chymistes have need for the perfourming of their works, (...) Lute. Now
(...) diverse, sorts of Mortar* as the one named (...) only for the buylding
o^ ^urnaces and Towers for dystilling* The other is named the Lute or Mortar of
wisdom, with which the vessels of Glass are p^rgetted and fenced, to the
end that those may the better sustain and abide the violent force of fire*
The other is profitable for the conioyning and (...) the (...) of the vessels
gaping or ^hapt: although the Mortar of wisdom may sometimes serve for
stopping and fencing the crackes an^ cleftes of Glasses.

The Lute or Mortar common, fit and the best for Furnaces* may on such wise be
prepared: Take Chalk or Potters claye, or earth which appears very fat and
cleau^ng* to the same add a little quantity of Sand or gravel, myxing or
wor^ing with these Woollen floxe, and Horse dung, After incorporate and labor
the whole together with great diligence, unto the time that it be of a
consistence more ^ft, than hard or dry. This borrowed out of Leonarde
Fiarauant.

A Lute or Mortar for the buylding of Furna^es, and the P^ilosophers Tower:
Take a quantity of Hearts hears (with which Sad^^^rs are act (...) to stuff
Saddles) being before well shaken and beaten, or else take floxe of Wo^llen
^loth, dr^sse or beatings of Iron (flying from the Anuill) Lyme, the blood of
a Bull, or Wether: of these well myxed and wrought together, couch and erect
your Furnaces with Tyles and Bryckes.

A Lute or Mortar, for to parget, cover, and arm or fence the vessels, to
the end that those crack not by violence of the fire: Take the fine powder and
well searsed of Tyles, the powder searsed of the beatings of Iron about the
Anuyll, the powder searsed and very fine of Sand, of each one pound, of fat
Lute or Cley well cleaving three pounds: all these diligently temper with
Lie, after myxe them carefully, by stirring the whole strongly together with a
staff: to which (in the working) add always a third part of shoren floxe,
brought very small and myxed as it were in powder: which done, let the whole be
well stirred and myxed together. The vessels pargetted and covered with this
Lute or Mortar, may well abide the violence of fire, without breaking or
cracking at all, if it be somewhat thycke laid, and even spread about the
Bodies.

The Glass Bodies for to be pargetted or covered with Lute, require to be
wrought clear, smooth and without knots or bladders: in that otherwise they be
in danger of breaking, for the weakness of composition, and may lesser or
weakelyer endure the heat of fire. These on such wise strongly made by the
Glassemakers, ought to be fenced with the best Lute (named the Lute of
wisdom) up to the narrower part of the Glass body, or three fingers breadth
higher for Aqua fortis, and such like, and spredde round about of a reasonable
thickness: to the end the Coats made strong; and the choppes filled with the
best Mortar all about (after the well drying of them diverse times) may the
aptlyer abide the forte of fire: The commended Lute or Mortar for the vessels
of glass, is to be made of Potters earth, with a fourth part to the same added
of shoren floxe, and an eight part of white Ashes, with a fourth part of dry
Horse dung, all these well incorporated together, ought to be well beaten with
an Iron rod. For this on such wise ordered, is the composition that the
Chymistes name the Lute of wisdom, with which they cover and fence the
bottomes of those bodies, that they mind to occupy unto Dystillation. There
be some that add to this composition, the powder of Brycke finely beaten and
searsed, and the scales or beatings of Iron searsed: and for the apt drying of
the vessels thus fenced, do make a long Wooden form, bored full of holes
all along, into which they thrust or put the necks of the Glass Bodies, with
the mouths turned downewarde: and on such wise they set all the vessels
together to dry in the Sun, or in the wind, or by the fire, or in some hot
place* which on such wise thoroughly dry, they apply to diverse uses, or as
pleases them for the dystilling of matters: That the form of drying the
vessels may readyer be conceived, behold the Figure before demonstrated to the
eye.

Another fashion of Lute or Mortar, often used of a certain skylfull man: Take
of the fine powder of Sand searsed, one pound: of the scales or beatings of
iron (about the Anuill) brought into fine powder, so much: of Glass beaten
into fine powder, as much: of fat Potters Earth and cleaving, three pounds: to
which add a third part of a pound of the shoren flox of cloth, with old water
of Tartar, or Salt water: which done, myxe the whole together, and work it
strongly with an iron rod, as before taught.

Another. Take of Venice Glass, and of Tartar, of each a like quantity: of
Salt Armonjacke a little, these beat and labor well together. Of this shall
you use, when that you will diligently Lute any thing, or seal glass with
glass, by smearing it round about the vessels when they are hot.

Another for to defend that the Glasses break not by the force of fire: Take
what quantity you will of Alum, putting the same into an earthen Pot, on
which pour clear water to putrify, after boil the whole with diligence, and
skimme it: which done, let this thoroughly cool, then smeare or dawbe with the*
said mixture the Glasses without, until that you may well and safely bestow
them in the fire, or on Sand: these let to dry by themselves, and do the
like unto a third time.

Another Lute or Mortar for to defend the vessels, that they crack or
break not in pieces, by force of the fire, or by violence of the spirits, and
that p^rpetually they may contain and keep Aqua fortis, or the strong water.
The vessels smeared or dawbed with the said Mortar, ought to be well dried in
the Sun: It is also profitable for the conglutinating or fastening together
of Glasses or vessels broken: Take of Glass and V^rmilon, of each a like
quantity, these labor into most fine powder, after sift it through a fine
searse, then incorporate the same with Vernishe: adding to it a little of the
Oil of Lynseede, and making of the whole like to a soft Pultise: which done,
spread the same on a fine Lynnen cloth, and apply or wrappe it about the
Orifices of the vessels, or their joints, letting them so to dry in the Sun
by themselves: which although it be very slowly done, yet does it retain and
keep the fire, the strong water (named Aqua fortis) and the kinds of the
strong water. This is very true, and experienced by the Author of the work
named Pyrotechnia.

For the fast closing and stopping of Glasses, the grounds and thicker
substance of that Mortar of other Glasses made, is very commodious: the self
same does the Meal, Lyme, and Bole Armoniacke myxed together, in the form of
Paste like avail.

Another Lute or Mortar to be applied about the joints, which so lets or
stops, that the vapors in no manner breath forth: Take the fine pouders of
Glass, and Litarge of Gold sifted through a searse, of each a pound: the
Meal of Wheat, two pounds, myxe these diligently, and work or labor
them very well with the whytes of Eggs in the form of Paste, extended and
spredde on the one side of a wette Lynnen cloth, for to apply about the
joints: after that it shall be through dry, bestow or lay yet another
Lynnen cloth upon, and on such wise the spirits shall be retained.

If the Glass that any has to set on the fire, happens to be cracked, it
may be stopped by this means, that the spirits breath not forth: wette or
steep diverse Lynnen clothes in the whytes of Eggs well beaten, those apply
on the crack of the Glass hot, the one after the other, of such sort, that
as soon as the one shall be dry and hard as any crust, to bestow an other,
and in like manner another consequently: Such a kind and form of Mortar is
commended for the Luting and fencing all about of vessels, when as any will
dystill Aqua fortis, or strong water, or the Oil of Vitrioll.

A Lute or Mortar of wisdom on this wise: Take fat Cley, and Horsedung, these
strongly myxe and work together with Wine, Ale, or Beer: and in the second
laboring together, add shoren floxe of Clothe: and in the third working
together, myxe pure Wheaten Meal and Flower, with the whytes of Eggs
diligently tempered: and on such wise shall you make the Lute of wisdom.

Or thus, take two parts of Clay, so much of Horse dung, and one part of the
scales or dross of Iron about the Anuyll: all these diligently bring to fine
powder, dissoluing after a part of Salt in water: with that water work the
whole together, spreading the same after on a Lynnen cloth, which apply round
about the vessel.

Another Lute: Take a fast and tough earth, which after the through drying,
bring into fine powder, the same sprynckle with a little quantity of water, to
which add Horse dung, brought to powder: after the well myxing of all these
with the whytes of Eggs, diligently labor them together, then of both joined,
make one myxture, with which you shall Lute round about your vessels.

Another Lute: take of the excrement or upper dross of the Iron, one pound
and a half: of the Meal dust, half a pound: of Glass brought to fine
powder, one pound: of the whytes of Eggs as much as shall suffyce to myxe the
whole throughlye, unto the form of Paste.

A Lute of wisdom is made on this wise, according to Fyerauant the Italian,
in his book of secret inventions, with which a man may lute vessels of
Glass to resist a mighty heat of fire. Take of the best and finest Chalk,
to which add the dross of Iron brought to fine powder, and the common white
Ashes, the shoren floxe, and Horse dung, these Artely myxe together: For this
is the true composition of the Lute of wisdom, which resists the fire
marvelously.

Another Lute or Mortar of wisdom, that is much commended by an Empericke,
which prepares of the Antimonie: Take of the best Cley, beaten and wrought
with the powder of Tyles or Brycke, the dross of iron in powder, and the
Hearts or Ox hears, all which diligently myxe and labor with the whytes of
Eggs, unto the form of Paste,

The correction of Waters and Oils dystilled. The.xxvi. Chapter.
IN every kind of Dystillation, it oftentimes comes to pass, for the
vehemency of the cause agent, that is, the heat, or the default of
Instruments, or the ignorance of the workman, that the waters or Oils
dystilled, attain some fiery heat, or some incommoditie excrementuous or
superfluous, or other such strange quality; as taste, and evil savor: For
which cause it is very requisite and necessary (for the keeping of them a long
time) to know how it behooves to correct all their defaults. For in that
fashion of dystilling, which is wrought and done by force of the fire agent
(says Ioannes Languis) although that the matters which are naturally cold, as
the Nightshade, Succorie, Endyue, Lettuce, and such others are dystilled, yet
those purchase or conceive an Empyreuma, that is, a heat and dryth
accidental, like to things burned: Of which ( Galen affirms) that no one of
burned things, is perfitely cold because in them is left a fiery quality,
which Aristotle reports to be Empyreuma: After this manner the black Choler
or Melancholy, although the same be Earthly and naturally cold, for so much as
it is engendered of blood adust or burnt, yet is it not altogether without
heat, no otherwise than the Ashes and Vyneger. For this reason, the Chymistes
more expert, to the end that the same heat may be lessened and caused (as it
were) mylder, and that the virtues of matters cold, do not euaporate away,
dystill such things, in vessels hanging over water boiling, that they name
Balneum Mariae, which fashion of Dystilling, they learned of the ancient
Apothecaries of the Greeks: which for the same causes procured to boil softly
or gently the Oils, the Ointments of Spykenarde, of Lauander, of Benjamin, and
other medicines of sweet savor in a double vessel: Also the same in a clear
air, on the fire without smoke, and of Coals well kyndled. After which
manner, they more boiled in time past the medicines Arteriacall and
Stomaticall, that the Arabians named Loch: These hitherto borrowed out of
Ioannes Langius. Now not only the Dystillation brings with it this adustion
to waters or Oils, but they also attain by the same means a watery and
excrementuous moisture, which by the Sunning, ought to be corrected in this
manner.

The waters set in the Sun for certain days, in Glasses well stopped with
Lynnen cloth, or Parchment having sundry holes, to the end that all the same
which is excrementuous in them, may so be consumed: and by the said means,
that what the dystilled waters have of strange heat, may in like manner be
breathed away. In cold Countries for correcting the moisture excrementuous of
waters, which can not be rectified nor sufficiently euaporated by the gentle
heat of the sun and the air: set the Glass or vessel which contains the
things dystilled into a vessel full of water, causing it gently to boil for
two or three days together, unto the consumption of a third part of the Oil
(if the same shall be Oil) but if it be water dystilled, then by the like
means the moisture excrementuous (if any such remain) shall easily be
consumed, and the Oil, or the Water rectified. This Rogerius. Or rather that
the Chemists do and observe in the water of Life, by Balneum Mariae: the
moisture watrie (that they name Fleume) is received a part, and separated from
the subtle lycour. But of the other manners of rectifying lycours, we shall
more at large hereafter entreat in the proper place.

Nor there is no less danger in the Dystillation, which is wrought or done by
the heat of dung stynking and rotten: least that there may* remain some
smatch of rottenness or foystynes in the lycour dystilled. Hereof it comes
also (that Langius in his Epistles makes mention) that many worthy Physicians
(in learning and skill of matters) do abhor utterly this ^aner of
Dystilling, by reason of the rottenness of heat, and euaporation of the dung
stynking, which may easily or lightly infe^t the medicines: for which cause
the matters stynking, are always dangerous to the body. To these the same
Author answers on such wise, that when the things be emptyed out of the
vessels of putrefaction, and at the last dystilled by a Lymbecke, are then
purified wholly from the contagion and annoyance of this rottenness: for so much
as the heat of fire resists the poison, and corrects the same: For Hera
also (a worthy Physician of Cappadocia) reports, that when he purposed to
correct the styptickenesse and astriction of his proper medicine, did before
bestow and bury under the earth, the same for three whole Months, and there
left it in a manner to putrify: hoping by the said industry, that the
substance of the medicine might be restored of the more subtle parts.
Wherefore a man may persuade and believe, that if the matters by happ^ shall
gather and attain any infection by the putrefaction, all the same may be
taken away, and corrected by the Dystillation following.

The end of the first Book of secret Remedies* for Dystillations.

The second Book of Dystillations, containing sundry excellent secret
Remedies of Dystilled waters.

Of the Waters simple dystilled of Herbs especially, and of diverse other
Bodies simple.
Of Vinegar dystilled. The first Chapter.
Bestow or put the best Vinegar that you can choose, into a Lymbecke, set
after into Balneum Mariae, or on fine sifted Ashes, having the lyppes or edges
(round about) well stopped with Paste or Meal tempered in water, or with
Paper pasted: which done, make under it a soft fire for the space of three or
four hours, in which time the flewme, that is; the moisture excrementuous is
separated from the Vinegar, which you ought to cast away as a matter
unprofitable. And a man may know that the Flewme is taken away and gone, when
the Vinegar shall be consumed unto a third or fourth part: After, let all the
joints of the Lymbecke be well stopped, to the end that it makes no
euaporation, then increase the fire by little and little: By the same means
shall you dystill forth (for the second draught) a Vinegar very good, and
most white unto the Lies, of which you shall have a sign or note certain, if
you see the Fecies black, and that there comes forth any Lycour which has
the consistence of Honey or Pytch: you may draw the like of Vinegar, Rosate,
of the Elder, of the Cloue Gellyflowers, and others: If any shall infuse all a
night in Vinegar (which is drawn the second time) the Pellitorie, Staphisagre
(or Iuye bruised) in Balneo Mariae, after the expression made, and the grosser
substance thrown away, dystill with diligence the Lycour poured into a
Lymbecke: This third extraction or draught (besides a number of experiences
that a man may work with it) does greatly prevail against the myghtie ache
and dolor of the teeth: This borrowed out of the Book of an Alchymister of
Paris. In the Dystillation of Vinegar only I suppose (says the worthy
Practicioner Leonarde Fiarauante) that the part wateryshe first runs forth,
after the better sort, in ordering the Dystillation, as above uttered: This
second draught of Vinegar, is a matter incorruptible, which Artely separated
from the Fecies, becomes of such force, that it cannot after corrupt. It also
dissolueth precious Stones, and Mynerals, that are laid to steep in it, as
Iron, Tynne, Lattone, Copper, and other like things. It serves for the
clensing and clearing of women's faces, washyng sometimes with it, in that this
corrodeth and wears away all spots: It serves effectuously, for making the
Sirupe of Vinegar: It preserves all matters corruptible put into it, as are
Flesh, Eggs, Gourdes, Melons, Cucumbers, Orenges, Lemmons, Fennel, and to be
brief, whatsoever thing a man will put into it. This in like manner dissolueth
the Rheum, makes a good and clear voice by drincking a little at a time: It
mittigateth the pain in all sores, and in effect is helping in every matter,
and never harmeth in none. If the Vinegar shall be dystilled by a Lymbecke,
unto the time that the Fecies remain dry, and they after burned so long in
the fire, unto the time that they become white Ashes, which after bestowed in a
moist Celler, or other moist place, dissolueth (as the Tartare prepared does)
into an Oil, which is of so excellent virtue, for the health of man's body,
that a man would hardly believe. For gyuing a little quantity of this by the
mouth, it dissolueth the Stone of the Kidneys, and wastes the Stone in the
Bladder: The Vinegar dystilled with a little quantity of the Oil of Tartare,
and pure Aqua vitae together, preserves the faces of women, and makes them to
appear most comely. Sundry other great matters may be wrought with the
dystilled Vinegar, which here for brevity are omitted: and referred to the
wisdom of skillful practicioners to find out.

The Sea or Salt water may a man make sweet, by this means: If he fills a
vessel or Pot with Salt water, and causing it to boil a time by the fire,
does after dystill the same by a Lymbecke, as the Rose water, and the Salt
shall remain a^ the bottom. But to make a great quantity in short time, it
behooves to dystill the same by a Lymbecke having a Bucket on the head, which
fill with cold water, and as the water waxes hot in the dystilling, draw it
forth by the Tap or Cock, and pour cold water immediately into the Bucket:
For by this often cooling of the head, shall you purchase the more yield. And
this is the secret to dystill much at once with a small cost: and the
Instrument being not of this manner fashioned, a man can not dystill but a small
quantity at a time.

The manner of Dystilling water simple, and the waters of Minurall Bathes, to
the end that a man may know the things myxed in them, and of their property:
Borrowed out of the learned work of Medicinal waters of Gabriel Fallopius. The
second Chapter.
A Man may dissolve after two fashions, the waters of Mynurall Bathes by
Dystillation: the one in Balneo Mariae, but such a resolution is hard to bring
to pass: the other by a Distillation dry, which is done in vessels of Glass,
whether they be Vrinall Bodies, or those named (of the Arabians) Bozia, it much
forces not, as I have said: It is sufficient that by this Dissolution of the
water, which is wrought by the Dystillation of dry heat, that all those
things are known, myxed in such waters, without excluding or excepting the
vapors or spirits, which are known by this reason. Have a Furnace wholly in a
readynesse, the fire represented by the letter A. let be kyndled beneath, a
high on the Furnace, as in the hollownesse, set a vessel of strong Earth very
large, (in fashion of a Carnation pot) full of sifted Sand expressed by B.
fill the Bozia or, Vrinall vessel declared by C. (it forces not much whether
of them) with the Mynerall or Bathe water, and that the vessel be set unto the
myddle in the sand, which is within the Earthen pot: let the Bozia be covered
with his head, having a nose sufficient long, signified by the note D. Both
these Lute well together, to the end that there be no cleftes, nor any space
between the two vessels: After purchase a Pype of Glass about the bygnesse of
a finger, hollow and open at both ends, descrybed by E. into the one end of
this Pype thrust the nose of the head, and wrap a Lynnen cloth many times
about that joint, to the end that the passages and pores may on such wise be
stopped, that no vapor at all breath forth: then have in a readynesse a baled
Payle, or other like vessel of wood, expressed by the letter F. full of cold
water* and bored of either side directlye, that the Pype descending from the
nose of the Head, may pass ouerthwhart this Paile along, within the cold
water: By this means and way shall you know what manner of Spirits have been
commixed with the Mynerall water. For the Sand contained in the Earthen pot,
heated by the fire, does make hot by his heat the Bozia or Vrinall body and
the water contained in the same, from which many vapors continually are sent,
which ascending and flying to the head, are there thickened and converted into
water, which running down by the Pype, retayneth as yet the vapors, because
that the water descending by this Pype, is somewhat cooled, by the cold as
well of the Pype, as of the (...) water which is in the wooden vessel
(overthwart the which, the Pype extends and passes along) that touches the
water: so that the cooling of the one and the other, does not permit that the
vapors being in the water which descend, to breath forth: Thus proceed with
that fire under the Furnace, until all the water shall be dystilled forth, and
consumed in the Glass body. This done, draw the Bozia out of the Earthen
pot, in which you shall find and see yet remaining some moisture, the same let
to dry and consume away in the sun, after set in the Sun the Fecies or
grounds which shall be at the bottom of the vessel, and let them throughlye
dry. When the Fecies shall be thus dried in the Sun, then it behooves to
consider and mark what in them is contained. Certain will that the sedunents
or grounds be laid abroad on a fair smooth Table, and behold them in the
Sun, to the end that what bright and shyning Body shall be there, the same
may appear more easily in the Beams of the Sun. As touching my mind in
this, I rather wyshe that another matter be before done: First, so soon as the
Bozia shall be drawn forth of the Furnace, the sediments or grounds being yet
hot, it behooves to approach and put down the Nose to the mouth of the Bozia,
for a man shall easily know and perceive by the smell, whether the same be of
Cleye, or of Earth, which is impossible to know by any other means: In like
manner the savor of the grounds yet being hot, brings or yields a
knowledge of the red Chalk (that we name Ruddell) which renders a savor
sweet, and by the same note is the presence of the Oker perceived. After that,
the sedimentes shall be somewhat more cooled, take a portion of the same,
rubbing it between the fingers: By the same means shall you discern and
know the Sandaraca, Brymstone, Orpyment, and others like: In the end let the
grounds being dry, be spredde on a Table in the Sun, for if there shall be
any small Bodies of Alumne, those will be made manifest by the Sun, so that
on such wise shall they apparently show and be seen: By this manner and
fashion shall you perceive the Salt, if it be gathered in bygge graynes, the
Nytre likewise if it be in great quantity, for that in small quantity the same
is very hardly discerned. The Brymstone, if it be pure, is known by his
color, in that it is somewhat yelow, or palyshe: even so may a man have
judgment or perceyueraunce of Ashes and Stones, clotted and hardened together.
As touching other Metals, as the Gold, Silver Tin, Iron, and such like, are
not known: for that those are sometimes so much myxed with Marble, Ashes, and
such like things, that they cannot be judged or perceived by any sense: yea,
although that you taste the sediment, yet may you know nothing by the same.
For which cause it behooves to proceed and try by another means and way: as
to spread that sediment on a Lamyne of Iron polyshed and burning, or read
hot: for on such wise shall it be ^asie to dyscerne the Ashes, Marble, Gypsum,
Lyme, Brymstone, Salt, Nytre, and Ceruse: For So Much that if it has of the
Lyme, or Marble, they will not be burned at all, but after that some one of the
others shall be burned, they will remain, and possess a color more white
than they had before. And if you discern or see that it has any matter, which
cannot be burned, but rather incontinent becomes very white, know for troth
that ye same is Gypsu^: for which cause, the Lyme, Marble, and Gypsum agree and
partake in this, that they be not burned at all, but remain, and be caused
more white: yet this difference there is, that the Lyme and Marble are slowly
caused white, and their whytenesse is not much more increased than it was
before: But contrariwise the Gypsum attayneth incontinent a whytenesse, which
is much greater tha^ the same was before. The Brymstone is also easily known
by this experience, for so much as that it m^lteth and represents his proper
savor: The Salt likewise and the Nytre are known, for that their sediments (if
they be there) are burned, and will cast forth sparckles: But this difference
there is, for if there be Salt, it will sparckle and crack likewise, if only
Nytre, it will sparkle without cracking: If the matter be myxed of Salt and
Nytre, whiles the sediment is in burning, part of it will sparckle and crack,
and part of it will sparckle without cracking: I never yet found the Lead by
this experience, but I suppose that if it were found in the s^diment, it
would be molten on a Lamy^e of Iron burning. If there be in it of the Ceruse,
the grounds then will render or be caused read, which is also a note of the
Lead, for so much as these two are very little dyffering: For the Ceruse is
made of Lead, and of Ceruse the Vermillon, that is, a like quantity of Ceruse
and Ruddell or red earth burned together: If you see that the sediment is
molten, and become so white as Milk, you may not persuade and gather
incontinent, that there is in it of the Alum, for although that there be
sometimes a note that there is of the Alum with his stone, yet may it be
caused there to be without m^lting, for the Alum is molten one whiles by
heat, an other whiles by moisture: The other Metals cannot be known by any
of these experiences.

I nevertheless have found an Art, which I have experienced at the
Aponitaine Bathes, Lucensis, and the water of Villensis, which is on such wise:
When you will examine and try, if any water has of the Vitrioll, or of Alum,
or other like Mynurall, cause the water first to boil, not in a vessel of
Glass, but of Tynne, or Iron: after that the water shall be boiled a certain
time, let it settle, then after the boiling yet a little more, incontinent
throw or pour into it the juice or decoction of Gall nuttes, in small
quantity: If the water has of Vitrioll, or of Alum, it will incontinent
become black: Or else take some composition black, as is the medicine (named
Verzinum) known in Italy, causing it to boil in water, unto the time that
the water takes a color in manner black: after strain the same, and
sprinckle a quantity of this water on the grounds, and if there be of the
Alum, that color black, will incontinent be restored or caused more clear.
And what I have said of the color left of the medicine Verzinum, as much it
behooves to understand of any other matter, in such sort that the water for
to work or do such an experience, may be made of every matter, which may dye
the water into a black color: and the water so that it be black, it forces
not of what matter the same be caused black. As touching the astriction, which
consists in the Alum, I report nothing of it, in that the Alum being in the
sediment, cannot be known by the taste: For it comes often to pass, that
when you taste the sediment, and that you feel an astriction, yet the same
proceeds or comes not of the Alum, but perhaps of Salt or some other
thing: The Iron, the Copper, and such like Metals, cannot by other means be
known^, but by the corruption and resolution of the grounds, in such sort that
every Metal (that there shall be) may be turned into his proper excrement,
and so of his proper excrement, shall you after know this or that Metal to
be in it. By the self same fashion and manner is known the Iron, the Silver,
the Gold, the Chrysocolla, that is, the Saulder of Gold, the Copper, and such
like. For these reasons it behooves to join and myxe the grounds with some
medicine, or sharp lycour, to the end that every Metal which shall be
contained in the sediment, may be turned into his proper excrement. Now the
sharp and corrosiue medicine that a man may find, apt and fit to do the
same, shall be the strong Vinegar, the Aqua fortis, and such like. Take
therefore the sediment, and bestow the same into Aqua fortis, or other such
medicine corrosiue, and when you shall see the water to be dried up and
consumed, regard and mark diligently, if the excrement of any Metal, be not
on the sediment: as if you see on the Grounds, the excrement of Iron to be
coagulated and heaped together, you shall easily judge the Iron to be in the
sediment or grounds. If you there see of the excrement of Copper, or a matter
green cankered, the same is a note that there is of the Copper, and even so of
the others. Therefore the Mettalles are known by the corruption, and mutation,
or changing of them into their proper excrements: And this shall you know to
be a sure experience and a troth of the matter (as you may easily try in the
doing) if you take a portion of any Metal, as the Fylings of Iron, and shall
myxe the same with the grounds of any matter, and bestow a pain about it,
that the fylinges may be corrupted, then shall you see that the same will be
corrupted into his proper excrement, which is named (of the Latynes Ferrugo)
that is, the rust of Iron. After this manner are known how much and what are
the things which are myxed with the Mynurall waters, that serve to Bathes,
which is especially tried by the industry and work of Dystillation: But
consider and take heed that the green color does not deceive you, which
appears sometimes in the sediment, although that it has nothing of the
Copper myxed: for oftentimes this color is there engendered of some Bole, which
is myxed amongst the grounds: for that cause thoroughly examine and make the
proof, if this color proceeds of the Copper myxed, or Iron, or the
excrement of Iron, or of some Bole, in this sort: Take the sediment of that
water, and pour the same into Vinegar dystilled, and consider or mark what
color the Vinegar represents or draws unto, the like consider what the
color is of the sediment, after that it shall be through dried. For if it has
there the excrement of Iron, the color shall be black: If Bole, the color
shall be read, that is, less black, and tending or drawing to a redness: I
here utter nothing of the savor and taste, for that so diverse is the savor
and taste of Mynurall waters, that a man cannot know of them, what those are
myxed wythall. All these hitherto have I borrowed out of the learned work of
Mynurall Bathes of Fallopius, which I have endeavored to pen or write word
for word, as things appertayning to the matter, of which we have entreated, in
respect that we so oftentimes entreat of Metals in this Book, which are
things worthy to be examined diligently, for the utility and profit of most
men.

A collection of certain waters dystilled of Herbs, Juices, Lycours, and
Fruits.
The water of Hemp. The.iij. Chapter.
THe congruent time of dystilling the Hemp, is, that the tops as yet tender
and green, shredde small, be dystilled by Balneo Mariae. This water greatly
helps the pains of the head proceeding of a hot cause, if the head, the
foreheade, and Temples, be often labored with the same. This also profits
against any heat, in what part or member of the Body it shall be, especially
the Gout, if a Lynnen clothe dypped in the water, be applied on the place: and
this in the Winter use twyse in the day, but in the Summer three times of the
day. Take of the water of the green Walnuts one ounce, of the water of
Egrimonie an ounce and a half, of the water of Rewe, half an ounce, of the
water of Hysope three ounces, of the water of Hemp four ounces, these myxe
together, of which take half an ounce, adding to it half a dram of Mumia,
half an ounce of Sugar Candy, and a dram of the Conserve of Roses, this
after the drinking warm to bed, and lying down well covered with clothes to
sweet, expels those wicked humors of which the plague proceeds: the same
potion helps the Dropsy, taken in the same manner, and preserves a man from
such sickenesses: A water dystilled of the Hemp seed with the juice of
Garlic, of the same fashion that the Rose water is dystilled, which is
Cosemeticall, that is, profitable for garnishing, for it causes hears to
grow in the bare and balde places, being often applied.

The water of Walwort. The fourth Chapter.
THe best time of dystilling the Walwort, is, when it begins to bear
flowers, that then the whole Herb and root finely shredde and bestowed in a
Cucurbite or Glass Body, may be distilled by Balneo Mariae, this water
drunk with a little Sugar, or the juice of Reysons, unto the quantity of
four or five ounces at a time fasting, does loose the Belly: In the same
manner drunk morning and evening, avails against the swellings of the
Body, but especially the Dropsy: even so this drunk, helps the Quotidian
Ague, and stytches or other pains in the sides: it profits against the
outward swellings of the Body, by applying Lynnen clothes wette in the same:
This water also remooueth stytches or other griefs in the sides, by applying
Lynnen clothes wette in it: This gargelled with a little of the powder of
Pellitorie, helps the falling of the Vuula down: This drunk warm (after
the manner above taught) helps a dry cough: This gargelled in the throat,
helps that swelling there, named Angina: The dystilled water of the roots
finely shredde, does much mitigate the grievous dolor of the Gout, by daily
dryncking and applying Lynnen clothes wette in it, on the grieved places: This
also helps marvelously joint aches, by applying on the grieved places,
Lynnen clothes wette in it: and eating a few of the tender green tops
(whether two or three) in a Sallate, causes a man soluble, and to have sundry
stools: The water drunk with Sirupe of Vinegar, helps a burning Ague: The
powder of the leaves marueylouslye works in all sorts of Ulcers, in that the
same asswageth pains, cleanses them, and does incarnate.

The water of Imperatoria. The fifth Chapter.
THe time aptest for dystilling the Herb Imperatoria, is, when it yields the
flowers, then the whole Herb with the roots well shredde (although some
rather will the roots only) require to be infused in wine for twelve hours,
after the bestowing into a Cucurbite, dystill the whole (after Art) in Balneo
Mariae: This water drunk, does marvelous expel the wind of the stomach,
Bowels, and Belly: for which cause, auayleable in the Cholicke p^ssions, and
t^^sion^ of the stomach: This also procures the Terms in women, and moves
vryne: If asswageth toothach, by washing the mouth therewith: The same myxed
with Rosed Honey, and drink warm, helps marvelously the griefs and
stranglings of the womb or Matrice in women, and Conception greatly
furthereth, where the impediment proceeds of coldenesse. This water in like
manner drunk warm, strengthens the stomach, and causes digestion. This
water sundry times gargelled in the mouth, comfort a cold Brain, and
purges it effectuously of Flewme: A dram of the powder drunk with a
quantity of the water, preuayleth in cold sicknesses: so that this
marvelously helps the loose parts of the Body, convulsions, and the falling
sickness. This water myxed with Rosed Honey, and drunk with half a
spoonefull of the fine powder of the root, an hour before the coming of the
fit, helps myraculously the Quartane ague: The water gargelled in the
mouth, amendeth the breath, and strengthens all the senses: This drunk with
half a spoonefull of the powder of the root, helps the plague, all manner of
poisons, the biting and stinging of venymous beasts and worms. This water
drunk with Rosed Honey, and half a spoonefull of pure Cynnamone water,
amendeth such hardly fetching breath, opens obstructions, helps the water
between the skin and flesh, the Dropsy, and diseases in the Mylt: To be
brief, it heateth all those parts of the Body, where cold occupyeth and
offends.

The water of the blessed Thystell. The sixth Chapter.
THe commended time for the dystillation of the blessed Thystell, is, that the
Herb alone finely shredde and stamped, be dystilled by Balneo Mariae, in a
Cucurbite of Glass about the end of May. This water drunk Morning and
Evening, unto the quantity of two or three ounces at a time, with Rosed
Honye, purifyeth the blood, remooueth headache, comfort and causes a
ready memory, breaks the stone, puts away gyddynesse of the head,
amendeth the consumption of the Body, and preserves the person long in
health: This like ministered, avails against the Plague, and deadly poisons,
received as well within the Body, as outwardly by the stinging or biting of
venymous Beasts applied upon. This water drunk with a dram of the powder,
before the coming of the fit, helps not only the Quartayne, but other
Fevers, whose beginning are with cold. This like drunk, helps the falling
sickness in children. The water drunk with a quant^tie of Rosed honye,
asswageth the griefs of the bowels and kydneys, cease the other torsions of
the Belly, and keeps the Body soluble: It also causes sweating, sleyeth the
worms in the Bellye, amendeth the defaultes of the stomach and womb. The
abouesayde quantity of the powder drunk with pure Aqua vitae, not only
kylleth worms in the Body of Children, but delivers in short time the
grievous pains of the Body. A Pass made with the powder of the blessed
Thystle, white Bread, and Honye, and dystilled with white wine, yields a
water right singular, for the decayed sight of the eyes.

The water of Pellitorie of the wall. The.vij. Chapter.
THe time of the dystillation is, that the whole Herb shredde and infused in
wine, be dystilled about the end of May in Balneo Mariae, the water drunk
with Rosed honey for eight or nine days together, to the quantity of three
ounces at a time, Morning and Evening, opens the stopping of the Liver and
Mylt, purges the kydneyes and Bladder, cease the griefs of the Matrice, and
sends down the Terms in women: The same drunk Morning and Evening unto the
quantity of three ounces at a time, helps an old and continual cough: The
water simplye of the Herb gargelled, and applied without, amendeth the
inflammation of the throat. The above said water drunk with a quantity of
Rosed honye, avails against the Strangulion, and grypings of the Bellye,
proceeding of wind and cold humors. The water applied with Linen clothes wet
in it, asswageth swellings, and pain of the Gout, also the Shingles, burning,
or scalding, and hot ulcers.

The water of Yarrowe. The.viij. Chapter.
THe congruent time of the dystillation of Yarrowe, is, that the whole Herb
shredde and infused in wine, be dystilled about the end of May in Balneo
Mariae. This water drunk every morning (for a time together) to the quantity
of four ounces at a time, and applying of it on the region of the heart,
heateth a cold stomach: This also avails against the worms of the Belly,
and difficulties of Urine: The water drunk with a dram weight of the fine
powder of Cynamone, stays the over great flux of the Terms: The rather if
the green Herb bruised, be applied at that time by a skillful Midwyfe. This
water drunk sundry days, profits that person which has lost his color by
much bleeding, and purges the blood: Also fresh wounds washed with the
same, and Lynnen clothes after the wetting in it, applied upon, morning and
evening, does speedilye cure them. A handful of the herb bruised between two
stones, and applied on fresh and bloody wounds, after the stitching of the
lyppes, if they be great, cures them thoroughly within the space of.xxiiij.
hours, as of experience known by sundry persons. This water drunk, with
Coowe milk, unto the quantity of three ounces at a time, both Morning and
Evening, helps the vehement heat of the Kidneyes miraculously, and in short
time: and it like avails in them, which have the Liver and Lungs vlcered, and
this often experienced in many persons.

The water of Angelica. The.ix. Chapter.
THe aptest time for the distillation of the most singular herb Angelica, is,
when this begins to yield the flowers: then the whole Herb with the roots
(broken and shredde) infused a time in the best wine, to be dystilled by Balneo
Mariae, in a Cucurbite of Glass with his head, and large Receyuer set to the
Nose of it, well closed about with Wax and Rosin myxed together. This water
(thus Artely dystilled) by dryncking a quantity sundry Mornings, does not
only open, attenuate, and expel evil humors, but marvelously preu^yleth
against the Plague, and deadly poisons: The same drunk with a quantity of
Rosed honey, and a scruple weight of the powder of Cynamon, or more, digesteth
Fleugmaticke and clammie humors. Yea, this amendeth the Cough in short time
proceeding of cold, in that it causes the person more easily to spit up,
gross and clammie fleugme. The water drunk diverse Morninges, sweetened with a
little Sugar or Rosed honey, does recover and heal the inner Ulcers of the
Bowelles, and dissolueth the clotted blo^de within the Body, and strengthens
the stomach. This water ministered with a little of Cynamone water, and a
scruple of the powder of the root at a time, for sundry Mornings, does
mirac^lously help swouning, and other passions or griefs of the heart. This
water avails against the biting of mad and venymous Beasts, applied
outwardly with Rewe, and received within the body, with a scruple weight of
fine Tryacle. Hereof it comes to pass, that certain of the later Physicians
have a great opinion in the bestowing of the root (of the Herb) in their
Medicines, for the expelling of poison.

The water of the Nettle. The.x. Chapter.
THe leaves and flowers plucked of, require to be dystilled about the.xiij.
day of July in Balneo Mariae: This water drunk at Morning, Noone, and at
Evening, unto the quantity of three ounces at a time, profits against the
Cholicke passion, and grypings of the Bowels, it puts away the stone, and
griefs of the Kidneyes proceeding of cold. The like quantity drunk, helps
an old Cough, the hard fetching of breath, and swouning, of an intemperate
coldenesse proceeding, and like recouereth the Lungs cold. The same druncke a
time together, preuayleth against worms of the belly, and all manner of wyndie
passions in the same: It profits filthy and mattrie wounds, and sores
running, if they be often washed with the same, or Lynnen clothes wet in it be
applied upon. If linen clothes wet in the water of the red Nettle, be diverse
times applied, does marvelously recover and help in short t^^^, the byte of a
mad Dog. The water of the roots purely washed and shred, before the dystilling
in the Canicular days, drunk Morning and Evening, unto the quantity of two
or three ounces at a time, preuayleth against a long continuing and cold
Cholicke, cease an old Cough, and breaks the Impostumes of the Lungs: The
water drunk and applied on the members, puts away the deprivation of
feeling, speech, and moving, and the Palsy: It also profits the prime
place, loses the Belly, heals the griefs of the Lunges, and is to be
applied to the breast. The same drunk Morning and Evening to the quantity of
two or three ounces at a time, puts away the pain of the stomach, draws
down women's Terms, and expels the yoongling dead: A dram weight of the
powder of the Seeds drunk with a quantity of the water, and a little of the
sweet Cuite of Reysius, provoke a desire to the Venerall act.

The water of Alkakengi, or Winter Cheries. The.xi. Chapter.
OF the kirnels gathered in the Month of August and bruised, let a water be
dystilled in Balneo Mariae, according to Art: This water daily drunk at
Morning, Noone, and at Evening, to the quantity of three or four ounces at a
time (but to Children and Infants only one ounce given) helps the Liver, the
stone of the Kidneyes, and Bladder: The water drunk in the same manner, stays
the dropping of the Urine, speedily purges the Liver, Kidneys, and Bladder.
This also drunk in the manner abouesayde, recouereth the grievous blystering
and soreness of the Kidneys and Bladder, and right profitable for the pyssing
of Blood.

The water of Alchimilla, or Lions foot. The.xij. Chapter.
Unto the congruent Dystillation, the root and Herb with the whole substance
requires to be shredde, and to be dystilled about the end of May, or the
mids of June in Balneo Mariae: This water drunk unto the quantity of three
or four ounces at a time, both Morning and Evening, is not only auayleable
for inward wounds, but heals wynding ulcers, and ruptures: The water
applied with Lynnen clothes wette in it, on outward wounds, does not only
assuage the evil heat, but also closes them in short time: and this
experienced in wound drynckes, ministered by diverse skillful Germans: A
dram of the powder of it, taken with three ounces of the water, helps the
falling of the Bowels into the Codde, or other rupture in short time, without
any cutting. The like weight of the powder, given with the water (sweetened
with a little Sugar) for fifteen or twenty days together, procures the
woman (not apt to conceive, through a coldenesse of the overmuch moisture of
the womb, which lets the retayning of the seed iniected) to conceive in
short time after: The dystilled water drunk, and conceived into the womb,
does myraculously stay the whytes (or white flux from the back) in women:
yea, by the daily iniection, is the privy place made so straight, that hardly
she can be known from the chaste Maiden, the rather by sitting in the
decoction, which then is sooner performed. This also draws up hanging Pappes
or Breasts of women, and causes them to be fast and hard, if Lynnen clothes
wette in it, with the water of Horsetayles, and the dried pears of Roses, with
other ^ipticke things, be often applied.

The water of Barberies. The.xiij. Chapter.
THe fruit of Barberies when they be ripe (as in October) require to be
dystilled in Balneo Mariae: This water given with the sirrupe of Violets, to
the quantity of three ounces at a time, Morning and Evening, does not only
cease thyrst in vehement and pestilent Agues, but suppresseth Choleric and
pernicions exhalations causing an evil heat in man: The same like drunk,
profits against the heat of the Liver, in the Cholicke passion, in the
casting or vomiting up of meat, in fluxes and painful grypings of the
belly, and restores the appetite weak: The water myxed with read Coral,
and drunk, stays the overmuch shedding of the Terms: The water drunk with
the water of Grass, or Purcelane, or Southernwoode, sweetened well with Sugar*
kills the woormes in the Belly: the water drunk sundry times, helps the
spitting of blood: It fasteneth loose teeth, if they be often washed with it:
It strengthens the gummes and Jaws, by often gargelling, and represseth the
hot styllinges from the head: The water closes the fresh wounds in the
upper face of the flesh, and dries up old Ulcers, being orderly applied:
Nevertheless, this water harmeth them, which be grieved with pains of the
stomach, proceeding of wind and coldenesse, and that hardly fetch breath.

The water of Bryonie. The.xiiij. Chapter.
THe root of Bryonie shredde small, requires to be dystilled about the end
of May: This water drunk to the quantity of four ounces at a time, with the
conserve of Quinces, and a little Ma^ticke, helps digestion, cleanses the
breast, mundifieth the brain, opens the stoppings of the bowels, causes
Urine, expels the stone in the Kidney^, and delivers the falling
sickness. The water g^^en with the ^rrup of Roses and Figs wrought together,
does marvelously help the Cough, and resolves hard swellings, especially of
the Mylt. The water drunk with a little Cynamone, draws down the Terms,
purges the whole womb, and expels the dead yongling, the rather if she
sits in the decoction of the roots: The feet washed and labored with the
feign, preuayleth against the gout. Four ounces of the water drunk, with a
dram weight of some Cordial powder, amendeth an evil stomach: but eight
ounces received at a time, loses the Belly. The water asswageth the burning
heat of the Shingles, puts away unseemly spots, moles, and pimples, yea,
clears a red and L^pr^^^ face, and amendeth the scarres of wounds, if it
be often applied after the form of a Liniment: The water applied with Linen
clothes wet in it, does recover a running Palsy, and puts away a swelling,
and the ^ing^ evil. The water sundry days drunk, does marvelously help
the suffocation or strangling of the Matrice, insomuch that it thoroughly
delivers and heals such of the same grief: And a (...) daily de^e^ (in a
(...)) with this grief for certain years, was in the end thoroughly cured of
the same, by drinking of the water boiled with an ounce of the root sweetened
with Sugar (at the going to Bed) once in the week, for one whole year.

The water of Shepeheardes Purse. The.xv. Chapter.
THe Herb with the whole substance gathered and shredde small, requires to be
dystilled in Balneo Mariae, about the end of May, or beginning of June: This
water drunk morning and evening, to the quantity of three ounces at a time,
with a little fine Bole and Plantaine water, is profitable for all manner of
fluxes and grypings of the Belly, and helps the spitting up of Blood: in
the same manner druncke, stays the abundance of the Terms in women, if they
sit in the decoction of the Herb and Persicaria or Arssmart: The water orderly
applied, closes fresh wounds, and mitigateth the dolor of all wounds, by
washing them oftentimes with it: This also dropped warm into the ears*
amendeth the matterie running of them: The water applied with Lynnen clothes
wette in it, on Inflammations, and the Shingles, mightily preuayleth: Yea, it
stays all fluxes of Blood, by applying Lynnen clothes wette in it round
about, or on the place. This also commended for the washing of wounds on the
head, in that it mightilye stays bleeding: and the same druncke to the
quantity of vj. or.vij. ounces sweetened with a little Sugar, stays the
bleeding of wounds: The water restrayneth the bleeding at the Nose, if a
Pessarie made with raw silk and dipped or wette in the same, be put up into
the Nosethrils: The like it perfourmeth, if with a Lynnen cloth wette in the
water, it be applied on the foreheade.

The water of Camomill. The.xvi. Chapter.
THe Herb Camomill with the whole substance shredde, requires to be
dystilled by Balneo Mariae, in a Cucurbite of Glass, about the end of May, or
beginning of June: This water drunk morning and evening, to the quantity of
two or three ounces at a time, sweetened with Sugar, does mittigate the pain of
the Belly, and grypings in the Bowels: It strengthens the sinews, takes
away the Palsy, and softeneth styffe members: The same quantity drunck with
Rosed honnie, loses the Belly, purges downewarde Melancholy and Fleugme,
with other clammie humors, and asswageth heat in the Bowels: The water in like
quantity druncke, amendeth the yelowe Iaundyse, opens the Vrinall ways,
procures urine, and breaks the stone of the bladder and Kidneys, by mixing
the Saxifrag^ water with it: It moves the Terms in women, and expels the
dead yongling (if any such be) in the womb of the woman, and all clammie
humors besides of the Matrice: This water druncke, in the like manner
abouesayde, does put away Agues (without burning in the bowels) proceeding of
Choleric humors, or by thickness of the skin: It also opens the Mylt
stopped, puts away swelling of the stomach, by comforting and heating, it
stays besides the flux of the Belly, named Lienteria: In the abouesayde
manner druncke, recouereth the impostume of the Lunges, and amendeth the Leprie:
The water applied with Lynnen clothes on the vlcered priuities, asswageth
heat, and diminishes the pain: The water druncke, and applied with Lynnen
clothes wette in it, does speedily heal the bytte and stinging of venomous
worms and beasts: The water profits the Marrowe or Bones, if they shall be
felt cold, by often washing and rubbing of them with the same: It also
comfort the Brain, cease headache proceeding of a cold cause, stays the
cold running of the ears, and draws down evil humors from the Brain,
gathered of cold, if the head by a Lie made with the flowers boiled in it, be
well washed.

The water of Honysuckles. The.xvij. Chapter.
THe time congruent to the Dystillation, is, that the flowers bestowed in a
Cucurbite of Glass, be dystilled by Balneo Mariae, about the beginning of
June: This water druncke four or five days morning and evening, recouereth
the Cardiacke passion, and hard fetching of breath: The water druncke in the
same manner, helps the Dropsy, the shortness of wind, causing a long
breath, and purges the stomach: This in like manner, preuayleth against the
stone of the Loins, purges the reins, and dissolueth the swelling of the
Mylt: yet by drincking a long time together of this, procures barraynesse all
the life time: This water is profitable for them to drink, which fear the
coming of the Leaprie, and purges the blood: it also amendeth the red
pushes in the Face, puts away Moles, and causes a clear face, if it be
diverse times in the day washed with the same: the water is effectuous, for
Palsy me^bres, which be dried and consumed, if with the same they be daily
rubbed: it profits old and new wounds, washed morning and evening with the
same: it also heals speedily old ulcers on the legs, as the worthy
Chyrurgian Johannes de Vigo affirms, if they be often washed with the same:
this anointed on any swellings heals them, or druncke morning and evening,
to the quantity of three ounces at a time. The water does like recover
astonished or benumbed parts of the body, by diverse days drincking, or
rubbing them with it: it heals the burning or scalding, if the places shall
be washed with the same, or linen clothes wet in it, applied upon them: it
heals the Canker in the mouth, if it be often washed with the same, and the
gummes vlcered within the mouth. A Canker washed with the same, morning and
evening, or if linen clothes wette in it be often applied, does in short time
cure the sore. The water dropped into the eyes, does amend a thick and dim
sight. The water heals a Fistula, puts away whelkes, the ytche, and foul
scabbes, by often washing with the same.

The water of Centorie the lesser. The.xviij. Chapter.
THe time of Distilling this Centorie, is about the end of June: then the
stalks, leaves, and flowers shred together, require to be distilled by Balneo
Mariae in a cucurbite of glass: this water druncke morning and evening, to the
quantity of three or four ounces at a time, is right profitable for them,
which have a raw and cold stomach, for all that which is evil and hurtful
in the same, it co^sumeth: this druncke in the like quantity abouesayde,
draws and sends forth Choler, Flewme, and other gross Humors by sieges.
This water druncke of a Child, to the quantity of two ounces, but of a man
(of full age) four ounces, in the morning fasting, expels the worms in the
bellye: the same druncke at the beginning of the fit, puts away the Ague:
but druncke for three morninges fasting (sweetened with sugar) avails against
all Agues. The water druncke in the manner abouesayde, helps the hard
fetching of breath, and puts away an old cowgh. The water druncke of a
woman, expels out of the womb the dead younglyng. This is right profitable
for staying the desire to vomit, and belching of the stomach: it procures an
appetyte to meat, purges and expels gross Humors, of which are wont to
proceed Ache and pain in the hyppes, feet and hands, the Iaundyse, and
others like. The water sweetened with sugare and druncke in the morning fasting,
recouereth the stopping of the Liver, Loins, Milte, and Bladder: and amendeth
the hardness of the Liver and Milte; it preuayleth against the Chollicke
passion, and gripinges of the bowels. The water closes and cures new wounds
big, if they be washed with the same, or by Lynnen clothes wette in it
applied upon: and old ulcers that may hardly be brought to a scarre, are
doing in the same manner covered with a scarre. The water druncke much
avails, in the spitting of Blood. The water mixed with a little Honny, and
dropped into the eyes, greatly clears them: the same druncke, sends down
the Terms. This druncke, helps the sinews affected, by emptying and drying
up the matter offending. The water sweetened with Sugar and druncke fasting, is
much auayleable, for the obstructions of the liver: and applied as well without
the body, as received inward, is a singular remedy in the hardness of the
Milte.

The water of Cherryes. The.xix. Chapter.
THe great, read, and sower Cherries with short stalks, when they shall be
ripe, are to be gathered: And for two days spread abr^de on a shete, after
distilled by Balneo Mariae, in a Cucurbite of glass: This water druncke twice
or thrice a day, to the quantity of four ounces at a time, sweetened with a
little sugar, does restrain the terms, the flux Dysenteria, and all other
Fluxes of the Belly. In the same manner druncke and applied without, amendeth
the heat of the Liver, stomach, and other parts of the Body, and comfort
the heart. The distilled water of the flowers, dropped into the eyes at
evening, when the pacient goes to bed, puts away the pin and web, and
other spots of the eyes: and the water like puts away the redness, and
watering of the eyes, if it shall be dropped into them, twice or thrice a day.
The water of the black Cherries (distilled in the same manner) druncke twice a
day, to the quantity of three ounces at a time, helps the Dropsy: but it
behooves that the pacient in the mean time refrain, from taking any other
drinck. The water druncke in the same manner, remooueth the depryuation and
Palsy of members: so that they be washed and rubbed with the same, and let to
dry in by it self: in like manner washing and gargelling the mouth with it,
restores the use of the tongue lost. Also such annoyed with those griefs,
ought daily to drink the water fasting, to the quantity of two ounces at a
time. The water druncke helps swellings, and is auayliable in burning, and
pestilent Agues, in that it cools seasseth, thirst, and yields strength.
The water (of the ripe black Cherries, newlye distilled in a Cucurbite of
Glass by Balneo Mariae) druncke to the quantity of half an ounce at a time,
or powered into the mouth at the time of the fytte of the falling sickness,
does forthwith reuyue the person to knowledge of himself, and causes him to
be free from convulsions and Crampes, until the next fit take him. Which
as soon as it shall happen to come again, let the same quantity of the water
be powered into the pacients mouth: for this not only shall let, but take
away, and heal altogether the fit: as the like, of experience known. A
certain woman afflicted with the falling sickness, recovered health, and was
delivered thoroughly of it, by the daily receiving (and at the fittes) of the
water distilled of the black Cherries, the lesser Nettill, and the flowers of
the tree named Tilia. The water distilled of the meat and kernelles bruised
together, does send forth the sand, procuring the stone in the Kidneyes and
Bladder. The Gum of the tree infused a time in this water, and druncke twice
a day, is not only auayleable against an old cough, but helps such as are
vexed with the stone.

The water of Cheruell. The.xx. Chapter.
THe chosen time for the distilling of Cheruell is, that the herb the root,
with the whole substance finely shred, be distilled by Balneo Mariae, about
the middle of May: This water druncke morning and evening, to the quantity of
four ounces at a time: helps persons bursten, and harmed by a grievous fall,
and resolves the Blood clotted into lumpes. The same drunk, helps the
stone of the Kidneyes, and a great quantity druncke at a time, loses the
Belly: it causes a good stomach, strengthens and comfort the heart,
puts away the cold shiuering or shaking of the Ague, amendeth the head,
and comfort the senses. The water druncke in the manner abouesayde, puts
away most great pains, and prickinges or stitches, it helps the Lunges, and
his affectes or griefs.

The water of Germander. The.xxi. Chapter.
THe time of the distillation is about the middle of May, then the herb with
the whole substance shredde small requires to be distilled by Balneo Mariae:
The water druncke fasting, to the quantity of four ounces at a time,
dissolueth the swollen and hard Milt, provoke Vryne, and sends down the
terms. This druncke in like quantity, cutteth asundre the gross and clammie
Humors, cleanses the stoppinges of the bowelles, and expels the youngling
dead. This water for an inward rupture is right profitable, if to the
quantity of four ounces at a time, it be often times (in the day) druncke.
The water daily druncke, morning and evening, to the quantity of three ounces
at a time, sweetened with a little sugare, purges, and causes good Blood,
gladneth the heart, refreshes and cools the Liver, especially if it shall be
distilled with the flowers. The water also recouereth the exulceration of the
mouth, if it be often washed with the same.

The water of the stock Gelyflowere. The.xxij. Chapter.
THe congruente time for the dystillation is, about the end of April or
mids of May, when the flowers shall be full blown: then the herb with the
whole substance finely shredde, ought to be dystilled by Balneo Mariae, in a
Cucurbyte of Glass. This water druncke morning and evening, to the quantity
of two ounces at a time, recouereth the Frenticke person, and comfort the
Brain. The water in ye same manner druncke, strengthens the Liver, and
Kidneyes, procures the Terms, causes women to be fruitful, cleanses them
after the birth of Child, and sends forth the younglyng dead. In the same
manner the water druncke, heateth and comfort the heart cold, sharpneth the
senses and reason, ioyeth the mind, cleanses and strengthens the Blood
corrupt, heateth the marrow of the bones, and recouereth cold Fluxes. The
depriuatio^ or Palsy of the tongue, does the water help: or if the sides
shall be molested with this evil, the water thoroughly recouereth, by drincking
twice a day of it, or rubbing the members therewyth. The water delivers the
trembling of the hands, if they be rubbed with the same: the like does the
water perform, druncke Morning and Evening. The water druncke morning and
evening, to the quantity of two ounces at a time, temperateth the heat of the
heart, comfort and opens the same. The water droped twice in the day,
does put away spots in the eyes, wheather those shall proceed of heat, or
of cold, and procures a clear and fair face. The water seaseth all pains
of the head, by applying and binding about the head, Lynnen clothes wette in
it: and in the same manner applied, procures sleep to weak persons.

The water of Dragons. The.xxiij. Chapter.
THe congruent time of dystilling is, that the root shredde and bruised be
dystilled by Balneo Mariae, between the months of July and September. This
water druncke with a little Rosed honnie, preuayleth against the plague. The
water druncke morning and evening, helps the Cough, opens obstructions,
attenuateth gross Flewme, purges the breast of evil humors, cleanses the
Bowels, and helps the dropping of Urine. The water is greatly auayleable, if
any shall happen to have a grievous fall, or be stricken, or pricked with
weapon, or bruised by staff, that the Blood within the body or skin shall
be congeled: then take a wine pint of this water, and four ounces of Muster
seed bruised, these after the tempering with four ounces of Cheruell water,
and strayned through a cloth, and wringed out to the manner of Milk, give to
drink (sweetened before with half an ounce of Sugar pennuttes) morning and
evening, to the quantity of three ounces at a time, for this thoroughly helps
in short time. If Cotton wette in the water, be laid on fresh wounds,
stays the bleeding of them. It also heals wounds, by Lynnen clothes (wette
in it) applied upon: or by drincking morning and evening, to the quantity of
two ounces at a time. The feet astonished and without feeling by cold, wash
morning and evening with the same water: For it expels the cold, and
mitigateth the grief. The person bytte or stinged of a Snake or Adder, let him
wash the grieved place with Lynnen clothes wet in it, and apply those upon the
sore, for it speedily helps. The like does heal a Canker, if Lynnen clothes
wette be applied.

The water of the greater Comferie. The.xxiiij. Chapter.
THe roots with the whole Herb shredde and bruised, require to be dystilled
by Balneo Mariae about ye middle of the Spring. This water druncke, helps
such as are bursten, and that have broken the bone of the leg: by taking of
the same to the quantity of three ounces at a time, both Morning, noone, and
at Evening: It heals the choppes of the lips, if they shall be washed with
the same. The water druncke, and Lynnen clothes (after the wetting in it)
applied upon, does speedily heal wounds, and extinguisheth inflammations, and
seaseth pains. The water in the same manner applied, asswageth the burning of
the Shingles, and expels outward swellings. Applied with Cotton wette in
it, stays the bleeding of wounds: the like it performs, if myxed with any
other drink, it be druncke twice or thryse a day. The water druncke twyse a
day, dissolueth and sends forth the clottes of blood congealed in the
stomach, or in any other part of the Body. And this applied with Lynnen
clothes wette in it, does marvelously cleanse and sease the running of Matterie
ulcers eaten in, happening about the pryuie place of man or woman.

The water of Quinces. The.xxv. Chapter.
THe chosen time for dystilling of Quinces is, when they be ripe: then they
shredde and bruised, require to be dystilled by Balneo Mariae, in a Cucurbyte of
Glass. This water to the quantity of four ounces, myxed with three ounces of
thick red wine, and druncke morning, noone, and at evening, yields fresh
blood, amendeth an evil stomach, in that it comfort and strengthens the
same, retayneth the meat in it, and puts away the will to vomit: It also
seaseth belching of the stomach and vomiting, and restrayneth all manner of
Fluxes of the belly, and comfort all the members of the body, by daily and
often drincking of it: the water amendeth the exulceratio^ of the throat, if it
be often gargelled within the mouth. The water retained in the mouth, seaseth
thirst, heals tongue vlcered, and cools the heat of the stomach. The
water taken with a dram wayght of some Cordial powder at evening, procures an
appetyte and desire to eat, yields a great strength to the heart, and
comfort it, and puts away drunckennesse. In the griefs of the bowelles
this is not to be used, in that it restrayneth: and in Fevers this neither is
to be ministered, when as any coueteth to have the belly soluble. The water of
Quince flowers (dystilled by Balneo Mariae in a Cucurbyte of Glass) druncke of
women, to the quantity of two ounces at a time, stays the great Flux of
the Terms. In the same manner druncke, comfort the heart: and stays the
will to vomit and vomiting, by drincking to the quantity of three ounces at a
time, morning, noone, and at evening.

The water of Doder. The.xxvi. Chapter.
THe congruent time of Dystilling the Doder is, when the stringes, eyes, or
seeds begin to appear, for it has no leaves as other herbs: then to
shredde the whole substance, and dystill it by Balneo Mariae: this water
druncke morning and evening, to the quantity of three ounces at a time,
recouereth all griefs of the Liver and Lunges, by purging and comforting: for
it cleanses, ^ by a certain astriction strengthens: it opens the stoppinges
of the Liver, and dyssolueth the hardness of the Mylt and Liver, by drincking
of the water of hearts tongue myxed with the same. The water druncke twyse a
day, expels Flewmaticke and Chollericke humors out of the Body, and
causes Vryne. In the same manner druncke, puts away Iaundise, and sends
forth the stone of the Bladder. It helps the grypings of the Belly, druncke
morning and evening: the water dropped into the eyes, causes them clear
within short time. The water recouereth women's places cold, if it be drunk in
the foresaid manner. The water helps women, whose terms be stayed, and that
have a swelling about the Navel. The water druncke with a little powder of
Annis seeds* profits such which abound in corrupt Blood, and be infected
with foul or Leaprowse scabbes. The water myxed with common drink, and
druncke daily for a time, comfort the stomach. The water helps Fevers in
Children, given in Ale with a little of the powder of Annis seeds, in that it
purges the hot humor.

The water of Elecampane. The.xxvij. Chapter.
THe congruent time for dystillation is, that the roots with the Herb
shredde together, be dystilled by Balneo Mariae, about the end of May: This
water druncke morning and evening, to the quantity of an Egg shell full at a
time, for five or six days together, delyuereth the grief of the stone:
washing the teeth therewyth, strengthens them, and i^ amendeth the cough, by
drinking two ounces at a time with the powder of Lycorise and Annis seeds
myxed. It also expels worms in the Body, helps conuulsions and
swellings, and pain in the Loins. In the foresaid manner druncke, or taken
with drink, helps such bursten. The water druncke with a little Rosed honey,
and the head well labored with the same, that it may dry in by it self,
comfort the head. The water druncke many days together, not only
comfort and strengthens the stomach, but cleanses the breast and Lunges,
of gross and clammie humors: Yea, this causes a fair skin to women, both
in face and Body, through the often using of it. It also procures a glansome
mind, and the person often using the same, to have a cheerful and amyable
countenance. The water druncke and anointed, strengthens loose members. It
profits such fetching the breath hardly, by drincking sundry morninges with
Rosed honey. The water druncke morning and evening, for a certain time
together, expels the stone of the Kydneyes and Bladder, cleanses them, and
causes Vryne. The water of the roots alone (dystilled about the end of May,
or from the month of Iulye unto September) druncke Morning and Evening, to the
quantity of two or three ounces at a time, for certain days, heals an
inner rupture. In the same manner druncke, helps the stone, provoke the
Terms in women, delyuereth the grief of the stone, and causes Vryne. This
druncke in the abouesayd manner, sends forth the dead yongling out of the
mothers womb. It like druncke, or applied with linne^ clothes, dissolueth and
puts away the swelling of women's places. This on such wise druncke, or
applied, remooueth the swelling of the testicles. The water often druncke,
sweetened with Rosed honnie, seasseth the Coughe, and consumes the gross and
clammie humors, detayned within the Breast.

The water of Eiebright. The.xxviij. Chapter.
THe congruent time for the dystillatio^ of it is, that the leaves, stalks,
flowers, with the whole substance be dystilled in a Cucurbyte of glass by
Balneo Mariae, when it yields or bears the flowers. This water dropped and
stryked about the eyes, causes clear eyes, and sharpeneth the sight: the
water used in the same manner seasseth the pain of the eyes: the water dropped
into the eyes an hour before night, and striked about, and druncke to the
quantity of three ounces at a time, comfort, strengthens, and preserves
the sight, especially in the aged persons, and flewmaticke of complexion. The
herb dried and brought to powder, and eaten every day in a rear potched
Egg, for a certain time together, restores sight lost: the water myxed with
half a dram of the powder, and druncke every evening for a month or
forty days together, recouereth a weak sight.

The water of our Beans. The.xxix. Chapter.
THe best time of dystilling them, that the green bestowed in a Cucurbyte of
Gloss, be dystilled by Balneo Mariae: with the water of Beans, wash vlcered
and matterie legs, and that remaining after the water dystilled quite forth,
bring by heat of fire into powder: Which then sprinckle on the sore, for it
dries up, and is the best remedy for foul and matterie legs. The water of
the Bean coddes (distilled when the Sun shall be in Leo, and the Moon in
Aries) druncke morning and evening, to the quantity of two or three ounces at
a time, does marvelously remove and help the grief of the stone, of the
Kydneyes and Bladder. The water of the green herb with the stalks
(dystilled about the end of May) druncke for certain days, morning and
evening, to the quantity of two ounces at a time sweetened with sugar, puts
away the stone in Children, the same every day druncke, to the quantity of
four or five ounces at a time, preuayleth against a strong Poison. The water
druncke in the like manner for a month, engenders good and pure blood. The
face and skin of the Body washed with the same water, procures a soft
skin and clear, and a fair face. The water of the flowers (gathered at the
full rypenesse and before the rotting, dystilled in a Cucurbyte of Glass by
Balneo Mariae) dropped into the eyes at evening, dries up the watering and
dropping of the eyes. It amendeth the exulceration and redness of the eyes
dropped into them, after the manner abouesayd. The like it avails in pushes of
the eyes. The face also washed with this water or labored on the Body,
causes a clear and soft skin, and cleanses or takes away spots on the
skin. The same druncke to the quantity of six ounces at a time, avails
against poison. If Lynnen clothes wette in it be applied upon, does draw forth
Dart or Arrow heads, and thorns run into the Body. The water druncke of
women morning and evening, to the quantity of three or four ounces at a time,
for six or seven days together, sends down their Terms in due season.
The water extinguisheth the burning of the Shingles, and expels evil
pushes, if it be applied morning and evening, with a Lynnen cloth or soft towe
wette in the same.

The water of Filipendula. The.xxx. Chapter.
THe chosen time for dystillyng the same is, that the whole herb with the
roots shredde small, be dystilled by Balneo Mariae about the end of May.
This water druncke Morning and Evening, to the quantitye of three ounces at a
time, with a dram weight of the powder of the Gentiane root, sweetened with
sugar, healpeth the stayinge back of the vryne, and dropping of the same: it
also amendeth the coldenesse of stomach, and helps digestion. This in like
manner druncke, helps such fetching the breath short and painefully, and all
sicknesses proceeding of a cold cause. The water druncke in the like quantity
abouesayd, mixed with a dram weight of the powder of the blessed Thistell,
sweetened with sugar, helps the plague, and preuayleth against poison, eaten
or druncke by hap: The water druncke Morning and Evening, to the quantitye of
four or six ounces at a time, sweetened with Sugar, eases the griefs, and
expels the stone of the Kydneyes and Bladder.

The Water of Fumitarie. The.xxxi. Chapter.
THe best time of dystillation is, that the herb with the whole substance
shredde small, be dystilled by Balneo, about the end of May or the mids of
June: this water druncke Morning and Evening, to the quantity of three or
four ounces at a time, recouereth the Iaundyse, and clears away the foul
scabbe on the face, after the kind of a Leaprie, and preserves the person by
the dailye vsinge of it, from the Leaprie. In the same manner druncke, helps
every kind of scabbes, the morfew, and ytche. Let the pacient entered into Bath
drink this with a little Triacle, for it then provoke sweat, by which the
blood is pourged, and helps the sickness, which is proceeded of corrupt
blood. In the time of the plague may the water be used, in that it preserves
such by drincking of it. The water myxed with fine Tryacle and pure bole
Armoniake, and given to that pacient afflicted with the plague, yealdeth a
help, and delivers him in short time. The water druncke attenuateth,
pierces, opens obstructions, and loses the bellye: it also purges the
blood, Choler, and all discommodities proceeding of chollor, and adust
humors. The water drunck twice a day, strengthens the stomach, the Liver,
and the Bowels: it also puts away the chollericke and burning Agues, and
those sickness which are caused by the obstruction of the vessels. The water
in the foresaid manner druncke, provoke much chollericke vryne, and helps
the stoppings of the Liver. It also puts away clotted blood, and dissolueth
the swelling, both within and without the body, and provoke the terms in
women. The water druncke with a dram weight of the powder of Synamon,
comfort the stomach, provoke urine, puts away scabbes and ytche, and
mundifyeth the blood. A potion of the same water recouereth ulcers of the
mouth and dolours.

The water of the garden Clar^e. The.xxxij. Chapter.
THe aptest time for the Dystillation of it, is, that the whole herb shredde
small, be distilled by Balneo Mariae, about the myddle of May: this water
druncke Morning and Evening, to the quantity of three ounces at a time
sweetened with Sugare, ceasseth the gripings of the belly, and pains of the
stomach and sides, the rather by applyng upon the places, lynnen clothes wet
often in it. The water drunck twice a day, to the quantity of three ounces at
a time, remooueth the pain of women's places, and prepares them apt to
conceive with child: it also comfort and recouereth the members harmed by
cold, by applying lynnen clothes wette in it on the places.

The water of Caryophyllata. The.xxxiij. Chapter.
THe Herb with the roots finely shredde, and bestowed in a Cucurbite of
glass, require to be distilled by Balneo Mariae, about the end of March or
mids of April, this water druncke Morning and evening, to the quantity of
three or four ounces at a time, sweetened with Sugar, for four of five days
together, ceasseth gripinges of the belly, stays the blouddie flux, women's
Terms, the spitting of blood, and strengthens a cold brain. This in like
manner druncke, purges all evil and clammye humors, and sends them forth of
the body. The water drunck in the foresaid manner digesteth meat hard of
digestion, and amendeth a cold stomach. This druncke twice a day, profyteth
the Liver. The water druncke Morning and Evening, to the quantitye of three or
four ounces at a time, heals the inner wounds of the breast, the like does
this recover wounds, deep and desperate ulcers, if they be often washed, and
that linen clothes wette in it be applied on the fores. The water helps
impostumes, by applying lynnen clothes wet in it on the swellings. The water
druncke Morning and Evening, to the quantitye of three ounces at a time
sweetened with Sugar, heals fistulaes: it also profits much, if they be
washed with the same, or that linen clothes wette in it, be applied on the
places. The water remooueth and puts away spots, and moles, or other like
marks, which Infantes have taken of the Moothers: if they be often washed in
their Infancy, with that water.

The Water of Broom flowers. The.xxxiiij. Chapter.
THe dystillation of the flowers, is to be done by Balneo Mariae, in a
Cucurbite of glass, when the flowers are full ripe, and begin in a manner to
fall of: this water druncke with a little Rosed honye, morning and evening, to
the quantity of two or three ounces at a time, for twelve of fourteen days
together, draws humors from the joints, purges flewme, and avails against
the shedding of the Gaul. The water druncke twice a day, to the quantitye of
five or six ounces at a time, sweetened with Rosed honye, and a dram weight of
the powder of Fe^ell seeds myxed expels the excrementes of the kidneyes,
causes urine effectuously, and breaks the stone as well in the bladder, as
in the kidneyes and suffers not matter after to gather in th^^^, to harden
into a stone. The water druncke with Oximell or (...) honey for a certain time,
dissolueth the hardness of the Mylte, and puts away the swellings in the
throat. The water profits the head, if applied, it be suffered to dry in by
it self: this in like manner ordered, recouereth the weariness of members.

The Water of Gentiane. The.xxxv. Chapter.
THe congruent time for dystilling only the root (as more commendid) is, that
the green or fresh root shredde small, and bestowed in a Cucurbyte of
glass, be distilled by Balneo Mariae, about the end of the Caniculare days:
where otherwise the dried roots infused a time in wine, may be dystilled at
any time. The water simple of the fresh roots druncke often fasting, to the
quantity of three ounc^s at a time, expels fevers caused by the obstruction
of the Bowels, and other parts of the body, kylleth the worms in the
belly, cleanses all manner of spots in the face, if they be often washed with
the same and prolongeth man's life, in that it consumes all the clammye humors
in the stomach. The water like druncke provoke the terms in women, and
causes vryne, and against the plague and stinging or bit of venomous worms
and Beasts, this druncke and applied with lynnen clothes, does myraculously
avail. The water druncke of him which has taken by hap the venomous and
monstrous blood of a nim 455. expels the same, nor suffers any hurtful
disease to ensue to the parson. The water druncke fasting for certain days,
procures an appetite to meat, and purges the stomach of clammye humors. If
with it (before the taking) be half a drame of pure Calamus Aromaticus brought
to fine powder and a dram of Sugar myxed, the same potion taken three or
four times, does mightily restore the taste and desire to rate. The ^ater
druncke with a dram of Ginger, and an ounce of Sugar ^asting, does speedily
deliver the grypings of the Bellye caused by wind, and the obstruction in the
flanks. This of experience foun^e, that the fresh root bruised and applied in
plaster form on the belly, does undoubtedly kill the worms consisting in
the Bowels.

The Water of ioynted Grass. The.xxxvi. Chapter.
THe congruent Distillation of it, is done of the Herb with the roots, and
the whole substance shredde small: And the same after the bestowing in a
Cucurbite of Glass, distilled by Balneo Mariae, about the end of May. This
water drunk morning and Evening, to the quantity of four ounces at a time,
with a dram of the fine powder of Synamone, and a little Sugar, stays the
great flux of the Belly. The same quantity of the water drunk at one time,
purges the Reins, provoke vryne, and opens the stopping of parts in the
body. The like quantity taken with a little Rosed Honey fasting, expels
the worms in the Belly: to Infantes and children, only give but two ounces:
to youth of more years minister three ounces: to men and elder persons, four
ounces, as above taught. The water cease the grievous pain of the Shyngles,
by applying lynnen clothes wette in it* It puts away the Fever arysing by
heat, either by drinking or applying the same without the body. The water
preuayleth against all pains, and burning beat of wounds, yea, and closes
them, if they be gently washed and soupled with a lynnen clothe wette in it,
or lynnen clothes wette in the same be applied. The water in the foresaid
quantity, drunk fasting, cease and helps the grypinges of the Bowels,
amendeth the stopping of Vryne, recouereth the ulcers of the Bladder, and
breaks the stone: but a dram of the powder of the seeds mixed with the
water, more avails in sending forth the vryne. The water dropped warm in the
matterie ears, heals them in short time: It profyteth the rottenness of the
Gummes, if they be often washed with the same. This helps black pushes ^ if
a ly^^nen clothe or soft Towe wette in it, be applied twyse or th^yce a day,
and that at each time be three or four ounces drunck. The water cease all
manner of heates, by applying without, lynnen clothes wette in it. In yongmen,
and of xxx. years, does this water m^^e work, than in the elder persons.

The water of Ground Yuie or Tunhoue. The.xxxvij. Chapter.
THe congruent time of Dystillation is, that the whole herb shredde small, be
dystilled by Balneo Mariae, about the beginning of June. This water drink
morning and evening, to the quantity of two ounces at a time, sweetened with
Sugar, preuayleth against the trembling of the heart, the Kings ^uill, and a
weak stomach. The water druncke in a bathe, throughlye cleanses clammie
h^mours, which are contained in the stomach, the Lungs, the Liver, and
Bladder, and procures the ^erson healthful. The water druncke in like manner,
preuayleth ^^ainst the infection and poison of the Plague, in that it expel^eth
the same. The water druncke twyse a day, to the quantity abouesayde, does
recover the ulcers of the Heads, opens the stopping of the Liver and Mylt,
draws down the T^rmes of women, and provoke urine. The water drunck
morning, noone, and at evening, preuayleth against the weariness of members in
women, if the parts also be rubbed, with it four times in a day. This water
stilled into dropping and running eyes, stays and dries up the water. The
like perfourmeth the ^^^ce of the leaves, or myxed with this water, and applied
to them.

The water of Cowslippes. The.xxxviij. Chapter.
THe aptest time for Dystillation of it, is, that the leaves and flowers, with
the whole substance shredde together, be dystilled by Balneo Mariae (in a
Cucurbite of Glass) about the beginning of May, or sooner. This water druncke
twyce a day, to the quantity of two ounces at a time, heateth the stomach,
the Liver, and Matrice. For which cause it is much auayleable for women
painfully traueyling, and provoke the terms in them. The water in the
foresaid manner druncke, asswageth swellings of the hoade, if lynnen clothes
wette in it, be often applied: The water twyse a day drunck, resolves humors
gathered, causing ache in the Hyppes and Joints, and sends them forth by
urine. This water preuayleth against all manner of headache proceeding of cold,
by applying lynnen clothes wette in it, to the aching head. It heals also the
bytte and stinging of venomous worms and beasts, and all poysonings. The
water cleanses the foul staynings, the wrinckling and spots of the face, and
the rest of the b^die: in that it causes a smoothe and fair skin, by often
washing with the same. The water druncke twyse a day, helps the Palsy,
puts away the stone in the Kidneyes and Bladder: It also recouereth loose
and broken bones, by drinking and often applying lynnen clothes wette in it.
The flowers made into a Con^e^^e with Sugar, profit such as are feeble and
often swounding, and that be decay^d of strength, in that they recover and
restore strength lost.

The water of Stoikes bill, or herb Robert. The.xxxix. Chapter.
THe ^^st congruent time for Distillation of it, is, that the stalks, leaves,
and whole substance shredde small, be distilled in a Cucurbite of Glass by
Balneo Mariae, about the end of May, or beginning of June. This water druncke
Morning and Evening to the quantity of two ounces at a time, mixed with a
little Pepper and Myrrh in fine powder, profits such as are dacayed in
strength: and the like quantity druncke twyce a day for three days together
(or longer time) mixed with Rosed Honey, preuayleth against Inflations, and
recouereth the Phthisick or sore in the Lunges with a Consumption of all the
body. The water dr^nck with half an ounce of the seeds, and a quantity of
Myrrh and Pepper in fine powder myxed together, does put away the ^rycke and
s^yffenesse of turning the neck. The water profits the exulceration of
women's places, if they be washed twice a day with the same, and that lynnen
clothes wette in it, be applied. This water puts away the black and blewe
of the skin, caused by a fall or st^ype, if it be applied with linen clothes
three or four times a day: in that it dissolueth and wears away the
congeale^ ^loude under the skin. Th^s also heals the Fistula, if it be
washed with the water morning and evening, or that lyn^^n clothes wette in it
be applied. The water avails against ioyntaches of the shoulders and feet,
if it be labored on the grieved place* or that it be* applied with lynnen
clothes wette in it. The water applied with linen clothes wet in it, puts
away swellings of the Pappes, and cease the pain of them. The water applied
on bruised and shaken members to pieces, recouereth them, and puts away the
clotted blouder.

The water of Horsetayle. The.xl. Chapter.
THe congruent time for the distillation of it, is, that the herb^ and roots
shred small, be d^sti^^ed by Balneo Mariae, about the mids of May. This water
drunk morning and evening, to the quantity of two ounces at a time* mixed
with a dram of the powder of Cynamone and a little Sugar, recouereth the
spitting of blood, heals the bowels exulcerated and hurt, stays the terms
of Women, the flux Dysenteria, and all other fluxes of the Belly, cures the
Bladder, vlcered, comfort the stomach harmed, and the Liver, by applying
also of lynnen clothes wette in it without. The water druncke morning, noone,
and evening, to the quantity of four ounces at a time, sweetened with a
little Sugar, and that lynnen clothes wette in it, be applied in a plaster
form, asswageth inflammations, and burning of the Shingles. The water druncke
twyse a day, helps the grief of the stone, and the Strangurie. The water
recouereth the perilous flux Dysenteria, if a linen clothe wet in it, be
often applied to the fundament. The water applied hot with lynnen clothes, to
the man's privy member swollen, does put away the swelling, and cease the
pain. The water heals wounds of the feet, and the holes open, if they be
washed with the same. The water applied with lynnen clothes on the swelling of
the Dropsy, morning and evening, does assuage and put away the same. The water
applied with linen clothes wet in it to the foreheade and nose, and put within
the nosthrils, restrayneth and stays the bleeding of the nose, and puts
away the running of the nose, by drawing it up by the nosthrils.

The water of Hoppes. The *xli. Chapter.
THe congruent time for Dystillation of it, is, that the upper tops, and
first branches cut up (in heygth or length of two handbredthes) and shredde
small, be dystilled by Balneo Mariae, about the end of April. This water
druncke morning and evening, to the quantity of three ounces at a time, and
that mixed with Rosed honey, it be used for three or four weeks together,
puts away Melancholy, of which commonly is caused scabs, ytche, and the
Leprie, and such like griefs that are wont to happen of corrupt blood. The
water druncke in the abouesayde manner, opens the stopping of the Milt,
puts away the pricking, and all griefs, which are wont to be caused by the
stopping of the Mylt. The water druncke, and of it dropped at Evening into the
ears, cleanses and wears away the mattering of them. The water myxed with a
like quantity of Hearts tongue water, and druncke with a little Rosed Honey,
or Sugar, before the beginning of the cold, delivers the Quartaine ague in
short time. The water on such wise prepared, and druncke twice a day, amendeth
the hard fetching of breath, and the stopping of the Breast. The waters like
prepared and drunck, puts away the Iaundise, and Dropsy, and loses the
belly. The water druncke, corrects Choler, purges the blood of the same,
and extinguisheth his inflammations. It also puts away headache, gathered of
heat. The water druncke, mittigateth the heat of the Liver, and stomach, and
avails in Fevers, caused of Choler and blood.

The water of Henbane. The.xlij. Chapter.
THe chosen time for Dystillation of it, is, that the whole Herb with the
roots and flowers shred and bruised, be dystilled about S. John's day. This
water cease all manner of pain of the head, proceeding of heat, if the head
be rubbed and labored with the same. The water anointed on the forhead and
Temples, and washing the feet with it, procures sleep in a sharp
sickness, the rather, if the seeds brought to powder, and myxed with woman's
milk, and the white of an Egg, and a little Vinegar, be applied on the
Temples: It represseth and asswageth all manner of heat, if linen clothes
wette in it be applied on the places: On such wise it remooueth all dolor of
the members, and palifyeth, or rather hydeth the form of the Leprie on the
face, if it be often washed and sowpled with the same, in that it draws forth
all manner of heat not natural. The water profits them, which have no
natural rest, by applying it (by discretion) as well within, as without the
body: and if it be labored oftentimes on the head, and applied with linen
clothes wette in it, then it causes a man the rather to rest naturally.

The water of Hearts ease. The.xliij. Chapter.
THe congruent time for dystillation of it, is, that the Herb with the Flowers
shredde and bruised, be dystilled by Balneo Mariae, in a Cucurbite of Glass,
about the end of June, or mids of Iulie. This water ministered to children
twyse a day, to the quantity of two ounces at a time, sweetened with a little
Sugar, recouereth without doubt the burning heat that commonly takes them.
The water drunk morning and evening, to the quantity of two or three ounces
at a time, helps such hardly breathing, and drawing the wind short* the
inflammation and impostume of the Lunges, and those which have a straytenesse
about the heart and breast, and that have there some sore or a swelling. The
water druncke fasting for a certain time, heals scabbednesse, and all other
corruptions of the skin.

The water of Juniper Beries. The.xliiij. Chapter.
THe congruent dystillation of the Beries, is, when they be ripe, and waxing
black, then they ought to be bruised and dystilled by Balneo Mariae. This
water drunk morning, noone, and at evening, to the quantity of two ounces at
a time, sweetened with a little Sugar, delivers and helps the stone of the
kidneyes and Bladder, also cleanses the kidneyes and Bladder, causes vryne,
and draws down the terms of Women, by drincking three ounces at a time,
with a dram of the powder of Cassia lignea. The water druncke with a little
Cinamone and Sugar, expels the dead yoongling, and poison, and profits
against the byte and stinging of venomous beasts, and worms. The water
avails against all ioyntaches, proceeding of cold, if the joints be rubbed
and applied with the same, morning, noone, and at evening, and let after to
dry in by it self. The water attenuateth, opens, and cleanses filthy
ulcers, if they be washed with the same.

The water of the wood Lilly. The.xlv. Chapter.
THe flowers only are distilled in a Cucurbite of Glass by Balneo Mariae,
about the mids of the Spring: yet the roots distilled, more excel. The
water of the flowers druncke, to the quantity of six ounces at a time,
sweetened with Sugar, recouereth them which have eaten poison in their meat.
The water ministered orderly, preuayleth against the byte of a mad Dog, it
helps the hard traueyle of Child, comfort the Brain, the Heart, the
Liver, and other spiritual members, and riddeth away the falling sickness,
by drincking of the same for forty days together. The water druncke fasting,
sweetened with a little Sugar, helps swounding, recouereth the lack of
speech lost, and sundry diseases of the body, and restores plenty of milk
in women's breasts. The water druncke in the foresaid manner, helps the
Strangurie, avails against the pricking about the heart, and amendeth the
inflammation of the Liver. The water druncke twyse a day, stays the
immoderate course of the terms in women. The water heal^th the byte and
stinging of venomous beasts, and woormes, if a lynnen clothe wette in it, be
applied on the place. The water dropped into the eyes, puts away the
inflammation and darckenesse of them. It cools also hot inflammations, by
applying Lynnen clothes wette in the same. Whose members or head do tremble,
it behooves him before to wash purely, and dry them, after to rub and labor
this water on the places, and to let it dry in by it self, recouereth them, if
this be done morning and evening. The water applied with Lynnen clothes wette
in it, puts away the pain of the priusties. To conclude, this water
orderly ministered, recouereth loose and palsy members, the falling sickness,
convulsions, dazeling and swimming of the head, and swounding. In Germany,
certain do make of the Flowers dried in the summer time, a wine (in the time
of pressing forth ye Grapes) which after the myxing and standing together a
certain time, they minister of it for the foresaid griefs. But there are
other, which steep a pound of the fresh flowers in a gallon or two of old
wine, and set the Glass in the Sun for six weeks or two Months, putting
to it of Lauander, and of Rosemarie flowers, with sundry pleasant spyces: this
after the strayning, they distill in a Cucurbite of Glass by Balneo Mariae,
which water purchased, they bestowed (for the preciousnesse of it) in Silver or
Golden vessels close stopped, and they name this the Golden water, which they
use to all the foresaid griefs of the body: The rather if it be dystilled
three times over, and rectified by a Pellicane, which then ministered with six
graynes of Pepper, and a little of Lauander water, works miraculously: for it
comforts the Brain, restores such swouning, and left for dead in a manner,
yea causes them to live after a long time. It also recouereth the deprivation
of Senses, puts away the Cholicke passion, and profits that person which
shall have an impostume in the hinder part of the Brain and Head, by drinking
a spoonefull at a time, of this precious water. This water in like manner, by
applying it often on the foreheade, and hinder part of the head, procures a
good memory and ready wit. As touching the recovery of swounding, and great
hazard of death by it, the learned Mathiolus reports that he has of proof,
found many times the contrary: yet such is the fame of it (says he) in
Germany, that many cannot refrain the ministering of the same, yea, in most
hot sickenesses.

The water of the Wyldinges or Crabbes. The.xlvi. Chapter.
THe congruent time for Dystillation of them, is, that they bruised, be
dystilled by Balneo Mariae, about the end of October. This water druncke
Morning, Noone, and at Evening, to the quantity of three ounces at a time,
sweetened with Sugar, is a most precious water, and miraculously avails
against the grypings of the Bowels. The water in like manner taken, helps the
flux Dysenteria, delivers the griefs of the stone, cleanses the Reins and
Bladder: The water of the vnrypened Crabbes or Wyldinges (dystilled by Balneo
Mariae, about S. John's day) not only helps the face swollen, by washing it
with the same, and letting it to dry in by it self, but puts away the high
red color, and peeling of the skin on the face, and the red pymples, or
other deformity of the same.

The water of putrified and rotten Apples. The.xlvij. Chapter.
OF the graffed or sweet Apples which shall be rotten, shall you dystill a
water by Balneo Mariae. This water helps that inflammation, which cooled and
putrified larger spreads, insomuch that the flesh falls out, if the place
be morning and evening washed with the same, or Lynnen clothes often applied.
The water recouereth hot and red swellings, and sores, or Cankers eating, and
pestilent Botches, by applying Lynnen clothes wette in it, thryse in the day.
The water of the Apples through ripe (and before their rotting) dystilled by
Balneo Mariae, very much avails for comforting, in that it cools the body
and heart, by drinking morning and evening, to the quantity of three ounces at
a time, sweetened with a little Sugar. The flowers of the graffed Apples
require to be gathered, when as they be through blown, and by a Lynnen sheet
spredde under the tree, the blossoms ought to be beaten down with a staff,
and to be dystilled in a Cucurbite of Glass by Balneo Mariae. This water
recouereth (and thoroughly helps) the redness and deformity of the face, if
for three or four weeks together, it be washed morning and evening with the
same.

The water of the Peache tree flowers. The.xlviij. Chapter.
A Certain Chemist (of fame in Germany) dystilled a Rose water out of the
Peache Roses or Flowers, which loses the Belly, and procures to vomit: and
he took for loosing of the Belly, the water which dystilled forth first
(before the Roses were burned) and dystilled them in a Cucurbite of Glass by
Balneo Mariae, where he also dystilled the dry herbs, and others in Sand^.
The water of the leaves (dystilled by Balneo Mariae at the increasing of the
Moon in May, druncke in the morning fasting, puts away the grief of the
stone in the loins, the rather by taking it thryce a day, to the quantity of
two or three ounces at a time, which in like manner used, procures urine, and
purges the Bladder. The water druncke of children fasting, to the quantity of
an ounce at a time sweetened with Sugar, kills the long worms in the body.
The water druncke Morning and Evening, to the quantity of two ounces at a
time, preuayleth against the stone. The water dropped into the ears, kills
the worms in them: Rubbing the head with it, cease headache.

The water of the smaller Mallows. The.xlix. Chapter.
WHen the Mallows shall bear flowers, then the roots with the whole Herb
gathered and shredde small, dystill by Balneo Mariae, about the beginning of
May. This water (between day and night) druncke four times to the quantity
of four ounces at a time sweetened with a little Sugar, recouereth the pricking
or stitches in the sides, and Pleurisy, and purges wounds. The water
druncke, to the quantity of six or eight ounces at a time fasting, softeneth
and loses the belly, remooueth the pain of the Matrice, breaks and
heals inward swellings. The water in like manner druncke, stays the
perilous flux Dysenteria, puts away the grief of the stone, asswageth the
pain of the Bladder, and cleanses the Reins and Bladder. The water applied on
the Temples, procures sleep. If the feet of a sick person of a hot Ague be
rubbed or labored with the same, procures rest, and cease thirst. The water
puts away the Impostume behind the ears, by dropping it warm into them,
and by applying it without, and by drincking a quantity each day. The water
druncke, helps the often desire to the stool, and by applying lynnen clothes
wette in it on the Belly. The water heals the bytte of venomous things, if
it be washed with the same, and lynnen clothes wette in it applied upon. This
also puts away scabbednesse and ytche, and spots of the body, by doing the
like. The water drunk, resists the infection of the Plague, and preserves
the person that he be not taken with the same sickness. The water applied on
wounds, or washed with the same, fills them with flesh. The water of the
flowers (dystilled in a Cucurbite of Glass by Balneo Mariae) drunk morning,
noone, and at evening, to the quantity of four ounces at a time, puts away
the grypings of the Bowels, heateth and softeneth the Belly. The water dropped
into the eyes, diverse times in the day, does marvelously recover and restore a
decayed sight, as the same of experience found.

The water of Horehounde. The.L. Chapter.
THe time for Dystillation of it, is, that the whole substance, with the
roots shredde small, be dystilled by Balneo Mariae, about the end of May.
This water druncke morning and evening, to the quantity of two or three ounces
at a time, sweetened with Sugar, preuayleth against the Cough, the hardness of
fetching breath, the spitting of blood, and the Dropsy, comfort the
stomach, cleanses the breast, and lungs, opens the liver and Mylt, and
strengthens the Kidneys and bladder. It comfort the yongling in the mothers
womb, druncke of women with child, to the quantity of two ounces at a time,
sweetened with Sugar. This comfort and quickens the wit and memory, by
chasing or rubbing it on the head. The water dropped into the ears, takes
away the pain of them, purges and cleanses fresh wounds, by washing them
morning and evening with it: yea, it heals open ulcers. The water puts
away visions, and evil dreams, by drincking sundry times of it. It also
helps the Dropsy if such refrain from moist things, and to much drincking:
and all swellings this heals, by applying it on the places.

The water of the herb Baulme. The.Li. Chapter.
THe herb with the whole substance shredde small, and well stamped, lay to
steep for a whole night in good white wine, that it may well drink in of the
wine. Which done, dystill the whole on the morrow, in a Cucurbite of Glass by
Balneo Mariae, about the end of May. This water druncke twyse a day, to the
quantity of two ounces at a time, recouereth in short time any kind of
scabbednesse of the body, and causes a sweet savor of the same, if with a
grain of Musk myxed, it be washed. The water remooueth Pymples, Letters, and
all other spots happening on the face or breast, by myxing a quantity of the
natural or artificial Baulme, and washing or rubbing the places with the
same: and it causes the face to come to a fair read color. The water
druncke every morning fasting, to the quantity of a small Nutte shell full at
a time, puts away the ill ^auour or stinking of the breath. The water also
remooueth toothache, by holding it a time in the mouth. The water preserves a
long time flesh or fish, by lying in it: and poured into turned wine,
restores the same to be druncke. The water druncke, procures urine: and
applied with a Lynnen clothe on the bottom of the Belly, breaks the stone
of the Bladder, causes urine, and moves the Terms of women. The water
druncke, recouereth the pain of the Body and Kidneyes. The water druncke
twyse a day, and the herb applied in plaster form on that swelling under
the Chynne, named Scrophula, helps it greatly. The water druncke fasting,
breaks an impostume grown within the body. It heals also all prickinges
or stitches of the heart, and sides. This water taken in the manner abouesayde,
is a mortal enemy, or kills all manner of worms within the body. The water
druncke fasting, comfort the afflicted spirits, strengthens all the
members, and recouereth those parts endammaged or grieved with the Gout
through cold: For this comfort the sinews far better, than any other
remedy. The water druncke fasting with a little Triacle, delivers and
helps the falling sickness. And the person, which by occasion of any
sickness cannot speak, by putting a fine lynnen clothe wette in the water,
and put under the tongue oftentimes, recouereth the speech hyndered and
lacking. The water druncke fasting, comfort the breast, and helps
digestion. The water drunck twice a day, procures a sweet breath, cease all
inward swellings, puts away the Cholick and grypings of the Bowels, purges
the matrice, and helps the Dropsy. The water applied on wounds twyse a day,
heals them in short time. The water dropped into the eyes, stays the
watering of them, and procures a sharp sight* The water druncke fasting,
cheareth the heart, makes a man merry, helps a cold stomach, strengthens
the vital parts, helps digestion, recouereth the stoppings of the brain,
amendeth a feeble courage, strengthens the weakness of the heart, and the
same especially, by which sleep is often broken in the night, and the beating
of his pulse repressed. It also puts away the cares of the mind, and
troublesome imaginations, which either are of Melancholy, or of adust flewme
engendered. The water druncke fasting, sharpeneth the understanding, and wit,
and procures a good or ready memory.

The water of the herb Mercury. The.Lij. Chapter.
THe congruent time for the dystillation of it, is, that the whole herb
shredde small, be dystilled by Balneo Mariae, about the beginning of June. This
water drawn up into the Nosethrilles oftentimes, profits unto the purging of
the head, helps the running of the eyes, nose, and ears. The water applied
with lynnen clothes wette in it, on burnings, heals them, and mitigateth the
griefs. The water tempered with wine, and applied with lynnen clothes wette in
it on Ulcers, cures them. The water druncke in the morning fasting, to the
quantity of two ounces at a time, expel^eth superfluous heates, and gross
humors, as Flewme, and the gross black Choler. The water druncke, and the
herb eaten for three days together of women, as a day before, and two days
after the Terms begun, and at the fourth day (coming out of Bathe) to
coeate, works a marvelous matter in conception: The rather (as Hippocrates
affirms) if before it, the powder of the roots of Iroos and it, formed into
a Pessarie with Honey, be conueyghed up into the body, the readier to cause
the Terms to come down. The water druncke in time of traueyle of child, and
a Bathe made with the Herb and Malloes, sends forth the afterburthen. The
water dropped into deaf ears, and anointed with old wine, recouereth the
hearing. The water of Grummell (dystilled about the end of May, or beginning
of June) druncke morning and evening for xxx. or xl. days together, to the
quantity of three ounces at a time, with a little of this water, helps the
stone, the dropping of the urine, the Strangurie, and grief of the stone, of
the Kidneys and Bladder: It also cleanses the reins and Bladder.

The water of the Bramble berries. The.Liij. Chapter.
THe congruent time for dystillation of the Berries, is, when they are full
ripe, but not tarying till they be soft, and it behooves to wash them before,
and to dry them again, after to dystill them in a Cucurbite of Glass, by
Balneo Mariae. Thy^ water druncke morning and evening, to the quantity of two
ounces at a time, sweetened with Sugar, helps the stone in children. The
water druncke fasting, recouereth the grief of the stone of the Kidneyes and
Bladder. The water gargelled in the throat, profits the griefs of the Vuula:
and heals ulcers of the throat, by gargelling it hot, four times in the day.

The water of Mulberies. The.Liiij. Chapter.
THe Mulberies are to be dystilled, when they are sufficiently ripe by Balneo
Mariae. This water gargelled to the quantity of two or three ounces at a
time, for three or four times a day, recouereth vlc^rs of the throat. The
water handled after the same manner, and druncke down, puts away impostumes
of the Breast, expels flewme out of the body. The water in like manner
druncke, expels and dissolueth the congealed blood in the body, helps
the Cough, and loses the binding in the breast. The water of the vnrypened
Mulberies (dystilled by Balneo Mariae, dropped and applied about the eyes,
greatly helps them. This water often gargelled in the mouth, helps the
weakness of the Vuula, takes away all manner of roughness, exulceration,
and heat of the throat. The water druncke morning and evening, to the
quantity of three or four ounces at a time, with Rosed honey, recouereth the
impostumes of the Liver.

The water of Nenupl^are, or the water Lilly. The.Lv. Chapter.
THe white flowers of the water Lyllie, when they are full ripe, require in the
due season to be dystilled by Balneo Mariae. This water druncke with Rosed honey
morning and evening, for ten or thirteen days together, to the quantity of
two ounces at a time, helps the shedding of the gall, and a hot and dry
Cough. The water also profits them which have an impostume of the Breast,
with pain in the side. The water druncke with Sugar, preuayleth against the
ulcers of the Bowels, softeneth a hot bel^^e, and recouereth an old and
watrie rupture. The water druncke in like quantiti^, preuayleth against the
heat of the Plague, puts away headache, cease the Cough, and helps the
impostumes of the Mylt, if they proceed of heat. The water applied with
Lynnen clothes wette in it, morning and evening, does mightily extinguish all
inflammations in man's body. It also procures sleep, cease the inflammation
of the head, the Liver, stomach, and heart. The water especially profits
unto the cooling of the h^ade, if it be often applied round about: and
recouereth the heat of the heart, by applying lynnen clothes without. The
water drunk fasting, or outwardly applied, greatly avails against the
consumption of the Body. It also delivers the night forms of Venus in
sleep, and takes away the Uenereall delight for ever, by drincking it
fasting, and washing the Genitals with it for forty days together. The water
applied without, with lynnen clothes wette in it, does in short time cool the
burning heat of the Liver.

The Water of Hasill Nuttes. The.Lvi. Chapter.
THe green Hasill nuttes gathered and bruised, require to be dystilled by
Balneo Mariae, about the mids of July. This water well labored on the hands
and arms, morning and evening, and let to dry in by it self, puts away
scabbednesse, and trembling or shaking of the hands. The water dystilled of
the fresh Hasill Nuttes, druncke fasting, to the quantity of tw^ drammes at a
time, miraculously helps the Cholicke, and grypings of the Bowels: a thing
sure, and experimented often, as writes the learne^ Alexander Benedictus.

The water of Walnuttes. The.Lvij. Chapter.
THe green Walnuts gathered and bruised, ought to be dystilled by Balneo
Mariae, about the beginning of July. This water ministered to drink to a
wounded person, twyse or thryse a day, puts away the inflammation of the
wound: the rather, if a lynnen clothe wette in it, be applied sundry times of
the day. The water druncke twyse a day, to the quantity of two or three
ounces at a time, puts away any manner of heat, and profits black Pushes,
as the Carbuncle, and hard swellings in the grynde, and other pestilent
Blysters and swellings, by applying (diverse times) lynnen clothes wette i^ it.
It also helps the Plague, by drinking the like quantity twyse a day, with a
scruple weight of fine Triacle. Certain persons there are, which dystill a
water out of the Walnuts not ripe, and whole with their shelles, which is
sovereign and auayleable against the plague, and for to foment the places
afflicted with Gout, right profitable, as the learned Graterolus writes. The
water applied with lynnen clothes wette in it, puts away Tetters, in that it
extinguisheth and cease pain. The water of the green ryndes of the
Walnuttes (dystilled by Balneo Mariae, in September) taken in drink, with a
third part of Vinegar, when the heat of the Plague takes any, and that a
vein before be opened, and that he shall drink it within.xxiiij. hours, is a
sure and approved remedy against the Plague. This water dropped into the
ears, helps the rynging and sound or noise of them. The water of the ripe
ryndes applied, does like help those griefs. The water of the Walnut leaves
shredde and dystilled by Balneo Mariae, about the end of May, dries up the
open ulcers, cease heat, and causes a smooth skin to grow again on
ulcers, by applying lynnen clothes wette in it, morning and evening for a
certain time together.

The water of Palma Christi. The.Lviij. Chapter.
THe roots only gathered, and finely shredde, require to be dystilled in a
Cucurbite of Glass, by Balneo Mariae, about the end of May. This water
druncke twyse a day, recouereth the perilous flux Dysenteria, as the same of
experience known. The water like drunck, expels the gross humors of the
body, and by oftentimes washing with it, greatly cleanses and cleereth the
face. The water is profitable, ministered to mad persons and frantic, and in
the griefs of the sinews. A dram weight of the fine powder of the seeds,
given with three ounces of the water sweetened with a little Sugar, preuayleth
against the falling sickness. The water myxed with pure wine, and druncke at
dinner and supper for.xxx. or.xl. days together, does like recover the falling
sickness. The water druncke at the beginning of the cold fit, riddeth away
the Quartaine fever in short time, as a certain man of proof affirms. The
water druncke morning and evening, to the quantity of three ounces at a time,
strengthens the stomach, heateth and comfort nature. The water in like
manner druncke, puts away the yelowe Iaundise, and provoke urine. The
water taken in the morning fasting, for a certain time together, to the
quantity of four ounces at a time, and that Lynnen clothes wette in it, be
often applied: does prevail against all swellings, being as well without, as
within the body. The water druncke morning and evening, to the quantity of
three ounces at a time, and that Lynnen clothes wette in it, be often applied,
does heal old and new wounds, as well within happening, as without the body.

The water of Cinkfoyle, or five leaued grass. The.Lix. Chapter.
THe best time for dystillation of it, is, that the herb, stalk, and root,
with the whole substance shred small, be dystilled by Balneo Mariae, about the
mids of May. This water druncke morning and evening, for certain days, to
the quantity of four ounces at a time, helps the stone, the grief of the
Stone in the Loins, and cleanses the Reins. The water druncke fasting, to the
quantity of eygth or nine ounces at a time, does mightily loose the belly, and
like resolves the hardness of belly, by applying it without. The water
applied with lynnen clothes wette in it, cease all manner of heates and
swellings: applied with lynnen clothes wette to the foreheade, stays the
bleeding at the nose: It recouereth the trembling of members, and the hands,
if they be often labored with the same, and let to dry in by it self. The
water heals new and old wounds, if they be washed with the same, or
applied with lynnen clothes. It also puts away all swellings, and
Impostumes. The water druncke fasting, for certain days, profits against
all manner of Fevers, and expels them utterly. The water of Thowrowaxe
(dystilled in Balneo) druncke to the quantity of two ounces at a time,
sweetened with Sugar, helps the inner rupture of Children, heals
inflammations with a readnesse, and the Shingles, and cease the grief of a
burning stomach.

The water of S. John's Worte. The.Lx. Chapter.
THe best time for Dystillation of it, is, that the herb, the leaves, and
flowers drawn from the stalks, be dystilled by Balneo Mariae, about the end
of June. This water druncke morning and evening, to the quantity of two ounces
at a time, preuayleth against the Apoplexy or depriving of senses. This water
myxed with the powder of the roots, or seeds, or water of Pionie, and druncke
twyse or thryse a day, to the quantity of two or three ounces at a time,
recouereth and helps the falling sickness. The water preuayleth against the
trembling of members, if they be labored with the same twyse a day. The water
drunck with red wine, helps all manner of superfluous fluxes of the Belly,
the rather being applied, with a lynnen clothe wette in it. The water druncke
morning and evening, heals all manner of wounds, being as well without as
within the Body, foynes, or cuttes, the rather if they shall be washed, or
applied often, with a lynnen cloth wette in it.

The water of Pympernell. The.Lxi. Chapter.
THe congruent time for dystillation of the lesser Pympernell (which has a
sharp root) is, that the roots, the herb, with the whole substance shredde
and bruised, be dystilled by Balneo Mariae, about the end of May. This water
druncke morning and evening, to the quantity of three or four ounces at a
time, sweetened with Sugar, helps the stone, and grief of the stone in the
Loins and Bladder, and cleanses the Reins. This water helps the Plague,
druncke once within six days. It profits women, whose matrice is become
cold, and draws down the Terms. The water druncke in like quantity, with
a little of Castoreum brought to fine powder fasting, puts away the palsy
of members. The water druncke fasting, to the quantity of four ounces at a
time, defends the person from sickness that day, in that it puts away
all manner of grief from the heart, delivers evil humors, and procures
urine: this druncke with a little fine Triacle, preuayleth against poison. The
water causes a clear and fair skin of the face and hands, if any often
washes these outward parts with it.

The water of Plantayne. The.Lxij. Chapter.
THe roots and herb with the whole substance shredde small, dystill by Balneo
Mariae, about the end of May. The water druncke for forty days morning and
evening, to the quantity of four ounces at a time, sweetened with a little
Sugar, recouereth the Dropsy, a hot Cough, and that swelling proceeding of a
heat, and heals Blysters and pushes rising of heat. It profits any flux
of the Belly, but especially helps that flux Dysenteria, if you mix in
the drinking, the powders of the stone Hematites and Bole Armoniacke, to the
quantity or weight of a dram of each, with two ounces of the water. This
like mixed and druncke, stays the humorall flux, and the over great flux of
the Terms. The water heals the ulcers and impostume of the Lunges: it
preuayleth against poison. The water recouereth the falling sickness, by
drincking it for forty days. The water druncke for four days, helps the
love medicine, if a purgation be afterward taken, and this druncke a time,
delivers the grief of the Mylt. It kills worms, by drincking fasting the
quantity abouesayde: taken fasting for three days together, to the quantity
of four ounces at a time, helps the Ague. It also recouereth the Matrice,
and sends forth the after burden. The water helps the Plague, and
profits inflammations, by applying Lynnen clothes wette in it. The water
heals all ulcers which are happened by a bruise, stripe, fall, or by any
other cause. The water retained a long time in the mouth; heals all wounds
and ulcers of the mouth, and the gummes rotten by blood. The water dropped
every day into a Fistula, heals it, the rather if it be often washed with the
same. The water dropped into the ears, remooueth the pain of them. It helps
the Shingles, and dropped or applied to the eyes, puts away the swelling of
them. The water gargelled in the mouth, recouereth the exulceration of the
throat. The water applied with lynnen clothes on fresh wounds, stays the
issue of blood: It heals the bytte and stinging of venomous beasts and
woormes, recouereth inflammations, and those with a readnesse, by applying
lynnen clothes wette in it. The water applied with lynnen clothes, preserves
wounds, that no inflammation or other incommoditie happens to them. It
heals those Ulcers, which by feeding creep abroad. The water cures that
fore feeding, which most men name the Wolf, if in it be boiled the flowers of
Pomegranates, Psidia, the Cypress nuttes, Xylobalsamum, Carpobalsamum, Sugar
Alum, of each an ounce, of Mumia, an ounce and a half, and of Camphora one
dram, of Plantaine water one pynte: with the which decoction thus prepared,
let the sore be daily washed. The water often applied, causes flesh to grow
again: it heals the Fistula in the Fundament, and recouereth Canker sores,
by often washing the mouth therewith: it heals the exulcered bowels, given up
in glyster wise by the fundament. The water applied on running Pyles with
Cotton, cures them: it cures also evil Pushes, and grievous ulcers.

The water of Rybworte. The.Lxij. Chapter.
THe time of Dystillation of it, is, that the roots and herb, with the whole
substance shredde small, by dystilled by Balneo Mariae, about the mids of
May. This water druncke with Rosed Honey, to the quantity of four ounces;
two hours before the coming of the fit, delivers the Quartaine fever, so
that it be used before the beginning of sundry fittes. The water in like
quantity druncke, sends forth the afterburthen, cleanses the Reins and
Bladder, and preuayleth against the ulcers of the Nosethrils or eyes, if they
be washed twyse a day with the same. The water druncke warm, with a little
Rosed Honey, expels the worms of the belly. This water has in a manner
the same virtues, which the greater Plantaine possesses, saving that these are
not so mighty in working.

The water of the Polipodie. The.Lxiij. Chapter.
THe seasonable time for Dystillation of the Polipodie of the Oak, is, that the
roots only gathered (without the herb) and shredde small, be dystilled by
Balneo Mariae, from Iulye to September. This water druncke morning and evening,
to the quantity of four ounces at a time, with Rosed honey, helps the
Cough, and frensinesse: It also puts away Melancholy, heaviness, and
grief of the mind: and druncke for certain days, delivers the quartaine
Ague. The like quantity drunck with the broth of a Cock or Pullet, expels
by siege, Melancholy and flewme, and helps them greatly which by nature are
costiue. The water druncke, loses the streyghtnesse of the breast, softeneth
the belly, puts away fearful dreams, provoke urine, purges the
blood, comfort the heart, and amendeth an evil color.

The water of the Daysie. The.Lxiiij. Chapter.
THe herb and roots, with the whole substance shredde small, require to be
dystilled by Balneo Mariae, about the mids of May. This water druncke
Morning, Noone, and at Evening, to the quantity of three or four ounces at a
time, procures an appetite to meat. The water druncke, profits that person,
which shall have a rybbe or leg broken, and heals wounds, by drincking or
washing them with it. The water taken, to the quantity of six ounces at a
time, loses the Belly, heals the vlcered bowels, and strengthens the
Palsy members, if they be often rubbed or labored with the same. It cools
the Liver, extinguisheth an inward heat, represseth Choler, helps the
blysters of the mouth and tongue, proceeding of heat.

The water of Knotgrasse. The.Lxv. Chapter.
THe whole Herb with the roots shredde small, require to be dystilled by
Balneo Mariae, about the mids of May. This water druncke morning, noone, and
at evening, to the quantity of four ounces at a time, stays the over great
flux of the belly. The water profits against the Ague, which inuadeth with
a heat. It also heals the Shingles, by applying lynnen clothes wette in the
same. The water helps all manner of pain of wounds, where an inflammation
with redne^se consists, if they be washed with the same, or that a lynnen
clothe wette in it, be often applied. The water druncke in like manner
abouesayde, cleanses the Reins, expels the stone of the loins, procures
urine, and opens the obstruction of such members. The water druncke with
Rosed honey, profits children and men against worms. It recouereth rotten
gummes, if they be often washed with the same, and heals black pushes or
bladders, by applying lynnen clothes wette in it. The water extinguisheth all
manner of heates, happening as well within, as without the body.

The water of wild Tansey. The.Lxvi. Chapter.
THe whole Herb with the roots shredde small, require to be dystilled by
Balneo Mariae, from July unto September. This water druncke morning and
evening, for six or eight days together, to the quantity of two or three
ounces at a time, stays the white terms, or whytes in women. The water
dropped into the eyes, recouereth the much running of them, and heals the eye
lyddes folding outward, by annoynting them often with it. The water applied to
the eyes, profits against dymnesse of sight, the pin and web, and other
spots happening in them. The water heals wounds, if they be washed with
the same, and applied often with lynnen clothes wette in it. If the back bone
be labored with the same, it takes away the grief thereof. The water of the
flowers (when they shall be full ripe, dystilled in a Cucurbite of glass by
Balneo Mariae) druncke in the morning fasting, to the quantity of two or
three ounces at a time, for certain days together, comfort all the members
of man. The water druncke, and applied with a lynnen clothe on the forehead,
profits against the gyddynesse and swimming of the head. The water
delivers the Rheum, and running of bleared eyes. It also recouereth moist
ulcers, by applying lynnen clothes wette in the same, in that it draws forth
the moisture by the poores.

The water of self heal. The.Lxvij. Chapter.
THe time for dystillation of it, is, that the herb, stalks, and flowers
shredde small, be dystilled by Balneo Mariae, about the end of May. This
water recouereth the putrefaction of the mouth: tempered with the oil of Roses
and vinegar, and applied to the Temples, puts away the burning of the head:
mixed with Rose water, does like help the head. The water druncke morning and
evening, to the quantity of four ounces at a time, profits against the
stitches which are felt in the sides, and against the inner impostumes of the
body: It also extinguisheth inflammations, and recouereth a weakness of the
heart: In the like manner druncke, heals the Shingles, and the inflammations
with a redness, as well in men of ripe age, as in children. The water every
day druncke fasting, preserves from the plague, cleanses the breast, and
puts away the strangurie: It also preuayleth against the Tertian, and
Quartaine Ague. The water druncke in the abouesayde manner, helps such women,
whose matrice within begins to putrify and matter, for by the same are they
healed. The water recouereth wounds, if they be often washed with the same,
and that lynnen clothes wette in it, be applied. The water heals swellings
and exulceration of the mouth, by washing and gargelling the mouth with it: for
this delivers the putrefaction and heat, and the pushes or sores of the
mouth.

The water of the leaves of the Oak. The.Lxviij. Chapter.
THe leaves gathered and bruised, require to be dystilled by Balneo Mariae,
about the mids of May. This water drunck to the quantity of six ounces at a
time, recouereth the flux of the belly, whether the same be white or
matterie: It also expels congealed blood into clottes by a strype. The
water druncke, to the quantity of three or four ounces at a time, profits a
foul and corrupt liver, and diseased lunges (or at the least) begins to
putrify. This in like manner druncke, preuayleth against stitches in the sides.
The water druncke twyse a day, stays the over great flux of the terms, and
stops the bleeding of wounds, and like helps the pyssing of blood, by
taking it in the foresaid quantity. The water daily druncke, does especially
prevail against the stone of the loins and bladder. It also heals the
bowels exulcerated, by the dangerous flux of the belly. The water applied
with lynnen clothes on the inflamed member, exceedingly cools. It heals
old ulcers of the legs, if they be often washed with the same, and let to
dry in by it self. The water avails against redness, and burning of the
legs by black pushes, in applying on the places twyse or thryce a day, towe,
or lynnen clothes wette in it, until the heat be extinguished. The water
druncke with a dram weight of the fine powder of Mestiltowe of the Oak, for
certain days together, adding to it a scruple weight of Aqua vitae rectified,
recouereth not only Fevers, and the Apoplexy, or deprivation of senses, but
helps without doubt the falling sickness. The water in like manner prepared
and druncke, puts away gyddynesse, swellings of the body, preserves from
the Leprie, and delivers most diseases: in that it purges and sends forth
the gross, and evil humors offending.

The water of the leaves of the Willowe. The.Lxix. Chapter.
THe leaves of the white Wyllowes strypped from the twigs, being tender in
the Spring time, require to be dystilled about the beginning of May, by Balneo
Mariae. This water druncke morning and evening, to the quantity of four
ounces at a time sweetened with Sugar, helps the stone, procures vryne, and
preuayleth against the worms of the belly. The water profits against the
redness of eyes, being often washed with the same: It helps the Shyngles,
and recouereth the Fistula, by applying lynnen clothes wette in it. The water
druncke in like quantity, expels the yoongling dead. The water of the
flowers (dystilled after the manner of the flowers of the Apples and Peaches)
recouereth the sight, heals scabbednesse of the head, procures fair hear:
if wetting the hears well with a Sponge dypped in it, and kembed, be after
suffered to dry by themself.

The water of the Elder. The.Lxx. Chapter.
THe outward rynde scraped and pylled from the slyppes of the Elde^ tree, and
the inner ryndes taken and shredde, require to be dystilled by Balneo Mariae,
about the beginning of May. This water druncke morning and evening, to the
quantity of four ounces at a time, recouereth the Dropsy. The water druncke
fasting, to the quantity of six ounces at a time, sweetened with a little
Rosed honey, mightily loses the belly without harm. The water (of the
tender leaves of the tops and sides budding forth, shredde small, and
dystilled by Balneo Mariae, about the mids of May) helps hot legs and
putrified ulcers, if they be often washed with the same, and let to dry by
themself. The water of the flowers (through blown and stamped together,
dystilled in a Cucurbite of Glass by Balneo Mariae) druncke morning and
evening, to the quantity of three ounces at a time, sweetened with Rosed
honey, loses the straitness of the breast. The water in like quantity
druncke, profits against the swelling and water between the skin, and
opens the stopping of the liver, mylt, and kidneyes. The water druncke,
puts away the Tertian ague, cleanses and helps all courses proceeding of
Melancholy, and strengthens the stomach. The water druncke to the quantity
of six ounces at a time, purges all humors by siege, and cleanses the body.
The water dropped into the eyes, extinguisheth the heat of them: It also
druncke twyse a day, and dropped into the eyes, consumes white spots in
them. The water helps the trembling of the hands, if they be wette and
labored with the same, and let to dry by themself. The water profits
against ulcers, and that be cold, if they shall be often washed with the same,
or that lynnen clothes wette in it be applied.

The Water of Scabious. The.Lxxi. Chapter.
THe leaves and roots shredde together, require to be dystilled by Balneo
Mariae, about the end of May. This water druncke three or four times a day,
to the quantity of three ounces at a time, recouereth the straytenesse of
breast, and helps the impostumes of the same. The water druncke morning,
noone, and at evening, to the quantity of three ounces at a time, preuayleth
against stitches of the sides. The water profits against swellings in the
body, against the Plague, poisoning, the Cough, and all inward corruption of
the body. The water in the abouesayde manner druncke, helps scabbednesse, and
cleanses the blood corrupt: It also puts away swellings arysing in the
body, and heals wounds as well without, as within the body, by applying
lynnen clothes wette in it. The water in like manner druncke, purges the
lunges, and puts away the Cough. The water helps the Pyles, white scurfe,
Letters, and Ringwormes: It also recouereth pestilent pushes, as the Carbuncle
sore, and amendeth the sight of the eyes. The water of the Saxifrage (with the
whole substance shredde small, and dystilled by Balneo Mariae, about the mids
of May) drunck every day fasting, to the quantity of three or four ounces at
a time, sweetened with Sugar, breaks the stone of the kidneys and bladder,
helps ache in the hyppes, delivers the stopping of vryne, and cleanses the
reins and bladder.

The Water of Nightshade of the Garden. The.Lxxij. Chapter.
THe leaves with the stalks gathered and shredde small, require to be
dystilled by Balneo Mariae, when that the berries be green. This water druncke
morning, noone, and at evening, to the quantity of three ounces at a time,
helps a swelling proceeding of an intemperate hotenesse. It perfourmeth the
like, by applying lynnen clothes wette on the swelling. The water in the
foresaid manner taken, helps the stone, and puts away sweat, myxed with
the water of wormewoode, and druncke to the quantity of three ounces at a
time. The water preuayleth against the griefs and aching of the hinder part and
whole head, procured of heat. The water applied with Lynnen clothes wet in
it, on a hot Gowte, and the Shingles, does in short time help them, the
rather by the often applying of the clothes wette in the water. The water
dropped into the ears, puts away grief in them, asswageth inflamed
impostumes of the breasts or pappes of women, and represseth hot swellings
in the throat, that they do not hastily strangle nor stop the wind: and the
water gargelled in the throat, cools the liver, and extinguisheth heat. The
water helps men bursten, by often applying lynnen clothes wette in it, on the
rupture. The water druncke greatly avails, if by any night terror certain
pushes shall arise: and the like does the water prevail, applied with lynnen
clothes. The water of the Mustarde seeds (when the herb bearing flowers, is
to be dystilled by Balneo Mariae, about the beginning of June) puts away
ulcers of the gummes, by often washyng the mouth with the same. The water
profits the consumption of members, if they be often rubbed and labored with
the same, in that (by it) they recover strength and flesh. The water heateth
the marrowe of the bones, if they be often washed and labored with the same,
and let to dry by themself. The water profits against a cold disease of
the joints, if they be rubbed and labored with the same, and let to dry by
themself.

The water of Mullaine or Hygges Taper. The.Lxxiij. Chapter.
THe leaves with the flowers full ripe, gathered from the stalks, (after the
shredding small) dystill by Balneo Mariae. This water is most precious against
all swellings, as well inward as outward, by drincking of it morning and
evening, to the quantity of three or four ounces at a time: or that a lynnen
cloth doubled, and wette in the same, be often applied. The water in such manner
taken, helps the lunges ascending unto the throat, and increasing. This in
like manner profits against a hot gowte, by drincking of it morning and
evening, and applying lynnen clothes wette in the same, for on such wise
handled, a better remedy is not to be found. The water profits against all
manner of griefs, proceeding of a flux, by drincking thereof morning, noone,
and at night, to the quantity of three ounces at a time, sweetened with Sugar,
and a little of the fine powder of Cinamone: in the same manner druncke, puts
away the grypings of the bowels. The water recouere^h the face, which appears
infe^^ed after the kind of a Leprie, if a soft lynnen cloth dypped in the
same, be often applied upon. The water helps burnings or scalding* if a
double lynnen clothe (as soon as the harm done) wette in the same, be applied,
the rather by doing on such wise oftentimes: for it draws forth, and
extinguisheth the heat without harm leaving. The water amendeth an ytching
scabbednesse, whether the same shall be moist or dry, by applying lynnen
cloth^s wette in the same, morning, noone, and at evening. The water profits,
if an inflammation with redness happens on the skin, by wetting a lynnen
clothe in the some, and applying it to the place. The water profits, if an^e
shall have a long time dymme eyes and weak of sight, by letting one or two
drops fall at a time into each eye, for two or three weeks together.

The water of the Lynde or rope Timber tree. The.Lxxiiij. Chapter.
THe flowers orderly gathered, and put into a Cucurbite of glass, dystill by
Balneo Mariae. This water cleanses any spots of the face, if the face be
often washed with the same: as Hieronimus the Herbarian reports. The water
druncke with a little Cynawone water, recouereth the trembling of the heart.
The water druncke morning and evening, to the quantity of two ounces at a
time, helps the falling sickness. The water drunck in like manner, profits
against the fretting of the gu^t^s: and dropped at evening into the eyes,
procures a cleerenesse of them. The water druncke morning and evening, to the
quantity of three ounces at a time, helps the stone: In the same manner
druncke, recouereth swellings, and sends all manner of evil hum^rs out of the
body.

The water of Tormentill. The.Lxxv. Chapter.
THe herb with the whole substance shredde and bruised, requires to be
dystilled by Balneo Mariae, from the xv. day of August, unto the viij. of
September. This water druncke in the morning fasting, to the quantity of three
ounces at a time, preuayleth against all manner of poisons. The water is a good
preservative against the plague, and an unhealthful air. For the plague when
it inuadeth any, incontinent open a vein, as it behooves, after give this
potion, on such wise prepared: take of the water of Tormentill three ounces, of
Uenice Triacle a dram weight, of wine vinegar an ounce and a half, which
diligently myxed together, minister warm to the pacient, lying in his bed, and
well covered with clothes to sweat: whiles he thus lies in a sweat, rub
and labor his hands and feet, with Vinegar, Rue, Wormewoode, and Salt myxed.
The next day following, minister again the same potion, and he shall then
recover health. The water druncke morning and evening, to the quantity of three
ounces at a time, recouereth the desperate and all ulcers in manner, and staye^h
any manner flux of the belly, especially the flux Dysenteria. The water
taken in the same manner, strengthens the body, comfort the brain, the
heart, stomach, lyu^r, mylt, and the whole breast, if wine sometimes be myxed
with the same. The water druncke in the same manner, helps all Agues, it
strengthens and comfort such recovering out of a long sickness. The water
druncke profits wounds, as well within the body, as without, and cures
outward wounds the speedier, if they be often washed with the same: It also
helps all manner of griefs of the eyes, by dropping of the same every night
into the eyes, for it clears the sight. The water heals the Fistula and
Canker, if they be often washed with the same, and that lynnen clothes wette in
it, be applied. To be brief, in what manner, and what sickenesses the water
shall be applied and ministered, shall (of experience found) be profitable.

The water of Valeriane. The.Lxxvi. Chapter.
THe congruent time for dystillation of it, is, that the herb, roots, and
stalks, with the whole substance shredde small, be dystilled by Balneo Mariae,
about the end of May. This water druncke morning and evening, to the quantity
of three or four ounces at a time, and applied with lynnen clothes, recouereth
ulcers, and swellings causing pain, and great pyles in the fundament: It also
profits against other pyles, by applying lynnen clothes wette in the same.
The water helps such bursten, and the bone somewhat broken, by applying and
drincking of the same: It also dropped into the eyes, clears them. The water
druncke in the morning fasting of Children, to the quantity of of a spoon^full
at a time, delivers the worms in the belly. The water druncke, profits
against poison, and a pestilent air: It heal^th new and old wounds,
recouereth ulcers and impostumes within the body, and puts away ache of
the hyppes. The water drunck, procures clear eyes, takes away the pai^^ of
them, and provoke sweat: powered into troubled wine, causes the same cleerer
and purer. The water remooueth grief of the members, proceeding of a cold
cause, by laboring the members with the same. The water of the roots only
(dystilled by Balneo Mariae, from the mids of August unto the viij. day of
September) drunck; helps poison, and profits against venomous beasts and
worms. The water helps the quotidian fever, drunck to the quantity of six
ounces before the coming of the fit. The water drunck, and applied with lynnen
clothes, preuayleth against pain and stitches of the sides. The water
procures unity and love, where two shall drink together a cup full of this
water.

The water of Verueyne. The.Lxxvij. Chapter.
THe male Uerueyne with the whole substance gathered, shredde small, dystill
by Balneo Mariae, about S. John's day in June. This water druncke morning an^
evening, to the quantity of three ounces at a time, for six or eight days
together, recouereth the yelow Iaundise, preuayleth against poison, helps the
Tertian and Quartaine fever: and expels worms of the belly, by taking the
like quantity, every morning fasting. The water in such manner drunck, helps
the straitness of the breast; the hardness of fetching breath, the ulcers and
consumption of lunges. It comfort the liver, and causes a good color. The
water druncke, recouereth griefs of the stomach, the stoppings of the liver
and mylt, and grievous pains of the loins, and bladder. The water drunk,
amendeth the stopping of the bowels, stomach, and belly. The water cleanses
the reins and bladder, and washes the stones in them. The water profits
against inward pushes of the body: it helps the pyssing of blood, and
grypings of the belly. It is a precious water, for grievous pains and strypes
of the head, by often annoynting and applying lynnen clothes wette in it to
the head: It also helps long sickenesses, whose cause is not known. The
water preuayleth against all manner of dymnesse of the eyes, and ulcers in
them: comfort a weak sight* and procures a clearenesse to it, by ^ropping
and annoynting it diverse times in the eyes. The water helps sores or scabbes
arysing amongst the hears of the head, or other places of the body, and
griefs of the stomach, liver, and mylte, by annoynting and applying lynnen
clothes wette in the same. The water profits against the exulceration of
women's places, if they be washed morning and evening with the same, and that a
lynnen clothe wette in it, be often applied.

The water of Fluelling. The.Lxxviij. Chapter.
THe herb with the whole substance shredde small, and infused for a day and a
night in good Sack or white wine, dystill by Balneo Mariae, about the
beginning of June, which after rectified, will endure for ten years. This
water druncke in the morning fasting, to the quantity of two ounces or less
at a time: or that a Sponge wette in the water (myxed with other savors) be
borne in an Orange pyll, to smell oftentimes to it, preserves the person from
the plague. The hands, head, forheade, and temples, anointed with the same,
profits against any evil and noisome smell. The person which is taken with
the plague, if he lets a vein before it be opened, and takes an ounce and
a half of the fine powder of this herb, with three ounces of the water myxed
with a scruple weight of Venice triacle, and after the drincking be well
covered with clothes to sweat: the poison and evil humors be then expelled
from the heart, and by sweating avoided, so that it is a present and proved
remedy against venomous and pestilent fevers. The water druncke twyse a day,
to the quantity of three or four ounces at a time, heals new wounds, in
that the same issues forth of the wounds, by sweating like to an Oil. The
wounds are also to be washed with this water morning and evening, and applied
with lynnen clothes wette in it, for this on such wise cures wounds and evil
ulcers, in a marvelous manner. An ounce of Vitrioll, or rather of the stone
Chalcites brought to powder dissolved in a pynte of this water, heals all
putrified ulcers, the Ringworme, spots of sundry colors, or any evil
scabbe, whelkes, and fowlenesse of the skin, proceeding of corrupt humors.
The elder that this water shall be, so much the worthyer in diverse causes. The
water anointed or applied with lynnen clothes, on the sting of Spyders, or
byte of venomous beasts, heals and puts away the swelling. The water
druncke and gargelled morning and evening, to the quantity of three ounces at
a time, puts away incontinent the swelling of the throat: If half a pound
of Alum be dissolved in a pynte of this water, and heated, dryueth away
Mothes out of clothe; by wetting and washing it with the same. The water
druncke morning and evening to the quantity of an ounce and a half, or two
ounces for certain days together, puts away gyddynesse of the head,
helps memory, cleanses tough and clammie humors, wastes and purifieth
corrupt blood, the matrice and bladder purges, expels poisons, the stone
of the kidneyes, and all inward poisons of the body. The water delivers the
wandering heat, and opens the passages of the body. This also druncke every
morning fasting for six weeks together, to the quantity of three or four
ounces at a time, makes a man lean of body, strengthens the liver, and
consumes superfluous evil humors. The water druncke in the morning fasting,
an^ laboring it especially on the head, does greatly profit to the
comforting of memory, and to the strengthening of the head and brain: it
also causes a readynesse of speech, and purifyeth the blood. The water
druncke to the quantity of two ounces, or two ounces and a half, with a
dram weight of the fine powder of the leaves of Fluelling* and a dram of the
myddle rynde in powder of Amara dulcis, (that is, bitter sweet) myxte and
druncke fasting, for certain days together, delivers the clammynesse of the
lunges, purges the breast by spittings forth, helps the Cough, difficulties
of fetching breath, and corruption of the lungs, for which cause the
shepeheards in our time, use to give ye herb with salt to sheep vexed with
the cough. The water taken morning and evening, does especially help the
lunges and liver, if they inwardlye putrify, and do ascend unto the throat:
yea, though they shall putrified unto the gretnesse of a hasill nutte, yet will
they again be restored to health by this. The water druncke with a dram of
the powder of the herb, delivers the shedding of the gall; g^ntly procures
urine, and causes very fat and barren women, lean and fruitful. The water
druncke to the quantity of four ounces at a time, procures sweat according
to necessity.

The water of the Birche tree. The.Lxxix. Chapter.
THe leaves newly sprunge out* shredde and beaten, dystill by Balneo Mariae,
about the mids o^ May. This water drunck morning and evening, to the
quantity of four ounces at a time* sweetened with Sugar, delivers the
grief of the stone in the loins. The water profits unto the cooling of hot
ulcers, especially those which shall happen on man's priuities, if it be applied
with lynnen clothes. The water dy^tilled out of the tappe of the tree, after
this manner purchased (as that (...) a hole bored in the body of the tree,
near to the root, and under the same a glass set to gather the lycour
dystilling forth, which after dystilled by Balneo Mariae) profits unto all
wounds washed with the same, yea, heals and dries up open ulcers, if it be
often applied with lynnen clothes. The water druncke morning and evening, to
the quantity of two o^nces and a half, sweetened with Sugar, for xl. days
together, wastes the stone of the kidneyes and bladder. The water cleanses
away spots on the skin, and procures a fayrenesse of the same: It also
heals ulcers of the mouth, by often washing with the same. The water (of the
herb Peryuincle, dystilled about the end of May) drunck morning and evening,
to the quantity of three ounces at a time, recouereth women's places cold, the
rather by applying lynnen clothes wette in the same, and helps those which
have a cold stomach. The water for certain days druncke, with a dram of
the powder of the herb, sends forth the water between the flesh and skin
by vein. A Pessarie wette in the water, and conveyed up into the privy place,
draws down the Terms. The water druncke morning and evening, to the
quantity of three ounces at a time sweetened with Sugar, cease the grypinges
of the bowelles, and stays the flux of the belly* and terms: It also
purges all clammie humors out of the liver and bladder, and cleanses the
reins.

The water of the Vine tree. The.Lxxx. Chapter.
THe water of the Vine tree is gathered in a great glass, about the beginning
of April, when Vynes are cut: and the same (after the dystilling by Balneo
Mariae) requires to be sunned for xl. days. This water myxed with a little
pure wine, and druncke fasting, sharpeneth or quickens the mind and senses.
The water profits against any scabbednesse, if it be washed with the same, it
causes a clean and fair face, and puts away pushes and pymples of the
face. The water often applied, wears away wartes, and the thick knobbes of
hard flesh on the hands. The water recouereth ringwormes, foul spots on
the body, scuruynesse, and inflammations with a redness of the skin, if
they be washed with the same* and applied with lynnen clothes wette in it,
twyse or thryse a day. The leaves of the best vynes* which grow on high and
sunnie places, require to be dystilled in a due season of the year (as about
the end of May) by Balneo Mariae. Thi^ water dropped into running eyes, dries
and stays the running of them, and clears the sight. The water druncke,
helps the spitting of blood, recouereth ulcers of the bowels, and stays a
hot flux of the belly. The water taken thryce a day, to the quantity of
three ounces at a time, expels the stone, helps the abhorring of women
with child, and their foolish longing for sundry things, that no harm may
insewe to the yoongling. Of the roots of the vine, is made a decoction right
profitable, on this wise: Take of the feet of the Vine shredde small, two
pounds, these infuse in the strongest vyneger (covered well over) to which
after add nine pyntes of Conduite water, and a pynte of white honey: after the
boiling and consuming in a third part, that only six pyntes remain, strain
the whole through a carsey cloth, to which then add of the simple Iu^lepe
viij. ounces, and four graynes of Musk dissolved in four or six ounces of
pure Rose water, which after the pouring into a glass, stop close with a
cork and parchement: If any drincketh four ounces of this decoction hot, in
the morning fasting, and refrayneth meat four hours after, procures in
short time a very good stomach, and appetite to meat. This also helps the
Cholicke passion, increases milk in women's breasts, puts away griefs of
the matrice, and is much auayleable for the cough, the rheum, and grief of
the reins.

The water of the greater Celondine. The.Lxxxi. Chapter.
THe congruent time of dystilling the Celondine, is, that when the herb
bearing flowers, the whole substance gathered and shredde small, be dystilled
in a Cucurbite of glass by Balneo Mariae, about the mids of May. This water
druncke morning and evening, to the quantity of four ounces at a time,
delivers the yelowe Iaundise, and helps the grypings of the belly. The
water druncke in the same manner, mitigateth the Ague, and puts away
scabbednesse proceeding of cold, if the places be anointed with the same. The
water druncke twyse or thryse a day, to the quantity of two ounces at a
time, sweetened with Sugar, recouereth the stopping of the liver and mylt. The
water (after the infusion of the herb for six days in good Aqua vitae)
druncke for certain days morning and evening, to the quantity of an ounce at
a time, preserves the body long in health, and expels evil humors. The
water dropped into the eyes, recouereth spots, the pynne and web,
delivers the redness of them, preserves and causes a sharp and ready
sight, and restores the same in a manner lost: If the mouth be washed with the
water, it cease the grievous pain of the teeth, and puts away spots, if
the face be often washed with the same. The water dries and heals a Canker,
and likewise the Fistula, and puts away pestilent pushes, if a lynnen cloth
wet in it, be applied twyse or thrice a day. The water of the greater
Celondine, that has the property of helping diseases, as well the hot as
cold; gives strength to the spiritual members, expels poysen from the
heart, delivers the lunges of that which to it is noyous, heals it vlcered,
and by drincking sundry times of it, stays the flux of blood. I am in
doubt (says a certain skillful Physician) whether a man may believe, that all
these properties be in the dystilled water of Celondine; seeing that according
to Dioscorides and Galen, it is of quality mightily clensing, and very hot,
by reason whereof this causes the veins to be the cleerer of all gross
humors, and delivers the obstructions of the liver in the Iaundyse: This also
is the reason, why the learned Mathiolus in his commentary upon Dioscorides,
does so greatly reprehend the Chemists, which take upon them to draw forth a
Quintessence of this herb, that they affirm to be not only commodious for
their extractions, but as woonderfully profitable for the preserving of health,
and expelling of infinite diseases. Seeing that this herb can work no such
matter, it is possible that the Chymistes abuse the same, where they in stead
of rightly naming this herb Chelidonium, do name it Caelidonum, (rather
devising for it such a word Caelidonum) as if this herb were a gift from
heaven, to which are attributed all these great virtues. This water is on such
wise distilled, take the roots, leaves and flowers, which shredde small, and
put into a vessel of glass, well fenced with Lute, bury the vessel covered
with his head in horse dung, for the space of ten days: After the taking
forth, dystill it in ashes according to Art: the lycour that shall first run
forth, will be waterishe, the second as an oil, which you shall dystill yet
once again, and keep for your use.

The water of Strawberies. The.Lxxxij. Chapter.
THe time most agreeable for distilling of the berries, is, when they are ripe,
yet not over soft: and those which grow and are gathered in the hyllie woods,
be accounted the better. These full ripe, shall you putrify in a Cucurbite of
glass, by strawing upon them a good quantity of Sugar brought to powder,
which let so long stand (close covered with the head) until they appear
hoarie, after dystill the whole by Balneo Mariae. This singular water asswageth
burning humors, puts away spots of the eyes new grown, either of a hot
or cold humor, so that they be not ouergreat. It also stays the watring and
running of the eyes, proceeding of heat or cold, and like restores the sight
to a clearenesse, decayed or lost by either of the causes. This water druncke
in the morning fasting, to the quantity of three ounces at a time, with a
little wine, does marvelously prevail against the inward heates of the
lunges and liver, and extinguisheth thirst. It also comfort nature,
expels poisons, and procures the terms in women. The water drunck in like
quantity morning and evening, sweetened with a little Sugar, recouereth an
evil heat of the stomach, and asswageth the great desire to drink. The
water druncke morning and evening, to the quantity of four ounces at a time,
with a dram weight of pure Aqua vitae, recouereth and heals the Leprie, for
that the same druncke in wine, or otherwise eaten with bread, purges the
blood, and remooueth a noisome scabbednesse of the body. The water in the
same manner taken, helps the inflammations of the liver, the yelowe Iaundise,
the stone in the loins, kidneyes and bladder. It also loses the breast,
comfort the heart, and cleanses the blood. The water holden a little while
in the mouth, and gargelled in the throat, strengthens the gummes, fasteneth
the teeth loose, and stays the dystillations from the brain: It also
profits against ulcers, and swellings in the throat, soreness of the mouth,
and a stinking breath. The water marvelously recouereth and heals blysters
and pymples on the face, which proceed of heat, by often washing it with the
same. This also asswageth the swelling of the face, by washing and often
applying lynnen clothes wette in the water. The water recouereth that person
whose leg is broken, by drincking every morning fasting (for a certain
space) to the quantity of four ounces at a time, sweetened with Sugar, and to
apply often lynnen clothes wette in the same. The water heals all foul
legs, if they be washed morning and evening with the same, or that the water
often applied with linen clothes: It also cures filthy wounds, if they shall
be often washed with the same, and that the pacient in the mean season, does
daily drinck twyse a day of this water. The water mixed with pure white salt,
and distilled once again in a Cucurbite of glass by Balneo Mariae, is highly
commended for the eyes, in that it cools, cleereth, and puts away the
dymnesse of them. The water of the Strawberies, is a souereygne and an
effectuous ointment for the eyes, if they especially be grieved by an extreme
heat, or hot dystillings from the head. The water of the herb (dystilled by
Balneo Mariae, about the mids of May) druncke morning and evening, to the
quantity of four ounces at a time, recouereth the yelowe Iaundise, procures
urine, stays the flux Dysenteria, and the terms in women, and helps the
spleen. The water like druncke, loses the breast, purges the lunges, helps
the Cough, and puts away the Leprie. The water dropped into burning eyes
with a redness, morning and evening, does greatly mittigate the heat of them.
The water druncke, asswageth the overmuch sweating of body. For the burning and
obstruction of the liver, there is nothing more profitable, nor holesommer.

Of the Dystilling of waters out of beasts, or out of their parts.
The.Lxxxiij. Chapter.


THe manner of drawing forth a substance from all beasts and Eggs: Take new
laid eggs, the quantity and weight of nine ounces, of common salt prepared,
one ounce, beat and mix these well together, after put the same into a
Cucurbite or glass body, with the cover fast luted, the which set into Balneo
Mariae, or horse dung for ten days at the least. After set on a head with his
receyuer well luted together, which you shall dystill in ashes with a soft
fire, by little and little, and that which comes, keep charily. The like to
this may be drawn out, of Snayles, Partriches, and Capons, for consumptions:
and also the like may be drawn out of Adders, and Snakes for the Leprosy.

The water dystilled of the blood of a healthful young man, avails against
aches, and running pains in the joints, which is prepared on this wise: take
the blood of a young man, of twenty years old, or thereabout, being in
perfect health: this blood let stand to cool in a vessel so long, unto the
separation of the wheyishe moisture from the blood, which waterie moisture
floting above, throw away: the other put into a glass body with a head
close luted about, after set or bury the same in horse dung, for sixteen
days, that it may putrify or rot. Which after the drawing forth, set into
ashes, luting diligently the receyuer to the nose of the head. This dystill
with a soft and easy fire in the beginning: with this dystilled water, souple
(and as it were bathe) the aching and payning places.

The water of man's ordure dystilled by a Lymbecke, preuayling in the Fistula,
and brings or causes a fair scarre, if the grieved places be applied with
the same: If of this water be dropped into the eye, it takes away the redness
and dymnesse of sight, it breaks and dissolueth the web, and puts away
or dries up tears. This druncke, helps speedily the falling sickness,
namely if their heads be anointed therewith. This water also applied on
Impostumes with towe, speedily breaks them. If ministered with a quantity of
Lyme dissolved in it, breaks the stone. This water druncke, helps the
Dropsy. This water speedily heals the byte of any venomous dog being
mad, or other beast venomous, if the harmed person drink thereof: If this
water be druncke by and by after poison received, it delivers the person.
This Bertapalia.

The water of man's ordure or dung, of a sanguine man dystilled, being orderly
applied, does help the hasty changing of the hear of the head to a
whiteness, and the shedding of it, corrosiue ulcers, the canker, and spots
of the eyes. This also druncke, recouereth the falling sickness, amendeth the
stone of the kidneys and bladder, the Dropsy, and the byte of any venomous
beast.

The water of man's ordure dystilled, causing the hear of the head to grow,
is thus prepared: Take of man's ordure, and the same dystill in a glass body,
and that the same may not stink, myxe a little Camphora, or Musk finely
grinded with it: with this water wash the bare place, where you would have the
hear to grow, annoynting after the place with the best honey for xxx. days.
The place or scabbed part washed with the water of man's ordure dystilled, does
thoroughly cure it: for this is a secret in every scabbe, or in all manner of
scabbes.

The water of Dooues dung (steeped for a night before in wine) dystilled, and
druncke, helps the stone, this Theophrastus.

The water of a Capon dystilled, which a German woman used in the traueyle of
child, and in birth of the child: Take a Capon of twelve years of age, this
strangled, pulled, and orderly dressed, boil then in a sufficient quantity of
the best Malmesie, Rosewater, and Borage in a possenet, or rather new earthen
pot glased, unto a tenderness of the flesh: after stamp diligently the
flesh, with the bones and intrayles, which put into a Cucurbite and luted,
dystill according to Art in Balneo Mariae, add in the dystilling both Musk
and Amber greece, but another wills of Diambra, and of Diamoschus (which I
rather allow) of the powder of precious stones, of Diarrhodon abbatis, of
Diamargariton calidum, Aromaticum Rosatum, of each of these Cordial powders
(gotten from the Apothecarie) four scruples, of Coriander prepared half an
ounce, adding hereunto besides of the oil of Cynamone, four grains weight,
of the oil of Cloves six grains, these diligently mix together.

The description of the water of a Capon, out of the dispensatorie of the
Colonians. The.Lxxxiiij. Chapter.
THe Capon ought first to be much chased up and down, until he be wearied,
and then suddenly strangled, the feathers after plucked of, without dipping of
him in water (as the feathers dry pluckte) which on such wise wholye plucked
and bare, and the bowels drawn, choppe small both the flesh and bones, the
mawe or gyserne, the liver, and heart, the bowels remembered to be thrown away.
The Capon thus ordered and chopped very small, lay to soke in an earthen pot
glased, pouring upon a pynt and a half of read Rosewater, a pynte of Buglosse
water, half a pynte of Maioram or Baulme water, of Malmesie a pynte and three
ounces, of Cinnamon two ounces, of Saffron one dram, of Endive seeds three
drammes, of Galingale two drammes, of Gynger, Nutmegs, Mace, and the cytryne
Saunders, of each one dram, of the ryndes of the pleasant Citrone, a dram
and a half, of the Cordial flowers (to be learned of the Apothecarie) of each
one dram, of Couander seeds prepared, and of Melone seeds, of each two
drammes, of the Pyne apple seeds one ounce, of the Orange flowers preserved
and brought to powder half an ounce: All these let stand in the infusion for
twenty and four hours, upon a furnace, or in any other hot place: which in
setting the head close luted upon, (whether the same be in a glass body)
dystill by Balneo Mariae, and in the dystilled lycour quench sundry times a
piece or pieces of red glowing gold, especially at the time of the ministering
or using of this drinck: This borrowed out of the dispensa* of the Colonians.

The dystillation of a Capon Maystriall, of D. Peter Vnormatiensis. he first
boiled the Capon in water unto a sufficiency (on such wise) that two pyntes
remained of the broth, after he powered the broth and flesh into a glass body
close-luted, which he dystilled after Art in ashes, and having distilled about
a pint, or a pint and a half, ceased of, without adding to this water either
spices* either herbs or roots: which water he often ministered and used to
weak bodies, in Agues, and was delectable without abhorrement to the pacients.

Another, let a good Capon be boiled in pure water, with the leaves of Borage
and Buglosse, of each one handful, of the conserve of Violets, Roses, Borage
and Buglosse, of each two ounces (of the Cordial powlders a like quantity
added) let all these be dystilled in Balneo Mariae, the lycour dystilled,
aromatizate with the powder of the three Saunders: and let this be druncke or
ministered often to weak bodies: this borrowed out of And* a Lacuria, in the end
of his book of the pestilence.

The dystillation of a Capon, borrowed of a certain doctor. Take an ancient
Capon, of six, seven, or eight years of age, the same dry pull and bare,
which after the drawing, steep or soke in pure water for a night, the whole
put after into a new earthen pot glased, which contains four measures of
water, this in the seething skym diligently, and the fatness take carefully
of, remembering always to fill up the pot boiling: After the flesh t^^derly
sodden, and fallen from the bones, take or pare of both the fat and thin
skynnes (which so ordered) shredde the flesh very small, putting it with the
boiled water, into four glass bodies Artely luted, under which maintain
fire, until the whole work be ended, which dystilled on this wise, stop
close unto your use: for this mightily recouereth those which be decayed of
strength, and that have no appetite or will to meat.

Another water of a Capon, unto the restoring of decayed strength, out of a
written book of a certain Physician: the tender flesh and pulpe of one
Capon, the skynnes and fat drawn of, and pulled away, shredde finely, and
wash diligently with Buglosse water: after this, add to the conserve of
Violets, Borage, and Buglosse, of each an ounce and a half, of the conserve of
Roses one ounce, of lease gold vj. in number, all these arteficially mixed
together, and put after in a double vessel, dystill according to Art: let a
spoonefull alone of this licour, be often ministered, or with comfortable
brothes mixed.

Another water of a Capon, out of the same author, recovering bodies low
brought by the ague: Take the pulpe or tender flesh of the Capon, being chased
and coursed up and down, and to and fro, before the strangling, from which
draw or pluck both the fat and skins, then wash both in the waters of
the water Lilly (named of the Latins Nenuphar) and the Lettuce, adding
thereto the conserve of Violets new made, and the flowers of the Nenuphar, of
each one ounce, of the conserues of Borage and Buglosse, of each one ounce and
a half, of the white Poppie and Lettuce seeds, of each one ounce, of the
powder of the cold Diamargariton, one dram and a half, of the juice of
pleasant Apples, two ounces, all these diligently mixte together, and put in a
double vessel, dystill according to Art, which dystilled lycour use after the
manner above taught.

Another water of a Capon, of the same authors, for the recovering strength, in
a cold sickness: Take the pulpe of the Capon thoroughly wearied, and after
washed diligently in white wine, or else in Malmesie, if so be the sickness
shall be colder, adding thereunto of the conserve of Sage flowers one ounce, of
the conserve of Staechas, Anthos, and Acorus, of each half an ounce, of the
ryndes of the Cytrons prepared with sugar, and finely shred, six drammes, of
the inner part of the Cinamone, and of Nutmegs, of each one dram, let all
these be put in Balneo Mariae, and dystilled according to Art: let certain
spoonefulles of this lycour, be ministered for a certain time, to the weak and
feeble bodies.

There be some Authors, which in certain sickenesses, especially of the head,
and in cold diseases, with the weakness, and decayed strength: that highly
commend the waters of Capons dystilled on such wise, yea, the Author has
experienced to have auayled sometimes in the Colic passions, especially those
which were wyndie of body: for the distilled water given to such, much
perplexed with wind of the body, it speedily cease and stays the wind
from any more molesting, if so be the water shall rightly be prepared. Thus
diverse and sundry medicines may skilfully be devised by a learned Physician,
in the variety of sickenesses.

For what cause the brothes of Capons, and other fattes, seeing they be
fluxible, and of an ayreall substance, are so slowly elevated. The Lxxxv.
Chapter.
THe reason of this, is, in that the fatness floting or swimming above, does
of the same procure and draw over a thyn skin, which so keeps the moisture
resting under, that the humor can hardly euoporate through: and even the like,
does the oil poured into a vessel with either wine or pleasant waters, by the
floting above, suffer not any of them to breath through: and the Radish root
also eaten with oil, causes then not the like belchings or reastinges of the
stomach to insew, as did otherwise without the oil: and even the like of
juices may be learned, which when any would have kept for a time, they do
cover it with oil, that neither the spirits (through the same) keeping in the
juice, do breath forth, nor may be drawn away of the outward air: this
written of Langius in his Epistles.

A dystilled water restoring weak bodies, and most profitable in consumptions,
out of the secret conclusions of Fierauantus: Let a good young hen be gotten
that never laid egg, this pull alive, whereby her blood may so be stirred
up, and spersed thorowout all the body: thus being plucked bare, and dead,
draw forth the bowels only, beating after both the flesh and bones together
in a mortar, adding so much of the crummes of white bread, as the weight of
the flesh and bones beaten, beat these well together, putting thereunto also
one handful of the green or dry Scabious, and so many leaves of gold as wey
a French or English crown, to these after add so much of the water of the
garden Nightshade or petie Morell, as is the weight of the whole substance,
which after let so stand together for a whole night, putting it then into a
glass body with a head diligently luted, and three pyntes of the best and
mightiest wine also added before the dystilling, which (after the fastening of
the receyuer to the head) dystill in Balneo Mariae, unto the fecies remain
through dry, and then have you the water. Now to every pynte of this water,
add one ounce of our water of the honye (of which shall after be taught in the
proper place of this book) which let be kept in a glass close stopped, that
the air breath not forth. The use of it serves to be druncke both in the
meals, and between meals: which helps the dry cough of the persons
diseased and sick of the Ague, and women traueyling in childebed, and many
other like matters, does this dystillation work, greatly to be woondered at.

The Alchymistes instruct and teach a way of the drawing of waters out of the
whytes and y^lkes of eggs, (by burying the substance before, for five days in
horse dung) and adding also a quantity of Salt in the dystilling. The like do
they describe of the fattes, and rosinie substances* and many descriptions of
the like waters may be understood and read in many practices of Diodorus
Euclayon, already published by the Author.

The water of Swallows helping the falling sickness, borrowed out of the
method of Rondelle^ius* Take of swallows unto the quantity of vj. ounces* of
Gastore^m one ounce, these mix and infuse in wine for a night, and put after
into a glass body, dystill after Art* let the pacient use and take of this
water unto the quantity of two spoonefulles, once a month, in the morning
fasting.

A plaster marvelously helping the scrofuls, and Fistula etc. It has been
experienced, that cutting of the heads and tails of the snakes, and clensing
forth the bowels, and after dystilling them according to Art: This water
applied on scrofulles and the Fistula, does speedily help them: this
Fumanellus writes.

A remedy against the Leprie, prepared and made of frogs: This one singular
remedy and medicine, I will not hyde from the world (says Fumanellus) nor
lightly ouerpasse the confection of frogs, which ought before to be fleaed, and
the bowels drawn forth, then put into a Copper vessel tynned within, and
having sundry small holes in the bottom, like to the form of a watering pot,
under which must another pot be set, in such sort, that the upper standing
within the mouth of the nether pot; and diligently luted round about, that no
air at all breath forth, these so ordered, set into the earth unto the mouth of
the nether pot, and covering the earth close and hard, make a fire of coals
round about the upper pot, the mouth of it, like close luted: which so long
continue with fire, until the whole substance and moisture of the frogs shall
be dystilled: The licour may be ministered or druncke every morning fasting, for
a certain time, unto the quantity of the third part of an ounce: And if
oppurtunitie and just occasion shall so move me, I intend to make an attempt
of the dystilling also of Snakes, in like order (as above taught) of the
frogs. Now the form of the vessels, which Nicholaus Florenti teaches to be
made in his large commentary ( in fermo. 7.) fifth treatise, and xxxix.
Chapter, is on this wise: He first writes the vessel or pot (in which the
frogs prepared be) to be filled unto the mouth with them: and the mouth all
over filled and covered with butter: with this dystilled lycour, being a noble
medicine, he instrudeth to annoint the Canker, that heals it in short time.



The water of the honey comb, procures hear to grow: and helps the hard
fetching and drawing of breath, or such short wynded through the straytenesse
of the breast, if this be often druncke: it helps a man's beard to grow the
more, being sundry times anointed or wette therewith: but far better and
sooner does the oil and honey perform the same, which has a most great
force in the like.

The dystilled honey anointed on a bald pluee, causes the hear to grow, and
come very soon again, after the shedding of hear: this Theophrastus.

Ioannes Montanus writes, that of honey may a strong water be made: and that in
the third dystillation of it, to become a poysonable lycour: ^^t of Mercury
which is resolved by the strong water, is to be brought into a water the which
will make a helthfull lycour and strengthening.

The water of honey to make the face white and fair: take of reddishe honey
two pounds, of gum Arabecke two ounces, these two myxe together, and
dystill by a Lymbecke with a soft fire* The first (...) tha^ comes, serves
unto the clensing of the face, and unto the clearing and whytening of it: the
second with the third lycour, does cause the hears to grow and become
whytishe or flaxen of color.

Gesnerus distilled a water out of honey, whose first water sauoured somewhat of
wax, where besides it was sufficient delectable and clear, and whytish, which
perhaps may seem auayleable in the Cholicke passions. The second water which
dystilled forth, had a certain sowrenesse. The third water which came forth,
tasted as it were vinegar. The fourth water which came forth, tasted in a manner
as sour as vinegar: he began dystillation in the morning at the seventh
hour, and out of half a measure of honey, he purchased two small vials full
in a day, in the evening he began to dystill, and continued unto noone in a
manner, he also prepared and made his fire to last unto the ninth hour of the
night: and from that hour he renewed the fire unto the sixth hour of the next
morrow: and following the fire from the sixth hour of the morning unto two in
the after noone: then began a great fume or smoke to arise and issue forth into
the receyuet, and that somewhat stinking, and a substance also to ascend (as
when nothing remained of the watrie substance, then did the honey ascend)
then drew I forth the Cucurbite (says the author) which I should not have
done (but rather have set or lyfted him higher in the ashes) and then came the
drops forth read, and burnt in the Limbeck, yea sour, and in savor or
smell like to the oil of the Juniper wood in a manner: and of it fast cleaving
to the sides and bottom of the Cucurbite: The remnant in the Cucurbite, was
the honey of a blackish read color, burnt, somewhat sour, and coloring
yelowe.

Master Gesnerus dystilled the oldest Hydromell in ashes, and left in the
Cucurbite a substance tending or declyning unto a blackenesse, and sweet in
taste, yet sour or loathsome in smell. The first water which dystilled forth,
was odoriferous, and had the hot and quick taste of Aqua vitae, yet the same
conceived nor took no flame. The second water which came forth, seemed
wateryer, with a certain sowrenesse: so that a small quantity of water, he
dystilled of the same.

A water gotten of the hinder legs of frogs, by the sublymed vapor,
helps consumptions, and wasting of the lunges, yea, most effectuous for the
dry distemperance of the liver, being taken fasting, and twyse a day warm,
for this proved Alexander Benedictus, most excellent, and ministered of it to
his great praise.

The water dystilled out of the sperme of frogs, in the month of May: and
applied on the gowte, does marvelously assuage or mittigate the pain, and
takes the pain away utterly within a short time.

Of the compounde waters, especially of leaves, flowers, roots, seeds,
fruit, herbs, and trees, lycours, gummes, and wood. A water for the
eyesight. The.Lxxxvi. Chapter.
A Water defending and preserving the sight for a long time, and purging the
eyes of all spots: Take of the best and pleasantest white wine, twelve
pyntes, of new bread light wrought and well washed, four pounds, of
Fennel, Celondine, and of the heads of the squill onyon, of each four
ounces, of Cloves four drammes: these mix diligently together in a glass
body, having the head, and receyuer diligently luted about, which after set
into Balneo Mariae, to be dystilled until five pyntes of the water be come,
then ceasing, draw forth the fire, which water keep a part close stopped.
This water preserves the sight, as above uttered, and cleanses the eyes of all
filth, happening in them. This water works marueylouslye, by ministering one
ounce at a time: for taken fasting in the morning, for a month together,
preserves the body from any great and grievous sickness: and in all manner
of causes or griefs where this water shall be ministered, it works a great
and marvelous help: Or it is otherwise a great secret, in many sickenesses:
this borrowed out of Fierauantus.

Another water for the eyes, borrowed out of a written book of secrets: Take of
Turpentine, (of Tormentill I rather suppose) of Fennel, of Rue, or Endyue, or
Betonie, Celondine, of Eyebright, of red Rose leaves, of Syler of the
mountain, and of Maiden hear, of each one handful, let all these be steeped
in white wine for one day and a night, after put the wine and the whole
substance into a glass body, which dystill according to Art: for this is a
marvelous water for the eyes.

Another water, borrowed out of the same book, excellent for the eyes: Take of
Eyebright ( orenegliae) Celondine, the five leaued grass, the Veruaine, and
Rosemarie flowers, of each one handful, all these myxe together in the form
of a sauce, by pouring the best red wine upon, which after the infusion for a
time, and put up into a glass body, being luted after Art, let so stand
(before the dystilling for four or five days: which thus prepared, and the
receyuer fastened to the nose of the head, dystill with a soft fire: to this
water after add these following, as the Rewe seeds, the Fennel seeds, Sugar Candy, Tutia prepared and brought to powder, and Aloes hepaticke, of each
three drammes, all these diligently labor and myxe together with this water,
in a glass body with a head, and dystilled (as before) with a soft fire,
which after keep in a glass close stopped: Of this water pour a drop at a
time into the eye, of what grief soever the eye shall be molested or payned,
so that the same grief be cold, for it will ease and heal the grief within
a short time.

A water of master Peter the Spanyarde, which both sharpeneth the sight, and
clears the eyes, and puts away spots and the web of the eye: take of
Persely seeds, Fennel seeds, Smalledge seeds, Siler of the mountain, of
Annis seeds, of Carowaye seeds, of the seeds of either Claree, of the roots
of Celondine, of Acorus, of Betonie, of the leaves of Egrimonie, of Tormentill,
Rue, Veruaine, of each a like quantity, these together beaten and grynded, put
for the first day in a healthful chyldes urine: the second day in white
wine: the third day in woman's milk or Asses: and in the fourth day let all
these together, be distilled according to Art: which after keep as a Balm, in
stopping the mouth of the glass close, that it breathe not forth: for his
property is to breathe and seek out.

A water of marvelous working, clearing a mystie and dim sight, and
preserving the health of the eyes, borrowed out of Ioannes de Vigo: take of the
juice of Fennel, of the juice of Celondine, of Rue, of Eyebright, of each two
ounces, of Honey ten drammes, of Sarcocolla, of Antimonie, of Tutia, and of
Aloes, of each half an ounce, of the galls of Capons, Cocks, and Hens, of
each two ounces, of Nutmegs, of Saffron, of Cloves, of each one ounce, of Sugar Candy, and of the sirupe of Roses, of each six drammes, of the liver of a
healthful goat, two ounces and a half, of the flowers of Rosemarie, and
Veruayne, of each one handful and a half: these altogether beat diligently,
and very fine, and the liver cut or shredde very small, all these put after
into a glass body with a head, dystill twyse over according to Art: and
drop of this into the eye, for it is marvelous.

Another water of the same man's, unto that purpose: Take of the galls of those
fowls which live by rapine, and of the gall of a Crane, of each two drammes,
of the galls of Partriches, Fesants, and of Cocks, of each three drammes, of
Honey one ounce, of the juice of Fennel, and the juice of Eyebright, of each
one ounce and a half, of the wine of the sweet and sour Pomegranates, of
each ten drammes, of Aloes hepaticke, and of Sarcocolla, of each two drammes,
of Cubebae, of the long and round Pepper, of each one scruple, of Cynamone one
dram and a half, of Nutmegs, and of Cloves, of each one dram, of Sugar Candy, and of the sirupe of Roses, of both six drammes, of Antimonie, and of
Tutia, of each two drammes and a half, of a Goats liver three ounces, of
Rosemarie flowers one handful: all these finely shredde and bette together,
and put after into a glass body, dystill according to Art: for this water
dropped into the eye, preserves the health and sight of the eye, and amendeth
both the mystynesse and darckenesse of sight.

A most precious water that amendeth the mystynesse, the pynne and web, and
all defaults of the eyes: It clears also the sight by a marvelous manner, and
cleanses any manner of spotte of the eyes: Take of white wine one ounce and a
half, of the juice of Fennel purifyed and cleared, five drammes and a half,
of Camphora, one dram, of Tutia Alexandrina one ounce, of Ginger half an
ounce, of Honey four ounces: all these beaten and grynded together, let steep
for nine days in a clean scoured basin, set in a clear air, where neither
dew nor the sun beams may fall upon, which after dystilled by a Fylter,
keep the water in a glass with a narrow mouth: and drop of this water both
morning and evening, one drop or two into the eye: this Arnoldus.

A water of a most noble working, in the cataracts of the eyes, for it
resolves the matter consisting or being in the ways of the eyes, with a
notable comforting of the virtue visiue or seeing, borrowed out of Ioannes de
Vigo: Take of a healthful and fresh Goats liver two pounds, of Calamus
aromaticus, and of honey, of each half an ounce, of the juice of Rue, three
drammes, of the water of Celondine, six ounces, of Fenn^ll water, of Veruaine
water, and Eyebright water, of each three ounces, of long Pepper, of Nutmegs,
and of Cloves, of each two drammes, of Saffron one scruple, of Rosemarie
flowers grynded somewhat, Schiara or Bozomus, of each half a handful, of
Sarcocolla, of Aloes hepa^icke, af each three drammes, of the g^lles of those
fowls which live by rapine if they can be got en^ one ounce, or instead of
the^ let be taken or used the galls of the Cocks, Capons, Henn^s, and
Par^riches, of each three drammes: to all these after the grinding and beating
together, add three ounces of white Sugar, of Rosed honey, six drammes: these
after the diligent laboring and myxing together, dystill in a Cucurbite
according to Art, which diligently stop and keep to your use: for this
water comfort any dymnesse and weakness of sight, mundifyeth the
mystinesse of the eyes, and lets or stays the coming of a Cataracte.

A water to be dropped within the eye, restoring the largeness of the apple of
the eye, with a certain comforting of the virtue visiue: Take of the juice of
the sweet Fennel, one dram, of the blood of a Culuer one ounce, of Tutia,
and Antimonie, of each two drammes, of Rosewater, and of the water of Myrtels,
of each one ounce and a half, of the powder of the Myrobalan^s and Citrines
together half a dram, these after the myxing, and put into a glass body
with a head, dystill according to Art: which water after use, as above taught:
this Joan. de Vigo.

A water experienced, for the recovery of sight in a manner lost, being often
dropped into the eyes: take of Cellondine, Fennel, Sage, Rosemarie, Veruaine,
and Rue, of each one handful, these dystill in a Lymbecke.

A water recovering sight, in a manner lost, and the pynne and web: Take of
the garden Tasill, and of Yarrowe, of each one handful, of Celondine, of
Veruaine, of Rue, of Fenell, of the leaves of Euula Campana, of each one
handful, of Caphura half an ounce: these fresh gathered, stamp together,
and dystill in a Lymbecke.

An ointment or rather medicine for sore eyes, recovering the sight in a manner
lost and experienced: Take of Smalledge, of Fennel, of Rue, of Veruaine, of
herb Benedict or Hares foot, of Cudwoort, or Chasewoort, of Egrimonie, of
Germaunder, of Luminella, of Pympernell, of Strawberie leaves, and of Sage, of
each of these a like quantity, these steep together in a young chyldes urine,
adding to these, seven graynes or corns of Pepper, and a little white honey,
all which dystill in a Lymbecke: this borrowed out of Fumanellus.

A water of Sage, Fennel, read Roseleaues, Cellondine, and Rue, of each a
like, with a little of Veruaine, not so much of this herb, as of the others,
dystill a water, which if the same be dropped into the eyes both morning and
evening, it helps the weakness of an old sight: this Arnoldus.

Another water in the beginning of water descending, for the swelling of the
eye lyddes, and tears: Take of Assa one ounce, of pure white honey half a
pynte, of Fennel water, and Rue water, of each twelve drammes, of Maioram
water half an ounce, dystill in a Lymbecke, according to Art: this Fumanellus.

A water, or dystilled lycour unto the provoking of sleep, and it is a secret
worker of sleep: Take of Opium thebaicum, of Garlic heads pylled, of each
two ounces, the Garlic heads bette with a wooden Pestill in a Marble mortar,
adding thereto the Opium grynded, these well incorporate together, that it may
be like to a sauce: this dystill in a Retort, with a most soft or slow fire in
ashes: with this water when need shall require, annoint the temples, the
foreheade, and pulses of the wrestes: and beware you minister not, nor use
this, but upon a great necessity, as in the frantic persons, as you shall
think good.

A water of Fumanellus unto the provoking of sleep: Take of the juices of the
black and white Poppie, of each half a pynte, of the juices of the black and
white Henbane, of each two ounces, of the juice of Purselane, and of Lettuce,
of each three ounces, of the juice of Faba inuersa, half a pynte, of the
Nenuphar, three ounces, of the seeds of either Poppie, and of the roots of
Faba inuersa, of each two ounces, of the seeds of Darnell half a pound, of
the white and read Henbane three ounces, of Xyloaloes, and Nucis Methel, of
each one ounce and a half: of Purselane seeds, and Lettuce seeds, of each
one dram, of Scariola, one dram and a half, of Endive one ounce, these all
beaten together, put into a glass body for three days, which after dystill:
of this give one dram in either wine or water.

A water of Fumanellus procuring sleep, let the seeds of the Poppie and
Lettuce unto the weight of a pound, be bruised and steeped in wine for twenty
hours, adding to these a little of Opium, and after the dystilling, give one
dram of this water at the going to rest or sleep.

A water or sleeping lycour marvelous, being distilled: Take of
Diatragacanthum, two drammes, of Sumach half a dram, of the flowers Bedegnar,
three drammes, of the red Saunders half an ounce, of Psilium one dram, of
the rynde of the Mandrake root one ounce, of Henbane half an ounce, of the
black Poppie two ounces and a half, of the white Poppie half an ounce, of
the red Poppie so much, of Opium two drammes, of the Basil seeds one
dram and a half, of the roots of Alkakengi two drammes, of Camphora one
dram, of Dragons blood one ounce, of the seeds of the Hemlocke two
drammes, of the Adamant stone half a pound, of the Purselane seeds two
ounces, of Lettuce seeds two ounces, of Endyue seeds three ounces, of the
wine of Pomegranates half a wine pynte, of Plantaine seeds two ounces, of
the wine of Barberies half a pynte, of the garden Solanum one pound weight:
of all these dystill a water, which is marvelous: in that the same procures a
most strong and sound sleep, if at the lying down in bed, half an ounce
weight be ministered in a draught of good wine.

A water procuring sleep, borrowed out of Fumanellus: Take of black Pepper, of
the white Henbane, of the ryndes of the Mandrake root, of the seeds of
Lettuce, of Darnell, of the white and black Poppie, of each a like quantity:
and to these one dram of the juice of Lettuce, which after the stamping, let
so lie in the glass body for a day and a night, and being dystilled, minister
of this as above taught.

Another water: Take of the juice of the white Henbane, of the juice of the
leaves of the white and black Poppie, of the juice of the leaves of Mandrake,
or the juice of the Apples, of the juice of Iuie, and of the juice of the
Hemlocke, of each half a pynte, of the seeds of Lettuce, and seeds of the
Darnell, of each three ounces, these after the well grynding together, dystill
by a Lymbecke three times over, and in every dystilling grynde the fecies or
grounds, myxing them with the water dystilled: and in the third dystillation,
the water which then issues or comes forth, keep close stopped in a glass
with a narrow mouth: of this minister only two or three drops at a time.

A water for the washing of the head, borrowed out of the same Author: a
compounde (as they write) experienced, if so be the hinder part of the head be
bathed therewith, and that a decent diet be used before, which ought to be
applied at the going to bed, for xl. days together, and a grain of pure
Olibanum swallowed down withal, the form of the compounde is on this wise:
Take of the flowers of Rosemarie, of Borage flowers, of Buglosse flowers, of
the Roses, of the Violets, and of the herb Balm, of each one dram, of the
Camomill flowers two drammes, of Baye leaves, of Staechas, of Maioram, and
Sage, of each six drammes, these after the fine shredding, steep in pleasant
white wine for five days together: after dystill the whole according to Art,
which dystilled, keep close stopped with a narrow mouth, adding to it one
pound of Turpentine, of Masticke, Myrrh, and of the honey of Anacardus, of
each one ounce, of Olibanum two ounces: all these grynded and wrought
together, infuse for five days within the dystilled lycour: which again
dystilled, to this lycour add of Nutmegs, of Cloves, of Cubebae, of Cynamone,
of Mace, and Cardamomum, of each six drammes, of Lignum Aloes, eight drammes,
of Amber, and Musk, of each half a dram, all these grynded and myxte
together, infuse for five days, which then begin to dystill with an easy
fire, and toward the end a stronger fire, the same keep to your use.

A water experienced for the whitening of the face, and making thynne the
skin, and clensing or taking away all spots of the face: Take of chosen
Turpentine dystilled, two pounds, of Olibanum three ounces, of Masticke half
an ounce, of the herb Dragons, so much, all these beaten together, and with
the Turpentine water myxte, dystill again, adding to it after new Barrowes
grease molten, one pound, of Cloves two drams, of Nutmegs three ounces, of
chosen Cynamone half an ounce, of Spica Celtica, as much, of Spikenarde two
drammes, of Caphura three drammes, of gold leaves one dram, of silver two
drammes, all these finely grynded and beaten together, dystill it in a
Lymbecke, after add twyse so much of this water, as of the water following,
and scouring the face before with the decoction of Branne, wash the face all
over with this water: Take of the water of Quickesiluer one ounce, of Borace,
of Aluminis Zucharini, of Ceruse washed, of each one dram, these myxe
together, and use as above taught: This borrowed out of Fumanellus.

A water for memory, safe, and to be marueyled at, if so be the pacient keep
and use a diet: Take of Nutmegges, of Cloves, of Ginger, of the three Peppers,
of each three dammes, of Juniper beries half an ounce, of saint John's worte,
of the ryndes of Cytrones, of Rosemarie flowers, of Basil, of Maioram, of
Mintes, of Pennyroyall, of Baye beries, of Catmyntes, of Spyke, of Xyloaloes,
of Cubebae, of Cardamomum, of Calamus aromatichus, of Staechas, of each one
dram and a half, of Acorus roots, one handful and a half, of Orga^^ie, of
Hysope, of Rue, of the herb Hares foot, both the Aristolochia, and either
Picnie, of Cassia lignea* of Pimpernell, of Dittanie, of Tormentill, of
Scabious, of the Woodebynde or Honey suckle, of the Amryse, of Cummin Seseleos,
and of garden Cresses, of each one scruple, of old Triacle one ounce, of Aqua
vitae rectified according to Art, and dystilled out of the best wine thryse
over, viij. pyntes, all these beaten and ^arced, keep together in a glass
body, which then according to Art four times, continuallye pouring the
lycour upon the fecies that remained: to this fourth dystillation, add of all
the Myrobalanes, and of Anacardus, of each two drammes and a half, these
finely brought to powder, and infused, dystill after the sixth day, beginning to
dystill with an easy fire, and within a while after increasing the fire
somewhat, the first that then comes, is weak as water, the next that
comes, is of a yelowishe color, the third and last through the fire
increased, comes forth yelower of color, to which then add both Musk and
Amber greece, and other fragrant powders: and using it twyce in the week, unto
the quantity of a spoonefull at a time, six hours before meat: that if you
shall annoint the seat or place of memory, and the temples, you shall soon
after call to mind and remember what you will: this borrowed out of Fumanellus.

A water for memory: Take of Bean flowers, of the Elder, and Camomill
flowers, of each two small handfuls, of Rue, of Balm, of Pympern^ll, of
Buglosse, of Lycoris clean scraped and bruised, of each three handfuls: these
dystill in a Lymbecke with a soft fire: of this water use twyse or thryse in a
week, unto the quantity of half, or one ounce at a time.

A water helping the frensynesse or madness, which is a precious secret, and
proved in the cure of madness, and the Melancholy frensinesse, borrowed out
of an ancient written book: Take of the flowers of Rosemarie, of Borage, and
of the roots of Buglosse, of each a like, of Saffron one dram, of the Quince
or Quinces four ounces, of the best white wine well digested, and clear, two
pyntes, these after the myxing, let so stand for a natural day, after bury
the glass body in horse dung for fifteen days, which drawn forth, dystill
according to Art, two or three times over: This water (says the Author)
keep as the apple of your eye, for it is very precious: in that I have (says
the Author) experienced the same in all Melancholy sickenesses, very
effectuously, and in the pain and trembling of the heart: the quantity to be
ministered at one time, is a dram.

Another whytening water, causing or procuring a white color: Take of the red Honey two pounds, of gum Arabeck two ounces, these diligently myxed
together, dystill according to Art in a glass body with a soft fire. The
first water which comes, serves unto the clearing and whytening of the face:
the second and third lycour together, procures yelowe hear.

An odoriferous water, not dystilled, out of Alexander Benedict. Allachalach,
as the Arabians write, and it is a certain compounde, of the juice of the
leaves of the Myrtels, of Rosewater and Saunders, and a little of vinegar, and
the water of Alkalef, or of the juice of the fruits well smelling, and of such
like lycour myxed, and put into a glass with a narrow mouth, and after the
well laboring of these myxed, shall a pleasant smell ascend to the nose,
comforting the head and spirits.

An odoriferous or fragrant water, yet in taste in a manner unsavory, but in
savor and smell excellent, and a drop rubbed on the end of the nose,
seems to be as a procurer of sleep in a manner: out of Georg. Sighart: Take
Assa dulcis, and of Styrax calaminta, of each one ounce, of Lignum aloes, half
an ounce, of Cloves, of the cytrine Saunders, and of the ryndes of the Cytrone,
of each three drammes, these beaten and labored diligently together, infuse in
Rosewater unto the quantity of.xxiiij. ounces for eight days, which after
dystill in Balneo Mariae, the same dystilled, keep close stopped in a narrow
mouth glasie, in which hang of Musk and Amber greece, of each half a dram,
tied up in a fine lynnen cloth: of this use, to procure a sweet smell where
ever you walk.

A most proved water for the falling sickness: Take of the roots of the
flower de Luce, or Ireos, of Smalledge, of Fennel, of Perselie, of Sperage, of
Butchers broom roots, and of Hops, of each two handful, of Maiden hear, of
Hearts tongue, and the flowers of Tamariscus, of each one handful, of Fennel
seeds, Annise seeds, and Carroway seeds, of each three drams, all these well
beaten together, dystill in a glass body after Art: of this water minister
or use every morning, unto the quantity of two ounces at a time.

For the falling sickness, let the pacient drink a certain dystilled water
of the flowers of the Lynde tree, of the lesser Nettle, and Cherie tree leaves
or flowers: A certain woman molested with the falling sickness, by drincking
sundry times this water, recovered health.

A water effectuous for the clearing of the voice, and helps the hard
fetching o^ breath, the Cough, and Leprie: Take of Lycoris scraped, and the
juice of it, of each three ounces, of Spikenarde one ounce, of Diatragacanthum,
of the Melon seeds, of the Cytrone seeds, of the Gourde seeds, of the root
of Euula campana, of Hysope, of Time, of the flower of Time, of Polipodie, of
the round Aristolochia, of Gentian, of Ireos, of Saffron, of Sauerie, of
Organie, of Penny royal, and of Catmynt, of each half an ounce, all these
beaten together, and dystilled orderlye, use.

A pectorall water, or water for the breast, of great strength and virtue, that
especially avails in the weakness of the stomach, through clammie and
rotten humors, in that this softeneth, and helps digestion, and opens
withal, and is also cordial: Take of Figs, of Reysins, of the Pynaple
kirnels, and Almondes, of each four ounces, of Coliander, and Annis seeds, of
each two ounces, of common Honey one pound, these myxed together, pour into
twenty pintes of common water, letting the whole boil together unto the
consumption of six pynts, and that xiiij. remain, after strain the lycour
through a lynnen clothe, and then have you the water: to this add of our
Quintessence, four ounces, and keep to your use in a glass: and this is the
pectorall water, exceeding by his worthynesse the virtues of all other
pectorall waters hitherto invented of any: this out of the secret conclusions
of Leonar. Fiorauantus.

A dystilled water helping the Dropsy, of which let the pacient take fasting
every morning, unto the quantity of four ounces at a time, and if he will
with wine: Take of the roots of Ireos, or flower de Luce, of Fennel, of
Perselie, of Smalledge, of Sperage, of Butchers broom roots, and of Hoppes,
of each two handful, of Annis seeds, Fennel seeds, of Cummin, of Perselye
seeds, of Sperage roots, and Butch^rs broom roots, and of Hoppes, of each
half an ounce, of Maiden hear, Hearts tongue, and flowers of the Tamariske,
of each one handful, of Ginger, of Galingale, of Cynamone; and of Mace, of
each three drammes: all these diligently beaten and myxed together, dystill in
a glass body according to Art: this water has the Author often experienced.

A water perfitely healing the Dropsy, by washing and rubbing the belly twyse
a day therewith, and applying a plaster both on the Pulses and Arters, made
of Bay beries, so that the body be purged before: The water is made on this
wise, take of Cinamone, of Cloves, of the three Peppers, of Xyloaloes, of
Spikenarde, of Opobalsamum, of Galingale, of Calamus aromaticus, of Cubebae, of
Saffron, of each brought to powder one ounce, of Turpentine four ounces,
dystill according to Art: the first which comes forth, throw away: and the
second lycour that dystilleth forth, keep to your use: for the applying of
this above taught, both deliver and cleanse all the parts and veins from
filling any more.

Of a water, dystilled by a Lymbecke, of the matters herevnder described, and
druncke for a year, unto the quantity of a spoonefull, both morning and
evening* each day with four spoo^^fuls of wine, and the powder (described in
the second place) strawed upon the meats, does dissolve any stone, yea,
hardened, being either in the kidneyes or bladder: It also cease the pain of
the bowels, and cures the diseases of a cold cause: The preparing of it, is
on this wise: Take of Fennel roots, of Persely roots, Butchers broom
roots, and Radishe roots, of each one dram and a half: all these
diligently stamped, and stieped in the mightiest wine, dystill according to
Art, to which dystilled lycour add then of the powder of Cynamone half an
ounce, of Galingale, of Amber, of Ginger, and of Catmynt, of each one dram
and two scruples, of Macropiperis, one dram, of Cloves two drammes and a
half, of Cummin one dram, of Ameos, and of Louage, of each two drammes, of
Spikenarde, of Cassia lignea, and of Masticke, of each two drammes and a
half, which again dystilled, add thereunto of Cynamone, of Cloves, of
Spikenarde, of Ginger, of long* Pepper, of Xyloaloes, of Mace, of Galingale, of
Zedoaria, and Lycoris, of each seven drammes, and ten graynes weight: these
together myxed in the form of a sauce, dystill over again in a cucurbite:
which use as above taught: this borrowed out of Fumanellus.

A water breaking the stone in the bladder and kidneys: Take of the juice of
Saxifrage two pyntes, of Grummell, and of the juice of Perselie, of each one
pynte, of the best vinegar of a pleasant wine, eight ounces, these altogether
dystilled, let the lyc^ur be kept in a glass with a narrow mouth, of which
minister in the morning one ounce at a time, the like quantity at noone, and
at evening before the going to bed: for this is a proved water, as writes
Fumanellus.

A marvelous and rare water, causing the pacient to pysse forth sand, and
clensing the kidneyes of the same: borrowed out of Leonar. Fiorauantus. The
which sand in man procures a much and great heat and drythe of the kidneyes,
and such do pysse with an extreme diff^cultie, and burning in the coming
forth of the urine: in so much that such cannot abide many garments on, but
rather desire to go thinly and coldly, specia^ly on their back. And for that
cause any minding to cure such a gri^fe and disease, ought to minister and use
those matters, which both cool, moysten, and take away or abate heat: like as
this remedy following does, both with great facility, and in a short time.
The making of which is on this wise: Take of the seeds of the lesser Lemmons,
and of Orenges, of each one pound, of Saxifrage six pounds, of Balm, of
Hearts tongue, of the herb Vitriolum growing on old walls, of Sperage, of sea
Holy, of Ysope, of the roots of Fennel, and of Perselie, of each vj. ounces,
of the juice of small Lemmons so much as shall suffice, to labor and
incorporate the whole substance together in the form of a liquide paste or
very soft ointment: let this substance be distilled in a Tin Lymbecke, which is
diligently closed in the edges round about, until all the substance of
moisture be drawn, which after keep in a glass close stopped: But this
learn, that when you mind to minister and use of this water, that the body
before be thoroughly purged of the crude and clammy humors, and like the stomach
purged both of fleume and choler, which thus prepared, let the pacient take of
this water warm, both morning and evening, unto the quantity of six ounces at
a time: and in the mean time, to use a diet, in abstayning or refrayning from
cold and moist meats, and to eat the dry. And this in such a case and
disease, is a most proved remedy, often experienced of the Author.

A water breaking the stone of the bladder, which a Cardinal used sundry
times: Take of Philipendula six pounds, of the roots of Acorus, three
pounds, of Saxifrage with the roots, as much as the whole, these diligently
stamp together, and dystill according to Art: of this water use unto the
quantity of an ounce at a time.

A water of a marvelous property, against the stone of the kidneyes: Take of
the red Cicers, of the green ryndes of Beans, of each three pounds, of
Madder, of the Cherie tree leaves, of Egrimonie, of Centarach, of Mother wort,
of Date stones, of the jaws of a Pyke, of each one ounce, of sour Orenges
five in number, of sour Lemmons four in number, of Honey clean skymmed, and
of Sugar, of each one pound and a half, of the water of Wormewoode two
pyntes, of rosed Honey four ounces, of chosen Cynamone half an ounce, of
Galingale one ounce, of chosen Xyloaloes two drammes, of Pennyroyall one
ounce, of Maioram one ounce and a half, these beaten and labored together,
dystill according to Art: of which give three ounces at a time fasting.

A marvelous and proved water breaking the stone, whether the same shall be
in the kidneyes, or in the bladder, out of Arnoldus de villa noua: Take of the
Sperage roots, of Acorus, of Saxifrage, of Virga aurea, of Mirasolis, the
whole with his roots, of each two pounds, of the squilliticke vinegar four
pyntes, of the juice of Lemmons two pyntes, of burnt glass, and of the herb
Po^ey of the mountain, of each one pound, all these a little beaten and
grinded together, distill after Art in a Cucurbite, and that which shall be
dystilled, reserve in a glass: of this give two drammes with the wine of the
decoction of Leuisticus, for it marvelously avails.

A dystilled water for the hearing: Take of Betonie, one raw Onyon round and
white, of Rosemarie, of bitter Almondes, of a white gross Eele, all these
chopped together, dystill in a Limbecke, and the lycour which comes forth,
keep in a glass, of this drop warm into the ear or ears.

An odoriferous Damascene water, or water of virtue, in the time of the Plague:
Take of Rose water four pyntes, of Benjamin, that is, of Assa dulcis, of
Styrax calaminta, and of Cloves, of each one ounce, of both the Saunders, of
either three drams, of the ryndes of the Cytrone, of Cyperus Romanus, and of
Cynamone, of each half an ounce, of Camphora, three ounces, of Lignum Aloe
six drammes, these chopped and stamped together, put into a glass body
covered close with a Parchment, letting it so stand to infuse for three days,
which the fourth day dystill according to Art by a Lymbecke in Balneo Mariae,
after add to the water, of Cyuet twenty graynes, of Musk twenty grains,
these thoroughly labored together, set in the sun for xv. days, and then
will it be a water very odoriferous.

A water or rather a lycour, precious against pestilent Agues, and this sundry
times proved: Take of Al^es two drammes and a half, of the dystilled Myrrh
which otherwise is named Stacte, two drammes, of Saffron one dram, of
Nutmegs, of Cloves, of Cardamomum, of the grains of Paradise, of Cubebae, of
Cynamone, of Mace, of Ginger, of Xyloaloes, of Caphura, of the seeds of the
Pome cytron that be sour, of the Pionie seeds, of Xylobalsamum, of each one
dram, of Rosemarie flowers, of Buglosse, of Borage, of Marigolds, of Spike,
of each one dram, of Staechas one ounce, of the Dittanie roots, of Tormentill,
of Zedoaria, of the white Behen, and read Behen, of Euula campana, of Acorus,
of English Galingale, called otherwise Cyperus, of Carlina, of Reubarbe, of
the leaves of Hares Lettuce or iagged, of each one dram, of the ryndes of the
Pome cytrone so much, of old Triacle, of the electuarie of the precious (...),
of each an ounce, of Musk three graynes, of the bones of the Hearts heart two
drammes, of the juice of Pomewaters, or sweet apples, of Honey, of the
Myrobalanes Chebulae, of each half an ounce, of Sugar unto the weight of the
whole, which altogether beaten and infused in a glass body for two days,
dystill with a soft fire: that which first comes forth, let be kept to use,
of this minister every day one great spoonefull: for this is one of the best
and oftenest proved, of the true medicines in the Pestilence: the next which
comes forth, changes unto a whytenesse, or begins to be troubled, which
cast away. Fumanellus.

A compounde water which is made of spyces, delivering the Pestilence: Pour
the water on the spyces delyuering, and dystill in the same manner, like as the
oil of Cloves, or of Annise seeds, or of other dry herbs be dystilled. In
this distillation put a pound of pure white Sugar, which clean clarified, put
in then two ounces of the spyces, which frame into tables.

A compounde Damascen water, and oil Damascene: Take of Malmesie three pyntes,
of Rosewater, and of Lauander, of each half a pynte, of Cynamone, and of
Cloves, of each half an ounce, of Rosemarie flowers, and of Maiorame, of each
four handful, of the Cloue roots, of the ryndes of Orenges, of Cupressus,
Costmarie, and of the Balm wood, of each half a handful, of the Baye
leaves, and of the Nutmeg, of each one handefull, of Ladanum, of Nigella Roma.
of Styrax calaminta, of each one ounce, of the powder of Ireos, two ounces, of
Calamus aromaticus, of long Pepper, of each one ounce and a half, of Camphora
two drammes, of Amber and Musk, of each one scruple: these stamp, and
diligently labor together, which after the ^^eeping for three days, dystill
in a Cucurbite (...) water; and the next an oil: which (...) let (...) in a
double ve^^ell.

A water helping (...) proceeding of (...), the trembling of the heart, the
Quartain^ (...), the (...) and griefs of the spleen and w^^be, diseases (...)
of (...) cause: Take of the flowers of Rosemarie, of the flowers and roots of
Buglosse, and of the Q^^nce (...) o^nce^, of Saffron half a dram: all (...)
and infused in (...) of whyt^ wine, (...) body, covered, and set in (...):
after dystill and use* this but of Fumanellus.

A water that delivers (...) of Ague: (...) of the (...) of Fumitarie
purified, in which Reysins of the sun be (...).

(...), the (...) the (...) Take of Clo^^^, of Nutmegges, of (...), o^ Ginger,
of ^osemarie, of Herb grace, and of Scabious, of each two ounces, (...)
finely (...), and (...), which after (...) with a soft (...), keep to your use.

A water causing the pacient to re^y^e, and to appear young again: Take of
pure Turpentine one po^nde, of clarified honey (...) pyntes* of burning water
two pyntes, of Xyloaloes the purest in powder three or drammes and a half, of
the Saunders (...) much, of Olibanum, of (...), of the bone of the Harte^
heart, of Zedoaria, and of long Pepper, of each three drammes, of gum
Arabecke one ounce, of the Nutmegge, Galingale, Cubebae, Cynamone, Carowayes,
(...) Mace, Cloves, Spikenarde, Saffron and Ginger, of ech^ thr^eacute;e
drammes, of chosen Musk a pe^^e weight: all these diligently brought to
powder, dystill according to Art, until a water (...) forth so cle^^e as the
fountain water, and whiles the (...) water is in coming forth, which then
appears fiery, increase the fire by little and little: for the water will
^ssue then unto the thycknesse of honey.

Another water of youth: this so named the water of youth, in that it
preserves youth, and delivers the person using it from sickness: Take of
Xyloaloes, of Cloves, of Ginger, of Galingale, of Cardamomum, of Cubebae, of
graynes of Paradyse, of Rubarbe, of Cynamone, of Nutmegs, of Aloes, of Calomus
aromaticus, of Mace, of each two drammes, all these brought into a gross
powder, sea^se diligently, adding to it of the juice of Celondine two pyntes,
of (...), of Brionie, of Buglosse, of Fumiterrie, of Rue, of Bet^nie, of Mynte,
of Borage, and of Fennel, of each half a pound, all these reduced into one,
and dystilled with the best white wine: of this dystilled lycour druncke every
day in the Summer time one spoonefull, but in the Winter two.

A dystilled water for the drying of ulcers, and the Fistula: take of the best
Aqua vitae, and that thryse dystilled over, so much as you will, into it (...)
of Bet^nie, of Verua^^^, of Rosemarie, and of saint John's worte, of each alike
well boiled (put into the Aqua vitae*) or otherwise let them be dystilled
again together, and the ulcers after washed with it.

A marvelous water healing the: Fistula, and all wounds* Take of Rosemarie,
of B^y^s, of the Myrtill, of the wild Sm^lledge, ^^garden Smalledge, which
four herbs cause newly (...) be dystilled by a glass Lymbeck, of which water
take one ounce, after add of Turpentine six ounces, of gum Iuie three
ounces, of Olibanum two ounces, of Saffron, Mastick, of Cubebae, of Nutmegs,
of Myrre, of Galingale, of Cinamone, of Aloes ^^ceatrine, of Cloves, of each
one ounce, but let all these be finely brought to powder, and infused in the
abouesayde waters, put the whole into a Cucurbite, which dystill accor^ing to
Art: this water reserve in a glass body: for this avails against any
Fistula being from the throat downewarde, and all wounds, i^ of the same you
shall apply on them, and that a clothe wette in this water, be applied upon the
said Fistulaes, changing it fo^th ^ as it wareth, dri^^ this also much
avails and helps any passion^^ the body, impostume, and inward griefs,
by drinc^ing a little of the same. But if any Fistula shall be from the thr^te
upward, then let be added to the foresaid substances one ounce of Pepper* and
it will be most perfect: and the fecies which shall remain of the said
dystillation, bying to powder: for that applied on any ulcer, heals it.

A water of a divine working^ healing any wound in a short time, and both
ytche and scabbes. Take of the white Tartare calcined, that is, with the quick
silver decocted and purified, of burning water, so much as shall suffice unto
the dystilling that if oftener it shall be dystilled, it is then caused the
effectuou^^^. Fumanellu^.

Another proved water against the Fistula, which so hardens iron, that you
may cut another piece of iron therewith, so easy a^^ if the same were wood:
Take of ^a^th worms, and of them draw a water by dystillation, and like draw
a water of Ra^^sh (...): which myxed together, into thi^ then put (...) iron
(...) read hot, the same thus heated and (...) for three or four times by
anequall q^^ntitie used as (...) times, and the knyfe tempered with an edge,
^ippe read hot again into the glass with the waters abouesayde: for you may
after cut any Iron safely and easily, and this w^ter (...) is marvelous in
Fistulaes.

A water for all wounds: Take of Eg^^monde, of Solanum, of P^^^taine, of (...)
a pound, of white wine to much* of white glass four ounces, of crude Allu^
three ounces, of Masticke two ounces, of Orpiment half a scruple, of the
whytes of eggs six in number, let all these be stronglye beatin together, and
dystilled: with this water wash twyse a day the wound.

Another water for Fistulaes, knobbes, knottes, bunches, scr^f^^s, and any
other manner of swelling without pain: Take of the chosen oil of Tylestones
five pyntes, of white Franckincense, of Masticke, of gum Arabecke, of
Turpentine of Venice, of each three ounces, these finely wrought together,
dystill in a Cucurbite after Art, and in the dystilling over again add five
pounds of Salt, and that dystilled lycour then keep to thy use: this
Fumanellus.

A water soon healing wounds: Take of burning water four ounces, of Triacle
half ^n ounce, this after the dystilling, apply on wounds, and strawing then
the powder of Aloes and Myrre: this Fumanellus.

A water which heals all wounds speedily, in any part of the body, whether
those be new or old wounds, and the Fistul^* as the author has (...)
^^perienced: Take of Aqua vitae dystilled of the best wh^te wine, two pyntes,
of Rosemarie water, and of Sage water, dystilled at one time, of each five
pyntes, of white (...) ten pounds, which labored together, or still over
againe^ after add a vial or glass full of Rosemary flowers, and so much of
Sage flowers, these mixed with the foresaid dyst^lation, (...) it so stand
for a day, which after strain and keep in a glass to your use: The manner of
using, is, that it must be applied on with a lynnen cloth wette in it, and as
the same cloth always dries, moysten it again.

Another water to draw out bones, and to keep the member* from putrefying*
and avails in wounds: Take of white Venice Turpenti^^ unwashed, of pure
sh^ppe Pitche, of the h^nie combs, of each one pound, of pure and new Rosen
being white, and of H^nie five pounds: all these dystill by a Limbecke of
glass^, and the wa^ter keep in a Vial.

A compounde water, for them which newly recover out of there Frenc^e disease,
by the (...) Ronde^^^ius: Take of the r^sped (...)* one pound, of good old
Triacle^ (...) ounces, of the conserve of Roses, Buglosse, and Borage, of each
two ounces, of the Con^erue of Helenium or H^lycampane, and Rosemarie flowers,
of each one ounce, of the powder of the electuari^ of precious stan^^^ and of
that named Letitia Galeni, of each (...): th^se together infuse in a glass
body filled three parts up, with white wine and pure Conduite water, of each
alyke, which dystil^ with Cynamon on ashes: in this water dystilled, melt so
much Sugar as shall s^ffice, which after let run through an Ipocras bag: of
this give to the feeble recovered from the French disease.

A Tri^cle water of the same man's description: Take of old Triacle one pound,
of Sorrel three handfulles, of Camomill flowers, of Penny Royal, of the long
or great grass, and of the blessed Thystell, of each two handful, these
steeped in white wine, dystill after Art: this keep in a glass with a
narrow mouth: let the pacient take two ounces of the same water, with three
ounces of Sorrel water and Buglosse, when he goes to bed, or enters into
the bathe or hot house: This water cures the pains of the French disease, if
the same be ministered alone, or with the decoction of Grummell or the great
Burre: I (says the Author) by happy success have cured many children, and
old persons with this potion, or by sometimes adding certain drops to the
common decoction of Guaicum, so that through the thinness of parts, does this
water soon penetrate, and send forth the matter. This water also, with the
water of the extinction of gold myxed, does correct and amend all manner of
defaultes, of the Quicksiluer.

A Triacle water helping the falling sickness, of the same Authors invention:
Take of old Triacle four ounces, of Methridate two ounces, of the
Helycampane roots half a pound, of the herb Claree two handfuls, of the
greater Celondine one handful, these after the infusion for a night in
Malmesie, and put altogether into a glass body, distill according to Art:
This water avails in all cold griefs and diseases, both of the brain and
sinews.

A Triacle water of Iacobus Siluius, which he used in the French disease: take
of the rasped wood Guaicum half a pound, of Spring or Conduite water viij.
pyntes, of the white wine not pleasant two pyntes, of the waters of
Fumiterrie, Succorie, and Camomill, of each one pynte, let all these be infused
together for a night on hot ashes or ymbers, to which after add of the
Polipodie of the Oak half a pound, of the flower of Time two ounces, of
Sperage six ounces, of the Conserve of Roses, Succorie, Borage, and Buglosse,
of each four ounces, of the best Triacle two ounces, of the conserve of
Helycampane two ounces: these well closed in a glass body, dystill in a
double vessel: The quantity to be ministered at one time, is from two unto
three ounces: and you may (if you will) add to three ounces of the Triacle
water, one ounce of Sugar, and a dram of Cynamone, and let the same dystill
again through an Ipocras bag, for so the taste of it shall be the pleasanter
in the drincking: let be given in bed in the morning, to procure a strong
sweat.

Eight waters of S. Aegidius, helping the falling sickness new come, the
Palsy, wounds and Agues: Take of Isope, Penny Royal, Hares foot, of Succorie,
of each a like, these stamped in a mortar, and dystilled, keep in a glass
with a narrow mouth: After take of Rue, of Perselie, of Zedoaria, of Aloes, or
the stone Calaminaris, of each a like quantity or dram, these beaten
together, boil in the foresaid water unto a consumption of the third part, the
same after strain through a linen cloth, keeping it the^ close stopped: and
after the standing and setting of it. xl. days, let the pacient drink of
this lycour every morning fasting, for ten days together, being molested with
any of the abouesayde sickenesses or diseases, yea, if he happen to have the
Plague, but then let him refrain meat for six hours after the taking of this
drink: This lycour also druncke with a fasting stomach, does preserve the
person from the falling sickness and Palsy, for this exceedingly comfort
the members: If this besides be druncke fasting with Castorie, these
sickenesses being but new begun, it is a special remedy: It singularly
avails, in the healing of wounds, and the cutting of veins and sinews, if
those be washed with it: It cures besides all manner of Agues, being drunck
with a fasting stomach for nine mornings together.

The second water of the Philosophers: Take of Rue, of Egrimonie, of the
Satyrion, of Celondine, of Sugar, of the stone Calaminaris (otherwise Tutia) of
each a like quantity, these beaten together, dystill in a Lymbecke with a soft
fire: This water is very precious, in that it heals any grief or disease of
the eyes: This used or taken with meats, or otherwise in potions before meat,
and with a fasting stomach avails against all poisons, in casting it up by
vomiting: and druncke fasting, cures the Dropsy, and cleanses the stomach of
all putrified and cold humors, it extinguisheth the creeping influmation
called Saint Anthonies fire in a day, if playsters of Towe be applied upon,
being wette in this water: It cures the Canker, being myxt with Aloes, and
that a plaster of the towe of Hemp wette in it, be applied upon twyse in the
day.

The third water of the Philosophers, which otherwise is named Petralis* Take
of Pympernell seeds, of Persely, of Smalledge, of the Burre, and of Masticke,
of each a like: these myxed beat together with Goats blood, adding a little
strong vinegar, which let so stand close stopped for certain days, after
dystill the whole in a Cucurbite after Art: the water which then comes
forth, breaks both the red and white stone, being either rough, plain, or
sharp: But if the stone shall be broken, then let the pacient drink of this
water with a fasting stomach, and he shall then piss the sand forth. And
washing any scabbed parts with this water, does speedily heal the scabbes,
and causes hear to grow in the bare places: It cures also all manner of
scabbes of the body, by washing all the places of the body with this water,
for three or four days together: and druncke fasting in the morning,
ingendreth good blood in the body: It delivers the Palsy, by drincking of
it twyse in the day with Castoreum or Castorie, unless the sickness shall
be confirmed: This also heals the Apoplexy and falling sickness.

The fourth water: Take of young Swallows brought to powder, to which add
Castoreum or Castorie, myxing a quantity of vinegar withal, these distill in
a Cucurbite: The water drunck, avails against the falling sickness: If he
be a young person of xiiij. years of age taken with the sickness, if he shall
drink of this water fasting for forty days, shall throughlye be cured: It
also helps the Cough, and the straitenesse of the breast, or fetching of
breath, by drincking of it fasting nine mornings together: It comfort and
amendeth the brain, it purges the stomach, it inlargeth the breast, and
takes away the cause procuring the Palsy, it increases sperme, and heateth
the cold persons: and druncke fasting with Isope, heals the Dropsy of a
cold cause, and the Quotidian or daily Ague: But every woman with child must
refrain (that season) from the drincking of this wat^r, in that the same
slays the child. This also druncke with Isope, helps the diseases of the
head, and procures an appetyte, purchas^th sleep, helps digestion, and
sends forth the urine.

The fifth water: Take of Isope, of Gladen, of Sauin, of Sothernwood, of each
alyke, of the^e make a pa^te, letting it so stand impasted together for
certain days, which dystill according to Art: for this is a singular water,
and of a great virtue: It avails against all manner of Agues, as well hot as
cold: It provoke women's terms, and for that cause women with child ought to
refrain the taking of this water, for doubt and fear of loosing the yongling:
The water druncke, stays the bloody flux, or the perilous flux of blood
named Dysenteria, and is a singular remedy also against any manner of flux of
the belly: It purges the stomach of evil humors, and stays the worms in
the body: Druncke with Castoreum, helps the Palsy, ministered or taken warm
every morning.

The sixth water of the Philosophers, is made of a Moule, which serves unto the
dying or coloring of hears white, either of man or beast: Take a Moule, which
artely brought to powder with Brimstone, add to it the juice of Celondine,
which orderly myxed, let so stand for certain days, after dystill the whole
according to Art: The virtue of this water, is on such wise, that if a beast
wholly black of hear, shall be washed all over with this water, the hears
shall in short time become so white as snow: Also if to this water be wax and
Aloes myxed, and annoynting the Palsy member therewith, it cures the same in
short time: It heals besides the disease named Noli me tangere, if this be
applied plaisterwise upon: it amendeth the weakness of the head: Further this
water commixed with the stone named Calaminaris, and Aloes, heals the disease
named the Wolf, if the same be applied plaster wise twyse a day, or only
washed twyse a day with the same water: but beware that this lycour enter not,
and especially that you use it not within the body.

The seventh water, which is named the water of conservation or preserving:
Take Persely, which after the well beating in a mortar, dystill according to
Art: who that drincketh of this water, not having an appetyte to meat, with a
fasting stomach, does not only amend all wyndynesse and rawnesse of the
stomach, but procures digestion: it purges also the breast of superfluous
humors.

The eight water is named the condupliciue or doubled: Take of Smalledge
seeds, of the oil of Poppie, of white Sugar, and of Cloves, of each alyke,
these labored together in a Mortar, add to the whole the above said water of
preserving, and mixed diligently together, dystill these in a glass body after
Art: This water drunck cold in the morning fasting, and warm at the going to
bed, does marvelously help the Cough, and griefs or pains of the breast:
This water also druncke warm with Castorie, avails in all the diseases of
the spleen, and tremblings of the members, yea, and comfort both the head
and brain: These eight waters did the Author translate out of the Germayne
into the Latin tongue, written first by that godly man Aegidius. And a ninth
water, affirms the Author there was, which for that the description of the
same was imperfect, for that cause he left it, as unmentioned in this place.

Of the compounde waters, which are named Elixir, of which some also extend
unto Baulmes: and may like be applied, as shall after appear. The.Lxxxvij.
Chapter.
A Marvelous Elixir once made and experienced, by the singular le^rned John
^^ntiume, in that the same marvelously nourishes and restores, yea,
comfort the sinewie members, and the sinews themselves, as both the
stomach and the heart: besides it purges the stomach, increases memory
resolves windiness, and procures an appetite: The dose or quantity to be
used, at one time is so much as one dram weight. The person which shall have
a hot stomach, let him use this with the water of Endive, especially in the
hot season: But ye person which has a cold stomach, and that in a cold
season, let the pacient then use or take it with Baulme or Wormewoode water, or
such a like lycours: The making of it, is on this wise: take of Rosemarie, and
of Mints, of each half an ounce* of Cinamone one ounce, of the juice of
Licorise, and Lycorise scraped, of each, one ounce and a half, of chosen
Reubarbe one ounce and a half, of Spike three scruples, of Saffron one
scruple, of Cloves, of Mace, of Nutmegs, and of Galingale, of each one dram,
of chosen Manna, and oil of Turpentine, of each two ounces, of Tartare one
ounce and a half, of the pulpe or tender flesh of a Capon, half a pound
weight, of the pulpe of Partriches, one pound, of Diarrhodon abbatis, three
ounces, of the Fisticke nuttes, named otherwise Pistace^, of Iourdane Almondes,
and of the Pyn^ ^pple kirnel^, of each eight ounces, of Oats, of Reysins, and
of Pennites o^ Sugar, of each six ounces, of Musk, and of Amber, of each
half a scruple: all these beaten together, and infused in the best Aqua vitae
for three days, and dystilled after in a glass body: the water of life which
then is dystilled, will be clear and pure: If the dystillation, or rather the
infusion shall be done in Malmesie, i^ shall or will be much better. This
borrowed out of an Italian work written.

A secret water: Take of Malmesey, pure and good, into which put your flowers,
herbs, and spices, and what things besides you please: that let so stand
infused, for three or four days in a glass body close luted, to putryfie:
after dystill the whole with a most slow and easy fire, and make no
separation until the end: then separate or draw away the waters, and cease,
least the waters styncke, and the spyces burn. In that water drawn, dissolve
Sugar, adding after of Musk, Amber, and Cinnamon, and if you will have your
water very delectable or pleasant: the^^ take of Sugar Candy, pouring upon it
the best Aqua vitae, and the same dystill from the Sugar, until the spirits
and fumes ascend: pour the other water in the abouesayde glass body, in
which will three or four Aromaticall read drops fall: and such a dystillation
also shall be repeated with Sugar Candy, as before, and the same so often
repeated over, shall marueylouslye work, being especially mixed with gold, as
you may like co^ceyue: and you shall then have gold dissolved, or potable
gold, that is both marvelous and very effectuous, and sweetest. And if you be
minded to have pure gold, then lay a dead head in a moist place, and you
shall purchase and possess a marvelous Art: And this abouesayde manner, does
excel the others, as reason the like instructs: which the Author here will
not reveal, for causes that he knows.

A golden water, or Elixir vitae: Take of Sage three quarters of a handful, of
Nutmegs, of Mace, of Gynger, of graynes of Paradyse, of Cloves, and of
Cynamone, of each two drammes, of Reubarbe, of Castoree, and of Spikenarde, of
each half an ounce, of oil of Bays Artely drawn, two ounces, these
diligently beaten and mixed together, infuse in six measures of good wine,
close covered in a glass body for a month, at the end of which time, let
the wine be strayned, and the spyces or drugges again beaten very fine, until
the whole be like a thick broth or lycour, upon which, pour then the
abouesayde wine, letting the whole stand for other three days covered, which
after dystill by a Limbecke: The water which comes forth, will be so clear
as Crystal, the same keep in a glass body with a narrow mouth, being
close stopped, which apply to these griefs and sickenesses ensuing: If you
sprynckle Fyshes, Birds, Fowls, Venison, and such like, with this water, they
shall not putrify, so long as you be minded reasonablye to keep them. Wine of
a sower and straung savor, and decayed, is made pleasant and perfect, if you
pour a little of this water ^n it. This water druncke, or applied upon,
heals inward impostumes, it comfort the vowels, and helps the Cholick:
it heals wounds, if a lynnen cloth wette in this water be applied on the
wound: It defends the falling sickness beginning to come or grow on any,
being drunck, or applied on the brain: it cures the grief^s and sores of the
mouth and Jaws, and amendeth the evil savor or styncke of breath, through the
rottenness of the gummes, and the stinck also of the nosthrils and ears: If
this be druncke of men, ^t preserves their strength, and corrects
fearfulness, by drying up the moystures in body: It corrects and cleanses
the spots of the eyes, and amendeth also the defaults of the body: This out
of an unknown Author in the German tongue.

Another named a Golden water, of a most singular virtue: Take of Sage leaves
two ounces, of Nutmegges, of Cloves, of Zedoaria, and of the gra^nes of
Paradise, of each half an ounce, of Cinnamon one ounce, of Lauander four
ounces, of good wine one gallon. Let all these be close covered in a glasen
vessel for xiiij. days, after the wine strayned, let the spyces be well
beaten, and mixed again with the wine, which dystill in a Limbeck in sand, or
in Balneo Mariae: This water does provoke appetite, comfort and
strengthens the stomach, corrects the diseases of the lunges, and amendeth
the griefs of the spleen, and all the inner parts: it is a defender of all
poisons, it clears the blood, it amendeth and takes away the evil savor
of breath, and the stinking air coming out of the nose, caused through a
piece of flesh grown in the ouermost part of the nose within, also Rheu^res,
the cough, straitenesse of the breast, the difficulty of breathing, comfort
the brain* and memory, sharpeneth the sight, heals all manner of griefs of
the eyes, and is a singular medicine to them which are sore whipped, wounded,
or fallen from a high place: it dissolueth and puts away impostumes, it
asswageth and helps both the Gout and falling sickness, it cleanses and
heals the foul sourfe, Ringwormes, and the Leprie* and in the Crampe an
uttermost refuge, and singular help. If this be myxed with corrupt wynes, it
rectifieth the taste and savor of the wine: it preserves old men, such as be
comely or beautiful, and well colored.

The Elixir vitae, of the description of Fiorauantus, that aydeth the virtue
and property of all medicines, if a little quantity be mixed with them. And
this rather to be counted a divine, than a human secret: the making of which
precious and rare lycour is on this wise: Take of Cloves, of Nutmegs, of
Zedoaria, of Ginger, of Galingale, of the white and black Pepper, of Juniper
berries, of the ryndes of the Cytrone, of the ryndes of Orenges, of Sage, of
Ba^ill, of Rosemarie, of Myntes, of Maioram, of Bay beries, of Penny royal,
of Gentian, of Calamint, of the Elder flowers, of the white and red Rose
leaves, of the Spikenarde, of Cubebae, of the Aloes Hepaticke, of Lignum Aloe,
of Cardamomum, of Cynamone, of Calamus Aromaticus, of Stichas, of Germaunder,
of Camepithis, otherwise bitter sweet, Baulme, Mace, Olibanum, the seeds of
Motherwoort, the seeds of Maioram, of each two drammes, of Fygges, of Reysins
of the Sun, of Dates, of Almondes, of Pyne apple kirnels, of each six
ounces, of white Honey one pound, of Le^ant Musk one dram, of fine Sugar
four pounds, all these myxed, beat and labor diligently together, so that
those which may be stamped, beat^ in a gr^sse manner, and the whole then infuse
in xv. pynts of Aqua vitae drawn of good wine, and dystilled before thryse
over, put up, and close c^^^red in a glass body with a head, which le^ so
stand for te^^^ days at the least: after being diligently luted in the
neck, set the body to dystill so long in Balneo Mariae, until the feces
remain dry: then draw away the Receyuer, pouring the water after into a
Peltirane, which set in hot horse dung to circulate for two whole Months:
and being thus circulated, you have obtained your prepared and glorious Elixir,
which contains so great and strange virtues in it: After take the body in
which the feces be contained, and dystill them in ashes with a most strong
fire, for then shall come forth a licour so red as blood, which will
somewhat savor of smoke, and be troubled, the same also circulate in like
order, as above taught: for this is of a fiery substance, which may (through
his virtue) raise as it were the dead: and being thus circulated, stop
diligently the mouth of the glass, keeping it to your use: As touching the
virtues of this Elixir, in standing upon the rehearsal of all, would seem
over long, in that it helps and recouereth all manner of sicknesses and
diseases: notwithstanding shall here be uttered certain particular remedies
and helps with brevity: Now the first water dystilled by Balneo Mariae,
druncke unto the quantity of a dram every third day, preserves the body
in most happy estate, and defends it from many kinds of sickenesses and
diseases: It heals any kind of wound, by applying clothes wette in it,
within twice or thrice dressing, at the most: and both marvelously and
speedily heals all manner of griefs of the eyes, by letting fall o^e drop at a
time, and preserves also the sight a long time, in such sort, that such
persons shall not need a pair of spectacles: and (...) a woman often bath or
wash her face and breast* with this water, it preserves her long in one state,
insomuch that she shall not appear aged of a long time. Taking the Elixi^ by*
the mouth, moves and procures a veuer^ all ^ppetite, (...) disposes b^rr^^
women to conceive lightly with child, as h^th the^e exper^e^ced, and avails
in all matters* as by proof (who that lyfteth to try) shall further
understand, and know of the truth of these. This later water having a red
color as blou^^^ (...) of women by the mouth unto the^ ^^^^titie of two
drammes at a time, helps the pains of the m^tr^ce* and dissolueth the
stitches of the sides and Pleurisies, and cures the Cholicke passions by
anointing upon the grieved places, and the like helps the hardness of the
Mylt, the pain and grief of the teeth, the evil savor and stincke of
breath, and sundry others like: It takes away and heals any kind of Ague,
in that this sends forth and puts away all the evil humors which hinder
nature, so well without as within the body: and through the same apt to heal
any kind of disease or sickness: If any pacient or sick person has so
lost his speech, that he cannot utter his words in the hearing to the
Minister, nor confirm his testament or will, then minister one dram of the
first, with one dram of the second water, which entered and gone down the
throat, causes the pacient miraculouslye to recover speech, and to talk his
mind after until the panges of death, with good remembrance: and this the
Author experienced above a thousand times, in working miraculously by it, to
his great praise and report, and satisfying of the standers and lookers on:
wherefore the Author wills all persons of ability, to be never unprovided,
or without this precious lycour, both for their own healthes, and for their
neighbors, when need shall require.

A marvelous water, which is named the mother of Baulme, whose properties are
infinite and marvelous, and procures a marvelous working in Fistulaes: Take
of Turpentine one ounce, of Olibanum two ounces, of Aloes succotryne, of
Masticke, of Cloves, of Galingale, of Cynamone, of Saffron, of Nutmegges, and
Cubebae, of each one ounce, of Gum Iuie five ounces: all these finely brought
to powder, and close luted with the lute of wisdom in a glass body, distill
with a soft ^^^e: The f^es^ water which comes forth, will be white and
clear: the same continue so long with fire, until the water begins to
appear yelowe and thick, then take away the receyuer, and purchase the
second water, which will be yelow, thick, and swymme above the first water:
when that yelowe color is higher tincted, then remove the second water, in
that the third comes, which in color is as the clear Honey, and named
properly a Balm, and has the like effects and properties to it: If you shall
let fall a drop of it, from a knyues point into a cup glass of water, the
same will keep together, even like a true Baulme, in the bottom of the
glass, which after it has stand for an hour, will flote above the water,
not breaking a sunder: This also burns, further, it courdeth milk, for if
one drop of it warm fall into a pynte of milk, it forthwith thickeneth and
courdeth the same, even like the Baulme: The first water is named a Baulme*
which cures the Fistula, the sound and noise of the ears, if you shall drop
two or three drops of the same into the ear in the morning. The second
water is named the oil of Baulme, which cures the eyes lacking the hears of
the eye lyddes, the Leprosy and the running of the eyes, and that suddenly, if
so be you wash the eyes mourning and evening with it: The third licour is
named the Artificial Baulme oil, which in a manner possesses the like
properties, that the natural has: for this cures and expels all worms,
the scabbe, and superfluousnesse, in what part of man's body the same shall
happen: the like all impostumes, and all ulcers newly happening, and any
swelling of the eyes, if you shall bathe or wash them with the same: It is
also more driving back of cold humors, than any other medicine: it cures,
restrayneth, and slays any pain of the teeth, proceeding either of the
worm, or of humors, if so be you wash them with it. And it singularly
avails in all cold poisons, as of the Tode, the Spyder, the Adder, and
Scorpion, nor it is possible that they may harm a man, if he be either stinged
or poisoned of any of them, so that the pacient apply upon the place one
drop warm of it. All ulcers how deep soever they be, whether in the flesh,
or in the sinews and bone, and matterie impostumes, if you shall wash them
with it, without any tent applied, it cures them within nine days, how
hideous soever, or loathsome, canckred, or Fistulated they shall be, yes Noli me
tangere, and Aegidius disease: It has also marvelous effects, in the
sweeting of metalline bodies. If you wash any cold gowte with it, and shall
apply playsterwyse with a linen cloth wette in it on the grieved place, it
speedily asswageth and cures the same: it puts away, dries up, and
heals the strokes or cuttes happening through a stone, or fall, causing a
wound in the place, by applying a lynnen cloth wette in it, and both stays,
comfort, and strengthens the sinews: and conceive that it is the hottest
above any degree, and no substance can be found hotter then it, and it is
also of such a penetration and hotnesse, that if you let fall one drop warm
on the paulme of the hand, it forthwith pearceth without harm, that you shall
not feel it. It cures and heals the swelling of the feet, the legs, and
also the grief or pain of the joints, applied thereon, it helps any cold
coming of a cold cause, or of corrupt blood. This liquour also is named the
mother of Baulme, which if you will prove the same, take a Pullet plucked
bare, and clean drawn within, or the guts taken out, after heat him so
long, until you can hardly abide the holding of him in your hand, which then
annoint with the said oil, and lay after in the sun for two hours to dry,
which through dry annoint again with the said oil, letting it dry in: after
put or lay the pullet where you will, for he shall never after putrifye, and it
has besides many other properties of the like kind and order: this borrowed
out of Bertapalia.

A water or noble oil, of a diverse and sundry properties unto many grieffes
and disseases, as unto the recouerye of sight, and memory. It also
strengthens any member anointed with it, and digesteth the flewme harming the
stomach, and strengthens it, mynistred unto the quantity of a sponeful at a
time: and in what manner also it be taken every day fasting, the same defends
the person from any byt of venomous beast, and applied on the byt of any
venomous beast, spedily delivers and cures the poisoning: anointed on any
foul scabbes, it spedilye heals them, and slays worms of the body:
dropped into the ears, takes away the hard and flow hearing, helps the
running or watering of the eyes, and all dullness of sight: and drunck it,
delyuereth the swellings of the inner members, and the teeth by washing: and
if both ulcer and canker be anointed with it eueryday, they are spedily cured:
and in the like manner, the resolution of the synewes: it cures besides the
swellings of the legs, or any sickness proceeding of a cold cause. The
Aucthour (to make this:) took of Turpentine, half a pound, of burning water
two pints, of Xyloaloes, of the citryne and read Saunders, of chosen Cinnamon,
of Cubebae, of Galingale, of Nutmegs, of Cardamomu^, of Saffron, of
Frankincense, of Mace, of Mastick, of Ginger, of Spiknard, of cloves, of each
three ounces, of gum Arabicke, one ounce, of Musk one dra^, of Amber greece so
much, all these he did beat apart, and finely searsed them, which after he had
infused the^ together in Aqua vitae or burning water for a day in a glass
body, he then distilled ye whole with a very soft and slow fire, until the
water distylling come forth clear, and when it changed color, he set under
another Receauer, and so kept either by it self: This Fumanellus.

An Elixir, or compound water of Life, which shall be applied unto the Baulmes.
The.lxxxviij. Chapter.
TAke of Cloves, of Nutmegs, of Gynger, of Galingale, of long Pepper, of black
Pepper, of Zedoaria, of Juniper horryes, of the rynds of Orynges, of ye rynds
of citrones, of Maioram, of rosemarie, of Myntes, of Baye berryes, of penny
royal, of the round Aeristolochia, of Stoechas, of Sigillu^. B. Mariae, of ye
blessed thistle, of the flowers of Cheiri named of some the stock gelyflowers,
or rather the yelowe Violet flowers, of Dasie flowers, of red Roses, of Elder
flowers, of Spyknarde, of Lignum aloe, of Cubebae, of Cardamomum, of chosen
Cynamon, of Calamus aromaticus, of Sage, of Basil, of Gentiane, of Catminte,
of all the kinds of Saunders, of Acorus, of Pionie both the roots and seeds,
of Mace, of the garden nightshade, of the Hearts horn, of the sylinges of
yuorie, of Germander, of Chamepithis or bitter sweet, of Nelligetta, of
Masticke, of Olibanum, of Aloes hepaticke, of Myrre, of Chamomill flowers, of
Dyll, of Mugwoort, and of Bytonie, of each three drams, or Borrage flowers, of
Buglosse flowers, of Baulme, of Annise s^edes, of Fennel, and Carrowaye
seeds, of each two drams, of Specierum electuarij de gemmis, of Specierum
diarhodon, of Specierum triasantali, Specierum aromatici rosati, of each half
a dram, of Diamuschi, of Dulcis diambrae, of the electuarie of precious stones,
of Triacle, of Diacorus, of Dianthos, of each half an ounce, of the flowers of
the herb Lichnitis, of Altilis, of the bremble flowers, of Marygold flowers,
of the roots of Bardana, of the Fern roots, of each half an ounce, of the
greater Celondine, with the roots clean scraped from the fylthe, and the
rotten and decayed leaves cut away, if any such hang on, one ounce, of chosen
Ruberbe an ounce and a half, and of oil of Turpentine one pound; all these
above noted, well beaten and brought to powder, and let each be gotten and put
up in his proper time (in beginning from the Spring, and continuing the Summer)
in the best Aqua vitae made of pure and pleasant rennyshe wine distylled in a
Glass body, and not in a Copper vessel, and in that the flowers and herbs
gathered in their special times infused, and close stopped in a glass body,
with the head dilygently luted on. The Aqua vitae in which the abouesayd spyces
shall be infused, must be unto the quantity of twenty and six pyntes. If you
shall divide the water into three bodies, and like the spyces and other
matters: you shall then distyll safer in those three several times, then in
one body, and at one time alone. And set your body with his head on, in
Balneo Mariae, having a soft fire under. The first which comes, will be the
Elixir or jewel of Life, the same keep alone close stopped in a Glass, that
it breathe not forth. The next water which comes, will be grosser, serving
unto far sympter uses. And the Feces remaining in the glass body, be
compared to Triacle, and serve for the poor, and many sycknesses.

Another Elixir vitae, maruaylously strengthening and comforting the head, in a
manner like to the other before: saving it is nothing so chargeable, and with
lesser travail done. Take of Cloves, of Nutmegs, of gynger, of Zedoaria, of
Galingale, of long Pepper, and the black, of the ryndes of the Cytrone, of
Juniper berryes, of Sage leaves, of Basil, of Rosemarie, of Maioram, of
Eyebright, of Fennel, of Bytanie, of Bayeberryes, of Pennye royal, of
Gentiane, of Catmynte, of red Roses, of Spyknard, of Lignum aloe, of Cubebae,
of Cinnamon, of Cardamomum, of Calamus aromaticus: of Staechas, of mace, and of
Olibanum, of each one dram: of dry Fygges, of Reysons, of Dates without the
stones, and of Iourdaine Almons, of each one dram and a half, of Honey six
ounces, and of white Sugar unto the wayght of all: let all these be dilygently
beaten and labored together, and infused in good Aqua vitae thrice distylled
over, which after distyl in a glass body, with a soft fire, in doing besides
(as is before taught) of the other Elixir vitae.

A most laudable water, containing in it the virtues of a baulme, necessary
and helping many sicknesses, borrowed out of Fumanellus. The water which
follows and yields the propertyes of a baulme, procures mirth and
gladness, comforts the brain, and druncke, breaks and cleanses the
rotten and mattery impostumes within the body, puts away the redness and
spots of the eyes, cures the Fistula, and the Cankar applied upon, by
drinking of it, it heals the falling sickness, the lousenesse of members, or
the palsy this cures by applying and anointing the grieved places, which
especially proceeds of a cold cause: the quantity also of a sponefull, drunck
with a cup full of wine fasting, does as it were stay back old age, and
mayntayneth health, and puts away the pymples* waterye whelkes, and other
spots of the face by annoynting upon, yea the high redness of the face
being deformable, and all other foul blemishes happening on the face: it takes
away the pain of the teeth, and the wyndye beating of the ears, being
orderlye applied* the s^incke either of the swelling in the nosethrelles, or
swelling of the gummes, and any manner of swelling of the throat, this breaks
and cleanses: it helps the Melancholicke, the persons molested with ache of
the hyppes, and gout: it cures the dropsy, and pain of the great gutte
proceeding of a cold cause: and anointed about the garland seame, takes away
all manner of pain and ache of the head, coming of a cold cause: and slays
worms in the body, by taking unto the quantytie of half a dram at a time, and
in the same manner does it avail against poison. Many things else he promised,
which are by him thus written: the making of which is on this wise: take of
Masticke, of Cloves, of Nutmegs, of the lesser Cardamomum, of Cubebae, of long
Pepper, of Cynamon, of Galingale, of Ginger, of Lignum aloe, of the great
Cardamomum, of each half an ounce, of Spiknard three drams, of Mace one dram,
of Caphura one dram and a half, of the Iundiane nutte, half a dra^: of a
pleasant and clear white wine, so much as shall suffice to infuse thoroughly
the whole, which after the dilygent, beating and myxing together, distyll with
^ soft and flow fire according to art.

The spyces serving for the distylled Malmesie, in the place to be used of
potable Gold: take of the best Malmesie six measures, which put in a glass
body, distyll with a slow or soft fire in sifted ashes, seven times over, but
after the opinion of the best distyllers, three times over will be sufficient
to be druncke; as affyrmeth Fumanellus. Into the Aqua vitae thus well
rectifyed, infuse these matters following: take of Spermaceti, of chosen Ambre,
and of the best Ruberbe, of each two drams, of very fine and well chosen Musk
one dram, or more: these after the distyllyng and running through a fine
ypocrase bag, made of pure Hob land, and white washed, put up the lycour
into a glass with a narrow mouth, which close stop that no air breathe
forth, for this after the settling, will become and appear of a golden color.
You may put in a little of the inner part of the Cynamon, in the running
through, which will cause the water to taste the pleasaunter. The virtues of
this water are these; it first cures and expels poisons. And to preserve
the body fro^^ having the plague or pestilence, let the person take a drop
of it fasting in the morning, with a little toste of white bread, not to dry
tosted: but purge the body before with some easy purgation, and be let
blood^. And the person infected, give to the quantitye of a great hasyll nutte
shell full of it, with a toste of white bread, which (by the receiving)
delyuereth the pacient. But I (says the Aucthour) always did give of it with
preseruatyue medicynes, and myxed it besides with Cordial medycines and
Electuaries, for the better digesting and comforting of weak persons. And in
this distyllacion (says the Aucthour) I found, and practiced many good helps.
This borrowed out of a written work.

A syngular compound water of spyces, having great virtue, in that the same
helps all cold grieffes of the stomach: borrowed out of the secret
conclusions of Leonar, Fiorauantus, the famous Gretian* This water of Life
(says he) is only aromatizated with the Leuaunt spyces, which is glorious and
woonderful in his working, as ^y reason and practyse shall playner appear,
which is made and distylled on this wise: Take of Nutmegs, of Cloves, of
Galingale, of Cardamomum, of Cubebae, of Mace, of Cynamon, of Gynger, of
Saffron, of Frankensence or rather Olibanum, of each one ounce, these myxed and
grossly beaten together, and having a glass body well luted, put in your
spices, pouring upon six pynts of the best Aqua vitae distylled thryse, or at
the least twyse over, which let so stand for six days: after the closing of
the Receauer, to the nose of the head, distyl the whole in fine sifted ashes,
the water being come forth will be of a red color, which is more precious than
any other water: the same helps all grieffes or sicknesses proceeding of a
cold cause, and cleanses any manner of wound or sore. This also heals all
cuttes and wounds, without causing any pain to the pacient, it procures a
ready memory, it heals the cough of a cold cause, it makes or disposes
the person to mirth, and works many other great matters besides, which were
over long and tedious to utter them one by one: therefore does the Aucthour
here ouerpasse them, wyshing all men to practice and learn further proofs of
the virtues of this precious water.

The making of a myraculous and divine lycour, which causes rare and
wonderful works, in that the same raised in a manner the dead unto life, by
giving a drop or two into the mouth, with either syrup, wine, or broth, or
any other lycour: The making of which is on this wise, take healthful blood of
a young man drawn by vain, the sperme of a whale, and the marow of a Bull, of
each one pound, of Musk one ounce, of the ashes of ye bones of Olives burned
two ounces, of fine Aqua vitae two pynts, these after ye dyligent mixing
together, distyl according to art in a Retorte, until the whole liquide
substance become forth: this the^ come forth distill again in Balneo Mariae
thrice over, leuing ye Feces at the end: this keep in a glass closse stopped*
with the which you may do rare miracles, both within, and without the body
applied.

Of the metalline water, and strong waters. The.lxxxix. Chapter.
A Water of Quicksyluer sublymed, prevailing against ye Canker, in eradycating
or drawing it up by the roots, and soon slays or kylleth ye same, if it be
applied upon, so that you shall need no long cure in the doing of it, but even
the same dylygence and time as is required in an ulcer, to bestow in it: the
making of which water, is on this wise. Let a quantitye of Tynne be molten,
and when the same begins to cool and wax thick, cast then into it so much
of quicksyluer as the wayght of the Tynne, which incorporate or work together,
that the whole may be as a paste, and that the paste must be laid on a smoothe
and even stone, and fynely grynded on the stone: after, it shall be thus
handled, add to it of Mercury, or quicksiluer sublymed, so much as is the
paste, which again grynde and work on the stone, and remaining thus on the
stone, will shortly become liquide as water, the same distyll in a strong
luted body with a head: the water which comes, keep dyligentlie in a strong
glass, to your use.

Against all manner of scabbes, tetters, foul scurfe, ringwoorms, and the foul
Morphew, etc. A distylled lycour out of Theophrastus, on this wise: Take
Helycampane one ounce, of Barrowes grease purifyed half a pound, of
quicksyluer half an ounce, of Brymstone two drams, distyll the whole in a
Retorte, but if you will in a Lymbecke, as the Aucthour wylleth, which drawn,
annoint the places therewith.

An Alome water serving unto all wounds, being a secret, of a certain noble
man: take of Egrimon, of Nightshade, and of plantaine, of each half a pound,
of white wine four ounces, of raw Alome four ounces, of Masticke two drams,
of Orpyment half a scruple, of the whytes of eggs six in number, these after
the well beating and laboring together, distyl in a Retorte according to art:
with this water, let the wound be washed twyse a day.

Another, named an Alome water, which marueylouslye and soon heals, all
corrosyue ulcers, happening either in the mouth, or in any other parts or
places of the body. Take of Alome, of the juice of Purcelane, of the juice of
Plantayne, of the juice of green Grapes, of the whytes of eggs, of each a
like quantity, which after the well myxing together, distyll according to the
order and manner of the Cynamon water.

Another Alome water, borrowed out of the book of Fulgonus: Take of the whytes
of eggs to the number of fyfteene, of roche Alome, of the iuyces of
Purcelayne, of Plantayne, and of Nightshade, of Rosewater of the juice of sour
docke or sour Grapes, of each two pyntes: these dyligently labored and mixed
together, distyll in a Lymbecke, with which wash the grieved places: for it
speedilye brings old ulcers and sores unto a scarre.

A syngular practyse, which a cunning Surgion uttered to the Aucthour, that he
often used, against the eating Cankers, happening in the over parts of the body.
This Surgeon heated a new tyle stone, which he after quenced in Alome water
sundry times: but he oftener used to hang up the tyle read hot, and to pour
leasurelye after a sprinckling manner Alome water upon it, until the tyle was
cold, which water so stylling down, he gathered or received in a basin, or
dyshe, and dypping lynnen clothes in the water, he applied them on the ulcers
and sores: and thus (as he affyrmed) did he marvelous soon heal those
wicked Cankers, to the admyration of many: This Fumanellus.

A most syngular water, helping the spots of the eyes: Take of white Honey two
pyntes, of Antymonie, of Titia prepared, and of Sugarcandie, of each three
drams, of the best Aloes half a dram, of Celondine, of Rue, and eye bright, of
each half a handful, these gross beaten and myxed together, distyll in a
Lymbecke.

A water of Tutia prepared: take of the eye bright water, of Fennel water, of
the Honey suckle water, of each half a pynt, of Rosewater two pyntes, of Tutia
prepared two drams, of Aloes half an ounce, of white Coperase half a dram, of
Camphora one dram, all these labored and dilygently myxed together, distyll
according to art: For this is a notable water, experienced sundrys times,
against the spots of the eyes: this borrowed out of the learned practices of
Arnoldus.

A water of Marchasite, which consumes and cleanses the web and other spots of
the eyes, and the pyn or web confirmed this softneth. The making of which water
is on this wise: take sundry pieces of Marchasite, which read hot, quench in
a basin or deep dythe filled with old sallet Oil, the pieces through
quenched and cold, break very small, which after distyll in a Lymbecke, the
Feces remaining, grynde fynelie again, distylling that over again.

A water helping the Leprie, and other disseases. This water preuayling against
the Leprie, and al manner foulness and deformyty of the body, cleansing the
eyes, mayntayning or preserving youth, and effectuous in many other causes, as
by practice may further be co^iectured: the making of which distylled lycour is
on this wise: take of the fylinges or small pieces of silver, of copper, of
iron, of lead, of steel, of the owre of gold, of copper, of silver, of
s^or^re, of all a like wayght, these stiepe for a day and a night in the bryne
of a child not polluted, the next day infuse those in hot white wine, the
third day these stiepe in the juice of Fennel, the fowrth day stiepe these in
the milk of a woman, gyuing suck to a man child* which she bore into the
world, the fyft day infused in red wine, and the sixth day these infused in
seven times so much (as the whole is) of the whytes of eggs, which after the
distylling keep to your use.

A water auayling against the Lepry, take of May dewflue measures, of Brimstone
one pound, of Crystal half a pound, of Camphora one ounce, these diligently
beaten and myxed together, let so stand a time, after boil the whole easily or
lightly, which settled again, distyll according to art, to this water add
pearls. This orderlye mynistred purges choler adust, and melancholic.

Lyme not quenched or staked, joined with the whites of eggs, and grinded on a
marble stone, distyl on such wise, that the same which is the grosser may
descend, and for a day and a night keep this in a moist place, which distyll
again: with this whyten the face according to discretion.

Another whytning water, take Lyme unslaked, and incorporate the same with ye
water of the whytes of eggs distylled by a Lymbecke: which work so thick, as
a sauce, after power this into a Glass body, setting it covered in a moist
place, for a day and a night, after distyll the whole according to art, which
dystilled keep in a glass with a narrow mouth.

A water whitning the face, take of ye whytes of eggs, of Boraci^, petrosi, of
salt, of roch Alome, of each one dram: each beaten alone, myxe to the whytes of
eggs, the whole distyll, and use.

A great use there is at this day of the strong water, and often occupied of
the Chymistes, and Goldsmythes, yea in Physic exercised unto sundry
disseases. For that well practiced Physician Amatus Lusitanus* prosperously
exercised and ministered the same, in the great and wicked ulcer of the jaws.
And certain at the beginning of the web, cured it, by dropping of this water
into the eyes. A certain Chyrurgian on a time, applied of this water into the
hollow toothe of a Woman, which caused the Woman to rag^ like almadde body;
^ntyll th^^ a little of Opium was applied to the toothe, by the advice of a
skillful Physician, through which she speedily after amended. But this
marvelously cures ulcers, Fistulaes, Cankers, and knobbes, or knottes, whiles
they yet be not entered within the bones, and hollow: by wetting them only
with a Feather or Lynnen cloth dypped in the water, with which the Gold is
separated from the Syluer^e* The ancient in times paste, that they might part
or separate the Gold from Silver, used the dystylled Lycour of Shoemakers
yncke or bleeche: as they also in Asia do at this day, which with it do
separate Gold from Silver. But our later practysioners, that they might make
the water stronger, and vehementer, added to it Salt peter. Bellonius uttering,
and writing of those medycines or compoundes, preserving dead bodies: affyrmeth
that if iron or any other mettallyne matter, be put into the strong water,
that it forthwith boyleth, and ryseth up to fast, that if it has not vente to
breathe out, it then breaks the vessel or doubble Glass. But if you throw
Gold into it, then does it not like boil up, but dyssolue the same into the
form of Sand, and all the other mettalles in the form of a lycour. When
Silver shall be dyssolued in this water, then put into it Copper plates, and
the Silver will clean to it, which after stryke of with a brushe: and in the
end, this in the melting will join.

A strong water is thus made: take of Vitryoll, and of Salt peter, a like
quantitye, of these draw a water by distyllacion, into which if you put
parsyll or doubble gylt ruppes or pottes, the Silver shortly after will be
dyssolued, but the Gold remains vndyssolued, or as I may say whole, which
after strain, and if you will stryke or wype of the Gold, then add unto the
abouesayd water, of the Salt, etc. * after dry each, and prepare orderlye.

Another strong water: take of strong water, of common salt, and a little of
Salt Ammoniacum, these dystill together, or if the strong water shall be
distylled before, and the others after distylled with it: this then is named
the regal water, or water of a king, which seperateth Gold. But the common
Aqua fortis or strong water, does only separate Silver: so that it does both
leave the Gold, and makes it apparaunt.

A causticke water in the Fistula, without pain: and avails also against
kernelles, swellings, and knobbes, yea, it takes away all manner of excessive
or superfluous increasing of the flesh in man's body without pain. The making
of which is on this wise: take of the best oil of Tyle stands, of chosen
Masticke, of gum Arabicke, and of Turpentyne; of each three ounces, such as
are to be beaten, beat dilygentlye, the whole then myxe together, which
distyll by a Lymbecke: this after myxe and incorporate with half a pound of
the ashes of the tree Cerrus: which distyl again by a Lymbecke, and that
distylled or come forth, keep in a Glass well stopped.

A marvelous water in the Fistula, with which golden letters may be written in
iron: take a Rams horn clean rasped and cleansed without, which cut into
small or fine pieces, puttyng it after into a Lymbecked of glass to be
subtylly distylled: this water then come forth, works so on hot iron, that
it gyldeth it, and marvelously avails in Fistulae^: This Bertapalia.

A water corroding and eating away in the steed of a cauterice, in so much
that it eats into iron: take of ^alt water two ounces, of Roman Vitryoll
one pound, of Vermylion (or * of the red sanguinarie stone) four ounces,
grynde each a part: which after the myxing together dystyll by a Lymbecke, the
water keep in a Glass: this Bertapalia.

A ruptory, which serves to part and cut away any swellyng, or mattery
impostume without iron: take of Roman Vitryoll rubys^ed or made read, six
ounces, or Salt and nyter, of each two ounces, of gauls, of salt Ammoniacu^,
of each eight ounces, of Vitryol not rubifyed two ounces, all these after the
powthering, and distylled in a Lymbecke, keep warely in a glass. The use of
this lycour is, that if an Olyue twygge, or other piece of wood edged like to a
knyfe, be dypped and well wette in this water, that the same cutteth away the
swelling: and wartes may in like manner, be taken away with it. This borrowed
out of Fumanellus.

A water against long continuing ulcers, yea how peryllous or wicked so ever
they be, and the Fistula, a medycine learned of a certain religious person
(of which in another place we have mentioned) taught to me many years ago,
and by sundry practices tried the same, that it cleanses all rottenness, and
brings to healing, yea and heals them in a short time: which is prepared
and made after this manner take of Chalcitis or of the Romain Vitryoll one
pound, of Salt nyter so much, of water so much as shall suffice these boil
together with a little of quicksiluer. Take of this water cleared, two pyntes,
of quicksiluer one pound, the whole myxed together distyll in a Lymbecke, and
the distyllacion ended, break then the Glass body, and the substance within
it (which he as Feces or groun^e) grind fynely on a marble stone, which
distyll together again with the abouesayd water, three or four times over:
For the ulcers being old, does the powder remaining heal; by applying upon
them withal the water: This Fumanellus*

Another water taking away, and healing Fistulaes, and knobbes or k^ottes: Take
of the oil of Tyle stones five pyntes, of unquenched Lyme ^ew made, three
ounces, of pure Arsenicke, two ounces, of Euphorbium one ounce, all these
distyll in a Lymbecke according to art: This Fuma^ellus.

Another mightyer water, inputting away Fistulaes, knobbes and wartes: Take of
the oil of Tyle stones half a pynt, of unslaked Lyme four ounces, of pure
Ammoniacum so much, of Euphorbium half an ounce, all these myxed with the
oil, distyll after art in a Lymbecke: and the distylled lycour* keep to your
use: This Fumanellus.

An Oil for the cleansing of the Morphew: take of white Tartare, and of Salt
nyter, of each a like, these grynde finely on a smothe stone, after make a
hole in the myddle of the powder, in which lay a burning coal, and the oil
which runs from the stone, dilygently keep, with the same annoint the
Morphew places, and they shall speedily be cleansed and healed.

A strong water of an empericke Frenchmans inuencion: take of Salt nyter, and
of Vitryoll; of each two pounds, of burnt Alome eight ounces, all these most
fynelie grynded, put after into a glass body well luted, in this manner, as here
this figure demo^nstrateth: under which maitayn a fire for ten hours space,
always increasing it.

A strong water, take of Orpyme^te, of Floris aeris, of each two ounces, of
Roman vitryoll one pound and a half, of Salt nyter two pounds, of Alome
three pounds, all these dyligently brought to powder, distyll according to art.

A strong water maruaylous, in the curing of an old Fistula, and that deep
entered within the bone: borrowed out of a most ancient written book. Take of
Salt Ammoniaci, of vitrioll, of the red and cytrine Orpymente, of green
copperase, of each two drams, either more, or less, according to the
discrecion of the workman, all these brought to powder, distyll in a glass
body well luted, making a gentle fire at the first, and increasing it so long
until the glass body become read: that distylled, keep in a glass closse
stopped, in that otherwise it would breath out and consume away. This water is
of such a force and virtue, that it pearceth the bones, and for that cause one
small drop let fall in the hollow of the Fistula: does forthwith canterizate
the same, even like to fire. After let the burning be taken or gotten away with
the white of an egg, or fresh butter: and a wary application then used, for
the increasing of flesh.

Another strong water, take of Salt peter, and of the Roman Vitryoll, of
each two pounds, of Alome calcyned half a pound, all these brought to
powder, distyll in a Cucurbite, but I rather think a Retorte the better. This
water whytneth the teeth that be black, if so be you apply a drop of it on
the teeth, with a Goose feather, and wash them after with spring or Conduite
water.

A kind of strong water, auayling against worms, wartes, and knobbes, or
little swellings: take of Salt Ammoniacum, of Romayne vitryoll, and of each two
ounces, of Sugar Alome, and of unslaked Lyme, of each half an ounce, all
these dilygentlye myxed, distyll after art.

Another water maruaylous, in the Fistulaes, and in the dyssoluing of pearls,
and the Gold in leaves. Take of Salt Ammoniacum half a pound, of Salt niter
three ounces, of Tartare two ounces, of common salt half an ounce, all these
finely brought to powder, and distylled by a Lymbecke, keep in a glass close
stopped.

A water which dies or colors Horses, Dogs, clothes, and Feathers, of a
green color: take of Salt nyter one pound, and of Smerilij half a pound,
these fynelie brought to powder, distyll by a Lymbecke: the water keep in a
glass, closse stopped.

For the taking away of a Canker, a secret of Master Frances: take the
distyllacion by a Lymbecke of the quicksyluer, of the silver sublymed, of
Roman vitryoll, of each a like, this orderlye use.

A strong water helping a knob called Morum, (Bertapalia) in the sixtene
Chapter of impostumes: take of Roman vitryoll, of roche Alome, of salt
Ammoniacu^, of Salt gemme, of each four, three, two, and one, these are the
wayghtes according to order, which dilygently brought to powder, distyll in a
glass body fensed with the lute of wisdom, and Ore doong, and straw myxed,
This water is maruaylous, for by touching the round knobbe Morum with it, both
shortly destroy it, yea any other knobbe of flesh grown on the skin: and
this is named the strong water, with which the Golosmythes do separate, the
silver from the Gold.

A strong water auayling in Fistulaes, and is besides of great virtue and power
in ulcers. Take of Salt nyter, of Roman vitryoll, of roche Alome, of each
one pound, each fynely grinded alone, and incorporated together, put into a
Lymbecke, making at the first a soft fire: the first water that comes, keep by
it self, dystylling forewarde with the increasing of heat, until the glass
body wareth read, then take away that second water, and receive the other by
it self, for the first water is nothing worth: and increase then the fire
myghtyer, until the Glass body and headde become redder, forsing then the
Ashes which are in the vessel to ascend unto the neck of the Glass, and
increase your heat of fire, stronger and stronger, until the headde be read,
and that the red fume ascending shall cease, which shall well or euidentlye
appear in the Glass, the same thus come, seal dilygentlye with wax, and
keep the abouesayde water. The Furnace through cold, and the body opened,
you shall find in the bottom of it a red mass or lump, which keep. The
said water, is stronger then the water of the world, and has maruaylous
workinges in it. For this water dyssolueth, corrodeth the flesh, and reduces
or changes all things of the world, into a powder and water: as the stones,
and mettalles. If this be heated, it then gives up a very read, and myghtie
fume. This water, if it touches by it self, either the flesh, or a garment,
it dies or colors the same yellowe to Saffron, which spotte will never be
gotten out: for the color or stayne on the flesh contynueth many days, and
if you wash the stayne with Lie, it becomes very read of color. Further
if you shall put a little piece of good Luna, that is of silver, into this
water, it dies then the same of a black color, which after cannot be gotten
out or cleansed away. And if you shall put a little of Mercury, which is
quicksyluer, into it* that it be molten, it is then caused mightyer then the
fire. For if it then touches the flesh, it does cauterizate or burn, even
lyk^ to an iron fire hot, and is not fealt: and is right notable for
canterises, or to make cauterizations: it also mortifyeth all Fistulaes,
Cankers, Carbuneles, wicked, and venomous humors. If iron also be put into
the said water, it forthwith heateth and boyleth without fire* and if you put
into it iron, it causes a red water, by the intermedling and dissoluing of
the iron. And if you shall draw or distyll the water by a body of glass
fensed, the iron then will remain in the bottom of the vessel, and will be a
very read powder, which properly is named, Marses, Saffron. If also in the
above said water you shall put Venus, that is to say Copper, it like boyleth,
and of the same is made a green water. And if you will draw that water forth
by a Lymbecke, then will a most black powder of Venus, remain in the bottom
of the vessel, which properlye is named Venus Lyme. Note that if you shall put
Saturn that is Lead, in the said water, it causes the water clear, and if
you shall draw that water forth by Limbeck, there will remain a white Salt in
the bottom, and that bitter. Also if you shall put Jupiter, that is tynne into
it, it will then cause of it a paste like to butter: and if you shall dry the
same (as above taught) the powder then will be white in the bottom. And if you
shall put Mercury, that is quicksyluer, into it, it makes then a clear water
of the same: and if you shall let the water of Mercury to settle, it will then
fall to the bottom like to yse: and if you will dry the same, then remains a
white salt in the bottom, and strong as the styffest wax. And if you will
recover your Silver, when it is in the water, put then in the same water crude
Mercury, and the good Silver will incontinent enter within the Mercury, after
emptye the water, and take the myxion, which put into a Goats skin, wring
the substance very hard, and the Mercury or quicksyluer will then issue
forth: the substance which shall remain in the skin, put into a Crucible to
be molten, and you shall then find the good silver. Also if you shall put
Gold in the same water, it causes the water yelowe of it, and if you shall
dry the same, then is a golden salt caused bitter as the earth, that avails
in the drying of Fistulaes. If also you shall dyssolue one part of good Luna or
silver in the said water, and so much of Mercury or quicksyluer, and so much
of the white sublymed Silver, and a fowrth part of one of these, of Tutia
Alexandrina, and shall draw this water by a Lymbecke, all these then shall
remain in the bottom of the glass, unto the form of a stone: of which
stone put one part, upon four parts of Copper molten, and it shall soon after
become so white, as the silver (...) if you shall io^ne good Silver, then may
fair ornaments be made of the same. The author ma^es it i^ their kind of
money. xxij. shyllinges, the which is in our coin vvorth three shyllinges.
Also if you (...) cause l^ttle vesselle^ or small rings or any other things
be made of half Gold, and half Silver, and that after you shall take the red substance, which remained in the (...) the vessel of the (...) and will
bring it into fine powder, you shall then do or worked (...).

another water p^euayling (...), and the taking a^^ye of thick sky^nes, and
hard flesh gathered: take of Cuperosa, that is Romayne vitryoll, of Salt
nyter, of (...) made of each a like quan^^tie these after the dily^^nt (...)
^nd^nyring t^gither, distyl ^y a Lymbeck according to art. The first water
yssuing or coming forth i^ white, that (...) pymples and (...), but (...)
cleansing thick, and hard ^nottie flesh: the other water is read, which
cle^nseth both knobbes and wartes, and heals all those, which I have above
uttered.

Or thus, take of vnsl^^ed Lyme new made, thr^e ounces, of (...) Euphorbi^m
(...) ounce; (...) these beaten a part myxe dyligently with h^th half a
po^n^e of oil of Tyle stones, which after distyll according to art: that
distylled and come, keep in a glass, both for thick gatheringes, and knobbes
of flesh.

Another water, take of Salt nyter three ounces, of Romayne vitryoll one
pound, of Vermylion four ounces, all these grynded together, distyll artlye
by a Lymbecke: and the water come, keep for the gylding of Marse, that is to
say iron.

Another water, take of Salt nyter, of Romayne vitryoll, of Salt Ammoniacum, of
Viridis aeris, of Orpimente, of new unslaked Lyme, of Alome, of salt Alkali,
all these after the dilygent laboring and my^ing together, distyll artlye, in
which stiepe Marse, or let the same lie infused in it for a tyine, and it will
corrode and eat in marueylouslye.

A water dyssoluing the Son or Gold, take of Salt peter, of Vitryoll, of
Gypsum, of Alumiu^ iameni, of each twelve ounces, of Vermylion two o^nces, of
the water of Salt The Alcamistes do name the metals, after the name of the
planets, as Gold the Sun, and Silver the Moon.
three ounces: these after the ^eating, distyll in a Lymbecke: and the first
water come, will be sweet^* the second and l^^t that co^^eth, i^ read* and
good.

To separate gold from any metal: take of oil of Tartare two parts, of
Brymston^ one part, after the distylling, annoin^ the metal, or iron, which
made read hot, quench them in cold water, and the Gold will after fall of in
the ^ourme of Sand, to the bottom of the vessel.

A strong water seperating the Sun, that is to say Gold, from the Moon,
that is to say silver, take of salt one part, of vitryoll one part, of Salt
nyter half a part, of Viridis Graeci the fowrth part of one part: the whole
stiepe with the strongest vinegar, to the form of paste, and dried, then
sublyme the water.

Another working b^tter, which seperateth the M^^ne, that (...) silver, unto
one part, and the Sun, that is Gold, unto another, after the manner of a mass
or lump: take of Tyles one dram wayght, of common salt burnt half a dram,
of Aeris vsti, of Viridis aeris, of each half a dram, all these brought to
powder and myxed together, put after the matter which you will separate into
this powder, being then in a glased earthen pan, which c^uer with another
pan, and when the mass is dyssolued, the one then will be separated from the
other.

A water and oil of salt Ammoniaci: take of six or ten hard Eggs sodden,
which opened in the heads, and the yolks taken forth, fill those empty places
of the Eggs, with the salt Ammoniaci in fine powder: after let th^se be set
into a vessel filled with sand, that is moystned or wette with water, and the
next morrow you shall find a water within the shell, which power forth the
next morrow after, empty again the water in like manner, and so often do,
until the whole be resolved. But if you mind to draw and have an oil of the
same, then separate the water by a Lymbecke, and the oil will remain, which
keep in a glass. The special use of it is and serves unto the fyxing, and
unto many other Alchymicall works, Marcell.

A water mollyfying or softning all mettalies, Glass, Steel, and Iron, and
the Amber stone: take of salt Ammoniaci, of the Salt nyter with Tartare, of
each a like quantity, which boil (in same lycour) with a small ^y^e: and the
same softneth any metal powered into it.

Salt nyter and Tartare, equallye or of a like quantitye taken, do soften
metalles, after the opynion of some pr^aysioners.

A strong water: take of Salt nyter of Salt Armoniacke, of each a like
quantytie ^ mak^ of these a water for the Sun, that is Gold. And if you will
separate Gold and Silver in the water, take of Salt nyter one pound, of burnt
Alome two pounde^, these distyll by a Lymbeck, into the water put so thin
plates heaten as a leaf* standing or set on the fire, which then will boil,
and when the saui^ seac^th boiling, take it from the fire, and the water c^oled
shake well together, and it will be troubled, power then the water, lyghtlie or
subtyllye, forth into another Glass, and you shall see black Gold to settle
or rest in the bottom, then take a little Spryng or C^nduite water, pouring
that upon the Sun^^ or Gold^, and wash it dyligentlye, and the water after
^^wre, as unto the first water, the Sun or Gold then put into a Cru^ible,
which through dried on the coals, add after to it of Salt nyter a little
quantitye, melting the Sun with it, and then cast it into form. And when
you will have the Moon, take the water powered forth, and distyll the ^ame by a
Lynmbecke, and the Moon shall abide in the glass, which then power or put
forth, as is above taught of the Gold: the Moon then washed with the first
water, may be powered upon the Feces: that if more of the Moon in black
powder happen, that the same also be then dyssolued, and power it after forth
again, on which power Spryng or Conduyte water, washing it as above taught.
The Mo^n^ in the rude dried, put into a Crucible, filled* with half so much of
Nyter, as the same is: and making a small hole above or on the top of it,
blow the fire, and you shall have the Moon purifyed.

A water of the Philosophers, borrowed out of a written leaf of Paper, in the
French tongue: take of ^i^maine vitryoll one ^ounde, at Salt nyter half a
pound of Uermillio^ three ounces, ^^ese fyuelie beaten to powder, and myxed
together, ^^^tyll in a Lymbecke, which after must be set in a new earthen
pot. The same fill so bighe with syfted ashes, as they may well receive and
rise somewhat above the substance contained in the Glass body, standing in
the earthen pot. Which so ordered, make then in the beginning a clear and
soft fire, and after the first water is ^ome, keep that a part which is
known to be then full come, when as the neck of the Lymbecke above shall
appear yelowe: and following or mayntayning the fire, get the second water in
another Receauer: so that each ought to be kept a part. The virtues of this
water are many: with this water are cups, helmets, Armor, sword^, knives, and
such like things gylded: yea, wry^^ing l^fters, paynting leaves, or ^ther
ornaments, in ordering it after this manner: as that first or before, the matter
or thing to be gylded, be stricken over with vernishe, and the same after dried
at the fire: on which well dried, write what you will, with a styffe prick of a
hard wood sharpened for the purpose: after wette ^ll that pl^^^* (...) or
written with the said water, which let to rest a little space, then holding or
setting these to a soft fire, an^ after a whiles to a stronger fire: being then
well heated or sufficient hot, let them be rubbed over with a roughe Lynnen
cloth, and wyped or cleansed from the vernishe. And if you will whyten or make
white latten metal, let it boil in this water, and i^ will after appe^re
silver ^yke. If you will c^^e the wa^ts, the (...), the pymples, or (...)
deformable in any person or take away the super^^uous ^^esh growing in any
place or part of the body: let the place be first opened with a needle, and
power in a little of the above said water, which in^ontinent will take the same
away. But if you would help and cure Fistulaes, and impostumes, then with a
tent apply the water to them* for it will and does break the Fistulaes, and
eradicateth by takes them away by the roots within two date^; and does like
take away evil flesh grown, and restores the good. And if you would open
impostumes wi^^out an iron instrument, then take white ware, making of it a
plaster, with a hole bored with them y^^le^, which apply on the grieue^ plate,
after po^^e, a ^ytl^ of the water into that hole, which (...) after opens the
impostumes. This water softneth Corralles: if you put them into one, or both of
these waters myxed together: which after the softning and taking forth, you
may work and frame to what form you will, for after a time they return,
unto their proper nature and hardness. This water druncke of any beast,
slays or kylleth him. The wind, to which this water is admyred, forthwith is
corrupted: but when you will recover the wine, then put into it Rosemarye. And
it has also other properties, not here to be uttered, for the lewdness sake
of the craftye, wicked, and detestable persons: which may abuse this water,
unto menni^ destruction.

A water named Royal, for the syngular properties which it has unto many
grie^^e^punc; the making of which is on this wise, take of yellowe Brimstone,
of roche Alonie, and of Salt gemu^e, of each two pounds, of Borrace, and of
^a^^icke, of each two ounces, these dilygentlye beaten in a mortar, and myxe^
after in a glass body fenced, with a head and Receauer ^^tly^ (...), dystyll
according to s^yll, making a most ^trong or mighty fire toward the end, and
continuing the same until all the moy^ture be drawn and come: the water which
distylleth and is gathered in the Receauer, is white and troubled, which
strain through a fine cloth, the same keep in a glass with a narrow mouth,
putting to it four grains of Musk^ dyssolued in half an ounce of Rose water:
and after the setlyng, will this water be clear, and very sweet. The
approved virtues of this water are many, as the Aucthour affyrmeth: of which,
some he does here utter that he has many times experienced. And the first is,
that this royal water takes away the pain of any wound, if the wound all
about be bathed with it. The second propertye and virtue of this water is,
that all manner of ulcers, fores, and grief^es that may happen within the
mouth, and the gummes much putryfied, and to the ache, by holding a little of
this water in the mouth, by the space of a Crade and spytting it after forth,
does marueylouslye and sp^dily heal any of the above said. The third
propertye and virtue of this water is, that rubbing the teeth with a ^yne
lynnen cloth wette in this water, does make them very white, a matter
delectable to many men and women. The fowrth, by giving half a scruple of this
water by the mouth with broth, to the person in the fyt of an Agu^, does
marvelously deliver it, and that for certain. This borrowed out of the
singular practices, of the Greek Fiorauant.

A precious water for the eyes, of Vitryoll: take a quantitye of Vitryoll,
drawing a water of it in a Cucurbite by distyllacion, in Sand: but this
Vitryoll needs not, nor ought to be calcyned. Another, serving to the same
purpose. Take a new laid egg, which after the seething hard, pluck of the
shell, and cut the same into just halues in the myddle. The yolke taken out,
put in the place the quantitye of a Pease, of white Vitryoll in powder, and it
will be turned into a water, after let the* whole be wrynged through a linen
cloth into a glass, and the water kept, for it is singular for the eyes.

A marvelous water, taking away the spots vndoubtedly^ of the eyes, and
clearyng the sight: above all, it preserves and maintayneth youth, and takes
away any spotte of the face: but in the high read c^lour, and Leprie, it
does not so much avail, or not throughlye cure them. The making of which is on
this wise, take of the sylinges of Silver, of Tynne, of Copper, of St^ele, of
Lead, of the Gold and Silver ower, of each so much as the abillitie of the
person may extend: Infuse these for the first day and night, in the vryne of
a sound^ child: the next day, in warm white wine: the thyrd^ day, in the
juice of Fennel, Veruayne, or Celondyne: the fowrth day, in the whytes of
Eggs: the fyfte day, in the milk of a woman gyuing suck to a man child:
the syxt day in red wine: the seventh day, in the whytes of seven eggs:
and the whole together put into a tynne Lymbecke or Rose still, to be
distylled with a soft fire, and that which comes, keep dilygently^ in a
Glass with a narrow mouth, close stopped.

Of this water let fall two or three drops at a time into the eyes, both
morning and evening, washing the eyes before with Spring water, etc. This
borrowed out of the learned work of Arnolde De villa noua.



A water of metals experienced; that helps any Leprie, foul scabbes, the
Fistula, the Morphew, the (...) sootte, T^tter, and Canker, and avails, unto
the comforting (...) at the m^mbers of the ^ody, and pallyueth any contagiou^
sore or grief, and kylleth any grief continually running. Take of the fylings
of iron, of steel, of Gold, of Silver, of Copper, of Tynne, and of Lead, of
each a like wayght, of Myrre and Aloes, so much as of all or of the whole^ all
these grynde an^ myxe together, which after put into a glasen or* Alchymicall
pot, with a headde of Glass set upon it, and artlye luted: the same set in
a Furnace over the fire, and gather the water, which distylleth by a Lymbecke,
in a Receauer standing under, which keep to your use, for it marueylouslye
avails in all the grieffes above uttered: this out of the aforesaid Aucthour.

A blessed water distylled against the Cowte: take of Roman Vitryoll two
pounds, of the distylled Honey four pynts, distyll these as you know, after
add a third part of Aqua vitae rectifyed to it, which dilygently myxed, ke^pe
to your use, and with a white Dooues feather, stryke over or annoint the
grieved place, according to art.

A ^roued water helping the foulness and filthy color of the ^^eth,
borrowed out of Guido: take of salt Ammoniacke, and of Salt gemme, of each
half a pound, of Sugar alome, one quarter of a pound, these brought to powder,
and put into a Cucurbite, distyll after art: with this water rub the teeth,
with a piece of Scarlet.

A water cau^^ng the heir of the headde yelowe: take of the Ashes of the Tree
Cerrus one pound, of a Spring or Conduite water six pyntes, boiled a good
whiles together, to which add or put two ounces of Roman vitryoll, and set
in the open air for three days, after use the same according to discretion.

Another water: take of salt gemme, of the ^rosse beatings about the Antui^ld
of Copper, and of Alcan^a, of each a like quantitye, these after the beating,
distyll after art in a Lymbecke.

Another water, more of value: take of salt gemme one pound, of Roman
vitryoll half a pound, of Salt nyter four ounc^^, of the green roots of
Celondyne scraped, unto the wayght of all, these seuerallye heate^* and myxed
together, draw ^ water by Lymbecke the same (...) first (...) thro^e^ way
(...) ^nprofitable: the next which co^^eth, keepe^, (...) it colors: the
heir, in washing the heirs before with ^ye* and ^^tting the heirs often with
a Sponge, as they dry in the hot sun.

A powder made by subl^mation most strong, serving with the corr^^ing and
eating away, and mortifying de^^^slcke, borowe^ out of Lanfra^ke; in his
Anty^^^arie. Take of the fylinges of iron of the powder of vitryoll; of Al^ne
ia^^^i, and of Anti^^^nie, of each two ounces* of the Salt* A^^nonia^i, of
Arsenic^e cytrine* of Sulphur viue, of Floris* aeris, of each one ounce and a
half, of vn^laked Lyme new made half a pound: after all these well beaten
and myxed together, add to the whole one ounce of quicksyluer extincted or
killed with fasting spyttle, or mortifyed with the squilletick vinegar, or the
sea water, or strong Lie, which shall be the better, if the same shall be of the
ashes of Beans, and that Trochistes or little flat balls be made thereof; and
dried, put into a Aludel, and sublymed after art. The manner of the sublymation
^s on this wise: take a thick and strong Glass body* which will abide the
heat of fire, without cracking or breaking, or that it be a body of earth
glased within, and has a cover to artificiallye framed and matched to it, that
one part enters, close within the mouth of the body, which shall be under,
and so closely and near joined to it, that nothing at all can breath out of
the same, and with this that the edges or lyppes be luted round about, with the
lute of wisdom, or potters claye. Let the powder to be sublymed, be put in
the bottom of the body, and close covered with the cover, and the edges
stronglye luted, and set in the Furnace, under which a soft or slow fire made
for half a day, after take the vessel from the fire, letting the same
throughlye cool, which being cold uncover the head, and that which then
remains allow in the bottom, throw away. But that which cleaves or
sticks to the cover, take away, and keep in the pieces. And when you shall
need of the same, then use and work with the same by good cyrcumspection, and
in a wary manner, in that this burns like to fire, and both putrifyeth and
corrupts the place, to which this is applied.

Certain instructions, of Mercury precypitate, to be prepared and made, with
Aqua fortis, are here under uttered.

Th^^ Mercury precypitate, is made on this wise: take of Aqua fortis or strong
w^^er, one pound, of crude Mercury four ounces, dyssolued into water, after
the water euaporate in Sand, or by distyllacion, separate it stronglye, that
it waxes read and through dried, the same after grind in a marble mortar,
pouring upon Aqua vitae, distylled five or seven times over, which also
kyndle* and let it burn until the same be consumed. After let it be rectifyed
with Rosewater very well myxed, and then by fyltring or by a fylter, separate
the Rosewater, and leave or suffer it to dry. Then power again of the Aqua
vitae upon, which kyndle and burn until the same be through dry, and the
same repeted a third time, you shall have that you desire and seek. And so
much of Aqua vitae must be powered upon, as may only suffice to cover it, but
not to much in any wise.

A Mercury precypitate, invented of an Empericke French man: take of
quicksyluer one pound, of strong water fifteen pyntes, these put into a
Cucurbyte strongly luted, distyll after the manner of strong water, as is before
taught, increasing always the fire unto the end.

A common precypitate, which serves for the drawing out and eating away of
rotten flesh in ulcers, and much exercised in our time, for sundry grieffes:
the making of which is on this wise, take of strong water, which serves to
separate, and for every three ounces of it, put or add two ounces of
quicksyluer, that is not falsified with any other mynerall, the whole power
into a long necked body, which is strongly luted, applying fire so long under,
until the water be throughlye drawn away and dry, and that no fumes ascend
to the head: after make a strong or great fire for an hours space, and then
let the body cool, which through cold, break the Glass body, for in the
bottom shall you find a red mass or substance, like to Vermyllion, the
same bring to fine powder in a brass mortar (as in a manner vnpalpable which
then may rightly be named the common precypitate. And be which myndeth to
prepare the precypitate in such sort, that it may not work so rygorous and
painful, as it does and is fealt, where the same is applied, let him do it on
this wise, wash the same with clear water, after draw away and dry
thoroughly the precypitate by heat of fire, which through heat burned, quench
in strong vinegar, and this do three times together, for then will his force of
payning be qualyfied, and on this wise is the common precypitate prepared, with
which you may do miracles, applied in sundaye medycines. This borrowed out of
the secret practices, of Leonard Fiorauant, the Greek.

Of Mercury precipitate, which serves and is a remedy against all sicknesses
and disseases, caused of the rottenness of humors. The.lxxxx. Chap.
TAke equal parts of Roman vitryoll, and Salt nyter, and of them gather a
water by distyllacion, with a body, head, and Receauer, into which body you
shall put a sixth part of the wayght of crude Mercury or quicksyluer, that is,
if of the Vitryoll and Salt nyter, there be three pounds, then add to these
of Mercury, six ounces: after this so do, that a water with his spirits may
ascend, and fall into the Receauer. All which come in the receauer, empty
then into another Glass body pure within, and stronglye luted and fensed
without: to the headde of which set a Receauer fastened with lute, and standing
under: the same cause to distyll again, and the water when it shall be
gathered in the Receauer, power the same again into the body in which
Mercury yet remained, and you shall often repeat and go over with this,
until a Mercury come to redness, and being thus come read, take the Cake
forth, and wash it with Cordial waters, as the water of Rosemarye, Buglosse,
Baulme, and such like. But wash the Mercury before (and that often times) in
spring, Cunduite, or well water being before distylled: which Mercury thus
corrected and prepared, you shall mynister to the sick and grieved persons,
after this order and manner.

If the person shall be sufficientlye strong of body, then mynister (after the
mind of Gabriell Fallopius) of Aloes cicotri half a scruple, of Myrre and
Masticke four grains, of precypitate five graynes: myxe these with rosed
Honey, or rather with the conserve of Roses, framing of the whole, either three
or four pylles, which give fasting in the morning, and dryncking a draft of
white wine warmed after them. If the body shall be mean of strength, then
mynister but four graynes with a little sweet^ butter, Sugar, and three graynes
of Masticke. If the body shall be feeble and through crased, then only three
graynes, with half a scruple of Aloes ^ycotrine powthered, and myxed with
Rhodosaccharu^, which made into three pylles, minister as above taught. But if
you mind to minister this to a Child, then use but four graynes, or rather
apply of it, according to the strength and weakness of the Chyldes body,
Further learn and note, that you ought to myxe the precypitate before with
Triacle, and to mynister the same then to the pacient poisoned, to the dropsy
person* and pacient taken with the Pestilence, or any other sickness. And that
more to be understood, if a healthful and sound man shall yearly, or every
third year use this precypitate, as need and occasion shall require the same,
with a prudent digestion of humors, that is, the preparation of the purgation,
the pacient then shall avoid disseases, and from being sick.

Here conceive, that in the place of precypitate, you may use the myxture named
Amalgama, which (after the mind of the Chymistes) is made of sire parts of
quicksyluer, and of one part of Gold: with which thus prepared, you may do
the greater marueyles. And note, that with the first, and second precypitate,
you may cure wounds, by using the same after this manner, as to put of it about
the wounds, and within. Besides the water remaining after the precypitate
made, takes away the pain of all filthye wounds, if they be bathed with the
same, and a drop of this water put with coten into a hollow tooth, which
greuouslye aketh and payneth, it does sodaynlie astonishe and mortifye the
marow of the tooth, and delyuereth the pain for ever. Also this water mixed
with white wine, and wetting the heirs of the head or beard with it being
hoarie white, causes them to come yelow. And sundry other matters besides this
works, which for breuitye here omytted.

The manner of making the Philosophers stone, which heals all disseases in
man, or woman, is on this wise: take of Salt nyter prepared, of roche Alome,
and of Roman vitryoll* of each two pounds, dry the vitryoll before in an
earthen pan, and being dried, beat altogyther into powder, unto which add
four ounces of Salt gemme, after put the whole into a body luted or fensed
about with the lute of wisdom, and the head close joined and clayed about,
which set in an open Furnace, making a fire under with cleft wood if you will,
unless you had rather use coals, then to the nose of the headde artlye fasten
the Receauer that no air breath forth: which done, kyndle the fire, and when
it begins to distyl, wet then lynnen clothes easilye wringed out, which
shall apply both upon the head and Receauer, unto this end, that the spy^^^es
of the water do not euaporate and waste, for by the spirits euaporating, the
water is so caused vnper^ite to such a purpose: and in the beginning of this
distyllacion, do the vessels appear so read, as blood, and within a whiles
after they become white, when as you distyll with a strong fire: after that
they return so red as at the first: and these ^e the good spirytes of the
strong water, after that they return once again white, and as soon as they
appear no more read, the water is then ended and perfect: after which draw
forth the fire, and let the vessels cool, the^ power forth the water into a
strong glass, close stopping the same, which diligently keep, for the making
of the Philosophers stone. After take of quicksyluer one pound, of vnflaked
Lyme six ounces, of black Soap four ounces, of strong Ashes three ounces:
all these labor together in a mortar, which dilygentlye incorporated, put
after into a Retorte stronglye luted, which fastened to his Receauer, set in a
Furnace to distyll, making about and under it a strong or great fire,
continuing this fire so long, until all the quicksyluer ^ee come forth, and
gathered in the Receauer, which draw away, and keep in a strong Glass
body, close luted. After labor the composition of the stone, which is made
after this manner: Take the said water, which you made first, pouring the same
into a body of such a bygnesse, that two third parts of the same may rest
empty, which stronglye fence and lute about: after power into it the
quicksyluer, which you kept, adding two ounces of thynne iron plates, and one
ounce of steel plates beaten very thynne, to the ^^ put so many gold leaves
or sheets, as wayghe two English crowns, or font what less of wayght:
after these so put into the body, set on the head forth with, and the Receauer
luted to with speed, for immediately after the myxing of these together, does
the substance in the body boil, and cause so read Funles that yse as blood,
which then gather to the head, so that spedilye ^ou must set the body in the
Furnace, applying fire so long under, until the whole water be distylled and
come, and the Fume ended. Then let the vessels cool, and keep the water a
part close stopped, after break the body, in the bottom of which you shall
find the Philosophers stone, the same reduce and bring into very fine powder,
and dilygently sear^e it, keeping it after in a ^alley pot or broad mouthed
glass, ^^ry close covered, and setting it up, as you would a precio^s
treasure. The water gathered, and that you keep, will ser^e anoth^r time to
perform (...) ly^^ effect and purpose: but it for ^^th not, although you can
work ^uer but half the quantitye of the substance, the same half you must
necessarilye labor once ^uer again, in the fayde water, which second work
ended of the stone, bring the same into very fine powder, and myxing ^^ with
the first substance: the water keep then close covered unto infinite uses* as
shall after be uttered in the proper place. But as touching the powder this one
special matter is written by the Aucthour of the singular properties contained
in it, being prepared and compo^^ned after the manner here under taught, which
so framed* and mynistred, does then work myraculously, in that the same (...)
position named of him Aromaticum leonardi, does help all grieffes and
sicknesses of the body, of what qualitye and condi^ion so ever they be, for
settled in the stomach, does forthwith draw to it, round about, and from the
headde, all the evil humors thereabout among the body, which drawn
together, it speedilye sends them forth of the body, as well by vomit, as
downwarde by stool or siege, disburd^ning by that means, nature before
charged, after which the body, may the sooner (without impediment) recover to
health: and in this respect; the same is a helper to the amendment of body, and
preuayling against all sicknesses, as may appear in the glorious and singular
workings of it: the making of which composition is on this wise: take of white
Sugar four ounces, of Pearls grynded, of Musk, of Saffron, of Lignu^ aloe,
and of Cynamon, of each one scruple, of this Philosophers stone, four drams,
which after art make into Tables with Rosewater, as you do Manus Christi:
these after put up in a close wooden box, that no air breath forth, and kept
in a dry place. The quantity to be mynistred at a time, is from one dram*
unto two: and you may either gyu^ it in broth, wine, or Ale, or in any
conserve: But gyuing it in a potion, have regard that the same which setleth
to the bottom of the cup be druncke also: in that the same being heavy,
evermore, setleth to the bottom, and the same not druncke, the effect then is
not, nor will be performed at that time. This also learn, that what ^ays the
pacient takes it, he may then eat but little unto night, and drink only
thynne drink, for the better discharging of the stomach. The Aucthour also
writes of an angelike electuarie to be made with this stone, that is
marvelous in many disseases and sicknesses. For this ministered, avails in all
Agues, by abating the force of them, for grief of the flanks eight
marvelous, and eases straungely the gowte, by taking adosed; quantitye of it,
every third day, and that three times together in ten days, for by that time
(does the Aucthour write) that he shall thoroughly he cured of his gowte, and he
reports that many times he has woonderfullye cured it, to his great fame.
This also avails in the cough, the rewme, and dissease of the Milt: and
helps besides the French dissease, joint aches, and such like.

The making of which precious lycour, is on this wise: take of Saffron, of
Lignum aloe, of Cynamon, of read Coral, of each a dram, of black De^^abore
without preparation two ounces, of the electuarie of the juice of Roses (of
Mesue) not to much or to high boiled, six ounces, of Sugar Roset or of the
conserve of Roses, eight ounces, of the East Musk one dram, of the
Philosophers stone three ounces, of the best quintessence, two ounces, of stone
Honey boiled and skimmed, so much as shall suffice to make a good form of an
electuarie, these after the powthering, myxe and incorporate dilygently
together over a soft and easy fire, in an earthen glased vessel, in that a
vessel of any metal, is not fyt for this composition, and being made, keep
dilygently in a glass, rather than in any other vessel. And this electuarie
may be matched or myxed with any other solutiue medicine, and taken with a
fasting stomach in the morning: the quantity at one time to be mynistred, is
from two drams unto four. This conceive, that the same rayseth in a manner the
doad, through the singular virtue contained in it: as the Aucthour in Rome, and
in sundry other places, has both seen, and done many experiences worthy
memory. For which cause, he wysheth the skylfull practysioners, not to be
without this Angelike electuarie, that myndeth to purchase, fame on earth. This
borrowed out of the singular practices, of the skylfull Greek Leonard
Fiorauant.

The making of the vegelant stone, after a rare and strange order, that
changes bodies from one quality into another, and defends or preserves the
body a long time in health: and that has also infinite virtues in a manner, and
without comparison. Is borrowed out of the practices, of the above said
Aucthour, in this manner.

Take of the Tartare of white wine, which is both thick and clear, or bright,
of Turpe^tine very pure and clear, of the herb Aloes which has long leaves,
thick and indented on the sides (and hanged in men's houses, being
continuallye green, and brought of Marryners many times out of Barbary into
England) of each of these three one pound, which after stamp together in a
mortar, making and incorporating the whole to a paste, the same put then into
an vrynall body of Glass with a head luted to, and a Receauer artlie fastened,
under which apply fire so (...) until all the lyquide substance and moisture
be come: and after draw forth the Feces out of the vrynall, and if you
otherwise can not choose, break then the vrynall, and grynde those Feces,
which incorporate with the whole water come, after distyll the whole as above
taught, and in the end always of your work, make a greater fire, and so
mighty, that your Feces may appear burned well, those Feces again draw
forth, grynde and impaste with the said water, as before taught, and distylling
it the like over again, which repeat and do fifteen times over* or twenty
times together without ceassing, until all the water be wholye consumed after
this manner, and that no moisture rests in the Feces, but are so white and
bright, as Salt. Those Feces then lay upon a smoothe marble stone, hanging it,
or laying it in a moist place, and the stone will after dyssolue and turn into
a most clear water: and being thus wholye dissolved, keep the same in a
narrow mouthed glass, close stopped: for this water is the vegetable stone*
Which water is of such a virtue, that one scruple of the same myxed with two
ounces of the Iulepe or syrup of Violets, and mynistred or taken by the mouth,
of any sick person or evil complexioned, for the space of fortye days, shall
be delivered and quyted of any grievous and hard sickness, and this must be
taken with a fasting and empty stomach in the morning, and that the meat be
well dygisted before: for being ^n such wise, this then works the greater
effect: and is also a syngular remedy against worms, in mynistring of it as
above taught, and cleanses the Liver, dries up the moisture of the Mylt,
delyuereth the cough, the rewme, and causes the pacient to pysse, which has
impediment of vryne, and sundry other virtues this myraculous water has,
which the Aucthour ouerpasseth, for doubting that he should seem to any, that
he uttered impossible matters. Wherefore he wysheth the skylfull to examine
these, and to make further tryalles of this water: whereby they may find out
other secrets, both strange and myraculous, to the benefit and recouerye of
health. This also serves for the fixation of Myneralles, without flying away
in the fume, in that this stone resists the force of any great fire, without
the consuming away: and it also so fyxeth the Brimstone and Orpymente, that
they after may abide the fire, and causes them also most white, through which,
in making proiection with them on Copper, or brass (...) it changes either
into a most pure Silver for whytenesse, or as I (may aptlye term the same)
silver like to the eye, which the Aucthour saw wrought and done by a Chymiste,
before his face.

The manner of making of a red powder, that is, of precypitate, or of
quicksyluer calcyned, borrowed out of Marianus: take of the water, with which
the Goldsmythes do separate the gold from the silver, six ounces, of
quicksyluer four ounces, these after the myxing, distyll in a Lymbeck after
art, which strongly lute before. For the helmette or head has a body, which
must be fensed and luted about (in which the matter or substaunces to be
distylled are put) and the Receauer must be fastened to the Nose of the head,
as this figure here formed dot^ pla^ner demonstrate* Where the letter A.
rep^^^enteth the vrynall body, having yt head set on, with a long b^ke or
nos^ retch^^g out, to which the Receauer, represented by the letter B. must
artlye be luted or fastened. In the Furnace set the body, fenced with the lute
of wisdom round about, as here by the letter A. is demonstrated, and distyll
at the first with a fire of a temperate heat, which increase by little and
little until all the water be come, and that no sum aryseth, which ended, and
the body through cold, break then the Glass body, etc. But the strong
water, which seperateth gold from silver, is made after this manner* take of
Salt nyter, of roche Alome, and of Romayne vitryoll, of each two pounds,
these grind and myxe dilygently together in a mortar, which done, and the
powder thus gross made, put into a vrynall body, of such a bygnesse as may
well and sufficiently receive the whole, and strongly luted about. After this
lute artlie the head and Receauer, that no air of the water breath forth, and
in the distylling draw thus the water, which you may rightly use. And the note
of his goodness, is thus understood that when you let a little of it fall on
the earth, you shall see the same presently boil up. And on this wise have
you the manner of making of the powder and water, which is of such a virtue that
no man will credit the same. This powder to be received within the body, must
be prepared and corrected (after the mind of Matthiolus) on this wise, as that
four pynts of strong water be taken, and a pound and a half of Mercury or
quicksyluer, which put not into an vrynall body with a head, but into a
Retorte or crooked necked Glass, being strongly fenced with the lute of
wisdom etc.

A Mercury sublymed, borrowed of an Emperick Frenchman, made on this wise:
take of quicksyluer one pound, which extinguishe in the strongest vinyger, of
vitryoll dried and pure, two pounds, of common salt very white, three
pounds, after power the whole into an vrinall body strongly luted, with the
head and Receauer close luted in the joints: under which keep fire for six
hours, as by little and little increasing: the work ended, break then the
Cucurbite, and you shall have persite Sublimatum.

Quicksyluer out of Lea^e, was on this w^se drawn and g^tten (...) the same
Empi^^cke: take of (...) mo^^ ^nely chopped, ten pounds, of Salt ^yter, and
of (...) calcyned, of each twelve ounces, let all these be put into an earthen
vessel glased: after they are dissolved in strong Aqua vitae, let them be set
in the hotter place of all the hot house, for four or six days together,
and you shall then purchase and have seven pounds of quicksyluer.

Mercury or quicksyluer crude, powered into strong water, the whole is so
reduced and brought in a manner, unto the form of an oil: with this are
rotten flesh, and the piece of flesh within the nose causing a stincke taken
away, etc. But if an evil or sore shall be within the mouth, then is Vnguetum
aegiptiacum better, or to be preferred.

Of the precypitate with Gold: this is the manner of the taking of it, and this
is the dose or quantity to be mynistred at a time, borrowed out of the letters
written unto Gesnerus. I have given four Barlie corns wayght, sometimes of
this powder, with conserve of Roses, tymelie in the morning, but the pacient
after refrained meat unto dynner time, and made then a small meal or dynner,
but a better supper. Through the benefit of which, for the space of two years
after, yea three years and more, the pacient had perfect health of body, as
he reported. Yet the mind of the best practysioners is, that the precypitate,
how so ever the same be corrected, does always painefully torment the head and
stomach, especially of tender bodies. Wherefore although this may seem to
help sundry disseases, to purge the belly mightily, and to procure strong
vomytes: yet does it many times procure the blooddy flixe to ensue, and a vein
to break in the breast, through the painful inforsing, and strayning to
vomyte, Which nevertheless thought meet for husband men, that have strong
stomachs to abide the drawing of it: so that to them it is porfitable, and may
help sundry grieffes and disseases.

FINIS.
The third Book of Distyllations, containing very strange secrets.

Of certain oils in general.
The.j. Chapter.
MAny needs as much of oils as waters, unto the benefit and preservation of
health, as for other necessary commodityes of body, besides. For seeing of
these which we now possess, that certain especially avail to healthful
persons, for the preservation and maynteynaunce of the health of body, as
those on which we feed, by which a help to be clothed, and defended by
shoes, and that strengthen our bodies, as well as certain helping the sick:
and others also there be of such sort, which both avail to the healthful,
and sick persons, as the oil Olyue does: which as Galen witnesses, is of
such condition, that the same so necassarilye serves the healthful, as the
sick persons, in applying of it as well within, as without the body: For
among those medycines, which are applied on the outward parts, the Oils
bear not the least swaye, as well this simple, as the compounde oils. And the
use of them is very often, insomuch that we are occasioned and procured
sometimes to use them alone, but we often are moved to use them in the making
of ointments, Ceroltes, and playsters. And there be oils and oyntmentes, that
not only for their consistencie or styfuesse, but for their near agreeing in
virtue, that the oils are often named of Dioscorides oyntinentes, as is the
ointment Nardinum Mastichinum, and such like, which many rather name oils than
oyntmentes, Yet many kinds of oils there be. But that (of Galen) is named
symplye and properlye an oil, which is pressed out of r^pe Olyues, and is free
in a manner of any quality exceeding. And for that cause, the ^^me i^ not only
most profitable, and (...) unto the composition of many medy ^i^es^* that of
them with which it is my^ed, it ^as^ly^ (...) but for that it ma^e also be^^
(...) by it self, and alone within the body, unto the ^uryng of sundry
disseases. Yea an oil is, many times pressed out of green O^yu^s, which they
^auie oyl^ ^in^^acine that has the property of rooling and binding^ which
now as a matter of other medycines* like the sweet* can not be. So that these
two* be properly and truly named oils. And as touching the o^ders, of which
we fullye and at large entreat in this book (for that an oil is here named
to be the same, whatsoever juice is fattie and oily) are named oils through a
certain symilitude, as be the oy^^e and running ^^^ees, pressed out,
distylled, or wrought and done by any other order and manner, out of fruits,
se^des beaten, and kernelles, as of ^a^ill nuttes, the Indiane nutte, Almonds,
Balano merepfica, mustard seeds, Line seeds, Ricini, and such like.

And such oils are made, after many orders and manners: for certain are made
by pressing out, and others only by impression (as Mesue names and terms
it) as when ^^mple medycines, boiled, stieped, in common oil, do leave their
virtues in it. But certain are done by a Chymisticall resolution, as when that
which is oily in all parts, is then by the force of fire resolved by
distyllation. And these manner of oils be most vehement in working, and very
thynne. A man may also by the bene^ite of fire, draw a kind of oil, in a
manner out of all things, yet out of some a plentifuller yield, and out of
other some a lesser yield: in which this is a peculiar among the rest, that by
a marvelous thynnesse of the essence, which they received through the fire,
that do most spedilye penetrate or pierce into the deep parts, and do most
spedily offer and show their virtues: like as those oils, which the
Alchymistes draw out of Brymstone, vitryoll, Tyles, and such like. For all
these have greater virtues, then those, from which they are drawn.

And these oils that are drawn by distyllacion, are chieflye done in sand,
in such sort that the spyces or ^eedes, grossly beaten, be put into an vrynall
body strongly sensed and luted about: and at one time are put in unto the
q^^ntitye of three (...) of spices, or according to the g^ea^nesse of the
Cuc^^bit^ or gla^^e body, upon which are ^ixe pyntes of most ^sea^^ water
powr^^ upon, and myxed dyligently. After that a head set on the glass body
answering or ^yt to the Furnace, which body so set in sand, that a good
quantitye be under it, that it may nothing stand nygh ye bottom. To the nose
of the glasen head ^ixe or artlie faste^ a Tynne or iron pype, but ye same
(tynned) both within and without. Let the same pype pass bowingly or after a
leaning manner (a slope) through the vessel, which has in it cold water, that
in the distylling the vapor issuing or going forth with the oil, may so be
cooled: before the distylling, remember to close dilygently the wyntes, with
thick paper or a lynnen cloth wette, and set under a Receauer or Glass at
the end of the pype. After make an easy fire, and take heed in the time of
your distylling, that the substance in the glass body, rises not up through a
rash heat, nor boyleth. Yet certain seeds as the Annise, through the
thynnesse of his substance, and clamminesse together which they have, do
largely boil, and for that cause may not the head be set on by and by or soon
after: but rather when you see bubles arise, and that a vapor to ascend
withal, then prepare and take of your head, and stir the stuff about with a
small stick, that the bubles and some may so be resolved into vapor, which
may after by a mean fire be moderated, aswaged, and dried up* Which done, set
on the head again, and dilygently luted about, distyl orderlye so long, until
you think no more oil to be contained within: which both by sight and taste
you shall by and by perceive, for when by taste the drops distylling, carrye
or have no more savor nor taste of the spyce, then leave of or cease, least
the spice burn then to the bottom of the glass. After separate dilygently
the oil contained in the distylled water, as after shall be taught. But this
note and learn, that certain of these oils, do swym on the water, and
othersome do syncke and fall to the bottom. Of which ye oils of the black
pepper, of the new Cardamomu^, and the Annyse swymme above. But those which
sincke and fall to the bottom, be the oils of Cynamon, of Mace, and of
Cloves, etc. The water of Cynamon and Annyse, when they are distylled, have a
mylkie color, and this mylkie substance is by little and little changed into
an oil: this hitherto borrowed out of Valerius Cordus.

Further understand, that two matters or points especially are required in
the drawing out of oils first, that the substance have plenty or sufficient
water powered upon, that the same may so be lyfted and carried upward, through
which it may the less be burned, or consumed. The other is, that either the
head, yt pype, or long nose, be continually cooled, with most cold water,
standing in some apt vessel fast by. Which two necessary helps yield and give
this use, that the spyrites of the oil, which be very subtle and most hot,
that as soon as they inflame and mightilye heat in a burning manner the
headde, they forthwith by the cooling are repressed, and converted into an oil.



Of the distyllacion of Oils by an instrument named a bladder. The.ij. Chapter.
FIrst let a vessel be made of potters earth, of a finger thyckenesse, that it
may be the stronger and surer, which frame after the form of an Egg, with yt
head (as it were) cut away, as this figure here plainer demonstrateth. And
make the same of what largeness, and bygnesse you will: yet seeing for two
pounds of spyces, there ought twenty pyntes of water be powered upon (and that
the Copper vessel must so be filled, that a third part or a little less be
left empty) even as by this quantity which seenieth a mean, you will
distyll in it oyther more or less, make the bygnesse accordinglye of the
earthen vessel: in whose bottom let fine Sand be powered, unto the thickness
of a finger, or rather two fingers, and round about the body, for the drawing
of oils, out of spyces and seeds: but for herbs, this manner needs not.

2. The vessel thus prepared of chosen earth, purged, well and fast wrought
together, and through dried, etc. as all other potte^^ are wont (yet scarcely
prepared at the three weeks en^^) and mak^ your Furnace in largeness,
according to the compass of the pot, of Tyles only, (for the pot whiles it
is thus baked, is drawn and shruncke together much, and for that cause the
same ought before to be thus handled) having a deep foundation: and a^rou^d
hole framed to the bottom, having a grate made within, above which, fyxe
higher by half a foot, two bars lying cross, on which set or let the
bottom of the pot stand, and let the Furnace rise and be above the bottom
of the pot, that is, above the iron bars, one foot and a half, or little
les^e.

3. Within the pot, set a large Copper vessell^ according to the quantity of
the water (as for two pounds of spyces, let twenty pyntes of water be powered
upon) in such s^r^, that the empty^nesse round about, be filled with Sand a
finger and a half high. This vessel with the head shall stand and be above
the Sand, half a foot almost.

4. Let the helmet or head above be round, and not sharp poynted, that the
vapor fall not again downwarde, nor that the head be cooled with water, nor
has any edge or gutter. For being on such wys^, all the vapor will issue and
pass speedily and forth with into the pype. If the head now should be cooled,
the vapors there gathered, would ^uer soon be thyckened, and fall also
backward: or else this also otherwise hyndered, by this manner in the distylling
of oils. For that cause must be c^nsydered and known, how the crookedness
of the nose ought to be, according to the standing and space of the place, that
the pype fastened to the nose of the head, may aptlye pass and retche through
the Fyrkin or other vessel of water, etc.

5. Let the pype be long, in a manner six foot, and let it pass or retche
through the tubbe or vessel filled with cold water.

6. Let the fire first or at the beginning, be made somewhat great: after that
by little and little abated or lessened, but let it be kept in an equal force of
heat. The oil will come forth together, with the water, and flewme, etc. Some
part of it setleth under the water, and another part swymmeth above, and the
oil also may be separated. The water then may be distylled again, and that
which shall first come, will be the sweetest water, for the other is only
flewme. This distyllacion, may be performed in eight hours: these hitherto
of the practices of the learned Gesnerus.

A most apt instrument for the drawing of Oils, out of Roots, Herbs,
Seeds, Spyces, and others like. The.iij. Chapter.
A. Represents the vessel, which the Aucthour names a bladder, in which the
matter or substance is contained.



B. Does here represent the bellye that is fastened to the neck, that the
neck may the commodiousser, be applied to the large mouth of the vessel,
which the neck could not so commodiously be fastened, but through this mean
and help.

C. Does here show the long neck, that lets the head, that ^t heat not to
fast.

D. Signifies the head.

E. The vessel or bucket compassing the head, into which cold water is
continually powered, after the heating.

F. Represents the long Receauer.

G. Here signifies the Tappe or Cock, letting out the water hot.

This form and manner of Furnace, purchased the Aucthour, of a skylfull
practisioner, and learned Physician of Basyll.

Of the drawing of Oils by distyllacion of water boiling. The.iiij. Chapter.
TAke a Copper body or pot, of such a greatness, that will well receive
fifteen pynts, the same fill so with wine or water, or with both myxed
together, that a third part only may remain empty. To the water power your
substance, apt to yield an oil, and that grosely beaten, which let stand to
infuse for three hours, yea the better four, or six hours. After set on the
head, very close luted about, and cause the water most strongly to boil, for
with the vapor then of the water, do the oily spyrites ascend, which by the
pipe, passing through the cold water, do descend and distyl into the
Receauer of Glass standing under, and are so changed into oil, which after
in the Furnace of dygestion, you shall separate from the water, with a Silver
spone. And on this manner, may you draw an oil out of Nutmegges, Mace, Annise
seeds, Fennel seeds, Cynamon, Cloves, Juniper berries, and others. This
Furnace of digestion, is a vessel, into which the water and oil is powered
together, in a place temperately hot standing, that they may the aptlyer be
separated, one from the other. And how this seperacion ought artlie be done,
shall after be taught.

The manner of purchasing Oils by an iron, or wood press. The.v. Chapter.
TAke a press made with strong cheeks, between which two sides, put too iron
plates sufficiently heated, but not burning hot: after wring hard together
the substance, out of which you mind to purchase an oil (remembering before
to put up your matter into a new Canuas bag) and then in this hard
drawing, will an oil come forth. That if your substance shall wax dryer and
dryer, before the end of the work, then moysten the same, by sprinckling a
little of the best Aqua vitae upon. But this conceive* that all substaunces
ought before to be gross beaten, and being well heated in an earthen pan,
put then up hot into a new thynne bag, and wrynging the same hard, a more
quantity of oil will come. But for a playner understanding, conceive these
examples following: and first the purchasing of the oil of Almondes, which is
gotten ^n this wise. Take of iourdaine Almondes or of other Almondes, four
pounds, these after the paring and cleansing of them dry with a knyfe (for
that they may not be blaunched in water) stamp grosely in a marble mortar,
which sprinckle with a little of the best Aqua vitae mixed with Rosewater, to
the quantitye of two ounces of both, these after the dilygent incorporating
together, put into a new earthen pan glased over the fire, which after the
heating so hot, that it begins to fume, or at the least that you can not
suffer your hand in it, then put up of the same, a quantitye being so hot,
into a thynne square bag of new cloth, and wring this very hard in a
press between two smooth iron plates, or two square boardes smoothed of Sugar
cheast, into a porrenger or clean pewter dyshe: this wholye gathered, wash
after if you will, in an earthen pan filled with rain water, which so long
labor with a stycke in the water, until the same be come white, with this
may women (if they will) annoint their faces, both in the morning first, and
at night last, for this both clears, and makes be wtyfull the skin, in any
place, wheresoever the same be applied.

Another example, ayding the above taught, made of Almondes compowned after
this manner: take of Almondes ten pounds, of read Saunders, in powder six
ounces, of Cloves one ounce, of white wine four ounces, of Rosewater three
ounces: these after the gross beating, let so lie in the marble mortar close
covered for eight or nine days, beating the same over once a day, after the
heating of the whole in an earthen vessel, until it begins to fume, and
be through hot, put then of the substance into a new square bag of lynnen
cloth* which stronglye wring in the press; as above taught, for out will come
a red oil, with which women may onnoynt their fa^^, for it causes a
comely^ read; and bewtifull skin, a secreth not before uttered ^n any book,
and known to few otherwise.

The making of anoth^r oil* which causes the face white and be wtyfull* ^of
no^ ^esse importance than the others, on this wysel^ take of common Abu^nde^
s^^^ped, six pounds, of Sond a ^acha* of Masticke white, a^^eac^e three
ounces, of the whytes of new laid Eggs four ounces, of gum dragant two
ounces, all these beats dilygentlye in a mortar, which after closed cover for
six days, beating and s^^rring it about once every daye^ which heating in a
pan (as before taught) and put up into square lynnen ^agges hot, wring hard
in the press, for out wy^^ come an oil which clears the skin, and makes
it white and comelye, in such sort that it will appear myraculous and rare:
for this is one of the greatest secrets taught of bewtifying, in that the same
mayntayneth the skin smoothe, clear, and white, and never harmeth the
person, nor the place where it is anointed.

The making of a synguler Oil, very rare, which causes a comelye face, and
makes the person merrye, which uses it, yea strong and hardye to fight, being
gotten after this manner: take one pound or two of Hemp seed, which after
the fynely beating, sprinckle and wette with a little wine, then put the whole
into an new earthen pan glased, and set over the fire, heat so long until
you can not suffer your hand in it, after put of the substance hot into
square bags, which wring hard out in a press, and an oil will come forth
very profitable: of which if any drincketh, vnt^ the quantitye of an ounce at
a time, it makes him pleasant and merrye, and being a Soldier which
drincketh it, this makes him both flexce and hardy to fight, having the^ no
doubt nor fear of his enimye: and also profitable to women, in that the same
makes them merry, and comely to see to. And in this manner, may you draw an
oil, out of all seeds.

The making of the pleasant Oil of Cloves, by only pressing out, after this
manner: which for that an oil alone, cannot be purchased through their
dryness, therefore do on this wise: Take of Cloves one pound, which bring to
powder in a brass mortar, to it add three pounds of Almondes scraped and
beaten in a mortar, which after the well myxing together, sprinckle an du^e of
the best white wine on each pound of the wh^^e, letting it ^^lye in (...),
for the spare of eight days at the lea^^* after (...) the whole over again,
putting it into an (...) earthen (...)* which heat so long until you can not
suffer your hand in it, then put up into s^^^re bags ^wordand ^^de in a
press, until all the whole substa^^^e of oil be co^^.

The making of an ^do^ifer querade of (...) with another substance right
profitable ^^ and to be ^desyred, prepared on this wise* take of Spy^^ ^arde
one pound, this beat fine in powder, after beat six pounds of sweet
Almondes sera^ed, which my^e together (...) letting the whole solye* for ten
days, at the least after beat the same over again, sprinckling upon each
pound of the substance, one ounce of Aqua vitae* the whole after heat in an
earthen pan so hot, as you can not suffer your hand in it, then putting it
into square bags hot, wring hard in a press so long, until all the oil be
come which is very sweet, and serving to the use of Phis^icke, and for other
needful purposes.

The making of an odo^iferous oil of our garden* Spyke, with an other
substance, in that this of it self yields no lycour, and yet of a strong
sauoure: yet to purchase his savor or smell, do on this wise: take what
quantitye of Spyke you will, the same after the fine beating, wette with the
fynest Aqua vitae, until the substance be sufficientlye wette: to each pound
of this, add four pounds of ^^urdaine Almendes scraped, which beat and
labor together, letting the whole so lie for ten days, the same after the
well beating* wring hard in a press, for out comes a most clear, and
pleasant sweet oil: which serves so well in Physic matters, as in the
art of per^^ming.

The making of the Oil of Nutmegges, in an easy manner, gott^n by pressing
out, on this wise: take of Nutmegges, and of the best Almondes scraped, of
each a like quantity or wayght, these beaten together* let so lie ^or fow^^
or five days, and after the sufficient heating, wring hard in a press, for
an oil will some, of (...), savor, and taste of the Nutmegge^. And this by
good reason, in that the oil of Almondes enters to the making of it, which
neither abateth his savor nor taste, nor hyndereth any thing hi^ virtue: for
being myted with any other substance, neither hyndereth, nor takes away any
part of hi^ quality* So that this is the aptest manner that any can use, in the
drawing out of the oil of Nutmegs, and works a greater effect* where the
same ^^ applied: for it is more? p^ar^^ng, and has then a pleasaunter savor,
and more delectable in ^aste* and worthyer in all his other workinges.

The drawing out of the oil of Cynamon, after an easy manner by presse^ a
secret veris rare and marueylous^ borrowed out of the syngular practy^^o^^r ^
which serves to the use of P^^^cke, in that the same preserves the stomach
from corruption, by taking of it by the mouth^ and applying of it on the
stomach: the manner of purchasing this oil, is on this wise. Take one pound
of Canell or Cynamon, which finely bea^e, after myxe and impaste it is with
the oil of sweet Almondes, ^nt^ the form of an ^yntment, the same he^^fe in
an earthen glased pan^e soft what, which after ^et stand ((...) close) for
fowreteene days, or twelve at the least, at the end of which time, heat the
whose again sufficientlye, the same wring hard in a press (as before taught)
until the whole Cynamon rest through dry in the bags which come forth, will
then be of the color, savor, and taste of the Cynamon (a secret) and an own
to few, to be wrought in th^^ ^rder.

The making of a pro^^^able Oil, named the oil of the yolks of Eggs,
borrowed out of the before said Aucthour ^ which serves to diverse and sundry
matters, and is an oil, which never consumes: the same besides serves in
many working^ of Ale^ymie, as in gyuing fyxation to the medy^^^, when the
spyrites are fleeting a way: the drawing of it, is on this wise. Take a
quantitye of the yolks of Eggs, when they are hard, those beat and work
together in a mortar, which after put into a copper pan setting the same over
the fire, and making under a great fire of coals, which in the mean time
stir dyligentlye about with a splatter, until the same begins of it
self, to turn into an oil, which thus turned, speedily put up into thynne
canuase bags and wringe the oil hard out: and on this mane^ have you
purchased the oil of the yolks of eggs, which is both precious, and
marvelous. And in the drawing of it on this manner is a secret, and known to
few persons: and has also such properties in his workinges, that a man will
scarcelye believe them: for this healet a wound with marvelous expedicion, it
causes the heirs of the head and ^eard bl^ck, and takes away the sign and
blemishe of a wound, by annoynting often upon, it aswageth the grievous pain of
the Pyles, dyssolueth and helps the pain of the sides, and does many other
matters besides, which for breuitye are here omytted.

The Aucthour here shows of a certain Practysioner, that otherwise prepared
and drew such manner of oils: For he took the flowers of Camomyll, and the
like of all other fresh and green herbs, and after the chopping or
shredding of them, he artlye boiled them in oil: and when the oil was cold;
h^ strongly pressed the whole forth, putting into yt oil again fresh
flowers, which he after set in the Sun for a time.

A Greek; and synguler practisioner, instructs the manner of making all
sorts of oils, out of flowers, herbs, and other dry things: as out of the
Saunders, the woodde Aloes, the Tancariske woodde, and such like, that have no
oil in them: which is on this wise. Take that simple, of which you mind to
draw an oil, the same orderlye beat, letting it after lie to soke in the
oil of sweet Almondes, for the space of eight or ten days, which after the
heating in an earthen pan (as before taught) and put up into square bags,
wring hard in a press, and out will come a pleasant oil serving to sundry
uses. And after this manner may you draw an oil out of any, of the others,
above mentioned, and the same very perfyte: in that this oil of Almondes (as
before uttered) (...) apt to receive the virtue and property^ of all things
infused in it, and nothing hyndereth the virtue, nor working of any.

By what devise and means an oil which distylleth forth with the water, may
be artlie separated. The.vj. Chapter.
THe separation of an oil, may aptly be done from the water, either with a
silver spone, especially if the oil shall swym on the face of the water: or
otherwise which is by a more dilyge^ce and skill, in preparing a peculyar
instrument or funnel of glass, serving to the same purpose, as is this
instrument or funnel, here placed, right against, which has in the bottom a
hole stopped with wax* or a vessel having three small pypes contained in it,
as the one retching to the bottom of the vessel, another to yt middle of it,
and the third to the highest of it. But further does Bessonius utter, in his
little treatise of the drawing of oils, after this manner. First, he wills
the practisioner, to consider and learn that the receauer ought to be made
somewhat sharp toward the bottom, and to be like the point of a thing bored or
stricken through, with many strokes of a small punchin or small nail. This hole
then in the time of the distyllacion, stop dilygentlye with wrought wax. The
water and oil after distylled, and set a time to cool in the air, mark then
in the clear receauer of glass, what place the oil occupyeth in the water.
Which you shall well perceive, by the dyuersitie of the color. That if the
same occupyeth the bottom, in taking or plucking away of the wax from the
hole of the receauer, forthwith does the oil issue or run into the vial or
glass set under, and the water will rest behynd: if so be you mind to keep,
or to stay the water, by stopping the hole speedily with wax. But if the oil
occupyeth above the water, then in opening the hole again, the whole water
shall be drawn forth softlye* and by little and little, into the glass standing
under* that the^ (...) in the bottom of the receauer may so be reserved (...)
it (...) wise happens through the hastiness, and imprudencie of ye worker,
that it shedd^th so away into the receauer being under, then into the glass
prepared for the only purpose. But if the oil through the water carrying it,
be troubled and turned into clouds, the whole water then shall be strayned
through a lynnen cloth in the air, I mean, in the cold air, and the
distyllacion before cooled. Through which all the oil in the end thus stayed,
will rest on the linen cloth, that you may after gather easily of with a
knife, and shyft thence unto a vyall or small glass, by which in the end if
need shall be, you may resolve into a thynne lycour, ^uen with the least heat
that may be, etc.

Of the rectifying of oils, out of ^^ares or gummes, wooddes, Seeds, yea and
of Baulme. The.vij. Chapter.
THe oil that presently is by yt force of fire drawn, needs also to be
rectified, which to do, shall then be powered into another Retorte or glass
with a bended neck, and with a most soft fire, in ashes distylled: which
distyllacion performed, you shall then purchase a most pure oil, piercing,
and falling to the bottom.

Note, that out of two pounds of Cynamon, scarcelye half (...) ounce of pure
oil is attained or gathered: but out of two (...) of Cloves, is gathered two
ounces, or at the least an ounce and a half: and out of two pounds of Annise
or Fennel s^edes, is purchased two ounces: and out of two pounds of Nutmegs
the practysioners attain in a manner, three ounces most commonly.

Of the many sold use of oils. The.viij. Chapter.
MAny and sundry wise, is the use of the distylled oils, as shall after
appear. But on such wise or on such manner, are they commodiouslye applied and
used, if so be a quantitye of Sugar be dyssolued in the water of Vyolettes or
Rosewater, or in the water of Cynamon or other spyces: and the some being thus
dyssolued in either of these, power into after, a drop or two of some oil,
whose use you seek to try, and fra^e or make s^^are tables (or round if you
will) of the whole: of these minister according to art.

Of the Baulme, and Baulme oils distylled, and of a few not distylled, and of
other oils compouned, being in ^se like the Artyficiall Baulme. The.ix.
Chapter.


WHat a true Baulme is, and whether the same also be known to be at this day,
is thoroughly uttered and opened by the Aucthour in a proper chapter of the
first part of his work. Therefore our mind in this place is, to utter and
entreat of the artificial Baulme, which by a certain imytacion and nere
agreeing in the use of the true Baulme, was of the same (at the first)
inue^^te^, and put in ure, of the ancient practissoners. For when they wayed
and understoode, that both the one and the other were falsyfied by the
counterfayters, and that those compound lycours which were sold and mynistred
to men, neither agreed in substance nor properties by any manner to the true
Baulme, were upon the occasion the earnest lier moved, for the avoiding of such
an end ^nyt^^e and great harm, and that such a treasure especially should no
longer lie hyd and unknown to men, upon this good and so reasonable
consideration, they applied their wits and industrye, to the attayning and
trying out of a lycour, nearest aunswering in properties of the precious
Baulme. And for that they might the commodiousser perform and bring it to
pass, invented to us a certain general kind* of the qualityes and
properties of the true and natural Baulme. And s^ing by nature the Baulme is
most hot, and piersing, and endued with a mighty property and drying, or
that mightylie ^ryeth of property, for that cause especially this may
preserve bodies very long from putrefying, being anointed with it, and put of
old^ age or mayntaine youth a long time: for the perfourming of which, they
chose simple (...) of like property, so nyghe as they could purchase, which
myrte might yield the like faculties, so aptlye as art could match them. Of
which kind, that be principallest, are the Myrre, the Olybanum, Frankensence,
and Aloes. The next to these, be the Turpentyne, and Aqua vitae. The third
sort are these, the gum yuie, Galbanum, ^yquide stor^^, the Woodde Aloes or
Lignum aloes, etc. But from the purpose these disagree not, as the Galingale,
the Nutmegges, the Cloves, and many others of like kind. For all these being
gathered into one, by an artificial conjecture matching, was so made, that of
all these myxed together, by a iu^^ proportion, in the Chymisticall art, they
drew an oil, which in faculties and consistence, was most like and nearest
agreeing to the true Baulme. These hitherto agreeing in a manner, to the words
and mind of Leonarde Fiorauant, in the making of the artificial Baulme. So
that to the making of the artificial baulme, is necessarily required* that the
Turpentine of it self, with the essence (of wine) be only (...) in Balneo: the
other spyces after dyssolued in the essence, and with the abouesayd oil of
Turpentyne, by Balneum again distylled For wrought in ashes or sand. does a
gross oil ascend, even with a most soft and easy fire, so that the same in
the receauer come is then nothing worth.

If so be you defyre or would perfitelie know, a good and true Baulme, from an
evil and falsyfied, then after the mind of Fallopius (in his secrets) cast
or instyll certain drops of the Baulme into clear water, and with a stycke
labor well the water* that if the water then be troubled, the Baulme is not
perfect: but contrariwyse, the water if it shall abide clear, then is the same
true and good, and does gather it self alwaye^ into one place.

It is to be considered and noted, that out of three pounds of Turpentyne,
myxed with one handful of Salt, and a little of the essence of wine, are four
ounces and a half of the oil of Turpentyne, distylled and gotten in Balneo
Mariae. Yet they ought to stand, for certain days before, to putrifye.
Further that Turpentyne gives or yields more oil of it self, if the same
be distylled by a small pype, than by boiling water, is to be doubted.

A marvelous Baulme made or drawn by art, most laudable, and often tried,
which serves unto diverse and sundry disseases and grieffes: invented by a
synguler Greek of great same in our time, named Leonarde Fiorauante: the
making of which is on this wise, take of most fine Turpentyne one pound, of the
oil of Bays four ounces, of Galbanum three ounces, of gum Arabic four
ounces, of pury Frankencense, of Myrre* of gum yuie, and of Lignum aloes, of
each three ounces, of Galingale, of Cloves, of Consolida minor, of Nutmegges,
of Cynamon, of Zedoaria* of Gynger, of the white Dyttanye, of each one ounce,
of Musk, and Amber greese, of each one dram, all these beat and labor
together; putting the whole after into a Retort, to which add or power upon
^i^e pynts of the best o^ ^ine^^ Aqua vitae: the trial of which is on this
wise, that a lynnen cloth wet in it (and set on fire) burns clear, which
cloth so burning put into the Retorte, that it may so cause the ^^ter to
burn, and the cloth in it together, which thus burning, ^turr^ dilygentlye*
the water with the stuff about, letting the whole stand to infuse for nine
days, which after the setting in Ashes, distyll according to art, the same
which distylleth and comes forth, is a white, water with an oil together,
and on such wise proceed, forward with a soft fire, until you see the oil
begin to come forth black^she: incontinent upon that sight, change your
Receauer, setting under another, and increase the fire stronger, until all the
spyrites of the substance he come forth of the body, all which throughlye
come, separate then the oil from that black water, and each keep a part by
it self; and the like do with the first water, in seperating the oil, and
keeping each a part. The first water, which is white, is named the baulme
water, the oil separated from that water, is named the baulme oil. The
second water blackishe, is named the mother of baulme, the lycour separated
from that water, is named the artificial baulme* which ought to be kept, as a
most precious Jewel. And this composition have I gathered, and dygested into
such a perfection, as in (my opinion) seems not no defull of any further
addicion: besides I have made many practices and trials, of all these matters,
here under uttered. The first water come, and dropped into the eyes, does
marvelously clear, and preserve the sight of the eyes: and washing the face
with this water, makes after a most comely and bewtyfull face, it preserves
youth, and puts of old age, it breaks and dyssolueth the stone of the
kydneys, and causes the pacient to pysse, which otherwise is let by a
certain fleshie stopping in the way: this also cures all manner of wounds
happening in any part of the body, and of what condition so ever they be, by
the washing with this water, and the applying upon of Lynnen clothes wette in
this water, which sundry times exercised, will show so marvelous a working,
(as though the same were done by the blessed hand of God only.) This besides
mightily helps the persons in a consumption, and all manner of rewmes, and
the coughe. This water also bathed or rather fomentedon the Sciatica or ache in
the hyppe, causes the pain forthwith to cease. That other water named the
mother of baulme, fomented on scabbes, does speedily and with marvelous
easiness heal them: and works the like on the foul scurfe, the Leprie: and
all manner of ulcers, which are not corrosyue, this water marvelously cures,
and that without tediousness: and unto infinite other grieffes also this
serves, that the Aucthour here ouerpasseth. The baulme oil serves unto
infinite matters and purposes, and especially for wounds of the headde, where
bones be perished or harmed, and the pannickles: by pouring into, and applying
on it on the wounds. This preserves the fa^e, by annoynting (after
dyscretion) with it.

This also does marueylouslie help the Plewrisse, by giving one dram with
water at a time* and many other matters this works besides. The Baulme is a
marvelous lycour, for who that has pain of the flanks or bowelles, by
taking two drammes of this Baulme in the mouth, shall spedilie be eased and
delivered: this does like help the cough, the rewme, the coldness of the
head, and the stomach: and for all wounds of the headde, this is a most
synguler remedy, by annoynting all the headde about once a day, for this
pierces into the brain, and even to the stomach allow. This also dissolueth
any swelling happening in any part of the body, and in short time. This
besides cures the quartaine Ague, by annoynting all the body with it, in
omytting no part untouched, and the same in a short time: to be brief, the
Aucthour knew at no time, any sickness or dissease, which he did not cure
with this Baulme: in that this avails as well in the hot sicknesses, as in
the cold: for the cold this heateth, and the hot sicknesses this (of a
certain hid property) cools. To conclude I have (says the Aucthour)
found and tried such synguler virtues in this p^ceious lycour, that I can not
utter all (or at the least) to write of them all, were over long. Wherefore I
wyshe all men and women (being of abilytic) to be always provided, and to
carry of this treasure with them, whether so ever they traueyle or journey,
for the health of body: in that the use of this, defends them a long time,
from any sickness or dissease, and this is a most certain truth, as the
Aucthour of trial knows.

The manner of distylling an artificial Baulm^, of D. Ioh. Mag. In the
beginning ought thyrteene pounds of Turpentine myxed with Aqua vitae rectyfied
be distylled, and gather that oil by a Receauer, which by Balneo Mariae
ascends, that is most clear, very thynne, and light. Of this oil take one
pound and a quarter, of Borrag^ flowers, of Roseleaues, of Buglosse flowers, of
Staechas arabica, of the garden Spyke, of Rosemarie flowers, of Lauender, and
of Chamomyll flowers, of each one pugyll or little handful, of Annnise
seeds, of Basyll seed, and of Pyonie seeds, of each half a dram, of the
roots of Angelica, of Helycampane, of Valerian, of the flower Deluce or Ireos,
of the true Acorus, of Dyttanie, of Lycorps, of Pyonie, of Spica, of each one
dram, of the ryndes of the Cytrone and Orrenges, of each two scruples, of
herbs, as of Sauge, of Maioram, of Lauender, of Rosemarie, of Hysope, of
Myntes, of Bytonie, and of Baye leaves, of each one little handful: let all
these be finelye shredde and stamped according to art, and put into the glass
body strongly luted, or Copper body, together with the oil of Turpentine
distylled, and to all these power the water of Annyse, or Cloves, or that last
in the dis^yllacion of Cynamon, in so much that the body be in a manner fylle^.
On this after set the headde, and the joint about close stop, with lute. Then
fire put under, let the distyllation be like done, as of the Annise, or water
of Cyanmon, that is, let this be distylled, by a pype running through a vessel
of water. Which done, that is, when the water shall be ascended and come, then
let the refuse or Feces of the herbs, flowers, and roots be taken forth, and
put again^ into the body cleansed, into which power one quarter of a pynte of
Lyquide stora^, and to the same power, what so ever you shall draw forth in
the next distyllacion, and let them be distylled again, as the first. That if
the water of the first distyllacion, shall be diminished in quantity, then shall
you power more lycour upon. Now as soon as the second distyllation shall be
ended, cleanse again the body, pouring into it of Storaxe calamyte, and of
Myrre, of each two ounces, of Masticke, Frankensence, and of Asa dulcis, of
each one ounce and a half, which finely brought to powder and put in, power
upon the water and oil already distylled. If those suffice not, then add to
it of the like water, above taught, until you shall think it sufficient, and
let a like distyllation be done, as above taught of the herbs. Which
performed, take then forth all those which remain in the bottom of the
Glass, and power in these following in their steed. Yet this must be noted by
the way, that many mix the Lyquide storaxe together with the foresaid gummes,
so that there ne^deth no peculyar distyllacion of these following. The spyces to
be added are these, take of Gynger, of Zedoaria, and, of Galingale, of each two
drams, of Rubarbe half a dram, of Gentiane, and of Cubebae, of each one dram
and a half, of Saffron half a dram, of Cynamon one ounce, of Nutmegges, of
Mace, and of Cloves, of each six drams, of Calamus odoratus half an ounce,
let al these be finely brought to powder, and powered together with the water
and oil of the last separation, and distilled like the first time by a pype in
water, which thus fynished, separate the oil from the water, and keep the
oyl^ of the artificial Baulme in a glass, which use, as here under
instructs. There may also in this last distillatio^ be a ball or great button
made of the spyces tied round up in a fine lynnen clothe, and distilled
together, and that the savor, may be purchased and caused the sweeter, take of
Mus^^ dissolved in Rosewater five graynes, of Camphora two grains, of Cynamon
and Cloves, of each one scruple, these orderly mix as above taught. And this
Baulme is four times distilled over, as first with the herbs only, in the
second with the Liquid storaxe, in the third with the gummes, in the fourth
with the spyces. This has the property of comforting all the synewie parts,
and those lacking blood, which be, the stomach, the womb, the bowels, and
bladder. But it especially helps the stranguri^, and those passioned with the
stone, if eight or ten drops of the same be druncke, in either Fern water,
or wine. This also opens all inner stoppings: it defends and preserves a
person long in health, by taking certain drops mixed in broth, and that in
the morning fasting twice in the week, etc.

A brief rehersall of this distillation, he took one pound of the oil of
Turpentine, and added besides sundry seeds, of herbs, of flowers, and of the
above mentioned roots, and mixed all in a glass body luted, and added after
to it, five pintes (of rectified Aqua vitae) and of Cloves, and distilled them
together by a pype. The next day, he took Lyquid styrax, and the other gummes,
and distilled it again, and this distillation (note) is hard, in that the same
so lightly boyleth up, and for that cause shall the coals be drawn forth, when
it begins to boil up. The third day following, he distilled the spyces and
others, with the Baulme by a pype in water, etc. And on such wise, he purchased
the prepared Baulme.

A Baulme of G. a Klee, take of good and clear Turpentyne, one pound, of the
oil of Bays two ounces, these two mix together, after of pure Olibanum, and
of Lignum aloes pure, of each two ounces, of Masticke half an ounce, of Myrre,
of Ladanum, and of Castorie, of each two drams, all these diligently brought to
powder, and mixed with the abouesaid, let so stand for thirty days in the
abouesaid oil. To these after add, of Galingale, of Cloves, of Cynamon, of
Nutmegs, of Zedoaria, and of Cubebae, of each half an ounce, of Dittanie, and
of Campherie, of each two ounces, all these prepare and put into four ounces
of Aqua vitae rectifyed, which mix artely together, and let the whole thus
stand for four days, at the end of which time, mix together all the whole,
and put into a Lymbecke diligently luted and closed in the joint, distill then
with a soft or slow fire. First comes a water, which is named the Baulme
water: next insueth a cytryne lycour, in color like to oil, which as soon as
you shall see distylling, draw away the receauer with the water of Baulme,
setting speedy under an other receauer, to gather the most precious lycour
then coming after the manner of oil, which is named the mother of Baulme.
After these shall the great lycour distill and come, and remove then the
receauer, setting under an other, to gather that blackishe lycour a part, which
then sends forth drops or droppeth, a long space and time between drop and
drop, and this lycour (slowest distilling) is more precious than the other two.
These three lycours thoroughly distilled, keep diligently in several glasses
close stopped, with wax, which wax notwithstanding through the fortitude of
ye Baulme water, is within a short time softened like paste. The second lycour
is cytryne or yelowe, which is the mother of Baulme. The third is black,
which is named Xylobalsamum, eue^ as the first, named Opobalsamum. The first is
good, the second is better then it, but same excellenter is the third. I saw
says the Author, a person tro^bled with the palsy, which by applying one
drop on the forehead, and another on the nauill of the belly, was forth with
delivered and cured of it. Another taken with the palsy, lest the sense and
feeling of the right Arm and foot, who with the annoynting of the joints,
the shoulder blades or p^yntes, the arms from the Elbowes to the hands, the
knob and joint of the hand, the knee, the neck, and breast, by spending on
each place thr^^ drops; arose within a few days after from his bed, and was
thoroughly healed by it.

A Muncke carrying a Beam in Paui^ a City of Lumbardie, wrung and
grieuouslie bruised his hand betw^^ne a pyller and the Beam, in such sort that
his hand (...) after waxed so black as a coal, with an intolerable pain,
and ^rampe that hap^ed after in that hand, which being anointed with this oil
of the mother of Baulme, the pain in short time after ceased: but being after
anointed with it, morning and evening, the hand became white again, and
thoroughly restored and healed. The Aucthour (by a chance) cutting his finger
deep, healed it only with this baulme, in a short time.

Another Baulme distylled in a Retorte, which not much varyeth, both in the
properties and composition, from the other above. Take of Turpentyne one pound,
of the oil of Bays two ounces, to these mixed* add of Galbanu^, of gum
Elenum, of gum yuie, of Frankensence, of Lignum aloes, also diverse spyces, of
each two drams, these after the artlie distylling, put up in a glass. The use
of this baulme is, that a certain noble man, having the hand drawn and
shrunk together, in such sort, that he could not (...) the same: by annoynting
the joints and hand with it (and covering or wrapping yt hand with a hot
cloth) was within fifteen dai^^, thoroughly cured. Another person having a
hardness in his throat, on such wise, that he could not retche nor cast up
spy^tle out of his throat and mouth, but by annoynting the throat with this
oil* the whole throat after was greatly inlarge^ (...) ^y annoynting again
the throat ye next day following with it, the pacient was wholly cured. Another
having a pestilent Ca^^o^cle or swelling in the grynde, by annoynting the sa^^
with this lycour, was wholly cured. This also helps the belching and pain of
the stomachs the crampe* the chollick, and stitches: the (...) of the ears,
^y ius^ylling one drop at a time, both morning and evening into them. The
synewes shrunck, and at wounds: the canker, the Fistulaes, bruses or the
strypes of black and blue; the pe^^il^ce; and every hard impostume does this
resolve. This besides helps memory, if you apply or anoint one drop on the
forepart of the head, and anointed on the back bone, and joints, helps the
palsy*

A maystrial Baulme, of unknown Aucthour to Gesnerus: take of Xyloaloes, of
Masticke, of mace, of Galingale, of Nutmegs, of Spykenard, of Gynger, of
Cinnamon, of Cardamo^^, of Cubebae, of Cloves, of Zedoaria, of gum Arabicke, of
Santali muscellini, of frankensence, of saffron, and of Olibanu^, of each two
dram^^ al the^^ finely labor and bring to p^wder, and myxe with the waters of
Turpenti^^ and honey, prepared on this wise: take of Turpentine and honey, of
each half a pound, these distyll together, and a part from others, without any
myxing of spyces to them. After take of Aqua vitae once rectifyed, one pynte,
this myxe with the abouesayd confection, letting the whole then putrify in the
sun, in a Glass close stopped with wax, for eight days, or longer time if
you will. After make a separation by Lymbecke, according to art, and the first
water which then comes, is named the mother of Baulme. The second which
yssueth, named the oil of Baulme: the third, named the artificial Baulme,
and in the end aromatizated or made pleasant of savor, with Musk and Amber
greese, and that addicion very much comfort and delights, and used or
added in every confection of Baulme.

The mother of Baulme simple: take of the best Turpentine, three pounds, of
fine Frankensence, of Lignum aloes, of each three ounces, of Cloves, of
Galingale, of Cynamon, of Nutmegges, of Cubebae, and of gum Elemi, of each
two ounces, all these beaten and incorporated together, and put in a luted
body, and standing in fermentacion for five or six days, distyll after in
syfted ashes, beginning with a soft fire, and increasing stronger and
stronger, unto the end of the work: and this which first comes, named the
mother o^ Baulme. Of this mother of Baulme then, and of the Elixir vitae, alyke
myxed in the Lymbecke, and fermented again (as above taught) and a
distyllacion after wrought in Balneo Mariae: there will a most clear water
distyll and come forth, which is named the mother of Baulme coniunct, or
compouned.

A Baulme invented, and first made in Rome: take of Turpentine, half an ounce,
of Olibanum six ounces, of Aloes succotryne, of Masticke, of Galingale, of
Cynamon, of Saffron, of Nutmegges, of Cloves, and of Cubebae, of each one
ounce, of gum yuie two ounces, all these brought to powder, and myxed with
the Turpentyne, and put into a Glass body, and to these adding of Camphora,
and Amber greese, of each two drams, distyll after with a soft fire. The first
water which comes, is white and clear, and the wine of the Baulme: the
second is yellow, and named the oil: the third more yellowe, and is the true
Baulme.

The description of a certain Baulme or water, invented of a famous Physician,
of which he reported and affyrmed very rare and wonderful matters, and gave
to it a royal name, which is, the reuyuer, and defendour or mainteyner of
youth. Take of Turpentyne one pound, of pure honey half a pynte, of good Aqua
vitae two pyntes, of Lignum aloes dilygently beaten, and of all the Saunders, of
each three drams and a half, of Olibanum, of gum yuie, of the bones of the
Hearts heart, of Zedoaria, of long Pepper, of each three drams, of gum
Arabicke, one ounce, of Nutmegges, of Galingale, of Cubebae, of Cynamon, of
Carrowayes, of Masticke, of Cloves, of Spykenarde, of Saffron, and of Gynger,
of each three drams and a scruple, of ^ine musk, the wayght of two pence:
these artelie prepared, distyll according to art, beginning with a soft fire,
and increasing after a stronger and stronger heat unto the end, the first
water that comes forth, is as clear, as the Cunduite water: the second will
be fyrie, as a coal: and then increase the fire, and the third lycour will
come forth blackishe.

A Baulme lycour of Johan Mesue, very excellent, and most profitable unto many
grieffes and disseases: he took of thosen Myrre, of Aloes hepaticke, of
Spykenarde, of Dragons blood, of pure Frankencense, of Munia, of Opobalsamum,
of Bolellium, of Carpobalsamum, of Ammoniacum, of Sarcocolla, of Saffron, of
Masticke, of gum Arabicke, of Lyquide storax, of each two drammes (otherwise
two drammes and a half) of chosen Ladanum, of Succi castorei of each two
drammes and a half, of Musk half a dram, of the best Turpentyne, unto the
wayght of all: these artlie brought to powder, and myxed with the Turpentyne,
and powered into a Glass body with a headde, and the same strongly fensed with
the lute of wisdom: distyll in the beginning with a soft fire, and
increasing the heat after, according to skyll and discretion: the lycour which
aryseth by distyllacion, and artlye gathered, preserve in a strong Glass,
close stopped. This lycour draws nighe, unto the true juice of Baulme. Guido
a cauliaco, did sometimes to this precious lycour, add the herbs appointed
and used to the Palsy, and then the worthyer, and much more effectuous (as he
witnesses) practyses, he wrought and did: And with this lycour alone, in the
palsy, Mesue many times dealed, without the addition of any others, and had
good success, by annoynting the pacientes nape of the neck, and all the rydge
bone of the back downwarde, and that part affected or taken. For in this manner
doing, it marvelously helps the great debilitie of the back, and decayed
strength of all the parts, and the deprivation of the synewes and bones. So
that it much profits the Palsy, all the griefs of the synewes, the beating
and trembling of the heart, and a manifest looseness of parts, through the
secret property incredible. And this conceive, that there can no medycine be
invented, nor found worthier then it. For at any time, when the heart needs
any speedy comforting and strengthening, use this as a singular and divine
remedy, if we may credit the learned practisioner Mesue.

An oil of the Philosophers, drawn out of Turpentine and Wax, which is a
certain secret Baulme having infinite virtues, exceeding all other lycours,
that can be invented and made, in that the same is made of two symples, which
be but little subject to corruption, or in a manner incorruptible, the one is
Turpentine, which is a lycour dystilled and gotten of the Fyrre tree, and the
other is the wax, which is a celestial matter, that discendeth or falls
from heaven, and that this is true, we thoroughly know, that nature neither
produces the honny nor wax, but rather prepared and sent from heaven. And we
after see that the Bees by their wonderful skill and Art (far above man's
towardness) gather the one, and the other, and carry them to their home,
which man by no industry can gather one drop the like, but to abreuiate
this, the preparyng and making of this precious lycour, is on this wise, take
of clear Turpentyne eyghtene ounces, of sweet yealow wax, twelve ounces, of
the Ashes of the Wine tree six ounces, these put together into a Retorte or
crooked neckte glass, artely luted and fensed, which after the setting into
Ashes, distill according to Art, mayntayning a stranger and stronger heat,
unto the end of the work. And when no more will dystyll forth, you shall
then see about the neck of the Retorte within wax courded, which is a
manifest sign, of the distyllation performed. This now distylled and
gathered, stop dilygentlye with wax, and keep to your use, for you have
then a lycour like to Baulme in properties, which is of a syngular virtue, and
much piersing. If any with this lycour, shall be anointed all the body over,
it then by the sundry times using, preserves and mayntayneth youth a long
time, and keeps all things put in it from corrupcion, and putrefying: and
does also keep the body a long time in health, and preserves dead bodies
imbaulmed with it a long time. And a person wounded in any member or part of
the body, by only annoynting on the wound three or four times, with this
oil, shall thoroughly be cured. And that person which can not pysse, by
taking only two drammes of this lycour by the mouth, shall forthwith pysse
plentifullye: and this the like mynistred, helps the grievous pain of the
flanks, stitches in the sides, the worms in the body, the cough, the rewme,
and pestilent Ague, and other like grieffes and disseases, by mynistring the
abouesayd quantytie by the mouth, shall speedilye be delivered. This borrowed
out of the skylfull practyses, of the Greek Leonarde Fierouant.

A water or Baulme of Hermes, borrowed out of that book, named Trotula, in the
end of the woemens passions: where he wylleth to take of Turpentyne three
times distylled over, and at last all together one pound, of Lignum aloes
likewise three times distylled over one pound, of crude Amber one pound, of
Nutmegs beaten and grynded on a marble, unto the manner of an ointment, with the
oil of the same added, unto the full incorporating of these to a mass: the
whole distyll nine times over. This Baulme dilygentlie keep to use, for it is
then perfect and susteyneth all trial of fire and water: it soketh through the
hand, and by annoynting the face with it, the same preserves youth, closes
and cures any cut or wound, clears marueylouslie the sight: and by
annoynting all the body with it, does defend the same from putrefying, and
from worms feeding on it: these hitherto has the Aucthour sundry times done
and experienced, and found a most certainty in them.

An oil of Baulme maystriall, borrowed out of the dispensatorie of the
college of Physicians of Florence: which wylleth to take of Turpentyne one
pound, of old Oil six ounces, of the oil of Bays four ounces, of
Spykenarde, and of Cynamon, of each two ounces, of new Tyles well baked eight
ounces, these after the well beating and laboring together, distyll in a
Lymbecke after art. This sends forth vryne, breaks the stone, kylleth
worms in the body, the rynging and noise of the ears proceeding of a gross
wyndinesse, the palsy, the fierce crampe, the ache of the hyppes, the pain in
the knees, and grieffes of the other joints: this speedily delivers and
helps by drincking and annoynting with it, but a small quantitye at a time,
and mynister of it, myxed with that water apt to the dissease, in the taking
by the mouth.

A marvelous oil of Baulme, that cures all manner of wounds, borrowed out
of the practices of that synguler man Gabriell Fallopio Modouese: take of
Turpentyne one pound, of pure Frankensence, of Masticke, of Myrre, and of
Sarcocolla, of each one ounce, of good Aqua vitae eight ounces, all these
dilygentlye beaten and myxed together, put into a Retorte strongly luted, with
the lute of wisdom, the same after the setting in Ashes, distyll according to
art, beginning with a soft fire, and increasing the fire after by little and
little, unto the end of the work: the same substance gathered, will be an
oil and water, which orderlye separate, and keep the one from the other a
part: this seperacion may you make and do on this wise, take a Glass funnell
fylling it up in a manner to the brymme with the distylled substance, holding
one finger in the mean time under, and that stopping the nether hole: by this
means, the water will fall to the sharper end, and the oil flote or swymme
above: which by warylye shyfting your finger (stopping the hole) now and then,
the water will slide or shed forth, leaving the oil fully behind, if you
be careful in the doing. These thus separated, keep in several glasses
dilygentlye stopped. The Oil is of such a virtue, that it heals all manner of
wounds, in a very short time, and without payning at all. And of this has
Fallopio made the proof many times, and especially on wounds of the head, in
closing or stitching first the wound, and applying after on the cut, with
lynt dypped in the Oil: for this synguler Oil dries the wound, defends it
from putryfiyng, and corrupting: and to be briffe, this Oil works miracles.
This secret did he attain of one M. George Catelyne a Genua, in France.

A synguler Baulme oil, drawn out of wax and Turpentyne, which dries, and
mightylie pierces, where the same is applied, borrowed out of the secrets of
Fallopio: take of the purest and clearest Turpentyne that can be gotten, one
pound and two ounces, of new yellowe wax, that is odoriferous, one Venetian
pound (which with us is twelve ounces) of Nutmegs, and of Cloves, of each one
ounce, of common ashes six ounces, all these after the beatyng, put into a
Retorte, fenced with the lute of wisdom, and set in ashes, distyll with a
slow fire at the first, after increasing it, until all be come: which
gathered, dystyll the second time in a glass body with a head, and Receauer,
putting into it before the distylling, four ounces of the powder of brick or
Tyles, which dilygentlye luted in the joints, maintain fire under, until no
more will come: then have you purchased an oil of a rubyne color, which
works miracles in wounds, especially where synewes be harmed: this also
helps any manner rewme, proceeded of a cold cause: it helps besides the
cough, by annoynting the region of the breast with it: and is also of great
importance, unto many other grieffes: invented and proved, by the abouesayd
Aucthour, infinite times.

An oil of Baulme, borrowed out of the practices of Petrus de Abano: take of
Mire, of Aloes, of Spykenarde, of Dragons blood, of fine Frankensence, of
Munia, of Panax, of Carpobalsamum, of Bolellium, of Amoniacum, of Sarcocolla,
of Saffron, of Masticke, of gum Arabicke, and of Lyquide storax, of each two
drams, of Ladanum, of Castorie, of each two drams and a half, of Musk half a
dram, of Turpentyne unto the wayght of all: these after the dilygent beating,
mix together, and distyll in a Lymbeck according to art. This may perform
and do all these matters, that are uttered before of the baulme oil in the
dispensatorie of the Florentines, yea and effectuousser.

A Baulme oil synguler, that forthwith eases and helps the Gowte, as well
cold, as hot, or of other accident. Take of Venice Turpentine two parts, of
new Masticke one part, of Opopanax, and of the ryndes of Pomegranates, of each
a small quantity and a like, these prepared, distyll according to art.

A perfect Baulme, helping the cold gowte, by annoynting the grieved places
with it: understood and learned of an Ancient Chymiste. Take of Turpentine
three pounds, of Frankensence, of Masticke, of Myrre, and of Ladanum, of each
one ounce, distyll the whole by a Retorte, and keep the oil.

A baulme of a certain Empericke, of great same and aucthority take of
Turpentyne four ounces, of Frankensence half an ounce, of Lignum aloes, two
drams, of Mastick, of Cloves, of Galingale, of Cynamon, of Zedoaria, of
Nutmegs, and of Cubebae, of each two drams, of gum Elemi, one ounce and a
half. This baulme marvelously works, in that it puts away the Leprie*
both ways, in applying of it both within and without the body: and many other
incurable diseases, as the Canker, and Fistulaes, and of the like kind.

Another baulme of a certain English man, with which he cured wounds, by
laying lynt upon wette in it, the Ague, the impostume or gathering under the
short rybbes, such short winded, the consumption of the Lunges, all swellings
except the dropsy. It eases bruses, the crampe and palsy of a cold cause,
and a drop mynistred to a person lying (or at the point of death) reuyueth
him. He took of Turpentyne two pounds, of chosen Myrre, of Castorie, of
Mastick, of each three ounces, of Olibanum, of Aloes succotryne, of each four
ounces, of the roots of C^nsolida minor one ounce* of Turmentyll roots, of
gum yuie, of the Indian nut, (and if you will of Nutmegs for it) of Zedoaria,
of each half an ounce, of Cubebae one dram* let al these be stieped two
days) then distylled with a slow fire.

A compounde water distylled, called the lycour of youth, which is a great
secret in nature, and is named the medycine of medicynes, and curer of all
infirmyties and disseases: take of Lignum aloes, of Cloves, of Galingale, of
Cardamomum, of Cubebae, of graynes of Paradize, of chosen Ruberbe, of Cynamon,
of the smaller Nutmegges, of Calomus aromaticus, of Mace, of each two drammes,
let all these be finelye beaten and searsed, to these then add of the juice of
Celondyne one pynte, of the iuyces of Sage, of Bryonie, of Rue, of Bytonie, of
Myntes, of Borrage flowers, and Buglosse, and of the juice of Fennel, of each
half a pynt, these after the well myxing and incorporating together, dystyll
in a glass body with a head, according to art. Of this water take one
sponefull fasting every morning all the summer, and in the winter use two
sponefulles. For this water is right profitable to all sorts of persons, both
young and old, for this preserves the stomach in great strength, and
yields great strength of body, if that a great heat be not in the brain
and liver: and this delyuereth or recouereth that person in a consumption, the
iaundise, and the dropsy: this greatly preserves and helps the sight, and
comfort the hearing. This helps poisoning, and comfort all the members,
and preserves the blood in good color, and from any manner putrefying, and
helps a stinking breath.

A Baulme of a marvelous virtue, in tremblings, and the Palsy, which a most
synguler Physician kept pryuie to him self a time, as a most precious secret,
which in the end revealed to the Aucthour: the making of which is on this
wise, he took of Galbanum one pound, of gum yuie three ounces, these finely
beaten a part, myxe together, which after put into a glass body with a
headde, and distyll the substance in Balneo Mariae: this after distylled myxe
with one ounce of the oil of Bays, and of good Turpentyne one pound, then let
the whole be distylled, and separate the water from the oil, as before taught.
The use of this is, that the pacient vexed with the Palsy, convulsions, the
crampe, and trembling of members, be laid vpryght, and of this oil
temperatelye hot powered upon the bellye into the hollow and bottom of his
navel: and you shall see after a marvelous working that may rather be
accoumpted a dyuine, then natural, and very much helps the palsy, after a
collicke.

An oil or Baulme, that the like is not to be found, against tremblyng, the
crampe, drawings, convulsions, and the astonying of parts or members: take of
chosen Myrre, of Aloes hepaticke, of Spykenarde, of Dragons blood, of
Frankensence, of Numia* of Opopanax, of Carbobalsamum, of Saffron, of Masticke,
of gum Arabic, of Lyquide storax, of Storacis rubrae, of each two drams and a
half, of fine Musk half a dram, of Herba paralysis, two handfuls, of good
Turpentyne unto the wayght of all, these after the dyligent bringing to powder,
and incorporating the whole together, put into a Lymbecke, which distyll
according to art: for this according to the declaration above opened, is one of
the most syngular medycines: with which therefore, let the Nucha, and rydge
bone downward be anointed, of the person troubled with the crampe, the
trembling of members, the Palsy, the astonying of parts, and the drawings or
convulsions.

A most precious Baulme, helping the palsy, and many other grieffes, borrowed
out of Leonellus, a syngular Physician: take of Lignum aloes two ounces, of
Opopanax, of the Rosen of the Pynaple tree, of Bolellium, of Galbanum, of
Myrre, of Mastick, of Sarcocolla, of each one ounce, of the Benedick oil,
three ounces of Ladanum two ounces, of Carpobalsamum, Xylobalsamu^,
Opobalsamum, or of the artificial baulme, of each one ounce, of Olibanum, of
oil of Bays, of Dragons blood, of Castorie, of Spykenard, of Galingale, of
Cubebae, of Mace, of Cinnamon, of Cardamomum, of Melicitorum, of the ryndes of
the Cytrone, of each one ounce, of the oil of Turpentine unto the wayght of
all, of old oil Olyue one pynt and a half: let the gums be finely brought to
powder, pouring upon as much of burnt wine, as may cover the whole substance,
which after set into Balneu^ Mariae, for three days to dygest, after add to
these, the other remaining and finelye brought to powder, with the oil of
Turpentyne, and the oil Olyue, letting the whole then for other fowreteene
days stand, to dygest either in Balneo Mariae, or in horse doong, which after
distyll in ashes with a s^ft fire, according to art.

A precious water and marvelous, which avails in wounds, ulcers, and
Fystulaes, and prevail against the plague or Pestilence, and the virtue of it
besides is marvelous, but the whole must be distylled by a glass body with a
head: For in such a manner of distyllation, do then three lycours appear,
having diverse colors, and each ought properlye to be gathered a part, and
powered into sundry glasses. And note, that the first water which comes,
avails against the plague, and ought daily to be druncke in the plague time
with a fasting stomach: this also comfort the brain, by drawing up of the
water by the nosethrelles: this besides destroys the piece of flesh grown
within the nosethrell causing a stynking air to issue, and all other defaultes
or euylles, growing within the Nosethrelles, in daily touching this piece of
flesh within the Nosethrell with the said water. If daily the temples, and
the pulses, be fomented with this water, and the rydge or back bone the like,
in a warm place (as a hot house) shall speedilye be cured. If any were fallen
from any place, let him then be anointed with the said water. If any has a
weak brain or memory, let the headde then be anointed all about, but the
forepart especially (being shaven) many times fomented warm with it, and he
shall thoroughly be cured. The said water drunck, maystreth and expels
poisons forthwith. The said water avails, against ulcers and wounds.
Against the Palsy of the tongue or other members, if they be impostumated or
cankered, and against any manner of sycknesse of the body. The second water
which comes, is like to oil, and is an oil, with which we may apply on
places of the body, in steed of the Baulme: for if you still one drop into
water, this drop then goes or falls to the bottom, and may be had or
gotten again. If you also throw a needle into the said lycour, it shall
swymme above. This also cowrdeth milk, and has all the virtues, which seem
to be and are in a Baulme. The third water, may be named a Baulme, whose
virtues be infinite. This borrowed of the learned Bertapalia: Take of the
finest Turpentyne (in the steed of Oleum vici or Lachryma, of which two
seems a contrauersie, whether to use, and yet in the end concludes, that
for the lack of either, to use Turpentyne, as not much dygressing from the
purpose) of this therefore two pounds, of pure Honey skymmed two pounds, of
good Aqua vitae one pynte, of Lignum aloes pure, of Santali muscati, of Mace,
of Cubebae, of Galingale, of Nutmegges, of Cloves, of Spykenard, of Masticke,
of Gynger, of Cynamon, of Saffron, of graynes of Paradize, of each three
drammes, of gum Arabicke three ounces, of fine Musk half a dram.

An oil serving unto sundry disseases, having the virtue of a Baulme, thus
discrybed of D. Gesnerus (as I think:) take of the best white wine two
measures and a half, of new Cow mylk (new milked) three ounces, of good Honey
eight ounces, of the roots of the Gentiane eight ounces, of Astrantia three
ounces, of Angelica two ounces, of chosen Baye berries one ounce and a half,
of Rue, of Juniper berryes, of dry read Roseleaues, of each one handful, of
Helycampane roots one ounce, of Cloves, of the sweet ryndes of the Cytrone,
of Calamus aromaticus, of Cynamon, of Annyse, of Fennel seeds, of Masticke,
of Beniamyne, of each half an ounce, these after the finely shredding and
beating together, stiepe in a large glass, or glasses (if you will) close
luted, and set in a hot place for seven or eight days. After dystyll the
whole with a head, and Receauer, close luted in the joints, so great and large,
that a third part or more of the body remain empty. This body set in fine
sifted ashes, and distyll in the beginning with a soft fire, after increase
the fire by little and little, unto the end of the work. But the Aucthour
supposes the first distyllacion ought to be done a part in another vessel,
and that the wine and milk to be first distylled together. Out of this
distyllation, are also three lycours gotten and gathered. This water will
avail against poisons, the Pestilence, the stone, the quartayne, the cotydiane
Ague, unto sweating, moving, etc. This also helps the hard fetching of
breath, and the obstructions or stoppings of the bowelles, unto all flewmaticke
matters, and unto the Falling sycknesse, and to defend or preserve also the
pacient from the Falling sycknesse. A man may like conjecture, that this
Baulme, for the making of a perfect Tryacle, to be aptlye and to good purpose
appointed.

The Aucthor of Nouia viatici, in the Chapter of the palsy, discribeth a like
licour to the baulme: take of the whitest Fra^kensence, and of Mastick, of each
two ounces, of Lignum aloes one ounce, of Cloves, of Galingale, of Cynamon, of
Zedoaria, of Nutmegges, and of Cubebae, of each six drams, of Myrre, of
Aloes, of Ladanum, of Sarcocolla, of Castorie, of each half an ounce, of Bay
berries, of the kernels of the Pyne aple, of each one ounce, of gum Elemi, of
Opopanax, and of Beniamen, of each two ounces, of the iuyces of Iua, and the
herb Paralycis or Cowselyp, of each three ounces, of good Turpentyne unto the
wayght of all, the whole dystyll in a glass body, after art. The first which
comes, is a water: the second, like to oil: the third like to Honey.

A compounde oil borrowed out of Aristotle, against the hot and cold gowte,
and against the incuruacions of the synewes, so that the synewes be not cut a
sunder, borrowed out of an Italian book written: take of Aqua vitae thryse
distylled, and of the juice of Byttonie, of each three ounces, of Saffron, of
the juice of Mugwoort, of the juice of walwoort, of the juice of Capreni or
Caprellae, of each four ounces, of the juice of march mallows eight ounces,
of Cloves, of Carpobalsamum, of Xylobalsamum, of each two ounces, of Ceruse, of
Frankensence, of the Tartare of the white wine, of each three ounces, of
chyldes urine, and of good Honey* of each eight ounces, of the oil of
Turpentine three ounces, of the oil of Eggs four ounces, of the oil of
Brymstone two ounces, of the oil of worms six ounces, of the oil of
Rosemary half an ounce, of the oil of Bays three drams: let al these be
distylled by a Lymbeck: the first which comes, delyuereth the person from the
hot gowte: the second* from the cold gowte, and heals any manner pain, in
what part of the body so ever the same shall happen, and be.

An oil or water, which is named of virtue, and a drinck of youth: borrowed
out of a high Dutche or Germayne book written, of one Michaell Schricke. Take
of Sage leaves three quarters of a pound, of Cynamon, of Cubebae, of
Galingale, of long pepper, of Annise, of Mace, of Nutmegs, of Gynger, and of
graynes of Paradize, of each half an ounce* these brought to powder, myxe
artlye, which power into six times so much wayght of good wine as the whole,
being in a tynne vessel, the same cover close, that nothing vapor or breath
forth, and let so stand in a hot place for fowreteen days. At the end of
that time, separate the wine from the spyces, by a strayner, and beat the
spyces then finer, that of the whole may be made like to a thick broth or
gruell, and with the aforesaid wine join the whole again, which then distyll
according to art. This water distilled and come, powered either on flesh or
fish, and lying covered in it, does defend and keep either from putryfying:
and wine commyxed with it, does not suffer it to corrupt, but rather clears
it, and if the wine presently be corrupt, this speedily restores it unto
perfection. This druncke fasting in the morning, consumes impostumes, and all
inner disseases, and heals also the outward grieffes, by fomenting on the
places: it amendeth besides any manner grieffes of the eyes: and wounds, by
applying of it upon, within eight days this closes. This druncke, causes
mirth, and mayntaineth youth. This besides avails in the disseases of the
head, and apoplexy. This water (to be brief) may be compared to baulme, for
it swymmeth above any other lycour myxt with it, except oil: dropped on the
fire, this burns. It cures the spots of the face, and druncke, defends
or keeps back the Leprie.

A certain sublymacio^ like to a baulme, in procuring of memory, borrowed out
of ( Michael angelus Blondus) of memory. In remembering to orderly purge the
stomach and head before, which done, prepare of Frankensence, of Cubebae, of
Cloves, of Nutmegs, of Galingale, and of Juniper berries, of each half a
dram, of Cynamon three drams, of Castorie fat, three drams, of Costus, and of
long Pepper, of each a dram: all these brought to powder, myxe a due
proporcion of Aqua vitae answerable to the whole: these put up together in a
glass body covered, set into horse doong to digest, for the space of a. xi.
days or more, and longer time if you will: after this time ended, sublyme then
this in Balneo Mariae, and to the sublymation add, of Mellis anacardini two or
three small ounces, and this then sublymed with the Honey, let be buried again
in a glass body under doong for ye space of two or three months, but let
this doong be changed every eight days, least too much or to strong a heat
may break or crack the glass: by such a space of time, thi^ sublymacion
shall be then perfect, unto the sharpning and quickening of memory. The use of it
is on this wise, before you would apply for memory by a days space, annoint
the temples and hinder part of the head, and instyll one drop into the
nosethrelles, after that, eat down fasting in the morning certain drops,
before you would rehearse or utter your Oration, or in any other manner
(exercise of memory) for this is the worthyest medicine of procuring memory.

An holly oil, which is very singular unto diverse diseases, for it especially
avails against any Canker and Fistula, and all old griefs or diseases,
borrowed out of a book of secrets in written hand. Take of old oil Olyue
two pyntes, of old white wine and the best, four pintes, of clear and the
best Turpentine one pound, of the seeds of Hypericon or Saint John's worte two
pounds and one dram, of the white Dittanie, of the Tormentill roots, and of
the Gentian, of each one ounce: all these brought to powder, and mixed together,
putting the whole into a glass body well stopped with paste, that no matter
breath forth, procure that they may boil in this manner. Let the said vessel
be set into a c^uldron filled with water and straw and boil there a time
softly, after raise it from the fire, and when it shall be cold, put that vessel
into a pot filled with sand, in such sort, that the whole vessel be
compassed and covered unto the neck with the said sand, which set in a place
where the sun all the day shines, and there let it stand, for forty days.
After draw it out of the said sand, and set it in the vessel of sand, in
such order and manner, that the sun for eight days fully, may with his beams
wholly compass about it, which time ended, strain ye whole through a new
lynnen cloth, and press out strongly the remnant in a press, the oil after
separate from the wine, and the same keep a part, put up into a glass close
stopped. This distillation ought rather be done in the month of July or
August, then in any other time. This oil gotten, avails against the Fistula
and Canker, if either be washed before with the abouesayd wine, and anointed
after with the said oil, shall speedily and soon be cured. This ^yle also,
helps all griefs, and pains of the synowes. This ^elpeth the ache of the
hippes, the pains of the joints, and a cold gowte. And if a plaster be made
of it, and Ammoniacum, does then dissolve the impostumes of the spleen, and
the hardness of it, in a short time, it does the like help, all other hard
impostumes. This avails in all passions of the ears proceedyng of a cold
cause, it kylleth the worms of the ears, and helps speedily the hyssing,
noise, and deafness of them. This also helps the Palsy and drawyng awrye
of the mouth, if the same be often anointed with it. It provoke the
terms, if of the same be aptly applied into the Matrice, and draws forth
the Embryo quick or dead. If a little of it be druncke, it dissolueth the
curded blood in the body. If a small quantity of this oil be commixed with
the Syrope of Roses, does then purge the Lunges of gross and clammie humors,
and such short winded. This marvelously helps all infirmities, and diseases
of the eyes, but especially, the Cataractes. This druncke avails against
poisons: for if the pacient shall drink a little of it, it extinguisheth any
person. It speedily cures the quartane and tertian Ague, if the back and
rydge bone be anointed with it against the fire, in the beginning of the
fit. This does immediately take away and deliver the crampe or co^vulsion of
wounds, if the same be applied warm on the place. This to conclude, heals
all wounds as well old as new, yea better and perfecter in one day, then any
other medicyne in a month.

A Lyniment or thynne ointment, as M. Michael Angelus Blondus writes in his
book of memory, which in virtue may be compared to a Baulme choose (says
he) of the best Turpentyne thyrtie ounces, of the oil of Bays, six ounces,
after that bring to powder, of gum Elemi, of the Rosen of the Pyne apple
tree, six drammes, of Sarcocolla two drammes, of gum yuie, of Ammoniacum, of
Bolellium, and of Frankencense, of each two drammes, of Masticke, of Aloes
Hepaticke, of Castorie, and of Ladanum of each one dram, of Galbanum six
drammes, of Xyloaloes an ounce and a half, of Cynamon, of Cloves, of
Nutmegges, of Mace, of Gynger, of Pepper, of Galingale, of graynes of Paradize,
of Cubebae, and of Zedoaria, of each one ounce, Xylobalsamum, Carpobalsamum,
of tormentill roots, of the white Dyttanye* of Liuerwort, of Celondine, of
both the greater and lesser Cons^lida, of each one ounce and a half, these
after the dilygent beating, myxe together, addyng to so much of Aqua vitae, as
to make and bring the whole into a form and body, which leave so for three
days, the fourth day following, add to it the Turpentyne, the oil, and
Rosen, and other of the gums which can not be powdered, these then sublime in a
glass body according to Art, making in the beginning a soft fire, but
continuing the fire unto the end, and for that three kind of lycours are
sublimed and gotten of the whole, as in the same, that the first which shall
come, will then appear yelowishe, the second and next oily, but the third of
a swartyshe color, and as the changing of colors, even so put under other
receauers, keeping each several and a part, and those close stop with wax,
that no air breath forth. But this one thing does the Author admonish and
give us to understand, that the fire be studiously cared for and looked unto,
until the sublimation of the whole shall be performed, for in the stopping or
slaking of fire in that time, the lycours could then not be thoroughly drawn
and gathered. These three lycours to be brief, or rather this sublimation
tryple wise, be indewed with properties, agreeable or answerable to their
degrees, yet the first of these lycours, is of lesser power in properties, then
the other, and ye second weaker in virtue then the third, so that the third
is mightier and worthier then both, or the other two. The report is, that
besides the quickening and helping of memory, they repress the hollow ulcers,
master the canker that it cleaves not to the bone, they also sease
convulsions, help cold rewmes, vanquishe the langours and griefs of the
stomach, and the cold tormentings of the body, especially of the Bowels,
they cure also the noise of the ears, the grievous pains of the teeth, help
the synew drawn together or shrunk, and they dissolve hard gatherings and
swellings they master and help many cold langours, and recover memory lost,
by annoynting the hinder part of the head with it, it draws down and
purges the head of all humors offending, through the help of the root
Cyclaminus, put up with it into the nosethrells, as the Author reports and
instructs. After this, let the pacient swallowe down, of the pills of Hiera
Mag* with Agaricke, one dram, and the day after draw up certain drops of this
oil into the nosethrells, in that this procures ye virtues of the brain,
quickneth understanding, and recouereth memory. If so be the temples and hinder
part of the head, be anointed for certain bays with it.

This also is a certain composition of a baulme: take of clear Turpentine
seven ounces, which wash well in wine, after take of Honey white, three pyntes,
clean skymmed over a soft fire with a little wine, to the same well clarifyed
myxe very well the Turpentyne, pouring upon four pyntes of good Aqua vitae, to
these then add of Borrage, of Buglosse, of Baulme, of Sage, and of Lauender,
of each one handful, of Hysope, of Camomyll, of Yarrow, of read Roseleaues,
of each half a handful, of wormewoodde one dram, of Rosemary two handfuls: to
these after add of Lignum aloes, of Xylobalsamum, and of the three Saunders,
of each one dram, of Mace, of Nutmegs, of Cynamon, of Galingale, of Cloves, of
Cubebae, of white Ginger, of long Pepper, of Saffron, of Spykenard, of graynes
of Paradize, of Cardamomum, of each one dram, of Zedoaria half an ounce, of
Squinanthum half a dram, of the ryndes of the cytrone, the seeds of the
cytrone, of Stoechas, of each one dram, of Calamus aromaticus, half a dram,
of Carlina that is cardopacia two ounces, of Bistorta two drams, of Ireos or
the flower De luce, half an ounce, of Baye berryes, of Valerian, and of
Polypodie, of each half an ounce, of Lycoryse, and of Annise, of each half a
dram, of Fennel seeds two ounces, of Colyander seeds prepared half an ounce,
of that wythie on the mountain, and of Cummine, of each one dram, of blaunched
Almondes, half a pound, of Reysons of the Sun washed with wine, half a
pound, all these orderly stamped and beaten together, put into the abouesayd
body or Cucurbyte with the Honey and others. And if there be not sufficient of
Aqua vitae, power then more upon the whole, letting these stand to digest for
seven days close stopped, after distyll the substance in syfted ashes, set
within three fingers breadth of the bottom of the pot, and the ashes artly
put about the body, the head and Receauer being artly luted in the joints,
that no air breathe forth, which after sublyme for four hours, with a very
soft and easy fire (least the Honey boyleth up) and a clear water then yssueth
and is gathered in the Receauer: after which, increase the fire, and you shall
see come a yellowe water, then draw away the Receauer, putting under another
glass, which you shall like lute as the first, to the nose of the head, the
first water then come, keep several and a part, and strengthen or increase
your fire. And when the yelow color in the water shall cease, make your fire
again stronger then before, and a water blackishe will issue, and when you
shall see a fume arise, then cease, for you have drawn sufficient, which
water also keep a part, letting the Cucurbite then stand to cool in the
Furnace, before the drawing forth. Into the first water put of fol^^ Iudi, one
dram, of Amber one dram, of Musk so much, and fifteen leaves or sheets
of Gold, which after the mixing diligently, keep. If you will apply of this
white water to the head, then add to it of Bytonie or of Buglosse water one
ounce, which mix and drink in the morning fasting. For this fortifyeth all ye
members. To an ounce of Malmesie or good wine, add a sponefull of this water,
which myxed together will be white as milk, the same drink with a fasting
stomach two hours before meat, and it preserves all the members. For the
liver, use of it with one ounce of the Succorie, Sage, Mulberie, or Endive
water. For the breast, and cough proceeding of a cold rewme, use of it with
Hysope water, or ye water of Louage. Unto the heart, minister of it with
Borrage or Buglosse water, or of Yarrow, with Wormwood or Baulme water, unto
ye stomach. For the Lunges, with the water of Lung wort* maiden hear, or
Polipodie. For the Spleen, with ye water of Hearts tunge. For ye gyddinesse of
the head, and Apoplexy, with the water of the Pyonie roots, or Hypericone.
For the Stone with ye Radish root water, or the water of Alkekengi. In the
retention or staying back of urine, with water^resse water, or the parcely, or
sa^i^rage water. For the eyes, with Fennel, Celondine, or eye bright water. In
the retention or staying back of the Terms, with the water of Mugworte, or
with the water of the roots and herbs of Mader. In the over great flux of
the terms, with the water of playntayne, or Solanum. In ye harming or hurt of
the matrice, through the ygnoraunce of the Mydwyfe, or of a cold cause,
whereof she can not after conceive wi^h child, let her use of this with the
water of Valerian, or Bytonie, or Lyuerwoort In the spots of the face, take
of Pympernell water four drams or ounces, of this water one dram or ounce,
which after the myxing, annoint the face with it, morning and evening, drink
also of this water, with the water of Endive, twyse or thryse in the week. It
cures the Canker by annoynting with it, and dropped into the Fistula speedily
heals it: this helps a cold ache in any of the joints, by applying of it
upon. In Agues, add to it of Folefoote half a handful, which put into a
glass with a quarter of a pynte of Alome water, letting these stand to dygest
for three days, which after shyfte into another glass, then of these an hour
before the coming of the fytte of the Ague, drink one sponefull, and annoint
the Temples, the Nose, the pulses, the back, and the Mylte. The Cytryne oil
has many virtues, if the same shall be anointed on grieffes. The black oil
is of great virtue in the joint sickness, even like to a baulme: and the
white, is named the golden water.

Take of Lauender eight ounces, of Sage so much, of Cynanamon, and of Mace, of
each one ounce, of Gynger, of Nutmegges, of Cloves, of each one ounce and a
dram, of Rubarbe, and of Galingale, of each one dram, of small Reysons two
ounces, of the graynes of Paradize, and of the red Saunders, of each half an
ounce, of Cubebae two drams, let the Reysons be beaten a part, and the spyces
put and labored a part, which after put al together into a Cucurbyte, addyng
to these one measure and a half of Malmesie or of other good wine, the same
then dilygentlye stop, setting it in new earth toward the Sun for
fifteen days, which after distyll by a Lymbecke, with a Receauer luted to it,
and beginning with a soft fire. Take of Turpentyne six drammes, of Diagridij
five drammes, of Ginger two drams, of Mastick, and of white Saunders* of each
one dram, of Sugar half a pound* of fine wheaten flower one pynte, make of the
whole a thynne paste* which bake after the manner of hosts or waver bread, of
which take one or two in ye morning fasting, with flesh broth, or Pease broth,
with Buglosse water. etc.

A most excellent oil for the recovery of the weak memory, for the coldness
and moisture of the brain: which very often proved on the Aucthour, and on
many others, to his great ^umendation. Take of Rosemarie flowers, as many, as
you think good, of these distyll a water: of this water then take one pynt,
the same put into an vrynall body of Glass, well fensed about with strong
lute, into which after put of Nutmegges, of Cloves, of the graynes of Paradyze,
of Cynamon, of Cubebae, of Mace, of Gynger, of each one ounce, of Musk four
carates (or sixteen graynes wayght) of long Pepper one dram, of Saffron
three drams, of Galingale two drams, all these brought to powder and myxed
together, incorporate with the Rosemarye water, which let stand to putrifye
for three whole days* after the setting in syfted ashes, distyll according to
art, and continue the fire unto the burning of the Feces, or that the Feces
rest burned. After get a pynt of the water of Rosemarye leaves distylled,
which myxe together with the said water, already distylled, these then powered
into a strong glass, and set into Balneo over the fire, boil unto the
consumption of the half: which done, take of the oldest oil Olyue that you
can find one pynt, of oil de Been one ounce, of Euphorbium, and of Castorie,
of each four ounces, of Mustarde seeds six ounces, of Oleum sesaminum, of
oil D^tiri, of the oil of Hypericon or Saint John's woort, of Olei citri, of
the oil of Spyke, of Olei ex cibeto, of each four drams: all these above
uttered, put into the glass body, which then stop close that no air breath
forth, setting ye same after in horse doong, sufficiently hot, for fortye
days, at the end of which time, draw the glass forth, letting it after stand
in the Sun for three whole months, and then have you purchased the oil
thus prepared, unto the abouesayde purpose. This is a lycour of such power and
virtue, that ye same puts away any impediment that may hinder memory, by
annoynting at night, before the going to bed, all the head about, and the
stomach. But this especially is to be remembered and noted, that you may not
use this anointing, all the three Summer months, but in any time else
throughout the year, you may use it safely, and without any scruple or doubt.
And for truth it is marvelous, and his working very great, and this I (says
the Aucthour) have often experienced, both on my self, and on many others, and
have always seen and understood a myraculous working of it, in a manner
incredible to be reported. Wherefore I wyshe all those, that would purchase a
good and ready memory* to use only this singular oil: setting a part all
others invented for the same purpose, as most vain and fryuolous. This
borrowed out of the most worthy practices, of the Greek Leonarde Fiorauant.

A marvelous and dyuine oil, borrowed out of the practyses, of the abouesayde
Aucthour, Leonarde Fiorauant. Which reuyueth the sick, and in a manner dead, by
receiving a drop or two of it by the mouth, in either broth, wine, or any
other lycour: take of the blood of a healthful young man, of Spermaceti, and
of the marrow of a Bull, of each one pound, of good Musk one ounce, of the
ashes of the Olyue tree (or for lack of it) of the young Oak tree two ounces,
these after the dilygent working and incorporating together, put up into a
Retorte artlye luted and set into fine sand, which after distyll with an easy
fire at the first, in artlie seperating the Elements. For the first water
which comes will be white: the second, a cytrine or yellowe oil: the third
lycour which comes, will be of a reddishe color, and of the greatest
property, which is most profitable unto diverse matters. But more of this
understand, in a place uttered before.

The making of a Baulme, borrowed out of the secrets of Gabriell Fallop. Take
of good Turpentyne, half an ounce, of Xylobalsami as much, of cloves two
ounces: these after the beating and laboring together, distyll according to
art: and the first which distylleth and comes forth, is a water, the second
an oil, and the third a Baulme.

Another Baulme borrowed out of the same Aucthour: tak^ of pure Turpentyne one
pound, of Aloes hepatick one ounce, of Myrre half an ounce, all these artlye
grynded and myxed together, distyll thryse over, and you shall then purchase a
Baulme, serving unto all matters. But unto the preservation of dead bodies, the
excellentest.

An oil, preserving the body in safety a long time, and sharpning or
quickening the wit, which is to be used after the exact^ purging of the body,
and a reasonable diet used the whiles or in the mean time. Take of the
Philosophers oil three pyntes, of the oldest oil Olyue* or at the least
sublymed by a Lymbeck, and Olei de alcana, of ea^^^ two pyntes* of the fat of
a Moele, of a Wesell, and of a Bear, of each two ounces, of Castorie three
ounces, of the juice of Acorus four pyntes, of the juice of Rosemarie flowers,
of the juice of Bytonie, of each half a wine pynt, of the juice of Clare, of
the juice of the English Galingale, of each four ounces, of the wine of Candie
two pynts, of burning water half a pynt, all these boil with a very soft
fire, unto a certain consumption, adding to these after of Ladanum, stieped
before i^ a sharp or eager wine, and well beaten, one dram and a half, of
Nutmegges half an ounce, of Mace, of Cloves, of Euphorbium, of the three
Peppers, of each two drams, all these dilygently beaten, put into a vessel,
close stopping it, which after let stand for thyrtie days, the whole then
distyll according to art. The use of it is in the winter, and once in the
week: but in the Summer time only once in a month: the head before washed,
and to the hinder part of the head, of this applied, but the temples before
being anointed: Fumanellus.

A description of Christ's baulme borrowed out of the learned practices of
Theophrastus Paracelsus: take of oil Olive one pint, of good wine three
pyntes, these myxt together in a strong glass* set after into Balneo Mariae
for a month, and of the oil will a lycour then be caused: but beware you fill
not the glass to full, for sufficient will it be, if to a fowrth part it be
filled. The alteration and amendment of Theophrastus: take of oil Olyue one
pynte, of the oldest red wine three pyntes, these after the myxing and
distylled: add to of the lycour of Hyperycone six ounces, of the lycour of
Mumia four ounces, distyll the whole for a month in Balneo, and keep to your
use: This avails in the wounds of the joints.

The making of a blessed oil for wounds, happening on the head, which this oil
heals dyuinely, whether there be a fracture of bones, or the perishing of the
pannicles: and that further, in any other part of the body, where either the
synewes, the muscles, or veins be harmed, or any member besides, this blessed
oil heals most easily, and in a very short time, without any danger, or
incombrance to the person wounded, and this many times experienced of the
Aucthour. The making of the blessed oil, is on this wise. Take of the oil of
the Fyr^^ tree, (...) ^ynd of Turpentyne most clear and fair, one pound, of
the whiles of new laid Eggs sodden hard in water, and the yolks taken
forth, fowreteene ounces, of Rosen of the pyne aple tree* six ounces, of
chosen Myrre three ounces, of gum yuie two ounces: all these artlye ^rought to
powder, and mixed together, put into a Retort, stro^glie fensed with the lute
of wisdom, the same after set in ashes, distyl with a most slow fire in the
beginning, increasing after the fire by little and little unto the end of the
work, until that all the substance be come, which will wholly be finished
in.xxxvi. hours: this distyllation then gathered will be a water and oil
blackishe of color, these separate, keeping either a part in a gl^sse: which
oil after the settling for a time, will become read, yet darck. And here note,
that if you draw these with a very soft fire, you shall the^ purchase a better
and sweter oil, as Fallopio affirms of experience* in his book of secreet^.
This oil miraculously heals al manner of wounds, and bruses, that especially
happen on the head: for that singular Surgiane Gabriell Fallopio, did
woonderful cures with it, among which, he healed a plowman of two such long,
and deep cuttes on the head, that were fearful to behold, besides a wound
that passed through both sides of his thyghe, that he healed only with this
oil, and with such expedicion, that it were in a manner incredible to be
reported: so yt where need is of drying, there cannot be found anything of
greater virtue then this blessed oil, so often and many times proved of
Fallopio. Besides the greek Fiorauant reports, that it causes hear to
grow on the head, and the hears of the beard shedding, this stays, and
causes them to grow again with expedicio^, by annoynting the weak place, and
the bare pla^e after a wound this also helps the pain of the flanks, and
retention or staying back of the ^ry^^, by applying a glyffer prepared with a
little of this oil with^^ the body, and this it does forthwith. For it
mightylie dries up that alteracion caused in the secret places within, where
no lo^all matter can be applied on the kydneys, nor otherwise de^^^ withal.
This oil first invented by the famous Greek Leonarde Fiorauant, and increased
by that worthy man Gabriell Fallopio* (...) ^^most precious oil for wor^^^*
whi^^ ^uer they be* borrowed out of the first chapter (...), written by
Bertapa^^a. Take of the kernelles of Peaches, of bitter Almondes, of Gentiane,
of wormwood, of Horehounde, or of Lupynes, of Colewort seeds, of the Peache
tree leaves, of the river or water Catmintes, of Oleandri, of Pellytorie, of
white Elleborie, of the roots of the long grass, of each half a handful:
all these dilygentlye brought to powder, and labored with the gaul of a
caulfe, and the juice of Leekes, and myntes, of each two ounces, of Neunphare
oil one ounce, of wormwood oil two wine pynts: all these after the dilygent
myxing together, set in horse doong to putrify for a month, in a strong glass
well stopped, which after distyll with a headde close luted, and you shall then
purchase a water and an oil, reuyuing and strengthening the disseased and sick
of the worms, by taking two scruples of the water by the mouth, with Malm^sie:
and by annoynting of the oil on the temples, and pulses of the hands and
feet, and all about the body, and the mouth of the stomach, and about the
shoulder points: By which doing, the Aucthour saw many children, in a manner
deadde of the worms, recover health in a short time after: and healed wounds
with this oil, and ulcers with expedicion.

Of Baulmes which are applied and used without the body: of which some are
prepared and done by distyllacion, and some without distyllation. The.x.
Chapter.
AN artificial Baulme, curing all old wounds, and helping the dryness of
members, and the members shrunck: take of Galbanum, of Ammoniacu^, of Mastick,
of pure Myrre, of gum Elemi, of Bolellium, of each half an ounce, of
Turpentine one ounce and a half, or two ounces, which is the better, of oil
Olive two pyntes, of Viridis aeris two ounces and a half, all these brought to
powder, infuse for six or eight days in the strongest vinegar* after
distylled by a Lymbecke, as in the first day by Balneo Mariae, and the next
day in sand: but if you will have it stronger, and of better taste, then add
these under taught, and let it be brought and done as before uttered: take of
Storax calam^^a; of gum yuie, of Spykenard, of Car^^e, of ^olophonia, of g^m
Traga^^^ite, of gum Serapine, of Opopanax, of each half an ounce, (...)
ph^^^bium, half a dram, of Viridis aeris three drams, of Turpentine one
pound. This baulme cures all old wounds, in a cold and hot cause. It
helps also the dryness and shrincking of members, if those shall be
anointed with that baulme.

A distylled oil, helping the trembling or shaking of the hands: let equal
portions of the oil of Bays, of Rue, and of Sage be distylled together, which
after ten days power into a strong wine, and distyll the whole in a
Lymbecke: with this water gathered, annoint the hands, and feet, and the
trembling members.

Another oil helping the tre^bling of the head: take all the abouesayde, which
put into Aqua vitae for fowreteene days, the whole distyll by a Lymbeck: and
with this water annoint the temples, both morning and evening. Here it is to be
understood, that where he speaks by the matters above taught, he means
not the oiles in this, but the Bay berries, the Rue, and Sage especially.

A distylled baulme helping and curing wounds, and deep ulcers: take of
Turpentyne six pounds, of Olibanum half an ounce, of Lignum aloes, of
Masticke, of each one dram, of Cloves, of Cynamon, of Zedoaria, of Nutmegges,
of Cubebae, and of Galingale, of each three drammes, of oil Olyue six drams,
these brought to powder and myxed, distyll with a slow fire: this helps the
cold poisons of Toades, Fistulaes, Noli me tangere, the Palsy, and venymous
wounds with or by a Tente. Here in this place besides is to be noted, after
the mind of Theophrastus Paracelsus, that baulmes prepared and gotten by
distyllation, are not to be applied at all on wounds, of which let others
judge.

An oil effectuous and proved, for softning of the synewes, or palsy, and the
shrincking of them, or the crampe, the falling sickness, or Epileptia, the
trembling of parts, and any cold disease: it increases also memory, and the
understanding. Take of Galbanum half an ounce, of gum yuie five ounces, these
after the bringing to powder, distyl in a Lymbeck, and mixed after with one
pound of Sebesten, distyll the whole again: with this anoint the hinder part
of the head, and the nape of the neck at night, before the entering into
bed: this borrowed out of Fumanellus.

The best oil, serving unto all the synewes, and unto the joints, and helping
marvelously all the aches, happening in the hyppes, the knees, the hands, and
feet, the body before purged* after the beginning of the sycknesse: and let
the grieved place be anointed at the fire, or in the Sun, twyse a day. Take
of chyldrens vryne twentye pyntes, of Brymstone one pound, of vnflaked, Lyme
two pounds, let the Brymstone and Lyme be brought to powder, and the Vryne
^^^tyng a hand breadth above them, which boil together, until it shall come
unto a green color, after the strayning, boil again the grosser parts and
Feces remaining, with the other part of the Vryne restyng, and this do three
or four times, (and so often) until the vryne has lest his color: and
sees that which remains, unto the thycknesse of Honny, being cold, distyll
in a Glass body: the same which first comes forth in the color of water,
throw away: and the next which comes, being of a yellowe color, through
the fire increase, dylygentlye keep.

Another of the same man's.
An oyntmente helping Synewes cut a sunder, in what part of the body they
shall so happen, puttyng away swellyngs, and all manner of hardness in the
flesh, the Canker, the hollye fire, and any pain of wounds, and bruses, and
works more in one week, then any other medycine in a month.

A certain Physician (of small understanding) promysing and under taking
much, confessed that he healed many disseases, with this medycine alone, as
any manner ulcers of the Synewes, the grieffes of the wyntes, convulsions, and
swellings, and to be brieffe, to do more matters, than may decentlye be
written: the making of which, is on this wise: let three pounds of new
puryfied wax be taken, and stieped in twelve wine pyntes of the strongest
white wine: the wax soked through, let it be wrynged hard with the hand, and
put after into another vessel of the like bygnesse, having so many pyntes of
wine, and through wrong the wax hard prepared, and the wax put into a body,
which distyll after art, three times over, this keep to your use.

Another of the same man's.
The best oil for the Canker, and Fistula: take of the oldest oil Olyue two
pyntes or three, distylled with a sufficient small fire, continuing for twelve
days, the same which shall come, and be gotten, helps the pains of the
joints, and grieffes of the Synewes* the same which remains ^ee grounds in
the bottom of the vessel, helps Cankers, and Fistulaes, and by myxing
Caphura with it, works the perfyter.

Another of the same man's.
A water or oil of great efficacye in healyng wounds: Take of washed
Turpentyne, of the flowers of Saint John's woort, so much as you will, of
Olibanum in powder, of oil Olyue, and of fresh butter, of each a like
wayght, but little in quantitye, these distyll in a Lymbecke, that which first
comes keep to your use, and by increasing the fire, that which next comes
serves for wounds.

This likewise of the same man's.
A blessed oil for wounds, out of the secrets of Fallopio: read in the end
of the other Baulmes, more at large uttered their in this place; wherefore (for
repiticion sake) here wyllinglye omytted.

An artificial Baulme, for the healing of wounds, borrowed out of the Italian
secrets, of the famous Chyrurgian Gabriell Fallopio: Take of the clear
Turpentyne, one pound and a half, of the oil of Bays, of Galbanum, of gum
Arabicke, of gum yuie, of each one ounce, of Frankensence, of Lignum aloes,
of Galingale, of Cloves, of Nutmegges, of Consolida minor, of Cynamon, of
Zedoaria, and of Gynger, of each six drammes, of the white Dyttanie, and of
Lyquide storax, of each two ounces, of Leuaunte Musk, and Amber greece, of
each one dram, all these brought to powder, and myxed together, power into
eight pyntes of Aqua vitae, four times distylled over, which let stand
together for eight days, in a glass Retorte. At the eight days end* dystyll
the whole in an open Furnace, beginning with a soft fire, and a white water
^^^eweth as Milk: which diligently followed, you shall after see, a clearer
water come, then changing your receauer put under an other, gathering the
clear water apart. In this water is a whytishe oil contained, which must also
be separated and kept. This water, is named the water of Baulme, and the oil,
the oil of Baulme. After this, will an other water come, whytishe as common
water, which when it begins to wax and come forth black, change then the
receauer, putting under another, and this is named the second water of the
Baulme. After increase the fire, and a Baulme black in color* will then
follow and come, whose fume stincketh: The work or distillation ended,
separate the black water, from the black Baulme, that which remains in the
bottom of the vessel, keep in a glass, the same standing open for a good
space that the fumes may pass, becomes sweet of smell. The first water
anointed on the head, helps the rewme, deafness, the Leprie, the weakness
of sight, and marvelously heals wounds. The oil of Baulme does speedily
dissolve, bruses, bewtifieth the face, preserves youth, and is a divine
medicine in the piercing and searching of wounds, if the same be anointed, and
drunk in wine The second water, gives a comeliness of face, if once in the
day it be washed with it. The Baulme also, does excel the natural Baulme in
properties. The black water separated from the Baulme avails in all wounds,
proceeding of a cold matter etc. It is (to be brief) the most precious and
surest remedy unto many diseases.

An oil of great efficacy and power, in the closing of wounds, singular and
experienced. Take of Turpentine two pounds, of the flowers of Saint John's
woortten drams, of Frankencense in powder two ounces, of common oil four
ounces, of fresh, butter without any salt three ounces, all these mixed
together distill in a Limbeck, and the same which first comes, gather unto
your use, but that which remains in the bottom of the vessel, distill with a
fire encreas^d, the same gathered is mightier in the healing of wounds. This
out of Fumanellus.

A singular oil, helping the grief and pain of the synewes and joints. Take
of the oil of Turpentine one pint, of new gum Iuie six ounces, of pure
lyquid ve^uishe, of Frankensence, of each two ounces, these mixed together,
distill in a Limbecke, which keep to your use. This out of the same Author.

An oil, or ointment sharpning the wit, and increasing memory, out of
Fumanellus. Take of Stoechias, of Rosemary flowers, of Buglosse flowers, of
Borrage flowers, of Camomyll flowers, of Maioram, of Sage, of Baulme, of Violet
flowers, of red Rose leaves and of Bay leaves, of each, one ounce and a half, al
these put up into a glass body strongly luted with four pints either of
Malmesie, Rennishe wine, or Aqua vitae, let these so stand to infuse for five
days, and distilled, add to it of the best Turpentine, one pound and a half,
of Olibanu^, of chosen Myrre, of Masticke, Bolelliu^, and of gum Iuie, of each
two ounces, of Vernicis integrae, one ounce, of Mellis anacardi, three ounces,
all these brought to powder and infused for five days with the foresaid
distillation, in a boddy with a head close luted, distill again, adding to it
of Cinnamon, of Cloves of Mace, of Nutmegs, of Cardamomum, of grains of
Paradize, of the long and round Pepper, of Ginger, Xyloaloes, and of Cubebae of
each one ounce, all these finely brought to powder. To these add of Musk and
Amber greece, of each two drams, al these mixed together distill (after that
these added and put into the former distillation have remained five days) the
fire in the beginning soft, increase after by little and little, unto thend of
the work. The use of it, is, yt the same may be applied in the winter time
once in the week, but in the so^mer time once in a month* ye head before
being washed, ye temples and hinder part of the head anoint with it.

An oil helping the gowte, borrowed out of a written book, tak^ of
Carpobalsamum, of Xylobalsamum, of red corral, of long Pepper, of Nutmegs, of
each two ounces, of Saffro^ one ounce, of the fat of a Beuer, of the fat of a
Grype, or of the kydneys of a Weather, of the marrow of the bones of an Ass,
or of an horse, of each four ounces, of Turpentine six ounces, of old oil
Olyue, one pint, of virgin wax four ounces, of old Malmesie two pintes, of
live water frogs xxx. in number, of the juice of the tops of Canes or
reeds, of the juice of the wall yuie, which yeldeth yelow seeds* of the juice
of ye roots of Veruaine, of each four ounces, all these beaten a part, and
put after into a Limbecke, distill with a soft fire. The first water which
comes, will be clear, and helps the moist gowte: the third water
gathered, will be read, which avails in the cold gowte: and this remember,
that the frogs ought to be put alive into the Lymbecke, for this is an
approved m^dicine, and always found true.

A marvelous oil in the palsy, and shrincking of synewes, the falling
sickness, and the crampe, and helps any cold sickness, engendered of a cold
cause. Take of Galbanum half a pound, of gum yuie three ounces, these brought
to powder and myxed together, dystyll in a Lymbeck after art, the water and
oil distylling forth, gather in a receauer, into which put one ounce of the
oil of Bays, and one pound of good Turpentine, the whole thoroughly myxed,
dystyl again, the oil and water then gathered, separate the one from the
other, and the oil keep as a Baulme: for it matcheth and is like to the
baulme in all his virtues. A certain practyser, applied one drop of the
oil, on the pacientes forehead of the palsy, and another on his navel, and
he ^ncontinent arose, as amassed of him self, and was after an hour, delivered
of the grievous pain of a wound, in a certain place of the body: and the
shrincking of synewes he anointed with this oil, and the pacient was speedily
healed. And in other sicknesses and grieffes, was this oil diversely proved,
and found to be of great efficacye. The hinder part of the head anointed with
it, at the going to bed, and that in the morning he eats one dram wayght of
the Reysons of the Sun, it quickens (in a short time) the memory: This
oil helps the defenesse, and any sickness proceeding of a cold cause, and
helps besides the loss of smelling: this borrowed out of the Breuiarie of
Arnoldus de villa noua^^^ the Chapter of the palsy.

An oil of many virtues, but auayling especially in wounds, borrowed out of
the secrets of Fallopio: take of clear Turpentine two pounds, of the oil of
Line seed one wine pynt, of the Rosen of the Pyne tree six ounces, of
Frankensence, of Myrre, of Aloes, of Mastick, and of Sarcocolla, of each two
ounces (of Mace, of Saffron, and of Lignum aloes, of each two ounces) but these
three last, add to if you will. All these wrought together, put into a Retorte
of glass strongly fenced, which artly distyll in sand^, with a very soft fire
in the beginning, and a clear water shall come: but a red oil within a
whiles after will distyl forth, which seen, begin then to increase your fire,
and stronger and stronger unto the end of the distillation or that all be come,
after take away the receauer, and separate the water from the oil, which keep
apart in several glasses. The water within a time, waxes read, and the oil
will become of a Rubine color. This oil is precious, especially to be applied
on wounds, where the synewes, the bones, and veins be cut, for by closing
or stitching the parts and lips of the wound, and applying of this lycour
upon, it heals the same speedily, without any grief and pain to the
pacient. And Falloppio on a time, cured a scholar (being a young man) with
this lycour, which had fourteen wounds, and of these eight were deadly, by
sowing or stitching all the wounds, and applying only of this lycour upon, was
in the space of thyrtie days thoroughly cured, without annoyance to the
pacient. And of the wounds, of small importance, he healed a great number,
within four or five days, with the said oil, and used none other, so that he
concludes and proves this oil to be singular in his properties, and that a
man with it may do miracles, in applying of it on wounds, and ruptures.

An artificial Faulme helping and putting away the scarres of wounds, if
after a stripe, a great scarre shall remain on the face, or in any other
parts of the body: then with this Baulme following may you remove a scarre,
not wholly or altogyther, but in such sort, that it shall be little seen of
any. Take of Mastick one ounce, of the ryndes of the sweet Pomegranates, and
of gum Arabicke, of each half an ounce, of Saffron two drams, of English
Galingale, one ounce, of Carpobalsamu^, half an ounce, of Aloes ten drams, of
Frankensence one ounce, of Myrre one ounce, of Turpentine of the Fyrre tree
half a pound, of old oil Olive one ounce, those to be beaten, bring to powder,
and after the mixing together, put the whole into a Retort of glass strongly
fensed with the lute of wisdom, which order distill with a soft fire in the
beginning, and increasing after the fire by little and little unto yt end. The
receauer after the close sealing or stopping (after art) set into Balneo
Mariae, or bury in horse dung for ten days, which then draw forth, and use.
This perfourmeth the same, which the Baulme does, in all proofs.

The confection of a baulme, which is named a greeks baulme, borrowed out of
Tarquinius Schnellen bergius: take of Turbith two ounces and a half, of
Rhapontick four ounces, of Rubarb one ounce and a half, of long Pepper, and
of Cloves, of each two drams, of Gynger one ounce two drams, of Zedoaria one
ounce, a half, and two drams, of Nutmegges seven drams, of Cardamomum one
ounce, a half, and two drams, of Cubebae, eight drams, of Cynamon three ounces,
of the roots of Pympernell one ounce, of Annise six ounces, of Sugarcandie
three ounces and two drams, al these beaten a part or severally, take after of
oil Olive four pyntes, of the oil of Line seed one pynt, of the juice of
wormwood half a pynt: Let the oils be first heated, after put in the
powders, but beware that you heat not the oils over hot. After the putting
up of the whole unto a Retorte (or if you had rather in a Cucurbite) distyll
thrice over.

A secret water of good accoumpt, which puts away spots, whitneth the
skin, takes away spots, wrinckles, and pimples, causes besides, a clear
and most comely face, borrowed out of Bertapalia: take of Turpentyne sufficient
clear two pounds, and of the same draw a water by a Lymbecke, to the same
distylled and come of the Turpentine, add these powthered, of chosen Masticke
half an ounce, of the white and pure Frankensence three drams, of Tragacanthi
half an ounce, all these dilygently mixed together with the abouesayd water,
put after into a Lymbecke, and distyll the substance with a very easy fire,
that which then comes keep in a glass, close stopped. After take of
Barrowes grease strayned through a thyck cloth, one pound, of chosen Ginger
one ounce, of Cloves two drams, of Nutmegs three in number, of chosen Cynamon,
and of Euphorbium, of each half a dram, of Spykenard two drams, of Cubebae
half a dram, of Camphora three drams, all these after the finelye brynging to
powder, myxe artlie with the said Barrowes grease.

Also take of crude Mercury three pounds, of fine silver one dram, ye silver
finely file to powder, chopping ye powder over again, which after myxe with the
said Mercury, and of these two make an argenture, incorporate then al these
dilyge^tly with the abouesaid mixture of barrows grease putting altogether into
a glass body, and setting the headde artlye upon, distyll with a soft fire in
the beginning, but after increase the fire stronger unto the end of the work,
and the same which comes forth and is gathered in the Receauer, power into a
glass, dilygentlye keeping the same to your use. After take of the first
Turpentyne water half a pynt, and of this other myxte with the Barrowes grease
one pound, and these two artlie myxed keep in a glass close stopped. And
when any woman will use this water, let her w^ she her face well before, with
the water of the decoction of branne, after wyping very dry her face, let her
pause an hour after, and by applying of this water on all the face with a fine
lynnen cloth wette in it, will then cause such a comely whiteness to appear,
that will endure or continue many days after.

An oil having the properties of a Baulme borrowed out of a written book:
take of chosen Turpentyne two ounces, of the roots of Campherie, and of
Symphiti Petraei, cut into square Tables and thynne one pound, and of the
roots of Vlmi six ounces, of the leaves of the wylding tree, of horse tails,
of yarrowe, and of herb Iudaica, of each two handfulles, of ripe Dates with
their kernelles a little bruised, ten in number, of gum Elemi half an ounce,
chosen Myrre, of Beniamyne, and of Storax Calamyta, of each two ounces, of
Frankensence, and of Masticke, of each three ounces, of Nutmegs one dram and a
half, of worms dilygently washed with red wine, one ounce and a half, of
red Rose leaves, of Spykenarde* and of the flowers of Saint John's woort, of
each one little handful, of the leaves of Vlmi with his licour two in number,
of Ox eye brought to powder two drams: all these labored and artlye myxed
together, put into a Lymbecke with a head close stopped about, which dystyll
after with a soft fire. The first lycour that comes, is shynne: the second
that follows is an oil, supplying the properties of a baulme, which is most
effectuous in the closing and curing of new wounds, and fylling the
hollownesse with ^^she, or unto other great ulcers, and old grieffes, and unto
many others much helping. This oil ought dilygently to be stopped in a glass,
with a narrow^ mouth, that adver^ue of it breath forth.

Of the Baulmes not distylled. The.xi. Chapter.
AN oil supplying the properties of a baulme, in the curyng of wounds,
borrowed out of a written book: take of the flowers and herbs of Saint John's
woort as much as you will, those put into glass with a narrow neck and mouth,
fylling the same full with old oil Olyue, or common oil, setting the same
after in the sun, for fifteen days, at the end of which time, power into
it, half a cup full of white wine, and laboring altogyther, set the glass
close stopped, into hot horse doong for fifteen or twentye days, which after
the drawing forth bind about with a small hand of hay, into which put then of
Myrre, of Mastick, of Venice Turpentine, and of Rosen, of each two ounces, or
according unto the quantity of the oil prepared, and let all these be finely
brough to powder, before the putting in, and the glass then close stopped,
that no air breath forth, set after into a kettle of water over the fire,
letting the substance in the glass boil for a certain time: and after the
same shall be sufficientlye boiled, strain the whole, through a common
strayner, and the refuse throw away: the oil preserve in a glass close
stopped, which the older it shall be before the occupying, the greater will be
his effects: and when you will use of it, heat the oil a little before.

Another baulme curing wound^: take of gum yuie, and of Myrre, of each one
ounce, of gum Elemi, of Colophoni^, of Fra^kensence* of Masticke, of Storax
calamita, of Lignum aloes, of Saffron, of Dragons blood, of each half an
ounce* of Sarcocolla of Ammoniacum, of Opopanax; of Bolellium, of the long
Aristolochia, of Castorie, of gum Arabic, of Nutmegs, of Cloves, ^ of ^aules*
of each one dram, of Ladanum, of Storax liquid^, of each half an ounce, o^ Aqua
vitae* four ounces, of Turpentine one pound, of old oyl^ two pyntes, of the
oil of thorough wax made of the simple flower half a pynte, all these
orderly put into a glass, boil in Balneo Mariae, as above taught.

A good baulme of many virtues, but it does peculiarly close and heal ^^lde
wounds, without leaving manifest signs of scars, this also cleanses the
eyes, preserves the flesh from putrefying, and does marvelously help the
swelling of the joints, and pain of the hot gowte, this borrowed out of a
written book of secrets, in the Italian tongue: take of the lycour of the
bladders of Vlmus, the same strain through a lynnen cloth, putting it after
into a glass, which set in sand to digest for fifteen days (the same lycour
strayning every third day) after set this in the Sun, for two whole
months. And note, that this ought to be prepared and made, from the middle of
the month of March, unto the mydle of June.

Another, take of oil Olyue two ounces, of white pytche one ounce, of Galbanum
half a dram, let all these be molten, with one dram of the oil of Romayne
vitryoll, with three ounces of the oil of Poppie, with four ounces of the
oil of bitter Almondes, with one ounce of the oil of Olybanum, those that are
to be brought to fine powder, myxe with the oil. The inuentour of this is
unknown to the Aucthour.

Another out of the secrets of Gabriell Fallopio: take the juice of Leekes,
and the juice of Myntes, of each a like, which powered into a glass, set in the
Sun all the Dog days, and the same shall after be a syngular baulme.

Another of Tarquinius Schnellen bergius: take of Masticke, of Olibanum, of
each two drams, of Ammoniacum one dram, of Galbanum three drams, of Bolellium
six drams, of Opopanax one dram, of Ladanum half an ounce, of Assa foetida
one ounce and a half, and three drammes, of gum yuie two drammes, of gum
Arabicke half a dram, of Turpentyne two ounces, and a half, of Camphora
half an ounce, of oil Olyue two pyntes, all these dyssolue and mealt in a
pan with a soft fire, scurring the whole strongly about, after add of
Viridis aeris finely powthered, half an ounce, boil the whole again a little
more unto the changing green of color, which after strain through a cloth,
keeping the same artly in a glass, by stopping the mouth of it with sylke.

Another, which receaueth all those, which are required unto the true baulme,
it easilye pierces all wounds, and on what wounds soever this is applied, it
spedily heals them: take of ye white Rosen two drams, let this be dissolved
in good wine, after strain it through a linen cloth, this lycour boil with a
soft fire, unto the consumption of the wine, after take one pynt of oil Olyue,
in which dissolve the Rosen with a soft fire, this done take of gum Ammoniacum,
of Galbanum, of Opopanax, of each one ounce, of gum Elemi two ounces, which
myxe together or stir so long about, until the same shall be thoroughly
prepared to use.

Another, of the same man's, take of Galbanum, of Ammoniacu^, and of Bolellium,
of each half an ounce, of Myrre, of Masticke, and of Olibanum, of each two
drams, of Turpentine two ounces, of Verdigresse half an ounce, of oil Olyue
one pynt and a half, let the gums be stieped for three days in wine vinegar,
in such manner, that they may wholly be covered of the vyneger, then let them be
boiled with the oil, in an earthen pot glased, unto the consumption of the
vyneger, after strain the whole through a lynnen cloth, wringing out the
substance thoroughly, then finely make the green Verdigresse into powder, which
diligently work and dissolve with the oil Olyue, and added to the lycour
pressed out, boil the whole, until it come unto ye perfy^ color of
grenenesse, which diligently keep in a glass.

Another, serving unto all new and old wounds, especially to those happening on
the head, take of Turpentine twelve ounces, of gum Elemi five ounces, of Rosen
four ounces, all these melt together, and when they shall be molte^, add the
pouders following, of Aristolochia long a two ounces, of Drago^s blood three
drams, with which let a mass be made after art.

A Baulme not distilled serving unto all ulcers and wounds, and through the
applying with tents, this then mundifyeth and heals. Take of the oils of
Turpentine, of line seed, of sweet Almondes, and of Roses, of each one ounce,
let the oil of Roses boil in a glass, with the grene Verdigresse, as much as
you can take up on a knyues point, and when it has boiled a little, strain the
same through a cloth, myxing it after with the other oils.

Another, take of Turpentine one ounce, of the Juice of ripe Lemmons, two
ounces, these after the putting into a possenet or skellet, set in such manner
over the fire, that it touches not the possenet, which let boil unto the
consumption of an ounce, after take up a little with an Iron spattle, and
^^still sundry drops on a cold stone, which so often do, until it shall be of
a red color: this then use, as the right and perfect baulme. This borrowed
out of the secrets of Fallopio.

An oil curing the prickings of the synewes, and wounds: of a practisioner
unknown to the Aucthour. Take of the Rosen of the pyne tree, two ounces, of
common oil one ounce and a half, of Turpentine one ounce, all these molten
together, strain dilygently, to which after add of Frankensence, of Masticke,
of each one dram, of gum Elemi two drams, of this apply hot on sylke to the
place.

The discriptio^ of a baulme in wounds of the bones, borrowed out of the
practices, of Theophrastus paracelsus: Take of the grease of Mumia, of the
juice of S. John's woort, of Centory, and of Sophia, of each seven ounces, of
the lycour of Myrre, of Masticke, and of Frankensence half an ounce, of
Litharge prepared, of the lycours of Centorie, Trebanae, Spicariae, Pastonicae,
of each one dram, of ye oil of Baies unto the weight of al, these bring into a
baulme after art.

A compound oil, proved many times, helping spedily such that be poisoned:
the making of which is on this wise. Take of the oldest oil Olyue one pynt, of
Aloes hepatick, of Ruberbe, of Spyknarde, and of Myrre, of each four drams, of
Turpentine, of white Dittany, of Ge^tiane, of Bistorta, of Camphery, and of
Madder, of each four drams, of Triacle, and Methridate, of each three drams, of
live Scorpions three score in number, but let the Scorpio^s before be boiled in
Balneo for four hours, after add to them all the others, letting the whole
the^ boil for other four hours, which after the strayning, keep dilygently
in a glass, close stopped. For this undoubtedly is, a divine lycour in such an
accident, in which as you perceive the Scorpions be, that are venomous beasts,
and their venom avails against venom, and such as are poisoned, even as one
poison (of property) drives out another, and as we daily see that a person
through druncke, by drincking after the juice of the Cabbedge with wine, does
sone after become sober, which the wine alone does not. A like to this, that if
a man happen to be burned in any place with fire, that the presentest remedy
is, to burn the same place again, as a sovereign help experienced. And a
like also to this, that if a man happen to be deep wounded, that he sheddeth
of the same much blood, the next remedy then is, as has been many times
tried, to let the pacient bleed of a vein. By these and many other like
reasons, the Aucthour here proves, that to drive forth poisons, a man ought to
do those, with the kinds aunswerable to them. But in such manner prepared,
that the matter alter not, and be by that means, a more harm to the poisoned.
For that cause, the manner of applying the oil against poison, ought on this
wise be done: when any needs ye use of this remedy, let the pacie^t then be
outwardly anointed with it, and take immediately two drams of it by the mouth,
with white vinegar, as well in the morning, as at night before the going to
bed, and he shall thoroughly be cured of any great poison. Unless it be
either Sublimatum, or dyamonde, which this remedy helps not, in that they be
no poyso^s, yet deadly myneralles, that in no manner can dygest, nor their evil
effect but little mytigated. Notwithstanding if any shall be intoxicated with
Sublimatum, he needs then no other, but to bath him self in Vinegar, to
drink plenty of milk, to eat often butter, and to drinck the whaye of
milk, at a sure and true remedy experienced. It shall also be good and
necessary, that the pacient vomitte once a day for a time, for the readier
purging and emptying of the stomach of that matter. This borrowed out of the
Greek Fiorauant.

The best oil, for the helping of Scroffles, fresh and new begun, especially
on children, which ^y it are soon healed, borrowed out the breuiary of
Arnoldus de villa noua: take of the roots of Tapsia, and of the Radishe, of
each one dram, of the old oil Olyue two ounces, let this oil with the roots
well beaten be put together into a glass, or into any other vessel, which
after put into a kettle of water, set over the fire, letting it there stand
unto a consumpcion of half the water in the kettle: of this oil warm, instyl
two or three drops into the ear of the pacient, on that side where Scroffles
be, and let this be done many times. And if through the oil, the care shall be
heated, or swell, in so much that some rottenness or matter begins to
yssewe forth: conceive then that only a little of this oil hot, put thus
every night in the ear, may so cure such Scroffles, and the matter of them by
the same shall so be emptied and wholly purged. And use or persevere with this
oil, after the abouesayd manner, until the pacient be thoroughly cured. But if
the ear shall neither swell, nor run any thing, then may you use other apt
remeedies to the purpose.

An oil, or certain great lycour of the famous greek Leonarde Fiorauant,
being a composition of most excellent virtue, in sundry workings: the making of
which, is on this wise. Take of oil Olyue twenty pyntes, of white wine two
pynts, these boil gently together unto the consumpcion of the wine, or unto all the wine be gone away in smoke. Which after power into an earthen pot
glased, stopping the mouth very close with clay, the same then bury two cubits
deep or more in the earth, and let it there so stand covered with earth for
six months. But the time when to bury or set this pot into the earth,
ought to be about the first or second day of August, and to be drawn or taken
forth of the earth again, must be in the month of February: which opened,
the oil will then appear, as if it were fyftie years old. But when you
mind to bury the pot, then put in these insewing: of Rosemary flowers, three
pounds, of Lignum aloes six ounces, of Frankensence, and Bolellium, of each
ten ounces. And after the drawing forth of the pot, and setting it in the
Sun, add these following: of Sage, of Rosemary, of Rue, of Byttonie, of
yarrow, of the root of Campherie, of Tamarisci, and of Bryonie, of each one
handful, of Galingale, of Cloves, of Nutmegs, of Spykenard, and of Saffron, of
each one ounce, of Sarcocolla, of Dragons blood, and of Masticke, of each two
ounces, of Aloes hepaticke, and of Rosen of the Pyne tree, of each eight
ounces, of Greek pytche one pound, of yellow wax, and of Barrowes grease, of
each eyghteene ounces, of S. John's woort with the seeds two pounds, of Musk
one dram, these after the dilygent myxing together, boil in Balneo, until the
herbs appear dry in it, and that no more substance seem to be gotten out
of them, which after the being on such wise, draw them forth, and strain them
through a cloth: to the lycour add for each pound wayght, six drams of the
natural baulme (of Fiorauants invention.) And when September is come, to it
add (in that month) two pounds of the fresh fruits, of that herb named
Balsami which be read: this done, you have then the greater lycour prepared
and in a readiness, which dilygently stop that no air breath forth: and this
lycour also, the older it shall be before the occupying, the better it works.
For this is of such a virtue, that it heals consumpcions, and dropsies, in
the ministering four drams weight of it, with one ounce of the syrup of Roses
hot by the mouth, every morning fasting: which for forty days thus given,
does thoroughly cure them. This also is a true and perfect oyntme^t, with which
Petechiae are thoroughly cured, by annoynting the places sundry times with it.
And any wounded, and having the veins, the sinews, and bones cut, by
closing or stitching the wounds, and applying of this oil upon hot, shall in
short time be cured, without any alteracion or great pain to the pacient. This
also cures the scurfe, by annoynting those places of the head with it. For the
coldness of the head, and rewmes, by applying of it to the nosethrelles
morning and evening, shall speedily be cured, without the use of any other
thing: and this it does through his sharp savor and piersing, which enters
and flies to the head and stomach, and does so dissolve those corrupt
humors, both in the head and stomach: in that this is a lycour, which
preserves from any corruption. And if the stomach be anointed round about
with the oil, it procures a good digestion of meat: it also moves vryne
retained, or that cannot pysse, through a fleshinesse stopping it, or the
Gonorrhaea, or of any other cause. This causes besides the heirs to grow,
and preserves the beard black a long time, and avails against worms, artly
applied. And all these practices are most true, and proved many times in the
abouesayd diseases and grieffes, and in many others, and never harmed nor
pained any pacient with it, except such infected with ye French disease: for
annoynting any such with this, it mightily paineth him: by which at any time
you shall thoroughly be persuaded, whether the pacient be vexed with the same, or
any other disease.

A secret oil, and experienced, that heals the Legs vlcered, and all other
ulcers, as well old as new, except those which happen on the head. It cures
also the canker, and Fistulaes: the making of which is on this wise. Take of
Apiu^, of Rosemary, of yarrow, of plaintain, and of wormwood, of each one
handful, of Sage, of Rue, of Tapsus Barbatus, of Celondine, and of Lauceola,
of each two handfuls, of the fat of a Weather, one ounce and a half, of
Herba Laurentia, and of Florum omniu^ mensium, of each three handfuls, of
common oil two pynts, of pure Turpentine one pound, of Galbanum two ounces,
of the juice of yuie growing on trees, two ounces and a half, of r^che Alome
one ounce and a half, of the Rosen of the Pyne tree, two pounds, of Viridis
aeris two ounces, of Fra^kensence, of Diachylon, and of Tryacle, of each one
ounce, of Gentiane, of the round Aristolachia, of each one ounce and a half,
of Vitryol, of Tartare, of Agarick, of burnt salt, of each two drams, of the
juice of Pulicaria three ounces, of the roots of the flower De luce one ounce,
of Sarcocolla half an ounce, of the red lead and powder of lead three
drams: of all the herbs the juice drawn or wringed forth, myxe in a brass
pan with the oil, the Turpentine, and Galbanum, which so long boil together
over a soft fire of coals, until the juice be consumed, sturring it (in the
mean time) well about, with a short bed staff or great spattle: after
strain the lycor, putting into it then, of ye green Verdigres brought to
powder, the same stir still about, until it be in a manner cold: these may
also be boiled in burning water, and preserved after in a glass close stopped.
This out of Fumanellus.

A precious oil, and compared to Gold, in that the same cures all euyls of
ye Legs, and synewes cut, it increases or procures flesh to rise, and
closes ulcers, it remooueth besides pain, it cures ye Fistula, the Ca^ker,
and al old ulcers, except those which happen on the head. In the month of May,
take of Apium one handful, of Rosemarie so much, of Sage and Rue, of each one
handful, of Herba laurentia, and Florum omnium menseum, of both, three
handfuls, of Tapsus Barbatus, of Lanceola, of Celondine, of each two hanfuls, of
wormwood one handful, of common oil two pyntes, of good Turpentine one
pound, of Galbanum two ounces, of the Rosen of the Pyne tree two pounds, of
Viridis aeris, or Diphrygis brought to powder two ounces: the juice of the
herbs strayned, and myxed with the oil* and Turpentine, boil on a soft
fire of coals, sturring the lycour continually about with a spattle, unto the
consump^^^n of the juice, to which after the strayning, add of Viridis a^^is
brought to powder, and still stir the lycour about, until it (ta^^n from the
fire) be cold: which after put up in a glass, close stopped.

An artificial baulme prepared and made without distyllation, that avails in
wounds, and cures them without the ingendrin^ or procuring of matter: it
helps also the palsy members, and stay^th the blood, and water, which
yssueth out of the wounded joints, this borrowed out of a certain Emperickes
book, written in the Germayne tongue: take of Rubarbe two drams, cut and
pared into round balls, to which add of Camphora one dram and a half, these
after put into a tynne porrenger, pouring upon one ounce and a half of common
oil Olyue, the same let stand in the Sun for fowreteene days.

Another approved baulme, out of the same book: take a glass which is about a
pynt in measure, the same fill with Spyknarde, upon which power half a pynt of
good Sallet oil, letting it after stand for a month in the Sun, which
always stir about. To it after add of the oil of Violettes two ounces, of
the oil of Spike so much, of the oil of Camomyl, and of the oil of Roses, of
each two ounces: all these myxed together, let stand for a whole month.

Another of the same man's not to be contempned: take of Galbanum, of
Ammoniacum, and of Bolellium, of each half an ounce, of chosen Myrre, of
Masticke, and white Frankensence, of each half an ounce: all these stiepe in
the strongest vinegar for three days, and dissolved, after power the whole
into an earthen Basin or pan well glased within, which set over a fire of coals
without flame, putting into it then of Turpentine two ounces, and of Sallet
oil two pyntes and a half: let these boil together, in sturring the whole
still obout, until the Feces stick or cleave to the bottom. Which come to
pass or being on such wise, add then to it of Viridi^ aeris brought to powder
half an ounce, the same taken from the fire, and become through cold, strain
through a lynnen cloth, putting the lycour dyligently up into a glass, to
your use: for this avails in all wounds, by applying lynt, and tents wette
in it.

Another noble Baulme: take half a pynte of common oil, with which myxe
Violettes in a glass, setting the same after in the Sun, and the like do
with Broom flowers, and leaves of the same: after take of Galbanum two drams
and a half, of Bolellium, of Ammoniacum, and of Myrre, of each half an
ounce, of Masticke two drammes, let the gummes before be dissolved in the
strongest vinegar, which after myxe together with the oils and flowers,
strayning the whole through a lynnen cloth into a well glased pot, the same
set over a fire of coals, and when the oil is hot, power in the Turpentyne
heated and molten, with the gummes dyssolued, sturring them still about, that
they burn not to the pot sides, and be careful also that the lycour runs
not over: then put into it of Viridis aeris finely brought to powder, half an
ounce, or six drammes, and setting this again to the fire, stir continually
about, until the remoouing from the fire, it shall be through cold: which
after the strayning, put into a glass, and keep ^^^se stopped to your use.

Another ^el^^ng members, shruncke, borrowed out of the practyses of
Theophrastus paracellus: take of distylled Turpentine one pound* of the gum
Galbanum, and of Dyttanie, half a pound, to these artlie myxed together* add
of the oil of Bays one ounce, which after made a Baulme: with it annoint
members shruncke, for many months, and it shortly recouereth them. The oil
Benedicke also myxed, with the fat of a Gray or Badger, and the members
anointed with it, does marueylouslye work in this case.

Another of the same man's, auayling in wounds: Take of oil Olyue one pynt*
of Saint John's woort of Bytonie, of Centorie, and of the herb self heal, of
each one handful, these herbs after the stamping and the iuyre wrynged out,
or only stamped, and myxed with the oil, let them distyll in a glass all
the Summer, after wring forth the whole through a cloth, which keep: for a
nobler can not be found for wounds, in that the same cures them, by the only
annoynting morning and evening, without the applying of any other medycine:
this also expels the humors* and far otherwise is, then can well be
uttered: and what matters seem impossible to be done, by the help of this are
speedily performed: as in every incarnating, and closing together and
healing, so well in fractures, as in bruses, and such like.

Of the oils gotten out of Flowers. The xij. Chapter.
THe oil of Spyke is thus prepared, if so be the Spyke be infused in wine, and
distylled, an oil first follow, where a water otherwise by distyllacion (I
guess in Sand) should be separated. This oil anointed on the region of the
kydneys, helps the Gonorrhaea. A certain friend (of the Aucthours) having
his wife now and then sick, procured to be ministered to her in a draft of
wine, but two drops of the distylled oil of Spyke, which after she had
druncke down, was brought by it in great hazard of life, but through it, she
voyded soon many worms, and recovered within short space.

The oil of the common Spykenarde, which is brought out of France, does
Brassanolus commend: but he affyrmeth that little worth, or of lesser accoumpt
to be made of, which certain prepare and make of the Lauender in Italy: the
same (writes he) that many name a Balsamyne, and use it in the steed of a
natural baulme. Of the oil of Spyke, which many used in the steed of baulme,
and of his properties: was fully and at large uttered in the other book, or
first part of the treasure of Euonimus.

The oil of the flowers of Verbascum, is thus made: stamp the flowers in a
mortar, which after the putting into a glass, set in the Sun close stopped,
for five or six weeks: this oil much avails and is right profitable for
the gowte in the feet and other members. It cures also fresh wounds, and if
the same be infused in the oil Olyue, it will then serve unto many grieffes.
The flowers ought to be gathered, when they be dry, for the virtues sake.

The oil made or drawn of the flowers of Tapsus Barbatus, infused in oil or
wine, and set in the Sun for five or six weeks, or boiled in a double
vessel, like the oil of Hypericon or S. John's woort, and artly strayned:
avails in the ache of the hyppes.

The oil of S. John's woort, is hot and dry, and stipticke, through which it
closes and heals the wounds of synewes cut, and the burning of fire: it
ceasseth also the pains, about the privy place, and bladder, and procures
urine. The preparing and making of the oil, is on this wise, borrowed out of
the natural history, of Adamus Leonicerus. Take of the tops being presently
full ripe, of S. John's woort three ounces, let these be stieped in pleasant
wine for three days, after let those boil in a double vessel, stopping
dilygentlie the mouth of the vessel, which in a redynesse wring hard out,
putting in a like wayght of the Hypericon fresh gathered, and infusing it in
like order, as above taught, which after boil, and strain, and do this a
third time: and if the wine be dyminished before the end, then add a little
more, according to discretion. Take after of clear Turpentine three drams, of
old clear oil six ounces, let these be boiled in a double vessel unto the
consumption of the wine, after the strayning and clear purging of it, from the
sedyment, power the oil into a glass.

The oil of Hypericon, learned of John Tanwyler the younger, a singular
Chyrurgian in the City of Auguste: take of the flowers of Hypericon or S.
John's woort, four ounces, these infuse in red wine for fowreteene days,
after boil these a little, which after the strayning forth, put in other
fresh flowers, unto the quantity of four ounces, of the oil Olyue half a
pynt, let these stand to infuse other eight days, which after strain, adding
to it of the juice of yarrow two ounces, of the earth worms washed in white
wine, two ounces, of Turpentyne one ounce and a half, of Saffron half a dram,
of Masticke six drams, of Myrre, and Olibanum, of each two drams, of
Opopanax, and of Sarcocolla, of each two drams and a half, of madder three
drams, let all these boil together, unto the consumpcion of the wine and
juice: which after the strayning, keep close stopped in a glass.

A compounde oil of Hypericon, borrowed out of the wonderful practices of
the Greek Leonarde Fiorauant, which avails and cures by a marvelous manner
wounds, especially of the sinewie parts: in that it closes them, and
brings those to a scarre, without sign to be plainlye seen. This also
dissolueth bruses, avails against poison, and helps any crude kind of
venymous Ague, by annoynting all the pacientes body, without omytting any
part: and many other virtues has this oil, which for breuitye are here
omytted: the making of which, is on this wise. Take of the Flowers, Leaves,
Stalks, and roots of Saint John's woort, as much as you will, which stamp
together in a mortar, stieping it after in the best white wine, as much as will
well cover the substance, the same let stand in the Sun for ten whole
days, pouring into it after of oil Olyue, as much as the wayght of the whole
with the wine, these then let stand in the Sun for other ten days: herein
considering, that the oil before be wayed, whereby a just wayght of it may be
known. This done, add for every pound of the oil, two ounces of good
Turpentyne, of Saffron one dram to every pound, of the Nutmegs and Cloves, of
each half an ounce to every pound, of Myrre, and Rosen of the Pyne tree, of
each fifteen ounces for every pound, of Vitecella two ounces for every
pound: let all these be put into a body of glass, well incorporated together,
which after set into Balneo Mariae, letting it there boil, with the head close
set on, and the Receauer artly luted to the nose of the head. The note when
this is sufficiently boiled, when the head distylleth no more forth, and this
will be within twenty hours or there about: this seen, draw forth the body,
and whiles the substance yet boyleth, strain the whole through a cloth,
keeping this lycour close stopped in a glass, as a precious iuel: for with
this (as we have above vttred) may many matters be done, so that you lay of
this hot on the upper face of wounds, with out the applying of tents within:
and in such manner doing, you shall win great praise, and have prosperous
success at al times. For the Aucthour (many and sundry wise) proved this oil,
to his estimation.

The oil of Hypericon (although the same may many ways be prepared and made)
yet this way and manner is the perfitest, invented by a singular Chirurgian of
Dadna, named Gabriell Fallopio: take of Bolellium, of Opopanax, of Galbanum, of
gum Serapinum, of gum Elemi, of each one dram, of Turpentine, of Rosen of the
Pyne tree, and of Masticke, of each one ounce, of the earth worms washed with
white wine two ounces, of Antimoniu^, of the flowers and leaves of Hypericon,
of playntaine, of the greater and lesser Consolida, of the greater and lesser
Centorie, of the yarrow, and of Canda aequina or horse tail, of each three
ounces: al these yt are to be beaten, somewhat broken before, which then myxe
together in a glass body, with so much oil (but better the same shall be, if
it be with the oil of Roses) as will well cover the whole substance, and
infused thus in the oil, let the glass stand in the Sun, for fifteen
days. This oil with the whole substance put into a Retort, which dystyll
with a soft fire, for the first that comes is a water, the next yt follows
(by a stronger fire increased) will be an oil, at the coming of which change
the receauer, and maintain the fire unto the end of the work: the
distyllacion ended, add the water and oil together in a glased pan, which
boil for an hour: to which after add one ounce of Madder, of Graua sina
half an ounce, of Saffron two drams, and a handful of the flowers of S. John's
woort, putting it again into the glass, where the whole substance standing in
ye Sun was. But if you will make a most precious oil of it, burye the glass
with the lycour in the earth or horse doong, for six months: of which after
apply on any wound, and you shall then see a miraculous working of this oil,
for it seaseth the pain of wounds, it dries up, cleanses, and comfort,
and does the same which may be wrought by any, and is especially profitable to
wounds of the synewes. The use of this oil is, that it ought to be applied
hot on the grieved places.

Another mastryall composition, of the oil of Hypericon, right profitable for
wounds, borrowed out of the Italian secrets, of the abouesayd Aucthor: take
of common oil Olive, that is sweet, and pleasant of taste, as much as you
think needeful, into which put so much of the Hypericon, the flowers, and
seeds, as yt oil will well receive, this let so stand in a glass, until the
oil appears read, into which after put these: of Turpentine one ounce for
every pound of the oil, of Nutmegs, of Saffron, and of Beniamine, of each one
dra^, for every pound of the oil, of claryfied Barrowes grease, two ounces for
every pound of the oil, of yarrow, of read Roseleaues, of Campherie, and of
Cummine, of each one ounce and a half, for every pound of the oil, of the best
wine two ounces, for every pound: let these infuse together, for the space of a
month, after shyft all the substance into a glass body, with a cover which
set into Balneo, letting the substance there boil, unto the co^sumption of the
wine, and dryness of the herbs: after the taking forth, strain the whole
through a lynnen cloth, which preserve in a glass close stopped. This oil is
marvelous, used on wounds: if so it be applied hot with lint, or a fine
lynne^ cloth upon yt wou^d. This oil also avails against poison, and helps
Petechiae, and swellings or knobs, by anointing of it on the places, and that
with expedicion. And with this oil has ye Author done many singular
practices, to his high co^me^datio^.

An oil of the Orrenge flowers, take Melone seeds well broken, so many as you
will, of these straw a part in yt bottom of a broad or gallie glass, on which
straw a bed of the flowers of yt Orrenges, upon that straw another course of
the seeds: which done, let them so stand for a day, after the throwing away of
the flowers, put in fresh flowers to ye seeds, in like order as above taught:
this do for sundry days together, in shyfting the flowers, until the seeds
have purchased the virtue and savor of the Orrendge flowers, which sprincled
and wette somewhat with good Rosewater, put up into swear lynnen bags, these
wring hard in a press, pressing the oil.

The oil of the Iasemyne flowers may in a like manner be purchased, by
ordering the flowers as above uttered: and if you think the yield not
sufficient at a time, then may you increase the same (in my opinion) with the
iourdaine Almondes clean scraped, and broken after discrecion.

An oil of the Damask Roses, may in a like manner be obtained: if so be you
break Almondes into small parts, being clean scraped before (and not
blaunched) and ordered as above taught, of the oil of Orrendge flowers: which
after put into bags, press forth an oil.

An oil of Roses by sunning, is prepared and made on this wise, as Rogerius in
his fowrth treatise and eight Chapter instructs. Take the Flowers of green
Roses, and fill the glass with the flowers and oil, in such manner: that to
one pound of Roseleaues, be two pounds of oil added, which dilygently
stopped, set the glass in the Sun, for forty days, sturring about the
flowers once a day. After such a decoction, strain it through a Lynnen
cloth, into a Basin of fair cold water, and labor or stir the oil about
with a Hasill stick white scraped, after shift the oil into another Basin of
cold water and sturring it, and this do ten times together. For through this
often washing, it purchases a coldness in working, and a lesser dryness. By
which it does after more cool, and moysten. Also the substance put into a
glass and set in the Sun, until the moisture which enters the powers, may
through the same be consumed. In a cold country, where through a weak heat
of the air this can not be decocted, let the glass be set into a pan of
water, that it may there softlye boil for two or three days, unto a third
part of the oil away: and if that country has not oil Olyue, then draw an
oil of fresh Nuttes scraped, with which make your oil of Roses: or otherwise
use old Nuttes scraped clean, and stieped for two days in cold water, after
let an oil be pressed forth. Whereof the Aucthour alleges, that the milk
drawn or made of fresh Nuttes, may so safely be given to the sick of the
Ague at all times, in a cold country: as the Almonde milk, in a hot
country. This oil also above taught, has sundry properties, for if a
pacient vexed with the Ague, be daily or often anointed about the forehead,
and temples, and paulmes of the hands, the soles of the feet, and on the
beating veins of the wrestes, this note only represseth the pain of the
head, and other parts, but alters the heat and procures sleep, yet this
in no case, may be done in the sick day, where you hope of the universal or
particular action. A singular remedy commended, that the yolks of Eggs be
labored with the oil of Roses, and laid plaster wise on the region of the
Liver, or upon a fyrie impostume: which being once, or twyse applied, does
marueylouslie mitigate pain, and does dissolve the fumositie, and sharpness
of matter. And the same cleanses the place or swelling to fall, and remooueth
the redness from the place. This oil also mixed, with a like wayght of the
juice of plaintayne, for a glyster in the blooddy flux, or perylous scouring
with blood is greatly commended, this does speedily bring wounds to a scarre,
and mytigateth the pain, by repressing the matter.

These oils before placed, although they be prepared and gotten without
distyllation, or but by pressing out, or otherwise made by the Sun: yet would
I not omytte them, in that these forms and ways, seem easy, comely, and to
skyll invented: and oils being thus prepared, may aptly be applied to men's
use, and vtilytie.

The oil of Violettes, is prepared and made of Violettes, in the like manner,
as the oil of Roses (out of Rogerius) and serves to like purposes, as the
oil of Roses, saving that the one ofter the new making is laxatiue, and the
other bynding. If with a like wayght of ye juice of Mercury, this oil be
applied in glyster wise, in the sharp daily, and renewing Agues, and
Tertians, the same gently does louse the belly, and easilye expels the
superfluities, by the excrements sent forth. This out of Rogerius.

An oil helping the spots of the face, which commonly we name Lyntelles:
take a sufficient quantity of the flowers of Rosemarie (which put into a
glass) burye it in hot horse doong, in a place free or safe from rain, for
thyrtie days, or unto the time, the flowers be dyssolued, after set the glass
in the Sun for o^^er nine days: putting into it then of the powder of
Pollypodie, so much as you may take up with three fyngers: of which let the
pacient every day take, for one whole month.

An oil of the Rosemary flowers not distylled, may be drawn and made after
the manner ensewing, borrowed out of a certain written book in the Italian
tongue: take of Rosemarie flowers, a good quantity, putting them into a pot,
and thrusting them hard down with a staff. After power upon of oil Olyue,
so much as shall be sufficent, that a part of the pot remain empty: which
done, close and stop dilygently the mouth of the pot with paste, that no
air breath forth. The pot ordered on this wise, set or bury in horse doong,
not made of hay: in such wise letting the pot stand, that the doong be more
then three fingers above the mouth of the pot: the same so standing for
forty days, draw after forth, and keep the oil carefully. When you will
use of the oil, strain it through a cloth. This mightily helps in the
grieffes and pains of the Loins, the ache in the hyppes, the Arms, and other
parts. It is in the like manner appointed, and prepared of the Earl De alta
villa.



Of the oils out of Seeds. The.xiij. Chapter.
SEeing that sundry Spyces, and the seeds of all herbs in a manner, be rather
of a hot, thin and ayreall substance: for that cause, it must needs
insewe, that these possess a certain oily substance. In that every oil in a
manner, has a like myxture. Now oils distylled or gotten out of seeds, as
well hot, as cold, are purchased in this manner.

These oils by distyllacion drawn in Sand, ought on such wise be prepared,
that the seeds before the putting into the Cucurbite be bruised, and the glass
very well fensed about with the lute of wisdom. And there may, six, or
seven, or eight ounces of any seeds bruised, be put into the glass at a time,
or more if you will, but this according to the greatness of the Cucurbite.
After power five, or six, or seven pyntes of the clearest water at a time on
the seeds, myxing the whole dilygently together. Which thus myxed dilygently
in the infusion, let stand to infuse, or dygest, or putryfye, in some hot
place, for certain days, as either eight, or ten days, after set the
Cucurbyte into a pot apt to the Furnace, which fill so with Sand, that the
Cucurbyte standing in it, touches not the bottom, by two fyngers breadth, and
that a good thycknesse of Sand be round about the body. And let the oil be
distylled in the same manner, and with the same vessels, as shall after be
uttered: whereas we teach the order of drawing of oils, out of Spyces and
wooddes. This by the way does the Aucthour warn you of, that at the first you
make a soft fire: and take heed, that the substance contained in the
Cucurbyte, boyleth not up unto the Lymbecke or headde. For certain seeds, as
the Annise seeds, through the thynnesse of their substance, and clammynesse
together which they possess, do myghtilye boil up: for which cause, you
may not by and by fyxe on the headde: but after you see bubbles arise, and the
vapor carried upward, take of the Lymbecke, and puttyng in a fair stycke,
stir the substance well about. And on such wise may the foam or bubbles be
resolved into vapor, and breath up, which may after with a mean fire, be
qualyfied, and increased, at the will of the Practysioner. Which thus mytygated
or alayde, set on your Lymbecke close luted about, and distyll or draw so long
until you suppose that no more oil be contained within, which by sight and
taste, you shall easilye and soon perceive. For when the drops distylling,
in taste, carry with them no more virtue of the manifest qualitye of the
seeds and Spyces put in, then must you cease gathering any more, least the
matter stick, or burn in the bottom of the Cucurbyte: this borrowed out of
Cordus.

A preparation of oils out of seeds, as of the Fennel, Annise, etc. Is
wrought after this manner, as the Aucthour gathered and learned, by the sundry
letters written unto the singular Gesnerus in the German tongue. First, I
took (says he) such a quantity of seeds, as I thought necessary, but a
five or six pounds alwaeys: those I so stamped or beat in a gross manner,
that I left no one seed unbroken, which I then powered into the Cucurbyte.
After I powered upon so much scalding or very hot water, that well covered the
seeds, and then set on the Lymbecke or head, close luted in the joint about,
and stopped the nose, that no air breathed forth: which standing to putrify
for three or four days, I after distylled with a soft fire, and a fair oil
followed (so that the water by which the oil passes, be very cold) as you
were before taught. This one matter is worthy to be considered, that the oil of
Annise seeds can not in the Summer time be distylled at all, for that their
spyrites then are over subtle, and the Fennel seeds at that time much
subtyller then them: which they euaporate through the heat in that season,
how easy so ever you make your fire under, or labor you^ distyllacion. So
that the aptest and meetest time for the dystyllacion of these, is in the
winter: in that the colder the air shall then be, so much the sooner, when the
oil shall fall into the Receauer, will it be cowrded together, like to
Camphora. Which when after you shall strain through a fair cloth, all the
water then runs through, but the oil remains on the cloth: which I after
(says the Aucthour) dyssolued in a gallie or broad mouth glass set in a
stewe or hot house, and the flewme so separated.

In the distylling of such manner of oils, must first be considered and noted,
that a man may not prepare and distyll more then half a pound at a time.
After remembering, that the matter to be dystylled, be brayed or broken in a
mortar, after a gross manner, and not in a subtle or fine powder. To this
matter then let a due quantity of pure water be powered, that it may cover the
seeds, which after power into a copper Cucurbite, and well myxed together, set
on a copper head, close luted to the body in the joint, that no air breath
forth. This distyllacion then ought to be done through a vessel filled with
cold water, the tynne or leaden pype retching to the nose of the head, whereby
the oil (in the distylling) may not burn. All which thus prepared, make a
very soft or slow fire in the beginning, until the Furnace waxes hot, then
increase your heat or fire, more and more, as the matter begins to distyll:
the water and oil all come, separate the one from the other, after art. When
this begins to distyll, you may withdraw some of the fire, and mark whether
the fire being at that stay, the distyllacion nevertheless proceeds, then
must the stronger heat or fire be left, and the other followed and mayntained:
but if otherwise, then let the heat be increased. Thyrdly must be considered
and learned, that the oil first distilleth, so that at the coming of the
second, or third oil, the receauer may be changed. And within an hours space
in a manner, will half an ounce be distilled and gathered in the receauer. So
that when no more lyquidnesse appears on high, in the Cucurbite, then will no
more matter distyll forth: and the work upon this sight, is fully ended.

The oil of Annise seeds, is thus prepared and drawn: take of Annise seeds
(for this is a common form and way, unto the distylling also of oils, out of
other seeds) one pound, these after ye gross beating, r^t into a horned or
croke necked body, to which let the receauer be artly closed and fastened,
setting the body the^ into a pot of ashes, the same distyl with a most soft
fire, and you shall gather a water and an oil in the receauer. The water you
shall draw forth by a reuoluing or repeting again of the whole substance: yt
oil remaining or tarrying behind in the body, whose use serves unto the
collicke passion, and pain of the bowels. But of the water is an electuary
made with Sugar, in the form of losings or Manus christi, of which one table
at a time, either after dynner, or after supper may be given or taken. For this
strengthens ye stomach and digestion, and puts away or expels wynd. This
at any time taken or used profits, but in ye morning especially: and helps
the lungs, the cough, and the obstructions or stoppings of choler, and helps
the inward parts. The use of it properly, is in drops.

The oil of Annise is much more in property, then the Annise it self, and in
working myghtier. Yet the natural heat, of the whole Annise seed, can never
be so exactly purchased, as to draw forth and separate a perfect substance:
although an artificial preparation may be wrought, and the same by man's
industry. For like as any meat, that the same may be taken and eaten, without
danger or harm, it needs before an outward preparation: even so must a like
preparation be wrought in medicines, that the subtyller parts be separated from
the grosser, before those be applied or taken within the body: for on such wise
prepared and ordered, may any medicine work the easier, and perform the
proper action in the body, without harm to the pacient. The use of this oil
much avails in the gyddinesse of the head, the hard fetching of breath,
proceeding through a dangerous Rewme in a manner suffocating or choking the
person, in the weakness of stom^ck and wyndinesse, in the dropsy, in other
cold diseases, and those procured of wynd. This also much profits the
members lacking blood; and the synew parts, as the stomach, the veins, the
bladder, the bellye, and the white flux of the womb this mightilye stays.
This oil may be taken or ministered by droppos, in gyuin certain drops of it
either in wine, or in breath in the morning, or in time of necessity.

The oil of Fennel seeds helps the head, but the eyes especially, the
kydneys and bladder: Tables may be made of the same, of like propertyes, and
unto the same uses: or certain drops may be mynistred alone, at any time: or
else taken morning, and evening. And an oil is drawn, out of the dry seeds,
without any other addicion, it is very pleasant and sweet of taste, as the
Aucthour proved and felt of the same: the same also in color is white, that
first distylleth.

The oil of Cummyne drawn, is profitable to wounds, joining near unto the
Mylt, the swellings of the body proceeding of a cold cause, which sometimes
happens and is the cause, why the vryne is stayed back: unto this use may a
drop, or two, be mynistred in Fern water, or in Tables, if they be made with
it.

The oil out of Henbane seeds, prepared in the same manner, as the oil of
Roses, by the description of Rogerius, avails the like, that the oil of the
apples of Mandrake does. It avails also in the hot joint aches, in
repressing mightily the pain, and causing an astonishment to those places
applied: in burning and in excoriations, it may procure and make a little
scarre, and mytigate the burnings, out of the same Aucthour.

The self same Aucthour, does otherwise prepare the oil, which works
stronger and to greater purpose in the abouesayd burning. Take on Mydsomer eve,
the tops, flowers and leaves, with which let a new pot be filled, having in
the bottom a little hole, and let the mouth of the upper pot be dyligently
stopped, which set into ye mouth of another pot standing under, the mouth of
which lute round about with the other, that no air breath forth: this done,
set the pots so deep into the earth that they may wholly be covered and buried
in the earth, after let them stand for a whole year in the ground: at the
end of which time, draw the pottes forth, and you shall find in the nether
pot a clear oil, which by the heat of the fumosities of the earth, is
drawn forth from the Henbane. This manner of instruction is found perfiter, in
the description of the oil of yuie berries (where is otherwise left in the
earth for six months) with this are members laboring and sore payned with
daily fluxes falling to them, anointed.

A compounde oil out of Seeds, procuring sleep: Take of the Seeds of
Lollij, of Henbane, of the white and black Poppie, of the Lettuce and
Purcelane seeds, of each four small handfulles, of the seeds of Faba
inuersa, which is Telephium, two small handfulles: let all these be distylled
together: of this distylled, mynister two scruples wayght at a time, with a
little or small quantity of Opium.

Of the oils out of Fruytes. The.xiiij. Chapter.
THe oil of Juniper berryes, is distylled in the same manner, as the Aqua
vitae, by pouring water upon, and it then speedilye and easilye distylleth. As
an oil first comes, and a water next inseweth: even in the like manner, as
when the Spike is distylled. But it behooves to break the berries before.
Some also distyll them in a body: this avails unto many grieffes, unto the
gripings of the belly, unto the mattering of the yard, which is as the same
were the Gonorrhaea, unto the pains or grieffes of the neck, proceeding of
Rewme. Agyrtae or Iuglers publishe marvelous matters of the same oil, which
who that list may read their tables imprinted with them. But the manner how
this oil ought to be distylled, is on this wise: I took (says the Aucthour)
a pynt full of Iunyper berryes, which I brake somewhat small, upon which I
powered pure water, such a quantity as very well covered them, after I powered
the whole into such a copper vessel, as the same is, in which the Aqua vitae
most commonly is distylled, and with a copper pype also passing through cold
water, did I distyll, having under a bygge Receauer, fastened to the pype,
which might well receive or hold four measures of lycour: and on this wise,
did the oil distyll and come, with the water. But another instrument I used
standing on the head, which I filled with cold water, for ye better cooling of
the spyrites, that they burned not in the coming. Out of the abouesayde
quantity of berryes, I never drew above three ounces of perfect oil. There is
a further instruction, for the drawing of this oil, in the first part of
distyllations.

By pressing out also in this manner or on this wise, we draw and get an oil
not evil sauouring: take of Juniper berryes broken, first myxt with burning
water, and after with oil Olyue: let them boil a little, or at the least let
these be infused together, often sturring them with a spattle, for eight days,
then pouring them into a body, distyll in a Furnace after art, the oil after
swimming above, gather into another glass: you may then put into it a little of
Angelica, or some other thing a little bruised before.

The Mandrake apples are cut into quarters, and boiled in oil, in a double
vessel, in a cold country as before of the oil of Roses, out of Rogerius was
taught, or you may otherwise prepare the Oil, by the heat of the Sun. This
Oil avails the like in contynuall and burning Agues, which the Oil of Roses
does: but in that this oil stupyfieth and mightier alters, more then the
oil of Roses does, it ought (for that cause) that the malice or hurt be
repressed, with woman's milk myxed, the same oil also avails, in the hot
aches, and gowte. This borrowed out of Rogerius.

An oil out of Bay berries, does Rogerius instruct to make many ways: take
the green berries, those break small, which after the sufficient boiling,
strain through a cloth, and keep the lycour in a glass. Otherwise, take a
quantity of ripe bay berries, and those after the finely breaking, boil with
bay leaves after art, and the same strayned, keep dilygently in a glass. Or
after the baye berries be finely broken, and infused for six or eight days in
wine, and then put up into bags, and an oil drawn by a press. Or the ripe
and fresh berryes broken, which after the putting into bags, an oil pressed
forth. This oil (as witnesses Rogerius) avails against the Colic, the
Ilyacke, and Sciaticke passion, or pain in the hyppe bone.

An oil out of yuie berryes, is gotten and made many ways, especially by
those ways taught above, in the drawing an oil out of bay berryes: this oil
purchased, avails against cold causes, especially against the cold joint
aches. Wherefore I affirm (says Rogerius) that whatsoever consists in the
yuie, avails against ache of the joints: whereof the oil, that myghtier
works, is on this wise prepared and made: take of the dry wood, the berries,
and gum of the yuie, if you can purchase altogyther, and the wood small cut,
put into an earthen pot, being full of hooles in the bottom, or at the least
having three holes passing through in the bottom, which set into the mouth of
another pot glased, the mouths of which stop close, with potters clay or
past: these two so ordered, set to deep into the earth, that the upper pot
stand wholly above the earth, and the mouth of the nether pot covered over
with the earth: which done, make a fire about the upper pot, and a black oil
will after distyll into the nether pot.

A Rape oil gotten, by pressing out: take a Rape, which after the making of a
hollow deep hole in the root, fill that hollownesse up with oil Olyue, on
which set the cappe or cover of the root, before cut of, and being thus close
stopped on the head, wrap the whole root dilygently about with towe wette,
which after bury in the hot ymbers with a few coals upon: this done, let it
there lie for half an hour: after which time draw it forth, and taking of
the cappe, preserve the oil strayned, and the root also strayned together
through a lynnen cloth. This oil avails against cleftes and choppes of the
hands, caused of cold. This borrowed out of a written book.

Out of the Pyne aple kernelles (I saw) an oil drawn or gotten by
discencion, which serves for the wrincles of women's faces: this out of
Manaraus.

An oil out of the Onyon and Triacle, provoking sweat in the pestilence, take
a big white Onyon, in the myddle of which make a deep hole, filling the same
with good Triacle, after the cappe set on and a wet lynnen cloth wrapped round
about* put it under the hot ymbers to roast for half an hour, which after ye
distilling in a Limbecke, give of this lycour, unto the quantity of two ounces,
to the pacie^t. The same effect works; six ounces of the distylled lycour*
of the green Nuts. This out of Fumanellus.



Of the oils out of Spyces: but the oil or water, to be gotten out of
Cynamon, see and read hereafter among the Barks. The.xv. Chapter.
THis general precept, ought to be observed, in ye distillacion of all spyces
in a manner: yt what spices soever you chose, bray the^ first into fine powder,
pouring upon a quantity of cunduite or spryng water, which after the same shall
be colored with the spyce, shyft into another glass, into which power other
fresh spyces broken: and so often do the same, until ye water purchase no
further color, then distyl it in Balneo Mariae, and separate after the water
from the oil: this G. Rast. But the waters and oils, which are preapared and
gotten out of spyces, ought to be done by the infusion in simple water, and not
in wine, or Aqua vitae in that those do hastily ascend, and not carry the
force of the spyces with them: but the water contrarywyse ascends not,
without the spyce. And to be brief, those are here to be applied, which are
before taught, of the oils out of seeds, in the beginning uttered to be done.

The oil out of Cloves, Nutmegs, Pepper, Mace, and Cinamo^, are made and
wrought through the spyces before broken, and put into a Cucurbite well luted,
or into a copper body, with a head set close on: which you shall distyll by a
pype retching through a vessel of cold water: for on such wise cooled, will a
water and oil come, which after separate, as the one from the other. For the
oil evermore swymmeth above the water, except the oil of Cloves, which
falls to the bottom.

An oil out of Nutmegs, unto the imitacio^ of this general rule, which a
certain Empericke teaches to be in a manner like prepared. Take a third, or
fowrth part of good Aqua vitae distylled, and the Nutmegs finely broken, put
altogether into a glass body, filled with the Aqua vitae, three fingers above
the Nutmegs, which let stand covered to infuse for.xxiiii. hours, and that the
Aqua vitae has attained a yellow color, the same then shyft into another
glass: into which pour after fresh Aqua vitae, so much as before, and the
same so often repeat with fresh Aqua vitae, until it will color the Aqua vitae
no more. Which done, power all ye Aqua vitae thus colored into a glass body,
which after the setting into Balneo Mariae, distyll according to art, that the
Aqua vitae may ascend, and the oil of Nutmegs remain in the bottom of the
body: and on such wise, shall you attain the oil prepared. In the like manner,
may an oil be altogyther distylled, out of all other spyces.

I saw, says one of Gesnerus friends, a distyllation of the oil of Nutmegs,
which was an oil drawn most pleasant and sweet, and of a great yield, by an
Alchymist, after this manner. He took the Nutmegs and brought the^ to fine
powder, on which he powered two measures of simple pure water, after he shyfted
the whole into a glass Cucurbite fensed about with yt lute of wisdom (this
lute was made with simple clay, to which he mixed the shorn floxe of cloth
tempred with salt water) eue^ as the Alchymists are wont to lute their bodies,
for the purchasing of strong water: after the head set on, he like luted the
joint of the head round about, and the joint of the receauer in the same manner,
that no spirits should breath forth. The body thus fenced he set into the
Furnace, making under a soft fire in the beginning, but next a bygger, and last
a strong fire: even as they do, which distyl the strong water: and drawn, it
was for truth an oil most excellent of savor, swymming above the water come
in the Receauer, which he dilygentlie gathered: for he affirmed the same to be
of great virtue in sundry matters.

The oil of Mace, is of a hot quality, and for that cause the use of it is
right profitable in the collicke passion, proceeding of a cold cause, and of
the rewme distylling or descending from the head: it comfort also the heart,
the stomach, and matrice. But a most singular help in especial, is felt of
this oil, in the tremblings of the heart proceeding of fear, or through the
stopping of the bladder, or matrice, it avails besides in the strangurie, and
helps all diseases proceeding of a cold matter. A three or four drops may
be ministered or taken by the mouth at a time, prepared with some other dayntye
matter, or in an iron Ladle or great spoone over the fire: or in a fresh draft
of good wine: this borrowed out of an unknown Aucthor, in the Germain tongue.

An oil out of Mace may be gotten, by pressing forth, in the same manner, as
shall after be taught, in the form and way of preparing the oil of Cloves.

An oil distylled out of Pepper, having all those propertyes, which the Pepper
it self, saving that the same burning which the Pepper procurrth on the tongue,
is not the like fealt (by taste) in yt oil. This oil of the pepper is none
other matter, then an ayriall element separated from the other elements: even
as the like we prove in the distylled oil of the vitryoll, and brymstone. In
the same manner, is the oil of pepper thoroughly separated from his burning, and
consists or has greater properties then the Pepper it self, and has the
singular property of piersing. In the Collicke passion, and parts stuffed
with much soft and clammy flewme, let two or three drops of it be ministered
or taken with broth, unto the cutting a sunder, and breaking away of it. I gave
(says a certain Practisioner) in the Tertiane ague, after a purgation, and
the bleeding by vain done, three drops of this oil, with one scruple of
Mina, two hours before the sytte began: and it let within once or twyse
taking* yea and maystred the cold, the shaking, and the Ague it self, to the
wonder of the pacient. And he further affyrmeth of it, that if this avails
not in the first giving, it wholly cures in the second time.

An oil of Cloves is like prepared and gotten as the oil of Juniper berries,
and not as the oil of Cinnamon. This oil is far sooner and easier purchased,
if the same distyllatinn be done with waters, as oyther ^ayne, or ponde waters,
or other more dayntie waters. The Cloves besides have a far more moisture
contained in them, then has the Cinnamon. There be some (yea many) which do
like prepare and get an oil of Cloves, by only pressing forth.

Take of Cloves what quantity you will, those beat in a gross manner, which
after stiepe in Rosewater so long, until you think it has thoroughly purchased
the qualities and effects of the Cloves. Then take a quantity of good
Almondes, clean and white scraped with a knyfe, those lightly cut into
pieces, which after infuse in the said water, that they may thoroughly drinck
in of the savor and taste of the Cloves, those then lay a sunder to dry:
which dried, infuse again in the said water, and those dry again, and this
do for four times together. After put into bags, press an oil forth,
which set in the Sun to purify for a time. And in this manner also may many
profitable oils be prepared and gotten, as an oil out of Musk, Amber, and
Beniamine, Storax, Cynamon and Mace. This borrowed out of a written book, of
the Aucthours.

An oil of Cloves, that is as the Cloves it self, being hot and dry, in the
third degree, which helps the stomach, the Liver, the heart, the humorall
flux of a cold cause, and all cold diseases of the stomach. The Cloves put
away Melancholy spirits, and clear the gross: but the oil does these far
excellenter, and as I may soothly affirm (says the Aucthour) it has all the
virtues of a Baulme. For this does heal outwardly fresh and green wounds. It
stateth, the yssewing of blood and water, out of wounds. It comfort within
the natural parts, it purges Melancholy blood, it comfort the heart and
head, and does especially help, the gyddynesse of the head, and weakness of
sight: if in the morning three or four drops of it be taken fasting in a
spoone, with some pleasant syrup, or other daynty thing, or in wine.

Of the oil of Cloves, writes another: who thus says, this I dare affirm,
that it has the virtues of baulme: I saw (says he) a wound closed and healed
by it, without stitching, by one Ioachimus Rhoeticus. And as touching the other
worthy effects of this oil, I (by silence over pass) which this does in
strengthening, and in restoring especially decayed strength. The oil of Cloves
druncke, to the quantity of two or three drops, in the broth, or ^ulleys of
a Capon, does then avail in the Colic, and suffocations of the womb. Tables
or losings prepared and made of the oil of Cloves, and eating of them morning,
and evening, do strengththen the head, and stay rewmes.

Of the oils out of gummes, tears, or lycours thyckned, or coniealed, and
Rosens. The.xvj. Chapter.
THE ^ COVER


THe oils of Gums, or Tears, may thus be distylled: take of G^ins, what
quantity you will, those put into a Retort set in ashes, which in the beginning
distyl with a soft fire, but after increase, by little and little, until no
more will come, and the oil power forth, which must thus be rec^tifyed: take
an other fair Retorte, into which shyft the oil, the same set into ashes,
distyll again with a very gentle fire, and you shall obtain a most pure oil,
piercing, and entering much better the powers of the body. And in the same
manner rectyfy oils drawn out of wooddes, the seeds, and Baulme. Lullius
distylleth an oil out of a gum, or gummie matter, being before well brayed,
and infused for a day, in sour verguice, or sharp vinegar.



An oil out of Masticke, is gotten by descentio^, in a Retorte: in such manner
ordered, that ye fire be made both above, and under it, and you shall so
purchase an oil of Mastick, which after may be rectifyed, as above taught. A
certain Practisioner in ye worthy City of Auguste, distylleth it on this
wise: in taking whole Masticke, and it alone puts into a Retorte luted, unto
that part showing and lying without the Furnace, which has four vente holes,
and covered above: this with a soft fire distyll: for that which comes, is a
marvelous Baulme unto wounds. Note, I have distylled (says a certain
person, forgotten of the Aucthour) Masticke by a pype, but the same would
yield no more, then a savor or taste. Yet was that Masticke, nevertheless
light and ^orous in the bottom.

The water also which remained in the bottom of the Cucurbite, was of a
yelowishe color, and bitterishe. And to conclude, the Masticke in the boiling
(then by a Limbecke) loses a virtue, powered into the same matter, in which it
is boiled. Seeing ye essence of it, yields a greater virtue by a Lymbecke.

A confection of the oil out of Frankensence, and Carabe, peradventure also
out of Assa dulcis, Caphora, styrax calaminta, etc. Take first a body very well
luted, but of small length, and the neck somewhat broken of or cut away with a
big wire read hot, that the mouth of the glass may be the wyder (for into
the mouth of it must another glass be thrust) into which power your fine
powder of Frankensence, or of Carabe, unto the weight of half a pound. After
this, prepare another white glass of Crystal, having a broad mouth like to
our pewter quarte pot, into which you may power the hot water, and into
this set the first Cucurbyte, in such order, that the same may stand upright in
the myddle of it. Then close the Cucurbite about his end, being bored in the
top, into which hole set an apt Tunnel, that may have a tappe somewhat
higher than the hole whose narrower part, and end, may regard or lean toward
the glass with ye hot water, which thus prepared and done, power the whote
water into the Tunnel, and by opening or plucking forth the tappe, the hot
water may not then distyll down* by drops softly, into the vessel standing
under: and on such wise govern your water, that ye glass be not drowned, for
through this with the help together of the vapor of the hot water, a most
sweet and pleasant oil ascends into the Lymbeck, bearing with it, or having
the very savor of the Frankensence, which without ye working with this vapor,
does most filthily smell.

Johannes Manardus in his Epistle of the woormes.xxxi. writes that he observed
two simple oils preuayling against the woormes: as the oil of Frankensence,
and oil of vitryol, prepared by the Chymis^^^ (...) art. With the first
(says h^^) let the dully be anointed: but in ministering the second, the same
must cyrcumspectly be done* least the place may be uttered with it, if inwardly
it be given or taken. But there be which dare give, a little drop of it to
drink, with Mellarate.

An oil of Myrre, that mayntaineth the person long youthful, even as the
natural baulme does: for this oil by his natural virtue defends and
preserves all things from putrefying, which are laid into it: and this also
anointed on the face, mayntaineth a fresh and comely face, and that long
youthful appearing. This besides heals wounds marvelous soon, and cures
all inward grieffes, or at the least, a marvelous number of diseases, in
giving unto the quantity of two drams at a time by the mouth. This helps the
defnesse of the ears, by pouring certain drops into them: and mightily
avails against all manner of aches, proceeding of a cold cause: it preserves
the sight, by being distylled into the eyes, and especially one drop at a time:
and marvelous singular for women payned with the grief and disease of the
matrice: and it stays the sheding of heir, by anointing the places with it:
and annoynting all the parts of the body of him which has a grievous Ague, and
procuring him to sweat, shall speedily be cured of his ague: and many other
sicknesses, does this precious oil cure, if those be wrought after knowledge.
The making of which singular oil is on this wise: take of chosen Myrre, that
in no manner is falsyfied, six ounces, of pure Aqua vitae which has no flewme
in it twelve ounces, these after the myxing together in a glass body, set into
hot horse doong to digest, for six days. After the taking forth, distyl the
substance in Balneo with an easy fire at the first, until all the Aqua vitae
be distylled and come forth: for then will the oil carry behind in the
bottom of the body, which strain through a fine lynnen cloth, the same
dilygently keep in a glass to your use. And when any person will annoint of
it on the face, to make it seem at one stay, and comeliness, a long time:
let him or her make a decoction of Nettles in common water, and whiles the same
boyleth, let the party hold over his face, that it may by the same means
strongly sweat, after in drying the face very well, annoint forthwith the
face all about with the oil: and the like manner may be observed and used, in
annoynting the breast, the hands, and other parts of the creature, in
preserving that those appear not wrincled, and ill favored: as commonly they
do in old age. This borrowed out of the worthy Greek, Leonarde Fiorauant.

This precious oil of Myrre, is otherwise prepared and made by a certain
practisioner, helping the aches and pains of the Gowte, and serving unto many
other matters before uttered. Take of new laid eggs ten in number, which after
the hard seething, cut into just halfes: the yolks taken forth, fill those
hollow places with so much fine powder of Myrre in each, as will well
contain the half of the yolke. Which done, close the two halfes of the whites
of the eggs together, and putting or laying them in a glasen vessel, set after
into a deep seller, which let there remain for fifteen days, or longer, and
a lycour will then yssew forth, which keep dilygently to your use. And if the
making of this oil on this wise, seems not agreeable to reason and art, let
them read Mattholus last increase upon Diascories, where he utters the same
words above taught, etc.

Beniamine is the gum of a certain tree, which (in the Italian tongue) is
named Lasero Cirenaico, yt grows in India, and brought to Venice, and other
parts of the world, in very great pieces, being in savor most pleasant, of
which by art, may a most pleasant and marvelous oil be drawn, serving unto
diverse diseases, and very pleasant of smell: but who that myndeth to purchase
an oil, that for smell to be woondered at, let him prepare and draw the same,
after this manner. Take one pound of Beniamine, of Leuanute, or the East Musk
one dram, of most pure and fine Aqua vitae ten ounces, of the River sand well
washed and dried before, four ounces, all these after the myxing together, put
into a Retort of glass, of such a bygnesse, that the same may remain three
fowrth parts empty, after the substance put in, which then distyl in Balneo,
until all the substance be come: and when no more will distyll forth, draw
away your Receauer, and separate the water from the oil, keeping each a part
by it self: for you shall then inioye a water right pleasant, and oil of
Beniamine myraculous. The like for sweetness and savor not seen, nor
invented of any. This borrowed out of the rational secrets, of Leonarde
Fiorauant.

An oil of Beniamine is thus m^de^take so much of the Aqua vitae, as of the
Beniamine in wayght, which after the fine beating into powder, power together
into a short body and wide, the same after set into a pan or earthen pot with
ashes, the head close luted about in the joint, and receauer the like with
past: this done, distyl in the beginning with a soft fire, until all the water
be distilled and come. Which dilygently keep, in yt the same serves unto
sundry uses: after increase the fire by little and little, and when you see the
oil distyll forth, increase the fire bygger and bygger, until you shall have
obtained all the oil. And in the end will follow a certain gum, like to
Manna, which avails unto the making of pleasant sweet water, with spryng
water, but better and sweeter will it be, being made with Rosewater. This
borrowed out of the Italian secrets, of Gabriell Fallopio.

Another oil of Beniamine well commended, take of Beniamine one pound, which
after the fine beating into powder, power into a body with a head (or rather
into a Retort) on which pour then of Rosewater two pynts: the joints after
dilygently stopped, begin to distyll with a soft fire, until all the water be
come, then increase the fire until you see the oil distyll, which appearing,
increase the fire stronger and stronger, until all the oil be gotten, which
rectify in the Sun. And in the same manner altogyther, is an oil distylled of
the Storax, both Calamita, and Liquida.

An oil by distyllacio^, of the Lyquide storax, is thus made: take of the
Storax what quantity you will, the same put into a retort, upon which power so
much of good Aqua vitae as the wayght of ye Storax, and to every pound of the
Storax, put in three ounces of river sand well washed and dried, which after
the diligent luting set into ashes, beginning first with a soft fire, and after
the appearance of ye oil, increase ye fire stronger and stronger, until al ye
oil be distilled and come. And in the end of ye distyllatio^, when certain
fumes come into the retort which savor, draw away the receauer, putting under
another, for the odoriferous oil otherwise would be spylt and lost: after
separate the oil from the Aqua vitae, which keep in a glass. This out of the
rational secrets, of Leonarde Fiorauant.

An oil of Ladanum, is drawn and gotten on this wise: take of Ladanum what
quantity you will, which brought to powder, put into a copper body tynned
within, on which power a pynt or half a pynt of Rosewater, according to the
quantity of the Ladanum, and about half the wayght, power in of the oil of
sweet Almondes: after this set on the head like tynned within, and close the
joint about, as you do in the other oils: after let the substance boil in
your Furnace, for a reasonble time. In this, it behooves to use your own
discretion in permitting it to boil, either a longer or shorter time,
according to the quantity of the substance, put into the body. And before you
draw the oil forth, let it thoroughly cool in the body, which after keep in a
glass to your use. And that the same may the longer and better be preserved,
put into it a little of roch Alome burnt, or of Ambra cana.

Of the oil of Turpentine. The xvj. Chapter.
THe ancient in times paste used alone the Turpentyne, and not the oil, yet
the oil is the thynnest part of the Turpentyne, helping the cold grieffes of
the synewes, and all cold and wyndie diseases: in the hard fetching of
breath, and shortness of wynd much auailing, if two drams of it be taken in
the morning fasting for a time together. This also is profitable in the
gathering of matter in the bulk of the stomach, and in all manner of paynfull
grief in the breast, proceeding of flewme: the Collicke passions also, and all
grieffes that comes of wind: it corrects besides, and brings to fair
pass, the scarres of wounds. Very fair is the oil of Turpentyne, and has
few Feces or grounds in the bottom of the body, after the distyllacion, for it
is in a manner all oil of it self, and the greatest part of it, is by
distillacion gotten or drawn into oil. For an oil is purchased out of it,
either by force of an extreme cold labored, or of an extreme hotenesse
done: even as out of all matters in a manner, this may be drawn.

Also this distylled oil of Turpentyne, heals scabbes, and the choppes of
them: the brain it heateth and comfort, by putting up a feather into the
nosethrelles dypped in it, and draws forth flewme without snysings: this
heals besides, the chops of women's breasts. For the recovering of memory,
defnesse, and the crampe, this obtayneth principality. That wounds may
speedily be healed, take the oil of Turpentyne, and heated by the fire, myxe
with it an equal part of Viridis aeris, which after keep to use. This learned
out of the written book, of a notable Empericke.

The proper manner of distylling oil out of Turpentine, read among the
Balsams: and in the first part, of the treasure of Euonymus.

A simple oil of Turpentyne, which has many virtues, in sundry grieffes: take
of clear Turpentyne, what quantity you will, and for every pound put three
ounces of the ashes of a hard or strong wood, which after the myxing together,
and put into a Retort, set on a Furnace: and in the beginning distyll with a
soft fire, until all the moisture be drawn: after increase the heat with a
stronger fire, until all the oil be distylled and come. Which keep diligently
in a glass, for this is the simple oil of Turpentyne, which serves unto many
grieffes: and heals simple wounds in.xxiiii* hours; by applying the oil
upon. It is right profitable and auaylyable in sinews ^hrunck, proceeding of a
cold cause: in taking one dram of it by the mouth with white wine or other
wine, procures the pacient to pysse speedily, and dissolueth all the
windynesse of the body. This also helps stitches in the sides: and
marueilously* cures pestilent Agues, by mynistring the same quantity (above
taught) by the mouth: and by annoynting the mouth of the stomach with it,
causes a good digestion. This borrowed out of the Italian secrets, of
Gabriell Fallopio.

Another of the same man's, I have distylled (says Fallopio) in Padna, an oil
out of Turpentyne in the same manner, with washed in sand myxed, which so let
that the Turpentine did not hastily ascend: this I tried, to be a marvelous
oil in wounds.

A compounde oil of Turpentine, against the crampe, and other open pains,
take of clear Turpentyne one pound, of oil Olyue ten ounces, of
Frankensen^s, of Sarcocolla, of Mastick, and of Saffron, of each one ounce, of
Panis porcini, of Cauda equina or horse tails, and of Madder, of each one
ounce, of earth worms washed three ounces, all these incorporate well together
in a pan, over a very soft fire: which then pouring into a Retort of glass;
distyll in the beginning with a soft fire: after increase the fire unto the
end of the work. Which ended, separate the oil from the water, and the oil
keep dilygently in a glass. For this is a myraculous lycour, against the
crampe: and marvelous sone heals wounds, bruses, and other grieffes of the
body. This out of the secrets, of Gabriell Fallopio.

An oil out of Turpentyne ( Larigna) marvelous against the shryncking of
members, if members be anointed with it, borrowed out of an unknown writer,
to the Aucthour. He took of Turpentyne one part, of Vitryoll calcyned one
part, of Apples dried and brought to powder without skin or paring one part,
of oil Olyueene part, of burnte Tyles one part, all these synelie brought to
powder, and myxed together, he let stand in a pot glased, in a hot place,
for fowreteene days, sturring it about each day. After the whole he distylled
by descention, in a vessel (which most diligently be luted, of three fyngers
thycknesse) and through dried it, before the occupying.

An oil to be drawn out of Turpentnie with Sage, is on this wise prepared and
done, which preuayleth against the palsy of the members, left after an
Apoplexy, or Hemiplexie. Let be put into a glass Cucurbite, named a Retorte,
of the green Sage leaves finely shred, about one pound, to which add the same
quantity^ of Turpentine, which may suffice to the forming of a certain paste
with the Sage, that the same may be handled with the hands, that is, that of
the one there may be as much, as of the other, and so much in the end, that
after both myxed there be no more, than may fill two third parts of the
glass Retort. This before remembered, that the Retort be dilygently and
strongly luted about, after use and art. Then set the belly of the Retorte
within the Furnace, fastened and luted dilygentlie in the joint after art, that
no air breath forth. And let your Receauer be of a sufficient bygnesse, and
strong, for if it shall otherwise be over small, then through the vehemency
of the spyrites, it will lyghtlie break. In the beginning proceed with a
soft fire, and with the same fire persevere or continue so long, until all
the moisture of the Sage shall be distilled and come, for after the same, there
is no danger in the force of the fire. But whiles the dystyllacion is in
doing, the neck of the Retort will be vehemently hot: when as in it shall no
other be contained or remain, then the excrementes of the Sage, and the
remnaunt or Feces of the Turpe^tine, which are none other, than that named
Colophonia* the neck shall then be cooled, although it may appear very hot,
in that no more does after ascend, which may heat the neck. Yet that the
whole distyllacion may be performed and done by a easier way, and with lesser
danger, and that the fire also may by a better means be governed according to
the necessity and will of the workman. For that cause are here two furnaces
placed, standing one by the other, of which the one serves for the fire, and
the other is for the Retort* this (for the Retort) receives the fyrie heat,
by an apt hole framed unto it, placed in the myddle between both, which may
one whiles shut, and another whiles open, according to the necessity of the
work, through the help of a certain plate or wyndowe of iron, hid between
both the Furnaces.

And when any matter is in the distylling, both the Furnaces in the mean time
ought to be closed and shut in all places, except certain vent holes in both
the Furnaces, that the fume may so pass by them. And that these Furnaces, may
appear playner to understanding, conceive this figure, here above discrybed.
With this oil (purchased by the means above taught) the payned members ought
moderately to be anointed.

An oil by distillacion of the ship pytch, anointed on places, does avail
unto the extenuation of resolved and weak members, yet does it not like
resolve, as the pytche lying a long time together. An oil out of the white
pytche, by distyllacion may be gotten, right precious: this borrowed out of an
Empericke, unknown to the Aucthour.

Of the oils gotten out of Barks. The.xviij. Chapter.
A Water or oil of Cynamon, is to be required and coueted before other waters,
and Oils: as the Cynamon it self in respect to other spyces. And the Cynamon
is of a subtle heat, through which it especially avails in the winter, in
that it strengthens then more the stomach, and marvelously puts away all
evil and corrupt moystures of the stomach, and defends it from corrupting
at all: it also sharpeneth the sight, and opens any manner stopping of the
veins and marvelously comfort the heart. But an oil distylled of it, does
answer in general to a natural baulme, which within helps all
putrefaction, and without the body cures all fresh wounds or ulcers. And the
distylled water mightily avails in all cold diseases, as well of men, as
women, especially which have a stomach so affected, that they have no
appetyte. When the spirits also be weakened, or the pacient weak, a draft of
this water, with a little of good Malmesie, o^ of the juice of the Pomegranate,
taken by the mouth, woonderfully avails and helps. Men in a manner dead, by
dropping or pouring a drop or two into the mouth, does recover the person in
a swoone or trance: especially which to old men many times happens, this is
the presentest remedy. Mydwiues and other motherlye women with us, carry of
this water with them, and use of the same with prosperous success, to young
women in the dangerous traueyle of child. For does in the hastening, and
helping forward of the birth, it is the worthyest remedy. The sundry manners,
that a water and oil may be distylled and gotten out of the Cynamon, shall by a
few examples here be uttered. Some there be which stiepe the Cinnamon before in
Rosewater, others in white wine* many draw it in a Cucurbyte luted about, but
then is the substance lightly burned. If the same be distylled in a bladder
(which the Apotetaryes use) it can not then be done without the great quantity
of Cynamon. The best manner and way of drawing these, is in the vapor of
boiling water: but as touching the rehersall of these, is here sufficient.

The Poticaries (certain years past) were wont, to stiepe the Cynamon for
certain days, in Rosewater, as that which regarded the heart, and was always
applied for the recovery of strength: and for that a little quantity of the
water, has not his smell, the water is esteemed of the lesser value with many.
And for that cause better it is, that the Cynamo^ be stieped before the
distyllation, in old pleasant white wine, for a certain time: For on such
wise prepared, the distylled water is caused the excellenter, and in piercing
more effectuous.

The manner of preparing a water out of Cynamon, which Gesnerus received of a
certain friend of his, that made great trials, and often distylled the same.
Let one pound of chosen Cynamon be gotten, which beat so fine, that the powder
may pass through a fine sieue, yet the whole you may not work to powder:
after put al into a Cucurbite, on which power of the water of Borrage of
Buglosse, of Endive, and of baulme, of each half a pynt, these let stand to
infuse in a glass close stopped, for four or five days. After out of this
Cucurbite or glass body, let the whole be shyfted into a copper body, which
you shall place in a Furnace with his head set upon, and cooling beak fastened
to after art: and beware that the body stand not over nigh the fire, but that
an iron plate full of holes, be fyxed in the myddle between, that the fire may
so vent through, and the vapor be sent upward* First kyndle or begin with a
soft fire, until the distyllacion be somewhat come, but increase after the
fire bygger and bygger, that it may the speedilyer distyll forth. When a
measure is come or dystilled forth, separate yt a part, as principal, setting
under another Receauer, for ye same which next distylleth and is gathered, is
much inferior to the first, and may serve for new Cinnamon, to be styeped in
the same. And in the same manner, may a water be distilled out of Cloves. Where
to be noted, that a manner and way of cooling be used: as when the water
begins to wax hot; to draw forth the same, and power in colder water.

A water of Cinamo^, if any will distyl by a bladder made of copper, together
with a pype fyxed to it, passing through a vessel of cold water: a great
quantity then shall be distylled together, for it would not easily be drawn in
a small quantity. But in a Cucurbite dilygently luted, this special care is to
be had, that your stuff burn not to the bottom, whereby your water then
distylling forth may savor of the burning. That if the fire shall be hoter
increased, an oil also distylleth, and so much the more, if the Cynamon shall
be stieped in good white wine. A water distylled in a Cucurbite, is gathered
white in the receauer.

I do take (says the Aucthour) ^ (...) quantity of Cynamon, even so much as I
thinck good, and put the same into a Cucurbite or glass body not luted,
together with water, to stiepe for certain days, after I distyll the
substance by the vapor of boiling water, in such sort that the Cucurbite in
which the Cynamon is contained, does not touch the water, as the like Manardus
teaches: and on such wise I distylled and gathered a clear water, not
troubled, nor the spirits also of the Cynamon heated to much. Sometimes when I
would have the water myghtyer, I then add to it a little of Gynger. And in this
manner, a certain Poticarie (with the Aucthour) distylleth the water of Cynamon.

Certain others there be, which follow and use this manner: take of water
sixteen parts, of Cynamon one part, which grosely was powdered together, the
same after put into a Cucurbite to stiepe close stopped, for a certain time,
as either four, or five days: after this set on the head close to the body,
and distyll the substance with a most temperate heat in Balneo Mariae, which
exceeds not the heat of man's vryne in the first coming forth, for so may a
most pleasant water be drawn and purchased. In the time of this boiling, may
hot water be powered in, that a like quantity continue still, for doubt of
wasting away, and you shall gather into a Receauer the distinct waters: as the
first a mighty water, the second of lesser strength, and the third feeble. And
in the like manner may all other spyces be ordered and dystilled: and many
distyllers there be, which purchase by the same doing, an oil and water.

Another manner briefly, in purchasing the water of Cynamon: take of chosen
Cynamon two ounces, of water, a fowrth part of a measure, of wine so much,
these after the myxing, distyll, as before taught.

Others prepare a water of Cynamon, after this mamer: they take of Cynamon, one
pound grosely beaten, on which they power a Sextarie and a half, that is
(about a wine quarte) of pure water, which close covered, they let stand to
infuse, for.xviii. hours, after they set the body on a soft fire, and
distylled the water, even as we do Aqua vitae, by a pype passing through a
wooden vessel or tubbe filled with cold water, which crooketh or wryeth in
an out (after the figure here playner dyscribeth) least the spyrites should
burn. This form also may serve all those distyllacions, which ought to be
done, by cooling means, through a vessel of cold water.

A certain woman well practiced, and skylfull in distyllation, prepared and
drew Cynamon water, on this wise: but it little dyffereth, from the ways
before uttered: take of the best Cynamon fynelye brought to powder in a mortar,
but not searsed, half a pound, this so charilye power into the distyllatorye
body, that none cleave on the sides falling in, on which power one measure and
a half of clear Cundui^te water, then set the headde close to the body:
after distyll in the beginning with a very soft fire, and increase the fire
by little and little, as you see the drops come, either quick, or slowly: to
the Nose of the Lymbecke or headde, let a Pype be fastened (as before taught,
and demonstrated) passing or retching through cold water, at the end of which
a Receauer fastened.

When the water thus comes, you shall need three persons to stand by, the
one and first to consider and tend the head, and pype, that he or she always
cools them, with lynnen clothes wette in cold water and applied after
discretion on the head and pype, the other standing by the Receauer, let him
observe and mark the color of the water distylling into the receauer: the
third, that he mark and tend the glass in such manner, as when need shall
be, to retche or put under speedily another Receauer, and to take the other
again, and stop dilygently. The water distilling has four differences, for
which cause it shall need four sundry receivers. The first water that comes,
is somewhat fattie and strong, and of this, is the best: and as this proceeds
in distylling, and a mylkie color begins to come, then gather the second
water, which in his fortitude lacks of the first, or is of a weaker virtue:
and when this color is vanished, and that the water coming forth, as a water
distylled out of other matters, remember and consider the third water, which
must like be gathered a part or several by it self. When this water shall be
turned into a yellowe color, or changed yellowishe, gather then the fowrth
water, which distylleth or comes forth in a small quantity: and the work is
at an end, when certain drops begin to appear of a red color, at
which sight cease, for the rest behynd is of no force, nor serves to any use
or purpose. Besides take heed, least through the force of the fire your
substance over high boyleth up, and through the same may the distyllacion
proceed amysse, and in danger of losing the whole stuff. Of which to be out
of doubt, you shall avoid and end that care (by good government) in the space
of one hour.

Three drops of this water, myxed to other waters of like property
aunswering, do help the falling sickness. If with this, the veins under the
tongue be aptly rubbed, does help the palsy persons in a short time.

Out of the Cynamon may by distyllacion, but a little oil be gotten, for which
cause in the steed of it, we may often use the water of Cynamon, especially
the same which is first gathered, for this has singular properties contained
in it.

An oil of Cynamon, is prepared and gotten on this wise, borrowed out of a
certain written coppie, of an unknown Aucthor: take of the best Malmesie
three measures, and the same distylled twyse over. After let it be a third
time, that one measure only rests in the Cucurbite. Let it be distylled
once again, that a lesser quantity may remain in the Cucurbite. Then let it
be yet once again distylled, that one measure only remains: by so often
repiticion shall you have the wine very well rectifyed, which keep to your use.
The same done, take of Cynamon what quantity you think necessary, the same
break smally, after power the Cynamon with the rectifyed wine into a
Cucurbite, that it may be two fingers above the Cinnamon. Let the Cucurbite then
be dilygently closed with a blind Lymbecke, and setting it into Balneo Mariae,
make a soft fire under for three days. Which time ended, power yt wine warely
forth, in regarding that none of the Feces or grosser substance be powered
forth withal, and the wine keep a part. Then power other rectifyed wine upon,
and work as you did with the other before. These done, mix either Aqua vitae
or both together, in a Cucurbite, which dilygently cover with a head, and begin
to distyll with a very soft fire, and so slow, that nynes stroks or knockes
with the finger, may be made between drop and drop falling: and on this wise
you shall continue, unto the time that all the wine be ascended: for in the
bottom then of the glass, you shall have an oil, which dilygently keep.

The manner of preparing and drawing a water of Cynamon, and an oil of the
same: which a most singular Physician named Master John Crato a Krafftheim,
gently opened and taught to the Aucthour. The.xjx. Chapter.
TAke of the best and finest Cynamon, which beat very small, after the tying
up in a fine lynnen cloth, and this little bag hanged within the vessel, in
which water is contained in yt bottom, but in such sort that the water
touches not the bag, and the vessel in the mean time dilygently closed,
which vessel set into a great pot, full of hot and scalding water, in such
manner, that the water, which is contained in the same vessel: in which the
Cynamon hangs, may boil: and let the Cynamon hang in this manner for a
certain space, in that or over that hot vapor, until the Cynamon has
sufficiently drawn and gathered to it of moisture. After the Cynamon thus
prepared and moystned with the vapor of the boiling water, let it be again
beaten over, and as it were, a certain paste made thereof, and the same
together with the impressed lycour, which it before gathered and received, let
be put into a Lymbecke: if need shall require, you may yet power in some more
hot water, but ye lesser water you power in or occupye, so much the worthier
water of Cinnamon you shall possess, and somewhat also of the Oil. But if you
covet to have a more store of water, and less precious, then power in the more
water, as certain (at this day) do, to purchase them rather a more gain,
then men's commoditye and health: but ordering it thus, you shall then
obtain, either none, or very little of the Oil.



A. Represents the cover of that pot, in which the Cynamon is hanged: this
cover, if it have within a head pynne, made of purpose, in the myddle as it
were, of the hollownesse, like to that pynne set in the top of a Helmette, or
rather as this figure more playnlie demonstrateth, to which the bag may
aptlyer be fastened, and hang by that means the iustlyer in the myddle. That if
the same like can not be gotten or wrought, in putting a stycke overthwart the
head of the pot, it may to the stycke be tied and hang. And the cover stop
dilygently about* that no air breath forth.

B. B. Does here represent the empty hollownesse of the vessel.

C. Does here show the bag filled with the Cynamon.

E. Expresses the tunnell pype, by which the water, if that any fails or
needs, may be powered in, but the hole after dilygently stopped.

F. F Is here the great pot full of water, which conteyneth and receives the
vessel* into which the Cynamon is put.

If the vessel receiving the lycour distylled* be large, there needs not to
draw the water by the pype of the Helmette, ex^ept the Receauer wax hot* and
then let a lynnen cloth wette in cold water be applied upon, which by that
means, shall perform and yield the same use. In the same manner, as the
water of Cynamon is prepared and drawn; may also the Annise, the Fennel, the
Cummyne, etc. be distylled and gotten.

The distylled oils of Gums, and Rosens, have another manner and way, and
require an inspection in the putrefying: for a man must dilygently beware and
foresee, that the fire be made very soft under, and the same still or
continually a like, for if the spirit once begins to breath forth, the oil
and whole work is lost. And unto use, must not the ponde, but river water be
taken.

Again the oil of Cynamon, certain do affirm, that the same to be prepared
and made of some, with Aqua vitae: and that it ought to be applied to them that
are encombred with the falling sickness, by gyuing of the oil for three
months, as daily a drop with Maiorome water, or some other like.

An oil out of the ryndes of the Orrendges dried, is made most singular: but
whether the same ought only be done in the Sun, or by distyllacion properly, as
yet is not known to the Aucthour. But this the Aucthour learned and knew, that
the Oil is whytishe and sweet smelling, and has very little sowrenesse, or in
a manner nothing at all, that the Aucthour could taste or feel.

An oil out of the ryndes of Nuttes: take the dry rynders of Nuttes, which
after the beating in a mortar, put into a Retorte very well luted about, the
same set over a fire not over bygge, and you shall then draw forth an Oil and
water out of the ryndes. After shall you separate the oil, from the water, by
Balneo Mariae. And last, you shall purge the oil, by distylling of it in a small
glass in Sand, three or four times over. This is in a manner better, then the
oil of Vitryoll, especially in the pestilence, and in poison, G. Ras.

Of the oil of Tartare, which is the dry Lies of wine prepared. The *.xx.
Chapter.
AN oil of Tartare is on this wise drawn and made: take of the Tartare of the
white wine, or Malmesse, if you can get the same (for it shall be ye better) as
much as you think good, the same calcyne in a glass Furnaces: until it be so
white as Meal: which done, prepare and get a marble stone into moist place,
this so order, that it may seem to hang, on which lay your Tartare calcyned,
that will of it self dyssolue and convert into oil, within six or eight
days, which gather and let run through a strayner or ypocrasse bag, into a
vessel or pan set right under, and this will be white of color, which keep
in a glass close stopped. This is the true oil of Tartare, but the same is
most strong and corrosiue: when any woman will use of this to bewtifye the
face, let her then myxe a little of it with some other water proper to the face,
with which wash morning and evening the face, for it corrodeth and cleanses all
manner spots of yt face, clears and whyteneth the face, and takes away the
redness of the same. This oil clears the hands, of any foul spots: it
mundifieth matrie and foul ulcers, by washing them sundry times with it. This
also helps the evil dispositions of the stomak* by taking one scruple of it,
with two ounces of rosed Honey, and three ounces of Rosewater by the mouth, in
the morning fasting. This besides serves for fixation, in Alchimye matters.
This borrowod out of the Italian secrets, of that singular Gabriell Fallopio.

Another oil of Tartare, borrowed out of the same Aucthour: take of Tartare,
cleaving to the sides of the vessels, especially of the white wine, which
beaten before, calcyne in an earthen pan, after the calcynation, beat again,
which being put into an ypocrasse bag, hang in a cold and moist seller,
setting under a deep glased pan: the same let there hang for six, or eight
days, until you see the oil come. This oil thus purchased, helps all
manner of spots of the face, makes a clear, and smooth skin: it heals
the foul scruffe, scabbes, and ryngwoormes, the redness of the face, through
a saltmatter, and such like.

An oil of Tartare* that avails against the pushes, or little wheales of the
eyes, proceeding of the Leprie. Take of Tartare beaten, three pounds, this put
into a glased pot with twentye ounces of vinegar, boil for half an hours
space, which in the mean time dilygently skym, after take the pot from the
fire, in stopping it dilygently, that no vapor breath forth. Then set the
pot again an whote ymbers or hot coals, which let there so long boil, or
calcyne, until the Tartare may be brought into powder again. The same after
the cooling, or being cold, bring to powder, which the power into a Sugar
strayner, or ypocrasse bag, and hang it in a cold and moist place, or wine
seller, some glased pan set under. The use of this oil, is on this wise: let
the pacient before enter into bathe, and at night when he goes to bed,
annoint the places under the eyes, where the wheales or bladders appear, and
cover them dilygently with a lynnen cloth, that they may not be touched of the
air before the drying up of it. This continue in like order, morning and
evening, for eight days together.

For to calcine the Tartare on a sudden, that with nyter it may be white,
which avails aygainst wartes: out of a written German book. Take of salt
peter and Tartare brought to powder, of each a like quantity. After heat an
oarthen pan not glased, into which power the nyter and Tartare, and when they
make a ^o^se^ and shal^e through burnt they become speedily white. This Tartare
thus calcyned, after the lying in a bag, you shall hang in a moist Seller,
and an Oil will dystyll forth into the pan standing under. This oil thus
gathered, does remove and put away the wartes on the hands, and other parts,
if with it they be anointed. Here is to be noted, that when you shall myxe
lesser together of nyter, then of the Tartare, the substance after the
calcynation, will not be so white: although four ounces of salt peter, with
one pound of Tartare, myxed together, may calcyne the Tartare, but not reduce
it into a whytenesse, but that the same will after remain black, out of which
an oil notwithstanding is wont also to be distylled.

Of the oils that are drawn out of woods. The.xxj. Chapter.


THat an oil may be drawn or gotten out of any woodde: take the small chyppes
of either the Guaicum, the Pyne tree, the Ash, or Juniper tree, which ordered
by two pottes, distyll after by discention (as before was taught) or happily as
you know, and you shall purchase without doubt oil abundantly. But if you
will, that it should be mightyer wrought, and that the same may be worthier,
distyl then the substance by a Retort, and your oil shall after be very fair,
and piercing, and sone entering, where so ever it is applied.

An oil out of the wood Guaicum, or (that better succeeded) out of the Polly
wood (says Manardus) I used in the French grieffes or ulcers, or in Aches:
unto which use, does the oil also out of the Juniper woodde, not a little
avail.

An oil out of the wood of the Ash tree, is prepared and made in the same
manner, as out of the Guaicum: the use of it serves, in a cold ache of the
joints, and brings to a scarre the excoriatio^s: it does properly dissolve
and put away the white morphew, and makes it appear black. And in the like
manner, may an oil be gotten, out of all wooddes: this Rogerius. Such an oil
besides, cures the palsy persons. Manardus also reports, that the oil of
the Ash wood, not only anointed, but druncke also, to help the persons
diseased with the Spleen or Mylt.

An oil out of the yuie woodde, how the same may be prepared and gotten, was
before taught in the place, where we instructed the manner of drawing an oil,
out of the Iunyper berryes, borrowed out of Rogerius.

An oil out of the Iunyper woodde, is obtained in the same manner, as the oil
out of the yuie woodde, that remooueth or represseth the causes of coldness,
and the type or figure of the quartayne: but more singular and especial it is,
by annoynting from the navel, unto the pryuie place: for it avails and has
the property, to comfort the kydneys, and matrice, and to dry up the moisture
of it, and to prepare also the party meet unto conception: this Rogerius.

The Oil of Juniper, does avail in Fistulaes, in cuttes of the skyn, in that
named, Malum mortuum: the Serpigo and Canker of the Legs, in wounds and evil
ulcers. Take of the small chyppes of the Juniper wood, a sufficient quantity,
which put into a bigg^ glased pot or great pytcher glased within, and fylling
the pot full, whose mouth ought to be narrow: after make a deep hole in the
earth, and prepare the walls of it with potters earth, after set the other
pot glased within to the bottom of the hole, and vpryght standing, having a
large mouth, and covered with a plate stricken full of small holes, after sense
and stop the mouths of these two pottes, set one within the other, with
potters earth, that no air breath forth of neither pot, which covered close
about with earth, kyndle, and maintain the fire clear for three hours,
until ye shall have yielded the best oil of the Iunyper woodde, into the
lesser and shorter vessel standing under.

An oil of the Iunyper woodde rectified, is wrought in the first distyllation
by discention: after the whole powered into a glass body, distylled over
again, and that upward, in Balneo Mariae, which although it be the slower
way, yet is it the comelyer manner, and causes a bewtyfuller oil, then either
in Sand or ashes, in that it causes the oil readyer in them.

An oil out of the small chyppes or pieces of the woodde which the Germans
name Hobelspon, prepared and drawn on this wise, helps sundry grieffes of
the eyes: take of the good mother of Pearls, which lay for a night, either in
a wine Seller, or into cold water, after let it be thoroughly dried: which
done, to this mother of pearls, put in so many chyppes of the wood as the
pot will well receive, the same draw with a fire by descention, or by (a
shorter way) kyndle the chyppes, and an oil will come, of a yellow color for
the eyes.

Of the oils gotten out of Paper, and the pieces of lynnen cloth. The.xxij.
Chapter.
AN oil out of Paper is thus purchased, take a pewter dyshe, in which put so
much paper as you mind to burn: after the paper burnt, you shall find a
yelowishe some running out of the dyshe, the same gather, and annoint the
wryncled or folded eye lyddes: or otherwise use for the spots, the whitneses,
and other grieffes of the eyes.

An oil otherwise purchased out of paper, make a long hoode rolled together of
white paper, the very top of which cut of: and the sharp end folded many
times about, hold with a pair of sheeres or long nyppers, on such wise that
the brother edge and end hang or be within the dyshe, until the half, or
greater part be burnte, yet suffer not the flame to fall into the dyshe, unto
the end of the work.

An oil out of lynnen pieces, take a fine lynnen cloth clean washed, the
same kindle or burn over a pewter dysh, and a canstick oil will come, with
which annoint ulcers: after dissolve chalk in vyneger, into the manner of a
white ointment, with which annoint round about, as a defensive to the place.



Of the oils out of Beasts, or their parts, together with an Epistle of
Arnoldus de villa noua, of man's blood distylled. The.xxiij. Chapter.
MY dearelye beloved friend Master lacobus, of late you required of me, that
I would open to you my secret of man's blood, which the dyuine power
favoring and helping me, and by my own industry (although not wholly) and by
many experiences, with the manifold labors bestowed, I have found some worthy
practices, of which I have tried, and those by my letters, I mind to utter to
you. And although I have been a long time occupied about the same, yet for that
I now wax aged, and set rancour or envy aside, for that cause, will I fully
open to you, what I many times, have experienced, by this worthy secret.
Therefore give ear, and hear the chosen secrets, and words of my mouth in
that the holy Ghost, where (it him best likes) breaths his divine gift* and
of this, let it be recluded in the pit of a penitent breast, if any will make
common, or reueile this secret, to either a foolish, or negligent person,
which the ancient in times past, so carefully and busily sought, and yet could
not attain the same yea they many ways practiced, and yet could not retche
to, nor purchase the same high secret. For it is celestial gift, revealed to
us unworthy of God, which neither ye Physicians before knew, nor the
Philosophers also which labored in the deep secrets of Alchymie, found. But
I take God to witness, that by sundry traueiles, which a I long time have
bestowed (as you know) in the secret Art of Alchymie, have now brought to
pass, that I have known by experience, such an efficacy to be of this
matter, that ye full to utter of the singular virtues of it, my wits will not
extend, and for that cause I reclude the^, in the pit of a penitent breast.

To come to the matter, conceive this secret, yt is, man's blood, and let the
blood be of healthful men, about xxx. years of age, out of which draw
according to Art, the four Elements, as you well have learned and know by the
rules of Alchymie, and diligently stop each Element a part, that no air
breath forth.

For the water of it avails in all sicknesses, as well hot as cold, in yt
the same is of a hid nature and property, and reduces unto a temperament the
quality decayed, and does especially avail in pacients corrupted in the
spiritual members, and expels poison from the heart. It has also the
virtue to enlarge, and moysten the Arters, and this I say, through the manifest
working, that it dissolueth the gross flewme contained in ye Lungs, without
harm, and the same vlcered (no mighty matter hindering) it thoroughly heals.
And briefly, all matters found in the Lungs, and spiritual members, this
singularly purges, and preserves those purged. It cleanses the blood, without
any other medicine ministered. It cures also, any flux of the belly, and
speedily delyuereth and heals any impostume of the side.

The Air also distylled of it, much avails unto the aforesaid matters, and
perhaps more, then the water, and does especially avail in young persons, that
they may persevere and continue in the same state of strength and youthful
comeliness, if they use now and than of it, and in a little quantity at a
time. And it is in a manner of such a virtue, that it suffers the blood by no
means to putrify, nor flewme to superabound or have the ouerhand, nor that
choler to burn. Further it does increase blood above measure, and for that
cause, it behooves such using it, to blede often by vain. The same Element
besides does open the vain and synewes, and if any virtue shall be deminished
in them, this reduces it unto a dew temperament. I have besides these proved
(says the Aucthour) that if a young person, before the state and rypnesse of
his age, as in the growing time, shall have the sight perished* let him every
day put one drop of this Element into the eye, and keep him quiet for a
month together, shall recover his sight without doubt. If in any member also,
any superfluous matter consists, or comes apt to putrefying, this forth
with dissolueth and takes it away, and if it finds any thing, that is
diminished, it strengthens the same by restoring. And this Element avails in
the Ap^plexie, the falling sickness, the dymnesse of sight, the mygrynie, the
gyddinesse of the head, and in all these it ought to be ministered with some apt
electuarie, auailing unto the purpose.

But the fire purchased of it, is more precious and marueylousser, and avails
unto all those, which the air helps, yea and unto that which more is, of the
man dead, that it restored to life; this is here so meant and understood. That
if in the hour of death (yet resting or ye^ing) be given of this fire, unto
the weight or quantity of a wheat grain, distempered or myxed with wine, in
such manner entered down, that it be past ye throat, it shall forthwith cause
the person to reuyue again, and shall at the instant enter to the heart it
self, in expelling the superfluous humors, and with this reuyueth the
natural heat of his Liver, and quickneth so all the parts, that it moves
the pacient and very weak person, as it were within an hour to speak, and to
dispose and utter his will, etc. And on this manner, I saw (says the Aucthour)
a miracle wrought on the noble Earl and deputy of Paris, which before lay in
a manner as dead, and immediately after he had received this down, became
again to himself somewhat, and within an hour after dyed. And this I
ministered, and tried in many the like. If old men also use of this fire every
day, in a little quantity, it makes old age lusty, and to continue in like
estate a long time, in that this cheareth their hearts, in such manner: that
they will think themselves to possess In ^enyle hearts and courages. And
for that cause this fire, is named the Elixir vitae: yet is not this the
Alchimisters Elixir* in that this is prepared and drawn of putrifyed blood. If
the same also were made of putrifyed blood, then man's nature would overmuch
abhor such a medicine. This conceive, that if the Elements shall be distilled
a second time over, they shall then be most excellent, and through them may a
man live, unto ye uttermost peryode of his life, without disease or sickness,
if of these be used, every other day. And such a skill and knowledge consists
in these last distillations, even as is in the distillations of Alchymie.

Here note of this man's blood, that I do myxe the same fresh drawn, with the
strongest and best Aqua vitae, and do distill (...), and the same shall serve,
for the first Elemente. And upon the Feces, I power another most strong water
of life, and distyll in like manner, and the same shall be, for the second
Elemente. Here somewhat (seems to lack) and this I proone, says the
Aucthour; in that he writes, let a latten cup be made, and set on a Table,
and if poison be laid or set near to it, the cup will, then change into
sundry colors, like to ma^i^lyne^* etc: and on such wise in poison known to
be there present, and a like matter of the Ague.

A most holy Oil prepared and made of dead men's bones, seruyng unto all
griefs, and often proved of the Aucthour, after a dew Purgation, take of the
great benes of dead men, breakyng them into small pieces, which after suffer
to be glowing hot in the fire, and being so fyerie hot, quence them
speedily in a pan or pot, filled with auncientoyle Olyue, and as soon as
you have put them into the Oil, forthwyth stop close the mouth of your
pot, with a proper cover, as the like we taught, in the making of the
Philosophers Oil. Which bones leave thus to stiepe and soke in the Oil for
certain hours (whether six, or eight hours, or more) these bones thus
ordered, (without any part of the oil, yet resting behind in the pot* beat
fyner to a powder, which alone put into a Retort, and distyll it like to the
Oil of the Philosophers, before taught, which keep in a glass, and use after
knowledge. For this works a mighty matter, unto all pains of the joints,
experienced.

An Oil of bones, helping the falling sickness: Take the hinder sea^^e bones
of dead men (named Sut^^^ lab^orides) ^^ose put unto calcyning, until they be
glowing hot, after let them be quenched in oil Olyue, and then brought to
powder, as before taught of the other bones above* and like used in the
distyllacion: this is a most singular medicine and remedy, by annoynting the
apt place.

An Oil of men's bones, by discention, that mightily avails against the
gowte: of experience.

An oil drawn out of the excrements of children, that avails in the foul
matterie scabbes of the head: distyll twyse over in a glass Lymbecke the
excrem^^^^s or or^ur^ of ^^yldren, and with the Oyl^ (that you shall draw of
the same) apply hot on the grieved place or (...) part: but before you ^^all
^^^ppe nee^^ away, or shave away the heir, a^^ shall wash the affected place
with sharp lie* prepared and made after this manner: take of the ashes made of
the Oak branches a reasonable quantity, on which power a like quantitye
aunswering of water, this cover with a cloth close, letting it so stand to
infuse for a day and a half, into this water then put in one handful of the
white whea^^ ears: which done, wash the affected part, once a day, with the
said water or lie, letting it dry in, after annoint the place, as above
taught.

An Oil out of man's ordure, does cure the Canker, and mortifyeth the
Fistula. Of the properties of the water, drawn out of mane ordure, read among
the waters out of Beasts.

An Oil or fatness, gotten out of a fat Goose, avails against the cold
joint ache, and gowte: and I believe also (says the Aucthor) that this
mightily helps the extenuation of members. An old Goose stuffed or filled
with swynes blood, sheep sewet, pytche, larde or common fat of the hog,
of each two ounces, of Frankensence three ounces, and a little wax: this Goose
so ordered, roste according to discretion, under which set a pan glased, to
gather the fatness distilling, the same dilygently keep, and with it often
annoint the grieved place. In the like manner, they do distyll a fatness out
of a fat whelpe, stuffed with Iunyper berryes, Bears grease, etc.

An oil or distylled licour, gotten by discention, out of the Badgare or
Graye, helping members shruncke, through synewes shrunck, borrowed out of a
written book in the German tongue. Take a Graye or Brocke, whose skin
flaye of, and cutting of the head and feet, and throwing away the bowels: this
then so ordered, put into a glased earthen pot full of holes in the bottom,
which set into another wyder mouth pot glased within, the same after bury in
the earth, when they be close luted in the seame or edge, and the mouth of the
upper pot close stopped, that no air out of either post may pass. Which
done, let a fire of clear coals, be made round about the upper pot, that
all the fat by such a means and way may from the upper, distyll through the
holes into the nether pot: and when all (by conjecture) shall be thought
distylled and come: then after with that fatness kept, annoint the shruncke
members.

An oil marvelous, gotten out of the Beuer, that helps any palsy, and
extenuacion of parts: take a Beuer, the same let be put into the strongest
Aqua vitae, that it may putrifye, which after distyll with a soft fire, with
which let the parts be anointed.

For the extenuation of a member (resolved) distyll the feet or fatness, and
the Liver of a Calfe new killed, with fine handfulles of Sage, and one ounce of
Pepper: with this anoint the member.

A marvelous oil distylled of Eggs, and experienced on many matters, the
Aucthor not known: take of the yolks of Eggs sodden hard, fifteen in
number, those break between the fingers, with one dram of Pelytorie brought
to powder, these distyl together in a glass, but first begin with a soft fire,
after by little and little increase the fire, so that in the end, let the fire
be strong, until all the lycour be drawn^ and come. Which done, take of white
Frankensence, of Castorie, and of Ladanum, of each half a ounce, althese
brought to powder, mixed with ye oil new drawn, and let these together be
distilled four times again, ever pouring the oil upon the pouders. The fire
of the first and second distillation, let it be but weak, this oil in the end
kept stopped diligently in a glass, keep to your use. For this is a great
secret, and a proved matter or practice, unto these which ensue. First this
heals the defaults and griefs of the eyes, if a drop at a time shall be
instylled into them. This mortifyeth and cures by annoynting the Fistulaes. It
heals the Canker, and ulcers hard to close, and does besides that which other
remedies cannot overcome. It destroys and maistereth the grief named the
fig or sort, like to a skabbe, which grows in the places of a man's body
where heir is* It takes away the prickings of any part of the body, and
cures the^. It heals the mattery skabbe on the head, if ye heirs before be
shaven away, and that the skin be rubbed with a lynnen cloth wette in lie,
and that dried in, annoint the places after with the oil. This also profits
the Apoplexy and especially the gowte if the places be anointed with it twice
a day, for four days together. This also speedily heals the burning of
fire, by annoynting the places with it, and cures the disease called the
woulfe.

An oil out of eggs: take six eggs, which boil unto a hardness, after the
shelles pylled of, cut away the whites, the yolks after with your fingers,
break into small pieces, those put into a frying pan, which whilst they
heat and fry stir to and fro, by little and little, with a spone, until
they begin so to melt, and run in the pan, yet does the substance remain,
of a yelow color, when the whole shall be in this readiness, power the
substance into lynnen bags, which wring hard in a press, and you shall
possess a lycour or yelow oil, with which annoint the burnings.

Others, after the yolks be so heated and molten in a pan, unto the time the
substance run about the pan, yet do they further heat, and as it were fry
the^, until they appear dry and black in the pan, which they as soon after
as these shall thus be dried, and become black, do melt them again, and by
that means cause a plentiful moisture, and black, to run forth, yet ill
savoring. The^ with a spone those which be in the frying pan, they stur
grossoly together, yt the oil and all the humor fallen to the one side of the
frying pan, may like fall into the other side, and be so gathered to use.

A red oil out of the yolks of eggs, that avails against a cold gowte,
borrowed out of a written book, in the Italian tongue. Take the hard yolks of
seventy eggs sodden, out of which let an oil be drawn after this manner: let
them be put into a frying pan on the fire, which stur to and fro with a spone
diligently, and let the same so long frye, until it be well molten, the whole
after put into lynnen bags, wette before in water, which wring hard out in a
press, and an oil will distyll forth. With this oil myxe of Pelytorie, of
Castorie, of Mas^icke, and of Ladanum of each one ounce, all these together
put into a glass Limbecke, distill after the accustomed manner with a soft
fire, the joints of the head and receauer before close luted that no air
breath forth, and the same which shall come of this distillation, repeat upon
the Feces thrice over, and with this oil, annoint the grieved place, and it
shall speedily cure it, for this is a most excellent oil proved.

A Juice or lycour, pressed out of the hard yolks of Eggs sodden, and
instilled or dropped into the ears, does much help the ringing and sounding
of the Ears. The oil of the yolks of eggs druncke, before meat, puts
away drunckennesse, how mightily any drincketh. If pain vexes a person, by
the cutting of any member, if is cured by the oil of the yolks of eggs, and
Goose grease incorporated together, unto the form of an ointment, and of it
applied upon, which does marvelously assuage the pain, and causes sleep.
This also mytigateth the pain of the privy member, anointed with it. The use
of it also serves in Alchymical works, in that the same fixes certain
medicines.

The shelles of eggs cleansed or pylled from the inner skin, out of which
Chickins have lately been hatched, beat to fine powder, of this a dram weight
druncke, wi^h Saxifrage water, does provoke urine speedily, this borrowed out
of Leonellus.

Out of the honey, is a Quintisence drawn, by Art of distillatio^ which
yields marvelous and wonderful effects, prepared and drawn on this wise:
Take of honey two pounds, that is very clear, of a good savor, and gathered
of Bees in a good region or country, which put into a large glass body, that
remains four or five parts empty, this body lute about very well, setting a
head close upon, with the Receauer luted to the Nose: after make a fire, which
maintain greater and greater, until certain whyt^ fumes or vapors come or
appear, which after be converted into water by applying linen clothes wet in
cold water and those laid on the head of the glass, and the like on the neck
of the receauer. The water distilling, will then come red as blood: which at
the end of the distyllacion, power into a glass, dilygently stopping it, and
letting it there stand, until the water come most clear, and be of a Rubine
color. The same then distyl again by Balneo Mariae, above six or seven
times, through which it loses the red color, and receives a golden color,
and it then obtayneth a most sweet and fragrant savor. This quyntisence, does
dyssolue gold, and makes it potable or to be drunck, and the like, it
dyssolueth all precious stones infused or put in it. For this is a blessed
water, which given to the quantity of two or three drams, unto a person lying at
the point of death, makes him speedily recover and come to him self again.
If with it wounds or other fores be washed, or applied wet upon, are speedily
cured. This the like heals the cough, the rewme, and sicknesses of the
spleen. If it shall be twenty times distylled over, it would render or restore
sight to the blind. I have (says the Aucthour) given it to a person of ye
palsy, xlvi. days, through which he was thoroughly cured. This besides heals
the falling sickness, and preserves the body from putrefying. To whom I gave
this by the mouth, I ministered it so closely (in that I would not be seen of
any standing about) through my which doing, and the success that followed, they
supposed me to use some manner of incantacions. This borrowed out of the greek
Leonarde Fiorauant.

An oil of Honey, serving unto the coloring of the heirs of the head yellow:
take of Honey one pound, to which add one handful of wheaten meal, these after
the myxing, distyl according to art, and draw the oil from the water, after
myxe the oil and water together in a glass, with which kembe the heirs.

The distylling of two waters, of which the one serves to the clearing and
bewtifying of the face, and the other, to the coloring and dying of the heirs
of the head yellow. Take of the best Honey one pound, this put into a great
Retort, set into sand on a Furnace, under which make a soft fire, until a
white water be dystylled and come: and when a yellow begins to distyll, draw
away the Receauer, setting under another, and increase the fire by little and
little, until certain white fumes y^^ew forth, and so long maintain your
fire, until no more lycour will distyll forth. And this last distyllacion,
will be of a Rubyne color: with which if you wet the heirs, it dies them of
the color of gold, and makes the heirs grow very fair and long. But
washing the face with the first water, makes it comely and fair, and
preserves the skin a long time, from appearing old. These two, have many
noble women used, and found great vtility by them: as well for the face, as
coloring the heir, to their great admiration, as writes the Aucthour,
Leonarde Fiorauant.

A water or lycour, prohybiting or letting the ingendring of the stone: Take of
new Honey two pounds, of Venice Turpentyne one pound, these after the myxing
together, distyll with a soft fire: let the pacient take ounces, but (I rather
judge two drams) to be taken, in the morning fasting.

A lycour or water out of Honey, drawn by distyllacion, which serves unto the
making of the heir yellowe, cytrine, and golden. Take of Salt peter, and Honey,
of each a like quantity, these after the myxing, distyll in a tynne Lymbecke:
with this water, kembe the heirs of the head. But after the w^tting of the
heir, beware that it touches not the skin, or flesh.

An Oil out of fat wax, drawn by Chymicke or Chymisticke art, most
excellent unto the softning of hard swellings: in that it mightily pierces,
softneth, and dyssolueth, and this is no common medycine in brynging wounds to
fair scarres, so that within a few days, after the closing of the wound, you
use to apply of it, least a new inflammation be caused. The oil is on this
wise prepared: take new wax (and Gesnerus judges virgin wax to be taken) and
the same especially fat, which you shall leasurely melt in some vessel* with a
soft fire, and the same you shall often wash, and thryst hard together in
wine, which you shall melt again, and into the same molten, shall you put many
small pieces broken, of Tyles made glowing hot, which may so drinck up much of
the wax, and this do a second, and third time, if need shall require, until
all the wax be thus druncke up: which done, put al your small and fine pieces
of Tyles, into that crooked body named a Retorte, the same dilygently fence with
the lute of wisdom, to which fasten a receauer, to receive the drops
distylling: the first which comes, will be a water, but in the end will a most
pure oil distyl forth, which you may use unto the mollifying and softning of
members: this Bartholomeus Maggius, in the cure of hard swellings. I learned
(says the Aucthour) of a certain Alchymister in Padua (in Italy) that Sand
very well washed, after syfted and myxed with the wax molten, would let the
rising and boiling up of the wax. There be some, which to wax, and all other
Rosen substances to be distylled, put to glass fine brought to powder* by
which means it lets the rising of the wax, but this then causes in the
distyllacion, that the oils after distylled with it, purchase a certain
strange and an ungrateful savor, through the salt Alkali, for which cause,
this ought utterly to be refused. Some say that in the distylling it makes a
noise, as it would break the glass. The oil of wax works miracles, in
the ceasing of pains, as of the gowte, and joint aches. This to conclude, is a
singular remedy to many grieffes, and a most temperate oil: for which cause,
it is highly commended in wounds, and ulcers.

An oil of wax, that heals the clofts and choppes of the hippes, and
choppes or other soreness that happen on the Tettes of women's breasts,
borrowed out of a written book in the Italian tongue: take of the oil of new
wax distylled, by a glass, in the same manner altogether, as the oil of
Frankensence is distylled: with this oil annoint the chops of the hyps, and
Tettes of women's breasts, and they are spedily healed: and it nothing hyndreth,
yt the child suck in the night time, for this takes away the pain.

An Oil of wax myraculous and dy^ine, that helps most diseases, and heals
a great wound in ten or twelve days at the most, but a little wound in three
days, by applying of the oil on the wound, and clothes wet in it on the
place, it stays also ye shedding of the heir of the head, and heard: and
given to the quantity of one dram by the mouth, mightily delivers the
Colic, and wyndy gripings of the body. The making of the foresaid oil, is on
this wise: take a glass Retort, which dilygently lute, into which put such
quantity of wax as you thinck necessary, so ^ it excedeth not ye half of the
glass, and to each pound of the wax, add four ounces of Brick in powder,
or rather more aptlye (make the wax into many small balls, with the powder of
the Brick) which after put into a Retort, setting it into a pan of ashes, or
sand, under which make a soft fire, until all the oil be come, which although
it conieale or thicken in the glass, it forces not (says the Aucthour) as
touching to his perfection: for if you should distill the oil so often over,
until it will no more conieale, it would be ^uer hot, and sharp to take by
the mouth: so that once distylled suffices, to be given inward, and to annoint
on the outward parts of the body: that always helps, and never harmeth. This
borrowed out of the greek practisioner, Leonarde Fiorauant.

An oil of Rosen simple, serving unto sundry uses, distylled on this wise:
take a glass Retort, being well fensed with lute, into this put of Rosen, unto
ye quantity of half the glass full, and to every pound add of fi^e sifted
ashes three ounces, which after set into a pan filled with sand or ashes,
standing in a Furnace, under which make a soft fire: and the first which
comes will be a water, the same setting a time, will be most clear: after it
follows an oil (by making the fire stronger) ye ysseweth forth of a Rubine
color, the same (after the settling) certain days, keep in a glass close
stopped: the water first come, serves unto sundry purposes, among which, it
myraculously cures the swellings, and choppings of the hands, proceeding of
cold in the winter time, by holding the^ first over the fume of hot water
boiling in the evening: and anointing the^ after with the distilled water, and
then drawing o^ glooues on ye hands: by which doing, this heals the^ in a
very short time. This also does spedily cure, the foul scurse of the head, the
scab and other like matters. The oil serves in many grieffes, especially in
all manner of cold grieffes, if yt they be inward, by taking one scruple at a
time, by the mouth fasting: and if any grieffes be outward, the^ annoint of it
on the places* and on great wounds* annoint only of this oil, without either
applying plaster, or tent, and it cures in a short time: and a bruise in like
manner anointed with it, does spedilie dyssolue the same: and sundry other
matters this does, not here mentioned: this out of the greek Fiorauant.

An Oil of Frogs, right profitable to such payned with the Gowte, to joint
aches, and members over febled, whose description Gesnerus received, of yt
learned Georgius Pictorius* take of oil Olyue one pynt, of river Frogs four
in number, these put a live into the oil, letting them so remain until they
be dead, after the whole powered into a new earthen pot sensed with clay, and
the mouth close stopped, boil with a soft fire, unto the parting and
dyssoluing of the flesh, from the bones. Let the frogs after be taken forth
of the Oil, and beaten in a mortar, which put again into the Oil, boiling it
after with a very soft fire, one boiling more: this done, take it from the
fire, and strain the same, that the oil may so be clear from his Fe^es, to
which then add, of clear and washed Turpentine four ounces, these by the
fire, without any more boiling, myxe dyligently together. This oil is
precious, above measure. Of the water of the Frogs legs, read among the
water of Beasts.

An Oil prepared and made of the red Serpent, that avails against
Scroffles: take a red Serpent, or Adder (as I judge) cutting of the head and
tail, the rest of the body put into an earthen pot full of small holes in
the bottom: this set into another pot, but that second set into a vessel of
boiling water, where let the water boil so long, until you suppose, that the
oil of the Serpent be distylled, into the nether pot, and that the Serpent
it self be consumed in the upper pot. With this fat* and powder of the root of
Caphars myxed together, the Scroffles anointed for eight days together, are
thoroughly healed.

An Oil of Scorpions distylled, against poisons, borrowed out of a written
book: take of the oldest oil Olyue, as much as you will, into it put of
Scorpions, so many as you can purchase and gather, in the month of Iulie, to
which after add, of white Dyttanie, of the leaves of wormwood, of Byttonie,
of Veruayne, and of Rosemary, let all these stand to iufuse together for many
days: after distyll the whole by a Lymbecke, and that gathered, keep in a
glass close stopped.

An Oil of Antes eggs, and the Nettle distylled together, with which the
kydneys and bladder anointed, provoke speedily vryne: this borrowed out of
Leonellus.

Of the Oil of Antymonie, and those which are prepared of the same, named the
glass, or precious stone, and powder. The xxiiij. Chapter.
STimini, or Stibium, of the later Practisers named: which with the Chymistes,
and makers of Oils, and sweet ointments, Antimonium, is now by great
experience, well accoumpted of and used very common among men, and with great
praises extolled. For there are three kynds of remedies, prepared of the
Antymonie: which either given within ye body, or applied without, do cause
miracles. Of which the one and first, named the oil and Quintessence: the
other and second, the Powder: and the third the glass and precious stone.

Of the oil of Antymonie. The.xxv. Chapter.
THe preparing and making of an Oil of Antymonie, which I received and learned
of a certain friend, is on this wise: take of crude Antymonie, and of crude
Tartare, of each half a pound, these after the beating together in a mortar,
or laboring on a stone, put into a pot well glased before, the mouth of which
let be close covered, with a cover and lute, that no air after breath forth,
and the pot so prepared, give to the potter, to set among other pottes to bake
in his Furnace. For by this burning it is made a paste, and blackishe or
swartishe read of color, round formed, and easily brought to powder: which
after the pot is through cold, and the pot opened, let the substance be
taken forth, beaten, and brought again into fine powder, after powered again
into another pot well glased, on which power distylled vinegar so much, that it
may lie two fingers breadth above the substance: this pot then set on a Furnace
to be heated, that the vyneger may approach and draw to a redness, and with
the same colored. And it ought to stand on the Furnace, for three or four
hours, the vyneger after shyfted into a distyllatory of glass, and other
vinegar powered upon: and the same so often do (I suppose six, or eight times)
until the vyneger be no more colored. All that colored vinegar powered forth,
distyll by a Lymbecke, that the vyneger may so be separated by distyllacion,
and the red substance abide or remain in the bottom. Which done, break
the glass, taking the whole forth, which cleaves or sticks to the glass,
and put into an ypocrase bag made of white cloth, the same hang in a cold
and moist Seller, where the oil will distyll forth drop by drop, into a glass
standing under. And in this manner, was a certain Practisioner, wont often to
prepare and make the same.

An oil of Antimonie also is gotten after this manner, communicated to
Gesnerus, by a most skillful practisioner, in the making of this matter. Let ye
Antimonie be brought into most fine powder, and powered into a glass body, on
which a most sharp wine vyneger powered, and the same distylled, stiepe on a
soft heat of fire, (least the glass break) so long time, until the vinegar
be changed read. The same thus colored, power into another glass, and on
the Feces power new distylled vinegar, until the same in like manner has
purchased a red color. These powrings upon, and addicions of new vinegar on
the Feces, ought so often to be repeated, until the powders send out of them no
more redness. The vinegar all gathered ought to be distylled with a soft fire,
until the redness beginning a little and little to thicken, seame to arise and
appear in the head. Then are the vessels to be cooled, and the red lycour,
set to dygest under hot horse doong for xl. days, until it attayneth ye
perfect form of an oil. The same some affirm, to be so sweet as sugar: to
cease al paints of wounds, and to heal them perfitly as certain write:
besides it does marvelously cure throublesome and tedious ulcers* and such
Cankred.

Another secret of Antimonie, which also unto the white work, not meanly
avails: take af Antimonie brought to powder, *xi. ounces, of Tartare
calcyned.ix. ounces, these after the myxing together, put into a goldsmythes
melting pot, which closely luted and stopped, set into a Furnace for two
hours, and it will well be calcyned, the same after it be cooled, and the mouth
of the pot opened, you shall find the substance in the pot, to be of a darcke
ashie color, myxed with certain yellow spots. This then beaten in a mortar,
put into hot water, and boiled in an iron pan, let the whole be after
distylled by fyltering, which distylleth like to lie. The first water yssewing
is read and troubled, which poured after on the Feces, will distyll and be
gathered clear. This water then euaporate in a glass Cucurbite in sand,
until the substance be left dry, or the moisture resolved. But this matter
left in the sand distyll, as first with a soft fire, after with a stronger,
until the spirits of the Antimonie begin to ascend, and begin as it were to
color the neck of the Lymbeck like gold. Then set the matter in it self, be
cyrculated. Some report, that if thynne silver plates be laid in this that they
are wholye gylded, and appear like gold, in such manner, that rubbed with the
touch stone, they yet appear as gold. But I suppose (says the Aucthour) that
it will be far better, if the first troubled water colored be kept a part,
and new powered on the Feces: for peradventure the second and third water,
would draw and carry with them more of the redness of the Antimonie, which
after gathered into one, may then be drawn with a soft fire, until the oily
redness appearing.

Another manner, which a certain practisioner often exercised and used: let
first the redness of the Antimonie, drawn many times by the distylled
vinegar, as is above taught, and let the exhaltacion of the vinegar be after
done on a soft fire, and the red powder preserved in the bottom. Let the
Quintessence then of wine be powered to it, and stand to cyrculate together for
forty days: this after may safely be ministered by the mouth, into the body.

Another manner, of the same Aucthor: take the Tartare calcyned unto a
whytnesse, let it run with the Antimonie in a gold^smit^es Crucible, this
after brought into powder, dissolve in hot water: and you shall so find a
certain redness to swym above ye water, all which gathered, and put into a
retort, a water first ysseweth, and a most bewtiful read oil after follows,
let ye same be cyrculated for *xl. days, and the best oil of Antimonie will
the^ be purchased, less corros^ue. And this manner, who that can be understand
and compass, shall attain a rytch oil, singular in many causes.

Another oil of Antimonie, learned of a French Empericke: take of Antimonie
two pou^ds, of Tartare, and of salt nyter, of each three ounces, of copper
Incisi one pound, al these grinded together, put after into a glass body, and
not vnglased body, which set into a furnace, make a great fire for three
hours. After ye cooling of the vessel by the own accord, break the vessel,
and you shall find in the bottom ye Mercury of the Antimonie separated from ye
brimstone, which you shall separate from the upper: this done, burn after the
upper face so long, until it be come impalpable, and of a red color, ye same
the^ put into a glass Lymbeck well luted, if it before be dissolved in most
strong vinegar. Which distyll after the manner and order of strong water, and
you shall possess a most precious oil like to blood. Note, that the Mercury
drawn out of the Antimonie, is a most pure gold, with which if you will
color, take then of the oil of Antimonie one ounce, of Aeris v^^i, and of
Viridis aeris, of each three ounces, of Vermilon or Cinnabaris fifteen ounces,
of salt nyter five ounces, of the abouesayd white gold four pou^ds, these put
into an earthen vessel well luted, and set in an open furnace, with fire for
six hours, and you shall then find a cytrin^ mass^: which put unto the
royal cemente, after unto Capella, and you shall obtain most pure gold. But
these royal cements, and the Capellas also, do goldsmythes prepare and make.

Another description of the Oil of Antymonie, not to be contempned,
communicated to Gesnerus by a skylfull practisioner, and very studious in these
matters. Take of Antymonie three pou^ds or four, which dyssolue in a
goldsmythes pot, that it may ru^ne. After power a measure of vinegar, into an
earthen glased vessel: which done, and the Antymonie molten, let him then
instyll by great care and dyligence, a little of this molten Antymonie into the
vinegar (taking diligent care, that you instyll not to much at one time, in
that the vessel then breaking, you should lose both oil and your labor) and
a red fume will breath forth, and the vinegar also will become so red as blood.
So that by times, and a little and little, and even by drops as it were, must the
whole Antimonie be thus instilled. For ye same is in a glass body, that the
vinegar floting above it, must always be separated, and so often, as it is
molten in the goldsmythes vessel. The Antimonie then must be again molten in
the Crucible, as before, and as the same shall be molten, it must then by little
and lytl^ ^e instylled into the vinegar* as above taught, and the same ought to
be repeated seven times, that it may so draw and gather both the property and
redness. The vinegar is consumed by the same order, and for that cause must
other vinegar be powered upon (for if the pot or vessel shall remain either
empty, or be over filled, the vessel breaks: for which cause, you must
especially take heed of the excess) least the vessel by such means
breaks. That if it shall be repeated seven times, let the red vinegar in a
glass body dilygently luted, be distilled in ashes: and a white vinegar will
yssew, but the oil remains behynd in the bottom. Which on this wise done,
and the spring or Cunduicte water left so with the oil for a time, that softly
powered forth, and distylled again, the savor af the vinegar may so be taken
from the oil. The same after it shall be thus twyse together ordered, that is,
the second time Cunduite water shall be powered upon, and by distyllacion shall
after separate the same, you shall then obtain a sweet oil of Antimonie, in
the bottom of the Cucurbite or glass body. But this form and manner of
dystylling, can not so well be uttered and discrybed in words, as by
demonstracion to the eye, and sight of the same done.

This way and manner also of making the Oil of Antimonie, is not to be
contempned: which as it should seame, Theophrastus Paracelsus, accoumpted for a
rare secret. He took of Antimonie half a pound, of Sugarcandie six ounces,
these brought to fine powder, distyl in sand, or in Balneo, according to art.
Of this oil take one ounce, of Aloes succotryne half an ounce, of Amber two
drams, of Saffron three drams, these after reduce into a mass, of which make
small pylles, according to discretion: let three of these be mynistred or given
by the mouth, with the conserve of Borrage, before the fytte of the Ague, and
the pacient procured to sweat, if it be possible.

I hear of an oil of Antimonie, to be distylled in the worthy City of Vlmes
in Germany, by a notable Physician, in the like order and manner, as the strong
water (or water of separation) is wont to be made. Which before wrought into
most fine powder, and myxt with a small quantity of good Aqua vitae: for thus
prepared, it may aptly be applied and given by the mouth, for the healing of
ulcers within the body. Such an oil also is exercysed and used of the
Chyrurgians, in the City of Norimberge, which applied, does forth with eat
or take away superfluous, or rotten flesh. This oil of the Antimonie is
prepared, with the salt G^mme, and Ammoniacum.

Another manner of oil there is, which a certain practisioner druncke before
me (but certain affirm the same not to be an oil, but rather a certain
washing or Lie) yet I suppose the same (says the Aucthour) to be distylled.
Others affirm it to be prepared, like the oil of Vitryoll: of which matter,
read more in that book named Coelum Philosophorum, where the manner of such a
preparing, and this oil is fully taught. And I hear (^sayth the Aucthour)
that the Chyrurgians of Norimberge do much and often use this oil.

There is besides a certain oil prepared and made, which by reason of the
redness, is named the blood of Stibium, which oil is most singular unto
creeping ulcers, and malign to cure, for this dries and takes away all the
malignity of them: and this oil is made after this manner, out of the learned
Fallopio of Metals or mines. They take (says he the Regulum of Antimonie,
which is here meant the Antimonie, five or six times molten and cooled. For
they take the Stibium, melting if, and letting it cool, which they again
melt, and cool the same, and proceed after this manner, unto the fyft, or syxt
time: so yt the Stibium which the last time remains cooled and compact, they
name Regulu^. Now they take this Regulum, and soften it on a marble, on which
they power the distilled vinegar, and when the same shall be very well softened:
they put into an ypocrasse bag to fylter, and power distilled vinegar upon,
until the Antimonie shall be wholly dyssolued and molten through, and that
nothing remains behynd in the fylter or bag, but all fyltred into the
vessel set under. They after take the strayning, or that lycour, and put it
into a Lymbeck, and dra^re forth a lycor: which drawn, there remains a
certain substa^c^ in the bottom of the Lymbeck, like to a red feces, which
they take, and put into a fyltring cloth, hanging it in a moist place, that
the feces may so melt (through the moisture of the place) into a vessel
standing under: and the same which melts and runs through, is the oil,
which otherwise is named the blood of the Antimonie, a medycine (as above
uttered) the notablest unto creeping, and wicked ulcers.

An oil of Antimonie, which is the flower of all mettalles, read in color,
as the Rubyne (for so does some, comm^nd it) it may safelye be taken by the
mouth, unto the wayght of three grains: for in taste it is sweet, pertaking
most lightly of a sharpness: he valewed four drams wayght of it, at two
Crowns. He knew little use or none of it, yet invented he (at the first) to
sell the same of a great price. I my self tasted (says the Aucthour) and
found a certain sweetness of it, and saw the redness tending unto a sanguine
color: and a drop or two let fall into water, went to the bottom. This out
of a letter sent unto Gesnerus.

Another read oil of Antimonie, the ab^^esayd person has, which I (says the
Aucthour) never saw, unlike to the first color, and of a burning qualitye,
whose smallest portion prouooked the bladder, and burned, that unto this day,
the least portion of it, dare not safely be given, through the wicked quality
not sufficiently corrected (whether of the crude quality, I can not justly
report.) This oil powered to Aqua fortis (through the vitriol, the Alome, and
salt peter) it stayneth Mercury of a yellow color. These I understood of
him, in that I could not come to the sight of it: he esteemed or valued half an
ounce of this oil: at a Floreyne. This I learned by the letters of a certain
Physician unto Gesnerus.

The oil or Quintessence of Antimonie, when the same is prepared and made
after a dew form and manner, is a most precious medycine, to be used as well
within the body, as without, and the quantity of one drop given at a time by
the mouth, either with wine or broth, or any other distylled water, does as
well empty the body by vomytting, as downewarde by syege: and this given to a
sick person, does thoroughly cure him of any crude, and malign kind of
sickness: as by trial, a further truth may be known. And this locally
applied on wicked ulcers, does marvelously cleanse them. The making of which
oil or quintesse^ce, is on this wise: take a quantity of the strongest
vinegar, the same distyl thrice over, to which ad of Antimonie so much as you
will, brought to fine powder, these put together in a body of glass, but let
the vyneger flote three fingers above the Antimonie, then stir them very well
together, and setting the body on hot imbers, let the substance boil a little
space, until the vinegar become read, which after the being read, let then
setle, until it appear clear, the same empty into another body, and on the
feces power the like quantity of distylled vinegar, as before taught: the same a
whiles boil, and empty after into another body: and do on this manner so
often, until the vinegar will no more be changed, and become read: this done,
the feces throw away, and all the red vinegar gathered, power into a crook
necked body or Retort, that is very well luted, and distyll the vyneger, which
will yssew forth clear and white: but take dilygent heed, when the red
drops begin to distyll: at the sight of which, draw away the receauer with
the vyneger, putting under another glass, and the fire increase stronger and
stronger, unto the end of the work, or that all the substance be yssewed
forth: for this come, is the quintessence of the Antimonie, which diligently
keep in a glass close stopped, that no air breath forth. And this is the
myraculous oil, that mortifyeth all kynds of rotten and wicked ulcers: for by
bathing on them with the said oil, are mortifyed, for which cause this
heals them in a short time, and with easiness: and given besides with any
lycour by the mouth, does heal any wicked sickness, as above vttred. So that
this Quintessence of Antimonie, may be accoumpted and named a holy lycour, and
precious for the health of man's body. This borrowed out of the singular
practyses of the greek, Leonard Fiorauant.

Of the same, does a certain Physician thus write: I find the oil of
Antimonie to be prepared and made, by Stibium most finely brought to powder,
and so often washed and infused in dystyll vinegar, until it will no more
color nor stayne the fingers, which after sublyme: for this they say, to
avail against the vlcered Canker, that it creeps no further: and so to let
or stay, that the Canker eats nor payneth any more.

An oil of Antimonie of the Alchymistes, unto the coloring of Luna or Silver,
is on this wise prepared, as I found the same written (says the Aucthour) in
an old Alchymy book. Take a a quantity of vinegar three times distylled over,
in this dyssolue of salt artyficiall one part, of salt Alkali two parts, after
the dyssoluing, distyll a strong water. Then take of Antimonie, so much as you
shall thinck needeful, pouring of the said water upon, and distilled with a soft
fire, power upon the water again, and this do for four times together. In
the end, when ye moisture shall asce^d, and that whytishe fumes appear, then by
increasing the fire stronger and stronger, you shall purchase the true oil of
Antimonie. Of this oil take three parts, of ye oil of the Sun one part, of
the oil of Mercury one part, these put unto fixing, does color and change
the Moon, Mercury, and Jupiter prepared, into ye Sun most perfect.

Of the preparation of Antimonie, that is like seen through as the glass, and
the sundry effects of the same powder. The *.xxvj. Chapter.
A Certain practisioner in the City of Vlma in Germany, chose the Stibium,
that had long strakes within, which the longer they were, so much the better he
accoumpted it: and he took away the upper part, or his spume, he after ten
or fowreteene days, grynded the Stibium on a marble with vinegar, for one day
still or continually: but in the night he lets it always dry, and the next
day he always gryndeth it again.



The precious stone of Antimonie, clear through as the Iacynt, they prepare
and make after this manner: the fine powder of the Stibium they put into a
goldsmithes Crucible, covering the same with another Crucible, which two they
close and fast lute together with strong lute, letting ye lute dry. After they
set the Crucibles on the fire and cover them wholly, until the powders melt
and run within: this mass then taken out, and brought to fine powder, they
thus commit to the fire, for two or three times together, and at the third
time, they power the lyquide mass, on a smooth Marble stone, which sone
coniealeth and is hard, and is transparent or to be seen through, even as a
precious stone or glass. It is sufficiently burned or calcyned, by twyse doing
over, and at the third time molten, and powered forth.

Another preparation of Antimonie, not much dyffering from the same, which
Matthiolus in his second edicio^ of Dioscorides discribeth, saving that he
adds also certain other things, where here nothing at al is mixed. Take of
crude Antimonie, the same grind very fine on a stone, which put into a small
Crucible, not glased, setting it unto a soft fire, that the same may putrify
and be cleansed: and stur it continually with an Iron spattle, until the
substance begin to gather up round, which then remove or take away, and grind
the like on a stone, as before, and put into the Crucible, setting the same to
the fire again, and let this so often times be done, until the powder be
changed and come unto an Ashie white color, and this will be, about the x. or
twelf, or more times. After let this be put into a like Crucible, yt the
goldsmythes commonly use, and the same Artly covered, set into coals, that
they may lie burning three fingers above the Crucible, for on such wise, shall
the substance melt and be decocted sufficiently, within the space of half an
hour, the same after take forth, and power into thin plates in a latton basen,
and cooled, keep diligently in a dry bore. For you shall have, yt you desire.

A certain preparation of Antimonie, which many hyde for a most great secret,
and this description did a notable Physician send unto Gesnerus, who was a
singular friend of Gesnerus. After that the Stibiu^ is calcyned, it must so
often be powered forth, as the same may be molten, in a Crucible. And ye same
ought so often be molten, as any impure matter remains in it, and for that
cause, the spume always gathered away. And at the last melting, but little of
the spume must be taken away, and the same part to which the spume cleaves,
(as a cloud) must be thrown away. The same is rightly prepared, yt is clear
and to be seen through, in a manner without any spot, after the form of a
Iacint, which nearer draws or approaches to a yelow, the^ unto a red and
blackish color. And the same the paler it appears, so much the better it is,
so that it be pure, without any cloud, or black spotte.

An Antimonie like to glass, yt may be seen through, and draws to a
redness, communicated to Gesnerus as a secret, by a singular Physician. First
take of Antimonie finely brought to powder (on a stone, or Marble) so much as
you think needeful, the same put into a new earthen pot not glased, which set
on a mean fire, in such order, that it may seem to lean on the one side, as
the pots that burn the lead, and to stur after the substance about with a
spatle. But when ye matter begins first to fume (of the fume shall you
beware, as you would of poison, if you be wise) which after power on a Marble,
and grind about, until the same be cold. This the^ put again into the pot,
sturring the same (as above taught) and when it begins to fume, power it
forth and grind ye same, as before rehearsed. This so often repeat, until it
approaches to a brown color, or otherwise is as black as glass, which is
performed in a manner by the tenth time repeated. The^ take of crude Antimonie
half an ounce, which melt at a strong fire, and of the brown Antimonie burnt
and brought to powder, as above uttered, four ounces, these by little and little
put into a Crucible, unto ye time the half ounce of of the Antimonie molte^,
and the whole be powered in, which so melt together, and when it shall be a
whiles thus molte^, power ye substance on a smooth and cold stone. The same
cooled melt again, and repeat the like, until it shows as glass of a fiery
color, or like to a Rubine. That if you shall diligently mark, and follow this
order, you can not err (believe me) says the Author.

Of the Antimonie thus prepared, they mix a few grains (either five, or six)
with one scruple of the juice of black Ellebere artificially drawn, or more,
and they form pills of ye same, which they name the pills of life yt do
marvelous matters, as they report. And yt the reader should not be frustrate
of any matter, nor of the preparation of this juice, for ye cause I will not
here discame to write the same, yt al me^ may conceive, that there consists
nothing in me worthy memory, yt I refrain to utter, and make known to the
world, so well of mine own practices, as those learned and purchased of ye
singular Gesnerus, to the benefit of all young students, and favorers of good
knowledge. Therefore understand, that the juice of the Ellebore is thus drawn,
let one pound of ye black Ellebore be stieped in hot water for certain hours,
the same the^ shifted forth, power upon other fresh water, and the same
repeat ii^. or v. times, and in the end that water, which is no more bitter,
boil unto a thickness of honey. About the middle of this boiling, add of the
juice of Alkakengi or winter cherries purified, two ounces and a half, but
about the end, of Annise seeds, and of Cinamo^ of each one ounce, of fennel
seeds half an ounce, of the flowers of Nymphaee or the water lilly two ounces
(where must be considered, whether these ought not to enter in the substance
but rather to be put in the last infusion of the Ellebore, and to be strayned
together, that the water alone may after be boiled unto a consumption) in the
end must a little Masticke be added, or at least in the forming of the Pylles.
This procures three or four stools without grief, and causes the belly to
remain sufficient solluble many days after. A certain person required a
great value to be given him, for a dose of these.

Another manner of preparing the Antimonie, that a certain practisioner, which
prepared the same for his Lady, had learned: and this by hap he left briefly
noted in writing: he bought (says the Aucthour) of Stimmeos four ounces and a
half, that is, one quarter of a pound and better of our wayght, the same
brought to powder and searsed: he melted ^n a white earthen pot (the mouth of
it covered with a great burning coal, so laid upon, that the same could not
fall of) upon the coals into the fire: and when this was through cold, he
dilygently considered whether any other myxture of matter consisted in it, that
approached to Tynne, or rather somewhat like Tin (being altogether of the same
kind) which many times the like happens in the Antimonie separated, and is
easily discerned and known: which unless the same be removed and cleared
away, it permysteth not the Antimonie, or rather so hyndereth, when the same is
molten, that it can not be transparent or seen clear through: but we found no
such matter in this Stimmi or Stibium: that if he had seen or known before
the like, he would then not have molten it. But now this black substance
brought again to powder, he powered into a Crucible made of the best earth,
new, and never wetted, and set on a mean fire to calcyne, unto the performance
of which matter, he used almost a day and a half, and sturred the same all the
whiles with a large spattle of iron, still and continually about (but some, as
I remember, do calcyne the same in an earthen skellet or pan) but he rather
supposed the color to come the darcker through the iron vessel (and the
whiles did a most wicked savor of Brimstone continually breath forth) through
which (he reported) ye whiles he was thus bus^ed, the same did often molest and
grieve his head, in such manner as if a fyt of sickness should incontinent
follow. Now this is perceived and known to be sufficiently calcyned, when it no
more sends forth the savor of Brimstome, and that the same appears of an
ashie color, nor can after in the calcyning be burned. The pot in the end
shows burned, and although it be cract and has a cleft in it (as the like he
reports, his pot had) yet may the same last and serve unto the end of the
work, unless the cleft shall wax and be greater. After these, let it be
taken forth, and brought again to fine powder in a mortar, and powered in a
Crucible for an hour space almost, and fire made to it for half an hours
time, this fire after dyminishe by little and little: that if there yet
consists or remains any strange matter behynd, the same may either be taken
away, or purged in the flying away. The Crucible must be covered with another
pot, that it may the sooner be molten. When this shall be through cold, add to
it one dram of Chrysocolla, which brought to powder, shall be mixed in a mortar,
and the whole powered into a crucible, that it may be molten, then occupy a long
iron spattle, or rod, in that a certain peril inseweth by touching the
substance, howsoever it were, if we may believe him. An the melting or running,
which is hardly done at the first (in that for an hour or more standing in the
fire, with great coals laid round about, and blown after with a byggs pair
of bellows, the Crucible, all the whiles appearing read hot, the substance
scarcely melted in that space (yet after the same was molte^, he powered it on a
marble or smoth stone, according to length, or rather in thick and round
plates. The color of the stone, in the first melting, is whytish. The second
melting, and all the others, succeed and come much sooner. After the first
melting, it begins next to appear and show of a darck yellow color: which
little or nothing alters, but abides in the same color in a manner, after the
sixth time molten. When the matter powered forth, is through cold, it must again
be brought to fine powder in a mortar, and molten.

Another manner of preparing the Stibium, take what quantity you will, the same
bring to powder: but first wash it well in cold cunduite water, until in the
same washing this appears pure, after wash this again in the water of Roses,
and the blessed thistle, which let the substance drink in. This powder then
set in the Sun, until it cleaves together in gobbettes or bygge pieces:
which again bringing into fine powder, power into a Crucible. The same melt,
with a soft fire: which as soon as a yellow vapor, and in the color of
Arsenicke, begins to breath forth, and that purple spumes or fomes swell or
rise up to the brymme, increase the fire, adding a certain quantity of each,
answering to the substance, of salt nyter, of the urine of a sanguine or read
man, dyssolued together with that named Hydrargyru^, and spitle of the same
man, so nygh as you can, that these may so be fyxed: which thus ordered, and
mixed in equal portions agreeable, stir about with an iron, or steel rod,
until all the green, and yellow vapors in a manner, be breathed forth. The
cla^mynesse and gl^wish cleaving to of it, you shall thus correct, in that the
same which otherwise was not persitely lyquide, but stycketh, or cleaves to
only, like glue, shall you cause to melt and run. By the side of the Crucible,
you shall set a marble stone, and in the sturring softly about with the rod,
power the liquide matter forth with a broad spattle on a smooth marble stone,
when the time requires. For the uppermost and most frothie by a great deal
power forth, the myddle (being the purer) next, and the lowest more drossie or
fuller of Feces, power last forth with the spattle, the same which runs
whole in the pouring forth, myxe not with the upper spumes, or the middle parts
mix not with the lowest (in that the myddle parts be judged the better) for
which cause, you must dyligently separate them, in pouring forth until the
whole be emptied. But after what manner and how this may be learned and known
these will sufficiently instruct and show, both in the ringing or sound, and
Silver bryghtnesse of the mydle parts. But in the sturring about and pouring
forth, least the wicked and venomous fume, and that dry spirit enters into
the mouth and nosethrelles, a man must carefully beware, for yt the same savor
is in a manner deadlye: so that many there be, which draw a bladder on the
face, to eschew this evil. Now so much as shall be of the purest, and of that
note (as in the ringing and clearenesse) put into a glass, which cover with
burning water six times rectifyed, the same distyll (whether by a Retorte) and
a red water will first yssewe, this draw away, and put under another
Receauer, gathering the same which shall distyll forth. At last, in the winter
or colder time that this may so much the better gather and thicken together)
dygge in the ground of a stable, a f^rrow of two foot in deepenesse, ye same
cast and make into a square room of three foot every way, this ground purge
with burning coals and Bay ^erryes cast among, after the cleansing of the
place, straw then horse doong meanly moist, a foot high: in which set the
glass (that the lycour is contained, which yssewed in the former distillacion)
and cover it (the pype of the same, which shall be put into the Receauer,
stop dylygently with the Philosophers lute) and at the fowrth day you shall
uncover the glass, putting about and covering it with fresh doong. And when
all is come, that will yssew forth, you have purchased the thycke lycour,
resembling or drawing nere to the lycour of Amber. Which power into christaline
and syluerlyke plates, these set abroad, in a cold and clear sky, the North
wind then blowing, that they may thycken and fryse (for these will then be like
as we have seen) in the end we have melted them with so little a heat, as the
Gum is molten: they annoint with this, desperate Cankers left as incurable, the
palsy members* the Apoplexy, and joint aches: and they inwardly mynister two
or three graynes at the most, finely brought to powder. And I hear that he
gave to the person infected with ye plague, not bleeding by vain before, which
shortly after dyed: but to another I heard, he gave the same dose, but letting
him blood before, and he escaped with life.

How the red spirits, is drawn or gotten out of Antimonie, is the most rare
secret, of a certain notable Chyrurgian. Take of pure Antimonie two or three
pou^ds, this dried and brought into fine powder, put into an earthen Cucurbite,
under which make a soft fire in the beginning, for twenty hours space, after
increase your fire somewhat hoter, the next stronger and stronger, unto the
end of.xxxvi. hours. In the belly of the earthen Receauer or Cucurbite, on
the side a high, fasten in a wooden pynne, which now and then drawn out of
the hole, does utter and express the color of the spirit breathing further
and cleaving too, as first white, next yellowishe and yellowe, and last
manifestly read. This sublymation being thus performed, and the vessels
through cold (the powder sublymed by force of the fire) let it be purged from
the Receauer either with a feather, or soft Pares foot, and put into a
Retorte, which set into Balneo Mariae, where let a second exhaltacion be
wrought, which also receive and gather in a glass or earthen receauer. For in
the same manner shall you purchase a powder wholly sanguine in color. And the
receauers into which the spirits or fume of the Antimonie breaths, ought
always o be cooled, with Lynnen clothes wet in cold water and applied upon.
For the Receauers cooled often, do by that means, draw to the^ so much ye
sooner, the fume of the Antimony. Then the bellyes of the receauers ought to be
set vpwardes, and the mouths into which the Cucurbites are fixed, placed
downewardes, as the figure hereafter playner demonstrateth. The Cucurbyte into
which the sublymed Antimonie must be put, ought to be fensed with the lute of
wisdom. But the Cucurbytes receiving, ought to be fourmed through the lute,
to endure the fire. Let their necks be long, in a manner of an arm length: and
the belly by that reason large, least stuffed or filled with the spirits it
breaks. But let the neck be so large, that the hand to the elbow may easily
be put in, and drawn out again, even as this figure here to the eye, does
more perfitly express.



A. Does here represe^t the furnace, and place of the fire, for the preparation
of ye Antimonie unto remedies, in a better manner, then Matthiolus instruc^eth.

B.B Express the Cucurbytes, containing the Antimonie in fine powder, formed
of strong potters clay.

C. The neck of the Cucurbites, te^ding upward, and carrying forth the ^ume
or spirit of the Antimonie, into the receiving vessels. And they ought to be
raised upward, and stayed on some proper shealfe, or on the like that the figure
does here show, or else on a form. The vessels in which the pegges of wood
appear, by which a judgment is bad and learned in the drawing forth of them,
how the fire ought and must be moderated, as either increased or lessened. And
these pegs serve in the steed of tappes of wood: that they may the readyer be
opened or drawn forth, whereby the color of the Antimone isublymed may be
seen, etc.

This powder ought to be ministered, but a little in quantie, at a time, yet how
much (and a perfect dose, does the Aucthour not know) to be given in the
ple^resie, the stoppings of the breast, in the purging of flewme, and in the
french disease, with ye waters answering to each, etc. There be some which
affirm, that they can cure the persons infected with ye french disease, within
three or ii^^. days, after this manner. They include or set the pacient within
a Pype or Butte (that his head may be quite without) and sitting on a stool
boored with many holes, under which they lay a thick plate of Iron meanly or
but lightly heated, and on the same straw of ye powder, that the fume of it may
ascend and compass about all the body, and enter into the body by the lower
parts, and they will the pacient thus to sweat there for three hours, if he
can bear or suffer it, but if (in no wise) he cannot, the^ let the pacient the
oftener repeat this kind or manner of sweating. For in so many days space shall
the foul disease be wholly cleared, as the pacient will exercise and use this
manner of sweating. And this, did a notable Captain report to the Aucthour,
that he saw and knew tried on sundry, to great admyration, etc.

Stimmi or Stib^um is molten in a white earthen Crucible, and set on a fire,
for certain hours (perhaps ten, yet does not Gesnerus express the same)
which after the through cooling, melt again, as before taught, and through
cold, repeat a third and fourth time, so that you shall not need to labor
it (as the Aucthour supposes) on a Marble stone, and on such wise, is his
vapor by little and little consumed, and the color in the end changed into
a yelow, and after thi^ manner, is the powder yelow, wholly subtle, and light,
which is stronger in virtue, then the glass, or the stone of Stibium. For two
or three grains of this in fine powder, shall be sufficient to be ministered at
one time by the mouth The stone of Stibium is brought to powder, yet the same
is grosser, and not so light and yelow, as the other, of which may seven
grains, and more, be given at a time.

Of the Antimonie prepared, the judgment of the learned, and of the use of it.
The.xxvij. Chapter.
OF the Antimonie prepared, which shines like to glass, does a certain
learned man thus judge, as seems by the letters unto Gesnerus: I have (says
he) thoroughly reuolued and called unto judgment the essence of the red
Antimonie prepared, and I find that this glass, not to be the same of ye old
Philosophers, of which they write so many matters, although of ye like it may
be made, in that it is more earthly and of the grosser parts, for which cause,
although we try and find out sundry properties of it or that this has, yet
does it but little possess of the self same virtues, which the ancient
ascribe to their proper glass. And this is named the glass of the
Philosophers, although (in very deed) it be no glass but rather a certain
natural Sugar, and that sweet, and clear or to be seen through like
Crystal, and cold, as the yse, coniealed. The preparation of this Antimonie,
is not the self same, or a like framed with all persons, by which reason it
does not cause nor work a like effect. That if we could attain, and purchase
a true and sure preparation of this Antimonie, it were a singular treasure
won.

Of the use of the Antimonie, as he has experienced, for on such wise Gesnerus
writes The Antimonie prepared (as Matthiolus instructs) I gave in the year
1563. and in the.xxij. day of January, to a Melancholy person, sore vexed,
which had often assayd to destroy himself, and a fleshie young man, five
graynes almost in powder, mixed with a little conserve of Roses and wine, framed
in a bale or dose (yt lay before on bed for three or four days, without
eating in a manner any meat, and could scarcely lift up his head, but with a
certain turning about, and imagined that he saw devils, through which he
came sorrowful and fearful, and with sighs calling on God) within an hour
after, yt a fat brothe was given him, he strongly vomited and within a whiles
after, he made sundry sieges or stools together, yet felt he after a mighty
^ormenting and vexing about the heart and belly, with a grievous headache sore
molesting, yt he never endured ye like in all his life time, as he reported,
(yet increased nevertheless the sickness, Melancholy lur^king in him, and he
became after marvelous thirsty and dry, to the qualifying of which, he had
drunk over much water with wine) he refrained besides supper, and slept
nothing, but lay groaning and sighing all the night, and vomited again the
morrow following, to the staying of which I gave him Rob de Ribes with the
syrup of Quinces, and the syrup of Roses, with wine and water warmed
together, and cordial matters I applied on the breast. The next day following
was given to him brothe, whether he would or no, after which he slept almost an
hour, and he began then to wax better. Nevertheless I applied to the
foreheade, a linen clothe wet in the water of Roses, Lettuce, the oil of
Roses, and vinegar, which I commanded a good whiles before to be done, but they
had neglected it. And I minded to have ministered to him of the oil of vitriol,
if he had not amended or recovered somewhat, and perhaps ye conserve or syrup
of Nymphea, I had given. The same night, I willed to be given him a little
quantity of new Triacle after myd night, if the vomiting ceased not, or yt he
slept not, but they gave him to little a quantity of it. Here note, yt I only
licking my fingers, whiles I mixed ye medicine, within two hours after, felt
an aching; and swimming or giddiness of the head, and cast much water and
spittell of my stomach, with a little gryping and pain in ye bottom of my
belly, especially of the right side, and provoking my self to vomit, I dranck
after of the syrup of wormwood warmed, and amended. The same Antimonie was
clear, and of a yelow color, and to be seen through as a precious stone, or
Glass, and lightly broken between the teeth. In the Hospital of Tygurie in
Germany, to a certain other person mad, Gesnerus gave of ye Stibium
prepared, and clear as glass, and nothing of the fumyng matter in it, six
grains in fine powder, and when he was about to vomit, he (upon the eating of
bread) sent the matter down ward so that he felt but a little pain in the
belly, yet this after wrought and caused, four sieges or stools. But the
next day after he said and complained, that his head marvelously grieved
him. Gesnerus also gave to a dropsye person, six graynes of the Stibium
prepared, darcke and fumyng a little, which after was grievously vexed about
the heart, the pain contynewing unto the next morrow, and he purged upward,
and downward, but little in quantity.

A certain notable, and singular preparer of the Antimonie wrote unto
Gesnerus, yt he had give, more the^ to four hundredth persons of every kind and
age, this his Antimonie, not only without any harm, but with prosperous
success. He gave of this to five taken with the pestilent Ague, who after
recovered to health. He also affyrmeth it to be a present remedy* in the
Plague, but who that minds to receive of ye Antimonie, may neither before,
nor after the taking of it, blede by vain. Of this his Antimonie he sent
certain parts, being of three sundry colors, differing one from the other,
of which the same, that was of a red color, be preferred before the others, in
yt the same tarried a longer time in the fire, that it might attain the
color, and so the virtue breathed forth. But for that it is a deeper red to
fire, for yt cause must a greater dose or quantity be ministered. The same
person gave of the red Antimonie, to a certain man strong of body, five
grains, but to such which were mean of strength, and to women, he ministered
only four grains. And to the persons weak of body, only three grains. But
if any shall be of a mighty strong complexion, the^ to him may six grains be
safely applied, but he thinks not good to minister above this dose, where
necessity requires, it may be ministered at any time of the day, yea at
midnight if need shall be, so that it be received five or six hours after
meat, and before or rather after the taking, to fast two or three hours. But
where necessity does not so urge or require, the aptest time in giving of it,
shall be in the morning, an hour before the sun rising. I minister (says he)
this Antimonie against al Agues, the dropsy, the Iaundise, the bloody
scouring, the Melancholy of women, rewmes the pains of the head, ye french
disease singularly, a costiue belly, the flewme and fullness of the breast and
stomach, a stinking breath proceeding of the corruption of the stomach,
poisons, fransynesse and many other diseases, these hitherto be his. Against
the falling sickness, take of the powder of Antimonie, of Dragons blood, of
Castorie, of each two drams, these brought to powder and mixed, minister after
Art, this also put under the tongue of a child, if need requires.

Gesnerus also has thus noted, by the judgment and opinion of others, of the
manner of using of the same. The dose of Stimmeos or Stibium to be prepared and
given to the strong persons, must be in weight either five or six grains, but
to persons weak of strenght, only three or four grains, mixed with Sugar
Roset, or Violets. To children being four, five, or six years old, give but
one grain weight and a half, in the Rob or syrup of Walwooort or elder
flowers. To slender old women, one grain, with milk. For this works within
an hour, or half an hour, after the taking. This also may be ministered (as
some report) to women with Child, without peril or harm (which I marvelously
doubt.)

They which mind to receive the Antimonie prepared, let them take it with a
fasting stomach, not eating any meat after, for seven or eight hours: but
within a whiles after the taking, let the person drink a little quantity
warm, of the broth of C^cerum. And keep within the house, for two days
space, and moderately drinck yt time. Some use of the Stibium being only most
finely brought to powder and calcyned, with ashes or Lyme in the same manner,
but it rather seems safer, that it be sundry times molten before.

This helps sicknesses, and first the pestilence, and those also which be
infected with it, soon after the same is ministered: it is given besides to
purge, for the preseruatiun of health. It is also a singular medicine, against
poisons drunck. It secondarily helps the^, which be continually vexed with
headache. It thirdly staieth rewms, falling to the Lungs. It fowrthly, helps
the grieffes, and pains of the stomach, and weakness of the same. It does
fifthly remedy, the dropsy. This sixthly, helps the hard fetching of breath,
and ha^dnesse to breath. This seventhly, does cure, the particular palsy. And
eyghtly, this helps ye falling sickness. Nynthly, this cures quartaine
Agues. The tenth is, that the same remedieth yt Melancholy, the frantic, and
mad persons. The eleventh, whose bodies do inclyne to a kind of Leprie, and
be affected with a foul scabbe. Many prepare and make pylles of Stibium, after
this manner. Take of Aloes half an ounce, of Cynamon half a dram, of Cloves
half a scruple, of Masticke half a dram, these artly myxed, make a mass of
the whole with Rosewater. Take of this mass, unto the quantity of three
Tares, to which myxe three graynes of the Stibium prepared, and with Rosewater
or wine, frame to the form of a pyll, which minister in two or three pylles.

A certain secret of a skylfull practisioner, in the cure of that piece of
flesh above in the nose causing a stincke, with Antimonie prepared. Take of
the powder of the Antimonie prepared, after make a tent, which annoint with an
ointment serving to the purpose, the same then roll in the said powder, and
put up to the flesh in the nose: for this speedily cures, and it is
experienced many times. After the use or taking of Antimonie, unto the
comforting of the stomach, certain are wont to give, these medicines
following. Take of the pleasant spiced wine, named Hypacras, two parts, of the
Inlep following, one part: in these mixed together, dyp a toast of white bread,
on which after straw of the powder of the electuary of the three Sa^ders, and
so much of ye pouders of the mynt and worm wood. The Inlep, is on this wise:
take three parts of ye Aqua vitae drawn through a parchment skyn wet with the
oil of Annise seeds, or with some other sweet smelling oil, and the same
distylled by the vapor only of Balneo Mariae, and of Rosewater two parts. In
the Aqua vitae let a few cloves be infused for a night, which mixed together,
add to sugar, so much as shall suffice. The French men are wont to give some
Cawdell, or broth, after the taking of the Antimony, when the person feels
him self provoked to vomit, that he may the easilyer vomit. This gathered out
of the letters, of a certain notable physician, unto the singular Gesnerus.

A certain Empericke affyrmeth, that it may at all times or always be safely
given to the sick of the quartaine: and he also vttreth certain proper
experiments of the same. For he gave of the same, to a certain dropsy person,
and had good success. Yet he affyrmeth, that this pacient at the first, was in
great danger. Of whom when we required to know the cause of this, he answered,
that he could not purchase the Antimony, sufficiently prepared.

To conclude, a certain practisioner affyrmeth, that the Antimonie is and may
safely be taken: for this kind of medicine (as he alleges) has the same
property of nature, that it rayseth or sends away no benign and profitable
humor in the body, but expels only the noyouse: and the same either by
sweat, which where it appears, occasion is then moved, either by vomit, or
by stool.

Certain do marvelously extol the use of Antimony, and suppose it to pass or
excel al other remedies, in the^ which be infected with the pestilence: but I
(says a most singular man) in his letters unto ye learned Gesnerus, which have
the Antimony as well prepared, as they have, know much harm done to many in ye
giving of it. For in ye taking of it, it grievously afflicts or torme^teth the
heart, which is especially caused and wrought in pestilent Agues, this is
certain.

Of the use of Antimony, a certain other learned man thus writes unto D.
Gesnerus: it answers in all, as gold to life, both in the preparation and
use. The Antimony in the use, but not in the preparation, that it expresses or
resembles not the Iacint, it manifesseth. I now have first prepared it, and
in the preparation of the same, certain, have tried it, as a perfect matter.
So that in their report of practice, and proper preparation trusting, gave
three graynes of it to a certain person, who within two hours and a half
after, vomyted six times, and went three times to the stool, procuring nor
leaving after it any harm.

Of the Antimony prepared, and his use, another certain learned thus writes
unto D. Gesnerus. I here send to you but a small piece of Stibium prepared, as
the learned Matthiolus upon Dioscorides instructs, of which he utters a
number of notable virtues, that if those were certain and true, who I beseech
you were happyer than I: which may by this medicine rydde or deliver my self,
from that my continual, and cruel sickness, as he reports there a story of a
certain person incombred with much windiness of body, like cured. But I have
used the powder of this (unto this day) and given it more then to twenty
persons, having sundry diseases: in all which, this first procured vomyting,
and after sundry great sieges or stools, and those without grief in the body
after remaining, as Matthiolus in the same place affyrmeth. And although
certain, of the^ became after better, yet were none wholly cleared of their
sickness. For which cause, whether the same perhaps may often be ministered, I
now doubt. But our noble persons much allow and commend it, seeing it taken in so
small a quantity, does so singularly and thoroughly purge corrupt humors. I am
wont (says he) to myxe this poison, with most pleasant conserues, and iuyces:
in such manner, that without any procurement to vomit, they may the wyllinger
and lightlyer swallow down the same. I my self (says he) have since used or
taken of it, to the quantity of two graynes, where I otherwise gave three
graynes, and for truth, without any grief in a manner: and I first vomyted
above half a pynt of green choler, with most tough flewme: after I made nine
sufficient stools, but the sickness nothing abated of these, but I rather
after a few days became worser (so yt I customably affected with the
Mela^choly disease in my fla^k) was constrained, to cease from taking any
purging medicine, whether they shall be vehementer or gentler, etc. That if any
be apter or easier to vomit upward, and harder to purge downward, or at ye
least indifferent, to this person may you safely minister two or three grayns
weight of this Stibiu^. But to the^ which hardly and painfully vomit, and have
a loose belly, or be of a slender and weak nature, this ministered, is not
without peril. The same which hitherto I have studiously observed: have I in
my letters, faithful written to you.

Again another certain Physician, writes unto D. Gesnerus, of ye use of
Antimony prepared. I send here to you Antimony, as you required the same of
me, prepared by the fire, and brought to powder, and in that I would not
purchase now the whole to send you. I for that cause send you two sorts: the
one which declineth unto a blackness, is the self same, that here with us was
often ministered to many. Of the use of this, I can report yt the same never
harmed: but I suppose there is another, far better and worthyer. They which use
the same, do give of it in the form of pyls, making an incorporatio^ with an
apt syrup. They give these pyls a little before meat, yt the meat may so insew
sone after the taking of the medicine, for by such means they affirm them to
be retained, and the working of this to be then strong. But they be many times
cast up again, before their proper working, if a longer space or time be
deferred, between the taking of the medicine, and the meat orderly dressed.

Of the oil of Brymstone. The.xxviij. Chapter.
ALthough brimstone appears dry and hard in sight, and for that may seem to
be quite without moisture, insomuch as no oily substance ca^ be drawn out of
it: yet the same for truth, is not so dry, and hot, but yt by the mixtion of
elements, a certain moisture, and the same fatty, by which truly it consists
in this form, it does and may contain to it adjoined: for an oil is
distylled out of it, as sometimes absolutely and by it self, without the
myxing together of any other simples: but sometimes other simples, are mixed
also to it.

An oil out of brimstone alone, as B^assanolus affirms, distilled and
gathered marueilously by force of fire, and yse. But ye best should be, if any
(says he) would purchase ye sweating of the brimstone, which in brymstony
places, out of hyls, as a flower sends it forth: yet it may and ought to be
named the flower of the brimstone: for as ye dew, even so does the sweat issue
forth of the stones. When I (says he) accompanied our most noble Duke to
Naples, unto the mighty Charles Emperor, in the year. 1535. and being there,
labored to see those hot bathes named Baiae, and other deep pyts of boiling
water, where among the mountains lies or is a goodly valley, in the myddle of
which does a water boil most hot, and in another Angle of it, is there a
pytte boiling, the ground or soil of this vall^e appears blew, and
compassed with mountains round about: certain Ch^^dren were there, which I
saw wype the hills with theye fingers, who after thrusting the fingers into
the mouth, lyeked them sweetly: which (when I saw) I demanded what the
children then did, and answer was made me, that they did eat Brymstone, and
that it was most sweet: then began I to taste that flower, which did sweat
out of the stones like dew: and I found this to be most sweet, insomuch that
the same morning I would eat none other thing at my dinner, saving bread, and
that most sweet flower of Brimstone: and this is the very same, out of which
the most perfect oil should be made. And in another place he writes again,
where he uses the like word* an oil of Brymstone may be distylled as well
out of the mine stone, that is, ^he Brymstone not tried by the fire, as out of
the (...) molte^ of the fire. But the best oil to be co^iectured, is drawn
out of the flower of brymstone: but out of the Brymstone tried by fire, that is
puryfied and fine^* or purged from the stones and earth, by force of the fire
is better, and out of the s^^e, which has not (...) molten or ^ried of the
fire, i^ a good oil distilled and gathered. The oil a part and simple i^
(...) any other thing, a great hea^ of (...), after the fou^ me of the head of
a Tin (...), with a Nose, being la^ge bene^^h and narrow above, ^ having a
kn^bbe to hang by which so tie up, that the same may (...) from the touching of
any other thing in that place (...) another vessel, narrower then the compass
of the (...) of white earth (...) which power your (...). And let you^ ^ell
hang so high from the vessel under it, that the smoke going out, choketh or
puts not out the fire, but that the smoke may wholly go up and be received
within the Bell, which if you hang the same two or three fingers distant, from
the vessel set under, it will well come to pass, and to the nose set a
receauer, having a little Musk in it dissolved in Rosewater, these done,
kindle the Brimstone in such manner, that the fume or smoke whiles it burns,
may ascend and rise all within the head, and the Brimstone ought to be sturred
sometimes, that it may burn the fre^^er. And this conceive, that neither any
water or oil will distill, until the time, it makes a certain thick cote
or crust within the Bell, round about, this Crust will be sometimes a whole day,
or it be thoroughly made, and the oil then begins to distill which
diligently gather. And this note, that never nothing distilleth forth, until
a thick cote or crust be gathered and made round about the Bell, and when the
Brimstone fails in the dishe, or vessel set under, then by little and little
power in of the Brimstone, that it may orderly burn, which spent, pour in
more after the same manner, and this do so long, until you see* that you have
gathered a dark red oil, which diligently keep in a glass. And this
conceive, that of five pounde^ of Brimstone, you shall hardly gather one ounce
of oil. And your Brimstone beaten must not be powered in all at once, but by
little and little, as it wa^^eth. And this is one of the rare medicynes, that so
long time has been hyd, and is also of such efficacy, and virtue, that
scarcely any man will bel^eue the marvelous effects, unless he had or
should see the wounderfull matters, that this does. For I (says the ^^mous
Leonard Fiorauant) never used this lycour, but that it singularly wrought,
especially mynistred by the mouth. And this oil thus sweetened, being very
sour or eager in taste, may be made potable or to be druncke, if it be mixed
with waters agreeable, and proper to the matter, or rather with any pleasant
Sy^ope, and the quantity at one time to be ministered, is sour graynes, unto
six, ^n^ not above. It may be incorporated or accompanied with all manner of
Electuaries, and kind of Pylles, and work a further benefit and help so
mixed, then ministered alone. This helps all sickenesses, as well the hot, as
the cold, etc. And is a most effectuo^s oil in easing of the tooth ach, and
whytning of the teeth. For thi^ ^^th vehemently dry up the moisture of them. A
certain person of great report, used the same in the french ulcers, and of the
yard, for although this in the beginning byteh somewhat, yet does it after take
away the pain and ulcer. The heat of it is qualified, with the white of an
egg beaten, and squirted in and upon, or with the ointment of Ceruse applied
upon or butter often washed. This cures also the wicked ulcers of the Gumes or
Jaws, and mouth in Children, unto Canckers, and wartes (which I in my self
prosperously have tried) and other desperate diseases. This oil of Brymstone
is applied into the Fistulaes of the fundament and Buttocke, and other members
of the body, with a syring or squyrte and the heat, if any such be, is after
qualifyed, as above taught, and it fylleth Fistulaes by the help of the white
Ellebore, and this experienced. This besides orderly ministered by the mouth
with any apt Syrup, does help the sheuering cold of the Ague, in that after
the taking, this provoke the body to sweat, and purges much matter by
vryne, it also dries up all the evil humors of the stomach, and heals all
Agues, which come by accident of cold, it dissolueth the stone in the kydneys,
and applying of it an ulcers, speedily cures the^, in that this heateth and
dries. And this oil does, all the abouesayd matters myraculously, as ye
Aucthor reports, who many times proved them, and had singular success.

Matthiolus has also a description of the oil of Brimstone, in a manner like
to this, saving that there is a certain difference of the vessels. Let a large
mouthed glass having a long tail retching out (like to yt lamp hanging in a
Church) be set into sand or Ashes in a bo^le or other vessel of wood, that the
same may stand steddie and upright. Then about the edge of the glass, let an
iron vessel be hanged (in height three fingers from the glass) being oyther
round or square, and bo^^d through in four places, where let iron wiars be
thrust down to the brim or edge of the glass, in such manner, done that ye
vessel in no manner touches the glass, but the wyars only, and above the
glass let a long and deep pot be hanged, that at the least, a foot, which
may receive the fume ascending, that it may distill again by the nether edges
of yt pot into ye glass standing under. A man must in the mean time whiles ye
Brimstone burns pour on new powder by little and little with a spone, and the
plate (whose nether part draws unto the bigness and form of the joint of
the thomb) lay in burning hot, and pour always new brimstone in until one or
two pound be consumed. That if the oil thus succeeds or comes not, in that
the Brimstone perhaps shall be over dry, the pot which inward received the
fume, set into a cold and moist place, and the oil within two days will so be
gathered.



Isabella Cortesa utters an apt manner, of the making of the oil of
Brimstone: take of cytryne Brymstone a certain quantity, which bring into fine
powder, ye same then power into an earthen pot neyled, like to that which the
Pottecarie puts his ointment into, this set vpryght, fylling it in a manner
full, or near to* After hang over a Bell of glass, like to the form of a
Lamp, as you see here figured. This done, set the vessel on an earthen
platter glased, into which then put an iron plate read hot, on the said
brimstone, and forthwith hang over the said Bell: in such manner, that it
touches not the mouth of the vessel standing under, whereby the oil may so
distyll round about, and fall into the platter* For the said brymstone does
then make a sufficient smoke al about the Bell, through which is caused, that
the oil distylleth down, and into the platte^. If so be you hang the Bell in
such order, that it (...) covers the mouth of the vessel, and be the breadth
of a knyfe haft distaunt from it, and the vessel standing in a large platter
very fair within, that the oil may fall into it, which ordered on such wise,
let so remain, until all the Brymstone be burned in the vessel. After shyft
the oil into a glass, which keep to your use.

The Brimstone (as a certain practisioner reports) does not dystyll by a
glass, hanged on high, but cleaves and sticks to the ^^^es of the glass.
For that cause, let a little Aqua vitae be powered into the glass, so much, as
will only wet all the sides of the glass round about, in rolling the Aqua vitae
to all the sides and parts of the glass round about. After let the whole
glass be ^euer^^ with a wooden boole, a sheet of paper put between, that no
air breath forth, and set into a cold and moist place for certain days,
until all the matter so settled in the bottom, and distylled by a glass
Lymbecke. Or if the whole matter be clear, power it then into another long
necked clear glass, and let it be separated, that the oils may so be
separated.

Another manner out of Sulphur vyue, which a certain Physician uttered to the
Aucthour: first the brymstone ought to be a little calcyned, but warely that it
be not burned, or set on fire, in such manner that it may almost be brought into
powder. After distyl the same by ascension, for it then easily ascends. But
he affyrmed, that hard it is, to prepare this oil: nor that he could well
discribe the manner of the same, but that a present sight in the doing is
rerequyred. Unto D. Gesnerus from a certain place, was a small piece of
brimstone sublimed sent, out of which an oil was drawn: which is the like
astringent, as the oil of vitryoll, and is rather of a watery substance, than
oily, which I marueyle at. This borrowed out of a certain Epistle, unto
Doctor Gesnerus.

Again unto D. Gesnerus, wrote an old friend, and learned man, thus of the
oil of brymstone. Let the brymstone not yet tried on the fire, be kyndled in
an earthen pan, and on the pan standing on a Treuet, hang a head, as some name
it, or a Bell (being of glass) and pargeted with lute: that it may receive the
fume of the brimstone, which within it is thyckned into an oil, and by the
pype or Nose of the Bell stylleth forth into a Receauer standing under, which
so gathers the oil distylling.

Another way: certain do make it, after another manner: unto one part of the
powder of Brymstone, they add another part of flynt stones like brought to
powder: this myxture power into a Retort, and set over a very soft fire, they
so draw a singular oil. Which oil in what manner diseases it may be used, and
with what it may be given in each, and in what quantity and how, shall
brief^y be here under uttered.

This oil is used in cold diseases, whose cause proceed and are the humors
either cold or putryfyed, or in whom much wind consists, as in rotten
Agues, Tertians* Quoti^ians, and Quartaynes: in the Pestilence, in wounds, in
ulcers, espetially hollow and wynding, in many grieffes of the brain, the
mouth, the teeth, the stomach, the Liver, the Mylt, the Matrice, the bladder,
the Bowelles, and joints: to those also which proceed, of the abundance of
humor, or of putrefying.

And a little of this oil is ministered, with a distilled lycour, or decoction
of a congruent herb, according to the qualitye of every part and disease.
This is the manner of the measure, a Hens quyl must be dypped into the oil,
and quicklyer drawn out again, and what that ha^geth on the quyl, of the
fatness or oil, the same temper in either syrup, or distylled lycour, and
give to drinck to the sick.

And with what, this may be conjoined in each disease: in the quoti^^a^ Ague,
in the wine of the decoction of Rosemary, or mint, a little before the fyt. In
the Tertian, with the decoction of Centorie in wine. In the quartaine, with the
water of Buglosse. In the Pestilence, with the wine of the decoction of
Radishe, to which a little Triacle and Methridate is mixed. In the ulcers and
sores of the mouth, a feather or fine bombasie wette in the oil, and the same
softlye apply on the vlcered place, for in the repeating sundry times, this
oil does so thoroughly heal the evil. And druncke of such as are molested
with falling sickness, in the decoction of Byttonie and Pyonie, speedily
helps. To such vered with the cough, with Nettle seed and Ysope boiled in
wine. In the abundaunce of flewme, with the water of wormwood. In the pain of
the stomach, and great gutte of wind, with the water of Camomyll. In the
coldness of the Liver and dropsy, with the water of Ireos, Celondyne, and
Honey. In the stoppings and grief of the Mylt, with Aquatamaricis. In yt French
disease, with ^umiterre water, and broom flowers. Against worms, in the long
grass or wormwood water. In the grief of the Matrice, with wine of the
decoction of byttonie and Mugwoort. In the staying back of vryne, with wine of
the decoction of garlike. Unto the cold gowte, with the water of Chamaepytyos.
And in all these, the like manner must be used, as before was uttered, of the
quyll or feather dypped in the oil, and forth with tempered in an apt lycour.
But in wounds and ulcers, the affected place must be anointed with the oil,
and that gentlye with a feather. The tooth that aketh, must be dressed with the
same softly. But if all the teeth pain and ache, then let the pacient hold a
space and wash the mouth, with the hot decoction of mynts, myxed with a
drop or two of the oil.

An oil of brimstone, invented of a certain Physician of Rome, and borrowed
out of a written book in the Italian tongue. An oil of brymstone, is easily
and soon prepared, and gotten with a Bell of glass: but the better, and
perfiter manner, is this. Let the brymstone be finely brought to powder, and so
much of the Pumeyse stone in fine powder, which two myxed together and put into
a Retort, fasten to it a sufficient large and bygge Receauer, and within two
days space, by a most soft fire, (...) shall distyll and gather the oil of
brymstone: which of the Italians is named oil De grata or De regestro. And the
powder of yt Pumeise is added, that the brimstone may not ascend, and that it
may also send the vapors sooner upward. The self same properties in a manner
are assigned to it, which a little before we recyted, saving that in a few, we
noted this diversity. That it cures wounds, by taking of the powder of the
leaves of the Oak, of Pympernel, of E^r^^onie, of Campherie, and of S. John's
wort, al which well beaten together, seath in wine, and to the straining mix a
little of this oil, or at least so much, as may be for the malice, and
greatness of the wound. And with this decoction, let yt fresh wou^d, or old
ulcer ^e washed, and they are speedily cured. In the French disease, after a
sufficient purgation, avayleth the oil ordered in the same manner, as above
taught. These truly, and all the others before written, which are to be applied
here: are reported, to be all experie^ced, by a singular phisitio^ of the
Emperors at Bononie, and of another notable phision at Rome.



An Odoriferouse or sweet smelling oil of brimstone, and potable or to be
dru^cke, which heals and cures in a manner all diseases and griefts how
wicked and desperate so ever they be: borrowed out of the Italia^ book of
secrets, of the singular Fallopio. Let the Brymstone be grosely brought to
powder, which put into an earthen vessel, over which hang a head or Bell with
a Nose, being two or three fingers distant from the vessel, and to the Nose
set a Receauer, in which let a little of pure Musk dyssolued in Rosewater be
put. Which done, kyndle the Brymstone, and the fume shall so ascend and be
received within the head. But before the Brymstone distylleth will a certain
C^ate or thynne skin as it were be gathered within the head (which nothing
will distyl, before this Coat shall be thus gathered round about the head)
remembering always to add or power in of the Brimstone, by little and little, as
the other before shall be consumed. This oil thus dystylled, is caused sweet
smelling, yet very sour in taste. But the same that it may be potable or to be
drunck, and well delyghted to be taken by the mouth, let a inlyppe be made of
Honey, in the same manner as commonly is made of Sugar, into which instyll so
much of the oil of Brymstone now made, as shall be needful to the purpose,
and that the same be not over sour to take. This drunck provoke sweat and
vryne, it cutteth a sunder and ^^ (...) the wicked humors of the stomach, all
Agues, which in ^ade with a cold, it helps, it dyssolueth the stones of the
kydneys* ^^ ^^^eth all kind of ulcers, if they be applied with this oil: in
that of the proper nature, this heateth and dries. And all these, the oil of
brymstone, prepared in the abouesayd manner, I have found to perform by a sure
and infallyble experience.

Another manner* but the same by distyllacion, uttered by the same Aucthour* the
joints before dilygently luted and sealed, and followed with a sof^ fire, ever
increasing the fire by little and little in a mean^ manner. In this manner is and
oil distylled, of singular virtues. First the same expels all manner of
inward impostumes of the body, unto the upper face of it: if of the same be
taken for three or four days* every morning fasting one dram (consider that
the same quantity, it be over much for one time) with broth, or wine, or any
such lycour. This avails in the hard fetching of breath, helps the cough,
the rewme, the evil dispositions of the Liver, any manner of scabbe, and cures
especially the pestilence. It is a treasure also, to ulcers and wounds.

Another manner: let some iron vessel be taken which may be sealed with a
Lymbecke, six fingers or a little more (...), and the same in the nether part
downward by two fyngers, let it have a large hole of three fyngers broad, by
which let the Brimstone be powered in, on this vessel set a Limbeck pergeted
about with lute, after by the hole a low let the Brimstone be kindled, and
burn so long as you think needful, and a lycour will after distill and
yssew forth drop by drop. And this manner although it be tedious, yet is it
not to be contemned.

An oil of Brimstone also is made by descention unto the Chymistick works, in
this manner. Let one part of the Cytrine Brimstone brought to powder, and put
into an earthen vessel, be molten with a soft fire, to which mix so much of
Roche Alome melted the like at the fire. After grind both together, putting
the whole into a discentorie standing under the earth set into an apt pit
made for the only purpose, on which ceales burning laid, and the same which
shall the^ be gathered, keep to your use, this out of Diod Euchyont.

An oil of Brimstone, is thus comp^wned, take of Brimstone, calcyned two
pounds, which infuse in vinegar, that the vyneger may flote four or six
fingers above, the same after bury in horse dung for four weeks, at the end,
distill it with a strong fire, for the spyrit of the Brimstone does then ascend
with the vinegar, which bury again in horse dung for two or three days, after
let the vyneger be euaporated in a large vessel having a wide mouth, and the
spirit and oil of the Brimstone will then abide in the bottem. The same oil
bury again in horse dung for eight days, which after distill by a Limbecke*
and in the end let it be buried for a month, for on such wise shall the oil
of Brimstone be purifyed. And it is of great virtue, yet but three drops
given at a time. This dung also of the horse, must always be renewed.

An oil of Naphtae, that is, of Brimstone vncombystible or never burned, which
is of the spirits vnseperated, and clarifyed, is prepared and made after this
manner, take of the Naphtae, that is, of any cytrine Brimstone, one part, of
salt Armoniacke five parts, these two beat, and mix together. After add to
them of the common oil a little, which then temper together after the form of
paste, or of a thick sauce. These then put into a Cucurbite, and a humor
after will distill with a soft fire, of great virtue unto many matters. But to
the first distillation ended, add of common salt five parts, of vnsleaked
lyme five parts, then a paste made of these distill again, and thus do for
four times, and at every time prove with a candell or otherwise, until it
burns not. For with such an oil of Naphtae, is Mercury sublimed, and
Arsenicke sublimed purifyed, and made clear, auailing vehemently unto the
white work.

An oil of Brimstone without distillatio^, against the pain of the gout,
prepared and made after this manner, borrowed out of a written book. Take of
sulphur viue, two pou^ds, of the yolks of eggs.xxv. in number, these beaten
and labored together, put into an iron possenet, boiling these with a soft
fire, and when the substance begins to burn, lean the iron pan on the one
side, and the same which is lyquid, will then yssew forth, and you shall so
purchase, that you desire.

An Oil of Sulphur or Brimstone, without distillation, does Brassanolus thus
prepare, take of Cytrine Brimstone, and of Turpe^tine, of each three ounces, of
good wine three ounces, of oil of Roses one pynt, boil these together with a
soft fire unto the consumption of the wine, what that after remains, is the
oil of Brimstone.

Otherwise and that sooner, is on this wise prepared, take a strong lie, or the
lycour made of unquenched lime stieped in it, that will well bear an egg
above. In this strong lie, let the Brymstone boil so long, until a fatness
shall appear on the upper face of the lie, and that the Feces shall fall to
the bottom, then as it were by a skymming of, is this fatness gathered.

Or let the Brymstone brought to fine powder, and powered into hot water, boil
so long, until the earthly part be settled, and that the Oily swymmeth above
on the face of the water, which practice was reported to me to be done, whiles
I was in Venice.

Or take of the oil of Line seed two parts, into which put one part of
Sulphur viue, these after the diligent mixing together, bury in dung for two
days, in a vessel close stopped, and it will be clear and fair.

Of the oil of Vitrioll, and of the making of the Oil of Vitrioll, out of
Valerius Cordus in a manner. The xxix. Chapter.
THe Oil of Vitrioll, which of some is named the Oil of life, or Artificial
Melancholy, and that many affirm to make of it a kind of Au^^m potabile or
potable Gold, in that the mine of Vystrioll, is a kind of the mine of Gold,
desired both of the Physicians and Chymistes. And it is also at this day much
exercysed and used of many Physicians in sundry purposes, for which cause, as a
most rare and singular secret, kept with them covered and unknown. And this
is none other, than an Alome quality and substance, drawn out of the
Vytrioll by Art, and a little myxed with Brymstone. For the same Vytrioll of
what manner it is made, does appear to consiste of a triple myxture, as of
much Alome, some ruste, and a little Brymstone. For the Alome water in
Mettalles, distylling by the Copper veins and Marchasite, attayneth a rus^ie
or cankred qualitye, and a Brimstonye, which rests myxed to the Marchasite,
that by little and little gathers, or by industry is boiled unto a
thickness. But in the distylling, the Alommie and Sulphurie vapor only do
ascend, and the rustie quality (by that means) left behind in the bottom
of the Retorte, through which is caused, that this oil has of Alome, and not
the taste of Ruste in it. And there are two diversities of this oil, as a
sharp and sweet. The eager or sharp Oil consists of a double myxture,
that is, of much Alome, and a little Brymstone. But the sweet, does simply
consiste of Brymstone. In that it is none other, then a lyquid Brimstone,
drawn out of the eager Oil. For which cause not the Alome in taste at all,
but the Brymstone is perceived. And both is to be prepared and made with great
care and diligence, in formyng an apt Furnace, and applying of a Retorte, and
receauer agreeable, for the aptness of the Instruments (as certayn^ Chymistes
affirm) procures a maistrie. These hitherto Cordus. But in this place, what
the ancient Philosophers understood by the name of the oil of Vitrioll,
whose discriptions we mind here to utter, whether the same any otherwise, then
that in the manner of preparing, may at the least differ, and not in the matter
out of which, those of any skyll and practyse in this Art, nothing doubt.
Seeing this, besides the other properties of it, in a manner innumerable, may
also conteyne in it the virtue of corrodyng (which matter also that it may be
made apparent of the same, in that this can not be wrought and keepte* but in
the best V^nice glass, that the cankred lyppe^ an^oynted of the same oil
may be consumed) of this, the use of it at anytime, ca^n^t be dangerous. For
that cause I suppose (says he) that this oil of the auncientes was prepared
in another manner, and was much subtiller * without corroding, and distilled in
Balneo Mariae. But for so much as this manner in unknown, therefore the later
practisioners from time to time invented, diverse and sundry preparations. Nor
am I ignorant (says he) how near unto the perfection of these, the
preparations agree, as that the pure and hurtful, may be separated from the
vnpure and vnhurtful, the subtle and penetrable, from the gross and
immouable. For in what manner soever any matter, may be made subtiller, clearer
and more penetrating, of these, does it declare the greater virtues in action.
In that the Feces of the simple elements, hinder the actions. And for that
cause do the ancient Philosophers, make mention of the reduction unto the
first matter, unto which when it shall come, the matter attaineth an extreme
subtilnesse, and the greatest also it yields in the practiue work. So that
you need not to deubt, but such an oil of Vitrioll, which shall attain the
extreme subtilnesse in preparation, may in his actions to come, be not only
most perfect, but also nothing at all hurtful, by which reason, if the
practysioners in the preparations, shall be either negligenter or slacker,
through this may it be caused the more venomous, to the taking within the body.
For how much the lesser the practysioner may err or does err in the
preparation, and distillation of the same, or how the oil may be made
perfitter, these three hereafter are diligently to be considered before all
others. First, what manner of Vitrioll must or ought to be chosen, then how the
same may be boiled, and what manner of calcination used. For it seems, that
the same rule or order, which was before vttred and taught in the preparation of
Antimonie, may like be applied in the oil of vitrioll. And the Antimonie (as
they say) except it be diligently chosen, and very well calcyned after art,
they in no wise grant, that the same rightly and without danger may be
ministered, for which cause they will it carefully to be prepared, that the
venomous quality may so be avoided.

THe true choosing of Vitrioll out of Valerius Cordus. The.xxx* Chapter.
Seeing there be many kinds of Vitrioll, for this reason, must it fully and
perfitely be uttered, what manner and kind of Vitriol, best answers and
agrees to this work. And although out of every manner and kind of Vitrioll, an
oil by distillation may be drawn, yet a more yield of oil, and the same
worthier or more excellent then the others, is distilled out of the blew or
green Vitriol, in that this contains much of the fugitive Brimstone, through
which it is much helped, that the oil may the easier and lightlyer ascend. It
is also to be noted, that the growe^ Vitrioll, and especially the Hungarian, to
be better and rather chosen, then the made or counterfaited. The same besides
is rather to be chose^, which cleaves in great clusters, and is coniealed in
greater lumpes. For that the small broken Vitrioll, and in a manner to powder,
must be rejected as unprofitable in this case, even as that also, which
gathered through the injury of the sun, or air, a witness, and dustie
hoorinesse. But the learned Fallopio, and singular practisioner Leonard
Fiorauant, do rather commend and prefer the Roman, then the German
Vitriol, to this use, seeing the same contains somewhat of the iron in it.

The manner of seething of the Vitrioll out of Cordus. The xxxi. Chapter.
FOr as much as the Vitrioll contains much of the waterie and excrementall
moisture in it, which weak^^eth or hinders the oil, and can not without a
long time, and great pains, be separated by distillation from the Oil, the
same compendiousser way must (of this) be invented by which in a short space
of time, that moisture may be consumed, least the long tarryaunce may cause
a weariness to the practisioner* Therefore take of the aforesaid Vitryoll,
twelve pounds, which powered into a great new pot, and well nealed, set into
the Furnace deep, upon burning coals, where, when the same shall begin to
melte and sees, stir with a spattle, that the whole may be myxed with the
molten, and until that be like molten, which suffer so long to seethe, until
no bubble or small bladder at all appears, and that the whole be thickened,
after the pot with the Vitryoll taken forth of the Furnace, suffer to cool,
neither in a moist, nor wyndie place, but in a dry and warm The Vytrioll
being through cold, take out of the pot, and consider whether the upper face
of it be throughout reddyshe. For the redness of it* is a sure note of the
perfect seething, that it may the easier he calcyned.

The manner of calcining of the Vitrioll, out of the same Aucthour. The xxxij.
Chapter.
THe Vitryoll taken out of the pot, break into small parts, and in a mortar
most fynely bring to powder, after power a third, or fourth part of it, into a
new and strong nealed pot, which set again into a deep Furnace, as above
uttered, and burn a whiles, until it be come redder, after take the pot
from the fire, and sturring it, see whether the Vitrioll be sufficiently
calcyned. For if in the pot appears after the manner of quicksyluer, or
molten lead, and that it casts or sends forth leapyng bubbles, you may
then conceive that the Vitrioll is sufficiently burned. Then power it into the
great and new pot before heated, and it will run forth as it were lyquid, or
unto the manner of quicksyluer. And what that remains of the Vitrioll, burn
in like manner orderly, that it may wholly be calcyned, when it shall thus be
burned and cold, let it be mixed again very well in a mortar, in such manner
laboring and sturring of it, that you raise not up the powder or dust, which
might offend the mouth, and nosethrelles. After you have performed all these,
and pouring the Vitrioll into a Balance, consider and know justly the weight.
For if it be six pounds, which is the half of the same* that you first began
to sees, yet remaining, then have you well handled, and rightly done all
things, that ought to be performed.

Of the making* and form of the Furnace. The xxxiij. Chapter.
FIrst an apt Furnace, must be framed and made, of Tyles laid flat, for how
thicker the walls be made, so much the stronger is the fire caused within, and
the heat longer kept. The walls also of this Furnace, ought to stand four
square, and of a like thickness round about, and the hollow sp^ce within,
must be of two spanne lengthes, lacking the third part of a spanne, which
done, it must then be builte up within, and in the top, after this manner,
that the first and lowest part or hollownesse, be builte half a foot high,
with strong iron bars thycke laid, which the wayght of the burning coals
can not bend. The second space or hollownesse made, above the iron grate (for
a resting) ought to be two foot high, and through the foresyde a square hole
artly made, just by the grate, to put the coals in with a little shouell.
After by the myddle space, regardyng the Furnace in the self same myddle, let
a four square iron bar be laid ouerthwarte, in bygnesse or thycknesse of a
thombe, which may well bear the Retorte laid upon. Then on the left side of
the Furnace, must a hole be left open, through which the neck of the Retorte
may be drawn.

The distillation of the Vitrioll. The.xxxiiij. Chapter.
AFter you have thus built and prepared the Furnace, choose then a big
Retort, and that apt to the purpose, being of the Venice glass made, if it be
possible to be gotten, which diligently and strongly lute about, into the same
pour all the Vitrioll (as by example the six pounds before prepared and
calcyned) yet that a fourth part of the^ Retort remain empty, whereby the
spirits may the easyer ascend from the Vitrioll, after upon the iron bar
laid ouerthwarte, Lute spredde, and a sharde of a pot or tyle laid just
upon the myddle of the bar, being like luted, on which set the Retorte thus
fastened, that the belly of it may be placed, just lying in the myddle of the
Furnace. And let the beak or neck of the Retorte retche without, and stoop
down ward, and the hoole also through which the neck passes, diligently
stop with Lute. After take five Tyles, with which make a ^yuer on the
Furnace, that the Retort may so lie hyd under that cover. This cover then
spredde over with lute every where, saving four holes left open, and that in
each corner one, for the fume or smoke to pass, being so large, that a thombe
may well pass in and out, in each hole. After make four couers sufficient
broad (for the holes) of strong Lute, with which stop or cover the holes,
as need requires. These being done, thrust the mouth within the neck of a
great receauer set under, being like of Venice glass, which how greater the
same shall be, so much the freelyer it will receive the spyrites entered, but if
the receauer be small, then is it dangerous, least the plenty of spyrites
stretched abroad, may break the glass. Also power into the receauer of very
clear water sixteen ounces, in that the water soon receives the spirits
unto it, and prohibiteth or defends that the receauer be not broken, and let
these be diligently luted together in ye joint taking careful heed besides,
that nothing fall after into the receauer, seeing the oil staineth it into a
red color. When you have performed all these, let the lute dry for a night,
and if any chops or cliftes do appear, let those be pargeted over with lute,
and the same morning after make a gentle fire in the beginning, of pure and
great coals, setting open one of the holes above, by which the fume may pass,
and let the fire within a whiles, be increased by little and little unto evening,
at which time the second hole must be opened. And mark then diligently,
whether any spirits appear, which yssew forth of the Retort, after ye form
of a white smoke, breathed into ye receiver. In ye night following be marvelous
careful, that the fire slack or abate not, but rather sharper, yet but a
little more increased, so that the fire after increased keep in that force: and
in the next day open the third hole, increasing still the fire, until the
neck of the Retort glowe like a burning coal, in the second night following
increase the fire, and after mydde night open the fourth hoole, when the fire
shall be grown and come unto the greatest heat, you shall then see the
spyrites yssew forth, even like to clouds heaped together, which when they be
at the point to cease, open all the passages and ventes of the Furnace, and
without ceasing power in coals with a small shouell, until the receauer also
appear glowing hot, in the mean time, and presently be very careful, that
no cold nor moist matter, fall by negligence, or by hap on the receiver. These
be^^de ^ ought to be wrought, in a close rome where neither went, nor wind
may enter. And the fire must so long be maintained, ^^tyll no spirits at all
be left in the Vitrioll, which by ^ight may easily be discerned, when no more
spyrites yssew forth, let the fire die and go out by it self, and suffer the
whole work to rest and cool, for a whole night and a day. After draw away
the receyuer with the whole lycour in it, and set aside close stopped, until
you ^^all separate the oil from the water, behold then the Retort broken, and
see whether the dead head be black, for this is a note of the work
performed.

A separation of the water infused. The xxxv. Chapter.
FOr as much as in the receyuer, is water contained, together with the oil of
Vitryoll: the same must be separated, that the lycour of the Vitrioll may be
set up, and reserved pure. And this is separated by distillation in Balneo
Mariae, or in fine syfted Ashes, but saffer is the doing, in Balneo Mariae. For
which cause power all the lycour which is in the receauer, into a Cucurbite of
Venice glass, setting on the head made of the like glass, which diligently
lute in the joint round about. After make a soft fire by little and little under
Balneo, and suffer the water to yssew, until the eyghteen ounces be come forth,
that you powered in. If so be the Vitrioll shall not be well calcyned then a more
quantity of water will yssew. For which cause see that these eighteen ounces,
be large or down wayght: when you have done this, suffer the Balne^^ to cool
and the water distilled forth thr^w away, but that which in Balneo shall
remain in the bottom of the Cucurbite, is the pure oil of Vitrioll, yet has
it for the more part a red color, for which cause must it be rectified, after
the form and manner following.

A rectifying of the oil of Vitrioll. The *xxxvj. Chapter.
TAke a Retort of Venice glass* which diligently fence with lute after power
into it, ye oil which is contained in the Cucurbite. That Retort set into a
lesser furnace, and into a deep pan, filled with pure and washed Sand, which
like distill in the Sand, as you did in Balneo, in sharpning and increasing the
fire by little and little, that the drops may leasurely fall. Thrust the mouth
of the Retort into the neck of the receauer made of the same glass, and the
joint diligently close with the best lute, ^^ no matter breath forth, when the
whole shall be distilled forth of the Retort, suffer it to cool and after the
taking away, power it again into a pure Venice glass which has a narrow
mouth, and set the same ^h^rely v^ ^l^se stoppe^ as a present remedy in many
diseases* that is* the shar^e oil of v^trioll, whose virtues and property
shall he^e under be vtt^^ed.

The virtues of the oil of Vitrioll. The *xxxvij. Chapter.
THe pure and not mixed, ought not, nor may be ministered or taken within the
body, for through the mighty sharpness thereof, after the m^^er of ^^e* this
(...) all places within the body, w^^re ye same touche^^* It ^oth also (...)
all things, except (...) the fa^tie substances* as the wax ^ pitch* (...) the
color of (...) oils this cha^ngeth, except the color of the oil of Mace* to
which ^^ it be (...) procures a sanguine color. If the Oil als^ (...)
conti^^^d within two vessels* and that the one has a cold (...) in it, and
(...) to the same* (...) after ^oyle so fe^^^ntly (...) scarcely ^e (...) hold
the glass in yo^^ hand. The oil shed down, boy^^ ^^^he ground, even as a
kind of Melancholy, whereof this is ^a^^ed the artificial Melancholie^* For
like as the Mola^^holy* even so does this oil comfort the stomach, and both
moves and pro^^^eth an app^tyte to meat, heateth ^ colde^ s^^acke* ^onsumeth
all manner (...), ^utteth a sunder the gross and cla^^^y humors, ^elpeth the
(...) and perrillous ^yxe Dysente^^* extinguisheth or qualifyeth the thyr^^,
and burning heat of the inner members in Agues, it stays belching speedily,
and puts away the desire to vomit, and the abhorring of meat, but this
must be orderly myxed with some other apt matters. For the better and readyer
conceauing of this artely myxture, learn an example or two here under uttered.

Take of the oil of Mace, and of clear Turpentine, of each twelve drops,
of the water of Annyse seeds, and of Fennel, of each two ounces, of the
syrup of Lycorise one ounce, of the oil of Vitrioll three of four drops,
these after the diligent myxing together, taste, if the whole has a sharpness
with it, which ast^nieth not the teethe then is it well, but if the potion be
not sour or sharp, instill one or two drops more, proouing the same by
taste how it is, after drink the same safely, against the stone. Or thus.

Take of ye syrop of ^intes* one o^^ce, of the water of Cynamon three ou^^es,
and a half of the oil of Cynamon two drops, and of the oil ^^ Vitrioll
three drops, these after the diligent mixing minister safely, unto the
weakness of stomach.

Or thus, take of the syrup* of the juice or infusion of Violettes, one ounce,
of the water of Cynamon, one ounce, of Barley three ounces, and of the oil of
Vitrioll, three or four drops, these after the mixing, draws and causes a
red color, and taste of an eager or sour wine, a^^^^tysed with Cynnamon, this
drink, against the heat, and dries of fevers or Agues.

Of the sour oil of Vitrioll, how the same may be made sweet to taste. The
xxxviij. Chapter.
AT the beginning of this Chapter of the oil of Vytrioll, we sufficiently
uttered, the oil of Vitry^ll to be sour, and to consiste of a double myxture,
as of much Alome, and a little Brimstone. For which cause, when you will have
out the eager or sour, draw a sweet oil, the same is none otherwise wrought
and caused, then that the brimstone be separated from the Alome, E y which
appears, that the sweet oil of Vitryoll, is none other, than the oil of
Brimstone, or the Brymstone it self reduced into a lyquide substance, and
this properly may be named a^ oil. For it is both fattie and unctuous, even
as the Brimstone it self, which into an oil, and not into water dissolueth or
melts. The manner now of separation, after inseweth.

The manner of seperating the oil. The *xxxix. Chapter.
TAke of the most sharp or eager burning wine, and thrice sublymed, six
ounces, of the eager Oil of Vitrioll, so much, these myxe together in a Venice
glass, which after power into a small Cucurbite with a narrow neck and
mouth, the mouth then close or stop with the surest lute, and let the same so
stand, for a whole month or two. After power the whole into a Cucurbite* on
which set the head, and lute immediately the joint* that no matter b^^^the forth
(this head ought to be formed* after the manner of the figure, here after
described, and made of Venice glass, as well as the body) this so ordered,
set then (...) a small F^^nace* and ^^^e^it half way up with ^ifted Ashes, to
which after apply the receauer, and close diligently the joint with ^^te, then
draw out the ^^xe ^^nces of burning wine, that you powered in before. That th^^
(...) the safelyer be wrought and done, set the (...) unto Bal^eum Mariae, and
the wine only does then ascend, without the oil, or the oil remains
behind; when you shall (...) drawn forth by Balneo, the six ounces infused
of the (...) wine, the same which remains, set into a Furnace, covered half
up with Sand* and a clear and empty receauer, and the same not b^gge set to,
the joint after diligently close with lute, under which kindle then a very soft
or modest ^^re, and by little and little draw or distill forth all the moisture,
which was left in the Cucurbite, until no more moisture at al appears in the
bottom, evermore having regard and most great care, that you so govern the
fire, that the lycour boyleth not unto the gutter or pype of the head. For i^
it shall once boil up unto this, you cannot after cease or stay the boiling,
by no means possible, but that all hastily ysseweth into ye receiver, to the
loss of the whole oil, in that this is wont very easily and soon to boil
up. But when you shall draw the same leasurely, you shall then obtain^ your
desire, and by and by after draw away the receauer with the licour for you have
purchased two substaunces, which you shall plainly see in it, as a waterie, and
Oily lycour, and fattie. These shall you speedilye separate, one from the
other, in such manner, that no watery humor be ^eft (...) in the oil. For that
(...) water left (if any such be) corrupts the (...). And the oil is wont
m^st commonly to (...) the ^a^er, especia^^y if the (...) wine be powered
^^^ord, and shall be drawn altogyther ^y Balneo Mariae: but you may by and
(...) after (...) in the ^^^ling* the oil from the water. In that the oil is
fattie, but the water very little at all. The oil thus separated, dilygently
keep stopped to your use.

The figure of the Cucurbite with the Limbecke or head annexed: which head must
be framed and made of Venice glass broken molten and wrought into the form,
here under demonstrated. The.xl. Chapter.


THe virtues of it which is separated, be altogyther the same, which of the
Brimstone, but it perf^^rmeth all them effectuousser, in that through the
lyquidnesse this does eas^er penetrate unto the properactious, which the
Brymstone cannot do: for that it is otherwise hyndered, through his solydnesse
and thycknesse. And the same more may this oil than the brimstone, that it
avails besides unto all putryfactions of the body, and especially unto the
plague or Pestilence, unto the clensing of the Lungs, in the plure^ie, and
apostume in the Lungs named Peripuenmonia, and hard or paynfull cough, matter
in the body, and both gross and clammy humors. For it may safely and without
perryll, be taken within the body. This suffers not the stone to engender,
neither in the kydneys, nor in the bladder, and this heals the vlcered
bladder. The dose or quantity of it at a time, is one drop, or two, or three,
and tempered in a little wine. It may al^o be prepared and myxed, in round and
^^uare tables made of Sugar. And ^^us^ dilygently be reserved, for out of one
pound (...) little of the eager (...) drawn, and it (...) va^isheth away through
the (...). Th^^^ ^ytherto* or the most of them* bor^^wed out of the (...) of
Vale^^^^ ^ord^^* of the artificial (...).

An oil of Vitryoll* prepared after this manner, according to the learned
F^llopio, in his Italia ^ooke of the ^ecrete remedies. Take of Romayne
vitryoll, in that the Germayne is not to be used, nor ^ood* for this contains
copper in it, and the Romayne has iron: and this is the cause, why the one is
good, and the other evil; so that when any will mynister of the oil to the
sick, regard must he had: seeing the copper is an enemy to the stomach, and
the iron a friend, and much healthful. Of this Romayne vitryoll take a
quantity, which put or set in a Furnace of reuerbaration, letting it there so
long remain, until it be calcined unto a redness or become r^dd^* After it
shall thus ^e ^aloyned to a redness or be read, put the whole into a body of
Venice glass, strongly fensed with the lute of wisdom, and the glass body
ought to be made, after the form of a lute, with a part of the belly ^la^, and
set into a Furnace of reuerberation, after such manner, that a part of the neck
hangs without the Furnace and tends downward somewhat, to which annexe the
Receauer, dilygently stopped or closed in the joint with lute: then contynew a
fire for four whole days, and so many nyghtes, until all the substa^^ce be
yssewed forth, or that no more remains which may be distylled by force of the
fire. Which ended, the oil will appear very black, in a manner as Incke, this
diligently keep in a strong glass close stopped, that no air breath forth.
This manner of way is easy to be done, and the best. That synguler Fallopio,
applied and used of it after this manner, he first took one pound of the
Inleppe of Violettes, and one pound of the finest Aqua vitae, and three ounces
of Rosewater, in which eight graynes of Musk dyssolued, and one dram of the
sayd^ Oil, these myxed together, forms or makes a divine composition in his
working. For by gyuing one sponefull of it to a pacient, fytted with a sharp
and hot Ague, is by and by after refreshed and cooled* And for the spytting of
blood, the flux of the body, the breaking of veins in the breast, an^ a
Rewme, this ^^^stred, does speedily help. And of a^ th^se the ^ucthor Fallopio
has seen, ^^e^tan^^pe^^i^e* experience, in sundry ^a^es. And ^yueth a most
great commendation of it, etc.

Another manner* take of Vitryoll as much as you wyll^^ thyncke needful, the
same calcyne in a pot* and calcyned bring to powder, the powder their power
into a Retort* pouring upon of the common Aqua tortis, that it may de^n^ke in
(...) place, which let so stand for twenti^ and ^^wre ^ower^ or longe^. The
same after set into a (...) it with lute and Tyles, and that four (...) made,
at each corner one. These done, dist^ll first with so* s^fte^^ (...)* that
four ^n^syca^^ strokes may be made* between drop, and drop falling: when
no more water dystylleth, then must the fire be increased: that the sp^r^te^
may yssew forth, which shall follow to be an Oil. After in Balneo Mariae,
separate the water from the Oil: and keep the same water, until you will
draw the Oil agayn^* Then shall you purge the Oil by a Retorte in a Furnace,
in distyll^ng with a great fire. And you m^ye draw, and cause the Oil to be
either white, read* or yellowe* and this* according to the greatness and
(...) of the (...). Th^^ borrowed out of the ^ynguler learned, (...).



Another manner, ta^^ ^ qu^^titie of Aqua vitae, the same power into a Lymbecke
of Glass ^ell ^en^e^ with lute, and between the Cucurbyte and cou^^ or ^y^de,
put four very thy^n^* Par^^^ente^* and dystyll the Aqua vitae, unto the half
part, (...) lesser. After take a quan^ytie of Vitryoll, which brought to fine
powder, power into a Retorte dylygently luted, and distyll the same after Art:
the water which shall then be gathered, pour again upon the Feces to be
druncke in, and this do for four ^ymes together, until no more moisture will
or can distyll forth. (...) the Feces again, pouring it into a like ve^^ell
well luted, with the Aqua vitae like prepared* as above uttered: in such manner,
that the Aqua vitae be well two fyngers breadth above in the fo^esay^e vessel
well closed, and let it abide on a soft fire for six hours* and this water
keep a part: and power again other Aqua vitae upon (for six hours) as above
uttered, and the same ought to be done a thy^de time. After take these three
^^^^rall (...), and distyll them in Balneo Mariae, with the Vitryoll above
said, and the water which shall then be gathered, (...) ^way if you will, and
in the bottom shall you find the oil resting. If any shall take of this oil,
unto the quantity of seven or eight drops with Ma^^es^e, or white wine, or
oil of Roses, or of Vio^ettes* before dynner or meat, preserves the body in
health. With the water of Pympernell, it cleanses the blood, ^hea^eth the
heart, and mayntayneth natural heat. With the de^o^tion of Buglosse or the
water of the same and Mastick, helps the g^^^i^^sse of the head. With the
water of Sage, it avails against the crampe. With the waters of Maioram and
Basil, ^^ avails against the trembling of the heart. With the waters of
Fennel and Wythie of the mountain, it helpe^h the weakness of (...). With
the water of the flower De luce, it is good against the rew^^^ of the ^ea^.
With the water or the (...) of ^o^es, it ^^yeth the bleeding of the Nose. With
the water of Maiden hair, it helps the ^ough. With the water of the Cytrone,
it procures an ^^petyte* With the water of Byttonie, it heals all the
bel^hing^, and pains of the stomach: that if the pain shall be of a hot
cause, then shall the oil be ryghtly given, with Rosewater, and Dior^hodon
Abba* This borrowed out of the Italian secrete^ of Ty. Rus^ellus.

An oil of vitryoll, learned of that singular Georgius Haymberserus: take of
common vitryoll so much as you will, out of which distyll a water by a
Lymbecke, as you know: after take the Feces, or earth of the vitryoll out of
the glass, and calcyne the same so much as is possible: then power the water,
which you distylled from it before, upon the earth of the vitryoll calcyned,
which after set into a dry wine Seller, and you shall attain the true oil of
vitryoll. But the earth of the vitriol calcined, ought a fore to be well brought
to powder, and the water then powered upon it. With this oil, and vermylon,
make as you know, unto the coniealing of Mercury. This first borrowed out of
an old Alchymy book written.

Another manner: that you may make the oil of vitryoll, take of Romayne
vitryoll finely brought to powder, twentye pounds, which dissolve by little and
little on coals in a pot or pan not glased, and after the vitryoll shall be
molten, suffer it after so long to boil, until it be well dried. Which done,
let it be diligently brought to powder, and powered into an other vessel not
glased, but well and close covered, that no fylth nor dust fall into it. After
this a clear and vehement fire of coals made, above and beneath it, that the
vitryoll may become so red as Vermylon: of this vitryoll brought and made so
read, take twelve pounds, which power into a Retorte very well luted: with
his Receauer, like luted in the joint: and the first day begin with a soft
fire, but the second day with a stronger fire of coals only, and the third
day, with a most strong fire made of wood, shall you distyl the oil of
vitryol. It is here to be noted, that you must power in a little Aqua vitae into
the Receauer, that the spyrites of the vitryoll may be retained in it. And
after the distyllacion ended, the same ought to be euaporated forth, the
Receauer being set on coals, for on such wise is the styncking vapor
elevated, and when no more vapor shall appear, or grievously stincketh, then
shall the oil be left and remain pure. The propertyes of this oil, be in a
manner innumerable. With the water of Tamaricis, it avails against the
passions of the Spleen. With the water of Radishe, or powder of the Tables of
marble stone, it avails against the st^ne, and all passions of the kydneys,
and the stopping of them. With the waters of the Marygold and Veruayne, it
avails against the pestilence. With the waters of Sage and Buglosse, against
the byt of Serpents. With Aqua vitae, it is a singular remedy, for the
superfluous course of women's terms. In the same manner given, it cures the
Tertian Ague. With the waters of cinquefoyle and Horehound, it helps the
Quartayne. With the Fern water given, it kylleth the worms within the body.
With good Malmesie, or with Pympernell water, unto the quantity of eight
drops druncke with a fasting stomach, does cheer the heart, mundi^yeth the
blood, represseth the Lepry, and both preserves and increases natural heat.
Taken with Fumyterre water, and the water of Mirobalanoru^ Citrinorum, cures
ye Leprie. With the Maioram water, does ease the headache, and kylleth the Lyce
of the head. With the waters of Buglosse and Baulme, it takes away the pain
of the head, the mygrime, gyddinesse, and dymnesse of sight. Taken after a
purgation with the water of the white Lyllyes* purges the Letharge or sleeping
downryght. With the water of Rue, it like cures the Letharge. With the water
of Fennel, or smallache, or Acorus, it helps memory, and profits unto the
dyminishing or loss of understanding. With the water of Lettyce, or the white
Poppie, it provoke sleep. With the water of Borrage or Buglosse, it
profits the Melancholicke persons. With the water of Nenuphar or the water
Lyllies, and with the water of the Myrtylles, delyuereth frenfynesse, and a
hot impostume, and profits in the pellycle of the brain. With Aqua vitae,
after a purgation, takes away the Apoplexy. With the water of Pyonie,
delyuereth ye falling sickness. With the water of wild myntes, it preuayleth
against the palsy. With Sage water, helps the crampe. With the waters of
Basil and Maioram, delivers the trembling of the heart. With the water of
Trifoyle, takes away the pain of the body. With Fennel water, and water of
the wythie of the mountain, takes away all manner of weakness of sight. With
the water of Sigillum salomonis, it avails against defenesse, and rynging of
the ears. With the water of Ireos, helps the rewme of the head. With the
water of the Acorne cups, and cups of the Roses, it stays the bleeding of
the Nose. With the water of Sage and Hysope, avails against the Palsy. With
the waters of Maiden heir, and Hysop, it helps the cough. With the water of
Playntayne, preuayleth against the plewresie, and such which spytte blood,
speedily helps. With the waters of Doder, and Maiden heir, avails against
the plewresie. With the water of Roses, or wine of Pomegranates, avails
against sounding. With the water of the rinds of the Cytrone, recouereth the
weakness of appetyte. With mynt water, avails against the weakness, and
coldness of stomach. With the water of Myrtylles, quallyfieth against the
pain of a hot stomach. With the water of Purcelane, avails and
extynguisheth thyrst. With the water of Byttonie, takes away belching, and
pain of the stomach: and if the pain be of a hot cause, it ought then to be
given with Rosewater, or with the powder of Diarrhodon abbatis. With the water
of Quinces, it del^uereth vomyting, and if the same be with blood, let it then
be given with Plantaine water, or with the water of s^epperds purse, and powder
of Diarrhodon abbatis. And if it be of a vain broken in the breast, then
apply with the Lyme of Egg shelles, and be shall be whole, in giving it every
day fasting, for one whole month. With the water of Penny royal, and powder
of Diarrhodon abbatis, after a purgation, avails against the inflammation of
the stomach. With the water of Scabious, takes away the gryping of the body,
which comes of the cause of venom, and if the same be of another cause, then
let it be given with the water of Rue, and syrup of Nenuphar. With the water
of Rue, it helps the chellicke passion. With the water of Molyne or yarrow,
preuayleth against the Pyles, and other passions beneath. With worme^ wood
water, it avails against the hytte of venymous heastes. With Endyue or
Egrymonie water, it delyuereth all the impostumes of the Liver, and helps the
dropsy. With the water of Cyn^quefoyle, it heals the Iaundise. With the
water of Mugwoort, it avails against the passion of the Matrice, and the
hard fetching of breath. With the water of Garlyke, it delyuereth the
toothacke. With the water of the wild myntes, or Aqua vitae, it takes away
the Sciaticke passion. With the water of the Colewortes, it delyuereth cold
gowtes. With the waterr of the Pellytorie or Plantayne, it cures hot Gowtes.
With the water of Egrymonie, helps the palsy. With the water of Eupatorium,
takes away the passions of the mylt. With the water of Rosemarie, comfort
the stomach. With the water of Catmynt, stays the rewme, falling to the
breast. And to conclude, it avails in all passions, if it be given with the
water agreeable to the passion: and is also named potable Gold, and is
precious in every medycine, even as Gold gives and works in all the
Myneralles. With the water of Bytonie it avails against the Ilyacke, and
chollyeke passion. With the water of Cresses and yarrowe, provoke vryne. This
borrowed out of the Italian practices, of Iero. Ruscell.

Another manner of preparing the oil of Vitryol, not much differing from the
former, and good, that he purchased of a certain friend, which affyrmed, that
he knew a Chyrurgian, which with this only got his living: translated out of a
written Copy, in the Germayne tongue. There be some (says he) which by force
of the fire draw an oil of vitryol, out of ten or twelve pounds of the Roman
or Vngarian vitryoll, in a body well fensed with lute, or earthen pot vnglased,
which they say to one side stouping, in that Furnace: with the receauer annexed
to it, and dyligently luted in the joint. Others when they have distylled it by
ascension, do separate the flewme from the oil, and power again the same
flewme on ye dead head, and distyll it in the like manner above uttered, and the
same they so often repeat, until the vitryol shall be wholly brought and made
unprofitable, and that no oil at all remains or is contained in it. And
although the oiles drawn by these means, be profitable unto many and sundry
diseases: yet I (says he) yt the oil may be applied within the body, or used
in any other manner, do, in ye preparation of it, proceed after this manner. I
take also two new pottes vnglased, into one of yt which I power the vitryol,
and set to the fire, that the vitrioll may melte. And the water may also be
powered to ye same; although it be not so requisite and necessary, and to be
sturred together with a wooden spatle, and on such wise to be through dried by
the fire. In this first calcynation* is the vitryoll purged from his
venemousnesse. Then I bring the vitryoll again into powder, and sy^^e it
through a fine sieue or salt, that it may so be labored into very fine powder,
and if any piece shall yet remain vnbroke^, I beat it again, etc. After do I
heat water, and the same very hot, do I power on the powder contained or
being in a vessel sufficient large and deep, and stir sometimes about with
the wooden sp^ttle, and let it so rest, that it may settle all the night
following. In the morning after the settling, I take away, so nygh as I can, all
the clearer and purer water resting above, but the troubled I distyll by
fylter. On those Feces or grounds remaining after the distyllacion, I power
the scalding water again, and both stir, and separate, as above uttered: and
I the same so often repeat, until the vitryoll has no bytternesse contained
or remaining in it, or is agreeable to the water. This clear Lie or water of
the vitryoll, let it be boiled so long by the fire, until in the vessel the
vitryoll be hard gathered together as a stone, and the water consumed.

Of the properties of the oil of Vitrioll, does one of D. Gesnerus friends
thus write: The principal virtue of this oil, is ( Montane also affirming the
same) that it causes men not to appear aged a long time, and most foul and
corrupt teeth, this causes fair and strong, and the gummes also it procures
strong: if the teeth daily are lightly rubbed with one or two drops of it: by
which manner doing, a famous curtisan in Venice, preserved her teeth from all
filth and corruption, and maintained them steddie and fast many years: but
Montane would not the oil to be used unto the remoouing of fittes, and curing
of sicknesses, without the addition of other simples or myxtures to it: for he
had always a regard unto those matters which were temperater, and surer in
the giving: these hitherto he: Ad morbum scorbunticum, a certain person not
without great reward used it prosperously.

Arnoldus of the use of the oil of Vitrioll: Take of the best Triacle, to
which add a few drops of the oil of Vitrioll, and let stand myxed
together until you will use it: If any lies grievously sick, and not unto
death, give a French crown weight of this myxture, but if the man be not over
weak, then a little more: and drinck the whole meanly hot, with a little wine
fasting in the morning four hours before meat: and if a little shall happen
to remain in the bottom, the same rynsed with wine, drink in like manner:
After this, the sick well covered in be^, and wrapped about the head, in such
manner, that nothing of the whole body may appear, saving the mouth free and
uncovered: which done, let the pacient lie sweating, so much as is possible for
the space of four hours, and sleep in no wise that time: The sheets then
changed, let the pacient yet abide in bed for other three hours, not
sweating, before he eats any thing, then let him eat somewhat, and drink
good old wine after his meat.

After this medicine given, the Physician may use other medicines, as the
purging and comforting: The nature of this medicine is to diminishe all
sickenesses, and to prepare the way unto health, and the same with expedition,
and in a short time: do in that manner, that the pacient may obey and keep a
good diet: The cure consists, that the pacient sweat rightly and plentifully
for the foresaid four hours: for this drinck rightly ministered, never
fails nor beguyleth the Physician: If the pacient after the taking, be not
cured, yet does he cast up (by vomiting) much evil matter offending.

In the Cholicke, Benedictus Victorius, thus used the oil of Vitrioll: he
took of Malmesie two drammes, of the oil of Vitriol half a dram: This is a
marvelous experiment, if of the same, or the said quantity be ministered at
the instant time of the grief, without an Ague: It also profits if the
payned or grieved place be anointed with the oil of Vitrioll, an apt plaster
or fomentation used before: An expert medicine of Alexis Pedemontanus, curing
the swelling of the throat or Squince: Take of the oil of the Roman Vitrioll,
three drops, which well myxed in wine, gargill in the throat sundry times:
Two drops of the oil mixed with Saxifrage water, and druncke, provoke vryne:
Against the evil ulcers of the legs, does the water of Alum, myxed with a
little of the oil of Vitrioll avail.

Against Agues, take the Vitrioll calcined and brought to powder, on which
pour Aqua vitae, that it may exceed two fingers above, the same let so rest
for three or four days, after pour in other Aqua vitae, and do the like,
then draw forth the Aqua vitae, of which give two or three drops in a
sufficient or congruent quantity of water: A certain person reported, that a
lynnen cloth wet in the oil of Vitrioll, and applied for six or seven days
on the forheade, does help the grievous pain of the head: A potion made of
the oil of Vitrioll, with two drammes of Malmesie, does deliver the pain of
the belly, and stomach: So much of the oil of Vitrioll dropped into fair
water, as will make the water sower, does purge. A certain practisioner cured
with the same, the Collicke despayred or out of hope: and he gave it in the
fleumaticke Asthma, or straitness of breath, and in the peril of suffocation,
for it has profited with the vomiting: This gave sometimes one dram with
good success to all fleumaticke affectes, especially of the stomach: For the
taking away of wartes, this is a singular remedy: A certain learned man
supposed the oil to help corns in the feet, although the same not
experienced.

Our Oil of Vitrioll is thus made: Take of the better Vitrioll such a
quantity as you shall think needful, the same dissolve in hot water, after
let that water clear again, and dystill it by a filter, the same which is
dystilled, pour into a Copper vessel, or vessel not glased: after pour it
again into another vessel of glass, set between coals, that the glass may
be through read: after dissolve it again as before, the same dystill by a
filter, and fully dry, until it be through read: then let it be brought to
very fine powder, and of the Vitrioll in powder, pour one pound or two pounds
into a Cucurbite or glass body, and before you pour the same in, pour into
the glass hafe a cup full of good Aqua vitae, without any fleume, after
pour upon the powder of the Vitrioll, and set the mouth of one body against
another, diligently luted in an apt furnace: beginning first with a soft fire,
until white fumes shall appear, after increase the fire, making a strong
flame under it, and continuing the same unto the end of the work: After take
all that which shall be dystilled, and dystill the same in a Retort by sand:
which gathered again by dystillation, pour into the Retorte, and distill
again, and the same so often repeat, until no feces shall remain in the
Retort, then dystill it in Balneo strong boiling, and the Quintessence and
fleume shall after be separated, and a pure oil shall abide in the bottom of
the glass: that if you shall not find it sufficient pure, pour it again by
it self into a Retort, and distill it once again by sand, and you shall then
purchase the oil rectified, which diligently stop and keep, for it is
precious.

An ingenious preparation of the oil of Vitrioll, proved, and that perfect
and sure, uttered by a singular practisioner, after this manner, translated out
of the German tongue. Unto the dystillation of the oil, before any other
matter, you must first build a furnace four square, of the same largeness,
that in it may a great body luted, be easily placed or set, being of glass,
which will hold eight or ten measures, and having a bygge and large belly: In
the beginning build the Furnace a foot, or thereabout, high from ground,
after place a grate at that heygth, being about a foot and a half distant:
then by the middle of the furnace fix a long and strong iron bar, luted over
with the best lute, and that it retcheth from one side to the other of ye
furnace: between the grate and iron bar, place or join the slow harrie to
the furnace, unto one side, even as this figure here ensuing, does playner
demonstrate: and let the slow harrie be of such a bygnesse, that the head
may in a manner lie all without: which prepared and done, let the building o^
the furnace be raised or made a foot and a half above the iron bar, and
left so open, unto the time the glass in which the Vitrioll shall be
contained, be set in the furnace. And note, that the same side from the slow
harrie, ought from the grate unto the top to be open, until the glass be
set into the furnace: the furnace being prepared, take of Vitrioll thirty or
forty pounds, according to the greatness and capacity of the glass, and
the Vitrioll pour into an vnglased pot, which set on the fire, that it may be
exactly calcined, and that no moisture, remains in it, and that also it be
brought to a red color, or hardened as a stone: the earthen vessel then
broken, and the Vitrioll through cooled, let it be most finely brought to
powder in a mortar, and that powder pour into this great glass, of which is
above mentioned: This glass thus filled with the Vitrioll, in the same part of
the furnace which is open, let be laid along on the iron bar, the neck
lying without, and turned downewarde so much as is possible, but in such man^r,
that you shed not out the Vitrioll, and let the neck also retch without the
furnace, unto the length of half a foot, whereby the receyuer may after be
annexed to it, and the commodiouser fenced about the joint with lute: which
done, close the open part of the furnace, from the grate unto the very top,
and the glass diligently join together to the furnace with lute: when you
shall thus come unto the top, make in each of the four corners, a hole so
large as the compass of an egg, with an apt cover to each, which may be set
on, and taken away at pleasure: let vent holes also be framed, and those
lesser, yet no wyder than that the thumb may easily pass in and out: after
work the furnace up narrower and narrower, into pinnacle form, that in the
top a hole may be left so wide, a^ you may well occupy the hand in and out,
for which hole also srame a cover that may cover it close, and be taken of at
pleasure: after the furnace thus wholly framed and buylt, together with the
glass body joined to it, and thoroughly performed, you shall then annexe
another great receyuer of glass, that will well conteyne eight or ten measures
of licour, into the neck of this receyuer, let the other enter a good depth,
and both by a diligent care, with the best lute, artly close in the joint,
after the common manner and custom: The figure hereafter following, does
manifestly utter to the eye, this whole description of the furnace and vessels:
where to be noted that the slow harrie ought not so exactlye to touch the
grate: but to be sufficient, if it ca^ieth the coals to it.

1 Represents the door, by which the air entering in, does maintain the
fire.

2 Signifies the grate, on which the coals settle and lie.

3 Does express the slow harrie, carrying in the coals.



4 Does show the place, in which the iron bar is fixed, that bears up the
glass body.

5 Represents the neck of the glass body retching without, and turned
downward.

6 Does represent that great receyuer annexed t^^.

7 Does plainly teach the four vent holes of the furnace made in the Angles.

8 Does manifestlye show the large hole being in the top of the furnace.

When all these are prepared, let the furnace be heated with a fire of coals,
and the slow harrie filled with great coals: and with a cover let it be close
covered, and all the other vent holes, except the three small above mentioned.
The door also which is under the grate, and noted with the number one, must be
half shut, for the air sake, and to preserve the fire: In the beginning
make a mean^ fire, and after shall a clear oil dystill: when the clear
color of the oil shall begin to appear darker, and the oil after a manner
troubled, then shall the fire be fortified, and a red matter will ensue,
which must be forced forward, in fortifying the fire a little more, and the
same in such manner, as by a hole which consists in the top, that you may
pour in the coals, and fill the furnace up with them unto the vent holes,
which ought to be opened, and none of them left covered: and this dystillation
m^st be continued so long as any matter distilleth, which indureth unto.xxiiij.
hours, yea, sometimes to thirty hours: so that this must be followed without
any staying, until all be gathered, for in this manner shall you obtain the
most perfect oil of Vitrioll: and this manner, as a most certain practice,
sundry times proved by a certain notable practisioner: Where to be noted,
that the receyuer ought to be cooled, by another vessel filled with cold
water, and having a tappe, that the cold water may continually dystill upon the
receauer, or set this into a filtring vessel, that the cold water may like
dystill upon it, and cool so the receyuer, which otherwise by force of the
exceeding heat would soon burst. After the dystillation fullye ended, and
cooling both of the furnace and glass, let the oil be poured into a Retort,
and rectified in Balneo Mariae, from the fiery or read matter, of which each
must be kept several in glasses. Another practisioner supposes it to be more
skilfully handled, that after the red matter shall appear in the
dystillation, the receiver be changed, least the true oil by any means may
be affected with a certain strange quality. The use of this oil is against
all Agues: against the cholicke, and strangurie: against the stone, or sand of
the bladder: It does marvelously help the suffocation of the womb, the
Cough, the Apostume of the breast and lungs, the matter ascending, and as it
were, suffocating the lungs. It cures the dropsy of any cause, and prevails
against the Gout, the Palsy* etc. And they ought to give or take at a time,
two, three, or four drops in some dystilled water or wine, morning and evening.

Leonard Fiorauant; that singular practisioner, in his second book of secret
practices, published in the Italian tongue* does there utter the manner of
dystilling the oil of Vitriol* which from the common manner does differ nothing
at all, saving that the dystillation of the oil at the eight or tenth day was
performed: and from the beginning, as it seemed, wrought with flame of fire,
and the oil dystilled, was black.

A compounde oil of Vitrioll, of the said Leonard Fiorauant prepared and made
after this manner: Take of pure and white Sugar four pounds, of Rhaponticke one
pound, of Ruberbe one ounce, of Mercury flowers, one pound, these after the
well beating together, frame into a paste: on which pour four pyntes of the
best Aqua vitae, then pour all into a Retort, which diligently stop, and
bury in hot horse dung for six days, after the drawing forth, dystill the
whole in Balneo Mariae, until no more will issue forth. The feces then gotten
forth of the Retort* put into a lynnen bag, which wring strongly and
thoroughly in a press: After take of Buglosse water, of Fumiterrie, and of
Scabio^s, of each six ounces, and with these waters, wash very well the feces
pressed out, and wring them hard again in the press, which done, throw the
feces away. And these two waters together, which you gathered by pressing
forth, dystill so often over by ^ filter^, until it appears sufficient
clear* after mix it with the first water, and dystill all together in Balneo
Mariae. And when of those three you shall have performed one water, then to each
pound or pynte of the water, add half a scruple, or one whole dram (if need
be) of the finest oil of Vitrioll, which diligently keep in a glass, unto
use. Th^s excellent composition I prepared in the summer, and used it to many
with singular success: for it restores a weak or decayed stomach* it
helps the disease of the mylt, and mittigateth the pain of the head and
teeth, and many other matters, which for breuitte are ^urpassed: But this
composition is of so maruailous a working, that it may be put in the book of
the maruailous things of Physic. For thy^ keeps or maintayneth old men in
their proper strength: a matter greatly to be abashed and woondred at. And I
can this avouch, that I have seen many men and women, which by using it after
my appointment and counsel, are renu^d, and become lustyer of age to see too:
A matter in deed greatly to be maruailed at, and scarcely to be believed: and
this compositi^n also preserves them long in health which use to take of it.
The manner of taking this excellent lycour is on this wise: that is, in the
morning let half an ounce of it be taken fasting, and so cold as it is: and
let the person after refrain to eat for the space of four hours, and the
same day, use to eat the best meats of s^^^nance: and this used for a time
together, preserves the person, as above uttered.

A corrosiue oil of Vitrioll: take of Roman Vitrioll six pounds, of common
salt one pound and a half, let these be calcyned so long together, until
they wax read, which then take from the fire, and bring to powder together,
the whole divide into three parts: after g^t three glass bodies, fashioned to
a Lu^e, very well fenced with the lute of wisdom, and into each of these,
pour a third part of the said Vitrioll rubified, and set all the three
bodies into one furnace of reuerberation: and make a fire under by little and
little, until all the substance by force of the fire be drawn, which will be
so black a substance as yncke, and many times flows, or is long in the
issuing forth: and when the same is come forth, keep it in a glass sufficient
large and thick, that it burst not: with this lycour you may open all manner of
impostumes, and cleanse all kind of putrified ulcers, by wetting only on the
upper face with the said lycour, which does cause speedily a marvelous
working: and mortifieth cankers, and ulcers cankred, and does many other
matters besides: all which I have many times tried, and found evermore true and
perfect: This borrowed out of the Italian secrets of the singular Fallopius.

Another of the same man's, otherwise prepared and drawn, named a compounde
oil of Vitrioll, and that most strong, on this wise: Take of Roman Vitrioll
six pounds, of salt Armoniack, of Brimstone, of Vermilion, of Orpiment, and
of Roche Alum, of each six ounces, let all be calcined (as we have above
uttered) until all the whole be come unto a redness, and being thus rubified,
let all be brought into fine powder, and poured into a body (as above uttered)
and let fire be continued under it for six whole days, remembering before that
the joints be diligently luted: With this licour may you depopulate or cut of
any member, if you wette a large knyfe made of the wood of the Olive tree in
it, and mark the place about with tha said wood where you will cut it of:
this then is of such a force and efficacy, that it opens the flesh, even as
the same were done or cut with a rasour, and works the proper effect, without
the shedding of any drop of blood: And this causticke is one of the worthyest
secrets of all Chirurgerie, and proved very often of the singular Fallopius,
and sundry other Chirurgions, which have wrought the self same effect, which
I have seen many times.

A natural and most subtle oil of Vitrioll, pleasant or sweet in taste,
which is accounted for a miracle: Take of the Hungarian vitrioll four pounds,
which brought into very fine powder, and dried in a body, pour after into
another body well fenced with lute, being well beaten together, and thrust
down: Then pour upon of sublymed wine rectified, unto the top of the four
pounds, which set to digest for forty days, after dystill according to Art:
and you shall then see the Oil of Vitrioll swim above the upper part of the
sublimed wine: But the common oil of Vitriol shall be mixed with his water,
and for that cause needs rectifying: this borrowed out a written book.

An oil of Vitrioll which mortifieth the Canker and Fistulaes, and old
corrosiue ulcers especially, is made after this manner: Take of Roman
Vitrioll, burnt in a pan unto a redness, one pound, which bring to fine
powder, to it after add, of oil Olyue half a pynte, these pour together
into a glass body, and sublime after the common manner: then let it be
distilled with one body set against another, or by a Limbecke, in adding to it
a little of Aqua vitae well rectified, that the Oil may ascend. etc.

Fumanellus of the oil of Vitrioll, against the Canker, thus writes: In
extreme diseases, the extreme remedies are best: and seeing the Canker is a
disease of the same kind, for that cause a man must apply extreme remedies to
it, as is the oil of Vitrioll which is made after this manner: Take of Vitrioll
a sufficient quantity, which after the through drying, and coming unto a
redness, and the same rubified, and brought to fine powder, pour into a
Limbecke, and dystill according to Art: of this let be given in the first day
fasting, one drop, with three ounces of Buglosse water, and in the second
day, two drops, with a greater quantity of the water, and in such manner adding
a drop of the water, unto five days end: These ended, let the extreme parts
or edges of ye Canker be anointed with the foresaid Oil, until the matter of
the canker be gotten out by the root: and this medicine has not been tried of
the Author, but obtained of an Impericke. A sirrupe digesting cankerous humors,
is made of the juice of Fumiterrie, of Borage, and of Scabious, of each three
ounces, of Endive, and of Succorie, of each two ounces, of Epithimi, of Senae,
and of the wine of Pomegranates, of each three ounces, of Sugar so much as
shall suffice, to form the sirrupe: and the solutiues belonging to the same,
are, the Electuarie of Hamecke, Pills de lapide Lazuli, pillu Iudae, Senee,
epithimum, and whaye wherein Senee is steeped.

Of the Oils out of other Mettalles. The.xxxix. Chapter.
AN oil of Copper learned of a French Empericke: Take of burnt Copper two
pounds, which finely brought to powder, and poured into a glass Cucurbite
very well luted, and imbybed with the strong vinegar, the whole dystill in
xxiij. hours space, and you shall obtain a most strong oil, of a red and
green color.

An oil of Saturn or Lead, is thus prepared and made, which is after an
easy manner: Take of Ceruse which is Lead calcined, and boil it with the
strongest vinegar, after let the same settle or rest a time, and the vinegar
shall become yelow of color: the same then pour into a body, and euaporate
the vinegar forth, and in the bottom will the oil remain: This oil of
Saturn is commended in old ulcers, especially those (which Theophrastus
names the ulcers of the face) of which kind are, the Canker, and Fistulaes
about the nose. I knew (says the Author) a woman who had her nose almost
eaten away with a wicked ulcer, and was thoroughly cured with this oil alone:
This oil molten, ought to be applied with a warmenesse, or by the furnace in
the Winter time, and striked over with a fether. A certain person sold half
an ounce of this for a crown of gold. The dose of it at a time, to be given
inward with any lycour, is three graynes: and used both in the cholicke, and in
fistulaes.

An oil of Iron, understood of a French Empericke: Take of the filings or
beatings of the Iron about the Anuill finely labored to powder, so much as you
will, the same imbibe with childs vryne, after calcine so often in the Furnace
of reuerberation, until it be brought impalpable, and of a sanguine color,
then pour it into a glass body well fenced with lute, and imbybe the
substance again, with the strongest dystilled vynegar, which dystill after the
manner of Aqua fortis, by the space of. xxiiij. hours, ever increasing the
fire, and you shall obtain a thick and very read oil. The experience of the
oil is, that the lamines of any metal rubified, if they be quenched in this
oil, forthwith receive the color of gold: so marvelous is the tincture, and
peercing, and does also congeale Mercury divinely, and does many other
affectes in the Art of Alchimie. Besides, in Physic, this works
marvelously, in that the same resolves and heals many infirmities, and
especially the flux of the body, if so be a small quantity be given by the
mouth with any sirrupe, or other like composition, which works a marvelous
help to the pacient that takes it: so the^ I affirm the sand oil to be as
a true* Quintessence to our bodies, seeing it is so miraculous in his working.

An oil out of Steel^, and the Ad^man^ stone, is drawn after the same manner,
as above taught of the Iron.

An oil of Litarge, is holden and accounted for a great secret, in that the
same is marvelous in the clearing of spots, and Morphewe, or other blemishes
of the face, it makes a small scarre, and puts away the redness of them,
borrowed out of a most ancient written book: Take of Litarge finely brought
to powder, so much as shall suffice, the same dissolve by decoction in the
strongest vinegar, many times together, after euaporate the vinegar on the
fire, and a black oil shall remain in the bottom: which then dissolve with
hot water, by the stirring about with a stick clean scraped, and after
dystill it by a woollen tongue, or by Fylter, and the oil shall abide in the
bottom, which separated from the water, is singular in the working.

An oil which is drawn out of Lyme, is marvelous: Take of vn^eaked lyme one
whole piece, which infuse in common oil until it be di^solued, and let the
Lyme be brought to powder, the whole after poured into a gla^se Limbecke, and
dystilled, an oil will then issue, which shall be named the calcine oil. etc.

An oil drawn out of Bole Armoniacke, is taught in a certain place of the
w^^ks of the singular learned Theophrastus Paracelsus.

Of the preparing and making of the oil of Amber, by the description of a
singular physician of Germany, which freely described the history also of the
whole Amber, as shall appear in the proper places. The.xl. Chapter.
THe oil of Amber is none other than a most subtle, fat, and ayreal substance
which consists in the Amber, drawn out by Art: and although it be not hard
to purchase such an oil, yet a special care and aptness of instruments is
required unto ye same art: for which cause must diligent heed be given that ye
precepts following be observed.

What manner of Amber must be chosen. The.xli. Chapter.
Although it be agreeable to Art, and right necessary to choose the purest
Amber, unto the dystilling and drawing forth of the oil, and that it be the
greater part of the Amber, for in taking the purer matter, a purer lycour also
issues forth, and the receyuer shall be filled with the lesser quantity of
the excrementall humor and refuse, and it besides shall not so easily be
resolved with fire, and at one instant fall together into the receyuer, if it
shall be of the grosser parts, but shall dissolve and melt by little and
little, and slowly, that the subtle substance which consists or is in it,
may the beter be separated from the feces: yet in the slaking of it, may the
powder and pieces be taken and used, in that those also yield an Oil, if they
be rightly prepared and poured into the vessel. A man must besides observe and
know, that on the Amber poured into the Cucurbite, be very small flynt stones
laid, and on them again an other course of the Amber, and like an other bed
of the flynt stones, and thus orderly to the end.

Of the Furnace and Instruments necessary unto the dystillation of the Amber.
The.xlij. Chapter.
IT much avails to have apt and fit instruments: And first, as touching
the Furnace, let it be round, and two foot and a half high, but in breadth
over, about two spannes: And let it be buylt either of Tyles, or Iron plates
covered over with strong lute, and having two round holes in it, by which (as
shall after be demonstrated) the Pypes of the Instrument set in the second
place, may retch forth.

But let other two instruments of copper be prepared and made, and those
covered or glased within, with tynne, especially the nether part, and let it
have the figure of a Cucurbite above, in heygth of one spanne and a half,
compouned of one whole lamine or plate, and let the neck of it be thrust
within the nether instrument, and enter a sufficient way within the same.

Let also a round cover be prepared of Copper, and full of hole^ stricken,
that the Amber covered with it, may issue and dystill liquide forth: but the
nether instrument receiving the Amber (for that it is a Dystillation by
descention) let the same be framed round, having a neck which may receive,
and may contain in it the neck of the Cucurbyte, and will well receive three
or four measures of lycour, having two Pypes, of which let the one ascend and
look upward, and the other descend and retch downward, as these figures
herevnder, does playner express to the eye.

The Furnace.
The upper hole retching unto the other Pype.

The nether hole by which the nether Pype issues.



The upper instrument or Cucurbite, into which the Amber with the flint stones
is poured.

The upper Pype by which the hot water is poured in.

The nether Pype by which the oil together with the water issues.

The nether instrument here receiving the refuse and oil.



A. The cover boared full of little hoales with which the Cucurbite is covered.



A Cucurbite with the nether instrument conjoined, as if both presently were to
be set in the furnace.



The Furnace with all the necessaries unto the dystillation.


In this figure, are all the necessary instruments propouned, serving unto the
dystillation of this Oil: The buylding of the furnace appears at the right
side, in the middle of whose top, does the Cucurbite appear and show: The
same Furnace has on the right side, a pype retching upward (which properlye
is named ye upper pype) stopped with a wooden stopple: In the same on the left
side, is an apparent nether pype, reatching downewarde, to which is another
pype annexed passing through a cooling vessel: In the myddle of the figure,
does a cooling vessel appear, with his pype retching unto the left side, with
which immediately is the Receiver committed and fastened.

Of the Dystillation of the Amber. The.xliij. Chapter.
AFter you have prepared the Furnace, and all the Instruments necessary to it:
Take the nether instrument, which set into the Furnace, does draw forth the
pypes of it (that you saw made in the former figure) and the same very well
fence in the furnace with Tyles and Lute, and let there be a cover within made
sufficient strong, that cannot be seen without, and that the fire lying on it
cannot harm, and then pour so much water into it, until the water runs
forth of the Pype: After the Cucurbite filled by turn with the Amber and
flynt stones (laid by courses as before taught) and fenced with lute, let not
the Amber but rather the course of flynt stones touch and be next the cover,
and cover the Cucurbite, then nail or fasten stronglye the lydde round about
the edge or sides with Iron nails, that the cover through the force and
mighty power of the heat may not fall of: but rather be able well to bear
the weight of the substance: Which done, set the Cucurbite on the nether
instrument, and the place where they be joined together, fence diligently about
with lute, that no vapor at all may issue forth: and stop the Pype ascending
with a wooden stoppell, that you may draw the same forth, if the hot water
must be taken forth, which shall then be done, if a little shall so hinder in
it, that the Oil cannot issue forth: To the nether Pype fasten another Tynne
pype, or Copper Pype, passing through a vessel filled with cold water, which
when it shall be hot, pour in other cold water. And to the end of that Pype
set a Receyuer, having in it one wine pynte of pure cold water, sufficient
great and able to contain both the Oil and water: And let the Receyuer be of
Glass, or earth, glased within, and not of Copper, in that it lightly draws
the oil to a greenness through the Canker which consists in the Copper, and
let all be marvelous well stopped: When all these shall be thus handled and
done, about the Cucurbite, kyndle a gentle and soft fire of coals in the
beginning, yielding an equal heat leysurely out of all the parts, and
increase the fire by little and little, unto evening (for in one day is the
same Dystillation ended) until the whole Cucurbite be covered and hid with
burning coals. And this conceive, that when the Cucurbyte is in a manner read
hot, then the Dystillation to be ended: so that then you may withdraw the
fire, and let them stand all a night without fire, that they may cool by
themselves. After draw forth the Cucurbite, and you shall find it empty of
Amber, but the stones which yet remain within black, covered as they were
with soote: And in the bottom of the nether Instrument you shall discern the
Feces, or the refuse appearing like to Pitche, and the Oil carried through the
Pype unto the receyuer, swymming on the water, which both are to be reserved,
until the oil be rectified. And these hitherto may suffice for the first
dystillation.

Of the Rectification. The.xliiij. Chapter.
LEt us now come unto the second and last dystillation, which is wrought by
ascension: and is the Rectifying of the oil, that is, the separation of the
pure from the vnpure, and performed after this manner: Take a glass Cucurbite,
and pour into it the water with the oil, that the belly of the same may be
filled unto the neck, and set on in like manner a head of glass, which commit
into Balneo, and you ought to govern all very well, least the heat breaks
it, and pour into Balneo hot water. For the glass through hot, cannot
endure the sudden cooling, but cracketh or breaks incontinent, which
prepared to distill, set then to the nose of the Lymbecke a glass receyuer,
and an oil will issue forth most pure, myxed with a little water: which also
must be separated from the Oil, by an instrument of glass, after the
instruction of Valerius Cordus, which manner he always used: or for lack of the
same, you may use the other instrument of glass, much like to the Funnell:
for this oil evermore swimmeth above the water.

And this dystillation may also be done by sand in the same manner, if so be
you fence the body before with lute, that the heat break not the glass, but
the purer and best commended, is that done by Balneo.

The Instrument of Valerius Cordus.


Another instrument of separating after the form of a Funnell.


4. Is ye empty space.

B. the pipe, by which ye air enters into ye empty space. 2. the space of
the oil and water.

5. the pype by which the water issues.

Of the virtues and utility of the rectified oil. The.xlv. Chapter.
THis Oil in ancient time was named holy, for the marvelous and secret
virtues of it: for it has the same properties, which the Amber it self, but
far effectuouser. For what efficacy and virtue consists in five, six, or
seven pounds of the Amber, the same may be reduced eas^ly into one pound: By
which reason it much avails in the falling sickness, in the Palsy, and
Crampe, and mightily helps women molested with the suffocation of the
Matrice, it comfort also the yongling in the mothers womb.

Of the Oil of Amber, and the virtues of it, does a certain learned man thus
write: it exceeds by his property (says he) all waters of life, as they
name them, and any manner of Aurum potabile, or potable gold, especially in the
curing of the Apoplexy, and falling sickness.

Of the Oil of Tylestones. The xlvi. Chapter.
THe Oil Benedick, or Oil of Tyle stones, having in it many virtues unto
cold griefs and diseases, and profitabler than a Baulme, by his virtue and
subtilnesse, is prepared and drawn after this manner: Take of new baked Tyles,
that never water came upon, such a quantity as you think needful, those
beat so small as Fetches, Hemp, Milium, or else the ponder most finely
fifted: After let it be poured into a glass body, or other body, and
mightily maintained with fire, or strongly burned: which thus burned, pour
into old and clear oil Olyue, if it may be gotten, being in an earthen
vessel glased: and let it so rest to infuse for vij. or x. days, and if any
pieces be gross, beat those small, and pour the whole into a great
Cucurbite, on which set a head artely luted in the joint, and dystill with a
soft fire: and this conceive, that of one pound of the Oil, you shall gather
but one ounce, whose natural virtue exceeds, and is greater in effect than
the natural Baulme, in the curing of all cold sicknesses and griefs, and is
hoter than it: and for that cause it is named oil Benedick, or blessed oil,
especially unto ye curing of cold sicknesses, and the older the oil shall be
before the occupying, ye better will it work.

The true and certain notes to know this Oil assuredly, are these: that the
oil Olive holds or bears up (as it were) this oil in the myddle of it: or
stays it hanging about the bottom, and not touching the bottom, whereof
this shows it self to be hoter and lighter than the oil Olyue: and the same
also which is not Artely drawn of Tyles, i^ heavy, so that if a drop be let
fall into this purer oil, it falls to the bottom: and in this is the
coldness and he auynesse of it known. Also this Oil causes or yields a
strong savor, and is read in color: and a drop of it besides poured in the
hand, does incontinent vanish away, and spreads all the hand: and if an iron
rod be anointed with the same Oil, and touched of any fl^me, does forthwith
burn: and kindled or flaming, does not easily go out, nor is lightly quenched.
When the distillation of this Oil shall be fully performed, open then the
vessel wittily after it shall be through cold, and draw forth the powder of
the Tyles resting in the bottom of the glass, into which oil after pour a
quantity of other powder burned, if you mind to purchase more of the Oil,
and dystill after the manner above taught: and the Oil dystilled, keep well in
a glass close stopped with wax.

There are here uttered xliiij. virtues of the same, auayling in a cold cause,
so well inward as outward. 1. First the Oil restores all those members cold
by any accident, if the harmed members be anointed with it. 2. It heals a
wound, if the proper herb agreeable, be a little boiled in it. 3. This
helps all ye clefts and chops happening on the hands and feet in the winter
time. 4. The oil helps sinews weak through the Gout, or some other cause,
and the trembling or shaking of the head and hands. 5. The Gout and ache of
the joints proceeding of a cold cause, the neck payning, and so stiff, that
it cannot turn hither and thither, is helpen with this oil. 6. It breaks
into small pieces the stone of the bladder and kidneys, by annoynting on the
places, and drinking often of the oil with white wine. 7. It cures also the
excoriation of the bladder, so well within as without (which is known by the
biting or fretting of the yard) by anointing on the proper place. 8. This
helps the staying back of the vryne, and hardness in the making of water. 9.
The oil helps the passions of ye ears proceeding of a cold cause, as the
deafness, the noise or hissing, and the flux of evil humors to the ears,
by applying a fine lynnen cloth wet in it within the ear. 10. This avails
against the worms either bred within, or crept in by hap. 11. This helps ye
drawing of the mouth by a crampe: and the drawing or tormenting of the belly,
and the griefs of the matrice in every age: to the help of the Sciaticke
pain, or ache of the hip, and pain of the kidneys and ridge bone, may be
added those herbs, flowers and roots of a hot nature, appropriated to them,
as the Sage, the Penyroyall, the Wormwood, ye running Time, Organy, Betony,
Hisop, and Dittany. 12. To every push, and raw impostume not through ripe, in
that the raw it soon rypeneth, and the ripe soon or speedily dissolueth: to
which if the Da^nell root, the yolk of an egg, and white Onyon roasted under
hot ymbers, be artly applied, does greatly profit. 13. The oil helps the
hardness of the milt through over much coldness, in that it speedily moystneth
and gently heateth it. 14. This oil helps such molested with the falling
sickness, is the nosthrill of the pacient be anointed with it. 15. This
helps the ^^slation or stopping of the brain and nose, through a cold cause
howsoever it shall happen, whether the eyes run or water, or the nosthrils be
full of phlegm, if the proper places be anointed with it, or that it be taken
by the mouth. 16. It helps all manner of coldness of ye head and brain: for
anointed with the oil, it does heat, and marvelously comforts. 17. This
also anointed on the hinder part of the head, does help forgetfulness, and
^ weak memory. 18. It cures the toothach, by rubbing or annoynting the gums
with it. 19. The oil drunk, helps the coldness of ye matrice, being also
anointed both within and without, and the staying back of the monthly terms.
20. It brings forth the dead yongling by opening the mouths of the veins.
21. It avails or cures the clotted blood of a stripe, and dries up the
evil humors of barren women. 22. The oil helps a cold cough, and stopping
of the lungs, by drinking and anointing the breast with it, and it cures a dry
and weak cough, which is named the straytnesse of the breast, and dissolueth
there the congealed humors, and opens the pypes of the lunges: anointed also
on the watery eyes, cures them, if the annoynting be done on the lids of the
eyes. 23. The oil cures the swelling of the lids, the pain and redness
through the swelling, or the abundance of bleude caused in them. 24. It also
cures ye bit of any venomous beast, as the Scorpion, the Spyder, the Waspe, ye
Be, the Snake, and Adder, if the stinged or poisoned place be anointed with
it. 25. The oil helps swounding and weakness of the heart and stomach, if
of it be drunk with good wine. 26. The oil profits fishermen, if their nets
be anointed with it before they go to fishing, for it allureth and draws
fishes in with the only savor. 27. It avails against the drinking of Opium,
or Henban. 28. This helps the grief and pain of the fundament, and worms:
drunk and anointed, especially if wormwood shall be admired with it. 29. It
helps the spitting of blood, and pissing of blood. 30. And whose blood is
congealed or clotted in the head, and the cause is of an impostume engendered,
or of a strype, if the place be anointed with it, this helps in short time,
31. The oil also avails and helps the person broken, by anointing, and
applying of it in plaster form, with the juice of wormwood. 32. This avails
against a hard and dry scab of ye head, by annoynting the places with it. 33.
This helps any Fistula. 34. The oil helps the stone of the bladder and
kidneyes, if the herbs agreeable unto this, as the Saxifrage, Grummell seeds,
Parsely seeds, Fennel seeds, and Gotes blood be mixed with it, and given to
drink. And blessed be the Lord God who of his exceeding liberality has
provided so many sundry helps, and varieties of things to man's frailty. 35. If
in the oil Benedick, you shall boil long pepper, and the grains of paradise,
and Pelitorie, of each one dram, and half a dram of Castorie, and with this
shall anoint (the Edray) avails unto coeating. 36. That a candell may not go
out, neither with rain nor the wind: take a quantity of silk or towe, and
wet the same in the oil Benedick, and with talow or wax make a candle, which
may burn in the water. 37. The dung also of the Dove myxed with the oil
Benedick, and a dry stick anointed with that mixture, and laid for a space
in the hot Sun, will kindle and burn of it self. 38. Take also of vnstaked
Lyme and Brimstone, of each a like quantity, these temper or myxe with the oil
Benedick, and form pylles of the whole, which throw into a pot of water, and
fire will issue forth of the water. That a thread may put out a candell
burning, wind it then about the candell: but annoint it before with good
Triacle, and it will put the light forth.

The fourth Book of Dystillations, containing many singular secret Remedies.

Of the dystilling of Aqua vitae, or as some name it, burning water, and of the
properties of the same.
The first Chapter.
THe water which is dystilled out of wine, or the lies of the same, is named of
some the water of life, in that it recouereth and maintayneth life, yea, and
stays old age. But this may righter be named the water of death, if it shall
not be rightly and Artly prepared: insomuch that such a water causes more
harm than commodity, as the Author of Pyrotechnia utters. But of some
named burning water, in that this poured on the hear of the head, or on a
cloth, and putting a candell to it, forthwith burns, in such manner, that the
hears of the head seem, or the clothe to burn, although neither of them be
consumed. The Quintessence also is said to be reduced of the Chemists, unto an
extreme subtilnesse. The burning water or water of life, is sometimes
dystilled out of pleasant and good wine, as the white or read, but oftener
drawn out of the wine lies, of a certain eager savor, or corrupt wine, by a
Tin or Copper Lymbecke, having the head sharp in ye top (like to a spyre
steeple) and a bucket for cold water framed artely upon, and the Furnace also
heated moderately with coals, as writes Lemnius. Further when out of pure
wine, a water of life is distilled, I hear (says D. Gesnerus) that out of a
great quantity of good wine, a little yield or quantity of burning water to
be distilled: but out of the lies of wine, a much yield and quantity
gathered: and out of the wine Alsatico, is not so commendable an Aqua vitae
dystilled: Besides, the burning wine in lightness, does in a manner exceed or
pass all other moystures, forasmuch as there be four (as the same Lemnius
reports in his second book, and. 34. cap.) of the secret miracles of
nature, which by reason of the lyghtnesse and heaviness, do contend in
themselves, as the wine, the water, the oil, and honny, of which the lightest,
and smallest of weight, is the burning wine, which mixed with the oil, floteth
above, and the oil setleth under: In that it is all the earthlye gathering, to
the uttermost boiled to it, and is the whole fiery and ayreall substance
wrought of the same, and next to this in lightness is the oil. etc.

That if you will try, whether the Quintessence be pure, or cou^terfaited,
wette a napkin or lynnen cloth in the said lyquour, and putting a candell to
it, set on fire, if incontinent it flameth, and the cloth never the worse, then
is it most effectuous and perfect. And handkerchiefes wette in this water,
being kyndled, flame, and not consume them, for the flame so lightly burns on
the linen cloth, that it pierces or enters not through, but as it were, by a
licking manner, suppeth up the lycour agreeable to it, and of a fiery nature:
That if you pour a little of it in the palm of the hand, and set it on fire
with the flame of paper, it then burns in the palm, and not heateth nor
burns the hand.

I have tried the marvelous virtue of it (says Lemnius) in many matters, for
at what time the air is very cold, and that it strongly freeseth, this lycour
for all that is not frosen, nor congealed to yse, insomuch the ynke at that
season, and many others besides, myxed with certain drops of it, are
defended from being frosen, and the same proceeds through the extreme
hotenesse and thynnesse, which consist in it: this burning wine myxed with
salt, and set on fire, causes the standers about, whiles it flameth, to
appear like dead persons. Hitherto Ringelbergius. This seetheth an egg, and
preserves boiled or raw flesh from putrefying, being dipped in the same: and
troubled wine myxed with it, cleereth, and is restored: and dropped into new
wine, does like clear it: Wine decaying and sower, it also restores: It
draws forth the virtue of all herbs, if they be infused in it, except the
savor of the Violet, which it retayneth not: The savor of it slays all
venymous worms, and auoydeth poison. This Vitalis. And this one thing is
marvelous, which I learned (says the Author) of a credible person: that if
certain drops of the water be poured into a gunne, and myxed with the powder
at the shooting of, this htetsarb: In the same manner are also great rocks of
stone broken: and I hear (says the Author) a beaten way so made by the
valley Tellina, (as I guess) toward Millaine: By the dropping of the water on
the rocks, made of wine thrice dystilled over, which by that means are
woonderfullye cracked and broken a sunder. Further a lynnen clothe dypped in it
(as we have above uttered) does wholye flame, without harm of the threades:
and dystilled a fourth time over, if you then throw of it up into the air,
nothing of it will discende or fall to the earth: And if you will a fish to
have a better savor with it, kill the fish then in this dystilled licour, and
suffer the same to lie in it a time, and it will continue in the like savor for
many days: if you season the fish killed in this manner, with Salt and Pepper,
there will nothing eat pleasanter, especially if it shall be a fish of the
best kind. The burning water often distilled, if with it you shall wash the
hands, and set on flame, they will burn without harm. This Gaudentius Merula,
in libro. 4. memorabilium, that if in the dystilling, the powder of Sulphur
viue be myxed, then the Aqua vitae kindled, will burn the stronger. This
cease the pain of the head, if it proceed of a cold matter. And druncke
with a fasting stomach for two days together, with a little quantity of
Triacle, purges the head, and dries up by the moystures of the same: If any
drincketh a quantity of this, with some manner of wine, in the morning fasting,
does like comfort the brain: This puts away the dymnesse of sight, and
consumes the web and spots of the eyes, and dries up the running of them:
and dropped into the ears, restores hearing: A lynnen cloth wette in it, and
laid on the tongue, restores the speech of the palsy person, if it shall be
often repeated for certain hours. Some commend the sublimation of wine
against worms which breed in the teeth, by washing the mouth with it: and the
best wine for this purpose (as affirms Alexander Benedictus) is the Candie,
or Rennishe wine, which the oftener repeated by distillation, will be the
stronger. This water drawn by a glass Limbecke, anointed on the neck, and
drunck in the morning fasting, helps hoarsnesse. The use of it in the
dropsy, is on this manner exercised: take half a measure of the Aqua vitae,
which gently heat, that it may be in a manner warm, after wash the feet with
it, and let the feet stand in the same for one quarter of an hour, then the
soles of the feet rub with the juice of the Nettle, and about the ancle
bones, and the pacient shall in short time be cured, as Virus of Rochberg
reported to the Author. The water sublymed of pure wine, avails against
refting or belching, proceeded of cold and wind: This Alexander Benedictus.
The Germans in a certain place, do drink or taste of the water thryse
distilled over, supposing it auayleable against flewme: the same Author. To be
auayleable against the pains of the loins, and phlegmatic swellings, did the
author understand and learn this of a certain farmer or franklin of the
country, on this wise: that a platter or basen should be taken, and so fenced,
that it could not be harmed with the fire, through a cloth laid on it: the same
so prepared, set into a hot house, close on every side, and the cloth then wet
with the best Aqua vitae, set on a flame (for if the Aqua vitae be good, the
cloth will not be burned) and let the pacient incontinent enter into that close
room, and he shall forthwith sweat, in that it procures there a mighty
heat: and let this be done five times, or more, according to the strength of
the pacient, and the places payning, bath well with the Aqua vitae, in which
the flowers of Spykenarde, shall be steeped, and the pacient shall be shortly
helped: And unto the stone of the bladder, they will to drink the water of
life, for the space of seven months, every day morning and evening, myxing
together two parts of pure wine, and one of the water of life: and in this
manner is the stone broken, and the pieces sent forth with the urine: Wounds
bathed with the water, and the Canker, and Fistula, are healed with it.

Vitalis de Furno (out of many) attributed these properties to it, that it
breaks impostumes as well within as without the body, if it be drunck, or
applied sometimes without: It takes away the spots of the eyes, and both the
redness and heat of them, and stays the shed^ing of tears: It helps such
diseased in the spleen and liver, being discretely drunck: It congealeth
Mercury, whiteneth Copper, and dissolueth the spirits and bodies calcyned: It
cures wounds, any manner Gout, the Canker, and Fistula, if drunck, or the
place of the wound washed with it: It sharpeneth understanding, discretely
taken, and matters past, it brings to memory, and makes the person
exceeding merry, and preserves youth: It cures the salt phlegm, and read
spots of the face: It takes away the stink of the nosthrils, gummes, and
armeholes: Gargelled, breaks impostumes in the throat: It very much helps
the Melancholic: and much profits the ache in the hippes, the gout, and
ioyntaches: It cures the Dropsy of a cold cause: It much avails against
the cholicke passion: with his lyme dissolved in wine, it breaks the stone of
the bladder: but dissolved with his salt, does break the stone of the kidneys,
and sends the pieces forth: And taken moderatly, does put away the quartaine
Ague: If the leprous person shall measurably drinck of the water sometimes, the
lepri^ shall not further extend: It profits women to conceive, and
conception it strengthens, if the woman conceived, drinck of it: If a little
of it be druncke sometimes, or holden a whiles in the mouth, cures the Rheum
^ The water anointed on the decayed eyes, and liddes, cures them: It gives
boldn^sse, if any faint hearted or weak couraged person, shall sometimes drink
of it. These hitherto Vitalis. Further of the properties of the same water in
general, does Leuius Lemnius: utter these in his book of the secret miracles
of nature: where he writes, that no lycour, which is ministered unto any use to
man's body, is either lighter, or more peercing, than the Aqua vitae, or that
more preserves and defends all things from putrefying, or corruption: whose
use has grown so common with the nether Germany, and Flaunders, that
freelyer than is profitable to health, they take and drinck of it: for not to
all persons, or at all times, the drinking of it is so agreeable and
healthful, insomuch that to lean persons, and of a dry nature, and in the
summer time, the use of it is very dangerous, for it burns their bodies, and
consumes natural moisture in them: but in the fat and moist bodies, and
such which do abound in the flegmaticke humors, this nothing harmeth, in that
the water digesteth the excrementall humors, and both defends and preserves
such bodies from the lithargie, or sleeping down right, the Apoplexy, and all
cold sicknesses. For which cause in ye winter time, I allow a moderate use of
it, as the quantity of half a dram (which fills a spoone) at one time,
thoroughly sweetened with sugar, and a slyce of fine white bread eaten with it,
whereby the burning force of it may the less strike or give unto the nosthrils
and brain, or hastily carry any harm to the liver, through the penetrable and
fervent heat: but applied without, does greatly help the sinews and muscles,
and the members oppressed with cold, all other painful diseases, which come
of cold humors, it asswageth and puts away, through the heating force, and
swiftness of piercing: and it recouereth also speech deprived and lost, if at
that instant time be mixed to it, of the seeds of Roket, and the squillitick
vinegar: That if the Aqua vitae be distylled twyse or thryse over, it
purchases an incredible force of peerchig. These hitherto Lemnius.

Of the instruments which the best practitioners use, unto the dystilling of
Aqua vitae. The second Chapter.
Seeing in the dystillation of the water of life, many gross spirits are
elevated or sent up by force of the heat, for that cause, the practisioner
must endeavor to temper them, and to cause those subtiller through the benefit
and help of the long, narrow and winding instruments, and the distillation to
be performed, needs not only cooling, but also to be in a cold place, where
water may remain for the continual cooling of them, that no viscositie or
grossness come unto the Limbecke, whereof is come to pass, that diverse and
sundry instruments are invented by skillful practisioners, unto the better
performing of the abouesaide.

Many do dystill the burning water by a bladder (as they name it) as Louicer9
reports, and teaches in his book, which the learned may there read, and
practice if they will: but this manner of dystillation, for that they shed the
water, is not allowed of the best dystillers: and for that reason they use this
manner and way, for a more speedynesse, and shorter form invented in a manner
for the Poticarie, only with us of Germany.

An instrument for the dystilling of the water of life, out of the lies of
Wine. The third Chapter.


A. represents the Furnace being round in form, or square, if it be,
forces not much.

B. does here express the place or hole, by which the fire is made under the
pot, or other copper vessel.

C. does here represent the Brass pot or Copper vessel, sufficient able or
great enough, containing the lies.

D. does signify the cover of the vessel, which if the same be made hollow
imbossing toward the myddle, and that in the myddle where the pype issues
forth, this be framed to a sharpness, it will send by the vapors much
better, than if the cover were plain or flat.

E. does signify the hole of the cover, into which the pype is set, and artely
fastened.

F. does aptlye show the Copper pype, carrying forth the vapors, which ought to
be made wrything and wynding after this manner: for on such wise (as they say)
the water will seem the oftener to be dystilled: or the same perhaps so framed,
that the vapors the longer kept back, may the lightlyer and easier be
thickened. Some there be, which make sundry windings in the pype, before it
enters within the Bucket or firkin, which perhaps less allowed and commended
of the skylfuller practisioners.

G. represents the wooden payle, bucket, or firkin containing in it the cold
water. H. Does signify the benche or great stool with four feet, bearing
the bucket or firkin full of cold water.

K. the place lower on the bench or stool, where the receyuer ought artely to
be set and fastened.

Two furnaces may be buylt near to this firkin or bucket (for on such wise
with us, a certain practisioner was wont to dystill the burning water) of
which, the one may be erected nearer to the bucket, and the other placed
further of: in the nearer pot to the Bucket, let the Lies be first dystilled:
in the other vessel placed further of, let it be dystilled a second time,
that the water may be the subtiller and purer. And the same water, may perhaps
be drawn with lesser business, if in the second dystillation, it be dystilled
with a longer Pype: in that by a longer Pype and way retching, the spirits
sent forth, may the thinner be gathered.

An other Instrument. The fourth Chapter.
1. The vessel or pot, containing the matter or liquide substance: A
certain dystiller (with the Author) had a pot that held xvj. measures: out of
which he drew, after a second, or third dystillation repeated, about three
measures.



2 Represents the cover of the vessel.

3 Does here set forth the pype, which ought to be made broad beneath (as the
Pynapple) and sharp vppewarde: and the same pype may be made double, that
the one filled with cold water, and heated, may be again drawn out.

4 Expresses the paile or bucket, containing the cold water.

5 Signifies the trancheon or small block of wood, set on a high stool, ye
apter to bear the Bucket, equal to the head, and nose of the instrument
placed.

6 Does here represent the place where the receyuer ought to be set and
fastened. 7 Plainly shows the fire, to be made round about of any small cloue
wood. By such an instrument, is a far greater yield of burning water
purchased, than by the common Limbecks: for so much as the pype retching from
the cover of the vessel, does ascend right up, and not as in the others
windingly: and in this perhaps is a greater speed made, than in the other
instruments.

Another Instrument for the dystilling of the water of life, borrowed out of
Pyrotechnia. The.v. Chapter.
ALthough sundry and diverse instruments be daily invented: yet I saw this
always most commodious, and profitablest, whose form shall hereafer be
described: and first let a Copper vessel tynned within be prepared, out of
which in that part, by which the wine is poured in, let a long pype formed with
many empty parts retch upward: and at the end above of three or four
yardes, let a small bucket either of Copper or wood be set, in the same manner
placed, that the pype in part of the bole, or in the upper part of the bucket,
retch wynding up, from the middle of it: but at the top or straight end of
this wynding Pype, let a head of glass be aptlye framed and set on, to the
nose of which artely set and fasten a receyuer, for the Aqua vitae dystilling
forth: This vessel on such wise prepared, set aptly into the furnace, and
the wine pour into it, by the pype retching up on the other side, right
against the cock, by which also the grounds or superfluous substance after
the dystillation ended, are purged clean forth: But in the upper part, the
bole or bucket placed under the pype, which for his wynding is named the
Serpent, shall be filled with cold water, and a soft fire in the beginning
made under the vessel of wine: whose furnace ought to be buylt after this
form above demonstrated.

A fourth Instrument for the dystilling of the Aqua vitae, so workemanly and
cunningly drawn, that the water but once dystilled, may be purchased most
mighty or strong: And I hear such a practice at Florence to be in use.
The.vi. Chapter.


A. Signi^^eth the place, where the ashes rest.

B. Does here represent the grate bearing the fire.

C. Does here manifestly show the place, where the fire is made.

D. Does express the high and narow furnace, worckmanly made.

E. Shows the long and byg vessel, receiving the great quantity of wine.

F. Represents the most narrow joint.

G. the pype, by which the wine is poured in.

H. does instruct the way, by which the vapors ascend.

I. The nose of the head, to which the mouth of ye receyuer is set and
fastened. K. Does here represent the bucket or other vessel, filled with cold
water, and cooling the head. L. Does show the cane or pype, by which the cold
water ascends or ryseth up into the bucket, M. Represents the nose or pype
of the bucket, by which the hot water is drawn forth. N. Signifies the
barrel or hoggesheade made long, and filled with cold water.

An instrument which is so formed, that the water by sucking, is forced to rise
up and run forth: as the like practice is often ^sed, in pittes of water, or
wells. And by this instrument with a little fire, may a great quantity of
the water of life be dystilled and gathered.

Of the diverse manners of distylling the Aqua vitae, so well simple, as
compounde. The.vij. Chapter.
A Water sublymed out of pure wine, affyrmeth an unknown practysioner, and the
same is of late days invented, to sublime the water by a glass or Copper
Body, in the which doing, the gross substance and refuse remains, or
stays behind, and the lighter matter, in the vapors ascending, dystilleth
and is gathered in the Receauer. Vitalis de Furno wylleth thus to dystill, the
simple burning water: Take pure Claret wine, and strong, which power into a
Lymbecke, and dystill with a soft fire, as you do the Rosewater, and a burning
water will issue forth by sublimation, which look how oftener it shall be
dystilled over, and so much the subtyller and profitabler it will be.

That the water of life once dystilled over, may be so perfyte and good, and
possess the same properties: which an other thrice, four times, or oftener
dystilled does. The.viij. Chapter.
IF so be you will dystill, a simple Aqua vitae, or burning wine at one
dystillation, that in property and virtue it may be, as if the same were
twenty times dystilled over, then cover a Sponge over the mouth of the
Cucurbite, and the Lymbecke close with the seal or lute of Hermes, and a
receauer set to the nose of the Lymbecke, and luted in the ioynte, dystill
according to Art in Balneo Mariae: For on such wise is caused, that the spyrit
of the wine ascends unto the highest, and from thence by the Nose falls
into the Receauer: but all the waterynesse, remains by the way in the
Sponge. And a certain Alchymister used this manner, for a most great and deep
secret. We compared or assayed it (says D. Gesnerus) with the Aqua vitae,
once dystilled over without a Sponge, and we found ours of greater effect and
virtue: and we again assayed it, with an other water dystilled ten times over
without a Sponge, and ours did more pearce, then that. A certain dystiller
with us (says the Aucthour) affyrmeth that the Aqua vitae only once
dystilled, to be very unwholesome to them, which drink it: and to have a great
force of putrefying, as the same experience proves. If the burning water be
set on fire (says he) and quenched again after a whiles, that which
remains, very much sauoureth or stincketh. But the water which shall be twice
or thrice distylled over, neither stincketh nor putrifieth.

Of the distyllation of Quintessence out of wine, by Balneum Mariae: Take of
white wine, the best, four measures, or five according to the greatness of
the Glass body, so that a third part of the Cucurbyte be empty, on which,
set a head of Glass, luted in the ioynte, with the whytes of Eggs, meal, and
water myxed together, and spread on a Lynnen clothe before the laying on: which
on this wise prepared, set into Balneum Mariae, and distyll after with a very
soft fire, both day and night: For out of five measures, you shall purchase
but a half measure pure, which after the rectifying in a Pellicane for
certain days, keep to your use.

A water of Life out of wine, distylled thrice over: Take twenty pyntes of good
and gross wine, and draw out of the whole four pintes, in such a vessel as
you know: after out of those four, draw two pyntes and out of those two
again, draw only one pynte. This water avails against any redness, and
spotte of the eyes, and is profitable unto all wounds, and avails also
against the Rewme and Fistula, and unto many other grieffes besides it is right
profitable. That if you myxe with this the gaul of a Partriche, it takes
away the heat, and myste of the eyes: also dropped in the eyes, stays and
takes away the tears, if it shall be mixed with the juice of the wild Time.

A burning water, take a pottell of the auncientest Red wine, and poured into a
great pytchard or Tankard, having a large bottom, and narrow mouth, to which
add three ounces of either Brunstone, or either O^pyment, of Armoniacke, of
Tartare, and of Salt nytre, and one pynte of very old Oil olyue, or common
Oil, which boil together unto the consumption of two parts, and let the
whole be strayned, to which then let hot or burning water be added, and drawn
after by an Ippocrasse bag or strainer, that the first water may be gotten.
If a Candle be anointed with this water, or the wyke of any other light, and
put under the water, will not go out. If this water also be sprinkled on the
heir of the head, on a clothe, or on a cappe, that it may burn, this after it
shall be consumed, the clothe will remain unharmed, or any other, on which it
is sprinkled. This Rogerius, in his fourth Tract. Chap. 7. where you shall
fullyer learn, this manner of distillation, by the former Chapter.

A burning water you may make on this wise: take thick, mighty, and old red
wine, to which add a quarter of the same, of vnsleaked Lyme, of Brymstone most
finely brought to powder, of the Tartare of good wine like brought to powder,
and of baye Salt: which pour together into a Cucurbite well luted: after the
head set on, and luted in the joint, distyll according to Art, and the burning
water gathered, keep in a Glass close stopped: this Albertus Magnus.

A spyced water, which they name the water of Life, or an Hyppocras, or Baulme:
let the herbs, the sweet smellyng roots, and Spyces, be stieped in six
times so much of good wine, for thyrtie days, the wine after strained, and the
spices broken, add again to the wine, and distyll the whole according to
Art. To the water distylled, add of fresh Sage, half an ounce, of Cynamon,
of Gynger, of Cloves, of Nutmegges, of Sage with the roots, and Grains of
Paradize, which after the infusion, distyll over again.

A water of Life serving unto diverse grieffes, proceeding of cold: as unto the
Gout, and pains of the same, unto the pain of the Bowelles, and distyllation
from the head, druncke twyse in a month: and the grief also of the teeth, the
gummes, and disseases of the Tongue, this marvelously helps, it works much
good to the stomach charged with flewme: and the collicke passion* one dram
given, with so much of good Triacle in wine. Take of burning water one pynt, of
Euphorbium, of Odellium, of Sagapenum, of Spodium, of long Pepper, of Cubebae,
of Opopanax, of Cynamon* of Cloves, of Nutmegs* of Pellytory, of Cyperus, of
Squinantum, of each one ounce, all these artlye brought to powder, stiepe in
burning water for three days, and draw the lycour according to Art in a
dystyllatorie instrument: this Bertapalia.

A water of Life against the Pestilence, borrowed out of a written Book: Take
of the Cloves half a dram, of Cynamon, of Zedoaria, of the roots of Valerian,
of Pympernell, of Turmentyll, and of red Roseleaues, of each one dram, of
the Cytrine and red Saunders, of Spodium, of the ryndes of the Cytrone, of
Doronicum, of Terra Sigillata, of Dittany, of Seseleos, of Baulme, of Maioram,
of the Helycampane, of the seeds of Seseleos, of Carabe, of Ruberbe, of
Nutmegges, and of Mace, of each half a dram, of Scabious, of the flowers of
Borrage, of Buglosse, of Rosemarie, of the Hearts horn burned, of Rue, of
Colyander prepared, Spetierum liberantis, Specierum de gennus, Diacameronis,
Letitiae Almansoris, Diarrhodon abbatis, Diamargaritonis, of the Iacinct, of
the Smaragde, of the pure Pearls, of each one dram, of Methridate, of Triacle
of venice, and of fine Bole armoniacke, of each half a scruple, of the leaves
of Gold and Silver, of each seven in number, of the best burning wine eight
pyntes: let all these be disligentlye beaten and labored together, and myxed
with the sublymed Wine, which after power into a glased vessel, and stop
diligently the mouth, that no air breathe forth, best let so stand to infuse
for three days, and dystill after with a soft fire according to Art, in
Balneo Mariae. Let of the same be given in the Pestilence, with the Electuarie
aunswerable or agreeable to it.

A water of life, helping all cold grieffes and sicknesses, especially an
astonyed dissease, the tenderness of members, and pain of the Gout and
joints: Take of burning water drawn of the best wine, half a pynte, of
Acorus prepared, two ounces, of Rosemary flowers and Sauge flowers, of each
one ounce and a half, of the leaves of the same herb, half a handful, of
Cynamon, of Xyloaloes, of each one dram, of Mace, of Cardomomum, of the ryndes
of the Cytrone, of Cloves, of Saffron, of each half a dram, of Nardus one
scruple, of Gynger one dram, of Stachados two ounces, of Musk, and of Amber,
of each six graynes: all these after the breaking somewhat, stiepe together
for five days, the Spices separated, dystill the liquour, and ad too after the
Spices.

Of a noble water, helping many sicknesses and griefs, of which as well the
first that is dystilled, as the second, laid on a fresh wound twyse in the
day, is affyrmed to heal it in a short time: also the Canker, the Fistula,
eating Cankers, or Wolf, and the dissease which is named Noli metangere, if
they be washed once a day with either, does speedily cure them: and if half a
dram weight be druncke, with a small draft of the best wine, breaks the
stone, and sends it forth: it mittigateth and helps the heat of the vryne
in the coming forth, and any manner grieffes of the Matrice: and anointed
with a like wayght of fat lycour, helps weariness, and strengthens the
Synewes: the Pacientes also molested with the Crampe, and washed thrice in the
day with this water, are speedily helped, and many other infirmyties this does
like help. But the water a third time distylled of these, maintayning the
color of the blood, is very precious, of which, if any shall drink half a
spoonefull, for fifteen days together, shall be cured of the Leprie, the
Palsy, the water between the Skin, the joint Ache, the Gout, and other
like disseases. This druncke besides unto the quantity of half a dram, or at
the least twice in the week, with a spoonefull of Borrage water for a year
together, does stay back old age, and recouereth strength (in such manner)
that if any sick be near drawing an^ ^r nigh head, and shall receive a little
quantity of this water, shall not ha^tity or sodaynlie dye. The manner of making
this water is on this wise: take of Zedoaria, of Galingale, of the long and
round Pepper, of Cloves, of Gynger, of Juniper Berryes, of the ryndes of the
Cytrone, and of the Orrenge, of Sauge leaves, of Basyll, of Rosemarie, of
Maiorame, of Myntes, of Baye berryes, of Penny royal, of Gentiane, of
Catmynte, of Elder flowers, of the red and white Roseleaues, of Nardus, of
Xyloaloes, of Cubebae, of Cardamomum, of Cynamome, of Calamus aromaticus, of
Stoechados, of Germaunder, of Chamaepithis, of Melegeta, of Mace, of Olibanum,
of Aloes Hepaticke, of the seeds and leaves of Mugwoorte, and of the seeds of
Wormewoode, of each one dram, of Fygges, of Reisons, of the meat of Dates, of
sweet Almondes and of Pine Apple kernels, of each one ounce, of chosen Honey
six ounces, of Sugar unto double the weight of the whole: all which brought
well to powder, stiepe in burning water drawn^ of the best wine, unto the
quantitye of three times so much, as the weight of the whole, which distyll
with a glass head according to Art^.

A singular water clearing the face and eyes: take of the field^ Rue, of
Fennel, of the leaves of Veruaine, of Bytony roots, of Roseleaues, and of
Maiden heir, of each a like quantity: these stiepe together for a night in
white Wine, strong and pleasant, and distyll after in a Cucurbyte after Art:
this Fumanellus.

A distylled lycour, for the speedylie healing of wounds, out of Fumanellus:
Take of the water of Life, or burning water, four ounces, of good Triacle
half an ounce, which distyll in a glass body after Art: of this apply on
the wound, on which straw dry, both of Aloes and Myrre (I mean the powder)
and on this again a Lynnen cloth wette in the foresaid water.

Unto the procuring of sleep, so many hours as is thought needful* take of
the white and black Poppie seeds, half an ounce, of good white wine, and of
the gaul of a Hare, of each two drams, of pure Aqua vitae, four ounces: let
these be poured together into the water, and (infused) for three days, which
after distyll by a Lymbecke, in Balneo Mariae. A drop of this procures
sleep for an hour, and two drops taken, for two hours, etc.

A certain composition of Doctor Gesnerus, for the dropsse, or the hardness
of fetching breathe: Take of old White wine two pyntes, of Cynamon one ounce,
of the Ireos of Florence, half an ounce, of our Ireos two drams and a half,
of the red Roseleaues three drams, of Colya^der prepared, one dram and a half,
of Fennel, and of Gynger, of each two drams, of ye roots of Asarum, three
drams, of Master woort half an ounce, of Chamaeleontis albi, and of Brionie,
of each two drams, of the ryndes of Esula three drams, of Arum one dram, of
the Electuarie of ye juice of Roses half an ounce^ all these after the
beating, stiepe in a Glass body well-luted, which distyll in ashes according
to Art, until strakes like to parted lines appear in the head. Of this give
one ounce, at a time, as tried. And for the same, may it be wrought or done
with ye whay of milk alone or with wine, in adding thereto a quantity of
Sugar, or Rosed H^nny, when you shall mynister it.

And he sometimes wylled a wine to be dystilled, in which the Raspinges of the
wood Guaiacum, the Juniper berries, and Cynamo^* and a little of red Roseleaues,
have been stieped before.

A water of Life, of D. Thomas Fincke, for many grieffes: take of Lauender, and
of Sage, of each three quarters, of Rue one ounce and a half, of Gynger, of
Nutmegges, of Cloves of Cynamon, of Grains of Paradize, and of white Sugar, of
each half an ounce, of Mace, of Alkekengi, of each one ounce and a half, of
Oil olyue two drams: al these after the beating, power into three pyntes (or a
pottell) of the strongest wine, which let stiepe together for fourteen days,
after distyll the whole according to Art, with a very soft fire.

A most singular water of Life, distylled for a noble man, helping the
consumption (and perhaps the wasting of the Lunges) take of ye sublymed wine,
of good Malmes^e, four pintes, here white bread a quantity, which let stand
close stopped in a Lymbecke for fourteen days: then distyl the same by
Balneum Mariae: after take of Specierum diamargariton, of Diambrae, of
Diarrhodon abbatis, of Dianthos, of Diap^^riscu^ musco, letitiae Galeni, of
each two drams, of Cassia new drawn, and of Sugarcandy, of each one ounce,
of the juice of Lycorys, two ounces, of Rosemary three drammes, of Musci
Alexandrini, half an ounce: let al these stand close stopped, in a
distyllatory vessel, for a whole month. After let the distyllation be done,
by Balneum Mariae, and the water separated into two parts: for the first water
gathered, is nobler then the second.

Another water of Life, written in the Germane tongue: take of the best Aqua
vitae one pottel, which distyl as you know, in a glass body in water, or by
Balneum Mariae: and of the whole gather a quarte, after take of Cynamon two
ounces, the same finely cut or choppped, and powered into a Glass, let it be
myxed with the Aqua vitae, (in such manner) that it may cover the Cynamon a
finger breadth above, which let stand together close stopped, for twelve or
fifteen hours, that the Aqua vitae may so purchase a red or blooddie
color, which pour after into another Glass, and dylligentlie stop the
same. Again to the same Cynamon, power another part of the Aqua vitae (of
like quantitye) least of the whole, which order as above taught: and the same
you shall do so often, as this half part endures, always pouring in, and
that so powered and colored, mix with the first, until the Aqua vitae powered
in be no more colored read. After take half an ounce of Cloves, finely
brought to powder, and likewise the other half of the Aqua vitae or more
remaining, power to this powder, as above uttered. That if of the Aqua vitae in
this doing, there shall no more remain, then take the red Aqua vitae in the
Glass body, and setting a head on it, dystill so much, as shall be needeful to
stiepe the matter: for no redness at all ascends, but what that is then
gathered by distyllation, is white. After this take half an ounce of Nutmegs
finely cut, and as above taught, pour the water of Life upon. Which done, take
the Aqua vitae of the Cloves, and of the Nutmegs, and mix them together with
the Aqua vitae of ye Cynamon. Then take of pure Malmesie, or of the best Renish
wine, one measure, which pour into a glased pot, to it add of Sugarca^dy
beaten, three ounces, and the mouth of the pot covered with paste, set on the
fire, that the Sugar may by little and little melt, and the Sugar molten* let it
leysurely cool. After the cooling, pour into it the red Aqua vitae, which
myxe together in the pot, or rather in a glass, for that it may aptlyer and
closer be stopped: and then shall you obtain, a singular Aqua vitae.

A most noble Aqua vitae, against a Reume: Take of Hysope, of Sauery, of white
Horehounde, of Euulae, of Ireos, of Louage, of Bytony, of Sage, of the leaves
of that Trifoyle (which sends up or yields many gross flowers so byg as a
Nut, in which flowers sucked, is found a certain sweetness, so pleasant as
Sugar or Honey) of each half a pound. All these, after the gross beating, put
into a Glass body, on which power so much of the strongest or myghtiest wine,
that will cover a finger breadth above. This after the distylling, keep
dilligently in a Glass: for it is more of value then Gold, or precious Stones.

A water of Life helping the Apaplexie, and Falling sickness, for it is, as a
certain water of Baulme: Take of Gingar, of Cloves, of Nutmegs, and of Grains
of Paradize, of each half an ounce, of Sage leaves one pound, of Cardamomum,
of Cubebae, of Masticke, of Galingale, of Rosemary, of Lauender, of Mai^rame,
of Baulme, and of Bytony, of each two drams, all these beaten and brought to
powder, power into a Glass body, on which pour nine pyntes of the strongest
and best wine, or so much dystilled wine as will well cover the whole, this
infused for ten days, distyl after according to Art. The water gathered,
helps the Palsy, the swymming of the head, the Ap^plexie, the Crampe, both
memory, and the head, and a cold stomach: and flesh, or fish sprincled over
with the same, does not after corrupt. And myxed with corrupt wine, rectyfieth
it: of this let be druncke three or four drops at a time, with a small slice
of bread dipped in the same, and after eaten, does so sharpen the wit. And let
the hinder part also of the head, and other places, be rubbed with it. It
helps the dropsy, the Melancholicke, and such disseased of the Spleen: and
for the eyes, it is very precious.

A certain marvelous and delectable distyllation, which a certain person
obtained of a certain occupyer, the experience of which. I both did and saw,
says a certain man unnamed: take of the best Malmesie, six measures, the
same distyll by a Lymbecke with a soft fire nine times over: after add to it
of Amber greese, of Sperma ceti, of chosen Rubarbe, of each half an ounce, of
Musk half a dram, these brought to powder: tie up in a fine Lynnen clothe,
being thin, which hang or put within the Aqua vitae. This water is
marvelous, and of great virtue, and serves for Kings, and Princes.

A water of Life of Frederick the Emperors, serving unto all grieffes: Take
of Aqua vitae half a measure, but of Malmesie a whole measure, of Cynamon
three ounces, of Cloves one ounce, of Gynger one ounce and a half, of Nutmegs
one ounce, of Venice Zedoaria, three ounces and a half, of the Grains of
Paradize, one ounce and a half, of Galingale two drams, of Cubebae half an
ounce, of Rosemary half an ounce, of Hysop so much, of Althea so much, of the
roots of Benedictae one ounce, of Sage one ounce, of Lauender half an ounce,
let al these be broken with the hands, and the others brought to powder, which
after put into a Glass body sufficient large, that may contain or hold three
or four measures of licour. To these the^ add of Sugar Candy three ounces, of
Reysons of the Sun, half a pound, of small Reysons one quarter of a pound, of
Figs one quarter of a pound, of Camphora one dram, of Rosewater, half a
cup full, of the water of Elder flowers so much, and so much of Endyue water,
all these then stop close, and set in the Sun for eight days, before the
Feast of S. John, and so many days after it, which after the strayning,
dyligently keep in a Glass close stopped. Of this use, when need shall
require, that is, in the greatest weakness of body and feblenesse of
strength, give a spoonefull of it, and you shall try and see maruailes: for
with this alone (as the report goes) was Frederick Caesar recovered.

A compound water of Life maruaylous, auayling against the Pestilence sore
vexing, and often proved, discribed of D.D. Mag. Take of the Rue newly
gathered, of Sage, of Lauender, of Rosemary, of Scabious, of the roots of
Tormentyl, of Pimpernel, of Valerian, and of the Dragons, of each two drams, of
Iunyper berries, and Baye berries, of each one dram, and a half, of Terra
sigillata, and of the purest Bole Armoniacke, of each four scruples, of the
roots of the counterfaite Dittany, of Seminis sancti, Benedictae,
Caryophyllata, Helenij, Gentiane, Rhapontici Dioscoridis, Ciambet (an Zurumbet)
of each three drams and a half, of Coliander prepared, of Sorrel, of Basil,
and of Pympernell, of each two scruples and a half, of the three Saunders, of
each one dram, of the flowers of Borrage, of Buglosse, and of red Roseleaues,
of each two little handfuls, of the roots of the white and red Ben, of each one
dram, of the ryndes of the sower Orrendges, of the Citrones, and Pomegranates
of each a like weight: these after the cutting and beating in gross manner,
distyll by a Lymbecke in sublimed wine according to Art, and rectified in a
Pellicane unto a sufficient quantitye, as unto eight pyntes: after take of
Niberis (whether of white Pepper) Bulledini, of Cynamon, of Grains of
Paradize, of Mace, of Nutmegs, and of Cardamomum, of each half an ounce, and
four scruples, of Saffro^ two drams, of Galingale, of Cubebae, of Cloves, and
of Calamus aromaticus, of each four scruples, of Spetierum elect liberantis,
of the cordial pouders against the plague, of each three drams, of
Diamuscidulcis, de gemmis, of each one dram and a half: all these finely cut
and brought to powder, put into the abouesayde wine distylled, which set in a
hot place for. 48. hours, after distyll the whole by a Lymbecke, fenced with
the lute of wisdom: the water gathered, aromatyzate with the powder of Musk
Alexandri. 17. graynes, of Amber greese. 12. grains, of Saffro^ half a
scruple, or six grains wayght, these tie together in a red Sarcenette, and
hang within the water, then dilligently stopped, keep unto your use.

A distylled wafer for all Fistulaes, borrowed out of Theophrastus paracelsus:
take of the best Aqua vitae four pints, of the Rosemary water, and of Sage, of
each two pintes and a half, of pure white sugar, five pou^ds, these after ye
mixing together, distill by a Limbeck according to Art: for this is most
certain in Fistulaes, and inward ulcers.

An Aqua vitae helping joint Aches, the heuinesse and soreness of the Breast,
and serving unto the fear of falling into the sicknesses of the Brain, like
as the falling sickness, the Apoplexy, the Palsy, gyddinesse and such like,
borrowed out of the Counsels, of the singular Benedic victorius: take of the
roots of Acorus two pou^ds, of Pyonie half a pound, of Galingale, and of
Zedoaria, of each one ounce and a half, of Ina, of the lesser Ce^tory, of
Sage, of Maioram, of Stoechados, of Bitany, of Rosemary, of Penny royal, of
Catmint, of Pol^opodie, of Poley, and of Folium, of each one handful, of red
Roseleaues, and of Baccarum Myrthi, of each half a ha^dfull, al these beat in
a gross manner, and in two hundred pintes of mighty and pleasant white wine,
let the whole be infused for the space of three whole days, after wring the
wine and substance very hard out, and that wine pour into a Glass body with
a head, which distyl after Art, to this then add, of Nutmegges of Mace, of
Cloves, of Cynamon, of Masticke, of Gynger, of each in a gross manner beaten,
one ounce, these after the standing a whole day, distyll again the whole by a
Lymbecke, and this water gathered, repeat nine times over. To the water
remaining of the ninth distyllation, add or mix of leaf Gold, leaves a
hundred in number, and of Silver leaves fifty, Om^^u^ fragmentorum, of each
two drams, of Pearls half an ounce, al these most finely bring to powder,
which again distyl two times over. And in the last distyllation* Aromatizate
the water with Musk and Amber. And you shall then possess, the dyuine Elixir
and treasure of Life. The manner of the taking, and use of it, is on this wise:
that in the morning before the filling of the belly, all the spondyles of the
neck, the Muscles of the breast, and all the parts about it, be wette and
rubbed over with it. And for three hours also before dynner, let this drink
be taken, as of the waters of Sage, and of Endive, of each half an ounce, to
it mix flue drops of the Elixir of Life, and give to drink, as most
profitable for the grieffes, above uttered.

A co^pound burning water distilled, against ye Pestilence, borrowed out of the
treatise of Guayuerus of the Pestilence: Many things (says he) are very
singular and effectuous against the Plague, but far excellenter and mightyer
of virtue, is the water that here is taught. For such is the agreement
between the heart and it, that at any time as it should seem, may this water
be drawn of the heart, and thus drawn, be changed in a short time, and
converted after into a spumouse substance, not only of the co^plexional
virtue, but even the whole form resists, any Pestilentiall poison, and
maistryeth the same out of hand. And for that cause, such is the excellent
virtue of the water, that the taking and use of it, not only preserves a man
from Pestilence, but that taken of it, both speedily deliver him: the making
and drawing of which water is on this wise. Take of Tormentyll roots, (fresh
if they may be gotten) one pound, of the roots of Fluellyng, and of Dittany,
of each half a pound, of the roots of Elecampane, eight ounces, of Sorrel
with the Seeds (if they may be gotten) two pound, or of Sorrel one pound,
and eight ounces, and of the Seeds of it, four ounces, of Borrage and
Buglosse, with their flowers, of the red and wild Roses, of each one pound, of
Pympernel, and of Scabious, of each half a pound, of the juice of Lymons one
pound, of fine Tryacle, half a pound, of burning Water drawn out of the
best Wine, and often repeated two ounces, of Terra sigillata, and Bole
Armoniacke, of each two ounces, of the white and red Saunders, of Spodij, of
the white and red Ben, of clear Pearls, of each one ounce and a half, of the
bone of a Hearts heart one ounce, of the shauings or filings of Iuory half an
ounce, of Saffro^ three drams, of Camphora two drams, of Leaf Gold half an
ounce weight: but first take the Leaves of Gold, and those clippe into so small
pieces as is possible, with a fine pair of sheeres, or those on a Marble stone
grind with Honey a long time into a powder not to be perceived by feeling, shall
you bring the leaves: after put them into the burning water, stopping close ye
mouth of the Glass, yt no air breath forth, and let it so stand for fifteen
days. Then take the pearls most finely brought to powder, and power the^ into
another glass with ye juice of the Lymons, which well stopped let stand so
many days: after with ye best wine wash well the roots, that they may be
cleansed from the earth, and dried of the wind in the shadow, beat them in a
Mortar, and like the herbs, the flowers, and Roses, with the seeds: which
done, pour all these into a certain earthen vessel glased, into which after
put the Triacle with those powders and other things. After with these power
that burning water with the leaves of Gold, and the juice of Lymons with the
Pearls, sealing the mouth of the vessel in such manner, that no air breath
forth. Then make a deep pyt in the earth in a moist place, unto the depth of
three feet, and make a Bed in the bottom of the pyt, half a foot thick of
unsleaked Lyme: That vessel then place in the myddle of it, with Horse doong
laid round about, and covering it, on which then power one or two buckets or
pailes of water: and the vessel thus buried, let stand for twelve natural
days, in remoouing it every third or fowrth day with fresh doong, which
time ended, draw the vessel forth, and the whole substance after power into
a Glass body, setting a head close on it, and stopping the joint round about
that no air breathe forth, after make a soft fire under of small cloven wood,
without smoke (or rather of pure Coals) and to the Nose of the head remember
to lute the receauer, that no air breathe forth. The water drawn according to
Art, power upon the Feces, and dystill again, which a third time power into
the Lymbecke without the Feces, and dystill again in Balneo Mariae, the water
gathered keep to your use in a Glass close stopped: Of this water take one
small sponefull by it self, or with any other confection or powder: For this
water multiplyeth the spyrites, clears them, comfort the principal
members, and dysposeth them, that the body hardlye may receive the impression
of any plague, being never so mighty raygning, and infected or stricken with
the Pestilence, does marvelous speedily help the impression. For whiles those
matters remained hyd, in those is a certain fermentacion caused. To conclude,
by the dystillation is a new form procured in them, that of it self caused,
and not by reason of the four qualyties: but in that it is on such wise, as
Aucthours report, that the Pestilence mightily vering each, is through
corruption caused.

A compounde water of Life, helping all grieffes of the body: take of
Nutmegges, of Floris moschatae, of Cloves, of Cynamon, of Ginger, of Cubebae,
of Grains of Paradize* of Stoechaaes, of the seeds of Pyonie, of each half
an ounce, of Mustard seeds, and of Lauender, of each one ounce, of Vermilon
(or rather Dragons blood) of Colyander, of Anise and of Basil, of each half an
ounce, of Geate (but I rather will, says D. Gesnerus, of Aumber) and of
Rosemary, of each one ounce, of Maioram, of Cardamomum, of Fennel, of Lycoris,
of Hysope, and of Spyknard, of each half an ounce, of the flowers of Borrage,
of the Lyllies of the valley, of Baulme, of the heads of the seeds of Roses,
of each half an ounce, of ye Missill toe of the Oak, of the bones of the
Hearts heart, of Lignum aloes, and of Saffron, of each one ounce, of Sage one
handful. The manner of preparing the water, is on this wise: take forty
measures of good wine, which dystill by a Lymbecke in Balneo Mariae: in the
first dystillatio^ gather twelve measures, which dystill over again, until no
more remains or be in the Glass, then a Nutte shell will hold, the same then
cast forth in that it is al flewme; the wine last dystilled, distyl again,
and the whole leysurely or softly five times over, in Balneo Mariae, and the
water shall then be prepared. Take after all the above said symples, as part of
them small chopped, and part beaten into fine powder, which may be brought to
powder, or which power so much of the dystilled wine, as will well reach four
fingers above the whole, these let stand together to infuse for three or four
days, until the water be coulored. The wine after pour into another Glass,
and stop the mouth close, that no air breathe forth. But on the Feces or
grounds remaining, pour fresh wine, which let so stand to stiepe for seven
or eight days, until the wine has drawn and gotten the substance of all
the infused. That wine then separate from the Feces, pouring after the whole
wine into a Glass body, which distyll with a head close luted, in Balneo
Mariae, until no moisture remains in the Glass: and then shall you possess
the Quintessence of the foresaid matters, which keep dyligently stopped, that
it be not touched of the air. After distyll wine of those simples drawn by a
Lymbecke, and take or gather the half part of the wine: for this shall be,
the true Quintessence of that wine. But the other part of the wine which
remains in the Glass, throw away, for it is only a waterie moisture. Then
the Quintessence of the wine, joined with the Quintessence of the other
matters, will become so yellowe as Gold. To this then add Muscum
Alexandrinum, and Amber greese, of each one dram, of Ruberbe two drams,
which after the tying in a fine lynnen clothe, hang within the water, and
stop dylligently the mouth of the Glass, for it is then wholly performed to
use.

A water of Life, marueylouslie comforting, etc. Dissoluing and coagulating
Irone, and other Mettalles, etc. Take of Nutmegs, of Galingale, of Cardamomum,
of the Graynes of Paradize, of Cubebae, of Mace, of Ginger, and of Cynamon: all
these brought to powder, and myxed with the strongest White wine, let all after
be beaten and labored together, unto the styfnesse and thickness of a
Pultyse, which then distyll with a soft fire, and you shall gather a clear
and pure water. To this water if you myxe a quantytie of Oil, the Oil will
then descend: but if you myxe Camphora with it, then shall the water possess
all the virtues, which the Camphora has. That if this Camphora water, be mixed
with the common water, it then works the same as milk, and if it be strayned
through a Lynnen cloathe, this water will remain courded: of which you may
after make a Candell, and lyghted, will burn like the match or Candle in a
Lamp. Now thi^ water profits in the cold disseases of the body, for it
dygesteth, and preserves flesh from putrefying, the sad person makes
merry, and draws unto it the virtues of all herbs, infused in the same:
druncke certain times, breaks the Impostume: it coagulateth and fyxeth
Mercury: it dries up tears of the eyes, the redness, and heat of them it
helps, and cures such disseased of the spleen. It preserves wounds from
putrefying, it helps the Fistula and Canker, reformeth or amendeth cold
causes, and the Palsy, it sharpneth and increases understanding, and helps
memory, if the temples sundry times be anointed with it. It makes a man
joyous and merry* preserves young age and health, and takes away the styncke
of the mouth and gummes. It makes old wine, of the new: it defends a man
against poison: it takes away the pain, and defenesse of the Ears. Two
drops druncke in a cup of the best White wine, do marvelously preserve
memory: if the same be used at the going to bed. The water anointed on the
Temples four times in the week, in the winter time, preserves memory.

A water of life invented and drawn, for a noble person: take of Spetierum
diambrae, one dram, of Dianthos, half a dram, of Pellitory roots, two drams,
of long Pepper, six drams, of Anacardus, one dram and a half, of Xyloaloes
one dram: these fynely wrought together, infuse in Aqua vitae of good
Maluesie, dystilled seven times over, eight ounces, which let so stand close
stopped, for eight days: after dystill the whole by Balneum Mariae, according
to Art.

An Aqua vitae helping Tertian Agues, borrowed out of Theophrastus paracelsus:
take a penny worth of Aqua vitae, and the white of one egg, these beat very
well together, until they be brought unto the form of a Pultyse, which give
before the coming of the fytte, well an hour or two, and to it also add a
little Saffron. etc.

A Golden water, helping the Apoplexy, the Falling sickness, and infirmities
of the Synewes: take of the leaves and flowers of the Sage, two ounces, of
Nutmegges, of Cloves, of Gynger, of Cynamon, of Graynes of Paradize, of each
one ounce, of Castory one dram, of the rindes of the Citrone, three drams, of
Spykenard one dram, of the pure Oil of Bays, one dram, all these after the
dylligent beating, power into one measure of the best white wine, and the mouth
of the Glass body close sealed, let so stand to putryfie for four days,
after dystill with a soft fire, according to Art.

Another water not unlike to the former, procuring and mayntayning young age:
take of the leaves and flowers of Sage royal, three ounces, of Gynger, of
Cloves, of Nutmegges, and of the Graynes of Paradyze, of each half an ounce,
all these most finely brought to powder, power into two measures of the
strongest wine, close stopped in a Glass body for fourteen days, after set
on the head cloose Luted, and dystill with a soft fire according to Art, the
water gathered, keep close stopped in a Glass. This helps the inward cold
impostumes: for druncke with the agreeable water, incontinent breaks them. It
avails unto the Pin and web of the eyes, in clearing and putting them
aawy: it sharpneth also the sight, and cures the cold Ophthalmia, with a
Feather a little dropped into the eyes, does marueylouslye clear them. It
avails also both without and within, applied and druncke: it preuayleth
besides against bruses and strypes. It cures the Gowte, and pain of the
joints. And annoynting with it, helps the pain of the head, the Apoplexy,
the rewme, and any manner coldness of the brain: and druncke, avails against
the dropsy, helps the stomach, and avails against the cough with the
water agreeable. I believe that it does preserve young age, if a little of it be
druncke every day. It cures also any Scabbe, anointed with it, and the bytte
of a mad Dog, applied on the byt, and given to drink.

A water of Life, according to Aristotle's instruction: Take of Cynamon, of
Gynger, of Cloves, of Nutmegs, and of long Pepper, of each half an ounce, of
Dates half an ounce, of Cubebae, of Grains of Paradize, of Mace, of Almondes,
and of Galingale, of each half an ounce, of Sage twelve ounces: all these
broken and beaten to powder, infuse after in Malmesie, for eight days in a
Glass body, which then distyll with a soft fire according to Art.

Another water of Life: take of the root with the herb of the black
Ellebore prepared (whether in the Quince Apple) sour ounces, of the flowers of
the Orrendges, of the flowers of Stoechados, of the flowers of the Pome
Cytrone, and of the flowers of Horehounde, of each four handfulles, which
serves for the first distillation. For the second distyllation: take of chosen
Ruberbe half an ounce or one ounce, of the flowers of Borrage and Buglosse, of
each six handfulles, of great Reysons half a pound, of Mouse ear, of the
flowers of the Dasie, of the herb of the black Ellebore prepared, of each
two handfulles, of the flowers of the Cytrone or Baulme, six handfulles, of
the flowers or leaves of Angelica two handfulles, of the flowers of Organy,
eight handfuls, of Lycorys scraped half a pound, these after the brusing,
distyll according to Art. Also take of rectifyed wine unto the uttermost,
four measures, which power on the Spices, and let the whole infuse for eight
days, sturring it every day twyse or thryse: after distyll with a soft fire,
and on such wise let it be done, a second and third time. After of chosen
Honny clean skymmed, and of oil Olyue, of each half a measure, let these be
mixed with the wine distylled, and distilled together with a most soft fire,
for then takes it away the stincke in the wine, and sweetneth the wine, and
takes away the stincke and burning of the herbs. But if you will have it
better, let the wine be filled with the flowers of the Cytrone Stoechados, and
distylled again with a most soft fire. After take of this Aqua vitae two
measures, of white Sugar one pound, and thus corrected let it be most finelye
brought to powder, and set on the coals, ever sturring it about, until the
whole Sugar be dyssolued in it, and it shall be performed and done in.xxix.
days. After take of the best Cynamon, one pound, which bring to fine powder,
the same infuse for eight or ten days, sturring it once or twice every day,
after strain and wring the same hard in a press. If you be minded to have it
smell and taste pleasaunter, then add to it of Musk and Amber greese,
according to your discretion. For this lycour is of a maruaylous efficacy in
the decay and faynting of the heart: in myxing it with Electuaries, and
Cordial Medicines, as you know that understand practice.



An Aqua vitae, aromatyzated, of great virtue, serving unto all cold grieffes
of the stomach: the making of which is glorious and rare water, is on this
wise. Take of Nutmegges, of Cloves, of Galingale, of Cardamomum, of Cubebae, of
Mace, of Cynamon, of Gynger, of Saffron, and of Frankincense, of each one
ounce: these beaten in a gross manner, myxe dillygentlye together: after power
all these into a Glass body, very well fensed with lute, on which power six
pyntes of the finest Aqua vitae, the whole let stand together for six or
eight days, then dystyll the lycour, with his head and Receauer in Ashes, and
a red water will be gathered, which is very singular and precious: For this
(as above uttered) helps all grieffes of the body, proceeding of a cold
cause, and both cleanses and heals all wounds, without any grief, it
procures a good memory, helps the coughe, and puts away heaviness of
mind, and many other matters it works, as by trial may be known: this
borrowed out of the synguler practices, of the famous Greek Leonard Tiorauant.

A maruaylous water of Life, that avails in the Apoplexy and falling
sickness, druncke morning and Evening, but better if taken every morning. In
the Evening three or four drops taken with a slyce of bread, comfort
both the heart and Brain, and all the powers and virtues of the Brain and
body. It dries up all the humors above nature or not natural, and all other
superfluityes also, whether these proceed of a hot or cold cause, and
preserves natural heat in his temperament. Yet persons under thyrtye years
of age, may not often use or drink of the water, unless they be much
charged with many cold humors: but very apt and agreeable, to old and
cold persons.

The virtue of this water, can not sufficientlye be expressed, in that the same
avails both within, and without the body. Against the plague, let it be
taken the same day, with good Venice Triacle. Anointed within the
Nosethrelles, very much comfort. And is a singular Medycine against the
Apoplexy, and falling sickness: it is also the mother of all Medycines, for
it comfort the Matrice, and Womb at any time, if it runs to much, this
stays it, and like provoke it, if need be.

Take of Sage half a pound, of Wormwood two drams, of the flowers of Organy
six drams, of Bytony half an ounce, of Rosemary half an ounce, of Maioram
one ounce, of Penny royal two drams, of Roses one ounce and a half, of Hysope
two drams, of Sauorye two drams, of Parcelye one ounce and a half, of the
roots of Parcelie one ounce, of Polypodie, and of Pympernell, of each two
drams, of Lauender one ounce, of Tormentyll half an ounce, of Bistorta six
drams, of Valerian two drams, of Maisterwoort one dram, or a half, of Radicis
benedictae one ounce, of Ruta six drammes, of Juniper berries one ounce, of
Gynger one ounce and a half, of Nutmegges, and of Mace, of each half an
ounce, of Cloves six drams, of Cynamon six drams, of Cubebae, and of
Cardamomum, of each two drams, of Galingale half an ounce, of the Graynes of
Paradize one dram, of the long and black Pepper, of each two drams, of Saffron
one dram, of Calamus aromaticus half an ounce, of Zedoaria, of Corticis
baccarum lau^i, of each two drams, of Fay berryes half an ounce, of Coliander
half an ounce, of Annise and Lycorys, of each one ounce and a half, of
Triacle two drams, of manus Christi, and of Sugarcandy, of each half an
ounce, of Cummine, of Carrowayes, and of Dyttany, of each two drams, of
Ruberbe one dram, of Nigella, and rindes of the Orrendge, of each half an
ounce, of the conserve of Roses, one ounce, of Psydia two drams or three, of
Honny half a pound, lastly add of Musk the sixteen part of a dram, of
Amber greese so much, of Camphora half a dram, of white Sugar one ounce, of
the sublymed wine, five times of wine, and not of the Feces three measures. The
herbs and roots beaten in a gross manner, power into an earthen Judge well
stopped for three days, and in the fourth day, let the whole be sublymed.
After let the Spyces be beaten and not searced, which power in: and let stand
to infuse for ten days, in the Judge close stopped, and once or twyse a day
stir the whole about. Then let the whole be sublymed in a Glass body with a
narrow neck, and Receauer artlye fastoned to it, and when it shall distyll
white forth, or styncke, then is it sufficient. And then pour into it these
four, as the Musk, the Amber, the Camphora, and Sugar broken: but the other
three not broken, which let stand together for three or four days, sturring
it every day once or twyse, from the bottom, with a wooden spattell: let
these then stand for other three or four days, until the whole be settled,
and that it appear clear, which being clear, power forth, in strayning the
same through a fine Lynnen cloth into a Glass. But in the end when the lycour
wareth troubled, myxe together again* and let it setle again, then strain
again, as before, and continue the like doing, until you have purchased all
that which is clear, which myxe altogyther, in keeping it in a tynne Bottell,
for that the Glass destroys it, and let it be kept in no hot place, and the
virtue of it endures for two or three years, or a longer time. When you will
use or give of it, pour forth a little of it apart, in stopping again the
^est. The remnaunt or that resting, you may dry on a cloth in the shadow, and
on the whole then power two measures of clear and good wine, close stopped in
an earthen Judge for ten days, after distyll according to Art, and the
sublymed wine keep in a vessel close stopped, and it shall be a noble water,
although not so mighty, as the first water: for this avails anointed
without, or applied on places with a Lynnen cloth wette on it, in many
infirmityes and grieffes. At the first a strong fire ought to be made of
coals, until it become so hot, that you cannot suffer your finger upon it,
then draw away and abate the fire, and so proceed with a soft fire, that if
you touch it, you may be able to suffer the finger upon: and yet let not the
fire be over soft, nor over strong in heat, least the substance may be dried
in the pot. Many times also a drop falling prove with the finger, for on
such wise shall you redilye perceive, when his faculty and strength is feebled
or lessened, or that his savor be changed odious or stinking: for if it be
felt on such wise, then change the Receauer, as is before taught.

A sublymed wine of D. Ambrosius lung, described for a Noble person: Take of
the inner part of the Cynamon three ounces, of Gynger, of Cloves, of each one
ounce, of the red Saunders, two ounces, of Mace, of Nutmegges, of black
Pepper, of Galingale, of Cubebae, of Cardamomum, of Annise, of Fennel, of
Coriander prepared, of Speticrum aromatici Rosati, of Drambrae, of Dianthos, of
Maioram, of Basil, of Laue^der flowers, of Rosemary flowers, and of Spyknarde,
of each half an ounce: all these beat in a gross manner, to which then add
of red Roses two handfuls and a half, of good Malmesie four pyntes or two, of
sublimed wine. xi. or. vj. pyntes of Rosewater Musked, one pynt and a half, of
the water of Cloves and of Cinnamon (that is of the water) of each two ounces,
of Sugarcandye brought to powder, three pounds: let all these stand to infuse,
for four days. After let a decoction be made according to Art, and claryfied
after the accustomed manner.

A water of Life, being a great secret of Master Edwardes: Take of Cynamon,
of Cloves, of Nutmegs, of Gynger, of Zedoaria, of Galingale, of the long and
black Pepper, of Juniper berryes, of the ryndes of the Cytrone, of the rindes
of the Orrenges, of Baye berries, of Sage leaves, of Basil, of Rosemary, of
Mace, of Spyknard, of Ligni aloes, of Cubebae, of Cardamomum, of Calamus
aromaticus, of Stoecadus Arab, of Chamcepityos, of Myrre, of Masticke, of
Olibanu^, of the seeds and leaves of the Dyll, and of the seeds of Mugwoort,
of each one dram, of dry Fygs, of Reysons, of the meat of Dates, of sweet
Almondes, of Pynaple kernels, of each one dram and a half, of white and pure
Honny six ounces, of hard and white Sugar, unto the wayght of all the above
said. All these beaten and myxed together, distyll by a Lymbecke of Glass,
five times over.

A water of Life, helping joint aches, and synewes drawn together, and the
Crampe of cold: Take of Cloves, of Mace, of each three drams, of the grains
of Paradize two drams, of long pepper two drams, of Nutmegs, of Ginger, of
Lauender, of Basil, of Hysope, and of Baulm, of each one ounce, of Galingale,
of the flowers o^ Rosemary, and of sage, of each half an ounce, of Xyloaloes
two dra^s, of fine Musk, half a scruple: all these brought to powder, pour
into four pyntes of Aqua vitae (distilled out of Malmesie) for fourteen
days, which after distyl in Balneo Mariae according to Art.

A water serving unto many hard infirmyties and disseases: For this water
cures the Canker, the Fistula, Sinus, Morbum attonicum, the falling sickness,
the ryng woorme, the Serpigo, the joint sickness, the Gout, and any pain of
the synewes, whether the same shall proceed of hot cause, or cold: the making
of which, is on this wise: Take of burning water, fine and pure, ten or
fifteen pyntes, of Ina one handful, of Sagapeni half an ounce, of Cubebae,
one ounce and a half, of Xyloaloes, two drams, of chosen Myrre half a dram,
of Aloes hepanticke half an ounce, of Aristolochia, of Ammoniaci, of
Opopanacis, of chosen Cadanum, of each half an ounce, of Sarcocollae half a
dram, of Frankincense, three ounces, of Masticke half an ounce, of Gum
Arabicke so much, of the red Saunders two drams, of Spyknard, one ounce, of
Galingale half an ounce, of Saffro^ two drams, of Mumia half an ounce, of Gum
Elemi three ounces, of Galbanum half a dram, of Storax, and of Cloves, of
each one dram, of Nutmegs half an ounce, of chosen Cinnamon half an ounce, of
Grains of Paradize, or of Amomum half an ounce, of Resina liquidae five
pounds, of Turpentyne thee pounds, of Dragons blood, and of Castorie, of
each half an ounce, of these let a lycour be dystylled according to Art.
This borrowed out of Fumanellus.

A syngular water for the preserving of youth, and staying back of old age:
the making of which, is on this wise. Take of Ligni aloes, of Cloves, of
Gynger, of Galingale, of Cynamon, of Mace, of Nutmegs, of long Pepper, of
Calamus aromaticus, of Cubebae, of Rubarbe, of the graynes of Paradize, of
Cardamomum, of each two drams, of Rosemary, of Celondine, of Mercury, of the
blessed Thystle, of Imperatoria, and of the white Dittany, of each one ounce,
all these after the beatyng infuse in six pyntes of the best Aqua vitae (that
serves for the Quintessence) which let so remain for eight days, after
distyll the lycour in Balneo Mariae according to Art. Of that water gathered,
add to each pynte, two ounces of fine Sugar dyssolued in Rosewater, and eight
graynes of Musk, which dillegentlye keep in a Glass close stopped. This
syngular water druncke every morning, unto the quantitye of one or two drammes
at a time, preserves the person a long time in health and perfyte strength:
in that the same heateth the stomach being cold, increases natural heat,
and causes good digestion of meat, through which, nature is preserved long
lustye and young. This also heateth the blood in the Veins, in such manner,
that the same causes it to run, and work his effects without impedyment.
It dries up cold and moist humors, which hinder the working of nature, and
worcketh many other helps. This borrowed out of the singular practices, of the
Greek Leonar. Tiorauant.

A water not to be mysliked, yielding and working many matters: for this
helps the Gout, joint sicknesses, the dystillation of the head, preserves
young age, and strength: gives also wit and memory, reuyueth the spyrites,
and causes them purer. The making of which is on this wise: take of burning
water, three or four times distylled over, four pyntes, of Rosemarye flowers
one pound, of the tops of the branches of the same, half a pound: these
stiepe together for a day, and draw in a double vessel, with a long necked
Receauer, the nether part of it resting in a cold place. For we so name it,
says Galen, when in a Pan or Kettyl, which contains the hot water, another
vessel stands. Of this water thus distylled by a Lymbecke, take half a
pynte, of Nutmegges, of Galingale, of Cloves, of Cardamomum, of Mace, and of
Cubebae, of each three ounces, of white Aumber, one ounce and a half, of Ligm
aloes so much, of Castorye, and of Spyknarde, of each two drams, these beaten
several and apart, and compounded after altogyther, until they be come unto a
certain thycknesse, and then distylled again together, keep to your use. For
an ounce of the above said water, druncke with a slyce of white bread,
avails so much, as a Baulme: This Fumanellus, as the Aucthour supposes.

Of the Iuyces or drawing of Iuyces, out of Symples and compound matters.
The.jx. Chapter.
IVyce, which of the Greeks is properly named (...) and the working of the
same, termed, (...), is that which is pressed or wringed out of simple or
compounde matters bruised, chopped, or stieped. But Iuyces are otherwise pressed
out, as either out of the leaves or branches of the herbs, beaten alone, and
that green and full of juice, or out of fruytes, as out of Grapes, not ripe or
green, Pomegranates, Services, Medlars, wyld Sl^es, Quinces, Lemons, etc. Or
out of herbs having little moisture, and the same clammye, as the Iuie, the
Purselan, Cotylidone, the Houselyke, etc. Out of which not simply a juice, can
be had or gotten, but through water poured upon, or other lycour, like to the
properties of them, that need wringing or pressing out, that pressed out
together with the same humor, the force and virtue of the simple herb may
so be purchased: or if bruised and put into a strayner or Bag, and hanged in a
cold Seller or place, that the juice by little and little, may drop into a
dyshe or Porrendger set under. Of these, and such like drawings forth of
iuyces, which in shoppes, in a vessel with a narrow mouth, oil being poured
upon finger high, or sprinkled with Salt, as appears of the juice of
vnripened fruits, unto Physic use, set up and kept, we mean here to entreat
nothing thereof: nor the like of certain others, which in the Sun, by a daily
moving, are dried and thyckned, and that in the shadow, as the juice of Sloes:
in an Oven or Furnace, or other hot place* included and hanged to dry. But we
will only entreat of those iuyces, which are described out of roots, and the
dryer herbs, or such having but very little moisture, stieped for certain
days in water, or any other lycour, distylled after by Balneum Mariae, that
separated from the watery moisture, that substance of the matter infused, pure
and sincere may be left somewhat grosser: or without distyllation, by boiling
only converted into a vapor having a strange humor, the substance of the
matter infused may thicken, strayned before, or the whole water distylled by
Fyltre, etc. And the use of this drawing forth, or substance purchased* which
of the juice taken in a small quantity, yields great commodities in our
bodies. For where of Medicines in the whole substance, is want to be given one
ounce: of the juice drawn, suffices only one dram: in which undoubtedly
may the sick be much delighted and pleased, especially seeing many are wont
much to abhor the taking of Medicines.

And this is to be noted, in the drawinges* that if the spirit shall not be
sufficient pure, or dilligently separated, insomuch that somewhat of the
earthinesse yet remains, and may contain, that then the virtue or propertye
of the matter drawn is myxed to this earthynesse, and ascends and
euaporateth together. But the sincere and pure spirit, does cause this least,
in that out of the matter drawn, this descends without any savor or taste:
and for that cause is the spyrit easily separated by Balneum Mariae, whose
heat exeedeth not the degree of heat, which consists or is in man's vryne.
Yet it behooves also that the wate, by which the washing is caused, be very
subtle, even like as the spyrit of the wine, least the evil quality of the
water may ascend together. But a sure trial and knowledge of the water is, if
it shall be without taste or savor.

The drawing of herbs, and other remedies, with burning water, perfytelie
distylled in Balneo Mariae, etc. As out of Rubarbe Agaricke, Ellebore, and
Guaicum, according to Theophrastus instruction. The.x. Chapter.
THe artificial drawing of simple matters, are wrought after this manner:
First let purest and best Aqua vitae be chosen, which is sufficient effectuous
unto the drawing forth and purchasing the properties of the herbs. Then take
Sage, or any like simple, out of the which you determine to draw a juice, the
same lay in a dry air, toward the North especially. Where after it shall be
a little dried, shred or choppe finely, and power the whole into a Glass,
whose mouth shall be sufficient wide, that is, two fyngers broad, that when you
will, you may easily get or draw forth whatsoever is put in, on which power
the Aqua vitae, or spirit of the wine, well the little finger breadth above the
herb. After cover the vessel dilligently, in this manner: let paste be made,
with which let the mouth be a finger breadth stopped round about, next to which
bind upon a fair white Paper, and let it be so stopped, that it may only
stick to the sides about the mouth of the Glass. This Paper thus set on, let
paste again be laid on round about the place, above taught, and another new
Paper again bound upon the same. Then a third time lay paste upon, and round
about the sides of the mouth, and let a third Paper be fastened, which
covers fullye over, that the mouth through the paste and Paper may closely
be stopped. After cover the whole with ware, although this be not so
ne^defull. These thus orderly handled and done, let the vessel after be set
for two or three days in a hot place: according as the herb put in, shall
be of a thycker or thinner substance, and shall so need to stiepe a longer or
shorter time. At the end of which time, power the spirit into another vessel,
and cover it again: and the herbs remaining, press or wring through a
Lynnen cloth, so strongly as is possible, (or that you can do by your
strength) and after the wrynging, throw them away. Then power other fresh
herbs again of the same kind, and prepared as above taught, power into the
same spyrit, which stiepe, and press forth, and the same repeat three or
four times over, even as you will purchase the drafte mighty or weak. That
if the matter, out of the which a juice shall be drawn* shall be of great
price, as is the Rubarbe, and Lignum aloes: then not once pouring of Aqua vitae
on it is sufficient, but diverse and often times* that whatsoever of the spirit
or property of the simple shall be, may wholly be left in the water. Now
after the spirit of the wine, shall abound in the faculty of the herbs, in so
much that it shall in a manner have lost the proper taste or savor, then press
or wring forth the herbs, and the same which shall be pressed forth,
dylligentlie and subtyllie distyl by Fylter, and use when need shall require.
Or the spirit of the wine from the property of the herbs, shall be easyer
separated by distyllation in Balneo Mariae, in drawing forth either the half,
or all together, until it shall come unto an extreme waterynesse, or until
it be thyckened as a Sauce, or the juice dried and hardened, which may be
brought to powder, according as you will apply and use the same. For when much
moisture shall be, in the drawing forth, then after the separation of the
wine, is it a noate or token, that the spirit of the wine was not sincere and
pure. But where the spyrit of the wine shall be sufficient mighty, and that in
the end of the distyllation, no waterynesse remains and insueth, then take
the distylled water of the same simple, and pour to that drawn, and myxe
dylligentlye together with a quyll or Feather, that the spirit yet remaining or
left behind in the matter, may be myxed together with the water poured forth:
then draw again by Lymbecke, the water poured forth, and the same may you so
often repeat, until no spirit of the wine be fealt or perceived in the
drawing, the which like may thus be known or proved. When no wine mixture of
the spirit is dystilled together with the water, but a pure water only, then
may you judge and perceive, that the same to be sufficient.

But I do counsel (says the Aucthour) and the same also is of use and
practice, that to the draft or substance of the herbs, let the proper water be
poured* yet before distylled apart, even as I have above uttered in the drawing
of the Sage. And in the same manner may the spirits of the wine be gotten, as
by pouring the water of the Sage distylled in the end, and very well mixed
together, and separated again. And such a drawing forth is excellent, and is
preserved many years.

An order and way by which the juice, of each herb, may be obtained: as in
the distylled water of any herb, power the dry herb powdered, which infuse
in hot water for a time, but boil it nothing at all. After strain the same,
then into the strayning power again the dry herb of the same kind in
powder, and like infused, strain again, which often repeat, and in the end
distyl it in Balneo Mariae, that the thynner part may be dissolved into a
vapor, and that which shall after remain in the bottom, will be so thick as
Honny, and juice of the herb: and in the Receauer is only gathered, the water
of the herb: Or thus.

Of the herb whose lycour you would distyl press out the juice, and the
remnaunt of the expression distilled together with ye juice, the lycor shall be
ye effectuousser and clearer as I hear, says D. Gesnerus.

A very comely manner, and nothing so laborious or painful, by which the true
substance, or Quintessence, and the water also may easilye be drawn, out of
any Simple, or herb, or root: and this manner also shall serve and be ayte,
for diverse fruits, as that the iuyces presed out and putrified.

Take the root or herb gathered in the aptest time, and dried in the shadow
or air, and the same in a clean vessel, poured in upon the proper water
drawn otherwise by distyllatio^, which infuse so long together untyl ye water
has purchased the color of the infused matter, the^ separate the water into
another vessel apart, which keep close stopped. And to the root or herb
pour ye other water distylled, and let them stand again covered, unto the
chau^ging of the color of the water, the^ (...) (above taught) separate the
water* and myxe it with the first, which so often repeat, until no more will
issue forth, and that the root or herb, obtains no more strength at all.
Which done, the waters gathered in a Cucurbite, distyll in Balneo Mariae, with
the head and Receauer set to after Art, that all the water may ascend and be
gathered, and the matter or substance be engrossed as paste, or a Pultyse. Which
when it shall so come unto, draw forth the gross matter left in the bottom
of the Cucurbite, and when you have poured it into Basen or other clean
vessel, stir the whole about with a most easy and gentle heat: as nygh to a
Furnace, or on hot ymbers, that ye superfluous moisture may by little and little
within certain days euaporate forth, and the same matter attain the
styfnesse of an Electuary, or else of Honny: then have you purchased the best
and most precious substance of the matter drawn, or the Quintessence, with
which, even with a most small quantity, you shall do more, then with great
quantityes of the roots or herbs. And let this be kept in a Silver, or
Tynnie vessel close stopped, which the older it shall be before the occupying,
the better will it be to use. And further note, that the water drawn by
distyllation, no less avails, then the other waters distylled of the herbs
or roots.



Another manner, of drawing forth of substaunces: Take any dry root, as the
root of Petasitis, the same brought to fine powder, and put into a Cucurbite,
pour upon a sufficient quantity of wine: the Cucurbite dilligentlie luted,
set into Balneo Mariae, and let the wine be drawn forth. When out of this wine
you shall have drawn a cup mean full, and that the matter which is in the
Cucurbyte, shall be cooled, power then the same water or wine which you have
drawn forth, and distyll it again in Balneo Mariae, and the same repeat or
do three times over, if need shall be, or oftener, until all the property
through the decoction shall consist in the wine. This being done, wring the
substance gently with the hands, and that pressed forth dylligentlye keep.
For this is so precious as Gold: and where you will, the substance in the
glass may be set in the Sun, that the wine may euaporate, and an oylinesse
only remain in the bottom.

Another manner of drawing forth, very singular, of an uncertain Aucthour:
Take your Quintessence, in which infuse your proper simple, or compound for
fourteen hours, grosely brought to powder, and set rather in a cold place,
then hot to infuse: and the proper Quintessence shall draw to it, the fixed
spirit of your matter, and be like in property to it: and when you shall see
the Quintessence colored, of the matter infused, separate then the same
artificially by an instrument, which dylligentlye keep in a Glass, close
stopped with wax.

Take again your proper Quintessence simple, and pour it upon your matter
before infused (which is now separated, by the instrument) and let it remain
again to infuse, for *xxii^* hours, in a cold place: after it be colored
again, separate the Quintessence again by an instrument, from the substance
infused (as you know) and that separated, add to the former Quintessence
colored.

And pour upon the simple essence of al your substance infused* and separate
the same so often* until your substance infused will yield no more color, or
color the Quintessence no more.

Take your Quintessence gathered, which pour into a long necked Cucurbite,
setting upon his Lymbecke or head, and luted accorcording to Art, set into
Balneum Mariae, after distyll the Quintessence with a soft fire, until you
shall see it come unto the styfnesse of Pappe in the bottom of the Cucurbite,
and shall have in the bottom of the substance infused, the spirit remaining
fixed, which gather artificially into a Silver vessel.

A most singular, and the profitablest manner of drawing iuyces out of herbs.
Take green Sage, and draw a water out of the same by distyllation: or let the
dried Sage be taken, on which power the water, that from it the subtyller part
may be separated, but the grosser Sauge infused, stiepe for certain days,
which after distyll according to Art. In this distylled water, stiepe again
the dried Sauge, in such manner, that the water may cover the Sauge, well two
or three fyngers above: and let the whole stand close stopped in a Judge or
pot, that it may breathe very little out, in water temperatelye hot. After
let the Sauge be pressed forth, and the Sauge like dried, as above uttered,
stiepe again in this water, and the same repeat three or four times. Which
done, let the water be separated, which unto another drawing may aptlye serve,
or unto other uses. And the same drawn, euaporate in an earthen vessel, and
that in a Furnace, or some other hot place, until it come unto such a
styfnesse, which best lyketh the practisioner.

When you will purchase the true substannce, out of the Rubarbe, the Ellebore,
the Agaricke, the woodde of the Ash, and other symples of like kind: then
proceed in the like order, as above uttered. As first, power upon the spyrit,
which infuse so long until it be very deep colored, then power the same
forth, strain it, and the spirit by little and little separate in Balneo: and
this power again to the abouesayde Rubarbe, which infuse for a certain space
in a hot place, until it purchases color, or be colored, then strain the
same, and separate again by distyllation in Balneo* which so often repeat,
until the spyrit through the Rubarbe be colored no more. The same then press
or wring out stronglye, and distyll by Fylter, for it has or purchases after
a certain qualytie of the tenacitye or clamminesse of the Rubarbe, which in
the drawing forth is unprofitable, yet many profitable parts of it issue
together, which are not to be neglected: and for that cause ought after this
manner, to dystyll by Fylter.

By the beak or nose of the Lymbecke, with a thread draw the Fyltre of a
finger breadth cut, so high up, that for the strayghtnes of the Nose, the
Fyltre will no further follow: yet taking heed that in the strong drawing,
you break not the Glass: which done, power the spirit to be filtered into the
Lymbecke stopped with wet Paper. The spyrit distylled by Fylter, to the
drawing, which was before separated, power again into the Glass (seeing much
cleaves to the Glass, for that cause into the first Glass, into which the
spyrit was infused, all the spyrites of the Rubarbe are to be strayned, and
unto the separation poured) not caring or regarding, that the one drafte, even
now before may be found in the Glass, for all the draftes are necessary to be
joined, and unto the end of the water distylled mixed together, and separated
again, until the water be clear drawn forth. And the draft may be done,
either in a dry manner, or in a moist form, even as it shall please any
practisioner.

Out of the wood of the Ash, is a draft gotten with easy labor, for the
spyrit once powered upon, and the wood stieped in it for four days, after the
lycour powered forth, and other fresh wood put into it as before, and the same
repeated and done for two or three times, according as you desire a great or
little yield of the draft: after let the lycour be cleared by Fyltre, but
separated by distyllation.

The extraction or drawing forth of Turbith, of Agaricke, or of any other
purging Medicine: take any of the Purgatiues, as the Turbith or Agaricke, or
any other with his correctiue: the same thus brought to powder, put up into a
bag of fine Lynnen cloth, or white Taffatie, and put either bag, into the
same part of the Lymbeck, which sends forth the conieled vapors by the
Nose: but into the bottom of the Cucurbite pour on Aqua vitae rectifyed,
which contains or has no flewme in it, which distyll by the same; which in
the bags included, are placed in the Lymbecke, and on such wise is all the
property of the Purgative drawn forth. Which done, wash dillygentlye and
purelie the body, and the water drawn power again into the body, into whose
mouth put a Sponge, and the head set on, distyll the Aqua vitae through a
Sponge, and in the bottom will a certain thick matter like to Honny remain,
which ^^ the true substance, and drawing of the matter stieped.

Of the Agaricke, the Turbith, the Colocynthis, the Rubarbe, the Berberis, the
Sumach, the flowers of Pomegranates, and others either laxatyue, or
restrictyue, or sweet smelling. Take of Agaricke (or of any Medycine) the same
a^^lye bring to powder: which power into a Glass body set in Balneo, and
power upon burning water, after the sealing, let it stand for a natural day,
to dyssolue, then draw it, by strayning through a Lynnen cloth, without
wrynging hard. After power it again into a vessel with so much water, as
before, and let it be cyrculated for xxiiij. hours in Balneo, and then
strayned. These strayninges gathered, power into a large vessel, which artlie
draw with a head and Receauer annexed, (the water if you will, keep
dylligentlye, which will serve to other uses,) and when it shall come unto a
thycknesse of Honny, or styfnesse, draw the same forth, and make Trochises or
flat balls of it after Art, which use according to skyll.

^ The drawing of Rubarbe: take of chosen Rubarbe four drams, the same brought
to powder, power into the waters agreeable, which let stand to infuse for a
day and a night, and then stronglye pressed or wringed out. Unto the
substance pressed forth add Sugarcandie, so much as you shall think
needful, and lyghtlie in the euaporating in Sand, dry it, unto the
thickness of an electuarye.

Or on such wise: the infusion of Rubarbe, is commodiouslye wrought, in the
iuyces of Borrage and Buglosse. After the infusion for a whole day in a double
vessel, let it be boiled unto the consumption of a third part away, and then
pressed or wringed forth. The juice pressed forth, and myxed with Sugarcandie*
boil unto an even styfnesse. For so may it be preserved and kept, many years.
The Feces or grounds after the pressing forth, are not to be thrown away:
in that there consists a great use of these, in bynding of the bellye,
especially in the perilous scouring Dysenteria. But the proper iuyse does
very gently louse the belly, yea in Infantes without harm.

The extraction or drawing forth of Rubarbe, which the learned D. Gesnerus
purchased of a singular Physician: the Rubarbe may in the same manner be
infused, as the roots of the black Ellebore, which hereafter shall be uttered
and taught: but in the water of Cynamon, and with the syrup of Roses solutiue,
ought the juice of Rubarbe be gotten and made.

Agaricke in the affect^s or grieffes of the head, and the Rewme, wo^^keth
better, if with the infusion and decoction it be prepared, than if drawn, and
the same may also be hardly drawn. But if you will thoroughly draw a juice
out of it, then do the same with the oil of Annise seeds in conduite water,
or with the water of Annise seeds, the oil clean taken of.

The drawing of the black Ellebore, described of a Phisitio^ of Caesaria^* let
the rindes of the root of the black Ellebore, the pythes taken forth, be
infused in ye water of Annise seeds, from which ye oil is newly separated,
and let the same rest to infuse for.xxiiij. hours, or as long as you will,
after boil ye whole together, until the roots remain, and that the water in
a manner be consumed, which after by a mighty strength wring forth. In ye end
boil the same pressed forth, with ye syrup of Roses solutiue, unto a
sufficient thickness, which put up in an earthe^ vessel glased, and use when
need requires. The dose or quantity at a time, is from one scruple, unto a
scruple and a half: and this purges the Melancholy humor, without grief or
harm. This infusio^ also, very much pleased D. Mo^tanus, for he reported ye
Hypocrates always in ye giving or ministering of ye black Ellebore, accustomed
to take and use also Annise, as a special correctour of it.

Another extraction or drawing forth of the black Ellebore, described of
Doctor Hieronymi Heroldy: take of the juice of Borrage and of Buglosse, of
each two pounds, which strain and purifye that they may be clear, to these
after add of Fennel roots, of Succorie, of Sperage, and of Parcelie, of each
four ounces of the fruits of Sebesten, and of Iniubarum, of each two ounces,
of the lesser cold seeds, of each half an ounce, let these be boiled in.xvi.
pints of water, unto a third part consumed, to the strayning add ye abouesayd
iuyces, which boil on a little fire: then join of the roots of the true
black Ellebore* four pounds, which so long boil, until the roots appear
as uncovered, the whole then strongly wring, and boil after with a soft fire,
unto the thickness of Honny.

A solutyue extraction or drawing forth, invented of D.D. Magenbuch: Take of
Colocynthis six drams, and two scruples, of Agaricke half an ounce, of
Rubarbe two drams, of chosen Cynamon four scruples, of Azari, of Spykenard, of
red Roses, of Masticke, and of Ligni aloes, of each one dram, of lyquide
Storax four scruples, of good Mal^^es^e one measure: of the whole, let an
infusion, and an extraction or distyllation be caused, like a Quintessence.

Another solutyue extraction or drawing forth, invented of the same Doctor,
whose dose or qua^titye is from one scruple unto half a dram, to a mane from
half a dram, unto two scruples or a whole dram: take of the Pulpe of
Colocinthis six drams, and two scruples, of white Turbith and gummie ten
drams, of Stoechados arabic, half an ounce, of Diagridium three drams
(otherwise six drams) of white Agaricke half an ounce, of chosen Rubarbe
three drams, of the inner part of the Cynamo^ five scruples, of the root of
Azari, of Spykenard, of red Roses, of Masticke, and of Lignum aloes, of each
four scruples, of Aloes hepatick one ounce and a half, and two drams, of
lyquide Storax two scruples, and three grains: these chopped and beaten,
infuse for a time in sublimed wine, which rectifye, and make an Electuarie of
the same according to art.

The description of another Electuarie, in a manner like to the ^ormer, which at
Norimberge is reported to be drawn, and the same after this manner was
prepared: take of Colocynthis one ounce and five drams, of black Ellebore, and
of the Cast Senee, of each half an ounce, of the whytest Agaricke one ounce,
of ye best Raned half an ounce, otherwise of his top one ounce, with ye Rubarb
not so excellent, and of Diagridij one ounce and.vi. dra^s, of Cynamon two
drams, and two scruples, of Turbith, and of Stoechados arabicke, of each two
ounces, and a half, of red Roses, of Ligni aloes of Mastick of Ligni paradisi,
of Myrre, of Mader, of Azori, of Spyknarde, and of lyquide Storax, of each five
scruples: let an infusio^ or putrifactio^ be made of all these for certain
days, as either.x. xij. or.xiiij. days, with the essence of wine, that is,
the Aqua vitae thrice distylled over, hot, and the juice after pressed forth,
joined or mixed with Aloes prepared, three ounces. But the Aloes, was in this
manner prepared: it was finely shred or cut, and the Aloes unto the quantity of
a pound, either more or less* was put into a Basin, or pan, or pot, to which
added of Rosevineger, and of Rosewater, of each* so much as shall suffice, yet
let there be more of the Rosevyneger, then of the Rosewater. And let these
boil together with a soft fire, for two or three boylinges, after strain it
by stronglye wrynging forth. The substance strayned boil again with soft
fire unto the styfnesse of Aloes, continuallye sturring it about with a spatle.
And when it shall be through cold, let it be kept to use. The Spyces above
named, shred before finelye, then beaten, and Aqua vitae after powered on these
(thryse distylled over) so much as shall suffice, sturring the same often every
day: after wring the whole through a Lynnen cloth, gross or course, and that
stronglye, then let the waterye moisture be drawn in a Lymbecke with an easy,
fire made under, until the same, which remains in the bottom, comes unto
the styfnesse of the confection named Diacyton^tes. That if in the same, shall
yet a certain moisture remain* then let it be set in some apt vessel on
burning coals, so long as shall seem needful: that the same moisture may
through the heat ^e wasted, and euaporate away.

Aiuyre drawn out of the Iunyper berryes, may be preserved and kept for
twelve years, if it be ryghtlie wrought. Which avails unto the preservation
of the stone, and the use of it has been experienced in many persons, which
of late days (before the publyshing of this book) were greeuouslye payned and
vexed, and many sharp and persing Medicines were applied, and yet none of them
so much auayled, nor the like helped, as by this. For this is a hot Medicine,
and for that cause may perhaps heat overmuch the Kydneys, as a certain
learned supposed: yet through the manner of preparing which is supposed to abate
and qualifye the heat somewhat, may in this avail greatly. This also either
dygesteth, or consumes, or casts forth the flewme in the stomach, and both
cleanses and strengthens the stomach. The use of it serves not so well unto
the defending and preserving from sycknesses, as unto the curing of grieffes.
It besides helps any kind of dystyllations and Rewmes, the gyddinesse or
swymming of the head, the blearedness of the eyes, the horseness of voice,
strayghtnesse of the breast, the coughe, the chollicke, the suffocation of the
Matrice, the staying back of the Terms, the sounding, the stone, and the
Pestilence. Yea these sicknesses* also are numbered of others, which this juice
is reported to cure, as the Frepesy or madness, the dropsy, styncke of the
mouth, the fal^lyng falyng sycknesse, the tremblyng of members, and inward
impostumes. The head and heart are marueylouslye relieved, and refreshed with
this juice, and preserves health many years. It must in discreet order be
taken with a fasting stomach three parts of the year, as in the Harvest, the
Winter, and the Spring, but in the Summer through the heat and dryness,
reserved to necessity. That if the air or season yet shall be moist, and the
heat temperate, you may then use it in the Summer. In the curing of disseases,
it may be applied at any time and often, yet by certain distaunces, and other
apt times between aunswering and agreeing with the same. Many there be which
name it the German Triacle, both for that it is effectuous against poisons,
and that friendlyest* yea especially healthful to German bodies.

The simple juice of the Quince Apples, and without any mixion, may be prepared
in a manner in the same form and order: which of it self is most singular, and
may be reserved or kept a very long time, and becomes also better and
sweeter, in a manner every day after the making.

Of Xylobeuo, of Theophrastus, of Hohenheim: First we purchase three kinds of
Medycines, as a Lycour, Gum, and Alkali. The lycour which yssueth, is like to
the juice of Acacia: the Gum, to that which is named Albotim: Alkali, to the
salt Geme. The lycour, is the proper or very drink it self, the Gum, only
the ointment: the Alkali, purging and mundifying. After the lycour by the
included distyllation, is as the Oil drawn forth: an ounce or four ounces of
which, are effectuousser and of greater value then a whole Talent, which
according to the boiling common of the Physicians yssueth forth of the wood. In
the second manner, the Gum succeeds the lycour, as out of the same wood,
which is remaining, after this manner. Put the Xyloebenum into the inclusiue
reuerberation, in the second degree of fire, and you shall at the end
of.xxiiij. hours see by and by after the Gum come, which in the same tenacitye
or clamminesse with the lyquyde Storax, is separated from the body, and unto
the same through the marvelous sweet savor (resembled) yet whiles each in
the mean whiles consist or rest in the heart, the body and Gum may be
molten, of which one pound, and six ounces, be effectuousser, then two
hundred pounds, which in the boiling are drawn. Last* the Alkali is drawn
after this manner: The body is changed or altered into the uttermost
substance, which is as the spring and original of Alkali, and mixing the
water of Fumyniter with it, is very well courded, even like Anation or Entali,
whose value of one pound and five ounces, is accoumpted worthyer then fifty
pounds, which are by the common way prepared.

For the use, in the beginning, purge the sick person after this manner: Take
of Alkali Xyloebeni half a scruple, of the Triacle of Alexandria two drams,
these myxe together, the dose or quantitye is half a scruple. And the self
same not a first and second time, but a third or fowrth time, and this acording
to the manner of the sickness. Further such a virtue of purging, especially
those payned and dysseased with the Gout, the Palsy, and pustulous humors,
has this Alkali: as the like neither in the laxatiues, purgatiues, and
expulsyues is to be found. And the Chyrurgicall way and form of curing, may
always follow and use this purgation, after this manner. In the beginning
whatsoever is open, aptly with the pure Alkali, after annoint the gum twyse
in the day, and the same use so often and so long, until each are restored
to a sound skymme. That if nothing be apparent, that you can evidently see:
there anoint and use the Gum, where ye pain lur^keth or seems to lie hid.
After this manner may you help, the Gowte, the Palsy, yea and the French
dissease. And wheresoever you shall apply and use it otherwise, then here
prescribed and taught you by us: you shall with the Emperickes, not without a
great expense and damage, lose both toil and travail.

The manner of government and diet: I will not that you prescribe (says he) in
this place the proper manner of diet, but that you cherishe the sick, as it
behooves, with good wine, and meats aptlye prepared. For the order of curing
of the foresaid disseases, consists not in the manner of diet, but in the
efficacy of the remedies, as may appear. Wherefore no cause there is, that by
strayte diet, you appoint here spare meals to the pacient. For this exceeds
all, and not the common virtue of this medicine.

Of the drawing forth of a true substance out of the Myrre, the Aloes, or
other like tears fattie, out of which truly can no perfect extraction or
drawing be* caused, but only in the resolution and dystillation which is done
by Fyltre, that may be putrifyed. As for example, take of Aloes what quantitye
you will, which stiepe certain hours, in a hot place, in some distylled
water agreeable, or in dew water, until the same water be colored, then let
this water be separated, and new poured upon, which water after it has
received color of the infusion, power the same forth, and this so often do
and repeat, until the water will no more be colored or receive color. Then
all these waters ought to be distylled by Fyltre, and when the water ^y
distyllation shall be separated, a substance will after remain, which you
seek. Such manner of drawinges are coni^aled through cold, but dissolved by
heat: and they are ministered and even in the same wayght and quantity, as the
substance out of which they be drawn, which like is not caused and done in
other drawinges, in that the draft is much mightyer, then the same substance
out of which it is drawn.

Of the made Saltes, and oil of Saltes. The.xj. Chapter*
OF the Saltes also of which are burned out of the simples, the use of them in
Physic is in a ma^er so great, as is the wine or common Salt, which daily and
in general serves to man's relief. For when from simples a gross flewme is
gotten, which for truth hyndered, how much less would they perform their
working, that they might be converted into a spiritual matter, which in the
long distillation, and Fyltring is caused, that they may change by a certain
manner into a fyrie matter. Nor it is to be doubted, that when the symples be so
converted into a Salt, and the Element of fire has on such wise dominion in
them, but that they also sooner pearce, and may perform the proper action:
that such a heap or company of diverse symples, shall not need besides, in the
composition of remeedyes. But such Saltes have certain properties, by which
the other purgers distylled, are in a manner abated and troubled: For every
Salt, as affyrmeth Theophrastus, purges: but the distylled waters of the
purgers, lack or have not the same propertye, in that the Salt is not joined
or increased in them. So that I suppose, a great tartnes or sharpnes consists
in all, which do change the vryne.

But the way and manner, by which such Saltes are prepared, is diverse and
sundry wise prescribed and taught of Aucthours. For some will on this wise
these to be made, as that the simple be gathered in a due time, from which let
his proper water be drawn by Balneu^ Mariae, and the Feces remaining in the
bottom, calcyne in the Furnace of reuerberation: the proper water Fyltre many
times over: the water Fyltred from the grosser matter, pour into a basin,
which set in the Sun, or on hot ashes, that the waterinesse may so breath
forth, and the Salt remain. This like may be wrought and done, of all the
symples.

Another manner of drawing the Saltes out of herbs, or roots, or any other
matter, written in the German tongue. The herbs or roots prepared unto this
use* ought before to be dried, then burned in a pot unto an ashie whiteness.
When you shall have purchased a sufficient store of these Ashes, then power
them into a vessel, on which power the cold distylled water, or pure and
clear rain water, letting them so stand to infuse for certain days, in
moving and sturring the whole often about, after Fyltre the water, or let it
run through an Ippocrasse bag, and on the former Ashes pour new or fresh
water, and the same so often (in the same order, as in the first time)
repeated, until the Ashes possess or have no more sharpness in them. Which
ended, all the waters gathered, and poured into a Cucurbite, euaporate in Ashes
or Sand, and a Salt in the end remains in the bottom, which dyllygentlie
^eepe, for it is precious.

It is to be enquired whether when this Salt shall be purchased, it were best to
burn the herbs not whollye, nor ^^daynlye, that a Lie may be made of the
Ashes: or unto the half burned, whereby a more virtue of the taste, and smell
may remain, and a lesser quantity of the yield: or at ye end whether any
Masticke may also be added, or any Gum, or any other matter, that being wrought
and made glutynous or glewishe, it may the better be preserved, and may also be
formed into Pylles: this D. Gesnerus.

Whether the Ashes may be boiled, as of the wormwood, with the water of the
same simple distylled, or with the juice of the herb puryfied and Fyltred: or
the same herb dried, which after the infusing boil together a whiles, then
strain the whole, for on such wise shall you purchase a better savor and
taste: dry Roses may in the like manner, be ordered and prepared. The same
Aucthour Ge. Here is to noted, that a certain person wylleth the drawing of
Saltes not to be done with hot water, but rather with colds. After the Ashes
drawn, a man may both burn, and calcyne them again, as above taught, and
draw a Salt out of them: and the same so often repeat over, until no more
taste of Salt be contained or remain in them. That if the Salt drawn, be not
white, then let it be reuerberated unto a whiteness: which three manner ways,
are dylligentlye to be noated.

In the preparing of Salts, this also is worthy to be noated, that the Saltes
be very well purged by Fyltre: which certain do Fyltre, well twente and
four times over.

These Saltes, which Theophrastus names or reports to be the true A^kalia,
ought to be kept in a Glass, that they be not molten with the Air, which
like happens especially to Saltes, that are drawn and made of herbs (and
those substaunces) which possess and have a more quantitye of Oil and the
sub^iller. The Salts (after a time) wax so hard as a stone: or those, which
be very well Fyltred, are so clear, that they may be seen through, even like
Crystal.

The Salt of Hypericon or S. John's woorte, certain affirm to be syngular and
hyghlie commended in the pleuresie. The dry plant of Hypericon, reduce or
bring to Ashes on the fire, the Ashes after pour^ into hot water, which boil
a time, and the earthlye parts will descend to the bottom. After let the
water in a Cucurbyte be euaporated or consumed away, in Balneo Mariae, and in
the bottom of it will the Salt remain, which dry very well: of which give to
the pacient in warm wine, so much as half a Hasyll nutte shell will hold or
receive. A certain singular Physician in the pleures^e, gave one Pugill, or
very little handful of the Salt of Hypericon, and God is the witness, that
the pacient was delivered by it.

A certain person gives the Salt of wormwood in all sycknesses in a manner,
but above the rest, he profitablye mynistred it in wine, in the Pestilence, as
I hear. Theophrastus only mynistred three grains of this Salt in the
^^^psie, but (as I suppose) he gave the same sundry times. The Salt of
Wormwood seems especially to savor the vryne, having no manifest
vytternesse in it: this Gesnerus.

The Salt of Mugwoort does also savor the vryne, but the same is white and
clear: and the same besides, as it were a certain Talow, fattye.

Of the herb called Kali, do certain prepare a Salt: which herb Kali is
of two Cubits of heygth, having no prickles or thorns, and is sometimes very
red, saltye in taste, with a certain ungrateful smell, found and gathered in
saltie places: out of which, the Salt of Alkali may be purchased, it must be
prepared after this manner, as they report, which prepare it. First they dygge a
pytte, in which they lay wood cleft overthwart, on which they lay a heap of
the foresaid herb, and the fire kindled, they so procure, yt the lycor of ye
herb may still into the pyt, which licour in the end contealeth hard, and
becomes or is made the salt Alkali, being partly of a black, and partly of
an ashie color, very sour and saltie, in so much yt it may accord, as
witnesses John Bauhimus physician of Geneua.

The Salt of Camomyll, gave a certain Physician in the best wine, that is, of
this salt, one little handful or Pugill in the hardness of making water: and
the pacient through it, was spedilye delivered.

Gesnerus thus prepared a Salt, of the Berries, and wood of the Iunyper: I
took (says he) the dry branches or sticks of the Juniper, together with
his berries, in a great quantity, which I brought to ashes: (for it behooves
most exactlye to burn them, some in a great new earthen pot, and in which no
lycour before has been, they burn these) with the ashes of these, let a
proper Lie be made, with water meanelye hot: or the ashes with the water may
be powered in a wooden vessel or Bole, that they may setle, and the water
after powr^d forth a part^, and the ashes with the troubled water to be
separated. To these must other water be powered, and the same sundry times,
until no savor of the Lie remains in the water, and the water by decoction
euaporated and consumed, unto the persite or full drying of the matter, and
whiteness of the same. It yields a smell and sauoureth, like Bora^e and
bryne: sour it is also, and pearcing.

The manner of making Salt, out of the waters of the Bathes of Aponensis in the
field near to Padna, which Johannes de Dondis first found, and invented, by
which he made and purchased such a store of Salt, that it sufficiently served
all his famylye, and had a reasonable store besides, to give of it to his
friends. Gabriel Fallopij teaches the like, in his learned book of bathes,
waters and metals. But ye Salt which he made of the same water, was more
sauourly or salty, and sowrer, than the Sea salt, or any salt dug out of the
earth. In the large Lake of water, of Aponitana, he placed certain hollow
vessels of flynt, well four fingers breadth deep, which vessels, besides
that they were made hollow unto such a depth, were also framed square. So that
he placed these vessels in ye lake, in such manner, that the water could not
enter into it, but stood on the water, well two fingers breadth above. After he
got many earthen pots, which he filled with that water: then placed he them
in those square vessels, and left them even there, until it came to pass,
that the water in those pottes contained, were wrought and boiled through the
heat, and by little and little euaporated forth: and so long this Philosopher
did permit or let this water there remain, that it might boil, as how long a
certain brightness appeared in the water: and he then powered forth that water
of the pots, into those hollow stony vessels, in which ye salt coniealed most
white, as in the highest upper face of those vessels: but in the lowest
remained, the matter or substance properly named of him Gypsea.

The urine of a Child, if it be distylled in a Lymbecke after the manner of
venyger, unto the thickness of Pitch, and the flewme then powered forth, let
the vessel after be very well sublimed, and you shall possess the volatyle
Salt. There be many which use this Salt, unto the dyssoluing of Gold and
Silver: and sundry Philosophers also there be, which name it their Menstruum.

Unto the procuring of the Terms, as I my self have experienced: Take the
roots of the Celondyne clean scraped, and not washed, so many as you will,
those dyllygentlye stamp in a Marble mortar: then put them in a vessel of
cyrculation (as you know) for a natural day, on which power the life of wine,
or burning water, as was of the Agaricke, and others taught before: after let it
remain for a night, in Balneo Mariae, and then in the morning draw it forth,
without any pressing or wrynging forth at all. After so work that it may be
separated (as that it may euaporate) the burning water in the dystylling, after
the accustomed manner, and that gathered, as before taught of the Agarick. And
when all the burning water shall be consumed by Balneu^ Mariae, in the bottom
of the vessel will then remain a cetayne powder, (but whether like Salt)
which use* of this minister at a time one scruple, in white wine, in an apt
place, and necessary time.

A powder of Saltes, unto the seperating of any flewme: Take of Hysope, and of
Penny royal, of each half an once, of Organy two drams, of Fennel seeds
half an ounce, of Carr^way seeds two drams, Lycorys one ounce, of burnt Salt,
six ounces* of ye Salt of wormwood two drams, of ye Salt of Juniper so much,
of Cinamo^ one ounce and a half, of long pepper six drams, of Cordamom^, of
grains of Paradise, and of Cloves, of each half an ounce, of Ginger ^ue
ounce, these after the laboring into powder, mix together.

Of the Oils, of the Saltes of the herbs: which to purchase, the Salt must
on this wise be dyssolued. Take the Salt, which calcyne in the strongest fire,
and calcyned, let it be after fynelye wrought to powder on a Marble stone, this
powder then straw abroad on a Glass: the Glass after with the powder, set
into a wine Seller, in a moist place, and the Salt will after be dyssolued into
an oily substance, which of many is properlye named Salsal.

An oil of Salt, or ointment of Salt, which mightilye anayleth and helps as
well the hot, as the cold distyllinges of the head, which is properly named
the rewme: take a good quantitye of Salt, which grind so fine as is possible,
after let it be boiled with out any moisture in a frying Pan, until it shall
attain a swart color, which ended, let it be labored to powder in a Mortar,
unto the finest of ^oulted flower, the same then myxe with the oil Olyue, unto
the styfnesse of an ointment, without heat or fire. With this ointment,
annoint the affected or grieved part, in a warm place.

The Salt Armoniack, invented of a French Empiricke: take of the whitest Gum
Arabicke, three ounces, which dyssolue in common water, to which after ^dde of
common Salt, clear, and brought to powder, two pounds, the whole boil unto a
just thickness, after power the same into a certain vessel, washed before
with common water, and both sproungen round about, and covered with Chimney
soote brought to powder, and dried in an apt place.

Of Borace. The.xij. Chapter.
THE confection of Borace used at Venice, a singular secret: Take of Cowes
milk distylled two pyntes, of clarified Honnye four ounces, of Saffron three
drams, or Salt nyter well purged (that is, pure and somewhat sweet, having no
sharpnes nor tartenes at all) four pounds. Let all these be incorporated with
the milk (that is dyssolued at the fire) with three pyntes of the water of the
strong myxture drayned, through the strongest and best ashes, and myxed
strongly together. After pour the whole into a pot glased, which set in a
cold (and moist) place, for one month. The stone after found in the bottom,
let it be cleansed again, and purifyed after this manner: Take of the said
stone one pound, of simple water dystylled four pyntes, the whole dyssolue
together at the fire, and purge or skymme the froth of very clean, and when
no more some or froth shall arise, euaporate the whole water (that is, cast or
pour the same forth, when it shall be through cold) and you shall possess a
most pure and fine Borace.

A syngular form and way, in making of the Borace, borrowed out of a French
book written: Take new Butter of one months making, or there about, salted,
which dylligentlye wash often times in clear water. Of this Butter washed,
take one pound, of the oil of Tartare three pyntes, these after the myxing in
the Sun, pour into an earthen platter or pan glased: which strongly stir
and labor together with a large spatle. After take one pound of roche Alome,
being very pure and clear, of Salis nitri Alexandrini half a pound, these
also myxe in the hot Sun, and set abroad at night in a clear air: For
otherwise if rain fall on the whole, or be wette with water, all would be in
vain and come to naught. The upper face of it only will be coniealed like to
Crystal, ye coniealed take of or away, for the same is the stone labored and
desired. And this may aptly be prepared and made, in the months of June,
Iulie, and August.

A syngular way of making Borace, that at this day is in use with the
Goldsmythes, which was brought out of Alexandria unto the Aucthour, and out of
an Italian book by him, and into Latin turned. Take of Goats milk distylled,
and poured, into a Glass body, add to it of roche Alome brought to powder,
that it may easily be dissolved without fire in the water of the mylk. The
whole poured into a narrow necked Glass, let the water be well two fingers
breadth above the Alome, which close covered, let so stand for five or six
weeks, or until the Alome appears a part, which from the water must be
separated or taken, and put into another Glass. Which thus ordered, take two
pounds of Oil of sweet Almondes, and four pounds of the marrow of an Ox
or Cow: the marrow with the Oil mix so together, that it may melt and be
dissolved* which after strain through a Linen cloth, and you shall obtain a
thick Oil. To this Oil add the abouesayd Alome, in such manner, that the
Oil covers two fingers breadth above the Alome, the same then set in the
Sun for three months, or a longer time, which is the better: and on such
wise shall you prepare, and make what quantity of Boraxe you will: and this
conceive, to be a most excellent secret. For it is the true Boraxe, which is
made in Alexandria.

Another composition, out of the same D.H.D. Take of Alome purged from the
Feces, which Dyars use, and of the same with water drayned through strong
Ashes, able to bear an egg, make a Lie: after take a quantity of the past of
Boraxe, which you mind to have, the same put into a vessel, to which power
such a quantitye of scaldyng Lie, as will cover the paste, and with Canell let
them be well incorporated together, then let the whole stand, until the ^eces be
settled in the bottom. Which so ordered, ingeniously separate the Lie, as above
taught, that the paste may be well separated and purged of all grounds and
fylthe. After take the whole. Lie (and power upon the paste of the Boraxe)
these in the boiling in a pan or pot, skymme very pure and clean. And the
skimme keep a part in a vessel, for in it is an Oil contained, which kyndled
burns like a Candle. That you may rightlye judge and know of the perfect
boiling of the same: instyll certain drops of it on a marble stone, or on
your nail, and if it remain coniealed, it is then sufficient.

Another perfect way, borrowed out of a Goldsmithes book, of fame with us: Take
of Alome one pound, which break in a gross manner, to it add of pure and
clear Gum Arabicke one quarter of a pound, very fine brought to powder, of
the seeds or corn of Wheat and Barlye, of each one quarter and a half, the
seeds of the Wheat and Barlie power into an earthen vessel glased within,
which cover with warm Cow milk, after set these into whote Horse doong for
five and fiftye days, and at every seven days end, renew it with new whote
doong.

Another well lyked, and to be put in use: Take two parts of ancient oil
Olyue, and one part of new Cow milk, these after the myxing together, power
into a Glass with a narrow mouth, to which add of roche Alome, such a
quantity chopped into pieces, so bygge as a Date, that the licours may well be
two fingers breadth above the Alome, then bury the Glass in hot Horse doong,
for fiftye days, and let the doong be sufficient hot all that season, after
dry the substance in the shadow, etc.

A special paste of Borace: take of white Soap, which finelye raspe or scrape,
the same myxe with Honny, and boil so long together in an earthen pan, until
the whole becomes tender: this proved.

A worthy confectio^ of Boraxe: take of roche Alome, two ounces, and resolve
two ounces of Salt Alkali dissolved, which put into a Tyn vessel, over a soft
fire to boil, for half an hour: after draw forth the water, and myxe with
the same two ounces of Salt Geme brought to powder, and so much of Salt Alkali,
and of Honny two pyntes, and one pynt of Cow milk: these then set in the Sun
for three days, and you shall purchase stones.

Another special manner, and that good, is thus made perfyte, unto all
judgments. Take of Salt Armoniacke, one ounce, of Gum Arabicke two ounces,
of Masticke, and of roche Alome, of each half an ounce, of Salt nitre one
ounce, of common Salt two ounces, of Tartare calcyned one ounce: all these
finelye brought to powder, pour into a Glass with vryne, which boil until
it be thycke.

Of potable Gold, of the oil of Gold, and powder of the Sun, or the Gold
of Life. The.xiij. Chapter.
THE ancient Philosophers in times past, had diverse opinions in the dyssoluing
of Gold, and yet unto this day, the same not of the learned fullye uttered,
whether so pure and perfyte substance, as the Gold is, may be purchased by
man's industrye with any Art, force, and property of fire, to be resolved into
a perfyter and purer lycour. For which cause, we shall here under utter
certain disputacions and arguments of this kind, even as we found them
written in scroules, in the treasure of Euonymus. And all those in a manner are
propouned, of learned men, on either part by their Letters familyarlye written
to D. Gesnerus. And first of all does a certain, most syngular Physician of
great report and fame with us, defend thus the Negatyue part. If so be (says
he) an Oil of Gold may be prepared and made, then the Alchymisters would
obtain and possess all things. For neither an Oil, nor water is purchased,
except it be reduced into a spirit, and the substance of the same perfitly
mixed dissolved. The same whether it may be compassed and done, I beseech you
to reuolue and ponder, according to your learned and Philosophical
understanding. Yet may Gold be dyssolued, and into very small parts, in so
much that with the lycour in the distyllation* as they name it, it may ascend:
Notwithstanding, certain it is, that the substance of Gold does remain. And
many things there be, which so dyssolue the Gold, that they reduce it into
very small parts. But do draw a water or oil, out of Gold, the skylfull
practysioners know: yet believe meacute;e, that none hitherto, which affirmed
this, performed the matter in deed: which if he could or knew the same, he
would be rytcher then Croesus. I do not deny, but that a stone and tinctures
may be wrought and done: yet consider a little I pray you, that these be but
tryfles, and to small purpose, So that how in a Golden vessel, the keuer of
Golden vessel can no^ be (...) a dream (...) as the most instructions in a
mane^ of all the Alchymi^^e^, which like many men of our time, have set forth
and le^t in writing, their own inventions and (...), and have uttered nothing
at all of the (...) pra^^ises and very^ tru^th: For as the others were
delighted to set forth other men's ^^^ties and (...) so the* Th^ophrastians also
with these, ^^^ye and practice to ma^e, of ^oole^ mad men. And very like it
is, that somewhat is aided, no^ by dyuine help, but that the master of them
to have wrought and done: yet that those (...) and remedies* which they
publy^he, to be* vain and false, nothing dou^te. For they utter them with such
an obscurity, least their peruersenes in teaching might be perceived. But of
those hitherto, shall su^fise. But this one thing (to conclude) I may adioyne,
that the same person must needs be very impudent and shameless, and an utter
enemy and defamer of your worthy name, which labored to persuade you to
credyte this. These hitherto be the words, which a singular Physician wrote
unto D. Gesnerus, of the oil of Gold.

The like wrote another learned, unto the same Gesnerus, yet otherwise he wrote
after this sentence: that what shall I write and utter of the dy^^oluing of
Gold, or Gold potable, seeing such practyses are the speculacions of ^ryuolous
persons, which if those helped, or served unto the matter, then loses he both
oil and labor. That Gold may be reduced into very small parts, and be so
caused lyquide, and that the nature of the Gold may be converted in a spyrit
and oil, the Alchymistycall hope, and not the ^eueth it self, allows it to
be performed and done. Yet the Gold brought into very small parts, and
reduced into the first Elements purest, may so be made potable: but the same
(not under the form of water or oil) seeing it may through the myrion,
cause other metals to be the better, and as it were to alter, which I do not
deny, yet grant I not the same to be any thing at all, as they affirm of the
Philosophers stone. But of the water and Oil of Gold, which they so
conninglye utter and teach. I am out of doubt and sure, the same to be wholye
untrue. And of the same mind and judgment seem both the learned Auycen, and
Albertus Magnus to be, yea and that syngular Brassanolus: as that (...), and is
as it were contrary (...) a substance that may seem to have no grounds,
seems (...): the rather, that by force of fire, without any other help may
in substance by any manner be altered. And the like words* used Brassanolus*
That of the purginges, th^se not only to be vain and fryuolous* which are
reported of the potable Gold and Silver* but he also doubted not to affirm
them to be poisons. And many like words and opinions may be alleged and
agreeable unto the same sentence, which at this time for breuitye were here
(...)* But a further instruction and larger discourse (...) shall be uttered,
in the Book intytuled of Stones, precious stones* and Myneralles: which as
infynite Papers in a manner written* our syngular Gesnerus has left them as
yet, vndygested in due order.



But the dyssoluing of Gold, that many affirm, which may be performed and
done by the same Chymicall art. And first do they per(...), by aucthority,
and the Books of the famous antiquity: but (...) they confyrme the same by the
clear or ready inspection and working of worthy persons in our time. And after
this order does a certain learned man, and that very studious in natural
Philosophy, write unto the syngular Gesnerus. There were with in^^ (says he)
two skylfull practysioners, which to ordered the fynest Gold, as in the
infusing, distylling, putrefying dyssoluing, and drying, that they brought it
into a most lyquide humor, or lycoure and at the performing or dryuging this
to pass, they were occupied and followed it (...) weeks, as from the nynth of
June* (...) of (...) ^ylligence applied, that the fire ^ll that season went
never wholye out: so that they used contynuallye a soft and easy^ fire, in
which doing, I see our Alchymisters especially to dygresse and err: they were
always with their work, and watched all the nights, (...) both few
vessel^^^, ^^d instruments. Tha^ ^f any lycour of p^^^ble Gold* be well
prepared (...) that the same may or ought to be prepared after this manner* as
of these men, wi^h whom I being conuersaunt, saw prepared and mad^. And that
I may believe the same, h^ prepares and makes first* that they reduce the
Go^^e on such wise (...) of h^s (...) as it (...) pure r^yme clo^^e whyti^^*
and the same (...) fyre^^* into the Receauer: and this Golden lyc^^r* which ^
most mar^^ylen^, dies, causyng a Golden color, or Paper, W^^ll: ^^any other
matter wet in it, which ^^lour so woonderfu^^ye pear^^th or enters, that a
(...) through sundry ^ea^es of my writ^^^ Tab^^^ (...) that the (...) ^^so^is
^ (...) of the per^yle (...) that (...) of the dyssolued Go^^e is white. These
and others they cause, th^^ I may believe this manner of dyssoluing to be most
true* Which these use, nor I have hythert^ s^^ne the ly^^ at any ^ther
A^chy^ister^ hands. That if this ^e a true (...) th^^ ^^ the (...) and way
easy, of (...) after the (...), la^oured to bring (...) a powder, but the same
then dyssolued in a moist place* (...) the form of ^^ Oils* by the ^wne
accord, in a Glass^, also well ^^nced, the practis^ ^^ which matter, was
wrought (...) sight. So that these which in presence I saw done^ I as a (...)
to the t^^et^ here wr^^^, and have s^^^ce ^^nfuted ma^^y (...) with (...)* and
others contrary working* For there be (...) ^atters in kind imp^^^^ble* which
by a cer^^yne way and ^easo^ are br^^^ght most easy to be wrought* I ^eare
that these ^ured certain desperate disseases with it* these ^^therto ^e.

Of the dy^^olved a^^ ^^table Gold and property (...) of the same* borrowed
out of the seventh Chap^ter of Antonius Fumanellus* in the book of the
composition of Medicines. The.xi^^^. Chapter.
NOt I mynd^ not by (...) ouer^asse that M^dycine, which (...) of the Chimic^ll
art, extolling with great (...), do (...) potable Gold: that at the least,
how the composy^^on of the same is, may be known. Of which they ^^^yrme
these propertyes to be, that druncke it y^eldeth or procures joy of the
heart, and (...) aseth the ^^rength of the same* and puts (...) sicknesses*
It stays back old (...) natural h^^^rs, and pr^serueth all the parts of
the body without (...) ^^ decay, it cures the Leprye, cleanses the blood,
^elyeth the shedding of heir* if it be given with Endyue water, or rather in
the decoction of the same taken: which suffices once to bane uttered, that
above declared? This with Bytonie water* helps headache, the ^ynmesse of
^yght, and ^yd^inesse or (...) of the head* with the decoction of Buglosse, and
Baulme: the Le^arge with the ^^^^ning water, and Lyllyes* Memory corrupt with
the decoction of the Fennel, and drunck restores ^eb^ed parts, it remoueth:
Melancholy, and all manner of madness with the water of B^rage: it helps an
a^tonish^^ sickness, with burning water* and cures the falling sickness,
taken with the decoction of the w^^ite ^^te of the Pyonie* gathered in the
decre^ (...) wayne of the (...): it ^^^^eth unto the softness or losenesse of
members, wit^ the dist^lled water of Sage, or decoction of the same^ it cures
the Ophtalmia, ^^ in^^amation of the eyes, and other pains, with the water of
(...) and ^ythie of the (...), and water^ it helps distyling (...) ^or (...),
with the water of (...) the bleeding of the Nose this helps, with the water
of S^abious: it cures the cough with the water of Maiden hair, and in the
spytting of blood with the water of ^^antane: in the consumption of the Lunges,
with the water of Honny, and milk: in the pain and swelling of the L^ng^,
with the water of river Creauisses: in the trembling of the heart, with the
water of ^^^line, or Buglosse: in the pain of the stomach, with the water of
Myntes, or decoction of the same: in a hot disposition of the body, with
Rosewater, or the water of Myrtylles: in the blooddy scouring, and gryping of
the bellye, or flyxe, with the water of plantaine: in the pain of the
Collycke, with burning water: in the passions of the worms, with the decoction
of Zedoaria, or wormwood: in the swellings of the Liver, or stopping, and
water between the skin, with the water of the wild Endyue, and of
Lyuerwoort in a hot cause, but in a cold cause with the decoction of
Spykenarde, or Cynamon: in the Iaundise with the water of Honysocles, commonly
named Periclymenos, or with Goats whaye: in the passions of the Mylte, with
the water of the Ash, or Tamariske: in the passions of the Kydneys, stoppinges
or fylling, and the stone, with the water of Tribulorum marinorum, or Radyshe,
Alkekengi, and Pympernell, or with the powder of Philantropos, or Apparina: in
the Srangurie, and ulcers of the Kydneys, with Goats milk: in the rupture of
the caul of the guts, and falling down of the guts into the coddes, with the
water of either Consolida: in the staying back of the Terms, with the water
of Sauyne, or Mugwoort: and in the painfulnesse, or straightnes of birth, with
the water of Mugwoort: it helps besides barrenness, with the water of Nepte,
and Lauender: all manner of joint aches, happening in any member and part of the
body, and consumpcions: this cures with burning water, or the Cowslyp, or the
Lauender: this serves to the pestilent Ague, with the water of Sorrel, or
Buglosse, and Scabious: to the Canker fystula, and scabbydnesse, with the water
of Verueyne, or Buglosse or Sorrel. It preserves a man from poison, and
helps persons poisoned, and cures the byt of a mad Dog with the water of
Tormentyll, white Dittany, or Bystorta, or the water of ye root of the Pyonie:
Quotydians, Tertians, and quartaine Agues, in the coming of the cold, or
beginning of the fytte give it with the water of Hearts tung, and it puts
away the unstable and burning Agues with the syrup of Violettes: and that
briefly to write, they affirm the potable Gold with burning water, to procure
a noble effect in man's body, and to put away in a manner all sicknesses. And of
it they appoint in great sicknesses, one scruple or half a dram wayght, to be
ministered at a time, but in easier or gentler sicknesses, unto the quantitye of
half a scruple, in small grieffes unto the wayght of two Barlye grains, and
myxed with a decoction being ten times so much. Seeing that they utter ^ teach
the making of it many ways, for that cause will I here declare sundry of them,
but if any shall desire to know more ways of the same, and that the Chymistes
term and name of fyxion of the Son in our heauine, let him read the
Commentary named the heauine of the Philophers, where you shall find many
forms of the potable Gold, and that sundry wise, and in the same also shall
you read many compositions of Aqua vitae: of which the truth it self
utters, what fydelitye is to be given to them.

A dyscription of the making of potable Gold.
The first, take a quantitye of the leaves of chosen Gold, which shall seem
apter to thy purpose, of the juice of Lemmons very well puryfied so much as
shall suffice, powered into a body, orderly stopped as it behooves, and set
into a Furnace of ashes, under which a fire made of a Candle or other light,
for fowr^ days, or more, to which after add half so much of burning water,
five times distylled over, this use, according to discretion.

The second they uttering and teaching another way of making the po^able gold,
do take of gold leaves beaten very fine and thin, a. C. i^ number, of salt
finely grinded on a smoth marble stone half anounce, these mixed together, and
washed in hot water, they after pour into a glass body, framed or having a
long neck, and in the bottom fenced with ye lute of wisdom, on ye mouth of
which a keuer artly set, under which a fire made of a light having. iij.
matches or wykes, that they may distill, as ye order is, accordi^ to art* yt if
any part of ye gold shall yet remain in ye bottom of ye vessel, they k^epe ye
same unto use.

The third, by another manner preparing and making the potable Gold, they take
one part of the purest Gold, of quicksyluer two parts, which they stiepe
together for a day and a night, until the Gold shall be dyssolued by his
force, after they distyll the whole with a fire, until the quicksyluer be
separated from the Gold: and to the Gold resting in the bottom of the
vessel, then tending unto a blackness, they add of Buglosse water half a
pynt, and the mouth of the vessel being stopped or keuered after art, they
mayntaine fire under for three days, and three nyghtes, unto the meltyng or
through dyssoluing of the Gold.

The fourth, let be taken of the cement of Gold, one ounce, which compound or
myxe with one ounce, of pure Spanishe quicksiluer: the whole put into a Glass
body, common Oil powered upon, and floting well two fingers above, then let it
boil on hot Ashes or ymbers for.xxiiij* hours, and when it shall be through
cold, draw forth the Oil, and that which remains, wash with warm water,
until the moisture, and vnctuousnesse be separated, and dried, the same bring
or work into a fine powder, which then put with the Sulphur into a Crucible
or coals, mayntayning the fire, until the Brimstone be burned or consumed:
after take the gold, and grynde it with Salt for a certain time, and after
with Honey make a long grynding on a Marble stone: then wash it with hot
water, until the Gold be very well cleansed, and pure: after take vryne
dystylled, three times over: as at the first let it be distylled unto the half
^ next unto the third part: the third time unto the fowrth part* and to this in
the last time distylled and powered into a Glass set on hot Ashes, add Salt
grynded, and Salt Armoniacke on a soft fire, until they be dyssolued into
the distylled vryne, and these distylled together in a Lymbecke. But the Gold
by fylter, which to the vryne prepared myxe, and to both the Saltes, the same
set on a soft fire, and that which swymmeth or floteth above, let it be taken
of and washed so often as an Oil, until no saltness rest in it, which then
powered into a Glass body with the water of Life, let them after be dyssolued
into a clear water.

The fyft, take of Vytrioll rubysied, one pound, of salt Nytre, nine ounces,
of Vermilon six ounces, of common Salt three ounces, the whole grinded
together, draw a sharp water, with which let the gold be mixed, prepared as
above taught, and distylled by a Lymbecke, until a water shall issue in the
color of Gold: that Gold remaining in the bottom of the vessel, reduced
unto the form of Honey, myxe with the water here under described. Take of
Vermilon three pounds, of Vitryoll ruby^ed, of Salt nytre, and of roche Alome
calcyned, of each one pound, of common salt one pound and a half, all these
grynde together, and artificiallye distyll: that which is sublymed, and cooled,
and made white, grind with a like wayght of salt Armoniacke, then let it be
sublymed, and grinded five times over: that which is sublimed work on a Marble
stone, the whole set on the ^yre, and molten, myxe with the Gold, prepared as
above taught, which boil with a soft fire, until the Gold be dyssolued, and
when it shall be through cold, let the vessel containing the above said
matters, be buried under hot horse doong, for thyrtie days, and set again on
the fire: that which shall be dystilled, safelye keep.

Another potable Gold against the Pestilence, and all sicknesses happening of
vntemperatnes* of ^uyll compowning of the members, and of the unity dissolved,
and those which be common. The.xv. Chapter.
OF the vryne thryse distylled, which is wrought after this manner: Take of man's
vryne twenty pyntes, the same distyll, by drawing at the first time ten
pyntes: in the second time draw out of these ten, five: and out of the five,
three: and with these five (or rather three) let the Gold prepared, be poured
into a Lymbeck. Take of Gold out of his natural cemente, one ounce, and
Amalgama, it with one pound of Spanishe quicksyluer, these power into a Glass
body, then boil the whole with common oil for four and thyrtie hours,
which after draw forth, and let cool throughlye: the same wash with hot
water, until the oil, and all ventositye be dygested, then press or wring
the substance through a skin, and the Gold shall remain Amalgamated, which
dry, and dried very well, grynd in a Mortar with Brimstone, that the Amalgama
with the Brimstone may be brought into a fine powder: after take the distylled
vryne, above uttered, which power into a glass with a narrow neck, to it add
of common Salt in powder, and of Salt Armoniack, these then distyll again:
after power it on the Gold in a glass body, and let it boil, that the Gold
may be dyssolued, then take the Gold of, swymming above, with a Spone of
glass, the same power into burning water, or into the same, which is distylted
out of the Elyxir vitae in a double vessel, and in this by heating dyssolue
the Gold: for this Gold is profitable, unto all manner grieffes. The seventh:
take the Honey comb with all the wax, and the Honey, which power into a glass
with a narrow neck, pouring upon of the best burning water: the same very
well stopped* let stand to stiepe for two months in a hot place (or in hot
Horse doong) and m^yst, until all be molten, the same distyll. That which
first yssueth* will be as a water: which in the second draft, will be as
vapor: that in the third, will be as a fyrie part: which boil so long,
until the Gold be dissolved. For this is marvelous, and experienced for the
Stomach, the Liver, and the Bowelles, affected of a cold vntemperatnes, and
where fear (of that swelling) named Ascites, is doubted to come.

The manner and way of making a potion like to potable Gold, serving unto
sundry sycknesses. The.xvi. Chapter.
C^rtayne of the Chymistes, supposing the burning water to purchase the
propertyes of Gold, do heat red hot the same Gold, which they name the
Sun, that by nature or by art purified into thinner plates, or pieces, an
hundredth times, and so many times quench them in the burning water, and
commyxed to the Quintessence, as a heauine, they used in sundry sicknesses:
this hitherto Fumanellus.

The manner of making potable Gold, invented of a Physician of Craconiensis,
which he also used in the compositions against the Pestilence: take of leaued
Gold, and myxe it (but I would put the same into a Glass body) with such a
quantitye, which shall seem reasonable and sufficient to your turn, of the
juice of Lemmons purifyed. After stop dilygentlye the mouth of the Glass,
which burye in hot Ashes, and let it so stand for four days or more, even
as need requires the same: then add for the half of this mixture, such a
quantitye of the best Aqua vitae (as of that sweet, of which above taught)
rectifyed, and close well the mouth of the Glass that no air breathe forth,
which keep as a precious pearl and Baulme, and an estimable Treasure, for the
health of man's body, necessary above all others. And of this treasure may a
man receive or take four times in the year, as in the beginning of every
third month, so much as a sponefull at a time, with the best Malmesse, or
with Brothe, in quantytie either more or less, as necessitye shall require. Of
the distyllation he makes no mention: yet what and if the juice of the Lemmons
should be first drawn by distylling, then the water of life added, and should
again be distylled. Or you may otherwise see and perceive, what manner if may
be, if it be so prepared by the order of the prescripcion, and if you will,
distyll besides with a mean fire of coals, for four and twenty hours.

A potable Gold prepared after the manner of the Alchimisters, on this wise,
which the Aucthour borrowed, out of an old Alchymic book written. First let
the Gold be calcyned, after the use and manner of the Goldsmythes, by
Mercury, and permytt^ that the Mercury or quicksyluer euaporate from it, then
let it be fynelie grounded on a Stone, after set in a Furnace of reuerberation
for two days, and most subtle flowers shall appear, which gathered and
calcined, and reuerberated to long, until the whole be changed and come to
flowers. With those flowers of the gold, take vyneger of the best wine
distylled, and put these flowers in a glass, then set it to putrify for
fourteen days, after power forth the vyneger colored, and power upon new
vyneger, sturring it well, after let the same thoroughly settle, then let the
vyneger in the end be changed again, pouring upon other, and the same so
often repeat, until no more remains in the bottom of the Glass, and that
the whole be dyssolued into the vyneger. After power the colored vyneger into
a bygge Glass, that the vyneger may freelye euaporate forth, and in the
bottom will a black Gold remain, like to an oil as pytch, which take, and
power to your wine rectifyed, that it may there be dyssolued, and powered into a
vessel of cyrculation, which let stand in a most gentle heat for twelve
weeks, and all the spyrites of the Wine shall so be gathered and fyxed, and
converted into a powder, together with the Son or Gold, which take forth,
and prepare or put to be dissolved: for it will be dissolved into a most
clear Oil, as Gold, and this is named potable Gold, of which use as you
know. And the rectifying of the wine, is on this wise done, in a vessel of
recteration or rectifying, let the Wine stand for ten days: but in the Wine
before let these be dyssolued, before that it be put into a Glass to be
rectifyed, as of Camphora, two ounces, of crude Sugar well dried before so
much, of Nutmegges one ounce, of Mace, of Zedoaria, and of Gynger, of each one
ounce, with these rectifye the Wine, in the vessels of rectifying, the
vess^lles ver^^ t^ose sto^^e^, that little or nothing may breathe forth, after
let it ^e taken, and with this Wine prepare the Gold.

The potable Gold, says the singular Fiorauante, is a dyuine lycour, to
which none other may be compared, that the ancient, and later Philosophe (...)
have by dillygent study, great search, art, and practice, dyue ^selye sought
and labored to dissolve and make this pocion of Gold, and have also attempted
diverse and sundry ways: of which some of them I will here rehearse, to the end
that the wife may judge, which way (of these) seems best. For some there
were, that before the distyllation, did diuer sly calcyne the Gold, to bring
it to dissoluing: others there were, which labored to dissolve the Gold with
Aqua fortis and others after the calcyning, have endeavored to dissolve the
Gold with Aqua vitae: and thus many have trauayled without light, in the
search of the Art, having neither knowledge, skyll, nor yet experience. And
this co^ceyue, that all those matters which are possible to be done are wrought
with great easiness: and in the like manner, is the dyssolucion of Gold easilye
wrought, Wherefore I will here utter and teach an easy manner, and sure way of
making this most precious lycour, so greatly and highlye esteemed of mortal
creatures, not without desert: in that the same is a substantial essence, and
as it were another Soul, yea our life this potable Gold may be named* for the
sundry effects, right wonderful, that it in desperate cases has wrought.
Take of Gold leaves, or leaf Gold, in wayght one ounce: after get a byg and
well fleshed Hen, or male Pullet, which after the kylling, pull, and take forth
the bowels and other*refuse, the body yet warm, then open or cut holes in many
parts of the body, where most flesh is, as on the breast, the legs, and under
the wings. These parts stuff and fill with the leaf Gold, until all be
full, or that the whole be bestowed. Which done set this Hen or pullet into an
apt place, where for six and thirty hours the body may retain or keep a
natural heat, that the Gold may so be dyssolued into a water: for there is
a certain hid propertye in the Hens or Pullettes flesh, for the
dyssoluing of Gold into a water. Which time ended take the body forth, and wash
all the flesh of the Hen or Pullet so thoroughly round about, and clearly that
nothing at al remains (...) of the Gold, with the water of Honny* distylled
with his spyrites, being re^tifyed twyse or thryse. This washing ended take so
much of the water of life, as is of the water, of the washing of the Hens
flesh, which mix together: and for each pynt of the said water, a^de one
dram of Salt Armoniacke, which is white without any blackness, these power
together into a Glass body, after burye the Glass in hot Horse doong, for
three whole months. But every month look^ to your substance, taking or
pouring forth the clearer above, which keep in a Glass close stopped: the
body again set into the hot Horse doong, and remaining another month, that
which shall be clear likewise separate from the Fece^: and on such wise, in the
space of three months, shall you purchase all the water dyssolued and clear.
In the end, distyll the Feces in ashes or sand, with a strong fire, that all
the substance may the better ascend and issue forth. But in the distyllacion
of the Feces, this remember, that on the Feces must half a pynt of the fynest
Aqua vitae be before powered, and the same which shall be distylled, power and
mix with the other, that was kept in the first draft* these distyll again in
Balneo Mariae, until all be distilled: which set again into hot Horse doong,
for.xxv. days, and then have you purchased potable Gold, easilye prepared,
and with small cost: which by his maruaylous propertye and great virtue,
rayseth in a manner the dead. The use and manner of ministering it, is on this
wise: Take one dram of the potable Gold, with one ounce of the Inleppe of
Violets mixed together. And this composition may be given in Broth, or with any
water, or by it self, without any other mixture or lycour. And if any sick
person be at the point of death, in giving such a lycour, shall live a far
longer time, then perhaps he might do without it: and many by the dryncking
of it, have recovered life and health a long time after, by which may well
appear, of what importance this is for the Aged, to live one, or two, or four
days after the taking, for the better dysposing of their goods and will:
besides this greatly avails, unto the restoring of strength. This also has
caused the speachlesse, in extreme danger, to speak and utter their minds
before death, of which (this Fiorauante) saw sundry in the like case.

The confection of potable Gold, borrowed out of the letters of a certain
shy^full pr^^tisioner, which wrote in the French tongue unto D. Gesnerus. Take
of Tartare what quantitye you will, which Calcyne unto a whiteness, that may
be performed in three days, the calcyned Tartare, dyssolue in common
distylled water: and this conceive, that to one pound of the Tartare calcyned,
are three pyntes of the water (...). After the dissolution, let the water be
distylled by Fylter, and conie^led. Which done, it must be calcyned again for
other eight or nine hours, then dyssolue the same again in the common water
dystylled, and let it be coni^aled as above taught, and the same repeat seven
times over. And after the seventh time calcyned, let the Tartare to be
dissolved be put by it self into a large glass, which set in a moist place,
where neither the air, nor rain may touch. Which on this wise prepared, take
fyftene ounces of this water calcyned of the Tartare, that for each ounce of
the Sun calcyned, add of the manner ensuing. Take of the purest or finest
Gold one ounce, which dissolve with Mercury, even as the practisioners and
Goldsmythes dissolve the same, that gylde vessels, after let the Mercury by
euaporating be separated on the fire. When you shall have purchased the lyme, or
ashes, or the powder of the Gold in a due wayght, put the same then into a
Glass, like to a Receauer, which the longer the neck shall be, so much the
better it is. Then stop dyllygentlie this Receauer, that no other impure or
strange matter fall into it, which after burye in hot Horse doong, or rather
set the same in Balneum Mariae for fiftene days: and beware you stir not the
vessel, least that which is dissolved, and the some which is sublymed cleaves
to the sides, may fall of, and the action so byndered, whereby the lesser may
the rest be dyssolued: And let there remain, as either unto the whole, or let
the greater part at the least be dissolved* When the dyssolued Gold shall be
drawn, the same with great dylligence shall then be attempted and be gu^^e,
least that which is dissolved, may be myxed with the same, which is not
resolved. And that the sharpness of the water, which it received of the water
of the Tartare, may be taken away: take of the water of Life four or five
times distylle^, which myxe with the water of Tartare, and the Son or Gold
dyssolued, and this so often repeat, until the whole water of the Tartare
shall be separated from the Son, and unto that no savor nor taste of the
Salt remains. After add to it a little Rosewater, that the savor of the
burning water may so be abated: and on such wise have you purchased, the Oil
most pure.

Of the way and manner of making, and preparing the potable Gold, wrote a
certain learned person thus unto D. Gesnerus: I here send unto you the
potable Gold, as you (most syngular learned) required* that is, the way of the
making of it, as I saw the same done by two practystoners conuersau^t with
nice, which prepared the same in this manner with (...), even of late years.
And I beseech (...) m^st singular Gesnerus, that if it shall so seem to you,
to continue any truth that you will voutchsafe to allow and retain it with
you. For the Aucthours thereof which were with me, made very much store, and
danger of the same, and condicioned with me to be an ^uer^^er of them (...),
to the end I should not communicate^ the (...) to any: which will of their I
hitherto kept, that I have not to any vt^ered the same, either by word or
writing, saving to you alone, and this with good faith; so largelye as memory
could bear away, and wit utter, I here communicate to you^ the brief sum
of which is on this wise.

Let the wor^hyest Gold be chosen, the same purge with fire ^y semen^e, that it
may be ^^ade (...) pure, and sincere, as is possible: af^^^ let ^t be ^^yuen
(...) the n^^e plates, and cut into ver^e ^^^ll pieces, which on such wise
shredded, dyssolue in a Glass with a long neck, much like to the Receauer,
having a flat bottom. For in this shall the dissolucion be sooner wrought.
After let Aqua f^rtis be taken, which purged four times from the Feces, and
dyst^lled with a fowrth part of common salt prepared let the gold f^n^ly cut,
be p^t into th^^ water thus prepared, and let the Tartare very well calcyned be
by little and little put in, and on a (...) fire so gentle, yt you may always
handle ye neck of the glass: this dissolved into a pour and clea^^ water*
(...) from the fire, yt it (...) through lie ^oole. Then pour the water out of
it, into a Glass with large mouth* and let (...) water be ^esol^ed in hot
Ashes, and the substance ^^odryed; that sea^celye you may f^^lt the savor of
the Aqua fortis, and after the same, the matter again cooled* then Rosewater
powered on it, and the matter resolved, let the substance again be euaporated
and (...) a^oue taught* and the some ^gaine like repeated* as above uttered:
for on (...) shall the force of the Aqua fortis in (...) v^rye well (...) forth.

The substance purifyed and dried after this manner that it come to putrefying,
the same shall on this wise be done and let the matter be put into a Glass
sufficient large, to the same add the common distylled water, ^o much as (...)
^ouer the subst^u^ce, three fyngers in a manner above it, the Glass set into
Horse doong; or let it ^^e wrought in Balneo, which better ^greeth by the space
of ten d^yes. Then distylled so long as the vapor of the water (that is, until
the water be euaporated forth) and the substance dried: on the matter dried
let the d^stylled water be powered, and with a soft, fire, let the water again
he dyssolued into a vapor, after distylled in Ashes, and dried as above
taught. If the wor^ke hitherto shall be decently continued* the substance is
then brought to that purpose, that it will give forth white clouds in the
end, which that it may the spedilyer be done: in the end of the fourmer
dystyllacion the substance dried, let the wine thryse distylled be powered on
the same, and by the vapor of the water on a soft fire, let the substance be
dyssolued. Which if it shall be orderly done, the white clouds will then begin
to appear, and golden drope will by little and little ascend from the bottom of
the Limbacke, unto the upper face of the water, which the whole most pure,
shall compass as a Cause, in which, the Golden drops will hang: and of the
same they interpreted this to be the Golden shower of Dana^^. And for trut^ I
never saw any thing, pleasaunter then the same. For which cause it behooves
studiously to regard, and gather these clouds. And they are taken of with the
back of the imbossed part of the Spone of Glass (the clouds ought to be
taken of with the ^^bossed part, that the wat^^ be ^ot drawn (...) taken up
with them, for to the imbossed part do they easily clean: and shyfted into a
dyshe of Glass, but sound or whole received from the water; (in the same I
mean to be conduite water) and shyfted again into a dyshe of Glass, which is
in a man^er filled (with conduite water) dystylled. In this by and by will the
cloud, fall to the bottom. The first cloud thus gathered, let the
putrefaction, the exicration, and dystyllacion be repeated by order, for on
such wise shall another cloud be gathered, and the same so often repeat
until all shall be gathered. When no cloud more shall appear, you have then
purchased the Gold separated from the Tartare (as it were the Tartare before
conglufynated to the Gold or corporated together) which shall remain white in
the bottom. The Gold thus converted into clouds, taken out of the water in
the dyshe of Glass, shall be dried in the Furnace of calcynation, for (...)
shall it be delivered of the strange humor, which perhapp^^ shall be wrought
or done by the tenth day, ^at the heat ought to be gentle, that it exceeds
not the natural heat of man's body. The substance dried by the tenth day or
after, shall ea^lye be brought to powder with a spone in a Glass dyshe. The
clouds thus gry^^ed to powder, and powered into a long necked Glass, putrifye
at Balneo, and let them be again dyssolued together, which will be compassed
and done sometimes at the thyrtye day. But it shall be dyssolued into an oily
matter, which again dried, shall thus be performed, as unto the present
purpose sufficientlye prepared. For that Sellar or other moist place, shall it
be converted if need v^^ into a cytryne water, which as they report to be of a
marueylou^ propertye, unto to all kinds of sicknesses in a manner. These by
good says and so far forth as I could by memory utter, I have commit^^^
(...) whole to you, etc. Farewell.

Another manner of Theophrastus, for potable Gold: the Gold must be dyssolued
(as into most thin plates driven, and shredded very small) in Aqua fortis
agreeable (as four times purged from the Feces; named Royal) and washed from
the sharpness with sweet water dystylled, after the dyssoluing dried, of
which take three drams of Aqua vitae purchased of Homry three pyntes, these
power together into a Cucurbyte dylligently luted about, and the mouth very
well sealed or stopped, and set on ymbers, or a gentle fire for four and
twenty hours, let the same then most easilye boil. For on such wise is the
Son or Gold dyssolued in this water, whose use is as you learn of the
others.

A most noble manner of potable Gold, very rare and secret. First let an
Orrenge be made hollow, in taking forth the pulpe and seeds, into which put
leaves of Gold, not driven unto the uttermost thynnesse, so much as shall
seem needful. Then the juice of the Orrenge or Lemmon pressed forth, and
powered to the Gold leaves, let the Apple be close covered with his cappe or
keuer, and set in a hot place, or by a Furnace, for five or eight days. In
this manner do they affirm the Gold to be brought into an Oil. Which done,
let the juice be separated from the oil, and the Oil mixed together with the
strongest Aqua vitae, which sometimes must be separated again by dystyllacion
from the oil. And the judgment of the perfection of the oil, is learned
after this manner: let a little of the Oil be anointed on a piece of flesh,
which if it gylde not the same, but pierces unto the deep parts of it, so
that no show of Gold any where appears, then is the distyllacion and
working cunninglye handled. And the singular practisioners affirm this Oil,
to exceed both in virtue and property, any other potable Gold, how so ever
the same shall be prepared.

A potable Gold borrowed out of an Italian Pamphlet: take of the Pomeyse stone
brought to powder two pounds, of the finest Gold in leaves eight ounces,
these very well labor together, after take other four pounds of the said
stone in powder, without gold, then let a Bed be made of the Pomeyse, and
another on this course, of the Pomeyse with the Gold, proceeding by like order
again, in a glased Pot luted, that no air breath forth: which done, set the
Pot in a Furnace, making under a temperate fire for forty days, after draw
forth the water of Life, as you know, that is, power the water of Life on it,
and the gold as an Oil shall ascend.

A potable Gold, which is reported, to have been prepared of Raymunde Lullie.
He took of the purest Gold, so much as he thought needful, which in Aqua
fortis (dyssoluing especially gold) be first dyssolued, but after he drew
forth a water and spyrites by distyllation, unto the through drying of the
matter, wrought wholye after the manner of precypitate, practiced in our time.
The same thus dried, he after in a wine Seller brought into an Oil (which he
performed by the fifth day) and myxing it with other apt matters, gave it to
drink. This is easy to be done, and a speedy way, and well to be regarded.



A potable Gold is thus made, borrowed out of an ancient Alchymie book
written. Potable Gold must be made in the same manner, as before uttered,
where out of the same boo^e, we have taught the way, to make the oil of
Vitryoll. And in the same manner may all precious stones be brought and made
potable, not by adding Mercury, but only Sulphur or Brymstone. Therefore
take what precious Stone you will, and the same grynde very fine on a Marble
stone, to it then add so much wayght of Sulfure vyue most finely grynded,
these powered into a Crucyble, set after on quick coals, until the Crucyble
become so red, as a burning coal, and that the Brymstone be burned and
breathed forth. This powder remaining power again on a Marble stone, to which
add a like wayght of Brimstone, these work the like, as above taught, and do
the same again a third time: which done, thy stone then shall be sufficient
prepared. Of this powder, take half a dram, and of the foresaid water three
ounces, these power together into a little Glass, and cause the water to wax
white, and thy stone after shall remain as paste, to which then add the water
of Life, and you shall possess the precious Stone potable. Such potable Stones
do myghtylye avail against diverse affectes and sycknesses of the Body.

A Medycine revealed of God, for the preserving of man's health, and life, a
long time: yea, resysting the Leprye, and containing in it many marvelous and
bydde virtues. Take of the purest Gold brought into very fine powder three
drams, of chosen Baulme, one dram, of chosen Myrre, of Aloes Hepaticke, of
Frankencense, and of pure Ladamum, of each two drammes, of Camphora, five
drammes, let the whole be wrought and made with the Oil of Mandrake Apples,
and Baulme, myxed together. Of this Medycine let the Pacient receive one
dram, or half a dram once in a month, and drink on it a Glass full of
burning Wine myxed with the water of Buglosse, and Rosemarye flowers, myxed and
dystylled together by a Lymbecke. This is a royal and famous medycine, whose
myghtie praises are innumerable, and not ^ytte to be communicated to the
unworthy. This also is compared, to potable Gold: yet if pure Gold were
resolved into a water without corrosyues, and myxed with the abouesayde
matters, it would be a much preciousser medycine. If any also would preserve
youth a long time, and could not compass or attain the like medycine, let
him use Chebulis preserved with his syrup.

Another potable Gold, most excellent: before any other* take of the oldest
wine so much as shall suffice, the same power into a glass Lymbecke, after
lute the head and body together in the joint, and the Receauer in like manner,
then let the distyllation be done in Balneo Mariae, by seperating the four
Elements from it: as the first water coming forth, shall be sharp tending
unto an unsavory taste, which is nothing worth* The second water shall be
most sharp, felt like fire, which also is unprofitable. The third shall be
sweet in taste, and the same is the best, for that is an Ayereall matter. The
fourth water will be altogyther unsavory, which is nothing worth, and is named
earth. Now take of the abouesayde sweet water, as the Ayereall matter five
ounces, of the purest Gold driven into very thynne plates, and clypped into
little pieces, one ounce and a half, these power together into a small Glass
Lymbecke, very well fenced with Lute in the bottom, which distyll by the
space of five days, with the light of four Candles: as the figure here under
to the eye, playner demonstrateth.



The five days being ended, remove the flame or light, and put under a mean
fire of coals, for the space of four and twentye hours, and the whole water
shall pass or fall into the Receauer, and the Gold shall r^mayne in the
bottom of the Lymbecke, being then a most clear Oil, which is the true and
sincere Gold potable, and most precious for the use of Physic. It is a
certain skylfull man often used, without the commyxion of others, with the
water of Life. And it avails or cures the shedding of tears of the eyes, if
into the outward corner of his eye, the pacient lying vpryght, a drop or
half drop of it be distylled.

Where you see the candelsticke stand, there must the burning flame, with the
four lyghtes be set. into the ear. It thoroughly heals the French scabbe, if
the heads of the pushes be before clypped, and the scarres anointed with the
same, after this manner. If the pushes shall be old, then these ought first to
be low seared away with a burning Iron, or deep clypped with a pair of
sheeres: after the vlcered places, anointed with the only Oil. That if the
pushes shall be new then anoint the oil only on them: and in this manner many,
were restored as by a sure practice, sundry times experienced. This Oil mixed
together with the water of Life appropriated with a proporcion in a manner six
times, or eight times so much of the water unto the oil, does avail against
all distillations of the head, especially the cold, that is, the suffocatyue
or choking Rewmes. But on such wise it must be myxed together, that a drop of
the oil of Gold be instylled, into the water of Life, and mightylie shaken
together, until the water of Life through the gold purchases a red color,
yet very clear, and to be seen through. The same Oil prepared with the
water of life, and then myxed together with Goats milk, so long labored,
until the milk be colored, helps swellynges, and sores of the mouth, and
throat, if it be sundry times gargelled in the throat. For the preseruacion of
health, let six or eight drops be given or taken every week, or fowreteene
days, for a time together. But in the curing of a sickness, let then be
mynistred half, or a whole sponefull at a time to the pacient: as he which
shall be vexed with the Palsy, or falling sickness, or crampe, or with a like
grief, shall through this be cured. To be brief, the propertyes of it are, to
enforce, purge also, and strengthen. He which has this Oil, in a redynesse
prepared, will never sell the pure to any, but rather prepared always with the
water of life: which evermore must be mynistred in the same proportion, as
before uttered. He sold one ounce of the same, never lesser, then two crowns.

A syngular oil of Gold: let the leaves of Gold be stieped in the juice of
Lemmons (but whether in vyneger, especially distylled) and by the waterie
humor in the distyllation drawn forth: yet (what if Pearls, and Corralles be
added) then remains in the bottom, like Butter. The same wine myxed,
purchases to it a Golden color, and makes it sharp, and does maruaylously
resist rottenness. It does also p^^ge many grieffes, and ^^ouoketh sweat. For
better credit of these, make a proof, and you shall well perceive that I have
written and uttered a truth to you (as reports a certain learned man, in his
letter written unto D. Gesnerus) which I nothing doubt you shall well like,
and not dyscommende the use of Gold. This remedy and practice, even as the
Oil of Vitryoll, which may be reduced into Gold, greatly avails in the
Leprosy, and such which are destroyed, by the Mercuriall annoyntings of those
men, which (as Hippocrates writes) purchase money by their blind practyse and
ygnoraunce.

An Oil of Gold, being the secret of a certain syngular practysioner with
us, which D. Gesnerus obtained of a certain friend, of that condition, that he
would not communicate or utter the secret to any other. The Gold must be
dyssolued into a water, but with what sharp remedies I know not: thus
dyssolued, it cannot on the fire be elevated and distylled through the wayght
of the same, but through a little burning water rectifyed, powered into it,
which by and by without fire ascends (so that speedilye must a Receauer be
set under) and separated from that other matter eating or freting it, by which
it had been before dyssolued into a water.

A great secret of the oil of Gold, invented by a man singularlye practiced,
in this kind of distyllation. First of all, for this working, prepare a Glass
cup, or other vessel with the best red wine, filled even unto the top or
brymme, which you shall then set into another vessel filled with the coldest
water, especially if the work be attempted, and begun in the Summer time:
for how much colder the wine then shall be, and so much the more yield of the
Oil: but how much the hoter, so much the lesser yield, or nothing at all can
be purchased. And on this Cup set the greater square, and large, yet a thynne
iron plate, as the figure noted with the letter A. Does plainer demonstrate,
having in the middle of it a round hole, and large. Into this great hole by and
by put and frame a deep dyshe, or vessel of Copper, like to D. expressed, or
of Gold like to the letter F. or of any other matter framed (for made of
Copper, and Oil of Copper is obtained, even as of the Golden, or ^yluer
vessel; is an Oil gotten of the Gold or Silver) in which after the a^^^ture
working an Oil is found, whose foil o^ heavier substance re^^eth drowned in
the wine cooled. That if the same vessel shall be strayghter or smaller, then
that it may era^^^stfyll the myddle hole A. Set on them the thynne cy^^le B.
on the ^^myne or plate A. that the hole (by that means) may be the nar^qwe^e*
^rayghter, whereby it may rightlye fytte, the vessel D. narrow^r^ which that
it may stand the surer, and not be easily moved hy^her and thither, out of
place, must then be fastened and stayed, with those iron hooks, or such like
pynned on the Lamyne or plate A. and with this note * marcked. Now all these
ryghtly prepared and done, then in the bottom of the vessel D. or F. shall a
round cloth be said, being sma^^ nigh worn, thynne, and of Lynnen. Which
done, a fire shall be made of quick coals, and the keuer C. set on it, if the
vessel with wine D. shall be drowned or set into ye water, or the keuer ^. if
that F. shall there be left, until the whose be very hot: then with ^^arpe
nyppers or tongues, take of the ^euer by the ring or knobbe a^ you may learn
and s^e in both, here following and set on spedily the little vessel or deep
Cup, in the same m^^ter as you see here afte^ ^^gured, and a noise by that
means will by and by be caused, and ^he little lynnen cloth lying in the
hollownesse, will then be burne^* When the noise shall cease, (...) those
vessel shall be a little (...), then the keuer taken of again with the ^^all
Longes, and the cloth also burned, and the black ^y^^yhe taken away, in the
(...) of the vessel will appear to you, either on the sides many hanging, or
at the least one small drop of the Oil, either of Gold, or Copper, or
Silver, after the nature of the vessel, which must be gathered with a thynne
and small Spone made of Silver, and kept dy^^gentlye in a Silver vessel. Here
worthilye is to be noted in this place, that such an Oil, by his nature, to
be ^oone coni^aled and thyckened like to pytche. Of which, if you desire the
use, or manner of the using of it, then take in the time of necessitye so much
of this, as shall seem necessary, which dyssolue in a Spone in the water of
Life, or the water of Cynamon, and mynister the same to the sick: For then
shall you throughlye know and try, not without admyration, the efficasie and
propertye of this Oil.

That if you seek and get the Oil in a copper, or la^ten vessel, beware that
you mynister or give not of it with^^^ the body, but only apply of it
without, to the Serpigo, and other (...) spots on the skin. An oil by the
same s^yll and practice wrought in a Silver vessel, is a syngular medycine for
the eyes. The Oil of Gold reports the same man, that he ministered of it to
his (...) even ready to leave his life (or as I may say, at the ^rer^poynt of
death) in the quantitye of three drops, with a whole sponefull of the best
Aqua vitae, and he immediatlye recovered life.

THE INSTRVMENTS INSVE.


A. Represents the square plate of iron, to be set on the Cup, or vessel
containing the wine, which has four great holes, that the Cup may so be
fastened, that it lightly or easilye swa^^eth not out of place. This has
besides two small holes, aunswering or agreing to the two little holes in the
Cyrcle of Band B. that if the same needs or must be put on, tha^ it may be
fastened by these. In the same plate are two books or the like fastners seen,
noated with a little Star, that the (...) ^up set into the great hole may so
be stayed by them.



B. Does here represent the Cyrcle, which does express and show a lesser
hole, for the Cup or small vessel to stand in.



C. Does here declare and show the keuer of the vessel, having a ryng in the
myddle.

D. Does here demonstrate the narrow vessel, agreeing to the Cyrcle B. with
the keuer and handle (as above said) standing upright.



E. Does here denote the keuer of the same vessel above, being hollow, with a
handle retching both above and beneath.

F. Does here express a greater vessel, set immediately on the great and
myddle hole.

A dyscripcion of the Gold of Life, or powder of the Son. Take of Mercury
four ounces and a half, or five, which let be thoroughly washed with Vinegar
and Salt, of the Hungariane Gold half an ounce, of these let a Amalgama be
made, like to the same which the Goldsmyths do use to gylde Silver vessels,
after let the same Amalgama be washed so often with Vyneger and Salt, until
the myxture sends forth no more blackness at all. This then put into a
Glass body, to which after power so much of Aqua fortis, that the whole
Mercury may thoroughly be dyssolued whereby in the bottom the Gold may
appear in powder of a red color. Then on this body ^et a head dyligently
luted i^ the joint, and by distyllacion separate the Aqua fortis, as first
beginning with a soft fire, next with a stronger, ever increasing the fire: but
last let it be so strong, that ye sand be fire or burning hot, and that all
the spyrites be drawn forth, then let the vessel cool, and after the cooling
open the body, and you shall find a powder of a purple color, in form like
to a certain * pleasant pastri^ myxed or wrought together. After break the
Glass, and grynde this pastrye in an open place and free air, on a marble
stone to fine powder, and turn your face from the wind then blowing on you,
because the fume and savor, is pestyferous and venymous.

The calcynation: Take the vessel or deep Basin sufficient large, noted with
the letter B. Which set under a hollow keuer in fashion like to a Pot, and
framed withsmall holes in the edge beneath round about, as the figure E.
hereafter playner demonstrateth: these together set in a Goldsmythes Furnace,
and suffer that it may burn darckishe or swartishe in color: which so
prepared, power a quantitye of this powder with an iron Ladle into the nether
vessel, as the portion of an ounce and a half, or two ounces at a time, which
in the heating stir dilygentlye with a^ iron spatle, and there shall appear
to you (in the doing) sundry^ colors, which in the end, come all unto a
black color, yet then work forewarde, and cease not, until the same
purchases again a red color. Which color so appearing, take the
su^staunce from the fire, and let it throughlye cool. These thus orderlye
handled, put under another vessel like to the abouesayde and of the same
largeness as the former was, and the same set into the place of the former,
and power again a like quantitye of the powder as above taught, and let it be
burned in the like manner, as above uttered, always and continuallye sturring
the same about, until all the colors be vanished away, and the same has
obtained a redness: for on such wise, by the benefit of this calcynation, all
the spyrites of the Aqua fortis are dispersed and euaporated away: that by
receiving a portion of the powder within the body, no harm at all can ensue of
the same.

In the preparation of this powder, a man must beware of the common Mercury,
which ye Alchymisters truly dye or change in sundry colors, but without
Gold, nor it cannot so mightily calcyne.

The dose or quantitye of this powder at a time is, that to old persons about
the wayght of an old pennye (waying so much, as I guess, as a pease groate,)
but to Children of twelve or fouretene years of age, so much as an old
halepenny wayght, given in a wafer cake, that the whole powder may well
descend.

The Aqua tortis, is thus prepared and made: take of Vitryoll two pounds, of
Salt peter, not extincted, and the best, one pound, these in the grynding myxe
together, and distyll the whole unto the drawing forth of all the spyrites: and
the like again a second time, distyll without any addicion, that it may so
be separated from the grosser spyrites, which on this wise ordered, the Aqua
fortis is then so mighty, that it may dyssolue the Mercury, and calcyne the
Gold. All these borrowed out of the book of Casparus Xeglerus Physician,
printed at Lipsia.

An explycation of certain of the former, with fygures expressed, uttered by a
certain singular Physician.

The letter A. which signifies the Amalgama, is thus prepared and made, the
most pure Gold must be brought or driven into thynne plates, the Crucyble
after set on the fire, make red or glowing hot, into which (beside the fire)
power the plates of gold and Mercury, that they may be so myxed together, and
this myxture is named Amalgama.

The letter B. represents, the body set on a hot place: for by that means,
is the working of Aqua fortis sooner caused.



D. Does demonstrate a vessel, named properlye a Test (as I may conceive of
the form) which the Germaynes term with them, Ein trybscherb, for it
expresses by a certain manner the same vessel, into which the Barbars
opening a vein, do receive the blood, saving that this is made of Lattyn, and
the same is made of earth, the perfyte form of which, is here before expressed.



E. Does here represent a hollow keuer, of the Aucthour named a Test, which
otherwise in the German tongue Ein miiffel. It is artlie made of Brickes and
mortar, framed like to a little Oven, having proper holes made in the edge
beneath, passing through, and that round about, as this figure here does
playner demonstrate.



F. Does here witness the goldsmythes Furnace, prepared and made of strong
Lute, after the manner here discrybed.

This is a descripcion of the powder of the Son or Gold, by a brieffer
manner, according to the observation of the same Aucthour. And in vain
labors he in many things, where otherwise it may be performed with few
things, and a short traueyle. To come to the matter, take a new and large
earthen vessel, with a wide mouth, as are the Basens of the Barbars, serving
for blood letting, saving that this ought to be wyder: the self same heated
red hot on burning coals, that it may appear glowing, then bring to fine
powder this thy red head gotten by distyllacion, as a little before was taught,
and power the same burned into the vessel, which continually stir about with
an iron spattle, that it may become and proceed from black of a swart color,
and in the end again of a red color: by which means you shall obtain, the
powder of the Son or Gold. But beware in any manner, that you be not
anointed and infected with the venymous vapor of the same.

Or thus, take the same Amalgama, of which above vttere^, the same order, that
it may melt into a water, whereby in the bottom the Gold may appear, after
the manner of a red powder. Then Lute dylligentlye the body, in which the
distyllacion mu^t be wrought, and let the same dry by it self, that it may
the ^eadyer and better abide the fire. After set the head on the body,
dyllygently luting the cleftes or joints with a piece of Lynnen cloth, and the
Lute of wisdom, that the spyrites breathe or issue not forth. And this
conceive, that if the body, in which the Amalgama with the Aqua fortis is
contained, shall be to the bygnesse of one measure, that then the Receauer must
be ten or twelve measures great: For otherwise through the multitude and
strength also of the spyrites, the Receauer would break. Which thus prepared
and done, set the body with his head in the Furnace of reuerberation, in which
a fire of coals must be made, as after ensues. First let the fire be soft,
until the spyrites begin to ascend, after let the fire be increased by
little and little. For in the end the Aqua fortis clears again. And in the
upper part of the Furnace, where the vente holes be, let the Furnace be
stopped, leaving open only the breathing places.

Of the Gold of Life, or powder of the Son (others seem to name the same
precypitate with Gold, of which somewhat has been entreated, and in the place
also before of the Mettalline wat^rs, at the end) thus wrote a certain learned
man unto D. Gesnerus. Of the Gold of Life, or powder of the Son (says he)
you seem to me to require the descripcion unto the same end, that you may
the readyer judge, whether the use of it may be safe and sure. I do commend
the inuencion, in that you apply all things unto use. This is compowned of
^ue ounces of Mercury five, of pure Gold half an ounce, and of Aqua fortis
so m^che as shall suffice. I have used the same even this month, and do
^aylye search and prove the virtues of it. I also do cure a great dissease
with this, which if the same shall so cease, as the working offers and gives
a good hope, I then affirm and pronounce the same to be a gift from God, etc.
And I believe that he which late^ye prepared it, with whom always I have been
conuersaunt, to have sold two drammes of this, for two Duche Dallers: in that
he acco^mpteth the labor great, the savor tedious, and the vessels
chargeable. Of this powder of the Son. I remember that I have given of it
five grains wayght, without any harm, but when I retch^d and took unto eight
grains, then did I mightilye procure and force vomyting, and the going to
stool, where I had before taken or re^cyued for four days together, unto the
wayght of five grains at a time, etc.



The manner to prepare fine Silver, which the Alchymisters name the Moon, and
to convert the same into a clear water, which the Alchymisters name also the
oil of the Moon: must be wrought and done, after this manner. Take the Silver,
which prepare and fine with Lead, as the Gold and Silver fyners cunninglye
do: which wrought on this wise, drive the plates so thynne as paper, those
then cut into very small pieces, and heat^ again on an iron plate: which
done, have in a readynesse your Aqua fortis, made of Salt nyter, Alome, and
Vitryoll, with all their spyrites, into which put your Silver, that forthwith
will be turned into a water, in color so blew as the Sky: and when you (...)
more of the silver undissolved in the water, then powr^ ^he whole water into a
body luted of purpose, with his head artlie set on, and a Receauer fastened to
the nose: the same distyll in ashes, until all the water be drawn and issued
forth* which keep, for it serves in other workings, and distyll so long,
until the silver rest and appear in the bottom of the body, so thick as a
san^^, which take from the fire, and let the substance dry on hot ymber^,
but suffer it not to be through dried: then take salt Sea water, and power such
a quantity on a little of it, that the same may appear wet with it, and no
more, this then heat again on hot ymbers, which speedily turns into a most
clear water, the same boil so long, until all the water be euaporated away,
and then will the Silver remain in a water potable: which has infinite
virtues given by potion. This also avails against the Leprie, helps a
saltie humor, the disseases of the Legs, a swelling of the Liver, and
sundry other grieffes, according to the skyll of the learned Physician. This
also mixed with Aqua vitae, heals all manner of fylthie wounds, happening on
the body by applying of the same on them, when the body shall be well purged.
And this is a new remedy, invented by a singular practisioner, with which
marueyles may be wrought.

Of Silver (an oil I suppose) may be gotten and made, after this manner: Take
of Silver calcyned, so much as you think necessary, the same put into
distylled vinegar, which within a few days will be dissolved, and become
blewishe: the same then euaporate gently in Balneo Mariae, until all the
vyneger be ascended, and in the bottom will a fair oil remain.

The virtues of wynes myxed after art, and those with medycines, and the manner
of using them. The.xvij. Chapter.
THe first wine here uttered, procures the Melancholicke to be merris, ^
puts away Melancholy: it helps also the Cholloricke, and such which have
infected Liver* or grief of ye Kydneys, or that can not pysse: this besides is
singular in the Quartaine, and inward burning of the body. The making of which
wine, is on this wise: take the whole Buglasse, with the leaves and roots, the
pythes of which roots take forth, of these let there be a pound, and so much
wayght of Sense* a pound of read Roseleaues, a pound of Borrage flowers* and a
pound of Buglosse flowers, all these after the beating together, put into a
Bag, and the Bag put into a vessel containing three gallons of go^d white
Must wine, it is a kind of wine so called the half of which Must wine, with
half of the said things, put together into the said vessel, and the other
half after the boiling and clean skymming, put then the whole together, and
let the same settle and clear in the vessel: of which use all the year
through, especially in the Winter, the ^pryng, and Harue^^ and yt helps all
the above said grieffes.

A syngular Cordial wine, is made of Borrage and Baulme: Which also is good
for the Melancholicke, and for the trembling of the heart* this cl^anseth the
evil blood of the body, and increases the good, it puts away from man an
evil thought, and all evil cogitacions coming to mind: This wine also serves
in the foul breaking out* and Leprosy, it makes a man merrye, and mas^tyeth
the worms in the bellye. The making of which wine, is on this wise: take a
pound of Borrage, and so much of the herb Baulme, which put into new Must,
boil together, and when the same is clear use of it, for it serves unto many
other purposes, not here mentioned.

The wine of Buglosse after the instruction of Macrobi^, is prepared and made
after this manner: Take the roots of Buglosse, which after the clean scraping,
s^iepe in good wine, until the wine has purchased the virtue of them: this
wine often used cleanses all the evil humors by vryne, and causes a good
brain, and if a person were become wholye mad, by the drincking of this wine
he should be recovered and helped th^oughlie: as the like proof was made on a
woman, who often was mad, either through ^re, or melancholy, in so much that
they were forced to byn^ (...), until she came again to her perfyte mind
and reason. And by chance a poor man coming to her door, to are his Alms,
understanding hereof, taught this remedy, through which in (...) time, she was
wholye delivered.

A laudable wine, helping the disseases of the Mylte, and heat of the Liver:
take the leaves and roots of Succorye, of Hearts ^ung, of Endyue, and
Horehounde, which boil together in a lytl^ ^uantit^e of wine, the same let
run through an Ipocras bag, and this wine pour on the herbs, letting the
wine run through two or three times; until it be clear. This wine hel^eth all
diseases within the body, as the griefs of the Liver, the Lungs, the Mylt,
and stomach: If the wine be over bitter to drink, myxe the same with other
sweet things, as Reysins, dry figs, Lycorise, and other sweet things.

A comfortable wine for all griefs of the eyes: Take eyebright, the same
infuse in new Must wine for a time: of this wine use daily, as morning and
evening, and you shall obtain a perfect sight, without pin or web, and it
recouereth besides any manner grief of the eyes, that may happen in either
old or young, where the sight is decayed. And sundry persons having not seen
a long time, through the drincking of this wine for a year together, recovered
sight: If any also use to eat every morning of the powder of this herb with a
rear egg, or with good wine every evening, shall recover sight, as above
taught: For many by using any of these, which before did read with
spectacles, could after read the smallest letters, without the occupying of
any spectacles at all, to the wonder of sundry. And there is no remedy
perfiter for the sight.

A commendable wine for memory: take an ounce of Ginger, two ^unces of long
Pepper, two ounces of Galingale, half an ounce of Cloves, and half an ounce
of Cubebae, and half an ounce of Nutmegs: these brought to powder, and tied in
a clothe, hang in a vessel covered with seven pyntes of wine, the same then
boil a little, in such manner, that no air breath forth, after the clearing,
use of this wine, not taking forth the bag: and this also is profitable for a
cold stomach.

The wine of Sage, being of great virtue, and marvelous, is made after two
ways: some put the Sage into a bag, and hang it in the vessel of wine: and
others boil the Sage in the wine, until it be sufficiently boiled, and both
ways be profitable and good: This wine is good for tooth ache, and for pain
of the gummes: it helps also any member that trembles, and any weak member
it strengthens, and puts away any evil humor in the body: this also is
good for the Palsy, and often proved for pain of the body, and drawing or
crampe of members, and sinews: this besides is good for the Lunaticke, which
at the change of the Moon lose their proper wits and reason: and to
conclude, this is profitable for pain of the stomach, and grief of the
Matrice, and all the smewie places.

The wine of Fennel commended with the seeds, for the dimnesse of sight, the
spots of the eyes, and dropsy, and the swellings like to Leprie spots,
happening to children: this also avails against evil meats, against
poisons, the Cough, and griefs of the lunges, and it multiplyeth the milk in
women's breasts: when this wine is made with ye roots, it avails against the
disease of the bladder, and purges al evil humors of the body.

The wine against the Fistula, is made on this wise: take the long and round
Aristolochia, of each two branches green, these after the steeping and
stamping in white wine, boil unto the consumption of two parts of the wine,
which strayned through a lynnen cloth and settled, drink every morning
fasting, and evening going to bed: and it helps or delivers any Fistula,
in xv. or.xx. days, so that the pacient in the mean time eat no gross
meats, nor white meats, nor other contrary, things: and on the sore also
lay plaster wise of the root of the round Aristolochia, or of the powder of
it, blowing the same into the hole, and on such wise shall the Fistula be
cured, so that it be not in the bone entered.

The wine of Rosemarie is made in like manner as the others: of which through
settled, if any takes a good draught morning and evening, it cleanses the
blood, procures a desire and appetite to meat, expels all the inner
humor^, and recouereth a great weakness: this taken with a quantity of the
electuarie of the flowers, helps the weakness of ye heart: this comfort a
moist brain, and strengthens memory: it confirms and heateth the veins
cooled, and comfort the Palsy, rubbed on the members: it cease any cold
swelling applied upon, preserves from the plague, mitigateth the hard
fetching of breath, and helps an ol^e cough: it heateth the marrowe in the
bones, helps digestion, and a cold and clammie stomach: it puts away the
swelling of the stomach, re^^^reth speech lost, makes a man bold and hardy,
and cleereth the face if it be washed with it: this daily drunk, causes a man
to look young a long time, procures a good or sweet b^eath, and cures the
Canker and Fistula, and cleanses evil and matterie ulcers. This wine of
Rosemarie, or the herb it self boiled with the flowers in wine, and a draught
at each time taken warm morning and evening, and not eating nor drinking three
hours after, does marueylouslye help the white flux, which is wont to
happen to women of an ulcer, and cures the exulceration of women's places: In
the same manner taken, it puts away the Kings evil, the hard drawing of
breath, opens the artery, causes easy spitting up, helps digestion,
cease grypings, and cleanses blood.

To make an oil incombustible, which is miraculous. The.xviij. Chapter.
TAke white Soap the best that may be gotten, the same after ye beating fine,
put into a big Retort, on which pour so much weight of Aqua vitae, vij. times
distilled over: the Retort then set into ashes, string a large receiver to it,
and very well luted in ye joint: this done, make under a soft fire in ye
beginning, and increase the fire by little and little, until all the substance
be issued forth that will come: which together shall be an oil and water, the
receiver then draw away, and separate the water from the oil, which oil is
incombustible, and miraculous in sundry matters, in the work of Alchimie, for
this greatly avails in fixing the medicine volatile, and serves well to
incorporate with all metals, and seasoneth such which be crude, and like
sweeteneth when they be eg^r: this also dissolueth al pains and swellings
caused of grosse^ cla^ (...), a manner all sorts of ^^cked vlc^r (...) in thi^
(says the author) and conceived a great delight, as to work such a mays^^r^e,
to see so many strange fumes and varieties: but a more pleasure I took in the
practice, as to see how the same auailed in every matter where it was applied:
by which I prove this to be a divine substance* and an oil worthy of eternal
memory* and this was that great secret, with which that singular Matheus the
Hungarian, did so many great maruailes in Padua: for he healed with it, the
gout, ye quartaine ague, the pain of the French disease, and the dry scab on
the head, with sundry other griefs, for which* whiles he remained in Padua, he
was highly esteemed and woondered at. And at the last, in his departure from
Padua, he revealed to me that the only medicine which he used to all the
griefs, was this oil, and none other: the making of which he fully uttered to
me at his departing (which before he would not teach any man) and the same I
have many times made, and have also seen such strange practices of it, that
here to report them, I should scarcely be believed. etc. This borrowed out of
the rational secrets of the singular Fallopius.

An other singular way in making of ye inco^bustible oil serving for the
Alchimical Art, on this wise: take of that substance drained through, of which
so^^ is made, and common oil, of each a like weight, these after the grinding
together, grind with so much weight of white so^e as the one of them, to each
pound of the said substance add one ounce of salt Alkali brought to powder,
which substance well mixed shall be as past: the same put into a retort, having a
receiver fastened to it after art, under which make a soft fire in ye beginning
and increase after the fire by little and little, until no more will distill
forth, the water the^ ^^p^rate from the oil, and the oil keep, for it is the
incombustible (...) with which they make all the Alchimical medicines to
penetra^e ^^ttalline bodies: and this it does in that the oil is fixed, and
the nature thereof is to suffer any medicine to pass away in the ^ume, and
this fixed oil so burns in the lamp, that it neue^* consumes, and it
serves to many other purposes which the author refuses to utter for sundry
causes* and the philosophers have alwais ^id th^^ oil, to then^ it should not
be known. I having thus travailed to bring this book to an end do render
thanks to ye heavenly Physician, on whom the success of all medicines
depends.

FINIS.

