QVESTIONS AND DISPVTATIONS CONCERNING THE HOLY SCRIPTVRE; WHEREIN ARE
CONtained, brief, faithful and sound expositions of the most difficult and
hardest places:

APPROVED BY THE TESTIMONY OF the Scriptures themselves; fully correspondent to
the analogy of faith, and the consent of the Church of God; conferred with the
judgment of the Fathers of the Church, and interpreters of the Scripture, new
and old.

Wherein also the everlasting truth of the word of God, is freed from the
errors and slanders of Atheists, Papists, Philosophers, and all Heretics.

The first part of the first Tome.

By NICHOLAS GIBBENS, Minister and Preacher of the word of God.

IOSHVA. 1.8. Let not the book of the Law depart out of thy mouth, but
meditate therein day and night, that thou may observe and do according to
all that is written therein: for then shall thou make thy way prosperous, and
then shall thou have good success.

JOHN. 7.17. Jf any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine,
whether it be of God, or whether J speak of my self.

AT LONDON Imprinted by FELIX KYNGSTON, 1601.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, MY VERY HONORABLE GOOD LORD, TOBIAH, by
the mercifulness of God, Bishop of Dirham, etc.
THe sacred Scriptures (as you know right Reverend) they are the breasts of the
Church of God, the food of the faithful, the oracles of God, the bequeath and
Testament of Jesus Christ. By them the Children of the Church, thorough
hearing, reading, and meditation in them, receive that sincere and wholesome
nourishment, whereby they grow from children to be perfect men in Christ. By
them the godly receive direction in every enterprise; for they are as faithful
counsailours to teach us wisdom: so that where men are blind thorough natural
corruption, they are the lantern whereby to see the light: where men for sin
despair of mercy, they teach, with confidence to rest on God; where men are
presumptuous, to fear his justice; where men delight in sin, they teach the
punishment, and how to avoid the danger of the same. And as they do thus
declare the truth; so also by the light thereof they discover error; and are
profitable to improve and to correct, that the man of God may be absolute and
perfect to all good works. By them our blessed Savior Jesus Christ, taking on
him our nature, that in our nature he might appease his fathers wrath for our
transgressions, and might furnish us with the merit of his righteousness,
whereby being restored to be the sons of God, we might be partakers in his
kingdom; has left his will and Testament recorded: by which the infallible
truth of God thorough the blood of Christ is sealed up, and men may know
assuredly (for as much as they know, that God who has promised is true, and
cannot lie) themselves to be inheritours of immortal glory; so many as
endeavor steadfastly to keep the conditions of the covenant. I will be their
God, says he, and they shall be my people.

Wherefore as on the one part we have infinite cause to magnify the mercy of
the Lord, for this inestimable treasure of his holy word; so on the other side
of intolerable grief and lamentation, considering the negligence of men to
embrace this benefit: whereby it comes to pass that not only so many
thousand souls of men do daily decay and perish; but even our enemies reproach
our religion and blaspheme the Lord thorough our security, that having the
word of God before us we neglect it, and are not amended in our lives.
Whereunto we cannot but confess (for our sins do testify unto our face)
that we are not for the greatest part, of better conversation, then are the
Heathen which know not God; and that many even among us, which seemed and were
esteemed to be religious, have also almost forgotten their former love. The
reason whereof is not strange unto your Lordship, nor unto any that is godly
prudent. For the word of God has not this privilege, that whosoever touches
the outward hem thereof, shall fully be cured of his disease. But as our
corporal meat returns not to nourishment, unless every member of
concoction perform his duty: Even so this spiritual food, unless it be
seen with the eye, heard with the ear, confessed with the mouth, believed
with the heart, it yields not that sap or juice that men may grow thereby.
Nevertheless, as the lightning thorough his sudden brightness, awaketh those
that are heavy with sleep, and forces their eyes to behold the cleerenes of
the same: even so the Gospel at the sudden appearing thereof in this our
land, allured all with her perfect beauty; yet many became offended at the
light, delighting in darkness more then light, because their deeds were evil:
and many became like the stony ground, whose hearts are hardened and will not
yield obedience: many also who mix it with covetousness, vaineglorie and
voluptuousness of life, but not with faith; hear it, and receive it, and
outwardly profess it, but yet are choked among the thorns. Neither can it
be, but many should behold it, and few regard it; many receive it, and many
fall away; for many, says our Savior, are called by it, but few are chosen by
the Lord.

Now albeit the highest cause of things remain in the secret counsel of the
will of God; yet the outward means undoubtedly of this distress are plain
and easy to be discerned, and ought of all men to be considered. One is, that
darnell and tares have grown up together with the wheat, which being sown
before in unhappy seeds of unwholesome doctrine, have been permitted by the
Lord himself to grow together, that they that are approved might be known.
Another is, that this vine of God is not in this world so carefully regarded,
but that briers and thorns, corrupted manners and profane impiety, do make
it, for the most part, to bring forth either sower or small grapes. The third
and principal is, negligent respect of the will of God revealed in the
Scriptures: whereby it comes to pass, that men have not their hearts
prepared to receive it when they hear it; neither can so easily be grounded
in the faith, by the preaching of the word, because they search not by reading
and conference of Scripture, whether the doctrine taught them be so in deed,
and carry that equal weight in the balance of Gods sanctuary: but while it
is sown in them as in the street, that evil one comes and steals both
the practice and remembrance out of their heart.

There are many who to excuse this negligence, pretend discouragement through
the hardness of the Scriptures; which notwithstanding the Lord has given, to be
even instruction and sharpnes of wit unto the simple. Wherein also we do
confess, that the Scriptures of God in diverse respects are hard and difficult.
Namely, hard to them that despise them and will not understand: hard to be
understood of the natural man, without the eye-salue of the spirit of grace.
Hard in some points of doctrine that are delivered, which so far forth as
they are delivered are nothing difficult. And sometime hard in disposition and
majesty of words, where the doctrine of it self is plain and easy. And
therefore has the Lord most wisely included some difficulty in the Scripture,
to the end he might provoke us, to ask assistance of his spirit, by whose only
light they are truly understood. Secondly, to stir up our endeavor, to
read, meditate and search them out. Thirdly, to make us esteem them precious
as they are, who naturally despise the things we easily obtain. Moreover, to
repress our pride and the boasting of our wisdom, he would show us thereby
our ignorance in heavenly things. Again, to preserve the treasures contained
in them, that they might not be cast before the proud and scornful men, as
holy things to dogs or pearls to swine. And withal, because he has ordained
some teachers, some learners in his Church; that the ministry which is his
ordinance, with love and reverence might be regarded. Nevertheless as there is
none so wise on earth, who is able to sound the deepnes of knowledge and
wisdom contained in them; so is there none so simple (endued with common
reason, but by the ordinary means of God, may attain to knowledge by them,
sufficient to save his soul. Neither is any thing more plain, then the
summarie doctrine of Salvation contained in them (to him that takes delight
therein, when as to Atheists and despisers of them, every sentence is obscure)
which can be invented by the industry of man, or contained in men's writings,
Philosophers, or heathen, or whosoever.

Some therefore contrariwise object unto themselves, the facility and
plainness of the Scriptures, as though they were not worthy their deepest
meditations. To whom again we answer; Tanta est Christianarum profunditas
literarum, etc. So great is the depth of the sacred Scriptures, that if a
Christian man were endued from heaven, with the years of Methushalem, and the
wisdom of Solomon, and would continually peruse them even from his childhood
unto his crooked age, he might ever gain in learning, and always with
abundant profit be exercised in them. The more wise the Preacher was, the more
he sought forth wisdom: but sound it as a deep profunditie which he was not
able to comprehend. They are like Jacobs ladder, the lowest step whereof
comes near the ground of our understanding; but the last step is high
above man's capacity, and reaches up to Heaven. They are a shallow foord, in
which a Lamb may wade; they are an Ocean Sea, in which an Elephant may swim.

Considering therefore with my self (right Reverend) both the fond objections
of vain and corrupted minds, which receive the holy Scriptures as the word of
man, not as it is indeed, the word of God; as also the subtle cauils of our
adversaries against the holy truth of our profession: and beholding with
continual grief the horrible neglect of the sacred word of God, with the
infinite enormities that proceed thereof: I have been provoked in my self, to
undertake a labor of no small importance; and I humbly beseech the heavenly
majesty, it may be found as profitable in time to come unto the Church of God.
Wherein first of all, to the end to provoke as many as profess the faith, to
the diligent reading of holy Scriptures; I have labored to unfold in some
convenient measure, with sincerity and faithfulness, the true and sound
interpretation of the word, especially in the most difficult and hardest places
of the same. Secondly, for as much as very many places of Scripture have been
distorted, and wrongfully applied to the purpose of heretics from time to
time: I have endeavored to demonstrate the true and undoubted purpose of the
holy Ghost, and gathered the doctrine that thereof arises, by the guide and
authority of the Scriptures, and the reverend and orthodox fathers of the
Church. Thirdly, whereas many objections have bin by Atheists displaied and
bent against the history of holy Scripture; which may happen also to be
called into doubt, either by such as begin to grow to head in these our days,
or some other perhaps that are indeed desirous of the knowledge of the truth: I
have had in purpose to remove such scrupulosity (which either I could find
objected or call to mind) and to clear the truth of the word of God.
Fourthly, whereas places of Scripture seem opposite to other, I have conferred
such places and reconciled them. Fifthly, to these interpretations, I have also
gathered the judgment of ancient writers, as I have found them either directly
exhibited, or here and there dispersed in their works, and have placed them as
parallels of full agreement with the doctrine at this day taught in the Church
of God. The reader shall thereby perceive, that the same his judgment, which
before he had conceived, or from hence shall learn by conference of Scripture,
shall be of perfect unity with the doctrine of the faithful heretofore.
Sixthly, I have divided these my labors into questions and answers, which I
take to be the plainest kind of teaching unto the simple; and for to resist the
gainsaiers of the truth, I have also, as occasion has been offered, added the
arguments and manifest reasons of the Church of God out of the plain
demonstration of the Scripture, carefully avoiding all vain and idle questions
and subtle disputations (which I profess before the Lord and before his
Church) as in my work it self I hope it shall appear: having in this kind
of exercise imitated diverse ancient and learned Fathers of the Church,
Theodoret, Acasius, Augustine, etc. and some of our countrymen here at home.

I have directed these my labors unto the private benefit of this my native
country. First, for that I acknowledge my self more nearly tied in duty to
those of mine own nation, and them of my kindred in the flesh: so that this
Commonwealth and state, wherein I was borne and hitherto maintained, as it
does worthily challenge my life and labors, because next under God, it has
been author and maintainer thereof; through the most godly, prudent, and
happy government of our most redoubted dread Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth
(whom God of his infinite mercy and favor to this our land, endow with
multiplied years and full felicity) so I desire of the Lord, that for the
emolume^t thereof, I may ever bestow my strength and labors, or my self may
be bestowed to the glory of God and edification of his Church. Secondly, for
that the same our Church and Commonwealth is continually assaulted by the
adversaries, either by open invasion, or secret immission of lurking espies,
Intelligencers, Remembrancers, Seminaries, Priests, Jesuits, solicitors for the
Church of Rome, remaining in every corner of this land; who thorough the power
of darkness, do work into the hearts of men, by false suggestions and colored
hypocrisy: I take it as the duty of the Ministers of the word, by sound and
holy doctrine; of every faithful Magistrate under her gracious Majesty, by
authority and power; of every good man in his place, as he tendereth the
welfare of the Church of God, the blessed continuance of the Gospel, which her
Majesty has always so carefully maintained, as the chiefest good of all her
subjects; and the safety and preservation of the public wealth; to labor
with watchfulnes and wisdom, to bridle the fury of such enterprisers.
Moreover, for that I know right well, that the writings of the Protestants are
wholly banished from all the territories of the Papacy, by the authority of
the Tridentine Council and the Pope (except to certain licensed) under pain
of confiscation of goods and life: therefore I did assure my self, my labors
in our vulgar tongue, would be communicate to more, than in the common language
of many countries. Nevertheless, if hereafter I shall perceive it more for the
service of the Church of God, and honor of my Country, to make my labors
common to other Nations; I promise also (this book of Genesis being happily
finished) if God give life and leisure, to convert my style. This in the mean
time I would crave of your Honorable Lordship, that if I shall be found in
some one or other point not so fully perhaps to satisfy my reader, as of some
peradventure will be expected (for as Hierome says; Quilibet in suo sensu
maxim abundat) you would favorably impute it, in part, to my manifold
distresses, which through the mercifulnes of God may hereafter be relieved;
having continued these eight and twenty years brought up in learning, only
upon the charges of mine own revenues; and in these my labors, received
neither encouragement or help of society, or conference, or like assistance,
which might otherwise have been mine advantage in this exercise.

Now that I have been thus bold to present my simple labors unto your
Honorable patronage; I am, besides more private causes, publicly invited, by
that honor and thankfulness that is due unto your Lordship, not only from my
self, but of this whole Realm, and the Church of God. That pattern of godly
praelacie, described by the Apostle, practiced by the godly Fathers and Bishops
of the Church, is very notably exemplified in your person. Your life
vnproueable (I speak nothing but before the Church of God, and by the
testimony of this Realm) your temperancie, vigilancie, sobriety, modesty,
hospitality, is known and commended in every quarter of this land: your
gravity, wisdom, learning, as it has abounded through the blessing of the
Lord, so has it been, as a rich talent, by a faithful servant carefully
applied, both in her Majesty private palaces, and in the farthest places of
her kingdom: your Zeal and diligence in holding forth the word of wholesome
doctrine, both by painful preaching, and prudent government in that precinct
committed unto you: your most pregnant loyalty, and long continued service
unto her sacred Majesty: your continual endeavors for the public wealth,
which every good man is bound to reverence, to love, and gratify.

Jesus Christ the great shepherd of the sheep, in the bowels of his mercy
tenderly regard his faithful flock within this land; preserve in peace this
Commonwealth; continue long this happy and triumphant regiment; bless
abundantly our gracious Sovereign and peerless Princess, renew her years,
enlarge her prosperity, treasure up in her royal heart all graces of
salvation and of government: And finally so prosper all your honorable
proceedings; your care and industry for the peace and welfare of his Church;
your pastoral endeavor, for that stewardship and flock committed unto you, as
that it may be ever to the praise of God, your honor and commendation in the
sight of men, your continued comfort in your much prolonged life; and at his
appearance, through his endless mercy, you may receive that infinite guerdon
of your faithful dispensation, which is that immortal Crown of unspeakable
glory. Diligat te Dominus quia tu dei seruos diligis.

Your Lordships most humble to be commanded, NICHOLAS GIBBENS.

TO THE GODLY READER. The counsel of Chrysostom touching the reading of the
Scripture. Hom. 3. de Lazaro, Luc. 16.
SVine librum in manus, lege historiam omnem, and quae nota sunt memoria tenem,
ea quae obscura sunt, parumque manifesta, frequenter percurre. Quod si non
poteris assiduitate lectionis inuenire quod dicitur, accede ad sapientiorem,
vade ad doctorem, communica cum his ea quae scripta sunt, declara vehemens
studiu^. Et si viderit te Deus tantam animi promptitudinem adhibere, non
despiciet tuam vigilantiam and solicitudinem. Verum etiamsi nullus homo te
docuerit quod quaeris, ipse sine ^^bio reserabit. Memento Eunuchi reginae
Aethiopum, etc.

Thus much in English.
TAke the Bible in thy hand, read the whole history, and remembering that thou
understand, that which is dark and not manifest unto thee run over often.
If thou can not find out the meaning of the words by diligent reading, have
access to one of better knowledge, go unto a teacher of the word: communicate
with them the things that are written, declare thy earnest desire to
understand. And if God see thee use so great readiness of mind, he will not
despise thy watching and thy carefulnes. Yea if no man teach thee that thou
ask, he himself without doubt will unlock it and disclose it unto thee.
Remember the Eunuch of the Queen of Aethiopia, a man troubled with innumerable
cares, and hedged in with many businesses, who being a Barbarian, and not
understanding what he read, he read notwithstanding sitting in his chariot: and
if he showed such diligence in the way, think what he did when he was at home.

QVESTIONS AND DISPVTATIONS UPON GENESIS.
CHAP. I.
Question 1. verse 1. Wherefore is it written thus: Jn the beginning God
created the heaven and earth?
BEcause the Lord would have it known unto men, but especially unto his
Church, that the world was not eternal, as men are ready to imagine, and the
Aristoteles de cielo lib. 1. cap. 10. etc. Metrodorus Chius.
Philosophers and Simon. Basilides, etc. vide August. de Here Is. 1. and 4.
heretics have taught; but that having a beginning in time, Elohim, a word of
the plural number, signifies the three persons in the Trinity: being joined
with the word of the singular number Bara, shows that the three persons are
but one God which did create. Deus vnus in trinitate, trinus in vnitate. Arnob.
in Psalm. 145. And although for honor sake a creature sometimes is spoken of
in the plural number, as the Jews object: yet no creature in any place of
Scripture ever spoke of himself in the plural number (as I am Elohim) this is
peculiar to the Lord.
God himself was the Bara to create, signifies to make of nothing, and
thereby is distinguished from the word (...), iatzar, to form, and (...)
gnashah, to make, so that all things were made of the first matter, and that
matter made of nothing, Basil. Epist. 141, Damascen. Orthodox. lib. 2. cap. 5.
creator of it. The Hebrew word (...), reshith, which is englished, the
beginning, does not signify Targhum Hierosol. tra^slateth it (...) in his
wisdom. Origin in Genesis 1. and alij in verbo suo, i. in filio, non ad sensum
genuinum huius loci.
any substance, but the Hieron. quaest. Hebr. in Genesis Ambros. Hexam. lib. 1.
cap. 6.
first moment or instance of time. Which Time is the space or measure of the
moving of the heavens, and therefore neither before nor after, but together
with the heavens was created. So that it is as much to say: as, God did once
create the heaven and the earth, when as there was before, neither heaven, nor
earth, nor matter whereof to make it: so that nothing was before time but God,
who made the heavens wherein time is. By this we learn, that God Isa. 44.6.
and 48.12. 1. Tim. 6.16. Cyril. Alexan. Thesaur. li. 12. cap. 12. Aeternitas,
Dei solummodo naturae substantialiter inest.
only is without beginning and eternal: whereof Tertullian Tertul. aduers.
Praxeam. Ante omnia enim Deus erat solus, etc.
says, before all things were, God only was, and he unto himself was in
steed of the world, place, time, and all things: he was alone, because nothing
was else where but himself: and yet not then alone, because he had with him,
his wisdom, power, happiness, and all goodness in himself. Neither did he
create the world, because he stood in need thereof: for August. in Psalm. 70.
Sermon. 2. Deus nullo indiget bono, etc.
God is in need of no good thing, both he himself is the chiefest good, and
whatsoever is good, is of him; he neither needs us, nor any of his
marvelous works; neither the heavens, nor the heaven of heavens, nor
whatsoever is said to be within or above the heavens, could make him more
good, more strong, or more blessed. For what should it have been, what so ever
is not himself, unless he himself had made it? Or what did he need thee,
that was before thee, and was able to make thee, when thou wast nothing? The
Lord therefore, before all times, and beyond all eternities, Prou. 8.30.
being delighted with that infinite glory which is in himself, August. de
Genes. cont. Manich. lib. 1. cap. 2. Respondendum est quia voluit: voluntas
enim Dei causa est coeli and terrae, and ideo mayor est voluntas Dei quam
coelum and terra.
of his own good will (for that he would have creatures to be partakers of his
blessedness, so much as the nature of a creature can contain) did create Coloss.
1.16.
Angels and men, and for them Isai. 45.18. Clem. Alexan. Strom. lib. 5. Lactan.
lib. 7. cap. 4. and 5. Qui domum aedifi^at, non idcirco aedificat vt tantummodo
domus sit, sed vt in ea possit habitari, etc. apparet ergo animantium causa
mundum esse constructum, etc.
as it were a house to dwell in, he made the heaven and the earth. If any man
should be so curious, as to ask Iren. lib. 2. cap. 47. Dicimus quonta ^ista
responsio subiaces Deo, etc.
what God did before he made the world? It is fitly Histor. Tripartit.
answered, he made hell for such fools as will ask such unprofitable
questions.

Question 2. verse 2. What is meant by this: The earth was without form and
void?
THat which before was called heaven and earth, August. confess. li. 12. cap.
21. Corporale illud quod fecit Deus, adhuc materies erat corporearum rerum,
informis, etc.
had not at the first the form or shape of heaven and earth, but only was the
matter whereof they are. And like as a foul brings forth an egg, or
Aristot. Histor. Animal. lib. 6. cap. 30. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 36. Informis caro,
paulo muribus mayor, sine oculis, sine pilo, vngues tantum prominent, hanc
lambendo paulatim figurant.
a Bear her whelpe, having neither feet nor head, nor tail, but a matter
whereof the form arises: so, that which was first created, was (...). Hesiod.
Theog. ver. 116. This very matter was created the first day.
an unfashioned mass or lump, wherein the matter of heaven and earth and all
creatures was It is called in the Hebrew, (...), tohu vabohu, (tohu) i. without
order, (bohu) without variety.
not severed or distinguished. By this we learn the Psalm. 135.6. Isa. 42.5.8.
omnipotency of God, who can make matter of no matter, and a Aquin. Sum. par.
1.66. d. 1.
form without form: this cannot be comprised in the wit of man, Heb. 11.3.
it is to be received and believed by faith.

Question 3. verse 2. How is the spirit of God said to move upon the waters?
IT is now called waters, which before was called heaven and earth, and earth
without form, thereby to explain that which went before. For as waters have
all one continued form, which cannot be distinguished into parts or members;
August. de Genes. ad lit. imperfect. cap. 4. Terra quam Deus fecit, inuisibilis
erat and incomposita, donec ab eodem ipso discerneretur, and ex confusione in
rerum certo ordine constitueretur. Hinc impudenter calumniatur Simplicius qui
coelum primo die factum, firmamentum vero (coelum appellatum) secundo die
positum, in narratione sacrae historiae reprehendit: cum tamen hoc, confusum;
illud, dictinctum; hoc, totum and continen omnium; illud, pars que illo
continetur a beato Mose declaratur. Disputat igitur non ad idem. Argum. 6.
so this matter of heaven and earth was such, as no man might say thereof, this
will be earth, this water, this light, etc. Upon this substance the Spirit of
God did move: the (...), merachepeth, a (...), rachap, mouere sese. Rab. David,
in lib. radic. Rab. Salom. incubare.
Hebrew word does aptly signify, to rest upon: Hieron. lib. Tradit. Hebra^. in
Genesis Quod nos appellare possumus, incubabat sieve confouebat etc.
Hierome says, it may be well translated (incubare) to sit upon and nourish,
as a foul does her eggs with heat and life. In which sense, this is to be
observed, that this mass of waters, which was utterly void of creatures, and
of virtue to bring forth creatures, Chrysostom. Hom. i^ Genesis 3. Mihi videtur
hoc significare, quod affuerit efficax quaedam and vitalis operatio aquis, and
non fuer^t simpliciter aqua stans and immobilis: sed mobilis and vitalem
quandam vim habent. August. de Genesis ad lit. lib. 5. cap 4.
was now by the spirit of God, endued with power and virtue, that it might
bring forth. But beside this, the word resting, seems to have a farther
meaning. The matter of the world, is called waters, not because it was It is
judged by the learned, that when God said: Let the waters be gathered together,
etc. the earth and the waters took their perfect form. August. de Genesis cont.
Manich. lib. 1. cap. 12. and con. Aduersar. legis and Proph. lib. 1. cap. 13.
perfect waters, for the substance of all creatures was therein confused, but
because of a certain resemblance thereunto: and that not only in the vniformed
vnformitie thereof, but also, as waters do by nature run, flow and spread
abroad; so in this matter, there was no power in it self, not so much as to
keep it self together, but by the power of the spirit of God, who Cyprian.
lib. de Spiritu Sancto: ipse potius ferebat, and complectentibus firmamentum
ipse dabat congruum motum, and limitem praefinitum.
as it were enclosing it, and sustaining it (as if a man should hold a lump of
sand in his hand, or a Crane in the air Plin. lib. 10. cap. 23. Grues excubias
habent nocturnis temporibus lapillum pede sustinentes, qui laxatus somno and
decidens indiligentiam coarguit.
a stone in her foot) by resting upon it, August. de Genesis cont. Manich. lib.
1. cap. 5. Non enim per spatia locorum, sed per potentiam inuisibilis
sublimitatis suae.
did give power unto it to be sustained. Wherefore you may in no case
understand (by spirit) either breath, or wind, or spirit, other then the holy
Ghost Hieron. Trad. Heb. in Genesis idem epist. ad Oceanum. Ambros. Hexam. lib. 1.
cap. 8. Nam etiam Spiritum Sanctum legimus creatorem. Job. 33.4.
the third person in the Trinity, who is called the Isai. 51.9.12.13.
arm, the Exodus 32.16. Deuteronomy. 9.10.
finger, the 2. Cor. 12.9.
power of God: for as much as to give it such a power, is no less than to
create, which belongs not to any but to God.

Question 4. verse 3. Wherefore is it written: Then God said, let there be
light?
BEcause the spirit of God, having showed that God created Heaven and Earth,
he would also show the manner how he did It is without controversy, that the
world was both begun and perfected by one and the same power of the word: but
God is not said to speak, before the making of the light, because in the
distinction of the creatures, his wisdom begins to appear. Calvin. in Genesis
1.
create them. Even like as Kings and Princes, do bring great things to pass,
by their commandment and word only; so God who is King of Kings, is so great
in power and majesty, as that he did Psalm. 33.9.
but say the word, and they were created. But how is it said, that God spoke?
or how could his voice be heard of things that were not? To speak Rab. Moses
libr. 1. Ductoris. cap. 64.
does signify diversely, in holy Scripture: sometime to utter a voice;
sometime to conceive in mind: as where he says, Psalm. 14.1. and 53.1. Hest.
6.6.
the fool has said in his heart, etc. that is, he does conceive or think so:
sometime to will or purpose: as 1. Sam. 18 11.
Saul said, I will smite David thorough to the wall: that is, he would or
purposed so to do. The Lord therefore, did not by Tertul cont. Praxeam. Quid
enim est (dices) sermo, nisi vox and sonus, etc. at ego nihil de Deo inane and
vacuum prodire potuisse.
pronouncing words, but by Dei dicere est Dei facere. August. epict. 49.
quaest. 6. Nam sicut humana consuetudo verbis, ita diuina potentia etiam factis
loquitur.
doing utter his mind: not by commanding any other, but by Basil. Hexam. Hom.
2. In voluntate inclinationem significat.
decreeing of it himself. Here then the Scripture, with heavenly wisdom
brings in the second person, who is the wisdom of God, to be the creator of
the world, together with the father, and the holy Spirit. Not that this word,
in which God said, let there be light, was not as well of the father and of the
spirit, as of the son: for the same word, was but the execution of the
eternal word of God, in time; it was of ordination, not of nature: but as, by
the making of that unformed matter and sustaining it, the mighty power of God
is known, to which end the Scripture says; The Spirit of God did move upon the
waters: so by the order and disposition of the creatures, the wisdom of God is
manifest, which is that essential and eternal Pro. 8.12.14.22.27.30
word of God, which in the beginning was with God, John. 1.1, 2, 3, 14. Heb 1.2.
without which nothing was made that was made; which word became flesh and
dwelt among us. Here therefore Athanas. Sermon. cont. Arian. 3. vt enim lux suis
radijs omnia illuminat, and sine eius radijs nihil illustrari quiuerit: ita
quoque and pater, veluti per manum, in verbo suo operatus est omnia, and sine
eo nihil fecit: est enim verbum domini architectus, and rerum author, and est
patris voluntas. Tertul. con. Praxeam. Caterum v^ique teneo vnam substantiam in
tribus cohaerentibus: tamen alium dicam oportet ex necessitate sensus, eum qui
lubet and eum qui facit.
is a manifest proof of the doctrine of the Trinity (whereof the Matthew. 3.16.
and 28.9. Ioh. 14. verse. 26. 2. Cor. 13.13. etc.
Scripture does so often and plentifully teach) as also of the diversity of
working in respect of the difference of the persons. The Father creates James
1.17. (...).
as the fountain of goodness. The Son creates Prou. 8.27. (...).
as the wisdom of the Father. The holy Ghost creates as the power Verse. 2.
Job. 26.3. (...).
of the Father and the Son. The work of creation is one, as God is one; the
manner of working, is diverse, according to the distinction of the persons. God
said, let there be light, and there was light: that is, the Trinity decreed
it, Hilar. de Trin. lib. 4. Dicit ergo fieri Deus ex quo omnia sunt: and fecit
Deus per quem omnia sunt.
the second person effected it, For Psa. 33.6. Ioh. 1.3.
by the word of the Lord were the heavens made. Neither is this (as Arriani,
Eunomij: item Macedonij de Spiritu Sancto.
heretics imagine) any disparagement unto the son of God, nor token of
inferioritie, but of equality; for he did both decree it as God, and perform
it as God: neither did he alone create, but the Father and the holy Ghost
created also, but by the Son. But as he that eats Prou. 25.27. Inuestigatio
gloriae illorum.
too much honey hurts himself; so he that searches too far into the
divine majesty, shall be overwhelmed with his glory. From these places we
observe: Verse 1. That the world Heb. 11.3. Ioh. 1.3.
with all the creatures therein, time, place, bodies, spirits, whatsoever is
existent as a Which is not God himself, for neither the Son nor holy Ghost
were created (as the Arrians and Macedonians durst affirm) being perfect God.
Athan. in Symbol. Neither sickness, death, sin, or darkness, because they are
priuations, and defects, but are no creatures.
creature, was made of nothing, that is to say, created. Verse 2. It is the
only omnipotent power of the Lord, which did Job. 26.5.6.13. Psalm. 104.5.29.
create, and does preserve the creatures. Verse. 3 The mystery of the Trinity
was known Genesis 4.25. and 11.7. and 15.8. Exodus 3.6. Psalm. 33.6. Isa. 63.9.10
in all ages of the world, which of all men is to be received with Romans 12.3.
wisdom and sobriety: which doctrine is Clem. Alexand. Nullus est in verbo
Cimmerius. lib. Adhort. ad Gent. Luther. lib. de Seru. Arbitr. Multis multa
manent abstrusa, non Scripturae obscuritate, sed illorum cacitate; simpliciter
consitetur trinitatem, quibus vero modis, scriptura non dicit, nec opus est
nosse. Justin. Mart. li. confess. fidei: sieve (...). Vnitas in Trinitate
intelligitur, and Trinitas in vnitate noscitur: id vero quomodo fiat: nec alios
scrutari velim, nec ipse mihi possum satissacere. August. de Trin. lib. 1. cap.
3. Vbi quaeritur vnitas Trinitatis, pater, filius and Spiritus Sanctus, nec
periculosius alicubi erratur, nec laboriosius aliquid quaeritur, nec
fructuosius aliquid inuenitur.
manifest as the Scriptures have revealed it; Isai. 40.13. 1. Cor. 2.16
as it is hid in God, it is unsearchable, our reason cannot contain it, our 2.
Chron. 20.20. Isa. 7.9. August. ep. 222. Iren. libr. 2. cap. 47. Quaedam quidem
absoluamus secundum gratiam Dei, quaedam autem commendemus Deo: vt semper
quidem Deus doceat, homo autem semper discat, etc.
faith with reverence must believe it. To speak or think Arnob. in Psalm. 91.
De Deo, etiam vera loqui periculosum.
the truth of God above our capacity is dangerous, in which sense the Non
loquendum de Deo sine lumine. Pythagoras. Laert. lib. 7.
heathen said, thou must not speak of God without a light.

Question 5. verse 6. What is meant by the firmament, which is created in the
midst of the waters?
THe word ((...), rakiah) which is englished the firmament, Septuagin. vertunt
(...), quasi res firma and solida dicatur: cum Hebraice magis extensum
significet, ne cum ex aqua sit, videretur infirmum. Homero: (...): and (...).
does properly signify, a thing made strong by stretching out, and therefore
is contrary to the word (...), karah, which is to break in stretching out. So
that by this word firmament, is signified: first, that this waterie matter,
which was gross and thick, was in part by the word of the Lord extended
abroad, and by extension was made Graecis, (...) ab (...) and (...), quod
sursum videmus: and (...) quasi (...) totus splendens.
thinner and purer than before: secondly, being weak before, by making it
thinner Job. 37.18. They are said to be strong as glass spread abroad, that is
to say: clear, and strong. Vide Theodoret. quaest. in Genesis 11. Beda Hexamer.
it was also made strong. But what creature is this that is called the
firmament? Nothing else August. de Genesis ad lit. lib. 2. cap. 4. Ergo ex aere
qui est inter vapores humidos, vnde, etc.
but the heavens and the very air in which we live. For the matter what is it?
2. Pet. 3.5.
It was made of water, and continues water (as it seems Theodoret. quaest.
in Genesis 11. Beda Hexam. and alij. The Lord calls it (...), shamajim, i. there
is water.
unto many) albeit in respect of the Ex communi materia desumptum, pro loci
natura variatur; quod terra est propinquius, aer crassus and humectans dicitur:
superius ignis, ratione caloris, denique supremum quod proprie coelum, ether
appellatur ob puritatem and sple^dorem: vnicum tamen est firmamentum, and ex
abysso communiter desumptum.
diversity of Forma dat esse rei and rem conseruat in esse.
form in the parts thereof, it is rightly called air, fire, and heaven: and
whether water, or air, or any other material existe^s, (as we are not
Chrysostom. Homil in Genesis 4. Nemo sapien^ temere asseuerauerit: oportet enim
magna modestia, and gratitudine ea quae dicuntur, a nobis accipi.
rashly to determine) we ought to be more thankful for the benefit, than
curious to search into the substance. For the quality how strong? Able to
bear up unmeasurable weight: in which respect he says in the Psalm. 104.3.
Psalm, He lays the beams of his chambers in the waters. For the quantity
how large? In widenes spreading over the whole earth: He Psalm. 104.2 Isa. 40.22
stretches out the heavens like a curtain: in deepnes, from the highest
circle of the stars, unto the face of the earth and of the sea. In which we
may behold the omnipotency of God: we, to make a weak thing strong, do join
as it were the force thereof together, and make it thick: God takes the The
strength of the creature is the power of the Lord, of whom they are, and in
whom they do consist. Coloss. 1.17.
weakest of all creatures, the water, and by displaying them and spreading them
abroad did make them strong. We do build our houses upon rocks and strong
foundations, and lay our chamber beams on walls of stone: but God does lay
the beams of his chambers in the waters, and himself does walk Psalm. 18.10.
upon the wings of the wind. We are further to admire the wormanship of God
herein, who by the cleerenes thereof, made it apt to convey the light unto us:
by the pureness thereof, made it meet for men to live and breathe in: and for
the strength, made it able to bear the clouds Job. 36.26, 27, etc.
with floods of water to moysten the earth.

Question 6. verse 7. What waters are they which are above the firmament?
THe firmament is twofold, or consists of two parts, God called the
firmament (...), shamaijm, heavens, that is to say, he made it meet to be
called so of men. Vatab. in Annot. in Genesis cap. 1.
as the name whereby God called it, (being a word of the duall number) does
import. The lower part is from the earth, Hieron. Zanch. de oper. dei part. 2
lib. 2. cap. 1.
until the Sphere or circle of the Moon, which is the lowest of all the
stars: the higher part, is from thence unto the height of the circle of the
stars. In Scripture sometimes the lower part only is called by the name of
firmament, as where it is Verse. 20.
said: Let the foul fly in the open firmament of the heaven, in which sense
they are called ((...) gnop hashamaijm,) the foul of the heaven Verse. 30. and
cap. 9.2 1. Kin. 16.4. and 21.24 Job. 28.21. Psalm. 8.9. etc.
almost thoroughout the Scripture. Sometime also the highest part, by the same
trope of speech, is called the firment, as where it is said, Verse. 17.
he set the Sun and the Moon and the Stars, in the firmament of the
heaven, when as he placed them only in the highest part thereof. This being
observed, the Scripture is not hard: herein is declared, how God divided the
waters which before were one, into two parts: one part he gathered together
afterward, and named seas: this other part, he caused the firmament to support,
that thereby he might water the dry land, August. lib. de Genesis ad lit. lib. 2.
cap. 4. Talibus eorum disputationibus cedens, laudabiliter conatus est quidam
demonstrare aquas super coelos, vt ex ipsis visibilib. conspicuisque naturis
assereret scripturae fidem. Et prius quide^ quod facillimum fuit, ostendit and
hu^c aerem coelum appellari non solum sermon communi, sed etiam consuetudine
scripturarum. De inde nulla alia causa primum firmamentum appellatum voluit
existimari, nisi quia interuallum eius diuidit inter quosdam vapores aquarum
and istat aquas, que corpulentius in terris fluitant. Et nubes quippe sicut
experti sunt, qui inter eas in montibus ambul^uerint, congregatione and
conglobatione minutissimarum guttarum talem speciem reddunt. quae si spissantur
amplius, vt coniungantur in vnam grandem, plures guttae minimae, non eam
patitur aer apudse teneri, sed eius ponderi dat locum and haec est pluuia, etc.
Hanc diligentiam considerationemque laud dignissimam iudico.
from whence rain, hail and snow do come. So that by waters above the
firmament are not meant, any waters that are above Sicut nonnulli asseruerunt.
Theod. quest. in Genesis 11. Quedam sursum collocauit quae suo liquore atque
frigiditate non sinerent corrumpi firmamentu^ ab igne luminarium. Idem Beda
Hexam.
the highest part of the firmament, or sphere of the stars, but those that
are above the lower part of the firmament, or above in the firmament, that is,
the air. The excellent wisdom of God in this his work, and the benefit it
brings unto man, which is so Job. 5.10. and 37.6. and 38.25. Psalm. 1.47.16,
etc.
often commended in the word, cannot sufficiently be praised, by the tongue and
pen of men or Angels.

Question 7. verse 9. How the waters under the firmament were gathered into one
place?
WHen God made the firmament, the waters that were under the firmament, were
Chrysostom. Homil. in Genesis 5. Omnia completa erant aquis.

Ambr. Hexam. lib. 3 cap. 2.

Caietan. Card. comment. in Genesis affirms ye waters were deeper than in the
flood of Noah.


over the face of the whole earth, and the earth was within and under the
waters, as the rocks which are in the deep seas: yea the water enclosed the
earth Aristotle himself testifies, that the best and most ancient
Philosophers before him, taught that the waters, at the first covering ye whole
earth, were partly drawn up into the firmament, and partly received into the
hollow places of the earth. Meteor. lib. 2. cap. 1. Qui ob rerum humanarum
scientiam magis commendantur, etc.
on every part, as the air incloseth the water and the earth, and the heaven
incloseth the air, as Ezechiels Ezech. 1.16.
wheels were one within another. Now to the end there might be a place of
habitation for men and beasts upon the earth, the Lord uncovers it in many
places, and gathered the waters together, which ouerflowed all before: which
was done through the supernatural power of the voice of God; partly by making
these August. de Genesis ad lit. lib. 1. cap. 12. idem cont. Aduers. legis and
Proph. lib. 1. cap. 13. Quid mirum si (aqua) rara terram texerat spissata
nudauit.
waters thicker than they were before; and partly by Basil. Hexameron. 4. ad
hoc sane dicemus, quod tunc vasa and conceptacula simul co^structa sunt. Non
enim erat illud extra Gades marc, neque magnum illud and horrendum nauigantibus
pelagus quod Britanicam insulam and occide^tales Hispanos ambit.
making channels in the earth to receive the waters, such as the seas and rivers
are: and partly also by heaping them Psalm. 33.7. Chrysostom. Hom. in Gen 26.
Iterum suum continuit impetum and ad proprium concessit locum, quem solus ipse
Dominus scit qui condidit.

Nazianzen orat 2. Non potest maris apud me mansuetudo in admirationem non
venire, quod suos intra limits, quum solutum ac liberum sit sese contineat.

Basil. Hexam. 4. Debilissima re arena, id quod violentia intolerabile est,
fraenatur: alioqui quid prohiberet, etc.

Aquin. sum. part. 1. quaest. 60. did. 1. Calu in Genesis 1. ver. 9. Pet. Martyr.
in Genesis ibid.


together in the high and wide seas, whereby it comes to pass, that they
flow to and fro, at springs and tides, and do force out water springs out of
the highest mountains. And that the waters were thus heaped up together, Psalm
33.7.
the Scriptures testify: He gathers the waters of the sea together as upon a
heap. And again, Psalm. 104.6.
iaamthu-maijm, the waters will stand, that is to say, Annalage temp. Hebreu
frequentiss.
do stand above the mountains. But some Caietan. Commentar. in Genesis 1. Perer.
in Genesis tom. 1. lib. 1. verse. 9.
object, that the waters should stand, or be higher than the earth, it cannot
be, without a perpetual miracle. I answer, it is no miracle, but natural,
which the Lord does Job. 38.10. Psalm. 104.9.
establish by a perpetual decree: for the will of God, Natura est quod Deus
vult. Plato. Ambros. Hexam. lib. 3 cap. 2. Vox enim Dei efficiens natura est.
and ordinary execution of the same upon the creatures, is that which of men
is Aristotle and Galen, and the veriest Heathen do so expound themselves.
called Nature. Secondly, it is acknowledged in nature, that the earth and the
waters do Aristot. Meteor. lib. 2. cap. 2.
make one perfect compass; which how it can be, unless there be an ascension
of the waters in the sea, the same being at the shore Let Caietan and others
consider it in their wisdom, who apply it altogether unto their sense. The
compass of the earth can no more be perceived, in the greatest plain, nor
hardly so much, as men's eyes will be witness, Peslom. Almag. lib. 1. cap. 4.
Siomnibus etc. Look 7. chap. quest. 4.5.
so far below the Continent, they shall never be able truly to demonstrate.
Thirdly, the upholding of the waters in the firmament is no less marvelous,
yet it is not miraculous, and this with it has equal proof, both in reason,
in use, and in the scriptures. The difference is, this is not so manifest, and
therefore not so much considered. By this we have to praise the bountifulnes of
God, who provides Isai. 45.18.
an habitation for man upon the dry land. Secondly, his wisdom, that can make,
by drawing them together, a mean in nature The moving of the waters by tides
and winds a special means to preserve them.
to purge and cleanse them, and from Eccles. 1.7.
these heaps of waters refreshes the earth with springs and fountains.
Thirdly, his long suffering unto sinners, for if God should not hold these
waters by his Job. 38.10.
word, and set Ierem. 5.22. Genesis 7
bars and doors unto them, they would soon break in over all the earth, as
in the days of Noah, but the Lord Psalm. 104.9. Isa. 54.9
has set them a bound which they shall not pass, they shall not return to
cover the earth.

Question 8. verse 14. Why did the Lord make the light, and days and nights,
and also herbs and trees to grow, before the Sun and Stars were made?
THe first thing that God created in his proper kind was light: not because he
was in darkness, for 1. Tim. 6.16.
he inhabited that light that no man can attain unto; but as our Savior
says, Ioh. 3.21. and praecipue expectas a te lucem sic luceat etc.
He that does the truth comes to the light: so the Lord in the first place
created light, because Calvin. in Genesis cap. 1 ver. 3. Angelos eodem tempore
creatos qui spiritus sunt lucidissimi, communis fert opinio, de qua
respondendum: Tu Deus nosti. August. lib. 65. quaest. q. 21. Epiphan. Haeres 65.
he would have his works appear, and show forth his glory. This light he
formed of the first matter, 2. Cor. 4.6.
commanding the light to shine out of darkness; and after separated it August.
de Genesis imperf. cap. 5. Eo. ipso quo lux facta est, consecuta est etiam diuisio
inter lucem and tenebras.
from the darkness, that is, made a division of light and darkness, so that half
the earth (being as yet unformed) was in the light, the other half in darkness
and without light. And withal, he made it to run, as it were As the Sun
and Stars did after their creation. The word signifies to divide, as Exo.
36.33. whereby is manifest, that on one part was darkness, on another part
light, so divided by place and time.
a race with time, by which means after the space of twelve hours, in which
the light had shined, darkness came in place of the light, and night succeeded
the first day. Now after three days finished, he gathered Just. Martyr. lib.
exposit. fid. (...), etc. id est. Sol autem ipsi corpus effectu^ est, in quo
lumen contractum vbique prorsus locorum, tam inde ab initio diffusum fuerat.
Nec conditus Sol est vt defectum suppleres; non talis est opifex. scilicet
Deus. Theodor. quaest. in Genesis 14.
the same light that was dispersed in the firmament, into certain bodies, the
Sun, the Moon, and the Stars, which should in more royal order govern the
day and night. Hereby the Lord would show, Look also Ios. 10.12 1. King. 17.6.
etc.
that although he commonly use the means, which he himself has set, for
the preservation of the creatures, yet he is not bound or tied unto the means,
but of his good pleasure uses them. He has made the Sun Ierem. 31.35. Psalm.
136.8.
to give us light, yet he is able to give light without the Sun, and so he
did, before he made the Sun: he uses the influence and heat thereof, to
bring forth grass, and corn, and trees out of the earth, and yet were all
these created With ripe fruit, Genesis 2.16.17. wherevpo^ the Jews imagine, the
world had his beginning in September.
in perfection before the Sun. Wherefore we ought to learn hereby, Hester
4.14.
that when we see no means whereby we may enjoy the promises of God, we
distrust not his power, who is able without means and against means to work
our preservation: and when Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 5. Ex quo discimus, quod
etiam nunc, neque cura, neque labor agricolarum fructuum nobis prouentus
concedunt: sed prae his omnibus verbum Dei, quod ab initio ad terram factum
est. Deinde, vt compescat eorum nugacitates, qui dicere audent quod solis
cooperatione ad fructuum prouentum opus sit: sunt and alij qui haec astris
aliquibus ascribere nituntur. Propterea docet nos Spiritus sanctus, quod ante
formationem horum elementorum, praecepto Dei obtemperans tellus, semina
adiderit, nullo alio ad cooperationem opus habent.
we have means, we should not trust 2. Chron. 16.12. Job. 31.24.
in the means, but in the Lord.

Question 9. verse 14. How do these lights in the firmament separate the day
from the night?
THe Sun, who is the Psalm. 136.8.
ruler of the day, does run a continual race in the firmament: for so the
Scripture teaches, Psalm. 19.5.
He rejoices as a giant to run his race. This running, is not any crooked
wandering, as our eyes are witnesses, nor yet a direct or straight course, (for
whither should he run, that always speedeth more Arist. lib. de Caelo.
Cleomed. lib. 2. (...) etc. i. Aue quae equo velocior, sagitta quae aeue.
(...). i. As swift as ones eyesight upon the sea.
swiftly than any creature upon the earth?) but a compass or circle course
about the earth, for so the Scripture affirms also: Psalm. 19.6.
He goes out from the end of the heaven, and compasses unto the end of the
same again. And in another place, Eccles. 1.5.
The Sun arises, and the Sun goes down, and compasses about to the
place where he arises. How (will one say) can the Sun have passage under
the earth? Thou find by daily experience, it is as the Scriptures testify:
Mark also religiously and they will teach thee how. God sits (says Isai.
42.22. We in English call a round stone a chug or chuggle, which seems to be
derived of the Hebrew word (chug) signifying any thing round: a ball, etc.
the Prophet) upon the ((...) chug) globe or circle of the earth: and again,
Prou. 8.27.
He set his compass upon the deep. By which words, is manifest, that as the
Sun is said to go round, so is the earth round and compass also. So round
(as the Arist. de coel. lib. 2. cap. 4. Mundum esse rotundum atque adeo exact,
vt nihil eorum quae apud nos oculis cernuntur sit tam exact rotundum; and
rationem eam subiro, quam aqua subit ad terram and elementa cetera.
Philosopher affirms and Ptol. Almag. lib. 1. cap. 4. Quod terra secundum
omnes parts accepta spherica sit, etc.
experience proves) as there is nothing in the world, more exactly compass
than it is. Neither do the mountains hinder this proportion, Cleom. lib. 1.
cap. 10. Vt si in pila sit puluisculus; quanquam hic maiorem habet rationem ad
totam sphere magnitudinem, quam cauitates maris and montium fastigia ad totius
terrae magnitudinem.
for they are as nothing, being compared with the greatness of the earth. But
where are then the foundations of the earth, which God has laid, which are so
much commended 1. Sam. 2.8. Psalm. 18.16. and 102.25. and 119.90.
in the Scriptures? I answer by the Scriptures: that the Ier. 31.37. Job. 38.6
foundations of the earth cannot be searched out: and withal, that these
foundations, are not without, or under, but within the earth, for so the Amos
9.6.
Prophet plainly speaks: He has laid the foundation of his globe of elements
in the earth: and Job says, Job. 26.7.
He extends the North (gnal tohu) upon emptines, and hangs the earth upon
nothing. In which words he affirms: first, Hieron. in Job. 26. Hoc sic
intelligendum est: sieve quod terra ex nihilo facta sit, sieve nihil infra terram
sit, quo terra sustineatur: cum ipsa vniuersa sustineat, and ipsa
innumerabiliter Dei virtute libretur, quia in ipso sint vniuersa, and ab illo
omnia continentur.
that the earth hangs, therefore it is not set upon any thing, as upon a
foundation. Secondly, that the North, that is, that part of this globe of
earth, which is farthest from us, is stretched out upon emptines, that is
August. de ciuit. Dei lib. 13. cap. 18. Cum terra vniuersa libretur in nihilo.
Item Ouidius. Terra pilae similis nullo fulcimine nixa, aere suspenso tam grave
pendet onus. OEcolampad. in Job. cap 26. Spatium illud aere plenum vacuum
vocat: iuxta opinionem vulgi. Ingrati Physici qui perpetuo opera mundi
spectantes, conditorem punquam agnoscunt.
upon the very thin air, such as we our selves do live and breathe in.
Thirdly, that though the earth do hang as it were in the air, yet has it
neither cord nor thread to hang by, for it rests upon nothing out of it self,
but upon Micah. 6.2. Amos 9.6.
that mighty foundation that God has laid within it. And what is that? I
answer with the Scriptures, Psalm. 104.5. Isai. 40.21.
the decree of God, that it should never move. Therefore if thou can not
conceive, where the foundations of the earth should be laid, Basil. Hexam 1. Si
tecum statueris terrae fundamentum etiam illud occurret animo quod simili
quopiam etiam illud opus habeat, quod ipsum sustineat. Quare percunctantibus,
super qua re ingens hoc terra pondus firmatum est, nos dicere oportet, quod in
manu Dei fines terrae sunt.
think that the power of God is the foundation thereof. And know also that God
has so showed his wisdom with his power, By the depression of every part
thereof unto the Center.
that even by nature it can no more be moved, Notwithstanding ye Lord does
move and shake the same, and can bring it to nothing with his word.
then if it were set on iron foundations, or rocks of Adamant. Now through the
roundnes of the earth (like as a boule that is set against a candle or in the
Sun) one half only at one time, can behold the brightness of the Sun, the
other half being shadowed by the compass of the whole, which also shadoweth
the air near about it, and must needs thereby be deprived of light,
Augustine. de Genesis contr. Manich. lib. 1. cap. 4. Non quia aliquid sunt tenebra.
sed ipsa lucis absentia tenebra dicuntur. Basil. Hexamer. Homil. 6. Plin. Hist.
Not. lib. 2. cap. 10.
the only want or absence whereof is that darkness that God called the night.
By which How the light and darkness are separate.
means the light and darkness are separate; for the brightness of the Sun, in
that part whereon it shines, causes the day; and the earth, by the thicknes
thereof, on the other part, shadoweth the air, and causes night or darkness.
Wherefore, as the Sun without ceasing, is carried about the earth; so the
morning, as his forerunner, Job. 38.13. Homer. Iliad. (...).
gets hold of the corners of the earth, and passes before him from East to
West, and compasses again unto the East. This doctrine, so far as thou
find it taught by the Scripture, esteem not as the wisdom 1 Thessalonians. 2.13.
of man, but of the Lord, and albeit thou can not August. epist. 222. Vt ergo
in quibusdam rebus ad doctrinam salutatem pertinentibus, quis ratione nondum
percipere valeamus, sed aliquando valebimus, fides praecedat rationem, etc.
Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 5.
conceive it, yet believe it: and cry out with reverence, Psalm. 104.24.
O Lord how wonderful are thy works! Neither is this truth of God, naked of
witnesses and proofs beside the Scripture. For even Aristot. de Coelo lib. 2.
cap 4. and lib 4. cap. 3 Ptolom. Almag. lib. 1. cap. 4.5.6. Cleom. lib. 1. cap.
8.
the Heathen, by the broken light of natural reason, have seen it, and by
invincible demonstration confirmed it, whose testimony serves to confute
those, that through prophanenes of heart shall deny the same.

Question 10. verse 14. What means this, that the Sun, the Moon and the
Stars, are said to be set for signs and for seasons, days and years?
THe words are manifest, if men's minds were as forward unto goodness, as to
evil. For thus they are to be read, out of the Hebrew: And let them Here the
point, is chiefly to be marked, which is: patsch^a, regius accentus, and vocem
exte^dit. Concerning the points or accents, the Hebrews give this rule: (...),
etc. ye is, if thou will be a perfect Grammarian (well able to understand the
Scriptures) labor to know and observe the accent.
be for signs: both for seasons, and for days, and for years: that is to
say, signs of seasons, days and years: according as the Hieron. in Ierem.
10. Et quae in signa sunt posita, annorum, temporum, mensium and dierum. Cyril.
Alex. contr. Julian. lib. 10. Quae sunt in temporum signa. August. de Genesis ad
lit. imperf. lib. 1. cap. 13. Ne aliud acciperent figna aliud tempora. Trant.
Iun. in Genesis cap. 1.
Fathers, and best writers of the Church do both read them, and understand
them. But such is the curiosity of men, that they will observe them as signs,
not only of seasons, for which they are, but also of all humane accidents and
affairs, as of Ptolom. de iudicijs lib. 1. cap. 3. Prima compositio virium and
actionum corporis and animi: itemque certae affectiones, and longaeuitas and
breuitas vitae. Idem lib. 3. cap 11.13. Item lib. 4. per totum.
the temperament, and condition of men's bodies, of the qualities of the mind,
of the length of life, of riches, friendship, sickness, hunger, wars,
pestilence, earthquakes, tempests, and disposition of the air for every
moment. We on the contrary, by the authority of the word of God, do testify
that these heavenly bodies were ordained to be signs only of seasons, days
and years, and that such farther observations, are but vanity and deceit, and
greatly derogatiue unto the providence of God. We mean by seasons not only
(as the Jews (...) mognadhim a iagnadh: to come together at set times: as
Deuteronomy. 16.1. etc.
do) the feasts and Sabboths of the year, but also the times of seed and
harvest, of summer and winter, and the disposition of them, whereof they are
the causes. For as the setting of the Sun betokens night approaching, so the
ascending of the Sun within the Zodiac betokens longer days, because the
course of the Sun is the cause thereof. Secondly, they are the signs of
seasons, Plato in Tim. (...), etc. Cic. lib. de vniuerso. Fragm. Nesciunt hos
siderum errores idiosum esse quod rite dicitur tempus: multitudine infinita etc.
through the swiftnes and slownes of their motion, Whereby times are
distinguished of ancient writers, as by years: Amos 1.6. Ptolom. Alm. lib. 1.
c. 8
whereby are caused the conjunctions and oppositions of them; the eclipses of
the Sun and Moon, the increasing and waning of the Moon and such like,
which they do as certainly foreshew, through the courses of nature that God
has set among them, as the appearing of the morning foresheweth the rising of
the Sun. Moreover, through their variable position As in summer, the Sun
coming more directly over that part of the earth in which we are, more
forciblie pearceth the same with his beams, and heateth the air with the
rebounding of them: this being the course of nature, we may prognosticate
before of Summer, it will be hot.
in the heavens, they show the inclination of the seasons, so far as they are
ordinarily the cause thereof, or so far as the inferior creatures do vary
with them in the seasons: as we know, by the approaching and declining of the
Sun, that the Summer will be hot, the Winter inclined to cold, the Springtime
to moisture, the Harvest to drouth, because the approaching or declining of
these lights is the ordinary cause thereof: as also we foreknow the ebbing
and flowing of the sea, because it is (by the wisdom of God) joined with the
courses of the Moon; of the inclination Which do vary much according to the
seasons, in drines after the seasons of the Moon, in heat after the course of
the Sun, being drier in the new Moon then in the full, as Physicians know
well, and the marrow of the bones do testify: hotter, inwardly in Winter than
in Summer.
of the bodies of men and beasts, to drines and moisture, to heat and cold. We
deny not also but that they may be signs miraculously of events to come, as
the staying of the Sun, and the going back of the Sun were unto Iosu.
10.13.14.
Joshua 2. King. 2.11.
and Hezechia, the appearing of the Star Matthew. 2.2.
at the birth of Christ; Joseph. de bello I^d. lib. 7. cap. 12.
the blazing Star of the destruction of Jerusalem; whereof there is neither
mention nor meaning in this place. They also may be signs So that men may
conjecture of weather not far off, from the cause to the effect; which if it
be oftimes uncertain in matter and causes before our eyes: how much more is it
frivolous, in those wherein there are no true and certain causes, and those if
any be, being let by other coming between.
by the interposition of other causes, of the disposition of the air, to
tempests, rain, wind, drouth or such like; and yet the same not happening of
themselves, but of the quality of the air between us and them: for thus it
is held a rule, in sailing and in husbandry, Pallida luna pluit, vubicunda
flat, alba serenat. Item, Si nigrum obscuro compre^derit aere cornu, etc. Item:
Sol vbi nascentem maculis varianerit o^tum. Virgil. Geor. 1.
A pale Moon is a sign of rain, a red Moon of wind, a clear Moon of
fair weather; and yet none is so weak of judgment to think that the Moon
her self does alter her color, but the same is caused of the moisture, or
drouth, or cleerenes of the air, which is likely to give effects accordingly.
In this sense our Savior Matthew. 16.3.
says unto the Jews: When it is evening you say fair weather, for the sky
is red. He misliketh not their judgment; but it was not of the face of the
Stars, but of the sky. Now to see how these creatures, are forged out for
signs (whether of ignorance or wilfulnes) it is a wonder. The country
husbandman has a certain sign of fair weather or foul, by the hanging (as
they call it) of the Moon, As just as Tenterden steeple was thought to be the
loss of Goodwin Sands, because it was builded at the same time: for as they
once stand so stand they ever; the Moon and the Sun being in the same
signs. Indeed the sharpnes or bluntnes of the points may betoken, but the
same is either by the age of the Moon, or the quality of the air altered, as
was said before.
when it first appears after the change: which notwithstanding the learned
know, to be variable according to the season of the year, through the diverse
position of the Sun and Moon in the Zodiac, and has continued alike from
the beginning of the world. In like sort men dare presume to take the placing
of the Stars for certain signs of accidental events to come, of the change
and variety of the weather, for every day in the year, and thereupon
determine before, Which though it be but coniecturall, yet it is evil. First,
because it is forbidden by the word. Secondly, the ground thereof is most
uncertain, as appears by the difference of their judgments. Thirdly,
innumerable lets do come, as a sudden cloud obscureth the shining of the Sun.
Fourthly, the times and seasons and the events of them, are placed in the power
of God: Act. 1.7.
this day will be fair, this foul, this windy, this rainie, wherein not only
they confute one another in their judgment, but forfeite their word and credit
to the husbandman, that depends on them, for whom it were much better to
commend a fair day at night. They accuse men of want of knowledge when they
are reproved, saying: Ptol. de Iudic. lib. 1. c. 1. Nam alij difficultate
cognitionis adducti, scientiam esse negant.
Art has no greater adversary than the ignorant. Let us hear therefore what
the consent of the Scriptures, of the Church of God, of the Fathers, and of the
wisest among the Heathen, have determined hereof. Learn not the way of the
heathen (says the Ierem. 10.1.
Prophet) neither be afraid of the signs of heaven, though the heathen be
afraid of such. And again, I destroy (says God) Isai. 44.25.
the tokens of the Soothsaiers, and make them that conjecture fools. And
again, to confute the arrogancy of men: Isai. 41.23.
Declare (says he) the things to come, and so Showing that it is proper unto
GOD only, to foretell of things to come, and to creatures as it is revealed
from him.
we shall know that you are Gods. Is there any (says the Church in her Ierem.
14.22.
supplication to God) among the vanities of the Gentiles that can give rain,
If they be not to be taken as the causes of rain, neither are they as the
signs of rain.
or can the heavens give showers? Is it not thou O Lord? To come unto men's
writings. The Council of Toledo decreed Which was holden in Anno 400.
thus: Si quis Astrologiae aus Mathesi existimat esse credendum, anathema sit.
In assertione fidei cap. vlt.
If any man shall think that Astrologers and Mathematicians (they mean
Prognosticators of weather, famine, plague, wars, etc. Fortune Tellers,
Wizards and such like) are to be believed, hold him accursed. The Council of
Venice decreed, In Anno 460. canon 16. In hoc quicunque clericus detectus
fuerit vel consulere vel docere, ab ecclesia habeatur extraneus.
that if any man did study Astrology, or take in hand to foretell things to
come, or he that did give credit to any such: if he were a Minister should be
deprived, and whatsoever he were he should be excommunicate. This Act was
afterward confirmed in the Council of Council. Agathens. canon. 42.
Agatha, and after that again Council. Aurelian. canon. 32. Cu^ his qui ijs
crediderint, ab ecclesiae communione pellantur.
in the Council of Orleans. Tertullian says: Tertul. in Apologet. cap. 35.
Quas arts (scil. Astrologia Aruspicina etc.) vt ab Angelis desertoribus
proditas, and a Deo interdictas etc.
Because Astrology, and such unlawful Arts, etc. were invented by evil
spirits, and forbidden by the Lord, Christians may not use them, though they
might have benefit by them. Again, Chrysostom. Hom. in Ephesians. 19. Qua ratione
hominem adeo paruum fecit, ta^tumque ab altitudine coeli distantem, vt nihil
certi scire possit eorum qua superne appareant.
Man (says Chrysostom) is so far distant from the heavens, as that he can
know nothing of certainty of those things that appear above, and therefore it
is wisdom for a man to profess himself ignorant in these things. Hierome
avouches, that Hieron. comment. in Isai. cap. 27.
Astrologers (qui futurorum scientiam pollicentur) are more hurtful to a city
than fire. Augustine affirms, August. de morib. eccles. lib. 1. cap. 21.
Reprimat igitur se anima ab huiusmodi vanae cognitionis cupiditate, si se
castam Deo seruare disponit.
that to delight in Astrology is to commit whoredom against God. That August.
confess. lib. 4 cap. 3. Quod eas falsiffimas comperisset, and nollet vir grauit
decipiendi^ hominibus victum quaerere.
the grounds of that Art are false, and those that use it, deceive the people.
The heathen likewise declaime against it: Phauorinus a Philosopher Aul. Gell.
lib. 14. cap. 1. Tollit enim quod maximum inter Deos and homines differt, si
homines quoque res omnes post futuras praenoscerent. Idem. Mutant and variant,
tempestatesque eodem in tempore alibi placidas alibi violentas mouent. Idem.
Constare inter astrologos stellas istas, infinito prope and innumerabili numero
annorum ad eundem locum cum eodem habitu regredi: vt neque vllus obseruationis
tenor neque memoriae vlla effigies literarum tanto aeuo potuerint edurare.
has these words: If men be able to foretell things to come; then were the
difference taken away, which is the greatest between God and men. The same
affirms also, that Astrologers cannot in wisdom divine of things to come,
because the same stars have diverse effects (if any at all) in diverse places,
as that they stir up tempests in England, and fair weather in France at the
same time. Neither can this Art be exactly gathered by experience, because the
stars do perpetually vary their positions, upon which the judgment of
Astrology is grounded. Marcus Cato Cato lib. 4. Origin.
held it unlawful to affirm, that even the eclipses of the Sun or Moon
(which Astrologers count most pregnant tokens) did foreshew either dearth or
plenty, either fair or foul. The wisest Philosophers, neither Socrates, nor
Plato, nor Aristotle, did either practice it or write of it. Cicero with all
his eloquence Cic. de Diuina. lib. 2
derideth and reprooueth it. And Ptolome himself Ptolom. lib. cention dicta.
1. Fieri nequit vt qui sciens est particulares rerum formas pronunciet, sicuti
nec sensus particularem sed generalem quandam suscipit sensibilis rei formam,
oportesque tractante^ haec rerum coniectura vti. Soli autem numine afflati
praedicum particulari^.
affirms, that no man can foretell particular things to come, unless he be
inspired with the spirit of God. And albeit that diverse of the testimonies here
alleged were principally directed against the conjectures of Natiuities, and
foretelling of the state of life, riches, prosperity, etc. yet this being
undoubted, that that which is true in general, is true in every member of the
same; as if the stars can give no certain judgment in any accidental or
casual things, they can give no judgment of the weather: If no man can
foretell particular things to come, no man can prognosticate of the weather
particularly to come: therefore that which is said in general, is said against
the particulars of Astrology. How then (will one say) does it come to pass,
that men foretelling of particular things, by the sight of the stars, do
rightly foretell that which comes to pass? I answer: Some are stirred up by
God to foretell events to come, 1. Sam. 12.17. but not by the sight of the
stars.
as were the Prophets. Some are Lactant. lib. 2. c. 15. Magorum autem ars omnis
ac potentia, horum (scil. daemonum) aspirationibus co^stat.
instructed by evil spirits with whom they have acquaintance, as is reported s
of Democritus, and Tertul. lib. de anim. cap. 14.
of Pythagoras. Some again when August. cont. Academ. lib. 1. cap. 7. Aliquem
ex hoc genere hominum proferte si potestis, qui consultus nunquam de resporsis
dubitauerit, nunquam postremo faisa responderit.
they know not what to say, speak Vide Ioachim. Fortium prognost. lib. de
Astrolog. c. vlt. Proximo (inquit) anno caeci parum aut nihil videbunt, surdi
male audient, muti non loque^tur. Senectus eodem anno erit immedicabilis
propter annos qui ^raecesserunt. Varia e^it reru^ mutatio, etc.
probably or Ita Deleus Apollo suis illusit consultoribus. Herodot. in Clio.
de Craeso, si arma Persis inferret, magnum euerteret imperium. scil. vel suum
vel Persarum.
doubtfully, of that which is uncertain; as when they say the weather will be
mean, indifferent, reasonable fair, seasonable, moderate, variable, warm,
etc. in which they cannot greatly fail. Sometime also when such teachers
obtain such favorable hearers (as it often comes to pass among people that
delight in lies) that one forespeech that happens true, shall counteruaile
many that happen otherwise (such is the blindness and simplicity of wretched
people that fear not God) as in their erring Authors, their observation of the
twelve days, of the Purification, of the day of S. Paul, of the hanging of the
Moon, and many such childish vanities without ground or reason may be seen.
And lastly sometime, for that God for the hardness of Deuteronomy. 13.3. 2 Thessalonians.
2.10.11.
men's hearts suffers such prophecies to come to pass. To conclude therefore:
Although that noble Science of Astronomy, is greatly profitable both for
Psalm. 19.1. A^^ob. cont. Gent. lib. 8. Coelum ipsum vide quam late tenditur,
etc. Calvin. in Genesis 1. ver. 16.
the knowledge of the marvelous works of God in the heavens, and for our
Basil. Hexam. 6. Necessariae sunt ad humanam vitam luminarium notae and
significationes. Si enim quis non vltra modum signa ex ipsis curiosius
inquirat, vtiles ipsorum obseruationes, ex longa experientia comperiet.
necessary direction in humane affairs, being therefore Job. 38.31.32.33.
Amos 9.6.
commended unto us in the scripture, which foresheweth the motions, positions,
aspects and eclipses of the heavenly bodies, with many things necessary for
the government of Commonwealth; which belong unto them, as they are signs of
seasons, days and years: and although we may foreknow in general the seasons
of the year, and that which depends on the same; yet those particular
conjectures which are gathered from hence, of the change of the weather for
every day, Of which they may as well (having the skill and use of the
Ephemerides, for as much as errantibus stellis nullae illit minus errant. Cic.)
foretell twenty, forty, or an hundred years before, as one year: how much the^
were such knowledge to be esteemed, if it were lawful, and were a skill, and
not a fraud.
of famine, earthquakes, wars, death of Princes, amity, sedition, and such
like, have neither ground in Art, nor hold in reason, but are flatly forbidden
by the word of God. And although sometimes particular predictions may happen
true, as those of Laert. lib. 1. in vita Thaletis. Cum velles ostendere, quam
sit facile sapienti ditari, praecognita futura vbertate conduxisse olearia
pecuniasque sibi innumeras comparasse.
Thales, Valor. Max. lib. 8. cap. 11. Qui mortem Caesari praedixit vt proximos
30. dies, quasi fatales, caueret, quorum vltimus eras idus Martij. Et cum forte
mane vterque conuenisset, Caesar Spurlnae: ecquid scis idus Martias iam
venisse? Et is, ecquid scis, illas nondum praeterijsse? Caesar eodem die 23.
vulneribus confissus est.
Spurina, and Sueton. in vita Domitian. Cum mortem imperatori praedixisset,
interrogatus quis ipsum maneret exitus: affirmanis sore vt breui laceraretur a
canibus. Hunc interfici sine mora iussit, sed ad coarguendam temeritatem artis,
sepeliri quoque accuratissime imperauit. Quod cum fieret, euenit vr repentina
tempestate derecto funere semiustum cadauer discerperent canes, etc.
Asclatarion: yet because it is flat sacrilege Isai 41.23.
unto the glory of God, invented by Cic. Divine. lib. 2. Gell. lib. 14. cap. 1.
in fine.
evil authors, forbidden by the Scriptures, Councels and Fathers of the
Church, has no ground nor certainty in Art, andk is unprofitable unto men:
therefore it is not lawful, for Christians, to profess, practice, or consent
unto it, neither were the heavenly bodies ordained for such abuses.

Question 11. verse 16. Wherefore is it said, that God made two great lights?
etc.
THe Sun and the Moon are called great lights: partly of their nature and
effects; because they give more light than other stars: and partly also after
the custom of the Scripture, (to speak unto the capacity of the simple)
because they Ambros. Hexamer. lib. 4. cap. 1. Non tam aliorum comparatione quam
suo munere. For the Moon being found to be the least of all the heavenly
bodies, except Venus and Mercury, through her neerenes unto us, gives
greatest light, and seems greatest, next the Sun.
appear unto men to be the greatest. The Sun appears alone in the day,
Varro de lingua lat. lib. 4. Sol, quia solus apparet.
not because he is alone, but because through his exceeding brightness, the
other Stars cannot be seen. The Moon also in her brightness August. de Genesis
cont. Manich. lib. 1. cap. 14. Illa tamen suo fulgore superat omnia, and ideo
princeps eorum rectissime dicitur. Therefore called of the heathen the Queen
of heaven. Iere. 44.17
obscureth many Stars, and being more beautiful than any other, has
worthily the verse. 18. Psalm. 136.9.
chief pre-eminence in ruling of the night. They are called greater or lesser
by comparison, either of their light, or of their bodies. The Sun is called
in the language of the Scriptures (...) shemesh, that is Hinc (...) shamash
Chaldaice to serve.
a servant, as if he were Gods only minister of light to all the world,
because he is Basil. Hexam. Hom. 6 Primo ipsa lucis natura producta est: nu^c
autem solare hoc corpus vt primogenite illi luci vehiculum sit, praeparatum est.
as it were the chariot wherein light is carried, not only to inlighten the
air and the earth; but even the Moon and Stars themselves: which although
they were indeed created lights, 1. Cor. 15.41.
so as one star differs from an other star in glory, yet is their glory
much more increased by their beholding of the Sun. The Moon is evidence
enough hereof, which shines only on that part Basil. Hexameron. 6 August.
Epist. 119. ad lannuar. cap. 4. lacrementa and decrementa lunaria ex
conuersione globi eius coniecerunt. Vitru^. lib. 9. cap. 4. Gerosus pilam esse
ex dimidia part candentem locuit, conue^tique candentem versus solemn, propter
eius proprietatem luminis ad lumen. Aristarchus Samius aliter: ^unam proprum
lumen non habere, sed esse vti speculum, and a solis impetu recipore splendorem.
which is next the Sun, as that whereon the Sun does cast his beams.
Wherefore the Moon is always full, as Augustine Aug. de Genesis ad lit. lib. 2.
cap. 15. Idem de Genesis imperfect. cap. 13.
says, although to us she appear not so. For according to her distance from
the Sun, so is her light to us ward, and the less it appears unto us, the
more Plin. lib. 2. c. 9. In coitu lid cernitur, quonia^ haustum omnem lucis:
^uersa, illo regerat vnde acceperat.
it is increased on the other part, being upward and next the Sun, which
through the thicknes of her body we cannot see. For to think that the body
of the Moon, waneth and increases with her light, were as apparent folly as
with Cic. in Lucullo.
Zenophanes and Laert. lib. 2. cap. 3. de Ana^r.
Anaxagoras, to imagine there were houses and cities in her. And yet the
eclipses of the Moon are more apparent testimonies of the same. For when she
is so opposed to the Sun, as Ptol^n. Almag. lib. 4 cap. 1. Cum distantia qua
lunae globus disiat a centro terrae non sic tanta quanta est ad Zodiacum, vt
insta: puncti magnitudo terrae ad eam habeat (de proinde vmbram per sphaeram
lune terrae faciat) cum ergo lunae sic opposita soli fuerit, vt in terrestris
vmbra incidat cono, quia ex opposito solu vna cum eo circumducitur
proportionaliter incidentiae qualitatibus lumin^ priuatur, terra enim solaribus
obijcitur radijs, hinc fit vt similiter omnibus, etc
that she comes within the shadow of the earth, having lost the light she
received from the Sun, she Perhaps somewhat enlarged by the brightness of
her circle and other stars.
shows her own, until she have recovered again her borrowed brightness.
Concerning the greatness of these lights, it may seem to simple men a miracle,
or rather a fable, that is affirmed by the universal consent of all the
learned, that the body of the Sun is greater than the earth, which Cic. in
Lucul. Cleom. lib. 2.
Epicure and Laert. lib. 9. cap. 1. de vita Herac.
Heraclitus would think might be contained in a bushel. But let it not move
thee Ambr. Hexam. lib. 4 cap. 6. Considera qua^tum intersit spatij inter solemn
and terras. Mentitur noster espectus; noli fidele astimare eius judicium.
(says Ambrose) that he seems unto thee not past a foot broad, thy sight
deceives thee, believe not the judgment thereof: but consider how much space
there is between the Sun and the earth, by which our sight is weakened (which
indeed is so great, as that it surmounteth the compass of the earth.) He
Ibid. Basil. Hexam. 6.
shows the same greatness in India and in England all at once: he inlighteneth
all parts of the earth alike, That is in the same Hemisphere of the earth in
which he shines.
and appears the same, indifferently to all. Neither say we this, that thou
should stand still in considering the creatures, but that thou should
ascend to Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 6. Non vt in eo subsistas dilecte, sed inde
ascendas, and in elementi opificem admirationem transferas: nam quanto maius
ostenditur elementum tanto admirabilier opifex eius apparet. Lact. lib. 6. c.
1. Ideo facti and inspirati ab eo sumus, non vt coelum videremus and solemn
(quod Anaxag. put^uit. Laert. lib. 1. c. 3.) sed vt artifice^ solis and coeli
Deu^ pura and integra mente coleromus.
admire the maker of them. For by how much they are more glorious, in regard of
their light and bigness, so much more glorious does he appear, who made them
so light, so great, so beautiful, and that of nothing. And if the Sun and
heavenly bodies be so great, which yet notwithstanding are nothing in respect
of the greatness of the heavens, how great is the Lord who Jerem. 23.24. Non
mole sed virtute and essentia spirituali: na^ Deus non est corpus, sed
spiritus. Ioh 4.24.
fills both the heaven and the earth? And how truly says the Prophet, He
measures Isai. 40.12.17.
the waters in his fist, and counts heaven with his span, and all nations to
him are nothing, and less than vanity? But we will give no raines to
curiosity, to search whether the Sun be Ptolom. Almag. lib. 5 cap. 16.
170. times (although by sufficient ground of Art the same is proved) or the
least star that appears in the firmament be eighteen times greater than
the earth; or whether it be eighteen hundred and fifty miles to the circle of
the Moon, or as many thousand, as is reported, from thence unto the stars,
seeing it makes little (as Ambr. Hexam. lib. 6 c. 2. Quid mihi quaerere quae
sit terrae me^sura circuitus, quam Geometrae centum octoginta millibus
stadiorum affirmant: libenter fateor, me nescire quod nescio, imo quod scire
nihil prodest.
Ambrose speaks) to matters of faith: and would have omitted at all to speak
thereof, so as the rebellious wit of man would not through ignorance accuse the
Scriptures. In lib. contra fidem Christi. Et est apud Cyrill. Alex. lib. 3. Vbi
praeponit Platone^ Mosi, imo ipsi Deo in narratione creationis.
Julian and Argum. 8. Quod dixerit duo luminariae magna solemn. and lunam. Cum
Mathematici firmissimis rationibus demonstrant no^ nullas stellas, multis
partibus maiores esse luna.
Simplicius blaspheme the spirit of God in Moses, because he wrote not more
curiously of these things. The simple idiots, on the other side do go away,
for that he wrote so much, saying: This is a hand saying, who can hear it.
Notwithstanding, the wisdom of the spirit of God is most excellent herein:
who only makes briefly mention of these things, and not a declaration, to the
end that the simplest might have a taste of the greatness of the Lord, and might
be provoked thereby to search the Scriptures; and that those who are able,
might use those Basil. H^^^m. 5. Arts naturae interprete^.
interpreters of nature, and Clem. Alex. Strom. 1 Ita hic eum been and vtiliter
eruditum existimo, qui omnia refere ad veritatem adeo vt ex Geometria, etc. Et
ipsa Philosophia coliigens quod est vtile, nullis insidijs interceptam seruet
fidem.
handmaids unto wisdom, which are the arts and sciences, as the means that
Isai. 28.26.29. Act. 7.22.
God has sanctified for the increase of godly knowledge.

Question 12. verse 26. Wherefore God said let us make man in our Jmage, etc?
WHen as the Lord had furnished the heaven and earth, with all the creatures
and ornaments thereof, last of all he forms man, consisting of heavenly and
earthly nature, Nazianz. orat. 42. in pasc. 2. Hoc igitur cum artifici verbo
visum fuisset ostendere, animal vnum ex vtroque, hoc est, ex inuisibili ac
visibili natura, fabricatu^, nempe hominem. (...). Plato in Tima.

Sanctius his animal. Ovid. Metam. 1.


as it were the end and perfection of his work. He says not, let man be made:
as he said, let there be a firmament, let there be lights, let the earth bring
forth the living thing, and such like: but let us make man: Neither was this
in respect of Genesis 18.14. Numb. 11.23.
any hardness in the doing, but in respect Artop. in Genesis 1. Iam autem in ipso
speculo ponit viuam suam imaginem proprijssime Deum referentem.
of the greatness of the work: the Scriptures speaking after our capacity, for
as much as men of wisdom when they are to handle matters of importance do
use the deeper consultation, and greater care in the performance of them.
Hereby then the spirit of God commends Basil. Hexamer. 11. Compara inter se
hominis generationem and lucis generationem: illic dixit fiat lux; hic accepit
Dominus Deus; super omnia est hominis generatio: dignatur propria manu corpus
nostrum formare.
the excellent workmanship of God, performed in the creation of man Hilar. in
Psalm. 119. sect. 10. Et id quod ad confirmationem coeli satis est, in hominis
condition non sufficit. Coelum manu Dei formatur, homo manibus (Isai 45. and
Psalm. 119.) praestat ergo officio vnius manus duarum operatio.
which surpasses the framing of the heavens. As also the dignity of man,
Origin in Genesis Hom. 11. Ambros. lib. de dignit. Hom. cap. 2 Ex interiore
hominis nobilitate.
being made a more noble creature than the heavens. And withal Chrysostom. in
epist. ad Romans Hom. 10. Veheme^ter enim salut^ nostra^ deside^at, and hoc ab
initio decla^auit.
the exceeding care and love the Lord does bear to manward even from the
creation. Neither is this, that we should wax proud of this our dignity, as
worldly men, but that by knowing what we were, we might Revel. 2.5.
bewail the Eccles. 7.3.
loss thereof Hose. 14.2.3.
thorough sin. Neither is it wisdom to esteem man's excellency, by that we
now can see in man, for that wherein his glory chiefly stood, which was the
image of God in him, is so far defaced, and the image of a Psalm. 49.12. Iere.
51.17.
beast, yea of the Ioh. 8.44. 1. Ioh. 3.8.10.

Origin. in Leuit. Homil. 4. Si pro misericorde crudelis pro pio impius
existas, abiecta imagine Dei diaboli in te imaginem suscepisti.


devil come in place, as that there remains but a very small portion of the
grace of his first original. Wherefore this consultation Cont. Iulianos,
Symplicias, Porphyrios, irrisores Atheos.
does not signify Cyril. lib. 1. cont. Julian. Nam consideratione, diuina and
incorruptibilis men's opus non habet, sed voluit ostendere factum apud Deum and
consilijs quasi praecedentibus honestatum.
as though God had need of counsel or of help, but that the Lord did most
singularly show his wisdom, his counsel, and (as I may say) himself, in
man's creation. But to whom said God, let us make man? Not to the Chrysostom.
Homil. de Trin. Tom. 3. Cum quo consilium init Deus? cum Angelis inquit. at non
habent angeli imaginem Dei: loquitur autem ad coop^ficem f^lium and sanctum
Spiritum. Epiphan. contr. Saturnilian. Haeres. 23. Asserit enim hic angelos,
and Deum Iudaeorum vnum ex ipsis esse dicit, and dixisse angelos, etc.
Angels, as the Rabb. Solom. and alij Rabbini, Angelos Deum adiu^isse
admittunt: imo alij, Deum, terrae, elementis, etiam animantibus fuisse
allocutum, potius statuunt; quam trinitatem deitatis, and diuinitate^ Jesus
Christi agnoscant, tam profunde traduntur in sensum reprobum.
Jews affirm, for he used none of their help in Genesis 2.7
man's creation, neither Chrysostom. de Trin.
did he create man after the image of Angels but of Ambros. Hexam. 7. c. 7.
Numquid Deo and angelis communis imago est?
Elohim, of God himself. But this consultation, or rather agreement or decree,
is of the Trinity, wherein the Father, Hilar. de Trin. lib. 5. Homo ad
communem fit secundum veritatem sermonis imaginem.
as the first in order, Chrysostom. Hom. de Trin. Council. Syrmiense apud Socrat.
lib. 2. cap. 25. Siquis hoc, faciamus hominem: non patrem ad filium dixisse,
sed ipsum Deum patrem ad seipsum locutum (scil. non agnoscens personas
trinitatis) sentiat; anathema esto.
speaks unto the Son, and to the holy Spirit: and the Son and holy
Spirit Cyril. Alexan. cont. Iul. lib. 1. Ipsam dixit sanctam trinitatem sibi
ipsi locutam, nequis ad filij similitudinem, diceret factum esse hominem non
autem patris.
speak it and decree it with the Father, which, because it is written Romans
15.4.
for man's instruction, is spoken also after the manner Romans 6.19.
of men. Beware of blasphemy, least we conceive of the Trinity as of a man.
Here therefore Justin. Mart. Dial. cum Triff. Non ad elementa, sieve ad terram
sieve ad alia locutum faciamu^ sed ad aliu^ qui and ((...)) numero alius and
rationali^ sit, neque Angelos, etc. Chrysostom. Hom. cont. ^^^omaeos. Ad quem
dicit? manifestum quod ad vnigenitum suum. Non dixit fac; vt ne servile aliquid
suspiceris pr^ceptum: sed faciamus, vt forma consultoriorum verborum aequaelis
detegeretur honor. Hilar. lib. de Trin. 2.
is a manifest proof of the trinity of the persons, and the unity of the
Godhead, for as much as man is created: Basil. Hexam. 9. Faciamus hominem
(inquit) and fecit hominem, non fecerunt: per illa quidem Iudeum erudiens, per
haec vero Paganismum excludens.
In our image says the Trinity; that is afterward declared, in the image of
God.

Question 13. verse 26. What is meant by the image of God whereunto man was
created?
COncerning the two original words ((...) tselem and (...) demuth) which are
translated image and likeness, they have August. lib. de Genesis imperf. cap. 16.
Omnis imago similis est ei cuius imago est, nec tame^ omne quod simile est
alicui, etiam imago eius est. Expositio ergo fortasse est cum additum sit, ad
imaginem. Calvin. in Genesis 1.26.
but one meaning, and signify one thing, as if the Lord had said: let us make
man in our image, that he may be (as a creature may be) like us; and the same
his likeness, may be our image. Some of the Ambros. lib. de dign. Hom. cap. 2.
and 3. Anima intellectus, anima voluntas, anima memoria. Nunc vero de
similitudine; Deus est charitas, est bonus, iustus. Hieron. in Ezech. cap. 28.
distinguit aliter. Notandum (inquit) quod imago tunc facta sit tantum:
similitudo in Christi baptismate compleatur.
Fathers and Lombard. lib. 2. did. ^6. d. Sed ad imaginem secundum memoriam,
etc. Ad similitudinem secundum innocentiam. Bonauent. inscript. secund.
distinct. 16.
school Doctors, do distinguish, as if, by image the Lord had meant the
reasonable powers of the soul, reason, will, and memory; and by likeness the
qualities of the mind, charity, justice, patience, etc. but both Moses
himself confounds this distinction (if you compare Genesis 1.27. and 5.1.
the Scriptures:) and the Apostle where he says, Coloss. 3.10.
he was created after the image of GOD in knowledge, and the same Ephesians. 4.24.
in righteousness and holiness. Here comes to be considered, the matter
subject, wherein the image of God was placed, and the form whereof it did
consist. Audius Epiphan. Haeres. 71. August. Haeres. 50.
the founder of the Anthropomorphite heresy, supposed it was placed in the
figure of the body: which (least there Leo magn. de natali Apostolor. Roma cum
omnibus dominaretur gentibus, omnium ge^tium seruiebat erroribus. Quod vere de
Romano imperio sub impijs regibus scripsi^ Leo, id multo verius in
ecclesiastico statis, and quasi prophetica vox comperta est sub pontificibus ab
ingresso in eam Antichristo.
should be any heresy so gross, which they would not acknowledge for their
own) the fathers of the Church of Rome, are content to like of and to defend:
in whose Churches, Chapels, and places of Devotion, it is every where to
find, the image of God the Father depictured Abominable Idolatry of the
Papists, which is not yet wholly extirpate out of England.
on their walls, or in their glass Origin. in epist. ad Romans Hom. 1.
Commutauerunt gloriam incorruptibilis Dei, etc. Non est sane praetereundum,
Apostolicu^ sermone^ non solu^ eos, qui idola colunt argue^e: sed inter
Anthropomorphitas intelligendi sunt co^putati qui in ecclesia positi, imagine^
corpoream hominis, Dei esse imagine^ dicunt: ignorantes quod scriptu^ est in
Genesis 1. etc. Deinde Anthropomorphitae, id est, qui corpore^ imaginem hominis,
Dei esse imagine^ dicunt, conuictos se ab Apostolo and confutatos esse
cognoscerent.
in the figure of a man: as though they had learned of Cic. de invent. lib. 2.
Zeuxis to draw his physiognomie. And they prove it lawful both to have such
pictures and to worship them Council. Constantin. 7. Act. 2. in epist. Adrian.
Papae ad imperatorem. Council. Trid. sess. 25. Mandat sancta synodus omnibus
episcopis docendi munus, etc. Imagines porro Christi, deiparae virginis and
aliorum in templis praesertim habenda^, ijsque debitum honorem impertiendum,
quoniam honos qui ijs adhibetur refertur ad pro^otypa, ita vt per imagines quas
osculamur, Christum adoramus, etc.
from hence, that God made Adam in his image. And some of the chiefest Alexand.
part. 2. quaest 30. art. vlt. Aquin. part 3. quaest. 25. art. 3. Si imago
consideretur quaetenus est lignum, tum nullam ei reue^entiam adhibenda^: si
vero vt imago Christi, tum adoratione latriae sicut Christum ipsum adorandum.
Ideo crucem alloquitur ecclesia: o crux aue spes vnica. Caietan. ibid.
Bonauentura in 3. distinct. 9.
Doctors of their Church are not afraid to teach, that there is the same
reverence to be given to the sign or image, as to the thing signified by it,
that is to say, to God himself. But it is a wonderful perverseness (says
Tertullian) Tertul. aduers. Marcion. lib. 2. Satis peruersum est vt in Deo
potius humana constitua^, quam in homin^ diuina, and hominis imagine Deu^
imbitas, potius quam Dei homine^.
to think that there are humane things in God, rather than divine things in
man: and to conceive of God to have the image of a man, rather than a man to
have the image of God. Basil also and Chrysostom, do expound the image of God
in man Basil. Hex. Hom. 10. Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 8. Idem ad pop. Antioch.
Hom 7.
to be his dominion over the creatures, and the pre-eminence that God gave unto
him. But this seems to be too small a piece, to make so large a garment of.
The Scripture does more plainly expound it self. Afterward ( Genesis 2. verse. 7.
says Moses) the Lord God made the man of the dust of the ground, and breathed
in his face breath of life, and the man was made a living soul. Herein we
find, that man consists of a body made of earth, and of a soul which was
the breath of life, which earthly and heavenly natures being united by the 1 Thessalonians. 5.23 Hilar. in Psalm. 139. Naturam sclicet ha^c terrenam atque caelestem
quodam inspirationis foedere copulatam.
Spirit, the man became a living soul. Seeing therefore God created the whole
man, in the image of God, it is evident; he created in that image (so far as
their several nature could contain) both Irenae. lib. 5.

Epiphan. in Ancorato. Neque enim corporis formationem intelligimus secundum
imaginem, neque animam, neque mentem, neque virtutem. Multa enim sunt quae
dicere me prohibent. Sed neque rursus dicimus, corpus non esse secundu^
imaginem, neque animam. Credentium enim est consiteri scriptura^: est igitur in
homine id quod est secundu^ imaginem: Deus aute^ ipse nouit quo modo est. Aug.
de Trin. lib. 11. cap. 1. and dein. Calvin. institut. lib. 1. cap. 15. sect. 3.
Nulla tamen pars fuit etiam vsque ad corpus, in qua non scintillae aliquae
imaginis micarunt, etc.


body and soul. But as wax is more apt than clay to receive a print, so the
soul being a spirit, was much more capable of the impression of the image of
God. Yet that which the body could contain, it did in very notable sort
express. As in that noble form, whereby it was endued with life and sense, and
became to have such excellent proportion, so marvelous, so beautiful, as no
creature in the world may be compared with it: and the Scriptures themselves
Psalm. 149.14.15. etc Eccles. 12.1.2. etc.
do so greatly praise it. This very perfection of the body, which is as it
were the perfection of all visible creatures, is of the image Matthew. 5.48. ex
analogia.
of Gods perfection, who is of al perfections Matthew. 5.48. Coloss. 1.17. Ephesians.
1.23.
the most perfect. Moreover, the sound temperature thereof, Addit insuper
Clemens Alexan. paedagog. lib. 2. cap. 10. Et ea ratione sit homo Dei imago,
quatenus homo cooperatur ad generationem hominis.
by which it would have continued for August. de peccat. mer. and remiss. lib.
1. cap. 2. Proinde si non peccasset Adam non erat expoliandus corpore sed
superuestiendus immortalitate.
ever without corruption, carries the savor of Gods eternity. The strength of
the body, wherein it was created, did evidently bear show of the power of the
Creator. But the soul being a spirit (as the Lord is Ioh. 4.24. Eccles. 3.21.
and 12.8.
a spirit) is far more apt to bear the image of God, and even in the very
Hilar. in Psalm. 119. sect. 10. Est ergo in hac rationali and incorporali anime
nostrae substantia, primum, quod ad imaginem Dei sit facta.
substance of the soul, there is a very lively print thereof: Chrysostom. ad
pop. Antioc. Hom. 3. Etsi non eiusdem cum Deo substantiae sunt homines.

August. de quant. Animae. lib. cap. 34. etc.


not as though the soul were of the substance of God, but in that it is a
spiritual and immortal substance. Secondly, in reason, knowledge, wisdom
and memory, which is the Coloss. 3.10.
very express character of his wisdom. Of the which without doubt he received
a marvelous great measure, especially of heavenly wisdom (as it were by
reflection of spiritual light) in ye knowledge of his Creator: for as much as
even in earthly things, his knowledge was so excellent, as that he perfectly
discerned, at the first view and sight of them, the nature and condition of The
word (...) ijcrah, he named: Genes. 2.19. signifies to give a significant
name, answerable to the nature of the thing. Latin, nomen quasi nouimen.
Festus.
every creature, so as God himself Genesis 2.19.
both permitted and allowed of his wisdom in giving names unto them. Thirdly
in righteousness, that is in justice which concerns the creatures, and is the
sum of the second table of the Law, resembling thereby Ephesians. 4.^4.
the justice, mercy and bountifulnes of God. Fourthly in 1. Pet. 1.14.15.
Ephesians. 4.24.
holiness, (which is the Deuteronomy. 6.5. Mat. 22.37.38.
Content of the first table) as pertaining to the worship of God, being pressed,
apt, and able to perform whatsoever of a creature might be expected. Fifthly,
the will was sanctified after 1. Chron. 29.9. Psalm. 27.4. Tertul. cont. Marc.
lib. 2. Sed in ea substa^tia quam ab ipso Deo traxit, id est anime, ad formam
Dei spondentis, and arbitrij sui liberate and potestate signatus est.
the image of God, and had liberty of election to will and choose good. Sixthly,
he bare the image of Gods eternity, August. lib. de quant. Anim. cap. 2.
Quemadmodum ipse immortalis, immortale quiddam fecit ad similitudinem suam, etc.
because he was made a living soul, to continue and live for ever. Seventhly,
in Ambros. Hex. lib. 6. cap. 8. Non enim caro potest esse ad imagine^ Dei, sed
anima nostra, quae libera est, and diffusi^ cogitationibus, atque consilijs,
huc atque illuc vagatur, quae considerando specta^ omnia. Ecce nunc sumus in
Italiae, and cogitamus quae ad Orientales, etc.

August. de quant. Animae. cap. 14. and 34.


that quicknes and agilitie of the soul, and that capacity whereby we
comprehend al creatures in our mind, and so readily conceive in thought, so
many matters, so different, so far distant, this is the shadow of Gods
vbiquitie who is present in all places at once, as Ierem. 23.24. Psalm. 139.7.
etc. Isai. 66.1.
says the Scripture. Lastly, Epiphan. in Anchor. Etsi dixeris non est corpus
secundum imaginem: accepit inquit limum de terra and vocauit hominem: and
homine^ vocat id quod terrenum est, and hominem vocat id quod animale est, etc.
the whole man was after the image of God, Psalm. 8.5. and 49.20. August. epist.
28. Vnde intelligitu^, animam propriam quandam habere natural, omnibus hic
mundanae molis elementis excellentiore substantia creat^m.
both in nobility, whereby he was more excellent than all creatures: and also
Psalm. 8.6. Heb. 2 5 6.7. Chrysostom. ad pop. Antioch. Hom. 7. Principatus
imaginem dixit: vt quemadmodum in coelo, non est Deo superior; sic super terram
nullus sit homine superior: and hic principatus naturalis fuit, vt est leonis
inter quadrupedes, non^ electionis vt est regis in conseruos.
in dominion, whereby he had the rule of all creatures: And finally Genesis 2.7.
and inde Psalm. 16.12. 1. Tim. 6.15. Fulgent. lib. 1. ad Monim. cap. 18. Cuius
(s^il. boni) participatione beata esset si summo bono humili dilectione
seruires. Creaturae quippe rationali, alia beatiudo nec potuit, nec potest esse
nec poterit: nisi vt agnoscens a quo non solum facta, sed etiam a quo
rationalis est facta, maiorem dilectionem exhibeat bono creator^ quam sibi.
in blessedness, inioying the glorious presence of God himself. Whereby it
appears, that the image of God, whereunto Adam was created, Franc. Iuni. in
Genesis cap. 1.
was Hilar. in Psalm. 119. sect. 10.
a spiritual substance, endued with all perfections or perfect qualities,
which were requisite unto a creature, to the showing forth of the divine
perfection and Majesty of God, so far as the nature of the creature was
capable thereof. So that we see, the same image of God consisted not in the
figure of the body, nor as though any substance of the Deity were in the
soul, as Anthropomorphitae, de corporis lineamentis and figura. Manichaei de
substantia animae. Item, Seruetus Hispanus qui itidem animae substantiam,
diuinae portionem haeretice asseruit.
Heretics have taught: but of the likeness and resemblance unto the substance,
and to the attributes and properties which be substantially in God. This ought
to teach us to beware of corrupting our selves by sin, or our neighbor by
our trespass or example. For as the brazen Chrysostom. ad pop. Antich. Hom. 3.
Neque enim aesstatuae eiusdem est cum rege substantiae, sed tamen hanc ausi
laedere, etc.
image of a king is not of the substance of the king, yet if any presume
against it to deface it, he shall suffer punishment: so men, although they are
not of the substance of God (as indeed they are not) yet because they are his
image, through a resemblance in their nature, he that does deface this image,
whether in himself or in his neighbor, is guilty of 1. Cor. 3.16.
high treason before the Lord. It ought to move us also to Deuteronomy. 10. verse. 12.
Ioh. 14.14.15.
love the Lord, who did in such glorious manner garnish our nature with his
image. Thirdly, Psalm. 119.113.128. Iud. verse. 23.
to hate our sins, by Romans 5.12. Hose. 14.2.
means whereof this image is so horribly defaced. And withal Iud. verse. 20.
Ioh. 3.15. Ephesians. cap. 2.8.13.19.
to labor to attain true faith in Jesus Christ, by 1. Cor. 15.22. Heb. 7.2^.
Irenae. lib. 3. cap. 20. Luctatus enim est and vicit: erat enim homo pro
patribus certan^, and per obedientiam inobedientiam persoluens: alligauit enim
fortem and soluit infirmos, and salutem donauit Plasmati suo, destruens
peccatum.
whom this image shall again be perfectly restored. How far this image is
decayed by sin, and how fully recovered by Jesus Christ, we reserve to
entreat of until his In our Questions and Disputations in 1. Cor. 15.49.
proper place.

Question 14. verse 27. Wherefore is it added, he created them male and female?
TO the end we might understand, that not man alone was created in the image
of God, but that Basil. Hexam. 10. Et nequis incrudite hominis appellatione de
solo viro vteretur, apposuit: and masculum and foemina^ fecit eos. Et mulier
habet quod secundum imaginem Dei facta est, velut etiam vir.

Contra Platonem, qui virum and foemina^ in duas species distinxit. Item
Platonis in Sympos. and Rabbin. Stultissimum commentum, primum homine^ creatum
fuisse androgyno^, marem simul and foeminam, quasi a tergo connexum; monstru^,
and inform. Hos scriptura aper^e refellit, quae articuli appositione (vt
inquit Basil.) masculinum genus ostendit. Deinde dicit, creauit eos non eum.
Denique abhorret ab analogia tum creationis tum fidei, vt Deus creationem
hominis, a monstro inciperet.


the woman was as well partaker of the same, although she were formed
afterward. Secondly, Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 10.
because of the blessing which follows in the next words, for where it is
added, he blessed them, the meaning is, August. de Genesis ad lit. 3. cap. 13.
Necessarium autem fuit hoc in homine repetere, ne quisquam diceret in officio
gignendi filios vllum esse peccatum, sicut est in libidine sieve fornicandi,
sieve ipso coniugio immoderatius ^butendi.
he gave them power to increase and multiply The man endued with that part
belonging unto him so soon as he was created, which because it was imperfect,
the Lord also says: It is not good the man to be himself alone. Vt vir sit
tanquam hominis dimidiu^.
so soon as they were created. And albeit the woman Vt videtur ex cap. 2.7.15.
etc.
were not yet formed, the blessing notwithstanding is most fitly remembered in
this place, whereas the creation of male and female, is testified to be in the
image of God. The Scripture here does briefly record the history of man's
creation: and in the second chapter does farther Per recapitulationem, and
explicationem.
explain the same; the order whereof is this: God created man in his image, 1.
Tim. 2.13.
first Adam, afterward Heua; they were both created in the image of God: but in
this order. First the man was made of the Verse. 27. cap. 2.7.
dust of the ground, Verse. 28. August. de ciuit. Dei. lib. 1^. cap. 1. Neque
hoc genus fuisset in singulis quibusque moriturum, nisi duo primi quorum
creatur est vnus ex nullo, alter ex ill^, id inobedientia meruissent: scil.
amittendo quod eo ordine accepissent: ergo and ipsissimo ordine acceperunt
generandi potestatem.
received the blessing for himself and all that were to proceed from him:
placed Cap. 2.15.
in paradise, Verse. 16.
received the commandment of the forbidden fruit, Verse. 20.
gave names unto the creatures, Verse. 21.22.
slept, and the woman was formed of his rib, Verse. 23.
he rejoices of his wife: and now that Heua was formed, they actually receive
the blessing of multiplication, Cap. 1.28.29.
and of food, all except of the tree of knowledge of good and evil. It is
therefore as if he had said: the woman which was afterward created, bare the
same impression of Gods image as did the man: and when they were both created,
August. de ciuit. Dei lib. 14. cap. 23. Idem Retractat. lib. 1. c. 13. Non
morituri de non morturis nascerentur. Et per hoc si in parentibus and in filijs
foecunditas felicitasque mansisset, vsque ad certum sanctorum numerum, quem
praedestinaui^ Deus, nascerentur homines non parentibus successuri morientibus,
sed cum viuentibus, regnaturi.
God gave them power to bring forth children in that image. But here perhaps a
Manichee or some blasphemous Atheist, will argue a contradiction in the
Scripture, for as much as here is said, that male and female were created in
the image of God, and the Apostle in the new Testament, seems to deny the
same, saying: 1. Cor. 11.7.
The man is the image and glory of God, but the woman is the glory of the
man. The answer is, the Fallacia a dicto secu^dum quid ad dictum simpliciter.
argument is false and is to be denied, yea the Scriptures in this agree with
heavenly concord, so far are they from any contrariety. The Apostle denies
not Co^ciliatio. 1.
the woman as she is a creature to be in the image of God, either in regard of
the soul or of the body: 1. Cor. 11.8.9. Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 8. Mulier
autem gloria viri est. Vir enim imperat, mulier autem subiecta est. Itaque
quoniam iuxta rationem dominij non formae ad imaginem factus est, ideo vir
dominatur omnibus, mulier aute^ subiecta est. Ea propter dicit de viro Paulus,
etc. Calvin. Institut. lib. 1. cap. 15. sect. 4. Ad ordinem politicum rest^ingi
hoc ex contextu patet.
but by comparison of the man in that she is a woman, that is, of that sex,
wherein she was made a helper to the man: and therefore being created for the
man, and of the man, she is inferior to him, and must needs be subject Genesis
3.16. 1. Tim. 2.12.14.
in this corrupted tabernacle. Being therefore compared together in themselves,
the man alone is the image of God, that is, a greater image than the woman is,
because he Ambros. in 1. Cor. 11 Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. Homil. 26. Vir quidem
non debet velare, etc. Principem enim qui ad rege^ accedit principatus insigne
habere oportet, ita mulier quoque contumelia viro est, nisi subiectionis
insigne habeat.
is more honorable and bears rule; the woman is the glory of the man,
because she was made for him, and in subjection to him, Ephesians. 5.22.23.
as he is to the Lord. But being simply considered as creatures, there is no
Basil Hexam. Hom. 10. Ne animum aduertas externo homini, integumentum est hoc,
anima seeds intus sub velamine, and tenero corpore. Anima sane and anima,
aequalis est, in velaminibus differentia est.
difference, but in their covering, neither so far as concerns the image of
God, is Galat. 3.28. August. de Trin. lib. 12. cap. 7. Ad imaginem Dei quippe
naturam ipsam humanam factam dicit, quae sex^ vtroque completur, nec ab
intelligenda imagine Dei separat foeminam.
there to be accounted male or female.

Question 15. verse 29. Whether God showed his liberality, as largely in
providing food for them, as in creating them?
GOd gives unto them, as says the text, every herb bearing seed, which is
upon all the earth, and every tree wherein is the fruit of a tree bearing
seed: And what could man desire more? Yea what more had The most exquisit
Glutton that ever the earth nourished, who used no common meats, but such as
were marvelous rare and costly both fish and foul, besides the brains of
Peahens, the tungs of Phaenicopteries and such like: his dogs and lions were
fed with Pheasants, Partridge and birds. Aelius Lamprid. Julius Capitolin.
Spartian. in vita Sept. Seueri. Sueton. in vitae Vitell. cap. 13. tells the
like of Vitellius.
Heliogabalus, or Cleopatra, in all their excess of gluttony, except
Athenaeus Dipn. lib. 4. cap. 7. Plutarch. in vit. M. Antonij. Plin. lib. 9. c.
35. affirms that Cleopatra to amend the cost of her banquet, supped up a
pearl of marvelous great price.
precious pearls, or ye flesh of beasts: which while men's bodies were
immortal, Romans 5.12. Death reigned and entered by sin.
because they were void of sin, was no convenient food to nourish them.
Besides that, such meats were not sanctified 1. Tim. 4.5.
by the word of God. The word and ordinance of God Deuteronomy. 8.31. Matthew. 4.4.
is it, that adds unto bread the staff of Leuit. 26.^6. Isai. 3.1.
bread, whereby such meats being creatures void of life, do feed our
bodies, and make them live: which stay or strength of bread when either it is
nor added, or else is taken away by God, the creatures become unprofitable and
cannot 2. King. 6.27.
help. Now therefore the Lord does here give strength to herbs and fruits of
trees, to be unto man for nourishment. In that he determines not the same of
flesh, it is manifest he gave no power at that time thereto. Which benefit of
food, bestowed on herbs which bare their seed, as Wheat, Barlie, Mill, Rice,
Sugar is not the seed of any herb, but the fruit or pith of a reed or cane
of Barbary, Madera, etc.
Sugar, and a thousand such: with the fruit of trees, as Apples, Almondes,
Dates, with as much variety in that kind, was doubtless Like as the bodies of
men were much more beautiful, by creation, then now they are with all the
ornaments of apparel.
a much more liberal gift and more abundant, and also more profitable for the
use of man, in the time of innocence, then when after the flood, the flesh of
creatures was joined with them. For sure it is, the Lord bestowed this gift on
Adam void of sin, the other was bestowed on sinful creatures, rather to
supply their necessity, then to minister abundance. Neither may it be
thought, that unto us remains the whole gift bestowed on Adam, either in
variety, or goodness of the fruit; for then was there a surplusage added, of
the use of beasts: which cannot stand with the analogy of the scriptures, Genesis
3.17.18.23. Ierem. 5.25.
which testify, that man's life is greatly impouerished through sin, and many
blessings taken away, which man through weakness could not rightly use. Wherefore
it is to be esteemed, that much more variety of The scripture says every
herb bearing seed, and every tree, etc. so that al of them no doubt were
not only wholesome, but also pleasant; whereas now very few, in respect of the
number of kinds, are good for meat.
herbs and plants were serviceable unto food, then now there are, and the
same Pet. Mart. in 1. Cor. cap 8.

Muscul. in Genesis 1.29. Prudenter sentiunt, qui terram si^ d dil^uto dicunt
corrupta^ fuisse, vt vix mediocre^ ^a^eamu^ gustum primae illius benedictioni^:
imo statim post l^ps^m hominis, iam degeneres and viti^so^ fructus pros^rie
coepit.


more delicate and pleasant, then after Genesis 3.17.
the earth was cursed, especially Look Genesis 7. and 9.
after it was drowned with the flood: and thereunto, that they were, by the law
of creation, always Becausse the trees bare fruit at all seasons, by the
creation, in regard whereof our Savior cursed the figtree, for his barre^nes,
although the time of figs were not as then. Mark. 11.13.14.
fresh, new, ripe, and never decaying, whereby men might be out of danger, to
loath them, or to stand in want. And in deed it may be gathered, that not
only before the fall, but ever also until the flood (albeit happily the Lord
in his counsel, secretly prepared the flesh of beasts for nourishment, when
he smote the earth with barrennes, although he revealed not his pleasure unto
men) and that liberty was given Genesis 9.3.
to eat flesh; the godly Patriarchs, Adam, Seth, Methushelah, Noah and the
rest, which lived so many hundred years, Tertul. lib. de cibis Iudaicis.

Origin. in Number. Homil. 27.

Chrysostom. in Genesis Homil. 27. Hic est initiu^ edendaru^ carniu^, etc. Hieron.
aduers. Iouin. lib. 2. Ada^ tamen eiectus, non protinus accepit licentiam
carnium vescendaru^, sed tantu^ poma arborum, and fruges segetum and herbarum
holera et traduntur in cibum: vt exul quoque paradisi, non carnibus quae in
paradiso non erant, sed similitudine frugum paradisi vesceretur.


did content themselves with that food that God had given them: although they
saw Genesis 6.11. Cruel.
the wicked people and ravenous beasts and foul devour flesh. But beasts,
which before the fall of man Isai. 11.6.7. Basil. Hexam Hom. 11. Etiam vultures
ad cygnorum similitudinem viuebant, and omnia nunc crudiuora, in pratis
pascebantur, etc. Etiam serae, and herbam and gramen si^i ipsis in alimentum
excogitarunt (scil. agnosce^tes proprios cibos, alijs enim verbi causa vtebatur
leo, alijs cer^^s, alijs bos, alijs aues, Origin. in Number. Hom. 27.) non mutuo
inter se insi^ias struxerunt.
did dwell together, and none did hurt or molest another, so soon as man had
rebelled against the Lord, and that themselves were Romans 8.20.
subject unto vanity, began to oppress and devour one another, as they
shook off the yoke of obedience unto man their governor. The Hieron. in
Iouin. lib. 2. Postea vero vident Deus quod diligenter appositu^ esset ad
malitia^ cor h^minis, etc. and auidissimam hominu^ gulam probant, dedit ijs
licentiam contedendaru^ carniu^.
wicked also, Genesis 4.12.
partly pinched with poverty, partly pricked with lust, and partly provoked
(through the instinct of Satan) with malice, or carelesnes to destroy Gods
creatures, did not (perhaps) long time refrain their appetite, or bridle their
affections, neither tarried they for liberty of the lawful use of them.

Question 16. verse 31. Wherefore is it said: And God saw all that he had made,
and lo it was very good?
THis is spoken before of every day-worke: and God saw that it was good: and
now in general: And God saw all that he had made, and lo it was very good:
Which is as if the Scripture had said thus: Stulte igitur ratiocinatur
Simplicius argum. 11. Deum tunc primum, vidisse and cognouisse.
God did not Prou. 8.26. etc. Ierem. 1.5.
only know The goodness of a creature is either in respect of himself; or of
other (ad se vel ad aliud) of himself; his very being is good. Eccles. 9.4.
August. de lib. Arbit. lib. 2. c. 1. Homo enim in quantum homo est, aliquod
bonum est. Secondly, by creation he is endued with good qualities. In respect
of ^ther: of God, of man, of themselves. And albeit now many creatures have
many evil qualities, yet there is none but has good use, being rightly
applied, according to their end and properties.
their goodness before he made them, Ioh. 2.22. Psalm. 145.10.
and showed his glory in making them, but also Psalm. 145.9.
loved them, allowed of them, and confirmed his wisdom in them when he had
made them: because that in themselves Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 10. Linguam omnium
contradicere conantium compescuit: dicens, and vidit omnia, etc. quoniam de
vnaquaque creatura dicebat.
particularly considered, as every day work, or every creature by it self,
Aug. de Genesis ad lit. lib. 3. c. 24. Non enim frustra est additum valde, quia
and corporis membra etiamsi singula pulchra sunt, multo sunt tame^ in vniuersi
corporis compage omnia pulchriora.
or generally in the due proportion of the whole; nothing could be more
perfect, nothing more profitable, either to declare the glory of God, or for
the benefit of man, or the beautiful ornament of the whole creature. The
Tertul. in Marcion. lib. 1. Duos Ponticus Deos affert (scil. vnum bonum qui
bona operatur, alterum malum qui mala, ab eo quod dixit Christus, bona arbor
bonos fructus) tanquam duas symplegedas naufragij sui, quem negare non potuit,
id est creatorem, id est nostrum, and quem probare non potuit, id est suum.
Marcionites and Epiphan. Heraes. 66. Manes introduxit duo principia principio
carenti^. Erat inquit Deus and materia, lux and tenebrae, bonum and malum.
Manichees as venomous spiders, do turn this pure doctrine into poison, thus;
All that he made was good: ergo, he made not that which is evil: whereupon the
foundation of a most pestilent heresy stands of two beginnings. But the
Scriptures are manifest: Verse. 31.
He saw all that he had made, Ioh. 1.3.
and he made all that was made, therefore all creatures were exceeding good.
Neque abyssum dicit factam esse a Deo, neque tenebras, neque aquam. Apud Cyril.
lib. 2. in Julian. The horrible presumption of Atheists against ye Scriptures,
to accuse all that they understand not, when as in men's writings they reverence
that which is obscure.
Julian in like sort blasphemeth the spirit of God, because he does not record
the creation of Angels, of darkness, of the waters. But how wilfully does this
man sin against the Spirit? For how does it appertain to man, to know how,
and whereof the Angels were created, farther than the Scriptures do fully
witness; Ioh. 1.3. Coloss. 1.16.
that they were created by God, that they are of the image of Gods 2. Sam.
14.20.
wisdom, Revel. 10.1.
power, Matthew. 25.31.
holiness, 1. Tim. 5.21.
happiness, that Genes. 1.1. and 2.1. Heaven and earth, and all the creatures
contained in them.

Epiphan. Heraes. 65. Firmamentumque coeli and terrae, and cum his simul angeli
facti fuerunt. scil. primo die. August. lib. quaest. 65. q 21. Porro primus
dies ipsae est angelica natura, quae primo coeli nomine nuncupata est. Vnde
euidenter ostenditur primo die spiritualem factam, id est angelicam naturam,
and sic hoc coelum quod oculis cernimus. Idem in Psalm. 90.


they were created in the beginning, that is, when the rest of the creatures
were created in the six days. And what is darkness but the defect of light, as
silence is the absence of a voice, and nakedness the want of clothing? how
could it be created God did actually make all things that were made. Darkness,
sin, and punishment so far as it is evil, are nothing but defects of
light, goodness, happiness, consisting only by privation, and therefore not
actually created.
that is nothing, but by privation? The waters and the deep (as Quest. 3.
we have said) are comprehended in the name of heaven and earth, like as the
earth was contained in the name of waters, August. de Genesis imperf. cap. 4. Cur
igitur non dictum est quod aquam Deus fecerit (nam aquam Deus fecit, and aliter
credere magnus est error.) An rursus eandem materiam, quam vel coeli vel
terrae, vel terrae inuisibilis, and incompositae atque abyssi nomine
nuncupauerat, eam aquam voluit appellare? cur enim non and aqua appelletur, si
terra potuit, cum adhuc neque aqua distincta atque formata, neque terra esset,
neque aliquid aliud. Idem de Genesis cont. Manich. lib. 1. cap. 12.
because the first created matter was a mixtion of waters, earth, and all
creatures, until they were separated by the word. The waters therefore were
begun the first day, and perfected the third day, as the scripture testifies.
But if God created al things, how could he allow them all for good, when as so
many evils are among them: Psalm. 78.49.
evil Angels, sinful men, noisome beasts, ravenous foul, venomous serpents,
mortiferous plants, and of fishes, foul, beasts and herbs, many hurtful,
but far more unprofitable? To this is answered: that even Tertullian lib. 2.
(...) Marcion. Ergo quod factus a Dei, id e^t angelus, id erit eiu^ qui fecit:
quod aut^ factus a Deo non est, id est diabolus, id est delator, superest vt
ipse sese fecerit, etc. Arnob. in Psalm. 13^. Malus enim per creationem, ne^
ipse est diabolus.

Au^ust. de vera relig. lib. cap. 13. Ille autem angelus magis seipsum quam
Deum diligendo, subditus ei esse noluit, and intumnit per superbiam, and a
summa essentia defecit, and lapsus est: and o^ hoc, minus est qua^ fuit, quia
eo ^^od minus erat f^^i voluit, cum magis voluit su^ potentia scui qua^ Dei.


those evil spirits were in their creation exceeding good, as the Scripture
Verse. 31.
speaks; the cause that they are evil is, Jude verse. 6.
they kept not their first estate. And that other creatures are evil, so far
as they are evil, is originally of them: for through their malice Hinc Satan
nomen eius, id est aduersarius. 1. Sam. 19.22. Zach. 3.1.
against God and Tertul. lib. de Patientia. Nec diabolo doluisset si
sustinuisset, nec inuidisset homini si sustinuisset; ad eo decepit, quia eum
inuider^t.
envy unto man, they provoked man to sin, whereby he became evil also, his
holiness and happiness being defiled; and for his sin the earth was cursed, the
nature August. de Genesis ad lit. lib. 3. cap. 16. and 18. Vt bestiae inuicem
nocent, and infructuos^ in agris nascuntur, hoc ad cumulum poene valere credi
potest: quod etsi stulto^ latet, sublucet proficientibus, clarum perfectis est;
and certe omnibus tal^bus inferioris creaturae motibus preb^nt homini salub^^^
admonitiones, etc. Beda Hexam. Aquin. sum. part. 1. quaest. 72.
of the creatures altered, their Basil. Hexam. 9.
evil made a scourge In this sense the Lord is said to create evil. Evil of
punishment, not evil of fault. Isai. 45.7. Amos cap. 3.6.
of God to chastise the sin of man: that he, who would not be subject unto his
sovereign Lord, should feel the hurt thereof, by the rebellion of those that
were under him: and by the obedience of a few, might weigh the loss of all the
residue.

Question 17. verse 31. Wherefore the Lord chose six days space to make the
world in?
HE performed not the work of creation all at once, as Philo Iudae. lib. de
Allegor.

Augustine. de Genesis ad lit. lib. 4. c. 21. and 34. Deceptus ab interpret
Sir^cidis c. 18. 1 Creauit omnia simul: quod dici debuit similiter, id est,
cuiuscunque speciei eodem modo^ scil. spirituoris eius. In Graeco est (...) non
(...).


some suppose; the Scripture does expressly Genesis 1. and 2.2. Exodus 20.11.
reprove that error. Neither yet is the Creator constrained unto time, unto
whom Psalm. 90.4. 2. Pet. 3.8.
one day is as a thousand years: neither was it for want of ability, in him
that is omnipotent; or for Isai. 40.28.
wearines, that Psalm. 33.6.
formed them all with the breath of his mouth. But for our sakes, Chrysostom.
in Genesis Hom. 7. Vides quanta se attemperatione ad nostram vsque humilitatem
dominus demittitur: vt scire possumus and facto^um ordinem and factoris
potentiam, and quo modo sermo suus effeo^rit opus, etc. Nisi enim nostrae
salutis curam habuisset Deus, and ita direxisset prophetae linguam, satis erat
dixisse fecit Deus coelum and terram and coelum and animantia, etc. Calvin. in
Genesis 1.31.
for our instruction he divided the creation of the world into six day-workes,
that he might temper his working with our understanding. Things that are
heaped or knit together, cannot be so well examined, as when every thing is
sorted by it self: wherefore God does also divide his works, that we might
with due consideration, as it were, go in between them, view them, and
discuss them, and by diligent examining his power, his wisdom, his greatness
in them, we should return the glory unto him. This was the chiefest work of
man before the fall, and ought to be Psalm. 63.6. and ^7.11.12. and 92.1.5.
Origin in Leuit. Hom. 13. De panibus propositionis. In vna propositione sex
panes: habet ^nim propinquitatem quandam cum hoc mundo senarius numerus; in s^^
enim diebus factu^ est iste visibilis mundus, etc. Et erunt inquit panes in
commemorationem propositi ante dominum, in die sabbatorum prop^netis ea. Panes
isti, verbum Dei est, quod nobis commemorationem Dei faciat.
continued of the faithful, at the least for a part of our Sabbath days
exercise.

CHAP. II.
Question 1. verse 2. How the Lord is said to rest the seventh day?
THe Scriptures may rightly be called Heb. (...), sepher diure iomim: The book
of the words of days. Irenaeus lib. 2. cap. 47 Regula veritatis, and in
apertum positum de Deo testimonium.
a Chronicle or Register of the works of God, and the Psalm. 103.7. 1. Sam.
3.21. Amos. 3.7.
reueiling of his counsels, whereby he did decree before Ephesians. 1.11. Isai.
46.10.
the world was, to make manifest his glory Ierem. 10.12.
by the creation and government of the creatures. For having now declared, so
much as was necessary, of the creation of the world: the holy Ghost
proceeds to show how God did govern the same. In regard whereof, the
multitude of the creatures (...) tseba: verse. 1.
are called the host of God: and he is called often 1. Sam. 1.11. etc.
the Lord of hosts. Hosts they were in regard of their Psalm. 147.4. Isai. 40 26.
multitude, and the creation was as the gathering of an army. Hosts they were
Psalm. 103.21.22. Augustine. de Genesis ad lit. lib. 3. cap. 14. Inest in omnibus
quoddam naturae sui generis decus, etc. Vt maiore attentione stupeamus,
agilitatem muscae volantis, quam magnitudine^ tumenti gradientis, and amplius
miremur opera formicarum, quam onera cameloru^.
in regard of their diverse natures, as soldiers that handle diverse weapons.
Hosts they were Deuteronomy. 4.19.
in respect of order, and the heaven and earth may rightly be compared to a
well ordered army. Hosts they are, because all and every of them (saving Satan
that enemy, and man that traitor) Psalm. 105.31. etc. 1. King. 22 19. Psalm.
119.91.
are ready in their kind, to spend themselves for the glory of their
Sovereign. And hosts they are, because God Psalm. 36.6. and 145.9
does love and govern them, as a Captain, without whose government and
preservation they Psalm. 104.29.
would wholly decay and perish. Now first after the creation the Lord is said to
rest, and yet he neither faints nor is weary, as says the Isai. 40.28.
Prophet. He is said to rest, The word (...) shabath does signify to cease,
properly, not to take ease. Again it is added, he rested from all his work
that he had made.
not as from labor, but from creating: which is to say, he made Chrysostom. in
Genesis Homil. 10. Substitit and cessauit a formandis producendisque ex nihilo
rebus, vt essent.
no more diversities or kinds of creatures, or he did not continue to create,
the seventh day; for having fully performed the work of creation in In the
Septuagint translation it is: he finished ((...)) the sixth day.
six days, and August. cont. Adimant. lib. cap. 2. Vt iam vltra non faceret
mundum cum omnibus quae in eo sunt, no^ tamen vt etia^ a mundi administratione
requiesceret.
finished whatsoever he had decreed to do, for the perfection of the world,
he ceased to extend the said work of creation any farther. Secondly, he is
Exo. 20.11. (...) nuak properly to rest or be refreshed, which is so spoken
because the Lord would have us refresh our selves, our servants and our
cattle. Deu. 5 verse. 14.
said actually to rest, Hieron. lib. Tradit. in Genesis Arta^imus Iudaeos, qui de
otio Sabbati gloriantur, quod iam tum in principio. Sabbatum dissolutum sit,
dum Deus operatur in Sabbato, complens opera sua in eo, and benedicens ipsi
diei. Huic subinfert Aben Ezra quod absolutio operis non est opus. Verum. Sed
ipsa perfectio operis, est diei sexti; sanctio eiusdem, diei septimi.
because he put an end unto the work, and established the end thereof, by
taking in hand the work of government, and blessing the seventh day. This
notably conuinceth the folly of the Jews, Justinius Martyr Dialog. cum
Triffon. (...).
who are so superstitious in observing the ceremony of rest, as that they
think they ought not prepare their meat, or heat a mess of pottage on the
Sabbath day, neither do any work, though it be for the preservation Luc.
6.9.11. Ioh. 5.19.
of life it self. But God so rested in the institution of the Sabbath (whose
example of resting Exodus 2.11.
we ought to imitate) as that Clem. Alexand. Stromat. lib. 6. Nam cum sit
bonus, si cessarit vnquam benefacere, Deus quoque esse cessabit, quod nefas est
dicere.
he ceased not in resting from doing good, but in ceasing to create, he
continued to preserve: of which our Savior says, My Ioh. 5.17.
father works hitherto and I work. But here again the wickedness of
heretics must be discovered, who hunt after contradictions in the Scripture,
that thereby they might get some color to refuse them and neglect them. God
rested (says Moses) the seventh day. My father works hitherto (says our
Savior Christ.) These places (says the Manichee) are contrary, they cannot
both be true. What injury do these blasphemous spirits unto the Scriptures,
and in them to God himself, thus to take the words, and not the meaning, and to
force a meaning R^quieuit ab operibus: He rested from his works that he had
made.
against the words. For Co^ciliatio. 2.
Moses says not, August. epist. 28. Vtique a nouis creaturis creandis
intelligendu^ est. Idem. de Genesis ad lit. lib. 4. cap. 12. Potest intelligi Deum
requieuisse a condendis generibus creaturae quia vltra iam no^ condidit aliqua
genera noua. Clem. Alex. Strom. 6. Quieuisse ergo est ordinasse, vt seruaretur
citra vllam transgressionem in omne tempus ordo eorum quae facta sunt, and
fecisse, vt vnaquaeque creatura cessaret a vet^ri confasione.
God rested from doing, but from creating; not from preserving those he made,
but from creating new besides; not that he rested altogether, but from his
works that he had made: And our Savior says not the contrary, but even the
same; My father works. What? not the work of creation (for how many worlds
would there then Que^admodu^ Democritus somniauit infinitos esse. Laert. lib. 9.
have bin created) but of government. Such blindness is in heretics, which have
more mind to cavil at, then to understand the Scriptures.

Question 2. verse 2. What is meant by this: that God blessed the seventh day
and sanctified it?
TO bless in the phrase of Scripture, sometime does signify Genesis 47.7. 1.
Sam. 10.15.
to salute, sometime Psalm. 145.1.2. to praise.
to give thanks: sometime Ruth. 2.4. Job. 1.10.
to advance, to do good unto or prosper: here then the circumstance of the
place does well expound the words: that God did Theodoret in Genesis quaest. 21.
Otio septimi dici docuit creatione^ perfectam esse, deinde nequit existimaret
septimum diem inutil^m esse, subiecit: and benedixit.
advance, prefer Rabb. Agnon. dicit hanc benedictionem transire super
observantes and sanctificantes ipsum sabbatum.
and enrich that day ^he rest of ye days were blessed also, but this seventh
day was blessed above the rest.
above the rest. The reason is annexed: because in it he had rested from all
his work: that is, had ceased from creating, therefore he appointed the
seventh day to be a perpetual memorial of that his work, From the creation
until the resurrection of our Savior Jesus Christ, the last of seven: who
sanctified the next day, or the first of the next seven by the perfection of
our redemption, and ordained it to be observed for the rest of Christians as
appears by his presenting himself among his Disciples on the same day, Ioh.
20.19.26. by the constant observation of the Apostles and Disciples, and the
Church of God.
by ordaining every seventh day a day of rest. Also to sanctify, does Mica
3.5. to prepare wa^re, where the same word is used.
sometime signify, to make ready or prepare: sometime Leuit. 21.23.
to make holy: sometime to declare Ezech. 30.27.
holiness: sometime to Joel. 1.14.
set apart or dedicate unto a holy use. God therefore blessed the seventh day,
when he ordained it a time of greater and more holy works, and by decree did
crown the Isai. 58.14.
works themselves with richer fruit: he sanctified the seventh day, when he
did choose it Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 10. Ab alijs illum segregauit.
above the rest unto a holy use. The Lord in hallowing does command it of his
creatures to be hallowed: Men are commanded to hallow it: that is, to do the
holy works thereof, which are commanded. Wherefore we must remember, that
the day is hallowed of us when holy works are holily performed in the day:
which seeing God himself has hallowed, that is, commanded to be done; they are
all found breakers of this ordinance, which either do works which are
unholy, or leave undone the works that God has sanctified, or by prophanenes
Hagg. 2.14.
make holy works to be unholy.

Question 3. verse 2. Whether in these words there is contained a commandment
of resting, and whether the godly Patriarchs observed the Sabbath before the
law given by Moses?
THese words contain nothing else, but a narratio^ or report of that which was
done, and do not indeed directly affirm, yt it was commanded: but they do
undoubtedly implie as much. For seeing it is said, God sanctified, and this
sanctifying is Exodus 13.2. Joel. 1.14.
to exempt unto a holy use, to be Nam vt nomen dei sanctificatur ab hominibus,
quod per se sanctum est, cum in se sanctificari cupiunt: Hieron. contra. Pelag.
lib. 3. sic itidem sabbatum sanctificant, cu^ sanctum habent (August. locut. in
Number. lib. 3.) ad opera sancta and in dei cultum destinata. Et licet omnia
sanctorum opera sancta sunt in fide operata, ea tamen ratione propri^ dicuntur
sancta, quo proprio modo ad cultum dei conseruntur.
performed of the creature, not of him that sanctified, that it might sanctify
in doing, which God had sanctified in ordaining: therefore when he sanctified,
he appointed; and in appointing The word of God contains all matters of
salvation, b^th of faith and works, with the circumstances thereof, either
explicit, expressly, as in the fourth commandment, or else implicit and
inclusiue inwardly or inclusiuely, as in this place the work^ of resting the
seventh day.
commanded the resting of the seventh day, the seventh day. Wherefore although
some there are Justin Mart. Dialog. cum Triffo. Tertull. aduers. Iudaeos lib.
D^^etur Adam sabbatizasse, aut Abel hostiam Deo sanctam offerentem sabbati
religione pla^uisse: aut Enoch translatum sabbati cultorem fuisse, aut Noe aut
Abraham. Beda and alij.
which think, that the Sabbath was not appointed to be kept, until the days
of Moses; yet surely we may answer them, as our Savior does the Jews: Ioh.
7.22.
It was not of Moses, but of the Fathers. But where were they commanded to
observe the Sabbath, or which of the Fathers was a keeper of it? The moral
duty of this commandment Romans 2.15.
was written in their hearts, as the restraint of murder, adultery, theft,
false witness, the choosing and worshipping of strange Gods: so that they whom
the Scripture Genesis 5.22. and 6.9. etc. Isai. 41.8.
commends, for just and righteous men, Iam. 2.23. Act. 13 22.
as certainly observed the tenor of this commandment, as they did abstain
from murder, or from worshipping of Images. And for the practice of it, who
can doubt, Romans 2.15. Genesis 4.24. and de septimo die, lauds decantat Hesiodus
in Theogon. and a^ij ethnici, perinde ac si iudaeis and gentibus communis esset.
seeing the very wicked did show the effect of the law written in their hearts;
and seeing that the faithful did perform the exercises of the Sabbath; as
that they called Genesis 4.26.
on the name of the Lord, Genesis 4.4. and 8.20.
offered sacrifices, Genesis 13.4.
prepared places to worship in, Genesis 18.19.
instructed and taught their families the fear of God? which duties, although
they are not to be restrained only unto the Sabbath day, yet are they chiefly
to be referred thereunto, seeing God has sanctified that day, and set it apart
Athanas. Hom. in Matthew. 11.27. Non igitur Sabbatum otiu^ designat aut innuit,
sed cognitionem conditoris, eo quod cessatum sit a forma creandi, vt in
Ezechiele scriptum est, Sabbata mea dedi illis vt esset in monime^tum and
recordationem mei: Intelligentiae igitur and non otij datum est Sabbatum.
to the same intent. The use also of this commandment, being no less
necessary before the giving of the law, then after, may seem a strong reason,
for the practice of it, by the Fathers. Yea moreover, as it was unto Adam and
to the Fathers, a remedy against sin, to use those exercises of the Sabbath,
after the first offense committed: so was it also to Adam in his innocence, no
less behouefull to be strengthened thereby, against concupiscence of sin, by
drawing as it were Numb. 16.19. 1. Sam. 14.36.
more near to God upon the Sabbath day, and using more exactly those blessed
means he knew to be ordained, by the purpose of this precept, to keep out
sin. Neither are examples wanting Genesis 2.2. and 7.4.
of the majesty of God himself, Genesis 8.10.12.
of Noah, Exodus 16.6.
of the Israelites before the law, by whom the days were gathered into weeks:
which shows that the observation of the Sabbath was not unknown before the
days of Moses. But chiefly since that the law given Ioh. ^.17.15
by Moses, was Romans 2.
written in the hearts of men August. lib. de spiritu and lit. cap 27. and 28.
Quia non vsque adeo in anima humana imago dei terrenorum affectuum l^be detrita
est, vt nulla in ea velut lineamenta extrema rem^serint, vnde merito dici
possit etiam in ipsa impietate vite sue facere ^liqua legis vel sapere: si hoc
est quod dictum est, quia gentes quae legem non habent, hoc est legem dei,
naturaliter quae legis sunt faciunt, and quia opus legis habent in cordibus
suis, id est, non omnimodo deletum est quod ibi per imagine^ dei cum crearentur
impressum est: tamen, etc.
from man's creation, was known unto the Fathers, practiced of the 1. Tim. 1.9.
Irene. lib. 4. cap. 30. Diligentes scilicet Deum, etc.
godly, without constraint, binding the Romans 2.12.
consciences of all, both Jews and Gentiles. Marvel therefore was it, if
they Psalm. 105.15, 2. Pet. 1.21.
who were inspired and governed by the spirit of God, should not observe the
Sabbath Ioh. 4 23. Romans 2.29.
in spirit and truth, in resting actually the seventh day: unless any will
say, that they received As Exodus 11.2.
a dispensation from the Lord, whereof we find no mention in the scripture.
Notwithstanding, that the Fathers were no ceremonial obseruers of it, as
Justin. Mart. Dial. cum Triffon. Perpetuum vos seruare sabbatum ^uit lex noua:
and cum vnam in otio transegeritis diem, religione vo^ defunctos arbitram^ni,
non fatis intelligentes, quamob^em id vobis sit imperatum, etc. Tertull. lib.
aduers. Iudaeos. Sequitur itaque vt quatenus circumcisionis carnalis, and legis
veteris abolitio, expu^cta suis temporibus demonstratur, ita sabbati quoque
obseruatio temporalis fuisse demonstratur. Quatenus scil. Typus.
Justin Martyr and Tertullian defend against the Jews, we Eusebius. Histor.
Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 5. Christianum nomen virum significare vult, qui per
Christi ^ognitionem and doctrinam, animi moderatione and iustitia
continentiaque vitae, and virtutis fortitu^ine, ac pietatis confessione erga
vni^m and solum omnium Deum excellit. Hoc autem prisci^ illis, non minus cu^^
fuit quam no^i^. Nec corporalis itaque circumcisionis rationem habuerant, sicut
neque nos, nec sabbatorum obseruan^iae quemadmodum neque nos, etc.
readily subscribe unto. For what need of ceremonies to Adam (to whom first
this law was given) in his innocence, who Intellexit enim Deum and diligebat
immediate and non per aenigmata.
knew the Lord better, by the wisdom of God wherein he was created, then
types and shadows could instruct him. But after he had sinned, and his
wisdom was corrupted, it was necessary that he should have a solemn
remembrance of the work of the creation, and the preservation of the
creatures, with a special means to recover, at the least in part, the
wisdom and holiness which he had lost: which means consists in holy
exercises, chiefly to be used the Exodus 20.11.
seventh day. Secondly, since that by sin he had lost the happiness and rest
which he enjoyed, and Genesis 3.15.
was promised the restoring of the same by Christ, it was meet that he should
begin the practice thereof in the day of Gods assignement, to meditate of the
grace of his restoring, and to perform the works of holiness with praise and
thanksgiving unto God. Thirdly, for as much as Romans 8.22.
he labored in pain, and did eat his bread Genesis 3.17.
in sorrow: it was requisite he should have a time of refreshing, which the Lord
thought meet to be the seventh day. Moreover, when afterward the sons of
Jacob (in whose only house Notwithstanding ye Lord chose some, as Job, and
Iethro, which were not of the same, but those not by ordinary succession.
religion might seem to be preserved) had forgotten the worship of God in
Egypt, by long continuance in bondage with idolatrous people, the Lord was as
it were Iraen. lib. 4. cap. 30. Necessario Deus propter multam suam erga
homines beneuole^tiam semetipsum oste^debat per vocem.
constrained to restore his law by lively voice: and Hier. in Ezec. c. 20. Dedi
ijs praecepta non bona, etc. Potest and hoc dici, quod ante offensam decalogum
ta^tum acceperunt, post idololatria vero, multiplices legis ceremonias, etc.
because the people were prone unto idolatry, the Irene. lib. ^. cap. 28.
Facilem autem ad idola reuerti populum erudiebat per multas aduocationes, per
ea quae erant secunda ad prima aduocan^, hoc est per typica ad vera, etc.
Lord restrained them with types and shadows, calling them by second things
unto the first, by types to truth, by temporal unto eternal, by carnal to
spiritual, by earthly things unto celestial. Wherefore to conclude, the Lord
does Verse. 3. Exodus 20.11.
bless the seventh day, when he ordains that Greg. Mag. moral. lib. 5 cap.
22. Praecepto enim legis ab exceriori ope^e in Sabbato cessatur. Hoste^ ergo
Sabbata videntes irrident (Iere. T^ren. 1.) cum maligni spiritus ipsa
vacationis otia ad cogitationes illicitas pertrahunt.
works of blessedness and of religion should be done therein, Isai. 58.14.
and 56.2.5.^.
when he blesses the works themselves, and the workers of them: as he blesses
Deuteronomy. 21.5. Exodus 20.12.
the parents blessing of their godly children. And surely those that shall be
careful of this precept, not as a shadow, but as a means ordained to increase
in godliness; 2. Cor. 3 6.
not in the deadnes of the letter, but in newnes of the spirit; not in
hypocrisy, but in truth: Isai. 56.5.6.7. and 58.14.
shall find how the virtue of this blessing shall make them rich in spiritual
gifts, which the gates of hell shall not prevail against.

Question 4. verse 5. Wherefore it is said, there was not a man to till the
ground, when as in the first chapter it is reported, that God made Adam in the
image of God?
THe manner of the Scripture is, sometime by August. de Doct. Christ. lib. 3.
cap. 36. Sextam regulam Ticonius recapitulatione^ vocat, in obscuritate
scripturarum satis vigilanter inuentam. Sic enim dicuntur quaeda^ quasi
sequantur in ordine temporis, vel reru^ continuatione narrentur, cum ad priora
quae praetermissa fuerant, latenter narratio reuocetur.
recapitulation, to repeat afterward a matter done before: and sometime by
August. lib. locut. in Number. cap. 13. They came to the river of Eshcol, and cut
down thence a bra^ch and a cluster of grapes, and the place was called the
river of Eshcol, because of the cluster of grapes: so that where he says they
came to the river of Eshcol, it was not so called when they ca^e thither, but
when they departed thence, or when Moses wrote the book.
anticipation, to record a history, or part thereof, before the order of the
doing of the same. The end whereof is, to make the doctrine plain, not to
obscure it, although froward and ignorant people which delight not in the
Scriptures, Aristot. Metaph. lib. 2. c. 1. Quemadmodum enim vespertilionum
oculi ad lumen dici se habent, ita and intellectus anima nostra ad ea quae
manifestissima omnium sunt.
like Night-owles are offended at the light. The Scripture Psalm. 19.7.8.
in it self is plain. In the first chapter is set forth the whole work of
creation, in order as it was performed: the purpose of the holy Ghost in this
place is, to inuit us once again, diligently to mark the power of God Ierem.
10.12.
declared in it, who alone without help or means performed it. As if he had
said: Chrysostom. in Genesis Hom. 12.
Consider the marvelous work of God in creating the heaven and the earth, who
himself Isai. 44.22.
alone created them, or else Before it was in the earth, that is, there was
none in ye earth before God created them.
they had not been: and first In the day that GOD created the earth and the
heavens, that is, in the season or time.
to consider that (which is nearest our understanding) of the earth: the plants
of the field had neither rain to water them, nor Sun to warm them (which
now are the ordinary means of God to bring them forth) nor help of man to
plant them, or to till the ground. The order of the history is this: Genesis
1.11.12.14.27. Genesis 2.6.7.8. observe verse. 5. the Lord is the author of the
rain. Ierem. 14.22.2. The Lord created the earthly bodies, all means both
natural and artificial being taken away, as he created the world of nothing.
In the third day the earth brought forth every herb and every tree,
according to his kind: that is, trees of every kind, that are, or ever were
upon the earth, when as there was none of them before, nor means whereof they
could proceed: the Sun was created the fourth day, Man the sixth day, who
being created God placed him in Paradise, when as yet it had not rained upon
the earth, that is to say, shortly after he was created.

Question 5. verse 7. How it is to be understood, where it is said: the Lord
made man dust of the ground, and breathed in his face breath of life, and the
man was a living soul?
IN all godly wisdom two points are Lactant. Institut. lib. 1. cap. 1. Calu.
Instit. lib. 1. c. 1.
chiefly to be regarded, Ierem. 9.24. Hose. 6.6.
the knowledge of God, and the Act. 17.29.30. Revel. 2.5. Hos. 14.2. (...),
Prae foribus templi Delphici inscriptum tanquam dignum Deo, testatur Plato in
Charm. Tanquam viam ad foelicitatem, ex responso Apollini^: refert Ma^ro^. de
Some. Scip. lib. 1. Tanquam rem difficillimam arguit Thales. Laert. vit. Thal.
Interroganti quid esset difficile, respondet seipsum nosse. Et illud (...),
noli putare ad arrogantiam mi^^endam solum esse dictum, verum etiam vt bona
nostra norimus. Cic. ad Quint. frat. lib. 3. epist. 6.
knowledge of our selves. At these two marks the Scriptures do principally
and almost wholly aim. The knowledge of God is taught by the work of creation,
and by the Deus enim semper agit and semper quiescit, nam a ut sine motu, and
quiescit in ipsiu^ action. August.
work of resting and of government, and (for as much as these points are
A^gust. de spiritu and anim. cap. 54. Vide amus quomodo per cognitionem nostri,
p^ssimus ascendere ad cognitionem ipsius dei. Calu. Institut lib. 1. 1.
knit together, so that the one cannot consist without the other) more
especially by the creating of man himself. The knowledge of man is taught in
like sort by the creation, and benefits bestowed on him, by his fall, by his
misery, and restoring, all which the Scripture does abundantly express. Thus
therefore does the holy Ghost make way, as it were to speak more largely of
man's creation, and of his government, as after follows: There was not a man
to till the ground. As if he had said: What cause have Laert. lib. 1. cap. 1.
^l Vulcano qui Philosophiae principia apertut ad Alexandrum Macedonem
interfluxisse quadragesus octies mill octinge^tos sexaginta tres annos, rebus
interea stantibus Aegyptijs.

Cic. de diuinat. lib. 2. p. 128. Nam quod a^uns Chaldaei quadringenta and
septuaginta millia annorum in experiendu pueris quicunque essent nati
Babylonios posuisse, fallunt.

Idem refert Diodor. Sicul. biblioth. lib. 3. Vide and similia monstra: apud
Platon, in Timaeo de antiq. Atheniensium.

Diodor. Sicul. lib. 1. inter Osirim and Alexandrum, and success. regum Egypt.
Pomp. Melam. lib. 1. Plin. lib. 11. and 35. cap. 13.


the heathen to brag so greatly of man's antiquity? the Lord created al
creatures and they were in perfection, Whereby man is excluded from any part of
the workmanship of them.
before there was any man: and when man was made, al ordinary means were
wanting, but the Lord The word (...) iaizar signifies to fashion by pressing
or keeping straight, as the Potter does the clay, Isai. 41.25. Hence a Potter
is called totzer: and we see upon what ground the Prophet says: We are the
clay, and thou art the Potter. Isai 64.8. and 45.9. Ierem. 18.6.
fashioned his body of the dust of the earth, and breathed in his face breath
of life. The nature of man consists of a body and a soul, both which he
received from the Lord, and nothing of himself: 1. Cor. 6.20. and creatione
and redemp.
he must therefore glorify God in both, because they are the Lords. The
original matter whereof the body of man was framed, is called The word (...)
gnapar is properly dust lying upon the earth: (...) adha^nah, from whence Adam
has his name, is red or moist earth: (...) erets, the whole globe of earth:
(...) tebel, the earth or land inhabited. Ral. David. lib. Rad. Pagn. thesaur.
co^. 2046.
dry earth of the ground, or dust of the ground: and he says not only he was
of the dust (least any should affirm there was more excellent matter joined
therewithal) but that he made man Thus are ye words: (...) vaijizer Iehoua
clohim eth haadam gnapar min haadamah: and the Lord God formed the man dust of
the ground.
dust of the ground, that is to say, consisting chiefly, and wholly of the
earth Nam terra sieve aequae que nobis sunt cotiguae non sunt pura elementa, sed
generationi aptae. Avici. de Genesis lib. 2. cap. 8. Cadit ergo Simplicij
argumentatio. 12. Neque enim cum ex terra dicit hominem Moses, statuendit ex
sola terra siu^ pura puta.
as the same is mixed with other elements. The more base the matter is, the
more excellent is the power and wisdom of the workmaster; the more ought man
to Genesis 18.21.
be humble in himself, and 2. Cor. 10.17.
to glory in the Lord, who has placed in so foul a matter De hac re vid.
Greg. Nissen. lib. 1. de Philosoph. cap 5. Ambr. Heram. lib. 6. cap. 9. Cic. de
Natura Deorum. lib. 2. Galen. de vsu partiu^ per tot. etc.
such incomparable beauty. And seeing the Lord had power to make the earth of
nothing, and the body of the earth, how easily can he restore the same body
being returned Genesis 3.10.
to the dust, and make it Cyprian. expos. in Symb. Quid tibi aut absurdum aut
contrarium videtur, etc.
of an earthly body 1. C^^. 15.44.
a spiritual body! The body being thus created, Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 13.
he added thereunto De traduce^ omnium est optima sententia Hieronym. Apolog.
aduers. Ruff. lib. 2. Deo test dico quia vsq^e ad praesens certi and definiti
aliquid de hac quaestione non teneo, sed Deo relinquo scire quid sit in vero,
and sicut ipse reuelare dignabitur. Similiter and Augustini Epist. 28.
a soul; the means how is described: he breathed in his face: the substance
or form thereof, is called breath of life: but how this dead body newly
framed was made to live, cannot fully be conceived in the heart of man, in
which respect the Lord does speak as we are able to hear: He breathed: not
that God has mouth or organes of breathing, but that we might discern that he
received life immediately from God. I find of this scripture three diverse
expositions of the learned, and none of them disagreeing from the faith. First
is, that by breathing is understood, his decree or word August. de Genesis ad lit.
lib. 7. cap. 3. Sed hoc ipsum est sufflare, quod est flatum facere, hoc est
animum facere. Et ita plurimi scriptores intelligunt.
that he should have breath, his divine and present power, whereby he made his
breath and made his soul, as he made the world Psalm. 33.6
by the breath of his mouth. Secondly, it may be understood, that Aug. de Genesis
contr. Manich. lib. 1. cap. 22 Primo ergo huius locutionis regula in multis
diuinarum script. locis animaduertenda atque discenda est. Quid enim aliud
significat quod dicitur Deus requieuisse, nisi requrem nostram, sic spiritus
sanctus gemit, quia ipse nos mouet ad orandum, etc. Pet. Mart. in Genesis c. 2
the Lord breathed in his The word (...) ap of (...) anap (to be angry, or
blow through the nosthrils) is properly the nosthrils, but often used for the
face. Synecdoc.
nosthrils, when he gave him power to breathe in his nosthrils: In like sort as
the Lord is Genesis 22.12. Deuteronomy. 13.3.
said to know us, when he makes us to know our selves: and the spirit Romans
8.26.
is said to groan, when he makes us to groan in prayer unto God. Thirdly,
Justin. Mart. Apolog. 2. Verba aute^ haec fecimus, vt probaremus Iesum istum
Christu^ esse filium and apostolu^ dei, out prius verbum existens cum aliquando
in forma igni^, aliquando in imagine in^orporeoru^ apparuisset, nunc porro
factus homo. Idem Dialog. cum Triff. Deum patre^ neque Abraham, neque alius
quisquam vidit vnqua^: sed illum ipsum qui iuxta consilium eius, and
voluntatem, and Deus est and filius ipsius and angelus, ex eo quod sententiae
illius est administer, etc. Irenae. lib. 4. cap. 37 Verbum autem eius,
quemadmodum volebat ipse* and ad vtilitatem videntiu^ claritatem monstrabat
patris, and dispositiones exponebat. Tertul aduers. Prax. Nemo (inquit) videbit
faciem meam: tamen patriarchae Deum vidisse referuntur, vt Abraham and Jacob,
and prophaetae, and mortus non sunt: igitur aut mori debuerant aut scriptura
mentitur? consequens est, vt inuisibilem patrem intelligamus pro plenitudine
maiestatis, visibilem filium agnoscamus pro modulo deriuationis. Filius itaque
est qui iudicauit, turrim superbissimam elidens, etc. Ipse enim and ad humana
semper colloquia descendit, ab Adam vsque ad patriarchas, in visione, in somno,
inspeculo, etc. Eusebius. de demonst. Euangel. lib. 7. Hier. ^anch. de op. part.
3. lib. 1. c. 1. Eundem cum creaturus esset Adamum tum primum formam hanc
corporis sumpsisse, suis itaque manibus lutum e terra accepisse in na^es
corporis iam formati insufflasse. Et certe non video quo iure possit aut debeat
haec interpretatio damnari. Cum neque pugnet cum alijs scripturis, neque cum
analogia fidei.
that the Son of God, who afterward took our nature on him, appeared in
humane form (as what lets that to be? seeing that August. de ciuit. Dei
lib. 16. cap. 29. Est quidem diuinae potestatis and inuisibus, incorporalis,
incommutabilisque naturae, sine vlla sui mutatione, etiam mortalibus aspectibus
apparere: non per id quod est, sed per aliquid quod sibi subditum est. Quid
autem illi subditum non est?
by his divine power, he might take unto his invisible and immutable nature,
the use of some creature, and appear in the view of mortal men, not by that
which he was himself, but by the creature which is subject unto him, like as
the Angels, being Psalm. 104.4.
void of bodily shape, have often appeared in the form of Genesis 18.2. and 19
5. Judge. cap. 6.17. and 13.6.11.16. Heb. 13.2.
men) and made his body of the dust, breathed in his nosthrils, Verse. 21.22.
made the woman of the rib of Adam, Genesis 3.8.
walked in the garden, and To Abraham, to Jacob. Genesis 18. and 32 etc. Justin
Mart. Dialog. cum Triff. Tertul. aduers. Praxeam. Ipse enim. and ad humana
semper colloquia descendit, etc.
sometime appeared At inquit Dionys. Areop. lib. Hierarch. 1 Omnes dei
manifestationes and apparitiones mediate per Angelos esse factas. Negant
vniuersalitatem ista^, multi patres; docet Augustinus fieri aliter potuisse,
nec iste Dionysius innotuit hoc scripto patribus, vt apparet ex catalog.
Hieronymi, nec a recentioribus omnino censetur genuinus.
unto the Patriarchs. But howsoever we understand the manner of doing, we must
remember that the thing that was created thus by breathing, was The word (...)
nishmah, is properly ((...)) the reasonable soul. Aben Ezra comment. in Genesis
cap 7. Rationalem and coelestem animam interpretatur, and cum nomine shamaijm
assinitatem habere. Rabb. Abraham in Gen 2. Nishmah collocat in cerebro, (...)
nephesh in ^epate, vt haec sit anima rationalis, illa vegetatiua: (...) ^uac
vero, spiritum, in cord; sicut omnes scriptores saniores...
the soul of man (wherein was Ambros. Hexam. lib. 6. cap. 8. Non enim caro
potest esse ad imaginem dei, sed anima nostra quae libera est. and diffusit
cogitationibus and consilijs huc and illuc vagatur.
chiefly placed the image of God) with all the faculties and furniture thereof.
And thus the man was made in the image of God a living soul, when as this
spiritual substance, created by God of nothing, was by the power of God joined
in personal union with the body; so that, that earthly image endued with
soul did live, and became the chief of all other living creatures. By this
place of scripture, many foul errors are apparently confuted to aching the
soul of man, which the devil has put in the hearts of men, to induce them the
rather to believe, that the soul were mortal as the body, or at leastwise
should not endure the punishment of sin after death, which it has deserved
in this life. For neither is it Cic. Tuscul. quaest. lib. 1. Dicaearchus nihil
esse omnino animam disputauit, vimque eam, qua vel agamus quid, vel sentiamus
in omnibus corporibus viuis aequaliter esse fusam, nec separabilem a corpore
esse, quippe quae nulla sit, nec sit quicquam nisi corpus vnum and simplex, ita
figuratum, vt temperatione natura vigeat, ac sentiat.
without substance proper to it self, when it is separated from the body (as
some have affirmed) for as much as when the body was perfectly created, this
spirit as a substance was breathed in his nosthrils. Neither is it of the Cic.
ibid. Vnde concordes. ex cords, vecordes dicuntur: opinio vulgi.
substance of the heart of man, neither Cic. ibid. Empedocles animum esse
censet, cordi suffusum sanguinem.
is it the blood about the heart, neither Sicut. Democritus, Leucippus, and
Pythagorici statuerunt. Arist. de anim. lib. 1. cap. 2. Cic. Tuscul. 1. Zenoni
Stoico animus ignis videtur.
fire, nor Arist. de anim. 1. cap. 2. Diogenes autem sicut and alij quidam,
acrem ipsam censuit esse.
air, nor Arist. ibid. Quidam magis importuni, vt Hippon, aquam esse dixerunt.
water, nor Solum terram nemo dixit, nisi quis ex omnibus clementis constare
dixerit. Arist. ibid.
of the four elements, nor consisting Vt Zenocrates qui numerum dixit esse.
Cic. in Tusc. lib. 1.
of number or Aristoxenes Cic. ibid.
consent of Music, neither yet Hippocrat. (...). lib. 1. Galenus lib. de
consecut. morum anim. Anima est temperatio, e quatuor eleme^tis, certa
prop^rtione concreta.
of any temperature of the four elements, seeing it is a substance not taken
from the earth or elements, or heavens, or Angels, but immediately infused or
inspired by the Lord. Neither is it of the substance of the Deity, Chrysostom.
in 2. Cor. Hom. 7. and passim apud Augustinum.
as the Manichees and Rabb. Moses ben Maim^n. and plerique Hebraei,
Priscillianistae apud Augustate here is Her. 70. Hi animas dicunt eiusdem natura
atque substantiae cuius est Deus. Origenes pe^ flatum, spiritum sanctum
intelligit, (...). li. 1. c. 3
others do esteem it, no more then the breath of man is of the August. de
Genesis ad lit. lib 7. cap. 3. Quo modo inquiunt scriptum est, and sufflauit, etc.
si non anima dei pars est? imo vero ex hoc verbo satis apparet ita non esse:
cum enim homo sufflat. anima vtique ipsa subiacentem sibi naturam corporis
monet, and de illa non de seipsa statum facit. Nisi isti forte tam tardi sunt,
vt nesciant isto reciproco halitu, quem de hoc acre circumfuso ducimus, and
reddimus, fieri etiam flatum cum voluntate sufflamus. Idem cap. 2. Nos autem
credimus dei naturam atque substantiam, quae in trinitate creditur a multis,
intelligitur a paucis, omnino esse in ommutabilem.
substance of his body, or of his soul. Neither is it August. de Spiritu and
anim. lib. cap. 13. Dicitur namque anima dum vegetat, spiritus dum
contemplatur, sensus dum sentit, animus dum sapit, dum intelligit men^, cum
liscernit ratio, dum recordatur memoria, dum vult voluntas.
manifold or consisting of many parts, but as the body is one, and consists
of diverse members, so the soul is one that cannot be divided, and consists
of diverse powers and properties. Such is the wisdom of the Lord, and his
bountifulnes to man, that having made the world as Psalm. 19 1. Romans 1.
the image of his glory, he would end the creation with the frame of man,
(...) tam ab ecclesiasti is quam a prophanis appellatur.
as of a little world, in whose body and soul he placed Eccles. 12.2.3. etc.
the beauty of all creatures void of life, the growing of plants, the sense
of beasts, the Tertul. lib. 2. in Mer. Fortior angelo (scil. seductore, qui
seductus est) sed afflatus dei generosior spiritu materiali p^o angeli
constiterunt.
reason of Angels, and also joined Ephesians. 2.13.18.22. 2. Pet. 1.4.
man which was the last, unto himself that Iren. lib. 4. cap. 37. Christus in
nouissimis temporibus homo in hominibus factus est vt finem coniungeret
principio, id est, hominem Deo.
was the first, by Jesus Christ.

Question 6. verse 5. What place the Garden of Eden was: and where it was
situated.
IT were almost innumerable, and also fruitless to report, the variety of
judgments, concerning this place of Paradise. Some hold, Hugo de Sancto
Victore. Annot. in Genesis ca. 2. Ex aliorum opinione refert item Perer. in Genesis
Tom. 1. lib. 3.
that this pleasant garden did extend over all the earth. Some August. lib. de
Haeres. haer. 59. Seleuciani negant visibilem paradisum.
that it was not at all in the earth, but in the heaven. Others think it to be
Tertul. in Apologet. cap. 45. Maceria quadam igneae zonae a notitia orbis
communis segregatum.
a place on earth, where now remain the godly souls departed. Others that it
is situate above the earth Lombard. lib. 2. did. 17. E. in alio situm, vsque
ad lunarem circulum pertingentem; vnde aquae dilutiij illuc peruenerunt.
Bonauent. super sent. 2. did. 17. Pet. Comestor. Histor. eccles. in initio.
Rupert. de Trin. lib. 1. cap. 37.
near unto the circle of the Moon, by reason whereof, it escaped drowning in
the great deluge. Others again (beside Homer. de horto Alcinoi, Odyss. lib. 7.
(Et aliorum de campis Elisijs. Virg. Aenea. 6.) Quod ea hac historia paradisi
didicit in Aegypto versatus, testatur Justin. Mart. in Exhort. ad Gent. Item.
Arrian. com. Indic. de Ha^ ione Carthaginensi. Anton. Muret. variar. lect. lib.
5. cap. 1. De insulis fortunatis, and littore Britannico.
many other more fond opinions) Philo Iud. lib. de allegorijs. Origin. in
EZech. Hom. 13. Et hoc nomine eum mordet Epiphan. in Ancor. ebiurgat Hieron. in
Dan. 10. Vnde illorum deliramenta conticescant, qui vmbras and imagines in
veritate quaerente^it sam conantur euertere veritatem, vt flumina and arbores
and Paradisum patent allegoriae legibu^ se debere subruere.
do think it to be nothing but an allegory, and therefore to have only a
spiritual understanding. But the wisest and grauest interpreters, who have
well considered the purpose of the Scripture, and waied diligently the words
of the text, Basil. Hexam Hom. 11. Hieron. in Dan. c. 10. idem in Trad. Hebr.
Qui tamen non been, de tempore plantationis. Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 13. Et
idcirco nomen loci inseruit beatus Moses, vt non licent nugari volentibus and
dicere nullum esse in terra hortum sed in coelis, and fabulas quasdam eiusmodi
somniare. August. de Genesis ad lit. lib. 8. c. 1. De Paradiso tres sententi^: vna
eorum qui corporaliter tantu^, alia eorum qui spiritualiter tantum, tertia
eorum qui vtroque modo accipiunt: tertiam mihi fateor placere sententiam, etc.
narratio quippe in his libris non genus figuratarum rerum est vt in Cantico
Cantic sed omnino gestarum rerum ficut in Regnorum libris and huiusmodi
caeteris.
do fully agree, that this garden of Eden was a certain place on earth,
altogether such as is here described. And to those that think it only to be an
allegory, Epiphan in Anchor. Si itaque non est Paradisus sensibilis, non est
fons, etc. Si non sunt folia, non est Adam, non est Eua, non est esus, non
comedit de ligno. Si non est Adam non sunt homines, and fabula est de caetero
ipsa veritas, and omnia allegorice dicuntur.
Epiphanius gives this pithy, discreet and absolute answer. If there was
(says he) no paradise but in an allegory, then also were there no trees but
in an allegory; if no trees, then no eating of the fruit; if no eating, then
no Adam; if no Adam, then are there no men but all are allegories, and the
truth it self is become a fable. But to come unto the purpose of the Holy
Ghost: The Scripture herein continues the declaration of the bountifulnes of
God toward man kind. For having showed already, how greatly the Lord God had
garnished man's nature with his Image, and had prepared as it were the world to
receive him in, and also made all the Psalm. 8.6.
creatures to do him homage: when thus the noblenes of his birth, the greatness
of his honor, and the largenes of his kingdom had bin declared; now he
comes to speak of the place as it were, or mansion house of his habitation.
To what purpose are al these circumstances? surely to Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis
13. Ecce secundam beneficentiae speciem and honore^ quem in hominem collocauit.
express the unspeakable bounty of the Lord to man-ward, Psalm. 49.20.
and the greatness of man's fall that was not content with such felicity; and
the malice John. 8.44.
of the devil, by whose Tertul. lib. de patientia. Adeo decepit quia ipsum
inuiderat.
envy man was provoked to rebellion: and the greatness of the punishment Deuteronomy.
13.5.
whereby Gods justice might be feared: and the glorious estate of our creation,
whereby we might be moved Luc. 7.43. Deuteronomy. 10.12.
to love God the giver thereof, to hate sin Ierem. 5.25. Hos. 13.2.
whereby we are spoiled, to continue in hope, seeing God Isai. 45.22. Revel.
2.7.
has promised to restore us: and to be patient in affliction Romans 8.18. 2.
Cor. 4.17.
knowing (by that we have received) that the troubles of this life are nothing
in comparison of the glory which shall be given unto us. To this end the
garden is commended by three notable arguments. First by the efficient cause or
author of it, who is said to be Jehovah Elohim who planted it: that is,
Chrysostom. Homil. in Genesis 13. Quid? dic oro: ligone opus habuit and agricultura,
and alia cura vt Paradisi hortum excoleret? absit. Iteru^ enim verbum
plantauit, sic intelligendum, quod imperauit hortum in terra fieri.
by his commandment made it a pleasant place. Secondly, by the nature or
fruitfulnes thereof, that in it did grow of every kind of tree which was
pleasant to the sight, and good for meat: whereby is signified that although
all the earth were exceeding fruitful, yet this garden exceeded all the earth,
and was made most fit without comparison for man to dwell in, both well and
blessedly. Thirdly, by the situation of the same in Eden, that is in English,
Heden, the name of a country so called for the pleasantnes of it: for (...),
haedan in Hebrew, is in english to delight: from hence also the Greeks call
pleasure (...), hedone.
in a pleasant place. The which situation of this garden (to make it most
apparent to our understanding) is again described by three other circumstances.
First, that it was not the whole country, but a garden or part of Eden, as it
were the fat of that, which was the fatnes of the earth. Again, it Some do
take it to be in the East part of the world: some Eastward from the land of
Canaan, or the wilderness where Moses wrote: but the purpose of ye Scripture
is more nearly to show the place thereof, by the part of the country wherein
it was, the word (...), mikedem of (...), kadam, signifies the first of place
or time, therefore the East, because it is the first place of light: of some it
is translated the first of time: from the beginning. Rab. David lib. Radic.
Targhum. Hieron. Trad. in Genesis Qui cum alijs Rabbinis Cabalicis, conditum
fuisse statuit ante mundum. Nisi forsitan hanc suam sententiam retractauit, vti
Eugubinus Steucus author est.
was Eastward or in the East part of Eden: and lastly, it was watered by that
river (being placed as it seems upon the bank thereof) which from Eden was
divided and became into four heads. Which streams again are more
particularly entreated of; by their division, by their names, and by their
passages. And not Chrysostom. Syllaba and apiculus vnicus reconditum habet
thesaurum. Hom. in Genesis 18. Hieron. Commentar. in Ephesians. 3. Nullus apex cares
sensibus.
a syllable of this in vain, but as the Lord does show his diligence in
teaching, so should we also show our heedfuines in receiving of the same.
Scarsly is there a river in the De Septem ostijs Nili and huiusmodi, non refert.
world, whose stream is divided into four parts: wherefore this was a notable
mark to know the situation of the garden. Again, al these names continued,
till the writing of this history by Moses, and all these streams were known
by name: to what purpose else were it to say, the name of the first river, or
the name of the second river was called thus, etc. And finally (that nothing
might be more required) the course and passage of them is so expressed, that
those which have bin attent in the searching of the same Quatenus scilicet
attenti f^erint, nam vel in ipso Ptolomeo diligetia desideratur. Lege Trem l.
and Iunij annot. in Genesis ^tem Iun. in 2. cap. ^en.
have most plainly given testimony unto the truth hereof. Great marvel is
it therefore that Theodoret. quaest. in Genesis 29. August. de Genesis ad lit. lib. 8.
cap 7. and fere omnes.
interpreters of the scripture, which have taken in hand to expound this place,
should so obscure it, as to take these four rivers for the four famous rivers
of the world: Ganges, Nilus, Tigris, and Euphrates, which are so many thousand
miles asunder, and can never be divided out of one stream, seeing in their
nearest meeting, the greatest part of Asia is between them, which is the Vide
Ptolem. descrip. Asiae.
fourth and greatest part of all the earth. By which occasion we are admonished
Matthew. 23.9.
to call no man our father upon earth, and to give credit to men's writings in
matters of salvation, no farther then agrees with the proportion of faith, and
the truth of holy scripture. Moreover since that by this occasion, the
comfortable truth of the word of God in this description has bin notoriously
slaundered of the wicked: It ought to bridle us that handle the sacred word of
God, that none presume to determine of that they do not understand; for it is
much better as Augustine says, August. de Genesis ad lit. lib. 8. cap. 5. Melius
est dubitare de occulus quam litigare de in^ertis Subsannas enim Simplicius
eoru^ erroribus, and stulte triumphat de verbo Dei. arg. 18.
to profess our doubtfulnesse in secret matters, then to be contentious in
things to us uncertain. But by this Scripture it appears manifest, that this
garden wherein man was placed, which we call Greek, (...) them. (...) to water:
signifies a pleasant garden or place closed in (Ci^. de sene^scenseptum agrum
ac diligenter consition) wherein choice and pleasant trees and beasts are
nourished for pleasure and delight, such was Paradise. Zenoph. lib. Oeconem.
Plut. Symp. 3. Heb. (...) began, a radice (...) ganan: circumelio. dear Rab. Dam.
l.
Paradise, was a Not only an Allegory.
certain place on earth, Not all the earth.
not spreading ouerall, but only a part thereof, containing a For neither was
it so great yt it could not rightly be ordered by Adam, neither so little but
it might sith receive the certain number of Gods elect, if Adam had not
sinned. Aug. retract. 1. 13 not as a prison to enclose them, but as a castle of
comfort to delight them, until they had been received into heaven. cont.
Simplic. arg 19.
convenient portion of the country 2. King. 19.12. Ezech. 27.23.
called Eden bounding upon the river Euphrates: which river is divided into
four streams, and runs, or at leastwise then did flow, in manner as the
text has here described. Wherefore Heretics and Atheists, have here no cause
to cavil at the Scripture, Contr. Simplic. argum. 1^. de fluminibus Paradisi.
as though it had affirmed that Ganges and Nilus had met together: for the
errors of interpreters ought not to prejudice ye sacred truth of the word of
God. Neither are interpreters altogether void of just excuse, seeing he that
falls by the infirmity of other, is rather to be pitied then punished. The
original of their error I find to be in the Septuagint translators, who turned
Eusebius. de praepar. Euang. lib. 8. Epiphan. de Mensur. and pond. Omnes viginti
duos libros conuertisse aiunt. Joseph. Antiq. lib. 1. in Prooem. legem tantum.
Assertio prior confirmatur a Chrysostomo. Hom. contr. Iudaeos. Theodores. etc.
the old Testament, or at least the books of Moses, out of the Hebrew tongue
into the Greek, Circa annum 268. ante Christum.
before the coming of our Savior Christ: who In Isai. 23.3. Ierem. 2.18. Sic
autem legebatur in c^ licibus Graecis temporibus a Christo ad vsque nos.
in steed of the river Sichor, which is Nilus have translated Gihon, calling
the river Hieron. in Ierem. 2. Pro Seor nos turbidam interpretati sumus, quod
verbum hebraicum significat, pro quo communis editio habet Geon. Epiphan.
epist. ad Ioh. Hierosol.
Sichor the river Gihon. Which whether it were a received opinion among the
Hebrews, that the river Sichor or Nilus, was the river Gihon here spoken of; or
whether because Gihon is said to compass the land of Nili primus sons apud
Libyae interioris montem Argyrum. Arist. meteor. lib. 1. c. 13 Omne^ Aethiopia^
praeterfluit quae dicitur Cush. non tame^ amb^t eam. At fuit alia regio Cush,
vnde Cushan Rishathaim, Iud. 3.8. and Mosis vxor. Exo. 2.21. Number. 12.1. Nam
Nimrod filius Cush imperauit Babylone. Genesis 10. Put vero and Misraim incolebant
Africam, hanc igitur terram Cush. Gihon circuibat, non illam AEthiopiae.
Cush: sure it is that Josephus a Jew and a writer of great account stumbled at
the same stone, Joseph. Antiq. lib. 1. cap. 3. Qui Pison nominatur, ad terra^
Indiam dilatus in illud se pelagus exonerat, Graecis Ganges appellatus: Geon
autem Aegyptum mediam secat.
and embraced that opinion: by both which authorities moved, many both of the
Hieron. and alij praedict. item Epiph.
Fathers and latter writers have gone astray. Unto this may have access, that
the country of Eden Post euersam regionem, primo a Sancheribo. 2. King. 19.
deinde a Persis, postea a Graecis, nec no^ a Romany.
has of long time lost his ancient name, as doubtless most part of the rivers
also, as to many other countries of the world, Now called Selcucia.
Mesopotamia, Bagdet.
Babylon, Elia.
Jerusalem, In old time Gallia.
France, Albion, Britannia.
England, and other has be fallen, of whom antiquity has changed the names:
so that thereby the truth could not easily be discerned, especially the
places to be described In confinio Persarum ditionis; quibus perpetuu^ erat
bellum cum Romany, vt ex Suetonio in vit. Augusti, Plutarcho in vit. Crassi,
Tacito, Procopio, Socrate, Euagrio, certum constat.
being without the limits of the Christian Empire. And what if it were said,
that the rivers here described run not perhaps altogether in the same
channels they did in the days of Moses? If any credit may be given to
antiquity; the same and the like may soon be proved against an Atheist by
sufficient testimony. Plato in Epimen.
Plato and Arist. Meteor. lib. 1. cap. 14. Troianis temporibus Argiuorum regio
quod palustris esset pauculos homines alere potuit, sed contra Mycenoru^ ager
pulchre se habebat. Nunc vero secus accidit. Nam haec sterilis facta est and
admodum inaruit, illa vero loca quae tunc erant sterilia quod aquis essent
obruta, nu^c fertilia sunt effecta.
Aristotle, and Lactant. Possum enumerare, quoties repentinis quassat^ motibus
vel hiauerunt terrae. vel descenderint in abruptum: quoties diuersae fluctibus,
and vibes and insulae abierint in profundum: frugiferos campos paludes
inundauerint. Flumina and stagna siccauerint: montes etiam vel deciderint
abrupti, vel planis fuerint adaequati; plurimas etiam regiones, and multorum
fundamenta montium latens and internus ignis consumpsit.
Lactantius and Strabo lib. 1. Geogr. Virgil. Aenead. 3. Valor. Flac. Neque
enim rex Aeolus ille, etc.
others do constantly affirm (as they have received of ancient monuments)
that mountains, and rivers, and Islands, and countries have received much
alteration in this kind. Sicilia is said to have been divided from Mela lib. 2.
Geog. cap. de insulis.
Italy, Cyprus Plin. lib. 2. c. 88. Insulas rerii natura fecit, auellit
Siciliam Italiae, Cyprum Syriae, etc.
from Syria, Seruius in Virg. Eglog 1. Et penitus toto diuisos orb Britannos:
Diuisos namque dixit Poeta, quia olim iuncta fuit orbi terrarum Britannia.
Tantum aeni longinqua valet mutare vetustas: inquit Virg. Aenead. 3. Haec
autem, quoniam l^ngo temporis spacio fiunt, memoriam hominum solent effugere,
vt inquit Aristot. Meteor. lib. 1. cap. 14.
England from France, by the violence of the Sea, whereas before they were
joined, as Peloponnesus is to ye rest of Grecia, or as the town of Rye Where
there is left scarce the high way to come in, the water flowing up on both
sides.
(at an high water) seems to be to the rest of England. But this is less to
be wondered at (although we give no certainty thereof, but only take away the
cauils of the adversaries) that these rivers should run in other streams:
forasmuch as Cyrus Dan. 3.30.
at the taking of Babylon, Herod. in Clio. Cum inutiliori exercitus part abijt
ad paludem, and quae Babyloniorum regina fecerat circa flumen, eadem and ipse
fecit (ipsa autem fluuium Euphratem qui prius mediam ipsorum vrbem interfluens,
rectus erat tortuosum reddidit, vt supra retulit) nam reuocato flumine alueum
eius pristinum vado transibilem reddidit.
is affirmed to have restrained the maine channel of this very river
Euphrates, unto an unwonted course, and to have divided the river Huic (cum non
posset nisi nauibus traijci) cum quidam e sacris equis petulanter ingressus
transire conabatur, quod fluutus vorti^ibus contorquens eum submersum abi
ipuit: Cyrus perquam aeg^ e ferens co^minatus est, se sic redditu^um eum tenuem
vt in posterum facile vel a mulieribus transiri posset, ne gentia quidem
tingentibus: cum demum in trecentos and sexaginta riuos mulciauit diductum. Ex
Herodot. in Clio. Senec. de ira. lib. 3.
Gindes which is next unto it in greatness, into 360. streams. Besides, the
country of Mesopotamia by which these rivers pass, being Plutarc. in vit.
Marc. Crass. Vbi impulit cum a flumine, abstractum medijs duxit campis via lent
and facili initio, inde succedente alta arena nudis^i, and sitientibus campis,
qui termin tri nusquam oculis poterant odiosa.
partly dry and sandy, and Herod. in Clio. Porro in Isl^riorum te^ra parum
pluit: sed omnis Babylonica regio d ffecta est in fossas, etc.
seldom watered with the shewers of heaven, and on the other part exceeding
Plin. lib. 18. c. 1^. Babylone segetes bis secant, tertio depascunt, alioqui
folia tantum fierent.
fruitful by the nature of the soil, is by the industry of the inhabitants
so nourished with waters, by cutting out channels and ditches out of the maine
streams, as the same is amended where it is barren, of the same
unfruitfulness; and corrected again of his over rich increase, Plin. ibid. Vt
prepinguis and densa vbertas diluatur, etc.
where it is over fertile. No marvel therefore, if these rivers are not fully
agreed upon by writers, having lost perhaps their ancient streams together
with their names, as Ex maledicto and diluuio.
Paradise, and the whole earth besides has lost her ancient fruitfulnes. It
suffices us that fear the Lord, that we so credit the knowledge and truth
Qui enim haec omnia Moses potuit scriberenisi dictante spiritu D^i?
of the spirit of God that was in Moses, as that we assure our selves, the
things spoken of were so in every point, as they are reported for to be. Those
that will not believe it Clement. Alexand. Stromat. 7. Scriptura magis fide
digna qua^ qucuis demonstratio, imo quae sola demonstratio est, etc.
because the Scripture has pronounced it, Hieron. comment. in Matthew. 27.42.
Fraudulenta promissio. Quid est pluc le cruce adhuc descendere viuentem, an de
sepulcro mortuum resurpere? resurrexit and non credidistis, ergo si etiam de
cruce descenderet, similiti^ non crederetis.
would not in truth believe it, although they saw it with their eyes, more then
they who cried unto our Savior Christ being on the cross: If he be the king
of Israel let him now come down from the cross, and we will believe him.
Notwithstanding for the confirmation of the godly, and the repressing of bold
and wicked Spirits, we thought good to add a table of description, whereby may
be perceived how this history of the situation of Paradise, fully agrees with
that which many writers have delivered thereof, and the same is found to
remain until this day.

map of Mesopotamia

Pishon, the first stream of Euphrates which the Scripture describes, joins
with Tigris, and from hence forth is called Pasitigris or Pisotigris, Strab.
lib. 15. Of Ptolome, lib. 6. cap. 18. (...), the Kings river, because it was
falsely) esteemed to have been by the kings of Babylon cut out of the earth.
Plin. lib. 6. cap. 26. This river is the West bound of the land Hauilah: for
the word (...) Sabab translated compasses, signifies to bound out as well as
to inuiron, and is so to be taken in this place.

Hauilah was part of Assyria and part of Persia (as after Moses those countries
were divided) where Gold and Bdelium and the Onyx stone is found, Plin. lib. 6.
cap. 27. Solin. cap. 68. Bdelium (as Pliny says) is a tree, the wood whereof
is black in color, sweet in savor, and bitter in taste: the same also
yields sweet Gum.

Gihon, the second head, called afterward Nahar-sares (...) Nahar (...) Seres,
that is, a river gelt or cut off, because it is the first division of
Euphrates, where his waters are gelt or divided: this compasses the plain of
Sinhar where Nimrod the son of Cush inhabited: is also the bound and border
of Arabia, where Seba, Sabatha, Sabtecha (together with Sheba, Dedan and Mi^i^n
he sons of Abraham) possessed. Of the land of Cush in Aethiopia, where Sheba
and Dedan the sons of Raamah had their possessions, there is no appearance of
such a river.

Hiddekel, the third head, runs on the East part of Babylonia, which is
toward the East side of Asshur, and for that in a short course it is joined
with Tigris (and perhaps imitateth the swiftnes of his stream) is also called
by his name, as appears Dan. 10.4. Pliny lib. 6. cap. 27. calls it
Diglito, which is for Hidelito or Hiddikel, corrupted; it takes his name of
swiftnes: and is called of the Persians Tigris, which (says Curtius lib. 4.)
i^ in the Persian tongue an arrow: of Greeks and Latins for his swiftnes and
violent stream is fitly compared with the Tiger. This is that other Arm of
Euphrates, whereof Ptolome says lib 6 cap. 18. (...), etc. Euphrates where he
is divided, his position being 79 degrees Lon. Lat. 35. in. 40. one of his
streams runs thorough Babylon, the other by Scleucia, and the river
Basilius is carried between them.

Perah, the fourth head, is the maine and principal stream of Euphrates; last
remembered, because more commonly known. This passes thorough the city
Babylon, and joins with Tigris at Apamea, from whence they run together;
and lastly, after a new division, do fall into the Persian Gulf.

Ninus is that Niniue, builded by Asshur, Genesis 10.11. it obtained the Empire
before that of Babylon, 2. King. 18.33. it repented at Ionahs preaching, Ion.
3.5. Matthew. 12.41. was destroyed for cruelty and contempt of God, Na^m. 2.8.
Herodot. in Clio. it contained sixescore thousand infants which knew not their
right hand from their left, Jonah. 4.11. and in circuit three days journey,
Jonah. 3.5. being 480. furlongs, and had 1500. towers upon the walls, Diodor.
Sic. lib. 3. Herodot. in Clio Strab^ lib. 16.

Babylon, that city of confusion, overcome by Cyrus, Isai. 45.12. Dan.
5.30.^1. was afterward brough^ to ruin by the successors of Alexander: In
solitudinem redijs, exhausta, vicinitate Scleuciae; became a desert (says
P^^^ic lib. 6 cap 26) as had been foretold by the Prophets, Isai. 13.2. Ierem
50.1.2. Dan. 2.30. Scleucus Nicanor having spoiled it, builded Scleucia in
stee^ thereof. Afterward the Persians ruinated Scleucia, builded Clesiphon, and
made it the head city of the kingdom, Strabo lib. 16. Plin. lib. 6. cap. 26.
Herodian. lib. 3. Sozomen. lib. 6. cap. 1. Clesiphon loco Babylonis, seeds
regia est Persarum.

Gaugamela, the meeting of the Ram and the Goat, Dan. 8.6. where Alexander
utterly overthrew the power of Darius, and obtained the Empire of Asia. It
contains Grad. 79 30. Lat. 37. 0.

Furthermore, it is to be observed, Genesis 11.2. They went from the East, etc.
that Noah and his company going forth of the Arc, passed the mountains of
Armenia, and dwelt in Assyria: which (as here appears is on the East from
Sirhar. For Ar^^a^ or Armenia it self, is not East from Sinhar, but North and
declining West. The mountains of Armenia are parts of that h^ge and mighty
Caucasus, which beginning with Taurus and Amaenus in Cilicia runs on into
Scythia and I^dia, called by diverse names, but yet continued in the general
terms of Caucasus and Caucasij montes. Look Genesis 8 q. 2. Aristot lib. 1. cap.
13 Philost^atus lib. 2. Ptolom. Geograph. lib. 5. cap. 9. 10. Tab. 2. 3. and
lib. 6. cap. 12. Tab. 7. Strabo lib. 11. Mela lib. 1. cap. de Lycia. Curtius
lib. 4. Dextra Tigrim habebat, a lana m^ntes, quos Gordiaeos vocant. I would
think rather they were the Niphates, but for the reverence of Antiquity.

Place this Map in page 68.

Question 7. verse 9. What is meant by the tree of life?
AMong all the trees of the Lords garden, which were most pleasant to the eye,
and good for meat, two especially excelled above the rest in use and virtue,
which are called the tree of life, and the tree of knowledge of good and evil.
These are said to be planted in the midst of the garden, either according to
ye property of the Hebrew phrase of speech, as thus: I dwell 2. King. 4 13.
in the midst of mine own people, that is, among mine own people, to signify
that out of the garden were no such trees: or else, about the midst of the
garden it self, either because thereby, their place might argue their excellent
use; or that by their placing he to whom they were given, Life, and the
commandment.
might have the use of them always to meditate thereon. They were August. de
Genesis ad lit. lib. 8. cap. 6. Prorsus and hoc lignum erat visibile and
corporale, sicut arbores caeterae. cap. 4. Ne cogat in allegoriam, vt non ista
ligna fuerint, sed aliud aliquid nomine ligni significent. Chrysostom. Hom. in
Gen, 13. Sed forte sunt, quex propria sententia quelibet dicere volu^t, nec
flumina conceduc esse flumina, etc. queso ne feramus tales, s^^ obturemus aures.
very trees, not allegories in the name of trees; for they were planted, they
were watered, they grew and bare fruit as other trees. What fruit they bare is
not expressed, and therefore not necessary for us to know. But that their fruit
might be of the kind of other fruit, and have a proper virtue given unto it, I
see not what does hinder, seeing that Act. 5.15.
the shadow of Peter, nor the Act. 19.12.
kerchiefs and handkerchiefs from Paul's body, did differ from the shadows of
other men, or from other linen of the same kind, but only in the Ibid.
virtue of healing, that God for a time did give unto them. Now the first of
these trees is (...) gnets h^chaijm: as the soul is called (...) nephesh
chaiah: not that the tree did live (nisi vita vegetatina) but gave or imparted
life to other.
called the tree of life, Properly a tree preserving or maintaining life (arbor
viuificans) for the hebrew tongue wants adjectives, or (which the Grammarians
call) denominata.
for that the fruit thereof Genesis 3.22.
had natural virtue in it to preserve life. Not the life of the Ioh. 6.63.
soul, the substance whereof is more For ye soul which dies the second
death, loses not the substance, but the blessed qualities: Non in substantia,
sed in qualitate moritur, as Gregory says.
noble then death can take away, but of the body For no elementarie substance
can by nature be perpetual, as Aristot. de coelo lib. 3. cap. 6.
being made of earthly mould: and the same not a temporary life Beda and
Strabus Histor. eccles.
as our meats and drinks preserve our lives, but even a August. de Ciuitat.
Dei. lib. 13. cap. 20. De ligno autem vitae propterea gustabant, ne mors ijs
vndecunque subreperet, vel senectute confecti, decursis temporum spatijs
interirent. Tanquam caetera essent alimento, hoc Sacramento, statis scilicet
temporibus de eo sumpto. Aquin. part. 1. quaest. 97. Beda. Lignum vitae dictum
est, quia diuinitus accepit hanc vint, vt qui ex eius fructu comederet,
corpuretus stabili samtare and perpetua soliditate firmaretur: nec vlla
infirmitate nec aetatis imbecillitate, in deterius ^el in occasum laberetur.
Hieron. Zanch. de oper. Dei. part. 3. lib. 1. cap. 1. Reliquarum arborum
fructus, docet Augustinus (vt supra) ad hoc fuisse destinatos, vt molestiam
famis and sitis tollerent: sed huius fructum vt praestaret homini vim, etc.
Haec fuit vis data illi arbori, and nunquam adempta: eoque naturalis quodammodo
illi fuit; and ob hanc causam post peccatum positus fuit Cherubim.
perpetual life; and to have banished not only hunger and thirst, but all
other enemies of our natural life, sorrow, sickness, age, and death it self.
So that although Adam August. de peccat. merit. and remiss. lib. 1. cap. 2.
Luther. com. in Genesis cap. 2. Docet Paulus, etiamsi Adam non peccasset, tamen
viclurum fuisse corporalem vitam indigam cibi, potus, quictis, crescentem,
generantem and caetera; donec per Deum, ad vitam spiritualem esset translatus,
in qua vixisset sine animalitate vt ita dicam, nempe ab intra ex solo De^, and
non ab extra sicut ante, ex herbis and fru^tibus: i^ l^ c sic vt tamen homo
habeat carnem and ossa, and non sit mere spiritus sictet angeli.
had not continued for ever in that Paradise; but after long time had been
taken up into the heavenly Paradise, as Enoch and Eliah Genesis 5.24. 2. King.
2.11.
were: yet he never should have gone the way of death, or sickness, of age, or
feebleness; but in most flourishing strength and full happiness of life, he
should have been translated unto God. And although that seem strange to
carnal me^, 2. King. 7.2.
which in their reason or experience they can not prove; yet was it no more
miraculous for the tree of life to have such virtue (seeing the good pleasure
of the Lord was such) then for our clothes to keep us warm, or our meat which
is but dead to revive our bodies, or the virtue of herbs to preserve our
health, which Isai. 3.1. Matthew. 4.4.
is not in themselves, Deuteronomy. 8.3. 1. Tim. 4.5.
but by virtue of the ordinance and word of God. And if these things are endued
with strength, as it were to lengthen our mortality, how much rather may we
think by the authority of the word, that God endued this tree with virtue to
preserve them in life, which were not subject unto death?

Question 8. verse 9. Wherefore the other tree was called the tree of
knowledge, of good and evil?
IT is Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 16. Neque enim esus ex eo ligno oculos eorum
aperuit
untruely supposed by the Targh. Hierosol. De qua quicunque edit, discernit
inter bonum and malum. Onkelos paraphrast. Caldaic. Cognoscet inter bonum and
malum. Joseph. Antiq. lib. 1. cap. 2. Rab. Salom.
Hebrew Doctors, that the tree had virtue in it to give sharpness of wit to
him that did eat thereof: which conceit gave cause to Julian Lib. 3. Apud
Cyril. contr. Julian. Deum autem interdicere cognitionem boni and mali,
hominibus a se formatis, quomodo non summam prae se fert absurditatem? Inquit
Iulianus.
to cavil at the Scripture, as though God had pleasure to have detained men in
ignorance. Other speak more near the purpose, but yet not fully; August. de
Genesis ad lit. lib 8. cap. 6. Lombard. li. 1. did. 17. Quia post probibitionem
erat in illa transgressio futura, qua homo experiendo disceret, quid esset
inter obedientiae bonum and inobedientiae malum.
that it was so called of the event, because through eating of the fruit
thereof, the knowledge of evil was procured: for it may seem it was so called
Verse. 17. Damascen. lib. 2. cap. 11. (...), etc. ad experientiam quandam
probationemque and exercitium obedientiae and inobedientia hominis.
to give Adam thereby a warning of feeling evil. But more directly indeed was
it called the tree of knowledge of good and evil; Chrysostom. Hom in Genesis 14. Ab
vno tantum ligno abstinere iussit, vt scire possit, quid sit sub domino (esse)
cui obedire debeat, and parere si quid ille imperarit. Zanch. part. 3. lib. 1.
cap. 1. de oper. Dei. Quia visibilis regula fuit, qua cognosceretur bonum and
malum, non per se sed propter mandatum Dei adiunctum. Ratio: quia hac fuit
prima lex Dei vnde omnes reliquae pendent; oportuit igitur hanc esse vim totius
legis, qua docetur quid bonum quidue malum.
because it was made a rule for man to know, what was good, and what was evil,
so soon as it was enjoined man by precept not to eat thereof. The tree Genesis
3.6. August. de Genesis ad lit. lib. 8. c. 6. Dici non potest ^u^nta mihi placeat
illa sententia, no fuisse illam arborem cibo noxiam; neque erum qui fecerat omn
a valde bona, in pa^adiso instituerat aliquid mali: sed malum fuisse homini
transgressionem praecepti.
bare wholesome and pleasant fruit as well as other. What made it evil to eat
thereof? nothing else but disobedience unto the Ambros. lib. de Paradis. cap. 7.
Ni fallor, mortis causa mobedientia fuit, and ideo homo ipse sibi mortis est
causa, non hebent Deum suae mortis autherem. Neque enim si me ti^us
praescripserit egrotanti a quibus vi^icatur cauendum, atque ille ab interdictis
non putaueris abstinendum: causa eius mortis est medicus, sed vtique ipse sibi
reus mortis est pro pri^e. August. de ciuit. Dei lib. 14. cap. 12 Esca no^ mala
and noxia, nisi quia prohibita. Sed obedientiae commendata est in praecepto
quae virtus in creatura rationali matter quodammodo est omnium custosque
virtutum.
commandment. For because it was said: thou shall not eat thereof; for that
cause only it was evil to eat thereof. But wherefore did the Lord forbid the
eating of the fruit? Because Basil. Hom. Quod Deus non est author mali.
Chrysostom Hom. in Genesis 13. V^ scire possit quod gratia and liberalitate illa
frueretur, essetque Dominus aliquis and naturae suae and omnium visibilium.
it was necessary, that man, who was adorned with such an height of dignity,
should yet owe homage unto his creator as to his Sovereign Lord: which duty
August. de Genesis ad lit. lib. 8 cap. 13. Dominus quidem quid insserit, viderit
faciendu^ est a seruiente quod iussit.
consists in subjection both in will and deed, his will to be commanded by
the will of God, and his work to be ruled by his will, that both in will, in
work, in word and thought, he might declare his inferioritie by obedience. Man
therefore by this commandment, thou shall not eat of it: August. de verb. Dom
Sermon. 34. Bona est arbor, nolo tangas. Quare^ Quia Dominus sunt, tu seruus.
Haec tota causa est. Si parua est, dedignaris esse seruus? Quid autem tibi
expedit nisi esse sub Domino?
was taught to measure good and evil, not by his own will, but by the will
and word of God, and to seek for the rule of good and evil, at the law and at
the testimony: Deuteronomy. 12.8. Isai. 8.1^.
as says the Prophet. And this was requisite, because Isai. 46.10. August. in
Psalm. 41.161. Inuentes fontem iustitiae, vbi est fons vitae.
the will of God is the fountain of justice and of goodness: therefore it
cannot be but good and righteous which he wills, and therefore righteous
because he wills it: but the will of man although it Genesis 1.27. Ephesians. 4.24.
Fulgent. ad Mon. lib. de praedest. cap. 18.
were created righteous, can be no farther righteous, then it is subject unto
the righteousness of God. But some complain of the planting of this tree, or
the giving of this precept unto man, Basil. Hom. Quod Deus non sit author mali.
At cur inquit in creatione non habemus, vt ne volentibus nobis peccare detur?
Quia etiam tu, famulos non cum vinctos habes beneuelos putas, sed cum
voluntary ea quae efficij sunt, explere videris. Itaque etiam Deo non gratum
est quod coactum est, sed quod ex virtute recte gertiur. Vide etiam causat in
Iren. lib. 4. cap. 78. 79.
as though thereby an occasion were given of offending. And do not they murmr
causeles against the Lord, either because he made not man like himself
immutable; or else because he taught him so graciously a point so necessary,
that his Justin. Mart. Epist. ad Diognet. Per cognitionem vitam ostendentem.
Neque enim vita sine cognitione, neque cognitio tuta sine vita vera.
felicity depended upon obedience? And so gracious was the Lord, that when he
might have tried his obedince As he did Abraham Gen 22.
by matters of greater moment: or as well might have commanded him to
Chrysostom. Hom in Genesis 14. Neque enim dimidiatam dedit illi rerum fruitionem,
neque a pluribus abstinere iussit.
abstain from all the trees save one (which had been for him sufficient) or
else from half of them; he forbids him but one, Bernard. Hom 2. de
circumcis. Dom. ^enissimum plane mandatum, and larga omnino mensura.
then which he could not have less restrained him, and taught him knowledge.
Wherefore this precept was not given, neither the tree of knowledge placed
there as a snare to make him fall, as the wicked do blasphemously murmr
against the Lord; but the August. in Psalm 70. and de verb. Dom. Sermon. 34.
Quomodo eri^ sub Domino, si non fuerit sub praecepto? non potuit Deus
perfectius demonstrare quantum sit bonum obedientiae, nisi cum prohibuerit ab
ear quae non erat mal^.
justice of God required, that the creature should be subject to his creator,
and therefore the Lord in mercy bound him to obedience, and most fatherly
gave him Tertul. in Marcion. lib. 2. Benignissime enim demonstrauit exitum
transgressionis: ne ignorantia periculi negligentiam iuuaret obsequij.
warning, to the end he should not fall, Justin. Mart. Epist. ad Diognet.
August. de ciuit Dei lib. 14. cap. 12. Quandoquidem sit creatura rationalis
facta est, vt ei sub litam esse sit vtile: pernitiosum antem suam, non eius a
quo creata est facere voluntatem. Et hinc maxim commendatur quale bonum sit
Deus, cum nulli ab eo recedemi been est. Idem de Genesis ad lit. 11. c. ^.
declaring that the life of man depends upon obedience to God. Neither did he
this, Iren. lib 4. c. ^8. Initio igitur no^ quasi indigens Deus hominem
plasmauit Adam, sed vt haberet in quem collocaret sua benefici^. Nec nostro
ministerio ind^gens, iussit vt eum sequeremur.
as though he needed man's obedience; but that being good and merciful, he
might Iren. ibid. Propter hoc exquirit ab hominibus seruitutem, vt quoniam est
bonus and misericors, benefaciat ijs qui perseuerant in seruitute eius.
continue and increase his goodness unto man, obeying his commandment. It
was therefore great Tum propter debitum seruitutis creaturae ad creatorem; tum
quia (Cyril. lib. 3. in Julian.) non dubium est, quin leges constringant quod
moratur, and quod propensum ad defectionem, vin lictis remorentur, dirigant ad
bonum, and a deterioribus recedere cogant co^qui ^inesti rationem alioqui non
haberent. Vnde nemo qui mente praeditus est, redarguerit vel leges, vel
legislature^ quod illas tul^^int: non enim ipsi aut ^ores sunt vt deprehensi
patiantur.
equity and righteousness in God to forbid the fruit. It was Tertul. adue^s.
Marcion. lib. 2. Benignissime enim demonstrauit. etc.
his gracious mercy to warn man of the punishment. It was shameful
negligence in Adam Matthew. 11.30. Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 14. Ma na huius
praecepti facilitas est. Sed dilecte, grave malum est desidiae, facitque vt
facilia omnia videantur difficilia. Et infra. Dedit nomina animantibus Non
temere hoc factum, sed (praeter alia) ne putaretur ex ignorantia peccasse, and
vt scire possis, quod lapsus ille ex desidiae fuerit.
not to keep a commandment so easy, and to bear so light a burden. For
seeing he had liberty Bernard. tract. de grad. humil. Si enim caetera bona
sunt, quae sapiunt bonum, quid opus est edere de ligno quod sapiat etiam malum?
to take of all the trees that sauored of life, what need had he to taste of
that only tree that sauored of death?

Question 9. verse 17. Whether God in justice could inflict so great a
punishment, as he pronounced for the eating of the fruit? in the day that thou
eatest thereof, thou shall die the death.
THe rebellious nature of man is always ready Genesis 4.13. Ezech. 11.3. Iren. lib.
5. Qui supergrediuntur leges and postea poenis dant, queruntur de
legislatoribus, sed non de semetipsis. Sic autem and diabolico spiritu pleni,
innumera^ accusationes inferunt sactori suo, cum and spiritum vitae nobis
donauerit, and legem omnibus aptam pisuerit; and nolunt iustum esse iudicium
Dei.
to repine against Gods justice, accusing the same of too much severity: but
in the mean season Ezech. 16.22. August. de ciuit. Dei lib. 21. cap. 12.
it will not see the hainousnes of sin, which is the cause thereof. And indeed
if God do punish more then is the greatness of the fault committed, then does
he not according to his word; Psalm. 62.12. Ezech. 7.8. Revel. 2.23. and 22.12
Give every man according to his work. Again, shall not Genesis 18.25.
the judge of all the world do right? Yea, Deuteronomy. 32.4. Psalm. 9.16.
the Lord is known by executing judgment, as says the Prophet. Wherefore
although the punishment it self that was denounced, do sufficiently declare
the greatness of the sin, because God does always punish righteously: yet if we
examine duly the force of the commandment, we shall find the offense to be
Ezech. 20.44. and 16.59. Psalm. 130.3. For although in respect of Adam, it were
an absolute threatening of death: yet in respect of Gods secret counsel, it
was co^ditional. viz. unless the Son of God do take upon him man's redemption:
so that, in that his bodily life was spared, though in misery, or that he
was not in body and in soul cast presently into the flames of hell, his
punishment is less then his desert.
greater then the punishment. In which commandment (as in every law of man)
three things are Bernard. lib. de praecept. and discip. Primam ergo
necessitater cuique facit in promittendo voluntas. Secundam praecipientis
authoritas. Tertiam praecepti dignitas. Hieron. Zanch. de oper. part. 3. lib.
1. cap. 1. In interdicto tria considerandae sunt. Res interdicta, authoritas
interdicentis, and fines interdictionis.
chiefly to be considered: first, the thing forbidden: secondly, the
authority of him that gives the charge: and thirdly, the end wherefore it
was prohibited. The thing forbidden was the eating of the fruit, which As
Julius the third, Pope, affirmed he had as great reason to be angry for a
Peacocke, as God had to be angry for an Apple, seeing an Apple was not so
great a matter as a Peacocke. Paul. Verg. Balae. in vita Romans Pontif.
the wicked esteem of no greater moment, then an apple or a nut is worth,
which Adam and his wife devoured. But the law is Romans 7.14.
spiritual, and Hieron. comment. in Romans 7.14. Et spiritualia mandat, etc.
commands things that are spiritual. It had therefore doubtless a farther
purpose and intent, which Adam by the image of Gods wisdom that was in him,
did also rightly understand: which was Romans 12.3. Ambros in Romans 12. Aperte
ostendit, hoc debere nos sapere, quod iustitiae terminos non egrediatur; vt non
nobis solis vtile sit, sed vt nulli obsit, vt contenti simus sort quam mensu^
est Deus: nequis arroganter de se sentiat.
that he must be wise according to sobriety, not presuming of his own
wisdom to define good and evil, but by the will and word of God, whereunto
he ought simply to submit himself. And seeing the Lord had taught him A
prohibitione and poena.
by the commandment, that it was evil to eat of this fruit, 2. King. 22.2.
August. de ciuit. Dei lib. 14. cap. 12. Obedientia commendatur in praecepto,
etc.
he must not look unto the fruit, or to the tree, or to his wife, or to the
Serpent, or to his own judgment and capacity, to think it good for meat,
which the Lord had pronounced to be evil. So that briefly, the force of this
commandment was, to forbid him to be wise above the condition of August. de
ciuit Dei lib. 12. c. 9. Nec tantit hominum, sed primitus praecipueque
angelorum bonum est, quod dictu^ est, mihi adhae rere Deo bomon est. Psalm.
73.27.28.
a creature, or Quoniam non been se habet facta natura, fi a faciente
recesserit. August. de Genesis ad lit. lib. 11. cap. ^.
to disioyne his wisdom from the wisdom of the Lord, August. in Psalm. 70.
and Sermon. de verbis Dom. 34. Si perverse voluerit imitari Deu^, vt quo modo
Deus no^ habet a quo formetur, non habet a quo regatur, sic ipse velit sua
potestate vti, vt sicut Deus nullo formante, nullo regente viuat; quid restat
fratres, nisi vt recedens ab eius calore torpescat, recedens a veritate
vanescat, recedens ab eo qui sum and incomparabiliter est, in deterius
mutatus deficiat? Hoc diabolus fecit, imitari Deum voluit sed peruerie, non
esse sub illius potestate, sed habere contra illum potestatem.
wherein he could not but work his own confusion. This was a matter of great
importance for a poor creature, which even now was dust, and was taken Psalm.
113.7. 1. Sam. 2.
from the dunghill to such nobility, to be so surprised with unthankfulness
and pride, as to strive to be equal with him that made him, and to esteem
better of his own wisdom, then of the wisdom and word of God. The second
thing to be considered in the force of this commandment is, Bernard. Supra.
Praecipientis authoritas. etc.
the authority of him that gave it for a law. This is as it were the very pith
and strength of laws, and makes the breaches of them to be great or small:
for according to the authority of him that makes it, the Ibid. Iam vero de
illo qui praecipit, and idem de eo quod praecipitur, huiusmodi aduertenda erit
secundum rationem distinctio, vt cuius inter praeceptores reuerentior nobis
imminebit authoritas, eius grauior formidetur offensio, de maioris cuiusque
mandati transgressio damnabilior aestimetur.
breach thereof deserves punishment. If then the laws of Hebr. 10.28. Dan.
5.18.19. Deuteronomy. 17.12.
Princes and of Deuteronomy. 21.18.21.
Parents laid upon their children, being despised, deserve death in the
judgment of the Lord: who yet have not sole authority over their inferiors,
to Job. 31.15. Matthew. 10.28. Ioh. 19.11. Ephesians. 6.9.
slay and to give life; how much more is his authority to be esteemed, whose
power James 4.12.
is absolute to save and to destroy, who made us of nothing Prou. 16.4.
for himself, in Act. 17.28.
whom we live, and move, and are: to whom Princes are not Job. 34.19.
comparable in respect of glory. Wherefore the fault is infinite, Infinite
peccat qui infinitam laeseris maiestatem. August. de ciuit. Dei lib. 21. cap.
11. Quida^ iniustum putant, us pro peccatis quantu^ libet magnis, paruo
scilicet tempore perpetratis, poena quisque da^netur aeterna. Quasi vllius id
vnquam iustitia attendat, vt tanta mora temporis quisque puniatur, quanta vnde
punietur admisit. An in vinculis? an in exilio? an in ipsa morte? Idem. cap.
12. Homo quanto magis fruebatur Deo, tanto maiore impietate dereliquis Deum,
and factus est malo dignus aeterno, qui hoc in se peremit bonum, quod esse
posset aeternum.
because God is infinite which does forbid the fault, and deserves infinite
and eternal torment, because his authority is infinite, who by the sin is
disobeyed, and his justice eternal which requires punishment. In this
authority both Deuteronomy. 33.3.
Moses and Isai. 1.2. etc.
the Prophets, Mat. 5.20.22. etc.
our Savior Christ and 1. Cor. 11.23.
his Apostles, have grounded their laws and doctrines: insinuating thereby the
greatness of the message they did bring, and the necessity of obedience to be
given thereunto. Yea for this cause the lawmakers among the Minos Cretensibus.
Plat. lib. de leg. 3. Paetricius. lib. 1. de repub. in praefat. Finxit se Iouem
in concilio habere cuius nulu singula quaeque decreta ad Cretenses deferret.
Postea in antrum Iouis descendit, noua instituta detulit, quae Iouis mandata
esse asseruit. Lycurgus leges suas authoritate Apollinis Delphici confirmauit.
Cic. de divine. libr. 1. Plutarc. vita Lycurg. Zeleucus a Minerua. Clem. Alexan.
Stroot 1. Numa ab Aegeria. Plutarc. in vit. Numae. Augustine. de ciuit. Dei lib.
7. cap. 35.
heathen, when they would bind their laws to be had in reverence, were wont to
persuade their subjects to whom they gave them, that their laws were devised
and approved by the Gods. Thirdly, the end of this commandment which was to
teach him obedience and humility, whereon his life and happiness consisted: as
namely, that he was not such a Prince on earth, Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 13.
vt esset dominus aliquis naturae suae.
but that he had a sovereign lord: so that therein he might know the Lord, and
know himself, which is the sum of knowledge: God, as the chief Lord, his
creator and loving father, the liberal giver of all his welfare: himself, to
be his servant, a creature, and one that had received all from him. Herein
therefore Deuteronomy. 6.3.4.5.
consisted both the inward and outward worship of God. Inward, as obedience,
honor, love, confidence, and religious fear, wherewith man should honor God
Deuteronomy. 10.12. Psalm. 116.
in thankfulness: outward, in actual and outward abstinence from sin, and
reverence unto the voice of God. Wherefore it is manifest by the eating of this
fruit, that Tertul. lib. aduers. Iudaeos. In hac enim lege Adae data, omnia
praecepta condita recognoscimus, quae postea pullulauerunt data per Mosen, etc.
the whole worship of God was violated: to the which, if we shall join the
easines of the precept to be kept, and the power that was in Adam to have
observed it, August. de ciuitat. Dei. lib. 21. c. 12. Sed poena aeterna, dura
and iniusta sensibus videtur humanis, quia in hac infirmitate moribunlorum
sensuum, deest ille sensus altissimae purissimaeque sapientiae, quo sentiri
possit quantum nefas in illa prima praeuaricatione commissum est.
there is none so void of sense, but may soon conceive, that not without
cause but of just desert, the punishment of death was inflicted thereon.

Question 10. verse 17. What death the Lord threatened, when he said: in the
day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall die the death?
THe death which the Lord denounced, August. lib. sexaginta quinque quaest. q.
32. Cum ergo requiritur. etc. Virum animae, an corporis, an totius hominis, an
illa quae secunda dicitur: respondendum est, omnes. Deserta anima Adae a Deo,
iure dicitur mortua prima morte, ex qua tres postea secutae sunt mortes.
was the death of soul and body, which is John 11.13.14. Revel. 20.14.
called the first and second death; neither could it be of the soul alone
Philo Iudaeus de Allegor. legis lib. 2. Gregor. lib. 6. Epistol. ep. 31. ad
Eulog. Si enim Adae qui primus peccauit anima in peccato mortua non est:
quomodo de ligno vetito ei dictum est, in quacunque, etc. Constat itaque quia
in carne non est mortuus.
as some suppose, 2. Corinthians. 5.10.
because the body was also guilty of the crime; and sin it self is so
contagious, that it does 1. Cor. 15.33. Ecclus. 13.1.
corrupt as pitch, whatsoever touches it, and Prou. 6.27. Isai. 9.18.
consume like fire whatsoever it takes hold of. By means whereof, when Adam
had declined in his wisdom, from the wisdom of the Lord, Genesis 3.6.
by knowing in his own wisdom the goodness of the fruit, Like as 2. Sam. 15.3
Romans 1.22.
the same his wisdom was turned into foolishnes: his will when he lusted for
the fruit, being separate from the will of God, became rebellious Romans 8.7.
and enemy to God: his happiness when he would augment it Ambros. lib. 1. de
Paradiso. cap. 14. Non solum sicut dij esse homines desierunt, sed etiam qui
quasi dij erant, quibus dictum est; ego dixi dij estis, sui gratiam
perdiderunt. Fulgent. lib. de praedesimas. ad Mon. c 17 Qui concupiuit plus
extra se, minus factus est in se.
above the measure God had given him, became unto him misery and infelicitie;
his body which was made to set forth the glory of God, Matthew. 5.28.
so soon as the eye had seen the fruit with liking, his hand had taken it,
his mouth eaten it, his stomach received it, was even as Isai. 30.14. Ierem.
22.28.
a broken vessel which is profitable for nothing, and therefore to be returned
to the mould from whence it was. The Lord foreshewed it to Adam in these
words: thou shall die the death, or after the Hebrew phrase, in dying thou
shall die, that is, thou shall surely die, or thou can not but die, plainly
expressing the danger of the same. How then comes it to pass, that both Adam
and Heua, so soon as they had tasted of the fruit, gave not up the ghost
immediately? Doubtless thorough the singular mercy of the Lord, tempered with
his justice. They were presently partakers of both, that the justice of God
might be fulfilled: but yet not fully, that the Lord therein might declare his
mercy. Concerning the soul: they who had separated themselves, that is, their
wisdom and their will, were separate from God, from the love and favor of God,
Basil. Hom. quod Deus non est author mali: Quantum enim discedebat a vita,
tantum appropinquabaet ad mortem: vita enim est Deus, priuatio autem vitae
mors; quare sibi ipsi mortem, per secessum a Deo Adam parauit. August. lib. de
Spir. and anim. cap. 36. Viuit anima naturali vita, etiamsi spirituali vita non
viuat. Sed talis vita mors est potius quam vita: quoniam mors peccatorum
pessima. Bernard. ad Milites Templar. cap. 11. Vita siquidem Deus animae, sicut
ipsa corporis.
which is the privation of goodness and felicity, and the very death and
torment of the soul thorough Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 20. Quis enim dic obsecro,
talem ad confessionem adegit? (Intelligit Cain.) Nullus alius quam conscientia
ille incorruptus index. Nam si null ac in peccatum declinauerat, statim
insurrexit conscientia, inclamansque and ostendens peccatorum magnitudine^, and
omnibus seipsam poenis obnoxiam fecit.
conscience of guiltines, and fear of punishment: this is the prison of the 1.
Pet. 3.19.
souls departed, and the chains of Satan, wherewith Jude. verse. 6.
he is tied and reserved to the judgment of the great day: of which they are
both partakers also, whereby they are compelled to fly from God, and Adam Genesis
3.10.
confessed he was afraid. And for the bodily death, it is gathered by some
that the time thereof was set Justin. Mart. Dial. cum Trif. Mill annos in
mysterio designari intelligimus. Vt enim Adae dictum est, quo die, etc. S^imus
enim mill annos non compleuisse. Nouimus quoque dictum illud, quod dies domini
sit sicut mill anni huc pertinere. Irenae. cont. Haeres. li. 5
in respect of God, to whom one day Psalm. 90.4. 2. Pet. 3.8.
is as a thousand years: seeing no man ever lived a day in that account. But
rather in deed it was fulfilled, Heb. 2 15. Symmachus translateth the Hebrew
word ((...) moth tamuth) thou shall be mortal. Hieron. Trad. Hebrae. in Genesis
but it signifies that, and more also, as Exodus 19 12. and 21.12. Leuit.
20.2.9. and^.
in that he was in bondage unto death, for as much as death it self Theodoret.
in Genesis quaest. 38. August. de ciuit. Dei lib. 13. cap. 23. Non ideo deb^t
absurdum videri quia non eo prorsus die, a corpore sunt soluti: eo quippe die
mutata in de terius virtataque natura, atque a l gno vitae separati ne
iustissima, mortis in ijs etiam corporalis necessitas facta est, cum qua nos
necessitate natisum ^s.
began to wound their bodies in the day they sinned, by hunger, cold, nakedness,
subjection to mortality, loss of native beauty and such like, that the very
life continued in so many miseries, may seem to be Aug. de peccator. merit.
and remissi. lib. 1. cap. 16. Quamuis ergo annos multos ^o^tea vixerins, illo
tamen d^e mori coeperunt, quo mortis legem, qua in senitem veterascerent
acceperunt. Non enim stat vel ^^m^^^ puncto, sed sine intermissione labitur,
quicquid continua immutatione sensim curr^t ad fin^m non perficientem sed
consumentem, Gregor in euangel. Hom. 37. Temporalis vita aeternae vitae
comparata mors est potius dicenda quam vita.
not life but a prolonged death. Thus deep did Adam drink of the wine of the
wrath of God. That he died not the extremity of death, behold how grace
abounds in the Lord; Adam now by sin was made Romans 6.16.
the servant unto sin, the wages whereof is death and condemnation, the
horrible pains and endless woes whereof no creature can endure. Wherefore when
Adam must die, the justice of God requiring it, the Lord in his endless mercy
Irenae. lib. 3. cap. 20. Quia enim non erat impossible, eum hominem, qui semel
victur ^^^at and elisus, per ^^^alentia^ replasmare, and obtinere brauium
victoriae: Iteu^ autem in possibile erat, vt salutem perciperet, qui sub
peccato ceciderat: vtraque operatus est filius, verbu^ Dei existens, etc. Si
autem, homo non vicisset inimicum hominu, non just victus esset inimicus.
Rursus autem, nisi Deus donasset salutem, no^ firmiter haberemus ea^; and nisi
homo coniunctus fuisset Deo nostro, non potuisset particeps fieri
incorruptibilitatis.
translated this death unto his Son our Savior, who Ioh. 10.18. Galat. 1.4.
willingly for the love he bare to man took on him to endure the punishment,
and making Isai. 53.10.
his soul an offering for sin, the justice of God by him was fully
satisfied, the soul of Adam Irenae. lib. 3. cap. 34. Cum autem saluatur homo,
oportet saluari eum, qui prior formatus est homo, quoniam nimis irrationabile
est, illum quidem qui vehementer ab inimico laesus erat, and prior captiuitate
passus est, dicere non eripi ab eo qui vicerit inimicum, ereptos vero filios
eius, quo^ in eadem captiuitate generani. Idem cap. 39. Sic and hi (scil.
Tatiani) qui contradicunt saluti Adae nihil proficiunt, nisi quod semetipsos
haereticos faciunt and aduocatos serpentis. August. epist. 99. Et de illo
quidem primo homine, patre generis humani, quod eum ibidem soluerit ( 1. Pet.
3.) ecclesia fera tota consentit. Idem. Tertul. in fine lib. de poenitent.
Gregor. epist. lib. 6. Epist. 31. ad Eulolaum and Anast.
reserved from death. And for the bodily death, he wisely made it a salve to
heal his sore, reserving him a while, as it were to bewail his sin, and to
wrestle with his enemy of whom he had bin foiled, and after made it a passage
into glory. So true it is that is spoken by the Prophet: Ezech. 18.32.
I desire not the death of him that dies, says the Lord, and Iam. 2.13. Psalm.
103.
again: mercy rejoices against judgment. Who is like unto the Lord: so good
to those that wait for him? as a father he has compassion of us, for he
remembers whereof we are made.

Question 11. verse 18. Wherefore it is said: it is not good that man should be
himself alone?
THe goodness of the Lord having laded man with so much felicity, does yet
epsy as it were a spot which might obscure the perfection of his happiness:
and that was, that man was The word (...) lebado, one without a second of the
same kind. Ierem. 49.31. Lament. 1.1. Zachar. 12.12.
himself alone. But how could he be alone? who had the presence and dominion
of so Genesis 1.28.
many creatures? yea how could he be alone, that had the Ioh. 16.32.
comfortable presence of God himself? wherefore he was already Psalm. 16.11.
exceedingly blessed, so that to have a help could alone augment his
blessedness. The meaning therefore is, as if God had said: there lacks yet
something to make up the full felicity of man, and that is a help which may be
with him. God said, it is not good: not as men do Tertul. contr. Prax. Non
vox, and sonus, and aer offensus, intelligibilis auditu.
speak by voice, but in his counsel, that is, August. de Genesis ad lit. lib.
9. cap. 2. Vtrum temporaliter, etc. Luth in Genesis com. c. 2.
even the holy Trinity did find it, know it, and define it in his wisdom,
to be not good. That which is called good, is so accepted, Arist. rhetoricor.
ad Theodect. lib. 1. cap. 6. Vt virtutes, vera voluptas, diuitiae, etc. Cic.
offic. lib. 1.
because it is either August. cont. Faust. lib. 22. cap. 27. Angeli habent
contemplationem and actionem suam; and aeterno imperio liberaliter quia
suauiter seruiunt: nos vero just viuimus, si ex fide viuimus quae per
dilectionem operatur, habentes spem ipsius iustitia perficiendae vsque ad
quanda^ ineffabiliter suauissimam saturitatem.
pleasant, or 1. Tim. 4.8.
profitable, or Ambros. offic. lib. 2. cap. 3. Nihil autem bonum scriptura,
nisi quod honestum asserit. Et vtile sane and iucundum sine honesto mala sunt.
honest: and whatsoever has these three properties united, the same is said to
be simply good: and if it have but some part of these, then is it good in
part, and not simply or absolutely so. He created Adam good, and yet he said
it is not good; both these may As partly good, partly not good: at this time
good, at other times evil.
truly stand together. But the time must be considered, and also the For
seeing the Lord did not create all men at one instant, as he did the Angels,
but in the loins of Adam disposed them: therefore whatsoever belonged unto
man's nature by creation, was placed in the person of Adam, from him to be
communicated to his children.
person of Adam, to the end we may discern how and wherefore it is not good.
In respect of the time either past or present, it was not good, that is, in
part not good, or not so fully good, but the same by adding of a help might
be increased, that is to say, man's state might be bettered by joining of an
help: for although in regard of that which was just and honest, The Chaldee
Paraphrast expounds good; apt, convenient, right, agreeable to the rest.
it was good; even man was good, as he was first created, as fully good as
afterward he was; having pleasure and profit also joined in abundant measure:
yet in respect Chrysostom. in Genesis 14. Vt non solum honest sed commode viuat.
But from this place, the Jews abundantly commend the state of marriage,
saying, he is not a whole man that is without a wife, that he is without good,
without joy, without blessing, without dwelling, without law, without peace:
being now grown superstitiously in love with marriage, as sometime they were
of Images.
of that pleasant good, and profitable, which man was to receive by the
society of his wife, the majesty of God affirms it was not good; which
perfection of goodness all living creatures (man excepted) had received, both of
society in their kind, and power to increase their kind: but in respect of the
time to come, it was simply not good, that is to say, not Ierem. 29.6.
honest, as it is a branch of justice, Prou. 18.22.
not profitable, not Prou. 5.18.19.
delightful for man to be himself alone. Not honest, because Deuteronomy. 32.4.
Matthew. 18.14.
it was not just, that there should be wanting so many reasonable creatures of
the nature of Adam, as Ephesians. 1.4.
the Lord had decreed should be unto his glory. Not profitable, for as much as
no creature could Verse. 20. August. de Genesis ad lit. lib. 9. c. 3. Nihil aliud
probabiliter occurrit, quam propter filios procreandos, sicut adiutoriu^ semini
est terra; and non video quid prohibere potuerit, vt essent ijs etiam in
Paradiso honorabiles nuptiae.
be an help meet for Adam, neither could Adam increase and multiply without an
help. Neither could it have bin so delightful unto Adam, to have bin partaker
of his happiness, if he had not received as it were Aristot. Ethicor. lib. 9.
cap. 9. (...). Idem magnor. moral. lib. 2. (...). Vt igitur seipsum esse, est
vnicuique expetibile, sic and amici esse, vel id quo frui amico possit, and
similiter. Esse autem ideo est expetibile quia sibi bonum esse, ipsum esse,
sentit; and talis sensus per seipsum incundus est. Eccles. 9.4.
another self, with whom to have taken solace and rejoiced. Whereby in the
second place it follows, that by the name of man or Adam is meant, The name
Adam, is often in Scripture, in the Hebrew tongue, used for Man, as a common
name to all: as Psalm. 49.2. Ezech. 2.1. etc.
not only that singular person, who was already formed, but Calvin. in Genesis 2.
Non tamen ad solam eius personam restringo, sed potius existimo communem esse
humana vocationis regulam. Melancth. in Symbol.
the whole posterity of Adam, which was to be partaker of his nature: which
exposition the Scriptures evidently Romans 5.12.14.15. 1. Corinthians. 15.21.22.
where Adams nature is made ye subordinate author of all mankind, and their
state of misery derived from his.
teach, the Iren. lib. 3. cap. 34. Hic est autem Adam, si oportet veram dicere,
primiformis ille homo, de quo scriptura aijt dixisse Dominum^ faciamus hominem
(item, non est bonum vt homo sit solus ipse) nos autem omnes ex ipso, propterea
quoque ipsius haereditauimus appellationem.

Tertul. lib. de exhortat. ad castitat. Adam princeps generis and delicti.

Ambros. off^^ior. lib. 1. cap. 28. Non est bonum. etc. Ad adiume^tion ergo
mulier data est vi^o.

August. Non vnum h^minen intelligit se^ hominum genus. Chrysostom. in 1. Cor 15.
Hom. 41. Leo Sermon. de Natiu. Dom. 4. Vniuersa posteritas in illo audiuit.
Anastasius Episc. N^ an. qu. est. in Script. 65.


Fathers follow, and 1. In whatsoever an help was necessary unto Adam, in the
same it had been necessary unto all his posterity, if they had continued in
the state of their creation: ergo. it is spok^n of mankind, not of Adam one
singular person. 2. In whatsoever an help was ^^ofitable unto Adam, in the
same i^ was necessary to his posterity (^aue to them who are by God himself
exempted) after the fall. Ergo. 3. In many things this help is necessary unto
Adams children, wherein the same was not needful in the state of c eation, as to
be a remedy against lust, a comfort in adversity, etc. Ergo.
manifest reason does confirm. And surely, if it were not good for Adam in
the state of happiness, much more is it not August. de Genesis (...). lib. 9. cap.
7. ^ombod. lib. 4. distinct. 26. B. Quod san^ est ad officiu^, aegrotis est ad
remedium. Luther in C^n. cap. 2. Ho^ie mulier non solum ad multiplicationem,
sed ad vitae socielite^, defensione^que and (...) iam; i^o quod miserabile est,
ad remediu^ peccati.
good for Adams children in misery, to be alone without a help. But the
Scripture in other places seems to affirm the contrary. It were good (says
the Apostle) 1. Cor. 7.1.8.
not to touch a woman. And again, it were good for the unmarried and the
widows to abide. Likewise our Savior commends those Matthew. 19.11.12.
that have made themselves chaste for the kingdom of heaven. They of the Church
of Rome do lay such hold on these places of the Scripture, to maintain the
nurse of whoredom, that is, their laws and decrees of single life, that they
do sharpen them, and retch them out, and rent them even in sunder, and yet (as
we shall see) nothing to their purpose. And Conciliatio. 3.
first it is to be observed, that herein they Peter. Tom. 1. lib. 4. in Genesis
Quid ergo? Doctrinam noui testamenti scriptur^e veteris testamenti con^^ariam
esse dicemus? minime vero, sed duo tempora duosque hominis status distinguere
oportet. Bellarm. Tom 1. ^ontr. 5. lib. 2 cap. 9. Deus loquitur de bono
speciei, Vaulus de bono indiui dui. Luth^r. vero similiter distinguit in bonu^
personale and common. c. 2. in Genesis
agree with us against the Manichees, that there is no contrariety of speech,
between this that Moses speaks (it is not good) and that which the Apostle
says; it were good for a man not to touch a woman, because it is not spoken of
the Apostle, of the same and according to the same, which the Lord here by
Moses Fallacia est non causae pro causa. Item compositionis.
speaks of. But these men reconcile these places thus. Bellarm. Tom. 1.
controu. 5. lib. 2. c. 9. Deus loquitur pro eo tempore quo mundus erat vacuus,
Paulus pro eo quo mundus erat plenus.

Perer. Tom. 1. lib. 4. in Genesis Citat Cyprianu^, and male torquet ipsius verba,
in tractatu de Habit. virginum. Prima sententia crescere (inquit) and generare
praecepit. Secunda continentiam suasit, etc. Loquitur Cypria^. non de votis
caelibatus, sed virgins a fastu and luxu dehortatur. Praecedunt enim: nec
monilium aut vesti^m quaerat ornamenta sed morum. Castitatem vero suadet ab
vtili: Deinde. Nec hoc iubet Dominus sed hortatur; nec iugum necessitatis
imponit, quando maneat voluntatis arbitrium liberum.


It was not good for man to be alone: namely in the beginning, when God
pronounced it, and that the world was unpeopled, and the earth uninhabited; but
now ye men are multiplied, and the earth replenished, it were good, and good in
respect of life to come, for a man not to touch a woman. The grossnes of which
assertion is many ways notorious, but especially in this, they attend not what
they say. Marriage (say they) was good, namely, for the increasing of the world.
Take marriage now away, and where is the lawful succession of the age to come?
It is therefore doubtless, as necessary now as at the first. But perhaps they
do not generally reprove it, save in the godly (beside the number of whom,
the world might be well increased) or in the clergy, and such as have taken
upon them holy vows. Let them show such difference to be made by scripture.
Let them show by the word of God such vows are lawful. We for our part
acknowledge with the Apostle, Heb. 1^.4.
that marriage is honorable among all, and 1. Cor. 7.9.
whosoever has not the gift of continency ought to marry, and that it is
more necessary for the increasing of the Church of God, and the number of the
faithful, that the godly should embrace this benefit, who of conscience would
have care to bring up their Ephesians. 6.4.
children in the nurture of the Lord, and that Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 21. Nam
si nuptiae, Vel puerorum educatio, praepedimentum forent in virtutum itinere,
nequaquam in hanc nostram vitam nuptias introduxisset vniuersorum Dominus.
if marriage and the bringing up of children were a hindrance in the way of
virtue, the Lord of all things would not have coupled it with this our life.
Wherefore those that do but observe the words of the text, shall see these
places easily to reconcile themselves in a far other meaning, then these
allow, if Statuit enim Romans Ecclesia vt nemo contra eum sensum, quem tenuis and
tenet sancta matter Ecclesia (scilices Romana) cuius est iudicare de vero sensu
and interpretatione sanctarum scripturarum. Council. Trident. sess. 4. Huic vero
strenue refragatur Caietanus Card. inter suos athleta primarius. Co^mentar. in
Genesis 1. Si quando occurrerit (inquit) aliquis sensus textui co^sonus, quamuis a
torrente doctoru^ alienus, lector aequum se prabeat ce^sore^, etc.
they will suffer the holy ghost to be his own interpreter. The Lord (we see)
absolutely pronounces here, it is not good for man (that is, as the Fathers
Supra dictum est. Item, Augustine. lib. de Genesis ad lit. 9. cap. 9. hic vero cum
implenda esset hominibus terra, etc. propter quid aliud secundum ipsum,
quaesitus est foemineus sexu, adiutor, nisi vt serentem genus humanu^, natura
mu^iebris tanquam terrae foecu^ditas adiuuaret?
expound it, and the adversaries of marriage themselves dare not deny it)
mankind to be without a help. But our Savior and the Apostle in plain words
restrain their speeches, to certain persons, and to certain causes. Our
Savior says not for all men, but for them to whom it is given. The Apostle
says, it were good, but for fornication; and wherefore good? 1. Cor. 7.28.
because such shall have trouble in the flesh. So that he affirms Verse. 32.
that because of care and trouble in the flesh, it is profitable as he says,
Verse. 26.
for the present necessity, to those 1. Cor. 7.6.7.8.
that can abstain, to abide unmarried, Verse. 34.
that their only care may be to be holy in body and in spirit. Thus there is
no show of contradiction. The Lord says, it is not good for man to be alone:
not good in respect of Pro. 5.19. Eccles. 9.9. August. lib. de bono coniug.
cap. 3. Cur sit bonum merito quaeritur, quod mihi non videtur propter solam
filiorum procreationem, sed propter ipsam etiam naturalem in diuerso sexu
societatem. Fulgent. Epist. 1. cap. 3. In illis namque bonis quae fecit Deus,
inuenitur casta copulatio vxoris and viri, inquibus Dei operibus libido non
potest inueniri: and non dep^^tatur fidelibus coniugibus ad peccatum, carnis
indul^^ commixtio.
sanctified love and godly delectation in the society of marriage: not good
in respect of profit, Psalm. 137.3. and 138.3 6.
either increase of children, or Prou. 31.10. etc. 1. Tim. 5.14.
household government: not good in respect of Ier. 29.6. Romans 9.5.
justice, August. de Genesis ad lit. lib. 9. cap. 7. Denique vtriusque sexus
infirmitas propendens in ruinam turpitudinis recte accipitur honestate
nuptiaerum.
honesty, or Chrysostom. in Isai. 6. Hom. 3. Sed adulter ob inoptam sensus,
exitium animae suae conciliat: sed dixerit aliquis, compellitur natural^
concupiscentia. At non permitt^t elabi vxor, quae illi sort obtigit, sed
inflat eripiens illi veniam; ob id enim matrimoniu^ and eius legitimus vsu^
permittitur, ne quid horu^ excusare p^ssit maritus.
continency, since the fall of man: not good for Adam nor the greatest Est
enim indefinita vniuersalis.
part of his posterity. Our Savior says, it is good for men: he says not
for all men, nor for most men, but for those to whom it is given; such as are
chaste from their mothers womb, such as are made chaste by men, such as do (
Matthew. 19.11.12.
that is to say, which can) make themselves chaste The kingdom of heaven, is
either the kingdom of grace, or the kingdom of glory: of grace, as Matthew.
3.2. consists of spiritual graces. Romans 14.17. It is the same therefore which
the Apostle speaks of 1. Cor. 7.5.32.34.
for the kingdom of heaven, that is, for the service of the Lord in this
kingdom of grace, from which the troubles and crosses of marriage do often
hinder: namely, such as are by privilege Hieron. Zanch. de oper. dei part. 3.
lib. 1 cap. 1.
exempted from that which does make it not good to be alone, as the procreation
of children, burning affection and such infirmities. The Apostle says it were
good, not simply good, 1. Cor. 7.26. A praesenti vtilitat^ rem commendat,
inquis Chrysostom. in Math. Hom. 15.
but for the present time, that is, Cyprian de discip. and habit. virgin. vos
ab hae sententia (Genesis 3.16.) liberae estis, vos mulieru^ tristitias and
gemitus non timetis: nullus vobis de partu circa filios metus est, nec maritus
est dominus, sed dominus vester and caput Christus est, ad instar and vicem
masculi.
because of the corrupted time, which brings so many domages unto marriage,
the time of persecution, and such other times of trouble: 1. Corinthians. 7.35.
Ambrosius in 1. Corinthians. 7. verse. 26.
good in respect of utility, if they can abstain, because the crosses that
happen in marriage unto men, by reason of their wife Ierem. 16.1.2. etc.
and family, do double their grief: but not good in respect of honesty
Clement. Alexand. Strom. 3. Perijt apud ipsos charitas etc. disputat. contr.
philosophos and Marcionitas qui abstinere nuptiis voluerunt, eo quod generatio
maximoru^ maloru^ causa esset.
even in times of affliction, save to them to whom it is given to abstain. But
it is a world to see, how these places are abused, by the adversaries of this
holy institution. It were good, says the Apostle, not to touch a woman: ergo
Albert Pigh. lib. 14. de vot. monast. Pet. A Soto in confess. cathol. Bellarm.
Tom. 1. contro. 5. lib. 2. cap. 6. Baptismus non solum poenam, sed etiam culpam
tollit; professio autem monastica, non tollit culpam, sed solam poenam. idem
cap. 9. nos autem praeter has duas calibatus vtilitates agnoscimus tertiam,
nimirum ad placandum Deo, and praemia ^axima promerenda.
say they, single life is meritorious to salvation. It were good for a man not
to touch a woman, Hieron. cont. Iouin. lib. 1. si bonu^ est mulierem non
tangere, malum ergo est tangere; nihil enim bono contrariu^ est nisi malum.
therefore it is evil to touch a woman. It were good but for fornication;
therefore Hieron. ibid. Anselm. in 1. Cor. 7. vnde pateat quia malum est
tangere, nihil enim bono contrarium nisi malum. Si autem malum est and
ignoscitur, ideo conceditur, ne malo quid deterius fiat.
say they, that which is evil is permitted, least that which is worse should
be performed: All men Math. 19.11.
can not receive this doctrine, says our Savior: they teach Council. Trident.
Ses. 24. Can. 9. Si quis dixerit, clericos in sacris ordinibus constitutos,
etc. posse matrimonium contrahere, anathema sit; cum Deus id recte petentibus
non de neget, nec patiatur nos supra id, quod possumus tentari. Bellarm. Tom.
1. cont. 5. lib. 2. cap. 9. nam essi non omnes habeant hoc donum, tamen omnes
possunt habere, si a Deo illud petant.
all me^ may receive it that will, so that they will ask it. The Apostle
teaches, 1. Cor. 7.37.
that the woman her husband being dead, is at liberty to marry again with
whom she will in the Lord: they Tertul. lib. de poenitent. item de Monogamia.
quae haeresis, si secundas nuptias vt i^licitas, iuxta adulterium iudicamus?
quid est enim adulterium quam matrimonium illicitum? Synod. Constantinop. 6.
can. 3.
affirm, that second marriage is no better then adultery. The Apostle
testifies, Heb. 13.4.
that marriage is honorable unto all; and that 1. Tim. 4.1.2.
it is a doctrine of devils to forbid it: they teach Epistola Decret. Siricij
Papa ad Himer. cap. 7. Tom council. 1. in vita Siric. (Sed est fictitia
Epistola.) Qui illiciti priuilegij excusatione nituntur, vt sibi asserant
veterihoc (scil. matrimonium) lege concessum, nouerint se ab omni Ecclesiastico
honor, quo indigne vsi sunt, Apostolicae sedis authoritate deiectos, nec
vnquam posse veneranda attrectare mysteria.
that it is dishonorable among Gods ministers, and Decret. Innocent. 1. Epist.
3. ad Exuper. cap. 1. qui in Diaconij ministerio, aut in officio presbyterij
positi. quos incontinentes esse aut fuisse, generati filij prodiderunt: omni
ecclesiastico honor priuentur, nec admittantur accedere ad ministerium, quod
s^la continentia oportet impleri.
separate them whom God had joined, and burn the bodies of those, and accurse
their souls, Synod. Trident. Sess. 24. can. 9. supra in s.
that do by word or deed maintain the lawfulnes of marriage in all men,
according to the Scriptures. Certain it is, that the opinion of Tertullian,
concerning the unlawfulness of second marriage, August. de Haeres. H. 86. non
ergo ideo (quod animam effigiatum corpus, dixit Tertullianus, and ipsum deum
corpus esse dicit, nempe spirituale quoddam and aethereum) sed quia ^^ansiens
ad Cataphriges, quos ^nte destruxerat, coepit etiam secundas nuptias, contra
Apostolicam doctrinam, tanquam stupra damnare.
was counted of the Church an heresy: and Jerome himself confesses, Hieron.
in catalog. illustrium scriptorum. Specialiter aduersus ecclesiam texuit
volumina, de pulicitia, de monogamia, etc.
he wrote the same against the church. Jerome also Vt tribus suis pro libris
contra Iouin. Apologeticis constat. and Testimonio Erasm. in annot. quid vero
pontificij: standum est (inquiunt) potius a part Hieronymi, quam ab omnibus
aduersarijs.
was greatly blamed of the godly of his time, for too much preferring the
state of single life. But it is fatal unto 2. These. 2 3.9.
the Church of Rome, that no heresy since the coming of our Savior, should
get perfection, til it has been authorized by the same. Among which this
devilish 1. Tim. 4.1.3. confess. Anglica. Section. 18.
doctrine, of forbidding marriage, although it were Nicolaitae. Epiph. Haeres.
25. Tatiani sieve Eucratitae, Epiphan. Haeres. 46. August. de Haeres. 2^.
Marcionite contra quo^ pro nuptijs ipse Tertullianus acerrime dimicauit, lib.
contra Marcion. lib 4. and alibi. Cataphryges a Montano de secundia nuptijs.
August. Haeres. 26.
maintained by many heretics, and favored too much Tertullian. Origin.
Hieron. etc.
by some of the Fathers of the Church; yet found it no fast footing in any
part, till the mystery of iniquity, not with substantial authority of the
word, Twelve hundred godly Ministers were murdered in England, at the coming
of Augustine the Monk, who first forbad Priests marriage here. Beda Histor.
lib. 2. cap. 2. Galfred. Monumeth. li. 8. cap. 4. Similia recordantur in annal.
Germany and Galliae.
but with severe torments of sword and fire, had established the same in the
kingdom of darkness. Nevertheless, this truth of God never wanted sufficient
witness in the Church: either of the Scriptures, of Councels, or Fathers, or
visible demonstration of the hand of God, or of the enemies themselves, till
the time that 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. Immissis Luthero and alijs fi^elibus operarijs in
messem suam.
the Lord began to abolish Antichrist. The Apostle as one foreseeing Non tantum
Tati^na^, sed and Romana^, que sub titulo c^nnubij Sacerdotum. (...) mentum
matrimonij omne labefectauit. Sic enim. Arguunt. qui sunt in carne Deo pl^^ere
non possunt, ergo vxor^tus sa^erdos Deo placere non potest. Epist. Siricij.
cap. 7. and Epist. Innocent. 3. ad E^^p^^. cap. 1. Quod si hoc sit verum, ne
laicus maritus potest. Nam inquit Apost. nemo p^^est. Fallacia est (...)
carnis, Amphil^^logie: nam esse in carne, non est cum vxore viue^e, sed
scortari, aut aliquod regn^^^ retinere peccatum.
this heresy in the Church, does flatly call it, a doctrine of devils, and 1.
Cor. 7 9.
straightly charge all those to marry, that have not received the gift of
continency. If councels or fathers be opposed unto this, we answer: Justin.
Mart. Dialog. cum Trisson. (...).
Paul is a Father of the Fathers, and though either Doctor or Father, Galat.
1.8.9.
or an Angel from heaven, should teach contrary to this doctrine, we would
hold him no better then accursed. Neither ought we to regard what some one or
other in the Church has done before us, but what Cyprian Epist. 63. Non
querendum est. quid aliquis ante no^ fecerit, sed quid ille, qui ante omnes est
facien^um iusserit, Christus.

Ignatius Mart. Epist. ad Philadelph. (...), etc. Illis qui anti quitatem
obijciunt, ego dico, quod mihi antiquitas est Jesus Christus, quem nolle audire
manifestus est interitus.


Christ has taught and commanded, which was before them all. And yet how
severely has the Primitive Church and the most ancient fathers censured the
deprauers of this doctrine. In the Canon A maine authority against a Papist.
of the Apostles Canon. 6. Episcopus aut presbyter vxorem propriam, ne quaquam
sub obtentu religionis abijciat, si vero reiecerit, excommunicetur; sed si
perseuerauerit deijciatur.
it is decreed: If any Bishop, Minister or Deacon, should put away his wife
under color of Religion, he should be excommunicate, and if he persisted in it
he should be deposed. In the Council Socrat. Eccles. Histor. lib. 1. cap. 2.
Sozomen. lib. 1. cap. 22.
general of Canon. 8. De his qui se nominant Catharo^ (scil. Nouatianos. qui
cum presbytero coniugato noluerunt communicare) haec pra omnibus eos scriptis
conuenit profiteri, quod Catholicae and Apostolicae Ecclesiae dogmata
suscipiant and sequantur, id est, and bigamis se communicare, and his qui in
persecutione prolapsi sunt.
Niece, it was concluded, that it was lawful for all callings and degrees of
men to marry, and that as often as the parties were severed by death. The
Counsel of Gangra determined, Council. Gangrens. can. 1. 10. and 4. Si quis
discernit inter presbyterum coniugalum, etc.
that if any man put difference between a married Minister (and one unmarried)
as though for marriage sake he might not minister, he should be held accursed.
The Council likewise of Trulla, Council General. Constantinop. in Trulla. can.
1^. Quoniam Roman Ecclesiae pro canone traditum esse cognouimus, vt Diaconi
and presbyteri, qui digni qui ordinationem suscipiant, existimandi sunt,
profiteantur se non amplius suis vxoribus coniungendos: nos antiquum canonem
Apostolicae perfectionis ordinisque servants, hominum qui sunt in sacris,
coniugia firma and stabilia esse volumus, nequaquam eorum cum vxoribus
coniunctionem dissoluentes, vel eos mutua tempore conuenienti consuetudine
priuantes. Quamobrem si quis dignus, etc. nequaquam prohibeatur, si cum
legitima vxore cohabitet: sed neque ab eo postuletur abstenturum, ne benedictas
nuptias iniuria afficere cogamur. Si quis vero talem conatur a coniunctione cum
legitima vxore priuare, deponatur; and si quis presbyter, etc.
that it was as lawful for the Ministers as well as others to use the company
of their wives (although say they it were prohibited at Rome) which they prove
by the word of God, and authority of the Church, and that if any should go
about to deprive a married Minister, for marriage sake, he should be deposed;
and if any Minister or Deacon did divorce by any such pretense, he should be
excommunicate and deprived. If any man confess God and Christ (says
Ignatius) Ignatius Epist. ad Philadelph. Si quis Deum and Christu^ co^fitetur,
labe^ vero and coinquinatione^ vocet ((...)) legitimam commi^tione and
liberorum procreationem, aut cibos quosda^ abominabiles: talu habet ((...))
inhabitatorem Draconem illum Apostatam.
and shall call the procreation of children, or the society of man and wife, a
defiling or pollution: the same has that Apostaticall Dragon dwelling in him.
We count them happy (says Clem. Alexandrinus Strom. 3. Nos quidem castitate^,
and eos quibus hoc a Deo datum est, beatos dicimus: Monogamians autem, and quae
consistit in vno solo matrimonio honestatem admiramur, dicentes tamen, oportere
aliorum misereri, etc. De secu^di^ autem nuptijs, si vraris, inquit Apostolus,
iungere matrimonio. Cyprian. De Symbol. sect. 28. Conciliu^ vanitatis est, quod
Nouatus solicitauit, lapsis poenitentiam denegando, and secundas nuptias, cum
forte iniri eas necessitas exegeris condemnando.
Clement Alex.) to whom God gives continency, praising the same as a blessed
gift, and admire that chastity which is satisfied with the first marriage:
professing notwithstanding, that we ought to have compassion on others, and
one to bear an others burden, least he which thinks he does stand upright,
do fall himself. Of second marriages, says the Apostle, if thou burn, marry.
Chrysostom. says: Chrysostom. in epist. ad Tit. Hom. 2. Obstruere prorsus intendit
hereticorumora, qui nuptias vituperant ostendens eam rem culpa carere, imo ita
esse pretiosum, vt cum ipsa possit quispiam ad sanctum Episcopatus solium
subuebi.
Wherefore does the scripture nominate a Bishop to be the husband of one wife,
but to stop the mouths of heretics, which condemn marriage, showing that
marriage is without fault; yea, so precious that a man may therewith be placed
in the seat of a Bishop. Idem in Hebraeo^ Hom. Vtere cum moderatione nuptijs,
and primus eris in regno.
Again, use marriage moderately, and thou Matthew. 20.16.
shall be the first in the kingdom of heaven. And again, Chrysostom. in Isai.
6. Hom. 4. Ne abomineris nuptias, sed oderis scortationem, nam ego meo periculo
spondeo tibi salutem etiamsi vxorem habueris.
abhor not marriage, but hate whoredom, at my peril I will warrant thee
salvation although thou have a wife. It were unnecessary to allege more
authorities of Hilarious, of Augustine, of Fulgentius, and others both Greek
and Latin. The horrible Romans 1.21.26.2^.
wrath of God, upon the professors of this doctrine, has made it to those that
have any spark of grace, detestable. Pope Gregory when he saw the Six
thousand carcasses of infants found in one lake, which being unlawfully borne
in houses of Monkish religion, were privily made away, Huldricus, Episcop.
Augustan. epist. ad Nicol. 1. Papam.
hurt that came by infringing of his ordinance, 1. Cor. 7. Idem in epist.
Huldrici.
added unto the Apostles saying, it is better to marry then to burn. It is
(says he) better to permit marriage, then to give occasion of murder. And
withal requires those Gregor. in Pastor. part. 3. admon. 28. Admonendi sunt
itaque, vt si temptationum procellas, cum difficultate salutis tolerant,
coniugij portum petant.
that are tossed with the waves of temptation, to have access unto the haven
of wedlock. Would to God ( Bernard. de conuers. ad Cler. Sermon. 29. Vtinam qui
continere non valent, perfectione^ temerarie profiteri, aut coelibatui dare
nomina vererentur. Sumptuosa siquidem turris est, and verbum grande quod non
omnes capere possunt. Esset sine dubio melius nubere quam v^i, and saluari in
humili gradu fidelis populi, quam in Cleri sublimitate, and deterius viuere,
and districtius, iudicari. Multi enim, non quidem omnes, sed tamen multi,
certum est, nec latere queu^t pra multitudine, nec prae impudentia quaeru^t,
etc. Idem. Supra. In Domo Dei videamus horre^du^. siquidem post fornicationes,
post adulteria, post incestus, nec ipsa quidem apud aliquo^ ignominiae
passiones and turpitudinis opera desunt.
says Bernard) that those which cannot contain, would stand in awe to
profess single life; for it were doubtless much better to marry then to burn:
but there are many (says he) and so many that they cannot be hid for
multitude, and for impudency do not seek it, which do use their liberty as
an occasion to the flesh, abstaining from the remedy of marriage, and flowing
from thence in all manner of filthiness, fornications, adulteries, incests,
Sodomitrie, and that Bernard. ibid. Vtinam non fierent, quae vsque adeo non
conueniunt, vt nec. Apostolum haec scribere, nec nos dicere oporteret, vt nec
dicentibus crederetur, quod humanum aliquando occupauerit animum tam abominanda
cupido. Legate qui vult, Paulu^ Vergerium. Bernardin. Ochinu^. Bal eum de vitis
Pontificum, etc.
which filthy Sodom never knew. But one will say, such filthiness by all
means is to be avoided; but they are to be chosen to that office of the
Ministry, which can contain: the Lord himself Ezec. 14.4.
will answer them, that because they reprove such as Vnius vxoris viros, etc.
1. Tim. 3.2. Tit. 1.6.
he has allowed, he will send Isai. 24.2. and 28.11.12.13.
them such as they deserve: that all might be damned 2 Thessalonians. 2.10.11.12.
that will not obey the truth. Therefore we conclude with the Apostles words,
marriage is honorable Heb. 13.4.
among all: and he that cannot contain, let him 1. Cor. 7.9. (...).
take a wife. And with the Prophet: did Malac. 2.16.
not God make one? yet had he abundance of Spirit: and wherefore one? because
he sought a godly seed: therefore keep your selves in your Spirit, and let
none trespass against the wife of his youth: whereof shall be spoken in his
place.

Question 12. verse 18. Wherefore the woman is said to be a help before him?
THe woman is here described by her form or nature, and by the end wherefore
she was created: her nature is (...) cheneged, a (...) nagad. nunciare,
indicare: one, as it were, in who^ Adam might see himself. Commonly it is
translated similis ei, like him. Kimchi. iugiter coram ipso.
to be like unto the man in soul and in body, to differ in sex. The end of
her creation In the Hebrew she is called (...) ezer, a help: in the Chaldee
(...) samech, a shore or stay.
was to be a help to man. To be an helper: first for Prou. 5.18.19. Eccles.
9.9. verse. 18. It is not good, that is, not so good: or, it were better with
man if he had an help: ergo, she was an increaser or help unto his happiness.
the society of life, to increase his joy, she was made to be always his
delight. Secondly, Genesis 1.28. Ambros. de Paradis. c. 10. Adiutorium ad
generationem constitutionis humanae intelligimus.
to obtain the blessing; Increase and multiply, she was made to be an help
for procreation. Thirdly, to help him 1. Tim. 5.10.14. Prou. 31.28.
in bringing up of children and governing the family. Fourthlie, was added
after sin was entered, that she should be Prou. 31.12. 1. Sam. 19.11.
a help in sickness and infirmity. Fiftlie, a help against incontinencie 1.
Cor. 7.5.9. August. lib. de Genesis ad lit. 9. cap. 7. Quod sanis possit esse
officium, sit aegrotis remedium.
and a remedy against sin: that men having the benefit of marriage bed
Chrysostom. Hom. 3. in Isai. 6. Ob id enim matrimonium, and huius legitimus vs^s
permittitur, etc.
might thereby restrain Matthew. 5.28.
their thoughts, their Job. 31.1.
eyes, their 1. Cor. 7.2. Proverb. 5.2. 1. Cor. 6.18
bodies from following strange flesh. Herby we conclude, first that the woman
is of the Ephe. 5.28.33. Galath. 3.28. Contra Platonem qui marem and foeminam
in duas species distinxit.
same nature with man, of like reasonable soul. 2. That 1. Cor. 11.9.
she was made for man, and joined unto him for his Prou. 18.22. The Greeks
called a woman in their common speech (...): that is in English, a beautiful
evil, or a fair naught. Cyrill. lib. 3. in Julian. Sa^is perverse ad
institutum Dei. Contra etiam Seuerianos and Andronicos qui mulierem Satanae
opus dicebant. Epiph. Haeres. 4.5.

Item contra Homer. Odys. (...). 1. Non est grauius malum muliere aut
rabiosius. Nisi distinguas cum Hesiod. Erg (...). i. Bona nihil melius, mala
nihil peius.

Item cont. Thaletem, qui mulierem necessarium malum appellauit. Lacrt. lib. 1.
Denique contra Julian. Qui malo fuisse Adamo mulierem carpit: quae in nullo
(inquit) adiuuit sed decepit.


good. Thirdly, that in marriage Iam. 1.17. Prou. 19.14. Tertul. lib. de anim.
cap. 13. Natura veneranda est non erubescenda; concubitum libido, non conditio
foedauit; excessus, non status est impudicus. Fulgent. epist. 1. cap. 3. In
illis n^mque bonis quae fecit Deus, inuenitur casta copulatio vxoris and viri.
no thing is hurtful, except sin when marriage Romans 13.13. Arnob. in Psalm.
139. Et vsus coniugij, in coniugibus bonus est, in adulteris malus est.
is abused, or else 1. Cor 7.28. Romans 8.28.
the punishment of sin, which unto the godly is made a salve and not a sore.
Fourthlie, that marriage Heb. 13.4.
is a holy ordinance of God, Verse. 18. 1. Cor. 7 9 38.
profitable and necessary for all men, except those Zanch. de creat. Hom. lib.
1 cap. 1. Sicut enim cum aliquem donat continentiae dono, videtur illum a
communi lege propagandi, speciali priuilegio eximere and liberare.
who as it were by privilege are exempted by the Lord. Fiftlie, that before
the fall of man Ephesians. 5.25.26. Exhinc plurimum boni, nihil autem mali.
marriage was more excellent then single life. Wherefore we do commend single
life, Matthew. 19.13.
as Christ and his 1. Cor. ^.38. Chrysostom. in Isai. 6. Hom. 3. Neque ideo
quoniam melior est virginitas, malum est coniugium. August. lib. de bono
coniugij cap. 8. Neque ergo duo mala sunt connubium and fornicatio, quorum
alterum est p^^us, sed duo bona sunt connubium and continentia, quorum alterum
est melius.
Apostles have commended it, as a gift more excellent since our corruption, in
those that can receive it, Melancthon. Tom. 1. in Apologet.
so that it be applied unto the end thereof, that is, Matthew 19.12. Erasm. in 1.
Tim. 3. Pontificios aijt pro beneficio non pro regno castrare sese.
for the kingdom of heaven, for 1. Cor. 7.^4.
meditation and study how to please the Lord, 1. Cor. 7.26.3^.
forasmuch as it is more free and void of cares, and other calamities then
marriage is. But we add withal, according Et plus credendum est vel simplici
laico, scripturam afferenti, quam papae aut toti simul concilio, inquit Abb.
Panormitan.
to the Scriptures, that there is no more merits Romans 3.24. and 14.17.
in virginity, then in marriage. That chastity Tit. 2.5. 1. Pet. 3.2.
Perperam igitur, castum and maritum opponum pontificij: Synod. Trident. Sess.
24. etc.
is as well in marriage as in single life: and much more Cyprian. lib. 1. Epist.
holy is a chaste mind in marriage, then an unchaste person professing
chastity. That a godly Bishop 1. Tim. 3.2. Confess. Anglica. Sect. 18.
does the office of the Ministry, nothing the worse for that he is married,
August. de Bono coniugal. cap. 5. Ad hoc enim nuptae sunt, vt illa
concupiscentia redacta ad legitimum vinculum, etc.
but rather the better, and with more ability of doing good: as Sozomenus
Sozom lib. 1. cap. 11. Qui tametsi vxorem habebat and liberos, non tamen
propterea res diuinas negligentius obijt.
reports of Spiridion, and Nazianz. Orat. 28. de funere patris. Huic mulier
Dei beneficio concessa, non modo adiutrix, minus enim id laudis and
admirationis haberet, sed dux and antesignana fuit.
Nazianzene of his own father who was a Bishop: and likewise Mantuan. Factor.
lib. 1.
Mantuan of Hilarious a reverend Doctor of the Church.

Non nocuit tibi progenies, non obstitit vxor
Ligitimo coniuncta toro.
Sola erat in pretio quae nunc incognita virtus
Sordet, and attrito viuit cum plebe cucullo.
Which sounds thus much in English.

Neither wife nor children did hurt thy holiness,
Which thou had gotten in marriage lawfulnes:
Because thou did delight in virtues noble grace,
Which now forlorn of vowed chastity,
With married folk has chosen place.
Question 13. verse 22. Wherefore it is said: God took one of the ribs of Adam
and made it a woman?
THe Spirit of God proceeds to declare the manner how the woman was created:
wherein chiefly is to be considered the time when, the Author and means, and
the matter whereof she did consist. She was (as Hieron. in 1. Tim. cap. 2. Quia
in factura posteriores sunt, and priores in culpa.
one, not unaptly speaks) the last in creation, but first in transgression:
for the Scriptures evidently show, that Adam was Verse. 8.15.16.20.21 which was
done in the sixth day. Genesis 1.29.31.
first placed in Paradise, had received the commandment, had named the
creatures, before he found a help meet for him. Which was no doubt, that the
woman thereby Iun. Parall. lib. 2. cap. 58. Qui posterior ex ^ltero, and causa
eius creatus est, non debet in alterum authoritate vti: huiusmodi est foemina.
in 1. Tim. 2.13.
might acknowledge her condition, Prou. 13.12.
and man might be more thankful for the benefit. The Author was the Lord. The
accidental means, that Adam slept. Which sleep was not a Hieron. Trad. Hebr.
in Genesis Et misit dominus deus extasin super Adam; pro extasi, id est, mentis
excussu, in hebraeo habetur Tardema ((...)) quod Aquila (...), Symmachus (...),
id est gra^em and profundum s^porem interpretati sunt.
natural or ordinary sleep: for the natural sleep is not said to fall on
men, as it were from heaven; but Fernel. lib. de funct. and humor. cap. 11.
Idem de partium morb^^. cap. 2.
from the stomach ascends to the head. The cause wherefore he slept, was
that he Chrysostom. Him. in Genesis 15. Vt ne sentien^o d^lorem, mulieri ex se
formate, postea d^loris memor insensus ^^eret. Epipha 1. Here Is. 48. (...) quod
f^^erit psum ad tempus non sentire dolorem. At non erat mentis extasi^, sed
s^^^m participatio, quo i^ ^^^^untur ^^nes sensus ad quietem con^cisi.
might not perceive or feel the taking of a member from his body. And
forasmuch as such divine sleep was Genesis 28.1.2 Number 12.6.
a mean whereby God revealed himself unto the Patriarchs, it Bernard. in
sep^^^gess. Sermon. 2. ^lle s poratus videtur, praeexcessu contemplationis R^
(...) enim in l^cat q^ (...) tanquam eb^ius de cella vinaria veniens, and (...)
illud vt ^gnum sacrame^^^^, etc.
may be thought that God in sleep did teach him whence she came, what she was,
and to what purpose she was created. Doubtless the Lord was able, to have
August. lib. 2. de Genesis contr. Manich. cap. 2. Non vtique si^e causa ita facta
est. n^si vt ali^^^^ secretum intrumaret. Nun enim aut li^^s d^fuit, vnde
^^^nina f^rm tretur; aut si vell^ (...) homini vigilanti, co^tam sine dol^^e
detrahe^^ non p^ssit.
saved Adam from pain and sorrow, waking, as when he was a sleep, and to
have taught him his will by lively word: but thus it seemed good unto his
wisdom, to teach not only him, but also Gen 15.12.
Abraham, Matthew. 2.13
and Joseph, and A^^ 2^. 3.
Paul, and other, Ch^ysost. Hom. in Genesis 15. Vn^^ cost^^^ (inquit) accepit,
and quomodo ex ha^ (...) ^animal fo^^euit? di^ o^ scero quomo^o oblatio (...)
est? quomodo Adam, cum au^ (...) ^non sensis? Sed nihil horum (...) poteris, v^
(...) qui ipse e^t con^^tor.
the farther cause whereof he only knows which has created all.
Concerning the substance whereof she was created, there appears a wonderful
excellency of the wisdom of God. First in that the woman being a baser sex,
was created of more noble matter, Zanchi. de creat. Homin. lib. 1. cap. 1.
sect. 18.
to the end that she should not be despised. Secondly, he made her of the
substance of the man, Ephesians. 5.28. August. de ciuit. Dei lib. 12. cap. 21. Sed
vt eo modo co^mendaretur ei vehementius societatis vnitas vinculumque
concordiae, si non tantum inter se naturae similitudine, verum etiam
cognationis affectu homines nect^^rentur.
whereby man in loving his wife, he does but love himself, the wife in
honoring her husband, as her head, receives that she gives, because they are
not two, but one flesh. Thirdly, in making of Act 17.16.
one beginning all mankind, and the woman of the man and for him, is declared,
yt the Ambros. de Paradis. cap. 10. Vt sciremus vnam in viro and muliere
corporis esse naturam, vnum fontem generis humani, etc.
perfection of the man is in the woman, and the original of the woman is in
her husband. Fourthly, he took a member from the midst of Adam, not a part
of his head or of his feet, whereby Hebraei in Bereshith Rabba and al.
perhaps is signified, that the man should not Luther. in Genesis cap. 26. Quales
videas, qui domi leones, foris lepores sunt.
oppress his wife in bearing rule, nor the woman 2. Sam. 6.20. Ephesians. 5.22.
disdain and controull her husband in her subjection, but being taken from his
side and near his heart, she should of all creatures Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis
34. Porro ne illa vicissim quod esset praesidio data, turgeret and vinculum
rumperet, ex costa facit, partem corporis esse volens, sed vt neque vir hinc
sibi placeret, non esse solius iam deinde finit, quod erat solius antea.
be most dear unto him, and they both agree with heavenly concord. Fiftlie, of
all the parts of man he took one only rib: whereby Malac. 2.14 Eccles. 9.
the woman is taught to honor her husband, as her greatest part, and man might
know the greatest part of the woman was the Lords, to the end he do not
presume of absolute authority; but give 1. Pet. 3.7.
honor to the woman in Gods behalf, as to the weaker vessel. For this cause
(says Adam, or the Lord by Adam) shall a man leave father and mother: that is,
because the Lord did make the woman suppose, of the By the ribbe, interpreters
understand, the bone and the flesh, sinews, veins, and skin that covered
it, so that Adam rightly said, she is flesh of my flesh.
flesh and bone of Adam, and did by marriage couple them, to be 1. Sam. 18.1.
Act. 4.32.
as it were one soul in two bodies knit together; Iun. Paral. libr. 1. paral.
33. Tanquam si dixisset Author, quia ex Dei institutione and facto, mulier
conuenit in manum viri, etc. hoc Dei factum, vim legis apud homines aequu^ est
obtinere, etc.
by virtue of this ordinance, shall the society of man and wife be such for
ever, as if they had been taken one out of another, yea the married shall
forgo Psalm. 45.10. Ideo (inquit Chaldaeus Paraphrastes) homo relinquet lectum
patris and matris, etc.
their fathers house to dwell together: and the fault of breaking wedlock
shall be more heinous, then Pet. Mart. in Genesis 2. Relinquet homo patrem and
matrem: non quod illos non alat, aut veneretur, sed iam aggl^tinabitur vxori,
and qui prius dicitur pars patris, iam inde auulsus, ^^es vna caro cum vxore.
Calvin. in Genesis 2
the violating of other societies whatsoever. The Hebrews Aben. Ezra. Com. in
Prou. 2.17.
do observe, that in (...) Ish, which is the common name of man, and (...)
Ishah, the name by which Adam first called his wife, are contained the letters
(...) Iah, which is the Psalm. 68.4.
name of God; which taken away, there remains in both the names, but (...)
esh va esh, that is, but fire and fire: and surely where the fear of God is
not in married folk, nor the force of this ordinance takes place (which
oftentimes Vt de Alcestide referunt, Eu^ip. in Alcest. Aristoph. in vespis.
Quae pro marito constanter op^etijt mortem. De Porcia vxore M. Bruti quae vt
virum a facinore deterreret sibi ipsi primo altissi^^um inflixit vulnus, postea
de viri interitu facta certior, and diligentiore cura cust^dita, quam vt manus
sibi ipsi inferret, ex foco arreptos carbones hausit, and occluso ore and
compresso, extincta est. Valor. Max. lib. 4. cap. 6. Plutarc. in vita Bruti. De
Miniarum vxoribus, quae vt vinctos maritos liberarent, carcerem intrantes quasi
postremo allocuturae perituros, commutata vest, velatis capitibus eos abire
passae sunt, vinculis eorum in sese translatis. Valor. Max. lib. 4. cap. 6.
Rubrius item Celer annos 43. menses 8. vixisse cum vxore sine vlla querela
memoratur. I^u. decad. 5.
it does among the very infidels) there are intolerable crosses and
contentions, there the tongue James. 3.6. Hinc est Gemini Oratoris dicterium
apud Hieron. contra Iouin. lib. 1. Qui, inquit, non litigat caelebi est.
being fire, does set on fire sometime the other members, and it is set on fire
of hell.

Question 14. verse 22. Wherefore it is said: He brought her to the man?
IN these words is briefly comprehended, how the Lord having made both Adam
and the woman, does August. Steueus Eugub. in Genesis 2. Haec est prima
constitutio matrimonij, vbi dominus viro foeminam adducit, copulat, and
benedicit.
couple them together as man and wife, which is the substance and pith of
marriage. Wherein are many points of doctrine to be observed. First, Matthew.
19.46. 2. Sam. 12.8.
that the Lord himself is the author of marriage, and therefore marriage is
Contra Saturniliaenos and Marcionitas, qui matrimonium a diabolo esse dicebant.
Epiphan. Haeres. 23. Tertul.
of him. Secondly, that Genesis 24.7.63. Prou. 18.22. Matthew. 7.11.
those that desire marriage, are to seek it of the Lord, and to attain it 1.
Cor. 7.39.
lawfully, that they may say with Adam, the woman Genesis 3.12.
which thou gave me. Thirdly, it is Ruth. 4.10. 1. Sam. 18.17.23. The
contrary is punished, Genesis 6 2 etc. whereof it is well considered in our
english liturgy, tit. of Marriage.
solemnly to be used and with reverence, forasmuch as it is a holy work,
wherein the Lord does 2 Samuel 12.8.
join them together who are married. Fourthlie, consent Exodus 34.16. and
22.17. Genesis 26.34.35. Albeit not essentiallie in some cases, as shall be showed
in the 24. Chapter.
of Parents is necessary unto marriage, which the Lord declares, when he
brings Heua unto Adam. Fiftlie, that none may be compelled, Genesis 24.5^. Judge.
14.2.3. Calvin in Genesis 24. Vocemus puellam, etc. Quod prius sine exceptione,
filiam suam obtulerunt intelligi debet quantum in ipsis erat. Nunc vero docet
Moses, eos non tyrannidem exercuisse in filiam, vt cogerent nubere cui nollet,
sed liberum ei consensum detulisse. Sacra quidem in hoc negotio parentibus
authoritas esse debet, sed tenenda est media ratio, vt sponte ac mutuo consensu
inter se contrahant parts. Muscul. in Genesis 2. Peccant igitur plurimum
parents, qui filiorum suorum coniugia non sinunt esse libera, sed perinde
illos sibi obstrictos tenent, ac si elocati non essent; atque ita vnitatem and
coniunctionem connubialem impediunt, vel siqua coepit dirimunt.
no not by their Parents, unto marriage, for God himself does not take so much
authority; but joins them together with full consent of both: for Heua
declares Zanch. de creat. Hom. lib. 1. cap. 1.
her good will by coming, Adam by rejoicing. Sixtlie, when parties are
lawfully joined by consent, they Matthew. 19 6.
may not by man be put asunder ( Mat. 5.32. and 19.9. August. Sermon. Dom. in
Mont. lib. 1. Dominus ergo ad illud confirmandum, vt non facile vxor
dimittatur, solam causam fornicationis excepit. Chrysostom. Him. in Matt. 32.
in opere imperf. Sicut autem crudelis est and iniquus, qui castam dimittit, sic
fatuus est and iniustus, qui retinet meretricem. Nam patronus turpitudinis est
qui crimen celat vxoris. Idem Hom. 17. in Matthew. 5. Hieron. in Matthew. 19. Sola
fornicatio est, qua vxoris vincat affectum: imo cum illa vnam carnem in aliam
diuiferit, and se fornicatione separauerit a marito, non debet teneri, ne virum
quoque sub maledicto faciat, dicente scriptura (Prou. 18.) qui adulteram tenet
stultus and impius est. Hilar. in Mat. 5. Nullam aliam causam desinendi a
coniugio praescribens, quam quae virum, prostitutae vxoris societate pollueret.
Oecumen. in 1. Cor. 7. Vxorem non dimittat, etc. Nisi quidpiam accesserit in
causa stupri, nam haec Christi lex est.
except it be for fo^nication) but they are so knit together by the Lord, that
they are not two, but one flesh: and therefore a man must forsake father and
mother, and all societies of men rather then forsake his wife.

Question 15. verse 25. How it could be that the man and his wife were not
ashamed of their nakedness?
NOt for want of wisdom as the Joseph. Antiq. lib. 1. cap. 2. Mulier gustato
arboris fructu, ciboque hoc delectata, etia^ Adamo vsum eius persuasit: iamque
se nudos esse sentiebant, arbori enim acuminis and cogitandi vis inerat. Rab.
Salom in Com.
Hebrews seem to teach, neither for impudency, as The Adamites were a Sect of
filthy heretics, which would imitate the nakedness of Adam, and so assembled
together to the exercises of religion, both men and women; they called the
place of this their meeting Paradise. Epiphan. Haeres. 52. August. Haeres. 31.
did the Adamites; but because there was in their nakedness nothing August. de
ciuit. Dei lib. 14. cap. 17. Non quod ijs sua nuditas esset incognita, sed
turpis nuditas nondum erat.
to be ashamed of, their bodies being more comely, Matthew. 6.29. Chrysostom. Hom.
in Genesis 16. Sciamus vitam illorum, tristitiae dolorisque expertem, and
angelicum quendam statum, etc. mira gloria amicti, and maiori, quam vllus
vestitus possit ornare.
then that apparel could adorn them. For if the beauty of a lilly of the
field, do surpass Matthew: 6.28.29.
as says our Savior, the gorgiousnes of Solomon, how far did the comely
shape of man's proportion exceed the same? Whereby we may evidently perceive
the difference between the state of man being free from sin, and the state
of our now polluted nature. Such was the condition of man's body before the
fall. Nothing in it was uncomely, nothing filthy, nothing to be dispraised or
despised: the body was of excellent form, As now the face and hands are, in
those that are beautiful. Cic. de not. Deor. lib. 2.

Lactant. de opific. Dei cap. 7. and 10. De corporis prastantia prout nunc est
copiose disseruit.


beautiful throughout, pleasant to behold, needing no clothing, either to
defend cold, or to cover shame. They were created naked, and naked they lived,
and they were not ashamed: that is, neither of them was ashamed of his own
nakedness, nor offended with the nakedness of ye other: until man was not ashamed
to commit sin. Then sin caused him, not only to be ashamed of the fact,
August. de peccar. merit. and remiss. lib. 2. cap. 22. Animam rationalem
natural verecundia nunc pudet, quod in carne in cuius seruitutem ius
potestatis accepit, nescio qua infirmitate efficere non potest, vt se nolente
non moueantur membra, and se mouente moueantur. Idem de peccato Origin. lib. 2.
c. 34. Prius neque Deo neque homini, illa simplex nuditas displicebat, qua^do
nihil erat pudendum, quia nihil praecesserat puniendum. Idem de ciuit. Dei lib.
14. cap. 17. Confusi inobedientia carnis suae, tanquam test poenae
inobedientiae suae, etc. Ex hoc omne^ Gentes, quoniam ab illa stirpe procreatae
sunt, vsque adeo tenent insitum pudenda velare, vt quidam barbari, illas
corporis parts nec in balneis nudas habeant.
but also of the body wherein he did the fact. The shadow hereof may be seen
in children, who so long as they are young, albeit Psalm. 51.7. Isai. 48.8.
they are in the conception defiled with original corruption; yet every one
commends the feature of their naked bodies, and there appears a certain
beauty in them. But so soon as we come of riper age, none of us beholds
our own naked bodies, without a private shame. And as man was naked, and had
no cause of shame, before his sin; August. de ciuit. Dei lib. 22. cap. 17.
Non enim erit ibi libido, quae confusionis est causa: nam priusquam peccassent
nudi erant, nec confundebantur vir and foemina; corporibus ergo illis vitia
detrahentur, natura seruabitur: erunt autem membra (sexus vtriusque) non
accommodata vsui veteri, sed decori nouo, quo non alliciatur aspicientis
concupiscentia quae nulla erit, sed Dei laudetur sapientia atque clementia, qui
and quod non erat fecit, and liberauit a corruptione quod fecit.
so shall he continue naked when sin is at an end: we shall Romans 14.10. 2.
Cor. 5.10.
all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, not clothed, saving 2. Cor.
5.2. Galat. 3.27.
with his righteousness. But those that have not on this Matthew. 22.11. Iren.
lib. 4. cap. 70. Hoc genus (scil. Iudae) quod non obediuit vocem Domini, neque
recepit disciplinam, defecit fides exore ipsoru^, etc. Hoc est enim indume^tum
nuptiaru^, de quo Apostolus, nolumus expoliari, etc. Iubet mitti in tenebras
exteriores, eum qui non habet indume^tu^ nuptiarum, hoc est conte^ptorem.
wedding garment, shall be so ashamed of their nakedness, Luc. 23.30. Revel.
6.16.
that they shall flee unto the rocks, to fall upon them, and to the mountains
to cover them. It is therefore seauenfold foolishnes to be proud of our
apparel, seeing we cannot look within it but with shame, and seeing it does
often show our filthiness of pride, disdain, and unchaste behavior, for the
which we are ashamed of our bodies. Let us therefore be ashamed of sin; so
shall our bodies recover in Christ their former glory.

CHAP. III.
Question 1. verse 1. How the Serpent could speak unto the woman?
MOses as the 2. Pet. 1.21.
penman of the spirit of God, has delivered both the glorious work of God in
the creation of the world, and also the happy estate of the creatures, and
especially of mankind, being created. Now he proceeds to show, by what
means man lost this happiness: and by what occasion the world and all the
creatures therein, are Romans 8.20.
subject unto vanity. The next and immediate Verse. 17.
cause, was man's disobedience in transgressing Gods commandment. The author
Here no mention is made of other then the Serpent, because Moses has in
purpose to deliver briefly the truth of history, but does not expound it
fully: for indeed the Serpent spoke, although not by his own power, but by
the power and guide of Satan: In like sort, because Satan was the chief
worker, the Scripture in other places does wholly ascribe it unto him: as Ioh.
8.44. 1. Ioh. 3.8.
or chief cause was Satan, that malicious enemy of God and man: who sought
Hinc dicitur (...) Satan, odio habere: osor. Job. 1.6.11. Matthew. 16.23.
Lactant. lib. 2. cap. 13. Tum criminator inuidens operibus Dei, omnes fallacias
and calliditates suas ad decipiendum hominem intendit, vt ei ad^neret
immortalitatem.
to overthrow the glory of God in man, and in the world; and could not endure
for envy, Tertul. lib. de patientia. Igitur nat^les impatientiae in ipso
diabolo deprehendo, iam tum cum Dominum Deum vniuersa opera quae fecisset,
imagini suae, id est, homini subiecisset, impatienter tulit, etc.
that man, who was but dust, should enjoy so great felicity, from which he
himself Jude 6.
had fallen. And knowing both by Being created an Angel of light, and
therefore wise. 2. Sam. 14.20.
nature and 2. Pet. 2.4.
experience that God was just, he knew also, that if he could seduce the woman
and her husband unto sin, he should bring destruction to them both, and so
subvert the glory of the creatures, which as he thought would be no small
dishonor unto the creator. And because he Iam. 1.14. Because every one that
is tempted inwardly, is drawn away by his own concupiscence. Not therefore by
his cogitations, but by outward object. In like sort he tempted Christ.
Damascen. lib. 3. Orthodox. cap. 20.
could not provoke either of them by any inward temptation (as now he does the
wicked, by the Ioh. 12.6. and 13.2.
help of their corruption) nor Ioh. 13.27. Act. 5.3 Didimus de Sp. Sancto lib.
3. Non per substantia^, sed per operationem, sicut de Judah: Obseruans Diabolus
quibusda^ motibus and operationum signis, ad qua potissimum Judah cor esset
vitia proclinius, deprehendis eum patere insidijs auaritiae, and reperta
cupiditatis ianua, misit in mentem eius quo modo desideratam pecuniam
acciperet. August. lib. de Spir. and anim. cap. 27.
enter into their minds or into their bodies, because of the holiness and
glory that was in them, he presumes to take a beast of the earth (the Lord
Matthew. 8.32. August. de Genesis ad lit. lib. 11. cap. 12. Number per aliud posse^,
nisi per quod permittebatur accedere? Hieron. in vit. Malchi. Monachi. Diabolus
nunquam aperta front se prodit.
permitting the same his malice) one, that for his Matthew. 10.16. Chrysostom. Hom.
in Genesis 16. Inuento animali hoc, serpentem dico, qui catera sua calliditate
vincebat, eo quasi instrumento quodam vsus, etc.
natural subtlety, was fittest for his purpose: August. de Genesis ad lit. lib.
11. cap. 29. Sic ergo locutus est serpens homini, sicut asina in qua sedebas
Balaam locuta est homini, nisi quod opus illud fuit opus diabolicum, hoc
angelicum. Epiphan. Haeres. 37. Non autem erat author solus serpens, qui
apparebat, sed serpens qui in serpente locutus est, hoc est, diabolus.
and by disposing of his tongue, does speak by him unto the woman. Therefore,
where that Atheist Julian Julian in Cyril. lib. 3. Quo idiomate, etc.
scornefully demands, in what language the Serpent spoke unto the woman; it
is easily answered, that Satan is skillful in every language, and therefore
able to speak that language which the woman understood, that which was of
Until the confusion of tongues and the building of Babel. Chrysostom. Hom. in
Genesis 30. Postremo Heber mansit (scil. a turris extructions) idem seruans idioma
quod and antea habebat. Hieron. in Sophoniam cap. 3. v. 17. Hinc nosse
possumus, linguam Hebraeam omnium linguarum esse matricem.
long time the only language of the world, the Hebrew tongue. Wherefore it is
The word (...) (hine forte gnarus and nosco apud Latinos) gnarum subtlety, is
commonly taken in the evil part, whereby may be understood, either that the
serpent exceeded all other, in that common sense which is in beasts, or else
(as Augustine does de Genesis lib. 11. cap. 29) that subtlety of the devil was
called the Serpents subtlety. Joseph. Antiq. lib. 1. cap. 1. seems to say
that Serpents at the first were endued with speech Serpenti vocem ademit Deus,
iratus ob malitiam, etc.
foolish also to suppose, because here is spoken of the Serpents speech and
subtlety, that beasts at any time were endued with speech or reason; for by
subtlety, he means Psalm. 58.4. Matthew. 10.16.
no other of the Serpent, then that natural policy Epiphan. Haeres. 37.
Duplicem prudentiam serpe^tis narra^t. Quod caput suum in omni periculo,
diligentissime custodit, and quod sita pressus deponit venenum, vt tutius
bibat. Plin. lib. 8. c. 27. alia.
we find to be in him: neither was his speech any power of his own, but of
the August. Dialog. ad Oros. quest. 43. Per illum nempe verba faciebat
diabolus, and tamen hoc etiam ille nesciebat.
Devil, who because he is a Spirit, was able to Lactant. lib. 2. c. 15. Qui
quonia^ sunt spiritus tenues, and inco^prehensibiles, insinua^^ se corporibus.
August. de Genesis ad lit. lib. 11. cap. 2. Quid ergo mirum si suo instinctu
diabolus, iam implens serpe^tem, eique spiritum suum misce^s, eo more quo vates
demoniorum.
enter into him, and as he was strong, was able to guide 1. King. 22.22.
August. de Genesis ad lit. lib. 11. cap. 28. Serpens verborum sonos non
intelligebat: sicut and ipsi homines, cum demon in ijs loquitur.
his tongue, and as he was subtle, did so season his speech with arguments,
that thereby he was able to weaken the woman's fear and love, while she gave
more heed unto his speech, then to the precept God had given her. But some one
will think it marvel, that the woman was not afraid of the Serpent, but
dared so boldly abide his speech? although Serpents at this day are hideous to
look upon, yet in their Basil. Hom. de Paradise. Non horrendus er^t tunc
serpens, sed mitis and mansuetus. Damascen, de Orthodox. lib. 2. cap. 10.
creation they were not so. We fear them for their evil, and we fear their
evil, because of the enmity between the nature of Genesis 3.15.
man and them: but in the beginning they were no enemies, Chrysostom. Hom. in
Genesis 16. Sicut nunc domestica animalia, ita and fera and immansueta tunc
sub^ita erant.
but servants unto Heua: and either Cyril. lib. 3. in Julian. Et cum tunc non
esset aliud animal rationale, mulier impendio simplex, existimabat fortasse and
alijs animantibus datum esse humana voce loqui posse. Sed huic assertioni
^chementer obstat, prudentia Adami, and imaginis Dei in vtrisque conformitas.
want of experience in the nature of the creatures (being her self Many
writers think they sinned the day they were created: that they continued a
very little time, is holden of all.
but lately before created) might induce her, to doubt of this accident in the
Serpent, or knowledge might cause her to admire the same, whereby she might be
retained in suspense, and so ensnared, as Satan always 1. Pet. 5.8.
waits his opportunity. For but that he took occasion by the subtle nature
of the Serpent (as Moses notes) to deceive, he was able as well to have made
an Sicus and simulachra and statua^. Valerius Max. lib. 1. cap. 8. Milites F.
Camilli simulachrum Iunonis, quod a Vijs praecipua religione cultum erat in
vrbem tra^slaturi, Dea ab vno eorum per iocum interrogata, an Romam migrare
vellet: Velle se respondit. Item Fo^tunae Simulachru^, Coriolano recedente ab
vrbe: rite me (inquit) matronae vidistis, riteque dedicastis. Similiter and
Bouem locutum, articulata voce, reserunt August. de ciuit. Dei, lib. 3 cap. 31.
Valor. Mar. lib. 1. c. 8. Plin. lib. 2. Iul. Obsequens de prodig. cap. 34 38.
53. Item: Causum flumen salutasse Pythagora^: Salve Pythagora. Cyril. lib. 3.
cont. Julian. Et Achillis equu^ praenunciasse ei mortem. Homer. Il. t. Item
vlmum allocuta^ Appollonium, a^ticulata and muliebri voce. Philostrat. lib. 6.
cap. 5. Et quer^um and c^^umbas in oracu^o Dodon^o. Pausan. in Achaicis.
Plutar. in vita Pyrrhi, Homer. Od^st. x. Arnob. contra Gent. lib. 8. In puri
spiritu^, substatuis and imaginibus consecratis delitescunt, and afflatu suo
authorita^e^ quasi praesentis numinis consequu^tur.
ass to speak, as he did the Serpent. The woman therefore, having no cause to
fear other harm then sin, when she heard the Serpent speak, which (it Ex
cap 2.20.
seems) she knew belonged not unto his nature, more greedily gave ear unto
it, and through Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 14. Non ignorantia peccasse e^ sola
desidia.
her negligence and August. confess. lib. 10. cap. 35. Curi^sita^ aute^
tentandi ca^sa, non ad subeunda^ molestiam, sed expe^iendi noscendique
libidine^. Bernard. Tra^t. de duo lec. grad. Humili^. Nisi men's minus se
curiose seruaret, tua curiositas tempus vacuum non haberet. Te aute^ intenta^
ad aliud, la^enter interim in cor tuu^ serpens illabitur, blande alloquitur
Blanditijs ratione^, mendacijs timore^ compescit Etsi igitur culpa non est,
^ulpae tamen occasio est, and indicium ^o^^^^sse, and causa est co^mitie^dae.
curiosity, gave advantage to the enemy, and Romans 15.4. 1. Cor. 10.11.
was beguiled. An example most worthy to be observed in this lastage of the
world, when as Satan shall work, Mat. 24.13. Luc. 21.8.
as Christ 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. 2. Tim. 3.2. 2. Pet. 3.3.
and his Apostles have foretold, not in the body of a Serpent, but in all
deceiueablenesse, with lying wonders, in false Prophets, and false Christ's,
with such strong delusions, that they shall Mat. 24.24.
deceive if it were possible the very Elect: who when they be in wilderness and
desert places, shall deceive Mat. 24.26.
as many as go forth unto them. For if Heua were seduced by a Serpent, how
much more shall thy weaker wisdom, be seduced by greater power, in a nobler
instrument. If thou will be so curious, as once to go and see, and thereby
Mat. 4.7. 1. Cor. 10.12.
tempt the Lord: know that the Spirit of God has given thee warning, and our
Savior has expresselie given charge to all: Matthew. 24.26.
go not forth unto them.

Question 2. verse 1. Whether this temptation were foreknowne of God, and the
event thereof, and why the Lord did permit the same.
Certainly the Lord foreknew both the malice of the devil, that he was
desirous to tempt, and his purpose that he would tempt, and August. de Genesis ad
lit. lib. 11. cap. 3. Nam licet in illo esset propte^ peruersam and inuidam
voluntate^ decipiendi cupiditas, non nisi vel per illud animal potuit, per quod
posse per nissus est. Nocendi enim voluntas, potest esse a suo quoque animo
praua; no^ est autem potestas nisi a Deo.
suffered him to tempt the woman, although he knew the whole event thereof. For
all things are manifest in his sight, Heb. 4.13.
as says the Apostle: neither can a Sparrow fall on the ground Matthew. 10.29.
without our heavenly father, that is, without the will and knowledge of the
heavenly father. Also a day with the Lord, is as Psalm. 90.4. 2. Pet. 3.8.
a thousand years. So that the Lord, which knew the fall of man the day he
fell, knew also the same for infinite time before. This truth of God has many
adversaries among Atheists, and contemners of the Gospel: who use it as a
weapon to fight against the Lord, and Epiphan. Here Is. 5^. Talpam appellant
animal quoddam intra terram latitans, etc. Desolatorium autem est animal,
inferne eradicans omnem hominum agriculturam, etc. Sic sane ego nunc aggredior
dicere, de proposita secta, qua quantum ad cor attinet, caecutit ac fatua est:
verum solitudinem sibi ipsi efficii, and multas radices virorum in ipsam
collapsoru^ denastas ac corrumpit.
as moules and battes, do work into the hearts of simple men in secret, and
do much harm in the harvest of the Lord. For say they: if God foreknew it,
the^ was it of necessity, for Aristot. Eth. lib. 6. c. 3. Scientia est eorum,
quae sese aliter atque scimus habere non possunt. Verum est. Attamen duplex
latet in arg. fallatia. 1. a dicto simpliciter, ad dictum secundum quid. Nam
non est absolute necessaria, sed quatenus res cognoscitur talis. 2. Non causa
pro causa. Necessaria cognitione Dei peccauit, ergo cognitio Dei est causa
peccati. Nam Deus etiam alias causas cognouis, quibus non peccares Adam nisi
vellet.
knowledge is of necessary and certain things: and if it were of necessity
that Adam sinned, then was not he in blame, forasmuch as he could not resist
necessity. Thus wicked men do call the way of the Lord Ezec. 18.29.
unequal: and dare presume to judge the judge of all the world, before the day
of judgment: notwithstanding that, of the same their judgment, Mat. 7.1. and
12.36. Romans 2.2.
they must themselves be judged. But how sitlie does the word of God Psalm.
76.1.2.5.
spoil these mighty conceited Homer. Odyss. (...). Virgil Georg. lib. 1. Ter
sunt cona^i imponere Pelio Ossam.
Titans of their armor wherein they trust, and also take Prou. 26.5.7
away the Crutches of the lame? The Lord (as says Deus. 32.4. Psalm. 145 17.
the Prophet) is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works: Genesis
18.25. Romans 3.5.6. But now if the Lord were blame-worthie, as the cause of
Adams fall, then is he not righteous in all his ways, etc.
neither can there be unrighteousness with God. Again, James 1.14.
when man is tempted, he is not August. Epist. 146. Tentatio alia est
deceptionis, alia tentatio probationis: secundum illam intelligitur qui tentat,
non nisi diabolus; secundum hanc vero tentat Deus.
tempted of the Lord, but sins of his own concupiscence. If this be so
indeed, then surely there was no cause in God, either in his will, or in his
knowledge or decree that man should fall, neither is there any fault thereof in
justice, to be imputed unto him. In whom then is the fault, but in man that
sinned, and in Satan that provoked him to sin? True it is, the Lord foreknew
it, and therefore it was certain or necessary that man should sin, in regard
of the knowledge of the Lord; for so is it of a Sparrow that falls to the
earth, and nothing is by chance Nazianz de Theolog. Hom. 2. Deus non casus,
omnia quaecunque sunt, creauit, ordinauit, and conseruat. Chrysostom. Hom. 16. in
Roman. Nihil enim simpliciter aut fortuito facit Deus, etiamsi sapientia ipsius
arcanum ignores. Lactant. lib. 3. cap. 29. Stultitia, and error, and cacitas,
and ignoratio rerum and causarum, naturae ac fortunae nomina induxit. August.
in Psalm. 148. Nam qui fecit angelum in coelo, ipse fecit in terra vermiculum,
etc. Etiam vilissimas and abiectissimas mundi particula^ diuina prouidentia
regi, d^cet Christus. Matthew. 6.25.26. August. de Genesis ad lit. lib. 5. cap. 21.
or at adventure in respect thereof. But this knowledge is in no sort Fulgent.
Ad Mon. de Praed. lib. 1 cap. 23. Proinde fidelibus congruit credere and
fateri, Deum bonum and iustum, praescisse quidem peccaturos homines, quia nihil
eum latere potuit futurorum (neque enim vel futura essent, si in eius
praescientia non fuissent) non tamen praedestinasse quemlibes hominem ad
peccatum. Idem. cap. 13. Posset autem peccatum aliquod, ex praedestination^ Dei
esse, si posset aliqui^ hominum just peccare. Nullus autem hominum just
peccat, quamnis eum just Deus peccare permittat, Just enim daseritur a Deo
qui deserit Deum.
the cause of evil things, so far as they are wicked or unrighteous. True it
is also, that whatsoever the Lord does foreknow will come to pass, August. de
Trinit. lib. 6. cap. 10. Non enim haec qua creata sunt, ideo sciuntur a Deo,
quia facta sunt: ac non potias ideo facta sunt vel mutabilia, quia
immutabiliter a Deo sciuntur. Idem lib. 15. cap. 13. Non quia sunt ideo nouit,
sed ideo sunt quia nouit: non enim nesciuit quae fueras creaturus: quia ergo
sciuit creauit, no^ quia creauit sciuit. Nec aliter ea sciuit creata quam
creanda, etc.
the same he does decree shall come to pass, and therefore they come to pass,
because he knows them, and therefore he foreknoweth them, because he does
decree them. But he decreeeth of diverse things Dicitur decretu^ vel efficax vel
permissiuu^.
in diverse sorts. Things that are good he decrees effectually to come to
pass: and that Decretu^ efficax, vel immediate vel mediate, hoc est, vel per
primaria vel secundaria principia operatur.
either by the first or second causes. In the first cause, was his effectual
decree of the creation of the world, of Angels, of men, by force whereof, they
were created. Of the second causes, are the disposition of natural things, and
the righteousness of holy things. As forasmuch as by his decree he has set an
order in the creatures (which order or course of things is called nature)
therefore natural things do come to pass by the course of nature, as the
fire burns, and the Sun continues in his course, except where the Lord
has decreed, by the first cause (which is himself) to let the second: as
thus, he 2. King. 20.9.11.
brought back the Sun by ten degrees, and Dan, 3.27.
stayed the violence of the fiery oven, and other miracles which have been
done, by the Matthew. 8. etc.
Son, or in the Mat. 7.22. Act. 3.
name of the Son of God. Also the righteousness of holy things: as he made
them righteous by the first cause, so he decreed them to continue righteous by
the second cause, that is to say, by depending August. de ciu. Dei lib. 12.
cap. 6. Proinde ea verissima causa heatitudinis angeloru^ honoru^ reperitur,
quia ei adhaerent qui sum est. Scilicet and hominum.
upon, and cleaving unto the fountain of holiness, which is himself. Things
that are Exodus 9.16.2. Sam. 24.1. 1. King. 12.24. August. Enchirid. cap. 95. Et
non fit aliquid nisi omnipotens fieri velit, vel sinendo vt fiat, vel ipse
faciendo. Nec dubitandum est, Deum facere been, etiam sinendo fier^ quaecunque
fiunt malo. Non enim haec, nisi iusto iudicio Dei sinit, and profecto bonum est
omne quod iustum est.
evil he wills or decrees also: not to do, or cause to them to be don,
neither to allow the^, or will them to be done, but to permit or suffer the^ to
be: (which notwithstanding, so far as they are actions, he may be said to do
them: so far as they are punishments, to will them: but so far as they are
evil of guiltines, they proceed from the defect of the creature, and God
only wills to permit them) and therefore Origin in epist. ad Romans cap. 8.
lib. 7. Non propterea aliquid (scilicet malum) erit, quia id scit Deus f^turum,
sed quia f^turum est, ideo scitur a Deo antequam fiat. August. in Euang. John.
tract. 53. Deus futurorum praescius per propheta^ praedixit infidelitatem
Iudaeorum, sed non fecit: neque praescisset mala eorum, nisi ea haberent. Non
autem ideo quenquam ad peccandum cogit, quia futura hominum peccata praenouit,
illorum enim praesciuit peccata, non sua. Damascen. Orthodox. lib. 2. cap. 30.
they are certain unto him, because he does decree to suffer them: and
therefore they belong not unto him, because he does neither do them, nor allow
them. This foreknowledge therefore of the Lord, of the fall of the Angels, or
the sin of Adam, was no more the cause of the fall of them, then the
foreknowledge of a wise Physician, is the cause of the danger of his patient:
for as the disease is the cause of the sickemans death, so the freedom of
election, or will in Adam Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 14. Sed scire possit, quod
lapsus ille ex desidia fuerit.
joined with his negligence, was the cause of the sin of Adam, and the
freedom of election in the Angels, when they August. de ciuit. Dei lib. 12. c.
6. Cum causa miseriae malorum angelorum queritur, ea merito occurrit, quod ab
illo qui sum est auerfi, ad scipsos conuersi sunt, qui non sum sunt.
chose a separation from the state wherein they were, was the cause of the
ruin of them. But the Lord had given them Tertul. contr. Marcion lib. 2.
Probat ab imagine Dei, and a lege data homini. Non enim inquit poneretur lex
ei, qui non haberet obsequium debitum legi, in sua potestate: nec rursus
comminatio mortis transgressioni ascriberetur, si non and contemptus legis in
arbitrij liberate homini deputaretur.
grace, wherein they might stand, and gifts abundant, whereby as it were to
maintain their standing. And he gave it them with freenes of will, that
August. Enchirid. cap. 30. Liberaliter enim seruit, qui sut Domini voluntatem
liberaliter facit.
they might stand of their own accord Coloss. 1.17.
in him. But why (will one say) did he give them free will, seeing he knew
before, that they would fall away, and not rather immutabilitie of will, that
they could not fall? The same might ask, why he made the^ not Iehoua, to whom
Malac. 3.6. James 1.17.
only it belongs to be immutable. For the goodness of the Lord is in himself,
whereby he cannot but be good for ever, because his goodness is in himself: but
the goodness of the creature is in the Lord, because he consists Coloss.
1.17. Iren. lib. 4. c. 75. Perfectus enim est infectus, hic aute^ est Deus.
Oportuerat autem hominem, and factum augeri, and auctum corroborari, and
corroboratum multiplicari, and multiplicatum co^ualescere, conualesce^tem vero
glorificari, and glorificatum videre suum Dominum. Respondet object. c. 72 Sed
oportibat inquit eum neque angelos tales fecisse vt possent transgredi, neque
homines, etc.
in the Lord, and therefore can be good no longer, the^ he does continue with
the Lord. Again, it Tertul. in Marcion. lib. 2. Vt ita demum bonus consisteret
homo, si secundum institutionem quidem, sed ex voluntate iam bonus inueniretur,
quasi de proprietate natura. Basil. Hom. quod Deuo non author mali. Itaque nec
Deo gratum est quod coactum est, sed quod ex virtute recte geritur; virtus
autem ex voluntate fit non ex necessitate.
was for the good of the creature, to have liberty of election in it self, to
the end that for choosing good, it might receive a 2. Tim. 4.8. Theodoret
quaest. in Genesis 36.
crown, and might be known to love the Lord freely, for his goodness sake. But
the Lord foreknew, yt thorough freedom they would fall? True: but he gave them
gifts according to their several kinds, so much as creatures could contain,
that they might not fall, which gifts were sufficient to have let them from the
fall: with freedom of choice, that they might choose also not to fall. But he
might have preserved man from fall, and likewise the angels, and therefore (some
will think) he ought to have preserved them from falling. In deed he was able
August. de Genesis ad lit. lib. 11. c. 10. Sed posset inquit etiam ipsorum
voluntatem in bonum co^uertere, quoniam omnipotens est? potuit plane. Cur ergo
non fecite quia noluit, qua^e autem no^uit penes ipsum est.
to have let the fall of man, but he might justly also suffer them to fall,
which would of their own accord abuse his endless mercy. Neither was he bound
with duty, or with justice to let the fall: for Mat. 20.15 Romans 4.4.5.
he owes duty unto none, which gives unto every creature that they have:
neither was it Tertul. lib. 2. in Marcion. Necessarium homini liberim
arbitrium: ne totius mundi possidens homo, non in prim sui possessione
regnares, aliorum Domin^s sui famulus. Quare si Deus a libertute semel comcessa
homini secederes, id est contineres in ipso, quo minus homo male liberate sua
frui aggressus, in periculum laheretur: sieve colubrum a congressu foeminae
arceret: nonne exclamaret Marcion: o Dominum futilem, instabilem, infidelem,
rescindentem quae instituit? Cur permiscrit liberum arbitrium, si intercedit?
etc.
meet that he should have Fulgent. de praedest. cap. 13. Just deseritur it
deo, qui deserit Deu^. Et quia homo deserens Deum, peccate deserens pe^atorem
Deus iustitiam seruat. Quid autem magis iustu^, quam vt ille, qui desiderio
peccandi iam peccat, pro eo quod desiderans peccare, ipse sibi noxius
efficitur, semetipsum peccato suo laedere permittat?
hindered it; forasmuch as he was able Romans 9.22.23. August. de Genesis ad lit.
lib. 11. cap. 4. Etiam sic ostenderet animae superbae ad eruditione^ futurorum
sanctoru^, quam recte ipse vteretur animarum voluntatibus etiam malis, cum
illae perverse vterentur naturis bonis.
of the fall, to raise more goodness by the power of his goodness, then
Satan or man could procure evil, through their maliciousnes or negligence.
Wherefore those men commit infamous blasphemy, which teach, either that the
Lord did not foreknow the fall of man: or if he knew it, that he did not
justly suffer it: or seeing he suffered it, that he was in any sort the cause
thereof. The Lord therefore certainly foreknew the fall of man, and most
justly did decree to suffer it for many causes; some hidden August. de Genesis
ad lit. lib. 11. c. 4. Si ergo quaeritur. etc. Aliitudinem quidem consilij eius
p^netrare no^ possum, and long supra vires meas hoc esse confiteor: sed tamen
quantum vel donat sapere, etc.
in the secret of his wisdom, some manifest and plain for men to see. As
namely, to show himself to be of power, August. ibid. and de ciuit, Dei, lib.
22. cap. 1. Potentius and melius esse iudicans, etiam de malis benefacere, quam
mala esse non sinere.
to turn that which was evil into goodness. Secondly, that all those that
Psalm. 73.27. Jonas 2.8. August. de Genesis 11. cap. 5. Hinc maxim commendatur,
quale bonum sit Deus, cum nulli ab eo recedenti been est.
depart from God, do fall into destruction. Thirdly, that the Psalm. 18.32.33.
Act. 17.28.
strength of a creature is in the Lord, so that none is 1. Sam. 2.9. Psalm.
33.16.
strong in his own might. Fourthly, that he might take Psalm. 9.16. Chrysostom.
in oper. imperf. Hom. 5. Dixit enim apud se: tria hec retia haebeo extensa,
super omnem mundum, vt quisquis euaserit de retibus gule, incurrat in retia
vanae gloriae, and qui euaserit de retibus vane gloriae, incidat in retia
auaritiae. De his tribus retibus, nullus hominum ad perfectum euasit. Iren.
lib. 5. Quoniam autem initio homini suasit transgredi praeceptum conditoris,
and ideo eum habuit in sua potestate, potestas autem eius est transgressio and
apostasia, and his colligauit hominem: per hominem, ipsum iterum oportebat
victum eum contrario colligari ijsdem vinculis quibus alligauit hominem, vt
homo solutus reuertatur, etc.
his enemies in the snares that they had set, and Satan who maliciously
desired to obscure his glory, might in his own craftiness be confounded. He
tempted Adam being full to eating, being in the glory of the image of God, to
be as God, and get the victory: the same tempted Matthew. 4.3.
Jesus, the Son of Marie, being hungry unto 1. Cor. 2.8. Quem nemo principum
seculi huius cognouit. Chrysostom. Hom. in Matthew. 13. Diabolus cum audisset
venientem de coelo vocem, deinsuper Ioannem testimonium illi tam insigne
perhibentem, ac demum esurie^tem vidit, magno teneri coepit ambiguo; nam neque
hominem illu^ esse nudum credere poterat, propter ea quae diuina vox de coelo
protulerat, nec rursus istud recipere quod filius esset Dei, quem esurlentem
videbat.
eating, and was Iren. lib. 5. Quonia^ in principio per esca^, non esurientem
hominem seduxit transgredi praeceptum Dei, in fine esurientem non potuit
dissuadere eam qua a Deo esset sustinere escam. Elatio itaque sensus qua fuit
in serpente, dissoluta est per eam, qua fuit in homine humilitas.
repulsed: and again, unto the glory of the world, the same who was Isai.
53.3. Ioh. 1.11.
despised of the world, and yet in no wise could obtain his purpose. Moreover,
he that triumphed for leading Adam into sin, who being Genesis 1.27. Eccles.
7.31.
void of sin, had power in will and wisdom to have avoided evil, was
himself in the triumph Hose. 13.14. Ephesians. 4.7.
taken captive, his 1. Ioh. 3.8.
wiles dispersed, his works dissolved, and they Psalm. 68.12.
of the family, who were Psalm. 51. All the faithful.
borne in sin, and Ephesians. 2.3. Romans 3.23.
subject by nature unto wrath, were able Revel. 7.14. and 12.11.
by the might of him that overcame, to resist his power and subtlety, and to
Ios. 10.24.
set their feet in the neck of his fury, and malitiousnes. Thus the Lord
gets him honor Exodus 14.17.
of all his enemies, who wilfully seek to subvert or to obscure his glory.
This is the end of all them that Psalm. 68.2. and 79.9.10.
strive against the Lord, they must glorify God in their own confusion. As for
me, it is Psalm. 73.28.
good for me to draw near unto God: for those that Psalm. 37.4.
delight themselves in him, the Lord will give them their hearts desire.

Question 3. verse 17. How it could be that the woman having such excellent
gifts by creation, could so easily be seduced?
Partly through the policy and craftines of so wily an enemy: and partly
by laying her self open unto his assaults. His craftines appears, in that
Ambros. lib. de Paradis. c. 12. Itaque machinatus est, vt no^ primo Adam
adoriretur, sed Adam per muliere^ circumscribere conaretur. Et addit, Adamum a
Deo, mulierem ab Adamo didicisse mandatum.
he incountreth with her, in the absence of her husband: in that he does it by
a creature August. quaest. vet. Test. q. 31. Admisce^^ enim se serpenti, egit
per illum quasi per organum, vt nec mulier occulti diaboli intelligeret dolu^,
sciens prudent^m esse serpen^em.
subjected to her, that thereby she might suspect none evil: in that he does
not at the first presume to teach, but Cyprian. de zelo and liu^re lib.
Diabolus in pace subdolus, in persecutione violentus. Eundem igitur odisse
maxim oportet blandiente^: tuncque maxim auersari, eum mat^ra promittit.
Chrysostom. Hom. in Mat. 13.
as one desirous of her welfare, asks as it were of her estate. And lastly,
having conceived hope of victory, by the proportion of her answer; tries her
with the Because that by her answer she after a sort showed some unsteadfastness
of mind; which unsteadfastness was apt to be kindled with hope, and especially
with hope of supremacy or deity, whereof the Heathen man had experience: Si
violandum est ius, regnandi gratia violandum est. Cic. offic. lib. 3. Eurip.
strongest and aptest temptation, that could be shaped unto the same. On the
other part, the woman (although she show her holiness, by defense of the
truth of God) yet withal she shows weakness: first, such as might be
without sin, and yet the occasion of sin. Secondly, such as being partly
evil, were by the August. de Genesis ad lit. lib. 11. cap. 30. Ideo interrogat
serpens, vt pranaricatio esset inexcusabilis, vt non ex obliuione, sed cum
memoria retinetur praeceptum, and tanquam in illo Deus assistens praesensque
contemnitur.
enemy forced unto farther evil. For first, being content to admit his
conference, whether of Cyrill. in Julian. lib. 3. Mulier existimabat fortasse,
and alijs animantibus datum esse humana voce loqui.
simplicity or Tanquam ex re noua, cuius causa non satis perspecta.
admiration, both which Mat. 24.36. 1. Tim. 3.16. 1. Pet. 1.12.
may be in a creature void of sin, yet thereby she was entangled by his
speech. Secondly, in not Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 16. Debuerat mulier ex ipso
aggressu eminentem coniectare malitiam, quod vltro non vera diceret, idque
quasi curam illorum gerens.
taking heed unto the purpose of him that spoke (although she knew no cause to
mistrust a mischief) in which her wisdom would have found deceit. Thirdly,
in declaring unto Satan, the sum of the Commandment, wherein as it were
Chrysostom. ibid. Verum quia non scipsam attendebat, non solum non est illum
auersata, sed omne mandatum illi detexit, and margaritas p^rcis obiecit,
impleturque quod a Christo dictum est, Matthew. 7.
she cast a pearl before a swine, and gave occasion to Satan to blaspheme.
Fourthlie, in adding to the Ambros. lib. de Paradiso. cap. 12. In ma^dato
quidem nullum est vitium, sed in relatione mandati: etenim quantum prasens
lectio docet, discimus nihil vel cautionis gratia iungere nos debere praecepto.
Si quid enim vel addas, vel detraha^, praeuaricatio videtur esse praecepti.
Commandment (which doubtless she did, with purpose to enlarge the fault,
not to show dislike of the hardness of the precept) ye shall not touch it.
Whereby we see how dangerous a thing it is, for any intent, Deu. 12.32. Prou.
30.6. Revel. 22.18.
to add unto the word of God. God said, ye shall not eat of it: the woman
added, neither shall ye touch it: whereby Satan took encouragement to
answer, ye shall eat and be as Gods. Fiftlie, Deuteronomy. 29.19. and 4.2
in extenuating the danger; which was to take away from the word of God
(albeit she meant to show the graciousnes of God in giving warning.) For God
had said: ye shall die the death, the woman expresses not the certainty of
punishment, but says, least ye die: whereupon the Serpent Bernard. Sermon. de
quadrup. debito. Deus affirmat, mulier dubitat, serpen^ negat. Etsi aliquando
vox Hebraea ^o pen, est praecauentis non dubitantis, vt Malac. 4.6.
found occasion to deny: ye shall not die at all. By whose woeful example we
are warned Ephesians. 4.27.
to give no occasion to the adversary. Secondly, to resist James 4.7.
in the beginning of temptation: and most earnestly to Deuteronomy. 4.2. 1. Tim.
5.14. Basil. in moral. Sum. 70. cap. 36. Quod ergo omnes in omni n^gotio
seruare eportet sinceritatem ^erborum Domini.
labor to keep pure the worship and word of God, and not to mingle it with
man's writings, traditions, or inventions.

Question 4. verse 6. Wherefore it is said: the woman saw the tree that it was
good for meat?
BEcause we might understand, that this actual transgression of eating the
fruit, was Tertul. lib. in Marcion. 2. Deliquit homo per liberum arbitriu^, a
Deo quidem rationaliter attributum, ab homine vero qua voluit agitatum.
Libertas enim arbitrij, non ei culpam suam respuit a quo data est, sed a quo
non vt debuit administrata est.
a wilful trespass, neither done of Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 14. Non per
ignora^tiam peccasse sed ex desidia. Tertul. in Marcion. lib. 2. Non per
infirmitatem, si^uti nec per ignorantiam. ne quid authori (scil. hominis)
imputaretur.
ignorance, nor Bernard. Sermon. de duplici Baptism. Serpens o Eua decepit te:
decepit profecto, non impulit aut coegit, etc. quis vero illum admisis nisi
propria voluntas?
constraint. Secondly, that it consisted of many branches: for sin is so
fruitful Iam. 2.10. August. epist. 29. Qui offendit in vno reus est omnium,
faciendo contra eam in qua pendens omnia: scil. charitatem.
and so sociable, that it will never go alone, nor be alone. Whereof the first
that appears was Chrysostom. lib. 1. de provident. Deus illi omnia largitus
est, cum tamen ab eo nulla ante recte facta manauissent. Quid autem ille? post
tanta, tamque singularia beneficia, fideliorem parente ac conditore suo
inimicum arbitratus est, spretoque mandato conditori^ fallaciam illius
pratulit. Basil. Hom. quod Deus non author mali.
unthankfulness to God. The Lord requires above all things a thankful
mind Deuteronomy. 10.12. Psalm. 50.15.
for his benefits received, and 1. Sam. 15.22.
obedience to his word, which is the exercise thereof. For which respect unto
Adam he enjoined obedience, in abstaining from the fruit, which if he had
zelously performed, he had reproved his wife, for her transgression, and not
obeyed her voice; as she likewise had Author op. imperfect. in Matthew. inter op.
Chrysostom. Hom. 5. Discamus quidem iniurias illatas ab impijs, sieve in dicto,
sieve in facto magnanimiter sustinere; Dei autem iniurias, nec vsque ad auditum
sufferre.
chastised the Serpent, at the first sound of his rebellious words, setting
before their eyes, Psalm. 116.12.13. Genesis 39.8.
the fulness of Gods mercy and liberality bestowed already on them. This
unthankfulness in them 2. Chron. 33.25.
brought forth Deuteronomy. 8.14. 2. Chron. 36.16. Act. 12. August. Dialog. ad Orosi.
quaest. 4. Sed ill^ inobediens mandato Dei, atque elatus superbia, suasioni
serpentis obediens, Dei praecepta contempsit.
pride, in that they did not give the glory unto God, but thought their
excellencies were worthy of all the gifts they had, and more also, if they
could attain unto them. Pride was the August. de ciu. Dei lib. 14. cap. 13.
Quid autem est superbia, nisi perverse celsitudinis appetitus?
mother of ambition, whereby they sought to be advanced above their calling and
estate. All these were sins against the first commandment. From these did
spring Romans 1.21.23.
neglect of Gods true worship; Prosper. lib. ad excepta, Genesis Nisi fidem primam
amisisset, caeteris bonis omnibus non careret. Bernard. Sermon. de quadrup.
debit. Quod Deus pro certo posucrat, ista sub dubio supponit. Et non credens,
posse inde se mori, arbitror quod putauerat Deum alicuius significationis causa
dixisse, si manducaueritis morte meriemini. August. Genesis lib. 11. cap. 30.
infidelity, in mistrusting of his goodness, in doubting of his threatening;
contempt of the word of God; Tertul. aduers. Iadaeos. In hac lege Adae data,
omnia praecepta condita recognoscimus.
violating thereby the whole worship of God enjoined them. From hence again
arose the abusing of the creatures, The name of God is put, and taken sometime
for God himself, and the titles of his name, as Exodus 34.5.6. 1. King. 5.5.
Malac. 1.14. for his properties, Psalm. 25.11.7. and 54.1. his works, Psalm.
66.4. and 86 9. and 9.16. his Gospel, Act. 9.15. Psalm. 22.22. August. Sermon. de
temp. 95. Nomen autem Dei veritas.
wherein the name of God, his glory, his power, his justice, and his mercy
was abused: which is the breach of the third Commandment. To these were added
Gluttony, Ambros. Sermon. 37. Arbitror itaque causam hanc esse ieiunij (scilicet
Christi) vt quia primus Adam, per intemperantiam gulae gloriam immortalitatis
amisisset, eandem secundus Adam Christus, per abstinentiam repararet.
when the woman lusted after it for the pleasantness thereof. Bernard. Sermon.
de annun. 1. Et misericordiam cum sic exarsit, perdidit Eua in concupiscentia
sua, vt nec sibi, nec viro, nec filijs parceret nascituris; simul omnes
terribili maledicto. and necessitati mortis addicens. Crudelis matter. etc.
Murder in not waying the danger of her own life, nor the life of her
posterity. Exodus 13.12. Leuit. 5.15. compared with Genesis 2.16.17.
Theft or Sacrilege, in taking that which was peculiar to God. False witness,
in Psalm. 15.3.
giving credit unto lies. All these are gathered by the manifest words of
Scripture: she heard the Serpent, she said unto the Serpent, she saw the tree,
she took the fruit, she eat thereof: and lastly, Ephesians. 5.22.23. Matthew. 18.7.
Romans 14.13.
she brake the duty of the fifth Commandment, or rather doubled her
transgression, she gave unto her husband with her, and he did eat. Herein
we may observe: First, that the outward Ambros. de Paradiso cap. 13. August.
de Genesis ad lit. lib. 11. cap. 30. Quomodo verbis serpentis crederet mulier, a
bonae atque vtili re diuinitus se fuisse prohibitos, nisi iam inesset menti
amor ille propriae potestatis, and quaedam de se superba praesumptio, etc.
taking of the apple was not the entrance into sin; but the Matthew. 5.28.
Chrysostom. lib. de Provident. 1. Luther. in Genesis 3. Hoc egit Satan, vt per suu^
dicere, abduceret Heuam ab eo quod Deus dixerat, ac sublato verbo, optimam
corripit voluntatem, etc. corripit and intellectu^, vt dubitaret de voluntate
Dei: Ex his sequitur postea, rebellis manus; deinde os and dentes rebels, in
summa omnia mala sequu^tur infidelitatem.
inward concupiscence of the heart, by Gregor. Moral. lib. 21. cap. 2. Vt munda
men's in cogitatione seruetur, a lasciuia voluptatis suae deprimendi sunt
occuli, quaesi quidam raptores ad culpam. Neque enim Eua lignum vetitum
contigisset, nisi hoc prius incante conspiceres. Bernard. de Grad. Hum. 1. Quid
spectare iibet, quod manducare non licet? oculos inquit tendo non manum, etc.
Etsi haec culpa non est, culpae tamen indicium est.
which she saw the fruit. Secondly, August. Enchirid. cap. 45. Quamuis and in
illo peccato vno, quod per vnum hominem intrauit in mundum, etc. possunt.
intelligi plura peccata, si vnum ipsum in sua quasi membra diuidantur singula.
that many trespasses do run together in one actual sin, according to
the wicked Prou. 24.9. and 1.18.19.
disposition of the mind, and the Romans 14.14.15.
circumstances of the fact committed. Thirdly, that our sins Prou. 14.9.
Ioh. 16.8. 1. King. 16.31. Pezel. lib. de laps. primor. Hom. In omni delicto
inest contemptus and violatio infiniti boni, digna infinita pana.
are much more heinous, then they seem unto us, and to be esteemed by Iere.
12.14. Revel 2.23.
the punishment that God does threaten and lay upon them. It is true in deed,
that this one actual sin of Adam, if we consider the August. de ciuit. Dei,
lib. 14. cap. 15. Quia ergo contemptus est Deus iubens, qui hominem creauerat,
qui ad suam imaginem, etc.
greatness of the disobedience, the power August. ibid. In Paradiso enim,
etiamsi non omnia poterat ante peccatum, quicquid tum non poterat non volebat,
and ideo poterat omnia quae volebat. Nunc vero homo vanitati similis factus.
he had to have resisted, and the Romans 1.18.28.31. For as his knowledge was
greater, so his sin was greater in oppressing that knowledge.
light of knowledge which he extinguished, was the greatest sin that ever
was committed. But again, if we consider the greatness of his Omnis generis
fraudis Satanica, in praestantissimo instrumento.
temptation, the malice of the wicked, and their continuance in sin, we
shall find that the Matthew. 27.24.25.41. and 28.12.13. Acts. 4.16.
hatred of the Jews, and of Ruffin. Histor. lib. 1. cap. 32.33. Socrat. lib.
3. c. 9. etc. Sozomen. lib. 6. c. 1. 2. Qui Christum, fabri filium;
Christianos, Galilaeos scommate dictitabat. Qui cum lethaliter saucius esset,
sanguinem e vulnere expressum in ae^rem proiecit, and velut Christum intuitus,
eum sua necia insimulauit; vicisti inquit Galliae, vicisti.
Julian against our Savior Christ, the blasphemous words and works of Ioh.
13.27.30. Matthew. 26.14. and 27.45. Act. 1.18. Quod Pererius primo tomo in Genesis
libr. 6. falsissime de Luthero pronunciauit, id ipsum in Romanum pontificem
verissime retorqueo, lis sit sub iudice verbo Dei.
Judas, of the Bishops of Rome, of Arrius and other Heretics which have
resisted the known truth, the hardness of heart of obstinate sinners, 2 Thessalonians.
2.3.4.8. etc. Chrysostom. Homil. in 1. Cor. 9. Verum grauius hoc est, quod non in
Paradiso, sed inter innumeras praesentis vita cal^mitates in peccata incidis,
quemadmodum siquis vinctus perstat in malitia, nec ipsa miseria fiat
continentior. Tibi autem Paradiso maiora promittuntur, quae neque adhuc dedit,
ne certaminum tempore te emollirent, nec tamen tacuit, ne in laboribus
deficeres. Et ille quidem vno peccato omnino mortem attraxit, nos autem
quotidie innumera scelera committimus. Quod si ille vno duntexat peccato tantum
mali and mortem induxit: quidnam perpeti nos oportet, etc. Grauis sanc oration,
and quae auditoris animum percellat; hoc enim ex meipso intelligo: contremisco
enim and timore dissoluor: sed necessaria, ne in Gehennam incidamus.
which neither for punishments, nor promises of mercy will repent, to be yet
more grievous before the Lord. Now our sins (as says the Zachar. 5.8. Malac.
3.16. Revel. 20.12.
Scripture) are recorded in a book; doubtless not after the measure that we
account them, but as they are in deed: and albeit we know not the Psalm. 19.12.
number or the greatness of them, yet Iud. verse. 14. Revel. 22.12.
a day of reckoning shall shortly come, as it did to Adam, in which the
justice of God shall be declared according to the measure and multitude of
sins, upon those that find not pardon by Jesus Christ.

Question 5. verse 6. Whether Adam did eat of his own accord, or were provoked,
and whether his transgression were not as great as that of Heua: whereof the
Scripture says no more but, she gave unto her husband with her, and he did
eat?
IT is manifest hereby that the Scripture applies it self in a sort
Theodoret. quaest. 1. in Genesis Scriptura sacra docendi rationem metiri consueuit
ex discipulis: ac perfectis perfecta proponere, rudioribus autem elementa. Cum
ergo conspicuam creaturam, Deum constituerent Aegyptij, quibuscum Israel
diutissime conuersatus impietatem hanc imbiberat: necessario quae de creatura
scire expediat illis proponit.
unto the rudeness of the Jews, to whom it was first directed: delivering
only the truth of the History, in manner as was meetest for their capacity:
and although pretermitting nothing that was necessary, yet leaves the
Doctrine Luther. in Genesis c. 3. Respondeo illa sic inuoluta esse, vt omnia
reseruarentur Christo and eius spiritui. etc. Hic spiritus Christi quia in
prophetis fuit, intellexerunt prophetae sanctitalia scripturae mysteria.
to be afterward expounded by the Prophets, and to be revealed by the Son of
righteousness. For this cause he neither reports the creation Theodoret. in
Genesis quaest. 2. Quia si tam facile sibi Deos sinxerunt e iumentorum simula^ris,
quid no^ perpetraturi fuissent, inuisibilis naturae notitiam assecuti?
or being of Angels (at least in the name of Angels) Genesis 16.7.
until the History of Abraham: neither names Satan the author of this
temptation, with the Serpent; neither recites how or by what means, Adam so
noble a creature was wrapped in transgression. Neither yet is it possible, that
Adam so wise, and so far endued with righteousness, would commit such
wickedness without horrible prouokement. For if Heua so far withstood the
subtle adversary, as that she at the first refuted The sum of the Serpents
speech, is: Seeing the tree is in the Garden, it is likely it is good for
meat, wherefore God has not forbidden it, or not justly forbidden it: the
woman answers, he has forbidden it, and justly forbidden one, that gave
liberty of all the rest.
his falsehood, and would not suffer her self to be entangled He seems to
provoke her to impatiencie, for that which was forbidden: but she denies as it
were the cause. We eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden.
with his provocation: and if Satan spent as it were the flower of his
strength and wit on Heua, Verse. 1. Asking her to entrap her: as Mat. 22.17.
August. de Genesis ad lit. 11. c. 30 The subtlety was in this: the fruit was
good by creation and by use, but not for food.
offering her, as he seemed, help and counsel, As 1. King. 20.^3. she says
lest ye dye: he adds: You are not sure to dye: nay rather you shall be as
Gods. He says not, you shall not surely dye, but you are not sure to dye; so
weakening her faith by degrees.
intangling her in her own words, In his nature and in his purpose.
covertly keeping off himself from being spied, and not God does know, etc.
accusing of falsehood and of envy. Your eyes shall etc. you shall have more
perfect wisdom: as Gods, etc. wise, etc. like unto God: that which he has
not or would not finish in you in the creation of his image, shall thus be
finished.
daring flatly to speak against the truth, until he had seasoned his words
with promise and persuasion of so great promotion: what, shall we think that
Adam eat for company he knew not what, or knowing it to be the same it was,
would suffer himself without some notorious motive, to be spoiled of his
glory and felicity? It is not lawful to define hereof, that which the word
of God does not contain: neither to be wise in that, wherein the spirit of God
will have us ignorant: as what motive did allure him, what words were used by
Heua, what form of seduction; save that the word of God expresses or
includes. As namely that he was not seduced 1. Tim. 2.14. 2. Cor. 11.3.
by the Serpent, but that the woman was the instrument of his decay: but
whether by entreaty, or by arguments, Verse. 17.
sure it is, he obeyed her voice. Again, in that is said, she gave unto him: is
included two principal engines of his overthrow; the first is the assault of
faith, in that Heua, so far as he perceived, remained safe after she had
eaten of the fruit, and died not as the Lord had threatened: the second was a
grievous onset unto his obedience; as whether he should obey the Lord, who had
denied before or his wife which now required, (perhaps with 1. King. 21.25.
arguments of persuasion) whom he knew to be given of the Lord, as the fellow
of his life, wise, holy, and perfect as himself. Notwithstanding his sin,
whether it were Pet. Mart. in. 2. Sam. 12. Affirmat Adamu^ grautus peccasse.
greater, or Lombard. contr e asserit mulierem. lib. 2. distinct. 12.
not so great as was the woman's, without doubt his fault was exceeding
grievous: the quality of Amos 3.2. Luc. 12 48.
his person, Tertul. lib. aduers. Iudaeos. August. Enchir. c. 45 Nam and
superb^a est illic, and sacrilegium, and hom^cidiu^, and fornicatio
spiritualis, and furtum, and auaritia, and siquid aliud.
the confluence of sin, the measure of his punishment do argue it. For his
person, he was first formed, made the Act. 17.26. August. de ciuit. Dei, lib.
14. cap. 1. Ad vni tatem concordem pacis vinculo colligandu^, ex homine vno
Deum voluisse omnes homine^ insti^uere.
universal father of the world, constituted 1. Cor. 11.3.
the woman's head and governor. He was allured Verse. 17. H^eron. in Iou. lib.
1. Ada^ seducere serpens non potuit.
by his wife, not by his superior; Be^nard Sermon. de duplic. Baptism. Mulier
tibi o Adam de ligno dedit, sed offerendo vtique non violentiam inferendo.
persuaded, not compelled to eat the fruit. Wherefore when he reproved not
Deuteronomy. 13.6.7 etc. Ioh. 2.10. Chrysostom. in Isai. Hom. 4. Quid igitur si non
fuerit commoda? fac illam commodam. mala est: corrige eam. Idem in Ephesians. Hom.
15. At non flagello neque timore duntaxat, sed blanditijs and beneficentia.
Turpe quippe est v^ro, verberare muliere^. Si temulenta fuerit, abscinde
temulentia causa^, etc.
his wife enticing him, he sinned diverse In prim. secund. and quintum mandat.
ways, and showed unthankfulness. In that he was moved by her August. de Genesis
ad lit. lib. 11. cap. 30. An forte nec suaderi iam opus erat viro, quando illam
eo cibo mortuam non esse cernebat. Fortasse tamen verbo suasorio, quod
scriptura tatem intelligi reliquit.
voice or reasons, or by the experience of her life prolonged, in infidelity:
when he Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 16 Sed forte audiuisti a muliere, and spe etiam
ipse inflatus ^ibi statim particeps factu^es.
wished or hoped for farther glory by the fruit, in pride and ambition: when
he consented to receive it, Isai. 1.19.20.23. Bernard. de aduent. Dom. Sermon.
1. Reuera principes nostri Adam and V^^a, principia propaginis nostrae,
inobedientes and socij furum.
in rebellion. And as the purpose of the tempter was, to deface in them Luther
in Genesis 3.
the whole image of God, and to solicit them to all manner of offenses; so did
they both transgress, without respect, the law of God; leaving in themselves
the sparks of no good thing, Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 5. Diuinae misericordiae
est, qua hominum generi concessit, vt vnicuique nostrum insitum sit
indeprauabile indicium conscientiae.
save only a wounded conscience. The punishment which was imposed on them,
was either personal or natural. That which was personal, was it which was
inflicted on themselves; which appears on Adam, not to be so grievous, as on
the woman. Natural was it which was laid upon Adam and the posterity of Adam,
partakers of his nature: which was, the deprivation of Cyprian. lib. de bone
patientiae. Sic perfectos dixit (M^t 5.4^.) fieri Dei filios, sipatie^tia Dei
patrit maneat in nobis, si similitudo diuina quam peccata Ada^ perdiderat,
manifestetur and luceat in actionibus nostri^.
the image of God, of Ephesians. 2.3.
the favor of God, original Romans 5.12.
corruption, and Ephesians. 2.2. Heb. 2.15.
subjection unto Satan. And most justly did the Lord deprive, not only Adam,
Fulgent. ad Monim. lib. 1. cap. 17. Per concupiscentiam malam qua concupiuit
plus extra se, minus factus est in se: quam concupiscentiam licet explore
nequiuerit opere, tamen retinuit voluntate. Calvin. in Genesis 3. v. 6. Quia totam
humani generis naturam in vno homine ornauerat, ita in eodem ipsum nudauit.
but Adams nature, that is, all mankind of those graces, which Adam in his
nature had so shamefullie abused. Wherefore as the woman's Chrysostom. Hom. in
Genesis 16. Esto igitur te ipsam in tantum praecipitium depuleris, and honor
maximo priuaueris: quare and virum tanta ruinae socium facis, and euius te
adiutricem esse oportebat, illius facta es insidiatrix.
fault exceeded in provoking him to sin, so Adams offense was multiplied in
August. de ciuit. lib. 14. cap. 15. Et sicut obedientia secundi hominis eo
praedicabilior, quia factus est obediens vsque ad mortem ita inobedientia primi
hominis eo detestabilior quia factus est inobediens vsque ad mortem.
defiling those graces which he had received: In like sort the Lord in justice
more sharply scourges the woman in her Vid. quest. 11.
sex and person, and the man in his children To whom they are chiefly to be
accounted as Romans 5.12.13. etc.
and succession. But the Apostle seems to excuse the man, and to extenuate
his fault, when as he says: 1. Tim. 2.14.
the man was not deceived, but the woman was deceived, and was in
transgression? The purpose of the Apostle is otherwise. He Ibid. verse. 12.
commands the woman not to teach, he gives this reason: because Ambros. in
1. Tim. 2. Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 16. Sed forte audiuisti a mu^iere, etc.
Hieron. in Iouin. lib. 1. Diabolus Adam seducere non poterat sed Euam, qua post
offensam statim vn^ subiecta est.
the woman was used as the instrument of Satan, to deceive her husband by
teaching: therefore he says, the man was not deceived; that is, not Epiphan.
Hares. 49. Et Adam non est deceptus sed Eua prima decepta in transgressione
fuit. Calvin. in 1. Tim. 2. Beza. An. mayor. ibid. Iun. Parallel. lib. 2.
paral. 49.
first deceived: not Hieron. in Iouin. lib. 1. Diabolus Adam seducere non
potest sed Euam. Chrysostom. in 1. Tim. Hom. 9. Par auie^ profecto no^ est, ab
ea qua sibi generis societate iungeretur decipi, and a bestia quae seruituti
homin. fuisset addicta.
deceived by the Serpent, but by the woman: not Ambros. de Paradis. cap. 12.
Viro enim mulier, non mulieri vir author erroris est. Vnde and Paulus, Ada^
inquit non est deceptus.
so deceived, as that by teaching and persuading, he caused his wife to be
deceived; but contrariewise the woman him: Chrysostom. Hom. in 1. Tim. 9.
Mulier docuit and cuncta peruertit. idcirco vltro non doceat.
therefore more meet and safe, that the man should teach, and the woman learn
in silence. And truly seeing the man transgressed as did the woman, if he
were not at al deceived, his sin was not thereby diminished, but rather
increased: for it draws near unto the sin of the evil Angels, August.
quast. de vtroque testam. mix. q. 1. Nemo fidelium dubitet diabolum apostasia
sua authorem non habere: ipse enim totius erroris est princeps.
which sinned without prouokement, and to the sin Mat. 12.32. Marc. 3.29.
against the spirit, which shall not be forgiven. But forasmuch as the Church
of God August. epist. 99. De illo primo homine patre generis humani quod eum
ibidem soluerie, ecclesia fere tota consentit. Tertul. lib. de poenitent. in
calce. Chrysostom. Hom. de interdict. Arboris. gaudens sancti omnes, quia
redempti triumphant, quod and hostis perieris diabolus, and quod Adam qui
perierat, diuina sit indulgentia restitutus. Gregor. epist. 31. ad Eulog.
does hold, and that for Iren. lib. 3. c. 34. Cum aute^ saluatur homo, oportet
saluari cum, qui prior formatus est homo, quonia^ nimis irrationabile est,
illum qui vehementer ab inimico lasus erat and prior captiuitate^ passus est,
dicere non eripi ab eo qui vicerit inimicum, ereptos vero filios eius, quo^ in
eadem captiuitate generauit.
necessary cause, that Adam was saved by the death of Christ; it follows he
sinned Tertul. lib. 2. in Marcion. Aut quis dubitabit ipsum illud Ada delictum
haeresin appellare, etc. rudis admodum haereticus. Hilar. in Mat. can. 3.
Diabolus enim Adam pellexerat, and in mortem fallendo traduxerat.
of error, not of malice: Leo Magn. Sermon. de natiu. 4. Temere and infeliciter
credidit.
rashly, and not advisedly: and that the Apostle means: not deceived
Chrysostom. in 1. Tim. Hom. 9. Ad comparationem igitur mulieris dicit illum non
fuisse diceptum: illa quippe ab irrationali animante, decepta est; hic autem a
libera muliere.
by comparing with his wife, but deceived August. de Genesis ad lit. lib. 11. c.
42. Ergo alio modo etia^ ipse deceptus est, sed dolo illo serpentino quo mulier
seducta est; nullo modo illum arbitror petuisse seduci, in illo modo quo illa
potuit. Hanc aui^ proprie seductionem appellauit apostolus.
in himself, and provoked by Basil. quaest. contract. q. 46. Chrysostom. August.
Anselm. in 1. Tim. 2. and alij.
his wife. So that the Apostles meaning is, neither to excuse the man of sin,
neither to accuse him of wilful sinnnig; but only to show by whose default,
he sinned: whereof more shall be spoken in his place.

Question 6. verse 7. What means this which is said: the eyes of them both
were opened?
HErein the Scripture uses a metaphor, or speech translated from a member of
the body, unto a power or property of the soul. That which gives light unto
the body is the eye: that which gives light unto the soul is understanding:
of this Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 16. Non de sensibilibus occulis dicens, sed de
sensu mentis, quia Deus eos sentira fecit, etc. Ambros. lib. de Paradiso ca.
13. Nam quomodo clausos occulos corporis habuit Adam, qui omnia anima^liai^
vidit, vt his and nomen imponeret? Cui contradicunt tamen Rabbinorum nonnulli,
and Ophitaru^ colluuies, Epiphan. Har. 37. Qui caecum hominem fuisse autumant
sabrifactum: ita vt plane dicas, nihil tam absurdum, quod non dicatur ab aliquo
Philosophorum. i. Haereticorum. Cic. Divine. lib. 2. Et nullum tam impudens
mendacium quod idem test careat. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 22.
eye of understanding, the Scripture speaks. God gave unto the tree, the name
Genesis 2.9.17. Chrysostom. Hom. 16. Non quod Homini scientiam dederit, sic vocatum
est lignum, sed quia postea ex illo intrauit peccati cognitio.
of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, and they by eating of the fruit,
were endued with the knowledge of good and evil: yet was not their eyesight at
all Quemadmodum Josephus Philosophatur. Antiq. libr. 1. cap. 2. Iamque se nudos
esse sentiebant, and de tegumento sibi displicebant. Arbori enim acuminis and
cogitandi vis merat.
amended, but rather weakened by eating of the fruit. The soul of Adam and his
wife must be considered, as they were of God by creation; or as they were
altered by transgression. You know they were created in the image Genesis 1.27.
and 2.7.
of God. God is light Ioh. 8.12. 1. Ioh. 1.5.
it self, and Psalm. 139.12 Ierm. 23.24.
sees al things: therefore man that was made after his similitude, was full
and abundant of light and wisdom, so long as he continued in that light of
God: but so soon as he had eaten of the fruit, he Genesis 2.17. Comederunt and
mortus sunt.
died, according to the Prophecy God had told him, in the day thou eatest
thereof, thou shall die the death: his body died, Theodoret. quaest. in Genesis
^8. Sententiam mortalitatis appellauit mortem. August. de Genesis ad lit. lib. 11.
cap. 32. Corpus little amisso statu mirabili, per quem nec morbo tentari, nec
mutari aetate potuisset, etc. duxit morbidam and mortiferam qualitatem.
having lost that immortal and happy state it had, and was made partaker of
mortality and misery. The soul also died, Gregor. Epist. lib. 6. epist. 31.
Nos Ad^ anima^ in peccato mortuam dicimus, non a substantia viuendi, sed a
qualitate viuendi. Non est eius anima ita mortua vt non esset, sed ita mortua
vt beata non esset.
not in the substance (as neither did the body) but in quality thereof. The
holiness thereof, and also the blessedness, which is as it were the breath of life
unto the soul, departed, and left the soul of them, as it were a dead corpse.
Now by the eye, and understanding of the soul, must Contra Ophitarum
deliramentum. Epiphan. Haeres. 37. Attribuunt huic serpenti omnem cognitionem,
dicentes quod hic fuit principium cognitionis hominis.
also be understood, not as the soul lived in holiness as it was created, for
no holy knowledge could be added by the fruit; but the understanding of the
soul, as it was dead in sin: the eye of the soul being dead, was opened,
that is to say: the soul having understanding, not holy but evil
understanding, by the eating of the forbidden fruit, the same perverse and
evil understanding, was opened or enlarged. This eye of evil understanding is
opened, by two salues Revel. 3.18. 1. Ioh. 2 27.
or ointments, as the Scripture speaks; one is the eye salve of the spirit of
grace, whereby a sinful heart, and a blind understanding in heavenly things, is
taught heavenly and holy knowledge. Thus the eye or heart Act. 16.14.
of Lydia was opened, and the understanding of the Luk 24 45.
Disciples: and this ointment does Psalm. 119.18. 1. Ioh. 2.27.
teach the faithful all holy knowledge of salvation, unto life eternal. The
other salve is as a biting corrosiue unto the understanding, and is called Isa.
66.24. Romans 2.15.16. Origin Hom 9. in Diuersis. in Matthew. 25. Vermis a
plerisque conscientia accipitur peccatorum, qua torqueat in supplicijs
constitutos.
the worm of conscience; and is bred in the soul, that is dead in sin. For
as the moisture and warmth of the air or earth does breed in a carcass
loathsome savors, and corruption: so the guiltines of sin engenders 1. Cor.
15.56. Hieron. in Isai. comment. cap. 14. Putredo, and tinea, and operimentum
vermitim, vt poenae intelliguntur aeternae, quas propria gignit conscientia,
vel suppliciorum materia, quae ex proprijs peccatis nascitur. Sicut enim
quamdiu cadaueris materia est, etc.
sting of conscience in an evil heart, which when it is opened, breeds
dangerous terrors and accusations in the same. Thus the eyes of them both were
opened: the eyes of their understanding corrupted by sin; they were opened
Nazianzen. orat. 40. in Sanct. Baptism. Vnum illud lumen fugiamus quod ex saeuo
and acerbo igne nascitur. Iam vero igni^ purgantis meminit scriptura, que^ in
terras missurus venit Christus; est alter ignis non purgans, sed scelerum
vindex and vltor.
not as yet by grace, but by the feeling and fear of sin. And herein
especially appears the subtlety of Satan, that as they admitted of his
conference, received his arguments, were moved by them to rebel against the
Lord, whereby they fell by little and little, from the sun and body of
light, which is the Lord, and were made thereby also Matthew. 6.23. 1. Ioh. 2.9.
darkness in themselves; so he drew by little and little That Eua perceived not
her own fall, until she had persuaded her husband, and he had fallen with
her: the like you shall read, 1. Chron. 21.1. etc. 2. Sam. 24.10. 2. Chron.
13.14.15. Chrysostom. Homil. in Genesis 16. Vidisti quomodo per verba, quasi per
escam virtu suum immittit, etc. Quo sic frauds suae praecedunt, vt supplantata
muliere, propositum suum impleat; Illam diabolus cap. iuam duxit, and
supplantauit eius rationem: nam quare ante diabolicum consilium, ligni
pulcritudinem non vidit? Sed timebat mandatum Dei, and subsecuturum supplicium.
a veil upon their hearts, whereby they perceived not the fullness of light
declining in them, nor the foulenes of darkness approaching, till they had
performed his desire. But now having murdered their souls, August. Tractat.
in John 2. Si enim malo non consentires, stares, illuminatus maneres: modo
autem quia iam cecidisti, and factus es sancius cord, vnde videri illa lux non
potest, venit ad te talis qualem possis videre
the relics of life that quiuered in them, which was the conscience, he
sets on fire, by letting the^ behold their fact, that it never As Genesis 4.14.
Matthew. 27.3.5.
afterward might be exstinguished. This conscience was as it were a spark
Tertul. in Marcion. lib. 1. Animae enim a primordio conscientia Dei dos est.
Calvin. Institut. lib. 4. cap. 10. sect. 3.
of that internal light, that man had received by creation: which light, man
so much as in him was, having wholly lost, the Lord did mercifully Chrysostom.
Hom. in Genesis 17. Eandem obrem, misericors Deus principio cum formaret hominem,
conscientiam illi indidit, accusatricem perpetuam, quae decipi, and imposturam
ferret nunquam.
preserve in him, to the end it might be as a spur to move man to embrace
that mercy, which the Lord in infinite compassion was purposed to show upon
him. Which spark of light, forasmuch as Satan can by no means take away, he
either Hieron. in Naum. 3. Semper enim diaboli studium est, vigilantes animas
consopire. August. de verbis Dom. 59. Nemo igitur sit solicitus, quod aliquid
ei non dimittatur; Sed iteru^ nemo perverse sit securus, ista enim duo occidunt
animas, aut desperatio aut vana spes.
hides it, in the children of disobedience, raking it up in the ashes of their
sins; or else inflameth it to desperation, except the Lord do give the
sinner Fulgent. lib. de praedest. cap. 7. Ille enim donat gratis indigno
gratiam, qua iustificatus impius, illuminet^r munere bonae voluntatis, and
facultate bone operationis; vt praeueniente misericordia bonum velle incipiat,
and subseque^te misericordia, bonum quod vult, facere valeat.
grace, to feel his mercy. By this, may be perceived, how they saw that they
were naked. They saw themselves in misery, which Bernard. Sermon. 1. de anunc.
Perdidit homo iustitiam, cum Eua serpentis, Adam mulieris voci obediuit, potius
qua^ diu^nae: perdidit and misericordiam, priuaturest and Adam veritate, etc.
Pacem quoque protinus amiserunt, quia non est pax impijs dicit Dominus.
they could not see before, because they were wholly void thereof: but their
glory was 1. Sam. 4.12.
departed, so that the same they could not see. As Hagars eyes were opened to
Genesis 21.19.
see the waters, and the Luc 24.31.
eyes of Cleophas to know our Savior Christ, when as they considered duly,
Aug. de Genesis ad lit. lib. 11. c. 31. Apertos vtique ad aliquid intuendum and
cogitandum, quod antea nunquam aduerterant.
that which before they did not mark: so the eyes of them both were opened,
when as by the conscience of their fault, they marked Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis
16. Tales enim sunt machinationes inimici, vt postquam per deceptionem in
sublime subduxerit, tandem in profundum per praecep^ deijciat.
to what purpose they were persuaded to eat the fruit: namely, that they
might incur the wrath of God, and be spoiled of all their good of body and
mind. They saw in themselves, in stead of that glory, holiness, felicity,
wisdom, and peace of conscience, wherein before they stood; guiltines of
sin, horror of punishment, August. de Genesis ad lit. 11. cap. 32. Idem de Nupt.
and concupisc. lib. 1. cap. 5. Lutherus in Genesis 3. Quae autem potest esse ma^or
corruption, quam quod ituditas quae antea gloria fuit, nunc vertatur in summam
turpitudinem?
filthiness and mortality of body, torment of Theodoret. quest. in Genesis 33.
Vocauit igitur diuina scriptura sic sensum illum peccati: mox enim post
admissum peccatum stimulatur conscientia.
conscience, and death of soul. But as their eyes were opened to see evil in
themselves, so were they sealed up from seeing good. And as Cyril. in Julian.
lib. 3. Non sunt conditi cum ignoratione beni and mali, quippe rationales
erant: vbi autem corruption intrauit, non habuerant simplicem scientiam mali,
sed per experientiam ipsam, in infirmitate laborarunt.
before they knew good by possession, and evil by opposition, as that which
was contrary thereunto; so now know they evil by possession, and good, by
that good which they had lost. Now Adam found himself Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis
16. Atque in tant^m poenitudinem venictis, vt and serus vester dolor futurus,
and malignus hostis risurus, vobisque insultaturus sit, vtpote iacentibus, and
eadem quae ipse possis.
to be trecherouslie beguiled, Ambros. lib. de Parad. cap. 14. Et hie quidem
aperuit oculos, vt culpam suam videret. Magis enim postquam peccauimus nescio
quo modo nostra delicta cognoscimus: and tunc peccatum intelligimus, quod
antequam peccaremus non putauimus esse peccatum.
to have vngraciouslie offended a most gracious God, to be spoiled of his goods
of body and mind, to be worthy Genesis 2.27. Ambros. ibid. Deus autem omnium
vides culpas, and omnia delicta cognos^it. Et homo post commissum aperuit
oculos, vt culpam suam videret, etc. Hinc (...) and conscientia dicitur, qua
and peccatum and iudicium cum ipso Deo agnoscimus. Conscius enim cum alio scius
est. Nou. Marcei. de propr. Sermon. cap. 5. Calvin. Iustitus. lib. 3. cap. 19.
Sect. 1^. and lib. 4. cap. 10. Sect 3.
of eternal punishment. Call again his sinful deed Nam semelemissum volat
irreuocabile verbum. Horat. lib. 1. epist. 18. Bernard, lib. 5. de consider. ad
^ugen. Transierunt a manu non a mente. Quod factum est, infectum esse non
potest. Proinde cisi facere in tempore fuit, sed fecisse in sempiternum manet.
Non transibit cum tempore, quod tempora transit. In aeternum ergo necesse est
crucies, quod perperam te egisse in aeternum memineris.
he could not: to have access to God, he durst not: he knew him to be just,
he had no promise of pardon, he knew not how God could pardon it and continue
just, nay rather he thought he would not pardon it, because he was just: to
look Isa. 5.30. Genesis 32.10. Luc. 15.21.
unto the earth, he saw he was unworthy to tread thereon; unto the creatures,
they could not, Job. 5.23.
neither would they comfort him. Whither the^ should Adam fly, but to hide
himself, which well he knew Verse. 8. Psalm. 139.7.
could not hide from God? The same condition shall be unto the wicked at the
judgment. Their Zachar. 5.3. Revel. 20.12.
deeds shall be written: their Isas. 66.24. Romans 2.15. Bernard. de consider.
ad Eugen, lib. 5. Hic est vermis qui non moritur, memoria praeteritorum: semel
iniectus vel potius innatus per peccatum, haesit firmiter nequaquam deinceps
auellendus. Author quaestionum inter oper. Athanas q. 62. Dicitur vero etiam
conscientia aduersarius: Matthew. 5.25. Luc. 12. Nam occulie in cord nostro
redarguit, coercet a malo, Et si simus inobe lientes, tandem nos ad Dei
tribunal sistit, vbi and panas dabimus tum inormium peccatorum, tum etiam
leuium and minimorum.
consciences shall accuse them: their sins irreuocable: their punishment
unpardonable: Prou. 1.16.
themselves inexcusable: whether should they fly, but Revel. 6.16.
to the mountains and rocks to cover them? Although therefore now, they
sleep with a stony Ezec. 11.19. 1. Sam. 25.37.38.
heart like Nabal, having their eyes closed up from the due regard of sin, 1.
Cor. 4.5. Matthew. 10.26.
yet when their eyes shall be opened, they Prou. 18.14. Chrysostom. in Isai. 6.
Hom. 3. Hoc enim tribunal non pecunijs corru^pitur, non adulationibus
acquiescis, eo quod diuinum est, and a Deo nostris impositum mentibus.
shall find no greater torment then a guilty conscience.

Question 7. verse 7. Wherefore it is said: they sowed figtree leaves together
and made themselves breeches?
BY this it appears that the curse due to sin Genesis 2.17.
before denounced, seized upon them with full power August. de ciuit. Dei lib.
13. cap. 23. Eo ipso die moriis in ijs corporalis necessitas facta est, cum qua
nos necessitate nati sumus: propter quod Apostolus no aijs, corpus qui de
morituru^ est propter peccatum, sed aijt corpus quidem mortuum est. Romans 8.10.
Gregor. Epist. (...). 6. ^^^ui. 3. Adam si in anima mortuus non est qua die
peccauit, quod dici nesas est, falsara ententiam de illo protulis Deus: qui
dixit, qua die comederet, moreretur.
at the very instant of the sin committed: so that when afterward the Lord
did call them to account, he Tertul. in Marcion. lib. 2. Vedaret ei locum
sponte confitendi delictum, and hoc nomine releuandi. Ideoqus nec maledixit
ipsum Adam and Euam, vt restitutionis candidatos, vt confessione releuato^.
did it of favor, not so much to punish them Chrysostom. lib. 1. de provide ^.
Deus vero non minus quam antea been illi facere perstitit. Ostende^s per hoc,
quod nos etsi millies peccemus, ipse tamen saluti nostra prospicere non
desistis, vt siquidem conuersi fuerimus saluemur.
as to give them a comfort of their release. For what can more plainly
describe the very hell it self, then this state of man in which he now stood:
in Romans 5.13. 2. Tim. 4.16. Matthew. 25.42. Gregor. dialog. lib. 4. cap. 43. Vnus
quidem est Geheane ignis, sed non vno modo omnes crucias peccatores.
Vniuscuiusque etenim quantum exigit c^lpa tanta illi^ sentuur and poena.
guiltines of sin, Romans 3.11.12. etc. Job. 10.^2. Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 16.
Nudati propter peccatum supernae gratiae amictu, and sensibilis suae
spoliationis sensum acceperunt.
nakedness of goodness, Matthew. 25.41. 2 Thessalonians. 1.9. Idem in Mat. Hom. 28
Intolerabilures est gehenna, tamen nihil eius quispiam est tale dicturus, quale
est a beatae illius glory honor propelli, exosum esse Christo, and audire de
illo, non noui vos.
loss of Gods favor, Romans 2.15 16. Ignes aeternos quos intelligere soles
Origenes, conscientiam peccatorum, and poenitudinem interna cordi^ vrentem.
Hieronim. contra Ruffin. Apolog. lib. 2.
accusing of conscience, Psalm. 25.3. and 31.1. August. in Psalm. 68. Confusio
est quae mordes conscientiam.
shame and confusion, with Job. 10.21.22. Ierem. cap. 48.43. Chrysostom. Hom.
in Genesis 17. Mox vt intrauis peccatum, tumultuatio simul eos inuasit and
erubescentia, etc. and magno me^tis angore constiterunt.
fear and astonishment of heart: whereunto only was absent the feeling of
fiery torments Revel. 20.14.
in soul and body, which the Lord deferred, not of any merit, but for his
mercy sake. At this time the state of all mankind Because in them there was no
means how man in justice might be delivered.
was most wretched and incurable, in the sight and judgment of men and Angels.
Deuteronomy. 32.37.39.
Now does the Lord in his secret wisdom, and infinite compassion provide a
remedy, 1. Tim. 3.16. 1. Pet. 1.12.
beyond the capacity of all his creatures: which was, that the Lord Jesus
Christ, for his John. 3.16.
unspeakable love to man, should Isai. 52.3. 1 Pet. 1.18. Revel. 5.9.
undertake the paying of our ransom, through satisfying by his obedience 1.
Pet. 2.22. 1. John. 3.5. Romans 5.19.
the perfection of justice which God of man required, and by enduring in his
person (for Isai. 53.5.6.
those that had offended) the rigor of the Galat. 3.13.
curse, and Luc. 22.44.
punishment: whereby he might be able even in justice, to save all those Heb.
7.25.
that come unto him, that is, Ioh. 6.35.
that do believe in him, and to Ioh. 1.12.
give them power to be the sons of God. But consider how the misery of man
did show it self, by the confusion that was in them for their sin, and the
help that was in them to hide the same. Their conscience Conscientia quidem
est ante peccatu^ fraenum, and flagrum post: flagellat autem a Deo non ad deum,
sine praeneniente gratia.
bred in them confusion for their fact, and did torment them, but had Hos.
13.9. Ephesians. 2.8.
no power to help them: it drove them to cover, but could not cure their sin:
it moved them to hide the shame, but the cause of shame, and the means of
hiding it, by seeking favor and mercy at the Lord, it could not move them to
desire to take away. Again, their bodies were defiled, they could neither
cleanse them with water, nor sufficiently cover them with The Hebrew word (...)
gnale of gnalah to ascend or grow up, does signify not only a leaf, but also
the bough yt grows of a tree: as you may see Nehem. 8.15 where this word is
three times used for small or young boughs: also here it is put in the
singular number, whereof a lease was not sufficient: wherefore as the Scripture
often uses enallage numeri, so does it Synecdoche speciei, and in that sense
may it be interpreted leaves, which were leaves and twigges and all.
branches of the fig tree. They knew these would not serve them, and yet they
could not for shame but use them. They sewed, or (as the (...) ijthperu a (...)
a thapar, to sow or make fit to ones body, or such like, as Job. 16. verse. 15.
Hebrew word does aptly signify) made fit unto themselves, The word (...)
chagoroth of (...) cagar, to compass about, does properly signify girdles,
and for the most part is so taken in the Scripture, as Prou. 31.24. 1. Sam.
18.4. 2. Sam. 18.11. 1. King. 2.5. Ezech. 23.15. that which the words of the
text does signify, is that they plaited the small boughs of the figtree about
their waste, thereby to cover their priuities: which is as yet the order in
some barbarous countries, where through heat they use no other apparel, as
says Isodor. lib. 19. cap. 22.
girdles of their loins, thereby to hide their priuities. But why did they not
rather cover their eyes, their ears, their hands, their mouth, which were all
the chiefest instruments of this tra^sgression; August. de Genesis ad lit. 11.
cap. 31. Item de peccator. merit. and remiss. lib. 2. c. 22. Item de nuptijs
and concup. lib 1. cap. 5. and alij, rationem reddunt, quia in sua membra
oculos iniecerunt, per concupiscentiam. Alij quod per haec membra peccatum
forent transfusuri per generationem. Arego (absque aliorum praeiudicio dictum
velim) maximam causam deputo misericordiam Dei, qua membris indignissimis lices
maxim necessarijs aliquam pristine dignitatis scintillam permisit, quanquam
peccati ratione, maxim tegerentur. Hisce vero qua nobis maxim videntur
inhonesta, Deus copiosiore honor tegumenti decorauit. Hine vero impij omnia
membra turpissima: boni viri honorifica sunt.
except it were to testify, that not only these now covered, but every part
of them was shamefullie defiled, and that the rest were to be uncovered, rather
of necessity, then any worthiness. And surely their wisdom was not
Sapientiam primam retinuerunt licet non sanctam, quemadmodum neque mortui sunt
in substantia viuendi sed in qualitate viuendi, vt inquit Gregor.
so far perished, but they knew better means of covering, then fig leaves:
but Verse. 21. and Genesis 9.2. Nam quod homo per peccatum similitudinem Dei
amiserit, Cyprian. lib. de bono patientia: Haec autem similitudo erat in
similitudine dominij, Chrysostom. Hom. 9. in Genesis necesse est vt authoritatem
in creaturas amiserit Adam, nec ijs potuit vlterius sine noua gratia legitime
frui.
their authority was gone, so that they might not, neither durst usurp them.
They understood that the trees of the garden could not hide them, and yet
thorough astonishment they hid themselves. But why came they not to confess
their sin to God? How can a man come to God, Ioh. 6.44. Ambros. de vocat.
Gent. lib. 1. cap. 3. Nemo fidas sui^ viribus, qua cum erant integrae, non
steterunt. Bernard. Sermon. 1. de Annunc. Si flare non potuit humana natura adhuc
integra, quanto minus poterit per seipsam resurgere iam corrupta.
except the heavenly father draw him? How could they have hope in God for
pardon, knowing his justice, and their own offense, and having no promise,
Romans 4.3. and 10.8.
whereon to ground their faith? or how could they albeit the promise had been
given, have of themselves received it Ioh. 6.65. Philip. 2.13. Council.
Arausican. 2. cap. 9. Diuini est muneris, cum and recte cogitamus, and pedes
nostros a falsitate and iniustitia tenemus. Quoties enim bona agimus, Deus in
nobis atque nobiscum, vt operemur operatur. Idem cap. 15. Ab eo quod formauis
Deus, mutatur Adam, sed in peius per iniquitatem suam; ab eo quod operata est
iniquitas, mutatur fidelis, sed in melius per gratiam Dei. Item August. epist.
28. Item de great. Christi lib. 1. cap. 19. and alibi. Fulgens. lib. 1. cap.
7.8.9. etc. Dei esse vt bonu^ facere velimus, and vt bonum facere valeamus.
without the power of the spirit of grace, reviving them being dead Ioh. 8.44.
in sin? Wherefore as Adam was before in the similitude of God, so is he now
Origin. Hom. in Leuit. 4. Si pro misericordia crudelis, etc. abiecta imagine
Dei, diaboli in te imaginem suscepisti, and bonum depositum tibi diuinitus
commendatum abnegasti.
of the likeness of the devil, Genesis 8.21. Isai. 1.5.6.
abounding in sin, boiling with a tormenting conscience, and nothing
outwardly before his eyes but death. These are Jude verse. 6.
the chains of darkness, in which the evil Angels are imprisoned, and 1. Pet.
3.19.
the wicked souls departed. In these Adam being wrapped, looked Theodores.
quaest. in Genesis 38. Siquidem post sententiam diuinam, per singulos vt ita
dicam, dies mortem expectabat.
as steadfastly for execution, as an offender condemned looks for the sword.

Question 8. verse 8. How it is said: they heard the voice of the Lord God
walking: and of the answer of Adam being examined, until the fourteenth verse?
WHen man through sin Psalm. 119. verse. 176.
had lost himself, the Lord like a Matthew. 18.12.
careful Pastor, goes Aliqui contendunt, hoc Dei iudicium immediate post
commissum initum esse. Caluinus postera in aurora. Plures ad vesperam eius
diei. Non est, vt opinor, horum diuersa animi sententia, nam vnusquisque summa
cum conuenientia actum pro tempore statuit. De catero inane est mouere lites.
speedily after him to seek him, and like a Chrysostom. de Prou. lib. 1. Ita
fere and medicu^, si vulnus negligat ac deserat, purulentum amplius reddit: sin
vero id contractum, iugiter depurare persistat, vlterius progredisaniem ac
morbi virus vetat.
good Physician brings with him medicine to heal his Psalm. 147.3.
sickness. They heard the voice of the Lord God walking, says the text: which
some Rabb. Jonah and Rabb. Solom. in Comment. and alij.
interpret: they walking heard the voice of the Lord God: some Pagnin. in
translat. priore. Tremel. Vocem Iehouae Dei itantem reddit.
other: they heard the walking voice of God, that is, according to the Hebrew
phrase, Exodus 19.19.
waxing more and more loud and terrible. But of the Justin. Martyr. dialog.
cum Triffon. Hieron. in Tradit. Hebra. Item in Psalm. 81. Audiuit vocem Dei
ambulantis, quia ipse cum Deo non stetit. August. de Genesis ad lit. lib. 11. cap.
34. and de Trin. lib. 2. cap. 10. Quomodo enim possit ad literam intelligi,
talis Dei am^ulatio and collocutio, nisi in speci^ humana non video. Neque enim
dici potest, vocem solam factam, vbi deambulasse dictus est Deus (si modo ita
interpretandus est locus, quod aliqui negant) aut eum qui deambulabat, in loco
non fuisse visibilem.
most interpreters, and as I take it, most consonant unto the scope of
Scripture, it is taken for the voice of the Lord God walking, that is to say,
The word (...) kol, does often signify a sound or noise, strepitus: as 2:
King. 6.32. Ezech. 1.24. where this word is five times used in one verse for
sound.
the sound of his feet; meaning thereby no doubt, that the Lord did manifest a
token of his presence. That the Lord did walk in the garden, who is 1. King.
8.17.
not contained in any place, but himself contains Act. 17.28. Coloss. 1.17.
time and place, and all Bernard. de considerat. ad Eugen. lib. 5. In quo
omnia, non quasi in loco, sed quasi in virtute, etc. Suo autem sublimi and
inco^prehensibili modo, sicut omnia in ipso, sic ipse in omnibus est. Deus non
est in loco inclusus, sed ipse continet locum: per omnia est and in omnibus.
things; is spoken either Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 17. Voluit illos haec tali
modo sentire, vt in magno mentia angore constituerentur, id quod factum est.
according to the present sense of Adam; or rather, Justin. Mart. Dialog. cum
Triff. Quod autem Jesus fuerit, qui Mosi and Abraha and alijs sanctu
patriarchis apparuit, etc. Tertul. aduer. Praxeam. Ipse enim and ad humana
semper colloquia descendit, ab Adam vsque ad Patriarchas. August. epist. 3.
Nouit Deus venire, non recedendo vbi erat; nouit abire, non deserendo quo
venerat: miratur hoc men's humana; and quia non capit, fortasse non credit.
that the Son of God, who afterward was clothed with our flesh, appeared unto
them, as before he Genesis 1.29. and 2.15.22.
did, not by the substance Ioh. 1.18. 1. Tim. 6.16.
of the deity which is invisible, but by August. de Genesis ad lit. lib. 11. cap.
33. Nunc tamen quod a^dierunt, etc. Non nisi per creaturam visibiliter factum
est, ne substantia inuisibilis eorum sensibus, locali and temporali motu
apparuisse credatur. Idem. de Trin. lib. 2. cap. 10. Et ille videtur loqui ad
primum hominem, qui dixit fiat lux: (scil. Trinitas quo modo per verbum fecisse
commemoratur) and potest esse transitio occulta a persona ad personam. Idem. de
ciuitat. Dei. lib. 16. c. 29. Et idem apparuit non per id quod est, sed per
creaturam, quae sibi subdita est. Idem. in epist. 102. In specie qua voluit,
sicut and quibus voluit.
the ministry of some creature, as it pleased him. Neither can it rightly be
gathered by the words of Scripture, that this his coming was in more As that
he came with tempest or whirlewind, as some do understand, by the word ((...),
ruack,) wind or cool of the day.
terrible manner, then was accustomed, whereby Adam had any farther cause of
fear, but that which arose of his own default. But such is man's corrupted
nature, that whether the Lord do come in Matthew. 17.5.
mercy or in judgment, his presence Matthew. 17.6. Heb. 12.21.
can not be endured, no not even of righteous and holy men. But here the Lord
does come to judgment, notwithstanding he makes man therein partaker of his
endless mercy. The form of this judgment is described: partly, that the
righteousness of God Ierem. 2.5. Eorum scil. qui Deum ex hoc iudicio Ada nimis
petulanter seueritatis arguunt. Iuliani scil. and nostri temporis nonnulli: de
quibus vere dicitur: Humiliter irrepunt, blande capiunt, molliter ligant,
latenter occidunt. Leo. Sermon. 5. de I^iunio. 10. men's.
might be maintained against the slanders of the wicked: partly also Chrysostom.
Hom. in Genesis 17. Et quasi mansuetus iudex and misericors, in tribunali terrore
and horrore pleno, sedet and examinat diligenter. Per hoc nos docens, ne quam
fratrum nostrorum condemnemus, nisi causa ante diligenter cognita.
that it might be as a pattern unto men, who are authorized Deuteronomy. 16.18. and
17.15.20. Psalm. 82.1.6.
of God to judge their brethren. And again, as an Compare Matthew.
25.32.33.34.41. Reu. 20.12.
example of the latter judgment, where transgression shall no more be
pardoned, but there shall be judgment Iam. 2.13.
merciles, in that every wicked one without the means of a mediator, shall
receive the fruit of his own works. First of all the Lord by coming, gives
token of the searching out of guilty persons, as a judge. Secondly, Verse. 9.
he calls them to the bar of judgment. Thirdly, he examineth the cause;
and lastly gives sentence upon the same. In the discussing whereof does
notably appear, the Contra Pelagianos and Papistas, in doctrina liberi
arbitrij, Council. Trident. Sess. 6. cap. 5. and Can. 4. Bellarm. Tom. 3. part.
3. lib. 3. cap. 5.
untowardness of the nature of all mankind to come to God; that neither it can
come Council. 2. Auransican. cap. 25. Prorsus donum est Dei, diligere Deum.
Ambros. de vocatio. Gent. lib. 1. cap. 6. Et vt breuissime pateat qualis sit
humana natura sine gratia, dicat Apostolus Judas quid agat vel ignorantia
imperitorum vel doctrina sapientum. Hi autem (inquit) quaecunque quidem
ignorant, bl^sphemant: quaecunque autem naturaliter vt muta animalia norunt, in
his corrumpuntur. August. lib. de natura and gratia. cap. 32. Praeuenit
misericordia vt sanemur, quia and subsequitur vt etiam sanati vegetemur. ibid.
cap. 33. Caneat homo, nedum quod Dei est deputat suum, amittat quod Dei est and
redeat ad suum.
of it own accord, neither being provoked, unless it be Ioh. 6.44. Hos. 4.16.
ouerruled by the power of grace. Secondly, that it is by grace only Romans
11.6. Ep^es. 2.8.9. Council. Arausican. 2. can. 12. Tales nos amat Deus, quales
futuri s^mus ipsius dono, non quales sumus nostro merito. August. epist. 105.
Quia vniuersa ista massa merito damnata est, contumeliam debitam reddit
iustitia, honorem donat indebitum gratia, non meriti praerogatiua, non fati
necessitate, non temeritate fortunae, sed altitudine diuitiarum sapientiae and
scientiae Dei.
that we are delivered, which Philip 1.6. Fulgent. lib. de Praedest. cap. 8.
Primum inchoans in homine voluntatem bonam, deinde eandem voluntatem adiuuans
inchoatam.
does both begin and finish our salvation, as here appears. The Lord finds
man Verse. 8. Luc. 23.30.
possessed with terrors of death; he comes therefore, to Look question 16.
appease his conscience, and to plague his enemy. Man can in no wise endure
his coming, but flies from God, and seeks most brutishlie to shun his
presence, Ierem. 23.21. Bernard. in Psalm. qui habitat. Sermon. 6. Deus est in
omni loco, omnia vniuersaliter continens, omniaque disponens, sed long tamen
aliter atque aliter. Apud homines est praestant and dissimulans, apud eloctos
operans and seruam, apud superos pascens and cubans, apud inferos arguens and
damnans.
who is present every where, and to hide himself from him, from whom the
Psalm. 139.12.
darkness cannot hide. But the Lord preventing Chrysostom. Hom. in Gen 17.
Verum diligentur. tendite, videbitu q^antum inte sit inter misericordiam Dei,
and homi^ (...) se austeritatem. (...) est, and (...), and inter^ogat, and
r^sponsum accipit, and quasi am^^^^ amno loquitur, and exp^^^tul^t cum eo, etc.
(...) homines ^acere nunq^^m serrent interse, lu^s candem naturam sertuisint.
him in mercy, does cause him to appear, who otherwise, as he had made
himself thorough sin R m. 6.16. Ephesians. 2.2.
the slave of Satan, had justly so continued, forasmuch as of his own accord
Romans 6.16. Ioh. 6.44.
he yielded him obedience, and would not, or could not will to be released. And
yet this second mercy was not enough for Adam, he abuses it as he did the
former. And seeing he cannot hide himself being drawn perforce out of his
covert, he is so far void of grace, that he seeks what he can to hide his
sins, keeping them Prou. 28.13.
thereby (so much as in him was) from being pardoned. And so desirous is he,
that Ioh. 3.19.
they should not come to light, that he adds therein Deuteronomy. 29.19.
as the Scripture says, drunkenness to thirst, and covers them with
blasphemies and lies, and by charging the Lord himself to be the author of
them. The Lord first calls him: where art thou? that is, in what state
Tertul. in Marcion. lib. 2. Quaerit Deus, nec incertus admissi, nec ignorans
loci. Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 17. Significat, quasi^ta diceret ad illum: qui
factum est? in alio statu reliqui te, in alio nunc inuemo. Vnde tibi hoc
accidit? Qui^ te in ta^tam induxit alierationem?
art thou? how is it that thou fleest my presence? Here had Adam just occasion
to have answered, Lord I have sinned, Lord I crave thy mercy. But says Adam:
I heard thy voice, etc. that is, thou art every way so terrible unto me, that
even thy voice will not suffer me to be free from fear, no not in this garden
which thou have given me, to be my dwelling place. And as thou art glorious
unto me and fearful; so I am naked, and therefore ashamed to appear:
wherefore this is the cause of my not appearance; my nakedness wherein thou have
created me, and thy Majesty which is greater then such a creature can endure.
What falsehood and lies, and devilish hypocrisy does rest herein, the Lord
himself uncovers, whereas he answered: Who told thee that thou wast naked?
etc. That is to say, thou wast naked before, and had no shame of nakedness,
also my glory was the same it is: how comes it now that thou art ashamed of
thy nakedness? this can be of no other cause, then of thy self: have thou eaten
of the tree? etc. Of shame and guiltines of conscience the only cause is
sin. Wherefore tell me plainly: have thou eaten of the tree whereof I
commanded thee thou should not eat? Here again was Adam compelled to
show, if any relic of grace remained in him, to have plainly confessed his
fault and craved mercy: but herein appeared no more show of grace or goodness
remaining in him, then shall be of the Luc. 13.26. Matthew. 25.11.44.
reprobate at the latter judgment: he confesses the fact, but not the fault.
This woman which thou gave to be with me, etc. This woman is in the fault
that gave it me to eat, yea thou thy self did give this woman to be with
me, by whom I was provoked to offend; wherefore in that I eat the fruit,
mark in justice, who is in fault thereof. A notable confession, and worthy
pardon. Such Council. Arausican. 2. can, 2. Si quis soli Adae praeuaricationem
suam, non and eius propagini asserit nocuisse, aut certe mortem tantum corporis
quae poena peccati est, non autem and peccatum, quod mors est animae, per vnum
hominem in omne genus hominum transisse testatur: iniustitiam Deo dabit,
contradicen Apostolo; per vnum hominem, etc. Romans 5.
is the nature of all men, unless they be guided by the spirit of grace, which
is not of themselves; for even the woman immediately does show the same
corruption. Here may you see the very image of Satan's wickedness and
subtlety. Hatred Psalm. 81.15. Huiusmodi est Satanae denominatio.
against God, as though he were the cause of man's offenses; Verse. 1.4.5.
blasphemies in accusing him of blame; hatred Ioh. 8.44.
against man; in so much that Adam spared not now his own flesh: hypocrisy
and lies, whereof this confession was fully fraught. God gave unto him the
woman Genesis 2.18. Et eo nomine ingrati sunt erga Deum Sophista tam Ethnici quam
pontificij, qui nupiijs quibusdam interdicunt.
for a stay (as Adam knew right well) and not a stumbling block: and she gave
him of the tree; she Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 17. Nusquam necessitas, nusquam
violentia, sed voluntas and electio; dedit solum, non coegit aut vim fecit.
could not compel him; but persuade him to receive it; Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis
17. Nam licet mulier cibum dederit, sufficiebat tamen mandatum meum, and timor
supplicij ad fugam escae incutiendam. Number ignorabas? Number nesciebas? Ideo curam
vestri gerens praedixi, ne in haec incideretis. Vt mulier tibi ad
transgressionem mandati ministrauit, tu propterea insons non eris. Caput enim
es mulieris, and propter te producta est. It Is autem ordinem peruerticti;
oportebat reliquum corpus capiti obsequi; sed diuerso modo res euenis,
corporique reliquo caputobsecutum est, and quae sursum erant, in infimum locum
deuenerunt.
his part it was to rule her as the head, and not to follow her as the heels.
Thus we see that there remains in man Ierem. 4.22.
wisdom to do evil, but to goodness there is none understanding. Secondly,
that the wicked are perverse Psalm. 58.3.
even from the womb. Thirdly, that Hypocrites are grieved and ashamed 1. Sam.
15.24. 1. King. 20.43. and 21.27.
of the punishment, not of the fault of sin. Fourthlie, that man being dead
in sin, his Psalm. 5.9. To send forth stinkes of blasphemies and slanders.
Matthew. 15.19.10.
throat is as an open sepulcher, Bernard. Sermon de Dupl. Baptism. Serpens o
Eua decepit te, decepit profecto non impulit aut coegit. Mulier tibi o Adam de
ligno dedit; sed offerendo vtique, non violentiam inferendo: neque enim
potestate illius, sed tua factu^ est voluntate, vt eius voci plus obedire^ quam
diuinae.
all his members Romans 6.13.
are weapons of unrighteousness, and can no otherwise be converted Ioh. 5.21.25.
Revel. 20.5.6.
then as dead men are raised from the grave, not by the power of any creature,
but Ioh. 6.63. and 15.5.
of the Lord.

Question 9. verse 14.15. How the punishment of the Serpent is to be
understood, and what this means: he shall break thy head, and thou shall
bruise his heel?
NOw that the Lord by due examination has found out the offenders, and the
fault, and the original thereof, he proceeds to pronounce the sentence of
desert. And because the Serpent is found to be the first in sinning, the Lord
justly also makes him the first in punishment. In whom must be considered,
that as before Quest. 1.
we showed the serpent was the instrument, and Satan the author and chief
worker in the temptation: so the Lord does declare his vengeance on either of
them, according to desert; insomuch that the Serpent, who did not of his own
accord offend, but was compelled to be an instrument by Satan; the Lord does
in great displeasure for the love of man condemn, Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 17.
Na^ sicut clementissi^ pater, ^unien^ eum ^ui filium suu^ ^oc^i^e it, and
gla^i^ and easem ^uibus si^^^ su^^ oc^^su^ de^truit, and in ^ulta frusta
fran^it: eo (...) modo and D^us epit. Quippe serpent quasi gladius quidam
di^bolicae seruiuis malitiae
as one that in anger, breaks the sword, wherewith his son or friend was
wounded. Wherefore as these two were joined together in the trespass, and yet
did severally offend; so it must be understood that the Lord in punishing them
together, does notwithstanding give either of them according to their nature,
several punishment. That which belongs to the brutish creature, is according
to the words and letter to be understood; that which belongs unto Satan,
being a spirit, is figuratiuelie and spirituallie to be perceived. Wherein I
find diversity among interpretors, according to the 1. Cor. 12.4. 2. Pet. 3
15. Hieron. epist. ad August. 30. inter ep. August. Quisque in suo sensu
abundat, iuxta Apostolum Romans 14. alius quidem sic, alius autem sic.
diverse measures of their knowledge; some taking this to be pronounced of the
Serpent only, and that which belongs unto Satan, to be understood: some,
that this belongs unto Satan only, under the figure of the Serpent: some
again, that it is to be understood of both, in diverse senses and meanings of
the same words: and some also, that they are both punished, but in diverse
words; as that the former part belongs to the Serpent, the latter part
belongs unto Satan. And surely for mine own part I rest in this; that the
same may be wholly understood of the Serpent, according to the letter of the
text; and wholly also of the devil, in the spiritual meaning of the Lord: but
yet, that the former part belongs more properly to the Serpent, the latter
part thereof to Satan. The Lord did not ask the Serpent, as he did the
woman: why have thou done thus? because if we consider it of the Serpent, as
of the brutish creature, he was destitute of reason Calvin. in Genesis 3. Quia
nec in bestia sensus erat peccati, and diabolo nullam spem veniae residua^
facturus erat.
and without the sense of sin, neither to speak of sinning properly, August.
de Adulter. coniug. lib. 1. cap. 16. Peccare autem proprie non est nisi eius,
qui vtitur rationali voluntatis arbitrio, quod in onmibus mortalibus
animantibus, non nisi homini est diuinitus attributum.
could he sin, although he were the instrument thereof. If we consider it of
Satan (whom the justice of God does Ambros. lib. de suga Seculi, cap. 7.
Etenim quia malum Deus non fecit, sed nequitia diaboli inseruit, vindictam Deus
distulit, vt ab ipsis quos deceperat diabolus vinceret tur, etc. nam Christi
gratia quae te resoluit, illum adstrinxit: manet enim maledictio directa in
serpentem propter tuam deceptionem.
chiefly level at in punishing) he being the author, was without excuse;
neither could he in justice in any wise be pardoned, either of his first or
latter offense. For therefore is the sin of Qui primarius suit apostata.
Satan, and of the Angels Job. 4.18. 2. Pet. 2.4. Jude. v. 6.
that fell together with him, Cyprian. exposit. Syml. sect. 39. Artic. Credo
sanct. Eccles. etc. Conciliu^ vanitatis est, quenqua^ (sicut Origin.) diabolu^
debita absoluere damnatione poenaru^,
desperate, and withont recovery of pardon: because that being created in the
August. Tract. in Ioh. Euang. 110. Cum vero nouerimus bonorum omnium creatore^
repara^dis angelis malis nihil gratiae contulisse, cur non potius intelligimus,
quod tanto damnabilior eoru^ iudicata sit culpa, quanto erat natura sublimior?
tanto enim minus quam not peccare debueru^t, quanto meliores nobis fuerunt.
Idem sieve author de mirabil. Sac. Scrip. lib. 1. cap. 2. Angelus in summo
honoris sui ordine co^stitutus, immutationem ad excellentiorem statum non
habuit, nisi per contemplatione^ sui creatoris confirmatus, in eo statu
permaneret vbi conditus fuit: and idcirco prolapsus, iterum reuocari minime
potuit, quod de sublimissimo sui ordinis statu proruit. Homo autem in terra
positus, meliorem and spiritualem vitam aliqua^do recepturu^, etc. clementia
igitur conditoris est non ad primum ordinem sed ad summam beatitudinem
reuocatus.
highest perfection that a creature can contain: there was, nor could be any
more excellent estate of any creature, whereunto they might in mercy be
restored, then that which they had already despised and rejected. Secondly,
they sinned Heb. 6.4.5.6. and 10.26
against the spirit they had received, and Heb. 10 27. August. de mirab. lib.
1. cap. 2. Ad cumulum diabolici peccati illud accedit, quod statim postquam
peccauit, foneam desperationis incurrit.
thereby fell into perpetual desperation, of the pardon of their fault.
Thirdly, they sinned without prouokement, August. quaest mixed. 1. Nemo fidelium
dubitet diabolum apostasy suae authorem non habere. Vide and de lib. Arbis 3.
cap. 28.
and therefore the justice of God would not permit, that they should have help
to rise again. The Serpent therefore, as he was the instrument, the Lord does
stain the nature of his first creation, with horrible and Verse. 14.
perpetual disgrace. Thou art cursed (says he) above all cattle: that is to
say, although al cattle through Adams fault Verse 17. Romans 8.2^.22.
are partakers with him in his punishment, yet thou which have deserved by thy
own default, shall (as reason is) endure a greater misery then any other. He
shows wherein: in his going, in his meat, in hatred unto The woman and her
seed.
man. The going of Serpents may seem Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 17. Sicut diabolus
qui per te operatus est, e coelo deo sum impu^sus est, etc. ita similiter
impero, vt and in tu aliam formationis figuram habeas, and super terram repas.
Basil. Hom. de Paradis. Serpent tunc non horribiliter in terram prorepens, ac
veluti inundans; sed alius super pedes gradiens. Adam gave him his name in
Hebrew not of his creeping, but of his subtlety, (...) nachash.
to have bin before more comely, either by the vprightnes of their bodies, or
other means; or else it may be taken that the Genesis 2.25. and 3.7.
comelines which he had before, was turned (as Adams nakedness) into shame; so
that same which before was nature, is now made misery and changed into
punishment. The herbs of the field were wont Genesis 1.30.
to be his meat, now is he condemned to eat the dust, that is to say, to
penury and extreme Chrysostom Hom. in Genesis 17. Et semper in hoc maneas statu:
and solus ex animantibus terra pascaris.
necessity. For although the Serpents Aristot. Histor. anim. lib. 8. cap. 4.
and communis experientia.
do feed ofttimes on other creatures, as frogs, fishes, birds, flies,
blood and Plin. lib. 8. c. 14. Boae serpe^tes in Italia ta^tae magnitudinis, vt
Diuo Claudio principe, occisa in Vaticano, solidus in al^io spectatus sit
Infans: Aluntur bubuli lactis succo, vnde nomen traxere. De serpentibus
immanissim. quaere historiam: vnius, Ptolemaeo Philadelpho dono missi. Diodor.
Sic. lib. 3 Item contra quem Atilius Regulus bellauit in Africa, ad Bagrada^.
Tit. Liui. Decad 2. in epit. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 14. Lucius Florus lib. 2. cap.
2.
milk of beasts; yet the Lord has made their nature so Circa Thessaliam a
ciconijs nisi deuorare^tur, inhabitabilem redderent eam regionem, prae
multitudine: Tradit Aristot. lib. de mirab. Ascultat. Ne intra terrem recipi
vnquam serpentem a quo homo fuerit morsu^, tradit. Dioscor. lib. 6. Plin. lib.
8.
odious to all creatures, that they dare scarslie of any be espied, whereby
thorough penury and famine they are compelled to eat the dust, and therefore
as besieged with so many enemies, they take delight to hide themselves within
the ground. And although they were before created, as servants unto man; yet
are they now against man's estate so fierce and cruel, that if at any time
Certu^ ex co^muni experientia.
they find him sleeping, or in case that they are sure to prevail against
him, they spare not the hurt of their own bodies to do him violence. And but
for the fear they stand in, of the nature of man, Genesis 9.2.
which God for the love of man, has put within them; they would surely
maintain more open war. Wherefore they are not without cause in hatred unto
man, both in respect of the Aug. quaest. in Exodus 8. Ad iustitiam pertinet vt
animal hominibus noxium perimatur.
permission of the Lord, as also in regard of the hurt that is in them,
especially to women, who as they are more weak, are also more justly
fearful of them. If any shall demand how all this may be understood of
Satan. Consider that albeit he was before Ambros. de Paradis. cap. 15. Non tam
propter corporis figuram, quam quod propter terrenas cogitationes, de illa
coelesti beatitudine sit lapsus.
accursed, by his fall; yet as he does increase his sin, so he does increase
his curse. He is cursed also above August. de Genesis cont. Manich. 2.17. Quia
pecora non amiserunt beatitudinem aliquam coelestem quam nunquam habuerunt, sed
in natura sua quam acceperunt degunt vitam.
every creature most worthily, because he is the fountain of the curse upon
the creatures. His going is upon his belly; that is, as it were creeping on the
earth; which 2. Pet. 2.4.
signifies that he is plunged in the lowest degree of misery, and perdition.
And also dust shall be his meat all the days of his life: that is, Cyprian. in
Symbol. Concilium vanitatis est, diabolum debita absoluere damnatione poenarum.
he shall never be delivered by any grace, from that fearful malice,
mischief, rebellion, and wickedness, wherein he takes now August. de Genesis
cont. Manich. lib. 2. cap. 17. Poena eius est vt in potestate habeat eos, qui
Dei praecept^t contemnunt, and in de mayor ei poena est, quia de hac tam
inse^t^^. potestate l^tatur. Idem de Genesis ad lit. lib. 11. cap. 36. de duplici
sensu verborum. Hoc ergo vere est dictum se^penti: Iam caetera verba Dei sunt,
quae libero lect^ris in tellectui relinquu^tur, vtru^ prop^ie an figurate
accipi debea^t, etc
delight. Also the Lord puts enmity etc. (wherein he begins to restore the
woman and her seed) between the woman and her seed, and Satan and his seed;
that is to say, between the godly children of the woman restored, and him,
Act. 13.10. 1. Ioh. 3.8 10.
his Angels and servants here on earth, who do continually make deadly Psalm.
15.4. and 139. verse. 21.22. Amos. 5.10. Act. 13.10. Apoc. 12.17.
strife; so that the true seed of the woman Ephesians. 6.13. 1. Pet. 5.9.
are commanded, withal their might, to fight against him. The effect whereof
which follows, belongs properly to satan: he shall ((...) Ieshuphcarosh)
break or crush thy head: that is, 1. Ioh. 3.8.
dissolve thy malice, Isai. 27.1. Romans 16.20.
subdue thy power, and finally Matthew. 25.41. Revel. 20.10.
destroy thee with the second death: and thou shall bruise his heel: that is,
thou shall not exceed or go beyond his heel in offending of his body: so yt
thou shall receive much more hurt by thy malitiousnes, then thou shall cause to
Adam; for he by his Iren. lib. 3. cap. 34. and 39. primum hominem fuisse
saluatum cont. Tatianum probat.
posterity shall be restored, but the same his seed shall utterly confound
thy pride and fury. Thus all the enemies of God do work their own
confusion, and the Prou. 16.4.
glory of God against their wills. And so wise and good is the Lord our God
Psalm. 76 10. ^ulgent. lib. 1. cap. 27. Been quippe malis interitus a Deo
redditur, quam^is sit malu interitus ijs, qui nunc just des^runtur, and
^ostmodu just torquebuntur, etc. nam and hoc tempore* quo discedentes malos
descrit Deus; non operat^^ in ijs quod e^ di^^ licet, sed operatur per eos quod
ei placet. Postmodum ijs reddituru^* quod ab eius iustitia merentur. Recipient
enim, non pro eo quod Deus been vsus est eorum operibus malis: sed pro eo quod
ipsi male abusi sunt Dei operibus bonis.
that he can use every crooked instrument, and make every work thereof to
serve unto his glory, and the Romans 8.28.
salvation of his Church.

Question 10. verse 15. What seed of the woman it is, that breaks the
Serpents head?
THe word (...) Zerahh translated seed, Nomen est collectiuu^ Linacer Gra^mat.
lib. 1 Quod singulari numero multitudinem significat.
does sometime Genesis 49.6. Job. 5.25.
in the singular number, signify a multitude or many children, and sometime
Genesis 4.25. Leuit. 22.13.
it is taken but for one singular person, a man's son or child, the fruit of
his body. In the former sense it is said: I will put enmity between thy seed
and her seed: that is, between every one of thy seed, and every one
(indefinitly Quidam enim inuenti sunt, quibus serpents terrestres terrori non
sunt, quemadmodu^ Tiberius Caesar serpentem manu sua cibauit, and in
oblectame^tis habuit. Sueton. lib. 3. cap. 72.
taken) of the woman's seed. In the latter exposition it is said: he, or it, or
that same seed, that is, one singular person of that seed, shall break thy
head. What one is he? even Isai. 11.1.2. Matthew. 1.21.
Jesus the Son of the Matthew. 16.16.
living God, who took unto his Godhead Heb. 2.14.16. Athanas. in Symbol. Non
conuersione diuinitatis in carnem, sed assumptione humanitatis in Deum.
the woman's seed, and was borne of Marie the virgin, Iren. lib 3. cap 20. Si
homo non vicisses inimicum hominis, non just victus esset inimicus: Rursus
nisi Deus donasset salutem, non firmiter haberemus eam, and nisi homo
coniunctus fuisset Deo nostro, non potuisses particeps fieri
incorruptibilitatis.
that in the person of man, he might overcome the enemy of man, and recover
again by righteousness, that which man had lost by sin. Whose heel was
bruised Leo de pass. Dom. Sermon. 1. Prorsus viraque natura vnus Christus, nec
verbum ibi ab homine disiunctum, nec ^^mo est dissociatus a verbo. Non est
fastidiata humilitas, quia nec imminuta maiestas: nihil nocuit naturae
inuiolabili, quod passibili oportebat inferri.
when his body was crucified: whose heel is bruised, Act. 9.4.
when his members by Satan are afflicted. So that it may not only be
translated, as Rabb. Abraham. Pagninus, and Tremel. hoc conteret.
some do, it; that is, that same seed; but much better, he: namely, that one
person; as Iren. lib. 5. cap. 3. ipse tu^m. Cyprian. ad Quirin lib. 2. ipse
tutum. Leo. Magn. de Natiu. Dom. Sermon. 2. Denunciam serpenti futuru^ semen
mulieris, quod no^ij capitis elationem sua vertute contereret, Christum
scilicet in carne venturum Deum hominemque signans, qui natus e^ virgin,
violatorem humanae propaginis incorrupta natiuitate damnaret.
many other, and even Hieron. lib. Tradit. in Genesis Ipse seruabit caput tuum.
Melius est in Hebaero, ipse conteret caput tuum.
Hierom himself, and the Septuagint translation, and our English has it. But
some of the Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 17. Sed mala fide translatus, tam contra
verba manifesta and sensum authoris, vti testis est, and obseruauit ante nos
Philip. Montanus. Ambros. de Fuga Seculi. cap. 7. August. de Genesis ad lit. lib.
11. c. 36. Idem de Genesis cont. Manich. lib. 2. cap. 18.
Fathers, misguided by the translations of Aquila, of Symmachus, and
Theodotion, which chiefly in their time were in use, do read it, she shall
break: so also does Targ. Hieros. interpretatur tamen de Messiah.
the Jewish Targhum which those translatours followed, as Jewish Epiphan. lib.
de mensuris and pond. Aquila expulsus ob Astrologiae studiu^ ab ecclesiae,
proselytus fit, and circu^ciditur Iu^aeus; deinde tradidit se ad disce^du^
Hebraeoru^ lingua^, quam eu^ sum didicisset, interpretatus est scripturas,
quo aliqua ex receptis libris peruerteret, and testimonia de Christo in
scripturis prolata, aliter ederet. Hunc secutus est Symmachus Samarita, qui
nunqua^ recepit fide^: hunc autem Theodotion Po^ticus ex Sectatoribus
Marcionis, qui and ipse ad Iudaismu^ declina^s, interpretatione^ edidit. Ha^
collegit omnes Origenes, and istis praeter vulgares codices patres vsi sunt, vt
apparet ex Hieron. and alijs.
heretics: yet none of these expound it of any other Non dum de Maria vel
somniantes.
woman then of Heua, saving that Aug. de Genesis cont. Manich. lib. 2. c. 18.
Dicit animale^ parte^ hominu, quasi mulieris imagine^ ostendere. Item. Semen
diaboli suggestio est; seme^ mulieris fructus boni operis.
in a mystical sense, they take it for the affections of the mind. But the
church of Rome will needs read it, she shall break, and understand it of the
virgin Marie, giving unto her the Qua^ mediatrice^ Dei and hominu^ agnoscu^t.
Vide infra.
glory of breaking the Serpents head: and those that refell their folly by
the truth of the Hebrew text, which is the very Vide Whitaker. co^tr. de
Script. quast. 2. c. 2.
language and words, which Moses wrote himself, they Carthusian. in 3. Genesis
(sieve sit Coloniensium marginalis nota) Vulgata editio, imo and ecclesia
Catholica, hactenut legit hoc in loco, Ipsa, non ipse aut ipsum, quemadmodum
curiosi and nostri temporis Hebra. isatores legunt.
call in disgrace hebraisatores: as likewise those which acknowledge a figure
in the words of Christ, Matthew. 26.26.
this is my body; Anton. Constantius, alias Stephan. Gardener. lib. de
Eucharist.
they call at their pleasure figuratores: and those which maintain the
authority of Scripture, to be above the church of Rome, they term by a new
name Albert. Pighius.
Scripturarios, and I would to God, they did practice no greater mischiefs.
Although (God be praised) the wisest of the^, begin to mislike Bonauent. in 3.
sent. did. 15. q. 2. Canendum est (inquit) ne dum excellentia Mariae matris
ampliatur, filij gloria minuatur. Alensi^. quaest 92. Caietan. in Comment. in
Genesis 3.
their own Idolatry in this point, and to give testimony to the truth. For
eue^ Andradius Andrad. desens. Trident. fid. lib. 4. Quod qua^uis Deiparae
virgini mu^ti p^e and religiose accommoddi, tamen cum and in vetustissimis
quibusda^ Latinis exemplaribus reperitur, Ipse, and cum Hebraeis id voluminibus
conspires, ita esse legendum non dubito.
says, he doubts not, but it should be read he, not she shall break: and
Montanus translateth it: not she, but it, that is the seed. Notwithstanding, it
is a wonder to behold, how fast they stick in their own pollution. They count
it Colonlensis nota: curiosi and nostri temporis Hebraisatores, etc.
a curious matter to contend as it were for a letter in the Scripture. Surely
the difference in the letter is not great; but the difference that comes of
the letter Extreme idolatry to place the Virgin in any step of the office of
mediation.
is great, and the Gregor. Epist. lib. 6. ep. 30. Alia sunt friuola valde
innoxia, atque alia vehementer nociua.
hurt is very great that arises thereof: and God has said, you shall Deuteronomy. 12
32. Prou 30.6.
put nothing to my words, and therefore man may not presume to add a letter.
Again, they defend it by Joseph. Antiq. lib. 1. c. 3. In quo nihil express
reperitur; Ambrosij, Augustini, Bedae, Bernardi, Rabbani and alior.
antiquity, and by Saint Hierome, who they Reliqua omnia praeter Psalmos, and
quosdam. Apocryphos libros, ex versione Hieronymi ex Hebraeo habemus in
editione vulgata, testatur Bellarm. tom. 1. cont. 1. lib. 2. cap. 9.
say, did so translate it. The whole antiquity that can be found, arises but
from According to which Theodotion and his fellows would have corrupted the
sacred Scriptures by their false translation, and have darkened the doctrine of
the Messiah.
Jewish errors: and those Fathers which followed the same, For they understood
it of the woman Heua, so far forth as she was to bear that seed: but it is
one thing to be the mother of the Mediator, and another to be the Mediatrix,
or to have ought to do in the office of the mediation. In that sense, not
only Marie, but Mary's mother, and all the progenitors of Christ may equally be
said to tread ye Serpents head: yea all the faithful, as they are members of
his body, do tread upon his head. Romans 16.20.
swarued not, as these do, in the point of faith, but only did obscure it.
And as for Hierome, who can believe, (seeing Hieron. tradit. Hebrae. shows
most plainly how it was commonly read in his time, and how it should be read
(he) as aforesaid.
his own voice does testify of him also otherwise) that so great a Que^ vulgo
ecclesiae doctore^, sicut ipse ecclesias magistru^ Origene^ salutauit.
Doctor could err of ignorance, or commit such a fault, as a boy of the first
weeks teaching in Grammar, is able to amend. For albeit it be confessed by
Alfonsus de Castro. lib. 1. cap. 4. Non enim credo aliquem esse adeo impudentem
Papae assertorem, vt ei tribuere hoc velit, vt nec errare, aut in interpretione
sacraru^ literarum hallucinari possit: nam cum constet plures eorum adeo
illiteratos esse, vt gra^maticam penitus ignorent, qui fit vt sacras literas
inte pretari possent?
witness approved of them selves, that it is of certainty, that many Popes of
Rome, have bin so unlettered, as that they have bin utterly ignorant of
Grammar: yet Hierome we know, being Hieron. Epist. ad August. Tres Simul, etc.
Ego in paruo tuguriolo cum monachis, id est cum compeccatoribus meis, de magnis
statuere no^ audeo. Idem ad August. epist. Crebras ad me, etc. non conuenit, vt
ab adolesce^tia vsque ad ha^c aetatem in Monasteriolo cum sanctu fratribus
labor desadans, aliquid contra Episcopum communionis meae scribere audeam.
but a poor Quem diu post obitum in numerum Cardinalium asciuerunt, Titulo
Sancti Laurentij: eundem tamen simplicem presbyterum fuisse testatur
Bellarminus. Tom. 1. contr. 3. lib. 1. c. 27.
minister of the Gospel, was August. de ciuit. Dei. lib. 18. cap. 43. Quamuis
non defuerit temporibus nostris Presbyter Hieronymus, homo doctissimus, and
omnium trium linguarum peritus. Et Hieron. de sese testatur Epist. ad Rusticum,
and ad Lucinium.
excellently skillful in the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin tongues, and in other
knowledge Idem Hieron. aduers. Ruff. apolog. 3.
greatly learned. Neither was his conscience so defiled, that in the
foundation of man's salvation, he would have corrupted the truth of God. But be
it that Hierome had so translated it. Hierome might err August. de Baptism.
contr. Donatist. lib. 2. cap. 5. In nullo autem aliter sapere, quam se res
habet, angelica perfectio est. Humanum est errare, Senec. lib. 4. declam. 3.
because he was a man. Yea, but that Sacrosanctum, Oecumenicum, generale
concilium Trident. Habet in Titulo. Sed Mindi vrbis instar, euius portae
magnificae, ciuitas modica. Parturint montes.
universal Oecumenicall Tridentine Council Melchior Canus. lib. 5. c. 4.
Concilium generale confirmatum authoritate Romani pontificis, certam fidem
facit Catholicorum dogmatum: Et quodcunque dogma posuerit, nobis illud pro
Catholica veritate habendum est. Idem lib. 12. cap. 6. Item Ep. 3. Synodalis.
Synodi Basiliensis.
could not err, in which the Ex Episcop. 255. in lectione Pauli. 3.
praesidentibus Cardinalibus and Legatis. De Monte, Aretin; sanctae Crucis; and
sanctae Mariae in Cosmedin Reginaldo Polo Anglo. in Catal. sess. 4.
whole body of the Church of Rome exalted Council. Trident. sess. 4. Statuit ac
declarat Sacrosancta Synodus, vt haec ipsa vetus and vulgata editio, quae longo
tot seculorum vsu in ecclesia ipsa probata est, in publicis lectionibus,
disputationibus, praedicationibus, and expositionibus, pro authentica habeatur,
and vt eam nemo reijcere quouis praetextu audeat vel praesumat.
this translation (without exception of any corruption) above the original
text it self: binding all men under pain of the curse, in their public
readings, disputations, sermons, and expositions, to use it only as
authentical; and that no man presume or dare reject it, under any color or
pretense. Whereby it is manifest, that they do not only not acknowledge this
for an error and reform it, but they allow it, confirm it, bind men unto it,
Author operis de viro perfecto, inter opera Hieronymi: sed nothus est liber,
vti monuit Erasmus. Aquinas. Andrad. and vulgus Papistarum.
expound it of the virgin Mary, and give her the honor of the same. Wherefore
also they Anselmus in fine operis. Precatio cuius est titulus: inuocatio matris
virginis Mariae, simul and filij eius. Sancta, and inter sanctos singulariter
sancta, etc. The whole book of Psalms turned into blasphemous prayers to the
Virgin, by Bonauentura: Blessed is the man yt loves thy name, O Virgin Marie,
etc.
pray unto her, they call her the Spiritualis elucidatio Papistarum in Genesis 2.9.
tree of life, the breaker of Antiphona de Domina nostra, secund. vsum eccles.
Hildenshem. Haec est mulier virtutis, quae contriuit caput serpentis, etc.
Sancta, sancta, sancta Maria.
the Serpents head, the Anton. Episc. Florent. par 3. tit. 3. Summae. Ideo
Maria coeli vocatur porta, quia quicquid vnquam gratiae de coelis exiuit in
mundum, hoc per Mariam exiuit: and quicquid intrauit, intrauit per eam.
gate of heaven, the In Indulgent. Sixti. Aue sanctissima matter Dei, Regina
coeli, porta Paradisi, Domina mundi, etc.
Queen of heaven, the throne Anton. Florent. in 4. Hebr. accedamus ad Thronum
Gratiae. Maria est thronus Christi, in qua acquieuit.
of grace, the Anselm. orat. de quinque doloribus Mariae. Mediatrix Dei and
hominum, and fons misericordiae, etc. te rogo dulcissima matter, etc.
mediatrix between God and man, the Ibid. fons misericordiae.
fountain of mercy, the Ibid. orat. 2. Ad quinque literas nominis Mariae.
Auxiliatrix Dei and hominum, and pacis aeternae condimentum Maria, etc.
Bernadinus in Mariali: Maria fuit adiutrix nostrae redemptionis, and est
auxiliatrix nostrae iustificationis.
helper of God and man (for it is not good, say Anton. Florentin. in assump.
Maria. Fingit Mariam talia respond^sse Seraphim volenti eam apud se detinere,
de Christo sedente ad dexteram Dei. Non est bonum hominem esse solum, and data
sum (inquit) ei in adiutorium, in redemtionem per compassionem, in
glorificationem per intercessionem.
they, that man, that is, Christ should be in the work of mediation himself
alone) the Anselm. in orat. 3. de literis Mariae. Reparatrix debilium, etc.
repairer of the weak, the Idem in orat. 4. Illuminatrix caecorum, te flagito,
etc.
giver of sight to the blind, the Idem orat. 5. Aduocatrix omnium peccatorum,
finisque nostra miseriae Maria, te deprecor.
advocate of al sinners: teaching that Gabr. Biel. super canon. Quemadmodum
Assuerus Esterae dimidium regni est pollicitus; sic coelestis pater cum habeat
iustitiam and misericordiam, iustitia sibiretneta, misericordiam exercendam
virgini matri concessit.
to her, the father has delivered up the throne of mercy, reserving the
throne of justice to himself. Thus do they worship Romans 1.15.
the creature, forsaking the creator who is blessed for ever. Thus is the
darkness of Revel. 9.2. and 16 10.
ignorance and Idolatry powered upon the seat of the beast: and that which the
Fathers among them maintained of Sicut perspicuum est ex magna eorum and
praepostera deuotione.
ignorance, the same do their children Bellarm. tom. 1. controu. 7. lib. 2.
cap. 2. Implexis distinctionibus and subterfugijs: quasi Maria pro mediatore,
Imagines Christi, Mariae, sanctorum, possens coli pro ipsis, per accidens, per
aliud, improprie, sine manifesta idolatrial. Sed ita colunt Iehouam cum idolis
suis; etiam filij eorum and nepotes eorum, vt fecerunt maiores eorum sic
faciunt vsque in diem hunc. 2. King. 17.41.
defend by subtlety, and are worse then their fathers, because Act. 4.16. Romans
1.18.
more obstinate against the truth. But what shall we say? Lord Psalm. 28.9.
advance thy kingdom and save thine elect. And of them: confounded be all they
that worship Psalm. 97.7.
carved images, and confounded be they that worship the virgin Marie or any
creature in the place of Christ. Call them Ioh. 10.16.
home O Lord, or let them quickly perish. My glory, says God, Isai. 42.8.
I will not give to any other.

Question 11. verse 16. What is the meaning of that the Lord says: I will
increase thy sorrows?
FOrasmuch as the woman followed the Serpent in offending, Chrysostom. Hom. in
Genesis 17. Attend hic oro ordinem co^textus, refertum Dei erga homines
beneuolentia, nam interroga^t a viro incepit, deinde ad mulierem transijt. Et
post quam ipsa dixit, quis sibi author fuerit, vt ventum est ad serpentem, non
iam illum dignatur vt ex eo responsum audiat, sed poenam intentat.
she is now compelled to be next unto him in punishment. Her excuse could not
defend her from being faulty, no more Matthew. 25.44. Luc. 13.26.
shall theirs which at the latter judgment, shall excuse themselves: yet the
Lord so sets out his endless goodness toward them, by tempering his justice
with Hab. 2.3. Lament. 3.22.23.
his mercy, Deuteronomy. 32.43. Salutaris seueritas vincit inanem speciem clementiae.
Cic. epist. ad Brut. 2.
and his mercy with severity: as that in punishing, he teaches men to stand
in dread Romans 11.21.22.
of his justice, and in showing mercy Psalm. 130.7. Dan. 9.7.
not to despair for their sins: and because he also turns the bitterness of
punishment unto the health of man, and Hose. 5.15.
makes it a way for us to come to him, man also should love him for Psalm.
119.167.
his justice, and fear him for his Genesis 39.9. August. in Psalm. 32. concio. 1.
Quando incipis quis amare iustitiam nisi quando mallet furta non esse, etsi
gehennae non essent in quas fures mittere^tur?
mercy, which none can skill of, but those of his own family. The sentence of
the curse is of Dan. 6.15. Isai. 45.23. Luc. 16.17.
much more force then the laws of Persia, and cannot be altered. But yet the
Lord is Isai. 55.9.
infinitlie more wise then the Persian Hester 8.11.12.13.
king, and knows how to help, and hinder not the course of justice. For
albeit it were in justice necessary, that the sentence of justice should
proceed against offenders, and that man having offended against his God, should
therefore endure a punishment answerable to his offense; which punishment was
such by his desert of sin, as he could never satisfy by enduring any
torment, but he must be held in it for ever: yet now does the Lord ordain a
remedy, whereby his pronounced sentence being vnreuoked (forasmuch as in
justice it might not be called back) both man might suffer, and man by
suffering might be saved from destruction. Mankind now is Galat. 3.10. Romans
5.12.
fallen into the danger of the curse, and therefore it cannot be but he must
die the death. He dies therefore 2. Cor. 5.14. Coloss. 2.13.
in soul and body: but is Ephesians. 2.1. 2. Cor. 1.9.
quickened again, by him that raises up the dead. And that this might Heb.
2.14. Iren. lib. 3. cap. 20.
rightly be performed, because it was impossible, but that Psalm. 49.14.
man of himself should be holden in death for ever, the second person in
Trinity Heb. 2.16. Romans 9.5.
did take unto him the woman's seed, and being Heb. 4.15.
perfect man, died also In his whole humanity.
as a man. But it being Act. 2.14.
not possible, that he should be holden in death, he rayseth John 10.18.
up himself to life: who by giving himself to be Galat. 3.13. August. de
ciuit. Dei, lib. 10. c. 24. Ideo potuit moriendo peccata soluere, quia and
mortuus est and no^ pro suo peccato.
accursed, for us that were accursed, and to be Isai. 53.5.
punished for us that had deserved punishment, and having fulfilled the law of
1. Pet. 2.22. 1. John 3.5. Leuit. 18.5.
righteousness, which who so does shall live therein, that mankind in him
fulfilling it, might live in him, who is the life it self: it could not be in
the justice of the Lord, but he should give life to them, and deliver them from
wrath to come, Ioh. 1.12.
as many as receive him, and believe in his name. This is the 1. Tim. 3.16. 1.
Pet. 1.12.
mystery of godliness which the Angels desire to behold. This was that seed of
the woman Verse. 15. Revel. 5.3.5.
promised, who is able to tread down the Serpents head. Thus does that Isai.
11.1.
root of Iesse, Matthew. 1.21.
Jesus the son of Marie, save his people from their sins. Thus does the
victorious lion of the tribe of Revel. 5.5.
Judah, conquer and Ephesians. 4.4.
triumph upon that 1. Pet. 5.8.
woluish lion Satan, Hose. 13.14.
hell and death. Whereby you may perceive, that this punishment which here is
laid on all mankind, proceeds not August. Enchirid. ad Laur. cap. 3^. Cum
autem Deus irascitur, non eius significatur perturbatio, qualis est in animo
irascentis hominis: sed ex humanis motibus translato vocabulo, vindicta eius,
quae non nisi iusta est, irae nomen accepit.
from any fury of anger in the Lord (like as men use to punish in the heat
of their affections, and do measure the Lord by their own infirmities) but is
Chrysostom Hom. in Genesis 17. Congrua and clementi correptione virum and mulierem
castigat, quae admonitio potius sit quam punitio.
a declaration how far the Lord would have the curse which they wholly had
deserved, in part to be extended on them. As if the Lord had said: you have
both brought Ambros. de Parad. cap. 14. Quo te duxerunt peccata tua, vt sugias
Deum tuum, quem aente quaerebas? dereliquisti vitam aeternam, and attumulatus
ei morti, consepultus errori.
destruction to your selves by sin. It Ezec. 16.6. Psalm. 103.4.8.
pitieth me of this your misery. For my own Deuteronomy. 7. verse. 8. Isai. 43.25.
sake I will deliver you, and Job. 33.24. 1. Ioh. 4.10. Act. 20.28.
receive a ransom of my self: you shall live again, and be perfectly
restored. Iehoua Ierem. 23.6.
himself shall take upon him Isai. 7.14.
your seed and nature. Only Marc. 5.6.
believe, fear not. But yet that you Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 17. At quia non
vsa es vt oportet tanta prosperitate, sed affluentia bonorum eo te
ingratitudinis adduxit: propterea tibi fraenum impono, vt ne amplius lasciuias,
ad tristitias and gemitus te condemnans.
may the better know my justice, and be Eccles. 3.10.
humbled for your sins; and because you have so far weakened my graces in you,
as that your Chrysostom. lib. 1. de provident. ad Stagir. Si in eode^ honor
perstitissem; 1. Deu^ maleuolum and iniustuur, 2. seductorem, beneficum atque
amicum putassent: 3. peccare imm^rtaliter et absque vllo sine perseuerassent.
nature cannot bear a better condition, till the same again shall be renewed:
therefore thou woman shall have sorrows in conceptions and children, and thou
Adam shall eat thy bread in sorrow, and shall return to dust. In this
sentence which here the Lord directs against the woman, it is to be observed,
that Chrysostom. de lapsu primi hominis H 2. Mulier seritur sententia duplici,
altera propria aliera communi: propria qua filios parere in dolor praecepta
est: communi, que cu^ viro morti addicta est.
only such punishments are declared, which properly belong unto the sex of
woman kind, but those miseries which are common unto man and woman are farther
expressed in Adams punishment. A threefold affliction is laid upon the woman:
increase of conceptions, sorrows in conceptions, and subjection in lust and
domination. She was fruitful by Genesis 1.28.
creation; but now her conceptions are increased: so that in the very point of
blessedness, she becomes subject unto misery. Increase of conceptions, are a
Psalm. 127.3. and 128.3
blessing, save when the same is smitten Deuteronomy. 28.18.
with a curse by God; as when she Pro. 17.21. as Caine.
conceiueth a reprobate and wicked person, or brings Hose. 9.13. Luc. 23.29.
forth children to the murderer: wherefore now that her conceptions are
increased, Galat. 4.29. Matthew. 26.24. the most interpreters do read it:
sorrows of conceptions, taking the word (heronim) conceptions in the Genitive
case, and the particle (vau) idle: but because (as Hierome says) in the
Scripture not one title is void of meaning, I take it that this conjunction
does join sorrows and conceptions in another sense, and has his proper force.
I know also that oftimes in Scripture, the latter clause is an exposition of
the former: so some do take sorrows of conceptions, to be nothing else but
sorrows in bringing forth children. For my part I understand, by the first word
sorrows, generally sorrows which belong to women; by the latter as it is said
particularly, sorrows in bringing forth: I desire the godly reader to judge
charitablie.
beyond the Church of God, such over fruitfulnes is Eccles. 2.15.19. Ierem.
16.2.3.
wretchedness. Again her conceptions are enclosed with sorrows, and sorrows
is she made partaker of, not only in conceptions, but both in 1. Sam. 1.6.7.
2. King 4.14.
barrennes, and in bearing of children; in child-births, in bringing forth
Exodus 23.26. Deuteronomy. 28.57.
untimely, dead, deformed; in nursing and education and tenderness over them,
the pains whereof experience does teach to women, better then Chrysostomes
Act. 18.24.
or Apollos eloquence. Childbearing by virtue of creation, did bring neither
Luther. in Genesis 3. Si non peccasset Heua, non solum sine dolor peperisset, sed
etiam ipsa cum viro coniunctio tam honesta fuit, quam honestu^ est hodie, cum
vxore in me^sa edere aut colloqui. Educatio esset facilima and plena volup
tatis: and sicut elegans puella, sine molestia, imo cum magna voluptate, and
superbia quadam, pulchram coronam ex floribus co^textam in capite gestat: sic
sine omni molestia in vtero gestasset foetum. Commune Theologorum iudiciu^.
August. de ciuit. Dei. lib. 14. cap. 26. Neque enim quia experientiae probari
non potest, ideo credendum non est, etc. Idem de great. Christi. lib. 2. cap. 2.
pain nor grief to women; forasmuch as we know, that pain is of punishment,
and punishment is the reward of sin. Wherefore, that pain and sorrow which
comes unto women in bearing of children, they must acknowledge to proceed
from sin, and themselves to be the cause and author of the same. Thirdly,
she is punished in subjection: thy desire shall be subject, etc. that is, thy
desire to increase and multiply, which was given as a blessing before the
fall, shall no less continue with sorrows, then before it did in pleasure.
Shall be unto thy husband: so it is read in the Hebrew text. The pains and
danger of bearing children, although they Their own experience is as a
thousand witnesses.
are so great, that it often causes women to despair of life, and sometime
through strength of pain does vanquish life it self, yet it cannot compel
them Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 17. Sape cum foetu nato commori eas contingis,
and neque hoc caeteras terret, neque persuades vt rem fugiant, etc. propter hoc
dicebat: multiplicant multiplicabo tristitias tuas and gemitum tuum.
to abhor it, that endure it, neither does it terrify the rest; for by the
former blessing of creation, there is a law of nature, both in man and woman,
of desire of children; by virtue whereof it is, that the woman delivered (as
says our Savior) Ioh. 16.20.
remembers no more the anguish. And such now is made the Bernard. Hom. 3.
super missut est. Dura necessitas and graut iugum super omnes filias Euae: and
si pariunt cruciantur, and si non pariunt maledicuntur.
hard condition of the daughters of Heua: If they bring forth children, they
are in torment; if they bring not forth, they are despised. Lastly, it is
added, and he shall rule over thee: that is, thou shall be more inferior unto
him, then before thou wast, and his dominion over thee, shall be more grievous.
Before it was commodious and delightful for you both, but hereafter it will be
more troublesome and bitter. In which estate Coloss. 3.18. Calu. in Genesis 3.
verse. 16. Prius quidem subiecta marito fuerat, sed erat liberalis and minime
dura subiectio, nunc vero inseruitute^ conijcitur.
thou shall be in subjection to thy husband; and seeing thou Chrysostom. Hom.
in Genesis 17. Et quia nesciuisti imperare, disce been regi. August. de Genesis ad
lit. lib. 11. c. 37. Ista seruitus est conditionis potius quam dilectionis; and
eam merui^ mulieris non natura, sed culpa. Prior illa fuit, de cuius simili
Apostolus (Galat. 5.) per charitatem seruite inuicem: sed nequaquam diceret,
inuicem dominamini.
could not rule, thou shall learn to obey. Rule thy 1. Tim. 5.14.
children, goods and family, as second after him, but to him be thou obedient,
Ephesians. 5.22. Clem. Alexandr. Paedagog. lib. 2. Neque domina^ esse, neque viri
ancillam. Idem lib. 3. c. 11. Honestum quidem est, vt viri vxoribus suis fidem
habentes, ijs domus custodiam permittant, vt qua ijs ad id opitulatrices datae
sunt.
as to the Lord. These punishments are generally allotted to the sex of women,
but yet indefinitelie to all; so that the Lord does often reserve from them, or
from some part of them, whom he will in mercy, which nothing hinders the
fulfilling of the pronounced sentence. Herein therefore we must acknowledge
the justice, wisdom, and special providence of God. How meet was it, that
the conceptions of the woman should be increased, that God might manifest his
justice and long suffering, on Rom 9.22. August. de Genesis ad lit. lib. 3. cap.
21. Idem de ciuit. Dei, lib. 14. cap. 23. Potest dici, quod ante peccatum, solo
piae charitatis affectu, nulla corruptionis concupiscentia filij nascerentur,
etc. donec terra immortalibus hominibus impleretur, ac si instituto iusto and
sancto populo, qualem post resurrectionem fururum credimus, nascendi etiam
modus fieres. Idem Retract. lib. 1. cap. 13. Vsque ad certum sanctorum numerum,
quem praedestinauit Deus.
the vessels of his wrath? How necessary for the preservation of the world, to
continue the desire of the woman to her husband, least she should because of
pain, abstain from procreation, or as did the Herodot. in Melpom. Si^abo
Geograph. lib. 11. Oros. lib. 1. cap. 15. August. quaest. mixed. 115.
Amazones and other Ethelfrida a Queen of the Saxo-Britains in England, and
Valasca a Queen of Boheme, caused many women of their country to kill their
husbands. In like sort the daughters of Danaus.
wicked women, for sorrows of childbirth, and subjection unto men, abhor
the use of marriage, and as instruments of satan, commit their husbands to
death. And how equal, that the woman, who by usurping authority over the man
had caused him to sin; should now be made a subject unto him, whom Verse. 17.
Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 17.
she had unhappily ruled, and should lose her liberty that would not
rightly use it. Also how (...). Homer. Iliad. b.
convenient for our infirmity it is, that Hest. 1.22.
the man should be chief in his own house, and should govern and rule the
wife: examples of the contrary, in 1. King. 11.4.
Solomon, 1. King. 21.23.
Ahab, Mark 6.24.26. Joseph. Antiq. lib. 17. cap. 15.
Herod, Cornel. Tacit. lib 1. Liuia the wife of Augustus rooted out the
posterity and kindred of her husband, to prefer her own. Liuia grauis in Remp.
matter, grauis domus Caesarum No. uerca, etc.
Augustus, Agrippina the wife of Claudius imp. contrived her husbands death by
poison, to obtain the Empire for her son. Suet. in vita Claud. c. 44. Plin.
lib. 32. cap. 22. Per bl^nditiarum tilecebras p^^^ectum in amorem.
and others, beside daily experience, does plainly prove. By this place of
Scripture, women are to know that the fountain of their sorrows are Malam
culpae progignit malum poenae.
their sins. Secondly, that in danger of childbirth, Genesis 25.21.
they have access by prayer unto the Lord: forasmuch as it is of him only to
increase, or moderate their pain. Thirdly, in ruling, not to pass the bounds
of obedience unto their husbands: although it be to 1. Pet. 2.18. and 3 5.6
cruel and uncivil husbands, for the 1. Pet 2 13.
Lords sake, and in Ephesians. 5.21.
the Lord: and seeing in liberty she overthrew his happiness, when she should
have been his help; now in misery (for amends sake) the woman should endeavor
by Tit. 2.4 5. 1. Tim. 3.11.
faithfulness, Tit. 2.5.
obedience and love, to be unto the man a Prou. 14.1.
wise, Col^ss. 3.15. Amiable: such as deserve to be beloved.
pleasant, Prou. 31.16. etc.
careful and comfortable help. So Prou. 5.19.
me^ likewise are taught, not to add unto the Psalm. 69.26.
sorrows of them whom God has smitten, but in wisdom as the instruments of
God, to relieve and comfort them; the husband, by bearing with (so far as he
may Romans 12.18. Gregor. in Pastoral. part 3. admon. 28.
in godlinsse) the infirmities of his wife, 1. Pet. 3.7.
and honoring her, as the weaker vessel: governing and loving her, as Ephesians.
5.28.
the soul, if it were not corrupted, would do the body: but yet governing,
seeing 1. Tim. 2.12. 1 Pet. 3.1.7.
God has so commanded, and has so greatly punished neglect of government.
And seeing this is Ephesians. 5.33. Hieron, Comment. in epist. ad Tit. cap. 2. Et
cum caput mulieris sit vir, caput aute^ viri Christus, quaecunque vxor no^
subijcitur viro suo, hoc est capiti suo: eiusdem criminis rea est, cuius and
vir, si non subijciatur Christo capiti suo.
his ordinance, that disposes all in wisdom: those women that will not be
subject to their husbands (obeying the voice of God) Psalm. 9.17. Bernard. Sermon.
10. Ibi clamabit pilosus ad pilosum, vnus ad alium, demon ad daenionem:
percute, dilacera, interfice, velociter spolia. infer prunas, and ebullientibus
impone lebetibus.
shall for reward, be subject to the devils and hellish torments: the men also
that will not govern, are justly deprived of obedience, and shall give
account of their negligence, to him that gave them power. But those that by
cruelty and injury, profane this ordinance, what will they answer, when the
Lord Job. 31.13.14. Coloss. 4.1.
stands up to judgment?

Question 12. verse 17. Wherefore the Lord cursed the earth, and not man, when
man had sinned?
ADam who was the last in sin, is punished the last. His sin at the length
for all his hiding places and excuses Numb. 32.23.
does find him out. Whereby we learn that not any one of the wicked
generation Prou. 16.5.
shall in the end escape Gods judgment. The Lord also does lay against him,
his sin before his punishment, showing thereby Ierem. 5.25. Hose. 14.2.
that sin is the cause of all his misery: declaring also Exodus 23.7. Deuteronomy.
17.6.
that none should be punished either without, or above desert; which is for
Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 17. Quo etiam nos docet, vt quando and nos reos
condemnamus, non tam crudeliter illis loquaemur, neque ferina in illos vtamur
saenitia, sed longanimiter, and misericorditer agamus, vtpote nostra ipsorum
membra condemnaturi, suppliciumque misericordia temperantes. Non enim fru^stra,
tanta verborum humilitate, nostrae ruditati congrua vtitur diuina scriptura,
sed verbis crassiamulari nos debere Dei misericordiam docet.
judges and Magistrates, a notable example of doing justice. The crime alleged
is, because thou haste obeyed, etc. Not for that thou have obeyed, but because
thou have obeyed and have eaten; and because thou have eaten of the tree,
whereof I commanded thee, thou should not eat of it; the fault therefore is,
not that Adam loved his wife, and heard her voice; but that he loved her
Bernard. Parui Sermon. 5.27. Peccauit autem nimis diligendo vxorem; non quia
eius voluntatem fecit, sed quia eam voluntati pratulis diuinae.
so much, that he obeyed her more then God; and the same had testified by a
manifest breach of Gods commandment, wherein was joined unthankfulness,
incredulity, pride, covetousness, rebellion, and many other sins, of which
we have already spoken. Wherefore although we Pro. 19.20. and 24.6
ought to hearken unto counsel, yet Pro. 1.10. Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 17.
Audiant viri, audiant mulieres, and illi quidem ne ferant mala consule^tes: ha
autem vt ne talia consulant. Nam si hic culpa in mulierem reiecta nullam veniam
assecutus est, qualem tu poteris habere, etc.
we must beware of wicked counsel. Men Ephesians. 5.33.
ought to love their wives, and be 1. Pet. 2.13.
subject to superiors, or else they Romans 13.1.2.
despise the ordinance of God: but must withal take heed, that they honor
not 1. Sam. 2.29.
any creature Isai. 44.6. and 42.8.
with the Lord, to love it Philip. 3.19. Coloss. 3.5.
as the Lord, or to obey it Act. 4.19.
more then God. Cursed is the earth, etc. It is marvel that the earth should
be accursed which had not sinned, for of Hilar. in Psalm. 66. Terra elementum
extra crimen est: caretergo maledictione quod carebat and crimine.
right it ought to be without the curse, that is without the crime. But because
the earth was made Psalm. 115.6. Isai. 45.18.
for the use of man, therefore Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 17. Et merito. nam quia
propter hominem producta est, vt illo posset frui his quae ex ea nascerentur:
ideo iterum propter hominem peccantem, maledictum ei ingeritur: quia maledictum
terra euenient, hominis securitati and felicitati obest.
justly also is the same for man's offenses, made subject to the curse; and the
earth being accursed, man thereby as it were, is cursed in his goods. The earth
is accursed Ambros. de Paradiso cap. 15. Nec terra in se maledicta est, sed
maledicta inquit in operibus tuis: and maledicta non in vniuersum, sed vt
spinas and tribulos generet, nisi fuerit humanae studio operationis exorcita.
not as the Serpent (who was an actor in this fearful tragedy) that the
punishment August. de Genesis contr. Manich. lib. 1. cap. 13. Ergo dicendu^ est,
quod per peccatum hominis terra maledicta sit, us spinas pareret: non vt ipsa
poenas sentiret, quae sine sensu est, sed vt peccati humani crimen semper
hominum ante oculos p^neret, quo admonerentur aliquando auerti a peccatis, and
ad Dei pracepta conuerti.
thereof should be unto it self: but the earth being smitten, the hurt thereof
Calvin. in Genesis 3. verse. 17. Add quod proprie loquendo, non de terra ipsa, sed
do solo homine tota vindicta exigitur. Caeterum Dominus iram suam diluuij
instar inundare voluit in omnes mundi parts, vtquocunque aspiceres homo, in
eius oculos incurreres peccati atrocitat, etc. vnde nunc in elementis omnibus
cernimus nos quodu^modo maledictos.
is his, who by sin Romans 8.20.
did subdue it unto vanity. But yet that we might see, that God so extremely
hates sin, who has not only commanded to abstain from evil, but from
1 Thessalonians. 5.22.
the very show of evil, and to Iud. 23. Isai. 30.22.
hate even the garment spotted by the flesh; he spares not the earth from
punishment, in which there was so foul a crime committed. The whole Origin.
contr. Celsum. lib. 7. Ad totam terram pertines, ex qua in molestijs, hoc est
laboribus, edit omnis homo in Adam mortuus, proinde and omnes portiones eius.
Quid igitur de terra Iudaea? qua bona, and fundens mel and lac dicitur? Vid.
Responsum quast. 13.
earth is accursed, 2. Pet. 3.7.
and therefore subject to devouring fire, with Romans 8.22. Aug lib. 83. quaest.
q. 67.
all the creatures that were made for the use of man, and that for Adams sake:
that is, for Hieron. lib. Tradit. Hebra. in Genesis Theodotio; maledicta Adama in
transgressione tua.
his transgression sake: that a 2. Pet. 3.13. Revel. 21.1.
new heaven and earth may be prepared, wherein none iniquity shall be
committed. Wherefore although it be not said, cursed art thou Adam, but cursed
is the earth for thee, yet that which was inflicted on the earth, was Adams
punishment. And much more does it declare the greatness of his sin, when as the
earth, the air, the water, the 2. Pet. 3.7.10.
heaven, all earthly living creatures and things without life, (for so large
is the name of earth to be understood) are punished with man, that is to say,
have their natural blessing and goodness of creation weakened; then if man had
borne the punishment alone. But how is it that no other, but temporal and
earthly punishments are imposed Upon the creature. Secondly, pain and sorrow.
Thirdly, temporary death.
upon Adam and his wife, for sin? Shall we judge no other to be due to
sinners, but such as they receive in this life present? It is most undoubted,
that Romans 6.23. Galat. 3.18. Revel. 21.8.
unto sin belongs eternal death of soul and body, which also in a sort
they By the loss of righteousness and felicity which before they had.
found within them; but the Lord came rather to deliver them from the danger of
the same: and being already Iren. lib. 3. cap. 37. Intellectus vero
tra^sgressionis fecit poenitentiam. Poenitentibus autem largitur benignitatem
suam Deus. Quae quidem poenitentia licet sancta non fuit, preparatio fuit ad
sancta^, quam Deus mox fuerat largiturus.
reconciled unto Adam by his son the woman's seed, he spares to repeat
August. de ciu. Dei lib. 13. cap. 23. Propterea nihil dixisse, de morte secunda
credendum est, quia occulia^ esse voluit, propter dispensationem testamenti
noui, etc. Perro mors secunda no^ vnque communis est omnibus.
the pains of hell, whereof Adam by Ephesians. 2.8. Heb. 7.25.
faith in Christ was free. But here it may again be asked, if God were
reconciled unto Adam, why does he yet punish him for offending? It is Eccles.
10.13.
wicked madness which some do Scotus in Sent. 4. distinct. 16. q. 2. Gabr.
Biel. Sent 3. distinct. 19. conc. 5. Bellarm. tom. 1. controu. 6. lib. 1. cap.
11. Item tom. 2. controu. 4. lib. 1. cap. 5. Et est vulgata fides Papistarum.
answer, he forgave the sin, but not the punishment; forasmuch as Christ has
paid our Heb. 9.12 14. 1. Tim. 2 6. Hebr. 7.25.
ransom, delivering us both from Matthew 1.21. Ephesians. 1.7. Tertul. lib. de
Baptism. Exempto reatu, eximitur and poena. Hieron. in Psalm. 31. Quod regitur
non videtur quod non videtur, non imputatur, quod non imputatur non punietur.
August. de verbis Dom. Sermon. 37. Suscipiendo poenam and non suscipiendo culpam,
and culpam deleuit and poenam; scilicet Christus.
sin and punishment. Wherefore this punishment is laid on Adam, not in any
sort as a satisfaction unto justice, but as a Heb. 17.^.
father does correct his son, so does the Lord chastise his children, that
Deuteronomy. 8.16.
he may do them good in the latter end. Even so, as many as are partakers of
the same faith in Jesus Christ, are freed from it, so far as it is a
punishment, and have it as Calu. Institut. lib. 3. c. 4. sect. 31. Iudicium est
vel vindictae vel castigationis; iudicio vindictae Deus inimicos suos
vlciscitur: iudicio castigationis, nonita saeuit vt irascatur, nec vindicat vt
perdat, vel fulmines ad interitum. Vnde non est supplicium proprie aut
vindicta, sed correctio and admonitio.
a warning to bring them home to God: but the wicked to whom the fault is
vnremitted, they have it as a punishment temporal, and forerunner of that
which is eternal. And in this regard the Lord is often Deuteronomy 32.^9. Job. 5.18.
Mat. 19.1^. Chrysostom. lib. 1. de Provident. Multis Deus malis hominem eiectu^
Paradiso liberauit, etc. ita fere and medicus, si vulnus negligat parulentum
amplius reddit. Idem ad Pop. Antioc. Hom. 7.
compared to a Physician, because he cures the souls of men, sometime by
promises of mercy, Psalm. 147.3. Job. 33.24.25.
as it were with oil; and sometime with 2. Sam. 7.14.
scourges and corrections, like Psalm. 60.3
bitter medicines according to the quality of their sickness. The soul of man
being surfeited with pride, it was necessary that the Lord should give a potion
of humility, whereby man being daily emptied of Ephesians. 4.22.
his old corruptions, might with hunger and thirst, Psalm. 42.2. and 63.1.
Matthew. 5.6.
gasp for the death of Christ, which is the fruit of life. The death of the
soul which is most dangerous, Isai. 22.13. 2. Pet. 2.13. (...).
the wicked do despise, so they may have their pleasures in the flesh: wherefore
God cutteth short their lust by temporary death, to the end they might be
moved to hate the pleasures, which they shall enjoy Heb. 11.25. Luc. 12.20.
but for a season, being afterward Luc. 16.25. Clem. Alexandr. in Protrept.
Primus homo in Paradiso erat; ludebat solutus, quoniam erat Dei puer; quando
autem subiecit se voluptati, etc. illectus est puer cupiditatibus; vir effectus
per inobedientiam; and cum patrem non audiuisset, Deum affecit ignominia: and
homo inuentus est alligatu^ peccatis. Hieron. Epist. ad Fabiolam de 42.
mansio^. Israel. Voluptas atque luxuria amaritudine terminantur. Quare, sperne
voluptates, nocet empta dolor voluptas. Horat. epist. 2.
the causes of everlasting pain. And because the Luc. 21.34.
fear of death is forgotten in a pleasant life, the Lord Amos 4.6.7. etc.
Ambros. lib. de bono mortis. Quid est enim quo haec vita delectat, plena
arumnarum and solicitudinum, in quo innumerae calamitates, and multa molestiae,
and multae lachrimae.
by the troubles of this life, and Mat. 24.43. Hieron. ad Cyprian. Epist. Qui
se recordatur quotidie morituru^, contemnit praesentia.
the uncertain time of death, would provoke us to be displeased with the life
we have, and continually to look for death that is to come: to the end that
(he having Nam morte^ in morte prorogauit, vt vita^ in vera vita viueremus:
aeternam poenam distulit, vitam concessit morti similima^, vn^renouati ad vlta^
Christi, per Christum and in Christo, Deo fruamur in aeternum.
prolonged life a time for our amendment) we might not through the corruption
of our nature fall away, but might be urged by calamity, not to forsake the
bounds of modesty. So that Adam and his children Amissa sanctitate eu
necessario amittitur foelicitas.
being no way able to use aright the felicity they had received, God changes
their condition to calamity, that their dulnes might be spurred up thereby, to
labor to attain, by Christ, ye former happiness which themselves had lost.

Question 13. verse 18. Wherein consists the punishment of Adam? in sorrow
shall thou eat thereof, etc.
THree things are contained in the punishment: the curse of the earth: the
misery of man's life; and the end thereof by death. The Lord herein expounds
in what meaning he did accurse the earth: namely that man should eat thereof
in sorrow: as if the Lord had said: by my Genesis 1. ver. 11. Basil. Hexam. 5. Vox
enim tunc and primum illud praeceptum, velut le^ quaedam natura facta est, and
permansit in ipsa terra, generandi and fructificandi vim consequentem ipsi
exhilens. Ambros. Hexam. lib. 3 cap. 2. Non ergo Sol aut Luna foecunditatis
authors sunt, sed Deus pater per Dominum Iesum omnibus libertatem fertilitatis
impertit.
only blessing the earth has hitherto abounded, with all manner of store, to
beautify the felicity of man: now for your sin sake, 1. Sam. 2.30.
I withdraw my blessing, not Ezech. 16.59. Non secundum peccata v^stra.
wholly, but so as thou shall eat thy bread in sorrow, and behold the reward
of sin in every creature, that for thy Romans 8.20. Calu. in Genesis 3. Vt
quocunque aspiceret homo, in eius occulos occurreret peccati atrocitas.
sake is subject to corruption. The blessing of the Lord it is, that Prou.
10.22. Deu. 8.18.
makes rich, and crowns Genesis 1.11. Psalm. 65.9.10.11.
the earth with plentiousnes: so his curse does turn a land that Psalm. 107.34.
Genesis 19.25.
is fruitful into saltnes, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein. The
force of this curse it was, that deprived the earth of her former fruitfulnes,
Genesis 1.24. August. de Genesis cont. Manich. lib. 1. cap. 13. Ante peccatum ergo
non est scriptum, quod terra aliud protulerit nisi herbam pabuli, and ligna
fru^tuosa. Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 5. Videre potuisses, subito terram quae antea
info^^nis and inculta erat decoro suo and ornatu cum coelo certare.
in which, by creation it was endued to bring forth of his own accord without
the help of man, both corn and fruitful trees, and herbs in wonderful
abundance, for the use of man and beast. But now as we see in steed of wheat,
it brings forth weeds: in steed of fruit, it brings thorns and thistles.
It is rightly supposed there were thorns August. de Genesis ad lit. lib. 3. cap.
18. Nec tamen facile dice^dum est, tum coepisse ista oriri ex terra. Fortassia
enim, quoniam in ipsis quoque generibus seminum multa reperiuntur vtilitates,
poterant habere locu^ suu^ sine vlla poena hominis. Damascen. lib. 2. Orthodox.
c. 10. Eduxit mundi opifice manda^te plantarum and herbarum genera: Hae quidem
plantae, fructiferae and ad esum accommodatae; ha odoriferae and floridae; ha
ad morboru^ (qui nunc sunt) curationem.
before, and thistles, and venomous herbs, and Serpents; but they were not Vt
Isai. 11.9. Beda Hexam. 3. Ante peccatum hominis, terra nihil noxium protulit,
non herbam venenatam nec arborem sterilem. Scilicet, Herbae quae nunc sunt,
venenatae non fuerunt, and arbores nunc steriles creabantur frugiferae; simili
modo nec ignis vreret, nec aqua sufforaret, si non fuisset peccatum;
nihilominus ignit esset calidus, and aqua humida, vt recte Albertus. Aquin.
Sum. part. 1. quaest. 72. Spinae and tribuli oriebantur in terra, sed non in
hominis poenam nisi post peccatum.
noisome, nor had power to hurt: they were for the full perfection of the
creature, Basil Hexam. 5. Dixit Deus germinet. etc. and statim cum his quae
alimenta prebent, simul prolata sunt venenata, cum frumento cicuta, etc.
not as sores and blemishes therein: they were rare and scarce, as serving
Ambros. Hexam. lib. 3. cap. 9. Singula autem little quae generantur e terris,
specialem quandam rationem habent, quae pro virili portione complent vniuersae
plenitudinem creatura: nam cicuta sturni vescuntur, veratrum cothurnicu^
alimentum est.
but to show the wisdom of God in the diversity of his works, and more
fruitful plants were then more plentiful. But when the curse was powered forth
for sin, thorns and thistles and such like fruits of barrennes increased
every where, and choked them of better fruit, which of themselves were ready
to decay. Yet as Sicut ipsa Paradisus Genesis 2.^. cum tamen nullus terrarum situs
suit sterilis, nec arbor sine fructu, vel al alimentu^ vel ad odorem. Vt
Tertul. lib. 2. in Marcion. Beda Hexam. 3. Lyra in Genesis 3. and alij.
some places of the earth, before the curse were more fruitful then the rest
(as the Lords garden exceeded all the earth) so the Lord Genesis 13.10.
does continue the same in mercy; not utterly depriving the earth of
blessedness: the which, as experience teaches, does decay; and as men's sins
increase, so does the earths unfruitfulness. The second punishment is derived
from the first. In sorrow shall thou eat thereof, etc. that is, the curse of
the earth shall be thy misery, to whom the abundance thereof was given. Thou
Tertul. in Marcion. lib. 2. Consilium exercendae centinentia intellige.
shall now seek thy living thereout in scarcity, that Deuteronomy. 17.20. Dan. 4.27.
Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 17. Cum tristitia viuere te facia^, vt hoc tibi fraenum
sit, ne quid supra dignitatem de te sentias.
thereby thou may be bridled from waxing proud. To these shall be added as
companions, Eccles. 5.10.
cares in riches, dishonor Prou. 14.20.
in poverty, diseases Ioh. 5.14. Hoc ipsum Pandorae pixidem extitisse credo,
quam ab Epimetheo reclusam, morbos and humanas omnes miserias profudisse
fabulantur Ethnici: Pausan. in Atticu. Horat. Epod. 3.
of body, Eccles. 1.14.
vexation of mind, Job. 1.21.
loss in wealth, Eccles. 1.8. and 2.23.
painefulnes of life, floods, drouth, unseasonable weather, thunder, storms,
and all other distresses, which shall be caused by those visible creatures
which were created for thy behoof. Till thou return to the earth, etc. that
is, thou shall have sorrows all thy life, Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 17. Ex quo
tempore audierunt, terra es et in terram abibis, and sententiam acceperunt
mortis; ex illo tempore fuerunt perinde, acsi quis illos dicat mortuos fuisse.
Sicut enim in humanis iudicijs condemnati, licet iterum in carcerem
conijciuntur, pro mortuis and defunctis habentur. etc.
and last of all shall be resolved into dust. Because thou art but dust, etc.
his Tertul. lib. de Resurrect. Origo rece^setur, non substantia reuocatur.
original is rehearsed, his substance is not recalled. Notwithstanding the Lord
says not, thou art of the dust, but thou art dust; and as before he said, Genesis
2.7.
the Lord made man dust of the ground, showing that the whole matter whereof
man was formed, was but dust; so now the Lord says again, thou art but dust:
which is as if the Lord had said. Thou wast raised out of dust to such
excellent perfection, as to bear in an earthly body a heavenly image: now
through thy default, the matter remaining, the form is perished; the earthly
Genesis 5.3. 1. Cor. 15.49.
image is left, the heavenly is lost; and that little, which remains by the
mercy of the Lord of that same heavenly, Romans 6.12. and 7.23. August. de
ciuit. Dei, lib. 14. cap. 15. Iucta damnatio subsecuta est, vt homo qui
custodiendo mandatu^ fututus fuerat etiam carne spiritualis, fieret (cum
peccasset) etiam mente carnalis; and qui mortuus est spiritu volen^, corpore
esset moriturui inuitus.
thou have made subject to the earthly image, that is to say, to flesh and
blood. For this cause it is not meet that thou should ever continue in this
corruption, but either be renewed Leo Sermon. 5. de natiu. Dom. Adam cupidus
honoris angelici, naturae suae perdidit dignitatem: Christus infirmitatis
nostrae suscipiens conditionem, propter quos ad inferna des^endit, cosdem in
coelestibus collocauit.
unto the glory thou have lost, or else be partaker of such pains, as the
defiling of so rich a treasure does deserve. Wherein we must observe, that the
punishment imposed upon Adam, Romans 5.12. 1. Cor. 15.22. August. Enchirid. cap.
26. Hinc post peccatum exul effectus, stirpem quoque suam, quam peccando in se
tanquam in radice vitiauerat, poena morti. and damnationis obstrinxit.
belongs unto all mankind: for in as much as he had received Eccles. 7.31.
Romans 11.16. Caesarius Dialog. 3. Sciendum quod imago quidem Dei est, qua in
tota humanitate perfectionem habuit: inquit enim quod fecerit Deus hominem, non
Adamum, secundum imaginem. In Hebrae^ quidem est Adam; atqui hoc nomen saepe
ponitur pro hominibus: si de Adamo, intelligendum tanquam de radice and massa
totius generis humani.
the image of God, and other gifts for all posterity, to be common unto other
which should proceed of him; it could not be, but the loss thereof was common,
and the want and hurt thereof should be to al. Secondly, we are admonished to
Psalm. 34.12.13. D. Whitaker. contr. 1. quaest. 2. cap. 14. arg. 6 Historiam
Adulterij Dauidis vtilem esse ecclesiae contendimus; nam primu^ hinc discimus,
neminem impune peccaturum esse, sed quenquam si peccet. poenam peccati
subiturum, vel castigationis vt David subijt, vel vltionis vt alij.
beware of sin, seeing all men do undergo the punishment thereof, either in
chastisement Psalm. 118.18.
as do the Saints; or as the Deuteronomy. 32.41.
wicked, of revenge. Thirdly, that we grudge not Psalm. 37.1.8. and 71.3.
at the prosperity of wicked men, whom sometime the Lord Io^. 21.7.17.
deferreth to punish in this life, because they belong not unto him: neither to
1. Pet. 4.10. Job. 1. Hieron Dialog. 1. contra Pelagian. Nec mihi Abraham and
cateros quos in veteri testamento diuites legimus exemplo proponas, qui diuites
ingressi sunt regna coelorum, cum ipsis diuitijs ad bona vtentes opera, diuites
esse desierunt: imo cum non sibi, sed alijs diuites fuerint; and dispensatores
magis Dei, quam diuites appellandi sunt.
condemn the righteous, if God increase their wealth, seeing God has set it
down as a punishment, not a commandment, In the sweat of thy face thou shall
eat bread, which in mercy he may take away from whom he will. Fourthlie, that
Romans 3.3 4.5. 2. Pet. 2.12.
we do not acuse the truth of God, because all men do not labor for living in
poverty. For as we are said to labor, when our hands and feet do labor: so
Ephesians. 4.25.
mankind may be said to labor, when most part thereof does labor, and none
is free from Job. 5.7. Eccl. 1.14.
labor, care, sorrow, sickness, death. Fiftlie, that we forsake not the
fellowship of Gods children for Mat. 10.28.33. Psalm. 73.13.
worldly punishments, for whose sake Heb. 12.6.7. etc.
chiefly, they are allotted to the world: forasmuch as they are Heb. 12.10.
etc. August. de ^eccat. merit. and remiss. lib. 2. c. 33. Deus ea^ ad certamen
fidei sinit manner, vt per illas erudiantur and exerceantur proficientes in
agone iustitiae. Cum tamen constat propter peccatum quod admiserant, illos a
Deo primos homines (intentatas poenas) audisse atque meruisse.
wholly taken away from them, from being punishments, and remain but exercises
for the godly Hose. 5.15. Calu. in Genesis 3.
whereby to provoke them to repentance, and to beware of sin. Sixtlie, seeing
the earth is cursed for our sins, let us Matt. 6.33. Author oper. imperf. in
Mat. Hom. 16. Tu ergo quaere iustitiam, and non decrit tibi panis.
seek the righteousness of God; we shall not want convenient food. He that is
faithful has promised to all his children: 1. Cor. 10.13. Heb. 13.5.
I will not leave thee, nor forsake thee. Seauenthlie, we are to understand
that death comes Romans 5.12. August. de Peccat. mer. and remiss. lib. 1. cap.
2. Proinde si non peccasset Adam, non erat expoliandus corpore sed
supernestiendus immortalitate. Idem de ciuit. Dei, lib. 13. cap. 15. Leo de
not. Dom. Sermon. 4. Quam naturae sua speciosissimam dignitatem, si per
obseruantiam legis datae perseueranter excoleres; ipsam illam terreni corporis
qualitatem ad coelestem gloriam men's incorrupta perduceres. Contra Pelagianos,
Scotum and Simplicium argum. 22.
not by creation, but by sin; and therefore as by sin it entered, so by the
righteousness of Christ, it shall 1. Cor. 15.21.
be taken away.

Question 14. verse 20. Wherefore Adam called the name of his wife Heua: as it
seems immediately after the punishment laid upon him?
BEcause, as says the Scripture, she was the mother of Onkelos paraphrast.
Chald. Quod sit pare^s omnium hominum. Rabb. Leui inepte allegorizat; fuisse
matrem omnium viuentium dictam, etiam brutorum matrem appellatam, ob mentis
ruditatem and stuporem, and quod terrestria saperet non coelestia.
all living: wherein there may be gathered a double reason. The one of
thankfulness to God, for the sparing of his earthly life; wherein although
himself was mortal, yet by posterity, in respect of humane kind, Alia enim
iuxta totu^ and parts sunt aeterna, scilicet permanentia vt coelestia: alia
iuxta tota se aeterna sunt; iuxta parts autem, generationi and corruptioni
sunt obnoxia. Sicut quatuor elementa and genus hominum. Philopon. in Arist. de
generat and eorr. lib. 1.
he should ever be continued in life: therefore her name was Chaua, Hieron.
Trad. Hebrae. in Genesis Chaua enim transfertur; in vitam: quare vita fuit
appellata. Et est (...), chaua, a (...), caiah, Iod in vau mutata, ne cum
(...), caiah, confunderetur, quod est anima.
that is in English, life or living. The second of faith; Irenae. lib. 3. cap.
39. Mentiuntur ergo omnes qui Adae saluti contradicunt, semper seipsos
excludentes a vita, eo quod non credunt inuentam onem quae perierat: Si autem
illa non est inuenta, adhuc possidetur in perditione omnis hominis generatio:
mendax ergo is qui hanc coecitate^ induxit Tatianus.
because he embraced the promise of the woman's seed. For seeing we find no
monuments in Scripture of Adam and his wife, after the promise bestowed on
them, but Genesis 4.1. and 25.26.
as of godly and virtuous Patriarchs, we may be bold to understand this action
as a fruit of grace, Respondetur Caluino in hunc locum.
not of corruption. His meaning therefore was to commend the bounty of the
Lord, and for a monument of mercy showed on him, in sparing his life, he
calls her by the name of life: and that most worthily in respect of faith.
Hitherto, she might rather have bin called death then life, because by
transgressing, she had been the cause of death; yet now the goodness of the
Lord Chrysostom. in Isai. 6. Hom. 4. Sed aijs, e Paradiso me expulit? Verum eadem
te in coelos induxit.
had made, of the mean by which sin had entrance, the mean by which again
it is Ioh. 1.29. and 1. Ioh. 2.2.
expelled. And for as much as the seed was promised to break the Serpents
head, he believed he should be restored unto life, by the same seed, which
should also give 1. Tim 1.15.
life to the world. Herein also the man begins in godly sort Chrysostom.
Hom. in Genesis 14. Nominis impositio monstrat manifest dominium.
to practice that authority which God had given him over his wife, in calling
her as it were Isa. 4.1. For in the same sense might Adam be called the father
of all living: but the Lord, who only had over him authority, gave him a most
significant name of the matter of his original: Earth. Genesis 5.2.
by his own name, which is a token among men, of their pre-eminence: and the
woman in receiving it declares her obedience. Which godly example the more
ancient it is, the more worthy to be followed both of man and wife, and
especially to be observed in this degenerate and declining age, in which the
duties of marriage society, are seldom and but slenderly regarded.

Question 15. verse 21. How it is said, that the Lord God clothed the man and
his wife?
TO let pass their Origin. in Genesis Referente Methodio apud Epiph. Heraes. 64.
Item Epist. Epiphan. ad John. Hierosol. Gregor. Nissen.
opinion, who expound it as an allegory, and not a history, that our first
Parents were clothed by the Lord: whether we understand it, that the Lord God
did by Epiphan. Haeres. 64. Sic etiam tunc voluit Deus, o incredule, pelliceas
natura tunicas, absque animalibus, absque art aliqua humana, and multiformi
cultis, and simul vt voluit fecit Adam and Euae, quemadmodum ab initio simul
voluit, and mundus and omnia facta sunt. Obiectio. At sunt, qui non possunt hoc
in animum inducere. Resp. Qui vero salutis doctrinam suscipere nolunt, his ne
totum aenum ad comprobationem suffecerit. Object. At in sex diebus omnia omnium
genera creauit, pelliceat tunicas non creauit. Resp. Neque has tunicas
pelliceas incepit nunc creare, qui pelles and bestias creauit antea. Justin.
Mart. in Quaest. orthodox 9.
willing or commanding it, make them garments without art or help of
creatures, as he did create the world; or that he did it Neque enim Deum aut
Linionem aut coriarium egisse debemus existimare, ficut obijciunt. Epiphan.
epist. ad Johan. Hierosol. Caesarius dialog. 3.
by his Angels, who are ministering Heb 1.14.
spirits, for their sakes who are heirs of salvation; or whether by Chrysostom.
Hom. in Genesis 18. Et verbum fecit, accipe, pro eo quod est, imperauit vt essent:
iussit enim tunicis pelliceis vestiri in perpetuam memoriam, quod inobedientes
fuerint Domino. Calvin. in Genesis 3. Crassa Minerua exponit Moses dominum hanc
Adae and eius vxori industriam dedisse, vt sibi vestes ex pellibus conficerent.
giving authority and liberty to Adam, to make use of the creatures for his
clothing (as Solomon is said to build 1. King. 6.2. etc.
the temple, when he caused his workmen to build the same) it nothing
differs from the rule of faith or godliness: neither is it meet that men
should move conte^tions for opinions that are but fixed in their own conceit.
There are of this our age, which will demand, more curious then wise, where
these skins were had so suddenly, which made Adam clothing: when
notwithstanding no such preposterous haste is signified in scripture, as they
them selves conceive without a cause: yea they will be so mad as to demand,
where Adam had a thread to sew his fig leaves. And this they do in mirth and
My self has bin an eye and an ear witness.
pastime among their consorts. Such I forewarne in the name of the Lord, that
they cease Isai. 28.22.
to dally with the Scripture, least while they play with it, as the Judge.
16.25.
Philistims did with Sampson, the sentence thereof do Deuteronomy. 27.26.
fall upon their heads, the weight whereof Luc. 20.18.
do grind them unto powder. Others I admonish to be Deuteronomy 29 29.
contented with the truth revealed, and that which is secret Irenae. lib 2.
cap. 47. Quaedam quidem absoluamus secundum gratiam Dei, etc. i. Some things,
viz. things revealed, let us labor perfectly to understand, according to the
grace of God revealing them: somethings, viz. things unrevealed, let us be
content to commend to God.
to commend to God. For it is not the way to increase in knowledge, August. de
Genesis ad lit. lib. 8. cap. 5. Melius est dubitare de occultis, quam litigare de
incertis.
to be curious in matters of uncertainty, such questions are 1. Tim. 3.4.5.
Hieron. in 1. Tim. 6. Quae generant lites and blasphemias in deum pugnando
sermonibus.
unprofitable, inge^der strife, and do foster Atheism, and contempt of the
word of God. And the godly I exhort Ieh. 5.39. Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 18.
Quantam sermonis himilitatem attemperat diuina scriptura? Ergo omnia ita
intelligamus, sicut par est de Deo intelligi.
to search the Scriptures, where they shall be easily answered of such
doubtfulnes, whereof they shall in christian sobriety, desire to understand the
certainty. He is well able to make a garment, that made the world; and to
Justin. Mart. Quaest. Orthodox. 48.
make a skin (if necessity required) without a beast, that made beasts and
skins of nothing. So much is it more easy with the Lord to work, then for us
to know the manner how he works. So likewise of their former garments, they
needed no such instruments, as fools imagine, to do any thing the Scripture
For the strictnes of the signification is this: they sewed or made fit a
figleafe or bough, and made themselves girdles: the meaning whereof is, they
compassed their body with the small bough (for so the word (...) gnale, does
also signify) or boughs of the figtree: and thereby covered their priuities.
does report; but those that wickedlie make necessity of Scripture, of their
own opinions, no marvel if the Lord do leave them to wrestle with their
folly, and to be entangled in the nets themselves have made. In a word
therefore the Scripture does record the chief author, and the matter of the
garments: and leaves out the means, Nam omnia nobis vtilia contines diuina
scriptura. Chrysostom.
because it is impertinent.

Question 16. verse 22. What means this that the Lord says: behold the man
is become like one of us: and of the Cherubims that kept the way of the of life?
ADam having lost Cyprian. lib. de Bona patientiae. Similitudo diuina, quam
peccato Adam perdidit.
the garment of righteousness, and the glory of creation, and Ambros. lib. de
Helia and Ieiunio. cap. 4. Quia voluisti esse quod non erat, desiisti esse quod
erat: and dum supra te esse affectas, infra te esse coepisti: ecce amictus
tuus, ecce dignum te indumentum.
received in steed thereof, these skins to hide his filthiness: behold says
the Lord, Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 18. Ecce factus es quod expectasti; imo quod
non expectasti, sed qualem te fieri dignum erat. Grauis hoc verbum exprobratio,
vt transgressorem pungere valeat: vult enim hic per verba in memoriam redigere,
quo modo decepti fuerimus a diabolo per serpente^.
what a change has Adam made, how well is he become The voice of the
trinity, Cyril. lib. 1. an Julian. or of one person unto the other, as the
father unto the son and holy spirit, or the holy spirit unto the father and
the son. Council. Syrmiense. in Socrat. libr. 2. cap. 25.
like one of us? behold what his pride and disobedience has brought unto him?
Let this be August. de Genesis ad lit. libr. 11. cap. 39. Verba haec sunt Dei, non
tam huic insultantis, quam caeteros ne ita superbiant deterrentis. Quid aliud
intelligendum, nisi exemplum timoris incutiendi esse propositum, quod non solum
fuerit factus qualis fieri voluit, sed nec illud quod factus fuerat conseruauit.
an example to him and his posterity, of daring to reject the word of God.
Thus does the Lord in wonderful great mercy Irenae. lib. 3. cap. 37.
Intellectus vero transgressionis fecit poenitentiam, etc. Dominus autem qui est
misericori, tunicas pelliceas pro folijs ficulneis induebat eos.
cloth the carcass, and arm the mind of Adam with humility and hatred of his
sin, and afterward does send him forth of Paradise. The Lord adds a reason
of the same his casting out: least he should take also of the tree of life,
and eat and live for ever. What? was the Lord in doubt, least he should live
for ever, whom he himself had condemned unto death? or could he not have kept
the tree, either by commandment, or by his Angels, as afterward he did the
garden, or have taken away the tree; but that this was left the only way to
save it, to expel Adam out of Paradise? yea doubtless the Lord was able
otherwise to have restrained him: but this is the meaning of the Lord. Seeing
Adam has eaten of the tree, whereof he was commanded not to eat, it is
justice that he should be deprived of the tree, whereof he had liberty to
eat: and seeing by eating the forbidden fruit, he has procured death; no
reason that he should eat of that fruit, which was ordained to preserve his
life. Wherefore Adam being made unable to use aright, the Chrysostom. de
provident. lib. 1. Quo scelerum progressa non esset audaica nostra, si nos
affluere diuitijs and otio constituisset Deus?
benefits and pleasures of the garden; the Lord depriueth him of that he could
not rule, Chrysostom. ibid. Omnia igitur hac clementiae signa non minus quam
priora.
in no less mercy and goodness, then he gave it at the first. Adam by sin
was subject unto death: he could not therefore have continued in life,
although he had eaten all the Epiphan. Haeres. 64. Igitur potuisset viuere
corpus in aternum, and immortale esse, nisi prohibitus fuisset gustare vitam.
Caluinus and alij contra statuunt. Certum quidem est (inquit. in Genesis cap. 3.)
non potuisse hominem, etiamsi totam arborem vorasset, vita frui Deo inuito,
etc. Quid igitur statuendum? Nempe arborem vim quidem retinuisse corpora humana
conseruandi in aeternum; sicut testantur praeter Epiphanium, Augustinus,
Chrysostomus, Beda, Damascen. Zanchius, and scriptores plerique nobiles; non
potuisse autem fieri vt corpus morti addictum viuificaretur quouis fructu.
Potuit igitur ex secundo principio, silicet creatione and natura; sed non
potuit ex primo principio, id est iustitia and decreto Dei quo peccatores
morerentur.
fruit, and the tree it self. But least Adam should Tertul. in Marcion. lib.
2. Benignissime, etc.
put confidence in outward things, or Irenae. lib. 3. cap. 37. Non inuidens ei
lignum vitae, quemadmodum quidam dicunt, sed miserans eius, vt non perseueraret
semper transgressor. Epiphan. Haeres. 64. Prohibitus est autem (fructus) vt
peccatum cooccisum cum corpore moreretur, corpus vero peccato perdito
resurgeret.
least in misery he should prolong his life, or least through the loss of
heavenly wisdom, Galat. 5.13.
he should abuse his liberty, and thereby hurt himself: the Lord in his
wisdom knew it better for Adam, to be deprived, and Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis
18. Ita vt magis prouidentia quam indignationis fuerit illa electio.
therefore sent him forth; that through labor and affliction being humbled,
he might with sorrow of heart for sin, fly unto the author of a better
life (which is Jesus Christ) by a lively faith. And for this cause he adds
Cherubims or Angels, who August. de Genesis ad lit. lib. 11. cap. 4. Hoc per
caelestes vtique potestates, etiam in Paradiso visibili factum, esse credendum
est, vt per angelicum ministerium esset illic ignea quaedam custodia.
by visible force, as it were with dint of sword, should keep the way of the
tree of life; that man Chrysostom Hom. in Genesis 18. Misericordiae etiam fuit,
quod and contra Paradisum illum habitare faciebat, vt iugem dolorem haberet,
quotidie cogitans vnde exciderat, and inde tutior and cautior esset in
caeteris: neque immodicae viuendi cupiditate concupisceret, neque foris
existens de ligno comedere praesumeret. Ideo praecepit Cherubim. etc.
being void of hope of recovering his lost estate, might quietly submit
himself to bear his cross, and hunger and thirst for the life to come. Some
there are, which by the name of Cherubims and the Hieron. Tradit. Hebrae. in
Genesis Cherubim and flammeum gladium. Alij. gladium cui erat splendour. Targh.
(...), veiah shenan charebah, aclem gladij. Aben Ezra. gladium ancipitem.
Septuagint. (...), quod in omni part versaretur and agitaretur, angelis ipsis
tenentibus, sicut Number. 22.23. Iosu. 5.13. 1. Chron. 21.16. and forte.
vibrantibus.
blade of a sword, do understand nothing else, but the heat of the sun, in
that space which is called the fiery zone, Aquin. Sum. Secund. Secun. quaest.
165. art. 2.
which they think was as a wall or hedge unto this garden. Other, Strabus
Histor. eccles. Lyran. in Genesis 3.
that this garden being situate in the top of some mighty mountain, was now
compassed about with material fire. Some papists take it, Rupert. in Genesis 32.
Sciendum est quod tam animabus quam corporibus, ignis ille molestissimus est,
and inaccessibilis cunctis mortalibus: Mortuis autem, id est mortuorum fidelium
animabus, a tempore dominicae passionis ex^perabilis est, and corporibus quoque
illorum in resurrectione erit peruius. Porro ante eande^ domini nostri
passione^, nulli omnino filioru^ Adae peruius fuit, donec fusus de corpore eius
sanguis cu^ aequa, ignem illum exuperauit.
for the fire of purgatory: but these all are manifestly confuted by the
text, which says they were Cherubes The Hebrews say, the Angels were called
(...), Cherubim, of the word, (...), cherabiah, yt is, in the Chaldee tongue,
like a boy; because they did commonly appear in such shape, and were so
protraited in the Tabernacle and temple. Rab. David.
or Cherubims or Angels. Wherefore some other of that sort of writers, do
acknowledge they were Angels: but withal Perer. Tom. 1. lib. 6. cap. vlt.
Voluit enim Deus ingressum Paradisi oc^ludere, tam contra diabolum qua^ contra
homines, ne eum in locum penetrans (diabolus) decerperet fructus arboris vitae,
cuius promissione and donatione, mortales proroga^dae vitae auidissimos
falleret, et ad sui cultu^ et obsequiu^ abduceret.
affirm, that they were to defend the garden, not only from Adam, but from
Satan also, least he by taking of the fruit of the tree of life, in offering
it to men, should of them procure to be worshipped and adored. Which ridiculous
conceit could never pass from men, which were not drowned in superstition, and
choked with idle speculations, the same having no countenance or color in the
text. Theodoret Theod. quaest. in Genesis 40. No^ igitur gladius ille fla^meus
naturaliter igneus erat, sed visu talis: neque Cherubim erant animalia sed
talia videbantur.
also a grave and godly Father, supposes that they were apparitions only of
Angels, and fire and sword: but it is of the Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 18.
Praecepit etiam vt flammeus gladius ille versatilis, and virtutes illae
Cherubim custodirent vtam quae illuc inducit. Hieron. Trad. Heb. in Genesis Illo
eiecto, ante fores Paradisi Cherubim and fla^meum gladiu^ posuerit ad
custodiendum Paradisi vestibulum, nequis posset intrare. Aug. de Genesis ad lit.
li. 11. c. 40. Hoc per caelestes vtique potestates.
most part understood, that they were Angels indeed, and living creatures,
unto whom God had added a visible shape, as the Scripture Namely of Cherubims
as they usually appeared, and a fity sword shaking.
speaks of, which were continued Until the death of Adam: Epiphan. Haeres.
64. Other think, even until the flood, and that until that time paradise was
known unto men, and the way into it kept by Cherubims. Chrysostom. Such like
flame is until this time seen in the country of Babylon (where this Garden
was) as Pliny reports, li. 2. c. 106. Which it may be, is as the brand or
foot print of this lamp, and the place of Paradise; but yt there is the very
Paradise, or ye Angels are there keepers, I would not say by any means.
a certain time, not to affray the devil, but to keep from man the way of
the tree of life. Observe from hence ver. 21. Apparel Ver. 21. 1. Cor. 12 24.25
is abadge or cognizance of our transgression, wherefore to be proud thereof,
or to abuse it vainly, is to Phil. 3.9.
glory in our shame. Secondly, verse. 22. Affliction and penury are
oftentimes more profitable unto Gods Psa. 119.71.
children, then prosperity. Thirdly, verse. 23. The Lord does often use the
ministry of Angels Heb. 1.14. Genesis 9.12. 1. Kin. 6.17.
for the preservation of the faithful, and the punishment 2. Kin. 9.35.
of the wicked. Fourthly, verse. 22.23.24. Those that have no part Pro. 3.18.
Reu. 22.2.
in Christ, the tree of life, receiving his merits by a lively faith, Ioh.
3.36.
shall have no part in the Paradise of God, and of the joys of the life to
come.

CHAP. IIII.
Question 1. verse 4. 5. For what cause had the Lord respect to Abel, and to
his offering, and not to Caine and his offering?
IN this Chapter the Spirit of God begins to describe how Eusebius. eccles.
Histor. lib. 1. cap. 2. 3. Chronologiam ecclesiasticam ab Adamo incipit,
eiusque lapsu and restitutione per promissum semen. Confestim cum primus homo,
cum in foelici statu esset, minus de diuino mandato solicitus, in mortal^m hanc
and fragile^ vitam decidit, etc.
the Lord did govern the world, but especially his church after the fall of
man. Wherein first of all he shows that the Epiphan. in Ancorat. Item in
Epist. ad Ioh. Hierosol. Ausus est dicere (scil. Origenes) perdidisse imaginem
dei Adam: cum hoc in nullo penitus loco scriptura significet.
image and blessing of God, first bestowed on man, was not so utterly perished
by sin, but in some small measure it was preserved by the Lord: of the which
blessing it is (for of the other we shall speak of Chapt. 5. quest. 1.
afterward) that they were fruitful in generation according to the Genesis 1.28.
voice of God. But is it not sufficient to have said, and Heua conceived and
bare Caine? why is it added by the holy Ghost: the man knew Heua his wife?
Surely it was thought meet in the wisdom of God to describe in a holy
manner the whole condition of generation, that Ierem. 29.6. Heb. 13.4.
Chrysostom. in Isai. 6. Hom. 4. Si habuit filium propheta, habuit and vxorem,
vt intelligat no^ malas esse nuptias, sed mala^ esse scortationem. Fulgent.
epist. 1. cap. 2. and 3. Neque ex commixtione maris et foeminae, sed ex
immoderatione libidinis culpa^ trahit coitus coniugalis. Quod proculdubi^ non
appellares Apostolus debitum ( 1. Cor. 7.) nisi legitime sciret esse reddendum:
nec iuberet reddendu^ mutuae consensionis officium, si esset iniquae
reposcentis exactio.
we might know that the same is not simply evil, but a means Genesis 1.28.
August. de ciuit. Dei, lib. 14. cap. 23. Quisquis autem dicit non fuisse
coituros neque generaturos, nisi peccassent, quid dicit, nisi propter
numerositatem sanctorum, necessarium fuisse hominis peccatum? illae quidem
nuptiae diligendam prolem gignerent, pudendam libidinem non haberent; and si
libido non fuisset, ad nutum voluntatis haec seruirent, sicut caetera membra.
Quisquis autem ad has literas impudicus accedit, culpam refugiat non naturam;
facta denotet suae turpitudinis, non verba nostra necessitatis.
which God himself had sanctified before the fall of man, for the increase of
mankind, albeit it be now polluted, as al other Ioh. 14.4. and 9.3.
actions are, which proceed from our corruption. It is not true which Rabbi
Salom. In comment. reddit per plusquam perfectum tempus cognouerat, autumant
enim tam ipse quam alij Rabb. Adamum vixisse ante peccatum viginti annos, and
Euam grauidam fuisse factam in Paradiso. Quod si factum esset, certe Cain
absque peccato originali conceptus, sine labe paterna nasceretur, quod dictu
absurdum and impium est.
the Rabbis teach, that Adam knew his wife by copulation before the fall:
neither is it true, because he did not, Hieron. contra Iouin. lib. 1. Nuptiae
replent terram, virginitas Paradisum. Et ideo (inquit) non vidit Deus opus suum
bonum secundi diei, nobis intelligentiam derelinquens, non esse bonum duplicem
numerum, qui ab union diuidit, and praefigurat foedera nuptiaru^. Sunt haec
reuera foenum and stipula in aedificio Domus Dei, nullo nixa fundamento.
that therefore it was not lawful, or that he had offended in doing thereof.
Furthermore herein is signified, how Adam and his wife proceeded in faith.
First in that the woman having borne a son, acknowledges it, as a gift from
God, to whom Verse. 1. Cain of (...) kana, to get or possess.
in the naming of the same her son, she gives thanks: neither yet does she
forget to bewail her sin and misery Habel of (...) hebel, vanity: in the
first, magnifying the Lord: in the second, humbling her self. Such is the
common duty of Gods children, to acknowledge the Lord the author of goodness,
and themselves the cause of evil. For by sin all the creature is subject
unto vanity.
which by the name of her second son she seems to profess. Secondly, in
that they did nurture their children and bring them up in true religion, Genesis
18.19. Exodus 13.14. Ephesians. 6.4.
as godly Parents ought to do. The which is plainly proved, in that Caine
and Abel In the Hebrew word for word ((...) mikets iomim) in the end of days:
i. after many days, namely when they were come to years.
being come to years, did offer sacrifice, which was to signify the
acknowledgement Origin. Hom. 1. in Leuit. Posuit manum super caput vituli: hoc
est, peccata imposuit. i. He put his hand upon the head of the calfe, the
meaning whereof is, he put his sins.
of their sin, and that Epiphan. Here Is. 42. Cuius sacrificij, and paschatis,
and doctrinae padagogus fuit lex, deducens per figuram and instituens in
sacrificium and victimam Christi, qui vno sacrificio omnia quae ante fuerunt
compleuit and perfecit.
they looked for the seed of the woman promised, to be slain in the evening of
the world, thereby to appease the wrath of God for man's offenses. And it is
more evident, that they were enjoined this worship, by their father, for that
Cain did bring his offering, who of himself neither had care of religion, 1.
Ioh. 3.12.
nor any feeling of comfort by it, in his heart. But forasmuch as Caine did
sacrifice with Abel, what reason why he was not accepted with Abel? The
Scripture seems to insinuate a double reason of the same. The first is, that
Abel offered with a cheerful heart Heb. 11.4. 1. Chron. 29.17. 2. Cor. 8.12.
and willing mind in faith: to which purpose is expressed, that he brought
(not of his sheep, but) of the first fruits, and of the fat and best of them;
but Caines oblation was of the fruit of the ground, Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis
18. Obserua quo modo pientissima Abelis men's significatur, and quod non tantum
de onibus obtulerit, sed de primogenitu, hoc est de preti^sissimis, and maxim
eximijs. Deinde and ex illis ipsis primogenitis optima quaeque. De Cain nihil
tale adnotatum est. Sed quid obtulit? de frugibus terrae sacrificium, quasi
diceret: qualiacunque obueniebans, nulla ad delectum adhibita opera vel
diligentia.
as it seems without choice or difference, and if otherwise (as the works of
hypocrites Isai. 58.2.3. Mark 12.41.42.
are often as fair in outward show, as of the righteous) yet the same Jude.
11. 1. John 3.12.
was performed of a wicked mind. And as this cause was in the offerers, so the
second cause was in the Lord, whose wisdom was able to make difference of the
persons. Of the which it is said he accepted, not Abels offering, but Abel and
his offering; so likewise he refused not alone the offering of Cain, but to Cain
and his offering he had no regard. So that now if any one should ask of me;
why the Lord had respect to Abels offering, I would answer with the text, To
Abel, and to his offering.
because he respected Abels person; and why did he respect Abels person? he
respected him as a Ioh. 15.5.
member of his son, because Heb 11.4. Ephesians. 2.20. and 5.30. Ambros. de Cain
and Abel. lib. 1. cap. 7. Sacrificium autem and celebritate and gratia. etc.
he offered in faith. If it were again asked wherein his faith was seen? It was
inwardly seen of him 1. Sam. 16.7. Psalm. 7.10.
that sees the heart, and outwardly was manifest in the manner of the
sacrifice. By which place of Scripture are overthrown two pestilent errors,
which at this day do cumber the Church of God: one, of them which teach
Council. Trident. sess. 6 cap. 16. can. de Iustific. 7. Si quis dixerit, opera
omnia quae anto iustificationem fiunt. quacunque ratione faecta sunt, vere esse
peccata, vel odium Dei mereri, aut quanto vehementius quis nititur se disponere
ad gratiam, tanto eum grauius peccare, anathema sit.

Andrad. defens. Trident. Synod. lib. 4. Synodi explicat sententiam. Ab impijs
(inquit) in quibus nec persona Deo est reconciliata, nec naturae renouatio per
spiritum inchoata, imo qui iustitiae de qua Paulus disputat expertes sunt,
multa opera emanare, quae omni peccati turpitudine and culpa careant: and quod
in huiusmodi desideretur, non tam iustitiae, quam diuinae cognitionis desectui
adscribendum est. Bellarm. tom. 3. contr. 3. part. 1. lib. 5. cap. 9. Id primum
probare volumus, non esse videlicet peccata omnia opera quae fiunt sine fide.


that a wicked man or infidel may do a good or righteous work, and
acceptable to God; when as the person that does the work is wicked, and not
through faith of him accepted. The second, which teaches that the works of the
righteous Council. Trident. sess. 6. cap. 16 canon de iustificat. 32. Siquis
dixerit hominis iustificati bona opera ita esse dona Dei, vt non sine bona
ipsius iustificati merita, aut ipsum iustificatu^ bonis operibus, quae ab eo
per Dei gratia^ and Jesus Christi meritum, cuius membrum viuu^ est, fiunt, non
vere mereri augmentum gratiae, vitam aternam, and ipsius vita aternae, si tamen
in gratia decesserit, consecutionem, atque etiam gloriae augmentum, anathema
sit. Et addit canon. 33. Si quis dixerit, per hanc doctrinam, aliqua ex part
gloriae Dei, vel meritis Jesus Christi Domini nostri derogari, anathema sit.
do of condignitie or of their own worthiness, deserve the favor of God, and
eternal life. For surely if the Prou. 15.8. and 21.27. August. in Julian.
Pelag. lib. 4. cap. 3. Sed absit vt sit in aliquo vera virtus, nisi fuerit
iustus. Absit etiam vt sit iustus vero, nisi viuas ex fide: iustus enim ex fide
viuit. and fides ex auditu, auditus autem per verbum Christi. Ergo nec
Fabritius, Fabius, Regulus, etc. operati sunt aliquam veram iustitiam. Nam si
iusti, tennerunt etiam regnum Dei; aut Deus ipse, quod absit, erit iniustus, si
ad eius regnum verus non admittitur iustus: si vero tennerunt and salui
fuerunt, pro his Christus vere gratis mortuus est. At qui fide^ non habent
Christi, profecto nec iusti sunt, nec Deo placent, cum sine fide placere
impossible est. etc. In hominibus Deus operatus est in occulto iudicio, tamen
iusto, vt alij fatui, alij acute intelligentes, alij lenes, alij iracundi, alij
spadones, alij libidinosi, quod diuino muneri tribuendum, licet ipsi hoc
nes^iunt. Sed non erat in ijs (scilicet eorum abstinentia vel intelligentia)
vera iustitiae quia non actibus sed finibus pensantur officia. August. de
ciuit. Dei, lib 19. cap. 25. Quamlibet enim videatur animus corpori, and ratio
vitijs laudabiliter imperare; si tum Deo animus and ratio ipsa non seruis,
sicut sibi seruiendum ipse Deus praecepit, nullo modo corpori vitijsque recte
imperat. Promde virtutes quas sibi habere videntur, per quas imperat corpori
and vitijs, ad quodlibet adipiscendum vel tenendum, nisi ad Deum retulerint
etiam ipsa vitia sunt potiu^ quam virtutes.
sacrifices of the wicked are abominable, then are all their works no less
then sins. And if Caine, the first man by birth of all the world, who brought
his sacrifice, in Verse. 3.
time before Abel, and offered it unto the Lord, and yet neither his work, nor
he himself was any thing accepted, Ex diaemetro aduersatur doctrinae
Papistarum, placere Deo missas, preces, opera, propter opus operatu^.
because he was not justified by faith; it is manifest, that the works of all
the wicked, which Lapsus igitur fuit Iustini Mart. and Clementis, existimare
quosdam infideles esse saluos. Justin. Mart. Apolog. 2. Quicunque secundu^
verbu^, Christiani sunt, quamuis (...) and nullius numinis cultores habiti
sunt, quales inter Graecos fuere Socrates and Heraclitus and ijs similes. At
quidem Socraetes Esculapio gallum dicauit postremis verbis. Plato in Phaedon.
Et scriptura docet, neque scortatores neque idololatra regni Dei haereditatem
possidebunt. 1. Cor. 6. Clem. Alex. Strom. 1. Ij^ qui a philosophia
iustificati, etc. at scriptura, no^ a philosophia iustificari homines, sed a
sola fide testatur. Habac. 2.4. Romans 1.17. and 3.28. Denique huic opinioni
opponit sese Augustinus infinitis in locis, et patrum confensus ex verbo Dei.
either know not Christ, or receive him not by faith, are not accepted of the
Lord; and therefore are no better then sins, because Verse. 7.
they are not of him accepted. Secondly, if the worthiness of Abels offering
did cause the same to be accepted, or the worthiness of his faith, whereby it
was accepted, Rom 4.2 3.4.
then had Abel to rejoice in the merit of his work, or of his faith, but not
with God. But seeing the Scripture teaches, Heb. 11.4.
that the worthiness of Abels offering was through faith, and that faith it
self Ioh. 6.35.51. Ephesians. 2.8.9.
is not a merit, but a means for man to obtain by the mercy of God, the merit
of Jesus Christ; it follows that Abel being justified by faith in Jesus
Christ, his work was respected not for the desert thereof, but for the merit
of Jesus Christ, which God had given him by imputation as to a member of his
son, and Abel himself had received by promise and believed by his faith. It
may farther be demanded, how it was known that the Lord accepted the offering
of Abel, and not of Cain. Doubtless, Sicut and prophetis.
either by voice, or Quemadmodum Salom^^i. and reddit Theodotio; infla^mauit
super. etc.
by fire from heaven, or by success and Calu. in Genesis 3.
event thereof, or by Ventilatione aut dissipatione fu^ti, vt quibusdam videtur,
sieve alio modo.
such like means, which because ye Scripture no where expresses, we must with
silence reverence, but not determine. Observe these doctrines: Genesis 20.40. 1.
Sam. 24.4. Clem. Alexandr. paedagog. lib. 2. cap. 6. Multas vtilitates pudici
sermonis docet. Fulgent. epist. 1. cap. 3. Huius potestatis inculpabilis est
vsus, si iustitiae terminum transgredi libidinosus non permittatur excessus.
all these works of nature are honest in themselves, and are to be covered
with honest names, as does the Scripture. Secondly, those that by filthy
speaking Ephesians. 5.4. Coloss. 3.5.
uncover their shame, 1. Cor. 15.33.
corrupt their manners, and have not learned the language of Isai. 19.18.
Canaan. Thirdly, that the godly from the beginning of the world, Hebr.
13.7.8. Hieron. Comment. in epist. ad Galat. cap. 1. Admonere debemus, sanctos
qui antiquitus fuerint, ex fide Christi iustificatos.

August. epist. 89. Vide quemadmodum co^mendat vnum and vnum (Romans
5.15.16.17.18.) id est Adam and Christum, illum ad condemnationem, hunc ad
iustificationem, cum tanto post Adam venerit Christus in carne: vt sciamus
etiam antiquos iustos quicunque esse potuerunt, non nisi per eandem fidem
liberatos per quam liberamur and nos, fidem scilicet incarnationis Christi,
quae illis praenunciabatur, sicut a nobis facta annu^ciatur. Idem epist. 157.
and confess. lib. 10. cap. 44.


were saved by the same faith in Jesus Christ which we profess. Fourthlie,
that the sacrifice of men Haggi. 2.13.14.15. Isai. 1.15. Iren. lib. 4. cap. 34.
Igitur non sacrificia sanctificant hominem, non enim indiget sacrificio Deus,
sed conscientia eius qui offert sanctificat sacrificium pura existens; and
praestat acceptare Deum quasi ab amico.
does not make holy the sacrificer, but contrary that the sacrificer does
pollute the sacrifice: only Heb. 11.6. Romans 14.23. Heb. 9.14. Ambros. de Cain
and Abel, lib. 2. cap. 2. Hinc ergo cognoscimus, quod ante omnia fides nos
commendare Deo debet. Bernard. in Cant. Hom. 24. Inuisibilis animi statum
nunciet fides and actio; rectum iudica si fide Catholicum, and iustum opere
probaueris.
faith in Christ does sanctify them both: So that the offerer must be accepted
Prou. 15.8.9. and 28.9. Isai. 1.11.12.
before his sacrifice, otherwise his offering can be no other then abominable.

Question 2. verse 4.5. Whether did the Patriarks receive a commandment from
God to offer Sacrifice, before the law of Moses?
WE find it not commanded unto Adam, nor unto Abel, to offer sacrifice,
neither to any other before the commandment of Moses law, save only Genesis 2.9.
and 22.12.
unto Abraham; unless that any will contend For many both Rabbis and
Christian writers do think, that history to be more ancient then M^ses. The
Jews seriously affirm that Jobs wife was Dina, ye daughter of Jacob. Some
have avouched yt Moses himself wrote that history, as Hierome testifies,
Commentar. in Job. cap. 2. and 32. Hereof there is no certainty.
for the History of Jobs antiquity. Wherefore some Author quaest. ad orthod.
inter op. Justin. Mart. q. 83. Nemo little qui irrationalia victimam Deo
sacrificauerunt ante legem, diuina id iussione fecit: quamuis pateat Deum hanc
recepisse; acceptione eius, sacricantem sibi placitum esse indicantem.
there are which teach, that indeed before the law, the sacrifice of beasts was
not commanded, notwithstanding that the Lord accepted them, showing thereby
that he accepted the sacrificer. Whereof again one may justly ask, whence it
came then to mind to holy men, to offer sacrifice? It is answered by Aquin.
Secund Secu. quest. 85. artic. 1. Offerre sacrificium esse de lege naturae.
Perer. Tom. 1. lib. 7. in Genesis Nullo docente potuit id Abel naturali ratione
cognitum habere, and tacito quodam naturae instinctu and impulsu ad id
faciendum induci.
such as defend the former doctrine, that it was by the law of nature;
forasmuch as natural reason teaches man to know his subjection unto God, and
that he ought to show the same by outward service. But this opinion is wholly
contrary unto the word of God: which firmly testifies that neither Exodus
20.4. Deuteronomy. 12.32. Matthew. 15.8. Etiam Socratis sententia est, vnumquemque Deum
sic colere oportere, quo mo^o ipse se colendu^ esse praeceperit. Aug. de
consensu Euangel. lib. 1. c. 18.
God can like of or accept any worship, which himself has not commanded:
neither that man by Iere. 51.17. Romans 1.21. and 8.7. 1. Cor. 1. verse. 19.21.
Lactant. lib. 6. cap. 1. Homines neglect^ iustitia, quicquid aspectu rarum,
quic quid opere aut odore pretiosum est, haec grata esse dijs suis non ex
aliqua diuinitatis ratione quam nes^iunt, sed ex suis cupiditatibus iudicant.
Nec intelligunt terrenis operibus Deum non indigere. Aug^st. lib. 50. Hom. Hom.
43 Ideo venit Christus illuminator, quia diabolus fuit excacator. Omnes caecos
nasci fecit, qui prinuan hominem decepit. Hanc denique scientiam Christus ipse
testatur esse metaphysi^am. Matthew 16.17. Ad quam autem scientiam, intellectum
anima nostrae perinde se habere, atque vespertilionu^ oculi ad lume^ dici sese
habent, fatetur quide^ Aristoteles Metaphys. lib. 2. c. 1.
any natural policy or wisdom can find out any, but that which is
detested of the Lord. Wherefore it remains certain, that Abel and the rest
of the godly Fathers, had commandment from God: for proof whereof we need
not be beholding to unwritten verities, the Scriptures do yield us sufficient
testimony. For whereas it witnesses, that God had respect to Abel and his
offering; it does determine that Abel had commandment to sacrifice, forasmuch
as nothing can be acceptable in the worship of the Lord, which the Lord
himself Leuit. 10.1.2. Deuteronomy. 12.8.10.11.
has not instituted and ordained. He needed not Psalm. 50.9.
at all the fat of Abels sheep, neither was delighted with the worth of Abels
offering; but it was Heb. 11.4. Ambr. de Cain and Abel. lib. 2. c. 2. Hinc ergo
cognoscimus, quod ante omnia fides nos commendare Deo debeat. Cum fidem
habuerimus, elaboremus vt opera nostra perfecta sint.
faith whereby it was commended, and obedience, which the 1. Sam. 15.22.
Lord more accepts of then sacrifice. The ground and foundation of faith is
Romans 4.3.18. and 10.8
the promise of God: the rule of obedience is Gods Deuteronomy. 12.32. Ios. 1.7.
commandment. Wherefore seeing no work can be accepted, unless it be
seasoned Romans 14.23.
with faith, and the Isai. 1.12. Ierem. 7.22.23. 1. Tim. 1.5. August. contr.
Faust. Manich. lib. 5. cap. 5. Quid ergo vos ^anquam de perfectione mandatorum
Christi iactatis, quod ea quae in Euangelio praecepta sunt operamini? Quid enim
illa prodessent, etiamsi vere implere^tur a vobis, vbi non est fides vera? Quid
vos tanquam de Christiana paupertate iactatis, cum Christiana charitate
careatis? Vnde habere potestis veram charitatem, no^ ex fide ficta surgentem,
etc.
fruit thereof, which is obedience; the Scripture in commending Abels sacrifice
does as well confirm, that Abel had commandment either by his Father, or by
the Lord, which is not spoken of; as that he had a promise Genesis 3.15.
which is expressed. Moreover the use of Sacrifice does testify, that they
found it not by natural reason, but were instructed in the same by God. Which
use was twofold in every right performed sacrifice; namely, the testification
of obedience, and the confirmation of faith. In the former use, they did
testify the honor of the Lord Leuit. cap. 4.1. etc. 1. Sam. 26.19.
in seeking the pacification of his wrath for sin, or Leuit. 3.1. 2. Sam.
6.14.17.
else in thankefulnes for his being pacified, and for benefits they had received
by the same. Likewise was their faith increased by sacrificing, forasmuch as
having Genesis 3.15. Revel. 13.8.
the promise of mercy, whereon to ground their faith, they understood that
according to the promise Genesis 8.21. Job. 42.8. Psalm. 51.19.
they were accepted, yet not for their own sake, or for their sacrifice; but
Psalm. 51.16. Heb. 9.8.12.
for the sacrifice of promise, that was to come. Wherefore also their
sacrifices did, as shadows, rightly lead them to the death of Jesus Christ,
in which the same Like as by our Sacraments, Baptism and the Supper: as we
shall consider (God willing) in our questions upon Leuiticus.
his death was rightly shadowed and depictured. And dare any say, that they
either had not the right knowledge of the death of Jesus Christ; or that same
knowledge, they had of themselves, and not by revelation from the Lord; or that
they shaped the manner of their sacrifices In his Priesthood, Genesis 14.18. Heb.
7.24.25. In the Altar, Genesis 8. verse. 20. Heb. 13.10. In the matter of
sacrifice, which was a clean beast, sheep or ox, etc. wherein the same
resembled Christ, Hebr. 10.6.7.8.9. and 13.11.12.
after the pattern of the death of Christ, and were not taught the manner of
his death, by being commanded such sacrifice from God? It may therefore well
be gathered, that Adam having the promise of the woman's seed, that Genesis 3.15.
1. Ioh. 3.8.
it should dissolve the work of Satan; the Lord did afterward instruct him of
the manner how, with such other doctrines of Tit. 1.1.
faith and godliness, as were necessary for the time, for man's salvation. By
these and many other undoubted reasons, it may be proved, that the godly did
not sacrifice, without the commandment of God, albeit the instant when, or
the manner how they were commanded, be not expressed in the Scripture. And that
the same they were commanded, not Justin. Mart. dialog. cum Triff. Deus ad
populum illum (scil. Iudeor.) se acco^modans hostias quoque offerre tanquam
nomini suo praecepit, ne simulachra coleretis.
only to withold them from Idolatry, which is the Romans 1.21.22.23.
fruit of all voluntary worship, devised by man's invention: but also for the
exercise Hieron. in Isai. 1.12. Hostiae ergo and immolatio victimarum, no^
principaliter a deo quaesita sunt, sed ne idolis offerrentur, and vt de
carnalibus victimis, quasi per typum and imaginem ad spirituales hostias
transiremus.
of true religion for Iren. lib. 4. cap. 32. Ex quibus omnibus (scil. script.
locis) manifestum est, quia non sacrificia and holocaustomata quarebat Deus,
sed fidem, and obedientiam and iustitiam propter eorum salutem.
the confirmation of their faith, and for August. epist. 5. Nec illorum ergo
sacrificiorum egebat Deus, nec cuiusquam eget vnquam, sed rerum diuinitus
impertitarum, vel imbuendo virtutibus animo, vel aternae saluti adipiscendae,
quaedam signa sunt, quorum celebratione atque functione, non Deo, sed nobis
vtilia pietatis officia exercentur. Atque haec quidem aeque omni tempore
necessaria. The Jews understand by the word ((...) iabe, he brought) that
Caine brought his offering to his father Adam, as to the Priest. Many Christian
writers think he brought it to a certain place, where they were wont to
exercise prayer and offer sacrifice.
the proof of their obedience.

Question 3. verse 10. What means it which the Lord says: thy brothers Blood
cries unto me from the earth?
IT is not without cause Chrysostom. in Epist. ad Hebrae. Hom. 22. Dicitur ignis
descendisse and assumpsisse hostias eius. Hieron. Tradit. Hebr. Vnde scire
poterat Cain, quod fratris eius munera suscepisset Deus, and sua repudiasset:
nisi illa interpretatio vera esset quam Theodotio posuit; and inflammauit, etc.
ignem autem ad sacrificium deuorandum solitum venire de coelo legimus.
supposed, that the Lord by some present token made known, what he liked and
disliked in the sacrifice: for in one sentence it is said: Caine and his
offering the Lord did not regard: therefore Cain was exceeding wroth, and his
countenance fell down: that is, he was Hieronymus interpretatur vultum dimisit
in terram.
of a sorrowful and irefull countenance. For now is Caine most Vox (...)
charah est quasi ira ardere: and deduci a (...) monet. Kimchi, quod est
ince^dere, and inter septem voculas Hebr^orum quae iram significant haec omnium
est grauissima; cui additur etiam in contextu (...). valde, quasi ad
incrementum.
vehemently offended, because the Lord will not regard his offering. But who
would have thought that Caine so devout outwardly in sacrifice, having humbled
his looks, for that the Lord refused him; had doubled his transgression by
conceiving malice, rather then effectually sorrowed for his offense? But the
Lord that beholds the 1. King. 8.39. Psalm. 7.9. and 139.2.13.
hearts of men, knew well his hatred, and the cause thereof, Tertul. in
Marcion. lib. 2. Hac erit ignorantia Dei nostri, quae ideo simulabatur, ne
delinquens homo quid sibi agendu^ sit ignores.
and therefore in his mercy, does preach unto him a sermon of repentance. Why
art thou wroth, etc. that is, how unjustly 1. Ioh. 3.12. Matthew. 5.22.
art thou so exceeding angry? If thou do well, etc. If thy heart were
upright, as is the heart of Abel, Deuteronomy. 10.17. 2. Chron. 19.7. Romans 2.11.
should not thy offering be as well accepted of? But seeing thy heart is
wicked, Psalm. 5.4. Isai. 58.5.6.
should I accept thee for thy offering? Psalm. 95.7.8. Gregor. Hom. in Euang.
12. Iam a deo non potest mereri quod petit, qui hic noluit audir^ quod iussit,
quia qui tempus congrua penitentiae perdidit, frustra ante ^egni ianua^ cum
precibus venit,
Wherefore I admonish thee defer not to repent, and amend thy wickedness,
otherwise thy sin, that is, 2. Cor. 5.21. Galat. 3.13.
the punishment of thy sin, is near thee, and will quickly find thee out.
Also to thee, etc. And for thy brother 1. Ioh. 3.12.
whom thou hate for his goodness, because I have received him; Matthew 10.16.
Galat. 6.10.
thou shall not be hurt nor indomaged by him, in so much Chrysostom. Hom. in
Genesis 18. Itaque etiam posi peccatum hoc permitto, vt primogeniturae priuilegijs
gaudeas, illumque sub tua potestate and dominio esse iubeo.
that the privilege of birthright shall remain unto thee, for all thy
naughtines, so that thou proceed therein no farther. Notwithstanding, Caine
being led August. de ciu. Dei, lib. 15. cap. 7. Caro co^cupiscit aduersus
spiritum, etc. in cuius carnis fructisibus, and inuidiam commemorat, qua vtique
Cain stimulabatur and accendebatur in fratris exitium.
by the lusts of Satan, whom he Prou. 2.14.15. John 8.44.
delights to obey, regards Prou. 1.24.25.
not this heavenly counsel: but albeit he saw that the Lord had found his
wickedness, yet is he more circumspect to hide it from his brother, then
careful to amend it before the Lord. He frames his countenance to speak
friendly unto his brother; speaking Psalm. 28.3. Dissimulation a mischief
whether more pestiferous or common, is hard to say.
most fair, when he meant most malitiouslie: and poor innocent Abel, obeying
By the instinct of nature, and also by precept.
his elder brothers voice, 1. Cor. 13.5.7. Beda de templo Salom. lib. 1 Simplex
erat (Abel, item Job.) per innoce^tiam mansuetudinis, rectus per cautelam
discretionis: Simplex quia nullum laedere, imo prodesse desiderabat; rectus
quia se a null^ corrumpi permittebat.
suspecting no more evil then he meant himself, Ambros. de Cain and Abel lib.
2. cap. 7. Impietas matter quedam est delictorum: and qui gra^iora peccauerit in
cetera facile prolabitur: quomodo enim potest ab humani^ te^perare, qui diuina
viola^^, and h^minibus bonus esse, qui Deum lesit? Be^nard. in Cant. Sermon. 24.
Non mirum igitur si Cain i^ surrexit in fratrem, qui suam prius occiderat fidem.
is pitifully, cruelly, and treacherously oppressed and done to death. Now
the Lord begins to enquire for Abel. But why did he not deliver him from
death, which he knew before was meant and practiced? Doubtless his death was
precious in the sight of God, as Psalm. 116.15.
is the death of all his Saints: and the Lord was as able to have delivered
him, as he was to save Genesis 32.6.9.25.28. and 33.4. etc.
Jacob from the rage of Esau, or the Dan. 3.22.25.27.
three children from the fiery furnace. But the Lord who has created Prou.
16.4.
all things for himself, will above all other Leuit. 10.3. Psalm. 48.14.
be glorious in his Saints: sometime Psalm. 10.3.4.12.13.14. and 22.1.2 etc.
by his patience in their suffering; sometime by Exodus 14.17.18. 2. King.
19.32.35.
his power in their deliverance, as he sees it most meet, Isai. 6.10. Ephesians.
1.11.
in the counsel of his will. In those which suffer, he hastneth their
immortality, Cyprian. Successo. Epist. 82. Peto vt singuli ex nostris, no^
magis mortem cogitent, quam immortalitate^: Et plena fide ac tota virtute
Domino dicata, gaudeant magis quam timeant in hac conf^ssi^ne, in qua sciunt
Dei and Christi milites non opprimi sed coronari.
which is more to be regarded then their death; he shows them more mercy,
forasmuch as he vouchsafes them August. de ciu. Dei, lib. 22. cap. 30. Quod
sint futuri gradus praemiorum non est ambigendum. Atque id etiam beata ciuitas
illa ma^num in se bonu^ videbit, quod nulli superiori vllus inferior inuidebit,
sicut nunc non inuiden^ Archa^gelis angeli caeteri: tanquam nolis esse
vnusquisque quod non accepit. Tertul lib. ad Martyr. E^hortas. Bonum agonem
subituri estu, in quo Agonothetes Deus viuens est: Xystarches, Spiritus
sanctu^: corona, aeternitatis: Brabium, angelicae substantiae politia in
coelis, gloriae in secula se^ul^r^m.
a greater Crown. In those whom he reserueth, he respects their Cyprian.
de Mortalit. Nec enim Deus sanguinem nostrum sed fidem quaerit. Nam nec
Abraham, nec Isaac, nec Jacob occisi sunt. Allud est enim Martyrio animum
deesse, aliud animo defuisse martyrium.
faith, and not their blood; their desire, not their deed; and in steed of one,
he tries their valor with many temptations. So that whether they suffer for
his sake, or are delivered by his power; Philip. 3 10.
they are therein conformable unto the death of Christ. For this remains a
foundation in his secret counsel: 1. Tim. 3.12. Calvin. ibid. Constat multos
fuisse pios qui nec exilium vnquam, nec carcerem nec sugam subierint. Sed non
vna est ratio, qua Satan persequitur seruos Ch^isti: sed tamen omnino necesse
est, omnes qualicunque modo habere sibi infertum mundum, vt eorum exerceatur
fides, and probetur constantia. Hieron. ibid. P^om ^e timendum nobis est ne non
pie viuamu^, qui nih^l patimur propter Deum.
That all that will live godly, shall suffer persecution. And here the wisdom
of the Lord did choose Abel, as his instrument of much instruction, unto the
world. First by the example of so innocent a life, finished with so lamentable
death; he shows 1. Pet. 4.17.
that judgment must begin at the house of God: Ibid. Si autem a nobis. etc.
terrifying thereby the wicked world of sin. Secondly, seeing Abels
righteousness was left in The reward of our good works the scripture every where
speaks of, as Matthew. 10 41.42 but the wages of our works or merit of them,
is no where found, nor no other acknowledged but death. Romans 6.23.
this life unrewarded, it gave assurance unto those that by faith did
acknowledge the righteousness of God, that Luc. 16.9.
he was received into everlasting habitation, and Heb. 11.35.
made partaker of a better resurrection. Neither was it loss to Abel, thus to
be deprived of his life: seeing he did Philip. 1.21. 2. Cor. 4.17. Chrysostom.
Hom. Quod nemo laeditur nisi a seipso. Mors ipsa, dic mihi, quid nocuit
iustissimo illi Abel, and mors amara and acerba mors, parricidio illata non
homicidio? nonne ob hoc in omni orb terrarum canitur and celebratur Abel?
nonne ad beatitudinem perduxit? and afflictio huius mundi coronat ei in
aeternum parauit?
exchange it for immortal glory, and Isai. 65.5. Eccles. 7.3.
received a name for ever in the Church of God, better then of sons and
daughters. But wherefore does the Lord enquire for Abel, Tertul. in Marcion
lib. 2. Nec incertus admissi nec ignorant loci.
whose estate he knew before he asked? First, to teach (by Caines example) that
all the wicked must 1. Pet. 4.5. Inde verse. 15.
shortly give account of all their evil words and deeds. Secondly, to give
occasion Ambros. de Cain. lib. 2. cap. 9. Ita pecca^tes admonet ad
poenitentiam: confessio enim poenarum compendium est.
unto Caine, either to confess his fault, and to crave Ierem. 31.18.
repentance, and pardon for his sin; or else to 2. Cor. 2 15.16. Tertul. in
Marcion. lib. 2. Sed vt and ille haberet potestatem, ex eadem arbitrij
potestate, spo^te negandi delicti, and hoc nomine grauendi.
increase his fault by resisting stubbornly his offered grace. But how
graceles was the caitiffe, to return the Lord such a brutish answer? In whom
we may see the image of Psalm. 14.1.3. Romans ^.10.12. etc. Hieron. commentar. in
Matthew. 27. Qui diuersas naturas conantur introducere, and dicunt Iudam
proditorem malae fuisse naturae, nec electionem Apostolatus potuisse seruare,
respondeant quomodo natura mala egerit poenetentia^.
the world, if it be not Psalm. 51.10.
restored or Genesis 20.6.
stayed by the Lord. In whom we may also see, how Iam. 1.14.15.
lust when it has conceived brings forth sin, and sin when it is
finished brings forth death. His heart was wicked Isai. 48.8. Psalm. 14.1.
through concupiscence, Psalm. 26.6.
and not cleansed before his sacrifice. He was therefore wicked in sacrificing,
wicked in conceiving murder, wicked in committing murder, wicked in despising
the Lords admonition, wicked in his answer, in lying and blaspheming. The same
poison of corruption Romans 3.23. Origin in Matthew. cap. 13. ver. 47. Et hic
igitur regnum coelorum simile est sagenae missae in mare, non quemadmodum
quidam opinantur, qui docent verbo naturas subiectas esse diuersas, malorum
scilicet and iustorum, qui sub rete venerunt: nam huic intellectui repugnant
omnes scriptura.
is common to all the sons of Adam, and shows it self as occasion is
given, unless it be purged Matthew. 3.11. Ioh. 3.5. August. contra duas epist.
Pelag. lib. 3. cap. 3. Filios Dei iubet orare: Pater noster qui es in coelo,
etc. Et tamen eos malos esse dicit, and nosse bona dare filijs suis. Nu^quid
inde mali, vnde filij Dei? absit. Sed inde mali vnde adhuc filij seculi, iam
tamen filij Dei facti, pignore spiritus sancti.
by the spirit of sanctification as in Abel, and in the righteous; or Psalm.
76.10. Hester. 5.10.
repressed and restrained by the providence of God, for the government of the
world, and the sauegard of the faithful, as it is manifestly in many of the
reprobate. Now that the heart of Caine remained obstinate, and his Romans 2.5. 1.
Tim 4.2.
conscience seared with continuance in sin: the Lord does more forcibly knock
Revel. 3.20.
at the door of his affections, by terrifiyng his conscience, with the Verse 10.
guilt and punishment of so heinous murder. What have thou done? that is, what
a horrible murder have thou committed? how unjustly have thou executed thy
fury, upon Psalm. 10.8.9. 1. John 3.12.
a poor innocent, unprovoked? How cruelly have thou, being blinded with
malice, against the law of God, of nature, of humanity, turned thy hand
against thine own flesh, and slain thy brother, whom thy conscience does
testify Verse. 9.
thou should rather have defended against the violence of enemies? Think
thou to hide it from my Ambros. de Cain. lib. 2. cap. 9. Cur nescis vbi est
frater tuus? Soli erat^s cum duobus parentibus: inter paucos, frater te latere
no^ debuit.
presence, because thou did it in a secret place; or perhaps have covered
his blood with dust, or hid his body in the earth? I know right well thy
murtherous deed: Thy brothers blood does cry unto me. I say not thy Epiphan.
Haeres. 9. Item Ambros. lib. 2. de Cain. cap. 9. Non accusat frater, non
accusat vox ipsius, non anima eius (sed vox sanguinis di^it, ostendens quod est
spes resurrectionis) sed vox sanguinis accusat, que^ ipse fudisti. Tuum te ergo
facinus non frater accusat.
brother, but his blood; not in his body, nor from his body, but from the
earth: forasmuch as when thou saw the same to receive his blood, thou was
Homo quod homini lupus sit, hoc sacinus abund^ docuit.
nothing moved to pity and compassion. Therefore now though Abel himself were
yet remaining, Ierem. 15.1.
would ask pardon of me for thy fault, yet his Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 19.
Ecce quousque volat vox sanguinis huius. and vsque in coelum a terra ascendit,
and praetercurrens coelum, coeloque superiores virtutes, regio throno assistit,
and tuum deplorat homicidium ac nefarium hoc scelus accusat. Ea propt^r talem
tibi poenam infero, vt quae in te fiunt, omnibus post haec secuturis castigatio
and admonitio sint.
blood requires vengeance; the guiltiness of the fact it self of shedding
blood, must needs in justice be revenged with grievous punishment. Now
therefore thou art cursed: Thy heinous trespass deserves justly, that Deuteronomy.
7 10.
thou should be accursed. The Lord himself in interpreting the curse,
expresses no more but earthly punishments: both because the wicked are not so
Ambros. de Cain. lib. 2. cap. 9. Augustae mentis homo, praesentem mortem
veretur, perpetuam negligit, and diuinu^ iudicium non reformidat.
greatly feared with the punishments of the life to come, as careful to
avoid calamities, which in this present life do fall upon them: And also
because he would not cut off from Caine the hope of Athanas. lib. de co^muni
essen^^a personar. Obtrectare filio est obtrectare spiritui sancto. Quin hoc
obsernandum est, non dixisse Christum blasphemanti and poenite^ tiam age^^i
remissionem dandam non esse, sed blasphemanti and in blasphemia mane^ti^
qua^doquidem nullum est peccatum irre^^ssibile apud Deum, in illis qui vere and
ex amino, vt par est, poenitentiam agunt.
pardon, if at Ezech 18.27.
any time he would repent him of his wickedness. In this place of Scripture,
are manifestly proved these points of doctrine. Verse. 7. first, the Lord
Psalm. 7 9. 1. King. 8.39.
searches the hearts of all the sons of men, and knows their thoughts.
Secondly, the wicked are Job. 15.20. Psalm. 7^.19.
continually in danger of the punishment of their sin. Verse. 8. thirdly, the
godly and the wicked are in this life Matthew. 13.30.
mixed, as the E cl. 9 12 Ha^ac. 1.14.
fishes of the sea, by the providence of God, but in the world to come they
shall be Mat. 25.32.
separated, the Luc. 16 25.
godly rewarded, the wicked punished. Fourthlie, all the godly in this life
2. Tim 3.12.
must suffer affliction. Verse 9. fiftlie, man's nature is an enemy Romans 8.7.
to the righteousness of God, and therefore Psalm 50 17.18.
hates to be reproved for sin. Sixtlie, man cannot Iere. 31.1. Lament. 5
21 Council. Arausican. 2.^.4.13.25. Arb t^tum voluntatis in primo homine
infirmatum, nisi per gratia^ baptismi non potest reparari. Item. Prorsus donum
Dei est diligere Deum.
convert, unless he be August. de Spir. and lit. cap. 30. Neque lex impletur
nisi libero arbitrio; sed per lege^ cognitio peccati, per fidem impetratio
gratiae contra peccatum, per gratiam sanatio animae abolitione peccati, per
animae sanationem libertas arbitrij, per liberum arbitriu^ iustitiae dilectio,
per iustitiae dilectione^ legis operatio.
converted, but sinketh farther Isai. 1.5.
by correction into mischief. Verse. 10. seuenthlie, the Lord is the Psalm.
10.14.
helper of the helpless, and he will take their cause in hand. Verse. 11.12.
eightlie, the wicked by increasing sin, increase Ezech. 9.10.
their punishment. Ninthlie, temporal afflictions unto the wicked, without
repentance, are but Isai. 65.13.14.15. Ioh. 5.14.
forerunners of eternal. Tenthlie, the blood of Christ Heb. 12.24.
speaks better things then that of Abel: the blood of Abel Exodus 22.27.
Ambros. Sermon. 65. Nulla vtique sangulnis vox est, sed clamare dicitur sangui^
qui innocens effusus est, non tam vere quam causa, and interpellare dominum,
non tam persecutione eloquij, quam indignatione commissi, ac reatum suum no^
tam verborum accusare sermonibus, quam cons^ientiae ipsius criminatione
constringere. Anselm. commentar. in Hebr. 12. Quia sanguis Abel mortem
parricidae fratris petijs, sanguis Christi vitam persecutoribus impetraeuit:
Sanguis Abel expetis vindictam, sanguis Christi misericordiam. Ille vni nocuit,
ista multis profuit, and idcirco melius loquit^r.
requires vengeance, the blood of Christ requires mercy, and shall
undoubtedly obtain, as much more precious, forasmuch as it was shed to appease
Gods wrath, and to make atonement for our sins.

Question 4. verse 14. Wherefore Caine says: whosoever sees me shall kill me?
CAine as the August. de ciu. Dei, li. 15 ^. 5. Primus itaque fuit terrene
ciuitatis conditor, fratricida: nam suum fratrem ciuem ciuitatis aeternae, in
hac terra peregrinante^ inuidia victus occidit.
standerd-bearer of the malignant Church, does lively express the Image of
all the reprobate, whose property it is Horat lib. 2. Satyr. 2. D^m vitant
stulti vitia, in contrariae currunt. Idem in Art Poetic. In vitiu^ ducit culpo
fuga, si cares art. s^il. vere secund. Spiritu^ Sanctu^.
to fall from one extremity unto another, but can never find the Vetus
Academia dixit virtutes omnes quandam medietatem esse moderatam. Cic. in Lucul.
item Aristot, habitus in mediocritato consistens. Ethic. 2. cap. 6.9. Harum via
tenuis and aspera Matthew. 7.13.
narrow way of virtue, which lies in the midst. His eyes As Genesis 3.7.
being now opened to see his sin, the sight of the fault thereof does utterly
affright his conscience, and the punishment does cause him to repine against
the Lord. Notwithstanding the worldling is not touched with any show of true
repentance; as with Psalm. 51.4.
grief for offending God, 2. Cor. 7.10.11. See there the fruits of sorrow.
sorrow for the fault of his offense, Prou. 8.13. Job. 32.22.
fear of the punishment of the life to come, Psalm. 51.9. and 27.9. and 119.176.
or desire to be reconciled unto God: but only Ambros. de Cain. lib. 2. cap.
9. Praesentem mortem veretur, perpetuam negligit.
sorrow for his worldly punishment, and the loss of the pleasures of this
life: neither does he Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 19.
seek at all the mercy of the Lord, but rather by his stubbornnes resist it.
My (gneuon) perverseness, or wickedness, says he, is greater The word (...)
gneuon, of gnauah: perverse agere, in English to do peruersly or to play ye
knave, is sometime also taken for the punishment of the fault. Psalm. 69.27.
Pro. 5.22. Likewise the verb ( Nasha (...)) signifies to remit or pardon, and
sometime to sustain and bear, like as to bear with, in in our English
tongue, is to forgive, not to punish: and therefore must be interpreted
according to the circumstance of the place. Kimchi goes with our English
translation. My punishment is greater then I can endure. On^elos the Chaldee
Paraphrast, the Septuagint translation, the common consent of the Fathers
Greek and Latin is: My offense is greater then it can be pardoned. Either of
th^se interpretations may well stand, but the latter seems rather agreeing
with the text, wherein he does as it were answer the Lord desperately, first
of his fault, and after of his punishment. Worse is the Jewish exposition,
^argh^m. Joseph. Antiq. lib. 1. cap. 3. Is my sin so grievous as my
suffering? (asking release) The Roman translation worst of al: My sin is
greater the ^ I can deserve forgiveness.
then (nesho) to pardon, or then thy pardon, that is, then thou can pardon. A
most Huic sese opponit Augustinus. Mentiris Cain: mayor est enim Dei
misericordia quam omnium peccator^m miseria. Et Bernard. in Cant. Hom. 11.
Absit, absit, mayor est enim eius pietas quam quauis iniquitas. Idem. Vox
sanguinis Christi in^aluit multo plus, qu^d^ vox sanguinis Abel, clamans in
co^dibut remissionem peccatorum nec dubium est quin efficacior and potentior
sit mors Christi ad bonum, quam peccata nostra ad malum.
wicked voice of Chrysostom Hom. in Genesis 19 Tale tantomque est inquit peccatum
quod commisi, vt non possim accipere veniam.
desperation. Behold thou have cast me out, etc. Thou have compelled me
Ambros. lib. de Cain. 2. cap. 10. Repul tenim cum a f^cit sua, and a parentibus
abdicatum, separatae habitationis quodam relegauit exilio, eo quod aeb humana
mansuetudine, transist ad saeuitiam bestiarum.
to fly my native soil; thou Deuteronomy. 32.20. Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 19.
wilt not defend me, nor show thy favor toward me, whereby I shall be made to
wander Hieron. epist. ad Damas. Eijcior inquit a conspectu tuo, and conscientia
sceleris tremebundus luce^ ipsam far non sustine^s, abscondar vt latite^.
etc. Isidorus hoc ipsum peccatum in Spiritu^ sanctum esse vult, quod vix alius
quisquam.
in wilderness unknown, and every one that sees me, shall judge me worthy
of death, and therefore shall endeavor to destroy me. Behold how fearful a
Chrysostom. Hom. de nequitia depuls. Siquide^ and prasentia verentur, and futura
pertimescunt, amicos pariter and inimicos, gnaros vti and sceleris conscios
suspectos habent, adeo vt neque quiesce^do huius sint auxietatis expertes, etc.
hell a wounded conscience is! For why is Caine afraid to be killed, seeing
there is none living to perform it, but his Father and Mother, and Verse. 25.
Epiphan. Haeres. 39. Seth vero tertius filius post Abel genitus. Quod autem
August. de ciuit. Dei. lib. 15. cap. 15. Refert: potest de caeteris optime and
vere dici, eos relatos quos successionis ordo poscebat, non necessario
primogenitos.
perhaps some women children which the Scripture names not? It is Gods just
judgment, that they that will not fear the Lord, who is only to be feared,
should Psalm. 53.5. Prou. 28.1.
stand in fear of the^, who are justly no cause of fear. He that lately
feared not to kill his brother, is now made a terror Ierem. 20.4.
to himself. Hereby also we may consider what is the repentance of the
wicked: they see perhaps the fault together with the punishment, but they admit
the fault, and lament the punishment. Such was the repentance of Exodus 9 27.
Pharaoh, 1. Sam 15 24 30.
Saul, 2. Sam. 17.23.
Ahitophel: Such is the repentance of many August. Hom. de temp. 66. Omnes
enim impij amara^ habent in tormentis poenitentiam: sed non proficit ijs ad
remissionem.
Epicures, carnal, and covetous worldly men, when death compels them to
leave their pleasures and Psalm. 49.10. Iere. 17.11.
riches unto others. Or if with Judas they Mat. 27.4. August. Sermon. de Temp.
128. Intelligens enim quantum scelus admiserit, non suffecit ei sacrilegij
carere mercede nisi careret and salute.
bewail their fault, yet 2. Tim. 2.25.
want they grace to seek for pardon in Jesus Christ; so that although Job.
33.23. Act. 28.24.
they have it offered by the messenger of God, they cannot, or not truly,
apply it to themselves. Which observation may admonish all that love their
souls, not to defer repentance; but to learn amendment by the daily
preaching of the word. Observe also, the wicked may be extremely sorry for
their sin, and 1. King. 21.27.
not repent unto salvation. True repentance is 2. Cor. 7.10
a godly sorrow for the fault, with persuasion that the same is, or Mark 9.24.
at least wise may be pardoned, by virtue of the death of Christ; and the
applying, Psalm. 31.22. and 77.10
or at leastwise laboring with inward sighs and groans to attain, and to
apply the same. Thirdly, the conscience of the wicked Vt de Ahitophel and
Judah.
is their iaylor and accuser. Fourthlie, to wander here and there for meat
(except it be for Heb. 11.37.
the profession of the Gospel) Job 5.4.
is a token of the wrath of God.

Question 5. verse 15. What means this: doubtless whosoever sleieth Caine
shall be punished seauenfold? and whether the Lord deny that he should be
killed? also of the mark set on him.
IT seems that the Lord himself infringed that Genesis 9.6. Exodus 21.14. Numb.
25.31.
perpetual ordinance: whosoever shedeth man's blood by man shall his blood be
shed; neither Obiectio Iulianoru^.
rewarded Caine with punishment agreeing with the condition of his trespass:
forasmuch as he set a mark on Caine, least any finding him, should kill him.
The The vulgar Roman translation falsely foisteth in: Nequaquam ita fiet: It
shall not be so. Item. Septuagint. and Theod.
Lord does not deny the course of justice, but even by sparing the life of
Caine, Co^ciliatio 4.
confirms it. The chiefest Deuteronomy. 13.11. and 17.13
end of civil punishments is, as says the Scripture, that other may hear,
and fear, and not commit such wickedness. Forasmuch therefore Perer. Pap. in
Genesis 4. verse. 14. tom. 1. lib 7. Credibile est cum mors Abel circa 130. annu^
Adami euenerit, and per illos 130 annos humanum genus iam numerosissime
multiplicatum etc. Figmenta ista sunt: nun cuiates essent, Abel enim mortuus
sine prole, tertius vero Adami filius Seth. Nisi ipse Cain erat ad miraculum
faecundus.
that as yet, there wanted those, to whom example might be given by his death;
his life is prolonged as Ambros. de Cain. li. 2 cap. 10. Nec tamen magna
concedit (cum vitae pepercis) sed in eo ipso imprudentiam insipientis
vlciscitur.
a plague, not as a benefit (for it was more Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 19.
Extendam enim vitam tuam, maiorque and inde tibi dolor erit, and relinquam te
posteritati magistrum, vt tui spectaculum illis sit admonitio and castigatio,
nullusque exemplum tuum sequatur.
bitter then death it self) to the end that those which were yet unborn,
might behold the punishment of murder inflicted on him. The curse which the
Lord pronounces does approve the same. The Lord in chastising Adam Genesis 3.17.
says unto him: cursed is the earth for thee or unto thee: but unto Caine he
says, Verse. 11.
cursed art thou from of the earth. To Adam, Genesis 3.19.
in the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread: but Caine though he labor
with sweat of face, should not receive Verse. 12. Non fructus feret solitos,
lice^ a te diligenter exculta sicut solita. Poena temporalis and mobilis Cain.
the strength thereof. Unto Adam was Psalm. 115.16. August. contr. Faust. 12.
Non dixit maledicta terra, sed maledictus tu a terra. and no^ dixit quoniam
operaberi^ eam: sed quoniam cum operaberis eam non adijciet dare fructus.
the earth given to live and rest thereon: but Caine is made a runnagate and
wanderer on the earth. So that if the common life of man be as it were Psalm.
39.6. Iam. 4.14. Gregor. Hom. in Euang. 37. Temporalis vita aeternae vitae
comparata, mors est potius dicenda quam vita.
the shadow of death: doubtless that wretched life of Caine, was nothing better
then death it self. And seeing death had brought an end Ambros. de Cain. li.
2. c. 10. Nam si nocentes moriuntur qui gradu^ a peccatis reuocare noluerunt,
vel inuiti: tamen fine^ non naturae, sed culpa adipiscu^tur, ne plura
delinquant, quibus vita foenus est delictoru^.
unto his faults, not to his nature, and his life could bring no more but sin
and misery: Caine Bernard. declamat. in ecce relinq. Omnis qui inuenerit me
occidet me. Grande scil. damnu^, grandis iactura si perimatur corpus,
quandoquide^ anima perijs. Romans 2.4.
had lost nothing by the loss of life, except that space offered for
repentance. Shall be punished seaue^fold, etc. The word ((...) Shibgnathaim)
seven or seauenfold, is diversely interpreted. Symmachus (Shibegnathaim iucam)
Hier. Ep. ad Damas. Postqua^ ep. etc. Item lib. Trad. Hebra. Aquila
Septe^pliciter interpretatus est. Symmachus septimu^. Theodotio per hebdomadam.
shall be the seventh punished. Theodotio and the Septuagint; shall dissolve
seven (plagues.) Aquila and the common translation: shall be punished
seauenfold, or seven times as much. Not that he should receive (says Ep. ad
Damas. No^ quod ipse qui occiderit Cain septe^ vltionibus subijcie^dus sit, sed
quod septe^ vindictas qua in Cain ta^to te^pore cucurrera^t s^^^t interfector,
occide^s eu^ qui vita fuerat derelictus ad poenam.
Hierome) seven punishments, but should dissolve or unloose seven punishments
on Caine, whose life was left him for seven punishments. In deed, he is not to
be punished more often, but yet more grievous that kills Caine, the^ Caine
himself. But how could he Perer. in Genesis 4. lib. 7 Tom. 1. Satis credibile
est non significari illis verbis interfectorem Cain grauiori supplicio punitum
iri. Nam quis dubitet grauius fuisse peccatum cade^ Abel facta^, quam necem
ipsius Cain. etc.
deserve a greater punishment, that kills a murderer, then he that so
cruelly slew his harmeles brother? Although it be less offense, Deuteronomy. 19.6.
to slay a murderer (without the form of judgment) then to slay an innocent;
yet if the Lord command any murderer to be spared, 1. Sam. 15.23.
it is no less offense to kill him, then to slay an innocent. How much more,
when the Lord had exempted Caine Ambros. de Cain. lib. 2. cap. 10. Hoc, scil.
reflectere voluit errantem and beneficio suo inuitare ad correctionem.
from being killed, by a August. in Psalm. 39. Accepit signu^ ne quis eum
occideret. etc.
known and outward token, as a seal of the same his will and pleasure, and
that for the behoof and instruction of the world; was it more offense, in
doing Caine to death, to frustrate the purpose of the Lord, and untie that,
which he had so well established? Wherefore the meaning of this restraint is
this: he that kills Caine Rab. David. lib. Rad. Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 19.
Septulici poenae se faciet abnoxium. Et septem poenarum reus erit.
shall receive more horrible punishment, then Caine himself. Whereby the Lord
does Hieron. epist. ad Damas. Non vt vis morieris, and finies morte supplicia:
verum longo tempore custodierit ad vitam, and tam infeliciter in hac luce
versaberis, vt quicunque te occiderit beneficiu^ praestet o^ciso.
not free the reprobate from being killed, neither altogether from the fear
thereof: but as if the Lord had said: Not every one that sees thee shall kill
thee: but thou shall live and be an example of committing murder to all the
world; for I will set such a mark upon thee, and such a punishment on him that
sleaeth thee, that none shall dare offend herein, unless he be more wretched
then thy self. The mark it self is known unto us Ne quis ignorant occideret
eum.
by the end, but not by the form thereof. For whether it were Vt ex ea
vagabundus, vt Strab. eccles. Hist.
a madness in his mind, or the Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 19. Tam dissoluta,
imbelliaque membra circumfere^s and vndique tremiscens. Hieron. ad Damas.
Conscie^tia sceleris tramebundus. Theodoret. quaest. in Genesis 42. Concussio
me^brorum.
trembling of his body, or the Laranus in Genesis 4.
shaking of his head, or a Vt plerique Hebraei: Quidam in fro^te cornu, quidam
inustam literam diuinarunt. Rab. Salom. Terram quassam and treme^tem asserit,
quo loco eeeianque haberet se. Aben Ezra nihil aliud hoc signum vult, quam vt
crederet se non fore occasurum, in morem Hezechiae. Ramb. Canem ei datum, vt
tutum monstrares iter and similes nugas.
print upon his flesh, the Scripture does no where fully signify. But in what
form soever, this it did testify, that Caine was condemned for a murderer,
and reserved for example by the Lord; which so plainly was expressed by the
sign, that none that saw him could thereof be ignorant. Obser. 1. Actual
murder is Exodus 21.18. 1. King. 2.31.
severely to be punished by the Magistrate, and is horribly Exemplo sunt
Orestes. Eurip in Orest. Nero. Tacit. Anal. lib. 14. Suet. de vita Ner. cap.
34. etc.
revenged by the Lord, where men either are not able to revenge it, or do
neglect to requite the same. Secondly, we are always to admire ye secret
wisdom of the Job. 11 7. and 33.13. Romans 11.33.
providence of God: Innocent Abel had Signum ponitur ne occidatur parricida,
cum prospectum non fuerit ne inocent occideretur.
no token given him whereby to save his life; but murtherous Caine was by
privilege defended: which Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 19. Vide obsecro, quis est
qui male patitur, occidens an occisus? etc.
yet was for the good of Abel, and for Caines confusion.

Question 6. verse. 17 What means this that is said: Caine went out from the
presence of the Lord: Also how it could be that Caine built a City, both in
respect of the small number of men in that age: and of the punishment, which God
laid upon him: a Vagabond and a Runnagate shall thou be in the earth?
WHen Caine had received the wages of his sin, the Scripture says, Verse. 16.
he went out from the presence of the Lord: but the same Scripture also says,
Psalm. 139.7. etc.
that the Lord is present every where: that Coloss. 1.17. Act. 17.28.
all creatures consist in him, and Ierem. 23.24. August. de Ciuit. lib. 22.
cap. 19. Non autem aliam partem, dicturi sumus, eum in coelo habere, and in
terra aliam; sed totus in coelo est, totus in terra, non alternis temporibus,
sed vtrunque simul, quod nulla natura corporalis potest.
that he fills heaven and earth. Wherefore Caine could not depart from the
knowledge, the power or the providence of God, but Co^ciliatio. 5.
he departed out of his Deu. 32.20. and 16.16.
protection, and from the place Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 20. Quid est exijt a
facie Deis Hoc est: nudatus est praesidio Dei, propter abominabile and
perniciosum faecinus. Bernard. in Dedicat. Eccles. Sermon. 6. Deus est in omni
loco, sed long aliter atque aliter, etc.
wherein he showed his presence. His misery gave name (...) nod, a radice
(...), nud, to move swiftly. Hieron. lib. Trad. Hebrae. (...), nod,
interpretatur (...), fluctuans and instabilis atque sedis incertae. Non est
igitur (inquit) terra Naid, vt vulgus nostrorum putat; sed expletur sententia
Dei, quod huc atque illuc vagus and profugus oberrauit, Josephus in contrarium
fertur, antiq. lib. 1. cap. 3. Naida (inquit) condidit: id loci nomen est.
Tremel. in Genesis 4. Hanc Nomadum esse putat in Arabia Petrea: quod non dissimile
vero est.
of moving unto the country wherein he dwelled, forasmuch as he wandered in
the same according to the curse. The wife of Caine was Importunissimi quidam
Haer^tici, Cainum hunc Enochum ex matre Heua suscepisse docuerunt, eo quod
vxoris ipsius natalibus tacuit scriptura, vt Author est Augustinus. lib. de
nature. and great. cont. Pelag. cap. 38. Atqui est nefarium and insipidissimum
commentum.
doubtless of the daughters of Adam, of whom the Scripture faith: he begat
sons and daughters. Neither was the same unlawful Epipanh. Haeres. 39.
Necesse fuit illo tempore filios Adami proprios, sororibus copulari: non enim
erat hoc iniquum, quoniam nullum aliud genus erat.
unto Cain or Seth; either in respect of nature, or ye Leuit. 18.19.
law of God: Because that the Lord creating of one Act. 17.26.
blood all mankind, and making them Genesis 1.27. and 2 18.
male and female, for the end of increase of children, they then performed the
right end of the same difference of sex, which in that Chrysostom. Hom. in
Genesis 20. Nam quia initia erant, debebatque augeri humanum genus, sorores vt
acciperent concedebatur.
necessity and scarcenes of the world, did use those means that God had made
for procreation. The cause was far otherwise when the world was multiplied,
because the Lord to maintain peace and friendship among men, and common unity,
has secretly inspired in the hearts of men a 1. Cor. 11.14. Quod naturae
indecorum, and quidem apud Graecos, Romanos, and plurimas gentes, turpe and
nefarium semper fuit habitum. Romani quidem. praterqua^ quod de gradibus
coniugiorum prohibitorum, id ipsu^ antiquitus sanxerunt, quod and Moses Leuit.
18. Cum a Clodio Caesare libertas e^ lege promulgata concessa fuerant, quam
ipse sibi vsurpanerat; nemo reperitur qui principis exemplum sequeretur,
excepto libertino quodam, and altero primipilari. Suet. de Clod. cap. 26. Apud
Persa^ tamen, and quasdam Orientales gentes, moris est cum seroribus
permisceri. Theodoret. in Leuit. quaest. 24. Nec a duarum serorum coniugio
(altera videlicet in demortuae locum superinducta) sincere abstinen^ Hispani,
vt apparet ex orat. Henrici regis 8. in Parliament. Fox. Act. and Mon. page
1053.
detestation of such near conjunction, and confirmed the same by his Leuit.
1^.6. etc. and 20.19.20
commandment: that not having Aug. de ciuit. Dei lib. 15. cap. 16. Habita enim
est rectissima ratio Charitaetis, vt homines quibus esset vtilis atque honesta
concordia, diuersarum necessitudinum vinculis necterentur: nec vnus in vna
multas haberet, sed singulae spergerentur in singulas: ac sic ad socialem vitam
diligentius colligandam plurima plu^imos obtinerent. Cic. de fin. lib. 5. In
omni honesto de qu^ loquimur, nihil est tam illustre nec quod latius pateat,
quam coniunctio inter homines hominum, and quast quaedam societas and
communicatio vtilitatum, and ipsa charitas generis humani: quae nata a prim^
satu, quo a procreatoribus nati diliguntur, and tota domus coniugio and stirpe
coniungitur, sexpit sensim for as cognationibus primum, tum affinitatibus,
deinde amicitijs: post vicinitatibus cum ciuibur and ijs qui publici socij
atque amici sunt, deinde totius complexis gentis humana.
many bands of kindred in one family, the same, and therewith amity, might be
dispersed into many. Moreover the Scripture speaks not of the marriage of
Caine, but of the use of marriage, and Caine also knew his wife; least it might
be thought there was 1. Cor. 7.39. 2. Cor. 6.24.^
any so wicked of the daughters of Adam, who being not already married, would
now willingly be joined with such a damned creature. And he built a City,
etc. It seems incredible to Infidels and Atheists, that Caine was able to
build a City. For where had he builders, August. quaest. in Genesis 1. Quomodo
Cain potuerit condere ciuitatem, cum ciuitas co^stituatur mulutudine?
and laborers for the work, or how could he replenish it with multitudes of
men, wherein cities and common wealths do principally consist: forasmuch as
by the Scripture, there were in all the world but only seven persons, which
were divided also For Cain was banished and divided from the family of Adam.
into diverse families? Again it is demanded, If he wandered, how did he
build? if he were a runnagate, how was he a King?
how it can stand with the curse of God, who condemned him to wander in the
earth, that now he is said to build a City? Albeit that among the godly, the
truth of Scripture needs not Clem. Alexan. strom. lib. 7. Vox Dei sola
fidelibus demonstratio.
be proved by demonstration, in whose heart the Ioh. 14.26. Heb. 4.2.
same spirit which speaks, works faith to receive and believe the doctrine:
yet forasmuch as there are many Leo Pap. 1. Epist. 83. ad Palest. Ecclesia
nomine armamini, sed contra Ecclesiam dimicatis.
armed with the name of Christ, that fight against his truth, and that are
August. de ciuit. Dei lib. 1. cap. 3. Eas linguas aduersus Christi nomen,
dementia sacrileg^ peruersitatis exercent, quibus linguis vsurpanerunt
^^^daciter ipsius no^^^i vt viuerent.
defended by the profession of true religion, which Talparum in modum enci and
subterranei nunc temporis Ashes. Epiph Haeres. 52. Et plus timendus and
cauendus inimicus, cu^ latenter surrepit, and qui per pacis imagi nem fallens
occultis accessibus serpit. Cyprian. Epist. 62.
secretly do undermine the same; it is convenient by opening of the
Scripture, to manifest the truth and defend the same against the adversaries.
When men which by prayer prepare not their hearts for the understanding of the
word, do conceive a falsehood, by the reading of the scripture; the error is
not to be imputed to the Scripture, but to their own erroneous heart which
misconceiue it. Caine as the Scripture says, did build a City. How (will some
perverse, or impudent person say) could one man build a City? Lend thine ear
to the scripture; it will teach thee. Solomon built the 1. King. 6.14.
house of the Lord and finished it. How did he build it? he had seauentie
thousand 1. King. 5.15.
that bare burdens, and fourscore thousand masons in the mountains. He ended
it not in a day, 1. King. 6.38.
but was seven years in building it. Consider what is to be gathered hereout.
He builds, that works by, or with the help of other. He builds a house,
city, or temple that finisheth it in many years. Forty Ioh. 2.20.
and six years was the latter temple a building, and yet Zerubbabel began
Zach. 4.9.
and finished it. One will say, if so many thousand were required for one
only building in a City, as is spoken of in the building of the temple of
Solomon; how many millions of men were necessary unto Caine for the building
of his City, and how destitute was he, having only the society of his wife
and his young son? Such vanity is conceived in the heart of men. But
consider in one word the second observation. If Zerubbabel were rightly said
to build the temple, for that he finished it before his death, notwithstanding
he could not finish it under the space of six and forty years: why may not
Caine as justly be said to build a City (which perhaps he began to build and
other finished) although he scarcely finished it in six or seven hundred
years, so that it were done before his death? For that he lived after the
common age of those times, which was seven Rabbi. Moses Ben. Maimon. lib. de
direc. perplex. Nullos praeter nominatos asserit adeo fuisse vinuaces, hos vero
miraculo quodam Dei. sed istum iurgijs castigat. Rab. Moses Aegyptius, and ipsa
antiquitas, nec non scriptorum consensus, qui verbo Dei non dissentiens
venerandus and sacer haberi debet.
hundredth years, the Scripture does sufficiently confirm, in that the Lord
did reserve him Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 19. Vt tui spectaculum alijs admonitio.
for example unto life, and set a mark on him that no man might by violence
take it away. Neither is there mention of the death of Genesis 5.31. Abel was
murdered, Henoch was taken away.
any which lived the course of natural life, before the flood, within the
space of seven hundredth and threescore years. Considering the premises, how
rightly is it spoken, and how justly to be believed even of an Infidel, that
Caine built a City? In the original of Cities, first Deuteronomy. 26.5. Judge. 10.4.
Arist. Polit. libr. 1. cap. 1. Quotidiana socletas secundum naturam constituta
Domus est: Ex pluribus domibus constituitur societas prima no^ quotidianae
vtilitatis, quae pagus est. inde civitates, etc. Cic. Offic. li. 1. Ex hinc
domum primum comparandam, deinde mulierem and bouem Arator^^ dixit Hesiod.
private houses were builded and peopled; when one house was too little,
because of the increase of children, they builded villages; from villages, by
time and number they ascended unto Cities. Wherefore the Scripture affirming
that Caine built a City; does therein testify, that the stock of Caine Neque
enim fingenda sunt miracula, sed scripture scopus perscrutandus.
did increase and multiply. So that if any distrust the doctrine, because of
the want of builders, he may thereof be easily answered. For if the children
Genesis 25.2, 3, 4, 12. Praeter Ismael, and Keturae liberos. Item Isaaci praeter
Jacob.
of Abraham were so greatly increased within the space of four hundredth
years, and the Exodus 12.37. Numb. 11.21.
sons of Jacob only, were six hundredth thousand men of war: how
necessary and truly is it gathered, that Caines posterity were sufficient
to replenish August. de ciuitat. Dei libr. 15. cap. 8. Quis itaque dubitauerit,
cum plures in illis temporibus, nongentos annos etiam transierunt, per vnius
hominis aetatem tantum multiplicari potuisse genus humanum, vt esset vnde
conflituere^tur non vna sed plurimae civitates.
many cities and countries also, before his death? Therefore to come unto the
second objection: how it could agree with the punishment that God had laid upon
him? Although it may seem, (not well considered) to be contrary unto that
which the Lord denou^ced: yet does it meruailouslie in truth agree therewith.
For why did he build a city? because he was constrained by number or
multitude? The stock of Adam increased also as well by Seth; yet none of that
family is said to build a City, before the flood. And wherefore not? because
the Lord had given them the Vt fuit omnis reglo Heden extra hortum, vbi Adam
consederit.
plenty of the earth; and was a stronger bulwark of defense, then the walls
and fortresses of any City. But Caine who was departed from the presence of
the Lord, was compelled to defend himself with City walls: and rather for the
fear of That he might live the more in saftie among his own, which is the
common opinion of the learned. Chrysostom thinks he did it of ambition, Hom.
20. in Genesis Joseph. Antiquit. 1. chap. 3. says, he did it rather for the
cause of Robbery and rapine.
evil, performed this labor, then for any pleasure of the same. Again,
seeing that thorough the wrath of God, he lived in Verse. 12. Either because he
was condemned to the barrennes of the earth, such as is the desert of Arabia,
which was his dwelling place, as Tremellius supposes: or else that the
barrennes of the earth did follow him, as though the curse did persecute the
murderer from place to place.
scarcity by his own labors, it may be gathered, he used it Joseph. antiq.
1. ca. 3.
as a hold to spoil from other. Moreover, in that he called it not by his own
name, but by his sons name, it may seem that himself received not the
benefit thereof, but continued Hierom. libr. Trad. Hebr. in Genesis Vt huc and
illuc vagus and profugus oberrarit.
oppressed with the curse. Observe: They Matthew. 6.32.33. Luc. 12.20.21. Philip.
3.19.
are worldly and wicked men, which chiefly set their mind on worldly
things, children, goods, arts, pleasures, and seek not first the kingdom of
God. Secondly, the Psalm. 17.14. Luc. 16.25.
wicked enjoy the chiefest pleasures of this world; Caine builds a City,
while the godly family remains in the open field, or else covered with a
tent; but godly security is a better defense then Psalm. 37.19. Prou. 11.4.
Horat. carm. lib. 1. ode. 22. Integer vitae scelerisij, purus non eget Mauri
iaculis nec Arcu. etc.
the walls of a City. Thirdly, the wicked Psalm. 37.9. etc. Job. 15.23 24.25.
are wanderers in the earth, albeit they build and be Lords of Cities, because
they are destitute Verse. 14.
of the favor of God, Job. 5.4. and 21.19. Psalm. 37.35.36.38. 1. King. 14.10.
have always the beesome of desolation to sweep them away in their
posterity, neither can take any sound comfort Job. 15.20.21. etc. August. in
Psalm. 96. Non est gaudere impijs, non in potatione, in luxuria, in theatris,
in spectaculis, respectu very gandij, non est gaudium.
in that which they set their heart upon thorough inward sorrow, which is
alwaie Plaut. in Amphitr. Ita cuique comparatum est in aetate hominum, ita dijs
placitum, voluptati vt moeror com^^ consequatur: quin incommodi plus malique
adsit boni si obtigit quid. Pindarus. in Pythijs. Him. (...). id est, ad vnum
bonum duo pariter incommoda distribuunt mortalibus immortales dij. Homer. Il.
^. Duo quippe dolia posita sunt in louis limine donorum quae dat: malorum
alterum, alterum honorum. etc. (...) etc.
mixed with their mirth, and the uncertainty of that which they possess.
Fourthlie, the beginning of Cities Duplicem causam Primae cogendae ciuitatis
dotet Cicero. 1. Vt homines qui in agris ferarum more vagabantur, in vnum
cogerentur ad ciuiliter viuendum. In Brut. 2. Cum premeretur initio multitudo
ab ijs qui maiores opes habebant; ad vnum aliquem confugiebant virtute
praestantem. Offic. 2. Quas ambas confictas ex hoc intelligi licet.
was an invention of the wicked, and those that trust in the strength of them
Deuteronomy. 28.52.2. Sam. 5.6.
do tempt the Lord. Fiftlie, true nobility consists not in the wealth of
Cities, but in Deuteronomy. 22.16. etc. Act. 17.11.
religion, and the fear of God.

Question 7. verse 24. To what purpose Lamech says: If Caine shall be avenged
seauenfold, then shall Lamech, seauentie times seauenfold?
OVt of a cursed root, springs up a branch of bitterness; and of a murderer
proceeds a cruel tyrant. It seems good unto the wisdom of the Lord, to
describe the posterity of Caine, thereby to show that the same increased from
worse to worse: so that when we shall hereafter hear of the fearful wrath of
God which was sent upon the world, we might know that the same was not done,
before the Lord long time had been horribly provoked, and that the wickedness
of men was otherwise past amendme^t. The (...) Henech: imbutus signifies
instructed, stained, infected, namely with his fathers manners: or initiatu^,
admitted happily unto the principality or government of the city. (...)
Ira^. descending, properly like water which by descending oppresses and
ouerfloweth. Isai. 8.^.8. (...) Mehuiael, a (...) delere and (...) velle cum
potentia: that is, willing and able to destroy. (...) Methushael, a (...) mori
and (...) postulo. i. seeking to slay. (...) Lamech a (...), to make poor or
to oppress: it signifies also passiuely to be made poor. This is the
difference between Lamech this wicked son of Methusael, and Lamech the son
of Methushela: the one signifies, borne to oppress; the other, borne to be
oppressed.
names of them all bewray their nature until Lamech, who as if he were the
ripenes of their sin, does make a light 1. Kin. 16.31.
matter of the prouocations of his fathers: of whom there is reported three
memorable monuments. First, that Verse. 19. Mat. 2.15. Hieron. epist. ad Saluin.
Primus, Lamech maledictus and sanguinarius de Cain stirp^ descendens, vnam
costam diuisit in duas, and plantarium digamiae diluuij poena subuertit.
he presumed to infringe the ordinance of God by polygamie, or marrying many
wives. Secondly, is showed the fruits of this wickedness, in his children:
immoderate desire of wealth, voluptuousnes and cruelty, which is seen by the
arts which they professed. Iabal was the father of such as sit in tents, and of
cattle or possession, that is, the author or the first that dwelt in tents,
and of cattle: of such as keep cattle. How can he be said to be the first,
or author of keeping cattle, when as Abel long before did live a shepherd?
Surely for that he lived not in that vocation as Abel did, but for the infinite
desire of riches, gave himself more greedily thereunto; so that albeit he
neither first invented the keeping of cattle, nor made it perfect, which other
had begun; yet he might be said to be the Father of such as have cattle,
because he first devised (as it seems) to keep and feed them, otherwise
then those had done before him (which grew into use in his posterity) by
removing from place to place to keep them; either constrained by the barrennes
of the earth, or provoked by his covetous lust; to which purpose it may be
thought Quemadmodu^ Nomades and Scenitae de quibus ^lin. lib. 9. cap 28.
Nomades, infestioresque Chaldeorum Scenitae vagi and ipsi, sed a tabernaculis
cognominati, quae cilicije m^tantur vbilibet. Idem lib. 5. c. 3.6.54. Huiusmodi
in Africa versari Nomades vulgo dicti a permutandis pabulis, Mapalia sua, hoc
est, domos plaustris circumferentes: i. the Nomades so called because they
change their pasture, which carry their houses about in carts. After this
manner it may seem was the behavior of Iabal, who first invented to remove
from place to palce, and for that behoof, the use of Tents.
he invented tents, that he might more commodiouslie remove. So likewise,
Iubal was the inuentor of (not music) but certain instruments of music;
and Tubal-Caine is The word (...) ^atesh, is sharpning or polishing: Hierome
translateth it faber, a Smith. The Jews affirm, he invented the sword and
instruments of war.
said to make sharp every instrument of brass and iron. Notwithstanding, who
would doubt that For Adam being so wise by creation, and not losing his
natural, but godly wisdom, could not be without the knowledge of such things
as belonged to the use of life. But afterward many other things were daily
invented, not so much for necessity as for voluptuousnes, covetousness, rapine
and tyranny; which being unpracticed of Ada^, were also out of the compass of
his invention.
all lawful and profitable Arts, were known and practiced of Adam, and
therefore in use in the family Joseph. Antiq. lib. 1. cap. 3. writes, that ye
posterity of Seth, being taught by Adam that the world should be twice
destroyed, once by water, another time by fire: wrote diverse inventions of their
age in two pillars, one of brass, the other of brick, whereof one (he said)
did remain unto his remembrance. But this although it were so, yet it was not
needful; when as Noah with his two good sons sufficed to instruct the world
in goodness: and Cham was enough and more, to lead them into mischief.
of Seth, so far as necessity of life required: but for weapons or warlike
instruments, as also melody of vain delight, they are fittest to be found It
is not incredible that the Heathen have had the knowledge of these inventions,
either by tradition from Cham and his succession after the flood, or rather by
this history of Moses, and that this Tubal-cain is that ancient Vulcan (for
there have bin many famous of that name, Cic. de Not. deor. lib. 3. Arnob.
contr. Gent. lib. 4.) of whom the Heathen histories are full. Look Diodor.
Sicul. lib. 1. Dionys. Halicarnass. lib. 2. Laert. lib. 1. cap. 1. Lactant.
lib. 1. cap. 17. August. de ciuit. Dei, lib. 4. cap. 11. which name as it
comes near to Tubal-cain, so the name of his wife is answerable to their
Lady of beauty: for Naamah (of (...) nagnam to be beautiful) was the wife of
this Tubal-cain. So as it may appear, that the farther the Heathen have been
from the truth of the word of God, the more foolish has been their fables: and
that truth that was among them of antiquity, the same they have obtained from
this holy Chronicle.
in the house of Caine, wherein first was practiced laciuiousnes and tyranny.
Thirdly, is described of Lamech, his fircenes, cruelty, and presumption. His
fierce disposition is perceived, By a most vehement repetition, which uses not
to be but in matters of great importance: as Isai. 1.2. Joel. 1.2. Matthew. 13.9.
by his so vehement demand of audience, unto so foul a speech. His cruelty
in that having as it seems committed murder, he makes Calvin. in Genesis 4.
Lamech in vxorum sinum euomuisse crudelitatis sua virus. Item Tremel. and alij.
Multi autem in futuro quasi minaciter dixisset legunt.
boast thereof. His presumption, in that he esteems himself, free from the
danger of being punished. In the variety of judgments of interpreters, I
suppose it safest, to come unto the very letter of the text it self, ((...)
chi ish etc.) Because I have slain a man ((...) lepitsegni) in my wound, and a
young man or lad ((...) veieled) that is to say, Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 20.
Factum non solum confitebatur, and cader in medio proserebat.
have committed many murders, and neither spared Theodoret. quast. in Genesis
44. Virum occidisse Lamech and eundem iuuenem dicit. id est vnicum iuuenem.
Suidas in verbo Lamech. Vult cum occidisse duos, eosque fratres Enochi iusti.
Rabb. Salomo. Ridiculam excogitanis fabulam, quod cum caecus esset Lamech,
occiderit Cainum pro fera inuitus, ducente Tubal-caino puero and arcum
dirigente, deinde poenite^tia ductus and ira, puerum Tubalcainum verberibus ad
necem vsque contriuisse, quod eum direxerit ad infelix facinus. Eodem argumento
audinisti credo Vulcanum e coelis praecipitatu^ apud Homeru^ Iliad. (...).
Vsque adeo Rabbinorum Theologia concordat nonnunqua^ cum insania. Ier.
young nor old: in my hurt or stripe ((...) Lechaburathi: Greek Dioscor. lib.
1. c. 151.
(...)) I being stricken, as it were but lightly provoked thereunto: ((...) Chi)
therefore if Caine shall be avenged, etc. If he that Chrysostom, and after him
Theodoret, do understand these words of Lamech, as of his repentance, and
hearty confession of his fault: but therein are they deceived, because the
Greek translation refers the vengeance unto Caine himself, not to him that
kills Caine, as that he should rid Caine of seven plagues. But this we have
showed to be otherwise. Hierom. Epist. ad Damas. determines that Lamech slew
Caine, but notwithstanding denies his repentance.
sleyeth Caine shall be punished seven fold, then he that sleyeth Lamech,
shall be punished seauentie times seven fold: If Caine had security from
being killed, how much more may Lamech be void of fear. So grievously does he
harden himself in sin, Calvin in Genesis 3. verse. 24.
that he even derideth the judgments of the Lord. Thus the wicked Prou 14.9.
make but a mock of sin. Thus Genesis 6.5.12.
was sin grown exceeding grievous in the house of Caine, which when the
sons of Seth were partakers of, by joining in marriage with such a family;
they were also shortly after made partakers in their punishment. Thus shall
there come mockers in the latter days, and Atheists which shall laugh at 2.
Pet. 3.3.
the promise of his coming. Wherefore seeing such mockers are already found,
it is evident that the same his coming draws near. Obser. 1. Gods ordinance
of marriage is infringed, when either man or woman is coupled in carnal
society, Malac. 2.15. 1. Cor. 7.2.
with more then one. 2. The Lord alwaie Act. 14.17.
leaves some tokens of his mercy, as of Isai. 28.26.29. Not that the Heathen
were inuentors of all profitable Arts, as Pliny lib. 7. cap. 56. falsely
ascribes to them, but that such inventions being partly natural gifts, are
common to the godly and the wicked.
wisdom to find out Arts among the wicked, which the wickedness of Either
in the inuen^ion, by ascribing them to Idols; Hab. 1.16. as Pythagoras, having
found the use of the Triangle in Geometry, sacrificed an ox unto the Muses;
Euclid. lib. 2. Laert. lib. 8. Vitruti. lib 9. cap. 2. Musis hostias immolauit:
or else in the fruition abusing them, as Ovid. in Ibin. Muneribusque suis
laeduntur vt Icarus in quem intulit armatas ebria turba manus.
men does pervert to their own destruction. Thirdly, continuance in sin
brings either Romans 1.28. 1. Tim. 4.2.
deadnes of security, or 2 Samuel 17.23. Matthew. 27.4.2.
desperation.

CHAP. V.
Question 1. verse 3. Wherefore it is said: that Adam begat a child in his own
likeness, after his image?
TO the end that we might understand, after what image and likeness men are
naturally borne, Dictis dat ipsa fidem res, vt inquit Lucret. lib. 2.
and thereby might behold the difference between the glorious condition of our
creation, and the miserable estate of our corruption. Some As it were in
respect of the essence of nature, not the qualities: whereas in truth, the
qualities of the image of God in man were by creation so excellent, as that
they do often times denominate the whole man: So Gregory expounds it, He
died. i. those qualities died: non in substantia viuendi, sed in qualitate
viuendi. Epist. 31. lib. 6.
do interpret this, as if the Scripture had said: he begat a Son in the form
and likeness of a man, as other creatures do beget their like: the which may be
understood either of the estate in which Adam was created, or of the estate
which Adam now had gained by corruption. But the Scripture (if you mark it)
makes an opposition between those two conditions, saying: In the day that God
created Adam, he made him in the likeness of God, but Adam begat a child in his
own likeness. And says not he begat a Son in the image of God, but in the
image of himself; that doubtless is, of the same condition Neither this in
respect of renewing by grace, but of corruption of nature. Aug. de peccat. mer.
and remiss. 2. cap. 5.
of himself at the time of generation. Neither is the same to be understood
Caesarius dial. 1. Secundum imagine^ sua^, hoc est, qualem habuit ab initio
quando factus est a deo, imagine^ and splendorem, and vocauit nomen, etc.
of the condition of the body only, but of the whole man. Seth was begotten
in the likeness of Adam: in what image then was Caine and Some teach that
because Caine was a reprobate, and Abel murdered, neither of them is said to
be in Adams image. But this is far from the the sense of ye scripture.
Abel, and the For beside them he begat sons and daughters, verse. 4.
rest of Adams children? To prevent such an objection the Scripture most
wisely says: not that he begat Seth, but he begat a son, and called his
name Seth: Showing thereby that the Sons and daughters which he begat,
whatsoever he called the names of them, in as much as they were the children
of Adam, were also after Adams likeness. And as Seth was himself, so was the
posterity of Seth, of whom Of whose posterity was Noah, who only with his
children escaped in the flood.
only came the offspring of the world. But forasmuch as Adam was created in the
image of God, and is no where said in Scripture to be in any other image, how
can it be, but that this image of Adam was the image of God; so that Seth was
also begotten in the image of God? In deed neither Adam, nor the sons of Adam
Epiphan. epist. ad Ioh. Hierosol. Ausus etiam illud dicere (intelligit
Origenem) perdidisse imaginem Dei Adam, cum hoc in nullo peni^us loco scriptura
significat. Atqui non intelligit Origenes absolutam abolitionem, sed sicut
Cyprianus and alij patres, deprauationem. Extitit nimirum nimis rigidus censor
Epiphanius in Origenem, impulsu Theophili Alexandrini, cuius gratia etiam cum
Chrysostomo grauissimas exercuit simultates.
are said to be in Scripture, of any other image, forasmuch as the same image,
as it were Hoc modo distinguunt authors nonnulli inter imaginem and
similitudinem. Basil. Hexam. ^. Secundu^ imaginem habeo quod rationalis sim:
secundum similitudinem in hoc quod Christianus sim. Eucher. com. in Genesis 1
Aquin. part. 1. q. 93. art. 9. Similitudo attenditur secundu^ virtutes, and
imago secundum proprietates naturales intellectualis naturae. At Apostolus
quidem vtrasque agnoscit, sed eadem appellatione donauit. 1. Cor. 15.49.
in the matter remains still, like a gorgious City whereof the foundation
does continue; Chrysostom. Hom. in Gen 17. Franc. Iun. in 3. Genesis Nu^c vero
mansit quidem materia in te, sed forma perijt.
but in the form is perished. To this purpose, where Ephesians. 4.23.24. etc.
the Scripture requires us to be renewed after the image of our creator, it
does testify Heb. 8.13.
that the image of our creation is lost within us: and where it shows how the
same should be renewed, it affirms also wherein the same is lost: namely, in
righteousness and holiness, and the effect and fruit thereof, which is spiritual
joy, and true felicity. And seeing the perfection of the image of God,
whereunto the Lord created Adam (that is the form, chiefest, or most excellent
part thereof) consisted in Leuit. 19.2. Ezech. 20.11. Ephesians. 4.24. Bernard.
Sermon. de annunciat. 1. Acceperat ergo homo misericordiam, acceperat and
veritatem (quae eum ad agnitionem summae perduceres veritatis) Iustitiam quoque
qua regeretur accepit: adhuc etiam pacem qua foueretur.
the perfect holiness and blessedness of his nature: and that the Genesis 3.6.
Eccles. 7.31.
Scripture shows, he defaced the image of his holiness Genesis 3.12.13
Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 17. Nusquam necessitas, nusquam violentia, sed voluntas
and arbitratio.
by wilful transgression of Gods commandment; which holiness was as it were
the Leuit. 18.5. August. de verb. Dom. Sermon. 34. Quo modo eris sub Domino si
non fueri^ sub praecepto?
bond and condition of his blessedness: it followed thereof, that in dissoluing
his holiness, he Psalm. 19.21.
overthrew his happiness, and so the image of God concerning the form
thereof, Council. Arausican. 2. cap. 1. Si quis per offensam praeuaricationis
Ada, non totum (id est secundum corpus and animum) in deterius dicit hominem
commutatum: contrariatur Apostolo.
was in every part defaced. Wherefore Adams nature and condition, being changed
from holiness to sinfulness, and from felicity to misery, Romans 5.12. and
6.23.
because the guiltiness of sin remained, bringing death; and because all
creatures in the act of generation Genesis 1.22. Damasc. lib. Discept. Christ. cum
Saracen. qu^est. 8. Sar. Quis format foetus in ^etre mulieris? Quid, ^^^m Deus
causa malorum? Number co^perator est fornicatorum and adulteroru^? Resp. Nequaquam
inuenimus. po^^ prima^ ^e^d^m^^am mundi creati, s^ript^ram di^entem formare
Deum aliquid vel creare etc. formauit Deus h^minem and precepit ipsum generare:
exhinc cognoscimus quod generantur and generat.
by the ordinance of God Nazianz. ^rat. 4. Quippe quod haec geniti natura sit,
vt ratione naturae sit idem eum eo quod ips^m genuit. Aristot. de Gener.
Animal. lib. 4. cap. 3. Qui enim suis parentibus similis non est, monstrum
quodammodo in natura est.
cannot but beget their like: It was no more possible for Adam after his
corruption, to beget a child in any other condition or likeness, then of sin
and wretchedness; then for a Dog to beget a Lion, or for a Sparrow to bring
forth an Eagle. For as Adam, if he had not sinned, had begotten children also
August. retract lib. 1. cap. 13. Nondum enim videram fie^i potuisse vt non
morituri, a non morituri^ nascerentur, si peccato illo magno non mutaretur in
deterius humana natura: ac per hoc, si and in parentibus and inf^lij^
secund^tas falicitasque mansisset, vsque a^ certum ^anctorum nume^um quem
pr^^estina^it Deus, nasc^rentur.
after the image of his perfection, because the image of God was in him
unpolluted: so whatsoever he Fulgent. ad Monim. li. 1 c. 17. Nam prima^
concupiscentiam, li^et e^petere n^quiuerit opere, tamen retinuit voluntate. Sic
ipse sibi iam factu^ est pana, ^t su^plicium semper esset malo voluntas mala,
tanquam caeco ipsa caecitas sua, and concupiscentia peccandi tormentum fie^^t
peccatori.
lost thereof by sin, and whatsoever by reason of those wants Hieron. in
Aboc. 1. c^m. ^t per vnum hominem peccatores constituti sunt plu^imi, and in
A^am omnes mortus sumus, and vniuersi denique sancti, cum illo pariter de
para^iso ^ie^l^. etc.
did grow unto him, the same he could not but impart, as an inheritance
Gregor. in Psalm. ^aniten. 2. al. 32. Adam, cum se confiteri culpabilem ^enuit,
mortif^rae damnationis sententiam ad posteros misit.
unto his children, forasmuch as they could not be but partakers of his nature.
But it may be demanded, seeing a blind man may beget a child that sees, and a
lame man a child of perfect limbs: why Adam could not also beget a child of
better condition then himself corrupted? Because such diseases are Quare
morbum definiunt: esse affectum contra natu^am corpori alicu^ insidens. Fernel.
Pathe^. lib. 1. cap. 1. Et tamen qui ortu and natura cla^di sunt, claudos
solent p^ocreare, licet casu mut^ati non item. Argenter. in. Art. medicin.
Galen. comment. 2. Similiter and podagrici; quia huiusmodi non pure pe^sonales
sunt morbi: quanto magis, viti^n^ animi and corporis tanquam in radi^e
attractum ^er peccatum? Romans 5.12.
personal, not generally belonging unto nature: but the image of God Romans
3.23. and 5.12. Omnes peccauerunt, and in Adam peccauerunt, quando omnes ille
vnus homo fuerat. August. de peccat. merit. lib. 1. c. 10. Et distituuntu^
gloria Dei: gloriam igitur Dei, omnes in illo habuerunt: Sed bonum d^positum
non seruauerunt. Origin. in ^euit. 4.
was a gift of God, bestowed, not only upon the person, but Athanas. Sermon. 3.
in Arian. Nam quanquam Adam solus e terra est formatus, fuere tamen in eo etiam
tum rations successionis posteritatisque humani generis. August. de peccat.
merit. lib. 2. cap. 4 Manes malum in carne nostra, no^ natura in qua diuinitus
creatus est homo, sed vitio in quo volu^tate prolapsu^ est.
on the nature of Adam, whereof all mankind Calvin. in Genesis 3.6. Deus sicuti
totam generis humani natural in vno homine ornauerat, ita in eodem ipsam
nudauit: iam vero ex quo in Adam corrupti sumus, non sustinemus alieni delicti
poenam, sed propria culpa rei sumus.
had interest in him. Whereby also the loss thereof, was a loss unto Adams
nature, and not unto his person only. For as, if Adam, so soon as he had
sinned, had died the natural death, the whole nature of man had bin destroyed,
and there could have been no children, because there had been no Parents:
even so the nature of all mankind in Adam, being corrupted not extinguished,
must needs continue corrupted in his children, Quia omnes ille vnus homo
fuerat. August.
because it was in him, as in the root corrupted. So that what was the state
of Adam, after his transgression, before he was restored; the same is the
estate August. de peccat. merit. lib. 2. cap. 9. Et quare iustus non gignit
iustum? Resp. Ex hoc quisque gignit, quod adhuc vetustum trahit inter filios
seculi, non ex hoc quod promouit in natiuitatem filios Dei: non carnaliter
gignit qua iustus est.
of all men by nature, before they are restored: and Psalm. 51.5. August. de
peccator. merit. and remiss. Aut ex persona generali ipsius hominis, hoc dicit
David: aut non vtique de fornicatione.
every child conceived, according to the course of nature, begins to be a
sinner, so soon as he begins to be a creature. It remains now to be
considered, how far the image of God is perished in the nature of man through
sin. The Apostle seems to give a perfect measure of the same, whereas he
commands Ephesians. 4. verse. 24.
to put on the new man, or that the man should be renewed in righteousness, and
true holiness. That which is to be renewed, Coloss. 3. verse. 10.
is the image of God: that wherein it is to be renewed, is in righteousness.
Wherein he speaks of the image of God, as of a substance, and calls it the
man; as it is corrupted, the old man; as it is renewed, the new man: of the
thing wherein it is to be renewed, as of a quality, which he calls holiness,
and therefore the contrary wherein it was lost, was also a quality, which is
unrighteousness. So that this image indeed Iren. lib. 3. cap. 20. Vt quod
praedixeraemus in Adam, id est secundum imaginem and similitudinem esse Dei,
hoc in Christo perciperemus. Cyprian. lib. de bono patient. Si patientia Dei
patris maneat in nobu, si similitudo diuina, quam peccato Ada^ perdiderat, etc.
In hoc sensu non male Origenes in Leu. Ho^. 4. Abiecta imagine Dei, diaboli
imaginem in te suscepisti. Que^ vehementer afflixit Epiphanius vt supra diximus.
is lost, not wholly, but in part, not in the substance, but in the quality;
the substance of man's nature does remain, but it cease to be a holy
substance. Notwithstanding that in respect of the Genesis 9.6. Calvin. in Genesis
9.6. Si quis obijciat, imaginem Dei deletam esse: respondeo, vtcunque corruptus
sit homo, manner tamen aliquid residuu^, vt praestet non parua dignitate homo.
substantial parts of man, albeit he be corrupted, he is more excellent and
more to be regarded, then any creature upon the earth; because that therein the
image of God remains in him. But the quality or form thereof is perished,
whereby the substance is miserably defiled, both through the want of the good
it Genesis 3.7.9. Hose. 14 2. Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 17. Vbi es? Vnde tibi hoc
accidit? Quis latro vel parietum perfossor, sic simul omnes diuitiarum c^pias
auferens, in tantam te inopiam induxit?
had, and thorough access of evil which it had not. Now the substance or
matter (that I may so call it) of the image of God, within the soul, was the
very substance of the soul; the quality or form thereof, was the holiness
that was therein, which it received from the divine nature: wherefore when Adam
and mankind in Adam Tertul. Aut igitur Adam mortuus est, aut scriptura
mentitur. August. de peccat. merit. lib. 1. cap. 16. Quando ergo peccauit Adam
non obediens Deo, tunc eius corpus quamuis esset animale atque mortale perdidit
gratiam, qua eius animae, omni ex part obediebat: tunc ille extitit bestialis
motus: tunc morbo qu^dam stabilitate aetatis amissa, per mutabilitatem atatum
irent in mortem. Quamuis ergo annos multos postea vixerunt: illo tamen die mori
caeperunt, quo mortis legem acceperunt. G^egor. lib 6. epist. 31.
did die the death by forsaking God, ye substance of the soul Cyril. Alexand.
dialog. de adorat. in Sp. Imperiti putant Spiritum sanctum in animam esse
transmutatum, and in hominis tranfijsse naturam. Verum id quod conditum est,
ineffabili virtute animabatur, donoque spiritus statim ornabatur, non enim
aliter diuinae imaginis capa^es sumus nos. Bernard. Sermon. de annunc. 1. Et
similitudo quidem perijt, veruntamen in imagine pertransit homo. Imago
siquidem, in gehenna ipsa vri poterit, non exuri; ardere sed non deleri.
remained, as the matter of this image; but the holiness thereof is lost, and
wickedness is come in place. This being in general in the soul, is also in
every power of the same. The wisdom albeit it remain as it were in
substance, yet is it perished in the right form, or property thereof; all
holiness of wisdom in the nature of man Deuteronomy. 32.28. Ierem. 8.9. Lactam. lib.
1. cap. 1. Magno and e^^^llenti ingenio ^iri, cum se doctrine penitus
ded^lis^ent, qui^qu (...) bo^^^ poter^^^ (...) contemp^^^ ^m^bus and p^b^^t^
and p^^uatis ^ct. onibus, a^ inqui^ende ve^^atis studium (...) Sed neque ad^pes
sunt id quod v^lebant, and operam si^^ul and indu^^^iam perd^^ ^er^^ quiae
veritas id est, ^r cantum (...) De^, (...) sent omni t^ngen^^ a^ proprijs (...)
jest s^nsibus comp^^he^^i.
is lost, all knowledge how to serve the Lord; that original deformity has
made man's wisdom wholly sinful; the force of which corruption is also such,
that in the very act or substance of wisdom, albeit it be evil, yet it has
decayed that evil wisdom Ierem. 4.22.
in man, in that part wherein it comes nearest unto goodness; and increased it
in that, wherein it is ye fittest instrument of sin. The will also remains
in act or substance as before, and as it was free before in election, so does
it still continue free: but the holiness thereof is perished, whereby Ierem.
10.23. 2. Cor. 3.^. (...). 3.1^. Council. (...) Si quis vt a (...) purgemur, v^.
(...) expe ^a^e ^omen^^^: non e^^a a vt p^rga^^ velmu^^, ^er sancti sp^^^u^
infusione and ope^^tio a^ in nos fr^^^ (...) ^er, resist: ipsi spirit^^ san^^,
licenti per Salomonem, to (...) al^r voluntas a Dom^o. Prou. 16.1. August. de
Spir. and l^^. (...). 30 Homines cum serui sunt peccati, quid se (...) de
libero a^bi^^^ Aquo c^^im qui^^de i^^lus est, hui and se^^us a li^^ct us est.
S. autem liberati sunt, quid se iactant velut de opere pro^^rio and gloriantis
q^asi non acceperint. Duo igitur statuimus ^^n verbo Dei, and patrunt consensu:
Homini inesse liberum arbitrium, sed vt est corruptum desti^^itur bono. vnde
non potest honum appet^^e, nam quia init^^tum est and im^^^m, ^m^^ia qu^rit.
Se^^ndo, non este liberum ad apperendum bonum, sed scruum, nisi a D^m^no
liberetur: liberata v to voluntate, non este inutile instrumentum, neque instar
lapidis insens^^ (...) loquitur A gust. de peccat. and ^^mist. lib. 2. cap. 5.
Sed mota mones, and liberata a possessione Satan^, li^^^e appe^ ^ quod bonum
est, in quantum gratia adit. ^atur.
it wills always evil, and lusts of it self Ioh. 8.44.
to be an enemy to good. The affections also do remain the same in
substance, but altered in quality Eccles. 8.11. Gala^. ^ 19. Ephesians. 4.26.31.
from goodness unto evil. Lastly, the body albeit it remain the same both
in proportion and in substance, wherein it does Psalm. 139.14.
wonderouslie set forth the wisdom of the Lord; yet is it in the beauty and
strength thereof, the aptest instrument of the soul to sin. Adam therefore
by falling away Ierem. 2.19.
from the God of holiness, by his rebellion; lost that holiness James 1.17.
which from him he had rece ued: whereby although he continued a man, yet he
remained a wicked man: his wisdom remained wise unto Ierem. 4.22.
evil, but to goodness, Romans 8. verse. 6.
foolishness. His will Isai. 65.12. Genesis 11.6.
at liberty of choosing evil, but Iere. 31.18. Ioh. 15.5.
could not choose goodness, because the goodness of it self was perished, by
Fulgent. ad Mon. li. 1 c. 17. (...) Domino quippe bono dissentiens, and ser^io
malo co^sentiens, malae voluntatis effectum plenum adipisca non potuit: quia
ipsa malitia voluntatis a Deo non fuit.
choosing evil. His affections which were created to delight in goodness, to
hate iniquity; forasmuch as they were changed from goodness into evil; became
wholly to delight in evil, but not in goodness. And because he had thus
defiled the image of his holiness, he every way deserved the second death. Now
such as Adam was, as says the Scripture, such a one begat he Contra
Sethianos. Qui Sethum ad imaginem Dei contendunt genitum perfectum. Epiphan.
Haeres. 39. August. Haeres. 19.
Seth, whom he begat in his own image and similitude: and such Psalm. 51.5.
Romans 5.12.
are begotten all the sons of Adam, whether they will take notice thereof Romans
7.7. Galat. 3.24.
to repentance and amendment of life, or either are ignorant, or will wilfully
be As the Jews, Pelagia^s, and Papists.
ignorant of the same. This corruption is called in the Scripture Iam. 1.14.
concupiscence and Romans 7.7.
lust, and of interpreters Augustine, and after him, others.
original sin. Which is, the deprauation Ezech. 16.45. Romans 7.23. Concit.
Arausica^. c. 25. Praedicare debemus and credere, quod per peccatum primi
hominis ita inclinatum and attenuatum fueris liberum arbitriu^, vt nullus
postea aut diligere Deu^ sicut oportuit, aut credere in Deu^, aut operari
propter Deu^, quod bonis esse possit; nisi gratia cum and diuina misericordia
praeuenerit. August. ^ib. de pradest. cap. ^. Vitiatae radicis ma^u^a ita
propaginis traduce per generationu^ sarmenta diffi sa est, vt nec infan^ quidem
vnius dici a culpa sit primae praeuaricationis alienus, nisi per indebitam
saluatoris gratiam suerit liberatus.
or defiling of the nature of man in Adam, continuing in the same nature by
propagation Bern. Sermon. in 4. feriam. Heb. pent. Duo nobis in haereditatem
reliquis ille vetustus Adam qui fugit a facie Dei, laborem scilicet and
dolorem, Laborem in action, dolorem in passione.
as it were an inheritance of birth: whereby a man so soon as he is begotten
Isai. 48.8. Romans 3.23.
is defiled, both with Genesis 3.7.
defect of goodness, and access Eccles. 7.31.
of evil, and thereby is made Ephesians. 2.3. Romans 6.32.
a child of wrath; and when he performs either thought, word or deed, the
same in nature is wicked and defiled, Job. 14.4. Psalm. 51.5.7.
because it proceeds from the same wicked fountain of uncleanness. Thus does
the Scripture declare our sickness, that we might Galat. 3.24.
fly to the physician Jesus Christ.

Question 2. verse 4. To what purpose does the Scripture so accuratelie
describe the succession, age, death of the Patriarchs?
FOr the confirmation of the godly in many points of necessary doctrine.
First, that the world was ever governed by the providence Psalm. 9.16.17.18.
Zephan. 3.5.6.7. etc.
of God, which most manifestly appears in the reward of righteous Henoch,
and the punishment of cruel Caine. Secondly, that the Lord had Isai. 60.2.
and 59.21.
evermore a special care of his Church, and the continuance of true religion;
for in as much as these were Verse. 22.29. and 6.9
righteous men, and Prophets, and 1. Pet. 3.19.20. and 2. Pet. 2.5. Jude 14.
August. contr. Faust. lib. 4. cap. 2. Intelligebant enim reuelante sibi Spiritu
Dei, quid illi tempori congrueret, and quibus modis Deus per illas omnes res
gestas et dictas (pista ceremonias and promissa, loquitur enim de populo sub
lege, sed quanto illis, patre^ma gis de quibus loquimur?) futura, figura^da and
pronuncianda decerneres, magisque desiderium little de norio testamento erat,
sed praesens functio corporalis, ad significanda noua ventura pollicitationibus
veteribus praebebatur. Ita illorum hominum non tantum lingua, sed and vita
prophetica fuit.
Preachers of righteousness as the Scripture witnesses, and it cannot be
esteemed but that Quid enim, number stipites and statuas fuisse credamus, hunc and
alios de quorum rebus gestis scriptura non meminit? and sanctos fuisse, and non
sancte vi^^sse; aut sanctos and prophetas, and non docuisse?
Adam continuing until the six and fiftieth year of the life of Lamech, the
father of Noah, he did continually instruct and preach unto his posterity, of
the estate of the creation; of his own disobedience, and the punishment
thereof; of the promise made of the life to come, and such other doctrines
convenient for the time: So that these fathers continued together as noble
witnesses of the truth of God; diverse of them Enoch, Kenan, Mahalaleel, Iared,
etc. lived all of them, after the birth of Noah: Lamech died but five years
before the drowning of the world: Methushelab died the very year wherein the
flood came: as appears by the computation of years in the text: and Hierom.
lib. Trad. Hebrae in Genesis
until the building of the Arc, and some until the coming of the flood.
Thirdly, that the transgression of Adam Romans 5.12. August. lib. de Pradest.
cap. 3. Qui peccatum originale negat, negat nos esse mortales. Bernard. Sermon.
in Job. 5.19. Et si Adam pro morsu pomi vetiti mortuus est cum posteris, and
fugiebat a facie Dei: quo nos post tanta flagitia fugiemus in die iudicij? and
quid post tanta facinora praesumimus?
brought death into the world, in which respect it is reported of them all:
they died. Fourthlie, although the Lord long time defer his Psalm. 103.8.9. 2.
Pet. 3.9.
anger, as he did the bodily death from Adam nine hundredth and thirty years;
or that the coming of our Savior unto judgment, has bin now as it were
deferred these sixteen hundred years: yet howsoever the wicked Matthew. 25.5.
slumber because he tarrieth long, and will not Matthew. 24.42.
wait to receive him at his coming: as it happened unto Adam and all his
children, that the word of God was in every Luc. 16.17.
tittle thereof fulfilled; so shall it be unto us, in mercy to the just, in
vengeance to the wicked, and the Lord Revel. 22.20. Cyprian lib. de Resur.
Resurrectio quidem communis est, and any tribunal Christi, necesse est in
corpore iusto^stare and iniustos, Dei hoc dictante iustitia, vt pietas and
impietas, debitis stipendijs donarentur, and quifinem habere contempserunt in
malis, infinita clauderentur vltione in poenis; and qui gloriati sunt in cruce,
cum crucifixo regnantes, beatae fierent pere^nitatis participes. Non sunt
participes huius gaudij. quos damnat ambitio: non potest surtiuos habens
loculos paschalibus solennijs interesse: nihil proditor and ve^ditor magistri,
fermentator profanus commune habet cum azymis: omnis immundus in anima, ad esum
huius agni prohibetur accedere: nulla ad hanc laetitiam perfidia recipitur;
omnis malignitas excluditur. Hieron. epist. ad Heligdor. Potentissimi quondam
reges, nudo latere palpitabunt. Adducetur cum suis slultus Plato discipulis,
tunc Aristotelis argumenta non proderunt, quando veniet ille filius paupercula
quaestuariae iudicaturus fines terrae. Idem Comment. in Matthew. 25. Quoties diem
illum considero, toto corpore contremisco, sieve enim comedo, sieve bibo, sieve
aliquid aliud facio, semper videtur illa tuba terribilis sonare in auribus
meis: surgite mortui and venite ad iudicium.
assuredly will come, and blessed are those whom at his coming he shall find
prepared. Fiftlie, that they enjoyed Genesis 3.15. Heb. 11.4.5.
the same promises, and looked for the resurrection Job. 29.25.
of their bodies; for confirmation Iren. lib. 5. Quoniam quidem Enoch placent
Deo, in quo placuit corpore translatus est, translationem iustorum
praemonstrans. Tertul lib. de Resurrect.
whereof, the Lord took up Henoch from among them After fifty years.
next after the death of Adam, the rest of the fathers being yet alive.
Sixtlie, in the manner of description of their age and death, such plainnes of
speech is used, in the number of years, that a child may count them on his
fingers: to the end we might neither wander For by this computation we are
sure, there were from the creation to the stood, no more but 1656. years.
in the uncertain times and ages of the world, neither be Clem. Alexandr. in
protr^pt ad Gent. Audite qui estis long, audite qui prope: nullis caelaetum
est verb^m, lux est communis. etc.
terrified with the hardness of the Scripture. But is it possible that men could
live nine hundred years? It cannot be but possible, because it was in them the
power Act. 17.28. Matthew. 19.26.
of the Lord, to whom all things are possible. And so light and easy a thing
was this unto his power, that he made man at the first a living soul, which
is Genesis 2.7. and 3.22. Aug^st. de ciuit. Dei, lib. 13. cap. 20. Resurget quidem
spirituale corpus, and non tale quale suit in primis hominibus ante peccatum,
qui licet morituri non essent nisi peccassent, alimentis tum vt homines
vtebantur, etc. quoniam corporalices senio non veterascerent, vt necessitate
perducerentur ad mortem, qui status ijs de ligno vitae praestabatur. etc.
to live many thousand years, and not to have died at all, but to remain for
ever: and that man dies, there is no other cause Romans 5.12. August. ^n^hirid.
cap 93. Nec prima mors, qua suum corpus anima relinquere cogitur, nec secunda,
qua poenale corpus animam relinquere non permittitur, homini t^^idisset si nemo
peccasset. Bern. Sermon. de translat. Mart. Mors peccati poena, peccatum causa
mortis.
but sin, whereby he is found a murderer of himself. Wherefore he has not in
him the wisdom of a man, For the very Heathen confess thus much of the power
of God: Plato. Cic. de not. Deor. Deus regit ipse naturam.
that doubts, whether it could be; much less of a Athanas. de Trin. dialog.
1. Item lib. de interpret. Psalm. Omnis quidem liuina s riptura magistra est
virtutis and verae fide^.
christian man, that does not consent unto the truth thereof, because the word
of God does testify and witness it. Now because it is abhorred As Irenaeus
witnesses of Policarpus, cited by Eusebius Histor. lib. 5. cap. 18. that when
he heard any blasphemy, he would stop his ears and say: Good God unto what
times have thou reserved me, that I should hear such things! and would forsake
the place wherein he happened to hear such wickedness.
of christian minds, and ears, to deny the Scriptures: some as it were of
purpose to darken the truth of God, do expound these years, to be years and
courses of the moon, not of the sun: or else that the lives of those that are
recorded, were maintained supernaturallie by miracle. But such are either Plin.
lib. 7. cap. 49. Solin. polyhist. ca^. 3. Et V^^ro, vt teria^^ Lactans. lib. 2.
cap. 13. Sic facta hommis vita est temporalis, sed tamen l^^nga, que in mill
annos propagaretur. Quod diuinis literis pr^ditum, cum Varro non ignoraret,
argumentari ni^us est, (...) putarentur antiqui milie annos victitasse: Aut
enim apud. Aegyptios pro annis menses habert: quod perspicue falsum est. Nemo
enim tunc millessimu^ annu^ tran^gressus est. Nunc vero qui ad centessimum
perueniu^t quod sit saepissime, mill certe and ducentis mensil us viuunt.
heathen, which knew not the power of God, or worse then heathen For a fouler
fault it is to sin of wilfulnes, then to fail of ignorance.
denying the power of God; or else Because they will not give due credit unto
the word of God.
extremely ignorant, and inexpert in the Scriptures. As we do call the space
of twelve months, or thirteen courses of the moon, (in which the sun
returns to the same point of heaven exactlie, from which it did proceed) by
the name of a year in our English tongue: so do they by the name Shanah,
(...) of the word (...) shanah, to alter or change; one may call it a renewing
or iteration: for it has the name, of ye Sunt returning after a yeere^ end, to
the same point of heaven where it began. There are, as Augustine says de ciu.
Dei, lib. 15. cap. 12. which would go in a mean way, and only tithe or
decimate, not duodecimate these years; setting down ninety years, where the
Scripture says nine hundred. But what absurdity would follow? Seth begat Enosh
being an hundredth and five years old: that is, as they will have it, but only
ten and six months. Mahalaleel but six year old and a half, by that
computation, begat Iered. The Greeks (as it seems) marking this
inconvenience, they add in the Septuagint translation, to every one, an
hundredth years: Adam (say they) being two hundred and thirty year old, begat
Seth: which number divided by ten, is three and twenty: Iered ^60. year old
begat Henoch, that is, at 26. But of one absurdity follow a thousand. First
none of these, by that reckoning, lived 100. years. Secondly, Methushelah in
this calculation, is reckoned to live 14. years after the flood. But where was
he? he was not in the Arc. Thirdly, Abraham is said to have died an old man
and full of days, an hundred and seventy five year old; which by their
account is but seventeen. But many of the very Heathen, have acknowledged this
truth of Scripture, as Menetho, Berosus, Histiaeus, Hieronymus Aegyptius,
Hesiodus, Hecataeus, Nicholaus Damascenus and other: cited by Josephus Antiq.
lib. 1. cap. 4.
understand the same space of time, in the Hebrew language of the Scripture.
The circuit of the moon, which commonly we term a month, is called of
them Chodesh, (...) of (...) chadesh, to renew, because in that space the Moon
is renewed. Genesis 29.14. Numb. 11.2. Vide Lyran. comment. in Exodus 2.
neither are these names perverted, or the one of them taken to signify the
other, in any place of the word of God: whereby it is evident that a year of
the life of these Patriarchs was no less space of time, then we That is, 165.
days and one fourth part, or six hours.
account it (forasmuch as the Scripture numbreth not the months, but years of
the Patriarchs lives, and says they lived so many years, not months of time)
nor their age of life more short then so many hundredth years. Neither need
it seem so strange, or be thought Sicut Rabb. Moses Ben Maimon and Rabb.
Paulus Burgens. in Genesis Qui flatuunt miraculo fuisse Dei, nec alijs omnino
communicatum. Quem filium Maimonis, Rab. Moses Ben Nahmah, pro talibus ausis,
satis acerbe flagellauit.
miraculous, for men of those times to live nine hundred years. For as it is
of Psalm. 90.10. Exodus 20.12. Prou. 3.2.
nature, whereto the Lord does add his blessing, that makes men long lived
now (as we account it) and either some natural Deuteronomy. 28.59.61. Fernel. lib.
de temperam. cap. 3. Quod mediocre temperatu^ diutissime, etc. Quanto
disiunctius, tanto citius dissoluuntur. In this respect Phisians say: Plures
perire gula quam gladio: More dye by surfeite then by the sword.
imperfection, or outward violence, which the Lord (who numbreth the days of
Job. 7.1.
men, and in whose hand Dan 5.23.
their life and breath remains) disposes of, by which men die, before they
come to perfect age: so was it of August. de ciuit. Dei lib. 15. cap 9 by like
reason the stature of men decaieth.
nature, thorough the goodness of God to them, that then prolonged life; and is
of the wisdom of the Lord for the disposition of his counsels, for our
sins, and the weakness of our bodies, that we cannot now live so long as
they. And if any shall demand, whether any sufficient cause in reason may be
yielded of the same: Although the truth of God be to be received Saluian. de
Prouid. lib. 3. Humana omnia dicta argumentis and tectibus egent: Dei autem
sermo, ipse sibi rectis est: quiae necesse est, quicquid incorrupta veritas
loquitur, incorruptum sit testimonium veritatis.
for it own authority; yet besides, there may be given reasons manifold.
First, the will and pleasure of the Lord August. de Genesis contra Manich. lib 1.
c. 2 Dicenti, quare Deus fecerit coelum and terram, respondendum est: quia
voluit. Voluntas enim Dei causa est coeli and terrae, and ideo mayor est
voluntas Dei quam coelum and terra: qui autem dicit, quare voluit facere, maius
aliquid quaerit, quam est voluntas Dei: nihil autem malus inueniri potest.
Compescat ergo se humana temeritas, and id quod non est non querat, ne id quod
est non inueniat.
as the cause of causes. Secondly, the excellent and sound temperature of the
bodies of men, as coming lately from the shop of Gods handie workmanship,
neither wasted Joseph. Antiq. lib. 1. c. 4. Dei recens cum opisiciu^. etc.
Qu^cunque enim morbo pater cum generat tenetur, eum semine tran^fert in prolem;
ita vt parentibus liberi succedans non minus morberum quam possessionum
haeredes. Fernel. lib. de morbor. cause. cap. 11. Been igitur agi potuit cum
rebus humanis, si sani tantum parents gi^neren^. Fuchius.
with succession of sicknesses, nor weakened with diseases, was more strong to
continue in longer life, and better able to resist things contrary to health.
Thirdly, because they were Joseph. Antiq. lib. 1. cap. 4.
of temperate and sober diet, not given so much Hieron. contr. Iouin. lib. 2.
Nemo vno aut duebus cibis ijsque vilibus, vsque ad inflationem ventris oneratur.
to fleshly appetite, nor mixing their meat with such varieties, but content
Author quast. orthodox. in oper. Justin. Martyr. quaest. 119. Perspicuum est
neque Abele^ ita pauisse gregem vt non ederes lac gregis eius, neque Cainum ita
coluisse terra^, vt non ederet fruges eius. Chrysostom. Hom. 27. in Genesis 9.
with simple food, which the abundance of the earth brought forth unto the^.
Fourthlie, because the fruits of the earth were much more nourishable and
healthful See farther in the second and third question of the 9. chapter.
before the flood, then afterward they were, either thorough the waters of the
sea, bringing barrennes and saltnes to the earth, and to the fruits thereof; or
for that the Lord had given unto man more liberty of food, the fruit of the
field was not so necessary. Nevertheless whosoever shall be moved with
probabilities or reasons, or authorities of men, rather then with the certain
authority of the Scriptures, cannot thereby be Isai. 7.9. Romans 10.17. Heb.
11.3.
established in faith, because he refuses to be taught of God.

Question 3. verse 22. What means this: Henoch walked with God?
THis godly Patriarch is by three arguments commended in the Scripture. First,
Verse. 22.
that he walked with God. Secondly, that Iud. verse. 14.
he was a Prophet. Thirdly, Verse. 24. Heb. 11.5.
that God took him away that he should not see death. To walk with God, is
the same, as to walk Genesis 17.1. Hilar. in Psalm. 118. Sin. Omnes viae meae in
conspectu tuo, etc. Agens Propheta sub iudice and scrutatore cordium Deo, in
custodia mandatorum testimoniorumque Dei permanet: non vias seculi, non vias
vitiorum and impietatis incedit. Nam quodcunque vita sue iter egerit, adeo tam
probabile tamque innocens agit, vt conspectu Dei diguum sit, etc.
before God, or to walk in the Luc. 1.6.
law and commandments of God; which is to say: in his Psalm. 119.59. and
139.17.18. Isai. 8.13.
walking, and his ways, in his Act. 24.16.
conscience, words, and deeds; to have the Lord and his commandment with him,
or Psalm. 139.4. Heb 11.27. Hieron. cont. Pelagian. dial. 2. Vt nunquam securus
sis, sed omni obseruantia custodiaes cor tuum: vt consi^tres, etc.
before his eyes. The very wicked cannot but walk with God, in respect of his
Isai. 66.1. Ierem. 23.24.
presence, who fills heaven and earth, and searches out Psalm. ^.9. and 139.3.
their words, their actions, and the secret corners of their hearts; yet
because his judgments Psalm. 10.5.
are far above out of their sight, and they as foolish as the Job. 39.20.
Plin. lib. 10. cap. 1. mira eorum stoliditas, cum colla f^utice o^culta rint
latere se exist^ mantium; cum ipsi altitudinem equitis inside^tis equo prae
magnitudine eacedunt.
Ostriche or the woodcocke, do think themselves are hid, because they see not
him; they are not said to walk with God, but rather Genesis 4 16.
to depart out of his presence. But it may seem, that to walk with God is to
be void of sin, forasmuch as he was taken up, and the Scripture witnesses,
that no unrighteous person Psalm. 5.4.
shall inherit the kingdom of God? It does not signify to be void in act,
from sin; for the Scriptures plainly teach, as well by Genesis 12 12. 2. Sam. 1
4. Ioh. 2.3.4. Matthew. 26.72.
example as by Eccles. 7.22. Romans 3.19.
testimony, that no man is void of the act of sin: yea rather the contrary
is plain by Noah, who is G^n. 6.9. (...), ijthhalec, vt est in coniugatione
hithpael, si nificat, quod sese compo^^t ad ambulan ium cum ^^eo. Vel vt
scriptura lo u^tur: apposuit cor: he set his heart to se^ke God.
also said to walk with God, notwithstanding he is Genesis 9 21.
spotted with that infamous sin of drunkenness. Wherefore to walk with God,
does not signify to be void of sin, but Psalm 119.106. Act 11.23. Ambros.
comment. in Luc. cap. 9. Dominus non obsequiorum speciem, sed puritatem quaerit
affectus. August. lib. confess. 8. cap. 8. Nam non solum ire, v^rumetiam
peruenire ill^c, nihil aliud erat quam velle ire; sed velle fortiter and
integre, non semisauciam hac atque hac iactare voluntatem, part assurgente cum
alia part cadente, luctante.
with a purpose of heart to avoid sin. In which respect, albeit the rest of
the Fathers, whose genealogy is reckoned Hebr. 11.13.
being godly men, did also walk with God: yet of Enoch, it is expressed and
Verse. 22. and 24.
repeated; either because the Nehem. 7.2.
spirit of regeneration was more excellent in him, or that his labors might be
commended, forasmuch as so noble a 2. Tim. 2.5.6.
reward is testified. Enoch walked with God after he begat Methusala. Before he
begat Methusala, says Precopius Gaze. in Genesis 5. Improbum and flagitiosum,
ante natum Methusalem: Et istud andet con^e^tare, ne viro coniugato tantum
praeconium cum scripturis ascriberet.
one of the Church of Rome, being an infamous and wicked person, he afterward
repented. Why should so fond a guess be uttered, if it were not to boulster up
the praise of single life beyond the bounds of Scripture? perhaps then
afterward, he forsook the fellowship of his wife (as they Nicephor. Histor.
Eccles. lib. 1. Et prorsus stupendum est discernere quam inepte Philosophantur
huiusmodi virginitatu assert^res: Methusalem (inquit Scriptura) vixit centum
octoginta soptem annos, and genuit Lamech. Methusalem qui tamdiu in virginitate
permansit, videtur fuisse vir magnae deuotioni, inquit Carthusian in Genesis 5.
Huic satisfacere potest August. de ciuit. Dei. li^. 15. c. 20. Qui ex hoc
mouetur, inquit, meminerit, duobus modis istam solutam esse quaestione^: aut de
s^ra pubertate, proportione ta^ longa vitae; aut de filijs qui co^memorantur in
generationibus, quod non fuerint primogeniti.
affirm that Peter did) and lived a virgin: No, no (says Hom. in Genesis ^1.
Aud^ant mariti and vxores, and d^scant iusti virtutem: nec putent nuptias in
catosa esse, quo minus quis Deo placiat: nam idcirco diuina scriptura semel
atque iterum id significauit, dicens, genuit Methusala and tunc pla^uit, and
idem ingeminat and repetit dicens, and placuit-postquam gennit, nequis
arbit^etur obstaculum virtutis esse coniugium, etc.
Chrysostom) let married men and wives attend. Neither let them think that
marriage is any cause, why they should the less please God: for therefore
does the divine Scripture repeat it once, and again, least any man should
think wedlock a let to virtue. A little after. For if marriage (beloved) and
the bringing up of children, were a hindrance in the way of virtue, the Lord of
all things would not have coupled it with this our life, to hurt us in
temporal and necessary things belonging unto life. But because, it is not
only no stop from serving God, if we will soberlie use the same, but
brings great consolation, whilst it does repress the raging lust of nature,
neither does suffer us to be tossed with temptations as in the sea, but does
cause that our ship may come safe into the harbor, therefore the Lord of all
things has given this consolation to mankind. Obser. They only please the
Psalm. 5.4.5.6. Isai. 58.5.6. Micah. 6.6.7.8.
Lord, which walk with God: that is, which are not 1. Chron. 12.33. Act. 8.21.
Iam. 1.8. and 4.3. Revel. 3.2.15.
double hearted, but do Psalm. 139. verse. 23.
lay their hearts open before the Lord: which Act. 24.14. Heb. 11.5.
believe his promises, and endeavor to keep their Act. 24.16. 2. Cor. 1.12.
consciences pure toward God, and toward men. Secondly, the godly in this
life do Psalm. 8.4.7. Ephesians. 4.15.
always increase in godliness, in knowledge, faith, experience, obedience,
etc. For by August. de verb. Apostol. Sermon. 15. Quid est ambulare? Breuiter
dico, profi^ere; ne forte non intelligatis, and pigrius ambuletis.
walking is signified a going forward. Thirdly, God gives his graces without
respect of Deuteronomy. 7.7.8. Romans 9.11.
persons or callings: Neither Romans 4. verse. 10 Galat. 5.6. Justin. Mart.
Dialog. cum Triff. Vos quidem (Iudei) carnem circumcisi, circumcisione nostra
indigetis, nos vero hanc habentes nihil vestra illa habemus opus. Si namque
necessaria esset, sicut existimatis, non praeputiatum Deus fin^isset Adam,
neque complacitum illi fuisset praeputium Enochi, qui non inuentus est, etc.
circumcision avails, neither uncircumcision, neither 1. Corinthians. 7.17.20.24.
Chrysostom. Homil in Hebre. 7. in Moral. Nam and beatitudines qua a Christo
dicuntur, non monachi^ tantum dictae sunt: alioquin totus mundus periret, and
accusabimus crudelitatem Dei. Si vero beatitudines solis monachis dictae sunt:
secularem autem hominem, impossible est eas implere; cum ipse nuptias i^ssit,
ipse ergo omnes perdidit. Si autem aliqui impediti sunt ex nuptijs, sclant
quo^iam non nuptiae illis impedimentum fuerunt, sed voluntat, qua male vtitur
nuptijs. Nam neque vinum facit ebritiatem, sed mala voluntat and excessus
moderationis. Vtere cum moderatione nuptijs, and primus crisiu regno. Anselm.
in Romans 5. Opus hoc castum in coniuge non habet culpam, sed origo peccati
trahit secum debitam poenam.
marriage nor single life: but Act. 10.35.
every one that fears God and works righteousness, is accepted of him. The
second prerogative of Enoch shall be remembered in his In annot. Epist. Iud.
place.

Question 4. verse 24. What means this: He was no more seen, for God took
him away?
THe Hebrews Aben Ezra in Comment. 5. Genesis and alij. David Kimchi affirms the
same of Eliah.
do thus interpret it: ((...) veenenu) and non ipse, and he (was) not: that is
say they, he continued not in life, he died: for so the same words do signify
in other places of Genesis 42 36. Ierem. 31.15.
the Scripture. But the holy Ghost is worthy to be his own interpreter: who
says; Heb. 11.5. And they that saw death, in the phrase of Scripture, dyed:
according as Luc. 2.26. Matthew. 16.28.
by faith Henoch was taken away, that he should not see death: therefore he was
taken away and died not. And no marvel is it Romans 11.28.
that these Hebrew Doctors should cross the authority of the Scriptures of
the new Testament: forasmuch as they Matthew. 28.13. Act. 4.16.17. Hierom.
comment. in Isai. 18. lib. 5. Iudaei in principio fidei Christiana ad totas
gentes epistolas miserunt, ne susciperent passione^ Christi, and miserunt vsque
ad Aethiopia^ and occide^talem plagam, totumque orbem huius blasphemiae
dissensione compleuerunt.
are such deadly enemies unto the cross of Christ. But it seems strange
that any Christian writer Oleaster in Genesis 5.
could doubt, that he was taken away, and saw not death, seeing the same is so
manifestly expressed. Some perhaps will curiously demand what became of
Henoch, seeing the Scripture says he was no more seen? We ought with faith
to receive the doctrine expressed in the Scripture, Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis
21. Discat non co^uenire humanis me^tibus, curiosius ea qua a Deo fiunt
explorare, sed credere his quae dicuntur.
not with curiosity to search for that which is not revealed in the same. This
matter notwithstanding may lawfully be demanded 1. Cor. 15.35. and contrary,
not. 1 Timothy 1.4. and 2. Tim. 2.23. Tit. 3.9.
so far as it makes for increase of faith, and ought to be answered, so far
as the Scriptures do teach the same; so as, we are found therein John 5.39.
to search the Scriptures, not men's idle inventions out of Scripture. The
spirit of God does testify of the departure of Henoch, two points to be
considered. First, that he was not, that he appeared not, or was seen no more
of men. Of which it were impudency, as Calu. in Genesis 5.24. Impudenter ergo
contentiosus erit, qui non fatebitur aliquid extraordinarium hic notari.
one very well notes, not to acknowledge some extraordinary matter: for of
all the rest, in all the generations it is plainly delivered, they died:
only of Henoch, he was no more seen. Perhaps-that is spoken, to show that
men knew not what was become of him, like as histories report Tit. Liuius
Decad. 1. lib. 1. Subito co^rta tempestas cum magno fragere tonitrubusque, tam
denso regem operuit nimbo, vt conspectum eius co^cioni abstulerit, nec deinde
in terris Romulus fuit. Idem Julius Obsequcus prodig. lib. 1. cap. 1. L. Florus
lib. 1. Alij tamen a senat^ secreto interfectum testantur: vt Plutarc. in vita
Romul^.
of Romulus, of Laert. lib. 8. cap. 2. Mane autem facto, e somno excitatis
caeteris, solus Empedocles repe^tus non est. Facta autem diligenti
inquisitione, e seruis qui rogabantur vnus adstum, q^^ affirmauit, se noste
media ingentem aud^sse vocem Empedoclem vocantem; tum vero vbi surrexisset,
coelestem vidisse luce^ and splendorem tedarum, nihil aliud. Interim
Empedocles, quia fidem facere voluit, quod Deus effectus esset, in AEtnae
crateres se contecit: agnitus vero, vna ex crepidis aereis vi flamma and ardore
reiecta.
Empedocles, of Pendarus C. Cassij libertus, rogatus a suo Domino cerurces
praecidit; hunc vero post came cadem nemo mortalium consperit. Plut. in vit. M.
Bruti.
Pindarus, that no man living knew the manner of their death. To take such
wicked conceit from the heart of men, the Scripture adds: that the Lord
received him. Whereof we undoubtedly do gather, that he was received
Epiphan. Haeres. 64. Non est translatus and reliquit corpus aut corporis
partem. Si enim reliquit corpus vidit etiam mortem.
into heaven, and there remains both soul and body. First, because he died
not, as the Scriptures Hebr. 11.5.
do fully testify: wherefore there being no separation of soul and body,
it is evident, whither the soul was taken, the body was also taken: but the
soul Eccles. 12.7.
does return to God that gave it, and Luc. 16.23.
remains in ye resting place of the faithful, until the Reu. 6.11.
number of the righteous be fulfilled. Secondly, like as Stephen at his
martyrdom called on the Lord: Act. 7.59.
Lord Jesus receive my spirit, so it is affirmed in this place, that the Lord
received (for so (...) lakach accipere. Genesis 3.22. Exodus 12.4. 2. King. 12.8.
Hest. 2.7.16. Prou. 1.3.
the word does most commonly signify, and is most often taken for in
Scripture) him, that is not the spirit of Henoch only, but Henoch himself in
spirit and body. Thirdly, whither Eliah that excellent Prophet was
translated, thither also was Henoch this noble Patriarch received, before the
flood. But Eliah 2. King. 2.11.
was carried up into heaven, and there remains with the same body, in Iren.
lib. 5. Quonia^ quide^ Enoch placens Deo, in quo placuit corpore transla^us
est, translationem iustorum praemonstrans. Et Elias sicut erat in plasmatis
substantia assumptus est, assumptionem prophetam: and nihil impedit cos corpus
in translatione and assumptione eorum. August. de peccato origin. lib. 2. cap.
23. Vel cum quaeritur vbi sit nunc vel Elias vel Enoch, an ibi (scilicet in
paradiso terrestri, ad quam sententiam aliquautum inclinat August. de Genesis ad
lit. li. 9. c. ^.) an alicubi alibi, quos tamen non dubitamus in quibus
natisunt corporibus viuere. Epiphan. Haeres. 64. Enoch cum corpore translatus
non vidit mortem, in corpore enim viuente and spiritualiter ablatus, and non
animaliter propter translationem: and quidem in corpore existens spiritualiter
(id est spirituali corpore, 1. Cor. 15.44.) Sed and de Elia similiter, quod
assumptus est in curru igneo, and est adhuc in carne: carne autem spirituali
and non opus habente vt per coruos nutriatur. etc.
which he was taken up; therefore Henoch was thither translated also. Neither
was he translated into that earthly Paradise, whence Adam was expelled, which
many Irenaeus quide^ ita sentire videtur, authoritate presbyteroru^ Asiae
ductus us ipse innuit lib. 5. sed and ipse cundem statuit paradisum esse, in
que^ raptus fuerat Paulus, vnde quid senserit Irenaeus no^ est obscurum.
Scholastici doctores long contentiosius. Anselm. com. in Hebra. cap. 11.
Translatus est Enoch in paradisum, vnde Adam eiectus fuerat. Lombard. 2.
Sentent. distinct. 17. Sixtus Sene^s. biblioth. annot. 16. Dicere Henoch and
Eliam non esse translatos in illum paradisum terrestrem, inibique versari est
contra diuinam scripturam, and a recta sidei regula exorbitare. Sed hic
mediocriter a suis vapulat.
of the Church of Rome do so stiflie hold; for how should he (poor man) have
escaped drowning, when Genesis 7.20.22. August. de ciuit. Dei, lib 15. cap. 27.
and lib. 20. cap. 18. Nam and illo tempore perijsse dixit, qui tunc erat.
mundum: nec solum orbem terrae, verumetiam coelos quos vtique istos ae^reos
intelligimus, quorum locum ac spatium, tunc aqua crescendo superauerat.
Paradise, and all places of the earth were covered with water, fifteen cubits
above the highest Genesis 7.20.
mountain; except he had bin helped by some of their For some, as Lombard.
lib. 2. distinct. 17. affirm this Paradise is placed in the air above the
Moon: other say that the water was kept out of Paradise by miracle, standing
upon an heap, like the waters of the red Sea. Scotus in Sentent. lib. 2.
^istinct. 17. q. 2.
devised miracles? But some one peradventure will reply against this doctrine,
by the words of our Savior Christ: Ioh. 3.13.
no man ascends up to heaven, but he that descended from heaven, etc. These
words CONCILIATIO. 6.
in no respect are to be applied hereunto. Our Savior in that place teaches
the doctrine of regeneration, which to make more plain he adds: no man
ascends, etc. that is (as S. August. in lib. de peccat. merit. and remiss.
lib. 1. cap. 31. Sic inquit siet generatio spiritualis. etc.
Augustine does interpret it) so is the regeneration spiritual, as that men
become heavenly men of earthly; which they cannot attain, unless they
become the members of my body, that he may ascend which has descended,
because none shall ascend, but he which has descended; taking his whole
Church to be himself, whom the mystery Mark. 10.8. Ephesians. 5.32. August. ibid.
Non aliud deputans corpus suum, id est Ecclesiam suam, quam seipsum; quiad
Christo and ecclesia verius intelligitur: erunt duo in carne vna, de quae re
ipse dixit: itaque iam non duo, sed vna caro, ascendere omnino non poterunt.
Omnes igitur qui renascuntur per gratiam Dei ascendunt in coelum, caeterorum
nemo prorsus. Idem de verb. Apost. Sermon. 14.
chiefly concerns, two, says he, shall be one flesh. Besides, it may be
answered, he means not by heaven, the place of the faithful souls departed,
but 1. Tim. 6.16. Bucer in Euang. Joan. cap. 3. verse. 13. Coelum significat
lucem in accessam quam Deus inhabitat.
that glorious light which no man can attain unto, or Matthew. 11.27. Ioh. 1.18.
Calvin. in Ioh. 3.13. Ascensus ergo in coelum, puram mysterioru^ Dei notitia^,
and spiritualis intelligentiae lucem significat: sed appositissima est
interpretatio Augustini.
that knowledge of the mysteries of God, which are not revealed but by Christ.
But where the Apostle says: in Adam 1. Cor. 15.22. Romans 5.12. Heb. 11.5.
all die, how can it stand that Henoch was taken away, and saw not death? The
Co^ciliatio. 7.
Apostle speaks not so generally, as though none might be excepted, for the
same Apostle says again, we 1. Cor. 15.51.52.
shall not all die; they that remain at the coming of the Lord 1 Thessalonians. 4.17.
they shall not die, but shall all be changed in steed of death. The same also
plainly says: Henoch Heb. 11.5.
was taken away, that he should not see death: and the same is to be affirmed
2. King. 2.11. Joseph. Antiq. lib. 9. cap. 1. Sicut alij Rabbini Languescit in
hoc dicto. Oecolampad. in Malac. cap. 4. Quiescit aute^ ipsius corpus, cum
reliquis sanctorum corporibus. Quid? number in terra? absit; sed requiescit potius
in corpore cum reliquis sanctis. Nam si sicut alij requiescit, vel corpus eius
in terra computruit; omnino mortuus est, de quo scriptura dicit non vidit
mortem.
of Eliah. But in Adam all die, that is, August. Epist. 28. Hoc est, omnes qui
moriuntur non nisi in Adam moriuntur. Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. 15. Hom. 42.
Mortales crint, etiam qui non morientur.
all are mortal and subject unto death: so were both Henoch and Eliah, like as
all other the sons of Adam, and their August. de ciuit. Dei, lib. 20. cap.
22. In eodem raptu de mortaelibus c^rporibus exituros, and ad eadem mox
immortalia redituros.
translation was in steed of death, and a changing of mortality with
immortality. An ancient Jewish error, as appears Matthew. 17.10. which, seeing
Christ himself confuted, it is marvel it suffices not Christians to have
him the expositor of Malachi. For if Elias be come, then is he not to come;
then these two witnesses Revel. 11.3. are not Enoch and Elias, but some other.
Wherefore they that expect Henoch and Eliah to come personally Triffo Iudaeus
apud ^ustin. in Dial. Tertul. lib. de Anima. cap. 28. Morsecrum non est
reperta, dilata scilicet. Ambros. in 1. Cor. 4. Quia erunt spectaculum and
Henoch and Eliah, vsque adeo vt corpora eorum in plateis proije^^ntur. August
de Genesis ad lit. lib. 9. cap. 7. Non negat, cum ex aliorum opinione recitauerit.
Gregor. in moral. lib. 14. cap. 12. Quod de Antichristi damnatione, and morte
Enoch and Eliae. Dicendum igitur cum Vincentio Lyrinens. lib. cont. Haeres.
cap. 39. Antiquae sanctorum patrum consensio, non in omnibus diuinae legis
quaestiunculis, sed solum in sides regula, magno nobis studio, and inuestiganda
est and sequenda, cum rect^ senserint. Philip. 3.17. 1. Cor. 11.3. Sed non est
papista fere, aut scholasticus professor, qui hoc ipsum no^ docuerit. Anselm.
in epist. ad Heb. 11. Albin. in Genesis 5. Aquin. in epist. ad Hebrae. cap 11. Qui
scil. fingunt Antichristu^ Enochi occisorem futurum, ex tribu Dan nasciturum
(quam sententiam euertie Hieron) mus, lib. Trad. Hebrae. in Genesis Erat Dan
coluber, etc. Et Bellarm. tom. 1. contr. 3. lib. 3. lib. 3. cap. 12.) vel
Iudaeum, vt ipse Bellarminus.
to reprove the world of sin, and to be slain of Antichrist, as they Revel.
11.3.
would prove by Scripture, rather then some other faithful servants and
ministers of the Gospel, whom the Lord either Whether Husse and Hierome of
Prage, as Fox is of opinion, med. in Apocah p. 11.3 or else, Wickliff, Scot.
Bruno, Occam, Husse, Hierom, Luther. Zuinglius, etc. as other think, which are
scarsely two, in regard of the multitude of enemies.
has or Or whether these two are yet to come: doubtless Enoch and Eliah they
cannot be, unless Eliah come ye third time, or Enoch come alone. But our
Savior expou^ding Malachi, has taught sufficiently the exposition of this
place.
will raise up according to the Scripture, may happen to find the ashes and
sinders of the world, There are, who in stead of Eliah, do join Moses and
Enoch, but that error carries a greater inconvenience. Hebru. 9.21.
before they be partakers of their expectation. What was the Vt August. de
statu Enoch. de pecca^ merit. lib. 1. cap. 3. and alij.
glorious estate of the Saints of God, before the Vtrum eundem locum tenuerint,
quem nunc sancti: vt videtur. Heb. 13.8. Apoc. 13.8.
death of Christ, as it is another question; so it must be handled in his
place. Now the cause why the Lord translated Henoch, as the Scriptures Verse.
24. Causa repetita.
seem to signify, and the Chrysostom. in Hebra. Hom. 22. Primum permittit fieri
mortem, terrere volens perfilium patrem. Deinde vero, vt ipsis initijs statim
anima humana spem acciperet, and quia solueretur mors, and damnaretur diabolica
tyrannis.
Fathers do interpret it; was to give hope unto the faithful of the
resurrection of their bodies. For they being Theodoret. quaest. in Genesis 45. ad
consolandos virtutis athletas: cum enim Abel, primus iustitiae fructus,
immaturus ad huc radicitus abscissus esset, nullaque resurrectionis spes, etc.
much afflicted with the fear of death, by the threatening of the curse, and
the examples of Abel, and of Adam, the Lord does by a new example animate his
children, that they should not stand in dread thereof, seeing that both soul
and body shall 2. Cor. 5.10.
be partaker of immortality, thorough the promise of the woman's seed. And
therefore Henoch next after Adam (of them whose genealogy is reckoned) who had
himself Genesis 3.15.
received and heard the promise was taken away; and it is not incredible
(according to the opinion of some of ye Jewish writers) not altogether
secretly, Sicut tradidit Rabb. Akiba in Alphabeto cabalico. Item Jonathan in
Targhu^. Vtrunque citat Rabb. Racanati. Neque tame^ dixerim, prorsus code^ quo
Elias modo.
but in the sight and view of me^; albeit the scripture applying Theodoret.
quaest. in Genesis 1. and 2. Na^ eadem silentij ratio, tum de creatione angelorum,
and de Mosis sepulchro.
it self to the weakness of the hearers, do not at this time express the same.
Obser. 1. The righteous shall be Prou. 11.31.
recompensed in the earth, how much more the wicked and the sinners. Secondly,
we shall again Job. 19.26.27.
be covered with the same flesh, and behold God with no other, but with the
same eyes, seeing that Henoch, and Eliah, and our Savior, in the body they
were borne and lived, 2. King. 2.11. Act. 1.19.
were received into heaven. Thirdly, God when he withdraws temporal
benefits promised unto his children, as Prou. 3.2.
long life, Deuteronomy. 28.1. Psalm. 37.9.11.18.
riches and prosperity, he Isai. 54.8.9. and 57.1
breaks no promise, but inlargeth his liberality: wherefore the godly have
no cause 1 Thessalonians. 4.13.
to sorrow for them that sleep, although they be taken in the midst of their
strength and age, as Henoch was, forasmuch as they are received into
everlasting habitation of the Saints.

CHAP. VI.
Question 1. verse 2. Who are they that are called in this place the sons of
God? and what was the cause of the ruin of the world in the days of Noah?
THe scope and purpose of this Scripture is to show, by what occasion Verse.
2.4.5.11.12. etc.
the offspring of mankind became to be so wicked, as that they even compelled
the most Psalm. 103.8.1^ Jonah. 4.11.
merciful and gracious Lord to destroy the work of his own hands, by bringing
in upon them the waters of the flood. Wherein are couched three points of
doctrine. First, that undoubtedly the 1. Cor. 10.11. These things happened to
them for examples, and are written to admonish us, etc.
world was destroyed, and that most justly in the days of Noah. Secondly,
that the cause of the flood Verse. 2.5.6. etc. Ierem. 4.7. Hose. 14.2.
was the ouerflowing of sin, among all conditions and estates of men. Thirdly,
that the original of this ripenes and growth of sin Verse. 2.4.11.
was, for that the sons of God joined in marriage with the daughters of men, of
whom were begotten a wicked seed, so that the earth was filled with cruelty.
But what they are who here are called the sons of God, many long ago have
stood in doubt, and some unto this day are not well resolved. This name does
properly belong Heb. 1.2.3.5.
only to Jesus Christ, who was Psalm. 2.7. Heb. 1.3.5.
begotten of the substance of his father before Prou. 8.23.24. Symbol. Nicaen.
Vnigenitum, hoc est, ex substantia patris. etc.
the world. But it is farther attributed by more large relation Ephesians. 4.6.
Malac. 2.10. Job. 28.7. per catachresin.
to the creatures in general, as they Coloss. 1.17. Iren. lib. 4. cap. 79. Et
impij secundum naturam, filij sunt propter hoc quod ab eo facti sunt: secundum
autem opera non sunt filij.
have their being from God, and again more specially, unto the chiefest
creatures, as to Job. 1.6. and 2.1. Luc. 20.36.
the Angels, because they are created unto, and do retain the image of the
Ezech. 1.10. 2. Sam. 14.10.
wise, Revel. 18.21.
mighty, Act. 10.22.
holy, Luc. 20.36.
and eternal God: and also to Hose. 1.10. Exodus 4 22. 1. Ioh. 3.2.
godly men, whom he has created of the earth, endued, and renewed unto his
image, Deuteronomy. 8 4.
nurtured as a father does his son, and Ioh. 1.18. 1. Pet. 1.3.
begotten again unto a lively hope by Jesus Christ. Again of such men as are
called the Sons of God, some are so in deed being borne again Ioh. 3.5. and
1.12.13
of the spirit after the will of God: some are so but only in name, either
for that they bear, but not effectually receive the outward Isai. 29.13.
marks of the sons of God, or else are borne Romans 9.7.8.
of the true sons of God according to the flesh. Of all which, there can be
none so gross, as to conceive this thing, of insensible or unreasonable
creatures. It is moreover against the Analogy of faith, and the authority of
the word of God, to understand it Matthew. 22.30. Luc. 24.39. Ephesians. 5.23. 1.
Cor. 6.16.
of Angels good or evil, that they lived with the daughters of men in marriage.
It is also 1. Ioh. 3.6.8.9. 1. Cor. 13.5.7.
against the word of God, and the rule of charity, to interpret of such men
who were effectually called by the spirit of grace. Wherefore it remains
only, by Deuteronomy 32.6. Isai. 1.2.
testimony of Scripture, and the authority and judgment of the most and
Chrysostom. Ho^. in Genesis 22. Vt videru^t filij dei qui a Seth et Enos progeniti,
filias hominu^, illas quae ab alijs nata sunt, filios autem Cain vocat filios
hominum. Ambr. lib. de Noa and Arca. cap. 4. Sicut viri probabilis vitae, filij
dei vocantur; ita quorum carnalia sunt opera, filios dici hominu^, etc. Aug.
li. q. in Genesis q. 4. and de ciu. lib. 15. c. 22. Athan. lib. quast. in Script.
q. 98. Theodoret. quaest. in Genesis 47. Cyril. Alexandr. contra Julian. lib. 9.
Caesarius Dialog. lib. 1. Cassian. collat. 8. c. 21. Onkelos Chaldaeus
Paraphrastes. Reddit filios potentum. Ita and Syn. machus: Hieron. in Trad.
Hebraic.
chiefest fathers and interpreters, that these who are called the sons of God,
were no other but the posterity of the godly Patriarchs, of the line of Nimis
confidenter diuinat Suidas in Lex. in vocabulo Seth, quod Seth fuerat Deus
appellatus ob scie^tiam reru^ coelestiu^.
Seth, who being brought up in true religion, declined from the steps of their
religious ancestors, and by joining in affinity with the wicked, by taking
the^ wives of the family of Caine, became to be partakers of their sins, and
therefore shortly after of their punishment. Certain it is, that Philo Iudaeus
lib. de Gigant. Joseph. Antiq. lib. 1. c. 4. Alij Rabbini rece^tiores, ferunt
Aza and Azael dilapsos. Ab istis scil. mutuati, and confirmati. Athenagor. lib.
de legatione sieve apolog. pro Christian. Justin. Martyr. Apolog. 1. Tertul.
contr. Marcion. lib. 5. and lib. de Virginib. velandis. Cyprian. lib. de
discipline. Virgin. Eusebius. de praeparat. Euangel. lib. 5. cap. 4.
diverse ancient writers, and the vulgar sort of Hugo de Sanct. vict. in Annot.
in Genesis Strabus Eccles. Hist. in Genesis 31. Burgensis in 6. Genesis in Addit. 1.
Quorum tame^ saniores ab Augustino edocti, aliter sentiu^t. vt Aquin. in Genesis
6. and Summa part. 1. quaest. 51. and Lyra in Genesis 6.
the Church of Rome do affirm, that these sons of God were Angels, unto whom
as says Lactant. lib. 2. cap. 15. Misit (Deus) angelos ad tutelam cultiumque
generis humani, etc. Itaque illos cum hominibus commorantes, dominator ille
terrae fallacissimu^, consuceudine ipsa, paulatim ad vitia pellexit, and
mulierum congressibus inquinauit.
Lactantius, God had committed the government and defense of man, against the
power and deceits of Satan. But what proof of scripture may be found to
favor this assertion? what sufficient reason to confirm this exposition? It
has often bin reported that Posse quidem, ratione suae substamiae non abhorret
a sapientia Platonicorum. Apulcius lib. de Deo Socrat. Sunt quidam diuinae
mediae potestates, inter summum aethera, and insimas terras, in isto intersitae
acris spatio, etc. and ficut nubes aliquid grauitatis and leuitatis habent.
Porphyr. de Sacrific. lib. 2. Quibus ratione, corporeum quidda^ est passioni
obnoxium atque dissoli bile. Psellus de Demon. c. 1. Natura Daemonu^ non est
absque corpore. Hac autem deliramenta sunt inania. Facere autem, testatur
Aquin. in Tract. qq. 1. part. tit. de miras. q. 8. and 5. and 55. Cardan. lib.
de Rebus contra naturam. Jacob. Ruffus de Hominum generat. lib. 5. c. 6.
August. de ciuit. Dei, lib. 15. cap. 23. Creberrima fama est, multique se
expertos affirmant, vel ab ijs qui experti essent, de quorum fide dubitandum
non est, audisse confirn ant, Syluanos and Faunos, quos vulgo incubos vocant,
improbos saepe extitisse mulieribut, and earum appetisse and peregisse
concubitum, vt hoc negare impudentiae videatur. non hic audeo aliquid temere
definire. Aliqui tamen acerrime contendunt fieri non posse in rerum natura. Sed
quid agunt? Disputant scibcet physice de rebus metaphyficis; hoc est inepte,
and non ad idem. Sufficiat in praesenti, talc aliquid non fuisse, cui scriptura
diuina multis rationibus contradicis.
evil spirits have had to do with women, Ioh. Bodin. de Demon. lib. 2. cap.
7. Mart. de Arles tract. de superstit. Etiam de honesta soemina quae viro
nupserat, talia refert.
witches, and Jacob. Ruffus de conceptu Hom. lib. 5. c. 6. Famulam Ciuit
Constantiae qua^dam a Daemone co^pressam scribit: enixamque non hominem neque
daemonem, sed flaccos and quisquilia, damonis art nimirum subornatas.
other notorious wicked persons; which whether it be, but Hieron. in Catalogo.
Beda in Luc. cap. 12. Iamblic. lib. de mysterijs Egypt. Quae fascinati
imaginamur, praeter imaginamenta nullam habent actionis and essentia veritatem.
a false imagination only of a mind given up to Satan, or whether it be
done in deed, as it may seem Qui igitur ex impossibili naturae hunc tanquam
errore^ euertunt, scripturis vim faciunt, quae de esu angelorum meminerunt,
quod vtique verum, licet non ex naturalibus; nam quae impossibiliae sunt
hominibus, Deo sunt and quibus ipse vult faecilima
as possible, for a spirit so to do, as to Genesis 18.8. and 19.3.
eat meat, whereof the Scripture says, he set before them and they did
eat; it is not for us to handle in this argument. But that spirits should take
them wives, and beget children in such wedlock, as the (...) nashim, proprie
vxoret, mulieres viris iunctae, ab (...) Enosh, id est. fragilis homo, Aleph in
foeminino plurali tantum deficiente. Et nimie audacter scribit. Sever.
Sulpitius de Sacr. Histor. li. 1. c. 1 Angeli quidam naturae suae originisque
degeneres, relictis superioribus quorum incolae erant, matrimonijs se
mortalibus miscuerunt.
word imports, or that the Elect Angels should sin by lust, after August.
de ciuitat. Dei. libr. 15. cap. 23. Dei tamen Angelos sanctos nullo modo illo
tempore sic labi potuisse crediderum: nec de his dixisse Apostolum Petrum: Si
Deuteronomy Angelis peccantibus non pepercit, etc. Idem de ciuit. lib. 13. cap. 13.
they were confirmed by the Lord, it is utterly against the truth of God, and
to be expelled from the hearts of Christians. But one would think it likely,
that they were spirits, because by them were begotten Giants? These Giants were
no other but Verse. 11. Genesis 10.9. (...), nephilim: properly mighty tyrants
oppressors.
men, whom the Scripture calls, because they were Genesis 14.1. 1. Chron. 20.8.
Sons of Haraphah: i. bloody or mighty, (...), raphah, to cure, so called by
the contrary, as a mountain of moving.
great and fearful Rephaim, and Emim, terrible: a rad. (...), Aiam, to
terrify.
Emim; because of their pride Anakim, a (...). gnanak, a chain, i. gorgious,
going in chains of Gold. Numb. 13.34. Prou. 1.19.
Hanakim; because of their strength Gibborim a (...), gabar, to make strong.
Genesis 6 4. and 10 9.
Gibborim; because of their tyranny Nephilim a (...), naphal: to kill, to
strike to the ground.
Nephilim; because of their Zamzummim, a (...), Zamam: to think evil: to
invent mischief, Deuteronomy. 19.19.
naughtines Zamzummim: forasmuch as they excelled in these properties other
men. Neither does the Scripture say, that all these Giants came of the sons
of God, and the daughters of men, Verse. 4.
but contrary: that there were Giants in those days, to wit, of the sons of
Caine; and that after the sons of God came unto, etc. they were augmented in
number, and the whole earth was filled with cruelty. Of whom then were those
first Giants, which were not of the sons of God? Likewise Og Deuteronomy. 3.11.
was of the remnant of the Giants; doubtless not of the remnant of these, who
were wholly destroyed with the flood, but of those who were begotten of the
sons of Cham. So Goliath, Ishibenob, and the rest were of the same condition,
of whom the Scripture does 1. Sam. 17.4. 2 Samuel 21.15.16.
express their parentage. And others the like Like as is recorded of Maximinus
the Roman Emperor: whole height was eight foot and an half, the length of
his shoe, an ordinary man's pace, his wives bracelets served him for rings;
his strength was answerable to his statute. Julius Capitolin. Herod. de 7.
Imperat. lib. 7. Likewise, Nicephor. Eccles. Histor. libr. 12. testifies, that
in the reign of Theodosius the Emperor, was one in Syria, of statute five
cubits and an hand breadth. Like to this do Flau. Vopisc. and Procop. de
Bell. Got. libr. 2. Plutarch. in vit. Sertorij, of the tomb of Antaeus, which
for the same thereof Sertorius caused to be opened, and finding the carcass
answerable to report, caused it to preserved with honor. I saw my self, says
Augustine (de ciuit. li. 15. cap. 9.) and not alone neither, upon the shore of
Vtica, the tooth of a man so great, that if it had been divided to the measure
of our teeth, as it seemed, it would have made an hundredth. I would think it
(says he) to have been the tooth of some Giant.
both since, and even in It appears by our own Chronicles that in anno 1581.
was brought to London a dutchman, who was in height seven foot, and seven
inches, this man I my self saw at Tunbridge in Kent the same year.
our time, concerning whom it were want of discretion either to deny
authority, or to think that they were of such abominable parents. And that
we may know the stone whereat the fathers stumbled: the occasion was It
appears by Tertullian. lib. de Idololatria. August. de ciuitat. lib. 15. cap.
23. Pet. Mart. in Genesis 6. moved perhaps somewhat by the authority of the Jews.
a book of Apocrypha or secret Scripture, falsely entitled by the name of
Henoch his Prophecy, unto which they gave reverence, as to the holy
Scripture, because the Apostle Jude Iud. verse. 14.
affirms he did Prophecy, notwithstanding he names neither book nor
writing of Henoch, neither is it of necessity that we should think (although
we deny August. de ciuitat. lib. 15. cap. 23. Notwithstanding, that that
prophecy which has gone under Enoches name, was written by Enoch, we utterly
deny, because it is apparandie countersaite.
it not) that he wrote his Prophecy: for the same spirit of Prophecy that was
in Jude, being 1. Pet. 3.19. 1. Cor. 12.11.
the same that was before in Henoch, could not but know the certain sum and
contents thereof. Neither is it a new invention of the Jews, and Heretics, to
entitle their own works Hieron. Epist. ad Laetam. Caveat omnia apocrypha; et
si quando ea, non ad dogmatum veritatem sed ad signorum reuerentiam legere
voluerit, sciat ^^on eorum esse, quocum titulis praenotantur, multaque hi^
admixta vitiosa, and grandis est prudentiae aurum in lui^ quarere.

August. Tracta. in Ioh. 98. Idem contra Faustum. lib. 22. c. 79. Innocentius.
1. Epist. Decret. 3.

Leo Magn. epistol. Decret. 91. cap. 14. Curandum ergo, vt falsati codices, and
a syncera veritate discordes, in nullo vsu lectionis habeantur, etc.


to another more famous or religious author; such is the power of Satan in
his instruments, to make them labor without hope of praise, and such is his
subtlety and malice, Hieron. commentar. in Isai. cap. 64. De quibus vere dici
potest, quod sedeat diabolus in infidijs, cum diuitibus in Apocryphis, vt
interficiat innocentem. Insidiatur enim in Apocryphis quasi Leo in spelunca
sua. Leo Magn. epist. 91. cap. 15. Apocryphae autem scripturae quae sub
nominibus apostolorum, multarum habent seminarium falsitatum, non solum
interdicenda, sed etiam penitus auferendae sunt atque ignibus conc^emandae.
under color of names of holy men, to seduce Gods people. But as the
authority of this counterfeit author is nothing worth, so on the other side
the truth of the Lord in holy Scripture, is the Psalm. 19.7. Isai. 8.19.20.
Clem. Alexan. Strom. 7.
only help; and fully is it sufficient to overthrow this error. By the
daughters of men, is meant as Tertul. lib. de virgin. v^land. Cum filias
hominum dicit, manifest virgins pertendit.
al confess, wicked women, or the daughters of the wicked. Therefore also by
the sons of God, such as were of the house and family of God, and godly
Parents. Moreover, they took them wives, and continued in the state of
wedlock. Lastly, they were Verse. 3. and 13.
flesh with whom the Lord was angry, and whom he destroyed in his anger; what
were they else therefore but perfect Not medioxumi or mungrels, half men half
devils, as is reported that Castor was, and Hercules and Radamanthus. Festus
Pomp. in verb. mediusfidius. Item Seruim in Virgil. Aenead. lib. 8. Lactant.
libr. 2. cap 15. Quia neque angeli neque homines fuerunt, sed mediam naturam
tenuerunt. A Scripturis absonum. Item. Eugubin. Steucus de Perenni Philosop.
libr. 6. cap. 32.
men? Wherefore these sons of God were flesh indeed, and Philip. 3.19.
Origin. in Psalm. 38. Si terrena sapias and terrena loquaris, and thesaurus
tuus and cor tuum in terra sit, terreni (and carnis) imaginem portas.
fleshly minded, such as chose rather to forsake the worship of God, then the
fulfilling of their foolish lust, fixed on the fading beauty De huiusmodi
hominum procreatione quasi de scripturia hausisset, ceciuit Orpheus. libr. 8.
Sacri Sermonis. (...). i. Nomine coelicolas illos dixere gigantes, orti quod
terra fuerint and sanguine coeli: binc Graecis (...), a terra geniti: i. ab
impijs mulieribus, and filijs Dei, scilices hominibus recte a parentibus
institutis.
of wicked women. Here has the Church of God a goodly warning. That all those
to whom religion is of care, do take heed Deuteronomy. 7.3. 2. King. 8.18.
of joining in society of marriage, with Infidels, Atheists, or Idolaters. The
example is manifest: the sons of God, that is, such men of the posterity of
Seth, as had been Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 22. Et viderunt filij Dei, qui a Seth
and Enos progeniti.
trained up in true religion, saw the daughters of men, of Cyril. Alexan. in
Julian. lib. 9. Certe and in Noae tomporibus filij Dei, hoc est qui ex sanguine
Enos, filias hominum, id est, cas qua ex sanguine Cain, etc.
Caine and Lamech and other of the wicked, Idolaters, tyrannous, Atheists; that
they were fair (as the daughter of the Philistim Judge. 14.3.7.
was in the eyes of Sampson) they They did not by violence ravish whomesoeuer,
as the Jews affirm, but they took themselves wives (so the word signifies)
of whom soever they thought beautiful: the word bears show of no violence,
but rather wantonness.
chose them wives, of all that liked them, that is; had not regard how religion
might be hindered, but how their affections might be satisfied: by which means
the knowledge of God decayed, religion was extinguished, sin increased, and
the fearful wrath of God was brought upon their heads. Now although this
example be known unto us, and their destruction 1. Cor. 10.11.
written to admonish us; although the word of God Exodus 34.6. Deuteronomy. 7.3.
do carefully forbid this sin, and severely threaten Malac. 2.11.
those that practice it: yet how often is it seen in this our age, that godly
Christian Protestants (in show and countenance) do join in marriage for
beauty, wealth or honor sake, with Atheists, with Libertines, with Papists,
and do take the daughter of a strange God? Yea, that which is the greatest
shame, such Parents will oftentimes provoke their children to match rather with
Cicero. Offic. lib. ^. Themistocles cum consuleretur, vtrum hono viro pauperi,
an minus probato diuitifiliam collocaret: Ego vero, inquit, malo virtum qui
pecunia egeat, quam pecuniam quae viro.
riches, then with godliness. Some do pretend herein, that they may convert a
sinner. But the Lord says, the wicked by marriage Deuteronomy. 7.4.
will pervert the righteous, Surely 1. King. 11.2.
they will turn away thy heart. The proof whereof we have beside this
example, in the Judge. 3.6.
nation of Israel, in Judge. 16.4.
Sampson, in 1. King. 11.4.
Solomon, and 1. King. 21.25. 2. Chron. 21.6.
other. The contrary through the mercy of God may 1. Cor. 7.16.
sometime happen, but we ought not to tempt Romans 3.8. Matthew. 4.6.7. Ne igitur
cum imp^t contrahas, ductam vero iam ne deseras.
the Lord: neither is it wisdom for men to make such dangerous experience.
But what hurt comes by this, unto the Church of God? As water and earth make
mire and dirt, which is fit for nothing, but to be trodden under foot: so the
combining of two 2. King. 17.33. Hieron. epist. ad Algasiam. In parabola (Luc.
10.) Samaritanus ponitur pro signo atque miraculo, quod malus benefecerit.
Item. Lu^. 17.16.
religions, or the mixture of religion, do engender according to their
condition, irreligion. None are more hateful unto the Lord, then those 1.
King. 18.21. Revel. 3.16.
that hault between two religions. None are more Cantic. 5.7. Exemplo Saul,
Iudae, etc.
fierce against the Saints; none are more pestilent unto the Church of God.
Never was a more cursed Atheist, then was Julian, who Socrat. Scholast. Hist.
eccles. lib. 3. cap. 1. At clam quidem disciplinas Philosophoru^ excoluit,
palam autem sacra Christianorum perlegit eloquia, atque adeo in eccl^sia
Nicomedensi lector designatur sit: abrasaque cu^e, vitam monasticam simulauit.
Theodoret. libr. 3. cap. 2. Idem in conuentibus ecclesiasticis recitabat populo
sacros libros, and aedem martyrum coepit extruere.
outwardly sometime was zealous for religion; but by In s^hola Libanij Ethnici
sophistae. Socrat. Histor. Eccles. lib. 3. cap. 1.
society of wicked company fell away. Never was a more cruel tyrant of the
Turks, then Mahomet, the Philip. Lonicer. Hist. Turcis c^^b. 1. in vit.
Mahometis 2.
son of a Christian Lady, who by his mother being taught religion, and by
others, his country superstition; kept between both, and observed neither,
worshipping no other God, but the John Fox. Acts and Montum. Tractat. of the
tyranny of the Turks.
goddess of good fortune. And what else is Which is the superstition of the
Turks.
Mahometisme it self, but a That is plain by the Turkish Alcaron: by their
eight precepts. Lonicer. li. 2. c. ^. By their profession of faith: there is
but one God, and Mahomet is his only Prophet; Non est Deuteronomy nisi vnus, Mahomet
autem Propheta eius: by their praier^, fastings, alms, sacrifice, etc. Ba^th.
Georg. epit. de morib. Turcar.
mixture of Gentilisme, and of heresies concerning the person of our Savior
Christ? Or what else is The degenerated religion of the Church of Rome. 1. John.
2.19.
Papistrie, but a very Chaos or leaven of all heresies Whitaker in praefat. 1.
Controuers. de Scripturis.
chiefly concerning the offices of Christ, as men by little and little fell
away from the true understanding of the word, and 1. Tim. 1.4.
gave heed to fables? Even so, of true religion joined with Papistry or other
heresies, can be begotten no other but Apostasy from true religion, Atheism,
and that which 2. Tim. 3.1. etc. 2. Pet. 3.3.
the Scriptures have foretold. Those therefore that will join 2. Cor. 6.14.
Tertul. ad vxor. lib. 2. Quis enim dubites obliterari quotidie fidem commercio
infideli. Bonos corrumpunt mores confabulationes prauae, quanto magis conuictus
and indiuiduus vsus Domino non potest pro disciplina satisfacere, habens in
latere diaboli seruum, etc. Habes causam, qua non dubites, nullum huiusmodi
matrimonium prospere decurri: a malo conciliatur, a domino damnatur.
Papistrie in marriage with the right and sound profession of the truth; or in
doctrine De huiusmodi conciliatoribus scribit Hieronym. Epistol. ad August.
tres simul, etc. Dum volunt and Iudaei esse and Christiani. nec Iudaei sunt nec
Christiani.
make a mean, between faith and works in the point of iustifiyng: they do no
less then ouerturne religion, bring in Atheism, obscure Revel 9.2.
Gods truth, and hasten the Matthew. 24.44. 1. These. 5.3. Revel. 14.16.
coming of Jesus Christ. This was the Verse. 2.5.6.
ruin of the old world. The fathers were outward worshippers of God, their
mothers were superstitious and wicked women, their children of no religion, but
lovers 2. Tim. 3.2.
of themselves, Verse. 11.13. August. de ciuit. lib. 15.23.
cruel, Psalm. 10.4.
high minded, and 1. Pet. 3.20.
hardened in their sins: and as it was in the Matthew. 24.37.
days of Noah, so shall it be in the coming of the son of man.

Question 2. verse 3. What means this which the Lord says: My Spirit shall
not always strive with man, because he is but flesh: and his days shall be an
hundredth and twenty years?
IT is of the Greeks translated: my spirit shall not always remain in man:
and so Origin in Psalm. ^8. Hom. 2. Idem in Isai. Hom. 3. Chrysostom. in Genesis
Hom. 22. Ambros. Hexam. lib. 6 cap. 6. Bernard. Sermon. 1. in festum S. Michael.
the Fathers for the most part do expound it. The Hebrew (...) iadhon a radice
(...) dun: from hence, Dan, judgment. Genesis 15.14. and 30.3. Ioh. 19.29. Iere.
5.28
word does often signify to judge. So that Jerome Hierom. Tradit. Hebraic. Hoc
est: Quia fragilis est in homine conditio, non eos ad aternos seruabo
cruciatus. sed hic illis restituam quod merentur. Ergo non seueritatem vt in
nostris libris legitur, sed clementiam Dei sonat. etc.
understands this sentence to be a speech of mercy, not of judgment, thus:
my spirit shall not judge these me^ for ever: that is, I will not judge them to
eternal punishments, but will here afflict them, that their souls may 1. Cor.
5.5.
be saved in the day of the Lord. But the word does also 2. Sam. 19.9. Prou.
6.14. and 27.15. Ierem. 15.10.
signify to strive or to contend; which is much more agreeing with the
circumstance and purpose of the text; and therefore undoubtedly, the word is so
to be Sic autem Rabb. Iehudah and Joseph Kimchi inter Hebraeos. Chaldaeus
Paraphr. Non stabilietur seu consistes hac praua generatio, non durabit in
longum tempus, scilicet vltra 120. annot. Calvin. in Genesis 6.3. Dominum quasi
defessum obstinata mundi pertinacia.
interpreted. But how can the spirit of God be said to strive with man? The
Scriptures speak Theodoret. quaest. in Genesis 52. Scriptura diuina loquitur,
prout hominibus expedit, and pro captu auditorum varias habet loquendi formas.
after our understanding, comparing the ways of God which are unsearchable, to
the condition of man, with which by experience and use we are acquainted. In
this sense he is said to strive, as he is said Ierem. 7.25. and 25.4. and 35.15.
to rise early, and send his Prophets: which is, when he does diligently send
his Prophets, often, or many Ezech. 13.5.
to repress or reprove men's wickedness. Or again, when by his judgments he
does forewarne Iere. 7.12. Amos. 6.2 Ioh. 5.14. vt Hieron. in Ier. 3. Alioru^
torme^ta aliorum sunt remedia.
other of the same or greater punishments; or when by Romans 2.4. 1. Pet. 3.20.
patient expectation he does awaite for our repentance. The words therefore are
thus to be resolved: my Spirit shall not always: that is, I will not always
by my spirit, by Isai. 61.1. 2. Tim. 3.16. 2. Cor. 3.17.
admonition, reprehension, threatening, and expectation; strive with man: labor
in vain to bring them to repentance; because they are but flesh; wholly
sinful and Romans 8.1.4.5. Orig. in Psalm. 38. Hom. 2. Chrysostom. in Ge^. Ho^.
22. Quasi sola carne circu^dati, anima carere^t; sic vita^ sua^ absumunt.
set on mischief, and there is no hope of amendment in them. Here may we
learn: First, the exceeding mercy of God Ezech. 33.11. 2. Cor. 5.20.
in offering his mercy to the wicked, and striving by Deuteronomy. 5.29. Ierm. 25.4.
Hose. 6.4. Amos. 4.6.7.
all means with them to bring them to repentance. Secondly, the long
suffering of God Romans 2.4. For the bou^tifulnes of God ought to lead us unto
thankfulness: in regard whereof, Policarpus being threatened, that unless he
would blaspheme the name of Christ he should be tormented to death: I have
served him now (said he) these 86. years, neither ever did he hurt me in any
thing: how should I then speak evil of so gracious a Lord that has ever been
my preservation? Eusebius.
ought to lead us to repentance. Thirdly, vengeance succeeds Pro. 1.24.25.
Zaechar. 1.6. and 7.13. Math. 21.43. Exemplis infinitis.
refused mercy, as the night ouertaketh the day. Fourthlie, the wicked are
alwaie Isaei. 1.5. and 26.10. Iere. 44.27.
past recovery, before wrath be sent upon them, which often, when it has long
time bin deferred, Mat. 23.38.44. Revel. 3.3.
comes swiftly, dreadfullie, and suddenly. But to what purpose says the
Lord: his days shall be an hundredth and twenty years? I will yet, says he,
forbear them Hieron. Trad. Hebrae. in Genesis Hoc est, habebunt 120. annos ad
agenda^ punitentiam.
an hundredth and twenty years. Behold the long suffering of God! Men were
corrupted in sin by Adam: men began Rabbini fere omnes, vocem ((...) huchal,
a rad. (...) chalal) reddunt prophanare. Sic and D. Kimchi libr. rad. Onkelos
paraphrast. Chalda. Prophanati sunt homines ne inuocarent. Tremel. Coeptum est
prophanari, alij incipere (nam vox ipsa in call, signif. vulnerare, inquinare in
hipil, scil. altera specie coniugationum Hebraeorum and rarius polluere sieve
inquinare) eo sensu, vt coeperunt inuocare sieve attribuere nome^ Iehouae idolis
suis: sed obseruandu^ est voce^ charah cum beth seque^te nu^quam poni nisi in
bona^ parte^. Deinde, esset dictu^, prophanatu^ est nome^ domini inuocando, non
aute^ prophanatum (quod vere, captu^ est) ad inuocandu^ in nomen, vt in textu
ad verbu^ est. Aben. Ezra. in Comment. Item Mercer. in politia Iudaie.
Coeperunt homines de nomine domini vocari, scil. vocabantur filij Dei.
Quocunque accipias modo, illud restat, prophanatum esse a plurimis, rite
inuocatum a paucioribus.
to profane religion in the days of Henoch, so that few they were which
rightly called on the name of the Lord. Cruel Giants, and fierce Tyrants were
of the brood of Caine, as Lamech, and other like unto him. Lastly, the family
of Seth, among whom true religion was maintained, joined in affinity with the
daughters of the wicked, whereby the same religion was quite extinguished, and
not a man remaining to uphold the truth, but Noah solus in generatione sua, nam
in superioribus Methusala and Lamech, in sequenti Sem and lapheth, etiamsi
omnes simul vixerint.
one, the rest being so drowned in security, and cruelty, that they would not
be admonished; and yet the Lord would wait for their repentance an hundred and
twenty years. One will ask perhaps, how the Lord is said to speak this: My
Spirit shall not always, etc. The Lord may be said to speak this (like as the
Scripture sometime 1. Sam 18.11. and 27.1. Hest. 6.6.
calls a man's inward thought, a speech, when as a thought is as effectual as
a speech) in respect of himself, because he decreed it in Basil. Hexam. 3.
Aut magis pium est dicere quod sancta volu^tas, and primus impetus
intellectualis motus, hoc ipsum sermo Dei est.
himself. He may be said to speak it, in respect of the world, because he
Se^l. per reuelatione^, vt Isai. 1.1. Hag. 1.1.
made his counsel and purpose known unto the world. For hereby it is
perceived, Verse. 13.14. 1. Pet. 3.20. August. contr. Faust. Manicha. Quod Noe
quingentoru^ erat annorum cum ei locutus est Dominus, etc. vnde intelligitur
per centum annos arca fabricata. Idem de ciu. Dei, lib. 15. c. 24. Sed
intelligendum est, hoc Deum dixisse cum circa finem quingentorum annorum esset
Noc: id est, quadringentes octoginta annos agent. quae re and area codem anno
incepta est, dur. n^itque in fabrica centum and viginti annos.
that an hundredth and twenty years before the coming of the flood, God
Ezech. 3.17. 2. Pet. 2.5.
taught these Preachers of righteousness, and they delivered it unto the people,
that the world should be destroyed by the flood. And to this purpose it is
added in the text: And God said unto Noah, An end of all flesh is come before
me: for the earth is filled with cruelty through them: and behold I will
destroy them with the earth. Make thee an Arc of pine trees, etc. and Noah did
according to all that God commanded him. Wherein the Scripture manifestly
teaches, that Noah received this revelation from God, and began to make
preparation for the Arc, ( Lamech and Methusala being then in life) six score
years before the flood began. Wherefore they are deceived Philo Iudaeus lib.
de Gigant. Joseph. Antiq. lib. 1. cap. 4. Primum vitam little breutori spacio
circumscripsit, and abrogata lo^gaeuitate intracentum and viginta annos
coercuit, deinde continentem terram in pelagi formam etc. Lactant. lib. 2. cap.
14. Ne rursus longitudo vitae causa esset excogitanderum malorum, paulatim per
singulat progenies diminuit hominis aetatem, atque in centum and viginti annis
meta^ collocauit. Long aliter Hieron. Trad. in Genesis Non igitur humana vita, vt
multi errant, in centum viginti annos, contracta est, sed generationi illi 120.
anni ad poenitentia^ dati sunt.
who interpret this space of an hundredth and twenty years, to be appointed
for the age of man's life after the sloud of waters; which has been
ouerpassed, not only Genesis 11.10.11.13.17 and 35.28. and 47.9.
of the fathers, but also of men of latter years almost Job. 42.16. 2. Chron.
24.15. Externi: Epimenides annos vixit 157. author Phasgo. Zenophanes, Laert.
li^. 1. in vita Epimen. Arganton Tartessioru^ rex in Hispan. 150. inquit Plin.
lib. 7. Silius de Bell. Punic. lib. 3. dicit 300. Ter denos decies amensus
belliger annos. Nestor 300. vt non pauci attestantur. Galenus 140. vt fama
constantest. Call. Rodigin. lect. antiq. lib. 16. Ioannes dictus de Temporibus
sub Carolo magno 300. Mant. etc.
in every age. For indeed the Lord does herein limite and bound out the time
of old and young, in the age before the flood: professing unto them by his
Prophets, that Jonah. 3.4.
unless they did repent, they should at the end of one hundredth and twenty
years be utterly destroyed. But herein remains no less a difficulty then
before. The Lord promises to spare the world an hundredth and twenty years;
and it seems by the Scripture, he forbear them but only an hundredth years.
For in the former Chapter, Noah is said to be five hundred years old, when he
begat children; and in the Chapter following, it is said that in the six
hundredth year of the life of Noah Confer Gen 5.32. and 7.11.
the flood of waters were upon the earth. Some writers upon this collection
Rabb. in Cabala. Tseror Bahi. and alij. Hieron. in Trad. Hebrae. viginti
annorum spatijs amputatis induxit dilunium. sic Hugo in annot. in Genesis Sic
Strab. in Eccles. Histor. viginti annos anticipauit vindictam, and plurimi
Papista.
have affirmed, that because the wicked world would not repent, God shortened
and cut off this time appointed, the space of twenty years. Which opinion
beside that it is untrue, is fully against the purpose and consent of
Scriptures; which 1. Pet. 3.20.
abundantly express the riches of Gods long suffering, in the days of Noah.
But in deed this chapter does not only continue the former history, in the
time where it left, In respect of time, the sixth chapter follows upon the
fourth: the fifth contains a digression of the life and death of the Fathers.
at the birth of the children of Noah, as it is in the end of the former
chapter: but also by recapitulation, and exposition (as is the manner of the
Scripture) does confirm and explane that which went before; and therefore it
begins: And it was when men began to multiply, etc. Men began not to
multiply after the birth of the sons of Noah, for then the earth was filled
with cruelty: but the Scripture means that long before this time, so soon
as men began to multiply, sin also began to multiply; forasmuch as not
only the wicked seed increased, but of the household of the godly, some from
time to time declined, and made shipwreck of their faith and godliness; and the
seeds of this mischief were sown, long before the birth of the sons of
Noah, in so much that the earth was by the curse prepared to the flood Genesis
5.29. 2. Pet. 3.5.6. Tremel. in Genesis 5 Co^solabiturde opere laboriosissi no
cuius necessitatem subiuimus tu^ proper communem illam omnium hominu^
deprauatione^, tu^ propter singular seculi nostri scelus. No^ quod primus
fuerit Noe Agricola vt Hebrat volunt, sed quod esset spes vnica restaurationis
a malo illo seculo, a poena communi, and de Christo in carne nascituro.
before the birth of Noah himself. Wherefore this is to be understood of the
course of time. Sin began to wax exceeding grievous, about the time of the
Verse. 1.2. etc.
birth of Noah: for the sons of God took the daughters of men in marriage:
by their posterity, cruelty and sin increased. For this cause the Lord
threatens to bring the sloud, and Noah is commanded to prepare the Arc,
sixscore years before the drowning of the world; that is to say, Noah being of
age four hundredth and fourscore years, and when he was Genesis 5.32.
five hundredth years old, he begat Sem, Ham, and Iapheth, Sem quidem centum
agens annos sexcentessimo secundo anno vitae Noae vt apparet Genesis 7.11. and
11.10. Non fuit primogenitus filiorum Noae, nisi forte indefinite sumas, hoc
est circa hunc annum; quod ex textu refutatur. Vide c. 11.
that is to say, the eldest of them. And as the Lord was patient in long
suffering, so was he merciful in giving warning to the world of their
calamity. The godly Patriarchs foresaw Joseph. Antiq. lib. 1. cap. 3. Adamum
vniuersalem rerum interetu^ praececinisse scribit Theodulus Coelesyr. Com. in
Ro^. 5. Idex naturali lege dictatum and reuelatu^. Forte autem ex
reuelationibus non paucis, cum prophetae fuerint.
destruction (albeit they knew not in what kind it was to come) long before
this special revelation given to Noah, for both Henoch and Lamech did Iud. 14.
Genesis 5.29.
prophecy of the destruction of the world; and Lemech for perpetual monument,
calls his son by the name of Noah, that is to say, rest, Noah (...) a (...)
nuach quiescere, to rest; because in him the wrath of GOD in the flood stayed
and went no farther: or because he was to refresh and comfort his fathers
concerning the destruction of mankind.
or refreshing, from grief or sorrow, to the end says Chrysostom. Hom. in
Genesis 21. Praedicit per appellationem pueri mala que totum humanum genus
deprehensura essent, vt vel timore castigati abarcerentur a vitijs, and
amplecterentur virtutem.
Chrysostom, that all that saw this child, and would enquire his name, might
learn thereby the general destruction that was to come. But no warning will
suffice the wicked, which Ierem. 8.7.9.
despise the word of God, and those which teach it by the 1. Cor. 2.4. 2. Cor.
4.3.
demonstration of the spirit. They knew right well the superfluity of sin, and
were partakers of the fulness of iniquity; they heard the preaching of the
Patriarchs, they found the Arc prepared, they perceived the coming of beasts
and cattle to the same for refuge from the waters; they saw the heavens power
down rain, and the floods increase: yet would Genesis 7.21.23. and 8.16.
not one person be admonished, not so much as the August. quaest. in Genesis q. 5.
Non erat magnum fabros alios adhibere: quamuis operis sui mercede accepta, non
curauerint, vtrum came Noe sapienter an vero inauiter fabricaret. Et ideo, non
in eam intrauerunt quia non crediderunt quod ille crediderat.
builders and carpenters which happily wrought upon the Arc, till the waters
had stopped their passage, from coming to receive it for their sauegard. The
reason was, they Heb. 4.2.
received not the word by faith, they Genesis 19.14. Ezech. 33.32.
counted Noah his preaching, to be but dotage; his building, cost in vain. And
those that will not believe the preaching of the word, they will not John 12
35.36. Joseph of the wars of the Jews, lib. 7. cap. 12. recites diverse
signs, which happened before the destruction of Jerusalem, foretold by
Christ, Luke 21. First, that a blazing Star in fashion of a sword, hung over
the city. Secondly, that at the feast of unleavened bread, a light shone round
about the Altar, about midnight, as clear as day. Thirdly, that a Cow led to
be sacrificed, calued a Lamb. Fourthlie, that the Brazen gate of the Temple,
which twenty men could scarsely open, was seen to open at midnight of it own
accord. Fifthly, that the first of May there were seen in the air Chariots and
standing battles skirmishing in the clouds, and compassing the City. Sixthly,
in the Temple was heard the sound of a wonderful terrible base voice, which
said: Let us go hence. Seventhly, a certain country fellow, one Jesus the
son of Anani, seven years before the City was destroyed, began to cry out:
A voice from the East, a voice from the West, a voice from the four winds, a
voice against Jerusalem and the Temple, a voice against this people: and though
they whipped and scourged him to the bone, yet he ceased not to cry, Woe, woe
to Jerusalem. And yet that people that would not obey Christ and his Apostles
preaching, were destroyed for all these signs, as though they had had no
warning.
be admonished by signs: those that will not Luc. 16.31. Chrysostom. in cap. 1.
ad Galat Comment. Haec autem Christus ipse in lucit in parabola loquentem
Abraham, declarans se velle plus fides habendum esse scripturis, quam si mortui
reuiuiscant.
believe the Prophets, will not receive an Angel, or one that is risen from
the dead. But now when they saw the flood increased, the heavens resolved into
rain, cattle and wild beasts striving for life within the streams, their
houses like fish pooles receiving the waters, their children ready to perish,
and themselves separate from help and comfort; what could they do, but Prou.
12.28. Heb. 12.17. August. Sermon. de Temp. 36. Age panitentiam d^m sanu^es, si
sic agis dico tibi quod securus es, quia poenitentiam egisti eo tempore quo
peccare potuisti. Si vis agere poenitentiam quando iam peccare non potes,
peccata te dimiserunt, non tu^ll^.
repent too late, and wish woe unto themselves, that would not in time be
warned. Obser. Sleepie security and contempt Mat. 24. verse. 30.
of the word, is a certain token of destruction, and the same Mat. 24.40.41.
1 Thessalonians. 5.3.
shall go before the end. Secondly, those that mix Heb. 4.2.
not the word with faith, Luc. 16.31. Ignati. epist. ad Philadelph. Jesus mihi
pro archiuis est, quim nolle audire manifesta pernicies est.
will receive no grace to believe the tokens that are promised to foreshew the
coming of the Lord to judgment: but as it was in the days of Noah, so shall
it be in the end of the world.

Question 3. verse 6. How it is said: The Lord repented that he made man?
THe Scriptures Numb. 23.19. 1. Sam. 15.29. Malac. 3.6.
often testify, that with the Lord there is no repentance nor Iam. 1.17.
shadow of change: and surely as there is no shadow of turning with the Lord,
so is there in deed Bernard. Sermon. de quadrup. debit. Viae Domini, viae
rectae, viae pulchrae, viae plenae, viae planae; recta sine errore, quia ducunt
ad vitam; pulchrae sine sorde, quia docent mu^ditiem: plenae multitudine, quia
totus iam mu^dus est intra Christi sagenam: planae sine difficultate, quia
donant suauitateos.
no shadow of contrariety in Scripture, albeit to us, as to them that are
bleare eyed, Tertul. in Marcion. lib. 1. Lippientibus, etiam singularis lucerna
numerosa est.
one candle seems many. Wherefore we must diligently consider, how the Lord
can rightly here be said to repent and to be sorry, when as in other
Scriptures it is said, he cannot repent. The Scriptures which are the Ierem.
15.19. Matthew. 4.4.
mouth of God, Co^ciliatio. 8.
are compelled through our infirmity and ignorance, to speak many things of
God, which in deed are proper unto men, which otherwise of man August. octuag.
triu^. quaest. lib. q. 52. Diuina scripturae a terreno and humano sensu ad
diuinum and coelest^ nos erigentes, vsque ad ea verba descenderunt, quibus
inter se stultissimorum etiam vtitur consuetudo.
could not be understood, thereby to make me^ rise by little and little from
the knowledge of themselves, to the knowledge of the Lord. For this cause it
calls the power and might of God, the Exodus 6.6. Psalm. 44.3. and 118.15.16.
arm and the right hand of God, not that he has a hand or arm, but because
our strength and power is executed by our hand and arm, which the Lord does
otherwise perform then we can understand. In this Anastasius Nicaen. lib.
quaest. in Script. q. 21. Nonnulli autem ob summam pultitia^, cum scripturam
audiant dicentem, aperi oculos tuos and vide, etc. Male audientes nec
intelligentes, existimant Deum humana forma praeditum, nec intellexerunt, vt
qui essent nunium ins^^iente^, quod cum hominibus per homines loquens Deus,
auditorum imbecillitati sermonem accommodet: and quoniam videmus per oculo^,
videndi facultatem oculos nominas, and audiendi facultatem aures, and iussum,
or. Sed oportebat cum non solum audire haec verba, sed etiam ea qu^ docent Deum
non posse circumscribi: quo en^m inquit ib^ a facie tua.
sense, his providence is called his Psalm. 34.15. Pro. 15.3. Isa. 37.17.
eye, because we with our eyes do watch and see. The appearing of his presence
is called his foot, because Psalm. 18.9 Isai 66.1.
we by our feet do come in presence. That which he will preserve unhurt, is
called Deuteronomy. 32.10. Psalm. 17.8. Zacar. 2.8.
the apple of his eye, because the same of us is most carefully preserved. His
essential substance is called Amos 6.8. The Lord has sworn ((...),
benephesho) by his life or soul: that is, by himself.
his soul, because the soul of man is the Of wicked men, ye body is the man,
for their belly is their God; but of godly me^, the mind: Men^ cuiusque is est
quisque.
man himself. His anger or displeasure is Psalm. 18.8. Ierem. 49.37.
called his nostrels, because men are known to be angry, by the moving of
their nostrels. And the same his anger (which in men is an Arist. Ethic. lib.
2. cap. 5. (...). Sunt huiusmodi in animo propter que neque laudamur nec
vituperamur. Zeno sic definit affectus. (...): auersio a recta ratione, and
contra naturam animae co^motio. Cic. Tuscul. quaest. li. 3 Morbos and
aegritudines animi vocat. in Academicis, perturbationes. de invent. 1. impetus,
commotiones, affectus: talia non reperiantur apud deum.
affection, when as there are Theodoret. quaest. in Genesis 50. Ira and
poenitentia humanae passiones sunt, a quibus natura diu^na prorsus est libera.
neither affections, nor passions in the Lord) as likewise his Malac. 1 21.
Ioh. 3.16.
love, Psalm. 11.5. Romans 9.13.
hatred, Exodus ^0.5. Deuteronomy. 32.21.
jealousy, Judge. 10.16.
sorrow and such like, are said to be in the heart of Verse. 6. Psalm. 11.5.
Judge. 10.16. Like as men which do earnestly sorrow, do earnestly seek remedy
for their grief: so by this so great alteration of his work, God appeared unto
men, as it were to be sorry in his very heart.
God, because as men do represent their affections by their deeds, and their
hearts remain unsearchable, save Psalm. 94.10.11.
of the maker of the heart; so the Eccles. 7.25.26. Isai. 40.13 Romans 11.23.
thoughts and ways of God are past man's finding out, farther they are explaned
by his word and works; wherein they are resembled to our affections, that we
might measure that in our selves, which in the Lord cannot be measured. Thus
also he is said to repent, when otherwise the Scripture says, he is without a
shadow of change. To repent does signify (...) nacham. verse. 6. properly in
repenting to alter his whole purpose. Judge. 21.15. Augustine. Amaritudinem animi
vocat; Metius est modica amaritudo in faucibus, quam aeternum tormentum in
visceribus. de December Chordis.
to sorrow for some Psalm. 51.3.4. either for gultines or punishment.
action which we find to be amiss, with From hence Aristotle calls
repentance ((...)) the changing of ones care or counsel: and also ((...)) the
changing of ones wisdom.
an afterthought, or purpose of mind, to change it into better. This belongs
For evil spirits will not repent: the blessed spirits need it not, because
thorough the goodness of God they cannot fall. August. de ciuit. Dei. lib. 22.
cap. 30.
properly to men, and peculiar it is to God alone, that he Ambros. Epist. 82.
Nunquam autem poenitere, solius est Dei.
cannot will, whereof he can repent. For this sorrow of mind, which is
repentance, arises of some evil committed, or goodness pretermitted: but the
divine nature Deuteronomy. 32.4. Psalm. 145.17.
being pure from these, so pure, that Job. 4.18. and 25.5.
the heavens, or Angels are not clean before his eyes, his Isai. 46.10.
August. contra Manich. lib. 1. cap. 3. Idem epist. 54. Deu^ ergo singulariter
est bonus, and hoc amitiere non potest. Nullius autem boni participatione bonus
est, quoniam bonum quo bonus est, ipse sibi est: homo autem cum bonus est, ab
illo bonus est, quod a se ipso esse non potest.
will also being the highest rule of righteousness, he cannot fail either in
omitting, or committing, whereof he should repent. Why then says the
Scripture, he did repent? Because as men, when they repent, do alter their
works together with their thoughts, and by their works it is known their
thoughts are changed; so when the Lord does change his works, he seems unto
us to change his mind, which the scripture witnesses he cannot alter, in any
thought. Wherefore we ought not to conceive any other of the Lords repentance,
Tertul. in Marcion. lib. 2. Quis ergo erit mos poenitentia diuinae, nihil enim
aliud intelligitur quam simplex conuersio sententiae prioris. Theodoret.
quaest. in Genesis 50. Poenitentia Dei nihil aliud est quam mutatio dispensationis
eius. Aug. lib. Octuag. Trium. quaest q. 52. Quoniam mutare captum aliquod and
in aliud transfer non facile solemus nisi poenitendo; quanquam diuina
prouidentia serena mente intuentibus appareat cuncta certissimo ordine
administrare: accommodatissime tamen ad humilem humanam intelligentiam, ea quae
incipiunt esse neque perseuerant, quantum perseueratura sperata sunt, quasi per
panitentiam Dei dicuntur ablata. Calvin. Instit. 1. cap. 17. sect. 13. Ita nec
aliud debemus accipere sub poenitentiae vocabulo, quam factorum mutationem:
quia solent homines sactae sua mutand^ testari sibi displicere.
then the mutation of his works, which change or alteration of works, is
called repentance, because me^ by changing of their works, do testify and
show repentance. And the same in the heavenly wisdom of the Scriptures, is
called not a change of works in God, but repentance it self, which properly
is a changing of the mind; because the Lord in every such repentance, does
alter even his revealed mind and purpose; that is to say, that which he has
revealed of his mind and purpose; notwithstanding that August. de Ciuit. lib.
22. cap. 1. Cum Deus mutare dicitur voluntatem, vt quibus lenis erat, verbi
graetia, reddatur iratus, ille potius quam ipse mutatur.
his mind, or will it self is not therein changed, but they of whom he
revealed the same his purpose. For the understanding of this doctrine we must
remember, that the majesty of God, his Nam ad ipsam substantiam Dei pertines
voluntas eius. Aug. Confess. lib. 11. c. 11.
holiness, his will, is incomprehensible of any creature, his wisdom and his
counsel Romans 11.33.
is unsearchable; in which he has purposed and ordered Hieron. commentar. in
Ierem. 12. Quicquid in mundo vel bonorum accidit vel malorum, non absque
prouidentia.
every thing, as they are to come to pass, from the creation of the world,
and the redemption of the same, to the Matthew. 10.29.30.
falling of a hair from the head of man, and to the lighting of a Sparrow upon
the ground. This his disposition and his counsel, he has made known to
men, not Athanas. dialog. de Trin. lib. 1. (...). It is not possible to know
God fully as he is, unless a man were endued fully with the same infinite
knowledge that God is. But none can be of the same knowledge, but he that is of
the same nature, etc.
so fully as in himself it is; but as men are able to contain the same. For
a little dish is more unto the sea, then the capacity of any man or Angel
is, Basil. in Psalm. 115. Qui enim mentem suam non humiliat, sed de essentia
Dei comprehensione cogitat, etc. Non reputans quod facilius est parua homina
totum mare demetiri, quam humana mente maiestatem Dei, frustra inflatus non
potest dicere, credidi qua pro^ter locutus sum. Finit^ ad infinitum nulla
comparatio.
unto that infinitenes that is in God. In which respect he says to Moses: thou
Exodus 33.20.
can not see my face, for no man shall see my face and live: because our
eyes, and hearts, and souls would burst in sunder, at the containing of the
glory of his greatness. So far then as he has revealed unto us his will and
counsel, the same is called It is called (voluntas signi) his signified or
revealed will. Augustine. De Ciuitat. Dei libr. 22. cap. 1. Multa volunt fieri
sancti Dei ab illo inspirati sancta voluntate, nec fiunt, sicut erant; ac per
hoc quando secundum Deum volunt and erant sancti, vt quisque sit saluus,
possumus illo modo locutionis dicere, vult Deus and non facit. Secundum illam
vero voluntatem suam quae cum eius prescientia sempiterna est, profecto in
coelo and in terra omnia quaecunque voluit, non solum praeteritae vel
praesentia, sedetiam futura iam facis. Peter. Mart, in 1. Sam. 15. Calvin.
institut. lib. 1. cap. 17. Sect. 1.2.
of the learned, his revealed will; so far as he has not revealed it,
namely that infinite wisdom, in the order and cause of things, which we
cannot comprehend, is said to be his Voluntas beneplaciti (the will of his
pleasure) Lombard. lib. 1. Distinct. 45. F.
secret will; not that there are two several wills in God, but August. de
ciuitat, lib. 22. cap. 1. Multa quidem fiunt a malia contra voluntate^ dei: sed
tantae est ille sapientiae tantaque virtutis, vt in eos exitus sieve sines quos
bonor and iustos ipse praesciuit, tendant omnia qua voluntati eius videntur
aduersa. Damascen. Orthodox. fid. lib. 3. cap. 14. (...). i. The father, the
son, and the holy spirit, which have all one substance, have all one will,
and one operation or power of working. Also the will of the father is simple
and uncompounded.
one, which one is partly known Namely so far as it is revealed. Chrysostom.
de incomprehens. Dei not. Hom. 1. Iam vias eius inuestigabiles audis. and ipsum
esse comprehensibilem putas?
and partly unknown unto us. Wherefore in regard of his mind or will
revealed, which we know or can contain, God can repent; but in respect of his
secret counsel, and his will it self, he cannot change. And because his
mind and will revealed Deuteronomy. 29.29. Isai. 8.19.20.
consists in his word and works, the repentance of the same his mind and
will, is but the changing of his 1. Sam. 2.30.32.
word or works. The example will make this doctrine plain. I will (says God)
destroy Verse. 13.
man from off the earth, for I repent that I have made them. Herein is set
down the quality or form of Gods repentance: The Lord when he created man,
declared that his pleasure was, that man should live upon the earth: now he
says, I repent, when he takes them away, changing that which he had
declared of his will, by their creation, and by farther revealing the purpose
of his will, does change his work; and seems also to change his counsel.
He made men in deed Mica. 6.8. Luc. 1.74.75. Irenae. lib. 4. cap. 28. Hominem
creauit vt haberet in quem collocaret beneficia, etc.
to live in righteousness and holiness, and not to be destroyed by the
Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 22. Non enim propter hoc produxi (inquit) vt tanta
ruina Lapsus. fibi ipsi perditionis fieret author.
waters of a flood; and as this was his revealed will, so he willed moreover, if
they sinned wholly in such execrable sort, and would not repent, to destroy
the^ wholly for their sin, thereby to make Romans 9.22. E^ quidem temporalis:
poenarum finis bonorum excordium est: Hieron. in Mica. cap. 7. Aeterne; poena
patientis ira creditus decernentis. Hilar. in Psalm. 2.
his power and justice known; which being not revealed, was then to be
accounted his secret will. Now then when God repents, and men are destroyed
for sin: men are changed by their own default from good to evil, but the
Lord is not changed: he alters his work, but not his Eucherius in Genesis 6.
Poenitudo Dei est mutandarum rerum immutabilu ratio.
wisdom: he changes his revealed pleasure, Idie Homer. Iliad.^ (...):
prudentum semper mutabilis animus.

Cicer Epist. Fam. lib. 1. Epist. 9. Nunquam enim praestantibus in republica
gubernanda viris, laudata est in vna sententia perpetua per mansio. idem. Neque
idem semper dicere, sed idem semper spectare debemus.


as wise men according to occasion do change their mind; but his wisdom and
will is infinite, in which he foreseeth from everlasting, Psalm. 139.2. Ephesians.
1.4. Etiam peccata ordinat non facit. Fulgent. lib. 1.
all occasions, and therefore wills to alter and change his will and works,
in the sight of men and Angels; and therefore does alter his revealed will and
counsel, that his unrevealed will and the purpose of the same, might from
everlasting remain immutable. Thus he repented concerning 1. Sam. 15.11.
Saul; he made his pleasure known, that he should be King; of whom the
Israelites could conceive no farther, but that to him should have remained the
succession of the same for ever: but the Lord did will moreover that Saul for
his unthankfulness and rebellion 1. Sam. 15.23.28.
should lose his kingdom, and to perform the same his will, he says, I
repent that I have made Saul king: that is, I have Theodores. quaest. in Genesis
50. Poemitet me (i^quit) pro eo quod est, statui illum deponere and alterum
creare: sic and in hoc loco: poenitet me fecisse hominem, hoc est, decreni
perdere hominum genus.
determined to depose him, and to prefer another. In like sort, when he
threatened the Ninevites Jonah. 3.4.
destruction, so far as the Prophet could Save only by experience of Gods
wonted mercy. Jonah. 4.2.
conceive, or he had already manifested his counsel, he purposed to
overthrow the City; but the Lord had in deed determined to preserve the City,
and therefore threatened them Hieron. in Jonah. cap. 3. Comminatur vt agant
poenitentiam. Look the like example of Gods repentance, Genesis 22.2.11. etc.
Amos 7.36.6.
to make them forsake their sin, for which cause he had revealed their
destruction, that so he might preserve them, and his Author. quaest Orthodox.
in oper. Justin. Mars. q. 36 Proinde cum ignoscit and non ignoscit
immutabilitatem retinet. His qui delicta sua corrigunt, ita vt non mutetur
ignoscit: ijs qui in vitijs suis perseuerant, ita vt non mutetur non ignoscit.
counsel of preserving them might not be altered. God therefore is truly in
Scripture affirmed to repent, because he changes his work, which Ierem. 7.3.
is a part of true repentance, and because his will and purpose, August. de
ciuit. Dei libr. 22. cap. 2. Vult Deus and non facit, etc.
so far as is revealed or may be understood of creatures, is, or may be
altered; which in men is the sum of true 2. Cor. 7.11.
repentance: but whereas in himself, as in a Isa. 40.13. Epiphan. Haeres. 70.
Nihil discors est in diuina scriptura, neque opposita dictio aduersus dictionem
reperitur: Atenim sicut si quis pertennissimum foramen, coelum conspicaretur
and diceret, video coelum: and sane non mentiretur talis, videt enim coelum
reuera. Dicit autem ad ipsum aliquis non vidisti coelum, and sane neque hic
mentitur. Qui enim dicit se vidisse non mentitur, and qui dixit ad ipsum quod
non viderit, idem vere dicit. Neque enim viderat extensionem neque latitudinem.
Itae est reuera de voluntate Dei, and per consequens de poenitentia eius.
bottomless depth of wisdom and counsel, he does decree the reuoking of
his revealed will or works (which reuocation is said to be repentance) he is
immutable, whereof the Scripture says: in him there is no shadow of change.
Obser. 1. We must look unto the law and to the testimony Deuteronomy. 29.29. Isai.
8.19.20. Micah. 6.8.
to know the will of God. Secondly, our sins are so execrable before the
Lord, that they are Zacar. 12 10. Amos 2 13.
said to wound him, to Verse. 6.
make him sorry, Deuteronomy. 32.21. Exodus 20.5.
jealous, Deuteronomy. 3^.21. 2. King. 17.11.17 18. Ierem 44.3.
angry: wherefore so far as man is inferior unto God, so far the 1. Sam.
2.25. Matthew. 18.24.28.
fault of sin exceeds, which is done against the Lord, the hurts and
domages that are done to us, which make us sorry, jealous, or offended.
Thirdly, sin was grown Verse. 11.12.13. Genesis 15.16. Revel. 14.15.
to height, before the flood of waters; but their sins were not Ezec.
16.48.49. 2. Tim. 3.1.2.3.4.5.
greater then, or more, then now are ours: wherefore Matthew. 24.42. Watch
therefore, for ye know not the hour.
of certainty the day of the Lord is near. Fourthlie, they that by notorious
sins provoke the Lord, as by cruelty, covetousness, whoredom, hypocrisy,
blaspemie, contempt of the word of God, etc. Ierem. 44.22. Amos 2.13. Isai.
1.24. Revel. 14.15.
are the cause of the hastening of the coming of Christ to judgment.

Question 4. verse 9. How Noah is said to be a righteous man, seeing the
Scripture says, there is none righteous, no not one?
THis noble Patriarch is commended by the Lord, with three degrees of praise;
that he was righteous, perfect, and walked with God. Whereas the Scripture
affirms he was righteous, it means no other Luc. 1.6.
but that he walked in the commandments of God, in faith and obedience; that
Job. 1.8. and 2.3.
he feared God, and eschewed evil. That he was (...) tamam, perficere,
complere, immaculatum esse. Targ. and vulg. Noc iustus perfectus.
tamim, upright, perfect, that is, Luc. 1.6. Philip. 3.6. 1. Tim. 3.2.
unreprovable, as not avoiding some vices, and following others, but
Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 23. Hic etiam est perfectus. nihil intermisit, in
nullo claudicauit, non in hoc benefaciebat, in illo vero peccabat: sed in omni
virtute perfectus erat, qua tunc pollere illum congruebat.
embraced all virtue, wherein it was meet for that time he should be
excellent. Thirdly it is said, he walked with God, that is to say, he
performed 1. King. 8.61. and 3.6 1. Chron. 29.17.
these duties with a perfect heart, not as an hypocrite deceitfullie, to the
end to be 1. Kin. 15.3. Prou. 11.21. Matthew. 23.5.
seen of men; but Psalm. 139.23.24. 2. Cor. 1.12.
approving himself before the Lord. Noah therefore was righteous Psalm.
34.13.14. Isai. 1.17.18. 1 Thessalonians. 5.22.
avoiding sin and doing equity; Phil^p. 3.6 Iam. 1.27.
he lived unblameable and unspotted of the world; neither did he outwardly
bear show of greater holiness, then Psalm 18.22.23. Ephesians. 3.17.
inwardly was rooted and grounded in his heart. But if Noah were righteous,
and that Genesis 7.1.
in the sight of God, how is it that the Scripture says, 1. King. 8.46. Job.
25.6. Psalm. 143.2. 1. Ioh. 1.8.
that none is righteous? Herein is contained CONCILIATIO. 9.
no co^tradictio^, but the more difficult it seems to be unto us, the more
diligently ought we to search the Scriptures. There are two kinds of
righteousness, expressed by name in the word of God. The first is the
righteousness of our Eccles. 7.31. Ephesians. 4.24.
creation, wherein we were created in the image of Gods holiness and
righteousness: and this is called in the Scriptures Rom 10.3. Tit. 3.5.
our own righteousness. The second is that righteousness which is given us Act
13.39. Romans 5.11.
by Jesus Christ, in our regeneration, and this is called Isai. 56.1. Romans
1.16.17. and 3.25. etc. August. lib. de Spir. and lit. cap. 9. Iustitia,
inquit, Dei manifesta est: non dixit iustitia hominis, etc. The justice of God
(says the Apostle) is manifest; he says not the justice of man, or the
justice of man's proper will, but the justice of God; not that whereby God is
just, sed qua induit hominem cum iustificat impium, but that wherewith he
clotheth man when he justifies the unrighteous. Vide Luther. in praefat. in
Tom. 1. oper. Atque haec passiua and gratia gratis data. Romans 3.24. altera
iustitia nostra, actiua, inhaerens.
the righteousness of God, as that which comes from him, not of our selves. Of
the first kind of righteousness, the Scripture witnesses that none is
righteous. For whereas man had by creation, both Genesis 1.26.27. Ephesians. 4.24.
Coloss. 3.10. Tertul, in Marcion. lib. 2. Liberum and sui arbitrij and suae
potestatis inuenio hominem a Deo institutum, etc. Nam non poneretur lex ei qui
non haberet obsequium debitum legi in sua potestate. etc.
will and power perfectly to have performed obedience unto all the
commandments of God; and the Lord does at our hands require the same
perfection, and that Luc. 12 48. Origin in Leuit. 6. Hom. 4. Videamus nunc quid
est depositum, quod fidelium vnusquisque suscepit. Ego puto quod and ipsam
aninam nostram and corpus depositum accepimus a Deo. Et vis videre maius aliud
depositum quod acceposti a Deo? Ipsi animae tuae Deus imaginem suam and
similitudinem commendauit: istud ergo depositum, tam integre tibi restituendum
est, quam a te constat esse susceptum.
most justly, forasmuch as he gave it us to keep: the same power Psalm. 53.3.
in all men Romans 5.12.19.
thorough Adams disobedience, in whom August. de peccat. merit. lib. 3. cap. 7.
Siquidem in Adam omnes tunc peccauerunt, quando eius natura illa insita in qua
eos gignere poterat, adhuc omnes ille unus fuerunt.
the nature of all men was contained, is so far Ierem. 10.23. Galat. 5 17.
Fulgent. ad Mon. lib. 1. cap. 9. Vnde cognoscimus Dei esse vt and bonum facere
velimus, and vt bonum facere ^aleamus August. de Great. and libero arbit. cap.
17. Deus est qui praeparat voluntatem and cooperando perficit quod operando
incepit.
weakened and defiled, and the Ioh. 8.44. Philip. 2.13. August. de corrept. and
Great. c. 12. Tantum quippe a spiritu sancto accenditur voluntas eorum, vt ideo
possint quia sic volunt, ideo sic velint quia Deus operatur vt velint. Na^ cum
fuisset voluntas serna peccati, liberata est per illum qui dixit, si vos filius
librauerit, etc.
will corrupted; that no man which ever lived, That is beside Christ alone.
begotten of the sons of Adam, can do, no not so much as will to do (by his
own power or will, without the virtue of the That is by Christ's righteousness
applied by faith.
second righteousness) obedience Ioh. 15.5. 2. Cor. 3.5. Philip. 2.13. Council.
Araufican. c. 25 Prorsus est donum Dei diligere Deum, etc. praedicare debemus
and eredere, quod per peccatum primi hominis ita inclinatum and attenuatum
fuerit liberum arbitriu^, vt nullus postea aut diligere Deum sicut oportuit,
aut credere in Deum, aut operari propter Deum, quod bonum est possit, nisi
gratia eum and diuina misericordia p^euenerit. i. Man's freewill is so weakened
by the fall of the first man, that it can neither love God, nor believe in God,
or do any good thing, unless it be prevented by grace and divine mercy.
of righteousness answerable to the least commandment. And therefore the
Scripture repeateth often man's imperfection, to confute August. de verb. Apost.
Sermon. 2. Sunt enim homines ingrati gratiae, multum tribuentes inopi sanciaeque
naturae. i. Men are ungrateful unto grace, and attribute too much to their
beggarly and wounded nature.
the natural pride of men, wherein both Romans 10.3. and 11.7.25.
Jews, and Arist. Ethicor. lib. 3. cap. 5. (...). i. Both virtue and vice is
in own power. The Pythagori^ns resembled this choice to the letter (Y) as if
all men being borne alike, when they come to discretion had in themselves two
ways (in form of Y^ to choose good or evil. Lactan. lib. 6. cap. 3. Virgil.
Litera Pythagora discrimine secta bi^orni, etc. Christians that hold this,
differ nothing but in name from the veriest Heathen. Cic. quaest. Academ. Zeno
omnes virtutes in natura and ratione ponebat.
Philosphers, and Hieron. Dialog. in Pelagian. 1. Been operari, and meum est
(inquit Pelagianus) and Dei, vt ego operer and ille adiuuet. Aug. Epist. 95.
Literas misimus contra inimicos gratiae Chr^sti, qui confidunt in virtute sua,
and in creatore nostro, quemadmodum dicunt: tu nos fecisti homines, iustos
autem nos ipsi fecimus.
Pelagians, and Aquin. part. 1. q. 83. art. 1. and prim. secund. q. 85. art. 2.
Council. Senonens. lecret. 15. Council. Trident. sess. 6. can. 4 Si quis diverit
liberum hominis arbitrium, a Deo motum and excitation, nihil cooperari
assentiendo Deo excitanti atque vocanti, quo ad obtinendam iustificationis
gratiam se disponat ac preparet. etc. If any man say, that man's freewill, moved
and stirred up by God, does not work together with him, by assenting unto God
moving it and stirring it up, whereby it might dispose and prepare it self to
obtain the grace of justification, etc. hold him accursed. Andrat. defens.
Trident. Synod. lib. 4. expounds the meaning of the Synod in these words,
moved and stirred up, thus: Non quasi men's and voluntas, etc. Not as though
(says he) the mind and will of man before conversion, had no power to begin,
and to effect spiritual actions; but because those natural powers, although
not extinguished, yet are they wrapped in the cords of sin, so that man by
his own power cannot rid himself clear: like as one that is tied is not able
to go, unless he be loosed, albeit he have natural power of going, etc. What
is thi^ but as the Pelagians said, I work, and God helps me forward? Bellarm.
tom. 3. cont. 3. part. 1 cap. 1^. Liberu^ arbitriu^ cooperatur cu^ gratia ad
co^ersione peccatoru^. i. Freewill works together with grace unto the
conversion of a sinner.
Papists believe and teach, that men are able, by virtue of this Council.
Trident. sess. 6. can. 7. Si quis dixerit operae omnia quae ante
iustificatione^ fiunt, vere peccata vel odiu^ Dei mere^i, etc. anathema sit. i.
If any man say yt al men's works, before justification, are sins, and deserve
Gods wrath, let him be accursed. And ^et the A^ostle says, Whatsoever is not
of faith is sin Romans 14.23. and those which are not ^^stified, are ye children
of wrath, Ephesians 2. Then which, what can be more opposite, I cannot see.
former righteousness, to keep the law, and to do good works, which may
stand righteous before Gods judgment. But the Scripture does most fully and
plainly confute their lies, whereas it teaches, that not only not any man is
righteous, but not any work of man Namely, which is not of faith, Romans 14.23.
which is not wrought in the second righteousness. This second kind of
righteousness, is Iere. 23.6. and 33.16 1. Cor. 1.30. The perfect righteousness
fulfilled by Jesus Christ, given of God to be our righteousness.
Iehoua our righteousness, Jesus that Ioh. 1.29.
Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world, who by uniting Ioh.
1.14. Philip. 2.6.7. Ignat. Mart. Epist. ad Ephesians. Vnus est medicus noster,
carnalis and spiritualis, factus and non factus: in homine Deus, in morte vita
aeterna, ex Maria and ex Deo, primum Passibilis, and tunc impassibilis dominus
noster Jesus Christus. Iren. libr. 3. cap. 20. Ostendimus quia non tunc coepit
filius Dei existens semper apud patrem, sed quando incarnatus and homo factus,
longam hominum expositionem in scipso recapitulauit, in compendie nobis salutem
praestans, etc. Vigil. cont. Eutych. lib. 1. Ita verbum intra virgenei
vterisecreta carnis sibi intiae conseuisse, id est incarnatum fuisse, vt tamen
verbi natura non mutaretur in carnem. Item carnis naturamita per suscipientis
co^mixtionem in verbi transijsse personam, vt non tamen fuerit in verbo
consumpta: manet enim vtraque id est, verbi carnisque natura, and ex his duabus
hodieque manentibus, vnus est Christus vnaque persona.
the nature of man with the nature of God in one person, in himself, which was
Athanas. in Symbol. Non conuersione diuinitatis in carnem, sed assumptione
humanitatis in Deum; vnus omnino no^ confusione substantiae, sed vnitae
personae. i. Not by converting the godhead into flesh, etc.
by taking the ma^hood into God: fulfilling also in that Chrysostom. Hom. in Ioh.
1. Non enim verbi substantia in carnem transijs: hoc enim impietatis est
vltimae; sed manens quod est, serui formam assumpsit. Ast. 20.28. 2. Cor. 5.19.
Namely, in the humane nature united to the godhead, Galat. 4.4.5. Damasus Pap.
Romans lib. Synod. ad Paulin. Tom. 1. Council. in vit. Damasi. Theodoret Histor.
lib. 5. cap. 10. Si quis dixerit in crucis passione sustinuisse dolorem fibum
dei, deitate, and non carne and anima rationali, quam assumpserit in forma
serui, vt sacra aijt scriptura: Anathema esto.
united nature, that perfect righteousness which justice of man required; and
enduring that punishment which unrighteousness committed did deserve; Isai.
10.22. Romans 9.28. John. 1.12. Iren. lib 3. cap. 20. Recapitulauit in scipso, in
compendio nobis salutem praestans, vt quod perdideramus in Adam, in Christo
Jesus reciperemus.
gathered together as many as received him Luc. 7.30. and. 13.34.
or would be gathered, and made them in himself the sons of God; whereby it
comes to pass, that they which Act. 13.39. and 4.12. Romans 10.13.
cannot in themselves be righteous, are made the righteousness of God 2. Cor.
3.21.
in him. Wherefore in that natural righteousness, no man is righteous before
the Lord: but in this righteousness given of God, both Noah, and many other are
righteous. Moreover, for as much as this second righteousness is of the Lord,
not of our selves, and we notwithstanding remain in our selves who are
corrupted; it cannot be that Romans 7.24.25. Matthew. 26.41. August. de peccator.
mer. and remiss. lib. 2. cap. 7. Non enim ex quae hora quisque baptizatur,
omnit vetus eius infirmitas absumitur; sed renouatio incipit a remissione
omnium peccatorum. Hieronym. Dialog. contra. Pelag. libr. 1. Qui pa^lo ante
dixerat, non quia iam accepi, aut iam perfectus sum, etc. Philip. 3.12. et
simpliciter fatebatur se non esse perfectum: nanc quid sibi proprie denegabat,
mittit in tarbam, iungitque se cum caeteris, and ait, quotquot sumus perfecti
verse. 15. Ex quo perspicuum est, duas in scripturis sanctis esse perfectiones,
duasque iustitias and duos timores. Primam perfectionem and incomparabilem
virtutem perfectamque iustitiam. Dei virtutibus coaptandam. Secundam autem quae
competit nostrae fragilitati, iuxta illud; non iustificabitur, etc. Psalm.
143.2. ad eam iustitiam quae non comparatione, sed Dei scientia dicitur esse
perfecta.
any in this present life, although he be made righteous by this second
righteousness, should be free and utterly void of his own unrighteousness.
Whereof it comes to pass, that it may be Job. 1.1. and 9.20. Hieron. in
Pelag. dialog. 1. Job quoque and Zacharias and Elizabet iusti dicti sunt,
secundum eam iustitiam, quae possit in iniustitiam aliquando mutari: and non
secii lum illam quae nunquam mutari potest, de qua dicitur: ego Deus and non
mutor.
truly, but in diverse respects, affirmed of every godly man: he is
righteous; and of the same, he is not righteous: And of every godly action,
the best that a righteous man Eccles. 7.22. that does good and sins not. 1.
Ioh. 3.9. Whosoever is borne of God sins not: Ergo, the works of faithful
men being imperfect in themselves, are made perfect in Christ, that is to say,
not imputed for sins, but have bin punished in Christ. Isai. 46.6. Ioh. 15.1.2.
etc. Romans 7.22.23. which doctrine albeit it be blasphemed by Papists: Perer.
Tom. in Genesis 2. cap. 6. Disp. 5. yet it is evident by Scripture, and confirmed
by the Fathers, which in that sense affirm al man's righteousness to be
imperfect. August. Epist 29. Virtus est charitas, quia id quod dilige^dum est
diligitur, haec in alijs inaior, in alijs minor, in alijs nulla est: plenissima
vero quae iam non possit augeri, quam diu hic homo viuit est in nemine: quamdiu
autem augeri potest, profecto illud quod minus est quam debet, ex vitio est: ex
quo vitio non est iustus in terra. Hieron. contr. Pelag. lib. 2. Orabit ad te
omnis sanctus, etc. Psalm. 32. Si sanctus est quomodo orabit pro iniquitate? si
iniquitatem habet, qua ratione sanctus appellatur? Iuxta illum videlicet modum,
qui and in alio loco scribitur: septies cadit iustus and resurgit. Gregor.
Moral. lib. 9. c. 1. Sanctus vir (Job) quia omne virtutis nostrae meritu^ esse
vitium conspicit, si ab interno arbitrio districte iudicetur, recte subiungit:
si voluerit contendere cum eo. etc. Job. 9.2.
can work, the same is righteous, and the same is not righteous before the
Lord. The person is truly called righteous, because he is made John. 15.5.
Ephesians. 3.30 1. Ioh. 2.1. Gregor. Mor. lib. 8. cap. 23. Quantalibet iustitia
polleant, nequaquam sibi ad innocentiam velelecti sufficient, si in iudicio
destricto iudicantur.
a member of Jesus Christ the righteous, and is as truly spirituallie in him,
and Matthew. 17.5. Romans 5.17.18. Galat. 3.16. To thy seed, not seeds: that is,
to Christ and his Ch^^^h, one body. B^za annot. mayor. in Galat. August. de
peccat merit. and remiss. l^b. 1. cap. 28. Sicut omnes non m^rt^ntu^ nisi in
Adam, in quo omnes peccauerunt: ita ex his omnes omnino pertinentes ad
regenerationem, non vinisicantur nisi in Christo, in quo omnes iustificantur.
was in him in all his obedience and sufferings, as he was in Rom 5.12. Heb
7.10.
the flesh, in Adam, when Adam sinned. Nevertheless forasmuch as he remains
in the sinful flesh of Adam, he Ioh. 3.6. Romans 7 14.
cannot but be partaker of the sinfulness of flesh, in which respect the
Scripture says: If 1. Ioh. 1.8.
he say he has no sin, he is a liar, and August de peccat. merit. and
remiss. lib. 3. cap. 13. Veritas in eo non est non ob aliud nisi quia falsum
putat.
sins in the same. So also the works that the righteous do perform, so
Verse. 5. Gen 8 21.
far as they proceed from the nature of their flesh, are Job. 9.^1 and 14.4.
foiled as in a pit of corruption, and Isai. ^4 6.
are as filthy clouts: but 1 Cor. 6 11.
they are washed, and sanctified, and cleansed, thorough the merit of Jesus
Christ, and are cast into the infinitnes of his desert, Micah. 7.19
as a stone into the bottom of the sea; so yt their unrighteousness, eue^ in
the judgment Isai 44.22.
of the Lord, is taken away. So taken away, not as though Exodus 34.7. 2. Chron.
19.7.
their unrighteousness were not in themselves unrighteousness, or their
imperfection no imperfection, or their transgression of the law no sin: but
because that same unrighteousness, and imperfection, and transgression Romans
5.17. Bernard. Vox sanguinis Christi, etc. Nec dubium est, quin effi^acior and
potentior sit vox Christi ad bonum quam nostra peccata in malu^.
is counteruailed and ouerprised, by the merit of Jesus Christ, with who^ John.
15.5. and 17.21.
the faithful are by faith made one, and therefore their sins not Romans 4.3.4.
2. Corinthians. 5.19.
imputed unto the^. Insomuch, that albeit they sin through the corruption of
the flesh, in which they are; yet they are 2. Corinthians. 5.21. Philip. 3 9.
perfectly righteous in the judgment of the Lord, thorough the merit of
Jesus Christ in whom they are. Yet their sin is not accounted righteousness,
but sin; more then an ungodly Infidel is counted just: but as God does
justify the sinner, neither in, nor for his sin, Job. 33.24. Isai. 53.45.10.
Romans 3.24.25.
but for the satisfaction and desert of Christ, which i Romans 3.24. Ephesians 2.9.
Tit. 3.5.
given without desert unto the sinner, and of him received Ioh. 1.12. and 6.35.
by his faith; so the work albeit imperfect, is counted perfect, neither as
though it were perfect in it self, nor in that it is imperfect, but in that
Philip. 4.18.19. Coloss. 2.10. When both our imperfections are taken away, and
also the righteousness and merit of Christ is made ours by faith. Micah.
7.19. 1. Cor. 1.30.
the imperfection thereof is abundantly repaired and filled up, by the
perfection of the work of Satisfaction of Jesus Christ. Therefore also no
work of man Luc. 17.10. Romans 6.23. Ephesians. 2.9. August. epist. 105. Quae igitur
sua merita tactaturus est liberatus, cui si digna suis meritis redderentur, non
esset nisi damnatus? Gregor. lib. 9. Moral. cap. 1.
does merit any thing at the hand of God, but death; because in man it is
defiled, by the natural defiling of the flesh: notwithstanding being purged,
by the blood of Christ, who has for us fully deserved Heb. 9.12.14.
eternal happiness, the same work which of it self deserves nothing, shall
for his sake be crowned Matthew. 25.35. 2. Tim. 4.8. August. in Psalm 70. Nihiles
per te: Deum inuoca: tua peccata sunt, merita Dei sunt: supplicium tibi
debetur, and cum praemium venerit, sua dona coronabit non merita tua. Idem
epist. 105. Nullane igitur sunt merita iustorum? sunt plane, quia iusti sunt
(hoc est, quia in Christo sunt iusti, cuius meritum est ipsorum) sed vt iusti
fierent, merita non fuerunt. Contrarium statuit Tridentina Synodus: Si quis
dixerit hominis iustificati bona opera ita esse dona Dei, vt non fiat etiam
bona ipsius iustificati meritae, etc. Anathema sit. Christo igitur retracta^da
sententia, Luc. 17.10. quin imo vlteritos ausi sunt imponere Pelio Ossam:
Siquis (aiunt) justification, bonis operibus que ab eo per Dei gratiam and Jesus
Christi meritum, cuius membrum viuum est. fiunt, non vere mereri augmentum
gratiae, vitam aeternam, and gloriae augmentum: Anathema sit. Ibid. can. 32.
Pet. a Soto. and Andrad. Defens. Trident. Syn. lib. 4. In expositione, addunt
ex debito promereri. Caietan. in prim. se^und. quaest. 114. art. 3. Docet opera
bona iustorum esse meritoria vitae aeternae, ex condigno, ratione operis,
etiamsi nulla extares diuina conuentio. Bellarm. Tom. 3 contr. 3. part. 2. lib.
5. cap. 17. Dicit ex condigno, ratione pacti and operis simul.
with everlasting reward, and in this life Prou. 11.31.
does obtain a recompense, being performed Coloss. 1.9.10. And whatsoever is
not of the commandment is not of faith; whatsoever is not of faith, is sin,
Romans 14.23.
in faith, with true obedience. Noah therefore is truly righteous, albeit it
be also true, that none is righteous. He is called righteous, not that he was
free from either Psalm. 51.5. It is not spoken of one man, but of mankind.
August. de peccat. merit. and remiss. lib. 2. cap. 14. Item Isai. 48.8.
natural corruption, which his ancestors Genesis 5.3.
Seth and Adam were partakers of, or Pro. 20.9. Eccles. 7.22.
actual transgression, which are the Iam. 1.15.
fruits of the same corruption, from which none Iam. 3.2. 1. Ioh. 1.8. August.
de peccat. merit. and remiss. lib. 2. cap. 14. De ijs qui diuinartem
scripturaru^ testimonijs, in bona voluntate atque actibus iustitiae praedicati
sunt atque laudati, omnes magni, omnes iusti, omnes veraciter laudabiles su^t,
sed sine peccato aliquo no^ sunt.
of the faithful in this life can be exempted: but righteous in his generation
says the Scripture, thereby not only showing the praise of Noah, Chrysostom.
Hom. in Genesis 23. Been agere inter virtutis horles, maius virtutis pondus
testatur.
that in the midst of so mischievous a nation, he preserved his soul from
their uncleanness: but also limiting his righteousness as not August. de ciuit.
Dei lib. 15. cap. 26. Non vtique sicut perficiendi sunt ciues ciuitatis Dei in
ilia immortalitate, qua aequal untur angei^s Dei, sed sicut esse possunt in hac
peregrinatione perfecti.
simply to be free from sin, but as he could be perfect in this pilgrimage.
Notwithstanding he was righteous Genesis 7.1.
in the sight of God: not in Psalm. 143.2. and 130 3.
himself, in the severity of justice; but yet by Mat. 3.17. and 17.5.
imputation and giving unto him the righteousness of Christ, (which he received
by faith) even in the severity of justice. In so much that he was ((...)
tsedek tamim) perfect righteous, before the Lord, both in respect that his
will, by the grace of God, was sanctified 1. King. 11.4. 1. Chron. 29.9.17.
Act. 11.23.
with a purpose of heart to cleave unto the Lord; which will Cyprian lib de
Exhort. ad Martyriu^ c. 12. Nec soles anima luc^sot and intersectos diuinae
pollicitationis manent premia, sed etia^ si ipsa passio fidelibus desit, sine
damno te^poris merces iudice Deo redditur; in perse ut^oue militia, in pace
conscientiae coronat^r. Ambros. Comment. in Luc. cap. 9. Deus non obsequ^orum
^peciem sed puritatem querit affectus.
the Lord accepts for performance, through Jesus Christ: And also in regard
that his Galat. 3.27. Philip. 3.9. Revel. 6.11.
person was wholly clothed with the righteousness of Christ, whereby he being
imperfect, was made perfect by his Ioh. 1.16. Romans 4.3.^ 5.8. In this point
Papists, as it were opposing themselves against the Scripture, race the
foundation of justification that is, of faith and salvation, denying in most
manifest words, that man's justification consists in the imputation of the
righteousness of Christ. Bellarm. ^om. 3. (...) 1^. partic. 2. lib. 2. cap. 7.
Iustificationem non consistere in imputatione iustitiae Christi.
Notwithstanding that the Scriptures do so plentifully testify it, Genesis 15.6.
Psalm. 32.2. Ie^^^. 23.6. Lu^. 18.13. Act. 13.39. Ioh. 15.3.4. 1. Ioh. 2.^.
(...): the Apostle do so plainly expound it, Romans 1.2, 4, 5, 6. etc. 1. Cor.
1.30. Ephesians. 1.4. and the same is the only gate of man's true happiness, and of
eternal life by Christ. But we refer this to Genesis 15. verse. 6.
perfection, and all his imperfections Micah. 7 19.
were buried, as in the bottom of the Sea. A heavenly comfort, for weak
distressed consciences, For in Noah, thou may see thy self called
righteous, by the Lord, (if so be thou will receive by faith the righteousness
of Christ) although thou be clothed with sinful flesh. And although thou have
many imperfections, such Genesis 9.21.
as there were in Noah; yet by the full satisfaction of Christ, in whom thou
do believe, they are fully Ierem. 31.34. Act 10.43.
pardoned, and taken away. And albeit thy conscience do accuse thee of want in
every work, so that thou dare not offer it Job 9.32. and 10.15.
as righteous before the Lord, much less demand Luc 17.10. As the Papists
presumptuously do, by merit of condignitie. Aquin. Prim. Secund. quaest. 114.
artic 2. The same does the Council of Trent confirm, albeit in colored
words: Sess. 6. can. 32. Item Aquin. prim. Secund. q. 114. artic. 8. and 9.
of him the wages and merit of the same; yet remember thou with Noah, that thy
Coloss. 3.^.
righteousness is hid with Christ in God, and he is thy perfection, of whom the
Lord has said, Matthew. 17.5.
in him I am well pleased: Matthew. 9.13. Ioh. 9.39.41. Hear, receive, and mix
with faith. Heb. 4.3.
hear him. Obser. 1. Although by nature 1. King. 8 46. Romans 3.23. and 5.12.
we all are sinners, yet every one that Ioh. 3.16 36. All true believers, and
only believers.
believes is Isai. 55.1. Romans 3 24.
freely, and Act. 4.12. Heb. 7.25.26. Psalm. 32.2. 2. Cor. 5.19.
fully justified, by the imputation of the righteousness of Christ through
faith. Secondly, a single heart, which truly does trust in God, Psalm. 15.2.
and 24.4.
is an undoubted token of a godly man. Thirdly, the Lord in punishing and
showing mercy Genesis 18.25. Ezech. 34.17.30. Matthew. 25.32.
will make a perfect difference between the righteous, and the wicked.

CHAP. VII.
Question 1. verse 2. What means this that the Lord puts difference
between the beasts, calling some clean, and some unclean, seeing that they
were all created good, and therefore clean? And how was the same distinction
observed of Noah?
GOD in the Creation made all the creatures Genesis 1.31. Arnob. in Psalm. 139.
Malus enim per creaturam nec ipse est diabolus.
exceeding good, and nothing evil or unclean among them, neither is there any
beast Act. 10.15. Romans 14.14. 1. Cor. 10.25. Fulgent. de Praedest. cap. 18. Sic
Deus rationali creaturae magis voluit inesse bonum, vt etiam infimae creaturae
nullum inesset substantialiter malum.
which in his nature or substance is unclean. Nevertheless as he made them
all for Genesis 9.2 3. Psalm. 8.6. and 115.16. Ambros. de Noa and Arca cap. 10
Rationis expertia non propter se, sed propter hominem generata sunt animalia.
the special use of man; so also, and that Leuit. 11.44.45. Iren. libr. 5.
Praedixit autem figuraliter omnia haec lex de animalibus delineans hominem. Qui
in patrem and filium per filem firmiter faciunt, haec est enim firmitat eorum
quae duplici sunt vngula: and eloquia Dei meditantur die and nocte, vti
operibus bonis adornentur: hac est enim ruminantium virtus.
only for his use, he does distinguish them. He taught the Israelites this
doctrine, and showed Leuit. 11.1. Deuteronomy. 14.4. etc.
them the difference between the clean beasts, and unclean: but it was
Justin. Martyr. Dial. cum Triffon. Vt etiam inter edendum and bibendum ob
oculos vobis versaretur Deus.
for their instruction and furtherance in faith, not for the nature of the
beasts, or any evil property inherent in them, which the Lord himself does
signify when as he says; not these are unclean, but these shall be
unclean unto you. The swine was called unclean Leuit. 11.7.
because he cheweth not the end, which is not August. contr. Faustum. lib. 6.
cap. 7. Immundum quippe illud animal in lege positu^ est, quod non ruminet: no^
autem hoc eius vitium sed natura est. Sunt autem homines, qui per hoc animal
significantur immundi, proprio vitio non natura, quicunque libenter audiunt
verba sapientiae, postea de his omnino non cogitant.
a fault, but nature in the beast: but because men do imitate Psalm. 32.9. 2.
Pet. 2.22.
or rather exceed their beastly qualities, he Tertul. lib. de Cibis Iudaic.
Proficere aute^ poterant, intellecto plus in hominibus vitia sugienda, quae lex
damnasset etiam in pecoribus. Nam quando irrationale animal ob aliquid
^eijcitur, magis illud ipsum in eo qui rationalis est homine damnatur.
shows the beasts, as examples unto men, and condemns them for warning
sake, which otherwise in their nature are 1. Tim. 4.4. Tertul. lib. de Cibis
Iudaic. Credendu^ est, quicquid est a Deo institu^um, mundum esse; and ipsa
instit^tionis author^tate purgation, neque culpandum, ne in authorem culpae
reuocetur.
clean and good. Furthermore the Lord would make this difference Just. n.
Martyr. Dial^^. ^um Triffon. Vt vobis ob oculos versaretur Deus, promptis
admodum and proclutibus ad deficiendum a notione eius: prout Moses quoque
inquit: edit Jacob and saturatus est, and impineuatu^, and recal^itrauit
dilectus. Deuteronomy. 32.
for the practice of obedience, as he Genesis 2.17.
forbad Adam the tree of knowledge. Also Tertul in Marcion. lib. 2. Vt si lex
aliquid d^cibi^ ^^trahit, and immunda pronunciat animalia, quae aliquando
benedicta sunt, consilium exerc^nd^ ^onti^entiae intelli e, and fraer^os
impositos illi ^ule acnosce, quae cum panem ederet ^n^elor^m, cucume^^ and
p^po^e, Ae^^^tiorum deside^^^at.
to put a bridle to the unruly appetite of men, he required thereby
temperance, and frugalitie in meats. Again, by sparingnes of food to Tertul.
ibid. Proinde vt pecuniae ardor res^ ingueretur ex part ^ua de victus
necessitate causatur, pr^ti^sorum ciborum ambitio detracta est. Hieron. contr
loum lib. 2. T^lle epularum (...) bidinis luxu^i^m, nemo quaeret diuitias.
quench the thirst and desire of money, 1. Tim. 6.10.
the root of evil; and perhaps no less to Tertul. contr. Mar^ion lib. 2. Vt
facilius homo ad ^e^unandum Deo formaretur, paucis and non gloriosi (...) assu^
sectu^, and nihil de lantioribus esu i^^rus. Basil. Hom. de iciunio.
Chrysostom. Hom. 1. in Genesis Paul^ti n inducebantur, neque delicijs va are
permittebantur.
lead them as it were to the use of fasting, wherein they were commanded to
humble their souls. But chiefly to stir up their Iren. libr. 4. cap. 28.
Praestruens eos perseuerare and seruire Deo. per ea quae erant secunda ad prima
aduocans. Calu. in Leuit. 20 25. Atque haec ratio diligenter notanda est,
discrimen inter Cibos illis proponi vt puritati studeant.
zeal, to maintain the purity of true religion, he perpetually Gen 15.9.
Leuit. 1.2. ex analogia.
forbad certain creatures to be offered, and that no more should be had in use
of religion, then God allowed for that purpose. And lastly, to confirm their
Deuteronomy. 8.3.4.5. Psalm. 145.13. and 123.2.
daily expectation of his fatherly protection, who when he in a sort
withdraws the abundance of the earth, because it pleases him; yet he
sends store of Psalm. 78.25. The food of Angels in stead of the food of
Egypt.
better things in place, and adds his promise thereunto: I Leuit 26.5. Heb.
13.5.
will not leave thee, nor forsake thee. We read indeed, that this was
seriously commanded to the Israelites, and every creature Leuit. 11.3. etc.
diligently described, to the end they might perfectly know the difference:
but no such commandment is remembered to be laid upon the fathers, before the
days of Moses; neither is it likely that Genesis 9.3. Justin. Mart. Dialog. cum
Triff.
any such was given. Wherefore it may be doubted, through this difference
which the Lord makes here to Noah, whether some creatures were not by nature
in themselves unclean, seeing the same distinction of cleannes is not made in
respect of food (of which none were as yet permitted to be eaten) but only
for the use of sacrifice. Which objection is Genesis 1.31. Act. 10.15. Romans 14.14.
1. Tim. 4.4.
fully answered by the word of God: wherein is plainly taught, that all the
creatures in themselves are good, and none to be esteemed polluted or unclean:
neither is the reason in any sort available to prove it otherwise; for neither
did that limitation of beasts for sacrifice, make the nature of the rest
unclean, which were not permitted to be offered: neither does the Lord at this
time make this difference Contra. Lyraenum in Genesis and Perer. in Genesis T^m. 2.
lib. 11. Disp. 2. Non igitur quantum ad cibum sed tantummodo quantum ad ritum
and vsum sacrificiorum.
only in respect of sacrifice, although the eating of flesh were not yet
allowed; but also Chrysostom. Hom. 24. in Genesis Considera quomodo in nonnullis
locis, ab aliquibus abstinent aliqui vt immundis, and non probati^ali^^ ^^illi^
ipsis vescuntur, consuctudine se ad hoc ind^cente: sic and tunc quoque erat.
in respect of eating flesh, which shortly after he did purpose to permit, in
which men by natural instinct, and the very guide of sense and reason, do As
we make difference between beef and horse flesh, between Conies and Cats,
between Hares and Foxes without a schoolem ister.
discern of beasts, which are good for meat, and do count ye rest as it were
unclean. But one will say, it was hard for Noah to know the difference of the
flesh of beasts, which never tasted any: and for us as hard to know, which he
accounted good for meat, seeing in respect of the situatio^ of countries, and
the For the constitution of men's bodies, follows greatly the quality of the
air in which they live: in which respect Galen was wont to say that he
prescribed diet no more to Germans and Britains, than to Lions and Bears,
viz. because of the difference of their country, from theirs to whom he
prescribed.
qualities of men's bodies in regard thereof; of cretures few or none there are
upon the earth, which may be The inestimable goodness and wisdom of Gods
providence is manifest in this.
thought unwholesome for the use of food. For it is not of light or vain
authority, but affirmed unto us by many witnesses, that the Hieron. contra
Iouinian. Arabes and Saraceni, and omnis eremi barbaria, camelorum lacte and
carnibus viuit, quia huiusmodi animal pro temperie and sterilitate regionum
facile apud eos and gignitur and nutritur.
Arabians feed on Camels flesh: the Which even by the law of Moses were
counted clean, Leuit. 11.21.22. and were John Baptists common food, Matthew. 3.
and yet of us they are esteemed unclean, loathsome and unwholesome. Hieron.
contra Iouin. lib. 2. Orientales locustis vesci moris est. Strabo de situ orb.
lib. 16. Vinunt ex locusti^, quas verni Libes and Zephiri vehementius flautes,
in ea loca compellunt. Item Plutarch. in Sympos. Aristoph. in Acarnens. Plin.
and alij.
people of the East, and of Libya, on Grasshoppers: the Hieron. contra Iouin.
lib. 2. Asri etiam lacertis viridibus vesci soleant.
Syrians and Africans, have Lizards or Neuts for dainty fare: those of Hieron.
ibid. In Ponto and Phrygia vermes albos and obesos, qui nigello capito sunt,
and nascuntur in lignorum carry pro magnis redditibus pater familias exigit.
Pontus and Phrygia count worms that breed in rottennes of trees as delicate:
the Hieron. ibid. Sarmatae, Quadi, Vandali, and innumerabiles aliae gentes
equorum and vulpium carnibus delectantur.
Sarmatians and Vandals feed on horses and wolves: the Nomades Salust. in
Bello Ingur^h. Getuli and Libes, queis cibus erat caro ferina atque humi
pabulum vti pecoribus.

Strabo de Situ Orb. lib. 16. Beyond the city Sabe, is the city Daraba where
they hunt Elepha^ts, and those do dwell which do eat Elephants: their manner
of hunting is in this sort. When an heard comes in the woods, they epsy them
from the top of some tree, then comes one privily behind the^ (for none so
great a multitude dares to set upon them) and sudde^ly cutteth the sinews of
the hindmost. Other shoot at the^ with arrows dipped in the blood of a
Serpent Other also do mark out that tree where against the Elephant does use
to rest; and cutting it half in sunder on the contrary side, when the beast
comes to lean against it again, he falls over with the tree and all:
then, for that he cannot rise again, because the legs of Elephants are of
one bone without joints, and cannot be bended, they come down which have
watched him, and do hew him to pieces.


of Africa, on lions and bears: the Plin. lib. 6. cap. 10. Hieron. lib. 2.
cont. Iouin. Syri cro^odilis terrenis vesci soleant. Strabo de situ orb. lib.
17.
Egyptians on crocodiles: the Plin. lib. 6. cap. 39. Quos Ophiophagos vocat:
alios Galenus (...).
Indians on serpents. Seeing therefore as yet Tertul. lib de cibis Iudaici^.
Postea vsus carnium accessit, diuina gratia humanis necessitatibus competentia
ciborum genera oportunit temporibus porrigente. etc.
no liberty was given of eating the flesh of any creature, which when it was
permitted, was given without restraint, whereby all creatures were lawful to
be eaten, and few can be named, which were not As appears by testimony, and
also by experience.
received unto food; of which, this or that kind Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 24.
Considera quomodo, etc. Hierom. contra Iouin. lib. 2. Compelle Phrygen and
Ponticum vt locustam comedat, nefas putabit. Coge Syrum and Arabem vt vermes
ponticos glutiat: ita eos despiciet, vt muscas and millepedas and lacertos.
which to one was clean, to another nation was counted as unclean; how can it
be discerned, which in this place are counted clean, and received by seuens
into the Arc? To this is answered: that by the name of clean beasts,
Theodoret. qurst. in Genesis 50. Nam cum hominibus esses permissurus manducare
carnes, and homines pij sacrificature essent illis, maiorem numerum mundorum
animaliu^ custodiri iussit. Beda has esse species asserit quae Iudaeis postea
mundae habebantur.
are meant the same which afterward were permitted to the Jews to eat: which
is manifest, both because Genesis 15.9 and 22.13.
those kinds were ever counted clean for sacrifice; and also if any other had
bin meant, then were Leuit. 11.1.
afterward expressed by name in Scripture, the holy Ghost would doubtless
have described them, either by their names or properties, for the better
understanding of the Church. And Noah did well perceive the meaning of this
distinction, both Chrysostom. in Genesis 27 Quia Deus qui praeceperat, ide^ and scire
ea manifesta fecit.
because he which gave this difference, taught him the meaning of the same; and
also by natural judgment, Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 24. Qua de causa (dic oro)
asinum immundum censemus quamu^^ le^uminibus tantum pascatur, alia autem
qua^^upedia cibo conuenientia putamus, etiamsi immundo paescantur alimento.
knowing what beasts were more convenient for food then other. Neither needed
he to have respect to all places of the world, but only to those beasts,
which were most Sic and Glossa vulg. Immunda vocat quae homini non adeo fuerunt
necessaria, and horum numerum restrictiorem fuisse dicit.
necessary, most profitable, and most Such as the ceremonial law adjudged
clean. Ergo, God gave unto the Israelites the best and most profitable, the
rest which were prohibited were not so necessary, yea not necessary for that
people and that time.
generally to be used of the world, having principal regard unto the place
wherein he lived, which is For there Adam both lived, and died: as Origin would
teach by tradition, in Matthew. tract. 35. Venit ad me traditio, etc. and Hieron.
epist. ad Marcell. Mensura^ charitas, etc. Item ad Eustochium virgin. Epitaph.
Paulae. and August. Sermon. de temp. 71. buried either in Caluarie or in Hebron.
It may be true, but it is not necessary to be believed.
thought to be the land after given for possession unto Abraham, or at least
wise, not far distant from the same. So that this difference here made of
beasts, is in respect of Theodoret. quest. in Genesis 50. Nam cum hominibus esset
permissurus, etc.
conueniencie of food, not only for religious sacrifice; and their uncleanness
which the Scripture speaks of, to be esteemed Calvin. in Leuit. 11.1.
Tenendum est, sanctos ante legem dictante naturae sensu, sponte refugisse
quosdam cibos: sicut hodie nemo lupos aut leones venabitur ad carnes eorum
edendas.
vnsauorines, or hardness of their flesh, not any defect in the goodness of
their kind. Wherefore those that for Sicut Marcionitae, Gnostici, and
Manichaei. Epiphan. Haeres. 42. Docet enim hic animatis non vesci, pronuncians
esse iudicij eos qui carnem edunt, velut qui animam edunt. August. de morib.
Manichaeorum lib. 2. cap. 17. Homicidium vos dicitis occidere animalia.
religions sake, count beasts unclean; or under any color of authority of
holy Scripture, command abstinence from meats, for conscience sake, and not
for civil uses This difference is to be understood between the Princes laws
and the Popish canons concerning fasting and abstinence from meats. The civil
Magistrate forbids flesh, not for conscience of days and times, but for the
increase of the creatures and benefit of the public wealth: he that hears
him not, resists the ordinance of God: the other forbids them as unclean,
or for conscience sake (when as yet they are not by Gods law forbidden, but so
far forth as they are forbidden by the Magistrate, whom men ought in
conscience to obey) albeit they confess they are not forbidden by the law of
God, but by the Church. Bellarm. Tom. 3. contr. 3. part. 3. lib. 2. cap. 4. Non
alia de causa nisi quia placuit Ecclesia prohibere. Idem cap. 7. Sententia
communis totius Ecclesiae Catholicae; quae legibus ieiuniorum obligari homines
in conscientia docet.
only; as Herodot. in Clio. Babylomorum tres sunt family, quae nullo alio
nisi piscibus victita^t. Joseph. Antiq. lib. 18. cap. 2.
the Babylonians and Jewish hypocrites were wont to do from flesh, the Eusebius.
de praeparat. Euang. lib. 6.
Indians from fish, the Laert. lib. 8. in vitae Pythagorae. Cic. de divine. lib.
1.
Pythagorians from beans and pease, the Ex decret. Gregor. 1. Pape. and
Gratian. distinct. 5. de consecrat. Diebus Sabbatorum. Item. Monacho carnem
gustare non licet. Mantuan. Fastor. lib. 2. Polidor Virgil. de invent. lib. 6.
cap. 6. Cum ieiunamur primum a carne; and a quocunque ciborum genere quod
sapiat carnem, sicut sunt lac, cascus, ona, authore diuo Gregorio, abstinendum
est. Idem faciunt and Turci, Alcoran. cap. 2.
papists in their holy Council. Moguntin. cap. 34. De quatuor temporibus
obseruandis. Ember days. Respons. Nicholas. 1. Papae ad consult. Bulgar. cap.
4. Tom. Council. 3. Quadragesimali videlicer tempore, item 4. temporibus, sexta
seria omnis hebdomadae, and in cunctis vigilijs insignium festiuitatum, a
carnium vsu cessandum: qui vero dicbus quadragessimae esum carnium
praesumpserit attentare, non solum reus erit resurrectionis Dominicae, verum
etiam alienus ab eiusdem diei sancta communione. Council. Toletan. 8. cap. 9.
times from butter, cheese, eggs, milk and flesh: they do Sueton lib. 4.
cap. 26. Non nunquam horreis praeclusis, populo samem indixit.
with Caligula, proclaim a famine without a scarcity, by shutting up men's
barnes and store, and by their traditions 1. Tim. 4.1.3. Ignat. ad Philadelph.
Si quis Deum and Christum confiteatur, and cibos aliquos immundos putet, talis
apostatam illum draconem in se habitantem souet. Council. Gangrens. can. 2. Si
quis carnem manducantem ex fide, cum religione, praeter sanguinem, and idolo
immolatum and suffocatum, crediderit condemnandum, tanquam spem non habentem,
qui eas manducat; anathema sit. Prosper. de vita contemplat. lib 2. cap. 17.
Primasius in Epist. ad Romans cap. 14. De ieiunio non est lex posita. Theodoret.
Epitom. divine. dogmat. cap. vlt. De abstinentia a vino aut ab esu carnium, etc.
eiusdem abstinentiam non similiter ac haretici amplectimur: nam neque Ecclesia,
eorum prohibet participationem: Et ideo alij permissis a lege bonis securi
fruimur. alij vero ab ijs abstinent; nullus autem qui sapit and recte sentit,
condemnat eum qui comedit. Et hoc ex Apostoli legibus probat oportere.
transgress Gods ordinance.

Question 2. verse 2. Wherefore the Lord commanded Noah, to receive the beasts
into the Arc, and why there were preserved more of the clean beasts then of
the unclean: also how many of every sort did enter?
THe cause is manifest, and expressed in the text: Verse. 3.
to keep seed alive upon the earth. Such was the fierceness of the wrath of
God, against the sins of that wicked world, as that the Lord, when he was
constrained to take vengeance of their ungodliness, could not Chrysostom. Hom.
in Genesis 17. Et merito, na^ quia propter hominem producta (terra) est, ideo and
propter hominem maledicta. etc. Ambros. de Noa and Arca. cap. 10. rations
reddit. 1. Sicut in bello cum imperator ab host occiditur, co^moritur eius
exercitus, sic just cum periret homo, etc. 2. Sicut cum caput inter membra
moritur, omnia commori necesse est. 3. Quia non propter se, sed propter
hominem: ergo cum deleretur homo, convenient erat, vt pari delerentur occasu.
in justice but punish the unreasonable creatures for their sakes, Lactan. lib
2. cap 11. Alia nimirum ad ci^o^, alia ad vestimenta, etc. Cicer. Tus^ul.
quaest. li^r. 1.
which were created for their use, as though they had been partakers of their
offenses. But forasmuch as the Lord was determined not utterly to destroy the
race of man Matthew. 24.22.
for his Elect sake, and the coming of our Savior in the flesh: it was also
necessary, that a seed of the creatures should be reserved, that the use of
them might remain to man. And although the Lord were able, as at the first,
with the breath of his mouth to have again created them, yet being created
already Genesis 1.31.
exceeding good, in their several kind, it was more convenient Num^. 14.16.
for the honor of their creator, that in their first creation they should not
wholly perish. And since that the preserving of the creatures was only to
keep seed alive, it is unnecessary to demand, whether of every kind of
creature, there were some preserved in the Arc, seeing that it is manifest
that some creatures needed not such preservation for generation sake. For of
Fishes (which were Verse. 22.
not destroyed, either because they were Author. de Mirab. Sacra Scrip. in
oper. August. libr. 1. cap. 4. Aquatilia enim maledicti vindictae non
suc^umbunt, quia in maledictionis participatione non sunt: and non participant,
quia non sunt terrae participes, quae maledicta fuit. Terra autem non aqua
maledicta, quia Adam haius no^ illiu^ fructum vetitum comedit: Ista ratio an
satis valida sit, lector viderit; and number aqua^ and coelos sub terrae nomine
maledixerit, quaerat a Scripturis, 2. Pet. 3.7. ab experientia, and a nostris,
cap. 3. quast. 13.
farther separat from the sins of men, as it were divided from them by the
element of waters, or for some other cause in the good pleasure of the Lord) it
was utterly needless to preserve any in the Arc, as also of such creatures
which live as well (...), ancipites bestiae, idem. de mirab. libr 1. cap. 4.
August. de ciuit. Dei lib. 15. cap. 27. Non fuerat necesse conseruare in Arca,
quae possent in aquis viuere, non solum mersa sicut pisces, verum etiam
supernatantia vt multa alites.
in the water as on the land, as Otters, sea wolves, water souls, and water
serpents, and if there be any other of the same condition: so likewise of those
that do not breed by generation, as Which are not bred in their own kind, as
we shall (God willing) show more at large in the 36. chapter, notwithstanding
which, report is that Mules do sometime breed, as Sueton. in vit. Galbae. cap.
4. but it is counted a matter of great admiration. Theophrastus affirms, they
do ordinarily bring forth in Syria: Of flies, etc. Aristotle writes, Histor.
animal. libr. 6. cap. 19. and our own experience shows sufficiently.
mules, flies, and certain kinds Plutarch avouches, that sometime they are
bred of the ^arrow of men. Baptista Deo in vit. Mar^ini. ^. Pap. reports,
that a great serpent was found in a sepulcher of stone so close, as that by no
means he might seem to take air.
of serpents, which being wholly perished might be restored in other creatures
As Mules are engendered of an Horse and a she Ass: which is commonly known.
which were preserved. But of those creatures which proceed by generation, and
have their whole abode upon the dry land, it is thought of some not possible,
that they should be gathered together in the Arc, that they could be together
preserved in the same, or that the Arc was sufficient to contain so many
creatures. For answer whereunto, we are first to observe out of the text, that
the Lord does not lay that labor upon Noah, to take all these beasts and
fowls, and to keep them in the Arc, but Gen 6.19. and 7.3. August. de ciuit.
Dei lib. 15. cap. 23 Non ea Noe capta intromittebat, sed venientia and
intrantia admittebat. Ad hoc enim vales quod dictum est, intrabunt ad te: non
scriicet industria hominis, sed Dei nutu.
only to give them entrance at their coming, which came unto him of their
own accord. So that it was the mighty power of God, which at the first
created them, that gathered them together unto Noah; and the faith of Noah was
an instrument of much more value, then all the nets and toils, that might be
thought sufficient. And Calvin. in Genesis 7.
the same instinct of the will of God was it, that made the beasts return unto
the Isai. 11.6. Basil. Hexam. Hom. 11. Etiam vultures cygnorum more viuebant,
etc. Beda and Alij.
lenity of their first creation, so that the fiercest of them, meekelie, not
only submitted themselves to Noah, and received the Genesis 6.21.
food at his hands which he gave unto them, but also suffered the most weak in
other kind, to remain beside them without hurt or fear. And no marvel if
we look into the original of them, which were not created Prou. 16.4. Basil.
Hexam. 11. Nobis enim and bestijs, and volatilibus coeli, and omnibus feris,
terrae fructus dati sunt; atque hec omnia animantia legi naturae subiecta
fructibus nutriebantur.
to devour one another, but to glorify the Lord, as now most notably in the
Arc they do, and to do service unto men, wherein it is only the sins of
man that has caused them Basil. Hexam. 11. Postquam autem homo dietam
transgressus est, permisit dominus vt carnibus vescerentur. Hac permissione,
etiam reliqua animalia libertatem edendi acceperunt; ex illo tempore de caetero
cruda vorat Leo, ex illo vultures expectant morticinia. Damascen. Orthodox.
libr. 2. cap. 10. Omnia ante transgressione^ homini subdita, and ad manum
parentia erant.
so greatly to degenerate. But was not the Arc of sufficient measure to
contain them? Who can look with indifferent judgment in to the description
of the same, and so affirm? Apelles that infamous heretic, groslie blasphemed
Origin. in Genesis Hom. 2. Apelles dum assignare cupit scripta Mosi nihil in se
diuinae sapientiae, nihilque operis sancti spiritus continere; exagitat
huiusmodi dicta, and dicit, nullo modo fieri potuisse, vt tam breue spatium tot
animalium genera eorumque cibos qui per totum annum sufficerent, capere
potuisset.
this place of Scripture, nouncing both his faith, and the truth of this
history; and to set a color upon his blasphemy, would needs understand the
text of a double number, as though fourteen of the clean beasts, and four of
every other kind had bin said to be received: which also Justin. Mart. in
quaest. Orthodox q. 43. Verius locutus est, qui quatuor and quatuordecim, etc.
Origin. Hom. 2. in Genesis Contra Apellem disputans, in numero non contradicit.
Lira. in Genesis 7. Oleaster in Genesis in eodem consentiunt.
some other writers have bin deceived in. And to answer this objection, some
Origin. Hom. 2. in Genesis Atebant saptentes viri and hebraicarum traditionu^
gnari, quod Moses, qui us de eo Scriptura testatur, omni sapientia Aegyptiorum
fuerat eruditus, secundum artem Geometricam, quam praecipue Aegyptij callent
cubitorum numerum hoc loco posuisse: apud Geometras enim secundu^ eam rationem
quae apud eos virtus vocatur, ex solido vel quadrato vel in sex cubitos vnus
deputatur. August. de ciuit. Dei lib. 15. cap. 27. Origenes non ineleganter
astruxit. etc. Idem in Genesis quest. 4.
interpreters would understand, these cubits to be Geometrical, containing
six cubits of common measure: other, Hugo de St. Victore. libr. de Arca Noae.
Quasi cubitum sacrum, ant quod viridicitur. Deuteronomy. 3.11.
that they did contain the double, or one and an half of common cubits. But
the Scripture does not warrant such exposition, but For what a monster had Og
bin and Goliath, and the rest, if the Scripture had spoken of any such double or
six fold measure, and not of common Cubits? Notwithstanding, we must
remember, that the standing measure of a cubite, did something differ, like as
our English measures do in diverse places. Herodot. in Clio. calls one the
Regius cubitus, the Kings cubit, which said he, was three inches longer then
the common cubite. Likewise in Euterpe, he makes mention of the cubite of
Egypt and of Sa^os, Vitruu. lib. 3. cap. 1. says the cubit consists of six
hand breadths or four and twenty inches, wherein he scarcely agrees with
our measure or with himself.
rather withstand it; neither is there any cause why we should suppose them to
be of greater measure then common cubits are esteemed, Namque tribus granis
digitus formabitur vnus, ter simul in palmo digitus, quater in pede palmus,
tresque pede^ passum faciunt, cubitus semipassum. In our common English
measures, three barley corns make an inch, three inches an hand breadth, four
hand breadthes a foot, three foot a pace, one and an half a cubite, and two
cubits a pace. A cubit properly taken, is the measure between the uttermost
point of the elbow and the top of the middle finger. Isodor. li. 11. Cubitus
articulus brachij in quo homines cubare solent. In the sanctuary, it was of
the largest, and a standing measure.
that is to say, of half a yeard, or a foot and a half, which is eighteen
inches of our measure: saving that it is not vnconsonant to truth, that the
bodies of men August. de ciuit. Dei lib. 15. cap. 9. Ita quippe non credunt,
etiam magnitudines corporum long ampliores tunc fuisse qua^ nunc sunt.
Cyprian. lib. ad Demetrian. Qua in part illud primo loco scire debes, senuisse
iam mundum, nec illis viribus stare quibus prius steterat, nec vigore and
robore eo valere quo antea praualebat. Non hieme nutriendit seminibus
tantaimbrium copia est, non frugibus aestate torrendis solis tanta flagrantia
est. etc.
in those times were greater then now they are, and therefore the common
measure of a cubite, was also greater. But concerning the number of every sort
to be received, the text is manifest: of every clean beast thou shall take
unto thee ((...). shibegnah, shibegnah) seven, seven, that is (as we in
English use to speak) seven of one sort, and seven of another; or of every
kind or sort seven, ((...), ish ve isheto) a male and a female; and of unclean
beasts ((...) hi shenaijin) one pair or couple, one male, and one female:
wherefore undoubtedly by the express words of Scripture, and the consent of
the chief interpreters, there were but two of every kind, except of the
clean beasts, whereof were seven. Furthermore the measure expressed of the
Arc, co^uinceth that it was abundantly sufficient to contain all the
creatures that were to be received, and their food (if need had been) for
many years. The length thereof three hundredth cubits (which was five times
the length 1. King 6.2.
of the temple of Solomon) and the breadth thereof fifty cubits, which being
joined together do make of square measure by the common rules of Art,
fifteen thousand cubits. Besides this, it contained in the height thereof,
three floores or rooms, in regard whereof it was three times as capable of the
creatures, containing thrice the measure of the lowest room, that is, if
account be rightly made in the whole, five and forty thousand cubits, and
every several room contained ten Except only the thickness of the floor
between the several rooms.
cubits, or fifteen foot in height. How As Appelles on the one side would not
believe this history, because in his judgment the Arc was too little, and not
capable of so many creatures: so contrariwise Celsus would not receive it,
because he esteemed the measure of the Arc to be so great, as that it could
not by man's industry be builded. We have at this day (I fear) Apellites, we
have also Celsians, whom if reverence of scripture will not move, it is in
vain to move with arguments. Yet Origin does answer thus: Cont. Cells. lib.
4. Quid enim absurdi est, cum centum annis fabricata dicatur: an non mirandum
opisicis ingenium, etc. An non merandum, introducta omnium generum seminar^a
per Dei prouidentiam? Item A^gust. d ciuit. Dei, lib. 15. cap. 27. Quod
disputant tantae. etc. Whereas some dispute that an Arc of so great measure
could not be reared up, they do but foolishly cavil, since that they know that
huge Cities have bin builded, neither have regard to the hundredth years
wherein it was in building.
sensles then was that Appelles, to say the Arc was not great enough for four
Elephants? and how blasphemous is that The true Berosus was a most ancient
Heathen writer of great authority; as appears by Josephus. Antiq. lib. 1.
cap. 4. etc. Eusebius. de demonstrat Euang. and in Chron. Hieron in Dan. c 5.
Berosus qui Chaldaeam scripsit historiam, and Josephus qui Berosunt secutus
est: ^ this writings being long ago lost, one Annius of Viterbium, forged a
pamphlet under the name of Berosus; wherein he writes that Noe being one of
the Giants of those days, foresaw the flood by skill in Astronomy, and
prepared the Arc. But the same is impious and blasphemous, sacrilegiously
contradicting the sacred Scripture.
forged fable of Berosus, which affirms that this so great a work was
devised, and framed, and finished, by the only wisdom of Noah, and For
indeed he could have no more foreknowledge of the flood by ye stars, then
Atheists shall have of the second coming of our Savior.
direction of the stars; whereas in deed it was past the wisdom of a mortal
man, to find out such a work; neither was ever such a building seen upon the
waters; it was past the reason of man to know the necessity of such a work,
past the providence of man so well to provide for so many creatures, and past
the power of man to guide it in the water, safe from August. de ciu. Dei. lib
^5. cap. 27. Area fabricatur, quam n^llu^ in mare mittat tonatus hominum, sed
leuet vnda (...) venerit naturali ord ne po^de^^^; magisque diuina proui
dentia, quam humana prude^tia natantem gubernet, ne incurrat vbicunque
naufragium.
shipwreck. And concerning the number of the creatures therein to be preserved:
It is found among the Plin. lib. 10. Histor. not. Gesnerus de Animalibus. Of
which, the fowls and creeping things would require no great room: of ye
beasts, no above forty kinds, do so greatly exceed the residue.
learned, that there are not known to be of beasts and creeping things, above
the number of one hundred and fifty kinds, and of likelihood they are not many
nor great that are not known. How easily mght they be ranged in such a space,
though they were double in number, as in deed they were, and though the fowls
were preserved and placed by them, and of every clean beast and foul, there
were seven in the Arc, and as much Origin in Genesis Homil. 2. supposes that
there were beasts also brought into the Arc, for to be devoured of the
ravenous beasts as their food: but Augustine thinks otherwise, that ravenous
beasts for that time, fed on herbs, or hey, as at the beginning: Quid e^go
(inquit) mirum si vir ille sapiens and iustus, etiam diuinitus admonitus quid
cuique congrueret sine carnibus, aptam cuique generi alemoniam praeparauit and
recendidit? Quid est autem quod vesci non cogere^ Pa^^^^ aut quid non suaue and
salubre facero posset Deus? What could not hunger compel them? what could not
God make sweet?
of every kind of food, as was sufficient for them all? Some one will ask,
seeing these creatures were kept to preserve seed alive, wherefore that seventh
beast was kept, seeing he remained without a fellow? Perhaps to fill up the
number of seven, which is Ambros. de Noa and Area, cap. 12. Et ideo virgo
dicitur quia nihil ex se general.
called the virgin number, Clemens Alexand. Strom. 6. Aliorum referens potius
quam suam sententiam. Origin. in Genesis Hom. 2. and in Exodus Hom. 9. Eusebius. de
praeparat. Euang. lib. 13. cap. 7. Ambros. lib. de Noa and Arca, cap. 12. Quia
mundus and sacer septimus numerus. August. de Genesis cont. Manich. lib. 1. cap.
13. Beda in Hexam. and alij.
a mystical number, a holy number, a number of perfection, and so much regarded
by writers both ecclesiastical, and Philo Iudaeus lib. de opific. Mundi. Solon
apud Clement. Alexand. Strom. 6. Infans septenos posiqua^ compleueris annos.
Hermippus Beritus lib. de Septenar. apud eundem. Varro lib. 1. Hebdomadis apud
Gellium, lib. 3. cap. 10. Irenaeus lib. 2. cap. 19. Vale^tinianos aijs suae
haereseos infectus, quod in numeris essent superstitiosi. Quod autem velins in
numeros transfer vniuersum, hoc a Pythagoricis acceperuns. Primu^ enim hi
initium omnium numeros substi^uerunt, and initium ipsorum, parem and imparem.
etc.
profane. Concerning which observation Chrysostom gives this godly answer.
Many (says Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 24. Multi enim varias de ijs fabulas
narrant, and hinc occasion sumpta obseruationes numerorum ostendunt. As non
obseruatio, sed intempestiua hominum curiositas talia fingere molitur, vnde and
multae haereses orta. etc.
he) do tell diverse fables of the number of seven, and taking occasion from
hence, do set forth observations of number. But it is not observation but the
untimely curiosity of men, that indeuoreth to feign such things, from whence
many heresies have sprung. For we find often (in the Scriptures) Luc. 10.1.
Mat. 21.1. Marc. 14.13.
the number of two observed, the number of Matthew. 10.2.
twelve, and The four Gospels, the four beasts, Revel. 4.
four: whereof it is in waste, to put your charity in memory, who are
sufficiently instructed to stop your ears against such curious sayings.
Wherefore not for the number sake, but for the worship of the Lord this number
was fulfilled. For as the number of six was fulfilled for the benefit of Noah
and his family, for his necessary clothing Vnde iumentum, a inuando dictum
est, sieve arando sieve onera portando Isidor. lib. 12. c. 1. vel a iungendo
Nonius Marcel. de propriet. Sermon. cap. 1.
or help in his labors, or for his food when it was permitted Genesis 9.3.
Justin. Mart. dialog. cum Triffon.
him to eat of the flesh of them that were convenient for food: so the seventh
beast was kept for Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 24. Ne hoc facie^do mutilaret paria.
sacrifice, which Noah did diligently Gen 8.2.
perform, after he escaped the danger of the waters. Obser. 1. The word and
promises of God Deuteronomy 6.7.8. Psalm. 94.18.19. and 119.97. Act. 13.42.
are often to be read, heard, and continually to be meditated of us in this
life, least we should faint in the manifold temptations of the world; for
which cause the Lord does so Genesis 6.18. and 7.1.4.
often repeat to Noah the promise of his preservation, and that his labor
should not be in vain. Secondly, it is the Leuit. 26.6.22. Deuteronomy. 32.24.
Aristot. Histor. Animal. lib. 6. c. 31. Rarum est leonis genus, nec multis
nascitur locis, sed totius Europaea part solum, quae inter Acheloum amnem and
Nessum est. Leones terrae Syriae quinquies in vita pariunt, deinde steriles
degunt.
special providence of God, that the number of the clean and profitable
beasts, does far exceed those that be devouring and hurtful. Thirdly, the
Lord does change and rule the heart Prou. 21.1. and 16.17
of man and Job. 5.23.
beast, and makes (for his children sake) Isai. 11.7.8.9. Dan. 6.20.22.
the hearts of wolves, as lambs; and for the wickedness of men Exodus 8.6.24.
the weakness of flies to be reuengers of his covenant. Fourthlie, great and
magnificent buildings 2. Sam. 5.9. 1. King. 7.2.
are not disallowed of the Lord, Such as are her Majesty's Navy Royal, for
the defense of the Commonwealth; Churches well garnished or goodly built for
the setting forth of Religion; Princely houses for the honor of Nobility:
but such as exceed their measure, or are built for lasciuiousnes, ambition, or
vainglory, are condemned and threatened in the Scripture, and often
manifestly punished, Isai. 5.8.9. Iere. 22.13.14. etc.
so they tend unto the glory of the Lord, and profit of his Church. Fiftlie,
the godly do increase in knowledge by the often Mat. 13.36.37. etc. Ioh.
16.28.30. 2. Tim 2 25.21. and 4.2
hearing of the word, forasmuch as the Lord by himself and by his ministers,
by often teaching, does amplify and explane the doctrine: as here the Lord
instructs Noah, Genesis 6.19. August. quast. in Gen 8 Hoc resertur non ad
numerum murdorum vel immundorum animalium, sed ad msculum and foeminam, quod in
omnibus sieve mundis sieve immundis duo sunt, masculus and foemina.
first of the quality not of the number, two of every sort, afterward the
certain number of them, of clean beasts by seauens, of other by couples.

Question 3. verse 11. To what purpose it is said: In the second month, the
seventeenth day of the month the fountains of the great deep were broken up?
HErein may we behold the diligence of the Scriptures, in describing the
month, and the day of the month in which the flood began. This argues the
Isai. 44.7. In this one point, the holy history excels all the histories of
the heathen, and whatsoever other; in that it was indicted by the holy Ghost,
who being present in all places as an eyewitnes, can neither deceive, or be
deceived.
certain knowledge of the author of this history, not only of the matter,
but also of every circumstance thereof. Secondly, it does admonish us that we
be Prou. 22.2. Matthew. 21.42.43.
diligent to learn, as the Scripture is diligent to teach. Thirdly, it
declares, that Basil. Hexam. 10. Otiosum verbu^ in scripturis ponere, grandis
est blasphemia. Hieron. in Ephesians. c 3. Singuli sermones, syllabae, apices,
punct^, in diuinis scripturis plena sunt sensibus. Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 18.
and 21 Syllaba and apiculios vnicus reco^ditum habet thesaurum.
not a word nor tittle in the Scripture, but is profitable and necessary for
our instruction. The month and the day is here described; notwithstanding,
there is grown no small dissension among interpreters, which is the month that
is here described, and called the second month. There are which Caietan.
Comment. in Genesis cap. 7. Perer. in Genesis Tom. 2. lib. 12. Disp. 2.
suppose it to be the second month, not of the common year, but of the life of
Noah. But I would demand what end they could assign, why the life of Noah
should so exactly be declared. It suffices unto the Church of God, to know
that he was then old, as having lived six hundred years, but how many more
months or days he lived, was nothing necessary. The second month then, was
the second of the common year, which year no doubt in the sacred history As
the Israelites began the year from their deliverance out of Egypt 1. King.
6.1. and the Christians from the birth of Jesus Christ: the Romans from the
building of Rome.
does take his beginning from the creation of the world. But at what season
this year began, is not a little doubtful, by reason of the difference
thereof, both among the heathen, and in the Church of God: the Egyptians and
they Joseph. Antiq. lib. 1. cap. 4. Mense secundo, qui Dius a Macedonibus
vocatur, ab Hebraeis Marsonane, sic enim Aegpptij distinxerunt annum. Lactant.
lib. 1. cap. 6. Aegyptij Mercurium appella^t Thoth, a quo apud eos primus anni
sui mensis, id est, september, nomen accepit. Hieron. in Ezech. 1. Apud
Orientales enim populos post collectionem frugum, and torcularia, cum decimae
deferrebantur in templu^, October erat primus mensis, and Ianuarius quartus.
of Asia, began the year in harvest, which month we call September: the (...),
Abab says Rab. David, properly is the stalk with the ear of corn, of which
the month Abib is so called of the Hebrews, because in yt month, the corn in
that region did come in ear: like as the Romans call April, which partly in
name and time answers to Abib, ab aperiendo terram. Varro de l^ngua Lat. lib.
5. of opening the earth: because then the earth (or the hand of the Lord in the
earth, Psalm. 104.28.) is opened. Of the Athenia^s, the same month April is
called (...), because the^ the earth begins to wax warm.
Israelites and Arabians, at the spring or March: The Dionys. Halicarnas. lib.
1. Ilium est captum, astate iam vergente, december and septem diebus ante
soli^titium aestiuum, octauo die mensis Thargelionis deficientis, quemadmodum
Athenienses tempora computant. Sed post solstitium supererant viginti dies qui
annum illum complebant.
Athenians and Grecians, in the height of summer which is June: the Romans
Macrob. lib. 1. Satur. 3. Plut. in vit. Numae. Primus ab Iano dictus est
Ianuarius, qui Ianus vitam seram atque immitem dicitur immutasse, vnde
bifrontem fingunt eum, quod aliam ex alia faciem rationemque accomodauit vitae.
in the deep of winter, closing up the old year, and beginning the new, with
the month of Ovid. Factor. Isiodor. libr. 5. Originum. cap. 23. Quia limes and
ianua sit anni.
January. Although every one of these would seem to draw their account, from
the original of the world, yet the truth remains only with the Church of
God. Wherefore to let the heathen pass, and to come unto the Hebrews who were
directed by the word of God, the difference as yet remains untaken away. For
it Exodus 12.2. Leuit. 25.9.
appears by the Scriptures, that as the affairs of men consist in
Ecclesiastical and civil things, so they had a twofold beginning of the
year, the one in respect of Sacred uses, which Exodus 12.3.
account began in the month of Exodus 12.2.
Abib, the other in respect of temporal affairs, which began at the end of
the sixth month by the first account. Concerning which Josephus a learned Jew
Joseph. Antiq. lib. 1. cap. 4. Moses autem Nisan qui est Xanthicus, mensem
primum in suis fastis ordinauit, quod per hunc Hebraeos ex Aegypto eduxisset
^eundem etiam omnium quae ad rem diuinam pertinerent exordium fecit; alio qui
quod ad nundinationes rerum venalium reliquamque dispensationem anni attinet,
nihil de pristino ritu innouauit.
affirms: that Moses ordained the month Nisan or Abib to be the first month,
because that in this month he brought the Israelites out of Egypt, and made it
the beginning of the year in all divine and sacred matters: but otherwise in
respect of merchandise and matters of sale, and the whole disposition of the
year beside, he altered nothing of the former (Egyptian) custom. Wherein
Josephus (as in many other things) does violent injury unto the Scripture,
and not only to the Scriptures, but even to Moses and the Lord himself. For
this ordinance was John. 7.22.
not of Moses, but the Lord commanded it to Moses, and Moses Numb. 12.7.
being faithful in the house of God, declared Exodus 12.21. and 13.3.4.
this ordinance unto the people as from the Lord. And although it was appointed
to be unto them Exodus 23.15.
a remembrance of their deliverance out of Egypt, yet was it ordained, they
being Exodus 12.1.
as yet in bondage, before the passover was eaten. And the Lord does most
significantlie express his ordinance: Exodus 12.2.
this month shall be unto you the beginning of months: it shall be to you the
first month of the year; therein Iren. libr. 4. cap. ^0. Cum autem haec
iustitia and dilectio quae erat erga Deum cessisset in obliuionem and extincta
esset in AEgypto. etc.
calling them from the customs and errors of the Egyptians, unto the right
knowledge of times, which their fathers and ancestors understood before.
Notwithstanding in respect of the When as every man was by the law of God to
return to the possession of his inheritance which he had morgaged, or sold,
except to the nearest kinsman of his tribe: Leuit. 25.13.16.23.
year of Iubile, and the rest of the land which the Lord commanded, it was
necessary, that the term of the year should end with the end of harvest,
least otherwise they should be hindered from reaping the land which they had
sown. And for this cause we, although we begin the year at an other season;
yet for the most part in matters of tenements and lands, and leases, and
revenues, we account the year ends, at the end of the fruits thereof. This
second month therefore was not the second month of the year of Iubile, Lyra.
in Genesis cap. 7. Oleaster. in Genesis c. 7. Perer. in Genesis Tom. 1. lib. 1.
as many do determine, for then had it been called the Leuit. 25.9.
eight month, and not the second; and if it had differed from the second month
of the sacred reckoning, doubtless the holy Ghost would have observed the
same; but seeing the contrary is manifest, it remains, that that which to
the Israelites, by the institution of the Lord, was the second month, was also
to Noah the second month: and by consequent, the first month was it, in which
Exodus 13.4. Deuteronomy. 16.1.
their deliverance was wrought; in which also the Lord Genesis 15.14. Exodus 12.41.
Galat. 3.17. August. quaest. in Exodus 47. Ex illa ergo promissione qua vocatus
est Abraham and credidit Deo, post quadringentos and triginta annos, factam
legem dicit Apostolus (and exijsse ex Aegypto dicit Moses) non ex tempore quo
Jacob intrauit in Egyptians.
fore-promised their deliverance unto Abraham; in which Exodus 12.2. Marc.
14.12. etc.
he performed the deliverance of the world by Jesus Christ; and the month in
which Ambros. Hex. lib. 1. cap. 4. In hoc principio mensium, quo pascha iussu
Dei celebrabant Iudai, coelum and terram fecit Deuteronomy. Gitudent. Episc. Brixian.
tract. 1. de Pascha obseruat. Nam veris tempore Deus condidit mundum. Martio
enim mense dixit per Mosen Deus: mensis hic vobis initium mensium, primus est
in mensibus anni, quem mensem verax vtique Deus primum non diceret nisi primus
esset: ficut septit^um diem non diceret Sabbatum, nisi Dominicus primus esset.
Athanas. libr. quaest. ad Antioch. q. 17. Eodem dicit quo Christus in virginis
vtero conceptus, in mundi principio Deus creauit Adam. Cyril. Hierosol.
Cateches. 14. Damascen. Orthodox. lib. 2. cap. 7. Per solemn quatuor temporum
versiones immututionesque constituuntur, and prima quidem verna est, in ipsa
enim Deus fecit vniuersa. Leo. 1. de pass. Dom. Sermon. 5. and 9. Beda lib. de
rat. temp. cap. 40. Rabb. Eliezer, etc. And whereas other Rabbis in Bereshith
Rabba hold that the world was created in the harvest time, either by the
transposition of the letters in the word Bereshith, or because that the herbs
and trees were created with ripe fruit: the reason follows not more, then
that it was in harvest when Aarons Rod budded: neither was it more labor to
the Lord to create fruits then trees: lastly, ripe fruit was to continue at
all seasons by creation. But let every man enjoy his own opinion (in things
indifferent) without contention.
the world was first created; in which man also by transgression stood first in
need of a deliverer, and received the first promise of the same. Whereby it is
apparent, that the second month here spoken of, was in the season of the year
next after it, which the children of Israel were commanded to account the
first, and is called of the Scripture 1. King. 6.1.37. Errauit igitur Gauricus
in annot. in Ptolom. Alinag. lib. 13. Q^i Hebrae^s ni^il de me^sium nominibus,
ante captiuitatem Babylonis habuisse scribit.
Zif: as the first month was called of the Hebrews Exodus 12.2. and 13.14. Deuteronomy.
16.
Abib, of the Chaldees Nehem. 2.1. Hester 3.7. Eliah in Tishbite. Tremel. in
Nehem. cap. 2.
Nisan. The first month began And the same is rather to be understood after the
ancient Roman computation, then that which we now have, who began the first of
March, or the Ides of March, that day which to us is counted the twelfth of
March: on which day the Sun enters into the first degree of Aries. Which
degree in the ancient time, the Sun entered into, the seventh of the Calends
of April, that is, about the five or six and twentieth of March: as Ovid
truly testifies, Fastor. lib. 3. And so is Vitrunius to be understood, lib. 9.
cap. 5. Sol enim cum Arietis signum mit, and partem octauam peruagatur,
perficit aequinoctium vernum: i. When the Sun comes into Aries, and passes
by the eight part or degree thereof, it makes the equinoctial of the Spring,
that is, the Sun does now pass the eight degree of Aries, at that season
wherein it was wont but to enter into Aries and make the Spring: for always
the Spring equinoctial was at the entering of the Sun in Aries. To this
agrees Eusebius. in Fragm. Omnim. historiae. Theodo^et. quaest. in Exodus 72. Beda
lib. de rat. temp. cap. 4. declares that the world was created, the Israelites
delivered, and that Christ suffered the five and twentieth of the month of
March.
in the tenth or twelfth of that which we call March (saving that the Hieron.
Comment. in Agge. cap. 2. Secundum Lunae cursum, menses variantur apud
Hebraeos, vt saepe primus mensis partem Martij possidet, interdum incipit in
Aprili.
Hebrew months are moveable, according to the courses of the moon) the second
at the tenth or twelfth of April, the seventeenth thereof about the last of
The certain day cannot truly be determined, unless the years be reckoned,
and the variable change of the Moon calculated from the flood.
April or the first of May, by our account. When as the Lord had opened Psalm.
145.16.
his hand over all the earth, the same every where abounding For in the East
and South countries the fruits are ripe sooner then ours, of which we will
speak in another place.
with riches, or with As in England, and such other countries of the North; of
which it is said: When May is gone, of all the year the pleasantest time is
past.
pleasures: when they were in the midst of their chief delights, and
proclaimed peace and saftie to themselves, and doubted least of any danger:
when their hearts 1. Sam. 25.36.37. 1 Thessalonians. 5.3.
were merry within them, and they least suspected any change; the wrath of God
comes on them Prou. 1.27. Ierem. 18.7. 1 Thessalonians. 5.3. Revel. 16.15.
suddenly, and fearful vengeance, which destroyed Luc. 17 27.29.
them all. A most admirable example of the justice of the Lord, Romans 15.4. 1.
Co^. 10.11. Luk 17.30.
continually to be laid before the eyes of this sleepie generation! How great
was this destruction, which was universal over all the earth? How miserable,
in that they Heb. 12.17. Be not rash, for the residue, but commit the judgment
to the Lord.
found no space unto repentance, at the least for the preservation of their
bodies? How sudden unto them, that in sixscore year would not be Genesis 6.9. 1.
Pet. 3.20. Lut^er in Genesis 7. Probabili^s videtur, circa vernum tempus coepisse
diluuium, cum scilicet spe noni anni omnium animi pleni essent.
warned? It takes them, when of all other times they would least have
believed. But on ye other side, what a grievous cross was this to Noah, to
Cicer. orat. post redit. ad Quiris. Ipsa autem patria dici vix potest, quid
charitatis, quod volaptatis habeat.
leave his sweet country, and native soil, and to be imprisoned in the Arc,
as in a stall of beasts? How greatly was he moved with reverence unto Heb.
11.7.
the voice of the words of God, that he would close up himself in such a
pinfold, while as yet both heaven and earth did promise as it were security
without the Arc? Or how might it be thought he Iere. 13.17. Luc. 19 verse. 41.
compared. Here some of the Rabbis, from the text, dispute against the text;
that Noe did not pray for the common safety of the world. Their reasons are,
first, because his age is so often repeated, which (say they) is to note his
want of wisdom. Secondly, for that the Lord deferred it of his own accord
seven days. But they are manifestly confuted by the Scripture: first, Genesis
6.3. in respect of Gods foreknowledge. Secondly, Genesis 7.4 God says not, I will
defer seven days; but prepare thou within seven days, for seven days hence
I will cause to rain, etc. Thirdly, though Noah, Daniel and Job had then
lived, etc. Iere. 15.1. Ezech. 14.14
lamented the desperate case of so many millions of souls, which would not yet
be warned, although they now were ready to be overwhelmed with the waters?
Wherefore surely his faith was very great, as the Hebr. 11.7. 1. Pet. 3.20.
Scripture does commend the same, that he would not be snared Luc. 17.2.3.
with the scandals and offenses of the world, but believed the coming of the
flood, when as almost heaven and earth, and all the creatures did secure him
otherwise. His obedience wonderful, that Genesis 6.22. and 7.5. Matthew. 8.10.
he did in all things obey the will of God, and despised the reproof of
sinners, and the allureme^ts of the world. His patience a mirrhor to the
godly, that Numb. 11.15. Job. 3.1. etc. Iere. 20. verse. 14. compared.
did not murmur under so great adversity, of loss of goods and lands, of
banishment out of the world, danger that in humane reason might ensue; but in
all things did follow the calling of the Lord, and committed himself unto his
protection. Obser. 1. The godly have need of Heb. 10.36. 2 Thessalonians. 4.10.11.
Revel. 3.10.11.
strong faith and patience to Ephesians. 6.12. Matthew. 24.21.24.
resist the scandals, wherewith they shall be besieged, especially toward the
latter end. Secondly, those that will not watch, and Verse. 11. Prou. 1.27.
Ierem. 2.31. Matthew. 24.14. Ezech. 33.5.
be warned by the word, shall suddenly be taken 1 Thessalonians. 5.2.3. Revel. 16.15.
a sleep in sin. Thirdly, the tokens which shall go before the day of
judgment Which were foretold by Christ and his Apostles in the Scriptures,
Mat. 24. ver. 15. Luke 17. and 21. Romans 11.26. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
shall not of the wicked be regarded, because the common course of things 2.
Pet. 3.4.
shall continue alike, as from the creation.

Question 4. verse 11. What are meant by the fountains of the great deep, and
the windows of heaven which were opened?
IT pleases the spitit of God, to describe unto us the manner how the earth
was ouerflowed, by two notable arguments thereof: First, by the means or
causes by which it came, which are called the fountains of the great deep,
and the windows of heaven. Secondly, by the effect which these instruments of
God did bring to pass; a flood of waters fifteen cubits above the highest
mountain under heaven. The word (tehem) which (...) taham: Locus aquarum
multarum, aquaru^ multitudo and profunditas. Rab. David.
is Englished the deep, is commonly taken in the Scripture for Exodus 15.5.8.
Psalm. 106.9. Esai. 51.10.
the sea, or Genesis 1.2. Psalm. 42.7 Metaphora.
a place of much water. The great deep therefore ((...) tehom rabba) or (...)
Rabba, to multiply or increase: Genesis 8.17. Psalm. 78.15
multiplied waters, is nothing else but the universal gathering together of the
water, which is called Genesis 1. verse. 10. Basil. Hexam. Hom. 2. Abyssus
significat copiosam aqua^, ad cuius fundum non facile penetrari possit deorsum
versus. August. in Psalm. 41. Abyssus est profunditas quaedam impenetrabilis and
incomprehensibilis: and maxim solet dici de aquarum multitudine. Vbi enim
altitudo ibi profunditas est, quae penetrari vsque ad fundum non potest.
seas. The word ((...) magnenoth) translated fountains, is derived from the
word ((...) gnaijn) Deuteronomy. 19.21. Esai. 52.8
which signifies an eye: And because fountains as men's eyes do drop forth
tears, therefore also a spring of water in the Hebrew tongue Genesis 16.7. and 24
42. and 49.22.
is called (gnaijn.) The same word does also signify Exodus 10.15 Leuit. 13.55.
Numb. 11.7.
the color or outward proportion of any thing: as where it is said, the
grasshoppers of Egypt, covered ((...) eth gnen) the upper face of the earth,
namely, the (...). Tanquam vmbra. Appolon. Summum. Cicer. fin 3. Superior pars
cuiusque rei cenfacies quae externos oculis cernitur, longitudinem cum
latitudine habens sine profundo.
superficies, or that which the eye beholds of the earth. So that from the
very signification and nature of the word, I gather, that as there were two
chief immediate causes of the flood, one from the sea, the other from the
heaven: so also there were two special causes from the sea; one by the Eccles.
1.17. Psalm. 10^.10. Hieron. in Eccles. 1. Putant quidam aquat dulces quae in
mare fluunt, vel ardente desuper sole consumi, vel salsugini maris esse pabula.
Ecclesiastes autem noster, and ipsarum aquarum conditor, eas dicit per occultas
venas, ad capita fontium regredi, and de matrice abysso in sua semper ebullire
principia.
veins and pores of the earth, which now were broken Ambros. de Noa and arc.
cap. 14. Vim diluuij conuenienter scriptura expressit, dicens coelum and terram
pariter esse commota; vndique ergo influentibus aquarum molibus conclusum genus
hominum purgetur.
up to send forth mighty streams; the other Genesis 1.10. Chrysostom. Hom. in Gen
25. Quasi diceret, praecepit tantum Dominus and statim aquarum natura mandato
conditoris obediuit, and vt confluxit totum orbem inunduit. Ambros. de Arc.
cap. 14. Vndique ergo influentibus aquarum molibus, conclusum genus hominum
purgetur. Philo Iud. Maria tumentia, fluuijque aucti, torrentes simul and
perennes, civitates cunctas in campestribus regionibus sitas inundarant, de
vita Mosis lib. 2.
from the gathering together of the waters, which now were Seneca de Nature.
quaest. lib. 3. cap. 27. de causa diluuij Prima imbres. 2. flamina aucta and
redanda^tia. 3. cum per ista profusium est, cres^unt maria supra solitum, etc.
and in miram altitudinem erigitur mare, and tuta illa hominum receptacula
supergreditur. Deinde, senientiam de solis terrae irruptionibus sequitur
absurdum, cum aquae enim euocaba^tur, quo abibant fon i^us occlusis? Resp.
author de mirab. in operibus August. lib. 1. cap. 6. Quamodo retro nisi apertis
aditibus remtrabant?

Et Hieron. Tract. in Genesis Nota secundum Ecclesiasten, quod omnes aque atque
torre^tes per occultas venas ad matricem abyssum reuertantur.


again dispersed, and oueflowed their banks Tehom Rabba. The Ocean Sea, not a
lake.
in every place, whereby the vpperface or proportion of the sea was altered,
yet nothing but (magnenoth) the upper face, and fountains of the deep
Whatsoever the word (...) Magnenoth does signify, that same was broken up: but
it signifies both the upper face of the deep, as well as the fountains: as
Psalm. 87.7. My sight, my watchfulness, or providence, Ra^b. Jonah. therefore
being used in this place in the plural number, I see no cause why we should
take it in this signification, and not in the other, or not rather indeed for
both together.
were broken up: Some will demand how it is possible, that the sea should
ouerflow the earth? I would ask also of them again, how such an impossibility
does so often come to pass, as almost in every age is found by lamentable
experience? Who knows not, but the Lord is able to Psalm. 135.6.
work whatsoever he will? but here the question is of natural causes, which the
scripture therefore does express, that we should not vainelie run to causes
supernatural or miraculous. In nature, it is acknowledged of all, that the
place of the waters, Aristot. de coelo lib. 2. cap. 13. Vt ter l^^^^ est aqua,
sic and aqua leuior est terra. Quare quonam modo id quod est leuius, inferius
eo quod grauius est natura iacere putatur? Idem meteoror. libr. 2. cap. 2. Cum
enim aqua aqua ipsam terram complectatur, atque huic ae^ris globus adiaceat;
aeri, vocati ignis globus, etc.
is to be above the earth: and therefore when the Lord did Genesis 1.9.
withdraw them from the earth, and couched them together in the sea, the same
was a supernatural work of his almighty power. Wherefore if God by his
almighty power do Job. 38.8.10.11.
restrain the waters in their place, and make that natural unto them, which
is against the nature of their first creation; it is not therefore against
their nature (although it be Miracuia enim, quae digna admiratione dicimus.
Fest. Pomp. de significat. verbor.
miraculous in the eyes of men) when soever he permits them to flow unto
their original seat and place. Neither is Caietan. com. in Genesis cap. 1. Nam
dicere, inquit, mare omnipotentia Dei teneri, ne destuat in terram, ineptum est
(and tamen dicit scriptura vt infra videbitur) and puerilis inscitiae, ponere
sine causa, tantum and tam perpetuum miraculum.
it to be called a perpetual miracle as contrary to nature, that the water
should remain thus gathered together; seeing the Lord has made it a second
nature, and works Aestus and scaturigine aquarum, vt panlo infra.
causes in nature from the same. And that we may enlarge the exposition of this
doctrine, (not to the end to prove by demonstration Scriptura enim omni
demonstratione mayor, vel potius sola demonstratio est. Clem. Alexan. libr. 7.
Strom.
the truth of scripture, which is of his own authority Basil. in Psalm. 115.
Fides praeeat ac ducat sermones de Deo, fides and non demonstratio. Fidei supra
rationales methodos animam ad assensum trahens. Fides non per geometricas
necessitates, sed per spiritus actiones accedens.
sufficient unto the godly; but to repress blasphemers and contemners of the
word, who judge the causes and event of all things, by the smalnes of that
light of reason that is in them) we testify; first of all, Job. 38.8, 9, 10,
11. Ierem. 5.22.
according to the authority of Scripture, that the waters are restrained from
ouerflowing the earth, only by the power and decree of God, which has given
them that nature, whereby they cannot ouerflow, except by special liberty
from God. Secondly, as a consequent thereof, that the waters by being gathered
together, are not so depressed in the sea, but that they are ((...) be gnen) in
the upper face of them, remaining as at the first above the highest places of
the earth, and do stand above the mountains, Psalm. 104.6. and 33.7
as the Scripture speaks. Those which in this case are ruled by their
Caietan. in 1. Genesis Si quis dubitas, terram que apparet extra aquas, esse
superiorem aquis, non tam egit ratione, quam applicatione ad sensum: cernimus
enim motum a^^ue, semper fieri in decliuiorem locum, flumina aute^ per terram
decurrunt in ma^e. Quod si altius ess^t quam terra, profecto in eam vt in locum
decliuiorem and humiliorem necessario deflueret. Forte quidem non videris
Caietanus ipsius Tibiris recursim, maris astu retrusum, and quidem cum bis
semper in die flumina retroeunt, propter maris supernos impetus, miror quo
animo talia exarauit Caietanus, vel quid statuisset, si ea qua Roma diluuio
prope perijs, vixisses tempestate.
senses, do greatly err, wherein those that are ruled by their reason, are
not perfect. For albeit it be rightly said, Psalm. 107.23.
those that go down to the sea in ships, etc. that the rivers do flow unto
the sea as to the lower place; and we do rightly esteem the waters to be
lower then the earth, because they are contained within the shore; yet none of
these reasons do hinder any whit, but yt the waters of the deep (that tehom
rabba) should stand above the mountains. For to think that the face of the
waters are fully eeuen, because they appear unto the eye so to be; and that
therefore there can be no gathering and Psalm. 33.7.
heaping together of the waters; manifest reason does persuade the contrary,
and the principles of nature do convince such a one to want both due
consideration of the cause of things, and good experience. For by reason of the
compass of the earth (whereof in the first chapter has been spoken) the
plainest place that is upon the earth, must needs give some thing unto the
compass, Because the earth is acknowledged to be a globe or compass, both in
the Scripture and of Philosophers. Isai. 42.22. Amos 9 6. Arist. de coelo lib.
2. cap. 14. Ptolom. Almagist. lib. 1. cap. 4.
or else it declineth from the common proportion of the same. In this respect,
many meadows and plains, which seem level and eeuen unto the eye, are found
by the certain grounds of art, to differ in equality of height. The waters
and streams of rivers, albeit the difference of higher or lower ground is not,
or at least wise not every where to be discerned; yet do they flow unto the
lower ground, and the waters which follow are always higher the^ those which
pass before. The sea appears eeuen (and yet not without a secret check unto
the eye) notwithstanding in the ebbing and flowing of the sea, there is no
little difference in a little space. Those also which seek help among
Philosophers in the denial of this doctrine, are nothing therein relieved by
them. For it is not hereby denied, that the face of the earth, and of the
waters do make one Arist. de coelo. lib. 2. cap. 4. Perer. in Genesis Tom. 1. lib.
1. in oper. 3. deie: quid quod aquam esse rotundam, and e^ aqua et terra vnum
conflari globu^. Scilicet. Quis contradicit?
perfect globe, but Quia and ipsa terra punctum est respectu coelestium orbium.
Ptolom. Almag. lib. 1. cap. 6. Atque ipsi montes and conualles, ad terrae
magnitudinem sunt vt si in pila sit puluisculus quispiam, and quasi eminentiae
circa spheria Platanorum, quae nihilo prohibens ipsa esse spherim (...).
Cleomed. lib. 1. cap. 10.
as the valleys and mountains of the earth do nothing hinder the exact
compass of the earth, because they are as motes, or nothing in regard of the
greatness of the earth; so likewise the height of the waters, albeit fifteen
cubits or more above the mountains, is nothing in respect of the greatness of
the earth. And withal it is absurd to think, that by reason of any such
ascension of the waters, Obiectio Pererij. Tom. 1. in Genesis lib. 1. in oper. 3.
diei: Primo quod nauis velocius ferretur ad portum, deinde quod in alto
prospectius cerneretur. Non valet.
a vessel or ship should more perfectly be seen a far in the sea, then
near at hand; forasmuch as the declining of the compass in the globe of
waters, and of the earth Ptolom. Alm. libr. 1. cap. 4. Ex spherica figura terra
and maris factum est, vt si omnibus aut quibusdam altioribus locis a quouis and
ad quemni^ angulum nauigantes accedimus, paulatim magnitudines eorum accrescere
videntur, quasi ab ipso mari emergant, que auteae submersa propter conuexam
aquae superficiem videbantur. Clecm. libr. 1. cap. 8. Et huius rei causa,
aerborem nauis scandendo, prospicere consueuerunt. Et cum vix huic obiectioni
satisfaciunt, qui ex editissimis montibus longinquat naues intuentur, quam
inique tales procliuitates omnimodo superfluas and nunquam vel fictas quidem
obijciunt.
prevails against the same, and the greatness of the compass of the earth
does make the former Quid enim est altitudo quindecim stadiorum, ad octoginta
millia stadiorum?
difference to be as nothing. It were also fondnes to conceive that in every
Vel de freto Anglicano vel mari mediterranco, etc.
narrow sea, the same proportion were to be observed, but only or at leastwise
chiefly, Genesis 1.9. We esteem that Tehem Rabba to be that great gathering
together of the waters in the Hyperborarie, Britain, Atlantic, Lybic, and Eoic
Oceans, which are not so many Seas, but alone, compassing the earth, so that
the land inhabited, is to them as it were an Island. Pompon. Mela. lib. 1.
in the main sea or deep, which we in our language term the high or ocean
sea. And that the waters of the deep do stand above the mountains, three
special reasons seem to argue; which I lay before the reader, desiring him to
judge in godly wisdom. First, the testimonies of Scripture, Job. 38.8.9.10.
Psalm. 104.6. Ierem. 5.
which if they prove it not, have not until this age For in this sense the
Fathers do interpret those places of the Scripture. Basil. Hen. 4. Vt non
superinfluens aqua, etc. Ambros. Hexan. lib. 3. cap. 2. Dicant mihi quomodo
tanquam in vtrem congregauit. Aquin. Sum. part. 1. quaest. 69. aertic. 1.
Calvin. in Genesis 7. And such new interpreters, which are carried into another
sense, do not satisfy the Scriptures.
bin sufficiently interpreted. The second is from the form or proportion of
the sea, which is The quantity is less, but the breadth of the Sea is greater
then of the earth, as appears by their tables of Geographie: Ptolom. etc.
much more space in the upper face thereof, then the residue of all the earth,
yet is it not exactlie eeuen in it self, as experience does manifest in
springs and tides; which because they show a falling and a rising of the
waters, and are not found in the great or maine sea, in the which Plin. lib. 2.
cap. 97.
there is no falling, or at any time abating of the waters: it follows
thereof, that the waters are wholly ascending in the Ocean, which because it is
more large, then the breadth of the earth, it is also more ascending Ascension
in the Sphere of ye earth is the farther distance from the Center or middle of
the earth: now the waters being gathered together on an heap, as the Scripture
says, although their heaping together be so small, and not sensible to the
eye, yet by reason of their breadth it must needs acrew to more then the height
of any mountain.
in the compass of the same. The third reason I take from the effects that do
come, or may seem to come from the gathering of the waters; in which they are
said to be above the mountains. One is, the fountains and springs of water
which are seen to arise out of the earth, even in the top Aristot. lib. 1.
c. 13. Meteor. Maximi amnes maximis de montibus deferri videntur. Quod terrae
ambitum cognoscentibus, constare poterit.
of the highest mountains. Whence come they? not of miracle: for the Lord so
governs the August. de ciuit. Dei, lib. 7. cap. 3. Sic itaque administrat
omnia Deus, quae creauit, vt etiam ipsae proprios exercere and agere motus
sinat.
things which he has created, that he permits them to exercise and do the
natural motions which he has placed in the^. Not of the Aristot. Meteor. lib.
2. cap. 2. Cum enim aqua ipsam terram complectatur, etc.
vaporous sweat, and distillation of the earth, as is manifest by their boiling
up, and vehement arising, even in the top of mountains, as though they were
forced forth by vehemency of following waters. It remains therefore
according to Eccles. 1.7. Hieron. ibid. Ecclesiastes autem noster and aquarum
ipsarum conditor, eas dicit per occultas venas, ad capita fontium regredi.
the Scripture, and The opinion of Thales, as appears by Aristot. de caelo
lib. 2. cap. 13. and Meteor. lib. 2. cap. 2. Nec defuerunt qui scriberent,
stumina non modo in mare fluere, sed ex co etiam effluere. Et Laert. lib. prim.
vit. Thales. Plato. in Phaedon. in hoc (s^il. tartareum oceanum) vti
receptaculum omnia confluunt flumina and inde rursus efflunt. Inde quatuor
flumina describit poeta^um more lectis Mosaicit libris vt tradit. Justin.
Martyr. Apolog. 2.
diverse ancient Philosophers, that they come from the sea; and that thorough
the veins and pores of the earth, which are found Defodientibus praesertim in
locis saxosis and in glarea, copiosiosiores ^^uae and salubriore^, in sabulosis
rart^res, neque na salubres. Vuruu. lib. 8. c. 1.
almost in every place. This also Arist. lib. 2. Meteor. cap. 2 Haec si ita
cue^^ant, i^ fieret quod in prouerbio vsurpatur, sontes sursum stuitant, quod
fieri non potest.
may seem to be against the nature of the waters, to arise up in the veins of
the earth: for being heavy they always of themselves descend unto a lower
place. But as we see a spring that rises in an hill, conveyed in lead ^inl^
of Hexam. li. 3 cap. 2. ^aeterum quis ignorant quod rap^do plerunque impetu in
imae descendeus in superiora se sulo^gat, atque in supercilium montis attollat?
plerunque eti^m caualibus manu artificis deriuata, quantum descender^t, tantum
rursies ascendat; naque si impetu suo fertur, vel artificis deriuata ingenio,
contrae naturam suam ducitur and eleuatur; miramini si diuini operatione
praecepti, aliquid ad vsum eius natura (scilicet congregationis aquarum)
accassit, quod in vsu any non fuerat.
unto a lower ground, will force his waters to ascend unto the height it
bears at the fountain; even so the waters which stand above the mountains,
do force out springs of water, by necessary and natural cause out of the
highest mountains. Another effect that seems to come from thence, is the
flowing and ebbing of the sea. This as some suppose, does come to pass There
have been many opinions of the cause of the eb^^ng and flowing of the Sea. Of
Lucan, and Soline it is left as a point indissoluble: De quo (inquit) plura pro
ingenijs disserentium, quam pro veritatis fide expressa. Some say it is the
breathing or blowing of the world, as Strabo lib. 1. Geograph. Albert. Magn. de
propriet. clement. tract. 2. cap. 2. Apollon. Tyanaeus said, it was because the
waters getting into certain holes of the earth, was forced out again by
Spirits remaining within the earth: reported by Philostratus, lib. 5. Macrobius
de Somno Scipio. lib. 2. says, it is by the meeting of the East and West
Ocean. Cicer. de not. Deorum seems to ascribe it only to the power of God:
Quid? aestus maritimi. vel Hispanienses, vel Britanici eorumque certis
temporibus vel accessus vel recessus sine Deo fieri non possunt. Si cum eo
secundum intulisset principium, omne tulisset punctum. Other for the most part
ascribe it to the influence of the Moon. Ptolom op. Quadripart. lib. 2. cap.
11. Picut Mirand. contr. Astrol. lib. 3. cap. 15. Silius de bell. Punic. lib. 3.
affirms, the Moon has the same virtue to draw water as the Loadstone has
to draw iron. Item Plin. lib. 2. cap. 8.9. Caesar. de Bell. Gal. lib 4. Hieron.
Zanch. de oper. Dei part. 2. libr. 4. suppose it to be caused by the variable
light of the Moon: which several opinions I can commend for reverence; allow
I cannot.
by the variable light of the moon. And is it not as likely, which other
Nich. Copernic. in Astronom. lib.
do imagine, that the light of the moon should be caused by the flowing of
the waters? No man denies, but that the Lord has imparted power unto that
creature, in things of As in Oysters and Cockles it is manifest.
moistnes. But forasmuch as we reason with natural men, of natural causes, I
demand: what cause in nature from the moon, that so huge floudes of waters,
so large and heavy should be driven to or fro, when as in pooles, in
fountains and rivers, it cannot be perceived that one drop of water is thereby
increased, or moved, or diminished? What cause also from the moon, that in
places near the Ocean, the tides are more vehement when as As at Venice the
tide is greater then at Tyrus: the reason whereof is indeed, because the
waters flowing into the middle sea at the creek of Gades out of the Ocean,
has a greater rise and fall (according to the Ocean) in places near hand,
then in those which are farther off. The same reason it is, why the tide is at
Bristow twenty foot, when at London it is scarce sixteen.
in middle seas they are small, and in As in the Sea Euxinum. Arist. Meteor.
libr 2.
some place not at all perceived? What cause moreover, that some where the
flowing is so violent, that it stays and turns the course of a ship that
saileth with the wind; as is reported to be in the In the mouth of the Red
sea, the waters flow with such violence, that they turn a ship, which is
driven with full sail. Sebast. Verro. Phys. lib. 3. cap. 18. Ad caput rubrum
Africae, etc.
coasts of Africa, and also in the Between Montausis and Capo Florida, in the
North part of the country Caba in America.
current of Capo Florida, by those which have seen it, and are yet alive?
Lastly, what cause that the red sea flows but four Ad caput rubrum Africae
aestus diuersus est, nam quaternis horis affluit, octonis autem recurrit.
hours, and ebbeth eight: that Cicer. de Not. Deor. lib. 3. Quid Chalcidico
Euripo in motuidentidem reciprocando, putas fieri posse constantius? Idem pro
Muraena. Pompon. Mela. lib. 2. cap. de insulis Mediter. Euripon vocant rapidum
mare quod septies die ac toties nocte fluctibus inuicem versis adeo immodice
fluens, vt ventes etiam ac plenis velis nauigia frustretur. Idem. Strab.
Geograph. lib. 9. Die quolibet ac nocte septies cursum transmutat. Plin. lib. 4
cap. 12. Senec. in Herc. Oeto. act. 3. Scen. 2. Euripus vndas flectit
instabiles vagus; septemque cursus flectit, and totidem refert, dum lassa Titan
mergo^ oceano ^uga. Aeschines orat. contr. Ctesi. L. Valla. Dialog. de libero
arbit. Aristoteles cum non posset Euri^i naturam inuestigare, se in profundum
illius praecipitans demersus est, prius id testatus elogio Graeco quod Latin
sic habet: Aristoteles non cepit Euripum, Euripus capiet Aristotelem.
Euripus sloweth and falls seven times within the space of a day and a
night? Wherefore seeing it were miraculous that the light of the moon should
work such To toss to and fro so great waters, so diversely, with so great
force, seeing it is said to be the least of all the heavenly bodies, and above
forty times less then the earth, as says Copernicus.
maisteries in the sea; it seems more couenient to suppose, that the natural
cause of the flowing of the waters, is in the waters: that they do in the
wisdom of the Lord after the courses of the moon, flow to and fro at
certain appointed seasons, to the end that men might As it were a sign given
from heaven by the Moon, least the tide should take men at unawares, as it was
likely to have oppressed the army of Alexander, as Curtius writes, de gestis
Alexan. lib. 9.
wisely be warned of them: that they flow naturally, as to a lower place, as
being Neque abhorrent ista a ratione Aristotelica, qui mare rubru^ compertum
esse terra Aegypto excelsius refert. Meteor. lib. 1. c. 14 Idem. Basil. Hexam.
4. Neque impedit authoritas Strabonu lib. 1^. Geograph. Nam and poterit
Aegyptus littore rubri maris depressior esse, que cu^ ab aquis Nili tota
praeter habitationes quae in quibusdam cumulis sieve aggeribus tam pagi quam
civitates maximae sitae sunt, quotannis obruitur, necessirio est ipso Nilo,
denique rubro mari inferior, ipso Strabone test. lib 17. Nemo denique rubrum
ma^e pro magna illa aquarum congregatione vel somno acceperit.
gathered and heaped up together in the deep, above the mountains. And as by
the rising of the sun Matthew. ^.45.
the Lord does signify his mercy; by the variety of the moon August.
quaest. Euangel. 19. Luna significat mortalitatem nostr^m, propter hoc quod
nascitur, crescit, senoscit.
the fragilitie of man: so by the flowing of the waters he shows his
justice, that he has in his hands wherewith to punish sinners. Also that the
waters do retire, is by the natural power of the voice of God, Basil. Herom..
Vox enim tunc and primum illud praeceptum. velut lex quaedam naturae facta est
and permansit (simul in mari atque) in terra ipsa. generandi and fructifi^andi
(in mari congregandi) vim consequenter ipsi exhibent.
let the waters be gathered together: by virtue whereof they do as naturally
retire or slow unto another place, as a stone descends unto the center of the
earth, or a tree though it be heavy, grows upward out of the ground. Many
other reasons Ex optica ratione and consimili.
might be observed, which for tediousnes unto the reader I omit. The purpose of
the premises is this: to admonish those, who Sicut Philosophi, Patriarchae
Hereticorum Tertul. aduers. Hermog. Maxim Athei omnibus deteriores. 2. Pet.
2.22 Quorum dogmata cum frigeant and volare non possint, sedem sibi ac requiem
inter Aristotelis and Chrysippi spineta reperiunt. Vt inquit Hieron. in N thum.
cap. 3. verse. 17.
only will be wise in natural things, and deny the authority of Scripture,
where they find not reason to confirm the same; that they despise not the
authority of Scripture, which agrees Albeit it do exceed humane reason, and
of Iulians and Atheists cannot be sounded, nor raught unto. Cyril. in Julian.
lib. 9.
ever with the truth of reason, as the truth is one, and truly does record
the works of God Psalm. 111.7.8.
which were done in truth and equity, sometime declaring the virtue of his
power; who as he is Bernard. de considerat. lib. 5. ^e^nere est in v^^tutibus,
vnam vbique equaliter praesto esse virtute^, etc. Nam Deus amat vt charitas,
n^^^ vt veritas, se let vt equitas, dominatur vt ma^estas, regit vt principium,
tuetur vt salus, operatur vt vi^^us, reue^^s vt lux, issistit vt pietas. Quae
omnia faciunt Angeli, facimus and (...), sed long inferiori modo, non vtique
bono quod sumus, sed quod participamus.
the author of nature it self, works beyond and against the course of
nature whatsoever pleases him: and sometime expressing by what natural causes
he works, that we might he moved thereby to reverence his works, and
acknowledge his power to be 1. Sam. 2.9. Coloss. 1.17. Act. 17.25. Huius gratia
ab Aristotele primus motor dicitur: natura quidem principium rerum est, Physic.
lib. 2. cap. 1. motor ille primus principium est principij, and cuius gratia
caetera mouentur, lib. 7. cap. 1. and 2 a Cicerone anima mundi vocatur, naturae
principiu^ and (...), lib. 2. de natura De^r.
the natural power of the creature. To those that will examine the truth of
Scripture, by the As Simplicius and other Atheists.
writings of Aristotle and Philosophers, I answer with Epiphanius, that In
Anchorat. Sic docet sancta Dei scriptura, fic sentit ecclesia Dei; non enim
astabit nobis Origenes (vel Aristoteles) in die iudicij.
Aristotle shall not stand to defend their errors and presumptions at the day
of judgment. The second general means whereby the earth was ouerflowed, was
that which the Scripture calls the windows of heaven. The word ((...),
aruboth) does properly signify Eccles. 12. verse. 3. Joshua 8.7. Judge. 10.29.
watch windows, of the word ((...), arabh) to lie in wait, and is also taken
for any place, where Hose. 13.3.
smoke or 2. King. 7.19.
water is let out; which is as if the Scripture had said: The heavens An
Hyperbolicall speech of Rain, like as is 1. Sam. 7.6. of weeping. Ambros. de
Noa and arca cap. 14.
also powered down rain, not by mists and drops, but even by streams
continually, for the space of forty days and forty nights. Whereby it
appears, that whereas the waters of the sea are gathered together, and the
waters above, are contained, Job. 26.8. Prou. 3.20.
borne up, and bound together in the firmament, Genesis 1.6.7.
by the separation whereby God divided the waters from the waters; at this time
the Lord did release the^ unto liberty, Genesis 1.6.9.
pulls down the partition, and lets them go together as at the first.
Obser. 1. The mighty power of the Lord, who has in his treasures Job. 38.22.
Psalm. 135.7.
creatures The earth, Numb. 16.31. Wind and waters, as Iona. 1.4.13. Fire from
heaven, Genesis 19. ver. 24. 2. King. 10.12. Wild beasts, 2. King. 2.24. and
17.25. Grasshoppers, flies, Exodus 8.6.
great and small, ready to Leuit. 26.25.
execute his wrath against the wicked. Secondly, his goodness Ierem. 5.22.
Lamen. 3.22.
that he does restrain them. Thirdly, his patience Exodus 34.6. Psalm.
103.8.10.
that he is not provoked to the contrary for all our sins. Fourthlie, our own
conditions, Genesis 1.1.6.7.9. Basil. Hexam. 4. Per omnem aquarum historiam memor
sis primae vocit: congregentur aquae; oportebat ipsas currere, vt proprium
locum occuparent: deinde vbi essent in praestitutis locis, manner in seipsit,
and non vlterius procedere. Calvin. in Genesis 7. Sed consulto Deus inter duo
sepulchra nos posuit, ne secure contemnamus eius gratiam, vnde vita nostra
dependet.
who are placed on the earth, as in the midst between two swallowing pits,
the waters of the sea and of the firmament; both which if Job. 38. ver. 11.
Psalm. 104.9. Prou. 8.29. etc.
they were not restrained and vpholden by the power of the Lord, would
ouerwhelme the wicked every moment.

Question 5. verse 20. What was the just and exact measure of the waters which
the Scripture speaks of: fifteen cubits upward were the mountains covered,
and whether those natural causes which the scripture speaks of, were
sufficient to procure so mighty waters?
THe height of the waters is described by the highest mountain, but the height
of the highest mountain is not any where described: because the mountains
remain unto the view of men, but the waters could not of any be considered by
view, but by the spirit of the Lord. That mountain of Ararat Joseph. Antiq.
lib. 1. cap. 4. Quin and Nicholaus Damascenus libr. 96. de his rebus narras in
hac verba: est super Regionem Minyarum magnus mons in Armenia nomine Baris, in
quo multos profugos duunij tempore seruator ferunt. and quendam arcae vectum in
huius vertice haesisse, and reliquias lignorum eius longo tempore durasse, qui
fortassis is fuit, de quo etiam Moses scribit Iudaeorum Legistator. Diceret
fortassis Lubaris non Baris vt obseruauit Tremel. Sic enim est apud Epiphan.
Haeres. 1. Post diluuium cum requieuisset arca Noa in montibus Ararat, per
mediam Armeniorum and Cardyentium terram, in monte Lubar appellato, isti^ prima
hominum habitati, sit post diluuium.
appears to be of a notable height, upon which the Ark rested two months and
thirteen days, before ye rest of the mountains were discovered. The
mountain Deuteronomy. 32.49. and 34.1. Joseph. Antiq. lib. 4. c. 8.
Abarim in the top of Pisgah, for the height thereof, was chosen of the Lord,
whereon to show Moses the land of promise. The mountain whereon our Savior
Matthew. 17.1. Luc. 9 28.
showed his glory to his Disciples, which was called Iud^ 4.6. Hieron. Epist
ad Eustor. epitaph. Paul^. Scandebat montem Tabor in quo transfiguratus est
dominus.
tabor, or Hieron. aduers. Hel^id. Mon^ Tabor Itaburium dicitur. Idem. in Hose.
cap. 5. a septuagint. interpret. Sic reddi and appellari.
Itaburium, is Joseph. de b^^lo Iudaic. lib. 4. c. 2. M^^tem Itaburium
occupauerunt, cuiu^ altitudo quidem triginta stedijs consa^gens, sep^entrionali
tractu inaccessus. Quod dicit consurgit, est pro decliuitate mo^tis non
raetione perpendicul^.
affirmed to ascend from the plain and champion fields, by the space of
thirty furlonges. Moreover the testimony of approved writers does confirm,
that there are mountains whose top does reach above the clouds. The mountain
Aristot. Meteor. lib. 5. cap. 13. Catech^^^ port maximus est montium omnium
qui estiuum ad o^t^m sunt cacumine atque latitudine: cuius ^uga a sole
radiantur vsque ad conti inium ab ortu and iterum ab occasit.
Caucasus does advance his tops so far above the common compass of the
earth, that thereon the Sun does shine, until (...), Conti^^rium,
crepusculum, Ma^rob. Saturnal. lib. 1 cap. 2. Tempus a deiuculo ad galli
cantus. Varro lib 6. de linguae Lat. Quod in eo hom^nes incipiunt conticescere.
Nomus Marcel. Conticinium noctis primum tempur, quo omnia quiescendi gratiae
conticescunt.
to those which dwell at the foot of the mountain, the evening is ouerspread,
or as we say, the day light is shut in. The hill Olympus in Thessalie, is
August. de Genesis contr. Manichi. lib. 1. cap. 15. and de ciuitate lib. 15. cap.
2^. Quidam inquit hanc historiam non esse ^estam, sed solas rerum
significa^darum figuras esse contendunt: primum opina^tur tam magnum fieri non
esse diluuium, vt altissimos montes, quindecim cubitis aqua c escendo
transcenderet, propter Olympi verticem montis, supra quem perhibentur nubes non
posse cons^endere, quod tam sublimis quam Coelum sit, vt non ibi sit aer iste
crassior, vbi venit nebulae, imbresque gignuntur, etc. Solin. Polyhist. cap.
18. and alij.
affirmed to be so high, as neither wind nor clouds, nor rain, are at any
time perceived to be in the top thereof. Much like is written of the Alps in
Herodian. Hist. lib. 8. Hi sunt longissime quidem montes, vice murorum Italiae
circundati, adeo in altum editi, vt etiam superare nubes videantur, etc.
France, of Herodot. in Melpom. Extat in hoc marimons cui nomen Atlas, est
autem vbique perangustus and ^^res, ita vero sublimis esse dicitur, vt ad
illius verticem oculi mortalium peruenire non possint: neque ibi vnquam vel per
astatem vel per hiemem nubes deesse consueuerunt; hinc incolae coeli columnam
esse dicunt.
Atlas in Barbary, of Plutarc. lib. de facie apparente in orb. Lunae, etc.
recites the proverb: Athos obumbra^ latera Lemnia bonis; that is, Athos
shadoweth the Ox of Lemnos, which is used when one obscureth another glory.
The occasion of which proverb was, that in the market place of Myrinum, a
City of Lemnos, there was set the image of a great Ox, which image the hill
Athos did ouershadow at the setting of the sun, being seventy furlongs
distant. Idem Apollonius. Argonaut. libr. 1. Pomp. Mela. libr. 2. Geograph,
reports of the hill Athos, the like unto that which Augustine and Solin. cap.
14. do ^ffirme of the hill Olympus.
Athos a mountain of Macedonia. Concerning which, as it is no matter of faith,
to believe or to reject the report of the measure of the mountains: so we
ought not lightly to respect the monuments of famous writers, which have
gathered their knowledge by labor and experience, and in gage of their
estimation do report unto us the wonderful works of God, performed in these
his creatures. But hereof it comes to pass, that men of profane and corrupt
minds, which rather embrace the report of men, then the certain testimony of
the word of God; do August. de ciu. Dei, lib. 15. cap. 27. Primo opinantur tam
magnum fieri non posse diluuium, vt altissimos montes quindecim cubitis aqua
crescendo transcenderet.
demand how it is possible that the waters were above the highest mountain,
seeing as they affirm, the highest mountain is found to be above the clouds.
It is neither of necessity, nor yet convenient, that we should Sicut L. Vall^
in Comment. in Aug. de ciu. Dei, lib. 15. c. 27. Ex authoritate cuiusdam
Franscisci Philelphi, qui se montem ascendisse affirmat, fabulosum esse dicit.
Item ex hoc Perer.
for defense sake, deny the authority of writers; but give every one liberty
to esteem thereof, as his judgment shall discern. But first of all we
answer with S. Augustine, August. de ciuit. Dei. Ibid, An forte negant esse
hanc terram verticem montis? Cur igitur vsque ad illa coeli sparta terris
exaltari licuisse, and aquis exaltari non licuisse contendunt; cum isti
mensores and pensores elementorum, aquas terris perhibeant superiores atque
leuiores.
that it is not so greatly marvel if the waters did ascend unto the still
air above the clouds, if so be the earth be found to be so high (as it is said
to be in the top of Olympus) forasmuch as the natural place of the water, is
to be above the earth. Here again they will object, that the means before
expressed, were not sufficient to raise the waters to such a height: seeing
those which were the highest and chiefest means, are called by the Scriptures
the windows of heaven; which of the Vide infrae. At alij aliter
interpretantur. Gulielm. Parisien. ep. lib de universe. par. 1. cap. De
firmament ait Mosen vocasse cataractas coeli eas coeli parts que sunt
generatrices pluuiarum and ^^undationum aquarum, qualia sunt signa aquatilia,
Cancer, Pisces, Ple^ades, Orion; inter Planetas, Mars, Venus, Luna, etc. Ite^
Pet. Abacus quest. in Genesis Noturam vel certe constellationem, diluuium
figurantem. Id ipsum voluit ficlitius ille Berosu^.
chiefest interpreters are esteemed to be placed in the clouds. For seeing
that some mountains are above the clouds, how could the waters by them be
enforced to be above the mountains? whereunto again we answer. First that
albeit the clouds are often carried in the firmament, not perhaps so far
distant from the earth, as the height of some mountain is: yet the firmament
it self wherein the clouds are carried, and wherein they did at the voice of
God power rain upon the earth, until the end of the forty days; is greatly
above the height of any mountain. So that albeit commonly the clouds are
carried, not past the Hieron. in ^sai. lib. 13. cap. 50. aiunt Philosophi, non
amplius december stadijs a terra, nubes in sublime sustolli, and solis splendorem
abscondere. Ergo non coelum sacco ob^^oluitur, sed intercluso coeli lumine aer
qui subter est nubis tenebris obscuratur.
distance of ten furlongs from the earth or there about, as is confirmed by
learned writers, and that there are mountains found, which are fifteen
furlongs, by the plumline or perpendicular, Cleomed. lib. 1. cap. 9 Neque enim
editior mons quindecim stadijs ad perpendiculum inuenitur, neque maris
profunditas ad sum number stadia tripinta.
ascending from the plain; yet the clouds are also Plin. lib. 2. cap. 23.
Possidonius (inquit) non minus quadraginta stadiorum a terra altitudinem esse
in qua nubila ac venti nubesque proueniant, sed haec a Plinio rarum
Philosophice explicantur.
sometime found to be no less then forty furlongs from the earth; and the
space of the firmament, wherein they are or may be gathered, is much
Possulonius teaches that there a^^ four hundred furlongs to the higher region
of the air: from thence to the circle of the Moon twenty thousand: which
Pliny reports lib. 2. cap. 23.
greater then the space of forty furlongs. Whereby it is evident, that this
only mean was sufficient unto the Lord, to have destroyed the world with
water; as also that such is the wisdom and power of God, that he has placed
in the creatures together, and in every one of them particularly, sufficient
Like as in the destruction of Sodom, Genesis 19. As learned Doctor Fulke (whom of
love and reverence I name) teaches in his Gallerie of Meteors.
power to destroy all the wicked; as to dissolve the earth with water, or with
fire, or such like other means at his commandment. Notwithstanding (least
any should find unto himself, an entrance whereby to cauil at the Scripture)
it is manifest also that the fountains of the deep were no less available,
for the destruction of the earth, then was the means which we have spoken of,
forasmuch as the waters of the deep do Psalm. 104.6.
stand above the mountains, and therefore are sufficient to cover them, being
permitted thereunto. Which point will be soon acknowledged and understood,
after we have prevented an objection or two which may be opposed by the
adversaries. It may seem unto some (not well considered) contrary to reason,
that the waters of the sea, which are of those waters beneath Genesis 1.7.9.
the firmament, should be above the mountains, seeing the waters above the
firmament are by August. de Genesis ad lit. lib. 2. cap. 4. Ergo ex aere, qui est
inter vapores hum dos, vnde superius nubila co^globantur, and maria subterfuga,
siendere ille voluit esse coelu^ inter aquam and aquam. Hieron. in epist. ad
Ephesians. Comment. cap. 6. Maxim si intelligimus, quomodo coelestia nominentur,
propter volucres coeli, and quod in vsu d citur, pluuia venire de coelo. non
quod pluuia de coelo veniat; Philosophi quippe aiunt non amplius, etc. Calvin.
in Genesis 1.6. Hieron. Zanch. de oper. Dei, part. 2. lib. 2. cap. 2.
interpreters acknowledged, to be those which are gathered in the clouds,
which often are found to be not the distance of the mountains from the earth:
whereof it would follow that the waters beneath the firmament, were higher then
those above the firmament. Which notwithstanding, is nothing contrary to
experience. For we often perceive that August. de Genesis ad lit. 2. cap. 4. Et
nubes quippe, sicut experti sunt, qui inter eas in montibus ambulauerunt
congregatione and conglobatione minutissimarum guttarum talem speciem reddu^t.
clouds and mists, being gathered beneath in valleys, are again dissolved
into rain, Genesis 1.7. August. de Genesis ibid. cap. 41.
which is of the waters above the firmament, before they are taken up so high,
as the mountains; for which cause they seem to those that behold them beneath
in the valleys, to be gathered in the tops of mountains, and do hide the
mountains with mists and darkness; in the height of which mountains,
springes Aristot. Meteor. lib. 1. cap. 13. Quorcirca rapidi fluminum cursus ex
iugis montium videntur praecipitari, atque etiam plurima amplissimaque flumina
de montibus in celfissima cacuminae elatis defluunt: vt ex Pyrene Dan^bius, ex
Parnaso vel Parapamiso Bactrus, Choaspes, Araxes, Tanais and Indus.
do often rise, which are of the waters beneath the firmament. But yet again,
this doubt may be thus augmented: the mountains are said to be above the
clouds; but the waters of the sea are not said to be above the clouds, either
by the Scriptures, or by any approved writer: wherefore it can not be that the
waters of the sea should be above the mountains. This objection the Lord
himself Job. 38.9.
has answered long ago: I have made (says he) the clouds as a covering of
the sea, and darkness, as the swaddling bands thereof. Wherein is affirmed that
by the wisdom and appointment of the Lord, clouds, vapors and darkness, do
compass the waters of the deep, as swaddling bands and garments, like as also
they do compass the earth, and are Genesis 9.14.
as a covering for the same. For wherefore does the Lord to particularly
express the excellency of his wisdom, in placing the clouds as the garment
of the sea, if there were not a special point of workmanship therein to be
considered? namely, that albeit Job. 38.8. Psalm. 104.6.
the sea is so gathered, and closed in with bars and doors; that it stands
above the mountains, which are higher then the clouds which cover the earth
(and thereby are Nam and altissimi qui dicuntur montes, vt Olympus and Atlas,
iuxta summitatem quidem and cacumina saepissime nubibus circundantur. Hinc
Olympus pro coelo sumitur and deorum domicilium apud Homerum (nisi quod and
ipse verum coelu^ intellexit) quod Olympus mon^ saepe cacumen retinet
circumfusum nubibus and ta^quam occlusum, saepe contra apertum videatur, vt
refert Eustath. in Homer. Il. 1. Id ipsum de Atlante refert Herodot. in Melpom.
Adeo celsus est, inquit, vt eius cacumen nequeat cerni, quod a nubibus nunquam
relinquatur neque hyeme, neque aestate. Supra cacumen nubes non habere tradit
antiquitas, and forte ratio est, quod cum supra communem locum nubium montes
extolluntur, atque ipsi aridi and angusti; non habent vnde sol vapores eliciat.
At mare contra and latitudinem habet and humorem, vnde optime potest sol
vapores cogere, atque crediderim in aere altius propter frigiditatem eleuari,
quod ipsum mare ex magna part sub aequatore and solis ipsius continuo cursu
positum, and quo feruentius aduritur, eo altius vapores ad frigidam aeris
regionem quicunque colluntur euehi necesse est.
not perhaps covered with clouds) yet he has made the clouds as a garment
for the sea, which do cover the sea alike as they cover the earth. If any will
examine this doctrine by the rules of nature, he shall find it in all things
correspondent thereunto. For this notwithstanding, the clouds are or may be
carried by means alike, gathered alike, and in like place, that is in the
middle region Which is the place in which they are gathered and thickened.
Aristot. Meteor. 1. c. 9.
of the air. For as the earth is nothing Aristot. de Coel. lib. 2. cap. 14.
Cleom. lib. 1. cap. 9.
in respect of the greatness of the spheres of heaven, and the gathering of the
waters, nothing in respect of the greatness of the globe of the earth it self:
so this difference in the sea and in the clouds, from the earth and the clouds
which cover it, is also nothing; whether we compare it with the heaven, or the
compass of the earth, For what are fifteen furlongs, in respect of twenty
thousand?
or only consider it with the space and largenes of the firmament. This
therefore may suffice to convince an Atheist of his impiety, that will not
believe the history of Scripture, because he cannot find how in reason it
might be done. Notwithstanding neither this, nor whatsoever may be Hieron. lib.
aduers. Heluid. Non Rhetorici campum desideramus eloquij, non Dialecticorum
tendiculas, nec Aristotelis spineta conquirimus, ipsa scripturarum verba
ponendae sunt.
confirmed by reason, or adorned with eloquece, is sufficient to persuade him
August. in epist. Ioh. Tract. 3. Sonus verborum nostrorum aures percutit,
magister intus est. Nolite p^^are quenquam hominem aliquid discere ab homine.
Admonere possumus per strepitum vocis nostrae, si non sit intus qui doceat,
inanis est strepitus noster. Adeo fraires vultis nosse numquid sermonem istum
omnes audistis, quam multi hinc indocti exituri sint? quantum ad me pertinet,
omnibus locutus sum: sed quibus vnctio illa intus non loquitur, quos spiritus
sanctus intus non docet, indocti redeunt.
of the truth thereof, which by the virtue Ioh. 14.26. and 1. Ioh. 2.20.
of the spirit of God, has not his heart Luc 8.15.
prepared to receive by says, the plain narration of the Scripture. It makes
also much unto the glory of God, his power, and wisdom in the creatures,
being considered and understood. For first the same declares his wisdom,
that has Genesis 2.1. Quaelibet suo ordine, vt leuiora natura sint altiorae, sic
vt vel ipse subscripsit Aristot. de Coelo lib 2. cap. 13.

Oecolampad. in Iere. 5. In mari Erithraeo, dicunt multo mare sublimius l^tore:
imo si naturam aduertimus, omnia eius rationis sunt maria, nam spericae figure
sunt.

Calvin. in Ierem 5.22 Leuitas ipsa ostendit (maris aquas) eminere super terram.


placed the creatures in such excellent order. Secondly, his power, who Job.
38.10 11. Ierem. 5.22. Basil. Hexam. 4. Debilissima re arena, id quod violentia
intolerabile est franatur: alioqui quid prohiberet, etc. Ambros. Hexam. lib. 3.
cap. 2. Vtrumque igitur ex praecepto dei, vt and fluat aqua and non superfluat.
makes the sand of the shore as bars and doors, to keep the waters, which
but for his word and ordinance, would ouerflow the earth. Thirdly, his
fidelity, Genesis 9.11. Psalm. 146.6. 1. Cor. 10.13.
that according to his promise he does keep them in. Lastly, if these
creatures have such power in them, by virtue of their Deuteronomy. 32.24. Amos 9.3.4.
which is the effectual voice of God, or his working power, in and by his
creatures Genesis 1. Psalm. 104.9 and 119.91. For the word Nature is taken
diversely: first, for God himself, so that by the word Nature, God is
understood: 2. Pet. 1.1.4. In this sense Aristotle calls God or Nature the
first mouer: Bernard. Principium, the beginning, ad Eugen. lib. 5. Zeno, Fire,
and the Soul of the world. Cicero de not. Deor. lib. 2. Secondly, it is taken
for the will of God. So Plato de leg. Natura est quod Deus vult: that is, what
God wills, that is Nature. And August. de ciu. Dei, lib. 20. cap. 8. Voluntas
creatoris cuius que rei natura est: that is, the will of the Creator, is the
nature of every creature. Thirdly, the effect of execution of that will, Romans
11.24. 1. Cor. 11.4. this is the second and subordinate beginning, which
Heathen Philosophers do commonly understand: of which Aristotle says, de
part. Animal. lib. 1. cap. 5. (...). i. No work of Nature is to be contemned,
because there is nothing in Nature, which has not in it some cause of
admiration. And Galen de vsu partium lib. 20. in the end (having spoken of Gods
wonderful works in the parts of man's body) Videmur nobis in Dei laudem
honoris cantum cecinisse: that is, we seem to have sung herein a song of
honor to the praise of God. And Zen^phon lib. 1. (...): These are the works of
yt wise Architect and lover of his creatures. Item Cicer. Not. Deor. lib. 2.
and in Lucull. Naturae effecta esse quaecunque sint, etc. Wherefore we which
sometime are compelled to use the word Nature in Divinity, do mean thereby
the power and ability of the creatures, which God has put within them to do
his will, in their creation such as is of the water, by their first power to
ouerflow the whole earth, by the second power whereby they were gathered
together, to ebb to and fro in the Sea. And in saying the flood was brought to
pass by natural causes, we mean the power which God put in those creatures by
their first creation before they were restrained: but we join withal this
saying of Seneca: T^ naturae Deo nomen mutas: quanto pulchrius si dixeris,
Deus, hoc aut illud fecit: i. Change that name Nature into that name God: how
much better were it to say, God (rather then to say Nature) did this or that.
And affirm moreover that the nature of the creature, is the effect of the will
of God, which is ingrafted into every creature.
nature and creation, as at the commandment of God to destroy the world, what
is he able by his power to perform, who made the creatures themselves of
nothing, gave them the power that Romans 13.1. Coloss. 1.17. Gregor. libr. Mor.
7. Bona ordine suo est potentia, sed nuncta regentis indiget vita.
is in them, and works whatsoever he will without the creatures as without
his instruments, for the preservation of his people, and the overthrow and
destruction of the wicked.

CHAP. VIII.
Question 1. verse 1. By what means were the waters of the flood diminished,
and the ground dried up, which was ouerflowed so deep with water?
ANd God remembered Noah, says the text: that is to say; albeit the Lord did
so fiercely show his wrath upon the world, by pouring rain from heaven upon
them, by the space of forty days and forty nights, and caused the deep to
return to cover the earth, whereby the highest mountains Caietanus in Genesis
cap. 7. Excipit montem Paradisi: apparat (inquit) quod Moses non loquitur de
omnibus montibus excelsis simpliciter and absolute, sed de illis tantum qui
sunt sub coelo, hoc est sub regione acris in qua generantur pluuiae: attestatur
quoque huic sensus co^munis acceptio montis in quo est Paradisus terrestris,
vbi Henoch erat te^pore diluuij adhuc ibidem versatus. Satis est quod hunc
co^uincit falsitatis Perer. Tom. 2. lib. 12. disp. 9.
under heaven (which at this day remain as a standing Cleomed. libr. 1. cap.
10. Nam quod Plinius altitudinem montis Casiij per directum esse quatuor mill
passuum lib. 5. c. 22. magis coniectura nititur, quam veritate; and quod
Plutar. refert in vita Pauli Emilij: Nec montis altitudinem nec maris
profunditatem december siadia excedere, manifest impingit. Vrinantibus enim mars
viginti stadia multis in locis abyssum non sufficient penetrare. Quare sequenda
magis sententia doctiss. Cleomedis qui nec montem quindecim stadia, non mare
30. stadia supergressum esse prodidit.
measure of the height of the waters of the flood) were covered fifteen cubits
upward: yet God remembered Noah: that is, made known unto Noah that God
remembered him. For seeing no Tertul. contra. Marcion. lib. 2. Stultissimi qui
de humanis diuina praeiudicant, vt quoniam in homine corruptoria conditionis
habentur huiusmodi passiones, idcirco and in Deo eiusdem status existimentur:
discern substantiat, and suos ijs distribut sensus tam diuersos quam
substantiae exigunt, licet vocabulis communicare videantur.

August. comment. in Psalm. 10. Nemo ita positum putet quasi obliuio cadat in
Deum. Idem. in Psalm. 87. Nam neque obliuio cadit in Deum, quiae nullo modo
mutatur; neque recordatio, quia non obliuiscitur.


forgetfulness can be in God; he Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 20. Quid est
recordatus est? Misertus est vult dicere, iusti in arca degentis. Augustine. in
Psalm. 87. Tunc Deus dicitur meminisse quando facit.
then is said in Scripture to remember, when he declares by his deed or word
the effect of his remembrance. Before he remembered the preservation of Noah,
where Genesis 7.16.
it is said the Lord Origin. Hom. in Genesis 2. Quod diuinae virtutis opus fuit ne
ingrederetur aqua per aditum quem humana non munierat manus.
shut them in: now he remembers his deliverance, when he makes a wind to
pass upon the earth. He remembered Noah and every beast: that is to say, so
showed the Lord Ambros. de Noa lib. cap. 16. Cum dixerit quod Noae ^emor
fuerit, in authore and praeside domus necessitates eius reliquat comprehendit.
Simul exprimi videtur quidam reliquarum consensus necessitudinum Etcium cum
omnes inuicem sibi ^hari sunt, vna est domus, etc.
his mercy and remembrance, as that neither Noah, nor his family, nor the
smallest or weakest creature in the Arc, but Psalm. 145.15.
he provided in due season for the same. Whereby we learn; that although God
do often Psalm. ^4.23. and ^3.19. Lament. cap. 5. verse. 20. August. in Psalm.
119. Conc. 15. Tunc dicitur obliuis^i quando tardare videtur adiutorium vel
promissum.
seem to have forgotten his afflicted church, yet Esai 49.15. 1. King. 9.3.
the same and every member John. 10.28.29. Matthew. 18.14.
of the same, is perpetually regarded in his watchful providence. And if God
remember the meanest creatures, will Matthew. 6.30. Psalm 34.22.
he not be much more mindful of those which attend with confidence upon his
promises? This remembrance of the Lord is farther amplified by the cause or
instrument: he made a wind to pass upon the earth, and the waters ceased.
There are which understand by the word (ruach) spirit or wind, the Ambros. de
Noa and Arc. lib. cap. 16. Non puto hoc ita dictum, vt spiritus nomine ventum
acciptamus. Neque enim ventus poterat siccare diluuium. Alioquin cum mare
ventis exagitetur quotidie, exinaniretur profecto.
spirit of God which first did move upon Genesis 1.2. Ruach Elohim, hic vero sine
additione est.
the waters, even the same who is called the holy spirit, the Ioh. 14.16.17.
and ita intelligit Rabbi Rasi (...) ruach nichumin. i. spiritum consolationis.
comforter, the Esai. 6.5. Act. 28.25
Lord of glory: Nevertheless although the holy Ghost, which is Esai. 51.9.
the very power of God, did show his might in diminishing the waters, yet he
used a creature as his means, which is expressly named a spirit or wind, of
which creature Athanas. lib. de Spir. Sanct. Quod non sit creatura: ad
Serapion. quin and ventus spiritus dicitur, ad istum modum in Genesi: and
excitauit Dominus spiritum in terra, etc. Item, Author de Mirab. sacr. script.
in op. August. lib. 1. cap. 7. Calvin. in Genesis 8. Peter Martyr in Genesis cap. 8.
the scripture does here entreat. It is also demanded, how the wind is said
to pass upon the earth, when the earth was covered so deep with water? which
of Caietan. in Genesis 8. Hunc spiritu^ seu ventum per totam profunditatem aquarum
penetrasse ac permeasse.
some is answered, that this wind did pierce within the waters unto the earth:
but in deed the wind did pass upon the earth, when Luther. in Genesis c. 8.
Facilis responsio est, dicit Moses adductum fuisse ventum super terram, super
aquae superficiem, ^antisper donec aqua exsiccatae terram iterum ostenderent
hominibus.
it passed upon the waters, which were upon the earth. Furthermore, we may
behold the almighty power of God, in bringing forth Psalm. 145.7. and 147.18.
this wind out of his treasure house, which could not in the ordinary
disposition of the creatures, which is called the course of nature, be drawn
Aristot. Meteor. lib. 2. cap. 4. Ventu^ naturalis est fumus seu halitus ex
calore and siccitate consurgens, quem sol calefaciendo terram ex terra euebis.
Non igitur hic naturalis ventus, cum tota terra sit aquis obruta.
out of the earth: as also in making it to pass The place where the winds do
naturally blow, is only between the earth and the middle region of the air.
Aristot. Meteor. lib. 2. cap. 4. Hieron. Zanch. de oper. part. 2. lib. 3. cap.
4.
so far above the natural place thereof: and thirdly by it, in diminishing
so speedily, such mighty waters. To which purpose the Scripture says: not,
that a wind did pass upon the earth, but a wind was made to pass, (...) a
(...) gnauar: in hiphil, fecit transire.
and God made that wind to pass upon the earth. Least any should think, that
the diminishing of the flood, was done by the virtue of the second causes, as
was the Illud tantum quasi loci mutatione and naturali, hoc de mandato ad
secundum locum reductio, ex miraculosa venti operatione, vt verbi in prima
congregatione.
bringing of the flood, but by the supernatural and miraculous power of God,
which at the first created them of nothing, and gathered them together, and
established Psalm. 104.9. Job. 38.
their natural abode for ever. The means therefore whereby the waters were
abated, were the Verse. 2.
restraint or closing up the springs or flowings of the deep, and the rain
from heaven, Aben Ezra in Genesis 8 Dicit pluisse post 40. dies alternis vicibus
ad finem 150. dies, sed nescio quo ^ititur fundamento.
that they might not give nourishment as it were unto the flood: and secondly
the wind; which when the waters did receive no farther augmentation, did
diminish them. But was the wind sufficient to dry up so great a sea of waters
in so short a space? yea doubtless, seeing the Lord did give power unto it,
partly by resolving these waters into Rabb. in Sedar olam. Aquin. in Genesis cap.
8. Quaeda^ redibant sursum rarefactae in vaporem aereum.
airie vapors as they were before, but much more available for the drying of
the earth, by causing these waters to go and to return to the place which is
by God ordained for them, Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 26. Tantum credamus quod
iussit, and exaltata est abyssus, and praecepit, and iteru^ suum continuit
impetum, and ad proprium concessit locum, quem solus ipse Dominur scit qui
condidit. It is to be observed that the 72. Interpreters, and Chrysostom. in Genesis
Homil. 26. August. quaest. in Genesis 12. and other, do read it exaltata est
abyssus, the deep was lifted up, when as in the Hebrew it is (...), the waters
were diminished: whereby it seems they understand, that as they were
diminished from the earth, so they were treasured and heaped together in the
Sea.
that is the sea. Wherein we see that the Lord, who by his power was able to
have dissolved this flood, without the means of creatures, as first he did,
when he commanded the dry land to appear; is able also Isai. 40.29. Psalm.
78.45.46.
to command his creatures; and to give power unto them to work his pleasure.
Thus as it were at his beck, or Isai. 7.18.
the wagging of his finger; the rain cease, the fountains are stopped, the
Psalm. 107.25. and 147.15.18.
wind arises, the waters ebb For naturally it could neither go nor return,
for as much as they flowed over all: but when as they began to be gathered
either by the voice of God, as Genesis 1.9. or by the wind, they begin to go and
to return; whereby it seems apparent, that the ebbing and flowing of the Sea
is caused by the gathering together of the waters. Ambros. Hexam. libr. 3. cap.
2. Hinc coepit labi aqua, quod iusserit Deus audiunt (vex enim Dei efficiens
natura est) and in vnam confluere congregationem, etc. Cursum eius ante no^
legi, motu^ eius ante non didici (non enim ex vsu hoc habet caeteroru^
elementoru^, sed speciale ac propriu^) nec oculus meus vidit, nec auris
audiuit. stabat aqua diuersis locis, ad vocem Dei mota est. Non quod non habuis
in se potestate^ fluendi, sed quod non vndique erat quo flueret. Item Caietan.
in Genesis c. 8.
and flow, and are gathered together both Genesis 1.7.9.
above and beneath the firmament. Obser. 1. The Lord to show Psalm. 106.8.9.
Isai. 7.18.
his power and glory in the creatures, does use them at his pleasure to effect
his will. Secondly, he is able to make strong creatures Exodus 14.31. 1. King.
19.11. Ierem. 37.10. Joel. 1.4.
of more force, and weak creatures strong, for the accomplishment of his
heavenly purpose. Thirdly, the winds do not blow, neither the waters ebb or
flow, but Psalm 107.25. and 147.15.18. Jonah. 1. Matthew. 10.29.
at the commandment of the Lord. Fourthlie, the power and disposition of the
creature, is not Sicut Ethnici solent and Athes.
always to be sought for, in the course of nature, but to be Isai. 9.13. Prou.
21.31. August. de ciuit. Dei, lib. 21. cap. 8. Omnia portenta contra naturam
dicimus esse, sed non sunt. Quomodo enim est contra naturam quod Dei fit
voluntate; cum voluntas tanti vtique conditoris condita rei cuiusque natura
sit? Portentum ergo fit non contra naturam, sed contra quae est nota natura.
Sic regit Deus ipse naturam Cicer. de Not, Deorum lib. 2.
considered as from the Lord; forasmuch as the Lord does Isai. 30.26. Ios.
14.11.
add to, Psalm. 107.34. Genesis 5.17.18.
diminish, and alter the course, condition and nature of them, so often as
pleases him.

Question 2. verse 4. If the flood began the seventeenth day of the second
month, and the rain continued forty days, and the waters prevailed an
hundredth and fifty days as the Scripture seems to report: how could it be
that the Arc rested upon the mountain of Ararat the seventh day of the
seventh month, which by this account is four days before the falling of the
water?
IT is very convenient, that this point of doctrine should be diligently
considered, for many causes, especially Romans 15.4. Hieron. comment. in Ephesians.
cap. 3. Scriptura sacrae nullus apex caret sensibus.

Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 13. Nam sicut aromata, quanto magis digitis
atteruntur, tanto maiorem sua natura fragrantiam reddunt: ita and in scripturis
vsu venit, quanto quis illis est familiarior, tanto magis videre potest
latentem in ipsis thesaurum, pluresque percipere ineffabilium diuitiarum
fructus.


seeing the spirit of God has so diligently described the same unto us.
Wherein first is to be observed a manifest and Gregor. Epist. lib. 6. Epist.
30. Alia sunt friuola and innoxia, alia sunt friuola and valde nociua. Et in
scripturis ne minima differentia emitti debet.
hurtful discord between the truth of the Hebrew text, and the common Latin
translation, Council. Trident. Sess 4. in Decret. de Canonicis scripturis. 8.
die Aprilis. Ita vt nefas sit, etc. So that it is an execrable thing with them,
to say, that that translation is false or faulty. Perer. Tom. 2. lib. 13.
Disp. 5.
which is authentical (that is to say of greatest authority) among the
Papists; and thereupon a Sic enim decreuit Hieron. epist. ad Damas. omissis
riuulis ad ipsum fontem recurramus, ipsa Hebraea verba ponenda sunt. Item.
August. de ciuit. lib. 15. cap. 13. Quandoquidem ad fidem rerum gestarum,
vtrunque esse non potest verum; ei linguae potius credatur, vnde est in aliam
per interpretes facta translatio. Plane contrarium decernit Council. Trident.
Sess. 4. Vt illa ^^ a vetus and vulgata editio in publicis lectionibus,
disputationibus, praedicantionibus, and expositionibus, pro authentica
habeatur, and vt eam nemo reijcere quouis pratextu audeat vel presumat.
mortal dissension between the judgment of the ancient fathers, and the
established authority of that translation in the Tridentine Council. For
where the first resting of the Arc is affirmed in the Hebrew text to be, the
seventeenth day of the seventh month, the same translation (obeying Act. 4.19.
rather the voice of man then God) has followed The Greek translation, and
not the Hebrew fountain.
translations and not the text, and says the Arc rested the seven and
twentieth day of the seventh month: which is For if it were the 27. day that
the Ark rested, it was not the seventeenth: if the seventeenth, then it began
not to rest ye twenty seventh. Notwithstanding Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 26. and
Ambros. de Noa and Arca. c 17. and also Augustine. cont. Faustum. lib. 12. cap.
19. do follow the Greek translation, the cause whereof we shall show in the
next question.
false in regard of the history of time, and can never with the truth be
reconciled. But to continue in the truth of Scripture: the Ark began to rest,
the seventeenth day of the seventh month. This seventh month Chrysostom.
Hom. in Genesis 25. Tos diebus mansit sublimis, etc. Caietan. Com. in Genesis cap. 7.
Calvin in Genesis cap. 8. intellexisse videntur.
by some interpreters is understood, to be the seventh month, not of the
year, but from the beginning of the flood; which notwithstanding by other is
disallowed, because the Scripture names before, Genesis 7.11.
the second month of the six hundredth year, and afterward Cap. 8.5.13.
in the tenth month of the same year, as all interpreters do understand it;
and again, the first month of the six hundredth and one year: by which it is
gathered also by them of the contrary judgment, that this seventh month, was
the seventh of the year, not of the flood. Such difference of judgments in
matters of obscurity, which the wisdom of man can not thoroughly find out,
is nothing at all hurtful, Augustine. Enchir. cap. 59. Cum ista quaeruntur, and
ea sicut potest quisque coniectat, non inutiliter exercentur ingenia, si
adhibeatur disceptatio moderata, and absit error opinantium se scire quod
nesciunt.
but greatly commodious unto the godly that labor to understand the truth:
for hereby it comes to pass, that two sufficient answers are delivered;
whereof although but one of them is answerable unto the truth unknown, yet
neither of them is different from the ground of faith, and that judgment which
is not sufficed with the one, may be fully satisfied with the other. Many
contrariwise therefore, Rabbi Moses Ben. Nahmah. in Leg. Mosis. Tremel.
Annotat. in Genesis cap. 8. Decimo septimo die mensis septimi, hoc est, inquit
centesimo quinquagesimo primo die a diluuio coepto. Item Lyra. in Genesis c. 8.
etc.
do understand this seventh month to be the seventh month of the year in
which the flood came. Unto whom is objected, no smaller inconvenience then the
former. For the Scripture says, the rain Genesis 7.11.12.24.
began the seventeenth day of the second month, and continued forty days:
and again, the waters prevailed upon the earth one hundredth and fifty days:
which being joined together (for many Rabbini in Beresh. Rabb. Chrysostom. Hom.
in Ge^. 25. Exaltata est abyssus. 150. diebus. tos diebus mansit sublimis illa
aquarum altitudo.

Joseph. Antiq. libr. 1. cap. 4. Centesima autem and quinquagesima die post
quam pluere desijt, tandem coeperunt aquae sidere. Calvin. in Genesis Com. cap. 8.
verse. 3.


do so, and not without good reason understand the Scripture) amount to the
number of one hundredth, fourscore and ten days. So that from the seventeenth
day of the second month, it might seem that the flood continued in perfection,
until the For between the seventeenth day of the second month, and the nine
and twentieth day of the eight month, there are 190. days, that is 40. and
150. days.
nine and twentieth day of the eight month of the year: and to say that the
Arc rested on any mountain before the waters were diminished, were to feign
a miracle, and to falsify the Scripture. Unto this is answered, that the
Oleaster. in Genesis cap. 8.

Muscul. ibidem. in Genesis 7.24. Annotarunt quidam centum istos and quinquaginta
dies, referendos esse non ad principium diluuij sed ad finem quadraginta
dierum, quibus pluuia continua coelitus demissa est. Sed falsi sunt.


forty days in which the flood increased, are part of the number of that
hundred and fifty days in which the Scripture says, the waters prevailed
upon the earth. This being granted (although it may with sufficient reason be
denied) the doubt remains as yet untaken away. For the space of a month
Munster in Calendario, secundum Lunae cursum. etc.
among the Hebrews, and in the account of Scripture, is but of twenty nine
days, and half a day, two months make threescore days save one, four
months one hundredth and eighteen days, whereunto nine and twenty days
being added (which is the just space of five months, between the seventeenth
day of the second month, and the seventeenth day of the seventh month) the
sum compriseth one hundredth forty and seven days, the first whereof is the
beginning of the flood; the last of them, the Arc rested on the mountains,
which was three days, or For this remains uncertain (and is nothing
material) for if the first month were of thirty days, then was it but two
days and an half; if nine and twenty days, then was it three days before
the falling of the waters.
two at the least, before the waters began to fall. For the waters prevailed
one hundredth and fifty days, in which the highest mountain under heaven was
covered fifteen cubits. How then could it be, that the Arc did rest upon the
mountains before the flood began to be diminished, the seventeenth day of the
seventh month? For hard it were to say, that Yet it is not against the
authority of very learned writers, to say, these mountains were as high as any
in the world: for first Joseph. Antiquit. libr. 1. cap. 4. Epiphan. Haeres lib
1. cap. 1. Onkelos Paraphrastes Chaldaeus, do call these mountains Cardiaeos
and Kardu, and of them, that whereon the Arc rested, Baris, or Lubaris: these
mountains are in Ptolom. Geograph. in descript. Asiae tabul. 6. Straho de s^^
orbis. lib. 11. called Gordiaeos, which by the description are found to be
certain tops of the mountain Caucasus, which of all the mountains of the
North-east parts of the world, is the greatest, both for height and breadth;
as Aristotle affirms: Meteor. lib 1. cap. 13. And least any should say there
were higher mountains in the South, the same Aristot. lib. 2. Meteor. cap. 1.
affirms by demonstration, that the North parts of the earth are higher than
the South, but the reader in such points as these, must beware of curiosity
and stifnes in opinion, remembering Hierom^ saying: whatsoever in Divinity
cannot be proved by the Scripture, is as easily denied as it is affirmed.
Quicquid de scripturis authoritatem non habet, eadem facilitate contemnitur qua
probatur. Hieron. Comment. in Matthew cap. 23.
these mountains of Ararat were the highest in the world, or that the Arc
being in all in height but thirty cubits, should Rabb. Solomon gathers that
the Arc diue water eleven Cubits: Hugo de sanct. Victore has but nine: Lyra
says thirteen: and whether more or less, it is not greatly pertinent.
draw so deep of water, as to rest upon them. It seems that to give answer
hereunto, the Septuagint and Latin translation, in steed of the seventeenth
day, have put the seven and twentieth day; wherein might be contained three
days for the fulfilling of the number of an hundredth and fifty, and seven
days for the abating of the waters before the Ark rested upon the mountains.
But this is to deface, not to defend the Scripture. For if August. Epist. 8.
Mihi quidem videtur exitiosissime credi, atiquod in libris sanctu esse
mendacium, id est, eos homines per quos nobis illa scriptura ministrata est
atque conscripta, aliquid (errasse Epistol. 19.) in suis libris (aut) suisse
mentitos. Admisso enim semel in tantum authoritatis fasi^^ium, vel officios^
aliquo mendacio, nulla eorum librorum particula remanebis, quae non vtcunque
videbitur, vel ad mores difficilis, vel ad fidem incredibilis, eadem
perniciosissima regula, ad mentientis authoris consilium officiumque referatur.
any error may any where be found in the divine Scripture, which is the rule
Isai. ^.19.2^. Ioh. 5.39. Ephesians. 2.20. Aug. lib. 2. cont. Crescon Gram cap.
Canon Ecclesiasticus constitutus est, ad quem prophetarum and Apostolorum libri
pertinent, quos omnino iudicare no^ audeamus, and secundum quos de cateris
literis vel fidelium vel infidelium libere iudicemus. Idem de Genesis ad lit.
libr. 5. cap. 7. Mayor est huius scripturae authoritas, quam omnis humani
ingenij perspicuitas. Idem de vnitate Eccles. cap. 10. Imo nec Cathol^cis
Episcopis consentiendum est, vbi contra canonicas Dei scripturas aliquid
sentiant. Idem de consensu Euang. 1. cap. 35. Nam quicquid Mediator Christus de
suis factis aut dictis nos legere voluit, hoc scribendum Prophetis and
Apostolis, tanquam su^ manibus imperauit, itaque cum illi scripserint quae ille
ostendit aut dixit, nequaquam dicendum est quod ipse non scripserit,
quandoquidem membra eius id operat^ sunt, quod dictante capite cognouerunt.
Proinde ne quis aliter arcipiet quod narrantibus discipulis Christi in
Euangelio legerit (vel quod in veseri canone continetur) quam si ipsam manum
Domini, quam in proprio corpore gestabat scribentem conspexerit.
of faith; how shall it from thence forth continue the rule of truth, seeing it
self admits error, which needs to be defended by the wit of men? God
forbid that any should think so wickedly of the Scripture; that howsoever
there may be some want in translations, through the weakness of men, or want of
As in some things it is not agreed upon among the Rabbis themselves, as of
Zijm and Iim, Isai. 31.21. whether they are apparitions, or Spirits, or beasts;
and such like, which we shall consider in their proper place; which things are
of that sort, whose names are worn out and unknown unto the Hebrews.
knowledge in the original language, there were also imperfections in the
Hebrew fountain, which are the writings of holy men, as they were inspired by
the holy Ghost; seeing the Prou. 30 6. Job. 13.7.8.9.10.
Lord himself pronounces against him that shall seem in such sort to defend
his truth, even he will condemn him for a liar. Wherefore seeing the Scripture
has affirmed the Ark rested upon the mountains of Armenia the seventeenth
day of the seventh month, the same of us Ignatius Epist. ad Philadelph.
Christus mihi pro archiuis est, quem nolle audire manifesta est pernicies.
must be maintained and believed, albeit the wit of man, the perverseness of the
adversaries of the truth, the subtlety Which thing he sets on work by a
threefold endeavor against ye holy Scripture; the open denial of Atheists, the
deprauations of heretics, the rejecting of Canonical books, or thrusting in
of Apocryphal (as of Enochs prophecy) into the Canon: of which Hierom says,
Comment. in Isai. 54. the Devil lies in wait in Apocryphal books, that he
may slay the simple.
of the devil himself do bend themselves against it; and we remain unable
August. Epist. 2. Tanta est enim Christianarum profunditas literarum, vt in ijs
quotidie preficerem, si eas sola^ ab incunte pueritia, vsque ad decrepitam
senectutem, maximo otio, summo studio, meliore ingenio conarer addiscere. No^
quo ad ea que necessaria sunt sal^ti, ta^ta in ijs perneniatur difficultate sed
cum quisque ibi fidem tenue: it sine qua pie recteque non viuitur, tam multa
tamque multiplicibus mysterioru^ vmbraculis opaca, intelligenda proficientibus
restant, tantaque non solum in verbis, quibus ista dicta sunt, verum etia^ in
rebus qua intelligenda sunt, lates altitudo sapientiae, vt annosissimis,
acutissimis, flagrantissimis, cupiditate dicendi hoc co^tingat, vt cu^
consummauerit homo tunc incipit.
to defend the same. Nevertheless herein remains no such difficulty, but
only this; seeing the truth hereof might by two means be fulfilled, the
learned stand in doubt, which of these means was it, by which the Lord
performed it, which whether so ever we take, Hilar. lib. 2 de Trin. De
intelligentia haeresit (and error) non de scriptura est, sensus and non sermo
fit crimen.
the truth remains as it is. First therefore a full sufficient answer is
found among the writings of the Jews. The waters (say they) Liber incerti
authoris, cui titulus (...) gnekidhothlischac: ligationis Isaac. Vide Mercer.
praelect. in Genesis cap. 8.
prevailed upon the earth one hundredth and fifty days, albeit they began to
be diminished, before the full end of an hundredth and fifty days: for nothing
lets but they might well be said Ijgeberu inualuerunt, significat vt vulgata
fers editio, obtinuerunt terram.
to prevail, to be strong and deep upon the earth, albeit they were in part
diminished. That God remembered Noah (as says the text) may Per
recapitulationem. Augustine. quaest. in Genesis 25. Recapitulatio ista si
aduertatur in scripturis, multas quaestiones soluit, quae indissolubiles
possunt videri. Quid sit recapitulatio vide quest. 4. in cap. 2. and August. de
Doctr. Christiana lib. 3. cap 36.
well be understood before the end of an hundredth and fifty days, or
otherwise, then, Calvin. in Genesis 8. Recordatio ista de qua loquitur Moses, non
modo ad externam rei apparentiam (vt loquitur) sed ad sancti quoque viri
affectum referri debet.
when Noah perceived it. For where it is said the water ceased, the fountains
were stopped, and the rain from heaven, is Genesis 7.11.12. Quicquid in
contrarium contendunt Aben Ezra and Hier. Oleaster in Genesis
doubtless to be understood at the end of forty days, and so continued.
Neither is this against that place, which says, that Verse. 3.
the waters were abated, after an hundredth and fifty days; for the Scripture
does often speak to fit our Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis ^2. Pro nostra infirmitate
omnia narrat diuina scriptura.
understanding, so that albeit they did before decrease, yet Noah neither by
mark nor means could understand the same. But now that the Arc was settled on
the mountains, and the wind began to force away the water, Just Noah might
well consider August. Arca^ magis diuina prouidentia qua^ humana prudentia
gubernauit, ne incurreret vbicunque naufragium. de ciuit. Dei, lib. 14. cap.
27. Haud aliter enim non cecinisset cum Ouidio. Trist. 1. Eleg. 2. M^ ^ise^um,
quanti montes voluuntur aquarum! etc.
his greatest danger past, and certainly conceive that God remembered him.
Such answer I suppose to be sufficient, to withstand the slanderous cauils of
the wicked; whereunto may be joined the second exposition of the words of
Scripture. For what inconvenience, if it be understood, of the seventh month,
not of the year, as Genesis 7.11. and 8 5.
is meant in other places; but from the beginning of the flood? This (will
Pe^er. in Genesis cap 8
one say) were to darken the course of history. Surely, nothing less; for
seeing the Scripture (as the Non occurrit.
Hebrews use to say) does presuppose an understanding reader, and seeing it
plainly signifies, that the flood endured longer For surely it had been
miraculous if the Arc had rested before the falling of the water. Wherefore it
is necessary that thus the scripture should be opened, and ye mouths of
gainsaiers should be stopped.
then the seventeenth day of the seventh month of the year, which was but
just five months from the Namely months of the Moon, or after account of
Scripture, which co^taine 147. days, and an half.
beginning of the same: It leaves only to be understood, that this was the
seventh month and seventeenth day (which is six months and sixteen days)
after the first increase of waters. For mine own part (reuerencing the
judgment of learned men, which understand it otherwise) I consent unto those
that gather thus much by the text. First, that the flood increased forty
days, Genesis 7.11.12. Sic intelligu^t Joseph. Antiq. 1. cap. 40

Chrysost^m. in Genesis Hom. 25.

Calvin. in Genesis 7.


according to the Scriptures, at the end whereof it continued fifteen cubits
above the mountains, one hundredth and fifty days, that is, until the nine
and twentieth day of the eight month of the year, which was the thirteenth day
of the seventh month of the flood. At that time the waters began to fall, and
Noah perceived it, by the wind that passed upon the earth. Four days after,
which was the seventeenth day of the seventh month, the Arc rested Ptolom.
Geograph. de script. Asiae tab. 3. Strabo de situ orbis, lib. 11.
on the mountains of Armenia, which day was the fourth day of the ninth month
of the year; and the first day of the tenth month, which was the seven and
twentieth day after, were the tops of the inferior mountains seen. Whereby
it is perceived, that (as in the As in the ebbing of the Sea, or any other
flood: for the greater their fall is, the more vehement is their course.
ordinary course of nature) the waters were more Lyra. in Genesis Statuis
aequalitatem.

Pererus Tom. 2. lib. 13 disputat. 7. nobiscum facit, sed ratio impote^s est:
cum non per totu^ globum diminuta, sed a terra facit retracta sunt.


speedily diminished, in the height of the flood; then afterward, when they
were in part decreased. It remains to the godly reader, to discern which of
these answers is more agreeing with the text, and pray (if he be not
satisfied) that God would farther reveal this secret unto him.

Question 3. verse 7.8. What is to be understood of the Raven and the Dove,
which Noah sent forth out of the Arc: and whether the Raven returned as says
the text, seeing the common translations both Greek and Latin, do say he
returned not, until the waters were dried up from the earth?
THe scope of this Scripture is to show, that Noah being enclosed in the arc,
so long time exercised Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 26. Ego vero admiror quomodo
pra tristitia non fuerit absorptus, cum mentem illius subiret humani generis
interitus, sua solitudo, and difficilis illa vita: cum post quadraginta dies
and quadraginta noctes, quibus impetu magno pluniae ingrueba^t, videret diebus
centum quinquaginta in eadem part manner aquas: and quod multo grauius, oculis
cu^ non posset inclusus assequi quanta essent mala, scil. maiorem sustinebat
dolorem, grauioraque quotidie suspicabatur: at causa bonorum omnium fuit, sua
in Deum fides, per quam and restitit, and omnia fortiter tulit: cumque spe
pasceretur, nihil triste sentiebat.
in temptation, seeks Pet. Mart. in Genesis 8. Obseruandu^ est, istu^ quamuis
prophetam spiritu Dei praeditu^, tamen naturali industria esse vsum in
scrutando orbis statu.
help by the use of creatures, for the sustentation of his faith: for so much
the Scripture does implie: that he might see if the waters were dried up upon
the earth. Unto this purpose, he chooses Verse. 3. Rabbini quidam in Cabala
causam reddunt quod in Camum, canem and coruum animaduersum fuit, quia in arca
coijssent. Alij eorum statuunt imp^dentius, vt me refer piget. Poenam attend
peccati and Iudaeorum excaecationem! The true cause why the Raven was sent
forth, was because he was a foul that fed on dead carcasses, and partly
domestical; so that for the one he might go seek the pray, and for the other
cause return, and Noah by his going and returning might know the falling of
the water.
a Raven, as the fittest creature in the Arc, and sends him Absque socia.
Rab. in Cab. Marlor. in Genesis 8.
forth alone. After which he sent a Dove, Verse. 9. Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 26.
Auem mitem and familiare^, quae miram trae se fert sapientia^, and non nisi
femimbus pasci solet.
which returned unto him into the Arc, because (as says the text) she found
no rest for the sole of her foot. But how is it said she found no resting
place, seeing the tops of the mountains were uncovered? Both because the
Dove was not sent The meaning therefore is, she could find no footing in those
places whereunto she was sent.
to search the mountains, which might be seen out of the Arc, but the plain
wherein Noah also might rest his foot: and also because Ch ysostom Hom. in Genesis
26. Neque conuenie^tem inuenire cibum valent.

Pet. Mart. in Gen c. 8.


the mountains being so lately ouerflowed with waters, could yield her
neither convenient food nor footing. What became of the Raven may seem more
doubtful: for concerning his return, the translations Graeca illa non vera
quae fuit 72. interp. sed de qua Hieron. in praefat. libr. 16. in Isai. vulgata
quae (...) dicitur et in toto orb diuersa est. Latina falio dicta Hieronymi,
sicut merito statuunt inter Papistas, Sanctes Pagninus praefat. bibliae suae
interpretationis, ad Clem. Pap. 7. Paulus Episcop. Forosempron. libr. de pass.
Domini die. lib. 2. c. 1. and multa esse a sententia Hieronymi aliena co^cedit
Bellarm tom. 1 contr. 1. lib. 2. cap. 9. partim ex errore and negligentia
librariorum, partim quod quae Hieronymus muranda fenserit, Ecclesia Romana
retinenda iudica ^it, and alijs de causis quas ipse ibide^ demonstrat.
Greek and Latin, are contrary unto the Hebrew text. The Hebrew has: (...)
vaietze jarzo vashobb: and exijs egrediendo and redeundo.
He went forth going and returning: the translations say, he went forth and did
not return, until the waters were dried up upon the earth. And after the
translation, do Vulgat qui egrediebatur and non reuertebatur, donec
siccarentur, etc. Ita Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 26. and in Matthew Comment. Hom. 5.
Ambros. de Noa and arc. cap. 1^. August. quaest. in Genesis 13.14. and Dialog. ad
Oros. quaest. 59. contra Faust. lib. 12 cap. 20.
many of the Fathers read it, and Ita vt nefas habeatur si quis legate aliter.
Perer. Tom 2. lib. 13. disp. 5.
the church of Rome with one consent. So that here we have a manifest
contrariety of speech, between the Hebrew copies, which now are extant or to
be found throughout the world; and the translations Greek and Latin, the
reading of the Fathers (for the most part) the testimony of Hierome, who says
it is so in the Hebrew text, and the authority and decrees of the Church of
Rome. On the one side, it may seem an injury done unto the Fathers, to
challenge that translation which they allowed in handling of this history. On
the other side, it may move a godly conscience, to doubt some corruption in
the Hebrew text, especially if it be objected, that Hierome did so translate
it, and affirm it Hieron. Trad. in Genesis libr Pro ostio, fenestra scripta est
in Hebraeo: and de coruo aliter dicitur, emisit coruum and egressus est exiens
and non reuertens.
to be otherwise in the Hebrew text, then now we find it. For by these
authorities it Sic enim statu^^^ no^nulli Pontificiorum. Melchior Canus de
locis Theolog. lib. 2. c. 13 Hebraeorum Doctores, nostri videlicet inimici,
multo studio contenderunt textum Hebraicu^ corru^pere. etc. Graeci quoque eade^
contentione multis locis, vt scriptura^ ad suum sensum traherent, nouum
testamentu^ violarunt. Non igitur ad Hebraica and Graeca exe^plaria, vt quae
deprauata sint, est recurrendum: and probatex Eusebius. Histor. Eccles. libr. 4.
cap. 18. Justin. Martyr. Dialog. cum Triffon. Justin. autem non ex Hebraeo sed
ex translatione Septuag. quae fortasse ideo apud homines perijt quod corrupta
esset. Id ipsum cum Cano statuit Jacob. Episcop. Christopolitan. praefat in
Psalm. Qui quoniam tam impudenter mentiuntur, vt a Christiano homine ferri non
possit, eos zelo bono sed non secundum scientiam praditos fuisse dicit Bellarm.
Tom. 1. contr. 1. lib. 2. cap. 9.
may seem apparent, that the Hebrew text has bin corrupted by the Jews:
which if it be; where is the truth of Scripture to be found, but Vide quam
apertam fenestram fecerunt Pontificij omni Atheism^ and Haeresi, nam si non sit
Hebraica summa veritas, atque ipsa Latina editio multis in locis a suis merito
reprobatur, quae est omnino veritas Euangelica? statim admisso vel vno errore
in tantum authoritatis fastigium, nulla illorum librorum particula remanebit,
quae non vtcunque videbitur, vel ad mores difficilis vel ad fidem incredibilis
(vt inquit Aug. epist 8.) quin vt falsum and erroneum respuetur.
either perished, or only remaining in that translation, which the Papists
Council. Trident. Sess. 4. Perer. super hunc locum: alij, inquit, incumbant,
istas dua^ lectiones inter se conciliare: dummodo illud ratum and fi^um sit. si
Hebraea lectio contradicat omnino Latinae, nec vtraque simul cohaerere queat;
standum esse potius Latinae quam Hebraea: quippe cum illa Trident Concilij
authoritate tantopere commendata and communita sit.
so greatly magnify? For answer whereunto, we affirm and testify by the
authority of the Isai. 40.8. Matthew. 5.18. Luc. 16.17. Romans 9.4.
Scriptures themselves, (which is the Origin. in Isai. lib. 8. Citante
Hieronymo.
voice of God) of the Hieron. Comment. in Isai cap. 6. August. lib. de ciuit.
Dei, lib. 15 cap. 13.
Fathers, and of Bellarm. Tom. 1. contr. 1. libr. 2. cap 9. Restat tertia
sententia quam ego verissimam puto, scripturas Hebraicas non esse in vniuersum
deprauatas, opera and ^^abtia Iudae^rum, nec tamen esse omnino integras, sed
habere suos quosdam errores: at hoc, quosdam errores, esse Bellarmini errorem
alij confirmabunt Papistae. Vbi enim errant Hebraae scriptura? certe
quibuscunque cum authentica translatione consent^^nt non errare fatebitur ipse
Bellarminus: vbi dessentiunt, defenduntur co^tra Bellarminum, vel a Pagnino,
vel Montano, vel Hieronymo, vel a veritate, vt suo loco docebitur.
the adversaries themselves; that the Scriptures in the Hebrew tongue are pure,
and unspotted of all corruption. Secondly, we convince by manifest reason,
that through the special providence of God, they neither were, nor could be in
any sort corrupted, but remain the same that Fab^la igitur est Iudaica and
impia que habetur Ezra lib. 4. cap. 14. de scripturis ab Ezra renouatis and
conscriptis; scripturae etiam contradicet Nehem. 1.2. and ab ipsis exploditur
Papistis. Bellarm. ibid. cap. 8.
Moses, the Prophets and Apostles wrote, inspired 2. Pet. 1.21.
by the holy Ghost. For if they were at all corrupted, the Argum. est Hieron.
in Comment. in I ai. cap. 6. Quod nunqua^ Dominus and Apostoli cum caetera
crimina arguunt in scribis and Pharisaeis, de hoc crimine quod erat maximum
reticuissent. Sin autem dixerint, post aduentum Domini and praedicationem
Apostolorum, libros Hebraeos fuisse falsatos, cachinnum tenere non potero, vt
Saluator and Euangelistae and Apostoli ita testimonia protulerint, vt Iudaei
postea falsaturi erant.
same had been done before the coming of our Savior Christ, or since his
time; but surely not before, for then he would have given the faithful warning
of the same, when he commanded them Ioh. 5.39.
to search the Scriptures: neither since, as appears by all the testimonies,
Praesertim ab Euangelistis, ad confirmandum Christum verum fuisse Messiam.
which both our Savior and his Apostles have alleged: therefore the
Scriptures remain in their first integrity. Secondly, in regard that the
Jews have ever bin dispersed, as it were throughout the world, August. de cin.
Dei, lib. 15. c. 13. Sed absit vt prudens quispiam vel Iudaeos cuiuslibet
peruersitatis atque malitiae tantum potuisse credat in codicibus tam multis and
tam long lateque dispersis.
it was not possible that they would, or could consent universally in all
their copies to corrupt the Scripture, but the same must have been known unto
the world. Thirdly, the Jews have ever showed such Eusebius. De Praeparat.
Euangel lib. 8. cap. 2. Scribit Philo, etc. id est, Philo the Jew writes,
that until his time, which was the space of more than two thousand years, not
one word of the law of God was altered, and that every Jew would rather dye an
hundredth times, than that he would suffer any letter thereof to be diminished.
Moreover, J. Isaac testifies, that the Jews have been so careful of the
scriptures, yt they have counted how often every letter of the alphabet is
found in all the Scripture, that thereby they might easily find if any letter
of the Scripture were at any time altered, or taken away.
zeal and diligence, for the preserving of the Scriptures uncorrupted in the
Hebrew tongue; as that the same without extreme and universal negligence
cannot decay for ever. And for defense of this private place of Scripture, let
prevail Cic. Orat. pro. Roscio. Amer.
Cassianu^ illud, cui bono fuerit: what advantage should the Jews have gotten,
by withdrawing this letter (Lo) from the text? Again, the same, going forth
and returning, is Deinsuper in nonnullis Latinis and Graecis.
read in all copies of the Hebrew. Lastly, the Rabbines, or Jewish
interpreters do with one consent expound it so: which argue that the same is
to be reverenced and received, as having the authority of the word; and that
the Scripture neither here, nor in any other place, is changed from the very
first writings of the Prophets and Apostles. Wherefore these translations must
of necessity, strike sail unto the authority and truth of the Hebrew text:
and the Church of Rome reform their rashness, in giving to their common
translation supreme In Cabala; Bereshith Rabba, etc.

Council. Trident. Sess. 4. Vt haec ipsa vetus and vulgata editio, quae longo
tot saeculorum vs^, in Ecclesia ipsa probata est, in publicis lectionibus,
disputationibus, praedicationibus, and expisitionibus pro authentica habeatur,
and vt eam nemo r^ijcere, quouis praetextu audeat vel praesumat. (...), proprie
qui arma: id est, potestatem and authoritatem habet in se: omnium rectissime
Deo attribuitur and Scripturis (...) esse: nam vt Deus est Iehoua quod
essentiam in se habet and omnia in illum Exodus 3.14. Colos. 1.17. sic
scripturae etiam fonsita est authenticus, vt qui ex Sp. Dei immediate
authoritatem habet, and reliquae versiones in illum; huiusmodi non est
translatio Romana, nisi quatenus eam canonizauit Romanus Pontifex; and quatenus
authoritas sit ei ex non authentica authenticam facere: nam si tantum declarat
hanc authenticam esse; tum quando ita corperit, per quem, and cuius gratia,
quaerendum est.


authority; or else not only forfeit Sancta and vniuersalis Ecclesia (quem
titulum sibi vsurpant in decretis Romany and decretalibus epistolis ementitis,
secus ac fecerit Aaron. Heb. 5.4.) Nam est Ecclesia coetus hominum, sub
regimine vnius Christi in terris Vicarij Romani Pontificis, vt docet Bellarm.
tom. 1. Contr. 4. lib. 3. cap. 2. Quomodo hoc probatur? scil. ex decret. epist.
Clement. 1. Papae ad Iacobum, Apostolum, quem docet in hunc modum. Notum tibi
facio Domine, quia Simon Petrus, qui verae merito, fundamentum esse Ecclesiae
definitus est. and. Conciliorum, tom. 1.
their glorious titles of Catholic, holy Church, but even be Qui Scripturam
authenticam facit, quae authentica non est, and veram authenticam non agnoscit
pro authentica, errat in fundamento Religionis Christianae. Qui autem in
fundamento aliquo errat, haereticus est: Haereticus autem post primam and
alteram admonitionem reiectaneus and in se damnatus: vide ergo an non hoc ad
mysterium iniquitatis quasi cumulus accedat.
secluded from being a member of the same. For what if the fathers in such a
point as this, did follow ye Greek translation, wherein (as being for the most
part Ambrosius Prouinciae Praefectus, communi omnium suffragio, deinde ipsius
Imp. Valentinlani consensu ad praesidendum Ecclesiae ascitus est, cum nondum
sacris intiatus erat. Socrates eccles. hist. lib. 4. cap. 25. Theodoret.
eccles. hist. lib. 4. cap. 6. Sanctissimus tamen Episcopus, and qui ad Ecclesia
vtilitatem multa vtilissime scripserit. Chrysostomus in Hebraicis libris non
est versatus: ignorabat enim hebraicam linguam. D. Whitak. contr. 1. quaest. 6.
cap. 9. August. de sese aperte fatetur. Neque enim in Hebraica lingua
quami^oro, potuit interpres. etc. Epist. 131. Omnes praestantissimi Patres and
celeberrimi.
not greatly skillful of the Hebrew tongue) they were chiefly exercised: must
it for their sake, be counted of sole authority? The fathers themselves in
matters of weighty difference, do August. epist. 80. Hebrai condices
expressius habent, etc. Idem de ciuit. Dei, lib. 15. c. 13. Quandoquidem ad
fidem rerum gestarum, vtrumque esse non potest verum, ei linguae potius
credatur, vnde est in aliam per interpretes facta translatio. Hieron longae
saepissime, nec non and Origenes:
appeal from translations, to the original fountain. Hierome a very learned
father, and excellent in the knowledge of the Hebrew language, does very
Hieron. lib. de Traedit. Hebraic. Idem Comment. in Isai. lib. 1. in fine.
Noluerunt (inquit) Septuaginta ta^ perspicuam de Christo prophetiam in Graecum
vertere. Et alia vbique eius fere generis.
often and grieuouslie reprehend the same Greek translation (which other of
the Fathers read) as disagreeing greatly from the Hebrew fountain. The Church
of Rome Neque vnquam pro authe^tica agnoueru^t, etiamsi a patribus maxima ex
part lecta fuerit.
denies the authority of that Greek translation, but yet notwithstanding
places another as impure in the stead of that which it does in some things
reprehend: and also of that Hebrew fountain, which the singular Quod vel ipse
fatetur Bellarminus, controu. 1. lib. 2. cap. 2. ex authoritate Iustini
Martyris in protrept. August. de ciuit. Dei, libr. 8. cap. 46. and ex Psalm.
58. Ne occidas eos, etc.
providence of God has hitherto preserved pure; presuming (which never came
into the thought of any godly father) to make their own translation Constat.
ex Trident. Synod. Sess. 4. Etiamsi mendax ipse Bellarminus idipsum mendacij
nomine obtrudit Caluino, controu. 1. lib. 2. cap. 10. Vt euincit testimoniu^
Cani and Andradij qui interpretes Concilij celebres and Bellarmino antiquiores
extitere. Canus de locis Theolog. lib. 2. cap. 13. ex concilij authoritate
concludit omnem quaestionem fidei definiri oportere, per Latinam and veterem
editionem: cuius videlicet si aliquod testimonium alteram quaestionis partem
confirmauerit, ea sit Catholicis amplectenda, sin contra reprobauerit,
^eijciendae. Deinde in disputatione, non esse ad Hebraica and Graeca exemplaria
prouocandum. Postremo in his quae ad fidem and mores pertinent, non esse Latina
exemplaris per Hebraica and Graeca corrigenda. Item Adrad defens. Prident lib.
4. Non est ferendum vt cuius liceat illius editionis, qua ecclesia vtitur,
authoritatem aspernari, atque ad Hebrae^ Graecaque libere prouocare.
a judge of all, and to be judged of none, no not of the Hebrew and Greek
original. Wherefore since this is evident, that the Hebrew remains
uncorrupted, let us consider, what was the cause why the translation adds
(not) unto the text, and alters the sense? Because it followed conjecture,
Addit particulam aduersatinam.
and not the text: for seeing it is not said Verse. 7.
that Noah received in the Raven, as he did the Dove, it is gathered of many,
Ab ipso Hieron. epist. ad O eanum. Idem aduers. Luciferian. dialog. sicut a
recentioribus qui Hebraeam lectionem equuntur, non intra arcam fuisse rursum
recentum, sed supra arca tectum resedisse, cirum circaque volitasse, sic enim
textus ipse sonas, exiens and reuertens donec, etc.
that he returned not. Moreover, the Hebrew word which the Scripture uses,
does sometime signify a Genesis 3.23. Ierem. 38.6.
sending forth without return, and is so observed of the Hebrews:
notwithstanding it cannot in this text be so interpreted, because there is
added her return. But most marvel it is, that Hierome Hieron. lib. Tradit.
Hebraic.
does affirm that it is in the Hebrew text, he returned not. For it cannot
be, but either the Hebrew text since Hieroms time has bin corrupted, or else
Hierome himself does wilfully belie the text. Here is the truth, the Romans
have Deuteronomy. 8.11. Non magica fraud, sed tamen diabolica.
asked counsel of the dead. Hierome being alive, was wont to say: it is
otherwise in the Hebrew: he went forth going and returning; but being dead he
says, he went forth and returned not. Hierome himself and not the text has
been corrupted. Hierome spoke it not an Quid enim hoc est aliud. Carthusian.
in Ge^. 8. impress. Colonia anno 1534. sic habet. Lyra dicit quod in Hebraeo
habetur exiens and reuertens: idem aijs (inquit) Hieronymus in quaestionibus
Hebraicis.

Aquinas vero in Genesis 1573. Louaniae impressus, cum censorina authoritate,
dicit secundum Hieron. and septuaginta dicitur, egressus non redijt. Deinde
quam incause and stulte hoc diceret Hieronymus; sic enim legit ex vulgata
editione: emisit cornum and egressus non redijs ad cum. Deinde corrigit ex
Hebraeo, de coruo aliter dicitur: emisit coruum and egressus est exiens and non
reuertens. Quam putide hoc? cum nihil sit aliter, vel in verbis vel in sensu.
Aufer quod in vulgata authentica habetur non: long est aliter sicut voluit and
scripsit Hieronymus ex testimonio tum Carthusiani, tum aliorum.


hundredth year ago, but Ratio quia etsi beatus Hieronymus interdum senserit
quaeda^ mutanda in sua versione, and ea notauerit in suis Commentarijs: tamen
ecclesia (Romana) postea magis iudicauit veram primam versionem, and eam
retinere maluit in vulgata editione. Bellarm. controu. 1. lib. 2. cap. 9.
Deinde etiam iudica^^unt censores illi Romani non esse conueniens, vt vulgatam
editionem tam aperte damnaret Hieronymus, quin ipse potius ex editione esset
corrigendus, tum hic, tum in alijs si auderent. De qua re, rite Bellarminus
fecerunt bono zelo sed absque scientia ibid. c. 2.
now he is forced so to say (or else to hold his peace) in favor of the new
authentical translation, and the Tridentine Council. Thus deal these Na^ in
qualibet vrbe sua ditionis censores and correctores habent, qui authors
excudendos a zizanijs impurae doctrina in typographiae expurgarent: vt ex
Diplom. regis Hispan. in Indic.
Roman censurers, with writers new and old. They Vide indicem librorum
prohibitoru^ per totum.
stop the writings of those that favor not the Church of Rome, whom they dare
presume to entitle heretics: but the Fathers of who^ they would seem to
hold, the Councels and the Scriptures, they make vassels to that Sea. For under
the name of Council Trident. Sess. 4. Vt innotescat quaea^ pro authentica
habenda sit etc. Cum prius apud bonos nunquam in dubium vocatum fuerit. Certe
Hieronimus and Augustinus abunde testantur.
allowing of the Scriptures, because they Codicibus tam longae lateque
dispersis vltra fines Romanae ditionis.
cannot purge the Hebrew copies for their purpose, as they do the Fathers,
Council. Trident. sess. 4 Statuit and declarat, vt haec vetus and vulgata editio
pro authe^tica habeatur: id est, omnem fidei questione^ per hanc definiri
oportere, nec eam per examplaria Hebraica in vllo corrigendam, nec in
disputationibus ad Hebraica prouocan lu^sicut Canus lib. 2. c. 13. Andrad.
libr. 4. qui concilio interfuit and eius sensu^ explicauit.
they take from them authority, and give it to translations, which they have
more aptly for many causes Ipsa conteret caput, Genesis 3.15. Merifice consentit
cum sancta Maria conterens caput Serpentis, ora pro nobis. Item stylo
Papistico, Laus Deo virginique matri Mariae. Cum in Hebraeo sit. Gloriam meam
alteri non dabo, Isai, 42.8.
serving their necessities. But the Councels and the Fathers, under pretense of
purging and correcting them, by truer copies (which copies Codex Vaticanus cum
quo confertur editio concilioru^. Codex Cambr. ex quo corrigitur Cyprianus, etc.
are their own, for the most part cou^terfeit Neque hoc nouum inuentum
Romanorum, vt apparet ex Council. 3. Africano cap. 105. Sozimus Papa canonem
Nicaeni Concilij de appellatione ad Romanam sedem, qui nusquam habebatur, in
fraud capitur: quia illud quod prident etc. non potuimus reperire: ex actis
concilij dignam lectu historiam intelliges. Habet and Iuel, in Hard. art. 4.
and suborned) they add, they take away, they frame and fashion for the
behoof of the Church of Rome, beyond the bounds of shame or modesty. And not
only Hierome has felt ye taste hereof, but also the Councels of Council.
African. 3. canon. 26. Vt prime sedis Episcopus non appelletur princeps
sacerdotum, aut summus sacerdos, aut aliquid huiusmodi, sed tantum primae sedis
Episcopus; vniuersalis autem Episcopus nec etiam Romanus appelletur. Vltimam
clausulam quo direct facit contra primatum Romanum, in editione Pet. Crab,
Surij and and Venetica delerunt and expunxerunt. Item in epist. Council.
African. ad Coelestin. clericos vestros quibusque petentibus nolite mittere,
etc. hic pro petentibus vt est in editione Parisiensi, iam legunt potentibus:
and cum delere penitus non audent, gestiunt vitiosa lectione corrumpere.
Africa, Council. Mileuit. can. 22. Ad transmarina autem qui putauerit
appellandum, a nullo intra Africam in communione suscipiatur: huic canoni addit
Gratian. cause. 2. cap. 6. nisi forte Romanam sedem appellauerint: is autem qui
appelauerit ad eum, a quo appellauit, remitti non debet. Bandemque cum glossa
probant censores Romani in editione Venetica. 1585.
Mileuita, and Recitatur Council. huius canon ab Aquin. lib. contra Graecor.
errores. Si quis Episcopus accusetur, poterit appellare beatissimum Episcopum
vrbis Romae, quia habemus Pertrum petram refugij and ipse solus, etc. Deinde
legitur in ^uit in Council. Chalcedonensi, concilium conclamasse. Leoni
sanctissimo, Apostolico, oecumenico Patriarchae longa sint tempora. Sed hanc
lectionens quod mendacium inane esset, sequi Romanti ppsteriores non ausi sunt.
Chalcedon: of the Fathers Origin in cap. 6. Iohannis sustulerunt. Iuell.
Origin, Cyprian. de unit. Eccles. sic auxerint in edit. Pamelij: Hoc vtique
erant caeters Apostoli quod fuit Petrus pari consortio praediti and honoris and
potestatis: sed exordium ab vnitate proficiscitur (primatus Petro datur) vt vna
Christi Ecclesia (and cathedra vna) monstretur. Hic ex codice Hosij and
Cambron. addiderunt: Primatus Petro datur, quod aduersatur Cypriano: pari
consortio praediti honoris and potestatis. Tum and Cathedra vna, and alias
similes clausulus: vt, super illum vnum aedificat ecclesiam suam: qui cathedram
Petri super quam fundata est Ecclesia deserit, etc. Quae Hosij vel cuiusdam
alius Papista glossemata ita Romany complacuere, vt ex margin in textum
transtulerint, adeo vt Cyprianus pro primatu ecclesiae Romana pugnat qui
solebat eundem euertere: hoc erant vtique and caeteri Apostoli quod fuit
Petrus. Item lib. 1. epist. 27. Item epist. 55. Nisi si paucit desperatis and
perditis, minor videatur esse autoritas Episcoporum in Africa constitutorum,
scilicet quam Romani pontificit.
Cyprian, Fran. Iun. in indice expurgat. praefat. ad lectorem. Rem, inquit,
meis visam oculis ad exemplum adfer^m. Franciscanos duos pro authoritate,
aliquos paginas Ambrosis, alias ex part, alias universe dispunxisse, and alias
in locum priorum substituisse, praeter omnem antiquorum exemplarium fidem:
pluribus narrat verbis. Talia scilicet incassum cona^^ sunt, cum fuerint alia
apud alios exemplaria.
Ambrose, In impressione 1494. cum Commentarijs Thomae Val^is and Nicholai
Treuith ita legitur: cuius rei sacrament. etc. Lib. de ciuit. Dei, 10. cap. 20.
Cuius rei sacramentum quotidianum esse voluit ecclesiae sacrificium: cum ipsius
corporis ipse sit caput, and ipsius capitis ipsa sit corpus: tam ipsa per ipsum
quam ipse per ipsam suetus offeri. In Augustino incorrupte legitur: quae cum
ipsius capitus corpus sit, seipsam per ipsum discit offere. Cui etiam plurimas
offixerunt sermones and tractatus aliquos, qui ne pilum habent Augustini, sicut
testis est Erasmus. Similia and Hieronymo affixerunt Tom. 4. and Athanasio,
praesertim ad Marcu^ Papam epist. in qua de rebus gestis post obitu^ Marci ad
december annos, scribit, and Arrianos Nicani Synodi decreta incendisse: vt apparet
ex Socrat. histor. 2. cap. 10. epist. Athanas ad Orthodox.
Augustine, Aquin. lib. contra. error. Graecor. citat Cyril. Alex. ex Thesauro
sic loquentem: quemadmodum Christus a patre recepit potestatem super omneos
potestatem, sic and Petro and eius successoribus plenissime commisit. Deinde,
nulli alij quam Petro Christus quod suum est plenum, sed ipsi soli dedit.
Postea vero: cui (scil. Petro) omnes iure diuino caput inclinant, and primates,
mundi, tanqua^ ipsi Domino Jesus obediunt. Nos vero tanquam membra corporis,
caepiti nostro pontifici Romano ^tharemus, solius pontificis enim est arguere,
corrigere, increpare, ratum facere, disponere, soluere and ligare. Quae omnia
Aquinas de suo finxit cerebro, and Papistas ipsos reserre pudes vt apparet ex
Dialog. D. Reinald. cu^ Job. Heart.
Cyril, Bertramum in Tract. de sanguine and corp. Domini, misere dilacerant
censores vniuersitatis Duacensis: in Catholicis veteribus (inquiunt) plurimos
feramus errores, and extenuemus, excusemus, excogitato commento persaepe
negemus etc. istum librum magni non aestimemus momenti etc. corrigunt tamen.
Bertram, and Nam non solum Protestantium libros prohibent quicunque de
religione ex professo tractant. Index prohib. lib reg. 2. sed and non pa^cos
Catholicorum nisi emendantur. Cuius causa non solum Erasmum, Lod, Vinem. and
similes correxerunt, sed and Polidorum de inuentione, Velcurionis Commentaria
in Aristotelem, Leouitij Ephemeridem, etc. quod contra Concilij Tridentini
decreta facere videntur. Ex indice expurgat.
many other authors, as is manifest to the perpetual infamy of the workers
thereof. Wherefore it behooves Magistratus enim est ecclesia and religionis
custos and pater nutricius. Isai. 49.23.
Christian Princes, to cause carefully to be maintained the ancient copies
of the Fathers, that learning and religion do not decay. The learned it
becomes to detect the lewdnes of such enterprisers. And the godly to esteem
no trespass small which is committed Sam. ^.25.
against the Lord, against -- Non patitur ludum, fama, fides, oculus.
true religion, or the August. de Doctr. Christia. lib. 1. cap. 37. Titubabit
enim fides, si diuinarum scripturarum vacillet authoritas. Nihil igitur parnum
in tantis ausis astimandum est.
perfection and authority of holy Scripture. Observe out of this verse.
First, the Lord does often upon his children Genesis 30.20. 1. Sam. 20.3. Psalm.
105.18.
lay long temptations and very grievous: wherefore the godly must labor 1.
Cor. 1.5. Ephesians. 6.16. Philip. 1.9.
to be rich in faith, whereby to stand in the day of trial. Secondly, we may
not Genesis 14.14. Exodus 10.9. Prou. 28.7.
without just cause forgo, the creatures and goods which Matthew. 25.14.
are committed unto us by the Lord. Thirdly, the godly have liberty in time
of temptation Genesis 25.22. Judge. 6.37.
to seek godly means to strengthen their weakness. Verse 4. Fourthlie, the
brutish creatures, through the goodness of the Lord, do Job. 5.23. 1. King.
17.6. Marc. 1.13.
often administer unwonted comfort to Gods children, in their adversities.

Question 4. verse 13.14. For what cause the ground being dry, the first day
of the first month: Noah continued in the Arc until the seven and twentieth
day of the second month?
TWo causes hereof may be gathered by the words of Scripture. One, where it is
said, the upper part (...), Panim, facies, a panah aspicere: id quod videre
possiomus.
or face of the earth was dry. Whereby it appears, that albeit the waters
were dried from the earth, yet the earth being so long before covered and
dre^ched with the waters, was soft and unfit for the foot of man and beast, and
did begin to be dried, and to return to his former hardness and (...), Charabu,
a (...), Charab. Arescere extrinsecus, a sole: To dry on the outside by the
sun, fire, or wind. (...) iabesha haeartes, ver. 14. the earth was dried up.
Lament. 4.8. Isai. 27.11.
soliditie, from the first day of the first month, and thence forth waxed
firm, and more and more increased to be habitable, till the Lord commanded
Noah out of the Arc: In the distance whereof is also signified, the Fatherly
care Genesis 1.11.24. Psalm. 145.15.
of the Lord toward all his creatures, who permits them not unto the earth,
till the same was fully refreshed of the waters, and had time to bring forth
herbs and food for man and beast; as also his providence toward them in the
Arc, that continued with Leuit. 26.5.6. etc.
abundance for all necessities. The second cause did rest in the Ambros. de
Arca. cap. 21. Itaque recedente aqau and siccata terra, exire potuit Noe ex
arca, sed iustus nihil sibi arrogat, sed totu^ se diuino co^mittis imperio: and
maxim qui coelest^ fuerit ingressus oraculo, coeleste debuit vt egrederetur
expectare responsum.
obedience of Noah: whose constancy was such, and faith Heb. 11.7.
toward God, that albeit he saw the ground was dry, and longed no doubt for
the fruition of thereof; yet Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 26. Tantum ibi
afflictionem far cogebatur iustus ille in tanta existens angustia, neque
auram rece^tem captare valens, ferarum insuper brutorumque conuictum ferens:
qui and in omnibus mentem suam solidam declarabat, and voluntatem flecti
nesciam, and fidem erga Deum. Calvin. in Genesis 9. In suo foetore iacere manuit,
quam liberum spiritum colligere, donec migrationem suam sentiat placere Deo.
he had rather die in that unsavory closet, then to enjoy the benefit of
pleasant air, and the Lordship and riches of the whole earth, without
permission given by the Lord. A notable example in so noble a Patriarch of Pet.
Martyr. Comment in Genesis 8. Qui vere se agnoscit in aliena potestate, haud secus
facere debet.
righteousness, Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 26. Qu^ declarata est iusti patientia.
patience, Ambros. de Noe and arc. cap. 21. Verecundia enim iustitia est, quia
inuerecundia iniquitas, qua vsurpat indebita nec reueretur authorem.
temperance, Matthew. 24.14. Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 26. Qui and in omnibus mentem
suam solidem declarabat and voluntate^ flecti nesciam.
perseverance, Heb. 11.7. Iam. 2.22. Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 26. Fidem
declarabat erga Deum per quam facile and leuiter omnia sustinebat.
faith. Thus it behooves Psalm. 27.14. and 31.24. and Psalm. 37.5. and 55.22.
the faithful to walk with God. This is a worthy 1 Pet. 2 19. Genesis 14.23.
token of an upright heart. Neither is a happy issue Psalm. 37.25. and 55.22.
Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 26. Expende hic Dei, bonitatem quomodo per omnia iustum
consolatur, etc.
ever wanting to those that wait on God; which the Scripture also does call to
our remembrance: for Verse. 15.
the day, as it were, that the earth was meet and fit the Noah, the Lord does
call him forth to enjoy the same.

Question 5. verse. 14.18. How long time did the waters of the flood continue
upon the earth: And whether the heathen have had any knowledge, or made report
thereof?
FOrasmuch as the scripture does so diligently describe the beginning, the
increase, the fall, and the final end of the flood of Noah, in respect of the
circumstance of time; there is no doubt, no small regard and estimation to be
had thereof. For the Scripture delivers nothing August. Epist. 3. Modus autem
ipse dice^di quo sancta scriptura contexitur, quam omnibus accessibilis,
quamuit paucissimis penetrabilis, ea quae aperta continet quasi amicus
familiaris sine fuco ad cor loquitur in doctorum atque doctoru^. Ea vero quae
in mysterijs occultat, etc.
without weighty reasons and ponderous judgment. And surely to those that
will religiously consider the cause of things, as it is administered by the
mighty power of God, it may justly seem no less an argument of admiration,
that the waters continued so long upon the earth, then that they ouerflowed in
so great a measure. When the earth was first Genesis 1.10.
ouercouered with waters, the same in one days space was unburdened of them.
When floods do happen from the waters of the sea, Vide Gaspar. Contaren. de 4.
elem. Vbi multas inundationes descripsit.
although they range far, and do great violence, yet are they commonly
returned together with the tide. The flowings which are caused by the rain of
heaven, although they continue As it comes to pass by ye meeting together of
much water in la^d floods.
a day or twain, yet they are maintained by following waters. But this flood
being only caused by the waters of the fountains, of the deep, and the
windows of heaven, being increased Genesis 7.17. Aben Ezra affirms that after
the forty days of rain, it rained every second day, until the end of the
150. days. But it is uncertain, and not to be built upon, for the authority
of Rabbis.
forty days, continued in perfection, without any new supply of waters (as
being only preserved in the nature of their first creation by the Lord) one
hundredth and fifty days, and afterward decreased one hundredth and eighteen
That is, from the 29. of the eight month, or the 17. day of the seventh
month, which is from the beginning of the flood, to the beginning of the next
year, so many days do come between.
days, before the earth was thoroughly unburdened of them: whereby it is
evident that the floods continued the Genesis 7.1. and 8.13.
space of ten months, and thirteens days, and Noah remained in the Arc a
year and ten days, Genesis 7.13. and 8.16.
as the Scripture does account the same. But the reader must remember, that the
months are reckoned by the Scripture, according to the Hebrew custom, Hieron.
Comment. in Ezech. cap. 29. Menses apud Hebraeos secundu^ lunae cursum
supputantur.

August. de ciuit. Dei, lib. 15. cap. 14. Mensis, quem luna caepta and finita
concludit. Munster. in Calender.


after the courses of the moon; whereas in a year, by the compass of the
sun, which is the space of a year by our account, there are twelve such
months, and the tenth day finished, of the thirteen moon or month. So that
where the Scripture accounts from the seventeenth day of the second month,
unto the seven and twentieth day of the second month of the year that
followed, the same is no more then the Aben. Ezra in Com. in Genesis affirms
that Noah continued in the Arc a year and ten days, after the Suns course:
the same, Luther in Genesis 8. seems to gather: but the Scripture speaks of
months, only and in all places, after the courses of the Moon, as Augustine
witnesses de ciuit. Dei, lib. 15. cap. 14. Now twelve times 29. days, and
twelve half days, that is, six days, are in sum, 354. which is a year
after the account of Scripture, and twelve just courses of the Moon: whereunto
if you add the ten days, from the 17. to the 27. of the second month, Genesis
7.11. and 8.14. they amount unto 164. days, which with the day in which Noah
came forth of the Arc, is a full year after our account. Note also, that the
Hebrews every third year have intercalarem mensem, a leap month (as we have
a day every fourth year) whereby it comes to pass that every three years
by their account, is equal to three years of our account.
just space of a year by the course of the sun, consisting of three hundredth
and threescore days and five. The heathen histories Origin. contr. Celsum.
lib. 5. Lactant. lib. 1. cap. 1. Institut. Omissis igitur terrenae philosophiae
authoribus, nihil certi asserentibus. etc.
corrupt through ignorance, do in part notwithstanding, express the history
of the flood, as well in respect For some say Deucalions flood lasted three
months: other say nine months, which can be true in none but in this flood of
Noah. Vide Zenophon. Annian. lib. de aequiuocis.
of the time thereof, as of other circumstances of the same. Which albeit they
do nothing confirm the truth of Scripture, yet their authority is a strength
sufficient to convince isai. 1.3. Ierem. 2.11. Sic Atheus Atheum, hareticus
haereticum conuincit.
an Atheist. But Augustine August. de ciuit. Dei, lib. 18. cap. 8. Quod
diluuium, gentium nec Graeca nec Latina nonis Historia.
denies that the mention of this flood is known to any heathen writer Greek
or Latin. Which if it be of truth, the Scriptures are the more to be beloved
of Christian people, which do so faithfully and fully deliver the memory of
such an ancient and peerless monument. Howbeit Saint Augustine means not,
that there were no parcels of this history appearing in heathen writers; but
that the heathen, which have understood the same by ancient report, have
corrupted the truth thereof, and covered it with names of less antiquity. For
both Josephus, whose works August. epist. 80. Nam Josephus qui Iudaicam
scirpsit historiam, talia mala dicit illi populo tunc accidisse, vt vix
credibilia videantur. Hunc ipsum Hieronymus in catalogo ecclesiasticorum
scriptorum annumerat.
were not unknown to Augustine, in making report hereof affirms, that
Joseph. Antiq. lib. 1. cap. 4. Huius autem diluuij and arcae, meminerunt omnes
barbarica historia scriptores.
all Barbarian histories whereof he cites Berosum Chaldaeu^ histor.
Hieronymum Aegyptium li. Antiquit. Phoenicum, Muaseam, Nicholaeum Damascen lib.
96.
many, did hear remembrance of this flood. And likewise Eusebius. in his
Chronicle, which Hierome turned into Latin.
Eusebius remembereth; Idem Eusebius. lib. 9. de praeparat. Euangel.
Abidenus and other Alexandrum Polyhistorem, Molonem, Eupolemum and alias.
Greek historians, which have put the same in record: not under the name of
the flood of Noah, but of Deucalion; nor according to the truth of history,
but as they had received it, as it were in pieces, by report. And first that
Ovid. 1. Metamorph. Iamque mare and tellus nullum discrimen habebant, omnia
pontus erat, decrant quoque littora P^nto.
fabulous Poet, speaking of Deucalions flood, describes by a false title, this
flood of Noah. For as Justin Martyr Justin. Mart. Apolog. 1. Sicut ante
diluuium reliquum neminem faciens, prater vnum cum suis, apud nos cognominatum
Noen, apud vos autem Deucalionem.
speaks, we christians call him Noah, that whom the heathen called Deucalion.
Plutarch in his treatise Plutarch. li. deindis stria animal. Columba^ ex arca
Deucalionis emissam attulisse indicium recedentis diluuij.
of the apt disposition of the creatures, affirms that a Dove sent out of the
Arc of Deucalion, brought a token of the falling of the waters. Another
heathen writer more ancient then these, and as strong an Atheist as any that
shall deny this history, makes report thereof in these words. The Greeks
(says Lucian. lib, De dea Syria. Exauditum est a Graecis hanc hominum
generatione^ qua nunc est, ab initio haudquaqua^ fuisse, sed ea^ qua tunc fuit
totam interijsse. Hos autem homines qui nu^c sunt, secundi generis esse eius
quod rursus a Deucalione in ta^tam multitudinem excreuerat.
he) do tell, that this offspring of men which now is, was not the same which
was from the beginning; but the same which then was, did wholly perish. The men
that now are, are of that second race, which from Deucalion grew into so great
a multitude. The former sort being fierce and proud, committed evil works:
they kept Ibid. De illis autem hominibus huiusmodi quaedam narrari: cum efferi
admodum essent, nefaria opera perpetrarunt. Neque enim insiurandu^ seruarunt,
neque hospites receperunt, neque supplicum miserti sunt, vid. and Ezech.
16.49.50.
not their oath and promises, they harbored not strangers, they pitied not the
poor. For which cause they endured great calamity. For suddenly the earth
powered forth abundance of water, great rain came from the Sky; the rivers
swelled with greater then wonted streams; the sea arose unto such a height,
that it overwhelmed all with water, and all things perished. Of all that
multitude, no Ibid. Deucalion autem solus hominu^ relictus fuit. Aduersatur
iste stultissimo mendacio Hectoris Beothij in histor. Scotiae, qui tradit
mulierem qua^dam etiam nauim co^scendisse and cum suis in Hiberniam delatem
esse. Sed insipida est fabula, and conuincitur fallaciae testimonio verbi Dei
and Ethnicorum. Pergis Lucianus: seruatus autem fuit hoc pacto: arcam quandam
magnam, quam ipse habebat, impositus in eam cum liberis and vxore sua
conscendit. Caterum cum ipse ingrederetur, venerunt eode, and Apri, and Equi,
and Leones, and Serpents, aliaque quacunque tel^^re pascuntur bina ex
vnoquoque genere cuncta.
more but Deucalion was left alive; who was preserved by this means. He put
himself with his wife and children in a great Arc, which he had made. And
when he entered, there came unto him, swine, and horses, and lions, and
serpents, and of all other creatures which the earth nourishes, two of every
sort. All which he received, which beasts notwithstanding hurt him not at all,
but Ille autem recepit ad se omnia^ atque ea ipsum haudquaqua^ laedebant, sed
magna inter eos, Jove sic dispensante, concordia erat, vnaque in arca omnes
nauiglaba^t quandiu superabat aqua.
(God so ordering the matter) there was great peace and concord among
themselves: and thus they sailed together, so long as the waters were above the
earth. Change here the name of Deucalion into Noah, by Iustins authority, and
we have a brief of all this history. This was not the voice of 1. Cor.
1.20.21.
Princes or great Philosophers, which were in their own conceit too wise to
believe the same, and therefore Abidenus refere Sissithru^, id est Noen,
accepisse a Saturno praecognitionem futuri diluuij, quaere hic Armeniam versus
nauigio confugiebat. In ^ecero concordat cum Plutarch. de Columba. extat apud
Eusebius. de praeparat. Euangel. libr. 9. Quod templa Deorum condidit, and
civitates. Apollonius libr. 3. Athemide eductus, reparauit humanum genus, etc.
devised lies of their own in place thereof; but is told as the speech of the
vulgar people: whereby does appear, how God left not Act. 14.17. and 17.27.
Romans 1.19.
himself without witness among the heathen, thereby to have stirred them up to
have searched out the truth, which only remained in the Church of God.
Secondly, we may understand, that those wise Justin. Mart. cohort. ad G^tes.
Plato. ne quemodo Socrati accidisse vide^^t, ipse quoque Anitum quempia^
excitaret accusatorem, (...), cicuti metu, fucatam de dijs instituit orationem.
Lactant, lib. 2. cap. 3. de Cicerone: Vana esse intelligis (deorum cultus
scilicet) and tamen eadem facit, quae faciunt ipsi, quos ipse stultissimos
confiteris, etc.
and grave Philosophers among the heathen, did more grieuouslie offend, in that
by their own wisdom, they obscured the wisdom and works of God; which
neither in their wanderings, Plato Athenis profectus est Mecaram, a Megaru
Cyrenem attigit; hinc in Jtaliam, inde in Aegyptum, Laert. lib. 3. Similiter
and Pythagoras, Epim^nides and alij. Athenas, Cretam, Italiam, Aegyptum, Indiam
profecti; Iudaeam interiacentem propter res afflictas Iudeorum contempsere.
Vide Hieron. epist. 1. Tom. 3.
and searching after wisdom, were wise enough to seek it among the people of
the Lord, where only true knowledge and wisdom was preserved: nor yet 1. Cor.
1.27. and 3.18.
foolish enough to receive the true report of things which might be taught them
of idiots among themselves; but spent their Eccles. 1.3. They built stubble and
straw withou a foundation. 1. Cor. 3.15.
days in vanity, and became Tertul. aduers. Hermogen. Haereticorum
Patriarchae Philosophi. Hieron. lib. 1. aduers. Pelap^an. philosophi
patriarchae hereticorum, ecclesie puritatem peruersa maculauere doctrina.
August. in Psalm. 8. Sapientiae philosophi se amatores profitentur, id est
Christi, qui virtus and sapientia Dei est, vnde etiam philosophi nominantur;
and propterea illam videntur defendere, cum inimici sint eius: quoniam
superstitiones noxias vt colantur and venerentur huius mundi clementa, suadere
non cessant.
the authors of heresies, and teachers of lies unto the people.
Notwithstanding that Romans 2.14.
thorough the natural wisdom that was in them, they showed diverse
testimonies Arattis in Pheinom. (...): i. Every one of us do stand in need of
God: for we are his generation, Act. 17. The first of all things is God, says
Thales, for he alone is without beginning, Laert. lib. 1. Chilo being asked
what God did: He humbles the proud (says he) and extolleth the humble:
Repr^ch not thy friend, says he, no not thy enemy, etc. Exercise godliness, be
th^i^tie, love purity, endeavor the truth Iouis omnia plena, All is full of
God, or God is in every place. And infinite other such sayings in Philosophers
and Poets.
of the wonderful works and providence of the Lord, for a farther witness Romans
2.1.21. Because they rather commended virtue then followed it. Hieron in Ierem
34.1. Et verae sapientiae, id est, Christo, fuerunt inimici. August. in Psalm.
8.
against themselves. Thirdly, we must observe, that albeit this only flood
of Noah was vniuersalll over all the earth, yet there have bin since, many
floods of waters, whereby diverse countries have been drowned with their
inhabitants: which also is the cause that the heathen more freshlie remember
the name Deucalion. The first flood that is remembered after this universal
deluge, Berosus lib. 1. Diod. Si^^^. biblioth. 1. Pomp. Mela. lib. 1. cap. 10.
est Ioppe (inquit) ante diluuium vt ferunt condita. Non ante universal
dibatium, nam id nec agnouerit Mela, nec loquitur de Ogygio aut Deucalionaeo,
qua Graeciae terminos test Augustino non excesserint. Intelligit ergo diluuium
Niliacum quo Aegyptus and omnia Syriae maritima submersa seruntur.
is called the flood of Nilus, whereby Egypt was drowned in the days of
Prometheus king of Egypt, and of Atlas king of Mauritania, which flood
continued one month. The second is named Atticum and Ogygium: whereby the
greatest part of Grecia was overwhelmed Berosus lib. Antiq. Chaldae. lib. 1.
cap. 7. Helameus ^esblu^. Philocorus. lib. de Sacrificijs. Eusebius. de praeparat.
Euangel: lib. ^0. cap. vlt. August. de ciuit. Dei. lib. 18. cap. 8. Quingent^s
circiter annos a diluuio contingit Noetico: vt colligitur ex Eusebio, Orosio.
and Augustino.
in the reign of Ogyges King of Thebes. The third, Thessalicu^, which Pausan.
in Atticis. Arrian. lib. de rebus Bithynicis. Aristot. Meteor. lib. 1. cap. 13.
Justin. histor. lib. 2. Eusebius. de preparat. Euang. lib. 10. cap. vlt. August de
ciuit Dei, lib. 15. cap. 10. de tempore litigant authors. Clem. Alexand.
Strom. 1. Statuit inter Deuecalionis diluuium and Ogygium centum interfuisse
tantum and triginta annos. Eusebius. in Chron. Centum and septuaginta annos.
Orosius lib. 1. Decenta and triginta. ^olin. cap. 18. Sexcenta.
destroyed the inhabitants of Thessalie, in the time of Deucalion king of
Thessalie, and of Amphitrio, or Amphiction king of Athens. This rage of water
In eo conueniunt quod non fuerit tam late patens quam fuit Ogygium. Videtur
igitur quod de duratione dicitur, plane ad N^eticum esse referendum, a quo and
plurimae historia parts desumpta sunt.
is said to have endured three months. The fourth Pharonicum, by which the
Herodot. in Euterpe. Regnante Proteo Aegyptio, ad quem rapta Helena diducta
est, vel decessore eius Pherone, sub quo, flumen supra octodecim cubitos rura
transcendebat. Annian. lib. de aequiuocis. Horat. Ode 3. Iam satis terris, etc.
Isle Phares was overwhelmed. Beside these also, floods more fresh in memory
in Anno. Dom. 1230.
Phrygia, Anno Dom. 1446.
Italy, Anno Dom. 1530. De istis tradit Gaspar. Contaren. lib. de 4. element.
Flaunders, and In Epidauro. vt refert Hieron. in vita Hilarion. in Anglia. vt
Polidor. Virgil. de prodigijs, lib. 3. circa anno 1012.
other places of the world, do testify the Psalm. 107.34.
justice and power of the Lord, in destroying the earth for the sins of men:
as also his mercy, in defending us from the Lament. 3.22. Basil. Hexam. 4.
violence of that furious element.

Question 6. verse 21. Wherefore seeing Noah would do nothing either in the
making, entering, or leaving of the Arc, without express commandment, he now
offers sacrifice, without express commandment: whereof the Lord smelled a
savor of rest?
BEcause it was not meet Ambros. de Noa and Arc. cap. 22. Dominus vtique non
debuit quasi auarus mercedem gratiae postulare, and iustus eam intellexit vera^
actionem gratiarum esse, qua non iuberetur sed deferretur.
says Ambrose, that so great a work of thankfulness should seem to be
performed of exaction or constraint, but rather of a willing mind. And surely
it appears by the text, that Verse. 20. He built an altar, and offered of
every clean beast, so soon as he was arrived on the earth.
Noah did it readily, and willingly, not at all being urged thereunto: but
withal the Scripture does instruct us, that 1. Sam. 15.22. Deuteronomy. 12.32. Romans
14.23.
obedience and faith is as fire and Leuit. 2.13. Marc. 9.49.
salt, wherewith the sacrifice is seasoned, which the Lord will accept at the
hands of men. So that neither for the work Job. 35.5.7. Luc. 17.10.
performed, or the Esai. 66.1.
greatness of the same; but for the faith and obedience Deuteronomy. 26.17.18. 1.
Chron. 29.17. Matthew. 10.41.
wherein it was performed, it was graciously received, Romans 3.24.25. and 11.6.
Heb. 9.14.
being sanctified by the merit of Jesus Christ. Noah therefore did not
Sacrifice without commandment, albeit he were not at this time commanded
sacrifice. For the Lord having Genesis 3.13. and 43.4 Leuit. 1.2. etc. Hebr.
9.13.14. being compared.
made it a perpetual law unto his Church, from the fall of man, until the
Heb. 10.14.15.18.
perfect sacrifice of Christ; it needed not to be repeated by commandment, as
the making of the Arc (being a private action, belonging to none, but Noah
himself) seeing it was before commanded, and taught from God. Wherefore, such
Isai. 58.2. Matthew. 23.
hypocrites have hereby no defense, which Such as are ye Popish Pilgrimages,
Fastes, Vows, etc. of which Papists teach: Omne quod fit ex voto, etiamsi
alioqui non sit a Deo praeceptum, vere and proprie esse cultus Dei: that is,
Whatsoever is done, to fulfill a vow, albeit it be not commanded by God, yet
it is truly and properly the worship of God. Bellar. Tom. 1. contr. 5. lib. 2.
c. 16. when as the Scripture 1. Sam. 15.22. Romans 14.23. does proclaim the
contrary. And S. August. de ciuit. Dei, lib. 14. cap. 12 Obedientia commendata
est in praecepto, etc. Obedience is the scope of the Commandment, which virtue
in a reasonable creature is as it were the mother and keeper of all virtue. For
as much, as the creature is made after that condition, that to be subject to
the creator, is the profit of the creature; and his great hurt, to do his own
will, and not the will of him that did create him. And Ignatius epist. ad
Philadelp. Christum non audire manifestus est interitus. Not to hear Christ is
manifest destruction. And Bernard. Sermon. in Cant. 29. Quicquid sine voluntate
and consensu Patris, filij, and Sp. fit, vanae gloria deputabitur non mercedi:
that is, whatsoever is not done, according to the will of the holy Trinity,
shall be accounted to vain glory, not to reward. The heathen Aristotle does
confess in effect as much, ad Alexan. cap. 3. (...). i. God is not delighted
with the costs and pains bestowed in Sacrifices, but with the religious
obedience of the Sacrificers. They will say perhaps: God wills it, albeit he
command it not. Isaiah denies that, cap. 1. verse. 12.13. and Moses, Deuteronomy.
12.32. also Tertul. libr. de Castitate. Deus vtique quae vetat non vult, a
quibus and offenditur; sicut and qua vult, praecipit and accipit, and
aternitatis mercede dispungit. i. Doubtless that which God forbids he
wills not, for which also he is offended: as also that which he wills, he
commands and receives, and requiteth with eternal reward.
worship the Lord without the warrant of his commandment, for the
commandment of worship Romans 2.15. The Law was written in man's heart; therefore
also this special Law of worship, which co^sisted partly in sacrifices, from
the fall of man, until Christ's Sacrifice.
being given already, and put in practice by the fathers, and taught unto Noah
by The word of God being not yet written, the godly taught one another, and
were taught by revelation from God, Genesis 18.19. and 49.2.
tradition and revelation from the Lord; was of the same force and nature unto
him, as to us Quia vice verbi illis scripti fuerant: Such revelations were to
them in stead of the word written, whereof Chrysostom shows the reason.
Chrysostem. Hom. in Matthew. 1. Oportuerat quidem nihil nos indigere auxilio
literarum, sed tam mundam exhibere vitam, vt librorum vice gratia spiritus
sancti suppeteret nostris animabus; and sicut atrame^to illi, ita corda ^^stra
inscripta essent a spiritu. Nam quod primum illud sit praestantius, and ex
verbis suis Deus and ex operibus ostendit. Nam and Noae and Abrahae eiusque
posteris, and Job and Mosi, non per literas sed per semetipsum locutus est,
quia scilicet puram eorum mente^ repererat. Quia vero hanc a nobis excussimus
gratiam, etc.
is the written word of God: wherein although not every private action be
commanded, yet every private action must have his warrant, Deuteronomy 4.2.8.9 and
12.32. Non singula generum, sed genera singulorum: id est omnia capita
doctri^ae. D Whitaker. controu 1. quaest. 6. cap. 9.
from the commandment of God contained in the word. And the Scripture does
not obscurely signify, that Noah did nothing in this sacrifice without the
warrant of the word. For surely he that Genesis 6.22. and 7.5. and 8.15.
in the least thing, would not pass the bounds of Gods commandment, would
much less in the Deuteronomy. 10.8.12.13. Basil. Hexam. 11. Glorifica creatorem;
neque enim alterius rei c^^sa factus es. i. Glorify thy Creator; thou wast
created for no other cause.
principal point of his obedience; alter, diminish, or go beyond the same.
Secondly, it could not be unknown to Noah, that the Lord had provided for
this Sacrifice, and Tertul. lib. de cast^tat. Deus quod vult pracipit.
Chrysostom. Hom. 24. in Genesis
therefore had commanded it, forasmuch as the seventh beast was sent into the
Arc, neither for procreation, or for the necessity of Noah, but for the Lord.
Thirdly, where the Scripture says, the Lord smelled a savor of rest therein,
seeing the Lord 1. Sam. 15.22.23. Isai. 64.6. August. lib. de mori^.
Manichaeor. lib. 2. c. 13 Finis quo referi^tur ea quae fa^imus, in quaque re,
spectandus est. De Cat^lina memoria proditum est quod frigus, sitim, famem
far poterat, haec erant illi spurco sacrilegoque etiam cum Apostolis nostris
communia. Et vnde ergo discernitur parricida iste ab Apostolis nostris, nisi
fine illo quem diue^fissimum sequebatur. Idem contr. Julian lib. 4. cap. 3.
Absit igitur vt in aliquo sit vera virtus, nisi fuerit iustus. Absit vt sit
iustus vere nisi viuat ex fide: quomodo sint vere iusti, quibus vilis est
humilitas very iusti?
abhors al devotion, which is not ruled by the obedience of his word; it is
manifest that Noah was commanded sacrifice, and did nothing without the warrant
of the same. And that the Lord is said to smell a savor of rest, is a phrase
of speech most apt for our capacity, to understand the graciousnes and goodness
of the Lord. As a nurse or tender mother, does teach her infant, at the first,
imperfect and broken speech; that thereby it may learn to speak, and
afterward attain to eloquence: so the Scripture does descend to Basil. in
Psalm. 37. Conc. 10. Talia per metaphora^ tra^slata scriptura sermo vsurpare
solet. Velut etiam oculos dei, and aures, and maru^^, and digitos, and ped^s,
and reliquas parts, quas tanquam and homines co^mode disponit ad auditoru^
qualitatem condescendens seseque accommodans.
our infirmity, that it might teach us as we are August. lib. quaest.
Ostoginta trium quaest. 52. Ad ea verba doscendit quibus inter se
stultissimoru^ etia^ veitur consuetudo.
able to conceive of God, and we might grow from children Ephesians 4.14. 1. Pet.
2.2.
in godly knowledge, to be ripe and perfect men in Christ. The Lord has no
Tertul. lib. de Trin. Loquitur non quomodo Deus est. sed quomodo populus capere
poterat, non igitur mediocris est Deus, sed populi mediocris est sensus.
nostrels, and yet is said to smell, he has no feet and yet is said Psalm.
18.10. Genesis 11.5. Judge. 5.4. Arnob. contr. Gent. lib 4. Suo forsitan genere non
nostro.
to go; no eyes, no ears, and yet Psalm. 139.16. Malac. 3.16. hen. lib. 2. c.
47. Deus cum sit totus men's, totus ratio, totus spiritus opera^s, etc. Et
Ethnici, Plin. lib. 2. cap. 7. Deus quisquis is est (inquit) totus est sensus,
totus visus, totus auditus, totus animae, totus animi, totus sui, etc.
he sees, and hears all things. He has no body, and therefore no members
of a body, because he is Ioh. 4.24. Luc. 24.39. Tertul. lib. de Trin. Deus
secundum id quod est, nec humano sermon dici, nec humanis auribus percipi, nec
humanis sensibus colligi potest.
a spirit, Ioh. 1. verse. 18. 1. Tim. 1.17.
invisible, Job. 11.7 Isai 40.28. 1. Tim. 6.16.
unsearchable, Exodus 3.14. Bernard. de consia. lib. 5. Deus non partibus
constat vt corpus, non ^ffectibus distat vt anima* etc. Gregor. in Ezech. Hom.
8. Deus omnia implet, complectitur omnia, superexcedit omnia, sustinet omnia:
nec alia ex part sustinet, atque alia superexcedit; neque alia ex part
impl^t, atque alia circumplectitur; sed circumplectendo implet, implendo
circumplectitur, sustmendo superexcedit, superexcedendo sustinet. Idem moral.
in Job. lib. 2. cap. 12. Ipse man^t intra omnia, ipse extra omnia, ipse supra
omnia, ipse infra omnia; superior est per potentiam, inferior per
sucto^tationem, exterior per magnitudinem, interior per sublimitatem. Vnus
idemque totus vbique praesidendo sustinens, sustinendo praesidens, circundando
penetrans, penetrando circundans. Est itaque and inferior and superior sine
loco, est amplior sine latitudine, est subtilior sine exte^^atione; quo igitur
ab eo exitur, qui dum per molem corporis nusquam est, per incircumscriptam
substantiam nusquam deest?
most pure in substance, and Psalm 139.6. and 147.5 Tertul. in Marcion. lib. 2.
Discern igitur substantias, and suos ijs distribue sensus, tam diuersos quam
substa^tia exigunt, licet vocabulis communicare videantur. Nam and dextram and
oculos dei legimus, nec ideo tame^ humanis comparabu^tur, quia de appellatione
sociantur.
infinite. But because we cannot see Damascen. Orthodox. lib. 1. cap. 14. Scire
nos decet cum nos ipsi simus crasso carnis indumento circundati, nos minime
posse diuinas and subtiles and immateriales dei operationes aut intelligere aut
eloqui, nisi imaginibus, and formis, and significatiuis nostro more vtamur
signis.
him as he is, nor comprehend the glory and perfection of his nature, he
shows himself unto us, as we are able to understand; showing therein his
nature and his work, Idem. Quaecunque igitur de Deo corporaliter dicuntur,
symbolice sunt dicta: habent autem altiorem intelligentiam. Simplex enim
diuinitas, and figuram nullam habent.
after, and above our understanding. To this intent when he would let us see
his mercy in accepting man's obedience, thorough faith in Christ: he says, he
smelt a savor of rest, in the sacrifice of Noah. For because men are delighted
with Aristot. Problem. section. 12. Idem de anima. lib. 2. cap. 9. Odoris homo
nihil percipit absque dolor aut voluptate, quia huius sensus instrumentum non
est exactum neque perfectum.
pleasant savors, therefore to express, Rabbi. Abraham, commentar. in Genesis
Absit, absit vt Deus odoretur, sed est sensus quod suscepit holocaustum.
how greatly God was pleased with this sacrifice, he says he smelt a pleasant
savor, or Oeculampad. in Genesis Quicscere faciens iram ipsius. Idem Ambros. de
Noe cap. 24.
savor of rest. Wherefore in that the Scripture says: the Lord smelt a savor
of rest, it means thereby, that Onkelos Paraphr. Chaldaeus. Recepit cum
fauore. Targ. Hieros. Suscepit cum beneplacito.
he received with favor, Psalm. 51.16. Isai. 1.11. and 66.3.
he accepted or took delight in the sacrifice of Noah. But if the Lord
delighted in this sacrifice: how says CONCILIATIO. 10.
the Scripture, he Isai. 66.3. Hieron. in Comment. ibid. audiant Iudaei, quod
Deus non quaerit sacrificia, sed offerentium animos. Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis
2. Fides sine operibus mortua, and opera sine fide mortua sunt.
delights not in sacrifice? It is not the work Isai. 58.6. Clem. Alexandr.
Strom. 7. Sacrificium D^o gratum and acceptum, cor a superbia and fastu
alienum, cum recta scientia, etc.
of sacrifice, but the Justin. Martyr. Dialog. cum Triff. Vt Dei recordemini,
and Deus ante oculos versaretur.
manner of the work that pleases him. The Lord commands sacrifice Job.
35.7. Iraen. libr. 4. cap. 28. Non quasi indigens Deus, hominem plasmauit, etc.
August. de ciuit. Dei. lib. 10. cap. 5. Sed ne ipsa iustitia hominis Deum egere
credendum est.
for the exercise of our obedience; he needs not our Irena. lib. 4. cap. 28.
Obedientiam requirit vt benefaciat ijs qui perseuerant in seruitute eius.
sacrifice, nor yet obedience; but we have need of obedience, and exercises,
whereby to manifest the same. Wherefore when men do sacrifice to God, or any
other work or worship, as it were to pleasure him, Sordidus est sensus natura
hominis communis, Iudaeis and Papisti^ praedominans. Lactant. libr. 6. cap. 2.
Mactant opimas and pingues hostias Deo quasi esurient^, etc.
as though he stood in need thereof, rather then to manifest their faith, and
true obedience; they do therein dishonor God, and proclaim him poor and
wanting, who has Deuteronomy. 10.14. Psalm. 50.10. Isai. 66.1.
in possession heaven and earth. No marvel therefore if the works and
sacrifice of those, who for the merit, wealth and worthiness of works, Council.
Trident. Sess. 6. Can. 32. Bellarm. Tom. 3. Controuer. 2. lib. 5. cap. 1.
do claim a recompense thereof, and do offer it, as Isai. 58.3. Ad
promerendum vitam aeternam, in qua pro meritorum diuersitate vitae aeternae
mansiones assignat Deus. Bell. Tom. 3. Cont. Genesis 3. cont. p. 2. li. 5. cap. 3.
usurers to receive again thereby, rather then to testify their hearty
obedience unto the precept of the Lord; are Esai. 66.3. Luc. 18.14.
detested as the works of hypocrites, and their presumption Isai. 1.15.
Bernard. Sermo. in Cant. 13. Quoniam dolose agunt in conspectu eius, inuenitur
iniquitas eorum ad odium.
menaced; when as those, which to show their love, 1. Chron. 29.9.17.
do freely yield obedience in faith, and perform religious works, are
accepted of God; and their works Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 27. Si qua^do vides
iacentem in foro, etc. Ambros. in Luc. 9. Deus non obsequioru^ speciem, etc.
which to men often times appear unsavory, are smelling sweet in the nostrils
of the Lord. When the Lord therefore in Scripture rejected sacrifice, Heb.
9.8.11.
before the offering of that all-sufficient sacrifice the son of God, it was
either where the outward work, was Isai. 1.11.15. Ierem. 7.23.
not combined with the inward virtue of true obediene; or where he shows
Isai. 66.1. Hieron ibid. Potest and hic esse sensus: post filium meum qui venit
mansuetus and pauper, etc.
such sacrifice in time should be abolished: or where he commends the August.
de ciuit. Dei, lib 10. cap. 5. Nihil aliud quam sacrifi^ium sacrifici^
praelatum oportet intelligi.
inward obedience to be more excellent then the outward work. But those that
did in faith and true obedience sacrifice to God, and those that now do August.
de ciuit. Dei, lib. 17. cap. 20. Id enim sacrificium suc^essit omnibus illis
sacrificijs veteris testamenti, quae immolabantur in vmbra futuri: quia pro
illis omnibus sacrificijs and oblationibus, corpus eius offertur and
participantibus ministratur.
rightly receive the Sacraments, which the Lord has ordained, in the steed of
sacrifice, rendering unto God Hosea. 14 2. Heb. 13.15.
the calves of their lips, and their Romans 12 1.2.
members as instruments of righteousness; Heb. 13.7.8.
have ever been, and Genesis 4.7. Act. 10.35.
shall be accepted of the Lord, thorough Romans 5.2. 1. Tim. 2.5. August. in
Psalm. 142.
the merit and mediation of Christ our Savior. Observe out of this godly
example. First, as we may do Deuteronomy. 12.32. Romans 14.23. Bernard. Sermon. in
Cant. 29. Sapientia est Deus, and vult se amari non solum dulciter, sed etiam
sapienter. Quia scripturae sufficient ad omnem veritatis instructionem, 2. Tim.
3.16. August. Epist. 112. Quicquid diuinarum scripturarum perspicua firmatur
authoritate, sine vlla dubitatione crede^du^ est. Alijs vero testibus, etc.
Athanas. lib. contra Gent. Ergo qui sacra non vtitur scriptura sed ascendit
aliunde, id est, non concessa via, fur est. Chrysostom. Hom. in Ioh. 58. cap. 10.
nothing without the warrant of the word; so may we not like children, omit
occasions 2. King. 12.2. 2. Chron. 24.14.17.
of doing good, because we want new reuelatio^s, or one to instruct us in the
word of God, but Iosu. 1.8. Deuteronomy. 6.7.8.9. Ioh. 5.39.
must be diligent to search the scriptures, wherein is 2. Tim. 3.16. August. de
doctr. Christ. lib. 2. cap 9. In ijs quae aperte in scriptura posit: sunt
inueniuntur illa omnia, que continent fidem moresque viuendi, spem scilicet and
charitatem. Vincent. ^yrinens. lib. contra Haeres. cap. 2. Cum sit perfectus
scripturarum canon, sibique ad omnia satis, superque sufficiat, quid opus est,
vt ei ecclesiasticae intelligentiae ^ungatur authoritas? In qua obseruandu^
est, quod perinde sunt ea, quae ex scripturis colliguntur (perspicua
authoritate and necessaria, vt loquitur Augustinus) atque ea quae scribuntur.
contained a direction for all our actions: by which we shall plainly see
with Noah, when we are called unto sacrifice. Secondly, we ought to place
the worship of God Haggi. 1.24. Psalm. 132.4.5. Mat. 6.33.
in the forefront of our affairs, and to prefer the things of God before our
own. Thirdly, the building of this altar Exodus 20.24 25
teaches, that God delights not 1. Sam. 16.7. Isai. 66.1.2. Ambros. in Luc.
lib. 9. Non obsequiorum speciem sed puritatem quaerit affectus. La^tant. lib.
6. cap. 8. Nihil aliud ab homine desiderat quam solam innocentiam. Ergo non
Hierosolymis fuisse, sed Hieros^lymis been vixisse laudandum est. Hieron.
epist. ad Paulin.
in the outward pomp or show of worship, but requires Exodus 20.^4.25. 1. Cor.
14.40.
decency according to the rule of godliness. Fourthlie, in the difference of
beasts for sacrifice. Although men live together in common as in the Arc, and
every one Prou. 16.2.25.
in his own way is a worshipper of God, yet the Lord is rightly served of none
but Psalm. 26.1.12. and 66.18. Isai. 66.2. Ioh. 4.23.
those, who are clean in heart, which worship the Lord in spirit and truth. We
ought therefore with Noah in matters of Sacrifice, to separate the precious
Ierem. 15.19.
from the vile; and those who by enormious sins do show uncleanness, ought to
be restrained Mat. 18.17. 1. Cor. 5.5 Notwithstanding, the Lord has declared,
John. 13.10. that of those which receive the Sacrament, in one congregation,
the uncleanness of some receivers does not defile those which religiously
communicate with them. Likewise also August. cont. Lit. Petiliani. libr. 2.
cap. 22.
from the supper of the Lord. Fiftlie, albeit the worship of God be perpetual
unto the Church, yet Ezech. 20.24.25. Heb. 10 9.26. Chrysostom. Hom. in Matthew.
1. Postquam omnis etc.
the ceremonies of worship, are not perpetual. The Patriarch does offer (...),
micoi humicol: and thus the Rabbis do interpret it, and reason persuades,
seeing of every clean beast there were seven preserved: yet some would
persuade that Noe offered no more then were after allowed by Moses law, albeit
the words of Scripture do so plainly show the contrary.
of every clean beast, and also foul: but the Jews might sacrifice, but
Leuit. 1.2.3.10.
oxen, sheep, or goats, neither of the fowls, but doves Leuit. 1.14. Except
Sparrowes which were offered for leapers.
or pigeons, notwithstanding there were many Leuit. 11.3. Deuteronomy. 14 4.
other beasts accounted clean, and of fowls, more kinds that were for use
then were forbidden: even so also when Galath 4.4.
the fulness of time was come, in steed Matthew. 26.26.
of the Passover and of Sacrifice, the Lord himself ordained the Sacrament or
ceremony of eating the body and blood of Jesus Christ.

Question 7. verse 21. What means this? The Lord said in his heart, I will
henceforth curse the earth no more for man's sake, for the imaginations, etc.
HErein does manifestly appear, how largely the Lord rewards the works of
faithful men, which are grounded in obedience unto the word of God. First, he
receives them, 2. Cor. 2.15. Philip. 4 18. Hieron. in Philip. c. 4. Odor
suauitatis non in re oblata, sed in mentis deuotione consistit, sicut
sacrificium Noae Deus describitur odoratus, cum ipse dicat nec carnibus se nec
animalium sanguine delectari.
and they are of a pleasant savor unto him: Secondly, he crowns them with
reward Matthew. 10.41.42. and 25.34.
and blessing, as in this example he does to Noah; I will henceforth curse the
ground no more for man. But least any man should think As the Apostle does
both object and answer, Romans 4.12. etc.
this blessing came of debt, and not of favor, that it was Council. Trident.
sess. 6 can. 32. Si quis dixerit, etc. If any man say, that the good works of
a man justified, be so the gifts of God, that they be not also the good merits
of him that is justified, etc. let him be accursed. Examine this definitive
doctrine by the Scripture. Tit. 3 4.5. Luc. 17.10. Isai. 64.6. and by the
consent of the Fathers of the church.
the wages or merit of man's righteousness, rather then reward which proceeded
of the only mercy of the Lord; the Lord adds this reason unto the same:
because man's heart is only evil: and not because of the sacrifice of Noah. The
pleasant savor therefore 1. Sam. 15.22. Galat. 5.6. 1. Tim 1.5. Joseph. Antiq.
libr. 1. cap. 4. Deus iustitia viri delectatus. Cyprian. ad Quirinum. lib. 3.
Fidem in totum prodesse, and tantum nos posse quantum credimus, and tantum
acceptos Deo probat. Genesis 15.6. Isai. 7.9.
that the Lord delighted in, was the obedience and faith of Noah, not the Sicut
docet Perer. Tom. 2. in Genesis lib. 13. alijque Papistae.
simple work of sacrifice: the desert or merit whereby it was accepted,
Origin. in Leuit. H m. 4 c. 6. Quicunque tetigerit carne sacrificij sanctus
erit. Igitur sacrificiu^ pro quo haec omnia sacrificia in typo and figura
praecesserant, vnum and perfectum immolatus est Christus. Huius sacrificij
carnem, si quis tetigerit (id est amplectitur fide, John. 6.35.) co^tinuo
sanctificatur, si immundus est mundatur, si in plaga est sanatur. Aug. in
Manuel cap. 22. Tota spes mea est in morte domini mei, mors eius meritum meu^,
refugium meum, salus, vita and resurrectio mea: meritum meum miseratio Domini.
Et Aquin. Comment. in Genesis c. 8. Odoratus aperte innuit se ista promittere non
propter meritum Noae, sed propter meritum Christi, in fide and sacrificio Noae
sacramentaliter contentum.
was the death and sacrifice of Christ as yet Heb. 13.8. Revel. 13.8.
to come; which who so Quemadmodum Papista dogmate suo posse hominem operibus
demereri vitam aeternam, vt supra ex Council. Trident. and Bellarmino. Vide
Isai. 42.8. Heb. 10.10.
robs by the merit of man's works, shall Sicut and Pelagiani, August. epist.
95. Qui olim docuerunt posse hominem implere iustitiam per liberum arbitrium,
cum adiutorio diuinae gratiae, quod Deus hoc dederit homini, ipsa possibilitate
natura. Quibus merito (inquit) responletur: ergo euacuatum est scandalum
crucis, ergo Christus gratis mortuus est. Istis vero Papistae haud multo melius
determinant: id est, posse hominem nulla tentatione vrgente, fine fide and
auxilio speciali, opus bonum perficere omni peccato vacuum. Albert. z. Sent.
did. 28. Aquin. in Prim. Secund. q. 109 art. 23. Bonauent. in 2. Sent. did.
28. Bellarm. Tom. 3 part. 1 contr. 1. lib. 5. cap. 4. Deinde. liberum arbitrium
cooperatur cum gratia ad conuersionem pe^catorum. Bellarmin. Tom. 3. controu.
3. part. 1. lib. 6. cap. 10.
want the fruit thereof unto salvation: For the Lord himself does teach what
is the merit of the heart of man, and Matthew. 15.19.
of the works that proceed thereof: the imagination of man's heart is evil,
even from his youth. To follow the interpretation of the text. The Lord said in
his heart. In the vulgar Latin translation it is: the Lord said unto him. The
cause of which difference seems to be, the doubtful acceptatio^ of the phrase
original; for in the Hebrew text it is, ((...) el-libo) unto (...) Iomer
el-libo.
his heart, which (his) may either be understood of the heart of Noah, or of the
Lord. To speak unto ones heart, in ye property of the Hebrew speech, is to Genesis
24.3. and 10.21.
speak favorably unto, or friendly to entreat: So that by speaking unto the
heart of Noah, is signified, he spoke lovingly and favorably to Noah: so
Joseph. lib. Antiq. ^. cap. 4. Rabb. Isaac Carus reddit gnal^libo.
diverse Jewish Doctors do expound it. But to speak unto his heart, does also
signify one 1 Samuel 27 1. Gen 17.17. Vana igitur distinctio Rabbinorum semper
de impijs dici bi-libbo, quia suo sensu and cord reguntur^ de bonis el-libbo
quod contrafit.
which speaks in his own heart, yt is, which does Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 40.
Dixit Abraham in cord suo, id est animo cogitauit. August. in Psalm. 14. Dixit
insipiens non est Deus. Dixit in cord, quia hoc nemo audet dicere, etiamsi
ansus fuerit cogitare.
conceive or purpose in his heart: Which when the scripture speaks of god, it
means not only his purpose, but the Pro reuelatione voluntatis.
manifestation of the same. So that it is as if it had been said: the Lord now
opens the purpose of his heart to Noah, that he would no more curse the
ground for man's sake. Wherein is gathered two points of doctrine: first, that
the Lord Tertul. in Marcion. lib. 3.
having decreed from everlasting the preservation of the earth, from the flood
of Noah, until the full consummation of the world; made known Aquin. in Genesis
8. Odoratus, aperte innuit se ista promittere.
the same his pleasure unto Noah immediately after his sacrifice. Secondly,
that the promise was more large to Noah, then the history of the chapter
following does contain. For therein is expressed a promise of no farther
deliverance Genesis 9.11.
but from waters, for which cause the rainebow was given for a seal unto the
covenant, which the Lord does chiefly handle, as being the chiefest danger
and fear of Noah; but withal, as appeased with Noah thorough Heb. 10.10.
the pacification of Jesus Christ, he adds promise and security from all
universal punishments, and ye succession of course, in the nature of things
for ever. I will from henceforth (says God) curse the ground no more for man's
sake. In the Hebrew it is: I will not add to curse the ground: the same being
doubled in the text, as Heb. 6.17. Genesis 22.16.17.
it were for more certain confirmation, and declared to be decreed and
pronounced by the Lord, Rabb. Salom. in Commentar.
is taken to be the form of the oath Isai. 54.9.
which the Lord had sworn concerning the waters of Noah, that they return not.
Neither will I add to smite all things living. An amplification and exposition
of the promise: wherein is taught, that the cursing of the earth, is the smiting
of the earth, and the creatures that are therein. Again says the Lord, I will
no more curse the earth, that is, all things living therein, as I have done,
that is, as I have now destroyed them together by the floude. Wherein we may
perceive, that there is no breach of promise, when the Lord for the wickedness
of men, does smite some special part thereof, with Genesis 19.24.
fire, or Genesis 14 3. Hieron. tradit. in Genesis Vallis autem Salinarum, sicut in
hoc eode^ libro scribitur, in qua fuerunt ante putei bituminis, post Dei ira^
and sulphuris pluuiam in mare mortuu^ versa est, quod a Graecis (...), id est,
stagnum bituminis appellatio.
water, or Psalm. 107.34.
barrennes, or Ezech. 36.13.14.
makes it to devour the inhabitants thereof. It seems wonderful, which the
Lord here promises, that he will destroy the earth no more for man's cause, in
respect of the reason which is given; because (he says) man's heart is only
evil from his youth: for Genesis 6 5.6.7.
this was the very reason for which before he says, I will destroy man from
the earth, from man to beast, to the creeping thing, and to the soul of
heaven, for I repent that I have made them: and therefore the Lord repented,
because the imaginations of man's heart was only evil, and the earth was
filled with cruelty. Wherefore we are herein to mark a worthy point of
doctrine, explaned and amplified in other places of the Esai. 28.22.23 24.
Scripture: namely, that the Lord in governing the world, and every Matthew.
10.29. Act. 17.28. Coloss. 1.17. August. de ciuit. Dei, lib. 14. cap. 26.
Omnipotenti Deo summo, ac sum bono creatori omnium naturarum, voluntatum
aute^ bonarum adiutori ac remuneratori, malarum autem relictori and da^natori,
vtramque ordinatori non defuit vtique consilium, etc. Fulgent. lib. 1. ad
Monim. cap. 26. Deus itaque licet auctor non sit malarum cogi^ationum,
ordinator tamen est malarum voluntatum: and de malo opere cuiuslibet mali non
desi^it ipse bonum operari.
creature and work thereof, follows not the Isai. 55.8.9.
ways and rules of men, in administering mercy and justice unto his creatures;
but works all things, Ephesians. 1.5.11.
after the counsel of his will: which is the Isai. 46.9.10. Job 34.18.
August. i^ Psalm. 35. Voluntas Dei est aliquando, vt sanus sis, aliquando vt
agrotes: si quando sanus es d^l^is est voluntas Dei, and quando aegrotas amara
est, non recto cord es: quia non vis voluntatem tuam dirigere ad voluntatem
Dei, sed Dei vis curuare ad tuam. Illa resta est, sed tu es curuus. Voluntas
tua corrigenda est ad illam, non illa curuanda est ad te. and rectum habebis
cor.
true and perfect rule of mercy and of justice. So that albeit the wicked
cannot discern the righteous ways of God, and therefore Psalm. 14 1. and 53.1.
do say in their heart, there is no God, or that he has Ezech 8.12. Ovid.
Non vacat exig^^^ re^ ut a ^esse ^^ui. (...) est d^ Deo, pe^udis non hominis,
imo diaboli incarnati.
forsaken the earth, because unto every one he gives not, Eccles. 8.11.
according to their works presently before their eyes: yet the Lord being
infinitely more wise, then man's conceit, finds cause to spare, when they see
cause to punish; and likewise to punish, Like as Titus the Emperor, looking up
toward heaven, complained that his life was taken from him undeserving it: for
he knew not (he said) of any sin that ever he committed, but only one.
Sueton. in vita Tit. cap. 10.
when they think in justice he ought to pardon; and both in sparing and
punishing, to observe the rules of perfect justice. As in this example is
manifest to be seen. The reason is grounded in the mercy and justice of the
Lord. In respect of his mercy, thus stands the condition of the world. The
heart of man is evil, even from his youth: If therefore the Lord should deal
with men after the deserts of men, and after the wickedness of their heart,
there should continual floods be raised to destroy the race of man, not only
every year, but every moment. Albeit therefore (says the Lord) the heart of
man is only evil, and they will continually provoke my justice, by their
sins, yet I will in mercy and compassion spare the punishment, that my Romans
2.4.
mercy and long suffering may lead them to repentance, and that the Isai.
48.9. Matthew. 24.22.
Church may be gathered, and the number of the faithful may be fulfilled.
Likewise in the justice of the Lord, the reason is excellent. The cause for
which the Lord was moved to destroy the world in the days of Noah, was Genesis
6.5.13.
the wickedness of their hearts and works, as the Scripture says. The cause why
he did destroy them, was for 1. Cor. 10.11. 2. Pet. 2.5.6. Hieron. in Ierem.
cap 3 Aliorum tormenta aliorum sunt remedia. Cumque punitur homicida, recipit
quidem ipse quod fecit, sed alij deterrentur a scelere.
example sake to those that afterward should live ungodly: for which cause
also the Lord overthrew Genesis 19.
Sodom with fire, Jerusalem with Ierem. 38.9. and 39.6 Whose first and second
overthrow was so much the more grievous, by how much before they abounded in
blessings, Amos 3.2. For as they had received above other nations, Psalm.
147.20. so for contempt and abuse of those benefits they received more
punishments then other nations, Lament. 1.12. Ezec 5.9.10. etc.
sword and famine, that they might be as monuments in the Scriptures, Iere.
26.6. Ezec. 5.15 Tria hac vindicta Dei celeberrima exempla and toto terrarum
orbi notissima.
and examples of the wrath of God against the wicked. Those that will not by
these examples be admonished, it is not meet (although in the sight of the
godly, he Zephan. 3.5.
brings his judgments every day to light) that they should have farther
warning, save in their own calamity. For this cause the Lord denies, albeit
the heart of man be only evil even from his youth, that he will destroy the
world any more, for example sake: as likewise our Savior for the former cause
denounces, that after the destruction of Jerusalem should no such example be
found Luc. 21.20.23.24. Which miseries foretold by our Savior Christ, were
abunda^tly fulfilled: as witnesses Josephus de bello Iudaic. lib. 7. cap. 16.
In time of the siege of Jerusalem there died in the city by famine, sword and
pestilence 1100000. There were taken captives 97. thousand. A noble woman in
the famine eat her own son, lib. 6. cap. 11. and 7. cap. 8. Likewise Eusebius.
in his Ecclesiastical history, lib. 3 cap. 5.6. Lastly, when as the City was
so wasted and made even with ye ground, that there was nothing left standing
but certain towers, by which it might appear to posterity how great and well
fortified the city had bin ( Joseph. of the wars o^ the Jews, lib. 7. c.
18.) yet were the Jews forbidden to come within the ruins of the city, and
as many Jews as entered were put to death, Justin. Mart. Apolog. 2.
of the wrath of God; but Mat. 24.29. Mark. 13.24. Luc. 21.25.
that the next and immediate so apparent manifestation of his justice, should
be in the consummation of the world. Hereby it has come to pass, that the
world having now continued the space of fifteen hundredth and threescore years
The fortieth year after they had crucified Christ, Joseph. lib. 3. cap. 7.
from the last example, and having forgotten the severity of God, by Romans 2.4.
the continuance of his patience, as not regarding the remembrance thereof, by
the Matthew. 24. etc. 2. Pet. 3.4.
testimony of the Scripture; now is frosen Zephan. 1.12.
in the dregs of sin, and the harvest of men's wickedness Revel. 14.15.
is ripe to judgment. Observe also: First, the secrets and will of God 1. Sam.
3.21. Isai. 8.20. 2. Tim. 3.16.
are revealed in his word, and the same is to be unto us, as Galat. 3.24. Psalm.
119.24. August. de doctr. Christ. lib. 3. cap. 80. Nam quicquid homo extra
didicerit, si noxium est hic damnatur, si vtile est hic inuenitur: and cum ibi
quisque inuenerit omnia, qua vtiliter alibi didicit, multo abundatius ibi
inueniet ea, quae nusquam alibi inuenire poterit. Hilar. lib. de Trin. 3. Been
igitur habet, si ijs qua scripta sunt (scilicet in verbo Dei) contenti simus.
a Schoolemaister and a Counselor. Secondly, men's sins Mica. 3.12. Romans 8
^0. Onkelos Paraph. Chaldai^. Propter homine^: reddit propter peccatum hominum.
are the cause of the cursing of the earth, and all calamities. Thirdly,
albeit the heart of man be evil from his youth, yet the same is Heb. 9.14.
Act. 15.9.
purged in the godly, and purified by faith, to bring forth 1 King. 18.3. and
22.2
works acceptable to God, not Job. 33.24. Esai. 64.6. Bernard. in festu^ omn.
sanct. Sermon. 1. Quid ergo de peccatis erit, quando ne ipsa quide^ per se
poterit respondere iustitia?
for the worthiness of the works, but for the worthiness Matthew. 3.17. Romans 3.25.
of the death of Christ. Fourthlie, I will not curse neither will I smite, etc.
The curse is Deuteronomy. 28.16.17.18. 1. King. 16.34.
ever accompanied with punishment, and the Psalm. 119.27. Ierem. 5.7.
punishment of the creature, is the fruit or effect of the curse of God.
Fiftlie, the Lord promises the continuance of the world; it Psalm. 119.90.91.
stands fast: so, all the promises of God 2. Cor. 1.20. Oecolampad. in Genesis
8. Magis afficimur, cum audimus aliquid esse illi fixum apud se.
are yea and Amen in Christ. Sixtlie, the certain succession of times and
seasons, have for their Act. 1.7. Isai. 38.8.
foundation, the will of God.

Question 8. verse 21. What means this which is said: the imaginations of
man's heart is evil, even from his youth?
TO stop the August. de bono perseuerantiae, lib 2. c. 2. Tria sunt quae
maxim aduersus Pelagianos Catholica defendit ecclesia. Primum, gratia^ Dei non
secundum merita nostra daeri. Secundum, in qua^tacunque iustitia, sine
quib^slibet cunque peccatis, in hoc corruptibili corpore nemine^ viuere.
Tert^um, obnoxium nasci homine^ peccato primi hominis, and vinculo damnationis
obstrictum, nisi reatus qui generatione contrabitur regeneratione soluatur.
Quae tria in hac clausulae habent fundamentum suum, and aduersi^ Papistas hodie
defenduntur, qui idem fere cum Pelagianis sentiunt; sed melle litum gladium.
mouths of heretics, and to confound the Hieron. epist. ad C^esiphon. De
Philosophorum and maxim Pythagorae and Zenonis font manarunt, qui passiones
asserunt extirpari posse de mentibus, and nullam fibram radicemque vitiorum in
homine omnino residere meditatione and assidua exercitatione virtutis. Aduersum
quos and Peripatetici and Academici noui fortissime disputant. Similiter and
Papistae, neque tamen quisquam Peripateticus, sieve Academicus, sieve Papista,
doctrinam de miseria naturae humanae, vel defendit, vel rite intelligit, vt
postea demonstrabitur.
natural pride of man; the Lord which is Psalm. 33.15.
the former of the heart, and the Ierem. 17.10.
searcher of the heart; does plainly testify the natural condition of the
heart of man: ((...), ietzer leb haada^ ragn minnegnurahu,) The imagination of
the heart of man is evil from his youth. The word (ietzer) translated the
imagination of the heart, does Aralic. (...), iatzar formare, to form or make.
Isai. 4^.10. Amos. 7.1. Vt fit vel forma scilicet acquisita cordis, vel id quod
formatur a cord.
properly signify, the form or frame of the heart; which is not only the
cogitations which are framed in the heart, but moreover the August. de ciuit.
Dei, lib. 22. cap. 22. Ab illa erroris and peruersi amoris radice, hac hominum
sunt, cum qua omnis filius Adam nascitur.
habit, quality and disposition of the soul, from whence the cogitations do
proceed, is only evil. Thus is the soul of man, which first was created in
the image and similitude of God, corrupted by sin, and defiled with
iniquity; by reason Job. 14.4. Psalm. 51.
whereof, it cannot but bring forth sinful thoughts, unrighteous words and
deeds, and those not in part but wholly evil; as a bitter fountain cannot but
send forth his bitter waters. Wherein we see the deformed condition of our
natural corruption; testified not in types and parables, but by plain and
manifest words of doctrine; not by the mouth of man, but from the very heart
of the Lord himself. But yet because this doctrine of the Lord, is not
authentical at Rome, where contrariwise they teach that this corruption, which
the Lord calls evil in the heart of man, is a guiltiness or subjection unto
punishment Scot. in Sentent. lib. 4 distinct. 14 art. 1. Iniustitia enim
actualis (scilicet Adaemi) vt inde deriuetur iniustitiae originalis, manner non
potest cessante actu; dicitur ergo quod manet in anima qua peccauit reatus
culpa, quae est quaedam obligatio ad poenam debitam illi culpa. Illa autem
obligatio, est quadam relatio realis non fundata super actum culpae, sed super
ipsam essentiam anima, etc. Quid igitur hoc cordis malum de quo Dominus hoc
loco? scilicet non iniustitia originalis, sed reatus, sieve obligatio ad poenam
debitam prima culpae. Idem Durand. sent. 2. did. 30. q. 2. 3. Quare and hoc
natural vitium, nulla poena degnum esse defendit Gulielm. epist. Parisiens.
lib. de peccat. and vitijs, cap. 7. Albertus Pigh. controu. de pecc. origin.
Negat infantes vllo vitio insito, and suo, laborare, sed duntaxat alieni
criminis culpam sustinere. De hac re Council. Trident. Sess. 5. Peccatum
originale statuit ab Adamo propagatione transfusum: sed quale sit, cum inter
Catholicos in questione versetur, opinandi nobis libertatem reliquit, Andrad.
defens. lib. 4. Certe suorum hareses tacendo approbauit.
indeed, but not a fault; or if Bellarm. Tom. 3. controu. 2 lib. 3. cap. 5. Est
tamen peccatum minimum inquit, quia minus voluntarium. Sic and reliqui
statuunt, quouis venali minus: quod est plane nullum. At nos peccauimus in Adam
inquit Apostolus, Romans 5.12. qui certe voluntary peccauit.
a guiltines and fault (as some of that Church, convicted with the manifest
light of the sacred Scriptures, are forced to acknowledge and condescend unto)
yet the same in Baptism, is perfectly, and fully taken away, not only in
the guiltines, but also Bellarm. Tom. 3. controu. 2. lib. 3. cap. 3. Originale
peccatum perfect sollitur baptism^.
in the fault thereof: therefore also they have given to that translation
supreme authority, without exception of fault or error, which thus
interprets the words of God: the cogitation of man's heart is (not evil but)
prone to evil, not from his conceptio^ or infancy, but from Vulgata Romana
authentica editio: sensus enim and cogitatio humani cordis in malum prona sini
ab ad^loscentia sua.
his middle age. Now if they are accursed from the Lord, which add Deuteronomy. 12
32. Prou. 30.6. Revel. 22.18.
unto the word of God; what account shall be made of that translation, which
has added words, and diminished the Pronus dicitur ad malum, sicut facilis ad
virtutem; non qui malus est, sed qui ad malum inclinatus, vt nihil est tam
pronum ad simultates, quam aemulatio, in foeminis praesertim, Plin. in Panegyr.
Dispositus.
meaning of the Lord, contrary to the express tenor of his words; and in
steed of being evil, has said, is prone or apt to evil? And where the Lord
says, from the Nagner, a (...) Nagnar excutere, Nehem. 5.13. Quasi excussus.
Gracis (...): Plato (...) qui recens vel ab vtero, vel co^ceptu, a pare^tibus
deriuatur. Interpretatur etiam rudis quoniam pueri tales sunt. Ioh. 11.12. At
hic alius requiritur sensus, and reliqua scriptura confirmatur, 1. Sam. 1.24.
licet Rab. Dau. Perspi^acem intelligit. Isai. 48.8.
womb, and from the very Psalm. 51.5. Genesis 6.5. Col^iamim: Omni die.
conception, the translation will afoord it, but from the time of youth, when
men begin to Isidor. Originum lib. 11. cap. 2. Ad^lescentia, quae ad gignendum
adulta, quae porrigitur a decimoquart^ anno ad vicessimum octanum. Adolescere
est crescere, dumque adolescendi summum tetigere cacumen. Lueret. lib. 11.
discern between good and evil? Wherefore unto the Church of Rome, let that
translation be of supreme and sole authority, as being made to decline unto
the doctrines of men: but unto the Church of God, let the divine Scriptures,
derived Ierem. 19.19. 2. Tim. 3.16. 2. Pet. 1.21. August. de consensu Euang.
lib. 1. cap. 35. Quicquid enim ille de suis factis and dictis nos legere
voluit, hoc scribendum illis (scilicet Prophetis and Apostolis) tamquam suis
manibus imperauit.
from the mouth of God, in their proper and natural fountain, govern the
doctrines and hearts of men, which neither bow to Hinc canon dicitur and
canonica scriptura, regula, amussis. Psalm. 19.8. and 119.4.9.
the right hand or to the left, but perfectly and plainly Psalm. 19.7. and
119.130. Bernard. in verb. sap. Iustum deduxit Dom. per via^ rectas. Via Domini
via recta, viae pulchrae, via planae, etc.
deliver the mind and counsel of the Lord, as being the Matthew. 10.20. 2.
Pet. 1.21.
immediate doctrine of the holy Ghost: and let those be Heb. 13.7.17.
regarded in the Church, which are able to draw these waters, out of their
native fountains, by the gift of knowledge 1. Cor. 12.8.10.11.
which the spirit of God has shed abroad in the hearts of men. Out of these
words of Scripture do naturally arise these points of doctrine. First, the
corruption of Romans 7.7.
concupiscence which is commonly called original sin, Contra Flac. Illyricum.
lib. de pecc. Orig. qui peccatum Originale esse de natura and essentia hominis,
esse ipsum cor. ipsumque rationem c^^ omnibus viribus praedicanit.
is not the substance of the soul, but Basil. libr. constitut. exercitatoria.
cap. 4. Peccatum vero est quidem nunquam, neque in propria substantia
deprehenditur, verum in facientibus ipsum, etc. August. libr. folil^ q. cap. 4.
Malum nihil aliud est quam priuatio boni. Sicut cacitas nihil aliud est quam
priuatio lucis.
a quality of corruption inherent in the same. For so the Scripture speaks
of the heart of man Sic Isai. 1.5.
as of the substance; of evil, as the quality thereof: like as the color is
a quality, but not the substance of the thing we see; or as an evil savor
is in a rotten carcass. Secondly, that through this corruption of evil, the
Matthew. 15.18.20. Tit. 1 15.
very substance of the soul of man is evil Job. 14.4. Ierem. 17.9.
in it self before the Lord. And thorough the same evil wherein it is
corrupted, by defect or want of the goodness of creation, and by access of
sin, through Adams first rebellion (forasmuch as the soul Anima definitur
esse primus actus Aristos. de anim libr. ^. cap. 1. Cicer. de fin libr. 5. In
omni animali appetit animus aliquid agere semper.
is always moving) it Matthew. 15.18.
brings forth thoughts, words, and deeds, which Job. 14.4. Iam 3.11.
cannot be but evil, and thereupon procures the wages of such evil, which is
both Romans 5.12.
temporal and eternal death. Thirdly, the nature of man is thus defiled, not
from the creation, but from the conception of man, or from his youth; by reason
that Adam in his transgression sinned Contra Pighium de pecc. origin. Infantes
nullo vitio suo sed duntaxat alieni criminis culpam sustinere. Et Cartharin.
Comsan. Comment in Rom 5. Eo ipso (inquit) quod sumus filij praeuaricatoris,
qui promisit se retenturum pro se and filijs suis, etc. nec retinuit, nos
peccatores and digni odio constituti. Et Bellarm. Tom. 3. Contro. 2. lib. 3. c.
5. Originale peccatum minimum esse quia minus voluntarium. Nos scilicet in
voluntate Adami non peccauimus!
not alone, and to his own only hurt Which we refer to Ezech. 18.
and damage; but Romans 5 12.14 Council. Milcuit. Can 2. Non aliter intelligendum
quod ait Apostolus; per vnum hominem peccatum intrauit in mundum and per
peccatum mors, and ita in omnes homines pertransijt, in quo omnes peccauerunt,
nisi quemadmodum Ecclesia catholica vbique diffusa semper intellexit. Augustine
de peccat. mer. and remiss. libr. 1. cap. 10. Hoc vnum in quo omnes
peccauerunt, quando omnes ille vnus homo fuerant.
we also in him against our selves, so that we receive not this corruption
Which was the error of the Pelagians, whom Augustine so zealouslie and
religiously confuteth, Epist. 89 quast. 3. etc.
by imitation, but by descent Ambros. lib. de Apolog. David. lib. 1. cap. 11.
Antequam nascimur maculamur contagio, and ante vsuram lucis originis ipsius
accipimus iniuriam, in iniquitate concipimur, etc. Vitium contraxit conditio,
infecit culpa naturam. Merito ergo David flebiliter in se deplorauit ipsa
inquinamenta naturae, quod prius inciperet in homine macula, quam vita.
or propagation, and Romans 3.23. and 11.32.
are Because all of us were that one man as Augustine says, de peccat. merit.
lib. 1. cap. 10. whereby it comes to pass, that that one man sinning, we all
lost in him to be of the image of God, or, the image of God was defiled in us
all, Romans 5.12. Origin in Leuit. Hom. 4. Cyprian. lib. de patiens. Iren. lib.
3. cap. 20.
unto our selves in Adam the authors of our misery. Fourthlie, the
imaginations of the heart, the Ietzer, figmentum, formatum: hoc est noua ipsius
animae transformatio sine potius deformatio per peccatum. Non tamen propter
seipsam quae laudabilis est, quia opus Dei est, sed propter damnabile vitium
quo vitiata est, natura humana damnatur.

August. de Nupt. and Concupiscent. libr. 1. cap. 23.

Anselm. libr. de concept. virginis, cap. 2. Totu^ quod erant. etc.


frame and constitution of the heart, Ierem. 17.9. Matthew. 12.34.35.
the heart it self is evil: not only at the middle age or youth of men, but
from the birth and Isai. 48.8. Psalm. 51.5. Ambros. Apolog. David. cap. 11.
very conception of them, and thenceforth remains sinful in all the sons
Romans 3.23. and 5.12. August. Non vnum aliquem designat hominem sed hominum
genus. Idem de praedestinat. and great. cap. 3. Vitiata enim radicis macula ita
propaginis traduce per generationum sarmenta diffusa est, vt nec infans quidem
vnius diei a culpa sit prima praeuaricationis alienus, nisi per indebitam
saluatoris gratiam fuerit liberatus.
of Adam, both before Contra Bellarm. Qui baptismo perfect tolli peccatum
originale, nec deinceps proprie peccatum dici, contendit. Probatur, Romans
7.17.24. Galat. cap. 5.17. Iam. 1.14. August de nupt. and concupiscent. lib. 1.
cap. 26. In ijs qui regenerantur in Christo, cum remissionem accipiunt omnium
prorsus peccatorum, vtique necesse est vt reatus etiam huius, licet adhuc
manentis concupiscentiae remittatur, vt in peccatum sicut dixi non imputetur.
and after Baptism; but the corruption thereof is daily weakened Romans 6.3.4.
in the faithful, and the guiltines is taken away by the 1. Cor. 1.30. Galat.
3.27.
pureness and holiness of Christ, to as many as are Ioh. 17.21. 1. Cor. 6.17.
united unto him by faith: who as they sinned Romans 5.12. Council. Mileuit. Can.
1.2.
when Adam sinned, because Romans 5.16.17. Heb. 7.10.
they were in the loins of Adam, and their substance sinned in him; so they
have in Romans 4.24.25. 1. Cor. 1.30. August. de peccator. merit. and remiss.
lib. 1. cap. 10. Legimus iustificari in Christo, qui credunt in eum, propter
occultam communicationem and inspirationem gratiae spiritus, qua quisquis haret
Domino vnus spiritus est.
Christ fulfilled the righteousness of God; his Philip. 3.9
merit, is their merit; and they Ephesians. 5.32. 1. Cor. 6.17.
are one in him, being of 1. Cor. 12.12.13.
his Spirit, of his Heb. 2 14. Iren. lib. 3. c. 20. Christum a patre vni^^^ suo
plasmati passibilem hominem factum esse.
substance, of Ephesians. 5.30.
his bone and of his flesh.

CHAP. IX.
Question 1. verse 2. What means this which the Lord says: the fear of you,
and the dread of you shall be upon every beast of the field, etc?
WE often find in Scripture, that after prayer, or sacrifice performed with
feruencie, zeal, and faith; the Lord did appear by dream or vision, answered
the petition asked, adding of his infinite liberality, a blessing more then
was required; and farther manifesting himself unto them, that were thus godly
exercised. Thus did he to Genesis 15.12. and 22.13.15.
Abraham, to Genesis 32.9.24.
Iac^b, to 1. Chron. 16.4. etc. and 17.4. etc.
Dau^d, to 1. King. 9.3. 2. King. 19.19.20. and 20.3.6.
Solomon, and other. The same is it, which here the Scripture signifies of
this sacrifice of Noah: First, how the Lord received it as a savor of rest:
Secondly, how he answers unto the Verse. 1. Psalm. 37.4. Josephus affirms
moreover, Antiq. 1. cap. 4. yt Noah prayed in sacrificing that the world might
no more be destroyed with water. The cause and reason is sufficient, but the
authority wants weight.
heart of Noah, and blesses him and his posterity with an everlasting
blessing for the same. Wherein we learn that the Jam. 5.16.17. Psalm. 18.6.
prayer of the faithful avails much with God, and that if we ask, Matthew.
7.7.8. and 21 22. Ioh. 14.13.15. August. in Psalm. 65. Ergo non deficiamus in
oratione. Ille quod concessurus est, essi differt non aufert. Securi de
pollicitatione ipsius non deficiamus orando, and hoc ex beneficio ipsius est:
cu^ videris non a te amotam deprecationem tua^, securus est^, etc.
we shall also assuredly receive: also that the Lord is Psalm. 145.18.
always near to those that call upon him, albeit h^e do not now reveal
himself but in his word, and by giving success unto us (so far Iam. 4.3. 1.
Ioh. 5.14.
as is expedient for us) according to our prayers. This blessing is first
described, by the largeness thereof: And God blessed N^ah and his sons. God
blesses Noah, and in him his faithful children, for whose 1. Cor. 3.22.
Oecumen. in 1. Cor. 3. Ipse quoque mundus and vita, propter vos sunt, and
condita sunt.
sake the world is again restored; and Cain and his wicked race is made
partaker of worldly benefits, which are Job. 5.3. etc. and 8.13.14. etc. Isai.
22.16 Psalm. 37.9. Notwithstanding that the wicked are partakers of outward
felicity, least they should complain, that means were taken from them, and
ability of doing well. Wherefore the prosperity of this life is not a
sufficient token of the favor of God, and man's obedience; because many pass
through this life's misery to life everlasting; and many from the height of
this life's felicity, go into eternal torment. For this cause, that sometime
good men want, and wicked men abound, this providence of God is blasphemed of
the wicked, and called blind Fortune: but Fortune her self is not blind (says
Cicero, lib. de amicit. understanding by fortune this administration of the
world) but men are blind whom she embraces.
properly belonging to Gods Elect. Secondly, the content or matter of this
blessing is declared, which is expounded by the Lord, until the eight verse;
and after amplified, until the eighteenth verse of this Chapter. In the former
part, the Lord lays down the means which in his providence he has
ordained, for the increase and preservation of the world, which are ordinances
and constitutions of the Lord, of men to be put in use and exercise. Whereof
the first is a law of nature, consisting of Verse. 1.
multiplication, of Verse. 2.
pre-eminence of man over all the creatures of the earth, and of Verse. 7.
man's receiving and enjoying the profit and benefit, that comes by the
creatures. The second law was ceremonial: but flesh with the life thereof,
etc. The third judicial; wherein the Lord appoints man, to be revenger of
the blood of man: and concludes with Verse. 7.
commandment to al, to endeavor to multiply their kind, and not in any wise
to be the cause of diminishing thereof. Which is as if the Lord had said: bring
forth fruit and multiply; Rabb. Moses ben Nahmah. Aben Ezra. Comment. in Genesis
neither be afraid of the beasts of the earth, or For they feared least they
might be drowned afterward by an other flood, as the Jews affirm: Joseph.
Antiq. 1. c. 4. and Chrysostom. and other.
the rain of heaven; I my self will repress their violence, and give unto
your use Verse. 2.3.16. Leuit. 26.3. Deuteronomy. 28.12.
the commodity of them. On^^ie have you regard, Verse. 5.6.7. Exodus 20.13.
Galat. 5.15.
that you do not oppress and devour one another. To this end, I command you
to abstain from blood, that Chrysostom Hom. in Genesis 27. Hoc aute^ facit ideo
vt primis illis temporibus co^primat illorum impetum, and propensione^ ad
homicidia. Author. quaest. Orthodox. inter opera Iustini. q^. 145. Vt ea quoque
re, Deus nos a ferarum immanitate and similitudine secerneret qua in laniatu
carnium sanguinem quoque eorum lambu^t quorum carnes vora^t.
the blood of men may be precious in your sight; and those that will not by
that instruction be admonished to abstain from murder; that their lives Verse.
6. Exodus 21.14
be taken from the earth. Wherein first of all, we see the cause, why the Lord
renueth this law of dominion to Noah, which Genesis 1.28.
before was given to Adam, in full possession: which was, to dissuade that What
time there were many more savage and ravenous beasts, then men to join together
against them.
little family from fear of evil, and to encourage them against supposed
dangers, which they had conceived of themselves; either because (as it is
affirmed) Rabb. Solom. in Com. and other Rabbis.
they had seen the violence of beasts, before the flood, which had been For
so the Jews do gather by these words, that the Lord, before the flood, sent
wild beasts to destroy much people, like as 2. King. 17.25.
sent by the Lord against the wicked; or for that now they were more acquainted
with their might, by their long abode with them in the Arc. But chiefly for
that the nature of man (thorough Psalm. 53.5. Prou. 28.1. Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis
9. Quemadmodum inter seruos fieri solet, vt probatiores and honestiore^
conseruis terrori sunt, qui autem deliquerunt, soci^s and seruo^timeant, sic
and de homine factum est: nam salua illius in Deum fiducia, terribilis erat and
bestijs; vbi autem deliquit, timere capit and conseru^rum extremos.
the guiltiness of sin) cannot but stand in dread and danger of the
creatures: their fear also taking strength August. in Epist. John. Tract. 8.
Quia per peccatu^ homo deseruit eum sub quo esse debuit, subditus est ijs supra
quae esse debuit.
from the smalnesse But eight persons.
of their number to make resistance: and (that which was the chiefest point)
that in their safety, consisted the sauegard of the world. Wherefore also it
is perceived, that this Sovereignty granted unto Noah, was in many respects
different from that which before was confirmed unto Adam. For that was Genesis
1.26.28.
fully given to Adam, void of sin; this was but Namely in regard of fear
and dread, but no fulness of power over them, save touching the use of them.
in part restored unto Noah and his children in corruption. That was lost of
Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 9. Vbi per inobedientiam libertatem and dignitatem
nostra^ amisimus; etia^ principatus noster mutilatus est.
Adam, by his sin; this is Iam. 3.7.
retained of the wicked. That was a Genesis 2.19. Basil. Hom. de Paradiso. Illic
etiam animantium varia spectacula: omnia enim sunt mansueta, omnia enim sunt
inter se moribus concordia.
loving subjection of the creatures void of dread: this a Fear and dread.
dreadful slavery, by compulsion. In this they fear Pet. Mart. in Genesis 9 Nec
vlla fere est bestia, quae hominis praesentiam non horreat, timent enim nostras
arts, dolos and vires, (...) capiantur: and qua rapiunt and dilacerant
homines, non fine norsto timore vinunt, i^^o statim vt deserta loca habitari
capta fuerint, mox fuga sibi co^sulunt.
the power, the snares, and sleights of man, and therefore Psalm. 104.22.
flee, or else submit themselves; in that, they did most willingly Chrysostom.
Hom. in Gen 16 Sicut nunc domestica animalia, ita and sera and immansueta tunc
suhdita erant.
submit themselves of reverence. They are now preserved by man's endeavor, and
yet by Romans 8.20.22. Iam. 3.7.
force and power are made to yield: then were they utterly without the help of
man created, notwithstanding which, they rendered unto man a greater duty.
This only have they indifferently: that as before they served Basil. Hexam.
10. Statim vt conditus es, etiam princeps conditus es.
for the beautifiyng of man's felicity, now they are for Lactant. lib. 2. cap.
11. Alia ad cibos, alia ad vestimenta, quae vero magnarum sunt virium, in
excolenda terra inuarent.
the supply of man's necessity; so that in both estates they are given of God
for the use of Tertullian. lib. de Patient. De bestijs obedientiam exprimimus,
intelligentes vsibus nostris e^^ a Domino prouisat tradit asque.
man. But it may be demanded how it is fulfilled, which the Lord here
promises that the fear of man should be on every creature of the earth, and
of the sea? we see the contrary: yea the Scriptures themselves, do seem to
affirm the contrary, as namely Prou. 30.30.
that the Lion turns not for fear of any: and many other Job. 39.13.30.
and 40.1. etc.
beasts, are said to resist the power of man, and are by Job. 41.25. August. in
Ioh. Tra^tat. 1. Propter superbiam nostram domandam, creata sunt ista qua
molesta nobis essent.
the terror of their fiercenes, ordained to abate their pride. Nothing
Conciliatio. 11.
more consonant then these places of the Scripture, being rightly understood:
For wheresoever the Scriptures testify of the strength and fiercenes of these
brutish creatures, therein do they also amplify the praise of God, who
notwithstanding their rage and cruelty, has subdued them unto the power of
men, and has made them for his promise sake, to stand in awe of creatures
weaker then themselves. And who so looks into the nature of the beasts, shall
easily by experience perceive plentiful arguments, both of their power and
vntamable nature in themselves, and of this bridle, wherewith the Lord for our
sakes, does curb their cruelty, and by his secret power makes them to give
reverence and fear to men. The Lion, which is Job. 39.1. Pro. 30.30 He is
called the tyra^t or king of beasts.
of greatest and rarest fortitude, although Nazianz. Orat. de Hominis vilitate.
The Lion at ye sight of weapons does presently set up his bristles, and makes
assault upon the hunters. Plin. libr. 8. cap. 16. Their valiantnes is chiefly
seen in dangers; being pursued with never so great a multitude of hu^tsmen and
hounds, as it were in scorn of them, he will sit down in a plain field,
where he may be seen. The Lioness when she fights for her young ones,
fixes her eyes on the ground, least she should be afraid of the Huntsmans
spear.
he dare stand and defend himself in open field, against a multitude of
pursuers; yet he Ambros. de Cain and Abel. lib. 2. cap. 1. Toruos leones
cernimus naturalem feritatem imperata mutare mansuetudine, suam rabiem
deponere, nostros mores sumere, and cum sint ipsi terribiles, discunt t^mere:
caditur canis vt pauesc^^ leo, and qui sua iniuria exasperatur, coercetur
aliena, alteriusque exemplo frangitur. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 16. Of all wild
beasts the Lion only uses clemency: he uses to spare those that do fall
down before him. When he does rage, he is rather fierce against men, then
women. He hurts not children unless he be pressed with great hunger.
does not lightly do violence to men, but being provoked: and although he
regard not the force of hunters, where he has liberty to defend himself, yet
being in woods and couerts, he cease not fleeing Pliny in the same chapter.
When he is chased into thickets or woods, he flees with all his might, as it
were avoiding the place that covers dishonor.
for fear of snares, and the Ambros. Epist. 38. Videmus leones quoque ipsos,
si vox hominis resultauerit praedam dimittere. i. We see the very Lions
(although their own voice by nature be so terrible, as that many beasts which
might easily escape their power by swiftnes, when they hear his roaring, are so
astonished, that they stand still, and have not power to flee away: Ambros.
Hexam. lib. 6. cap. 3. Basil. Hexam. 9. Aristot. Histor. Animal. lib. 9. cap.
44.) do at the sound of the voice of man forsake their pray.
voice of a child is sufficient to make him forsake his pray. The Elephant,
which is the greatest Job. 40.14. Cicer. de not. Deorum. lib. 1. Elephanto
belluarum nulla prudentior, at figura quae vastior? No beast more vast, none
more discreet.
beast on earth, for all his Job. 40.12.13.19. Aristot. hist. animal. li. 9. c.
46. Plin. lib. 8. c. 4. Vestigio hominis animaduerso, etc. Elephants when they
perceive man's footsteps, before they see the man himself, do tremble for
fear of snares.
fiercenes, does tremble at the sent of the foot of man. The Tiger also
August. de ciuit. Dei, lib. 19. cap. 12. Quae tigris non filijs suis etc.
Virgil. Aenead. lib. 4. Hyrcaniaeque admorunt vbera tigres.
more fierce then the Elephant (although much less in quantity) perceiving
man's footsteppes, although she see him not, Plin. lib. 8. cap. 4. Tigris etiam
Elephanto tr^culentior hominis viso vestigio, transfer protinus dicitur
catulos metu.
transporteth her young ones, for fear, into another cave. And no less the
creatures of the waters, (to let pass the little ones, which none of us are
ignorant, how hastily they void the sight of man) that Princely fish Basil.
Hexam. 10. Delphin quamuis sit omnium natatilium regalissimus, and omnis
aquatica creatura, vno apparente homine consternatur.
the Dolphin of the sea, the very shadow of man does terrify. And that great
Leuiathan, not so easily daunted Job. 40.22.23.
at the sight of man, is more easily Which for greedines of bait, are plunged
in the sands and taken at the ebbing of the water: whereas the Dolphin allured
with no deceit, auoideth his danger, being of all living creatures the
swiftest, whether fish or foul. Omnium animalium tam terrestrium quam
aquatilium velocissimus. Aristot. Histor. animal. lib. 9. cap. 48. Plin. lib.
9. cap. 8.
by the policy of man subdued. Herein therefore we may perceive two notable
arguments of the providence of God, in the government of his creatures
according to his word. What makes them to fear the power of man, seeing
themselves do much more Job. 29.1.13.22. and 40.10.21. etc. An argument of the
strength of the Lion is that their bones are solid, having no place for
marrow, or at leastwise, the smallest of all other creatures; and are also so
hard, that they strike fire, being switten together, like the flint. Aristot.
Histor. Animal. lib. 3. cap. 7. The Elephant is able to carry on his back a
tower of wood, with eight or ten fighting men, and to fight withal. Aristot.
Histor. Animal. lib. 6. c. 18. Elian. Histor. Animal. lib. 3. cap. 10. Plin.
lib 8. cap. 9. Lin. Decad. 3. lib. 8. Gesner. Tom. de Animal. terrestri^.
Notwithstanding, of the Indians they are used to the plough. Plin. lib. 8. c.
6. Ambros. Hexam. libr. 6. cap. 9. Vsus Elephan t^rum in bello, etc. In medijs
campis (homines de Elephanto) tanquam de muro dimicant, and velut in arce
quadam and speculo coll^cati, spectant magis bella quam subeunt: and bestiae
velut quidam mobiles montes versantur in praelijs, and nuda, iaculoru^ ferr^
prae tergoris duriti^ sunt impenetrabiles.
excel in strength? What makes them dread the policy of man, whereof they
never Plin. lib. 8. cap. 4. Pet. Mart. in Genesis 9.
had experience, but this law of fear which God has endued them withal,
whereby, V^bentas enim Dei efficiens naturae est.
as commanded from superior power, they all of them reverence the face of
man? Secondly, that they are not thoroughly subdued unto man, that Lions are
not as meek as Bulls, and Wolves as Sheep; is no less an argument of the
heavenly wisdom of the Lord in governing the world, then is the former. For
as Adam being created an inhabitant of Paradise, inioyed the same, by reason of
his rebellion, As it is thought by many, not one whole day. Iren. lib. 5 Look
cap. 3. q. 1. annot.
but a little space; and the Israelites It appears by Genesis 15.18. compared
with Judge. 3.3.
were not parakers of the fulness of the promise, in respect of the From the
river Euphrates to the river of Egypt.
largenes of the land, because Judge. 21.27. and 2.2.
thorough their own default and negligence, they did not wholly expel the old
inhabitants; and yet there Iosu. 21.45.
nothing failed in the goodness of the promise, in that which they enjoyed,
but it wholly and fully came to pass: so also these creatures, albeit
thorough the sins of men, they are fearful unto men; notwithstanding they
themselves Such as regard not men's strength, as Lions, Aristot. Histor. Animal
lib. 9. cap. 44. do fear his policy and sleights. From hence it seems to
be, that Lions are afraid of the turning of a cartwheele, of fire, and the
crowing of a Cock. Basil. Hexam. 10. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 16. And no less is
man's spettle venomous to venomous beasts. Aristot. Histor. Animal. lib 8. cap.
29. Briefly all beasts do stand in awe of the force and vigor of the reason
of man, as we our selves do of the Lord: Vigorem animi humani, etiamsi non
vident, tamen reformidant, sicut nos Deum. Ambros. epist. 38.
do no less fear man, then they are feared. Like as the Crocodile, which
most furiously pursues one that seeks to escape by flight, Plin. lib. 8.
cap. 25. Terribilis haec contra fugaces bell^a est, fugax contra insequentes.
and deuoureth whomsoever he takes in the chase: yet if one turn his face
against him in the pursuit, he dares not resist, but flees incontinent.
Wherefore these creatures, that they often assail mankind, and rebel against
him, whom they were created to obey; Basil. Hom. de Paradis^. Qu^tiescunqu^
video florem, peccati mei recordor, ob quod terra ad spinas and tribulos
ferendos damnata est. Chrysoctom. in Genesis Hom. 16. August. in epist. John.
Tractat. 8. Damascen. de Orthodox. fide. lib. 2. cap. 10. Theophil. Antioch.
lib. 2. contra religionis Christi Calumniatores: Nec tamen fera a rerum primor
di^ noxia and exitiales creatae sunt; sed hominis delictum conditionem
creaturaru^ deterior^m reddidit; and peccante homine, etiam reliqua quae in
hominis ministerium creata sunt prauaricarentur.
the only cause is sin, whereby man rebelled against his Sovereign; and
August. Tract. 1. in John. Euang. Quare autem patimur multa mala a creatura
quam fecit Deus, nisi quia offendimus Deum? de poena tua, peccatu^ tuum accusa,
non iudicem. Quia enim per peccatum homo deseruit eum sub quo esse debuit,
subditus est ijs supra quae esse debuit. Subdere igitur ei qui supra te est,
and infra te erunt illa quibus praepositus es. Ideo enim cu^ Daniel agnou^sset
supra se Deum, agnouerunt eum infra se leones. Idem in Epist. Ioh. Tract. 8.
therefore is smitten with the rod that he has made. That they still remain
in subjection of fear, is through the Numb. 23.19. 2. Cor. 1.20.
promise and special providence of God, who thereby Psalm. 104.22.
has tied them in caves, as in chains and fetters, that their fury should
not bring forth so great anoyance. That they are not wholly subject, but do
often Especially being sent of God, as 1. King. 20.36. 2. King. 2.24. and
17.25. As also among the heathen Euridice and Demetrius Phalareus were killed
with the sting of a serpent. Euripides was torn of dogs. Gell. lib. 15. c. 20.
So was Heracl^tus. Laert. lib. 9. Mil^ Crot^niates torn of Wolves; Pausan. in
Arcadicis: and Menpricius a King of England, etc.
in their rage and hunger devour men; is Caesarius. Adm^n. 6. Percutitur hac
animaduersione peccator, vt moriendo obliuiscatur sui, qui vine^^ oblitus est
Dei.
for the punishment of man, who has by sin Romans 8.29.
subdued the creature unto vanity; and to repress August. Tract. in Euangel.
John. Populum Pharaonis superbum potuit Deus domar^ de vrsis, de leonibus, de
serpentibus: muscas and ranas illis immisit, vt rebus vilissimis superbia
domaretur.
their pride and security: that seeing they will not fear the Lord, they
should fear the creatures, of whom they themselves are feared; and learn by
the danger 2. King. 2.24. Dan. 6.24. compared with Isai. 38.12.13. Psalm.
50.22.
of falling into the power of them, how Heb. 10.31.
fearful it is to fall into the hands of God. That righteous men do 1. King.
13.24. Ignatius, Eusebius. Eccles. Histor. lib. 3. cap. 32. Hieron. in Catalog.
Who when he heard the roaring of the Lions, spoke thus: I am the wheat of
Christ, I must be ground with the teeth of these beasts, and be made pure
manchet for my maker. Come fire, come cross, come beasts, come breaking of
bones, with division of my members, or beating to pieces of all my whole body;
let come what will come, even all the torments of the devil, so that I may
enjoy my love Christ, Tantum, vt Christo meo fruar. Cornel. Tacit. libr. 15.
Christians were put to death (by Nero) to make pastime: they were covered with
wild beasts skins, that they might be torn in pieces with dogs.
sometime taste this misery, it witnesses that all Ierem. 15.19. 1. Pet. 4.17.
men are attainted with sin, and none is free. That some of the godly Judge.
14.6. 1. Sam. 17.36.37. Heb. 11.33.
have vanquished their might and cruelty, approves that the Luc. 17.6. Marc.
16.18 For them that believe, death may kill, but it cannot hurt.
strength of faith is more of force to make resistance, then the For the
Roman Captain Regulus, could nor overcome the Serpent at the river Bragada,
with engines and slings of war, without the great calamity of all his army,
Liui. Decad. 2. libr. 8. in Epi^. Plin. libr. 8. cap. 14. But David being but a
shepherds boy, killed (through faith) a Lion and a Bear, and himself unhurt.
1. Sam. 18.35. Heb. 11.33.34.
engines and weapons of mighty men, and that the Lord is able to abate their
strength and courage, or give his weak servants power Judge. 14.6.
abundantly to overcome them; whereby when we see the creature, we Isai.
9.13. Matthew. 10.28. Psalm. 3.6.
should not so much regard his brutish violence, as have respect to the
providence of God, who has created them Psalm. 119.91.
to execute his will, the bounds whereof Job. 40.14. etc. Matthew. 10.29.
Gaudent. Brixian. in Exodus Tract. 8. in ordine 10. Ipsiu^ nutu, omnium, rerum
natura cursum suum vel iussa peragit vel prohibita subtrahit. August. in Psalm.
9. Cusus causa and ipse diabolus plerumque vult nocere and non potest, quia
potestas ista est sub potestate; nam si tantum posset nocere diabolus quantum
vult, aliquis iustorum non remaneret.
the breadth of a nail or hair, they cannot pass. Obser. 1. Increase of
children in Malac. 2.15. Heb. 13.4.
lawful marriage, is Psalm. 137.3. Deuteronomy. 28.4 11.
the blessing of the Lord. Secondly, it is the only goodness and steadfastness
of the promise of the Lord, 2. Cor. 1.20. For this cause it is, that tame
beasts are more fruitful and plentiful in breed; the Lioness scarcely
brings forth above one Lion, her womb being rent with the claws of her
whelpe: the Vipers come forth by gnawing their way out of their mothers bowels.
Basil. Hexam. 9. Plin. lib. 9.
that noisome beasts do not utterly destroy the seed of man, 1. King. 17
25.26. In like sort the City Amyclae in Italy was destroyed by serpents,
Seru. in Virg. Aeneid. lib. 10. Also Plin. lib 8. cap. 29. makes report of a
town in Spain, vndennined by Conies: of a town in Thessaly by Moules: of a
City in France wasted by Frogs, and the townsmen driven away: of a City in
Afric by Grasshoppers; the men of the island Gyarus were compelled to lea^e
their country, because of Mise. Beyond the Cynamolgae in Aethiope lies a
large country, whose inhabitants were destroyed by Scorpions, and the flies
Solfugae. Likewise Theophrastus testifies, that the Trerienses were driven out
by the worms Scolopendrae.
which they do attempt, whenever permission is left unto them. Thirdly, it
is against the ordinance of God, and instinct of nature, for men to Job.
31.13.15. Hieron. in Lament. 4. Cum tremor super animalia esse praecipitur,
profecto esse super homines prohibetur. Gregor. Moral. libr. 21. cap. 11.
Contra naturam superbire est, velle, ab hominibus timeri.
seek to be feared of men, rather then to be beloved; notwithstanding, the
Magistrate must with fear Romans 13.3.4. Gregor. Moral. libr. 21. cap. 11.
Plerunque a subditis etiam sancti viri timeri appetunt, sed quando ab ijsdem
sub litis Deum minime timeri deprehendunt; vt humana saltem formidine peccare
metuant, qui diuina iudicia non reformidant.
compel the wicked, which will not of love perform their duty.

Question 2. verse 4. In what sense is it said: every thing that lives and
moves shall be meat for you?
BY the tenor of this Commission given to Noah, concerning the liberty of
eating flesh, as also by that restraint which was made unto Adam, both before
and after his transgression; it seems manifest unto the judgment of Consent
of Divines is reverently to be regarded.
the most and chief interpretors, that permission of eating flesh was not
granted unto men, neither was in use among the godly before the flood.
Notwithstanding, it being no essential point of faith, forasmuch as the Romans
14.17.
kingdom of God consists not in meats and drinks, and that the Scriptures
do not expreslie affirm the same; it may be permitted unto the judgment of
the Reader without offense, so as we hold the analogy or substance of the
same; namely, that if before it were not given, the fruits of the earth did
abundantly supply the benefit thereof: if given before, seeing the same is
not expressed, it is not material unto the edification of the godly to be
known. But besides the judgment and testimony The Rabbis agree in it with
one accord, also Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 27. Theodoret. quaest. in Genesis 55.
Hieron. contra Iouin. lib. 2. Pet. Mart. in Genesis 9. Hoc primum etc. Item Lyran.
in Genesis cap. 9. Aquin. prim. secund. q. 102. did. 2. Et nemo veterum
retractauit. Caluinus tamen dubitauit, Genesis 6. Caietanus in Genesis 4. negauit.
Dominicus a Soto reprobauit. lib. Iustit. 5. quaest. 1. art. 4.
of learned writers, there may reasons and inducements be perceived, that the
same was first, at this time granted unto men. For whereas until this time
the Genesis 1.29. and 3.18.
herbs of the field continued wholesome and nourishable food, and were after
the curse appointed unto man, as in the creation they had been: now thorough
the waters of the flood, which were of the salt waters of the deep, the Rab.
Tseror Hamor. and alij non pauci.
earth became less fertile then before, and the herbs of the field more By
experiment of Heraclitus, Laert. lib. 9. who by eating raw herbs and roots,
fell into a Dropsy incurable.
unapt for sustenance. Secondly, because beasts had bin Francisc. Iun. Anal. in
Genesis cap. 9. Quae^itur number vsque ad illud tempus homo carnibus anima^tium
pa^^us no^ fuerit: respon. primum non legi: secundo, institutione cibarij
humani aliter videri: tert^o, ex hac ipsa institutione sic vno consensu a
Iudaeis confirmari: postremo, quia animantes reliqua humano generi secundum
Deum acceptam ferebant vitam; aequum fuisse, vt Deo authore, etia^ hunc fructum
homo ex animantibus perciperet propter vitam ab ipso acceptam atque conseruatam.
preserved, by the means of man; the Lord rewards this obedience of Noah,
with permission of their flesh: for it seemed of equity, (God being the
author) that man should reap this benefit of the beasts, in respect of their
life and nature preserved by him. Thirdly, in regard of Idolatry, which
Theodoret. quaest. in Genesis 55.
after the flood abounded thorough the world: for what more beastly folly,
then The citizens of Memphis worshipped a Calfe: the Mendesij a Goat: the
Leotophanti a Lion: the Lycopolitani a Wolf: the Cynopolitani a Dog: they of
Hierapolis a Dragon: the Aspe and the Crocodile were worshipped of all
Egyptians. Elias in Comment. in Nazianz. orat. 2.
to worship beasts, whereof they had liberty to eat; or The Egyptians gloried
that they worshipped living creatures, not stocks and stones. In like sort the
Persians, who honored the Sun and Fire for God, insulted over the Grecians,
that made Temples for their gods, and brake down both their Idols and their
Temples, Herodot. in Clio. The Chaldeans that worshipped the Fire, carried their
god about, to try masteries with all other gods of gold, silver, brass, wood
and stone, and their god always obtained the conquest. At last comes the
Priest of Canopus, with an earthen pot made in fashion of a man, with a great
belly and small legs, wherein were many holes finely stopped with wax; this
filled with water he set to skirmish with the Chaldees god, wherein the wax
being heated, the water runs out, and so was an earthen pitcher adored for
god of gods. Ruffin. Histor. lib. 2. cap. 26.
any other creature being more insensible then they? Fourthlie, because Romans
14.17.
the kingdom of God consists not in meat and drink, the Lord would permit
Neque dehinc cogit ad carnes edendas neque vetat: cum prius ipse pr^hibuerat
tamen.
as indifferent unto his children, that now it might be received without
offense, which Basil. Hexam. 11. Post diluuium cum Dominus insatiabiles homines
vidisset, in omnibus fruitionem permisit.
before the wicked had usurped without authority. From henceforth (says the
Lord) every thing that lives and moves shall be meat for you; and as before
I gave you the herb of the field, so now with like liberty, I permit you the
flesh of beasts. These words, unto the Jews Justin. Mart. dialog. cum Triff.
Quia vero quaedam non edimus ex oleribus, propterea tum quoque Noae ipsi
discrimen, delectumque carnis praeceptum est, sicut vos dicitis. Sed hoc minime
credendu^.
seem to implie a restraint: as the green herb have I given you al things.
For as of herbs Ambros. de Noe and area. lib. 3. c. 25. Non omnia holera ad
escae vsum habilia sunt, ita and iam non omne vinum reptile.
all are not good for meat; so every creeping thing is not good for meat.
Wherefore it is thought of them, that the Lord means thus: as I have given you
authority of the herbs of the field, so I now commit unto you the beasts of
the earth: but as the herbs are not all for the Quedam ad cibariae, quaedam
ad medicamenta. Lactant.
use of meat, so that which is good of the beasts, Of likelihood such as are
allowed for clean, Deuteronomy. 14.4. etc.
shall be your food. But this is a Jewish shift, to bind on the christians,
religion in choice of meats, as though the same The objection of the Jews in
Justin. cum Triffon.
had bin, and were perpetually to be observed: for surely every herb was
not Genesis 1.29. and 3.18.
given unto man for meat, but every herb bearing seed, and every tree
bearing fruit; and they were Basil. Hexam. 5. Ambros. Hexam. lib. 3. cap. 9.
Nullas autem arbores videmus, etc.
universally good for meat. Wherefore indeed, in these words: as the green
herb have I given you all things: the Lord seems not to restrain man's
liberty but to secure it: that he might make them secure of liberty,
Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 27. Edendi facultatem concedit, and valde securos
reddit; quasi olera herbarum dedi vobis omnia.
says Chrysostom, it is here said, as the herb of the field: wherein all
things very largely are permitted: wherein is evident, the wisdom and
bounty of the Lord. His wisdom, that has so tempered and disposed the nature
of beasts, with the quality of the air, and condition of men's bodies
throughout the world, that there is Vide Hieron. contra Iouin. lib. 2. Ran.
Textor. part 2. cap. 3 Cibi diuersorum populorum: vt supra quaest. 1. cap. 9.
scarcely any creature of the earth, which though in some countries, it be
thought unwholesome and unclean, yet unto others is in chiefest use, and agrees
most aptly unto nourishment. Again, his liberality which Psalm. 8.6. 1. Cor.
10.23. Act. 15.29. Basil. Hexam. 11. In omnibus fruitionem permisit, vt omnibus
vescerentur animalibus, velus oleribus and herbis.
gives them all indifferently for food: so that what creature soever, and
wheresoever, is or may be eaten; the same may also 1. Tim. 4.4.5.
lawfully be eaten, if it be eaten with giving thanks. And where the Lord has
given to this our land, the choice and principal creatures for common food,
when as if he withdrew them from us which we have in use, the residue Such as
are of us rejected and out of use for food, as horses, dogs, etc.
which in our fulness are contemned, (as 2. King. 6.25. and 18.27. Also Valerius
Maximus, lib. 7. cap. 6. records, that the Cassilinates besieged by Haniball,
for want of victuals were compelled to eat the leather of their bridles and of
their Targets, soaked in warm water. Josephus of the wars of the Jews, lib.
7. cap 7.8. testifies, that the famine in that city was such in the overthrow
thereof, that they forbear not to eat any manner of filthy or venomous
creature; the leather of their shoes and Targets; that men sustained hunger,
by eating hay and straw, and that a wealthy Lady of that city, killed her own
child, and roasted and ate the fruit of her own body for distress of food.
Like grievous distress of hunger is reported to have bin at the town of S.
Vincent in Spain, besieged the last year by the Turk. Our sins have
deserved the like or greater punishment. Lord for thy Christ's sake deliver us.
experience of famine teaches) would preserve our lives: those doubtless which
in receiving their daily bread, acknowledge not with thankefulnes Whereof we
may say, He that sits down to drink or to eat, forgetting to give God
thanks for his meat, and so rises up letting thanks ouerpasse, sits
down like an ox, and rises like an ass.
this sovereign bounty, do horribly offend the heavenly Majesty. Those
also that cavil at this Scripture, Because those beasts which in some
countries are counted wholesome and nourishable food, to other nations are
counted unwholesome and unclean. Hieron. contr. Iouin. 2. Saraceni Camelorum
^acte and carnibus vinunt. etc.
because in all places, all sorts of creatures are not wholesome food, bewray
their ignorance: those that refuse As the Jews until this day do, for the
ceremonies of the Law: and the Pythagorians were wont to do of their
superstition: Porphyr. lib. 4. de abstin. animal. Plutarch. de esu carn. orat.
2. and the Papists in their set fasting days, for the authority of the Church
of Rome. Whereas the authority of the Scriptures and the Church of God should
move them otherwise, Act. 10.15. Coloss. 2.16. 1. Tim. 4.3. Tertul. lib. de
cib. Iudaic. Primo credendum est, quicquid est a Deo institutum mundum esse,
and ipsa institutionis authoritate purgatum; nec culpandum, ne in authorem
culpa reuocetur.
the creatures for conscience sake, their superstition: those that acknowledge
not the whole benefit Iam. 1.7. Psalm. 145.15.16. Luther in Genesis 9.
from God, ingratitude: those that think they have not liberty to eat, or
not to Romans 14.2.14.21. 1. Cor. 8.7.
eat, simplicity. As the green herb have I given you all things: that is,
before, I gave you the whole use Genesis 1.29. and 3.1^. Tertul. lib. de cib.
Iudaic. Diuina gratiae humanis necessitatibus competentia ciborum genera
opportunis temporibus porrigente.
of the herbs of the field, which was sufficient: now I have added the flesh
of beasts, that Tertul. ibid. Postea accessit vsus carnium, diuina gratia, etc.
the former decayed, may be thus supplied; and that in the fulness of them both,
Deuteronomy. 8.10. Coloss. 3.17.
you may abound in giving thanks.

Question 3. verse 4.5. Wherefore the Scripture says: the life of the beast is
his blood: and the life of man is in his blood, and what difference there is to
be observed in the same?
FOrasmuch as thorough the permission of the Lord, Luther in Genesis 9.4. Quia
enim tam non peccatum erat occidere bonem aut ouem ad cibum, quam non peccatum
est decerpere florem aut herba^ nascentem in agro.
it was made no more sin to slay a beast for meat, then to crop an herb or
flower of the field; Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 27. Ideo vt comprin. at illorum
impetum and propensionem ad homicidium, etc.
least men should abuse this liberty, and pass this precinct, from the
slaughter of beasts to humane murder: the Lord in great wisdom does prevent
this mischief, and repress their pronenes by a double law. The first is
August. contr. Faust. lib. 32. cap. 13. De effundendo sanguine in figura
praeceptum est ipsi Noae.
ceremonial, that they should abstain from the blood of beasts: the second
judicial, that the blood of men should be by man revenged. Because (says God)
I will require your blood, etc. that is, if you shall through inhumanitie Pro.
12.10. Basil. lib. quaest. Diffuse explicat. quaest. 41.
use cruelty toward your beasts, and the same by Consuetudo peccandi tollit
sensum peccati. Augustine. Enchir. cap. 82.
custom break forth on men, I will require the blood of man, on him that
sheadeth man's blood: therefore that the Luther. in Genesis 9.4. Ideo vt ad
mansuetudine^ assuefaceret homines, iubet etiam a pecuino sanguine abstinere.
blood of men may be precious in your eyes, I command you to abstain from the
blood of beasts. Herein also is closely couched a twofold reason of this
ceremonial precept, drawn from the end or final cause thereof. One, in that
the blood of the beast is called his life. For seeing the life of every Deuteronomy.
16.22. Coloss. 1.17.
creature belongs unto God, the Lord requires them to abstain from blood,
because it is the life, that thereby they might show Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis
27. Prius benefacit, and multitudine beneficiorum naturam nostram ad se
allicit, and postea imperat facilia and leuia, etc.
their abstinence in things forbidden, and acknowledge Chrysostom. ibid. Quia
igitur sacrificia persecturi erant ex brutis, quasi doceret illos dicen^: quia
sanguis mihi segregatus est, vobis caro.
God the author of life to every creature. The second, in that he joins:
for surely I will require your life, at the hand of every beast, etc. Wherein
is employed, that the life of every Psalm. 145.9.
creature is regarded of the Lord, but the life of man is precious above the
rest; therefore man should not be Prou. 12.10. Luc 6.36.
tyrannouslie affected, or careless toward the creatures, least as the 1.
King. 16.31. August. Sermon. 4. de aduent. Dom. Nolite fratres co^temnere peccata
in quibus forte co^suetudinem iam fecistis: omne enim peccatum co^suetudine
vilescit, and fit homini quasi nullum fit; obduruit iam, dolorem perdidit and
valde putr^ est, nec est pro sano habendum, sed pro mortuo computandum. Idem
contra Fortunat. lib. Disput. 2. Bernard. lib. de confider. ad Eugen. 1. Per
consuetudinem in incuriam venitur: primum importabile videtur aliquid;
processi^ temporis, si assuesca^, iudicabis non adeo grave; paulo post and
leuesenties; paulo post etiam delectabit.
custom of sin does take away the sense of sinning; so Iam. 3.5.
the show of cruelty on beasts, should kindle their cruelty toward men. It is
inquired how the life of the beast is said to be his blood, for life is taken
for a power spiritual in every creature, Aristot. lib. 2. de anim. cap. 1.
Anima est primus actus, perfectioque corporis naturalis, potentia vitam
habentis, and talis plane vt parts ipsius sint instrumenta.
whereby it moves: but the blood is perceived to be a corporal matter, so
soon as it is derived from the body wherein it was, and remains the same in
substance, when the life is perished. Hereunto we answer; that by these words
the wisdom of Moses may be perceived to excel the wit of all Philosophers;
which proves that it was not his, but the wisdom of the Lord in him. For
which of them can tell, Eccles. 3.21.
whether the spirit of man descend upward, and the spirit of the beast descend
downward to the earth? Or who has ever taught the Plato in Timae^. Animam
humanam immortalem esse vult, sed eandem particulam deitatis, sicut and
testatur Gale^ de decret. Hippocrat. and Plat. li. 9. cap. 9. Et corporis
principium, and geometrica constare ratione, Laert. libr. 3. Potuit vero
Aristoteles eo vsque progredi, vt animam agnosceret esse causam mouentem, and
quod sit actus and forma corporis; sed quaenam sit propria illius forma
essentia, and quo pacto differat ab alijs formis, nequit docere, nisi ex
diuersis operibus and a posteriori, Argenter. in arte^ Medicin. Galen. lib. 2.
Stoici and alij omnes turpius a vero aberrauerunt. Post omnes laudatur ipse
Galenus, qui eius rei ignorantiam profitetur. libr. 7. de vsu partium. cap. 8.
and in lib. 6. Hippoc. de morb. vulg. com. 5.
true difference between the life of man and beast, which has not himself
been taught and instructed by the Scriptures? Wherefore thus much we have to
learn from Moses, 2. Pet. 1.21. Chrysostom. Hom. 2. in Genesis Obsecro igitur ita
ascultemus quasi haec non iam a Mose, sed per linguam Mosis, ab ipso omnium Deo
audiamus. August. de consensu Euangel. 1. cap. 35. Christus qui Prophetas ante
descensionem suam pramisit; and Apostolos post ascensionem suam misit: and
quicquid de suis factis aut dictis nos legere voluit, haec scribenda illis
tanquam suis manibus imperauit: ergo. etc.
that is, from the spirit of God that was in Moses, confirmed by the 1. Ioh.
5.7.
testimony of the holy Trinity, which is stronger proof Galen. de different.
^uls. libr. 2 cap. 4. In Mosi and Christi schola leges audias, nulla
constitutas demonstratione, idque vbi minime deceret. Sed nos voce Domini
probamus quod quaeritur, quae est magis fide digna, quam quaenis
demonstrationes, vel p^tius quae sola demonstratio est, Clem. Alexand. Strom.
lib. 7. Alia quidem omnia, id est humana dicta, argumentis and testibus egent:
Dei autem sermo ipse sibi testis est, quia necesse est, quicquid incorrupta
veritas loquitur, incorruptum sit testimonium veritatis, Saluian. epist.
Massiliens. de prouid. lib. 3.
then a thousand demonstrations, that the blood of the beast is the life
thereof. And although the wits of men are rather inclined to describe the life
of the creatures by the quality, then by the substance, calling it an Arist.
libr. 2. de anim. cap. 1. (...), quam vocem reddit Cicero. Tusc. quaest. 1.
Continuata motio and perennis. Item. Fernel. lib. de animae facultate cap. 1.
Est anima principium and causa functionu^ viuentis corporis. Vita vero propria
illius functio est. cap. 2. Vita tamen reuera actio nulla est (vt recte monet
Argent. in art. med. Galen lib 2.) tametsi ex actionibus deprehenduntur res
viuere. Minus multo est anima actus, nam substantia reuera est. Sed melius
sapuit Fernelius secundis cogitationibus, lib. de facult. anim. cap. 16. Est
(inquit) vita animantium facultatum actionumque omnium conseruatio.
act or action, because they are ignorant in truth of the substance of the
same; yet the Lord does not spare to call it by the substance, as only knowing
aright whereof it does consist. And what though we see the blood and not the
life? and that which we call blood, may be separated from the life? the defect
is in our Nam Hebraice sanguis in animali (...) netsach, appellatur a natsach,
roborare, quod sit fortitudo and vita animalibus, sanguis effusus, (...), dam,
ab (...), adam a rubore nominatur, licet nonnunquam ha voces inter se justice de
causis confanduntur. Sic inter (...) and (...), Graecis d^scrimen est. Aristot.
Histor. Animal lib. 3. cap. 5. Vnde Homerus (...), Dijs suis concessit. Il. ^.
Latini humorem eum extra venas cruorem, non sanguinem appellari volunt. Cicero.
de Fin. lib. 2. Isidor. lib. 11. cap. 1.
speech and understanding, but the truth of God is not thereby shaken. For we
cannot possibly behold the blood in the creature containing life, neither is
the same which we can behold, the same which is the creatures life. For as
quenched coals, are coals which have no fire; and chalk is the whitenes of a
wall, the substance whereof remains, notwithstanding lamb-blacke may be spread
thereon: so the blood which by slaughter or emission is derived from a beast,
loses his proper form or quality of life, so soon as it comes forth. And
as quenched coals, continue coals, but are improperly called fire: so that red
humor which we behold, is unfitly called blood, save in that meaning, wherein
we call a hand or foot cut from the body, not as it is, but as it was, a member
of the same. Blood therefore is the life of beasts, the form or property
whereof is Sanguis igitur consistit ex materia and forma. Materia cruor est,
forma vita sieve spiritus vitalis in brutis animantibus.
life, which is the effect of the voice of God, Genesis 1.21.24. (...), caiah.
Nephesh. Anima vitae, and nephesh dicitur de brutorum animabu^.
let the waters, and let the earth bring forth the soul of life: the matter is
the same which our eye beholds, which being separated from the body, is
severed also from the form of life. But the life of man, is not his blood, but
Obserua. contr. Manich^os.
in his blood, as says the Scripture. Wherein is perceived the perfect
difference between the life of man and beast. The life of the beast has no
other form, Sic vt sanguis vera sit illorum anima non autem cruor.
but that which is united with the blood, as the life of trees is the sap of
trees, which Genesis 1.12. Psalm. 104.16. Basil. Hexam. Hom. 5. Vox enim tunc and
primum illud praeceptum velut lex quaeda^ naturae facta est, etc.
the Lord by his voice has made their life: but man consists of Genesis 2.7.
breath of life, which is not made one with the blood of man, but has his
seat or room Sanguis igitur est seeds animae and quasi vehiculum ipsius.
Arist. de Genesis anim. li. 3.
therein; and therefore although the blood be putrified, yet that Stulti igitur
Empedocles and Critias, qui sanguine^ hominis esse animam voluerunt, nec minus
Cleanthes, Chrysippus, Zeno, qui animam ex sanguine nutritum affirmarunt. Gal.
de decret. Hippocrat. and Plat. libr. 2. cap. 8.
breath remains perfect, although it be removed from the blood. Hereby
Philosophers are taught, truly to discern Vt sit pecudum anima qualitatina,
hominum vero substantiua. Aquin.
between the life of creatures. Hereby also Atheists are condemned, which
Quemadmodu^ multi cum partem corporis aut terrenum quiddam statuunt. vid. Cic.
Tusc. 1. and Dicaearchus, qui nihil esse animam diceba^.
deny the immortality of the soul of man, or that are offended that the
scripture teaches, that the blood of beasts is the life of them. And withal,
are the Manichees confounded, which Epiphan. Haeres. 66. Augustine. Haeres. 46.
Damascen, de Haeres. 1.
under this pretense, blaspheme this Scripture, as if Moses had called the life
of men their blood, as he calls the life of beasts their blood: whereon
they deceitfullie infer the Apostles saying, that 1. Cor. 15.20.
flesh and blood shall not inherit the kingdom of God; trecherouslie
concluding thereupon, that either this Scripture was not indicted by the author
of the new testament, that is the holy ghost; or else that men are wholly
excluded from the kingdom. Unto whom Co^ciliatio. 12
S. Augustine that learned Father, answers thus: You August. contra aduersar.
Legis and Prophet. lib. 2. cap. 6. Sed Moses, inquit, omnem spem futurae
resucrectionis in hominibus extinxit.
shame not to teach (says he) that Moses has extinguished the hope of the
resurrection, for that (as you say) he pronounces the soul of man to be but
mortal, when he says the same was blood: for the Apostle testifies, that
flesh and blood shall not inherit the kingdom of God. Thus you, Aug. lib.
cont. Adimantum cap. 12. Nusquam enim hoc inuenient in illa scriptura, quam
lacerare miseri quanquam diu conantur, nullo modo permittuntur intelligere.
Item, Clausa sibi esse regna coelorum arbitrantur, si pecorum animis clausa
esse consentiant, etc. Neque enim dubitauit Dominus dicere, hoc est corpus
meum, cum signum daret corporis sui.
says he, presume to rent the Scripture, and therefore are not permitted to
understand the Scripture. But you shall never find in all the Scripture, where
the life of man is called his blood; but the life of beasts is said to be their
blood. And will you think your selves excluded, because beasts are excluded
from the kingdom? But suppose ye, that the life of man were called his blood:
It is not rare in Scripture, to call the sign by the name of the matter
signified: for the Lord himself doubted not to say, this is my body, when he
Mat. 26.26.
gave (unto them) the sign of his body. And even so it is 1. Cor. 10.6.
August. contr. aduersar. legis. lib. 2. cap. 6.
said: the rock was Christ, because by it, he was signified. Nevertheless,
the Apostle by the name of flesh and blood, understands either the corruption
of flesh and blood, or men given to the delights 1. Cor. 6.9. Ephesians. 5.5. Iren.
lib. 5. Origin. Dialog. in Marcion. 3. cap. 3. Epiphan. Haeres. 66. Reuera non
potest scortatio regnum coelorum possidere, neque adulterium, neque petulantia,
neque simulachrorum cultus, hoc est caro and sanguis.
of flesh and blood, which shall not inherit Ephesians. 5.5. Galat. 5 21.
the kingdom of God. Obser. 1. verse 4. We must abstain from Job. 31.1.
Matthew. 5.29.
occasions of evil, least by Ephesians. 4.7.
giving liberty to the tempter we be seduced. Secondly, those that Ierem.
13.23. 1. Tim. 4.1 Act. 4.16.17. Exodus 17.23. and 8.19.
continue in sin, are hardened in the same. Thirdly, the ceremony of
abstinence from blood Ioh. 4.21.23. Coloss. 2.14.17. Decreueru^^ tamen.
Apostoli a sanguine abstinendum: in qua elegisse mihi videntur, rem facilem,
and nequaquam obseruantibus ^^erosam, in qua cum Israelitis etiam gentes,
propter angularem illum lapidem, duos parietes in se condentem, aliquid
communiter obseruarent. August. contra Faust lib. 32. cap. 13. Quod tamen
institutum, diu obseruatum fuisse constat ex Tertul. Apolog. cap. 9. de suis
temporibus: and Betan. Presb. Raban. in Penitentiario and alijs.
is taken away by Christ, but Mich. 6.8. Ierem. 7.5.6. Isai. 58.6.
humanity and mercy thereby signified, is perpetually to be observed.

Question 4. verse. 6. What means this which the Lord says: whosoever
sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed?
BEcause the Lord would have mankind on every side defensed from cruelty and
shedding blood, he in heavenly wisdom ordeineth a double law concerning it:
the first being of abstinence from blood, that he might thereby Calvin. in
Genesis 9.4. Voluit autem Dominus, haec prohibitione in abstinentia pecuini
sanguinis, homines ad mansuetudine^ assuefacere; ne si in victu fero and
effraeni nimium audaces essent, non parcerent etiam tandem humano sanguini.
provoke them to the detestation of offending against humane blood, and might
add unto them a reverend regard of the life of man: the second, of judicial
revenge; that if any shall neglect the former statute, and offend against the
meaning of the same, he should endure the punishment that was due to his
desert: by man shall his blood be shed. And because the nature of man is
Hieron. in Micae. 7. Propemodum natural est, vt nurus socrum, and socrus
oderit nurum. Basil. Sermon. 5. exercit. Si Deus charitas est, omnino necesse
est, vt odium sit diabolus: quaemadmodum igitur qui charitatem habet, demn
habet; sic qui odium habet, nutrit in scipso diabolum.
so fiercely carried unto hatred, John. 8.44. humana crudelitas vincit
belluinam. vid. August. de ciuit. Dei, lib. 3. cap. 28. Valor. Max. lib. 9.
cap. 2. P^lidor. Virgil. invent. lib. 5. cap. 8. De truc^lentia Aegyptiorum,
Scytharum, Sarmatum, Nomadum, Graecorum, Massi^iensium, Scotorum, ante
propagatum Euangelium.
cruelty, Luc. 9.54. Hieron. epist. ad Algas. quast. 5.
and revenge of private injuries; it was most needful that the same their
mischief, should be repressed with extremity of pain; then which there is
not Solon. Rempub. contineri dicebat, praemio and poena. Cic. ad M. Brut.
epist. 15. Id ipsum Democritus docuisse fertur. Patric. de repub. li. 1. T. 6.
a greater bond for the maintenance of laws and societies of men. In this
place, are three points chiefly to be considered; the persons to be punished:
the persons by whom: and the reasons why so great a pain is ordained for
transgressors. Concerning the first point, the Lord gives sentence: whether
Exodus 21.28.
it be beast or man, that sheadeth the blood of man, he shall not live. We may
thereby understand, that the Lord does wonderouslie detest the fact of murder,
which has ordained that of beasts, albeit August. de Adulterin. Coniug. ad
Pollent. libr. 1. cap. 16. Peccare enim, proprie non est nisi eius, qui vtitur
rationali voluntatis arbitrio, quod in omnibus mortalibus animantibus, non nisi
homini est diuinitus attributum.
they are incapable of sin, yet Calvin. in Genesis 9. Non animantium respectis,
sed quiae pretiosam habet vitam hominum,

Pet. Mart. in Ge^. 9. Ad sceleris detestationem, vt magis a caedibus homines
deterreantur.


for the detestation of sin, and the terror of murderers; he should be
slain, that sleaeth man. But the words seem difficult, how the Lord will
require the blood of man at the hand of beasts. There are which Origin in Psalm.
36.14. Hom. 3. Cum vero contraria potestas fera and nequam perurget hominem,
etc. Rupertus and alij.
understand by beasts, infernal spirits, which provoke men unto murder. Other,
Rabbini autem aliter: Si sera immissa in aliquem fit ab alio, requiram per
manum bestiae, poenas de homicida sumens. Hunc in modum locum detorquent, quia
a Tito and suis successoribus Caesaribus multi luda^rum hestijs damnabantur.
Sueton, in vitae Titi. Ioseph^s de bello Iudaic. lib. 7. cap. 28.
by requiring of blood, do understand the resurrection of the dead: as if the
Lord had said, albeit the bodies of men; are sometime torn and devoured of
beasts, yet I will restore their bodies again and raise them up. Although
both these are true, yet are they from the purpose: for the Lord himself does
interpret this law in other sense: I will require it at every beast, that is,
Exodus 21.28. Which law was no less necessary unto Noah in that scarcity of
men, then unto Moses: nor any whit less needful unto us in respect both of
natural order, and repressing of the bloody minds of murderers, by example
of punishment.
that beast shall be slain. But does God inflict upon every special beast,
that has slain a man, particular punishment? Some Rambam. in Genesis 10.5. Si
^estia hominem occiderit efficiam vt altera bestia illam occidat. Plin. lib. 8.
affirms, that the earth never receives within her intrals, that Serpent that
has stung a man. Bees, Waspes, etc. breed themselves more hurt, then they can
give to man by stinging. Idem lib. 11. The best remedy against the stinging of
a Scorpion is, to rub him to pieces, and apply him to the place Dioscor.
lib. 6. c. 45.
are so bold to affirm ye same. Some otherwise think, that the For that men
to men, are more cruel then the beasts.
Lord has omitted it for the sins of men. But both these are ignorant of the
purpose of the Lord: which is to Exo. 21.28.29. etc.
arm mankind with authority against hurtful beasts, as afterward he armeth
the Magistrate with authority against a murderer. Wherefore it is not
needful for us to search, whether every beast which has bin the death of man,
be by the virtue of this judgment destroyed by the Lord; but rather to
remember, that he has ordained man to be his executioner upon the beast: who
therefore ought to slay Which law doubtless is in force for ever,
proportionally to be observed: the reason is the same: least manslaughter
being unrevenged upon the beast, should imbolden men in committing murder. Our
common law also adiudgeth him dead, and permits him unto the chief Lord of
the fee. By what right he may be preserved we shall consider further in his
place.
every beast, that has destroyed the life of man. And of those creatures
whose natures are bent to cruelty and hurt, as Lions, Bears, Tigers, Serpents
and venomous beasts, he requires of them the life of man (as well August.
quaest. in Exodus 31. Ad iustitiam pertinet, vt animal hominibus no^ium
perimatur, and quod de tau^o positum est, a part totum intelligendum est,
quicquid de pecoribus vsui humano subditum, infestum est hominibus. De feris
igitur multo maxim.
which have offended, as which would offend) by making the Exodus 4.3. Amos
5.19. Elia^. Var. Histor. lib. 13. cap. 34. Dionysius having commanded a Lion
to be killed, called him back again three times, and three times changed his
mind; at the last bad kill him: Alas lion (said he, overcome with fear) thou
may live no longer: (...), etc.
nature of man abhor them and seek to root them out. It may also be
demanded, how this is verified, which here the Lord pronounces, that he will
require the blood of man, of every one, that unjustly sheddeth it. For so
often do Sylla the Roman died in peace, (a most bloody tyrant) but was eaten
up of life: Plutarch in the life of Sylla. So Dionysius the first, Ochus the
Persian, Amasis the Egyptian, having reigned forty years in great
prosperity. Alexander, by whom the world was vexed with most cruel wars,
died (says Plutarch) of an ordinary fever: although other say, of poison.
tyrants and murderers escape unpunished, that the wicked thereby imbolden
themselves Job. 21.14.15. Psalm. 73.6.
in mischief, as Psalm. 10.4.^. Ezech. 8.12.
though the Lord had forsaken the earth. Moreover, some one commits so many
murders, that his blood is not sufcient Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 27. Quid ergo
fi innumeras quis paetrauerit caedes, and tantum sanguinis effundat? quo modo
dignam dabit poenam sanguinis effusi?

Alexander slew of the Thebans 90000 Eliau. Var. Histor. libr. 14. cap. 7. In
his first battle against Darius 150000. Quint. Curt. libr. 3. beside those
which were slain in his ten years wars, undertaken not for justice or
necessity, but of ambition and worldly glory. In the wars of Julius Caesar
were consumed 1192000. as Pliny avouches lib. 2. beside his civil wars
100000. Dioclesian flewe 70000. Christians within one month. Oros. in Chron.


to give for every one a drop. We must herein again consider Se^sum
legislatoris, interpreti requirendum. August. Epist. 19.
the purpose and intent of the maker of the law: which was indeed to repress
the rage of murderers, from the societies of men, Exodus 21.12.
by giving authority to man to take away such monsters from the earth: yet not
Matthew. 10.28. They are not able to kill the soul.
supreme authority of punishment, but reserueth the same unto himself. For
murder deserves a greater punishment, then to have his blood shed, that
sheddeth blood; because he sins, not only against Genesis 42.21.
his brother, or No person can unjustly be done to death, without the hurt of
the Commonwealth: therefore the Roman Scipio was wont to say, he had rather
save one citizen, then kill a thousand enemies, Cicero Offic. 2.
the society of men (which Deuteronomy. 13.5.
so by punishment of like for like is satisfied) but also Numb. 16.11. Act. 9.5.
against the Lord, whose image he has destroyed, and therefore of him Genesis
18.25 Marc. 9.43.44.
deserves endless torment. Wherefore those also Numb. 35.31. 1. King. 20.42.
who of men are pretermitted, or can not of men be punished, Being in supreme
authority.
for the height of power and dignity, which before they have received; the
Lord himself Eccl. 12.14 Romans 14.11.12. etc.
has bound over to the day of his appearance. But it were ridiculous to
think, that then the blood should be shed for murder. Doubtless the Lord by
the name of blood, because it is the Which here is defined by the word of God,
to be the blood, verse. 5. Of Aristotle it is placed in the heart, lib. de part.
Animal. lib. 2 cap. 7. and 10. and lib. 3. cap 3. Of Galen. in the brain, de
placit. Philosoph. lib. 5* Columbus seems to plant it in ye liver, Anatom.
lib. 6 They all have several reasons: the liver is the fountain and author of
blood: the heart, of the vital spirits: the brain, of motion: so that the
liver is indeed the chief particular instrument of growth or vegetation: the
heart of feeling (for although the sinews by which we feel, are from the
brain; yet the spirits by which they have their feeling, are from the heart)
the head of understanding and of reason: but the seat for the substance of the
soul is in the blood, as he has testified that made them both.
seat of life, understands that Hieron. in Zoph^^. cap. 1. Quo modo Dominus
est effusurus sanguinem in talionem, etc.
(...), the life or vital faculty, whereby men are sustained, and do live; as
he that destroys the life, should lose the life, and so shall they lose
their blood or life; or that which after the judgment should be That is, they
shall be separated from God, 2. Cor. 1.9. who is the life of the soul. And it
is infinitely more grievous and miserable to have the soul separated from God,
then to have the soul removed from the body. Bernard. in Psalm. Qui habitat.
Sermon. 10.
their life; being compelled to be partakers of the second death. And as their
sins shall then exceed in greatness, so shall their punishment be fully
answering thereunto; and their Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 27. Non hoc confidera
homo, sed tal^ no^ multo post accipie^ corpus incorruptibile, quod poterit
continuam and aeternam poenam far.
bodies incorruptible, and able to endure the pain: so that they which have
committed many murders, shall then Leuit. 19.8. 2. Cor. 5.10. Gregor. Dialog.
libr. 4. ^^nes Gehennae ignis credendus est, sed non vno modo omnes cruciat
peccatores; vnusquisque enim quantum e^igit culpa, tantam illic sentiet poenam.
endure as many deadly torments. Let them therefore who are guilty of this
wickedness, though they fear not man, yet dread Hebr. 10.31. and 12.29.
the judgments of the Lord; and return to him, who Isai. 53.5.12.
for their sakes was counted among the murderers: and even those 1. Pet. 3.17.
Ezech. 18.21. Isai. 5^.7. Cyprian. lib. de caena Dom. Nec serum est quod verum:
nec irremissibile quod voluntarium. Et quaecunque necessitas cogat ad
poenitudinem, nec quantitas criminis, nec breuitas temporis, nec horae
extremitas, nec vitae inormitas (si vera contritio, si pura fuerit voluptatum
mutatio) excludit a venia.
that suffer as evil doers, if they shall unfeignedly repent, Act. 22.6.
Micah. 7.19. Luc. 23.42 Athanas. Exposit. fid. Christus ex mortuis vitam
ingressumque in paradisum confecit, Ex qua Adam crectus fuit, in quam rursus
Adam intra^it per latronem.
their cross is made to them a path way into Paradise. The second point, is
of the Romana E^itio ita legit: Quicunque effuderit humanum sanguine^ in
terram. fundetur sanguis illius: at in Hebraeo est (...) baadam in adam, i. per
hominem. On^elos interpretatur, per, vel no^ absque testimonio and sententia
iudicis. In multis vulgatis exemplaribus est, quicunque effuderit humanum
sanguinem, fundetur sanguis illius. Sed quo impulsu, instrumentum vindicta a
Deo expressum, surpressum voluerunt, non aliud occurrit, nisi quod ex ficta
Donatione Constantini, and ipsius ad Nicaenos Episcopos oratione (Ruffin. lib.
10. c. 1) Quam isti ad Romanam Curiam transtulerunt, conceditur in hunc modum:
vos inquit nobis a Deo dati estis dij, and conueni^ns non est vt homo indicet
Deos, sed ille solus de quo scriptum est: Deus stetit in Synagoga deorum, etc.
Ex hoc scilicet praetextu ab ecclesiastica Romana hierarchia excluditur
magistratus. Council. apud Palate. Vernis, sub Pipino rege Francorum and Stephan.
3. Papa. can. 18. Council. Wermac. can. 61. Council. Roman. sub Nicholaeo 2. can.
10. capitula per Adrian. ex Synod. collecta cap. 25. Decret. Gregor. 9. tit. de
iudic. Clericus de omni crimine debet coram ecclesiastico iudice conueniri, nec
vale^ consuetudo contraria. Ergo nec imperatorem adeunt. Council. Mogontin. cap.
^4.
person by whom this punishment of shedding blood is to be ministered. That
person is a man appointed thereunto by God. Not Judge. 3.9. 1. Sam. 12.11. Deuteronomy.
16.18.
every man; but a man of the Lords appointment, to take revenge of blood. As
if the Lord had said: I have ordained man, and do give unto him Exodus 7.1.
Romans 13.1.
authority from my self, to take revenge for blood. The man therefore of
chief Psalm. 72.1.2. Exodus 18.19. Nazianz. in Apolog. Reuera mihi videtur esse
ars artium, and disciplina disciplinarum, hominem regere; qui certe est inter
omnes animantes, maxim and moribus varius, and voluntate diuersus.
authority in the societies of men, is to execute this office from the Lord.
The King or Prince Prou. 8.15. August. de ciuit. Dei, lib. 5. c. 1. Prorsus
diuina prouidentia regna constituuntur humana. Quae si propterea quisquam sato
tribuit, quia ipsam Dei voluntatem vel potestatem fati nomine appellat,
sententiam teneat, linguam corrigat.
which rules in the common wealth: the Genesis 14.15.
father in his family, where no superior authority is found. From this
commandment, arises the stay Psalm. 72.4.
and state of societies and common wealths, and also the authority and Romans
13.5. (...), ex necessitate subijci. Nam regum est, adeoque omnium imperantium,
eorum quibus praesint, commodis vtilitatique soruire. Cic. ad Q. fr. epist.
lib. 1. Epis. 1.
necessity of Magistrates. The Magistrate is therefore a person ordained by
God, in the Exodus 18.19. 2. Chron. 19.6. Psalm. 82.1.6.
room and place of God, to punish the wicked according Psalm. 82.4. Crudeles
autem sunt, qui puniendi causam habent, modum non habent. Senec. de Clement. ad
Neron. libr. 1.
to their crime, which shall offer in any violence unto the life of man, and to
Romans 13.4. 1. Tim. 2.2.
maintain the good, that they may live in peace. For seeing the wicked would
not be restrained from shedding innocent blood, neither feared by threatening of
revenge in the life to come, the Lord in his wisdom found it necessary, to
arm man with power to revenge the same their cruelty with present death. The
Romans 13.1. Prou. 8.15. August. de ciuit. Dei. libr. 4. cap. 34. Deus solus est
qui regna dat terrena and bonis and malis: and ideo bonis and malis, ne eius
cultores adhuc in prouestu animi paruuli, haec ab eo munera, quasi magnum
aliquid concupiscant, Anastas. quaest. in Script. 15. Cum Deus dicat in lege,
dabo vobis principes secundum corda vostra. Hieron. 3. euidens est quod ex
principibus and regibus, alij a Deo praeficiuntur tanquam digni eo honor; alij
autem rursus cum sint indigni, Dei permissione aut voluntate praeficiuntur
populo digno eorum indignitate.
author therefore of the Magistracy He therefore that obeys not the
Magistrate, albeit a wicked Magistrate, for Gods cause, but not against God, as
Dan. 3.28. does resist the ordinance of God. What more honest excuse can be
the^ David might have found, being a King anointed, to have killed Saul? What
greater tyrant then Nero? to whom the Apostle counsels obedience, Romans 13.
What more wicked governor then Phocas, of whom it was said, he was the
meetest ruler for such a people, because a worse then he could not be found?
to whom notwithstanding, Gregory persuades homage, and the Church
acknowledges their Emperor.
is God, which has given the power thereof to man. The form thereof Romans
13.4. Numbers 31.2.
is, in the place of God to take revenge. The matter, to requite Iosu. 7.25.
Matthew. 10.28. Cyril. Alexan. epist. ad Theodos. Imperator. pro^^m. contra
Julian. Quod ver^^ sacerdotes concilietis, and eos qui debacchantur in illos
abominemini, inque maximorum hostium numero censeatis, sic enim diuinus
Propheta David, (Psalm. 139.21.) vestris celsitudinibus dignissimu^ dixerim.
outward or uncivil faults, with bodily or civil punishments. The end, Romans
13.4.
that men may live in peace, and exercise 1. Tim. 2.2. Quibus sicut and
nauigantibus, finis est salus and conseruatio societatis, Aristot. Polit. lib.
3. cap. 3.
both godliness and honesty. By reason of this authority from God, although it
be murder, for a man vnauthorised 1. King. 2.5.
to kill, and his blood is to be shed that sheddeth it: yet that man, whom the
Lord Deuteronomy. 13.8. August. in Iosu. quaest. 16. Non dimisit in ea quicquid
spirans: propter hoc nullo modo putandae est ista crudelitas, quia Deus hoc
iusserat. Qui autem existimat hic Deum ipsum fuisse crudelem, tam perverse de
operibus Dei, quam de peccatis hominum iudicant, nescientes quo quisque dignus
fit, and magnum putantes malum, cum casura deijciantur, mortalesque moriantur.
has permitted to revenge, is bound by commandment, to shed the blood of him
that unjustly sheddeth blood; and is so free from sin thereby, that Romans
13.4.
he executes the vengeance of the Lord, and sins no less then 1. Sam.
22.23. De Clodio Caesare dicebatur: non faciendo nocens, sed patiendo fuit.
Auson de vita Caesar, tetrastie.
murder, which suffers a murderer to live. It is therefore the Magistrate,
that has from Romans 13.1.
God the power of revenge, and those whom the Magistrate permits 1. Pet.
2.13.14.
thereunto: and to them has the Lord permitted this authority; who from Deuteronomy.
31.25. Whether of wisdom or of power: according to the word of God, and the
common laws of Nations.
him, are endued with gifts of dignity: and whom the Lord has placed in his
stead to execute his judgments, As by succession, election, or lawful
victory, 2. Sam. 7.12. and 2.4. and 8.1.2.
by manifest token of his pleasure, the same 2. Sam. 16.18.
must we esteem as the Magistrate of God, and Romans 13.5.7. 1. Pet. 2.13.17.
reverence for conscience sake with honor, love, and due obedience. Now because
the Magistrate is put Exodus 18.19. 2. Chron. 19.6.
in the place of God, and cannot Psalm. 135.6. and 139.8.9.
be like God in every place (forasmuch as he oftimes is ruler under God,
Hester. 1.1.
of great and large dominions) he is also permitted to have lieuetenants under
him, as he is under God, in wars and peace. In peace, Judges and Exodus
18.20. 1. Pet. 2.14.
inferior Officers, who in the place of Kings and Princes, yea of Deuteronomy.
17.8.9. Romans 13.1.7.
the Lord himself, are duly with reverence to be obeyed. In wars likewise,
are Captains and soldiers Exodus 17.9.
the Princes deputies, who may therefore lawfully Deuteronomy. 7.16. 1. Sam. 15.3.
And that Christians did serve in wars under Heathen Emperors, is manifest by
Justin Martyr Apolog. 2. For they by prayer obtained rain, and saved the Army
of Antoninus Verus Emperor from perishing by thirst. By Tertullian. lib. de
Corona Militi^: Inter tot (inquit) fratres commili^^es solus Christianus: But
Christians ought not to take it upon them without lawful vocation: Luke 3.14.
whereof the Heathen give Christians example. Maulius Torquatus put to death his
own son, for that he attempted to fight (although in the field he had slain
his enemy) contrary to his precept and authority. Liui Decad. 1. lib. 4 Aul.
Gel. lib. 9. cap. 13. And Cato admonished his son to abstain from fight, for
that it was unlawful for him, after he was discharged by his Captain: Cic.
Offic. lib. 1. Voluntaries therefore are not to be commended, by the judgment
of Ambros. and Augustine. Possid. in vita August. unless for the special
defense of their religion, Prince and country, as Judge. 5.9. 1. Sam. 26.6.
shed blood in battle, in a lawful cause, because the Magistrate does arm
them, and Numb. 31.2.3. Nazianzen. orat. 18. ad Praesidem. Cum Christo geris
imperium, cum Christo rempub. administras, a Christo gladium consecutus es.
God himself the Magistrate, to take revenge of blood. In like case, the
Magistrate in extremity of danger, does 2. Sam. 14.8.10. Cic. pro Milo^^. Est
haec non scripta, sed nata lex: quam non didicimus, accepimus, legimus: verum
ex natura ipsa arripuimus, hae^simus, expressi^^^s: ad quam non docti, sed
facti; non instituti, sed imbuti sumus: vt, si vitae nostra in aliquas
insidias, si in vi^, si in tela aut latronum aut inimicorum incidisset: ^^^is
honesta ratio esset expedienda salutis.
arm a private subject, against unlawful violence, to defend himself. For as
it is permitted to wear lawful weapons for peaceable defense; Luc. 22.36.38.
Cic. orat. pro Milon^. Quid comitatus nostri, quid gladij volunt? quos habere
certe non liceret, si vti illis nullo pacto liceret. Sed obstat mandatum
Christi, Mat. 5.3 9. ne resistite malo. Respondat Chrysostom. Hom. in Mat. 18.
Quid igitur si non oportet nos resistere malo? oportet quidem, sed non hoc
tamen modo, verum eo quo ipse praecepit, vt scilicet ad pa^iendas nos iniurias
praebeamus. etc. Aug. q. in nouu^ Testam. q. 68. Si quis ergo Christianus ad
tempus vindicet, non acerbe, neque cum sanguine, non peccat; melius tamen
fecerit, si dimiserit iudici Deo. Item contra Faust. lib. 19. c. 25. Est quodam
iusta vindicta, iusteque debetur ei, qui suerit passus iniuriam: vnde vtique
cum ignoscimus, de nostro quodamodo iure largimur. Calvin. in Matthew. 5. Duplex
est resistendi modus: Alter quo innoxie arcemus iniurias; alter quo retaliamus:
qua^quam autem Christus suis non permittit, vt vim vi repellant; non tamen
prohibet qui^ deflectant ab iniusta violentia.
so is it likewise lawful, to strike with weapon, to wound, to kill, for the
same defense, in case where otherwise the murder of the innocent would be
performed, before the innocent person should have the benefit of just
reuengement. Wherein notwithstanding must be observed, that so much as is
possible, Namely, that thou defend thy innocence with that desire, to bring
(if it may be) thy cause before the Judge: which if it cannot be but with
extreme danger, the Commonwealth rather chooses to lose a murderer, then a
peaceable Citizen.
we reserve the life unto the Magistrate, and do show in our defense no And
he that with that mind repelleth injury, is not therein void of brotherly
charity: as 1. Cor. 5.5. where the Apostle shows, a man may in some cases
punish his adversary in love. August. lib. cont. Adimant. cap. 17.
private desire of revenge. The third point which is to be considered, is the
reason of the greatness of the pain, which also does aggrauate the greatness
of the sin. He is thy brother, says God, of the Act. 17.26.
same original and parentage, of Eccles. 2.15.16. Psalm. 49.6.7.
the same privilege of nature, of Natural, not civil, Ambros. lib. de
Naboth. cap. 13. Quid superbis dives? quid dicis pauperi: noli me tangere?
Nonne sic vtero conceptus, and natus es ex vtero, quemadmodum and pauper natus
est? etc.
the same honor and dignity; joined unto thee, in Man is by nature apt unto
society: Arist. Polit. lib. cap. 1. but this society is of two sorts: first,
either ecclesiastical or civil. Ecclesiastical, of God, or of this world: of
good men, or of the wicked: August. de ciuit. Dei, lib. 1. cap. 1.
society, in Act. 17.26.
affinity, and Cicer. lib. de Amicit. Plutarch. lib. de dignoscedo assentatore
ab amico. (...): A friend more necessary then fire and water.
amity: thou therefore In so much, as we may truly say: Man for man's cause
was created: Cic. de fin. lib. 2. and all for the glory of God, Prou. 16.4.
ought to have loved him, sustained and defended him from injury. Thus is
the nature of all mankind, conjoined in one band by God: but this is not the
fulness of the greatness of thy fault, he is moreover created in the image of
God. So that in murder, or shedding the blood of man unjustly; thou do
violence to thine own blood, whom thou defilest, to thy brother whom thou
sleyest, to the society of men whom thou robbest of a brother; to the Lord
himself, whose image in thy brother thou do despise and violate. For this,
it is meet thou should endure, Qua tamen non iusta compensatio est, quo hoc
tibi merito compensatur, quod tu immerenti inflixisti: Chrysostom. Hom. in
Matthew. 18.
the like as thou have caused thy brother to suffer wrongfullie; that those
which love themselves and not their brother, may be restrained Deuteronomy. 13.11.
Ephesians. 5.29.
from farther violence, by the pain, which for their brothers blood they must
abide. It is made a question, whether this law for murder, were now first
given, or renewed only. It is not material in regard of the It suffices us,
that the Lord being author thereof, the same law is continued unto us.
present use thereof, neither can it fully be determined. Only it may be
gathered, that before the flood, the Lord reserved all revenge of murder to
himself, at leastwise did not unto Adam prescribe the same. For so Genesis 4.11.
he himself does execute the punishment on Caine; and Lamech, being but a
private man, Genesis 4.23.24.
triumphs in his murders, with much security, which could not well have bin,
if Adam had received this authority. Also when he says, Genesis 6.11.
the earth was filled with cruelty, he seems to affirm, it abounded in
every place without discipline corrected. Wherefore that the world might know,
2. Pet. 2.5.9. Exodus 14.17.18.
that God, he is Lord of temporal punishments, as well as of those that be
eternal; he performs the office of the Magistrate alone, brought in Luc.
17.27.
the flood upon them, and destroyed them all, Obser. 1. The Lord does most
severely require, that is, revenge the blood of men at the hand of murderers,
as Exodus 21.14. Numb. 25.16. etc. and 33.34. 1. King. 2.31.32. 2. King. 19.37.
Matthew. 26.52.
the Scriptures testify, and Alexander dyed of tormenting poison, Curtius lib.
10 Valor. Max. lib. 1. cap. 7. his body was left without care of burial for
thirty days, no man vouchsafing to enterre the same. Elian. Var. Histor. lib.
12. cap. 64. Julius Caesar was torn with three and twenty wounds: Plutarc. in
the life of C. Caesar. Nero that raised the first persecution against the
Christians, when he found (as he said) neither friend nor enemy that would
dispatch him, cut his own throat, and was made a horrible spectacle to all
beholders: Defecitque extantibus rigentibusque oculis ad horrore^ formidinemque
visentium. Sueton. in vitae Neronis. Ergo. Ad generum Cereris fine caede and
sanguine pauci descendunt saeui, vel siccae morte tyranni.
infinite examples. Secondly, the creatures that are hurtful to the life of
man, are Exodus 21.2^.
worthy of themselves to be destroyed. Thirdly, the Magistrate is the
ordinance of Romans 13.4.
God, for the punishment of evil doers, and the praise of them that do well,
and therefore Judge. 17.6. and 19.1. Isai. 32.1.2.
most necessary unto the societies of men. Fourthly, Magistrates ought to
punish Exodus 21.14. Numb. 35.31.
murderers, with death: notwithstanding such murderers were themselves
created in the image of God, because Deuteronomy. 19.19.20.21. Muscul. in Genesis 9.
they have presumed to violate that image in their brethren. Fiftlie, the
judgment of blood appertains to the 2. Chron. 19.6. Psalm. 28.1.2.
Lord, as to the highest judge, and the punishment thereof to be acknowledged
Iosu. 7.25.
from him, not from the Magistrate; who also will reward the sin of murder,
Revel. 21.8.
with greater punishments, then can be inflicted by the Magistrate. Sixtlie,
those that seek to defend Judge. 20.13.
the life of murderers, for favor, fellowship or kindred; or the Magistrate
that does Deferred it may be, neglected it may not be, for regard of the
excellency of the person; as to Ioab, for the slaughter of Abner and Amasa. 1.
King. 2.5.31.32.
neglect to punish it; do make themselves 1. King. 2.31.
partakers with the murderers, and of the punishment of them; and also Deuteronomy.
21.8.9.
the land wherein they live. Seauenthlie, the consideration of the dignity of
man ought to restrain us from Luc. 10.16. Iam. 3.9. Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis
27. Cogita quod ad imaginem dei formatus est, and quiesces a mala voluntate.
cruelty toward man. Eightlie, man was Genesis 1.26.
created in the image of God, and continues (although Genesis 3.7.8. and 5.3
corrupted thorough the fall) in the same his image, in Psalm. 8.6.
excellency above the creatures of the earth, in Matthew. 10.28.
immortality of soul, in 2. Sam. 14.17. Ambros. Hexam. lib. 6. cap. 8. Cyril.
in Julian. lib. 9. Damascen. lib. de imag. Dei: (...). etc.
reason, memory, providence, conscience, all which Romans 8.5.6.7. Galath. 5.17.
Tit. 5.15. The Apostle calls our corruption, an earthly image, 1. Cor. 15.49.
notwithstanding are horribly defiled, and stained with sin. Ninthly, it is
Exodus 23.7. Deuteronomy. 27.25. Prou. 17.15.
a most grievous sin, for the Magistrate or any other, to put such innocents
to death, which are Ephesians. 4.24. Coloss. 3.10.
renewed to this image through faith, especially if it be Matthew. 5.10.11.12. 2 Thessalonians. 1.6.7.8. Let the Papists consider whose blood they spill: they say they
kill none but heretics (and that they deny to, for they say they deliver them
unto the Magistrate: but a more reasonable excuse we find, Ioh. 18.31.) let
therefore the word of God, who has given authority of death, try who are
heretics; whether those that inflict, or those that suffer death.
for the true profession of the faith of Jesus Christ. Tenthlie, when we see
the wicked murderers depart, whose blood is not required; it ought to move us
to remember another life, Genesis 18.25. Psalm. 73.17. etc. Eccles. 3.16.17.
Basil. in Psalm. 10. Quoniam exquires sanguinem, etc. Indicat hoc loco, nullum
homicidium impune abiturum, sed omnino in id requisitum iri.
for the restoring of their bodies, that in the same, 2. Cor. 5.10 Luc. 16.24.
they may receive according to their works.

Question 5. verse 13.16. What means this: behold I have set my bow in the
cloud, etc. Therefore the bow shall be in the cloud that I may see it?
FOr the full and perfect Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 28. Quia verifimile erat
is^^ adhuc in angore esse, and mente^ illius formidine teneri, and si qua^do
ingrueret vel paruus aliquis imber, futurum triste^ and attonitu^; ideo vt ipse
fidere possit omnisque posteritas, id circo misericors Deus in magna^
securitatem inducturul promisit ei. etc.
security of Noah and his posterity, the Lord vouchsafes to bind himself
by covenant, that the earth shall not be drowned any more with waters. In this
history of the covenant, is contained From verse. 8 to 16.
a promise; and the Verse. 17. Conclusio, qua quasi digito commonstrat. Tremel.
in annot. in Genesis
confirmation of the same. In the promise is to be considered: first the
persons between whom this covenant is made: God himself Verse. 9.10.
on the one part which freely promises, and every earthly creature, which
freely receives the benefit thereof. Secondly, the Verse. 11.
substance or matter of the covenant: that from thenceforth all flesh should
not be rooted out by waters. Thirdly, the sign Verse. 12.13.
or seal thereof. Lastly, Verse. 14.15.16.
the end or use thereof: then will I remember my covenant. We find herein a
long persuasion unto Noah, to be free from fear of another flood: the reason
is, Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 28. Verisimile erat, etc. nam praeteritorum
experientia ad formidinem incutiendam multum habet momenti.
the exceeding fear of Noah, in respect of the calamity which Noah had seen,
and the danger August. de ciuit. Dei, lib. 15. cap. 27. Magis diuina
prouidentia quam humana prudentia ^atantem gubernauit, ne incurrat vbicunque
na^fragium.
he was partaker of: as also in regard of the means, Ierem. 5.22.
which only are barred out by the mighty power of God. And albeit the
promises of God are Numb. 23. verse. 19. Tit. 1.2. 2. Cor. 1.20. To promise,
with God, is as much as to sweat by his holiness and truth. 2. Sam. 7.12.
Psalm. 89.35. and 132.11. and such promise, is called his oath, Isai. 54.9 The
Rabbis teach, his oath is contained in this: I will not add to curse, neither
will I add to smite: I will not add, being doubled, is the oath of God. Rab.
Salom.
infallible in themselves, and cannot but be verified: yet in respect of man's
Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 28. Deus non ad suam naturam spectans, sed nostram
infirmitatem, non contentus est promissione sua.
infirmity, his slownesse to believe, and his aptnes to despair; the Lord is
contented to promise, and to bind himself by covenant, and oath, Heb. 6.17.18.
to the end we might believe, and receive the comfort of his promises. Even so
in this place, the Lord does give a perpetual token of his covenant, that his
promise should be kept perpetually: This is the token of the covenant, I have
set my bow in the clouds, etc. The bow of God does signify in Scripture,
Psalm. 7.12. and 21.12. Hilar. in Psalm. 57. In arcis seueritatem iudicij Dei
significari ostendimus, peccatorum hunc semper poenis hi^ qui punie^tur
intentum.
the severity of judgment and wrath of God: but the Lord here speaks of
another bow, which he has placed in the clouds. This bow in the clouds, of
Ambros. de No^ and arca. cap. 27. Est ergo virtus inuisibilis Dei, qua and
specie istius arcus extendendi and remittendi, moderatur pro diuina voluntate,
misericordia, potesta^^^ qua neque omnia confundi nimia solutione, neque
dirumpi nimia irruptione patiatur.
some is also taken to be no other, but the invisible power of God, whereby the
moisture of the air is drawn together, and resolved into rain, like a bow
that is drawn, and again let go with an arrow shot forth of it: so that
the Lord here should signify, that this bow should not be shot with an arrow
of destruction, as Genesis ^.17.
late before, but the Verse. 14. Ezec. 1.28. Revel. 4.3.
Scripture expresses a bow that may be seen: which the learned for the most
part, both Rabbini in Cab. Tres iridis colores referunt ad tres Patriarcha^,
sicut and Christiani, quatuor colores, ad quatuor elementa.
Jews and Omnes quod scio, Ambrosio dempto.
Christians, do understand to be that notable and visible bow, that appears
in the clouds, then which, For which respect, of Chrysostom it is called a
miracle, Hom. in Genesis 28. of the Heathen, Thanmantis filia: i. the daughter of
admiration. Hesiodus. in Theogon. Calimachus in Lanacr. Deli. and Plato in Crat.
among all the imperfect creatures, there is none more excellent. Which bow both
Ambros. lib. de No^ and arc. cap. 27. Casarius frater Nazianzen. Dialog. 2.
August. Hom. 3. in Apocalyp. Tom. 9. Hieron. Zanch. de oper. Dei, part. 2. lib.
3. cap. 3.
Divines and heathen Philosophers Aristos. lib. 3. Meteor. cap. 4. Ammian.
Marcellin. lib. 20. Plut. de placi. Philosoph. 3. Zeno and Possidonius.
Laertius. 7. cap. 1.
agree, to be nothing else, but the beams or brightness of the sun, when it
shines against a thick and waterie cloud, by which those beams are unto our
sight returned (as the heat reboundeth from the earth in Summer) so that If a
man do with a staff raise the water against the Sun, he shall perceive in
the drops dispersed, as it were a white Rainbow, by which he may more easily
perceive the cause of the Rainebow in the clowd.
where the brightness that reboundeth from the cloud, and the brightness from the
sun do meet together Nam omnino consistit iris optica ratione: sieve per
conu^, vt vult Euclid. optic. Hypothesi. 2. (c^nus autem est pyramid rotunda.
Apollon. Perg^us. Conor. 1. Vitellio opticor. lib. 4.) sieve vt alij volunt per
triangulum, alij autem aliter. Vide Theophrast. de vertig. sine (...).
in our eye sight, they make this beautiful show which we bebold, and call the
rainebow. Which never appears square or long, but round or compass, because
it takes his proportion from the sun. Neither ever contains it Arist.
Meteor. li. 3. c. 5. Zanch. de oper. Dei, li. 3. part. 2. c. 3.
more then half a circle, because the residue of reflection is shadowed by the
earth. The cause of the diverse colors in the same, is said to be the A clowd
is a fume or exhalation gathered together in the middle region of the air,
which is borne up (as is thought) by the heat or warmenes which is in it:
consisting for the most part of airie matter, having therewith of the earth,
water, and fire, some parcels mixed. Basil. in Psalm. 134. Mirabile quod in leui
ae^re aequa continetur: multo mirabilius, etc. Great marvel it is that water
should be borne up in the very thin air, etc.
variety of matter, whereof the cloud consists, wherein it is. For it
partly consisting of dry and fumie matter, Aristotle teaches that they are
only appara^ces, not true colors in the Rainbow. Meteor. libr. 3. c. 4. Other
affirm they are colors in deed, and not alone in appearance. Methodor. lib de
Iride. Heliodor. Larissae. lib. de optic.
does thereby give that purple color like fiery smoke, or as dry clouds are
red, at the setting and rising of the sun. The waterish moisture of the
cloud casts forth that greenish color, like unto the waters of the sea. And
forasmuch as the cloud has alwaie airie matter joined withal, the same does
yield that whitish stream, or straw color that appears. Sometime is added a
perfect red, which is caused by the elementarie heat that is within the cloud.
Sometime appear two For a double Rainbow is a sign of great shewers: Arat. in
Pheinom. (...), vel gemina circuncingit magnu^ coelum iru. Virgil. Georg. 1. Et
bibit ingent arcus, etc.
rainebowes for the abundance of matter, the one within the other, their
colors placed contrary, for that the one is the image (by reflection) of the
other. Wherein we have cause to extol the wonderful wisdom of the Lord.
For if God do show such glory in gliffes and shadows, how glorious is his
wisdom and his power, Ambros. Hex. lib. 6. cap. 1.
in things of substance? And if his power and wisdom so plainly are Romans
1.20. Lactant. Institut. lib. 1 cap. 3. Qua in re quoniam and sensu deficimus
and verbis: quia neque tantae intellige^tiae lucem pectus humanum, neque
explanatione^ tantarum rerum cap ^ lingua mortalis, id ipsum intelligere nos
oportet and profiteri.
perceived, and are so excellent in the creatures; how far does he himself
surmount our words and thoughts, in infinite majesty, and incomparable glory?
Concerning this rainebow, there arises another doubt. For seeing it is said to
proceed of causes natural: it may be supposed the same had bin seen before
the promise; and seeing the Lord in six days finished the creation, and set
the perfect Genesis 2.1.
order of all the creatures; it follows that the rainebow had then his place,
either For it rained not in the first six days of creation. Genesis 2.5
in being or in power. Which if it were of old: how is it now said, this is the
token of the covenant: I have set my bow in the clouds? There are indeed which
persuade themselves, Author. de mirab. sacr. script. inter oper. August. lib.
2. cap. 10.
that there was never rainebow seen before this promise made; yea, some do
Lyza in Genesis 9.1. Alcui^ in Genesis ^. 9. Strabus Eccles. Histor.
fondly think, that it never rained on the earth, before the flood. But these
being private judgments, without authority of Scripture, are to be commended
to the credit of the authors. And that the rainebow has always bin, since
the sun and waterie clouds have bin, even Argum. ab eff^^ie^ta.
from the first creation, may much rather be esteemed; neither is there any let
or hindrance to be found. The Lord says not, I now create the rainebow, but I
have set the rainebow in the clouds; this is the sign; that is, the rainbow
which is in the clouds, shall henceforth be the sign. So that although the
rainebow were before (as the Some of the Hebrews say, that the Rainbow was
before, but was not in a cloud before: but this is against both Philosophy and
reason, and not at all approved by the Scripture.

Joseph. Antiq. libr. 1. cap. 4. Arcus coelectis signum vobis erit, etc
Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 28. Sole radios suas contra nubes mistente: i. The
Sun casting his beams against a clowd.

Ambros. de Noah and Arca. lib. cap. 27.

Hi^ro. in Ezech. Comment. cap. 1.

August. in Apocalyp. Tract. 2. Who all in setting down the cause of the
Rainbow to be from the beginning, do in effect affirm that it was from the
beginning.

Calvin. in Genesis 9. Neque enim Mosis verba sonant fabricatum suisse arcum, qui
prius non fuerat; verum notam esse illi in sculptam qua diuinae gratia signum
hominibus daret. Ita arcum coelestem qui naturaliter prius fueras hic
consecrari dicimus in signum and pignus.


most Divines consent) yet was it not before a token of the covenant, but now
was made a sign, which before it was not. If any man think it ought to be a
new creture, which was newly made a sign; let him also excogitate a reason why
it so should be. The virtue of Sacraments August. contr. Maxim. lib. 3. cap.
22. In sacramentis non quid sint, sed quid osten^ius attendatur: i. In the
Sacraments we must consider, not so much what matter they are of: but what they
signify.
depend not of the creatures whereof they are, but of the Ambros. de Sacram.
lib. 4. cap. 4.
Lord, as of the author, by whom they are. Water was before it was ordained
unto the use of Baptism: and bread and wine were before the Supper of the
Lord; but were no Sacraments before the Ambros. ibid. Panis istae panis est
ante verba sacramentorum, vbi accesserit consecratio, de panefit caro Christi.
August. in Euangel Ioh. tract. 80. Accedit verbum ad elementum and fit
sacramentum, etiam ipsum tanquam visible verbum.
institution of Christ was joined with them: which being added, August. ibid.
Detra^^ verbum, and quid est aqua nisi aqua?
and the creature in form thereof administered, is made a Sacrament. So
likewise those that believe this promise of the waters, and receive the
rainebow as the seal thereof; to them is the rainebow a seal of the covenant,
and a confirmation of the promise. But before it was promised, it could not be
believed, or received as a seal, whereof there was no covenant: and since it
is promised, it is Namely to whom the covenant is unknown: to Philosophers,
Heathen, or beasts.

Calo. in Genesis 9. Quare si anellitur facramentum a verbo, desinis esse quod
vocatur.


no Sacrament to those of whom the promise is unknown, or vnreceiued. The Lord
does make this covenant with all the Verse. 9.10.
creatures, but the sign Verse. 13.
belongs properly to those of faith: wherefore though all the creatures are
delivered by the covenant, yet only the believers reap spiritual benefit.
Now as it belongs unto Sacraments, to Nisi enim facrame^ta similitudine^
quandam earum reru^ quarum sacramenta sunt, haberent, omnino sacramenta non
essent. August. epist. 23.
have resemblance to the matter signified: so was there not a more apt
creature, to be seen in heaven or earth, to manifest in sight August. contr.
Fa^st. ^br. 19. cap. 16. Sacramenta corporacta quasi visibilia verba. Idem
tract. in Ioh. 10.
this mercy promised. The Lord was now Genesis 8.21. and 9.11.
appeased with Noah, and promised to shoot no such arrows of displeasure as
before. Even so Iris Graecis dicitur (...) a pace, quasi fignum pacis ve^l
(...), quod ostendit pactam. Latini a Gracis, vel ab ^ere vocant, quia
descendit per ^e^rem ad vsque terram. Isidor. lib. 13. cap. 10.
this bow is placed in the clouds, as one that holds a bow in peace, the
string is toward us, the ends are downward to the earth. Again, the earth
that then perished, ouerflowed with water, is 2. Pet. 3.7.
now kept in store, and reserved unto fire: wherefore the Lord, as it were to
put us in remembrance, Gregor. Mag. in Ezech. Hom. 8. Vnde and in aeren eodem,
color aquae and ignis, vt v^riusque indicij testis sit.
has joined with the color of water, the color of fire. Moreover, as we do
not always fear a sloud when we see a cloud; so the Neque enim in ae^re
denso apparet, nec apparuit vnquam, sicut fabulantur non philosophantur
Rabbini, sed in densa nube and concreta.
rainebow appears not in vain, but either before a tempest that is to come,
to admonish our faith of the promise of the Lord: or after it is passed, to
provoke us unto thankefulnes for our deliverance. In which respect the Lord
also says: the bow shall be in the cloud, that I may see it, and remember the
everlasting covenant. For he sees the rainebow, as all his creatures are
before his eyes; but he August. contr. aduersar. Legis, lib. 1. cap. 20. Dico
Deum admoneri se voluiss^, qua^uis non sit oblitus, sicut Christus doceri se
voluit vbi Lazarus positus fuerit, quamuis non esset ignarus: and sicut alibi
dicit, gaudete quia nomina vestra sunt scriptae in coelis, quae nisi pie
accipiantur, donec fides impetret vt intelliga^tur, nonne vt fabulosa videantur?
has a special eye unto our faith, how we beholding it, believe his word.
Neither Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 28. Non quia ipse habeat opus recordatione.
needs he to be put in remembrance by the rainebow, least he should destroy
the world with waters: but that we by seeing it, Chrysostom. ibid. Sed vt nos ad
illud respicientes nihil durum suspicemur.

Hieron. in Ezech. c. 1. Quando apparebit in nube, sciamus nos secundum
antiquitatis exemplum nequaqua^ perituros esse diluuio.


might remember that God remembers us, and upon the assurance of his promise,
might fear none evil. But whether is this rainebow a sign of nature, or a
sign of grace; a token that the earth cannot from thence forth be ouerflowed,
or that it shall be kept by the mercy of the Lord. Surely although Aquin.
quodlibet. 3. artic. 30. Idem in Ge^. Comment. cap. 9. Caietan. in Genesis Comment
cap. 9.
some do take it as a natural sign to show that there is no such abundance
of waters gathered, as whereby the world is in danger of a flood: yet much
more does it pretend the infinite power of God, which restrains the waters
that they cannot flow. For always it is perceived, the darker the clouds are,
and the more disposed to rain, and the more the creatures do threaten a
flood; the clearer is this sign of heaven, if no natural cause beside, do
let the same. And much rather it agrees with the power of God, to whom it
Deuteronomy. 32.36. 2. King. 3.13.14. Isai. 63.5.
appertains to save when none can help, and in the greatest Exodus 14.15. etc.
dangers, to show the greatest tokens of deliverance. Doctrines. 1. verse 1.8.
This covenant confirmed unto Noah, Sic enim legendu^ est: (...), vaeni hineni;
and ego ecce ego, id est, hoc insuper addo ad benedictionem: oration continuata.
immediately after his sacrifice; teaches that the Lord will give unto the
godly their Psalm. 37.4.13.14. and 55.22.
hearts desire, and grant them 2. Sam. 7.19. 1. King. 3.13.14.
more then they do ask. Secondly, verse 9. The Lord bestows his blessings
on his creatures, Deuteronomy. 9.6. Isai. 48.9.11.
for his own sake, not for Romans 9.11.16. Against ye new sprung opinion of
justification. This was an absolute covenant, not conditional. In the covenant
of grace there is a condition required, as Iere. 31.33. and the same not for
the Lord, Job. 35.7. but for our own behoof, 2. Pet. 1.8. etc. Iren. lib. 4.
c. 28. Nec nostro ministerio indigens Deus; sed quoniam bonus and misericors,
vt beneficiat ijs, qui perseuera^t in seruitute eius.
foreknowledge of any recompense: for here is no stipulation of reward.
Thirdly, verse 10. The covenant of preservation is extended to the beasts:
Psalm. 36.6. and 145.9
for God is loving unto all his creatures. Fourthlie, if unreasonable creatures
are vouchsafed to be partakers of the covenant of preservation; how Genesis 17.7.
Exodus 20. I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed, to a thousand
generations, to the^ that love me. Against the Anabaptists.
much more may the children of the faithful, be partakers of the covenant of
grace by Baptism, although Genesis 17.7. August. Epist. 23. Itaque paruulum, etsi
non fides illa, quae in credentium voluntate consistit, iam tamen ipsius fidei
sacramentum fidelem facit. Nam secundum quen^m modum, sacramentum corporis
Christi, corpus Christi est, sacramentum sanguinis Christi, sangnis Christi
est; ita sacramentum fidei fidei est.
they have not by reason of their infancy, attained the gift of lively faith.
Fiftlie, verse 11. God has most constantly performed Isai. 54.9.
his promise, in the preservation of the creatures, which was not confirmed in
the blood of Christ: he will therefore most undoubtedly Isai. 62.8. Heb.
6.17.18.
perform the covenant of grace, sealed by his death, to those that observe the
condition thereof. Sixtlie, verse 13. That the world neither has bin, nor
shall again be drowned with waters, 2. Pet. 3.5.6.7. Ierem. 5.22. Basil.
Hexam. Hom. 4. Vt ne superinfluens aqua, etc. Luther. in Genesis 9. Iris
significat nullum diluuium venturum esse, tamen hoc non ex aliquae naturali
causa, sed tantum ex verbo Dei. Calvin. in Genesis 9. Idem in Ierem. 5. Hieron.
Zanch. de oper. Dei. part. 2. lib. 3. cap. 3. Non autem ex causis naturalibus,
vt nunquam futurum sit diluuium. Contra ^pinant^^ non posse terram totam aquis
obrus nisi miraculo, and qui ponunt Iridem signum natural serenitatis. Valor.
Flacc. Argonaut. lib. 1. Emicuit reserata dies, coelianque resoluis arcus.
stands not of causes natural, but of the good pleasure and promise of the
Lord. Seuenthlie, the promises of God, and the seals thereof 2. Cor. 1 20. Romans
8.7. 1. Cor. 2.14.
are sure, although they seem never so greatly contrary to the reason of
man. Eightlie, verse. 14.15. When we behold the rainebow in the cloud, we Verse.
14.15. Luc. 22.19. Hinc dicitur sacramentum, visibile verbu^. August. tract. in
Euang. Ioh. 80. The Jews are accustomed when they see the Rainbow, to go
forth and confess their sins, that they are worthy of a flood, and are
preserved only by Gods mercy: take away superstition, the rest belongs unto
Christians.
ought to remember the covenant of God, and to confirm our selves therein by
faith.

Question 6. verse 2. Wherefore the Scripture makes report that Noah was
drunk with wine?
LIke as before the Scripture testified, that Verse. 1.
God blessed Noah and his sons; so now does it proceed to teach, in what
manner this For this cause the Genealogies are recited.
blessing was bestowed upon them. In the register or record whereof we may
consider an excellent doctrine: namely, that such of them and their
posterity, as were wicked and worldly men, were partakers of worldly and
temporal benefits but have had withal As it came to pass to Cham and Canaan,
verse. 25.
the wages of their sin: and that the godly, although not so greatly
flourishing in For Sem was not so fruitful in children: besides in Ioctan who
(as the Hebrews say) made shipwreck of his fathers religion. Heb. 10.36.
worldly things, yet in the end, have fully enjoyed the promises. This is the
scope of the two next following Chapters. In this place is laid down a
preparation thereunto. Herein also two points are chiefly handled. First that
Verse. 6.
only of these three sons of Noah, the nations have increased over all the
earth: against the presumption of some Berosu^ avouches that Noah had thirty
sons after the flood, whom he calls Titans. But it is not the true Berosus,
but a forged fable of Annius of Viterbium.
heathen and Methodius Patare^sis, lib. Reuelat. cap. 6. cites a fourth son of
Noah, and calls him Ionithus, by whose counsel (says he) they builded the
tower of Babel. Caictan. Cardinal. in Genesis 9. The sons of Noah which went out
of the Ark were Sem, Ham and Iapheth: it appears therefore (says he) that
Noah had other sons after the flood, which went not out of the Arc: a wide
and false conjecture. Hector Boethius in his history of Scotland affirms,
that a kinswoman of Noah in the time of the flood embarked her self and
arrived in Ireland, from whom that Nation is derived. But it is an impudent
falsehood, and contrary to the Scripture, Genesis 7.23.
christian writers, which have crossed the plain authority of the word of God,
in this respect. The second is, an oracle of God, wherein is foredescribed the
condition of the offspring of these three sons of Noah, in time, long
afterward. In this also is to be considered: the occasion of the oracle; which
is, that Noah was drunk with wine: and also the matter of the oracle, the
Prophecy of Noah unto his children. Wherein we may also indifferently behold
the sincerity of the word of God, in observing Cicer. de orat. lib. 2. Prima
est historiae lex, ne quid falsi dicere audeat; deinde ne quid ve^i non audeat:
ne qua suspicio gratiae sit in scribendo, ne qua simultatis.
the common laws of history, which neither Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 29. Neque
propter inuidiam iusto^^m virtutes pratexit, neque propter gratiam peccata
adumbrat.
for favor of the godly, concealeth their faults; neither for envy
pretermitteth their virtues: and that which is common with no other histories;
the Numb. 11.11.21. and 20.10. Psalm. 51.1. Iona. 1.3.5. and 4.3.7. Ierem.
20.14. Matthew. 9.9. 1. Tim. 1.13.
writers themselves are forced to declare their own infirmities, which is 2.
Pet. 1 21. (...), acti a spiritu sancto.
an evident argument that the Scriptures are of God. Noah also (says the text)
began to be an husband man. In the Hebrew text it is read thus (...) vaiachel
Noah ish headhamah: and Noah began (to be) a man of the earth. Ambros. de Noa,
cap. 29. understands it otherwise, but worse, that he began to plant vines,
before to sow seed, but this is not the meaning of the Scripture.
word for word: And Noah began (to be) a man of the earth: that is to say, a
husbandman. The which conjunction As if it had been said: whereas before the
stood men lived in husbandry, Noah continued the same also after the flood:
wherefore it is very well translated; And Noah began again, etc.
(And) imports that as before, so after the flood he was a husbandman, and
now began again to be an husbandman. Whereby as it is evident, that both Genesis
3.17.18. Ambros. de Noah. c. 29. Ergo sicut Adam primigenes magister, terram
videtur operatus, ita and iam egressus ex arca Noe, seminationis and
agriculturae author est factus.
Adam, and Genesis 4.12.
Caine, and Noah and other, did till the earth, and lived in husbandry before
the flood; so it seems no less by this, and Eccles. 5.8. Luc. 17. verse. 27.
Mat. 24.38. Whereby that appears a forgerie of Berosus, that says Noah
invented the making of Wine. Notwithstanding I suppose this history was not
unknown unto the Heathen: and that he was Noe who of the^ was called Bacchus,
or Boacus: of the Greeks Oenotrius (...), of wine: of others, Ianus, a (...)
Iain, which in Hebrew and Syriac signifies wine, who^ they pictured with two
faces, because he saw the first world before the flood, and this after, and
joined them as it were together. Tertul. lib. Apolog. cap. 11. A^nob. cont.
Gent. lib. 6. Of him ignorant Antiquity among the Heathen has sabuled many
things; as that Nicander lib. 1 linguar. tells that the mother of Bacchus was
enclosed in an Arc by Ca^mus. Other, that he invented sacrifice. Ovid. fastor.
3. Ante tuos ortus arae sine honor fuerunt Liber. Other, that he invented and
taught men husbandry, and planting of vineyards. Euripides in Bacchis. (...),
etc. Semele satus potum racemi reperit mortalibus. Plin. lib. 7. cap. 56. says
also, he was the first that taught to buy and sell. Other which are fond fables
are derided by August. de ciuit. Dei, libr. 7. cap. 7.8. Lactantius libr. 2
cap. 2. Diodor. Siculus. libr. 4. cap. 5.
other Scriptures, that the use of the vine and Rabb. Moses Ben. Nahmah, upon
this place, and David Kimchi lib. Rad. say, that the vine was known before,
but men planted no Vineyards, neither used Grapes for drink, but for meat:
Rabb. Leui says, he took the seed and slippes of every tree with him into
the Arc. In the Cabala it is, that he took them out of Paradise. But it is
the custom of the Jews, in divining to over reach.
wine it self, were not unknown unto the world; which augmenteth greatly
Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 25. Ostendit quod ipse vini bibendi primus inuentor
fuerit: sed perignorantiam and nescien bibendi mensuram, in ebrietatem
inciderit. Alij contra statuunt and verisimilius.
the fault of Noah, and he drank of the wine, and was drunk. Which report of
Noah, although Julian. apud. Cyril. lib. 7. Nonne and Solomon nostris seruiuit
dijs, a muliere, vt dicunt, deceptus? Igitur siquidem a muliere deceptus est,
eum sapientem ne dicatis.
Libertines, and Atheists do deride; yet is it of most precious use unto the
Church of God. For first seeing the righteousness of Noah, is so greatly Genesis
6.9. and 7.1. Ezec. 14.14.
praised, and his wonderful deliverance Genesis 7.18.23. and 8.1.3.
declared in the Scripture; his sin is also published, to the end it might be
known, Psalm. 130.3.4. Isai. 53.6. Hieron. in Isai. cap. 3^. August. epist.
105. Quaerimus obdurationis meritum and inuenimus; quaerimus autem meritum
misericordiae nec inuenimut, quia nullum est: ne gratia euacuetur, si non
gratis donatur sed meritis redditur. Bernard. in festo omnium sanctor. Sermon. 1.
Quid potest esse omnis nostra iustitia coram Deo? Nonne iux^^ prophetam, vt
pannus menstruatae reputabitur? Quid ergo de peccatis erit, quando ne ipsa
quidem per se poteris respondere iustitia?
he was saved not of merit, but of mercy. And if so great a Prince Romans 3.19.
and 4.2.
of righteousness, has not to glory in his works; what can we wretches claim
Romans 3.23. and 6.23. August. Epist. 105. Quae igitur sua merita iactaturus est
liberatus, cui si digna suis meritis redderentur, non esset nisi damnatus.
of due desert, save punishment. Secondly, albeit he Genesis 6.9. Heb. 11.7
Hieron. libr. tradit. Hebraic. in Ge^. Iustus non iuxta iustitiam consummatam,
sed iuxta generationis suae cum iustum fuisse, iustitiam.

August. de ciuit. Dei, lib. 15. cap. 26. Iustus non vtique sicut perficiendi
sunt ciues ciuitatis Dei in illa immortalitate qua aequabu^tur angelis dei, sed
sicut esse possunt in hac peregrinatione perfecti.


were righteous, and walked with God: yet was he Genesis 5.3. 1. Cor. 15.49.
of Adams image, and had his imperfections; which the Scripture therefore
records, Iren. libr. 4. cap. 45. Scriptura veteres increpauit, de his quae
sine consilio spiritus egerunt, vt non glorietur vniuersa caro in conspectu
domini. Ambros. Apolog. David. lib. c. 2. Na^ si inoffensum a vitijs inter tot
lubrica hu^^ seculi curriculum peregissent, dedissent nobis occasionem
infirmioribus aestimandi cuiusdam superioris eos naturae ac diuinae fuisse, vt
delictum recipere, and culpae consortium habere non possent.
least we should have thought him perfect. So does it in like manner Genesis
12.12.
of Abraham, Genesis 42.16.
Joseph, Numb. 11.22. Psalm. 106.33.
Moses, 2. Sam. 11.4.
David, Job. 3.1.3.
Job, Ierem. 20.14.
Jeremy, Ioh. 2.3.4.
Marie the virginmother of Christ, Matthew. 26.74.
Peter and the rest: to the end that we might know, that Job. 4.18.19. Romans
7.23.
none is void of sin, and therefore that we ought not to despair for our
infirmities, but Clem. Alexandr. Paedagog. lib 2. cap. 2. Quocirca No^ quoque
indecora vinolentia scripta est, vt ebrietatem qua^ maxim vitemus, manifestam
scriptisque mandatam lapsus imaginem habentes. August. in Psalm. 50. Multi enim
volunt cadere cum David, and nolunt surgere cum David. Non ergo ca^endi
exemplum propositum est, sed si cecideris resurgendi. Audiant qui non
ceciderunt, ne cadant; audiant qui ceciderunt, vt surgant.
learn to rise again with speed by their example. But how says the Scripture
then: he 1. John. 3.9.
sins not that is borne of God? I answer by CONCILIATIO. 13.
the Scripture. Sin after two sorts does excrcise his force on men. Some
where Romans 6.12. John. 8.44.
it reigns in the^, as in those that take delight in sin. In others, it
Romans 7.15.16 18.
lurketh, but does not rule their hearts: who with a purpose of heart Romans
6.13. 1. Ioh. 2.1^.16.
do cleave unto the Lord. So he that is borne of God sins not, that is,
Romans 7.15.18. Galath. 5.17.
delights not in sin: but although he seek continually Romans 7.24. 1. Cor.
9.27. Philip. 3.13.
to subdue concupiscence, yet often he is 1. King. 8.4^. Eccles. 7.22.
taken in infirmity. So that if any say in this life, he is Job. 9.20. 1. Ioh.
1.8. August. de peccat. merit. and remiss. lib. 2. cap. 10. Si me iustum dixero
contra iudicium eiu^, vbi perfecta illa iustitia regula me conuincit iniustum,
profecto impie loquetur os meum, quia contrae veritatem Dei loquitur.
free from sin, he is a liar, and therein shows the thing which he denies.
Here therefore ungodly drunkards have no patronage. Noah August. ibid. Noe
ficut legimus, fuit atiquando ebrius, qua^uis absit vt fuerit ebriosus.
was no drunkard albeit he were drunk with wine. Although once overcome, yet
he did not practice it. Yea the Lord so Verse. 21 22. Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis
29. lacet ridiculus, etc.
scourged him for it Prouer. 3.11. Revel. 3.19.
being a son, that he plainly showed, that those that use it daily Heb.
8.9.
are but bastards, and shall not, without most speedy repentance, receive
Psalm. 95.7.8.
inheritance in the kingdom.

Question 7. verse 29. What means this, that when Cham sinned, Canaan is
punished and accursed?
CHam although the Verse. 24.
youngest son of Noah, is always placed between his brethren: for Gregor.
Hom. in Euang. H. 38. Ex Noae tribus filijs, electi duo vnus reprobus fuit,
boni enim soli nunqua^ sunt nisi in coelo, mali soli in inferno: hec autem vita
vtrosque participat.
so the godly in this life are mingled with the wicked. He is so often Verse.
18.22.
called the father of Canaan, because Chrysostom. Hom. 28 Ne putetis obsecro
hoc absque causa fuisse aediectum. Nihil enim in diuina scriptura continetur,
quod non aliqua ratione dictum sit, quod non and latente^ in se habeat
vtilitatem. Ambros. de Noe and Arca. cap. 28. Significat igitur ex illo Canaan
Cananaeos fuisse, qui post multas generationes a populo iusto oppressi
cesserunt in e^^^ possessionem.
he was also author of the curse on Canaan, whose Genesis 15.16. Deuteronomy. 7.1.2. etc.
race were wholly ordained, of the holy seed, to be extinguished. The
greatness of his fact caused Cham to suffer a grievous punishment. He saw
(says the Scripture) his fathers nakedness, Genesis 9 22.
and told his brethren without. This only word (letting conjectures The
Rabbis in Cabala affirm, that Cham cut off his fathers priuitie. So does Rab
Leui in Comment. in Genesis Berosus Annian. that he enchanted them. I he^e are
absurd and fabulous lies.
and fables pass) does sufficiently display the fault. First in that he saw,
and did not cover; secondly, in that he saw, and told without. The law of
nature and Cicer. Offic. lib. 1. Quiequid sine detr^mento possit commodari, i^i
tribuatur cuique vel ignoto.
humanity prescribes, that what help or benefit, we may yield without our
hinderance, the same can no less then be affoorded unto the farthest aliant:
but unto Parents, friends, and country, we Cic. Offic. lib. 1. Charisunt
par^tes, chari liberi, propinqui, familiares: sed omnes omnium charitates
patria vna complexa est pro qua quis bonus dubitet mortem oppetere si ei sit
profuturus? Among Heathen examples, that of Cimon the son of Miltiades, is
worthy memory, who to deliver his father of imprisonment, was content to be
imprisoned in his steed, V^ler. Max. lib. 5. cap. 4. and that his father might
be buried, he paid all his creditors after his death, his debts arising to
fifty Talents: Herodot. in Erato. Notwithstanding that Miltiades, a worthy
Captain and member of his country, had been unjustly accused of briberie,
and causeles condemned to such penalty, as imprisonment and payment of fifty
Talents: Plutarch. in vita Cimon.
ought to spend our lives for help. The law of God requires farther, Romans
15.1. 1. Pet. 4.8.
that we should hide the imperfections of our brethren, and be Ephesians. 4.32.
Coloss. 3.12.
grieved for their infirmities; and for the godly (much more our godly
Parents) we Ioh. 3.16. Romans 5.7
ought if need require, Alcesti^ the wife of Admetus, offered to dye for her
husband: and with more holy love Priscilla and Aquila, for Paul, laid down
their own neck, Rom 16.4.
exchange our lives. How barbarous then was this negligence of Cham, to see his
Hieron. epist. ad Ocean. Noe ad vntus hora ebrietatem, nudauit famora sua, quae
per se^centos a^^^o^ contexerat.
fathers distress and shame, and not to cover him? Besides, he added unto
this: that he told his brethren without. Think you he asked their helping
hand, as not being able to relieve his father? no surely: for when they with
reverence did cover their fathers Verse. 13.
nakedness, he gave them not assistance with the least of his fingers. It is
evident therefore he did his father villainy, either by Chrysostom Hem. in Genesis
29. Fortassis etiam and derisit and subsann^nit patrem.
derision, or more opprobrious injury, both in his fathers sight, and in the
hearing of his brethren, for so the history does import: Noah Ve^s. 2^.
knew what his younger son had done unto him. How knew he? being certified
Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 29. Vorte fratres significa^erunt, non accusatien^^
quidem gratia, sed re^^ vt facta erat docentes, vt conneniens ille suo vulneri
remedium acciperet.
thereof by Sem and Iapheth? Nay rather of himself he knew or did For the
drunkard is said to remember, both what he has done or suffered in his
drunkenness, when his sit is past; which one that has been mad does not: yet is
drunkenness voluntaria i^sania, a wilful madness, as Cato says: being for this
cause detestable, because it is a wilful abuse of Gods benefits, of health and
nature it self.
remember, as the nature of the word does (...) Iadagh is properly belonging to
the mind and understanding, sometime also to ye sense or feeling. Genesis 39.8.
and 4.1.
signify. And said cursed be Canaan. A question may here be moved, whether
these words, cursed be Canaan, were the very words of Noah, or the
interpretation of Moses, by the same spirit of God, recording the history.
Some think Francs. Iun Analys. in Genesis c. 9. Hac vox maledictus Canaa^, aut
Noachi dictum est aut Mosis interpretamentum. Si Mosis (quod ego quidem facile
probauerim) etc.
that as Canaan is so often named Ambros. de Noa and Arca. cap. 28. Muscul. in
Genesis Comm^nt. cap. 9.
of Moses for the encouragement of Israel, against the Cananites; so he bears
in the history the curse by name, which was cast by Noah upon his father.
Nevertheless it seems rather by that which follows, that Canaan was by
name accursed of Noah. Again, it is esteemed of Cal^. in Genesis cap. 9. Videri
posset Noah etsi iustam excandescentiae causam habeat, parum tamen modeste and
grauiter se gerere. Iun. in Analys. in Genes. 9. Plerisque visum est, hanc
sententiam aut ab ebrio Noacho, aut ab exacerbato pronunciatam fuisse.
some, that Noah inflamed with wine, or anger, pronounced this malediction. But
it is unsound (I might truly say, ungodly) so to think. The scripture, for
this cause has testified, and Noah awoke from his wine, that is: was cleerelie
freed from the strength thereof. Again, this curse contains a Justin. Mart.
Dial. cum Triffo. Praedixit Noah quod qui a Semo prouenturi erant, occupaturi
fuerint possessiones and domicilia Canaan.
prophecy long ago fulfilled, whereof the Scripture testifies, 2. Pet. 1.20.
that no Prophecy in Scripture is of any private motion. Wherefore the holy
Ghost, who is the Verse. 21. 1. Pet. 1.
author of Prophecy, is likewise the author of this curse. Wherefore also the
same is thus to be interpreted: cursed is Theodoret. quaest. in Genesis 62.
Maledictus est vel eris Canaan.
Canaan, or cursed shall he be: Or if it be read as a wish or imprecation, we
are to consider the affection Psalm. 79.6.12. and 109.6 Revel. 6.10.
of the godly, when they desire vengeance on the wicked; they August. in Psalm.
78. Quapropter cum and homo iustus and homo malus de inimicis suis ve^^nt a
Domino vindicari, vnde discernerentur, nisi quia iustus magis cupit inimicum
suum corri^i ^^am pu^iri^ and cum vidit a Domino vindicari, non cius delectatur
poena, quia non eum odit, sed diuina iustitia quia deum diligit.
delight not in their punishment, because they hate not the persons of the
wicked, but their sin; but in the justice of God which punishes, because
they love the Lord. So that when the just man Psalm. 58.10.
sees the vengeance and rejoices, it is not of malice, but of benevolence,
either hoping that the August in Psalm 78. Denique si in hoc seculo in cum
vindicatur, vel pro illo etiam letatu^ si corrig^^r, vel certe pro alijs vt
timeant cum imitari: ipse quoque sit melior non supplicio illius odia sua
pascendo, sed errata emendando. Si autem in futuro seculo, vltimo Dei iudicio
vindicatur, hoc ci placet quod Deo, ne been sit malis, ne piorum praemijs etiam
impi^ perfruantur; quod vtique iniustum est, and a regula veritatis qua^ iustus
diligit alien^.
wicked may by punishment be amended, or loving Gods justice above men's
persons, not being displeased with the punishment of the wicked, because it
proceeds from the Lord, nor desiring that the wicked may be acquitted from
penalty, because they deserve in justice to be punished. If any demand, why
rather this curse is laid on Canaan; many causes thereof may be affoorded.
Diverse learned writers Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 28. Canaan fuisse genitum
tempore inu^dationis. Sic and Rabbini aliqui.
testify, that this accident was after the birth of Canaan, of whom Theodoret.
quaest. in Genesis Aliorum senten. tiam refere: tum ipse, Cuius rei inquit magnum
and illud argume^tum est quod Noe maledictionem suam, and quasi admissi
sceleris supplicium in Canaan potissimum contulit. Videtur igitur primus
nuditatem aui vidisse, and patri indicesse vt est sententia Rabbinorum.
some affirm, he was the beginner of this mischief; and some, that Aben Ezra
in Comment. in Gen 9. Scribit ipsum risisse referente Camo.
he was partaker with Cham his father, which if it were evident (as Origin. in
Number. Hom. 20. Canaan puer antequam nasceretur maledicitur. Ambros. de Noc. cap.
30. Vtique Canaan natus non erat.
the same by other is doubted and denied) then were the cause more manifest,
why the curse was imposed upon him. But contrariwise if as yet he were
unborn, the commendation of the Prophecy is so much more excellent,
foretelling so justly his Canaan proprie sernus est a (...) Canagh humiliate:
Significat and mercatorem. Hose. 12 7. Prou. 31.21. Quasi dicas homo Canaan,
nam ^^^ra Canaan mercati^^e rerum nobiliu^m maxim seruiebat. EZeck. 27.17. and
17.4. Videtur igitur hoc nomen non sponte susceptum, sed inustum potius
spirituque prophetico declaratum ab ipso Noe, and a posteris sic vocatunt.
name, person and condition; and whether or not it be maintained, it is not
material unto doctrine, seeing that the Lord directed the mouth of Noah, from
whose Psalm. 139.6. Ierem. 1.^.
knowledge, power, and providence, Canaan unborn could not be secret. Moreover
when Canaan is cursed, Cham is not freed, but himself is accursed in Deuteronomy.
28.15.18.
his posterity and August. in Psalm. 103. Filios vocat scriptura opera nostra:
inde (...) apud Grae^os. Ari^^ci. Polit. lib. 1. cap. 8.
goods. And therefore it is directed specially to Canaan: first in regard of
the sons of Sem and Abraham the Israelites, of whom the Lord had Ambros. de
Noe and arca. cap. 28. Calvin. in Genesis cap. 9. Iudais videtur habita fuisse
gratiae Dei ratio.
special regard, both in directing the mouth of Noah, and the pen of Moses
recording the history. Secondly, for the instruction of Est enim certissimu^
signum prophetiae ipsius complementum. Deuteronomy. 18.22.
all succeeding ages, concerning the admirable providence of God. The Lord does
long before point out as it were with finger, where this plague should burn in
the house of Cham: whose children both Genesis 12.15. and 41. etc. Herodot. in
Euterp. Reges in Aegypto fuisse ante Ninum Assyriu^: ex Trog. Justin. lib. 2.
Egyptians, and Cush obtained the greatest part of Africa and Arabia: look
chap. 10.
Aethiopians, and Canaan flourished almost a thousand years after ye curse. Numb
13.28.
the Cananites themselves, most notably flourished long after the threatening
of this curse, and even after the recording Qui haec scripserit in eremo.
of the same by Moses: notwithstanding in the end, Genesis 15.16. Iosu. 11.19.20.
Isai. 28.23. etc.
in the fulness of the time thereof, this prophecy was fufilled upon Canaan,
according to the stricktnes of the curse. Thirdly, to daclare the hainousnes
of the offense of Cham, the punishment Ambros. lib. de Noe and arca. c. 32. Vel
certe diutius poena producitur cum etiam ad filium vsque pertendit and
successoris afflictio in te^pora multa profertur.
was not only laid on him, but also on many generations after him.
Fourthlie, that the punishment of Cham, being laid also upon his children,
might Ambros. ibid. Et fortasse ideo quod pius afficitur iniurij^ filij sui
maxim quarum reut and author existat.
the more astonish his wicked heart: considering it often happens Tertul.
contr. Marcion. lib 2. Quis enim non magis filiorum salutem quam suam cures?
Chrysostom. Hom. 29. Scitis enim, quomodo saepenumero patres orant, vt siliorum
poenat ipsi ferrent.
that men are more careful of their children, then of themselves. Fiftlie,
forasmuch as the Lord before had blessed Noah and his sons, therefore Noah
does so adiudge the punishment, as that the offender receives his just reward,
and yet Justin. Mart. Dialog. cum Triff. Filium namque vna cum reliquis duobus
benedictione a Deo auctum, spiritus propheticas execraturus non erat. Chrysostom.
Hom. in Genesis 29. Volebat enim corri^ere filium propter peccatum and simul
noiebat praeiudicare benedictions quae illi pridem facta fuerat.
the blessing granted, remains inviolate. Noah therefore doubtless, does
neither rashly or cruelly correct his children, but Matthew. 7.3.
first repenting of his own offense, which gave Romans 14 13.
the stumbling block to other, chastises his son as one that Sicut Moses,
Exodus 32 27.32.
feels the smart himself: and yet spares not his own bowels, when God
commands him to strike. But how stands this with justice, that Canaan is
punished, when Cham offended, seeing the Lord affirms, the children Ezech.
18.20.
shall not bear their fathers sins? The Conciliatio. 14.
children that are not Hieron. in lere. comment. cap. 2.5. Offensam ducit a
patribus, non quo peccata pati^^ fisijs imputentur, sed quo and fil^ habentes
patru^ similitudinem, and suo, and parentum scelere puniantur. August. contra
Adimant. cap. 7. Ex eo quod addit, qui me oderunt (Exodus 20.5.) intelligitur
eos puniri peccatis pare^tum, qui in eadem peruersitate parenium, perseuerare
voluerunt.
partakers of their fathers sins, shall in no sort be partakers of their
punishment. For the Lord is so greatly inclined to mercy, that he always
pardons the fathers themselves, Ezech. 18.21.27.
whenever any does repent; and himself also does Psalm. 51.8. Lament. 5.21.
Ezech. 11.19. August. epist. 105. Sicut ergo nemo recte sapit, etc. nisi
acceperit spiritum sapientie and inteliectus, etc. quod est ergo meritum
hominis ante gratiam, quo merito perciptat gratiam, cum omne ^onum meritum
nostrum, non in nobis faciat nisi gratia: and cum De^s co^^nat merita nostra,
nihil a^^^d coronat quam minnera sua.
give them grace, whereby they do repent. But so horrible a thing is sin,
that it does attaint the Isai. 43.27. Romans 5.12. August. de Nupt. and
Concupisc. lib 1. cap. 19. Quod dimissum est in parente trahi^^ in prolem;
mi^is qui^e m^^i^ fit, sed tamen sit.
propagation unto many generations, and staineth it with the fathers
trespasses: yea so far, as that none is free Job. 14.4 Prou 20 9.
or can be freed there from, but by the Psalm 51.12. Ioh. 8.22.
free spirit of the Lord. Canaan therefore, continuing in his fathers sins,
and Genesis 13.13. Deuteronomy 18 2.
his posterity; were punished with their fathers Hos^. 2.4 Gal 3.10.
curse most justly. But why Canaan more then the rest of the sons of Cham?
The potter has power of the clay Ierem. 18 6. Romans 9.21.
to do therewith as pleases him. Gods counsels are infinite, let him Aug^st
epist. 105. Scrutetur qui potesi iudiciorum eius tam ^^^^tum p^^si ^ndri,
ver^^tamen caveat praecip^^ium. Calum. in Genesis 9. Quisque nostrum suae
infirm^^tis sibi cons^tu^ tri^uere pe^^us Deo laudem i^ stitiae discat, quam vt
se insana anda^^a in profunda a^^fl^^n praecipitet. Cum enim totum sen^en Cham
Deus maledicti^ni haberet obnoxi^m, Cananita^ sibi nominatim sumpsit, quos prae
alijs malediceret.
that is able search the depth of them, but let him beware of drowning in them.
Obser. 1. The godly which sin of infirmity, for the most part receive 2.
Sam. 2 14. Psalm. 89.31. Exemplis patet.
more grievous punishments in this life, then do the wicked. Secondly, Gods
children ought to cover Prou. 17.9. and 20.3 Romans 15.1.2. Gal. 6.2 Quae
scilicet tegenda sunt, nam quaedam no^ sunt. Deuteronomy. 13.8.
the imperfections of their brethren with love. Thirdly, children which
despise their parents are Deuteronomy. 27.16. Prou. 30.17.
cursed of the Lord. Fourthlie, the blessing of Parents Exodus 20.12. Genesis 49.1.
prolongeth life unto their children. Fiftlie, the Messiah Jesus Christ, is
come of Gen 11.10. Matthew. 1.1. Luc. 3.
the posterity of Sem, and liath Ioh. 10.16. Ephesians. 2.13.14.
gathered together the sons of Sem and Iapheth, according as the Verse. 27.
Ezech. 37.22.24.
Scriptures have foretold. Sixtlie, those that fall with Noah into the sin of
drunkenness, and Luc. 13.3. Heb. 10.26.
rise not again with Noah by repentance; shall in this life be Prou. 21.17.
and 23.29.30. 1. Cor. 6.10. Chrysostom. Hom. 29 in Genesis Ebrius in peio^i statu,
quam est mortuus; mala enim facere potest, bona non potest; tacetque ibi
ridiculus omnibus, and vxori, and pueris and famulis. Idem in Act. Hom. 27.
Bestia magis quam homo, ridiculus est inimicis, miserabilis apud amicos, omnium
detestatione dignus. Idem ad pop. Antioc Hom. 71. Cane and Asino, imo omni
animanti long deterior. Idem ad pop. Antioc. Hom. 57. Vbi regnat ebrietas, ibi
and Diabolus. Basil. Hom. de ebrio. Ebrius spontaneo seruit daemoni. August. ad
Sacr. Virgin. ^brietas est flagitiorum omnium matter, culparumque materia, radix
criminum, origo vitiorum, turbatio capitis, submersio sensus, tempestas
linguae, proc^lla corporis, naufragium castitatis, amissio temporis, insania
voluntaria, ignominiosus languor, turpitudo morum, de decus vitae, honestatis
infamia, animae corruptela.
partakers of shame and misery, and in the world to come, of 1. Cor. 6. verse.
10. Gal. 5.21.
eternal fire

CHAP. X.
Question 1. verse. 1.2. etc. To what purpose are these generations so largely
described?
NOT without many, and those very necessary causes, does the spirit of God
so fully, and amply describe the restoring of the world, by Noah and his
posterity. First that we might acknowledge the Author. ad Heren. lib. 1.
Historia est res g^sta, sed ab aetatis nostrae memoria remota. Est ergo testis
temporum, lux veritatis, vita memoriae, magistra vitae, nuncia vetustatis. Cic.
orat. lib. 2. August. libr. de vera relig. cap. 25. Quoniam autem diuina
prouidentia, non solum singulis hominibus quasi priuatim, sed vniuerso generi
humano tanqua^ public consulit; quid cum singulis agitur, Deus scit qui agit,
and ipsi cum quibus agitur sciunt: quid autem aegatur cum genere humano, per
historiam (sacram) commendari voluit and per prophetiam.
history of the Bible, to be the history of histories, containing a perfect,
faithful, and necessary record of all the monuments of antiquity; wherein
For among the Heathen there is no history of antiquity, which reaches beyond
the wars of Troy (which was about the time of Elie and Samuel) and the games
of Olympus, as Eusebius testifies by the witness of Iul. Africanus, Eusebius. de
praepar. Euang. lib 10. In this respect Varro called the time from the
beginning of the world until the flood (...), secret or unknown: from the
flood to the Trojan wars (...) fabulous: from thence until his time (...),
made known by history. Censorin. lib. de die Natal.
all the histories of men do fail: and therefore ought to be read, perused,
and Psalm. 119.97.98. Now the very Heathen esteemed their histories so much,
that Scipio would never lay the history of Cyrus bringing up, forth of his
hands. Cicer. Tusc. lib 2. Alexander was wont to hide Homers history of the
wars of Troy, under his pillow whereon he slept.

Alcibiades coming into a Grammar school, asked the Master to see a piece of
Homer, who answering he had none of Homer, Alcibiades struck him a buffet on
the face, saying he was an ass, and made his scholars like himself. How
much more should Christians be studious and zealous in and for the word of
God.


loved above them all. A perfect record it is, because it fully delivers as
well Ioh. 20.31.
in history, as in all other Vincent. Lyrinens. cap. 2. Cum sit perfectus
scripturarum canon, sibique ad omnia satis superque sufficiat, etc.
matters of salvation, whatsoever unto the Church of God is expedient to be
known. Faithful, as being 2. Pet. 1.21. Iren. libr. 3. cap. 1. August. de
consensu euangel. cap. vlt.
endited by the holy Ghost, the searcher 1. Cor. 4.5. Tit. 1.2.
of all secrets, and author of all truth. Necessary, because it contains
Basil. Hexam. 10. Otiosum verbum in scripturis ponere grandis est blasphemia.
Tertul. de Praescripe. Haeret. Apostolos domini habemus authors; qui nec ipsi
quicquam ex suo arbierlo, quod inducerent, elegerunt, sed acceptam a Christo
disciplinam, fideliter nationibus assigna^erunt.
no empty or idle circumstances, but necessary doctrines (even in those
places, which often times of men are thought impertinent) directly appertaining
to man's salvation, and the edification of the Church. The second cause is, that
whereas these nations are for the most part remembered again in Scripture, with
diverse accidents which in the providence of God befell them, in the days of
Moses, and of the Prophets; it could not be without the light of this
narration, that the wisdom and providence of God in disposing of them,
Francise. Iun. in analys. in Genesis 10. Tum vt fines ad ecclesiam decre^o Dei
pertinentes, tum vero ad alios, prout ad historiam Ecclesiae intelligendam
visum est per^inere, hoc capite circumscriberet: Nam abque hoc capite essent
multa, quae spiritus Dei per Mosen aliosque Prophetas consignauit scripto,
neque illo tempore fuissent ab Ecclesiae percepta, neque hoc nostro
perciperentur.
could be so manifestly understood. Thirdly, to explane the Prophecy
pronounced before of Noah, concerning the estate of his three sons, and in
them of the condition of the world. Which Prophecy consists of three parts,
according to the number of the sons of Noah, whom it concerns. The first is
of the punishment of Cham in Canaan his son, to which purpose is here
described the offspring of Canaan, and the place of their habitation, whereby
there can nothing be made more manifest in the sequel of this history, then
that those were the people, whom the Lord gave up unto the sword of Israel,
and which endured bondage, of all other seruitudes most miserable. In the
second place, it contains the blessing upon Sem, wherein if we diligently
observe the words of Scripture, we shall find the exposition of them, in this
which follows. Blessed (says Noah) be the Lord God of Sem: why says he not
rather, blessed be Sem of the Lord God, but that the Lord God of the Prophets
directed his mouth? For what is this, blessed be the Lord God, then as if he
had said: Psalm. 145.2.
praised be the Lord God; or I have, and the world with me shall have infinite
cause to praise the Lord for Sem? And why the Lord God of Sem? Not only in
respect of the righteousness of Sem, in which respect Hebr. 11.16. Chrysostom.
Hom. in Genesis 29. Hoc forte quis dixerit non est benedicere Sem^ Imo valde
benedixit illum. Quando enim dominus benedicitur, and aguntur illi gratiae ab
hominibus, tunc vberior ab illo solet istis benedictio dari, propter quos ipse
benedicitur. Si^ut autem quando benedicitur propter nos, multum id nobis
conciliat fanoris: ita and contra quando propter nos alij illum blasphemant
mayor hinc nostra fit condemnatio.

Oecolampad. in Genesis 9. Eratvtique etiam Deus Noah and Deuteronomy Iapheth and omnium
praeterea mortalium; verum significat esse cum singulari quadam gratia Deu^
filij sui Sem, propter futurum benedictionis semen Christum, ex ^o secundum
carnem nasciturum.


God was not ashamed of Sem to be called his God (for so he was also the God of
Noah, and of Iapheth) but particularly the God of Sem, for that among the
sons of Noah, the promised Genesis 3.15. Luc. 3.36.
seed should come of the root of Sem, for whom all nations should have cause
to bless the Lord: and that son of Sem should be Matthew. 22.43.
his Lord God, in whom all nations Psalm. 72.17.
should be blessed. Thus is the woman's seed, first promised to Adam, again
particularly promised to come of the stock of Sem; and thus do the
Scriptures in the following history, declare him yet more particularly the
son of Genesis 12.3.
Abraham, and yet more specially 2. Sam. 7.16. Matthew. 22.4.
of the house of David, that all the world might know Wherefore, the
blindness of the Jews and Turks is horrible and lamentable: who albeit all
the prophesies foretold of the Messiah, do fully agree in Christ, and only in
man; yet they will not acknowledge him for their Savior until this day. The
former part of this assertion is proved by all the Evangelists, the content of
whose history is this: that which the Prophets have foretold of the Messiah,
as that he should be borne of a Virgin, that he should fly into Egypt, that
he should be slain, his garments divided, not a bone of him broken, etc. the
same was fulfilled in Christ the son of Marie: Ergo, that Christ is the
promised Messiah. The later part is manifest by the Jewish stubbornenesse, and
the Turkish superstition: whose custom is to have this inscription in their
Chapels in the Arabicke tongue: ^a illah ilella. Mehumet iresul, that is to
say, there is but one God, and Mahumet is his prophet. Barthol. Georgieu. lib.
1. cap. 1. de morib. Turcar. in their triumphs and reioycings they use these
words: Illalla illalla, Machomet Russolalla, that is, God is and ever shall be,
and Mahomet his servant. Leon. Chiens. Mitylen. Archiep. lib. de excidio
Constantinop. Such stuff is their Alcoran filled with: which book if a Turk
permit unto a Christian to read, he is punished with death.
that Jesus that son of Marie, is the Messiah of the Lord, Genesis 3.15. Revel.
13 8.
promised from the beginning, and Isai. 63.5. Matthew. 1.21. Act. 4.12.
only he that can save his people from their sins. To this intent, the
genealogy of Sem is reckoned and repeated, and Sem is called the Verse. 21.
father of all the sons of Heber, of whom proceeded the Hebrew Abraham, to
who^ the promise was after renewed by the Lord. The third part of the Prophecy
concerns Iapheth, then which nothing could be more agreeable to the success,
which God has given to Iapheth, and his children. ((...) Iaphet Elohim
Lelepheth) God Eadem vox and Chaldeis and Sy^is dilatare est. Et in Hiphil
Hebraeis omnino id significat: in Call saepius aliter, quandoque tamen ita
redditur.
enlarge Iapheth, and let him dwell in the tents of Sem: wherein is contained a
double blessing. The first is temporal, the other spiritual, conjoined by the
Hebrew conjunction ((...)) and. The word which is interpreted to persuade, does
also signify to Radix (...) patha: blande alloqui; Graec. (...), sapissime
accipitur in malam partem: est etiam dilatare, authoritate Hieron. and
Rabbinorum.
enlarge, in which sense the most part of antiquity Onkelos. Chaldaic. Paraph.
in Gen 9. Hieron. lib. Tradit. in Genesis dilatet. Justin. Martyr. Dialog cum
Tr^ffon. Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 29. D^^^ndo dilatare omnes gentes significauit.
Athanaes. Orat. 1. contr. Arrian. Ex Deo, etc. Ambros. libr. ^e Noa and Arca.
cap. 32. Augustine. de Ciuit. Dei. libr. 16 cap. 2. Nam and Iapheth latitudo
interpretatur. id est, For Iapheth is by interpretation breadth or widenes.
Translat. Septuagint. vulgaris, Pagninus and Montanus.
does understand this place; and it seems most agreeable Chrysostom. homil.
in Gen 29. No aberrabit quis si dixerit benedictiones iusti prophetias esse.
Nam si paeter Noae non simpliciter neque frustra vocabulum indidit Noae, sed
vaticinatus est per nomen futurum Dilunium: multo magis iustus ille non
simpliciter neque frustra benedictiones protulit. Opinor autem quod benedicendo
hos duos duorli populorum vocatione^ significare voluerit; per Sem quidem
Iudaeos: per Iapheth autem Gentium vocationem.
to the purpose of Noah, in the naming of his son, and with his purpose
afterward in blessing him, and with the purpose of this Scripture, in
describing his posterity. The rest of the blessing is spiritual: and let him
dwell in the tents of Sem: that is, let him also be partaker Hieron. libr.
trad. Hebr. Quod autem dicit and habites in tabernaculis Sem, de nobis
prophetatur, qui in eruditione and scientia scripturarum eiecto Israele
versamur.
of the blessing of Sem, and joined and adopted unto the Church of God, whose
lot it is August. in Psalm. 30. Ecclesia huius temporis tabernaculum ideo
dicitur quia adhuc in hac terra peregrinatur. Figuratur autem in Sarah,
pulcherrima foemina in tabernaculis habitante. Idem contr. Faust. Man. lib. 22.
cap. 28. Hilar. de Trin. lib. 7. Hoc habes proprium Ecclesia, dum persequitur
floret, dum opprimitur crescit, dum contemnitur proficit, dum laeditur vincit,
dum arguitur intelligit, tunc stat cum supera^i videtur.
to dwell in tents. Concerning which, it is evident also by this Scripture,
that both God did well entreat, or enlarge Iapheth, and that his children even
until this day, continue in the tents of Sem. In which description it is first
to be observed, which the holy Ghost does so expressie teach; that as the
whole world consists Genesis 9 29.
of the progeny of these three sons of Noah; so Verse. 1. contra ac
Chrysostomus videtur admittere.
none of them had children till they were at liberty from the Arc, and the
danger of the waters, in which but only eight souls were saved, as says the
1. Pet. 3 20.
Scripture. Wherein is perceived the singular goodness of the Lord: for seeing
that only from these three roots, the earth was shortly ouerspred; and that
none of this increase was found, either before, nor in the time, but after the
flood of waters; it shows evidently the force and strength of the blessing
of the Lord, wherewith he had endued them: bring forth fruit and multiply, and
replenish the earth. Neither yet is there Calvin. in Genesis 10. Jam nasutis
hominibus quib^s ab, urdum non est, nullum agnoscere mundi conditorem, tam
subita mundi propagatio incredibilis videtur, atque ideo quasi fabulosum
rident. Fatemur quidem si sensu nostro, etc. At ego interim respondeo, quid
incredihile si in praescripto spacio a scripturis, longaeui homines in tantum
numerum excreuerint? imo nihil insolitum significatur.
occasion, why ignorant and foolish men should cavil at this history, in
respect of the multitude of nations that here are spoken of, as though they had
bin at an instant brought forth into the world. For the scope of the Scripture
is to show, who were the heads and original of the nations, which in process
of time were derived from such parentage. And to this intent it says: of these
were the Isles of the Gentiles divided in their lands, every man For these
things are spoken of by Anticipacion, as shall appear in the next Chapter.
after his language, when as yet the whole earth was of one language, and one
speech: and again; afterward were the families of the Cananites ouerspred:
that is in convenient time, which was long time after. So that the chief
fathers of the nations here spoken of, were Sic enim statuere videntur, qui
linguas 72. diuersas factas in confusione scribunt. Arnob. in Psalm. 104.
Hieron. tradit. Hebraic. Epiphan. ^b. 1. Haeres. cap. 1. August. de ciuit. dei.
lib. 16. cap. 3. Rabbini and alij.
all, or for the For seeing that Peleg was borne in the time of the division of
tongues, it cannot be that Ioctan who was his younger brother, should at that
time have children, whose languages were divided; wherefore it must needs be,
that either Pelegs name was given by Prophecy, which well might be, or that
Ioctan was the elder: which is unlikely: or that Ioctans children were not of
that number which were at that time divided which is likest of all.
most part borne before the division of languages, which afterward is
remembered. Concerning whom, it were a vanity to suppose The Scripture only
teaches such things, as do make for the edification of the Church.
that the Scripture would endeavor to feed the curious minds of men, to show
of what particular ancetor every nation of the earth descended, whereof there
is no use in matters concerning faith or godliness: but only in general, to
show the lineage of our Savior, the stock of Cham that was destroyed, the
issue of Iapheth, how at last they enjoyed the blessing promised; and such
other points as served to the necessary instruction of the church. It
appears in the account of genealogies, that God enlarged Verse. 2.6. and 22.
Iapheth above his brethren, for he enjoyed seven sons, Cham but four; Sem
flue: and, that his succession is not prosecuted, as is the residue, is not
August. de ciuit. Dei, lib. 16. cap. 2. Nec eos defuisse crediderius, sed si
omnes commemorarentur nimis longum fieres, and hac esset magis historita
diligentia quam prophetica prouidentia.
for that he was inferior to his brethren in multitude; but because of the
situation of the country By the divine providence, Deuteronomy. 32.8. Some affirm
that Noah cast lots for his sons: which is not against faith, albeit it be
not necessary to be believed.
allotted for his inheritance, his habitation was farther distant from the
family of Israel, and therefore not so necessary to them, to be described; or
by their special nations, of the Church of God, to be discerned. It seems
moreover, that the bounds of his habitation were more large then of his
brethren, and that the mightiest nations of the world have risen of this root
of Iapheth. The eldest son of Iapheth was Gomer, whose habitation was in the
north from Canaan, and from the common enemies of Israel, as Ezech. 38.6.
appears by the Scriptures: wherefore, Verse. 5.
where here it is said, that of the sons of Iapheth, the Isles of the
Gentiles were inhabited: it seems rightly For in the North part of the world
from Judea are found no Islands, until the Hyperboraic Ocean, nor any sea but
the lake Meotis. Wherefore it is necessarily concluded, that Iapheth inhabited
the north part, as Armenia, Scythia, etc. and the Isles of the Gentiles, which
is Europa. Iosep. ant. l. 1. c. 7 Hieron. trad. Hebraic. Iapheth filio Noa nati
sunt septem filij qui possederunt terram in Asia ab Amano and Tauro Syriae
Coeles and Ciciliae montibus ad fluuium Tanaim: in Europa vero vsque ad Gadira,
etc.
concluded by interpreters, that s from those famous mountains Taurus and
Amanus west and north, unto this our country of England and Ireland, and that
of Spain, which are esteemed to be the Ptolom lib. 1 Tab. Europae. 1.
farthest west part of the world, that is to say, a great part of Asia, with
all Europa, which is counted of it self a third part of the world, came into
the possession of the sons of Iapheth. Cham enjoyed the Aegyptum and Africam,
and partem Arabiae.
south part; and Sem the Verse. 30. Scil. reliquam Asia partem.
east, of whose line Israel was Ad mare mediteraneum sitae.
on the west the uttermost border. Of the family of Iapheth, these mighty
nations are said to come. Of Gomer (not the For the land of Gomer is in the
North part from Judea, Gallia or France in the West; and it were folly to place
Galatia instead of either Gomer or Gallia, for those Galatians or Gallogrecians
were of the Galls and Britans, which under the conduct of Brennus, brother to
Belinus King of England, sacked Rome, and afterward spoiled the Temple of
Delphos, and lastly planted themselves in that country Galatia: who because
they were called Celts or Galls (which name was then common to the inhabitants
of England and France) and spoke the Greek tongue, were called Gallo-Graeci,
French Greeks. Ptolom. lib. 3. cap. 32. Justin. libr. 34. alij. quod Galli and
Graeci a rege Bithyniae auxiliares socij solicitabantur and in eius ditiones
resederunt.
Galls or Galatians, of which there is no countenance of truth, but rather the
Comari scilicet and Massagetae. Pomp. Mela. Geograph. libr. 1. a filijs Gomer
Ascene, Pontici and Bithynici populi quibus eadem denominatio est, and Ascanius
fluuius, Strab. libr. 12. Vsque ad Ascanij Lacus, a Riphath, Riphij sine
Arimphai, Plin. lib. 6. cap. 7. a Togarmah, Armeni, quorum reges Tigranes,
oppida Tigranocertae. Strab. lib. 16.
people of Armenia, and the borders of the same. Of Magog, Joseph. Ant. lib. 1.
c. 7. Hieron. lib. Trad. Hebraic. Vt maxim fidem facis, quod simili ratione
nationes Gog and Magog describuntur, Ezech. cap. 38.5. and 59.2. etc.
the Scythians; of Madai, These are called Madai in Hebrew, as Dan. 6. etc.
the Medes; of Iauan, the So does the Scripture call the Greeks, Dan. 8.2.
Grecians: of Tubal, the inhabitants of Joseph. Antiq. lib. 1. cap. 7. Tobelus
Tobalais sedem dedit qui nunc sunt Iberi. Hieron. trad. in Genesis Tubal Iberi,
qui and Hispani a quibus Celtiberi, licet quidam Italos suspicentur. Celtiberi
vero a Celtis, id est Gallis, ad Iberum flumen habitantibus: Lucan. lib. 3.
France, England, Italy and Spain; of Meshech, the Meshech. Cappadoces qui
olim Meschinos vocatos and eorum vrbem Mazacam: testis est Joseph. Antiq. lib.
1. cap. 7. Hieron. Tradit. Hebraic.
men of Cappadocia; of Tiras, they Quorum non satis (vt inquis Hieron. ibid.)
immutatum est vocabulum.
of Thracia and Phrygia. But as it were in vain to be curious in bounding out
their habitations: so were it folly to suppose those nations which now
remain, to be purelie the offspring of such parentage. For such has bin the
wickedness of men, their They were soon turned out of the way: Exodus 32. for
within one hundredth year after the flood, they forgot the great example of
Gods justice; and his exceeding mercy in their own deliverance; provoking him
a new in building Babel.
unthankfulness to God, and their cruelty within themselves; and such the
wrath of God for their offenses; as that they have bin by wars and seditions
dashed one against another, and in their habitations mingled As Trojans, with
the Latians of Aborigenes in Italy: Goths with Italians and Spaniards: Saxons
and Normans with Britans: French men with Galls, etc.
and confused. Notwithstanding it cannot be perceived, by any testimony of
antiquity, but that in general, the sons of Iapheth have Not universally
expelled of any region by the Sons of Sem or Cham.
kept their habitation; and to Sem and Chams posterity have It is to be
observed out of all histories, that the greatest empires have been either from
the North toward the South, as of the Babylonians and Persians, as it were to
subdue Chams posterity; or toward the East and South, as of the Macedonians
and Romans; or lastly toward the West and South, as now is of the Turks and
Tartares, which seem to be of Togarmah, and of Iapheths family, though they
have changed their religion with the Saracens, the counterfeit Sons of Sem,
and Sarah.
rather offered, then suffered violence. By which as it is manifest, that as
God enlarged Iapheth according to the Prophecy, so he also has dwelt these
many 1600. years.
hundred years, in the tents of Sem. For so soon as the God of Sem was made
known unto the world: even from Jerusalem, and round about Romans 15.19. Hieron.
trad. Hebr. in Genesis de Iapheth populus gentium nascitur; quia igitur lata est
multitudo crede^tium, a latitudine quae (...) Iapheth dicitur, latitudo nomen
accepit.
unto Illyricum, and to the As England, Ireland and Sneueland: For the
longitude of the earth, that is, of Cities and Countries, according to
Mathematicians, is their distance from the Meridian, which is taken from the
Islands called Insulae Fortunatae.
farthest habitation of men westward, (all which are the territories of the
sons of Iapheth) has abounded of long time the Gospel of Jesus Christ. So
that even Italy 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. Revel. 2.13. and 18.2.
where Satan now has set his throne; and Spain Ambros. comment. in Romans cap.
15. Venturum promittit tempore quo ad Hispaniam erat iturus, quia illic
Christus non erat praedicatus, vt occuparet mentes illorum. Confer cum Eusebius.
Eccles. Histor. lib. 2. cap. 6.
(the last of all the sons of Iapheth receiving the gospel) has bin Martyrum
and professorum ferax, inter quos Osius Cordubae illustris prasul. Socrat.
libr. 1. cap. 4. Sozom. lib. 3. cap. 10.
renowned for the profession of Jesus Christ, albeit now they do furiously
oppress and persecute the same. Obser. 1. The Lord has Psalm. 115.16.
given the habitatio^ of the earth unto the sons of men. Secondly, the
Prophesies of the Scripture are the Isai. 55.11. Habac. 2.3. Luc. 1.28.
undoubted truth of God, and shall be fulfilled in their seasons.

Question 2. verse 9. What means this; that Nimrod is said to be a mighty
hunter before the Lord?
THe genealogy of Cham is prosecuted by the Scripture, unto the third
generation: not so much for that his seed was full of nations, as because such
nations being bordering neighbors unto the inheritance of Israel, As
Philistims, Egyptians, Arabians, etc. Isai. 14.28. and 19. and 20. Ierem. 46.
and 47.
are often set out in Scripture, as vassals of Gods wrath: whereby, as then
they might perceive, that such punishments Isai, 19.12. and 20 6. Ezec. 30.17.
and 31.10 Amos 1.6.9.
were inflicted on them for their wickedness, to give example Ierem. 7.12. and
46.^7. and Ezech. 26.8. Hieron. in Iere. 3. Tormenta aliorum, alioru^ sunt
remedia.
to the Church of God: so having recourse unto this record, they might also
find the parentage whereof they were descended. Cush gave name to Ierem.
13.23. Nunquid vertes Cushith pellem suam?
Aethiopia, which therefore doubtless is to be esteemed his inheritance.
Misraim to Terra Aegyptus Mizraim dicitur passim in scripturis.
Egypt, which is also called Psalm. 105.23.
the land of Cham. Put to Joseph. Antiq. lib. 1. cap. 7. Hieron, libr. trad.
Hebraic. in Genesis Cush vsque hodie ab Hebraeis Aethiopia nu^cupatur, Mizraim
Aegyptus; Phut, Libya, a q^o Mauritaniae fluuius vsque in praesens Phus
dicitur, omnisque circa cum regio, Phuthensis. Plin lib. 5. cap. 5.
Libya. Canaan to the place of his possession. The sons of Cush: Seba, of
Hieron. lib. trad. Hebraic. in Genesis Saba a quo Sabai, de quibus Virgilius,
Solisque est Thuria virga Sabais. Neque enim extra hanc Arabia felicis tractum
thus alicubi reperitur.
Saba in Arabia. Hanila, whose country is Descriptio eius habetur, Genesis 2.11.
and 25.18. 1. Sam. 15.7. quibus intelligitur esse porrectam a Perside and
Susiane Austrum versus iuxta amhitum Euphratis: vid. Plin. libr. 6. cap. 27.
Solin. cap. 68. Hinc palam est, terram Cush duplicem esse, quod filij Cush
partim Aethiopiam, partim Arabiam, and Babyloniam, cum Nimrod filio Cush
incoluerunt; vnde non immerito vxor Mosis Midianites vocatur Cushith, N^^,
12.1. Licet Midianita fuerit non Aethiopissa. Namque Abrahae filius Midian
sortem accepit in finibus Arabia felicis, quae ipsa a posteris Cush possessa
fuerat.
often remembered in the Scripture: Sabtah of whom Joseph. Antiq. lib 1. cap. 7.
Sabathes a quo Sabatheni, qui Gracis dicuntur Astabarri, vel potius Ascabari,
and Cascaboraei, a Nili appellatione que^ incolunt, vt trad. Tremel. in Annot.
the Sabatheni. Raamah, and Sabtecha Hieron. trad. in Genesis Regma vero and
Sabbatheca paulatin antiqua vocabula perdidere, and quae nunc pro veteribus
habeant ignoratur.
have lost their ancient names, if ever they were known to be a people. The
sons of Raamah: Sheba, who Obseruandum est Seba filium Cush, Hebraice scribi
cum (...) Samech, vt obseruauit Hieronymus, Seba filium Regina scribi cum Shin,
(...) Sheba: and praeterca notandum, Sheba cum Shin esse vel hunc filium
Regina, vel alium filium Iokshan filij Abraham, hic ^utem filius Regina in
Australi Aethiopia tractu sedem tenuis, vnde venit regina Austri. Filius
Iokshan in Orient a Canaan, cuius posteri Iobi ^rmenta depradantur, Job. 1.15.
cuius meminit Strab. lib. 17. Plin. lib. 6. cap. 29. Joseph Antiq. lib. 8. cap.
2. quare im^^^ito Pererius inuehitur in Iosephum vera praedicantem de situ
terrae Shebae, nam fuit illa Regina Austri non Orientis. Ergo ex Sheba filio
Regina, non filio Iokshan, qui dimissus fuerit orientem versus Genesis 25.6.
possessed a noble country in Aethiopia, where after reigned that famous
Princess; who came to Matthew. 12.42.
prove the wisdom of Solomon, whom our Luc. 11.21.
Savior calls the Queen of the south, which came from the uttermost parts
of the earth: and Dedan, after whom was Ezech. 27.7. Semper tonenda est
distinctio inter Sheba and Dedan filios Regma, and Sheba and Dedan filios
Iokshan. Quorum vtriusque mentio est ibid. verse. 15. and 20. videntur vtrobique
esse confines Sheba and Dedan, tam huius, quam illius: and Regma nonnunquam pro
Sheba sumi, nonnunqua^ pro Dedan e suis filijs.
named his nation and posterity. The sons of Misraim except Lubim and
Casluhim (being not else where remembered in holy Scripture, save in Chron. 1.11.
the repetition of this genealogy) are unknown says Josephus, and Joseph.
Antiq. lib. 1. cap. 7.
their names through wars have perished in forgetfulness: for whom also I think
it vain, to seek farther then the kinreds of Egyptians. The Cananites are
most largely described by name and situation; to the end the Israelites might
fully know the bounds of their country, which the Lord had promised: as
namely in their west border, from Sidon in the north, until Azza in the
south; and in their east side from Sodom and Gomorra Admah Zeboiim, even unto
Lasha, that is from the south to the north again; thus pointing out Vid.
Tremel. in Annot.
the four corners of the country. And Cush begot Nimrod says the Scripture:
why then is not Nimrod named among the sons of Cush? because being Ob eius
eminentiam, inquit August. de ciu. Dei, lib. 1. cap. 3.
more famous then the rest, the Scripture reserueth him unto his place. Of
Nimrod is recorded: first his lineage of the stock of Cush, and Cham. Secondly
his condition, that he began to be mighty, and a mighty hunter before the
Lord. Thirdly, his kingdom and dominion is bounded out. Fourthlie, his
succession is signified, that Epiphan. Haeres. 1. and Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis
29. do think that this Assure was the son of Nimrod: but the Scripture is
against it, and reason, and consent of authority: the Scripture names Ashur
the son of Sem, but of Ashur son of Nimrod remembers not.
Ashur, not of his Joseph. Antiq. libr. 1. cap. 17. Semae vero quinque fuerunt
filij quorum Assurus vrbem Ninum condidit, and subditos de se Assyrios
nominauit. August. de ciuit. Dei. lib. 16. cap. 3. Ashur autem vnde Assyrij,
non fuit ex filijs Cham medij filij Noae, sed ex filijs Sem.
children, but of the posterity of Sem, avoided his tyranny, and bridled his
fury, by building August. ibid. Vnde apparet ex progeny Sem exortos fuisse,
qui postea regnum Giga^tis illius Nimrod obtinerent, vnde proced^rent, atque
alias co^dirent civitates, quarum prima est a Nin^ appellata Niniue.
Niniue, Rehoboth, Calah, and Resen, the last and the least whereof Tremelio
visu^s est et alijs, de Niniue praedicari, quod ciuitas esset magna: sed quis
huius sententiae vsus cum omnibus esset Niniue notissi na tanqua^ culmen and
caput orbis? Deinde ipsa phrasis and ratio contextus aliter sonat, nec
huiusmodi transpositionem fere patitur; multo est tutius intelligere Resen
ips^m esse magnam etiamsi incognitam.
was a great and noble City. Unto which Ashur of Niniue, and his posterity
(being Ptolom. Geograph. descript. Asiae. Strab. de situ orbi^. lib. 16.
near in situation unto Babel) it seems by records of Numb. 24.22.24. 2.
King. 15. and 16.7. and 17.3. and 18.13.
Scripture, and Joseph. Antiq. lib. 1. cap. 7. Herodot. in Clio. Diodor. Sicul
l^b. 3. cap. 6. Justin. lib. 1. August. de ciuit. Dei, lib. 16. c. 17. From
Ninus about the time of Abraham, until Esarhaddon son of Senacherib, about a
thousand and four hundred years.
other testimonies, the Lord for many ages permitted the chiefest Empire of the
world. Of Nimrod it is said, he began to be mighty: that is to say, he was
the first Hieron. lib. tradit. in Genesis Nimrod fill us Cush arri^uit insueta^
primus in populo tyrannidens. August. lib. quaest. in Genesis q. 18. Quaeritur cur
diceret s^riptura: caepit esse gigas super terram, cum gigantes antea natos
commemorat, an forte post di^uu (...) nonitas generis humani reparandi de nouo
commemoratur, in quae nouitate, hic caepit esse gigas super terram? Seuerus lib
sacr. histor. Cami filius Cush nomine, Nimrod Gigantem genuit. Philastr. lib.
de Haeres. Nimrod primus Gigas appellatur a scriptura: i. Nimrod is called the
first Giant in the Scripture: observe that the old translation which Augustine
followed, in steed of fortem coram Domino, mighty before the Lord, translated
Gigantem, a Giant before the Lord.
that exercised his might and cruelty in manner of tyranny, after the flood
of Noah. For this his cruelty, he is called a hunter and a mighty hunter
before the Lord. There are two sorts of hunting which the Scripture speaks
of. The one of beasts, as Esau Genesis 27.5.
hunted. The other is of men, which is a spiritual kind of hunting. This also
is in diverse sorts. Some there are that hunt the souls of men, of who^ the
Ezech. 13.18.22.
Prophet speaks: you hunt the souls of my people, because with your lies,
you have made the heart of the righteous sad, whom I have not made sad; and
strengthened the wicked, that he should not return from his wicked way, by
promising him life. Some also hunt the bodies of men: and after Ierem. 16.16.
(says the Lord) I will send hunters, and they shall hunt them from every
mountain. Some, their lives; in which sense the Scripture Prou. 6.26.
says; a whorish woman will hunt for the precious life of a man. Some also
Prou. 1.17.18.19.
their lives and goods. By this it may be perceived, what kind of hunting this
Nimrod exercised; namely hunting of men, their lives, liberties and goods: to
which purpose, he erected Babel as a net, to be the beginning of his tyranny.
The which his subtlety and cruelty, the anceint Non deprauate ad sensum
vulgata legis editio: ab hoc exiuit in prouerbium: quasi etc.
people in a proverb termed hunting. But he is said to be a hunter and a
mighty hunter before the Lord. Some understand thereby Vatab. Annot. in Ge^.
Coram Domino. Id est, omnium qui sunt sub coelo maximus. Idem Mecer. in Genesis
his excessive greatness, as one would say a marvelous exceeding great hunter;
in which sense, a very great mountain Psalm. 36.6. Sicut montes Dei.
is called in the Scripture, a mountain of God; a great tree Psalm. 104.16.
Item Ion. 3.3. Nini^e ciuitas magna Dei: eodem sensu os maximu^ hominis, os
sacrum dicitur ab Anatomicis.
is called a tree of God. Some understand also, as though it had bin meant,
that he was not a worker of secret injuries, but August. de ciu. Dei, libr.
16. cap. 4. Sicut Nimrod Gigas venator contra Dominum, quod non intellegentes
no^nulli, ambiguo Graeco textu decepti sunt, vt non interpretarentur non contra
Dominu^, sed ante Dominu^; (...) enim and ante and contra significat. Tremel.
in annot. Pessime igitur Aben Ezra in bonam partem accipit, quod feras caperet
and coram Domino offerebat.
even of open villainy, in the sight of God and men, as the earth is said Genesis
6.11.
to be corrupt before God, and the men of Sodom Genesis 13.13.
exceeding sinners against the Lord. Other think, that Joseph. Antiq. lib. 1.
cap. 5. Hanc superbiam dei^; contemptum excitauit in ijs Nab^odes, vir audax
and manu promptus, subinde iactani non Deo, sed proprie virtuti praesentem
faelicitatem eos debere. Similia and Rabbi Rasi, Vatab. Eximere se conatus ex
numero omnium.
his insolency and pride of heart was such, as though he would have exempt
himself from the common condition of mortal men, to be like the almighty. He
was mighty in the earth, and a mighty hunter before the Lord: that is
Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 2^. Quida^ dicunt hic coram Deo, id est aduersarius Deo:
ego autem non puto scripturam hoc insinuare, sed quod robustu^ fuerit, and
virilis, and quod dicit coram Domino: hoc est a Domino constitutus, eo quod
acceperat ab illo aliquam diuinam existimationem.
says Chrysostom, he was endued with excellent parts by God; he was mighty in
strength, mighty in wisdom, mighty in fame and estimation; but these his
privileges he abused (and became a mighty hunter) seeking to be made a king,
when as yet 1. Sam. 12, 12.
the Lord was king, and to bring the free people in subjection, when before
Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 29. Sed hic iteru^ proauum suum imita^us, and abusus
naturae priuilegijs, alium seruitutis modum adinuenit, and princeps atque rex
fieri attentauit. Rex enim nondum erat cum no^dum essent subditi.
there were neither king nor subjects. This is it which the Scripture chiefly
means, and condemns in Nimrod and all his followers: namely ambition,
pride, and tyranny. To be mighty, or noble, or wise, or rich, or honorable,
is no where discommended by the holy Ghost, for they are indeed the Genesis
24.35. 1. King. 3.13.
blessings and gifts of God. But when men will lift up themselves above their
gifts, or because they have no more, will rob and spoil from other; such men
are hunters before the Lord. Nimrod was valiant, and wise, and noble: he ought
Psalm. 82.1.2.3.
therewith to have defended, not oppressed his weaker brethren. He had no right
of government. Noah his great grandfather, the Monarch of the world was yet For
Noah lived after the birth of Peleg (so called because of the division of
tongues) two hundred and nine and forty years, as appears by ye Scripture.
in life. Sem and Iapheth were much more honorable and more worthy; but none
of them presumed of regal government, but governed their own, as a father in
his family. But this wicked rebel Na^ Hebraice Nimrod rebellem sonat a marad.
(...) rebellare.
waxing proud of the gifts he had, albeit not satisfied with the greatness of
them, spared not to deprive the people of their ancient liberty, and his
superiors of their authority, to the end (undeserving it, save in his own
opinion) he might be made a king. But such was the providence of God (who uses
the wicked and crooked instruments August. de ciu. D i, lib. 22. cap. 1.
Potentius and melius iudicant, etiam de malis benefacere, quam mala esse non
sinere.
unto his own glory, and his peoples good) to brand this wickedness of Nimrod
with perpetual infamy, Calvin. in Genesis 10. Constat hoc Mosis elogio inuri
tyranno aeternam probri notam: hinc statuere licet, quantum Deo placeat
moderata administratio inter homines.
making it a proverb in the mouths of men, and cutting For the Scripture
makes no mention of any children of Nimrod. Historians teach that Ninus was
the builder of Nini^e. Strab. lib. 16. D^odor. Sicul. lib. 3. Plin. lib. 6.
that he overcame all the countries ab^^t him. Diodor. lib. 3 cap. 6. Justin.
lib. 1. August. de ciuit. Dei. lib. 16. cap. 17. that his wife S^m^^anis
builded Babylon. Justin. lib. 1. By which it is perceived that Nimrods empire
lasted but a little while. So August. de ciuit. Dei, lib. 16. c. 3. thinks
that Ninus was this Ashur son of Sem. But other writers affirm, that Ninus
was son of Belus of the house of Cha^, which Belus built Babylon: Eusebius. de
praepar. lib. 9. cap. 4. Q Curt. lib. 5. which Belus was this Nimrod according
to the Scripture. I suppose these authors may truly be reconciled thus: Nimrod
built Babylon, and Ashur Niniue. Nimrod was called Belus, or Saturn of
Babylon; Ninus son of Ashur subverted his Empire, but following his manners,
was as well counted his son, as of his godly father Assure, which Ninus also
continued his fathers enterprise, and finished Niniue: his wife Semiramis after
her husbands death reedified Babylon: but of uncertainties, let every one have
his judgment.
off his race from bearing rule. In whose example, we may observe 1. That
those that seek for, or do attain to honor, rule-bearing, or office in the
Church or common wealth, not Heb. 5.6.
being lawfully advanced or called thereunto, either by lawful 2. Sam. 7.12.
2. Chron. 13.5.6.
inheritance, 1. Sam. 11.12.
free election, or other means According to the laws and customs of the
Nations.
which the Lord has established, for the succession and continuance of such
offices; they are before the Lord, accounted Judge. 9.1.20. 1. King. 15.27.28.
and 16.1.2. 2. Chron. 23.3.14. etc. Isai. 22.15.16.
hunters of men's souls, or of their bodies, lives, liberties, or goods, and
shall be rewarded as Prou. 1.19. Psalm. 5.4.5.6.
spiritual murderers. 2. Those also that seek for honor and authority for
their own sake, their lucre or their glory, rather then for the glory of God,
and the good of the Church and common wealth: even they are 1. Sam. 2.29.30.
Ezech. 34.2.3.
hunters before the Lord, the Lord has not sent them, and yet they ran. 3.
They that to place themselves in honor and dignity, displace or hinder other,
which by right have more title thereunto: they also Judge. 9.1. 2. Sam. 15.4.5.
Numb. 16.1.2.
are hunters in this spiritual chase, they Habac. 2.13. Micah. 1.7.
often labor in the fire and get no gain, for the Prou. 20.21.
inheritance unjustly gotten, the end thereof shall not be blessed. 4. Those
that have received gifts, must 1. Sam. 26.9.10. 2. Sam. 4.11. Psalm. 131.1.2.
wait upon the Lord, until he call them forth to exercise them, which when
Prou. 8.15. Hosea. 8.4. Isai 22.21. Romans 3.8.
ever he does, he does by lawful and holy means; and be humbled Exodus 3.11.
Judge. 6.15. etc.
with the sight of their infirmities, not Judge. 9.28.29. 1. Cor. 4.7.1.
lifted up with the measure of their gifts, nor hasty to climb before the
Lord do stay Psalm. 94.18.
their hand and foot; for it is much more warm and safe, to sit at the root
of a tree then in the top; and honor Number. 11.11.12.13. Et honos est ^nus,
est in prouerbio. Hieron. epist. ad Marc. Non est dignum vt inde exigat honorem
vnde refugis labore^.
of it self is burdenous, much more 1. King. 16.1. Chrysostom. Hom. in Psalm.
50. Conscientia peccati formidinis est matter: Conscience of sin is the mother
of fear. Therefore the proverb is: Nothing so fearful as a Tyrant: whereof
many examples are: Valor. Max. lib. 9 cap. 14. Dionisius for fear of being
killed of his Barber, taught his daughters to pole his head: afterward not
daring to trust them, he burnt his hair with nutshels set on fire. Di^dor.
lib. 20. Cicer. Offic. libr. 2. Alexander Phareus used to search his wife
before he went to bed, least she carried any knife to murder him. Sueton. in
vit. Domit. cap. 14. Domitian was so fearful that he walked almost
continually in his gallerie, which he caused to be set with the stone
Phengites, that by the brightness thereof (as in a glass, Plin. libr. 36. cap.
22.) he might see what was done behind him.
when it is attained with an evil conscience: notwithstanding when the Lord
does call thee unto office, (which thou shall know by his Psalm. 19.11. and
119.98.99.
word, and the lawful means he lays before thee) Arise, and do the work
of the Lord with cheerefulnes; be thou a Zach. 4.2.6.
candlestick of light in the house of God, a Isai. 32.1.2.3.
conduit pipe to convey Gods mercies and benefits to men, a Romans 13.4.
sword in the Lords hand to avenge sin and wickedness: punish the evil,
maintain 1. Chron. 18.14. Psalm. 72.2.
the good: deliver Psalm. 82.3.4. Virgil. Aenead. 6. Regum est parcere
subiectis and debellare superbos.
the oppressed from the hand of the wicked: have not Leuit. 19.15.
respect unto the rich, nor to the poor: be unto Isai. 49.23.
the Church of God, a nursing father: cause the nurses thereof 2. Chron. 17.7.8.
and 31.2.3. 1. Pet. 2.2.
to feed with the milk of wholesome doctrine. If thou shall thus be occupied in
the Matthew. 21.28.29
vineyard of the Lord, not doing John. 6.38.
thine own will, but his that sent thee; not Philip. 2.21.
seeking thine own things, but his that put thee in authotitie: the Lord will
be with thee Exodus 3.12. Josh. 1.5.
as he was with Moses, with Joshua, with David, and 1. King. 1.29.
deliver thy soul out of all adversity: he Psalm. 55.22.
will bear the burden of thy magistracy; he will make thee a Ierem. 1.18.
defenced City, an iron pillar and walls of brass against all thy enemies;
he Psalm. 105.15. Zach. 2.8.
that touches thee, shall touch the apple of his eye: he will preserve thine
honor, and 1. Sam. 2.30.
peace of conscience in this life, and continue thy Prou. 15.15. Psalm. 5.11.12.
regencie in the life to come, with eternal glory and felicity. 5. Observe
also in Chams posterity, they flourish and are mighty, and Canaan exceeds
in outward blessings, as in number of children, and rich inheritance: so is the
Lord not hasty to bring Exodus 34.6. Psalm. 103.6.
destruction upon the wicked, but Romans 2.4. 2. Pet. 3.9.
provoke them with his goodness to repentance. 6. There is Job. 21.7.8.9. etc.
Psalm. 73.7.
no discerning in the present estate of temporal things, between the
righteous and the wicked. 7. The wicked, Job. 21.17. etc. Psalm. 73.18.19.20.
although for a time they flourish with prosperity, yet they soon decay, and
are in the wrath of God consumed.

Question 3. verse 21. For what cause is Sem called, the father of all the
sons of Heber: and what is to be esteemed of the eldership or seniority of
Sem and Iapheth, concerning whom there is difference in translations and
interpreters?
BEcause the Scripture purposes, from hence forth to abide August. de ciu.
Dei, lib. 16. cap. 3. Caeptum esse dicit a minimo, and gradatim generationum
istarum in maximo finitam orationem: Sed ex falsis praemissis non sequitur
conclusio.
in the history of the house of Sem, as by which only true religion was
professed in succeeding ages; of Romans 9.5.
whom are the fathers, and of whom came Jesus Christ concerning the flesh:
therefore in the beginning After the same manner in disgrace of Cham, the
Scripture calls him the Father of Canaan.
of his history these words are placed, as a preface to commend his person,
and the blessings which the Lord God of Sem bestowed upon him. One would think
it at the first, a speech absurd, that Sem should be called the father of all
the sons of Heber. For if Heber were of Sems posterity, how could Sem but be
the ancetor of all his progeny. But herein is a Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 3.
Merito thesauro cuipiam confertur diuinarum scripturarum lectio: nam sicut ex
illo, quisquis vel paruam micam capere valeat, multas sibi parat diuitias; ita
and in sacra scriptura, etiam in breui dictione variarum sententiarum vim and
ineffabiles diuitias inuenire licet.
mine of treasure hid. He was father of all the sons of August. libr. de ciu.
Dei. 16 c. 3. Orde verborum est: and Sem ^^^us est Heber etiam ipsi, id est,
ipsi Sem natus est Heber, qui Sem pater est omnium filiorum. Sem ergo
Patriarcham intelligi (...) ^^s, omnium qui de stirpe eius exorti sunt, quos
commemoraturus est, sieve sint nepotes, sieve abnopo^es, and pronepotes, and
deinceps indidem exorti.
Heber, that is of Some interpret it thus, the Father of all the Sons beyond
(namely Euphrates) not taking the word Heber to be a proper name, but as it
signifies tram, vltra, tra^ectum, vel vlteriorem partem, beyond or on the
further side: like as the word Beth bara, Ioh. 3.29. signifies a house (Beth
gnebar) beyond Iordane, for as Josephus testifies, Antiq. lib. 1. cap. 7. and
Hieron. Trad. in Genesis the Sons of Heber possessed, from Cophes a river of
India, unto the border of Euphrates and Assyria. Therefore it is here
interpreted of all the Sons beyond the river: But the conjecture is fetched
too far, to come home in season.
Heber and all his sons. And why of Heber? for so was he also of Elam and
Ashur, and Lud and Aram, and all the nations that came of them? Surely,
because the wisdom of God, willing to commend Sem, for the blessing upon Sem,
which Noah had prophesied; could find no such argument of commendation in any
of these, as was easy in Heber to be found; which was sincere piety, and
zealous perseverance in true religion, which the Lord regards Deuteronomy.
26.17.18.19. Hieron. ad Celant. Sola apud Deum libertas est, non seruire
peccatis: summa apud Deum nobilitas est, clarum esse virtutibus. Nazianzen.
Orat. 13. Triplex est genus nobilitatis; vnum quod superne originem duxit,
cuius respectu omnes ex aequo nobiles sumus, ad Dei scilicet imaginem facti:
alterum a sanguine prouenit, cuius ratione number quis fit nobilis equidem haud
scio; praeserti^ cum ortus eius cum interitu coniunctus est. Tertium, ex vltio
vel virtute aestimatur, cuius vel magis vel minus participes s^^^us, prout vel
seruanerimus imaginem vel corruperimus. Nam ^^^tum genus ex rescriptis and
edictis pendens apud me tunc erit in precio, cum pulchritudinem sitam in
coloribus amplexus fuere, and Simiam capero venerari, quae leo sit esse iussa.
above all the titles of nobility. Which appears partly by the name of
Heber, Transeuntem vel transuenitentem significat, quasi ab eorum societate
transisses.
that he separated himself from their assembly, which stubbornly Genesis ^1.4.
For it signifies one coming from beyond, departing or passing.
rebelled against the Lord: and partly by the benefit, which he received of
his constancy, which was that when every family of the earth had changed
Genesis 11.7.9.
his dialect of speech, only Heber continued with that he had attained from
his infancy. It seems also that Heber is here remembered, rather the^
Arphaxad, both because being young, and more apt Psalm. 119.9. Eccles. 11.9.
Ambros. libr. de viduis. Vicina est lapsibus adolescentia, quia vaeriarum astus
cupiditatum furorem calentis inflammas aetatis.
to be seduced, by preserving his soul from sin he obtained a greater
commendation; as also for that the Lord having chosen his Church, out Deuteronomy. 7.7.
of a little family, would hereby describe the limits and visible bounds
thereof. The father of all the sons of Heber. The father therefore of all
Ioctans multitude? yea doubtless: but much rather in the meaning of August. de
ciu. lib. 16. cap. 3. Et praelatus est Heber etiam filijs cum sit quintus
nepos: quid nisi verum est quod traditur, ex illo Hebraeos esse cognominatos,
in quo Dei ciuitas and in sa^ctis peregrinata est, and in omnibus sacramento
adumbrata.
the Scripture, of the Hebrew Abraham, of Moses and the Prophets, of David the
king, and of the Messiah Jesus Christ. This is the style of honor which the
Lord thought meet to bestow on Sem, thereby to distinguish him from his
brethren. Secondly, it follows: the brother of Iapheth the great. Why is he
not called the brother of Cham and Iapheth; especially since Cham in the
repetition of their names is always next him placed, as here he is also in the
recount of genealogies? Surely, be use the Lord would not vouchsafe Calvin. in
Genesis 10. Non vocatur hoc loco Sem, frater Came, quia resectus ex fratrum ordine,
and iure suo abdicatus fuerat.
that honor unto Cham, although he were as near by conjunction in the flesh,
to call him the brother of the fathers For as Abraham is called the father of
the faithful, albeit some are Gentiles; so Sem is called the father of all the
sons of Heber, because in the^ was the visible Church remaining until the
Messiah; namely for his praise and commendation. Romans 11.13.
of the Church, who by his sin had made himself August. de ciuit. lib. 16
cap. 2. Cham vero tanquam se ab vtrisque discernens, and inter vtrunque
remanens, nec in primitijs Israelitarum, nec in plenitudine Gentium; quid
significat nisi haereticorum genus callidum, non spiritu sapientiae, sed
spiritu versipellis astutiae, quo solent haeresi eorum feruere praecordia, and
pacem perturbare sanctorum.
an enemy: but only Iapheth, who was with Sem a partner Genesis 9.23.
in his piety, was also meet to be partaker of his praises. Herein is also
handled as difficult a question; whether Iapheth or Sem were the elder brother:
thus stand the words in the Hebrew text: Achi Iapheth Hagadol: the brother of
Iapheth the For so it is word for word, and very fitly to be translated, for
(...) ha, is a prepositiue particle with the Hebrews, and answers to (the)
in English, and (...) gadal, to be great, also to magnify, from whence (...)
gadol, great.
great. For first because this greatness is given to brotherhood, it is Sic enim
August. de ciuit. Dei, lib. 16. cap. 3. Calvin. in Genesis 10. Lyra. and consensus
interpretum.
wholly understood of the age of one of them, that he was the greater or elder
borne; but whether to Iapheth or to Sem to be referred, it cannot fully be by
the For the Hebrews having neither cases of variation, or degrees of
comparison; it cannot so plainly be perceived as if it had been varied of ye
Greeks or Latins, but by comparing the order of the words before and after:
which is common to us also with the Hebrews for the most part, in our English
tongue.
letter of the text determined. There are of the Aben. Ezra. in comment. in
Genesis Other make Cha^ the middle son, and Sem the youngest, as Rab. Solomon,
but neither of both opinions contains sufficient probability.
Hebrew writers which affirm, that Cham was the eldest son of Noah, but where
the Scripture calls Genesis 9.24.
Cham his Hachatan, paruus filius. Desunt ijs comparationes.
little son, it cutteth off that judgment from the truth. But for the David.
Kimchi. August. de ciuit. Dei, lib. 16. cap. 3. Pagnin. in trans. etc.
most part, Sem is esteemed the eldest son, both because he is always first
named among the brethren; and also for that (as Rab. Salom. in Genesis 27.15.
the Hebrews would auow) the Priesthood was joined with the Et inde sequeretur
hunc esse Melchisedec, de quo Genesis 14. quod Hebraeis placet. Rasi, Lyra. etc.
privilege of birth, until that Aaron was called and confirmed by the Lord.
Notwithstanding on the contrary, there want not many reasons, why we are to
hold, that Iapheth by nature was the eldest of them. For first the placing of
the words in the Hebrew text, do seem to He says not Sem Hagadol, Sem the
great, or Sem the great brother of Iapheth: but Achi Iapheth Hagadol, the
brother of Iapheth the great.
show the meaning of the Scripture, that Iapheth not Sem was greater or elder
borne. Secondly, the Sept. (...).
Greek translation does read it so, The Rabbis in Bereshith Rabba, and Rab.
Salom. do doubt of it, Rab. David. Kimchi in 1 Paralip. persuades it. Lyra.
in Genesis 10. Genebrard. in Chronolog. Mercer. in Genesis 10. Broughtons consent of
Scripture do confirm it.
and many learned writers do so expound it. Thirdly, it is most evident by
this: Noah being five hundred year old, as says the Scripture, Genesis 5.32.
begat Sem, Ham, and Iapheth, that is to say, August. lib. de ciu. 15.
Generauit id est generare coepit. quaest. in Genesis 25.
began to generate, and had none of them before. Cham was not then begotten,
for Genesis 9.^4.
he is called his youngest son. Neither yet was Sem at that time borne,
according Genesis 18.10.
to the time of life, but two year after, as the Scripture witnesses; being
an hundredth years of age not till the six hundredth and second Genesis 11.10.
year of Noah, which was two year after the flood of waters. Whereof it
remains that Iapheth being borne in the 500. year, was by birth the eldest
son of Noah, and to Sem the elder brother. Now this which the Scripture
speaks, may not unfitly be understood, of Iapheth, not only in respect of
age, that he was eldest, but also in respect of worldly greatness, in which
sense Esau is so often Genesis 27.1.15.
called Hagadhol, the great or elder, to show the greatness of his condition
in respect of Jacob. As if the Lord had said: not inferior to Iapheths
greatness: and as Iapheth was enlarged in earthly things, so Sem was preferred
in spiritual benefits. It may also not amiss be understood of Sem: not in
respect of age, but Franc. Iun. anal. in Ge^. 10. Primogenitura^ vero ad
Schemu^ pertinuisse, haec verba denotans. Fratre^ Iaphethi natu maximi: id est,
ascitum in iuris eiusdem communicationem, ade^que antepositum occasion illius
beneficij quod in Noachum contulerat, cum author illius obtegendi primus fuisse
dicitur.
of his privilege. For as he was Genesis 9.22.
author of covering his fathers nakedness, as the Scripture seems to
signify; so he obtained the chiefest blessing, to be father of the sons of
Heber, that is, the Church of God; in which respect, as if he had received a
superior dignity, he might be called the greater brother. The which his
privilege And whereas his Genealogy is in the last place reckened, it is for
the continuance of the history with ye which follows of the house of Sem.
does give him foremost place, throughout the Scripture, as to the worthiest.
Their error is great, and their negligence more large, Perer. in Genesis cap. 10.
disp. 10. Noen (di^it) non coepisse generare 500. aetatis suae anno praecise,
sed quingentessimo secundo: vel Sem secundo anno post dilu^ium non fuisse
centum annorum pracise: sed fuisse centum and duorum annorum. Sed hoc est
contra omnem authoritatem, contra rationem, and scripturam impingere manif^^tam.
who to reconcile this Scripture, would import that Noah was not exactlie 500.
years old, when he received the gift of generation: or that Sem was not
exactlie an 100. year old, two years after the flood, when he begat Arphaxad.
For the purpose of the Lord is It is manifest by the computation which the
Scripture uses in many places, as Genesis 8. Exodus 12.41. etc. and also by the
judgment of Eusebius and Hieron. in Chronic. of Orosius, Eucherius, Augustine
and other.
exactlie to describe the time, whereon the whole certainty Dan. 11.26. Gal.
4.4.
of time depends. It is farther reported of the sons of Sem, that they were
also the original of nations, and were divided into languages Verse. 31.
and countries. Elam was the father of those whom the So the Persians are
called in the Hebrew, Dan. 8.2. So in the Greek Act. 2.9. They are also
otherwise called Paras, but this seems to be a more common name belonging
also to the Medes, Parthians, Sogdians, Bactrians, and Atr^mites, as that all
these sprang of Paras: of which nation also, some one was the founder of the
Persians. Artop. in Genesis 10.
Scripture calls Elmaites, which Joseph. Antiq. lib. 1. cap. 7. Hieron. libr.
trad. in Genesis
are the Persians; Ashur, of Verse. 24.25. and Genesis 11.13. etc.
Assyrians; Arphaxad of the Genesis 11.10.
sons of Heber; and of the Cashdim. id est, Chaldaei, fine per Apheresin ab
Arphacasha quasi Arphachashdim. Hieron. Trad. in Genesis Arphaexad a quo Chaldai.
Joseph. Antiq. lib. 1. c. 7. Arphaxades eos qui nune Chaldaei sunt Arphaxadaeos
nomin^uit: sieve vt alij volun^ a rad. Cashah, quod est operiri denominati.
Chaldees; Lud of the Hieron. in Genesis trad. Lud. a quo Lydij, Populus scil.
m^noris Asia, quorum rex Cr^sus a Cyro captus est. Herodot. in Clio.
Lydians; Aram of the Joseph. Antiq. lib. 1. cap. 7. Hieron. Trad. in Genesis
Arameos Aram genuit: Aram was the father of the Aramites, whom the Greeks call
Syrians, whose head City was Damascus. But remember that the Aramites were
distinguished into diverse nations: as Padan Aram, or Aram Naharaim, Aram Sobah,
Aram M^achah, and Aram of Damascus.
Syrians, whose chiefest city was Damascus. Whose posterity (save Aram and
Arphaxad, although not farther amplified) grew doubtless as the Nam Arami citati
filij nationum Patriarchae dicuntur. Hui. Armenia incolentium, Hus Damasci,
Gother Caria, Mes, Meoniae, Joseph. Antiq. lib. 1. cap. 7. Hierom. Trad. Hebr.
in Genesis
rest in multitudes and nations. For if Ioctan had fourteen nations derived
from his loins, we have cause to think (through the blessing Genesis 9.2.
Di^dor. Sicul. lib. 2. by the authority of Csesiar reports that Ninus which
lived a little after these times, had an army of men, of seventeen hundredth
thousand footmen, and two hundredth thousand horsemen, which if it were
certain true, no doubt the world was wonderfully, and speedily increased. For
Ninus was in the time of Abraham, as Augustine proves, de ciuit. Dei. lib. 16.
cap. 8.
of the Lord) the other Patriarchs were not unfruitful. But concerning these
latter nations (says Hieron. lib. trad. Hebr. Harum genetium posteriora nomina
inuenire non ^otui, sed vsque in praesens, quia procul a nobis sunt, vel ita
vocantur, vt primum, vel quae immutata sunt ignorantur.
Hierome) because they are distant so far from us, as inhabiting Verse. 29.
the East parts of the world, and their former names being also changed, they
remain to us Ne^ alius ab Hieronymo haectenus explicuit.
as yet unknown. Obser. 1. The providence of God is the only Deuteronomy. 32.8.
Act. 17.26.
author and director of the habitation, and bounds of nations. Secondly, true
nobility 2. Sam. 7.21. Isai. 56.3.4. Demost. Philip. 2. Vir bonus mihi nobilis
cidetur; qui vero non iustus est, licet a patre meliore, quam Jupiter sit genus
ducat, ignobilis a me habebitur.
consists not in greatness of inheritance, but in true religion and the fear
of God. Thirdly, our kindred is often a scourge Isai 9 20.21. and 19.2 Mica 7.5.
unto us for our sins, and 1. Sam. 22.3.4. Prou. 16 7. Job. 5.23.
strangers in our repentance do give us comfort: Ashur is here the next of
kin, who first 2. King. 17.6.
brought Arphaxads sons in bondage. Arphaxads family 2. King. 25. Ierem.
39.5.
did captiuate the sons of Heber. Elam was Isai. 21.2. and 45.1. Dan.
5.30.31. et 6.28 which contains a prophetical narration of Cyrus the
Persian, subduing the M^dian and Chaldean Empire, as it is declared to have
been fulfilled, 2. Chron. 36.23. Herodot. in Ch^. Justin. libr. 1.
their deliverance after seauentie years. Aram a continual From Chushan
Rishathaim. Judge. 3 8. the first enemy of the Israelites, after their entrance
into Canaan, until Antiochus Epiphanes, the year before Christ 165. Joseph.
Antiq. lib. 12. cap. 7. and de bello Iudaic. lib. 1. cap. 3.
vexer of Hebers house, and of all other, most 2. King. ^.12. and 1^.7. Joseph.
Antiq. lib. 12. cap. 7.
bitterly oppressing them, until they were rescued by the Macab. libr. 1.
cap. 8. Joseph. Antiq. libr. 12. cap. 17. Ne cui Romanae ditionis cum Iuden
bellum gerere liceat vtque si quis Iudaeos inuadat, Romani succurrant pro
viribus, etc.
family of Iapheth, being ready to Namely about sixeteene years before the
birth of Christ.
enter into the tents of Sem. Who although they For before Christ's time, they
were enemies in religion, albeit they were friends by league, as appears by
Cicero pro Flacco. Cum aurum Iudaeorum nomine quotannis ex Italia, and ex
omnibus vestris prouincijs Heirosolymam exportar^ soleret; Flaccus sanxit
edicto, ne ex As^a exportari liceret etc. huic autem barbara superstitioni
(sacram Dei religionem intelligit) resistere, seueritatis; multitudinem
Iudaeroum flagrantem nonnunquam in concionibus, pro repub. contemnere,
grauitatis summa fuit. Et quod Cn. Pompeius captis Hierosolymis victor ex illo
fano nihil attigit: huius rei non religio Iudaeorum, sed pudor imperatori
impedimento fuit.
hated their religion, yet maintained their Until Caligula and Nero.
estate, until the God of Sem For the doctrine of the Gospel most speedily was
spread thoroughout the world, like lightening, as our Savior Christ foretold,
Matthew. 24.23. Luc. 23.24. and the event approved. Esub. Histor. Eccles. lib. 2.
cap. 3.
was known unto the world; from whom when the sons of Sem Ioh. 1.11. Luc.
19.14.
withdrew their tents, no marvel if they were destroyed by their former
friends, forasmuch as they would needs depart from his protection. By the
Romans under Vespasian. Joseph. de bell. Iudaic. lib. 2. and 3.


CHAP. XI.
Question 1. verse. 1. Wherefore is it said: the whole earth was of one
language and one speech: and how it agrees with the truth of that which went
before, that the nations were divided according to their tongues and languages?
AS there is not a place of Scripture more Julian. libr. in Christianos, apud
Cyril. lib. 4. Vos autem recipientes hanc historia^, quare per Deos ero,
reprobatis Homeri fabulam, etc.

Philo. Iudaeus. libr. de confus. linguar. Homines impij historiam hanc Mosis
de aedificatione turris cauillantur, nosque derident. Ecce sacri (inquiunt)
quos vocatis libri fabulas continent, quales vos alijs referentibus irridere
soletis. Hac enim historia de aedific^^^^ne turris vsque ad coelum, persimilis
est fabulae Gigantum.


groslie or disdainfully abused by atheists and co^te^ners of the truth: so is
there not a more noble testimony in Scripture, to confou^d their absurdities
and blasphemies. They cauil first at the words of the history: in ye second
place, the matter and doctrine seems to them incredible. For if the multitude
of nations were derived of the offspring of one man's children, how could it be
(say they) that Julian. apud Cyril. lib. 4. Nam illud opinor eacendum apud
rudes homines, quod licet vna vote and lingua omnes per vniuersum orbem homines
vtantur, etc.
so many languages, and diverse dialects should be spoken in the world. And by
such like reasons, are they rather moved, to maintain the doctrine of the
heathen Aristotle Aristot. de coelo, lib. 1 cap. 10.12. and libr. 2. cap. 1.
Mundum nec esse factum, nec eorrumpi posse. Item Methodor. Chius, and
Zenophanes. Cyril. lib. 2. in Julian. Sic igitur ratiocina^tur: mundus e^t
aeternus, ergo hominum genus aeternu^: nih^l enim natura fecit frustra, and
mundus reuera propter homines. Quod si ab aeterno homines fuerint, fabulae de
creatione, de confusione linguarum, etc. Iul. ib. li. 2. and 4.
concerning the worlds eternity, the^ to acknowledge with the word of God,
that the world Genesis 1. etc.
was created, and in such sort governed (as has been declared) by the
almighty. Against which kind of adversaries, the holy Scripture sets
down a most strong defense: The whole earth was of one language and one
speech: that is, as all nations were sometime united in one, so had they but
one common speech. That they have attained more languages, and one
understands not another speech, let all the heathen and Philosophers declare,
if they can give in nature, a reason thereof. For seeing man (as Aristot.
Polit. libr. 1. cap. 2. Homo natura est animal politicum.
they teach) is a creature apt by nature unto society, how should it come to
pass in nature, that the chiefest help and allureme^t of society, which is
Aristot. Polit. lib. 1. cap. 2. Paret sociale animal esse hominem, magis quam
omnes apes, and quam omne gregariu^ animal; quia sermonem homo habet solus, quo
vtilitate^ and damnum, iustu^ and iniustu^ ostendere potest. Cicer. Offic.
libr. 1. Est autem vinculum societatis ratio and oration, quae docendo,
discendo, commanicando, disceptando, iudicando, concilias inter se homines,
contungitque naturali quadam societate.
the voice and speech of men should be the only cause of separation of
societies, between Vt verse. 7.8. Et omnium experientia compertum est, in illis
enim linguis quas no^ intelligimus quae sunt innumerabiles surdi profecto
sumus. Cic. Tusc. Quaest. 3.
men and men? Again, seeing the speech is nothing else, but the Basil. epist.
41. ad Maxim. Imagines animarum reuera sunt sermones. Et oration dicitur quasi
oris ratio. Isodor. lib. 1. Originum cap. 5.
image and character of the mind; what cause in nature can be given, why this
man should so express his thoughts and purposes by his words, as that I should
not, although I think and will the same, understand his meaning and intent?
But as I understand not the voice of the Which notwithstanding are said to have
in their kind a proper dialect. Clem. Alexandr. Strom. 1. Lactant. lib. 6.
cap. 4.
dumb and brutish beasts; so I should be a Barbarian unto him, and he to me,
and as far in voice different, as the beasts are different in understanding;
albeit we both which speak without understanding of each others voice, are
endued with like soul, like wisdom, and gift of reason* This only comes
to pass thorough the diversity of languages of speech, which now are in the
world. But whence came these diversities of languages into the world, by For
seeing it is utterly against nature, we must need^ acknowledge another author.
whom, Whether from eternity, which is against the principles of Philosophy;
or whether it were done in time.
when, to Aristot. natura enim semper tendit ad optimum finem.
what end and purpose; for nature Natura enim frustra fecit nihil. Idem Polit.
1. cap. 5.
works nothing in vain or waste? Seeing beasts retain their voices without
alteration, notwithstanding the variety of sounds among them; how much more
men endued with reason, should preserve their speech, if God had not sent among
them, as a punishment of sin, confusion and alteration of speech and
languages? To this the Scripture answers (when the wit of man, or reach of
reason can yield no cause but silence) that the speech and voice of men Author.
de mirah. sacr. script. inter oper. August. libr. 2. cap 9. Cum illud vsque
tempus esset vnius linguae cu^ctus populus, vniuersoru^ qui ad tale opus
venerunt, linguas in diuersa verba diuisit. Contra errorem Philastrij qui
plures linguas fuisse a mundo condito opinatus est, Haeres. 106.
was sometime one, as the soul and reason of me^ is one in kind: and that it
continued not so as in nature is required, it was by the miraculous Calvin. in
Genesis 11. Et sane prodigij loco est lingna^um diuersitas.
work of God. The whole earth, that is, all creatures Chrysostom. Hom. 30. Non
de terra loquent sed de hominum genere, vt nos doceat vnum linguam omniu^
hominum fuisse natura. August. libr. Locus. in Gen cap. 11. Notandam omnem
terram appellatam omnes homines qui tunc erant, quamuis nondum in omni terra.
of the earth endued with speech, which is Aristot. Polit 1. cap. 2. Sermonem
vero homo habet solus omnium animantium.
only man; or all men through out the earth, were of one language and one
speech. Of one lip, (...) shapa e^ath hudebarim acadim: ad verbum vnius
labij, and vnorum verborum.
says the Hebrew, and one word: that is, Aben Ezra in Comment. in Genesis
say the Hebrew interpreters thereof; to one common matter spoken of, there was
but one common name in speech; to one notion of the mind, one simple means of
expressing the same by voice, which both the eloquent The Heathen have felt as
it were the sent hereof: which doubtless is ye menning of their corrupted
fables, whereas they have taught that men at the first being mute and dumb,
were vexed and destroyed of fowls and beasts: but Prometheus (that is
prouide^t or watchful wisdom) being careful of men's welfare, obtained speech
of God. Afterward Mercury taught them eloquence. Aristid. lib. 2 contr.
Plaeton. (...), etc. Compare this with the Scripture, and consider how
shamefully they erred: and praise the Lord for the light of his sacred word.
and ignorant did utter and understand alike. But although perhaps not so
strictly to be taken, yet this is the manifest meaning of the Scripture; that
as yet there was but one speech or language used, or spoken, or known unto the
world. But this (one will say) is contrary to that which was taught before,
that the Genesis 10.5.20.25.31.
posterity of Noah was divided by their tongues and languages. There is no
CONCILIATIO. 15.
contrariety nor diversity herein: but the Lord most graciously by this
latter history, would August. quast. in Genesis 20. Quomodo hoc potest intelligi
quando superius dictum est quod filij Noae, vel filiorum eius, distributi
essent per terras secundum tribus and linguas, nisi quia per recapitulationem,
postea commemorat quod prius erat. Idem de doctr. Christian. lib. 3. cap. 36.
Lasenter narratione redeunte, vt diceretur quo modo factum fit vt ex vna omnium
lingua, fuerint diuisi per multa^.
interpret unto us and expound the former. All nations were derived from the
root Genesis 7.25. and 8.16.18.
of Noah: How became they to speak such diverse languages? Noah had not
himself the use of them, Sem, Ham, and Inpheth enjoyed one voice or speech,
Philastrius, lib. de Haeres. cap. 10. writes, that before the confusion, all
languages were known to all men: habentes enim angelicam gratiam, id est
multarum linguarum scientiam, non agnosc^bant datorem tanta sapientiae, etc. i.
Having (says he) obtained angelike grace, that is, the knowledge of many
tongues, they did not acknowledge the giver of so great wisdom. But this is
an error, for the Scripture says they were all of one language and one speech.
which they had received from one common parent, as their mothers milk.
Neither if they had received the gift of many tongues, could they easily have
imparted them, as an inheritance unto their children, in such sort that none
should understand another speech. Wherefore that the nations were divided, as
we know they are divided, Verse. 7.
and their speech confounded, which by It may here happily, not altogether
causeless be demanded, what language it was yt men spoke, before this
confusion of tongues? The Egyptians affirmed the Phrygian tongue was the first
and natural, for Psammeticus their king causing two children to be kept,
without hearing of any sound of voice, to prove whether they would speak of
themselves, and what they would say; the children were first heard to pronounce
beccos, which in the Phrygian tongue is bread: Heredot. in Euterpe. Theodoret
quaest. in Genesis 59. would prove that the Syrian tongue was the first, by the
signification of Adams name, for Adam (says he) in the Syrian tongue
signifies red earth. Philo the Jew, lib. de conf^^. linguar. affirms the
Chaldee tongue was first. But greater reason there is, which confirms that
the Hebrew was the original and mother of all. First, both the Syriac and
Chaldee tongues, of many learned men are thought to be but as diverse dialects
within themselves and one language (which notwithstanding Imm. Tremel. in
prafat. in Gram. Chaldaie. and Syriac. does utterly deny, as indeed they are
to be taken as diverse tongues) both of them agreeing for the most part in
signification with the Hebrew, as Adam in the Hebrew signifies the same.
Secondly, the Syriac and Chaldee are, as it were but dialects of the Hebrew
(differing not much more then Northren and Western speech from plain English)
and differ more within themselves, then from the Hebrew. Thirdly, the Nations
the nearer they have bordered upon the Hebrews, the more they have agreed in
their speech, as the Syrians and Chaldeans, next the Arabians, and after them
the Egyptians and Persians, etc. and the languages which are farthest
disagreeing, are (for the most part) farthest scattered. Fourthly, all the
names which are spoken of in Scripture before the confusion of tongues, are in
the Hebrew significant, which in no other language, generally they are. If any
man would say that Moses translated them into Hebrew: I would ask how he knew
it: or what makes him to suspect that of Moses, which neither Moses, nor any
prophet or good history writer ever used to do, and which the Scripture in
the practice thereof abhors. Fifthly, authority of ancient writers does
confirm it. Origin. in Number. Hom. 11. Hieron. Comment. in Sophon. cap. 3.
Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 30. postremo Heber. etc. Aug. de ciuit. Dei, lib. 16.
cap. 3. and 11. Eucher. in Genesis lib. 2. cap. 2. In sola (inquit) domo Heber,
quae aniea suit, lingua commansit. Joseph. Antiq. lib. 1. cap. 5. etc. and new
writers for the best and chiefest part.
nature and nativity was one; the cause (says the holy Ghost) was this: the
presumptuous sins Verse. 4. So that first, men were Antithei: i. fighters
against God: next, Polythei, worshippers of many gods, or of Idols with Iehoua:
afterward Pseudothei, worshippers of Idols without Iehoua: lastly, they are
like to be Athei, worshippers of no God, neither Idol^ nor Iehoua. Sybilla
witnesses of this accident: Cum vniuersi homines, etc. What time all the world
spoke one language, men built a tower so high, as if they would have climed to
heaven, but the gods sent down storms and overthrew their building, and gave
every man a proper speech. Joseph. Antiq. lib. ^. cap. 5. Here heathenish
Atheists that will not receive the Scriptures, may by Heathenish testimony be
convinced.
of men provoked the most gracious Lord to divide their languages. Through this
occasion, they which not long before An hundred years and one, verse. 11.14.
were by the mercy of the Lord delivered in a wonderful manner, from
extremity of death: and now were multiplied in the place of their deliverance,
the hills Verse. 2. and Genesis 8.4 Joseph. Antiq. libr. 1. cap. 6. Primi relictis
montibus planitiem habitare caperunt. Epiphan. Haeres. 1.
of Ararat; departed from their place of habitation, and found a plain in the
land of Shinar Shina^ (...), seems to be so called of the event: of the word
(...) shen: that is, a tooth, and (...) nagnar, to strike or shake out, as it
were the striking out of their teeth, because their speech which is uttered by
their teeth and lips, was as it were strike^ out in the confusion. The same
also, of the confusion was called Babel: which country is said to be so
fruitful, that it brings forth two hundredth fold, and where it excels it
self, three hundredth fold, vbi autem bonitate scipsam vincit ad tricena
reddit: the same in power and increase, is as much as the third part of Asia
besides. I cease (says Herodotus) to speak further of the fruitfulnes
thereof, knowing well that they which never saw the country, will think the
report thereof incredible. Herodot. in Clio. Pliny also libr. 18. cap. 17.
speaks as largely of the fruitfulnes thereof.
most fertitle and meet to maintain so great a multitude. Then they said one
unto another, go to, let us build a City and a Tower, whose top may reach
to heaven. Hereby is discovered the exceeding great corruption that rests in
humane nature, which either of the one side remains Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis
3. Vide quo modo humanum genus non potest subsistere intra suos limits, sed
amplius concupiscens, maiora supra se appetit: atquo hoc est quod humanum genus
potissimum perdidit, quia non vult natura sua mensuram agnoscere, sed semper
maiora desiderat, and qua supra suam sunt dignitatem votis concipit.
discontented with the blessing which the Lord vouchsafes, for the furnishing
of our necessity: or on the other side, abuses Gregor. in Prolog. Psalm. 50.
Admonemur in hoc psalm prospera metuere and contra omnem saculi faelicitatem
acrius vigilare: sicut enim per fletus ad gaudia ducimur, ita per gaudium ad
fletum peruenitur. Quit sanctior David, etc.
the fulness of prosperity, unless it be preserved and guided Prou. 1.32. and
30. August. de verb. Dom. Sermon. Magnae virtutis est cum foelicitate luctari, ne
illiciat, ne corrumpat, ne ipsa subuertat foelicitas. Mag^e inquam virtutis cum
foelicitat eductari; magnae soelicitatis est a foelicitate non vinci.
by the Lord. For what compelled them to leave their Epiphan. Haeres. 1. Cum
autem se extenderent and vltra procederent a monte Lubar ac sinibus Armeniae,
hoc est a regione Ararat, consederunt in terra Sinar.
habitation in the East, but an inordinate desire of plenty, and greater
pleasure? And when they were in possession of the plain of Shinar, and enjoyed
the plenty and abundance of the same; what moved them to build a City, and a
Tower, whose top might reach to heaven, save that which plenty brings forth,
and the pleasures of this life in the heart of man, which is not grounded
Nehen. 5.15.19.
in the fear of God; that is to say Deuteronomy. 32.15. Gregor. Moral. in Job. lib.
11. Sicut boni per contumelias meliores existunt; ita semper reprobi de
benefitijs peiores fiunt.
unthankfulness, and Deuteronomy. 8.14. Bernard. libr. de diligendo Deo. Superbia est
and delictum maximum, vti datis tanquam innatis, and in acceptis beneficijs
gloriam vsurpar^ beneficij.
pride, and Pro. 30.2. Isai. 1.2.
rebellion against the Lord? It cannot be perceived by the Scripture, but as
they all enjoyed a common benefit of ease and plenty; so the sin was common
among them all, of this common counsel to build a City. So that albeit one
perhaps first opened this enterprise, either Joseph. Antiq. lib. 1. cap. 5.
Hanc superbiam deique contemptum excitauit in ijs Nabrodes nepos Cham. August.
de ciuit. Dei, libr. 16. cap. 4. Vnde colligitur, Gigantem illum Nimrod fuisse
illius conditorem. Calvin. in Genesis 11.2. Caeterum vt demus Nimrod praecipuum
fuisse ducem extruende tanta molis, quo formidabile sua tyrannidis monumentum
stat^eret, etc.
Nimrod or some other Musc. in Genesis 11. Verisimile est hanc cogitationem a
pa^cis Camitis sumpsisso exordium, verum tandem abijsse in studium Catholicum.
wretched tyrant, yet was not the devise sooner broched then allowed; which
plainly shows that although the invention was not, yet the Their ready
agreement argues their common corruption.
sin and corruption was common to them all. They found to these endeavors a
mighty adversary of distress (as Isai. 19.3.12.13.
is common to them that follow their own devises) for stone they could not
find, nor For this cause, as well the tower it self, as the walls and houses
of the City are of brick wrought wish slime. Quint. Curt. libr. de gest.
Alexand. 5.
mortar sufficient for the matter of their building. Yet, such is the courage
that men take in evil, that they will not yield until the uttermost Caesar.
de bent. civil. libr. 3. Hominibus nimia pertinacia atque arrogantia accidere
solet, vti eo recurrant, and id cupidissime appetant, quod paulo^^te
con^^m^ferint.
necessity. And so ripe is their invention to set forth evil attempts, as
that they find out among the creatures, new means to furnish their Plin. libr.
33. cap. 10. Postetis, laxitat mundi terumque amplitudo, damno fuit Idque
exemplo Romanorum omniumque fere gentium comprobatur, Po^^dor Virgil. de
invent. rer. libr. ^ ^^p. 5.
unlawful enterprises. For now they invent the making of brick, and the use of
slime, wherewithal they had hitherto been unacquainted. And where it is first
said, let (...) make b^^^^e, and presently thereon let us build a Cities, it
shows they were inclined to build a City, before they found Quent. Curt. de
gest. Alexand. libr. 5. says, that Babylon is so far destitute of stone or
stony earth, that to make a bridge over Euphrates, they could scarce find
ground firm enough to lay the foundation. Plin. libr. 35. cap. 15. also, that
this slime is instead of mortar unto the wolles of Babylon. Item Curt.
matter wherewith to build it. And that first making of brick is spoken of,
declares how men's sins by continuance do Hieron. in Isai. 14. Primum in
cogitationibus nostris semen colubri radicatur. Secundo, de semine pessimo
nascitur regulus, qui rex serpentum est.
grow; and inventions which of themselves are not unlawful, when they are
devised for wicked purposes, they Quemadmodum Perillus in tauro fabrefacto
perijt, Plin. libr. 34. cap. 8.
breed the bane of the inuentors of them. The invention of arts Genesis 4.2. Exodus
31.2.3. Cicer. Tuscul. Inuentio quid est? Prosecto id quo nec in deo quicquam
maius intelligi potest.
a commendable exercise. To build a City 2. Sam. 5.9. 2. Chron. 8.2.
an honorable achieuance. But to build a City and tower, whose top may reach
to heaven; to build a City to get a name thereby: here was the sin; this
August. libr. 2. de morib. Manichaeor. cap. 13. Finis enim quo reseruntur ea
quae facimus quicquid facinus, si non sol^^^ inculpabilis, sed etiam laud^bilis
sueris; tum demum etiam facta nostra laud aliqua digna sunt: fin ille iure
meritoque culpatur, id quoque officium in quo versantur, nemo improbandum,
vituperandumque dubitaueris.
end brought dishonor to all the work. But did they mind indeed to build a
tower and castle up to heaven? Who so deuoide of judgment as to esteem it
possible, for all nations of the earth (if all the land of Shinar had been
excocted into brickes, or all the earth were stone and mortar) to finish such a
building? Where then is the offense, that Philo. Iudae. lib. de confus.
linguar. Julian. apud Cyril. lib. 4. Ciuitatem aedificare non possunt ad c^^lum
pertingentem, etiamsi in laeteres totam terram coquant: infinitis enim opus
esse^ lateribus aequale.
Atheists stumble at in this narration? In the report of history, or in their
own blindness and perverseness, that will not understand? For the Scripture
reports what they spoke, by the testimony of him, that knew their thoughts.
Neither is it strange in use, either in the Deuteronomy. 1.28. Psalm. 107.26.
Scripture, or in common O^ud. Tri^. libr. 1. Eleg 2. Me miserum quan^i ^^ntes
voluuntur aquarum, iam iam tacturos sydera clara putes. Quanta diducto
subsidunt in aequore valles, iam iam tacturas tartara nigra putes.
speech of men, in such sort to amplify the declaration or report of any
thing, which seems to exceed our common judgment. Again, where such
adversaries do deride this history, Julian. Apud. Cyril. libr. 4. Cum veram
censo^tis, and de Deo opinemini quod tertitus sit humanae vocis vnitate, quare
per Deos H^^eri fabulam non recipitis, etc.
as though a Tower built to heaven, could any whit annoy or offend the Lord,
and not rather, the presumptuous and August. libr. 16. c. 4. de ciuitat. Dei,
quid denique noceret Deo, quantacunque vel spiritualis vel corporalis elatio?
Tutam veramque in coelum viam molitur humilitas, sursum leuans cor ad Dominum
non contra Dominum.
wicked minds of men on earth: they vainly triumph without show of victory.
For the Scripture ascribes not their scattering and confusion, to their
building; but to their wicked intent in building: their purpose Chrysostom.
Hom. in Genesis 30. Vt faciamus (inquit) nobis nomen. Vidicti radicem mali? vt
inquit, perpetuam memoriam consequamur.
was it, their building set a part, wherewith the Lord was so greatly angry.
They would get a name thereby, least they should be scattered upon the whole
earth. Here first appears unthankfulness, and pride. The Lord had imparted
unto them Act. 14.17.
the abundance of his benefits, for Prou. 16.4.
his own name sake, not theirs; that he in Deuteronomy. 10.12. Psalm. 50.15.
them might be magnified: and 1. Sam. 2.30.
they in honoring him, might receive Ioh. 5.44.
the true honor that comes thereof. But they convert this wholly to get
themselves a name, and neglect to honor him at all, whose only honor they
should have Bernard. Sermon. in Cant. 35. Gratianum cessat decursus, vbi recursus
non fuerit: nec modo nihil agetur ingrato, sed quod accipit vertitur ei in
perniciem. Fidelis autem in modico, censetur dignus munere ampliori.
sought. Such is the state of those whom the Lord has raised up in wealth and
dignity, unless they chiefly seek to honor him, with that which from him
Prou. 3 9.
they have received, by being profitable unto his Church, and common wealth,
wherein they live: or if they consume his benefits upon themselves, their
pleasures, honors, children, without Ezech. 18 18.
doing good among their people; they build to themselves Isai. 22.16.
a City of confusion: such gorgious buildings shall quickly come to naught.
Secondly, they fear to be sattered, and therefore build. Why fear they to be
scattered, whom the Lord by so many bands had Chrysostom. in 1. Corin. Hom. 34.
Principio etiam omnes in vnum collegit locum, nec antea dispersit quam essent
concordiae dono abusi: verum vndique no^ coniun vlt. a natura, a cogitatione,
ab affinitate, a lingua, a loco.
joined? If they doubted the greatness of their multitude, would soon have
been Metuebant igitur aeternam ca^^n tatem, nec tamen necesse est vt alierum
diluuium suspicabantur, sed quodlibet aliud malum. Pra^^ autem Graeca and
L^tina vulga^a, antequam: pro ne forte.
sufficient to inhabit all the earth: what hurt had they received in being
distributed to convenient inheritance? But they feared doubtless Prou. 28.1.
for the guiltines of sin; and how fondly would they avoid the punishment?
The means to escape adversity is to Deuteronomy. 30.3 4. Judge. 10.16.
abandon sin, and 1. Sam. 12.20.21.22 Psalm. 130.4.8. August. tract. in
Epist. John. 8. Haec spes est, nondum res; sed qui gaudet in spe tenebit and
rem, qui autem spem non habet, ad rem non poterit peruenire.
hope for mercy. Albeit their wicked lives foretold a scattering, yet the
Lords former mercies did promise safety to those that would repent. But such
is the nature of the wicked, who prophecy to themselves, through wound of
conscience, a time of misery: therefore they hoord up treasure Ierem. 49.4.
Habac. 2.9.
against the evil day; they Isai. 28.15.
make a covenant with hell and death, supposing by their own provision to
avoid the scourge: and make no peace Job. 22.21.22. Revel. 18.4.
with the Lord by true repentance, nor cease to be partakers of ungodliness: to
whom the Lord pronounces, Isai. 28.18.
your covenant with death shall be disanulled, when the scourge passes
thorough, it shall take you away, for that which Prou. 10.24.
the wicked fears shall come upon him. Thirdly, they build, least they
should be scattered, that is, they endeavor to arm themselves, to By this
appears whence that unsavory fable of the Giants which made war with the
Gods, took his original among the heathen: And how the wicked negligence of
men, had blotted out the remembrance of this history in ungrateful oblivion,
and covered it with lies. God therefore be eternally praised for this true
light of holy Scriptures. vide Eusebius. de praepar. lib. 7. cap. 3.
resist the justice of the Lord; as though they were able to war with him. This
open rebellion did justly cause their fall: they build a City for fear of
being scattered, and the building August. de ciuitat. Dei. lib. 16. cap. 4.
Merito enim malus punitur affectus, etiamsi non successit effectus.
of the City, is the cause of scattering. Thus does the Lord scatter the Job.
12.14. etc. 24.
devises of the wicked; for there is neither counsel nor strength Prou. 21.31.
against the Lord.

Question 2. verse 4. How is it to be understood, which is said: The Lord came
down to see the City, and again: Come on let us go down, and there
confound their languages?
FOrasmuch as the whole people of the earth (save Many writers affirm, that
Heber was not with them in the building of Babylon, which is to be esteemed of
Noe, Sem, Iapheth, and all the godly. The Rabbis avouch in Bereshith Rabba, yt
Abraham was there, and when he would not consent to help them, but reproving
his father Tharah for his Idolatry, he was taken by Nimrod and thrown into
the fiery limekill, but was delivered by a miracle of God. They say also that
only twelve persons joined not with the rest in building: but on what ground
they say it, I cannot find.
happily one little family) had conspired together to rebel against the Lord:
it seems good in the sight of God, in their confusion, to triumph of them
victoriously. And for this cause, is this holy history arrayed and garnished
with many figures of heavenly Hieron. epist. ad Rusticum. Cuius eloquentiae
torcularia, non verborum pampinis, sed sensuum quasi vnarum expressionibus
redundat.
rhetoric. In the first four verses, the cause was expressed why that one
common language of the world, was divided into many. In these five which
follow, is showed the effect, and manner how the Lord performed it. But the
Lord came down to see the City, etc. It seems strange to some, that the
Lord here is affirmed to go down to see the City. For the Scripture
teaches, that the Lord Psalm. 139.7.8.
is every where, and that Ierem. 23.24.
he fills heaven and earth: which notwithstanding is CONCILIATIO. 16.
quickly reconciled, if we mark the cause wherefore, and the manner how, the
Lord is said to have descended. The cause wherefore the Scripture uses this
phrase of speech is this: The holy spirit by Moses, contenteth not himself,
in delivering unto the Church the bare record of action, in this history; but
for the farther instruction of the faithful (...) quae continet in se (...)
and (...), verse. 5. (...) and (...), verse. 6.7. (...), verse. 7. (...), verse.
7.8. Hypotyposis dicitur propofita quaedam forma rerum, ita expressa verbis, vt
cerni potius videatur, quam audiri, Quintil. institut. orator. lib. 9. cap. 2
depictureth before our eyes, the manner how it was done and finished. And
because our weakness is such, as there are not words sufficient Marius Victor.
aduers. Arrium. libr. 2. Etenim in diuinis and in Deo sic accipimus substantiam
vt in hilicis corpora, and in corporalibus animum. Haec enim est ibi substantia
esse supra substantiam. Deum esse omnes fatentur, cum fit potentia substantiae,
and ideo supra substantia^, atque ex hoc, substantia: etenim potentiae inest
esse quod potest esse. Non dubitandum est igitur dicere substa^tiam Dei (vel
quicquid de Deo scriptura dicit) quia cum nos circa prima and summa proprie
verba deficiunt, non incongrue demum apud nos quod conuenire possit
intelligentiae aptamus.
to give us full understanding of the unsearchable greatness of the Lord,
because man is neither able to 2. Cor. 12.4.
utter nor conceive them: therefore he describes this marvelous work of
God, as we may understand; and that by Like unto this is the speech of Christ,
Ioh. 8 42. as Athanasius teaches Orat. contra Arrian. Deu^ de Deo: The father
has sens me, etc. wherein he calls his union with the manhood, by which the
indivisible nature of God was by visible humane nature made known to men, his
sending: for God changes not place, after our manner, which are contained in
place, etc.
that light which thereby we may behold, we might be provoked to love his
goodness, to admire his greatness, to believe his promises, which so far excel
Cyprian. lib. de Idolor. Vanit. Deus nec videri potest, visu clarior est: nec
comprehendi, tactu purior est: nec astimari, quia sensu mayor est: and ideo sic
cum digne actimamus, dum inastimabilem dicimus.
our understanding. For whereas it is said, the Lord descended, we know that
the Lord did descend in deed (albeit in such manner as is proper to the Lord,
not as the creatures do descend) but because he Tertull. lib de Trinitat. Quid
si idem Moses vbique introducit Deum patrem immensum, atque sine fine, qui non
loco clauditur, sed qui omnem locum claudat, nec cum qui in loco sit, sed
potius in quem omnis locus sit, omnia continentem and cuncta complexum, vt
merito nec descendat nec ascendat, quoniam ipse omnia and continet and implet,
and tamen introducit descendente^ etc.
ever fills heaven and earth, and the lowest places of the world; and we
cannot conceive how he can be said Cyprian. in prolog. Quicquid au^iri vel
videri, vel sciri potest non conuenit maiestati. Hebe^ est in hac
consideratione omnis acies sensuum, and caligat aspectus hanc inuisibilem
lucem, and inaccessibilem naturam, sed alis hinc and inde Seraphim statu and
volatu circumeunt and abscondunt.
to descend, which fills already the lowest places: therefore it is meet,
that with humility we reverence the testimony Ioh. 5.9. 2. Pet. 1.2.
that God does witness of himself, although the understanding of the same
cannot be comprised in man's capacity. But some man peradventure will ask this
question; What profit of that doctrine can be made, which the mind of man
cannot fully comprehend? It is answered, that Iren. libr. 2. cap. 47. Quid
mali est, si and little quae inscripturis requiruntur, vniuersis scripturis
spiritualibus existentibus, quaedam quidem absoluamus secundum gratiam Dei,
quaedam autem commendemus Deo, and non solum in hoc seculo, sed and in futuro:
vt semper quidem Deus doceat, homo autem semper discat, quae sunt a deo.
God may always teach, and man might always learn: that man might know the
measure Genesis 18.27. Job. 4.16.17. Gregor. Mor. 9. c. 10. Qui facit magna etc.
diuinae fortitudinis facta tunc verius explemus, cum haec nos explere non posse
cognoscimus; tunc facundius loquiuntur, cum ab his obstupescendo reticemus.
of himself, and not presume to mete the Lord, who is infinite, and cannot be
measured. Now the Scripture teaching that the Lord came down to see, does
signify; that this stop of man's rebellion, and this overthrow of building,
and confusion of languages, was the only, proper, immediate and mighty power
of God: for who is there, that can weaken the strength and power of the world
united, but God alone? And because it was his immediate work, a work wherein
he did evidently show (as Princes in their glory show themselves) his power
and wisdom, which none is able to counteruaile: therefore says the
Scripture, the Lord came down, that is, he showed his wisdom, his power, and
justice on them by their confusion. In like sense of speech does Mat^h. 6.9.
our Savior command, although our heavenly Father fill the heaven and the
earth, to call on him in prayer: Our father which art in heaven, August. Epist.
ad Dardan. ep. 57. Non dicimus pater noster qui es vbique, cum and hoc verum
sit, sed qui es in coelis, vt templu^ eius potius commemoremus in oratione,
quod and nos ipsi esse debemus.
because he does more clearelie and fully show his glory in the heavens;
that we being his temples, as the Isai. 66.1. 1. Cor. 6.19.
heavens are his throne; might be admonished, that as he is more glorious in
the heavens, then can of earthly creatures be contained; so most of all, he
shows his glory on them that call on him, and is chiefly glorified in his
children. Now the manner how the Lord descends: although it cannot
sufficiently with words be uttered, nor understood with the intelligence of
man (for in descending, Athanas. orat. cont. Arrian. Deus de Deo. No^ enim Deus
locum mutat nostro more, qui locis continemur, neq, ad similitudinem nostrae
paruitatis praesentia dei tota comprehensa latuit.
he neither forsakes the place wherein he was, neither approaches to a place
wherein he was not, but contains in himself all Tertul. aduers. Prax. libr.
Ante omnia Deus erat solus, ipse sibi and mundus and locus and omnia. Idem de
Trin. Qui non loco clauditur, sed qui omnem locum claudit.
space, and place, and whatsoever Coloss. 1.17.
his hand has made) yet is it not unprofitable to be considered; for the
Scripture has declared it for our behoof. The attributes and properties of
God are August. de ciu. Dei, lib. 7. cap. 6. Neque aliud dei est esse, aliud
viuere, quasi posset esse non viuens: nec aliud illi est viuere, aliud
intelligere, quasi possit viuere non intelligens: nec aliud intelligere, aliud
beatum esse, quasi posset intelligere and no^ bea^us esse: sed quod est illi
viuere, intelligere, beatu^ esse, hoc est illi esse.
of the very substance of his nature, his power, his wisdom, his justice,
goodness, providence: wherefore when by these he manifestly shows his glory,
to us inferior creatures, he is rightly said to descend unto us. Thus is he
said to descend to see the City. For although his power Nazianzen. orat. 21.
Nemo quidem potentiae dei and oculis sese subducere queat: solus quippe Deus ex
omnibus rebus, nec fuga vitari, nec bello sustineri potest.
was never absent, nor his providence August de ciuit. Dei, lib. 22. cap. 1.
Fulgent. lib. de praedest. ad Mon. cap. 26. Deus itaque licet author non sit
malarum cogitationum, ordinator tamen est malarum voluntatum.
in directing that which men did wickedlie commit, unto his own glory, and
the profit of his Church: yet now he descended by his power, when he showed
unto men the force thereof; and by his providence, when he declared himself
displeased with their wicked enterprise. Neither is it disagreeing from the
christian faith, if any think, that Justin. Mars. dial. came Triff. Non
debetis vos putare, ipsum ingenitum D^^m vel ascendisse vel nescendisse
quopiam, nam in effabilis etc. Tertul. lib. de Trinitat. Neque ergo pater
descendit, vt re^ indicat, neque Angelis ista praecepit, vt res probat; super
est igitur vt ille descenderit, de quo Apostolus (Ephesians. 4.10.) dei filius Dei
verbum.
this is spoken, especially of the second person of the Trinity, who, as in
the fulness of time, he took our perfect nature, Galat. 4.4. Hebr. 2.15.
and was clothed with our flesh; so even before that time was come, as Malach.
3.1. Hilar. ^e Trin. lib. 4. Qui angelus dei dictus est, idem Dominus and Deus
est. Est enim secundum prophetam filius Dei magni consilij Angelus: vt
personarum distinctio absoluta esset, Angelus Dei est nuncupatus.
the angel of the covenant, he immediately Iren. libr. 3. c. 6. Descendit
inquit etc. ipse est qui ascendit and descendit, propter salute^ hominum per
filium: naque qui est in patre, and habes in se patrem, his quibus est
manifestatus, patre testimonium praebente filio, and filio annunciante patrem.
by himself performed the counsel of his father, appeared Tertul. aeduers.
Praex. Filius erat qui ab initio iudicauit turrim superbissimam illidens
linguasque disperge^s, orhem totum aquaru^ viole^tia puniens, plue^s super
Sodomam ignem and sulphurem, Deus de Deo. Ipse enim and ad humana collequia
semper descendit. Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 58. Ne admireris dilecte, quod ta^ta
humiliationis illius magnitudo, sed cogita quod et patriarchae cu^ apud quercum
sederet (Genes. 18.) in hominis ^^gura cum angelis hospes fuerit: praesignans
nobis multo ante and ab initio, quod humanam natural esses suscepturus.
unto the Patriarchs, and in this place descended to see the City. It is no
less strange in respect of the end, that the Lord is said to descend to see.
For since that he 1. King. 6.39.
sees the hearts of all men, and Psalm. 139.2.
beholds their thoughts before they think them, it might seem in vain to
descend to see the City, which he beheld, before they had laid a corner stone
thereof. But the Lord does herein by his own example, teach Chrysostom. Hom. in
Genesis 30. Descendit inquit Dominus non vt humano more intelligeremus, sed vt per
hoc erudiamur, nunquam temere fraires nostros conde^n^ndos, neque auditis solo
iudicandum nisi pluribus argumentis prius certius reddamur.
Magistrates and Princes to examine seriously the crimes of offenders, before
they punish; who although he knew before, their rebellion and trespass worthy
punishment; yet he proceeds not to execution, without full and perfect
evidence of their iniquity. The crime was manifest; for they had begun to
build the City, which the Lord therefore permitted to proceed, that Chrysostom.
Hom. in Genesis 30. Per^nisit illos laboribus sese affligere, vt rerum
experientiae praeceptoris loco illis esset.
it might be a witness unto their condemnation. Now says the Lord, the people
is one, and have all one language; that is, Judge. 20.8.
they are united in consent, and fully of agreement in this business; and they
have the Ezech. 3.5.6.
greatest means to maintain Cicer. orat. 1. Qua vis alia potuit dispersos
homines vnum in locum congregart, aut a sera agrestique vita ad humanum cultum
ciuilemque deducere, aut iam constitutis ciuitatibus leges, iudicia, iura,
describere.
their society, which is community of speech: and build they will, for they
have begun to build; by which it is evident, they thus presume, that by no
ordinary means they can be stopped from their enterprise. Here then great
reason is found, why the Lord should give sentence against his adversaries, for
all this even in humane reason was convinced. But was there indeed no means to
hinder them? were they become so mighty; or the Lord of hosts so weak, that
he could not restrain them of their folly? Assuredly the flies, or frogs,
or pismires of the earth Exodus 8.^. and 10.14 Isai. 7.18.
had bin an army strong enough, if the Lord had sent them out to execute his
wrath: how much more so many Psalm. 68 17. Heb. 12.22.
thousand thousand Angels, of whom one, in one might Esai. 37.35.
slew all the army of Saneherib? yea such is the condition of all the
creatures, if the Lord Psalm. 104.29.
hide his face, they presently are troubled; if he take away their breath they
die and return unto their dust. But the Lord in this plea of judgment, Ch
ysostom. Hom. in Genesis 30. Quonia^ conatus illorum impediturus erat, primum cum
illis expostulat, and quasi ^stendis peccati illorum magnitudinem. Hic enim dei
mos est, vt puniturus prius indicet quam indgna sint peccata, and quasi
expostulam etiam ipse satisfaciat nobis, and tunc demum corripere incipiat.
speaks according to the intent and purpose of the offenders: and withal, in
indignation derideth the folly Calu. in Genesis 11. Videtur potius subesse
ironia, quasi Deus sibi difficultatem proponeret reprime^dae little audaciae.
of their inventions. As if he had said: behold Musc. in Genesis 11. Beni haada^
habet Emphasin, sic vocat eos Dominus per (...) vt de eorum originis humilitate
admoneat.
what these sons of men have taken in hand: the Isai. 45.9.
potsheards of the earth do strive with him that formed them. They are all of
one agreement, and are furnished with all things necessary for the work; they
suppose, their conspiracy can not be broken, nor their devises hindered: an
Isai. 37.28.
invincible army are they and cannot be mastered. Now shall they see how
easily their pride and height of mind shall have a fall. Come on let us go
down, and there confound their languages. The Lord before is said to come
down, to judge their cause; here again he does descend to punish: in Hieron.
in Mica. 1. comment. descensio Dei est maiestatis eius ad inferiora decursus.
August. de ciuitat. Dei. lib. 16. cap. 5. Non loco mouetur deus qui semper
vbique est totus: sed descendere dicitur, cum aliquid facit in terra, quod
praeter vsitatum naturae cursum mirabiliter factum, praesentiam quodammodo eius
ostendat.
both which he shows a notable token of his majesty, which is chiefly
manifest in heaven. He neither by As Psalm. 78.49.
Angel nor spirit vexes them, neither Genesis 7. and 19.
by fire nor water destroys them, neither Deuteronomy. 32.24.25.
uses the help of creatures, neither yet dissolueth any Mark. 7.35.
power of their body or their minds: but as the purpose of these sons of
men, was ridiculous and monstrous before the Lord: so the Lord again would
punish them, by that which might make them 1. Sam. 2.30.
a derision and a scorn for ever. For what could be a more jesting sport to
all succeeding ages, then to hear of a multitude agreeing to build a City, of
whom one could not interpret another speech; so that the master knew not for
what to call, and the servant understood not what to bring. And what more
contumelious, then that the whole wisdom and power of the world, should by so
Deuteronomy. 32.21. 1. Cor. 1.25.
foolish a means be overthrown. We see therefore this Scripture (which
Atheists Athei and Ethniei apud Philon. de linguar. confus. Item Julian. Cyril.
lib. 4 Manich. apud August. qui ignorantiae Deum accusant.
do deride) is full of gravity and majesty of the wisdom of the Lord. If
any would demand, to whom the Lord did communicate these words: Come on let us
go down, etc. Albeit it may be understood without impeachment of the faith,
August. de ciuit. lib. 16. cap. 5. Quod intelligitur Angelis dictum: per
Angelos descendebat qui in Angelis descendentibus erat.
to be spoken to the Angels, by whom and in whom he did descend; and therefore
to be said, let us go down, not go you down, because August. ibid. and been
non dicit, venite, and descendentes confundite, sed venite and confundamus,
ostendem ita se operari per ministro: suos, vt sine etiam ipsi cooperatores Dei.
the Lord so works by his ministers, as that they are said to be Mark. 16.20.
1. Tim. 4.16.
his fellow workers: Yet it is much rather to be esteemed the voice of the
August. de ciuit. lib. 16. cap. 6. Poterit and hic eadem intelligi Trinitas
tanquam pater dixerit ad sitium and spiritum san^tum. Chrysostom. Hom. de trin.
tom. 3. Dicendo venite, pares honor exhortando vocat, neque enim si Angelis
imperasset, dicere debuit venite, sed imocrando ite. Vide autem obsecro quomodo
patris vox filium and spiritum sanctum vocat: nam si ad vnum solu^^ hoc dictum
esset, debebat dicere, veni and descendamus: venite, vnius vox est ad duos
aequales. Hilar. de trin. libr. 4. Qu^d si deum patrem solitarium sibi haec
locutum fuisse affirmare voles, etc. Athanas. orat. contra Idola. Ex quibus
apparet Deum cum aliquo sibi proximo sermones his^r de rebus con^c^tre: and
quis ille fuerit nisi ipsius verbum. Council. Sardicens. in Socrat. hist. lib.
2. cap. 15. Hic enim est ad quem dixit pater: faciamus hominem etc. qui
antiquis patribus propria persona apparens legem dedit.
fountain of the Trinity the heavenly Father, or of the unity Cyril.
contrae Julian. lib. 1. Ipsa ad seipsam, sanctae and consubstantialis Trinitas,
ho^ de hisce facit sermones.
of the Godhead, in the persons of the deity. If again it be demanded, by
what means this confusion of tongues was wrought? The Scripture declares it
in these words: that one could not understand another speech: whereby is
signified: first, that all of them Verse. 7.
lost the understanding of the speech they had before. Secondly, they were
endued 1. Cor. 14.10.
with a several voice significant in steed thereof. Thirdly, that therein their
understanding was not Philo. lib. de confus. Lingu^r. quid est co^fasionis
simile? Mixtura scilicet and temperatura. Philo likeneth this confusion to
mixture of dry things, and temperature of moist things, as Wine and water. And
indeed it seems likely, that first every one forgot the use of their native
tongue (which was done of the Lord miraculously, as the Scripture signifies,
albeit some by natural imperfection have forgotte the knowledge of their
proper names, as Mess^la Coruinus. C^in^t. lib. 1. cap. 12.) and that
afterward they invented to themselves other words and sounds to express their
minds; diverse, after their diverse wits and dispositions; and what they thus
found out, they constantly kept as their several language, like as also so
much as they remembered of their primitie tongue. By this means it came to
pass, that no language but has some remainder of the Hebrew. Of the Greek we
have spoken in the second chapter, quest. 6. so the Chaldee, Syriac, Arabic,
Egyptian, Persian, etc. The Latin Hierome proves in Sophon. 2. in the word
Nugae, which signifies one thing in Hebrew and in Latin. And Augustine
affirms the Punick comes near the Hebrew. Among other (as worthy as any)
our English has many words which are common with the Hebrew, and seem to be
derived from the same. To shiuer or break to pieces, in the Hebrew is (...):
Sauar: (...) Chub, a chub or rich Usurer: (...) dad, a dugge, the mothers
breast: (...) phag, a fig, etc.
increased nor deminished, but altered to the notion of the language which they
spoke. Whereof it follows, that as this confusion was Isai. 28.11.13.
an horrible punishment, powered out upon the world for sin: so that speaking
and understanding Act. 2.3.4.
of all languages, shed forth upon the Disciples of our Savior; was 1. Cor.
12.10.
such a treasure and real gift, as from the beginning was not bestowed on
mortal creatures. Of some it is asked, how many languages were from hence
derived. To whom there are diverse of the fathers which make this answer, that
Arnob. in Psalm. 124. ^iunt ergo omnes simul linguae 72. Epiphan. Haeres. 1. Et
diuisit illorum linguas; vt ex vna, in 72. distribueret iuxta numerum virerum
tunc repertorium. Hieron. lib. trad. Hebrae. in Genesis August. de ciuit. Dei.
lib. 16. cap. 3.
their number was according to the number and names which are expressed in the
former chapter (which is 70.) and that the Lord The exposition of the Rabbis
in Deuteronom. 32.8.
appointed the borders of the sons of Adam, according to the number of the
For there are 70, beside Sem and Iapheth.
children of Israel. Yet because many The ten sons of Canaan, for ought that
can be proved, had but one language.
there remembered enjoyed one common speech, as the sons of Canaan: and that
many languages Exodus 17.14. Pliny libr. 5. cap. 30. reports by the
authority of Eratosthenes, that the nations of the Solimi, Lesegi, Bebrici,
Colicantij, Trepsedi. etc. in Asia, were utterly destroyed. The Canaanites
were so destroyed, that their language also perished, etc.
are known to have perished with the nations; and many have Nehem. 13.24.
risen since this confusion, by the mixing and confusing of diverse tongues: it
is utterly unnecessary to be decided, neither can it by the Scripture be
determined. Obser. 1. The Deuteronomy. 32.15. and 8.12. Job. 21.14.
prosperity of the wicked does make them proud, and does Psalm. 10. Prou. 30.9.
arm them with rebellion against the Lord. Secondly, sumptuousnes in
building, apparel, and such like, wherein men exceed their condition and
estate, I^ai. 5.8.9. Ierem. 22.13.14. Zephan. 1.8. 1. Pet. 3.5.6.
are great prouocations unto the Lord, to send down his wrath on the usurpers
of them. Thirdly, to seek for fame on earth, either by Judge. 9.54. Such as
were of Lucretia, of Cato Vticens. of Pausanias: which though they seemed to be
done for virtues cause, yet were they indeed against virtue and justice, and
not worthy commendation. August de ciuit. Dei, lib. 1. cap. 19. Valor. Max.
lib. 8. cap. 15.
ungodly actions, or Psalm. 49.11. Isai. 22.10.
indifferent things, as riches, strength, honor, lands, buildings, and only
save by righteousness, and Philip. 4.8.
good desert in the common wealth and Church of God, Isai. 10.13. and cap.
14.4. etc.
is sin, and provoke a curse of infamy. Fourthlie, the Lord does deride
the Psalm. 2.4.
counsels of the wicked, when they fortify themselves against the working
Act. 4.25.
of his providence. Fiftlie, counsels and purposes of men which Isai. 30.1.
are not grounded in the word of God, do work the woe of the inuentors Iosu.
9.14. Isai. 30.5.
of them.

Question 3. verse 12. Whether Shelah were the natural son of Arphaxad, as
the Scripture says, Arphaxad begat Shelah: or whether Shelah were the son of
Cainan, and Grand child of Arphaxad, as it is in the Gospel by saint Luke?
IN the latter part of this Chapter is contained a Catalogue of the genealogy
from Noah, until Abraham; both because the certain August. de ciu. Dei, lib.
16. cap. 14. Absurdum est existimare in ista serie generationum, vbi diligenter
commemoratur quo^ annos quisque vixerit vnius alicuius numerum annorum vitae,
non commendatum esse memoriae. Isle enim ordo qui dirigitur ab Adam vsque ad
Noe, and inde vsque ad Abraham sine numero annorum vitae sua neminem contine^.
distance and revolution of the time, might be fully known unto the Church of
God: and also to the end Matthew. 1.1. Luc. 3.2^. Romans 9.5.
that the parentage of our Savior Jesus Christ, might be described according
to the flesh. In record whereof, this diversity is found, that in the gospel,
where this pedigree is repeated; one Luc. 3 36. (...).
Cainan is placed as the father of Shelah, and son of this Arphaxad, which
Arphaxad himself is here said, to have begotten Shelah at his age of 35.
years. Now if Cainan were the father of Shelah, then can it not be also
agreeing with the truth, that Shelah was begotten by Aphaxad: and if Arphaxad
when he had lived but thirty five years had Shelah borne unto him; it can not
be, that Arphaxad had Cainan, and Cainan Shelah, and that Shelah was borne in
the five and thirtith year of the same Arphaxad. And seeing both these
Scriptures are Canonical, and the Iren. libr. 3. cap. 1. Non enim per alios
dispositione^ saluin nostrae cognouimus, etc. We have known the dispensation
of our salvation, not by other the^ those, by whom the Gospel has come unto
us; which Gospel they themselves then preached, and afterward, by the will of
God, delivered to us in the Scriptures, to be the foundation and pillar of our
faith; fundamentum and. columnam fidei nostrae futurum.
undoubted rules of faith, it seems to be a matter of great importance, that
such diversity is found between these testimonies: for yt must needs be
granted which Augustine confesses; if one error be August. epist 8. Admisso
enim semel in tantum authoritatis fastigium officioso aliquo mendacio, nulla
illorum librorum particula remanebis, quae vtcunque videbitur, vel ad mores
difficilis, vel ad fidem incredibilis, eadem perniciosissima regula ad
mentientis authoris consilium officiumque referatur.
admitted in the rule of faith, it cannot but diminish the whole authority
thereof. Wherefore seeing Hebr. 6.19.
faith is the anchor-hold of our salvation, and the Scriptures are Romans
10.14.17.
the ground, the rule and Ioh. 20.31.
matter of our faith, it behooves christian men, as they tender the common
salvation, and the glory of God, to maintain the sincerity and truth of
Scripture. As there are two causes whereby errors are contained in the writings
of men, the one unfaithfulness August. epist. ^1. Romani maximus author
Tullius eloquij, nullum inquit verbum vnquam quod reuocare vellet emisis. Quae
quidem laus quamuis praeclarissima videatur, tamen credibilior est de nimium
fatuo, quam de sapiente esse trofecta. Sed si in bonam partem accipiatur, hoc
potius de hominibus dei qui spiritis sancto acti locuti sunt quam de illo quem
sic Cicero laudat saluberrima pietate credendum est: quorum scripta summa sunt
authoritate dignissima, qui nullum verbum non quod reuocare vellent, sed quod
reuocare debere^s emiserunt.
of the authors, of ignorance of the truth: the other, vnheedfulnesse Quibus
huiusmodi adiuratione vsus est Irenaeus: Adiuro te qui transcribis librum
istum, per Dominum Iesum Christum and per gloriosum eius aduentum, quo
iudicaturus est and viuos and mortoos, vt conferas postqua^ transcripferis, and
emendes illum ad exemplar vnde scripsisti diligentissime: hanc quoque
obtestationem similiter transferas, vt inuenisti moxempla^i. Hieron. in Catol.
or negligence of those, who have exemplified such writings, renewing by
transcription the ancient and worn copies: so are there two sorts of
adversaries which falsely impute errors unto the Scriptures, which are both
alike dangerous and deadly enemies unto the faith. Of the first kind are
Julian. lib. 3. confuted by Cyrill, calls Christian religion (which sometime
he professed the learning of the Galileans; and the holy Scriptures a forgerie
devised by men: yet Porphyrius his fellow Atheist, confesses that Moses
writings were histories of truth. Contra Christianos lib. 4.
Atheists, and heathen men, which renounce the whole body of the Scripture, or
Libros veteris Testamenti respuerunt Simoniani. Iren. lib. 1. cap. 20. and
Marcion. ibid. cap. 29. Manichai. Epiphan. Haeres. 66. Cerdoniani. August. de
Here Is. c. 21 Librum Job. Talmud. Hebraeor. ord. 4. tract. 3. Psalmos
Nicholaitae, and Gnostici Philastri lib. de Haeres. cap. 127 alij Salomonis
libros infestant. Philast. cap. 132. Jacob. Iustinop. in praefat in Cant.
Porphyrius Daniclem, vt refer^ Hieron. in Daniel. in praefat.
heretics, which deny the parts thereof. These most blasphemouslie impute
unfaithfulness and falsehood to the authors of holy writings, whose names
they bear. Now because the Lord long ago by his mighty hand, By horrible
examples; as of Julian, Socrat. libr. 3. cap. 8. who having overcome his
enemies, is in the field deadly wounded, and dies blaspheming God and Christ:
of Manes, who^ the heathen Persian King caused to be flaied alive, his skin to
be stuffed with straw, and to be hung up at the gates of the city, for
sorcerie and working false miracles, Epiphan. Haeres. 66. Arrius voided his
bowels at the privy, Ruffin. Histor. lib. 1. cap. 13. So^rat. lib. 1. cap. 3.
Nestorius his tongue was eaten in his head of worms, and thereof died. Euagr.
lib. 1. cap. 7.
has weeded out such enemies, and they are not suffered to show their head
within the Leuit. 24.15 16. 1. Cor. 16.22
walls of the city or Church of God: therefore Satan, (who chiefly
labors to 2. Cor. 11.3. Ephesians. 6.12. 1. Pet. 5.8.
overthrow the faith) has secretly sent in another sort of more subtle
adversaries, who tread a secret path to undermine the Scripture, by calling
into doubt the integrity and purity thereof. Such were in old time August.
epist. 19. Quidam Manicha^rum falsa esse contendunt, ita tamen vt eandem
falsitotem non scribentibus Apostolit tribuant, sed nescio quibus codicum
corruptoribus.
the refuse of the christians, who not daring to accuse the authors
themselves, accused certain corrupters of the books: and such are now in the
Church of Rome, who to advance the credit of translations, Iacobus Christinop.
praefat. in Psalm. and Canus locis Theolog. lib. 2. c. 13. affirm that the
Scriptures have been corrupted by the Jews: other Papists are ashamed of this,
and Bellarmine says, they were endued with good zeal, but not according to
knowledge, Bellarm. Tom. 1. libr. 2. cap. 2. But in the same place he says;
that to say the Hebrew is a most pu^e fountain, is a false sentence.
accuse of corruptions the original fountains. Wherein they commit a treble
injury. First against the Lord, Psalm. 19.7.
the honor of whose word hereby they violate. Secondly against men, Matthew.
18.7.
whose faith and reverence toward the heavenly word of God, they do most
unworthily disturb and hinder. Thirdly against the truth, which they
falselie, and causeles bring into suspicion. For never shall either In this
point has Bellarmine dealt unfaithfully, and used many fallacies and
subtilties.
Papist, or Atheist, or any power of Satan be able fully and sufficiently to
show, either error in the Eugubin. Steuch. in Comment^m Genesis 11.7 says the 72.
Interpreters erred, and that S. Luke followed their error.
author, or Bellar. Tom. 1. lib. 2. cap. 3. cites (as he would bear the
world in hand) a manifest corruption. Psalm. 21. (for the test of his proofs
are nothing to his purpose, and unworthy to be answered) where it is read
(...) caari, which is in English, as a lion: whereas it is otherwise to be read
(...) caru, that is, they pierced: to this it is answered, that all copies have
it not (...) caari, but some. Secondly, the Rabbis acknowledge a diverse
reading. Thirdly, I find says Rabbi Jacob Ben Caijin lib. Masoreth litera
Aleph Resh, in the truer copies it is written, caru, though it be read caari.
Look Joan. Isaac contra Lindan. defens. verit. Haebraic. ^^lun. animad. in
Bellarm. Tom. 1. lib. 2. cap. 2. Therefore this is a weak argument of
Bellarmine. Some copies vary in a letter, ereo the Scriptures are corrupted:
yet this is the only proof of moment or difficulty, that hitherto could be
alleged, that the Scriptures are not pure and free from all corruption.
corruption of the copy generally received, in any writing of Canonical De
Apocryphis dicit Augustinus propter multa salsa ij^ nulla est canonica
authoritas, libr. de ciuit. Dei 15.23. quare de ijs in contrarium centendimus
contra Papistas.
account in holy Scripture. In such weighty causes Neque valet nifi
vniuersalis and certa demonstratio.
suspicions must make no proofs; neither is it S^spicatur quidem Theod. Beza
varias translationes verborum, vt annot. mayor. Apoc. 16.15. etc. sed absis
(inquit) vt ego quicquam hic audeam ex nuda coniectura, and cap. 18. Mihi
semper maxima religio fuit vel apicem in his sacro sanctis libris mutare ex
nuda coniectura. Quam religione^ omnes bonos decet. Et licet alijs non deest
huiusmodi suspicio, nullo ha^: iure damnare debet veritatem, cum nullis
rationibus pro cario e^^nci potest.
meet that private judgments should prejudice the common cause of man's
salvation. Concerning therefore this Scripture whereof we speak, and to
reserve the residue unto their place: In all Hebrew copies of this genealogy,
and in the repitition which 1. Chron. 1.18.
the Scripture makes of the same, in the book of Chronicles, Hebraice diure
Haiamim, id est, verba dierum.
or account of times, the scripture constantly does testify that Shelah was
Arphaxads son. Notwithstanding in the Greek translation, which is Nam hanc
quam habemus non esse genuinam multi non sine magna causa dubitant. Whitak.
controu. quaest. 2. cap. 4.
supposed to be made of seauentie Jews, from out of Hebrew into Greek; there
is not only made an augmentation of the time, Addunt annos 800. and plures.
above that the Hebrew does account; but also this addition in genealogy, that
Verse. 12. in sept. Graec.
Arphaxad begat Cainan, and Cainan Shelah. Now because the Jews in their
common speech, did use Nehem. 13.24. Na^ ex Hebraica and Chaldaica nata est
Syriaca
the Aramites or Syrian language in the time of our Savior Christ and his
Apostles, and had little use of the Hebrew tongue: and because the Greek was
famous and known among the Gentiles, therefore the Disciples of our Savior,
alleging the Romans 9.33. and 10.11 19. 2. Pet. 1.21.
Scriptures of the old testament, allege them after the translated copy,
where they differ in words but not in meaning from the Hebrew. To this effect
there are some which answer; that S. Luke (whose hand was guided and directed
Conciliatio. 17.
by our Savior Jesus Christ) writing unto the Gentiles, Pet. Martyr. Comment.
in Genesis Caietan. Comment. in Luc. cap. 3. Genebrard. in Chronolog.
did also choose to follow that authority, wherewith they were acquainted; and
after a sort with modesty to tolerate a Pet. Mart. ibid. No^ est illi vitio
vertendu^ cum Gentibus scriberet and versio illa 72. vulgata esset, and in
manibus passim haberetur. Franc. Iun. in Analysi cap. 11. Cum enim videret, non
esse positum in hac repiorum salutem, sed errorem iam olim temere a maioribus
inuectum, and apud omnes gentes aetate illa receptum, no^ posse sine graui
offensione tam repent conuelli ex manibus and libris hominum: dedit Lucas
charitati and pietati, ne dum history veritas ageritur, labefacte^etur pietas
infirmoru^ and dissueretur charitas quae primis illis temporibus nascentis
ecclesiae omnibus modis fuit falcien^a.
light error, consisting but of person, rather then to disturb the faith,
which was newly springing by the Gospel. But to this answer, another
question would be moved, whether it be lawful to August. epist. 9. Si enim ad
scrioturas sanctas admissae fuerint velut offi^iosa mendacia, quid mijs
remanebit authoritatis?
avouch an error or falsehood, to a godly end: seeing we may not Romans 3.8.
do evil in witness bearing, that good may come thereof. Which if it be
unlawful; be it far from godly men to impute such spots of charity to the
writers August. epist. 19. Ego fateor charitati tuae. solis ijs scripturarum
libris, qui iam canonici appellantur didici hunc timoreom h^noreuque defer,
vt nullum eorum authorem. scribendo aliquid errasse, firmissime credam.
of sacred Scriptures. It is manifest therefore that the Evangelist would never
testify any record that should be contrary to the writings of Moses and of
the Prophets; neither could offend therein of will, of ignorance; forasmuch as
his Matthew. 10.20. 2. Pet. 1.21.
heart and hand was guided by the Lord. It remains therefore to the
adversaries to object against us this only scruple; that this place of the
gospel has bin corrupted, since the authenticke writing and inditing thereof.
And this is indeed no small scandal (if it be admitted) to the embracing of
the faith: for if any Eccles. 10.1. August. epist. 8. Admisso enim etc.
error be found to be in the sacred Scriptures, whether it proceed from the
authors, or by fault of other; it cannot but greatly hinder the prosperous
proceedings of religion, and alienate the minds of men from receiving the rest
of Scripture without suspicion. Now therefore God be praised, who has not
suffered the occasion of such scandals in the Scriptures: but has rather by
the negligence and impiety of men, given warning of such offenses before they
come; as in this place of Scripture is well perceived. Arphaxad begat Shelah,
says the Hebrew word, by Moses, and by the Chronicles or register of days.
Why then says the Greek translation, Arphaxad Genesis 1.12. in Septuag.
begat Cainan, and Cainan begat Shelah, save only to enlarge the time, and to
add unto the Scripture Franc. Iun. in Anal. in Genesis cap. 11. Quod
existimauerunt non esse genti Aegyptioru^ aut vlli alter^ cedendum in
laudatissimo antiquitatis argume^to, quia antiquitatis nomen dignitatem cebus
venerand^m adferre solet. Quapropter dederunt illi operam, vt certis scripturae
locis infarciren^ nomina personarum and rationem temporu^ adaugerent, non eo
consilio vt de veritate derogarent, sed eo potius vt de exterarum gentium
gloriatione, quam adhibebant illa antiquitatis specie detraherent.
a show of great antiquity; following therein unlawfully, the vain glorious
boasting of the heathen, at whose entreaty Joseph. Antiq. 12.2.
the same translation was taken in hand. Nevertheless, we have thus much for
defense of that translation; that it cannot be sufficiently confirmed, that
the ancient copies thereof were so with falsehood blemished: because Joseph.
Antiq. lib. 1. cap. 7. Translationem 72. in omnibus fere secutus, tamen hic ex
Arphaxade (inquit) prognatus est Sales. Epiphan. Haeres. 53. Qui translationem
etiam secutus est; Arphaxad, inquit, annos natus ce^tum triginta quinque genuit
Sale: in primo errauit cum translatione in numero annorum, ergo procul dubio
extranslatione dixit, Arphaxad genuit Sale, nisi dixeris nequae Gra^am neque
Hebraeam secutum esse, quod absurdum est. Hieron. trad. in Genesis
diverse notable writers, who followed that translation, do otherwise read it
out of the same translation, then now (for the most part) it is found therein:
and where they diligently As Hieron. lib. trad. Hebr. where he notes all
disagreeme^t between the Hebrew and the Greek translation, and observes the
error of the translation in the account of time, speaks nothing of this so
great diversity, which shows that the same could no^ then be observed as a
difference, or was not a general disagreement.
note the faults of this translation, and disagreement from the Hebrew; they
have in this place observed no such difference; which is a manifest argument,
that the Greek and Hebrew (at the least in many copies) did accord. Moreover
if some copies of the Greek translation, agreed in old time with the Hebrew
text; like as many at this day are found For at this day there are found
copies both old and new which (in 1. Chron. 1.18.) have it thus, (...),
Arphaxad begat Salah, making no mention at all of Cainan.
to do: surely without all reason is it, to suppose, that the holy writer
for common peace sake, admitted such an error, and followed corrupted copies
before the true. And that indeed he did not, is no less apparent by evidence,
then is the former. For albeit most copies now adays have included the name of
Cainan in the register: yet some are also found, Beza in annos. in Luc. 3.36.
Ante hoc nomen legitur (...), quod non dubitaui expungere secutus authoritate^
Mosis (Genesis 11.12.) and me^ vetustissimi codicis. Augustinus tamen secundum
vulgar exemplar legit Cainan; non modo in Euangelio, sed in hac historia
Mosis, and post eum Beda and alij plerique: non est igitur leuis aut nona
corruption, non tamen propter authoritatem sequenda est.
which have it not, but do read it altogether agreeing to these words of Moses.
Whose truth and reverend antiquity does teach: First that the writings of
Moses and Luke were undoubtedly in all things of full agreement. Secondly,
that ignorance, and evil purposes have heretofore endeavored to pollute the
holy history. Thirdly, that the Lord has always, and will preserve his
word, that it may ever be a Isai. 8.20. Psalm. 119.105. Prou. 30.5.
perfect guide unto the faithful, and an Ioh. 12.48. Matthew. 5.18.
uncorrupted judge, for Atheists and unbelievers. Wherefore seeing all copies
of the Hebrew agree, concerning this report; but the copies of the gospel do
dissent among themselves: it follows that the truth remains with the Hebrew
text, and with those copies of the Gospel which accord therewith. And albeit
some copies of the Gospel may happen in this point (being no fundamental
point directly concerning man's salvation) to be corrupted, forasmuch as
universally they suffer not the same corruption: therefore neither Atheists
have cause hereby to condemn the word of contradiction; neither papists, to
allege that the fountains are corrupted; nor christians have cause to be
offended, although some copies disagree. For the holy Scripture has no such
privilege, that none shall dare presume against it, but that none that do
presume, shall Isai. 59.21. Revel. 6.6.
fully, and finally prevail. But because such heinous faults have proceeded
to so great enormities, we are all admonished to have care to preserve with
integrity, to maintain with purity the sacred word, and to amend with
modeste such copies of the same, as are found by wifulnes or negligence of men
to be corrupted.

Question 4. verse 31. Wherefore are the children of Terah more largely
entreated of in this genealogy, then of the rest of the Fathers, and for what
cause departed Terah from Vr of the Chaldees to go into the land of Canaan.
THe ancient generations are recounted but only in the line of the Messiah,
until Terah the father of Abraham; not that they were August. de ciuit. Dei,
lib. 16. c. 10. Intimans quemlibet filios filiasque genuisse: vt intelligamus
vnde po^^erint populi accrescere, ne in paucis qui commemorantur hominibus
occupati pueriliter hesitemus, vnde tanta spacia terrarum atque regionum
repleri potuerint.
not partakers of the blessing of increase in farther measure; but because the
residue of their children became August. ibid. Tenenda est igitu^ sertes
generationum ab ipso Sem, vt ipsa ostendat post dilunium ciuitatem Dei: propter
hoc diuina scriptura, cum terrenam ciuitatem in Babylone, hoc est in confusione
esse monstrasset, ad patriarcha^ Sem, recapitulando reuertitur.
even strangers unto the Church. Abraham as the Rabbinor. (...) in Beresh.
pearl that is hid amongst the sand, as the Father Genesis 17.5. Galat. 3.7.
of the faithful, and the Isai. 41.8. Iam. 2.23.
friend of God, his life was as a pattern Genesis 12.10. and 18.6. 50. etc. and
22.10.12.
unto the godly, of patience, of faith and piety to God: for this cause the
affairs of his life are largely recorded in the following history. Nahor as
the Grandfather of virtuous Rebecca, whom Genesis 24.7.27.^0.
the Lord God directed in marriage unto Isaac; and Haran as the father of
righteous Lot, of Milcha Rebeccas Grandmother, and Ischa (who as Rabbinoru^
consensus. Item Joseph. Antiq. 1. cap. 7. Aranes relicto filio Lotho and
filiabus Sara and Milcha in regione Chaldaeorum est mortuus, neptes vero ex
f^atre duxeru^t co^iuges Milcham Nachores, Saram Abraham. Hieron. in tradit.
Hebrai^. in Genesis August. de ciuit. Dei, lib. 16. cap. 12. Iste Aran pater
Milchae suit and pater Ischae, quae Ischa creditur ipsa esse etia^ Sara vxor
Abraham.
many writers affirm, was Sarah) are necessarily in respect of their
posterity remembered. Who Ischa was, and wherefore named in this record, can no
way be perceived, save by the signification of her name. By which it seems
that Sarah Abraham's wife Hieron. lib. trad. in Genesis Aran filius Their scater
Abraham and Nachor duas filias genuit, Milcham and Sarai cognomento Ischam
(...).
was called also Ischa of her fathers household, which in signification is Ischa
enim Chaldaeo sermon and Syro est spectata vel conspicus, vel clanum
administrationis tenent, vt testatur Francisc Iun. in Anal. Rab. Solom. in
Comment. a radic. (...) nasach, diducit, quod est magnificare, aut principe^
constituere, quod idem est cum significatu Sarah, (...).
one with Sarah, but differs in sound according to the common language of the
family. Neither makes this against the speech of Abraham: she is my sister,
or where he says, she is the daughter of my Genesis 20.12
Father: for in the language of the Church of God many which are 2. Sam.
19.12.13. Genesis 19.7.
farther in descent of kindred, are called brethren; and Lot is also called of
Abraham himself, his Genesis 13.8.
brother. In which respect might Sarah well be called his fathers daughter,
because she came of Terah being Notwithstanding some Interpreters affirm that
Sarai was the natural daughter of Tharah, not of Haran, as Clem. Alexan.
Strom. 2 upon these words, She is the daughter of my father, but not the
daughter of my mother, Genesis 20.12. he teaches thereby (says Clemens) that
they which were of the same mother, might not then be taken to wife. Of new
writers, Theodor. Beza, libr. de Repudijs. But the former sentence is more
consonant, confirmed by Josephus, Hierome, Augustine, Calvin, Iunius and
other. Wherein we must observe that Haran was not by the same wife of Terah
that Abra^ was; for otherwise Sarai had also been the daughter of his mother,
Genesis 20.12. But of this more in another place.
the daughter of his son. That Haran died before Terah his father in the land
of his nativity, is observed by many writers. Some affirming that Hieron. lib.
trad. Hebrate. in Genesis Tradunt Hebrai ex hac occasion huiusmodi fabulam: quod
Abraham in ignem missus sit, quia ignem adorare nobuerit, quem Chaldaei colunt;
and Dei auxilio liberatus, de Idololatriae igno profugerit: mortuus est Aran in
conspectis patris sui, in igne Chaldaeorum: quod videlicet ignem noluit
adorare, igne consumptus sit.
he died a witness of the Lord, by the hands of Idolaters at the building of
Babel. Some contrariwise, Epiphan. Haeres. 1. Hinc fieri taperunt statuae ex
luto and art sigulari per industriam huius Tharrae Durauit autem hoc studium
in vigessinam generationem vsque ad hunc dieus annis 3332. Suidas in voce
Sherug. hoc inuentu^^ ipsi tribuis, and Tharre statuarium fuisse scribit.
that being himself an inuentor of Idolatry, he was destroyed by the Lord
for his iniquity, being For Lamech the father of Noah died also before
Methushela his father: and the same is to be supposed of many other.
untruely called of them the first Epiphan. Haeres. 1. Et nullus vnquam ex
prioribus hominibus filius ante patrem mortuus est, donec Tharre aemutum Dei
per propriam versutiam commeritus erat.
that died a natural death before his father. But whether he died a Martyr or
for his sin, before his father; or whether for neither, but that Ioh. 9.3.
the work of God might be showed upon him, seeing the Scripture it self is
silent, men August. de Genesis contr. Manich. lib. 1. cap. 2 Compescat se humana
temerita^, and id quod non est non quarat: ne id quod est non inueniat. Prosp.
lib. de vocat Gent. Quae Deus occulia esse voluit, non sunt serutanda; qua
autem manifesta fecit, non sunt negligenda^e and in illis illicite curiofi, and
in his damnabiliter inueniamur ingrati.
must be contented to be ignorant. And Terah took Abram his son, and Sarai
his daughter in law, and Lot the son of Haran, and they departed together,
etc. The cause why Terah in this sort forfooke his country, was the Chrysostom.
Hom. in Genesis 31. Abraham imperauit Deus vt inde utigraret, quod vt agnouit
Tharra pater eius, lices infidelis pater esset, attamen ob amorem in filiuus,
socius illi peregrinationis esse voluit.
voice and oracle of God to Abraham, which is recorded in the Chapter
following: Come out of thy country, and from thy fathers house, etc. For Abram
now came out, and departed with his father to go into the land of Canaan: but
before his departing, while he Act. 7.2.
dwelt in Vr of the Chaldees, For Chalden it self and all Babylon is called by
Geographers, Mesopotamia. Plin. Hist. not. lib. 6. cap. 27.
and in Mesopotamia, the Lord said unto him, Go out of thy country, and from
thy fathers house. Wherefore the beginning of the chapter following, repeateth
and expounds August. de ciu. Dei, lib. 16. c. 15. Et dixit Dominus, exidae
terra tua etc. non quia hoc sequitur in sermon libri, hoc etiam in rerum
gostarum tempore sequi existimandum est: sed intelligendum est more suo
scripturam redijsse ad tempus, quod iam narnatio illa transierat. Sicut
superius de linguarum vnitate dictum est. Francisc. Iun. in. Anal. in Genesis cap.
12. Hic primus vocationis locus est plane (...) and causam exponena cur Tharra
cum familia, Ure Chaldaeoru^ discesserit.
the cause of their departing, which thus in regard of time must be understood:
The Lord had said to Abraham while he dwelt in Mesopotamia, Come out of thy
country, etc. Then Terah took Abraham his son. And for this cause does the
wisdom of God observe this order, in delivering the report, because it was
necessary in the life of Terah, to describe the acts of Terah, chiefly this
most memorable, which happened in all his life. But because the commandment
was given to Abraham, as was the promise of his reward: it was also most aptly
reserved unto the history of Abraham, thereby to declare his obedience and
faith. Now it may be objected, seeing Abraham was commanded to forsake his
country, and his Fathers house, that he in departing, obeyed not the voice of
God, forasmuch as Terah his father with his household, went out together in his
company. Doubtless Abraham obeyed the voice of God, not only in joining
company (in the departure) with his father, but also in Chrysostom. Hom. in
Genesis 31. Anim^tu ortere licet, quod cum Patriarcha Deo a^ceptus esset, visus ei
Deus imperauis quod vt agnonit Tharra pater eius, etc. Calvin. in Genesis 11. Nec
obstat quod prim^^ Thaerrae assignat Moses; quasi eius auspicijs, and ductu
potius quam dei mandato agressu^ fuerit Abraham: nam hoc honoris desertur
patrio nomini.
making known unto his father, the revelation of the will of God. Neither had
the Lord denied him his Fathers company, when he bad him forsake his Fathers
house in forsaking of his country: but that he Ambros. lib. (...). Abrah. cap.
2. Satis fuerat di risse exi de terra tua, ibi enim erat de cognatione exire,
de paterna Dom^^ sed ideo addidit singula, vt eius affectum proba^er, ne forte
aut imprudenter capisse vateretur, aut fraus aliqua mandatis coelestibus
pararetur.
should so forsake his country, as that his fathers house should be to him no
hindrance. In like sort, the godly are commanded Ephesians. 5.11.
to forsake the fellowship of the wicked, and in this respect Matthew. 10.37.
to forsake both Parents, and wife and children and possession. Notwithstanding
they are commanded, Ephesians. 6.4. etc.
to honor and love their father, and mother and wife and children: in regard
of which reverence and love, they are bound with Abraham to Isai. 2.3. Romans
11.14.
provoke them by all means, to go with them unto the land of Heb. 4.9.
rest: yet if they will not be persuaded to obey the calling of the Lord, then
Iosu. 24.15. Psalm. 45.10. Origin. in Ioh. tom. 20 Est autem quaedam
vniuscuiusque nostrum terra, atque quaedam ante diuinum responsum non bona
cogitatio, and postremo quaedam domus patris nostri, ante quam peruemat sermo
dei ad nos, quae omnia nobis propter sermonem dei da^nanda sunt and omittenda,
si seruatorem audimus dicentem: si filij estis Abrahae opera facite Abrahae.
Bernard. sermon. de cute, carne and ossibus animae. Excamus de terra nostra, vt
non comprehendat nos cogitatio spectans ad voluptatem carnis. Ex^amus de
cogitatione nostra, id est a cogitationibus curiositatit, quae carnali vtique
est cognata voluptati: exeamus etiam de domo patris nostri vt fugiamus
cogitationes superbie and vanitatis. Eramus nos aliquando sicut caeterifilij
^ra. etc.
are they to forsake them and go alone. The meaning therefore of the Lord was
to admonish Abraham, to have more regard of Gods commandment, then of his
fathers house; not to forsake his fathers house, if his fathers house forsake
not Abraham; but Abraham must in no case forsake the Lord: Let them return to
thee, but return not thou to them, says the Lord to the Ierem. 15.19.
Prophet, in a like commandment. But here remains, yet a greater doubt. The
Scripture Heb. 11.8.
commending the faith of Abraham, affirms he went out not knowing whither he
went: but here it is said, that Terah took Abraham, to go into the land of
Canaan. The words of the Apostle are nothing contrary to this narration, but
only CONCILIATIO. 18.
teach, how the same should be understood, namely as an inestimable argument
Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 31. Quasi diceret relinque certa and omnibus confessa,
and elige magis incerta, and non apparentia. Considera quomodo ab initio
exercetur iustus, vt praeeligat non apparentia pro appare^tibus, and futura
prae ijs, que in manibus sunt. Neque vulgar and paruum erat etc. non enim
dixit ei in quam regionem transfer eum voluit sed mandato indefinito pium
patriarcham exercuit. Ambros. de Alrah. lib. 1. c. 2 Tentatur vt fortis,
incitatur vt fidelis, prouocatur vt iustus, meriroque exiuit quemadmodu^
locutus est illi Dominus.
of the faith of Abraham, that at the calling of the Lord he would readily
forsake his native country, and wander he knew not whither certainly, and
therewithal would have forsaken his father and his house, if he would not have
gone with him, and have bin partaker of his hope. But the same country (albeit
to Abraham as yet unknown) to which they were directed, by the guiding of the
Lord, was Canaan: so that Abraham came out, and prepared himself to go,
before he understood he was to go to Canaan; yet afterward the Lord in mercy
not only showed him the way, but the place whereto he had assigned him.
Wherein we see, that where the Lord commands, he requires 1. Sam. 15.22.
Deuteronomy. 12.32.
absolute obedience, and Psalm. 55.22. 1. Pet. 5.7.
blessed are they that cast their care on him.

CHAP. XII.
Question 1. verse 4. Forasmuch as the Scripture says, Terah lived seauentie
years and begat Abraham, Nahor, and Haran; and again, Terah died at the age
of 205. years: how could it be that Abraham departed out of Haran after the
death of Terah, being but 75. years old, as says the Scripture?
IF Abraham were borne in the seauentith year of Terah, and entered not into
Canaan, before his fathers death; he could be no les of age, the^ an hundredth
thirty and five years, for so much distance of time there is between the
birth of Abraham and Terah his death. Again August. Epist. 2. ad Volusian.
Tanta est christianarum profunditas literarum, vt in ijs quotidie proficerem,
si eat solas ab intunte pueritia vsque ad decrepitam senectutem, maximo otio,
summo studio, meliore ingenio conarer addiscere, etc. In ijs cum consummaueris
homc, tunc incipit.
if Abraham departed into Canaan, being seauentie five years old, Act. 7 4.
his father being dead; he could not be borne in the seauentith year of
Terah, but in the hundredth and five and thirtith year. For answer whereunto,
the Veter^ Rabbini, ex quibus narrat Hieronymus. Item. Rab. Solomon in comment.
in Genesis sic resert. N^mrodo Tharra coniunctus and charus erat, atque vna in
Idolola tria communicabant, Abraham contradice bat, quare a tyranno suit
coniectus in forn^cem, sed Deo fauente ereptus est ex illo incendio.
Jews endeavoring to reconcile the Scripture, have broched this tradition,
(whereunto Hieron. trad. in Genesis Vera est igitur illa Hebraeorum traditio, etc.
Et ex illo tempore ei dies vitae and tempus reputetur aetatis ex quo confessus
est dominum, spernent Idola Chaldaeorum. August. de ciuit. Dei, lib. 16. cap.
15. Soluta autem est quaestio ista and aliter, vt 75. Anni Abrahae quando
egressus est de Charra, ex illo computetur, ex quo de igne Chaldaeorum
liberatus est, non ex quo natus est, tanquam tunc potius natu^, etc.
Hierome also gives his consent) that Abraham at the age of sixty years
being thrown by the Chaldees into the fire, because he would not (as they did)
worship it for a God, and being miraculouslie delivered by the Lord, his age is
thenceforth counted not from his birth, but at his deliverance from death. And
in this sense it is (say they) that the Lord speaks thus to Abraham, I Genesis
15.7. Kimehi lib. Radic.
brought thee out of Vr Chashdim, the fire of the Chaldees: for Vr in Hieron.
trad. Hebraic. in Genesis Pro eo quod legimus in regione Chaldeorum, in Hebraeo
habetur (...) Vr chashdim, id est in igne Chaldaeorum (...), Vr, a rad. (...)
or, lucere, illuminari, succendere. Graece (...).
the Hebrew tongue is fire. Nevertheless we may certainly perceive by the
words Genesis 11.31. Et sic docet Rabb. Abrab. Ben. Ezra in Comment. in Genesis 1.
Item Rab. Moses Ben. Nahmah. Licet non natale solum Abrahae fuisse dicit.
of Scripture (forasmuch as Terah, and Lot, and Sarah departed together with
Abraham from Vr, as the Scripture witnesses) that this Vr was a town or City
of the Chaldees where Abraham dwelt. So that this tradition being no where
grounded in the written word, we leave to those who embrace traditions Bellarm.
Tom. 1. controu. 1. lib. 4 cap. 7. Rectissime aequari traditiones scripturis
docet. Et quaedam (inquit) sunt traditiones maiores quam quaedam scripturae,
quaedam minores and quedam aequales, cum tamen omnes traditiones, and omnes
scripturae sunt aequales quantum ad fidem and venerationem, quae illis debetur,
cum proficiscantur ab eodem authore Deo, and veniunt ad nos per manus ciusdem
ecclesiae quae est matter nostra.
as the word. Wherefore taking the age of Abraham from the birth of Abraham,
divines have endeavored to find a more apt reconcilement of the Scripture.
Augustine a man of excellent dexterity and judgment in interpreting the
Scripture, affirms, that this departure of Abraham August. de ciu. Dei, libr.
16. cap. 15. Non ergo inde post mortem patris. id est post 205. annos quibus
pater eius vixit egressus est, sed annus de illo loco profectionis eius, cum
ipsius septuagessimu^ quintus erat, procul dubio patris eius, qui septuagesimo
vitae suae anno genuerat, centissimus quadragesimus quintus fuisse colligitur.
into Canaan at seauentie five years old, was before his fathers death. And
although many objections may be made against this opinion out of the
Scripture; yet being well considered they seem to be light, and easily taken
away. For where the Scripture places this departing of Abraham after the death
of Terah: it is found to be a continual practice Sic enim de exitu Terah. Genesis
11.31. and 12.1. and 14.27. Venerum ad fontem iudicij (Mispeth) Hieron. trad.
Hebraic. in Genesis Per anticipatione^ dicitur quod postea sic vocatum est. Number.
cap 12.24.25. August. locut. in Number. 13 Cum superius dixisset venerunt in
vallem Botri, dictum est ergo per anticipationem, non quia tum hoc vocabatur,
quando venerunt, sed cum scriberetur hic liber iam vocabatur. Et de Doct.
Christian. lib. 3. c. 36.
in the histories, first by anticipation to declare a matter done, and after by
recapitulation to show the cause and order of the doing thereof. Again, where
the Scripture repeateth this history, it uses these words. Then Act. 7.4.
came Abraham out of the land of the Chaldees, and (...).
dwelt in Haran: and after his father was dead, God brought him from thence
into this land wherein you now dwell: whereby it is manifest, that Abraham's
departure was after his fathers death. This objection is also dissolved by
Augustine and other writers: that August. de ciuit. Dei, lib. 16. cap. 15. Non
vt postquam mortuus est pater cius exijt de Charra. Sed inde postquam mortuus
est pater eius hic eu^ collecauit.
where the Martyr Stephen says, that God translated him after his fathers
death, he means not of Abraham's first arrival into Canaan, wherein he
wandered many years, but his (...) ex qua sue rei capit esse possesser, nam
altero sequente anno, tossessionem emit ad sepulturam, Genesis 23.17.18 prius ne
vestigium pedi^ possidebat.
settled abode when he was translated wholly after his fathers death. So that
Abraham is thought to have a double entrance into Canaan, one at the age of
seauentie five years, and another after the death of Terah. Which answer
notwithstanding, well considered, seems not to be sufficient unto the
purpose. For the Scripture Origin. in Ierem. Hom. 2. Qua propter necesse est
nobis scripturat sanctas in testimonium vocare: sensu^ quippe nostri and
enarrationes sine his testibus non habent fidem. Basil. in Mor. reg. 26.
Quicquid vel dicimus vel facimus, id testimonio diuinarum literarum confirmari
debet.
no where does insinuate any twofold departure of Abraham into Canaan, but
rather contrariwise that his departure was at once, and that the same was after
his fathers death. For at this his departure being seauentie five year old, he
carried with him Verse 5.
all his commodities and goods, and left not any thing for another time to be
transported. Secondly, the famine being in Verse. 10.
Canaan, he returned not to Haran, which of likelihood he would have done his
father being alive, neither is it ever found when he returned back to Haran,
that he might the second time depart to Canaan. Thirdly, since that Terah
departed with Abraham his son to Genesis 11.31.
go into the land of Canaan, for what cause remained he by the way in Haran
by the space of threescore years? Shall we say ^ben Ez^a Com. in Genesis and alij
trad^nt Tharra Charr^^ in I^olatria cap. tom, sed ipsum in sine die^um
resi^^isse. Mortuus est (inquit) Tharra in Cha an qu^ ia n p^^cuit illi ea
regio, nec sil^um est comitatut in Canaan. etc.
that he was infected with Idolatry in Haran, and therefore remained there?
Much rather we are to think, that this revelation being given to Abraham a
little before the death of Terah, they departed together to go to Canaan: but
Terah his Caiu. in Genesis cap. 11 Ridiculum enim est, cum patria egressus Tharra
recta peteret terrant Canaan, se^aginta annos hospitem in alieno opid ^hesisse:
magis verisimile est senem annis consectu^ morbo and lassitudin^ fuisse
consumptum. Bernard. epist. 105. Pretiosa mors sanctorum, pretiosa plane tan
quam finis laboru^, tanquam victory co^summatio, tanquam vitae ia^u^, and
persefectae securitatis ingressa^.
time being finished, by the mercy of the Lord, enjoyed a better rest, before
he came at Canaan. Fourthlie, it is said: after his Father was dead God
brought him into this place, and gave him none inheritance, no not the breadth
of a foot. Whereby it is evident, that Beza in Annot. in Act. cap. 7. Itaque
non assentior ijs qui vt hunc nodum soluant duplicem secerunt Abraha
vocationem, quarum vnam a Mose praetermissam recenseat Stephanus. Atqui si haec
Stephanus non accepit a Mose, a quo tandem accepit? dein quis non videt
Stephanum si quaedam a Mose discrepa^tia narrasset, maximam calumniandi
o^casionem fuisse aduersarijs praebiturum.
he came, but after his fathers death: that he came after his fathers death,
and inioyed not the inheritance of a foot: that he came and was translated
after his fathers death: so that when he first came he was translated, and the
same his coming was his translation. Seeing therefore that Abraham's age of
seauentie five years when he departed into Canaan, is perceived to be by the
authority of holy Scripture, either at or after the death of his father, who
lived an hundred and five years: it remains that Abraham was not Calvin. in
Genesis 11. verse. 26. Nunc cur Abraham no^ fuerit primogenitus. etc.

August. quaest. in Genesis 25. Petest and sic solui; quonia^ scriptura quae dixit
cu^ esset Tharre annorum 70. genuis Abraham and Nachor and Aran: non vtique hoc
intelligi voluit quod codem anno 70. aetatis suae omnes tres genuit, sed ex quo
anno generare coepis ^um annum commemorani^ scriptura. Fieri enim potuis vt
posterior sit generatus Abraham, sed merito excellentiae quae in scripturis
valde commendatur, prior fueris nominatus.

Tremel. Annotat. in Genesis 11.


borne in the seauentith year of Terah, but in the hundredth and five and
thirtith. There may in deed be many objections made against it, but none I hope
that shall prevail. The text says: Terah lived seauentie years and begat
Abraham, Nahor and Haran: therefore will one say, was Bellarm. Tom. 2. controu.
5. lib. 1. cap. 28. Perer, in Genesis 11. part. 3. disp. 14. Jllo autem anno natus
est Abraham: scriptura enim in Genesi semper indicat tempus ^atiuitatis eorum,
quorum texit genealogiam, vt sciamus aetatem totius mundi alijs praetermissi^
qui ad istam gentalogiam non pertinent, vt Genesis 5. dicitur No^ cum quingentoru^
esset annoru^ genuisse Sem, Cham and Iapheth. Vbi notatur praecise annus quo
nature est Sem. Sed hoc manifest falsum est vt docet scriptura. Genesis 11.10.
Deniqu^ ipse Per^rius disp. 10. Negat esse praecise annotatum.
Abraham borne in the seauentith year of Terah. I answer; by the words of the
Scripture, it is not necessary: for we plainly see that there is something to
be understood (unless we would imagine that they were twins of one birth,
which doubtless is against the truth) namely, August quaest. in Genesis 25. Non
vtique hoc intelligi voluit quod eodem anno 70. omnes tres genuit, sed ex quo
anno generare caepit. Calvin. in Genesis 11. Nec vero Moses quoio vitae anno
filios genu^rit Tharre e^primit, sed tantum superasse aetatem illam, priusquam
tresgigneret filios de quibus agitur.
that the eldest of his sons was then conceived, and that he had in all but
For the Scripture says not of T^rah as of all the rest, he beg^t sons and
daughters, but he begat Abram, Nahor and Haran. Although Calvin supposes he
had more children.
three. Now which of these three should be the eldest? Many think Abraham,
because he is placed first. But this is no sufficient reason: for Sem is
alwaie placed first among the sons of Noah, whom Both Jews and Christians,
as has been said above.
they themselves suppose was not the eldest: and Isaac is Genesis 25.9. 1. Chron.
1.28.
placed before Ismael, and Jacob Malach. 1.2.3. August. quaest. in. Genesis 25.
before Esau, whom all men know to be the younger Sons. Secondly, it may be
objected to Bellarm. Tom. 2. controu. 5. lib. 1. cap. 28.
be in vain to set down the age of Nahor or Haran in this genealogy, where
the fathers of the Church only are described. But indeed it belongs not a
little to the history, both in respect of Terah, who had no Sicut neque Noe
ante quingentessimu^ annum. August. quaest. in Genesis 25.

Calvin. in Genesis 11. Eo anno generare caepit.


child until he was seauentie years of age, when as his ancestors had
children at Genesis 11.14.24.
thirty, and nine and twenty years; and also in regard of Nahor, and of
Haran, to For Lot is said to be an old man at the destruction of Sodom. Genesis
19.31. when as Abraham had scarce fulfilled 100. years. So that Lot the son
of Haran is to be esteemed not much younger then Abraham himself.
give light into the age and condition of their posterity. Thirdly, if
Abraham were not the eldest son, there is no certain ground of the age of
Calvin. in Genesis 11. Hanc obiectionem ponit and diluit.
Abraham, and thereby no certain account of the age and succession of the
world, which the Scripture does so distinctlie, and purposelie August. de ciu.
Dei. lib. 16. cap. 14. Absurdum est existimare, etc.
define. Whereunto is opposed this place of Scripture, that Abraham departed
being but seauentie five year old. For wherefore is this time reported of, but
that it might be joined August. ibid. Defuncto autem Thara in Mesopotamia, iam
incipiunt iudicari facta ad Abraham promissiones Dei.
with the death of Terah? and wherefore is the age of Abraham delivered when he
departed out of Haran, and not rather when he departed from Vr of the Chaldees
the land of his nativity, but because Eucher. libr. 2. in Genesis cap. 11.
his departure from his native country and from Haran, were both in one year
fulfilled, namely in the year of the death of Terah. Fourthlie, if Abraham
were not the eldest of Terahs sons, Bellarm. tom. 2. controu. 5. libr. 1.
cap. 18. Perer in Genes. 11. tom. 2. Aliam suppositione^ inducu^t: quod illo
anno habere capit tres filios: vnum illo anno genitum, and alios antea. Sic vt
sit Abram minimus natu, and tamen septuagesimo natus anno, sed haec sententia
non tantum a scriptura ipsa discrepat, Genesis 5.32. and 12.4. sed and a sana
ratione, ab authoritate Augustini quaest. in Genesis 25. de ciuit. Dei, lib. 16.
cap. 15. and omnium Doctorum.
then was he borne in the hundredth and thirtieth year of Terah (which also
agrees with this account) or else no certainty can be found of the birth of
Abraham. But it seems not credible, by the course of nature, that Terah had
Abraham, borne at one hundred and thirty years, seeing Abraham esteems it a
miracle, for Genesis 17.17.
him to have a Son at an hundredth years. Surely the Scripture does not
obscurely signify, that about the days of Abraham, the Lord did greatly
shorten the common rate of the days of man, in a little space. For Terah who
lived two hundred years and five, is no where signified to exceed the common
age of his generation: but Abraham that lived not so long by thirty Genesis 25.7.
175. years.
years, is said to be an Genesis 25.8. In senectute magna, senex and satur dierum.
old man and of great years, when he was gathered to his people. Nevertheless
there is not so much difference of time Although Rabbi Solomon do affirm that
Ketura was that Hagar by whom he had Ismael, which also Hierom doubts of, yet
the words of Scripture seem to carry another sense: and Abraham added to take
another wife, Ge^. 25.1. Also Augustine is of this judgment, de ciuit. Dei,
lib. 16. c. 34. and many other.
between the sons which Abraham had by Keturah his latter wife, and the
death of Abraham, as between the hundredth and thirtieth year of Terah, and
his death. Neither in deed are the words of Abraham so to be understood, as if
in regard of his own age, he had thought it miraculous to have a son,
seeing many not only of those times, but long after Abraham both Jacob begat
Benjamin, being one hundred and four years old: compare Genesis 35.16. and
44.20. and Boaz, Obed and Iosse, had children at no less then one hundred
years of their age, as is manifest by comparing, Ruth 4.18. with Matthew. 1.5
and Acts 13.20.
of his posterity, and of Massanissa, Cat^ and other. Appian. lib. 3. who had
children at four score years: which is nothing strange, for our times are
witness of the like.
other nations, have engendered and had children at little less then an
hundredth years. But it was his age For so the Apostle joins them together,
Romans 4.19. which is to be observed. Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 40. Nihil enim a
lapidibus differebant quantum ad generationem pertinet, nam and patriarcha
praesenectute prope impotens trat, and Sara ad hoc quod natura sterilis erat
laborabat atatis and senectutis vitio. Committunt ergo Elenchum. diuisionis,
qui intelligunt Abrahae senectutem loco positam miraculi.
considered with the age of Sarah, who being by Genesis 11.30. and 16.1.2.
nature barren, and having lived with Abram from the flower of her youth,
until after the course of nature she was past childbearing: this made it
miraculous in deed, that Abraham should have a son at an hundredth years of
age by Sara, who was nintie year old, and had no Genesis 18.11.
child. Wherefore there is no doubt, but Abraham may well be understood, to be
borne in the hundredth and thirtith year of Terah, and be perhaps the youngest
of his sons, albeit that for August. quaest. in Genesis 25. Calvin in Genesis cap.
11. verse. 26.
honor sake, and regard of the history of his life, he be placed the foremost
in the text.

Question 2. verse 7. How is it to be understood, that God appeared unto
Abraham, and how the Patriarks and Prophets are said to see God which is
invisible?
Whosoever shall consider, or read, or hear this history, have cause to be
astonished at the strangeness of the counsels of the Lord: and to note
diligently the circumstances of the text, laying up the doctrine for
perpetual meditation. The Lord first of all Verse. 1. Act. 7.4. Chrysostom.
Hom. in Genesis 31. Quar^ in domo paterna versantem tua benedictione non dignaris?
Volebat illum doctorem fieri nunc quidem omnibus Palestinis, paulo post etiam
Aegyptijs. Idem. Hom. 32. Et quare non potius eos qui in Chaldaea erant ad
religionem sua pietate conuertit? Verisimile est illorum salutem per aliorum
prouidentiam fuisse procuratam.
commands Abraham to depart Cicero. Offic. 1. Chari sunt parents, chari
liberi, propinqui, familiares, sed omnes omnium Charitates, patria vna complexa
est, pro qua quis bonus dubitet mortem oppetere, si ei sit profuturus. Basil.
lib. de Virgin. Abraham vero, velut qui quod desiderabat vidit, and prompte
sequibatur, and erro atque exul esse amoris ergo iucunde tolerabat: dicens,
quis nos separabit a dilectione Dei?
from his country, to Cyprian. lib. de mont. Sinai and Sion. Abraham in sua
natiuitate a parentibus suis Abram vocatus est, tentatus vero a Deo fidelis
inuentus est.
forsake his kindred, and fathers house. A strong Ambros. libr. 1. de Abraham.
c. 2. Tentatur vt fortis, incitatur vt fidelis, prouocatur vt iustus, meritoque
exiuit quemadmodum locutus est illi dominus.
temptation in deed, and proof of Abraham's obedience and faith: but that which
follows was much more grievous. For the Lord had promised, I will make of
thee a great nation, and I will bless thee, etc. So that Abraham obeying the
voice of God, had now to look (although not in regard of Bernard. in Psalm.
qui habitat. sermo. 15. Hoc enim totum est hominis meritum, si totam spem suam
ponit in eo, qui totu^ hominem saluum facit.
the merit of his obedience, but because of the promise) for the blessing of
the Lord: and could not but continually expect it, because he had forsaken
all worldly stay he had, wholly to rest himself thereon. But when Abraham
was come to the land which God would show him, he could behold nothing less
then the fulfilling of the promise, if in carnal reason he should judge the
sequel; for the Cananite, a Numb. 13.29. Amos 2.9.
mighty people, a Genesis 34.^.
cruel, and Genesis 13.13. Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 31. Canaan^i (inquit) tunc
inhatabant terram. Nequ^ hoc simpliciter aut absque causa assignauit, sed quia
cum loca illa praoccupata essent a Canantis, cogebatur quasi vagus and
peregrinus, and quasi abiectus and v^lis aliquis diuersari, vt forte obtingebat.
wicked people did then possess the land. In this preplexitie, the Lord
appears unto Abra^, and promises to give the land unto his seed. But behold,
his wife Genesis 11.30.
was barren, and as yet Act. 7.5. Romans 4.18.19.
he had no child: and immediately as it were upon the promise of inheriting
the land, he is compelled by famine to forsake the land, and to flee with
exceeding care and danger into Egypt. Wherein we may behold both the wisdom
and power of God, who Nazianzen. Orat. 18. Orbit quidam, fraetres, rerum
humanarum est, perque contraria Deus nos crudit. Idem. Orat. 47. Prouidentia
Dei plerumque ex contrarijs meliora procurat.
out of contraries does work his promise and fidelity: and also the causes
and occasions of visions and appearances of God in former ages. The Lord from
the beginning did manifest himself unto the godly Patriarchs by his word, by
Genesis 3.9. and 9.1. and 25.23. Exodus 2^ 1.19.1. Sam. 28.111.2. Matt. 17.5. Acts
9.4.
lively voice sounding out unto their ears his pleasure and commandment. And
what Deuteronomy. 12.32. and 30.14.16.
he commands by voice, he shows to be his will; what he Genesis 26.5.
teaches, he confirms as a truth; what he promises, he Ge^. 9.9. Nu^b.
^3.19.
performs without shadow of change; until this time that Abraham in show of
humane reason (for the Genesis 22.1.12. Augustine. sermon. de temp. 129. Tentat deus
non quasi mentium nescius humanarum, sed vt suos fideles saciat in seculo
manifestos. Idem epist. 146. Tentatio alia est deceptionis, alia tentatio
probationis: secundum illam non intelligitur qui tentat nisi diabolus, secundum
hanc vero te^tat Deus.
trial and confirmation of his faith, and for the instruction Isai. 51.12.
Gregor. Moral. lib. 22. cap. 7. Plerumque enim ad exercenda bona opera aliena
nos vtiliter exempla persuadent. Leo Papa sermon. de ieiun. 1. Vatidiora sunt
exempla quam verba, and before opere dicetur quam voce.
of the Church in time to come) might seem to feel his breach of promise. Now
because the promise was made but in a moment, and there succeeded a world of
miseries; wherein the only stay of Abram was the remembrance of the promise,
neither testified by Deuteronomy. 31.19.21. Pro. 22.20.
writing, nor as yet by seal Genesis 9.12. and 17.9.
confirmed: therefore the Lord appears unto Abraham, confirming both his eye
and ear Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 32. Quia iustum a domo eius euocauerat, and
imperauerat vt in alienam terram abiret, in qua agebat vagus and peregrinus:
bonus igitur Dominus consolar^ eum and eius solidare alacritatem volens, visus
est ei Dominus and dixit ei, etc.
for the strengthening of his faith, and the greater remembrance and reverence
unto the promise. So that visions unto the Patriarchs Iren. lib. 3. cap. 1.
Apostoli Euangelium praeconiauerunt, postea vero per dei voluntatem in
scripturis nobis tradiderunt, fundamentum and columnam fidei nostra futurum.
Chrysostom. Hom. in Matthew. 1. Noa and Abraha ^i^sque posteris and Job and Mosi
non per literas sed per semetipsum locutus est, quia scilicet puram eorum
mentem repererat. Quia vero progrediente iam tempore alij quidem propter
dogmata, alij vero propter vitam and mores scopulis impeg^runt, ea rursus quae
constat literis admonitione fuit opus.
were in steed of the written word and sacraments, to confirm 1. King. 2.3.
and 11.9.
the promises; which seeing in the latter ages of the church, the Lord has
manifested his whole John. 15.15. 2. Tim. 3.16.17.
will and promise, with all behoouefull doctrine concerning Ioh. 20.31. Cyril.
in Ioh. lib. 12. cap. 68. Non omnia quae Dominus fecit conscripta sunt, sed
quae scribentes tam ad mores quam ad dogmata sufficere putauerunt, vt recta
fi^e and operibus ac virtute rutilantes, ad regnum coelorum perueniamus.
man's salvation, and has committed it to writing, Psalm. 119.50.92. Hieron. in
epist. ad Ephesians. Comment. cap. 1. Si quic quam est quod in haec vita virum
sapientem teneat and inter pressuras and turbines aequo animo manner
persuadeat; id esse primum reor, meditationem and scientiam scripturarum.
to be a perpetual and perfect guide in all temptations, for man therein to
behold and hear the Lord: it was also necessary, August. de vnitate Eccles.
Ipse Dominus Jesus cum resurrexisset a mortuis, and discipulorum oculis
videndum manibusque tangendum corpus suum offerres, nequid tamen fallacia se
pati arbitrarentur, magis eos testimonijs legis and prophetarum and Psalmorum
confirmandos esse iudicauit.
that visions in the Church should cease (that being given by the Scriptures,
for which visions themselves were 2. Pet. 1.18.19. Clem. Alexan. Strom. lib. 7.
Principium enim doctrina habemus dominum, qui and per Prophetas and per
Euangelium, and per beatos Apostolos multifariam multisque modis a principio ad
fine^ deducit cognitionis.
given) least they should restrain in any part the honor due unto the
Scriptures. And in deed the most wise and holy Lord found it most agreeable
unto Heb. 1.12. Chrysostom. Hom. in Romans 1. Non enim locuti tanta^ sunt
Prophetae, sed qua loqueba^tur literis etiam mandarunt: nequ^ scripserunt
tantum, sed and rebus ipsis qua futura erant prafigurarunt: vt erat quod
Abraham filium su^^ Isaac ad immolandum ducebat, quod Moses serpentem antum
exaltabat, and super Amales manus tend^bat, and agnum paschalem immolabat.
the condition of his Church, that visions should go before the written word,
that the word it self might contain the visions; and the former visions
recorded in the word, together with the word, Tertul. lib. de resurrect.
Carnis. Nobis curiositate non est opus post Iesum Christi^, nos inquisi^^ post
Euangeliu^. Cum ^redimus nihil desideramus vltra credere: hoc enim primu^
credimus, no^ esse quod vltra credere debe^^us.
might be a full direction unto the children of God for ever. Moreover, it is
manifest that the visions did serve for an increase of confirmation of the
promises, and were never used but in causes of greatest moment and necessity.
We read not until Abraham that Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 32. Nunc primum
inuenimus in scriptura dictum, quod visut est Dominus and dixerit ei.
God appeared unto any of the Fathers since Adams fall, for none are reported
to be tried with the like temptation. But Abraham to whom the Lord had promised
the land, and Act. 7.5. Heb. 11.9.10.
gave him not one foot of inheritance therein: promised his seed should be as
the stars of heaven, while Romans 4.18.19.
(his wife being barren and aged) he had no child; and when he had received a
son according to the promise, Genesis 22.1.2.
he commanded him to be offered for a sacrifice: least through these strong
Origin. Hom. in Genes. 8. Vbi non suffecerat dixiffe filium, sed adijcitur and
charissimum. Esto and hoec quid adhuc additur, and quem diligis? Sed vide
tentationis pondus? Pit and commemoratio nominis, vt and promissionum quae sub
hoc nomine facta sunt, desperatio subeat. Et hac omnia quia tantabat Deus
Abraham.
assaults, the promises should be Gregor. Moral. lib. 1. cap. 40. Incassum
bonum agitur si ante terminum vita descr^tur: quia and frustra velociter curris
qui priusquam ad metas venerit deficit.
neglected before the time to be fulfilled; the Lord would Occolampad. in Genesis
12. Ita accidere solet vt in continuis sanctorum persecutionibus and
afflictionibus intermisceantur nonnullae consolationes, non enim permittio Deus
suos amplius tantari quam far possunt, ita cum iam duram satis crucem
imposuisset hum^ris Abraha, illi apparet.
confirm by his appearing, that the promise did proceed from him, and should
be fulfilled in their seasons. And Isaac, who Genesis 35.27. Heb. 11.9.
continued likewise a stranger in the land; the Lord does likewise comfort,
with the Genesis 26.2.24.
like sustentation of his faith. Jacob, who of all the Patriarks was most Genesis
47 9. Chrysostom lib. 2. de provident. Dies mei parui and m^li, hoc est and
breuiore^ et laboriosio^em vius vitam vbi and omnes fere molestias e^ponit.
grievously assaulted with continual afflictions, does find him Genesis 32.24.
Justin. Ma^t. Dialog. cum Tr^ffon.

Tertull. lib. 2. in Marcion. Item cont. Praex. Hilar. lib. de Trin 4. Non
solum ad Abraham in viro Deuteronomy affuit, sed etiam ad Jacob in homine Deuteronomy venit:
neque solu^ venit, sed luctatus ostenditur Neque tantummodo luctatus, sed etiam
aduersus eu^ quo luctabatur infir^^us.

Ambros. de fide lib. 1. cap. 5.


wrestling with him face to face, to Bernard. de not. Mariae. sermon. 1. Notam
fecis dilectionem suam, e^periatur and tuam, in multis enim tentat te Dominus
Deus tuut. Declinat sapius, auertis faciem non in ira, probationis istud est
non reprobationis. Sustinuis te dilectus, sustine tu dilectum sustine and
viriliter age; non illum vicere peccata tua, to quoque ipsius flagella non
superent; and obtinebi^, cum aurora fuerit benedictionem.
teach him that it is the Lord himself that in afflictions presses down, and
by his promise and inward grace, as 1. Sam. 2 6. Job. 5.18.19.
by his other hand, supporteth: for who was Jacob else that should wrestle with
the angel, corruption with strength it self, until the dawning of the day?
Moses as being Numb. 12.7.
faithful in the house of God, and Heb. 2.5.
as a servant to deliver unto all the family the will and laws of the master
of the house, talks familiarlie with God, and the Lord Exodus 33.11. Numb.
12.8.
speaks with him face to face, as a man that speaks unto his friend. The
seauentie Elders, Exodus 24.9.10.
they saw the God of Israel, that their testimony Calvin. in Exodus 24. Illic
propius conspecta fuit Dei gloria a senioribus, vt deinde narr^erent populo
quod viderant, atque ita res idoneis testibus probata iud^biam fidem acquireret.
might be added for the confirmation of the people. Joshua that was to war
Ios. 5.13. and 6.2.
with so many nations, beholds the Captain of the host of God. And Balaam is
partaker Numb. 2^.4. etc. August. de mirab. script. lib. 1. cap. 3^. Vt
aduentus Christi per Prophetam Gentilem qui futurus erat gentium saluator in
lege Dei scriberetur.
of the visions of God, that he might witness among the heathen the praise of
Israel. Isaiah by vision is confirmed Isai. 6.1.10.
in the hardness of heart of th people of Israel, least Matthew. 13.14. Ioh.
12.40.41. Romans 11.7.8.
their ingratitude should be a scandal in the Church, as though such
negligence in receiving the true Messiah, in a people called of God, could not
have been. Ezechiel when the Church was in captivity, Ezech. 1.4. etc.
sees wheels and cherubims, and the similitude of the glory of the Lord, to
Hieron. in Nahum Comment. cap. 3. Von commitionis rotarum. Dum huc atque illuc
genus raptatur humanum, and incertis per cuncta discursibu^, vbi periculum, vbi
salus sit ignoramus. de qua rota in principio Ezechieli^ scriptu^ est.
confirm that both men and angels, and the change of times are guided and
directed by the Lord. Daniel beholds the Dan. 7 9.13.14.
ancient of days to sit in judgment, and the son of man to receive from
him a kingdom universal and perpetual, to signify that judgment Dan. 7.10.
remains with the Lord, and that it is that son of man, who was August.
contr. Faust. Manicha. lib. 12. cap. 44. Quis non eundem saluatorem agnoscat
apud Danielem, cum antiquo dierum offertur filius hominis, and excepit regnum
fine fine etc. Ia^ vero si locum illum quem ^ommemorauit Dominus: cum videritis
abhominationem, etc. et si supputatis etiam temporibus hebd^madum ille numerus
pertractetur, non solu^ Christus, sed etiam tempus reperitur quo eum oportuit
venire passurum.
to be slain at the time appointed, who was ordained of God the judge of the
quick and of the dead. And Zachary also sees the man Zachar. 1 ^.
upon a bloody horse among the myrtrees, that he might declare unto the Jews
the Zachar. 1.13.16.
wrath of God against their enemies, and their joyful and speedy deliverance
by him. But one will say, seeing these, as the Scripture says, have seen the
visions of God, and he has appeared to be seen of them; how says the
Scripture also, 1. Ioh. 1.18.
No man has seen God at any time, and that Exodus 33 20.
none can see the Lord and live? These places Conciliatio. 19.
of holy Scripture are August. quaest. in non. Testamen. q. 71. Ecce non est
contrarium, and visum and inuision esse Deum.
different (says Augustine) in appearance and show of words, but in matter and
substance of doctrine, are nothing contrary. Wherefore we are more narrowly
to search the meaning of the Scripture, whereunto the words themselves will
give direction. The Lord himself when he appeared unto Moses, Exodus 33.20.
says thus unto him, thou can not see my face, for no man shall see me and
live. If therefore when Moses face to face did talk with God, it was said unto
him, thou can not see my face; doubtless there is one thing meant by the face
of God which Moses saw, and another thing by his face which Moses could not
see. And so in deed the scripture calls the face of God which Moses did
behold, Numb. 12.8.
ye appearance and similitude of God: but the face of God which Moses could not
see, his Exodus 33.18.20. August. tract. in Ioh. 3 Quid vidit Moses? Moses vidit
nubem: vidit angelum, vidit ignem, omnis illa creatura typum Domini sui
gerebat, non ipsius Domini prasentiam exhibebat: namque aperte habet in lege:
and loquebatur Moses cum Domino quasi amicus cum amico suo. Sequitur tamen: si
inueni gratiam in conspectu tuo, ostende mihi seipsum manifest, vt videam te.
Et responsum accepit, non potes videre faciem mea^.
shape or substance, and his glory. Whereof this doctrine also follows: that
the glory Exodus 33.20. 1. Tim. 6.16. Hieron. in Isai. 6. Ad quod
respondebimus, non solum patris diuinitatem, sed ne filij quidem aut spiritus
sancti, quia vna in trinitate natura est, poss^ oculos carnis aspicere, sed
oculos mentis de quibus ipse saluator ^ijt, beati mu^di cord. Ergo Deuteronomy
naturae non ceruitur, sed videtur hominibus vt voluerit. Gregor. Moral. li. 18.
c. 39. Nec in coelis videbimus sicut videt seipsum, sed sicut angeli intuentur
faciem eius. Long quippe dispariliter videt creator se, quam videt creatura
Creature^. Nam quantu^ ad immensitate^ Dei, quidam modus figitur
contemplationis, quia eo ipso pondere circumscribin^^r, quo creatura sumus.
or essence of the Lord cannot be beheld of any mortal creature, neither can
any see him as he is: for seeing in deed that our Coloss. 1.7. Marius Victor.
cont. Arr. li. 3. Et quoniam potentia cessant vita est, and cessans
intelligentia, haec autem vita and intelligentia actio est, si quis Deum
viderit ^oriatur necesse est: quia dei vitae and intelligentia in semetipsa est
non in actu, omnis autem actus fori^ est; hoc vero est nostrum viuere quod
foris est viuere: ergo est mors Deum videre, nemo inquit vnquam Deum vidit, and
vixit: simili enim simile videtur. August. epist. 111. Nos autem omnes reuelata
facie gloriam Domini speculantes in eandem imaginem transforma^ur a gloria in
gloriam tanquam a Domini spiritu, licet faciem dei iuxta naturae sua
proprietatem nulla videat creatura, and tunc mente cernatur quando inuisibilis
creditur Verba sunt Hieronymi quem citat.
nature and being does consist in him, and God does infinitely exceed the
being Ierem. 23.24. Ephesians. 4.10. Ambros. in Luc. lib. 1. cap. 1. Cuius naturae
est non videri, voluntate videri, nam si non vult non videtur, si vult videtur.
Et ideo Deum nemo vidit vnquam quia eam quae in Deo habitat plenitudinem
diuinitatu nemo conspexit, nemo mente aut oculis comprehendit. Gregor. Moral.
lib. 2. cap. 3. Creator omnium Deus vbique est, and vbique totus est; in part
non est quia vbique est; and tunc minus inuenitur quando is qui vbique totus
est, in part quaeritur.
of all his creatures, both in respect of his incomparable greatness, and in
that he has Exodus 3.14. Hieron. epist. ad Damasum. Quoniam vetusto, etc. vna
est Dei and sola natura, quae vere est: id enim quod subfistit non habet
aliunde sed suum est. Ergo deuteronomy solus qui aternus est, hoc est qui exordium non
habet, essentiae nomen vere tenet.
his being of, and in himself: therefore it is much more possible, for one
drop of rain to contain the whole element of water, then for our August.
epist. 112. De videndo Deo, si quaeris quo modo dictus sit inuisibilis, cum
videri potest? Resp. Inuisibilem esse natura, videri autem cum vult sicut vult.
Si quaeris vnde eu^ videbimus? Resp. Vnde angeli vident, quibus tunc erimus
aequales. Sicut enim videntur ista quae visibilia nominantur, Deum nemo vidit
vnquam, nec videre potest, quonia^ lucem habitat inaccessibilem, and est natura
inuisibilis, sicut incorruptibilis (vt Apost. 1. Tim. 1.12.) and sicut nunc
incorruptibilis, nec postea corruptibilis; ita non solum nunc, sed etiam semper
inuisibilis. Damascen. Orthodox. libr. 1. cap. 1. Post primam itaque
beatissimamque naturam nullus vnquam Deum nouit, nisi cui ipse reuelauerit, non
hominum modo, sed ne supramundanarum virtutum: supramundanarum dico, vt ipsorum
Cherubim and Seraphim.
being to measure him, or our eyesight to contain his greatness, or our
understanding to attain unto it. Secondly, that where the Lord appeared unto
the Patriarks, he appeared not by his nature or substance which cannot be
seen, but Tertul. aduers. Prax. Visum quidem Deum secundum hominum
capacitates, non secundum plenitudinem diuinitatis. August. quaest. in non.
Testam. 71. Visus est Deus in imagine, vt intelligeretur Deus esse qui
apparebat per rationem non per substantiam, quia in natura sua Deuteronomy videri non
potest.
by similitude whereby they were able to behold him, and were assured that it
was the Lord himself that talked with them. And although he appeared by
Obiectio sit, nam patres plerique affirmant Christum fuisse qui apparebat
Patriarchi^: alij contra volunt authoritate Dionysij Arrop. Hierar. cap. 4. Non
esse a deo immediate, sed opere and ministerio angelorum: and videtur
difficilior quod scripturae eundem nunc angelum, nunc Iehouam appellat. Sed
respondit Augustine. Vtrumque fieri posse si^ul, nempe Deum vel per angelicam
aliquam potestatem, hoc est in and per angelum; vel per quam libet creaturam
apparuisse. Contra Adimant. cap. 9.
the ministry of some inferior creature, as the holy Ghost by the Matthew.
3.16.
likeness of a dove, and Act. 2.3.
similitude of fire, which August. de Agon^ Christian^. cap. 22. and de
incarnat. verb lib. 1. cap. 3. Non enim sicut filius hominem assumpsit, vt in
aeternum permaneat; sic spiritus sanctus columbam vel ignem. Sed illae facta
visiones de creatura inferiore, ad manifestandum sp^ritum, esse postea
defliterunt. Nun quam enim illa incomprehensibilis, incommutabilisque
diuinitas, quae est trinitas, ab oculis carnalibus videri potest, nisi per
subiectam creaturam.
ceased also to be, so soon as the vision ceased; yet God so appeared Tertul.
contr. Prax. Consequens erit vt inuisibilem patrem intelligamus pro plenitudine
maiestatis, visibilem vero filium agnoscamus pro modulo deriuationis. Sed ipse
quidem Dominus si forte coram ad saciem loquebatur, non tamen vt est, homo
faciem eius viderat, nisi sort in speculo and in anigmate.
by the creature, as that he himself was truly by the creature seen, the
manner how, a learned father wisely answers: as Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 32.
Sicut ipse solus scit, and vt illi possibile erat videre: on enim hoc dicere
desinam quoniant modum ignoro: audio enim solum scripturam dicentem, and visus
est Dominus.
the Lord only knows that did appear; and was possible for humane creatures
to contain. Doctrines. 1. verse 1. The Lord chooses and calls Abraham, not
for Romans 4.1.2.
Abraham's righteousness, but for his own mercy sake: and commands him
obedience, because Josh. 4.23. Isai. 48.11. and 31.2. Iren. libr. 4. c. 28. Nec
nostro ministerio indigens iussit vt eum sequeremur, sed vt nobis ipsis
attribuat salutem.
he would bless him for obedience. Secondly, those that will enter into the
spiritual land of promise Heb. 4.8.9.
must forsake their Luc. 14.26.
fathers house to follow Christ: and least they should 1. Cor. 9.21 27.
run in vain and miss the mark, they Luc. 14.28 ^3.
must cast before to endure the cross. Thirdly, verse 2. The blessings which
the Lord bestows on those that fear him, Genesis 32 10. 2. Sam. 7.18.
do infinitely surmount the measure of their obedience. Fourthlie, against
false Matthew. 24.25.26.
Christ's we must observe: that the true Messiah is the son of Matthew. 1.1.
Abraham and David, of whom all things Matthew. 5.17. Ioh. 19.28.
were fulfilled, forespoken by the Prophets. Fiftlie, those that curse or
persecute Gods children Isai. 49.26.
are accursed of the Lord; those that relieve or comfort them, Matthew. 10.41.
beca se they belong to Christ, shall receive the reward of those that belong
to Christ. Sixtlie, verse 5. The blessing of the Lord Psalm. 127.3. Prou. 3.33.
is in the house of the righteous: when Abraham does constantly obey the Lord,
Sarah does as constantly obey Abraham, the servants are in subjection to their
governors, their friends yield fellowship, their enemies Prou. 16.7.
peace. Seauenthlie, verse 7. The Lord in the trials of his children, sends
Genesis 32.24. Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 32. Talia sunt quae a deo dispensantur,
rara semper and admirabilia, and qua^do apud homines desperatum est, tum
potentiam and sapientia^ suam declarat Deus.
relief and comfort, according to the greatness of the temptation and
infirmity of the party tempted, and Psalm. 118.18. 1. Cor. 10.13.
suffers none to be tried above their strength and ability to endure the
burden.

Question 3. verse 13. Wherefore Abram said to Sarai his wife; Say I pray thee
that thou art my sister: and whether he sinned in persuading her thereunto?
THose that negligentlie consider this history, Calvin. in Genesis 12. Atque hinc
latrandi materia^ proterui quidam canes arripiunt, sanctum patriarcham lenonem
fuisse propria vxoris; sed hos resellere promptu^ est, quod scilicet altius
respexerit Abraham cum ta^ta in alijs animi magnitudine vsus fuerit.
as though Abraham for his wealth or life had put in hazard the chastity of
Sarah, are wickedlie deceived in their fond conceit. For first we must
remember the condition of his trial, before we may safely determine of his
fact. That Abraham was called from his native country, and endured the
hardness of famine in the land of Canaan; surely it could not be but a
grievous temptation of flesh and blood: but where the Lord promises to bless
him in the land, and to give it as an inheritance unto his seed; was a much
greater trial unto his faith. For how is it, that being promised a blessing,
he cannot attain unto necessary food? And having granted it by promise unto
his posterity, while as yet he was childlesse, he was forced either to famish
in the land, or to fly into Egypt among the barbarous people. We know
Hieron. in Amos. cap. 8. Vetus narrat historia tum Latina, and Graeca, and
omnium gentiam barbararum, nihil fame durius, quae sape compellit obsessos
humanis vesci carnibus, and in suam sauire naturam, ita vt nec parents
paruulis parcant liberis, and maritalis affectus dudum amatae vxoris membra
dilaceret. Exe^pla in scripturis. Deuteronomy. 28 54.57.12. King. 6.29. apud E^huicos.
Thucyd. histor. lib. 5. de fame Meliea. Liu. lib. 1. Decad. 3. de fame
Saguntina. Valor. Max. lib. 7. cap. 6. De N^mantinorum and Caliguritanorum fame
qui vxores suas natosque ad vsum nefaria dapis verterum: decent samis quanta
miseria sit. Quantum periculum incubuit Abrahae, videtur ex Genesis 44.4.
on the one side the woeful distress that famine brings, by which he was
provoked to try his adventures in the land of Egypt. For sure it is that
Abraham either would not, or ought not, to forsake the land which God had
showed him, but by extreme constraint, or Nonnulli enim interpretes haec omnia
fecisse Abraham prophetic^ spiritu conte^dunt, quo praeintelligebat eue^ tum;
and sane eo non caruisso verisimile est: sed cum de iussu Dei scriptura tacet:
and nobis silendi imposuit consci^tiam. Pet. Mart. Comment. in Genesis cap. 12.
direction of the Lord. So on the other side, if we consider the danger he
was in by going into Egypt, in respect of the Verse. 12.
lascivious and proud Egyptians, and the beauty Ambros. de Abrah. lib. 1.
cap. 2. Quo docetur non magnopere decorem quaerendum coniugit, qui viro necem
plerunque gignere solet. Scitum est Antistenis Cynici: sicubi ornataem
offendisset mulierem, ad domum illius proficiscebatur iubebatque virum eius
equum proferre and arma: vt siquidem haec illi essent, delicijs vacare sineret,
his enim iniurias propelleret, alias cultum amoueret. Laert. lib. 6.
of Sarah; not only of his life, but of Sarah her captivity, and the spoil
and bondage of all his family; and that which was the greatest in Abraham's
eyes, the August. tract. in Euang. Ioh. Quid est fides nisi credere quod non
vides: vnde and quomodo capitur trinitat recte o homo luterrogas, quomodo
creditur non been interrogat: imo ideo been creditur, quia cito non capitur:
nam si cito caperetur, non esset opus vt crederetur quia videretur.
defect of the promise, wherein was contained his everlasting bliss: we have
cause fully to conclude that Abraham found this the only way to preserve
himself, to fly to Egypt; and did therein seek by preserving his own life,
to preserve both the chastity and liberty of Sarah, and to enjoy the blessing
of the seed, which was more dear unto him then life it self. For albeit he
use such terms of speech to persuade Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 32. Quoniam non
vulgar erat quod imperabat, propterea allicere, and ad misericordium flectere,
and persuadere eam volebat, vt prompte in haec fabula parts suas ageret. Non
dixit vin^ tibi inferent, non vult enim came nunc contristare, propter famem
fugientem.
Sarah to obedience: that I may fare well for thy sake, and my life may be
preserved, because he knew to be the 1. Sam. 19.12.18. Prou. 31.12.28. etc.
Ambros. de Abraham, lib. 1. cap. 2. Sara non facultatibus ditior, non genere
splendidior erat: ideo virunt imparem non putabat, ideo quasi parem gratia
diligebat, ideo non censu est retenta: non parentibus, non propinquis, sed
virum proprium quocunque pergeret sequebatur, externa adijt, sororem se eius
asseruit, contenta si ita esset necesse, se periclitari pudore, quam virum
salute. Vt tueretur maritum mentita est germanitatem, ne insidiatoret pudoris
eius tanquam amulum and vindicem vxoris necarent.
greatest desire of a godly matron, the prosperity and welfare of her
husband: yet withal he premiseth this, else they will kill me, whereof it would
follow that the hope of the promise were extinguished. But here Abraham may
seem in three respects to sin. First, in over rash 1. Cor. 13.5.7.
Chrysostom. Hom. in Matthew. 9. Sicus difficile aliquem suspicatur malum qui
bonni est: sic difficile aliquem suspicatur bonum qui malus est.

Senec. lib. 1. de Morib. Hoc habet omnis affectus, vt in quod ipse insanit in
id^m putet caeteros insanire.


suspicion of the Egyptians, without Su^ton. in vita Domis. cap. 21. Miserum
dicebat principis statu^ cui refere^ti de insidiatoribus non haberetur s^les
nisi occiso.
trial of their cruelty, or cause of fear. Secondly, in Hieron. trad. in
Genesis Foedam vocat necessitatem. Chrysostom Hom. 32. in Genesis In adulterium vxoris
consentit iustus, and quasi seruit adulterio, in mulieris contumeliam vt mortem
essugiat.
offending against the chastity of Sarah, whom he made hereby as it were, a
lawful pray unto her enemies. Thirdly, in that he Obiectio Fausti: Cur non
potius crederet Deo suo?
stands not steadfastly unto the promises, that his seed should enjoy the
land, and all nations should in him be blessed; which seeing it could not be in
the person of Abraham, but in Justin. Mart. Dial. cum Triffon. Videre sant quo
modo and Isaaco and Iacobo eadem sint promissa: and benedicentior in semine tuo
omnes gentes: non hoc vel Esaeuo vel Reubeni vel alij cuipiam dicit, sed illis
tantum ex quibus iuxta ^economiam and dispositionem nasciturus erat Christus.
his posterity; it was most evident that the Lord therein had promised to
deliver Abraham from Egypt, and out of all adversity; that thereby he might
enjoy the promised seed. For answer to which objections, the Scripture first
of all does give sufficient testimony, that Abraham suspected not in vain,
the wantonness Genesis 26.2. Exodus 1.
and wickedness of Egypt. For the Princes themselves Verse. 14.
so soon as they saw the woman, commended her to Pharao, and Pharao upon their
report took her from Abraham into his house. And after when him self had bin
scourged by the Lord, least other should likewise attempt against her, he is
Verse. 20.
forced to give men charge concerning Abraham, and to convey him forth, and his
wife in safety. Now as the godly are commanded to keep themselves from
evil, and not so much as rashly to suspect another, or condemn of
wickedness without proof, or cause Romans 14.4. Psalm. 15.3.
of just suspicion: so are they also willed to be wise as Serpents, Matthew.
10.16. The Serpent of all creatures comes nearest unto the reason of man, and
knows the cause of things. When he goes to the water, he is said to lay off
his poison, least he should infect the waters, Epiphan. Haeres. 37. He uses to
rub himself with fenell, when he cannot shed his old skin, Plin. lib. 8. cap.
27. He defends his head in fight: and stops his ear from charming, Psalm.
58. In sickness he is his own physician, Plin. lib. 8. cap. 27.
to understand and perceive the cause of evil, so soon as it gives the first
appearance. Abraham therefore suspecting the Egyptians, where danger was in
deed, was neither injurious, nor too suspicious, but Aug. in Psalm. 18.10 Quis
est imprudens? Qui non sibi prospicit in futurum; insipiens, qui non intelligit
in quo malo sit.

Hieron. Apolog. 3. in Ruffin. Prudentium est duoru^ temporu^ maxim habere
curam, mane and vesperi, id est eorum quae acturi sumus, and eorum que
gesserimus. Simile est Pittaci dictum: Prudentium virorum esse priusquam
aduersa contingant praeuidere ne veniant: fortium vero cum illa contigerint
far aequo animo, Laert. lib. 1. Et pecora ipsa vitare norunt, quae laesisse
cognoscunt: nec itinera illa repetunt, vbi in foueam corruerint.


godly wise to prevent a mischief. Which godly care of Abraham gave none
offense; but the abounding of sin in every place, and principally in
Egypt, Verse. 14.15. and Genesis 20.11.
gave cause to Abraham to be offended. Which being confirmed, the second
objection is also taken away: for that he persuaded Sarah to say she was his
sister, was done of Verse. 12. August. de duab. animabus contr. Manich. cap. 10.
An erat difficile videre inuitum volenti esse contrarium, ita vt contrarium
sinistrum dext^o esse dicimus, non vt nigrum albo? Nazianzen. orat. 21.
Quicquid autem violenter cogitur non secus ac planta per vim manibus inflexa
atque distracta, simul vt missum factum est rursum ad sese redire consueuit.
compulsion, not of will; for Verse. 12. Ambros. de Abrah. lib. 1. cap. 2. Erat
quidem iusto viro cura coniugalis pudicitie, sed maius erat studium maturandae
deuotionis; ne praetulisse custodiam thorimandatis videretur coelestibus.
danger of life, not desire of wealth. But why did he not redeem the
chastity of Sarah, which to a godly woman is more Deuteronomy. 22.25.28. Susannae
exemplo illustratum, and Lucretiae Romanae. Liu. Decad. 1. li. 1. Timoclae e
Thebane. Q. Curt. li. 2. Sophtoniae Romanae, and matronae nobilis Alexandrinae,
quam cum plurimum obsecrasset Maximinius Tyrannus, and durissimae mortis minas
commiscuisset; ad mortem paratam, concupiscentia magis quam ira victus, exillo
damnauit and cunctis facultatibus spoliauit, and aliaru^ multaru^ quae
scortationis comminationem a praesidibus cuiusque gentis ne audire quidem
valentes, omne genus supplicicru^, torme^toru^ and laethaliu^ poenarum
sustinuerunt, Eusebius. histor. eccles. lib. 8. cap. 6.
dear then life, with danger of life it self; and not make it, as it
seems, the pawn and price of his deliverance? Because doubtless Sarah might
happen to be as a ransom unto Abraham, as in deed it came to pass; but
Abraham by death could not deliver, but bring perpetual captivity unto Sarah.
Yet Abraham ought not to have given example Ephesians. 4.25. 1. Tim. 4.12.
of leasing and dissembling unto Sarah, to the end to preserve his life; for we
may not do evil Romans 3.8.
that good may come thereof. True in deed, neither is there any note in this
action, of such offense. He persuades not Sarah to August. cont. Faust. lib.
22. cap. 35. Neque enim virum eius vxor esset interrogatus, non esse respondit:
sed cum ab eo quaereretur quid ei esset illa mulier, indicauit sorore^, non
negauit vxorem: tacu^t aliquid very, no^ dixit aliquid fals^.
deny her self to be his wife; but to say the truth, that she was his Genesis
20.12.
sister. He hid that which might hurt him, for fear of evil: he said not that
which was evil for any fear. He spoke the truth, but not all the truth, for
the part of a fool it is Prou. 29.11.
to utter all his mind, or to publish a secret, which may seem to impair the
cause of godliness, Marc. 14.61. John. 18.20.
unless it manifestly appear to be for the glory of God to utter it. But
ought not Abraham rather to have rested himself on God, and plainly to have
affirmed she was his wife: for the Lord would no doubt have maintained his
vprightnes, and was able to give him victory, if violence had bin offered? Men
are undoubtedly to trust on God by Psalm. 37.5.
faith, but not to Matthew. 4.7. August. de ciuit. Dei. lib. 16. cap. 19. Itaque
vxorem tacuit, non negauit; coniugis tuendam pudicitiam committens Deo, and
humanas infidias caeuens vt homo: quoniam si periculum quantum cauere poterat,
non caueret; magis tentaret Deum suum quam speraret in Deo.
tempt the Lord by careless negligence. For it pertains to wholesome doctrine,
August. cont. Faust. lib. 22. cap. 36. Pertinet autem ad sanam doctrinam, vt
quando habet quod faciat homo, non tentet dominum Deum suum. Cum igitur propter
pulchritudinem Sarae, and eius pudicitia and mariti vita esset in dubio nec
vtrumque tu^ri posset Abraham, veruntamen vnum horum posset, id est vitam; ne
Deum suum tentaret, fecit quod potuit; quod autem non potuit illi commisit.
Quod si secus fecisset, duas res tuendas committeret Deo, and suam vitam and
coniugis pudicitiam.
that when men have before them a way wherein to walk, they ought not to
tempt the Lord their God. Our Savior Christ himself, Matthew. 2.13.
was of power to have defended his life against the tyrant Herod; yet having
the means, he fled to Egypt. He commanded his Disciples Matthew. 10.26. and
20.31.
to depend on him; but yet being Matthew. 10.23.
persecuted to fly from City to City. When they have the means, Psalm.
91.11. 1. Cor. 7.21.
to use it as a remedy sent from God: when they have no means, to Exodus
14.13.14. 1. Chron. 25.9.
wait on him, who without means is able to deliver. Abraham having here the
truth to confess, and the truth to keep in silence; uttered that which gave
less fear of hurt; concealed that which might work his greater hurt; observed
August. cont. Faust. 22. cap. 36.
the means of preserving his own life, committed the care of Sarah unto God:
because he had no means to defend her chastity. Wherefore this example is no
Dissimulare est fingere nescire quae sciat: sicut simulare est fingere scire
quae nescias. Nonius Marcel. de propriet. Sermon. cap. 5. At sic non suasit
Abraham, sed puram taciturnitatem, idque in pium and optimum finem.
covert of dissembling which is not used, neither of denying the truth in
secret offenses, to those that are examined by the Magistrate; but a direction
of Ambros Offic. lib. 1. cap. 2. Complures vidi loquendo peccatum incidisse,
vix quenque tacendo: ideo tacere nosse, quam loqui difficilius est. Scio namque
loqui plerosque, cum tacere nesciant.
godly silence, which the Lord in the Scriptures by Iam. 1.19. Isai 50.4.
precept, and practice Matthew. 26.63.
does commend. Neither do we think that Abram is clearelie to be freed from
frailty in this action. First in that he has not Genesis 25.22.
recourse in danger to the oracle of God, but seems rather to take this
Josh. 14.4.
counsel of flesh and blood. Secondly, in that he appears so Chrysostom.
Hom. in Genesis 32. Erat adhuc terribilis facies mortis: nondum erant aneae portae
confractae, nondum erat aculeus eius habetatut: quare multus erat timor propter
insaniam Aegyptiacam.
astonished, with the fear of death, as that he sets the Vatab. annot. in
Genesis cap. 12. Si Abraham fidei suae firmitudinem retinuisset immotam, ad haec
consilia non appulisset ammum.
fear before the promise. Thirdly, in aduenturing Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 32.
Quia nondum erat soluta mortis tyrannis, propterea in adulterium vxoris
consentu iustus, etc. Hieron. trad. Hebraic. in Genesis Potest and aliter foeda
necessitat exculari, quod iuxta librum Hester, quaecunque mulierum pla^uisset
regi apud veteres, sex mensibus vngebatur oleo myrtino, and sex mensibus in
pigmentis vtrijs erat, interea Pharao sit percussus a Domino. Vatab. in Genesis
12.13. Misera sort, si maritus viu^t propter vxorem, cum vxor facta sit propter
maritum: miseriu si vinat propter vxorem, non cum vxore: miserimum prorsus si
viuat propter vxorem a se ablatam and a^teri coniunctam, praesertim vbi nullo
eam iuris praetextu repetere licet: non autem audebat Abraham Sarai suam
tanquam coniugem repetere, quandoquidem sororem non coniugem esse simulauerat.
upon a means so dangerous without special direction from the Lord. Wherein
we may behold the mercy of the Lord, and man's infirmity. The infirmity of
the chiefest Saints of God, Vatab. ibid. Monemur hoc exemplo quam debemus
nunquam de fidei nostra constantia praesumere, sed perpetuo in timore dei
versari and Domin^m precari.
who although they receive abundantly the spirit of grace, yet are they in
this life Psalm. 130.3. 1. Cor. 13.8.9. Romans 7. August de peccat. merit. and
remiss lib. 2. cap. 14. Sic itaque omnes quicunque in hac vita diuinaru^
scripturarum testimonijs, in bona voluntate atque actionibus iustitia
praedicati sunt, and quicunque talet post eos fierunt, omnes magni, omnes
iusti, omnes veraciter ^audabiles sunt, sed sine peccato aliquo no^ sunt.
but partly sanctified, mixing in their words and works often times, the grace
they have received, with the weakness of their own corruptions. The mercy of
the Lord; who delights Psalm. 147.11. 2. Sam. 15.20.
in the goodness, and passes by Psalm. 103.12. Isai. 43.25. Micah. 7.
the weakness of his children. For as the providence of God directed Abraham
into Egypt, that the knowledge Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 31. Volebat illum
doctorem fieri nunc quidem omnibus Palestinis, paeulo post autem etiam
Aegyptijs.
of the true God might be spread abroad by him: so most wisely he governs
the act of Abraham, thereby to show his hand in punishing for sin, the
Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 32. Sed paulisper expecta and videbi^ mirifice
sapientem dei prouide^tia^. Na^ propter hoc deuteronomy tanta^ prae se tulit
longanimitatem and opitulari distulit, vt iustum clariorem faceret; and per ea
quae illic fiebant, no^ solum Aegyptij, sed and Palestini discerent, quanta
beneuolentia Domini omnium hic patriarcha protegatur. Ergo hoc factum est vt
res fieret manifestior, and vltio non in priuatum aut plebeium aliquem sed in
regem sauiret, vt vbique diuulgaretur hoc factum.
King and Princes of the Egyptians; and his favor in Abraham, to those that
truly Psalm. 105.15.
worship him: that thereby the Egyptians might be Exodus 12.38. Act. 9.35.
provoked to follow the example of Abraham, and to have searched after God. And
as the Lord found cause to pardon Abraham, and to turn his woe to welfare, not
in the act Bernard. in fes^. omnium Sanct. sermon. 1. Quid potest esse omnis
nostra iustitia coram Deo? Nonne iuxta prophetam sicut pannus menstruate
reputabitur? Quid ergo de peccatis erit, quando nec ipsa quidem per se poterit
respondere iustitia?
of Abraham but in his mercy; so he finds cause to punish Pharao (nothing
therein forgetting his wonted clemency) in the act of Pharao, and his justice.
And as Pharao was justly punished, because he took the wife of Abraham,
albeit August. de libere arbit. lib. 3. cap. 22. Non quod naturaliter nescit,
and naturaliter non potest, hoc animae deputabitur in rea^um: sed quod scire
non studuit, and quod dignam facultati comparanda ad recte faciendum operam non
dedit. Estque antecedens secundum Bellarm. tom. 3. controu. 1. lib. 2 cap. 7.
Quae facit inuoluntarium and excusat a peccato ^vel concomitans, qua relinquit
liberum voluntatis actum, and non excusat. Sed in omni ignorantia per lapsum
Adae contracta, vulgaris regula tenenda est, ignorantia excusat non a toto sed
a tanto.
he knew her not to be his wife: so the house of Pharao was justly plagued,
which either were helpers, or in their place Ephesians. 5.11. Revel. 17.4. 1. Tim.
8.22. August. contr. Epist. Parmeniani lib. 2. cap. 21. Non communicare est non
consentire, si enim communicate consentit, si consentit corrumpitur.
not hinderers and mislikers of his trespass. Such also undoubtedly were
Pharaoes Some will perhaps demand how Pharao knew that he was punished for
Sarahs sake? Surely by his punishment. Which the Rabbis do affirm was a
venomous botch or boil: whereby he was hindered and stayed from fulfilling his
lust. Joseph. Antiq. libr. 1. cap. 9. says it was the plague. Philo lib. de
Abraham, a torment both of his mind and body: in the pain whereof, when he
consulted with the priests of Egypt, they showed him the cause. Josephus Antiq.
libr. 1. cap. 9. thinks he was admonished in a dream. Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis
32. that he was certified by Sarah.
plagues, as yt it was manifest they came for Sarah: whereby the Lord both
preserved her Which is most undoubted, by the full consent of all writers both
Jews and Christians, and by the accord of Scripture: God kept her from
Abimelech, Genesis 20.4. so that he touched her not. To what purpose had it been
to have preserved her from Abimelech, when she had been defiled by the king of
Egypt? But wherefore then says the Scripture in that place, Abimelech had not
yet come near her, and in this place expresses not the like of Pharao? It was
necessary in that place to stop the mouths of Atheists, least any should say
(because Isaac was not long after borne) that he was the son of Abimelech,
and not of Abraham: albeit the greatness and speedines of the punishment of both
the Kings do confirm as much, and therefore in this place, the preservation
of Sarah might well be unexpressed.
from being defiled, and Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 32. Grauiori enim poena
indigebat, ita vt ipse exterreretur, nam nisi dei suisset gratia, qua mentem
eius emolliebat; confectaneum erat quod in maiorem furorem inductus, quasi
deceptorem puniuisset, and extremis affecisset supplicijs: at nihil horum
fecit, timor enim supplicij inflammatam eius iram humiliauit and restinxit.
terrified Pharao, least Abraham for revenge or envy should be murdered. So
yt although the king were wicked, as al his servants were ungodly; yet his
plagues Luther in Genesis 12. Haec subita dimissio and custodia addita ^rguunt
Pharaonem vehementor territum plagis inflictis quales quales suerunt.
compel him to have care of Abraham, to convey him forth in safety with all
his substance. Whereby Abraham possesses in peace the gifts that for Sarahs
sake were given, but Pharao enioieth not Sarah, for whom he gave them. Obser.
1. verse 8. The godly ought to labor Psalm. 103.2.
to keep the promises and benefits of God in perpetual remembrance, and to use
Deuteronomy. 6.8.9. Notwithstanding we are not to be put in mind by Images. Habac.
2.18.
the lawful means thereof. Secondly, men are in all places to Psalm. 119.46.
Marc. 8.38.
profess the true religion, and not to 2. Tim. 2.12.
dissemble for any danger. Thirdly, verse 9. The life of the godly Genesis 47.9.
Heb. 11.9.13.
is a perpetual pilgrimage. Fourthly, verse 10. The troubles of the righteous
Psalm. 34.19. Act. 14.22.
are manifold and great, but the Lord delivers them out of them all. Fiftlie,
verse 11. Beauty is Ezech. 16.14. Iam. 1.17. Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 32. Nullus
igitur accuses pulchritudinem, nullus vana verba haec dicat: hauc perdidit
form^chuic pulchritudo causa suit interitus. Non pulchritudo in causa
estrabsit. Opus enim dei est and ipsa. Sed peruersa voluntas causa est malorum
omnium.
a blessing of the Lord, but for our corruptions cause, not Pro. 6.25. and
31.30. Ambros. de Abram lib. 1. cap. 2. Ex hoc docetur, non magnopere decorem
quaerendum coniugis, qui viro necem ple^unque gigneresolet. No^ enim tam
pulchritudo mulieris, quam virtus eius and grauitas delectat virum. Qui
suanitatem quaerit coningij, non tam superiorem censis ambiat, quam
necessitates non terrea^t maritales: non monilibus ornatam sed moribus.
greatly to be desired, because it is so apt to be abused. Sixtlie, verse 12.
Nothing more Psalm. 17.12. and 57.4 Plutarch. in vita Cicer. Ira and rabies
omnem Triumutris humanam excussit mentem. Imo docuerunt animal esse homine
nullum saeuins, si libidini habeat licentiam coniunctam.
savage then wicked men, partakers of power, and not restrained by the Lord.
Seauenthlie, verse 13. The godly may in danger Genesis 43.6.7. Ioh. 19.9.
August. contr. Faust. lib. 22. cap. 36.
conceal (but not Matthew. 10.33.
deny) the truth, when it is not for the glory of God to utter it. Eightlie,
verse 14. Laciuious looks are Matthew. 5.28. Clem. Alexand. Paedagog. lib 3.
cap. 11. Porro autem oculis maxim parcendum est, labi enim melius est pedibus
quam oculis. Huic Dominus compendiosissime quam fieri potest medetur, inquiens,
si tuus scandalizat oculus, ^^cinde cum, ex imo euellens cupiditatem. Lasciui
autem aspectus, and versatilibus ac tanquam conniuentibus oculis intueri, nihil
aliud est quam oculis maechari, cum per eos cupiditas ineat prima pugnae
praeludia.
sins of adultery, and Genesis 39.7. 2. Sam. 11.2.3.
prouokers of farther evils. Ninthlie, verse 15. Wicked Princes have Prou.
29.12.
wicked servants, often times Isai. 24.2.
for the punishment of their sin. Tenthlie, sins done of ignorance, are
deadly Genesis 20.3.6.7. Luc. 12.48.
sins, and inexcusable before the Lord. Doct. eleventh, verse 16. Wicked men
are often Deuteronomy. 23.5. Isai. 45.1.5.
instruments of God to bless his children. The twelfth, verse 17. The Lord 2.
Sam. 22.3. Psalm. 9.9. and 144.2.
is always a refuge to his children in time of need. The thirteenth, the sin of
adultery 2 Samuel 12.10.11. Ierem. 5.7.8.9. and 29.22.23.
is horribly revenged by the Lord. The fourteenth, verse 18. Hypocrites in
their destresse cannot see 1. Sam. 15.21. Isai. 58.2.3.4.
the causes of their misery. The fifteenth, verse 19. They cannot endure in
other, the offense Genesis 25.34. and 27.41. Heb. 12.17.
which they themselves have caused. The sixteenth, the hearts of Pro. 21.1.
kings are in the hand of God, who Psalm. 76.3.4. etc. 2. King. 19.28.
bridleth the fury of the wicked. The seventeenth, verse 20. God rules in
the midst Psalm. 110.2. Act. 12.23.24.
of his enemies, and procures the safety of his Church.

CHAP. XIII.
Question 1. verse 8. What means this, that Abram says unto Lot, let there
be no strife between me and thee, for we are brethren?
WE are not to think that Abram enjoys such abundant riches by the only
bounty of the Pet. Mart. in Genesis 14.
king of Egypt: for when he entered into Egypt, he Genesis 12.5.
possessed great substance; and when he returned; Lot that Which though some
writers do affirm, yet the Scripture says it not: and it seems by the words
of Abraham, Genesis 14.23. that the Lord, would have himself acknowledged the
only author of the wealth, both of Lot and Abraham, notwithstanding that gifts
happily were given to them by the King of Egypt.
received no gifts of Pharao, was also very rich. But the providence of God,
and his fidelity is manifest therein, that according to his promise blesses
Abram: who for destresse of famine departing into Egypt, and necessity of
food; returns laden with wealth and substance. For the Lord increasing the
wealth of Abram would doubtless have it known in Egypt, Chrysostom. Hom. in
Genesis 32. Omnibus post haec venerabilis erat iustus, tam ijs qui in Aegypto,
quam ijs qui in Palestina: quit enim non reueritus fuisset fic a Deo custoditum
and tantam beneuolentiam assecutum.
that the God that Abram served, was able to enrich him both Like as Exodus 11.2.
Aug. cont. Faust. lib. 22. cap. 71. In expoliandis Aegyptijs Moses vsque adeo
non peccauit, vt non faciendo peccaret. Deus enim iusserat, qui vtique nouit
non solum secundum facta verum etiam secundum cor hominis, quid vnisquisque and
per quem perpeti debeat. Potuit etiam vt Genesis 26.12.13.
with and without the king of Egypt. And Lot (says the text) that went with
Abram had sheep and cattle and tents: so profitable it is Bernard. Epist. 73.
Nam qui socij sunt laboris, proculdubio and mercedis participes erunt.
Chrysostom. Hom. 5. in Genesis Etenim sicut mali sua consuetudine familiaribus
multum nocent, quemadmodum beatus Paulus inquit; corrumpunt bones mores
colloquia praua: sic and bonorum familiaritas coniunctis, sibi maxima commoda
affert.
to enjoy the company of the children of God. But herein appears, that
riches Leo Pap. Sermon. 6. Insidia sunt in diuitiarum amplitudine, insidiae in
panpertatis angustijs: illae eleuant ad superbiam, h^ incitant ad querelam.
August. de verb. Apost. Sermon. 26. Aurum quod aerumna perquirit, quod auaritia
cupit. quod solicitudo custodit; aurum, materia laborum, periculosa res
possidentium; aurum eneruatio virtutum; aurum, malus dominus; proditor, seruus.
have their inconveniences as well as poverty: for those who were by nature His
brothers son: for so the Hebrews do often call their kinsmen.
brethren, by profession Whose society and fellowship we are not to forsake.
Hebr. 10.25. 1. Pet. 2.17.
the servants of the Lord; by affection so united, that Cic. Ossic. 1.
Charisunt parents, etc.
neither native country, nor August. in Psalm. 93. Odit valde patriam, qui sibi
been putat cum peregrinatur. Ovid. trist. 2. Nescio qua natale solum dulcedine
cunctos ducit and immemores non finet esse sui.
fathers house, nor Hieron. in Isai. cap. 23. Omnis vagus atque in orb
peregrinus, and incertarum sedium, semper in angustia ingiter and in marrore
est.
painful pilgrimage, nor Per varios casus per tot discrimina rerum.
dangerous voyage, nor Genesis 12.10.
distress of famine, nor Hieron. ad Paulin. Vera illa amicitia est and Christi
glutino copulata, quam non vtilitat rei familiaris, non praesentia corporum
tantum, non subdola and palpans adulatio, sed dei timor and diuinarum
scripturarum conciliant studia.
fear of death, could separate; riches and Bernard. Sermon 4. de Aduent. Aurum
and argentum and caetera huiusmodi, quantum ad animi bonum spectat, nec bona
funt nec mala: vsus tamen horum bonus, abusio mala, solicitudo peior, quaestus
turpior.
increase of worldly wealth do put asunder. No marvel therefore if the most
wise and gracious Lord, do August. de ciu. Dei. libr. 1. cap 8. Tamen si non
tas Deus quibusdam potentibus euidentissima largitate concederet, non ad eum
ista pertinere diceremus. Itemque si omnibus eas petentibus dares, non nisi
propter talia praemia seruiendum illi esse arbitraren^^r: nec pios n^^ faceret
talis seruitus, sed potius cupidos and auaros.
not here on earth cause all his children to abound in wealth, seeing the
cheifest of his servants, which have bin more purelie Hebr. 10.22.
washed from their native filth, and Psalm. 51.10.
sesoned with the spirit of renewing grace, can scarcely (for their own
corruptions) either use it to the glory of God, and their 2. Sam. 12.8.9.
own behoof; or handle it without their hurt. We therefore that have food and
raiment, 1. Tim. 6.8.
let us therewith be content: and pray with the Prophet, give Prou. 30.8.9.
me not riches least I be too full, but Prou. 30.8. Matthew. 6.11.
feed me with food convenient for me: Three causes are alleged of this
separation of Abram and Lot, which all arose of their wealth and riches. That
the land was not sufficient for their flocks; the strife of their servants;
and the Cananite and PeriZZite that dwelt in the land. The fruitfulnes of
Canaan could not suffice their family, that was sufficient for so many
hundred thousands Numb. 11.21.
of Abrams posterity. If any ask the reason, the Scripture answers it: it
was able to receive them being asunder, but it could not bear them to dwell
together. The froward heardmen set forward Verse. 7.
this defect, but the Cananite and PeriZZite fulfilled it: who having
themselves selected Verse. 10. Chrysostom. Hom. 33. Causam quoque docere voluit
diuina scripture, quod ideo eos no^ capiebat quia agentibus illis praeoccupata
erat.
the fatnes of the la^d, would afford no more to Abram, then otherwise for
want of inhabitant Gen 34 21.
lay desolate. Thus Abram and Lot which so long had lived in amity, were
compelled for the contention of their servants to depart asunder. Now Abram the
last that was privy to this contention, and farthest off from giving a cause
of strife; is the first that seeks peace, and labors for agreement.
Wherein he has taught a twofold lesson to Ioh. 8.39. Origin. in Epist. Romans
Hom. 4. Si filij essetis Abrahe opera vtique Abraha faceretis: per quod vtique
ostendit, quia qui faciunt opera Abrahae isti sunt filij Abrahae: and propter
illos scripta sunt, quae de Abraham scripta sunt.
all his children: first how peace is rightly to be attained: that is to say,
by Prou. 15.1. Matthew 5.39. Coloss. 3.12.13.
meekenes and humility, and Prou. 25 21. Romans 12.20. 1. Pet. 3.9. August. de
sermon. Do^. in mont. libr. 1. Mites sunt qui cedant improbitatibus and non
resistu^t mato, sed vin cunt in bono malum. Rixe^tur ergo immites and diuicent
pro terrenis and temporalibus rebus: beati autem mites etc.
rendering good for evil. Secondly, that in matters of contention, the Micah.
6.3. 2. Cor. 4.9.20. Ephesians. 2.13.16.17. Mat. 5.44.45.
least offender is fittest to begin agreement; and the worthier person ought
first to frame Genesis 45.15.78. Psalm. 120.7.
the exhortation unto unity. Not by repeating all his Prou. 17 9. Basil. in
quest. diffusis qu. 35. Cognoscitur ex eo arrogantia, quod ea que ad
praeminentiam pertinent re^uirit: curatur autem si crediderit indicio eius qui
dixit: Dominus superbis resistit, nec tamen curatur, nisi ab omnibus
praeminentiae studijs secesserit.
privilege; not by Isai. 58.3. Mat. 18.30. Phil. 2.3.4.
requiring all his right (muchlesse by advancing his estate, or demanding the
uttermost recompense of loss) but Coloss. 3.13. 1. Pet. 3.9. Cyprian. de
vni^t. Eccles. Si filij Dei sumus pacifici esse debemus: nam pacifi^os esse
oportes Dei filios, cord mites, sermon simplices, affectione concordes,
fideliter sibi vnanimitatis nexibus cohaerentes.
for the Lords sake who is the God of peace, by Romans 12.16. Chrysostom. Hom. de
anime humilit. Nihil est tam Deo gratum qua^ seipsum cum postremia numerare.
Modestia enim est, fortiter factis and virtutibus excelsum animo seipsum
deijcere.
making himself equal to his inferiors, and yielding Gregor. Moral. lib. 19
Regat disciplinae rigor mansuetudinem, and mansuetudo ornet rigorem, and sic
alterum commendetur ab altero, vt nec rigor sit rigidus, nec mansuetudo
disso^uta.
in his own right (so far as in godliness he may) to redeem a godly peace
and concord. If Abraham had lived in these our days, he had bin taught another
form of exhortation by many examples: and indeed he might lawfully have
pleaded for his privilege to this effect. Sir, I brought you up Chrysostom.
Hom. in Genesis 33. Succensuisset forsitan atque ita dixisset. Quis furor ille?
ausi sunt familiares ^ui, vel mutire aduersus operas meas, etc.
of a boy: you have continued these many years under my protection: that
substance which you have, you may Either given by Abraham, or for his sake: or
increased in Abraham's family, by the blessing of God, and Abraham's industry
and liberality.
thank me for, you enjoy it for my sake, it has bin gotten in my house. What
disorder therefore and presumption is this of yours, that you command not your
heardmen to give place to mine? I am your Genesis 11.27.31.
uncle and your elder: you show your self hereby vnreuerent and unthankful.
If you say you could not amend this broyle; depart from me and seek you
meeter pastures: let me with quietness enjoy mine own; and hold me for your
friend, that Ambros. lib. de Naboth. cap. 7. Modum non habet auaritia, nec
capiendo expletur: sed incitatur: hoc egentior quo plura quaesiuit.
I let you go without taking for your charge of bringing up. But Abram, who
already Ioh. 8.56.
had seen the day of Christ, had also learned that rule of him Matthew. 16.24.
Hieron. epist. ad Algas. quaest. 3. Quotidie credens in Christum tollit crucem
suam and negat scipsunt. Qui impudicus fuit versus in castitatem, temperantia
luxuriam negat: iniquus si sequatur iustitiam negat iniquitatem. Stultus si
Christum consi^ecatur Dei virtutem, and Dei sapientiam, negat stultitiam.
to deny himself. He forgets the inconvenience of contention in his
house, and from whom it did The Rabbis design the cause of this contention to
be, for that Lots heard-men putting in their cattle into other men's ground,
were reproved by Abraham's servants. An indiscreet conjecture, and reproved by
the scripture, which insinuates this reason; because the land could not bear
them both. etc.
proceed: as if he had himself been agent in the strife, I pray thee (says
he) let there be no contention between us. He remembers not that he was his
uncle, but gives this reason: for we are brethren. And as hitherto he made
himself but equal unto Lot, so in the rest he makes himself inferior: let
us, says he, depart asunder Verse 8.9.
for quietness sake. Choose you before me Verse. 9. Luther in Genes. 14. One
while he makes himself but equal to Lot, another while his inferior, when
he gives him the choice of habitation.
where you will dwell, I will take that dwelling which you forsake. Thus Abram
not only offers, but performs a As if he should have said, I am ready to
resign unto thee all my own privileges, and to give thee thy own demands,
rather then to contend. Vatab. in Genes. 13. Calvin. in Genesis 13. Poterat quidem
Abram, etc.
worthy pattern of humility and courtesy. For Lot makes choice of all the
land, and by this benefit inioyeth a soil for profit and plenteousnes, Verse.
10.
like the garden of the Lord. This meeknes of Abram has ever bin despised of
proud, contentious, and disdainefull persons, which have not Bernard. de modo
viuendi. sermon. 37. Superbia est cupiditas; in tantum est vnum malum, vt nec
superbia sine cupiditate, nec sine superbia possit cupiditas inueniri.
learned humility of Christ. It is thought but folly for quietness sake, to
lose Clem. Alexandr. Strom. 6. (...), id est nimis amor sui, est semper
quibuslibet causa peccatorum omnium. Quocirca non oportet eligendo and
expetendo gloriam ab hominibus esse nimium sui amantem, sed Deum diligendo esse
sanctum cum prudentia.
the least portion of our right: and therefore this example in worldly
wisdom, not worthy imitation. Such in deed there have been, and ever are
in the Church of God, which have esteemed the rules of Christ, 1. Tim. 6.5.
Muscul. in Genesis 13. Hodie reperias Christianos, qui ne pedis quidem latitudinem
de terreno suo iure fraternae paci largiantur, sed potius pro modico telluris
spacio, omnia iurgijs, rixis, litibus imo caedibus etiam and sanguine repleant.
no farther worth obedience, then may stand with pleasure or commodity. These
are Isai. 65.45.
smoke in mine anger, says the Lord, and a fire that burns all the day.
Notwithstanding, mark what success the Lord awardeth, who is Psalm 45.7.
judge of all men's actions, and gives sentence between Abram and Lot. Abram
that had given choice of all the country unto Lot, receives for Genesis 26.4.5.
August. 50. Hom. lib. Hom. 14. Da veniam Apostole, propria tua non noni nisi
mala: cum ergo Deus coronat merita tua, nihil coronat nisi dona sua.
reward of his humility, the inheritance of all the country: And Lot Verse.
10.11. Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 33. Oportebat igitur nepotem, cum tantam
experiretur aequitatem patriarchae, parem rependere honorem, and ei potius
liberam electionem concedere: at ille vtpote iuuenis and maiori concupiscentia
tractus, etc.
who returned not like kindness as was showed him; made more unprofitable
choice, then his vmpiers, or very adversaries would have awarded him: that is
to say Genesis 14.12.
both loss of liberty and goods. Would God this example were well considered
in these Ephesians. 5.16.
perilous days of the Church of God. The Cananite and the Perizzite Hieron. in
Hos. cap. 12. In istiusmodi Caenaan manu, hoc est operibus, statera dolosae
est, and iniqua: quicquid enim haereticus loquitur, Dei iustitiam non habet.
Hodis autem haeretici omnium procacissimi and alios pene omnes suo in gyro
complectentes sunt Romani, qui nobis intus and foris imminent and ingruunt.
seeks occasion against the Church on every side. Satan now rages Revel.
12.12.
because he knows his time is short. He provoke Abram and Lot to strife,
the faithful servants of the Lord to emulation and contention. He sets on
heardmen Que^admodu^ inter Caesare^ and Pompoiu^, Marcus Antonius tribunus
plebis, vt Helena Troianis causa belli, causa pestis and exitij fuit. Cicero.
Philip. 2.
to stir up sedition among Princes. Wherefore it behooves those that
profess the truth, diligently to watch against these 2. Cor. 2.11. Ephesians.
6.12.15.
wiles of Satan: to remove the Nazianz. Orat. 7. Quidnam est in doctrina
nostra pulcherrimoun? Pax: addam and vtilissimum idem esse. Quid turpissimum
and nocantissimum? Discordia. Quaram and alterum. Quid est quod illam maxim
sustulit? Quid hanc introduxit? Vt quemad modum in morbis fieri consueuit,
sublatis causis and fontibus merborum obstructis and exiccatis, etiam ortos
inde fluxus. and effecta simul tollamus.
causes of contention: to esteem with Abram Clem. Alexand. Paedagog. libr. 3.
cap. 11. In Dominam enim retorquatur ancillae intemperantia, etc.
the discord of their servants to be their own. And by how much they are
preferred to higher dignity, by Hieron. epist. ad Demetriad. Nobilitatis ad
hoc tantum memineris, vt cum claritate generis morum sanctitate contendas, and
cum nobilitate corporis animi virtute nobilier proficias.
so much the more to be careful of godly unity. It is known in this our
land, what woe and desolation has bin endured, when Abram and Lot, the nobles
of the same have Gildas Britan. lib. de excictio Britannia. Moris continui
gentis erat sicut nunc est (inquit) vt infirma esset ad retundenda hostium
tela, and fortis esset ad ciuilla bella. Simile Thorn Walsingham vita Edwardi
2. Richard. 2. etc.
lived in discord, for want of this religious care of peace with Abraham. If
there were any such in these our days, with whom the preaching of the Gospel
has not so far prevailed, as for the honor of Jesus Christ Philip. 2.5.
to renounce themselves, their wealth and honor, and to John. 5.44.
seek the honor that comes of God alone: so that I had access to speak
before them; I would after the manner of Augustine, yea of Gal. 4.12.
Paul, yea of 2. Cor. 6.20.
Jesus Christ even August. Epist. 15. Prociderem ad pedes vestros, flerem
quantum valerem, rogarem quantium, amare^, nunc vnum quemque vestrum proseipso,
nunc virumque pro alterutro, and pro alijs and maxim infirmis, pro quibus
Christus est ^ortuus, etc.
fall down before their feet, who either are prouokers of contention, or not
to their uttermost endeavors in religious godliness, redressers of the same with
Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 33. Audiant haec qui se extra crimina putant esse,
quando propter familiaritate^ suis ministris permittant and conniuen^, raepere,
decipere, m^^^a mala machinari etc. nam qui prohibere potest eum qui iniuriam
facit, neque prohibet, is non minorem lue^ poenam, quam qui iniuriam secit.
Abraham. I would weep from the bottom of my heart, I would beseech them with
my voice, for the 1. Ioh. 4.11. Ioh 13.34.
Lords sake, for his C^loss. 1.24.
Churches sake, for the Saluct. de bell, Iugurth. Nam concordia parnae res
crescunt, discordia maximae dilabuntur.
flourishing perpetuity of England, and the sauegard of innumerable lives and
souls therein; Psalm. 37.8.
to give place to wrath, to let go displeasure: If any have taken offense at
other, even Coloss. 3.13.
as Christ forgave, that so they would: I would most humbly crave of them, to
be fully desirous Cassidor. in Psalm. 34. Vera pax est concordiam habere cum
moribus probis, litigare cum vitijs. Nazianz orat. 6. Nihil enim ad concordiam
vsque adeo validum est, in ijs quibus diuina res vere cordi sunt, itque
consensus de Deo, nec quicquam adeo facit ad dissidium atque de eodem dissensio.
of unity, to take away the The principal cause of all discord is pride,
Prou. 13.10. by which men neglect the word of God, either in matters of faith,
or obedience. Subordinate causes are, self-love, flattery, envy, stifnes of
opinion, and such like.
causes of offense, to show humility with Abraham, to offer all Nazian. orat.
21. Apolog. Melius enim and optabilius est, egregium bellum, impia pace and a
deo distrabente: ob e^nque causam clementem hominem a^ man spiritus, vt
belligerendi facultate instructuus.
lawful conditions of agreement; which is to seek peace and Psalm. 34.14.
follow after it: not to esteem their own private cause before a public: nor
their honor, before the honor of their Prince and country; nor yet their
wealth before Pro qua quis bonu^ dubitet mortem oppetere si ei sit profuturus.
Exemplo Mosis, Exodus 32.32. Pauli. Romans 9.3
the welfare of the Church of God. Not to suffer themselves in heart to be
disioyned, who by God himself are coupled together, by Ex vno omnes, Act.
17.26. Arat. in Pheinom. Lucret. lib. 1. Et patria sal pluris bonis faciendus
est quam hospitis mensa. Aeschines orat. 2.
country, by blood, by nation, by 1. Pet. 2.14. Chrysostom. Hom. 2. in Matthew.
Quemadmodum certantibus ventis mare concutitur, sic regibus sibi aduersantibus
populus regni vexatur.
honor, by 1. Cor. 8.6. Nobis tamen vnus est Deus. Ignat. epist. ad
Philadelph. At vbi animorum discordia est, and ira and odium, ibide^ inhabitans
non est Deus.
profession; in one Ephesians. 4.5. Cyprian. libr. de orat. Domin. Pacificos and
concordes atque vnanimes esse in domo sua Deus praecipit: and quales nos fecit
secunda natiuitate, tales vult renatos perseuerare: vt qui filij Dei esse
caepimus, in Dei pace maneamus, and quibus spiritus vnus est, vnus sit and
animus and sensus.
Baptism, one 1. Cor. 16.17. Damascen. Orthodox. fid. lib 4. c. 14. (...) etc.
Nam qua ex vno pane participamus omnes, vnum corpus Christi, and vnus sanguis
and inuicem membra, essicimur, concorporati Christo existentes.
bread and body of his son, in Ephesians. 4.12.13.16. 1. Pet. 1.4.
fellowship of one inheritance and kingdom. Let them be separated here, 2.
Cor. 6.14.15.
who shall be separated in the life to come. But seeing it is his to separate,
who only Matthew. 25.32.
can make a true division between the sheep and goats: let man take heed how
he separateth his brother Origin. in Leuit. Hom. 8. Interdum fit vt aliquis non
recto iudicio little, qui praesunt ecclesia depellatur and soras emittatur: sed
non exit ante; si non ita se gessit, vt mereatur exire, nihil laditur in eo
quod non recto iudicio ab hominibus videtur expulsus: and ita fit vt interdum
ille qui for as mittitur intu^sit, and ille foris sit qui intus retineri videtur.
in his judgment; or himself Gregor. epist. Qui illicite quempiam
excommunicat seipsum non illum condemnat.
from the fellowship of the Church of God. I would also Malach. 2.7.
as the messenger of the Lord of hosts, declare before them the temporal
dangers, that the Lord in his judgments has pronounced against those, that by
contention, 1. King. 2.5.
do put the blood of war upon their girdles, in the days of peace: that
those that thus Matthew. 26.52.
do take the sword, shall perish with the sword: that the Lord in Dan. 5.23.
whose hand their life and breath is, does abhor Prou. 3.34.
the proud, the bloody and Psalm. 5.6.
deceitful man. And as he blesses those that 1. Pet. 3.9.
live in peace, and are lovers Mat^. 5.9.
of the same: so he rooteth out the Prou. 24.21.22. Romans 2.8. Et Ethnicus
orator: Tu Deus inquit omnes inimicos bonorum, hosts patria, latrones (dicerem
Anglie) Italiae, scelerum foedere inter se, ac nefaria societate coniunctor,
aeternis supplicijs viuos mortuosque mactabis, In Catilin. orat. 1.
race of those that are contentious, and will reward them with vengeance in
life and death. Doctrine 1. verse 1. The Lord is a Psalm. 125.2.
perpetual sauegard unto his children; no hand can Job. 2.5.6. Matthew. 10.30.31.
hurt them without permission from him. Secondly, verse 2. Wealth and riches
Prou. 3.16. and 8.18. and 10.22. Basil. Hom. in dictum Luc. 12. Destrua^ horrea
mea. No^ne nudus ex vtero excedisti? Non nudus rursus in terram reuerteris?
Praesentia vero vnde tibi sunt? Si a casu spontanto dicit, impius es non
agnoscens conditorem neque gratias habens largitori: si vero confiteris esse a
deo, dic rationem nobis ob quam accepisti. Number iniustus est Deus, qui
inequaliter nobis ad vitam necessaria distribuit? Cur tu quidem diue^ es, ille
vero egenus? Profecto omnino, quod and tu bonitatis and fidelis dispensationis
mercedem accipias, and ille ob magna patientia certamina praemia ferat.
are the blessings of the Lord; the hurt that comes in the abuse of them,
Luc. 12.15. August. de ciuit. lib. 1. cap. 10. In diuitijs cupiditas
reprehenditur non facultas. Chrysostom. Hom. in Mat. 25. Diuitiae non sunt
peccatum, sed peccatum est eas non distribuere panperibus.
is from our own corruptions. Thirdly, riches of godly men are used as Psalm.
132.3.4 Ambros. in Luc. 15. Discant diuites non in facultatibus crimen haberi,
sed in ijs qui vti nesciant: nam diuitiae vt impedimenta sunt improbis, ita
bonis sunt adiumenta virtutum.
the instruments of God, to promote religion, and to set forth the worship of
the Lord. Fourthlie, verse 4. The worship of God 1. Cor. 10.31. Coloss. 3.17
ought to be the beginning, continuance, and end of all our actions. Fiftlie,
verse 5. Christian religion and the rule of godliness Numb. 26.53.54. etc.
Ephesians. 4.28. Contr. Pythagoricam communitatem. Cicer. de Legib. libr. 1. Gell.
noct. Attic. lib. 1. cap. 9. Platonicam, Plato de Leg. lib. 5. Foelicem ac
beatam fore ciuitatem in qua non audiretur meum and non meum. Senec lib. de
Morib. Quietissimam vitam agerent homines, si hac duo verba a natura rerum
omnino tollerentur, meum, and iuum. Et contr. Anabaptistas.
requires, that there should be distinctions of honors, riches, and
authority; and that every man should know the bounds of his own preferment.
Sixtlie, verse 6. Riches 1. Tim. 6.9. Clement. Alexandr. Padagog. lib. 3. cap.
6. Diuitiae sunt serpenti fimiles, quem si quis nescit inoffense eminus
accipere, bestiam sine periculo summa canda apprehendens; ea manis
circumplicabitur and mordebit. Sed si quis magnificum se praebens, recte and
scienter ijs vtatur, cum verbi quidem carmine; bestiam detraxeris, ipse vero
illasus manscrit. Senec. epist. 20. Magna haereditas ex amito inimicum facit;
plus autem gaudebit tua mo^e quo p^us accipit.
have many inconveniences since the fall of man; wherefore those that excel
in riches, are to 1. King. 3.9.
strive by prayer with the Lord, that they may excel in wisdom and grace to
use them without offense. Seauenthlie, verse 7. Wicked servants are 1. King.
12.10. 2. Chron. 24.17.18.
often the causes of great afflictions unto their masters. Eightlie, the
Church of God is always compassed Psalm. 83.5.6.7. Matthew. 10.16.
with enemies, who greedily gape for the spoil thereof. Ninthlie, verse 8. It
is not enough for the godly to be peaceable, unless they be Mat. 5.9. (...)
pacem facientes. Psalm. 34.14.
peacemakers, and prouokers of others thereunto. Tenthlie, kindred in the
flesh, or conjunction in the spirit, ought to be 2. Sam. 19.12. Romans 9.3.
sufficient cause in the Church of God of peace and concord. The eleventh,
verse 9. We ought to Psalm. 7.4. Matthew. 5.40.
forgo our own right, to uphold and maintain peace, so far as may Romans
12.18. Matthew. 10.33. 1. Tim. 5.8. Ergo, that peace which cannot be obtained
without the overthrow of faith of religion, or a man's household estate, ye same
ought not to be reconciled. But in these cases hypocrites will find many
excuses.
stand with the glory of God, and the profit of his Church. The twelfth, verse
10. Men which are 1. Sam. 25.10.11. 2. Pet. 2.15.
ouergreedie of their own commodity, are in the end unprofitable to
themselves: Prou. 11.24.
for the Lord does adiudge them unto poverty. The thirteenth, the vengeance of
the Lord does Psalm. 107.34.
destroy a fruitful and pleasant land, for the wickedness of them that dwell
therein. The fourteenth, verse 11.12.13. Those that for worldly profit or
commodity, do choose their conversation with the wicked: they are 2. Pet. 2.7.
compelled to vex their righteous soul by their uncleanness, and often times
Genesis 14.12. Revel. 18.4.
to be partakers of their punishments.

Question 2. verse 15. How stands it with the truth of Gods promise: that the
Israelits the seed of Abram were so long ago expelled the land of Canaa^,
seeing the Lord here promises it to Abram and to his seed for ever?
AFter that Lot was departed away from Abram, when Ambros. de Abram. lib. 1.
cap. 3. Indiuisa domus duos non sustinet. Nonne melius est emigrare cum gratia
quam cohabitare cum discordia? August. in Psalm. 132. Nam in discordia non
benedicis dominum. Hieron. Comment. in Romans Quisquis corpus affligit, sed
concordiam deserit, deum quidem laudat in tympano, sed non laudat in choro.
contention and strife was ceased in his house; the Lord to the end to comfort
Abram, for the Calvin. in Genesis 13.
loss of so dear a friend, does recompense as it were his absence, with the
presence of himself; in steed of a kinsman does promise children, and in place
of the land which Lot had Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 34. Cessisti ob tuam
mansuetudinem regione meliore and amaniore fratris filio, tantam pacis habuisti
curam, vt nihil non potius delegeris, quam esse inter vos contentiones: ea
propter largas illas a me retributiones accipe.
chosen, gives Abram the whole country, and his seed for ever. In which
grant or gift, are three points of difficulty to be considered: the manner;
the measure; and indurance of the grant or patent. For the first point, the
Scripture testifies, that God gave not Act. 7.5.
unto Abram the inheritance of a foot of this promised bequeth:
notwithstanding the Lord says thus; I will give it unto thee, and to thy seed
for ever. What means CONCILIATIO. 20.
this, I will give, but I do Anallage temporis, scripturis and nobis ipsis
frequens and familiaris nunc praeteriti pro futuro, vt Esa. 1.7. Iere. 2.15.
Hab. 1.5. nunc futuri pro praeterito. Esa. 6.7.
give thee and thy seed? for if he gave it not; when was it given to Abram? If
he gave it, how says the Scripture, he gave him none inheritance therein?
Shall we think that the Scripture implies any contrariety in this? Shall
we think that Steven whose words they are, silled Act. 7.55. John. 7.15.16.
with wisdom and the holy Ghost, and knowledge of the Scriptures, standing
Act. 6.12.14.
in judgment, and answering for his life, would affirm any doctrine against
the testimony of Moses, or allege any history, which either was not known
or not believed, of the council that were his judges? Wherefore this is to be
understood as the meaning of the Scripture: that it is as if the Lord had said;
I so give it Pet. Mart. in Genesis 13 Ita proxima sententia particula priorem
interpretatur. Quasi dicat, ita tibi came dabo, vt illam in semine tuo sit
habiturus.
thee, as that it shall be unto thy seed an inheritance forever. So that Abram
himself enjoyed the Iure scilices divine, non solum quo cuncta iustoru^ sunt:
sed etiam speciali iure, quod suo verbo hanc terram dominus Abraha concessit,
designauit, confirmauit. August. Epist. 49. Et quamuis res quaeque terrena
recte a quoquam possideri non possit, nisi vel iure diuino, quo cuncta iustorum
sunt, vel iure humano quod in potestate regum est terra: ideoque res vestras
falso appellatis, quas nec iucti possidetis, and secundum leges regum
terrenorum amittere iussi ectis.
right, but not (...). Possessionem sortitam, vel sort datam, sicut haeredum
est.
inheritance: for the Cananite at that time possessed the whole inheritance
thereof, but for their wickedness they were disinherited by God: and because
Genesis 15.16. Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 37. Quasi dicat aliquis, nondum in tanto
numero peccata fecerunt, etc.
their iniquity was not fulfilled, the Lord deferred a time to perform this
gift to Abrams seed: that Abram and his seed, 2. Cor. 5.7. Isai. 51.2.3. Habac.
2.3.
might walk by faith, and not by sight; and from this inheritance which was
but temporal, might ascend with confidence, Coloss. 3.1.2. Heb. 11.10.
to that which was immortal and perpetual. Abram therefore For so much the
words do found, (...) lecha-etenennah vlezargneca: i. I give it to thee and to
thy seed: that is, thou shall have the right of it, namely divine, and so much
for use as shall be necessary: but thy posterity shall have the full
possession and inheritance. And this is that which the Scripture calls (...)
inheritance, Act. 7. He gave him none inheritance: for Abram could not
challenge one foot in humane right, sail the field of Machpelah for his
burial.
having the right of inheritance, although not actuallie possessing it, full
well perceived even in his pilgrimage, the fulfilling of the promise; both to
himself whom the Lord Genesis 14.15. and 17.1. etc.
maintained and defended therein on every side, and furnished with wealth and
necessary food: and to his seed, who by the same fidelity of God Genesis 15 6.
were promised to enjoy it with full possession, which he himself had by
wandering passed over. The second point is: that the Lord bad him look from the
place in which he was, and promised to give him the land which he beheld.
There are which hereupon Muscul. in Genesis 13. Fieri etia^ potest etc.
suppose that Abram was sent to view the land from the top of some mighty
mountain, that he might see the borders of the country: but this the
Scripture avouches not. Other think Peter. tom. 3. in Genesis cap. 15. Abram and
vigilantem and suis vtentem sensibus, etc.
that miraculouslie his sight was sharpened and enlarged, for that otherwise he
could not by sight have bin partaker of the measure of the land. But what need
of miracles? what need of hills or mountains? For the Lord says August. lib.
quaest. in Genesis q. 28. Sed nulla est quaestio, si aduertamus non hoc solum esse
pramissum: no^ enim dictum est, tantum terra dabo tibi quantum vides, sed tibi
dabo terram quam vides.
not to Abram, I will give thee so much as thou see of the land; but I will
give thee all that land thou see, or whereof thou see part. And to this end
is Verse. 17. August. ibid. Vt perambulando perueniret ad eam quam oculis vno
loco flans videre non posset.
added: Arise, walk through the land in the length thereof, and in the breadth
thereof: that it which he could not discern at once, he might by removing from
place to place consider. Thirdly it follows, I will give it to thee, and to
thy seed for ever. How ( Julian. apud Cyril. libr. 6. Numquid dij dederunt Roma
vt regnare^t, Iudaos aute^ vt paru^ tempore liberi, semper vero serui ac
peregrini essans?
says one) was this promise verified? Both Abram and his seed were Exodus 12.40.
four hundredth year after, before they possessed any inheritance therein;
and after they had by war obtained it, they continued not long, but oppressed
with Julian. ibid. Cum autem habitarent in Palestina, non ne crebrius fortunas
mutarunt quam colorem vt dicunt Camel^on? Caterum habitarunt in terra sua and
agros coluerunt fere quadringentis annis: ex illo tempore primum seruierunt
Assyrijs, deinde Medis, postea Persis, and nunc postremum etiam nobis ipsis.
enemies, were lastly lead into captivity; whereby they lost their land and
liberty. And so far proceeded this banishment of theirs, as that upon pain
Justin. Mart. Apolog. 2. Promulgatum vero etiam est de excidio eius, etc.
of death, they might not come within Jerusalem. In deed it cannot be denied,
but the afflictions of the seed of Abram, both in greatness of misery, and
diversity of punishment, exceeded the miseries of other nations: the reason
whereof is alleged by the Prophet: You only have Amos. 3 8.
I known of all the nations of the earth, therefore I will visit you for your
iniquities: that is to say, you only have known me, my laws and judgments,
as no Psalm. 147.19.20. Galat. 4.9.
other nation has; and yet have not obeyed my commandments more then they:
wherefore Iuc. 13 47. Cyprian. epist. 8. Quas igitur plagas, qua verbera non
meremur, quando nec confessores, qui exemplo caeteris ad bonos mores esse
debuerant teneant disciplinam?
you are in justice to be beaten with greater stripes. Notwithstanding the
several punishments that they endured; the famine, wars, captivity,
banishment, no not their very sins, could ever Psalm. 89.33.34. Hieron. epist.
ad Tit. Comment. cap. 1. Deus sicut dicitur solus immortalis, ita dicitur solus
verax: non quod and caeteri non immortales sunt, and veritatia amatores, sed
quod ille solus naturaliter sit and immortalis and verus: caeteri vero and
immortalitate^ and veritatem ex largitione illius consequuntur.
falsify in any syllable the Lords fidelity. For although they were a most
stif-necked people, Deuteronomy. 9.5.6.
as other nations were; yet the Lord for the promise Deuteronomy. 7.8. and 9.5.
that he made to Abram, gave them the possession of the land, and there failed
nothing Ios. 21.45. and 23.14.15.
of all the good which the Lord had promised. Wherefore first we have to examine
the substance of the promise, and then to discern of the accomplishment
thereof. In which when we have given the adversaries of the truth, their full
demand, and more also then they could expect, or can conceive to be contained
in the promise; yet shall we see that the Lord fulfilled it to Abram and his
seed in every jot and tittle. First of all therefore none can deny, but as he
promised to give to Abram and his seed, the land which Abram with his eyes
beheld; so he gave it fully, not according to that he saw, but according to
the limits of his promise, the country and seat Genesis 15.19.
of ten mighty nations of the Cananites. Again, where he promises to make
his seed as the dust Verse. 16.
of the earth in number, he shows wherein: not in the full measure of
number, but because they should be August. de ciu. Dei, lib. 16. c. 21. Iste
aute^ tropus id est modus locutionis, fit cu^ id quod dicitur, long est
amplius qua^ quod eo dicto significatur: quis enim no^ videat, quam sit
comparabiliter amplior arena numerus quam potest esse omnium hominum ab ipso
Adam vsque ad terminu^ seculi? Qua^to ergo magis quam semen Abrahae, quod semen
in co^paratione multitudinis aliorum in paucis est, quaemnis and ipsi pauci
faciunt innumerabile^ multitudine^ sua^, qua significata est secu^du^
hyperbolen per ar^^a^ terra.
both, innumerable; which also Deuteronomy. 10.22. Hose. 1.10.
truly and abundantly was fulfilled. But he promised it for ever unto him
and his seed? He fulfilled it also Conciliatio. 21.
in truth and righteousness. For what is contained in ye word ever, but length
of time, which properly in the Hebrew speech does signify Arad. (...) gnalam:
Latere, abscondere: in eundem sensam and significatum cecinit Aescul. in
Eumenid. (...). i. Simul senescens cuncta tempus destruit. Item Sophocles in
Aiace, (...), etc. cuncta pariter immensus ordo temporum occulta prodit, and
celas ipsum cognita.
a time for continuance and durance to me^ unknown; as sometime Exodus 15.18.
Deuteronomy. 32.40. Psalm. 104.31. Therefore it is said, (...) legnolim vagned, for ever
and beyond, or for ever and ever, that is to all eternities, which man is not
capable fully to conceive.
eternity, which cannot of man be measured: sometime Genesis 49.20. Eccles. 1.4.
Psalm. 49.11.
the end of the world, because it is unknown: sometime ye Genesis 17.13. Exodus
12.24. Heb. 8.5.6. and 10.18.19.
coming of Messiah, because he was the reconcilement of the world: sometime ye
end of life, because Psalm. 30.12. Jonas. 2.7. Bernard. Epist. 105. Nil
mortalibus vel morte certius vel incertius hora mortis. Quare dum viuis in
carne morere mundo, vt post mortem carnis Deo viuere incipias. Bona autem mors
iusti propter requiem, melior propter nouitatem, optima propter securitatem:
mala vero est impijs, in mundi amissione, peius in carnis separatione, pessima
in vermis ignisque duplici contritione.
it is uncertain: sometime also Deuteronomy. 15.17. Leuit. 39.40.
the year of Iubile: because then the state of possessions and freedoms did
return. Since therefore the scripture does so diversely use this word for length
of time, we are to search out by circumstances the peculiar sense thereof. We
may not esteem this patent made for one generation or age of men, because it
is manifestly bestowed Genesis 15.13.18.
on many: neither may we take it as a lease for life, because it appertained to
inumerable people. And how should it signify eternity, since lands and
possessions, and men, and Psalm. 102.26. 2. Pet. 3.11. Cyprian. lib. ad
Demetrian. Illud primo in loco scire debes, etc. This thou must understand,
that the world now waxes old; things stand not now in the same vigor and
strength wherein sometime they stood. This we may easily by experience
perceive, besides the testimonies of the Scriptures, etc. This Aristotle albeit
he dispute much of the worlds eternity, yet is compelled to confess, Meteor.
lib. 1. cap. 14. and Heraclitus taught expressly that the world should be
dissolved by fire. Laert. lib. 1. vita Heraclit. Cicer. in Lucul.
the world ^^selfe are to have an end? It remains therefore that the
perpetuity of their possession, was to remain unto the restoring; or else the
consummation of the world. Those perhaps which are contentious, will strive to
understand it, to be granted unto the end of time, because it is given to them
for ever: where as yet the covenant of Genesis 17.7.
circumcision, was called an everlasting covenant, notwithstanding it was to
last no longer then Genesis 49.10.
Shiloh came, in whom types and shadows Coloss. 2.17. Hieron. proam. in Epist.
ad Galat. Nullus quidem Apostoli sermo est, in quo non laboret docere antiqua
legis onera deposita and omnia illa quae in typis and imaginibus praecesserunt,
id est etium Sabati, circumcisionis iniuriam, etc. gratia Euangelij subrepente
cessasse: quam non sanguis victimarum sed fides animae credentis impleret.
were to have an end. In like sort the covenant of Priesthood was a covenant
for Numb. 25.12.
ever, which also was ordained Heb 9.9.11.12.
by the sacrifice of Christ to be abolished. Nevertheless two points observed,
we easily condescend, that this inheritance was to endure while the world
endured, and (if you will) also afterward. First that this promise Ierem.
31.33. Hiero^. ad Darda^. epist. Quaeris Dardane etc. Et ego fatebor haec tibi
re promissa non tradita: si obseruasses mandata dei, etc. si no^ pro
omnipotente Deo Idola coluisses, etc. quae quia praetulisti Deo, omnia quae
tibi promissa fuerum perdidisti. Et mihi in Euangelio promittuntur regna
coelorum: Sed si non secero quae praecepta sunt, nequaquant erit culpa in
promittente; sed in me qui promissum accipere non merus. August. de praedest.
sanct. lib. 1. cap. 10. Promisit tame^ quod ipse facturus fuerat, non quod
homines: quia ^tsi faciunt homines bona quae pertinent ad colendum Deu^, ipse
facit vt illi faciant quae pracepit: non illi faciunt vt ipse faciat quod
promisit.
was conditional to Abram and his seed: for so the Lord teaches Abraham
himself: thou Genesis 17.9.
also says he, shall keep my covenant, thou and thy seed after thee for ever.
Wherefore the Lord God promising to Abram whom Genesis 18.19.
he knew to be faithful in his covenant, to give him the land of Canaan and
his seed for ever: if the seed of Abraham enjoyed it not for ever, the fault
was in themselves, who Ierem. 31.32.
brake the conditions of the covenant. Secondly, that the promises of God,
Heb. 4.3.8.9. August. Sermon de Temp. 201. Si autem hoc tantum volumus quod sonat
in litera, aut paruam aut prope nullam aedificationem de diuini^, literis
capiemus. Which notwithstanding are not diverse senses or meanings, but one
sense diversely applied, sometime to the sign, sometime to the thing signified.
besides the litterall meaning, contain also a spiritual understanding: for
so the holy Ghost himself expounds it. God promises herein by word the
land of Canaan, he gives therein Rom 4.13.
to Abraham the inheritance of the world: he means by his seed, not only
those Romans 9.6.7.8. Galat. 3.29.
that were derived from his body; but also those, that should be partakers of
his faith: these have inheritance in Canaan, as his children in the flesh: the
other which are heirs of the Psalm. 37.9. Matthew. 5.5.
world, as his children in the spirit, have the continuance of their possession
((...) legnolim) enduring to the restoring of the world, to the dissolution of
the world, and time without time unto all eternity. Wherefore the Lord in
every respect may easily be perceived, to have fulfilled his covenant:
whether we take it absolute; they enjoyed it for ever, that is Genesis 49.10. Ioh.
11.48.50.
until the appearance of the son of God. If it were conditional; albeit
they brake the Ierem. 31.32. Hos. 1.9.
covenant, and rebelled against him; yet the Lord fulfilled his promise, Deuteronomy.
7.8. Ezech. 20.8.9.
for his truth and promise sake. If we understand it only of the fleshly
sons of Abraham, we can find no breach of promise in the Lord. If we join
with the^ his sons by faith, 2. Cor. 1.20. Chrysostom. Hom. de Nomine Abraham.
Non enim tam certa quae in manibus, atque ea qua in spe. Non sic manifesta est
praesens haec vita, vt futura illa. Hanc enim videmus nostris oculis, illam
videmus oculis fi^ei: hanc videmus in manibus nostris positam, illam videmus in
manibus dei custoditam. Promissiones aute^ dei multo certiores sunt, quam quae
in nostris sunt manibus.
the covenant is most sure and firm for ever. Obser. 1. verse. 14. The wicked
have no part in the promises of God, Luc. 12.34. Heb. 6.4.
because they are separate from God and his Elect, like as the only sons of
Abraham and not of Lot, do enjoy the inheritance of Canaan. Secondly, the
fittest time to hear the promises of God, or to offer our obedience unto him,
is Matthew. 5.24. Gregor. Pastor. part. 3 admon. 23. Discordes namque admonendi
sunt, vt certissime sciant, quia quantislibet virtutibus polleant, spirituales
fieri nullatenus possunt, si vniri per concordiam proximis negligant.
when we have reconciled our selves unto our brethren. Thirdly, verse 15. The
Lord by promise gives Abram and his seed the land of Canaan, Deuteronomy. 9.5. Psalm.
105.8.9. etc. Romans 4.13.14.
which he performs only for his truth and promise sake. Fourthlie, the seed
of Abram in the flesh inioyed the possession of Canaan: his seed also Romans
8.14.17. 2. Tim. 4.8. 1. Pet. 1.4.
after the spirit enjoy the kingdom of rest, an immortal inheritance and
everlasting. Fifthly, verse 16. The Lord only knows Numb. 33.10. Romans
4.16.18. Revel. 7.9.
the number of the faithful, and Romans 11.4.5. 2. Tim. 2.19.
who they are: man therefore in these things, Romans 8.11.16. 1. Cor. 2.11.12. 2.
Cor. 13.5. Romans 14.4.
must know himself; and concerning other, suspend his judgment. Sixtlie,
verse 17. We oughth Deuteronomy. 7.19. Ioh. 14.9. Ephesians. 4.14.15.
by hearing, seeing, and experience of Gods promises, to be confirmed in faith,
and to believe his truth. Seauenthlie, verse 18. Obedience and true worship of
the Lord, ought to be Deuteronomy. 10.12.
the continual conversation of the saints.

CHAP. XIIII.
Question 1. verse 1. Wherefore does the holy Scripture record this history
of wars, with the names of the Kings, and the original cause of their
contention?
THe principal purpose of the Scripture in this narration, is to declare unto
the world, and especially unto the Church of God; that albeit wars, and
seditions, and contentions, are raised, and begun by the pride and Augustine. de
ciuit. lib. 15. cap. 4. Terrena ciuitas habet in hoc mundo bonum suum, cuius
societate laetatur, qualu este de talibus rebus laetitia potest. Et quoniam non
est tale bonum, vt nullas angustias faciat amatoribus suis ideo ciuitas ista
aduersus seipsam, plerumque diuiditur, litigando, bellando, atque pugnando: and
aut mortiferas aut certe mortales victorias requirendo. Na^ ex quacunque sui
part, aduersus altera^ sui parte^ bellando surrexerit, quaerit esse victrix
gentiu^, cum sit captiua vitioru^.
wickedness of men in earth: yet the end and Salust. de bello Iugurth. Scito
omne beliu^ sumi facile, caeterum aegerrime desinere: nec in eiusde^ potestate
initiu^ and fine^ esse.
success of battles with all the miseries thereof, as well Esa. 45.1.2.5. Dan.
8.^0. etc. Alexander the great, coming against ^erusalem with his Army, the
City was in great perplexity; it was thought meet that the high Priest
(after a general fast proclaimed and supplication to God) should go to meet
the Conqueror, and entreat for peace. The Priest coming before Alexander in
his pontifical robes, according to the law: Alexander so soon as he saw
him, fell down before him, and did him reverence. Whereupon Parmen^o one of
his Princes, demanded why he, whom all nations adored, did with such
submission salute the Priest. To whom the King answered: I do not this
reverence unto the Priest, but to the God whose Priest he is. For while I was
yet, said he, in Macedonie, deliberating with my self how I might overcome all
Asia, I saw him in this very likeness and apparel, who exhorted me to
transport mine army without delay, for by his conduct I should enjoy the
Persian empire. Haecataeus Abderita. libr. de gest. Alexand. Joseph. Antiq.
libr. 11. cap. 8.
among the heathen as within the Church Exodus 17.11.12.13. 2. Chron. 2.12 15.
of God, are guided and moderated by the Lord. But more particularly to teach
in the example of Calu. in Genesis cap. 14
Abram, yt it is all one with the Lord, 1. Sam. 14.6. 2. Chron. 14.11.
to save with many or with few; and that he Psalm. 37.23.24. Iosu. 1.8. Deuteronomy.
32.17.
always gives good success to those that begin and continue their enterprise
in him. The kings are described by their names and by their countries, to the
end they might more perfectly be known unto us. 2. That by the greatness of
their dominions and power, might also be perceived the greatness of the faith of
Abraham, and the greatness of the victory ye God vouchsafed him. Sinhar obtained
that name of the Dicitur quasi (...) shen nagnar, excussit dentes: quia ibi
sermones hominum and voces exciderunt.
division of the languages of the world, and the plain of Shinar is known to
be the country wherein Genesis 11.2.9.
they built the city of confusion; whereby we understand that the king of
Shinhar, was king The Hebrews for the most part (to whom Lyra and Vatablus
accord) affirm that this Amraphel was Nimrod: but it is not likely in regard
of ye time, for this war was after the building of Babel about two hundred
years. Onkelos the Paraphrast translateth it the King of Babel.
of the country and city Babel. Elasar a country not elsewhere by that name
remembered in the Scripture, of some is taken for the kingdom of The vulgar
Latin translation following (as it seems) Aquila: Symmachus translateth it
the King of Scythia.
Pontus; of others Eupolemus a most ancient Historiographer, makes report of
this narration in these words: The Armenians in the days of Abraham, made
war upon them of Phenice and Palestina and overcame them, and took Lot
prisoner Abraham's brothers son. Then Abraham armed his servants, and making
an assault upon these Armenians, overcame them and put them to flight: and
recovered not only his brothers son, but withal a great booty and spoil of
the enemies. Cited by Alexand. Polyhist. in Eusebius. de praeparat. Euangel. lib.
9. cap. 4.
for Armenia; of other, and that most likely, Joseph Antiq. libr. 1. cap. 10.
Eodem tempore cum imperium Asiae penes Assyrios esset and Sodomitarum res a
quinque regibus administraretur, hos Assyrij bello petierunt.
for Assyria. Elam was of the sons of Sem, and father of Hieron. trad. in
Genesis Est autem Elam a quo Elamita principes Persidis.
the Persians. And Tidal was king of ((...) Gogim) that is, of nations, being
ruler as it seems Lyra understands that his kingdom consisted of a mixed
people or of diverse nations: Calvin, that they were vagabond people, without
habitation. Vatablus takes Gogim to be the name of a Province. It may be that
people which Strabo. lib. 16. calls Cossei.
of many Provinces. These made war, etc. A mischief perpetually to be
lamented, that the War of the Latins is called bellum, and has the name a
belluis, that is, of beasts, as though it were called belluinu^, that is,
beastly: Fest. Pomp. de verbor. signify. because men in rage and fight are
like the beasts: and before instruments of war were inverted, did fight like
beasts, having for weapons their fists, their heels, and their teeth. Herodot.
in Melpo^. Lucret. lib. 1 Arma antiqua manus, vngues, dentesque fuerunt.
hearts of men are so surprised with beastly cruelty, as unnaturally (to
Iam. 4.1.
fulfill the lusts that fight within themselves) to destroy and spill the life
of man. Against these are armed five other kings, which ruled those five Cities
of the plain Genesis 19.25.
in Canaan, whereof four were shortly after destroyed for sin, from heaven.
The occasion also of this war the Scripture does deliver, for that twelve
years they had bin subject to the king of Elam, and in the thirteenth year
rebelled against him: whereupon he with the assistanc of three other kings
(whether his Artopaeus in Genesis 14
confederats or Which seems most likely by the authority of Joseph. Antiq.
lib. 1. cap. 10. Hieron. Comment. in Hose. cap. 2. August. de ciuit. Dei, lib.
16. cap. 10. Diodor. Sicul. lib. 1. Justin. lib. 1. and other history writers,
who testify, that at this time the Assyria^ Empire was very great. Neither is
the Scripture in any sort against this: for either it may be that the Elamites
joined their forces with the Assyrians, as being all of the family of Sem; or
else that these Palestines were subject to the Persian, and he also tributarie
to the Assyrian Empire.
subjects, or As 2. Sam. 10.16.
hired by him, the Scripture names not) came to subdue them with force and
power. Herein the first and original cause of wars may be considered. For
what made these subjects to rebel against their Prince? Or what made the king
of Elam at the first to seek to bring them in subjection? Surely nothing else
can be answered for both the parties, then Calvin. in Genesis cap. 14.
ambition and hautines of mind. For most plainly in deed have the Scriptures
witnessed, and would God it were written in the hearts of all that bear
authority, that Prou 13.19.
only thorough pride men make and raise contention. But did Abram also here
through pride make war upon these kings? did Moses and Joshua subdue thorough
pride the nations of Canaan; or rather thorough faith, obeying the commandment
of God? No doubtless, neither yet the Scripture says of every one that warreth
or contendeth, he does it thorough pride; but every one that (...) ijchen
maisah, that gives or makes strife.
causes or makes the contention. Neither gives he occasion of strife, that
rescueth an innocent August. quaest. in libr. Ios. q. 10. Iusta bella definiri
solent, quae vlciscuntur iniurias, si qua gens vel ciuitas quae bello petenda
est, vel vindicare neglexerit, quod a suis improbe factum est, vel reddere quod
per iniuriam ablatum est, etc. dein quod Deus imperat, etc.
from the hands of murderers; but the murderers themselves, Fulgent. de
remiss. peccat. libr. 2. cap. 14. Si sterilitas in ignem mittitur, rapacitas
quid meretur? aut quid recipret, qui aliena^ abstu^erit, si semper ardebit qui
de suo non dederit.
which had unjustly brought the guilties person within their power. Neither
they that war at the voice of Gods commandment, whether to August. quaest.
in Ios. qu. 50. Sed etiam hoc genus belli sine dubitatione iustu^ est, quod
Deus imperat, apud quem non est iniquitas, and nouis quid cuique fieri debta^^
in quo bello ductor exercitus vel ipse populus, non ipse tam author belli quam
minister iudicandus. Sicut David pro regno Israelis contr. Ishboshethum,
Absolonem and Sibam. 2. Sam. 2 23. and 18.1. and 20 4.
possess the privilege that God has given them, or to 2. Sam 10.12. Judge.
11.27. 1. Chron. 20.
defend the liberty of the true worship and profession of the faith: but they
that seek August. contr. Faust. lib. Nocendi cupiditas, vlcisede^i crudelitas,
implicitus and implacabilis animus, feritas rebellandi, libido dominandi. and
si qua sunt similia, haec sunt quae in bellis iure culpantur.
unjustly to vanquish other, or give not place unto Ios. 11.19.20.
the wrath of God, as did the Cananites. But in this narration, (and in all the
histories of Heathen wars) we may well perceive, how both these enemies did
sin in pride. The king of Elam had subdued them before, and made them subject
Verse. 4. Joseph. Antiq. lib. 1. cap. 10.
unto him. But where had the king of Elam received this authority, to bring
into subjection nations borne in liberty? this could in him proceed from
nothing else then Iam. 4.1. August. in Psalm. Quoties hominibus praesse desidero
toties Deo meo praeire contendo.
covetousness, ambition and pride of mind, unless he had Such a calling as
Senacherib fained himself to have, 2. King. 18.25. or other ordinary and
lawful title of authority.
received a calling from the Lord. Notwithstanding, the most righteous Lord had
used Fulgent. lib. de Praedest. cap. 20. De malo opere cuiuslibet mali, non
definit ipse bonum operari. Cap. 27. nec operatur in ijs quod ei displicet, sed
operatur per eos quod ei placet: qui ab eo recipient, non pro eo quod Deus vsus
est been eorum operibus malis, sed pro eo quod ipsi male abusi sunt dei
operibus bonis.
righteouslie this wicked instrument, to take punishment of these Genesis 13.
verse. 13. Ezech. 29. verse. 20.
wicked sinners the Sodomites, by first subiecting them to bondage, albeit the
Elamite were unacquainted Isai. 10.5.7.
with the judgments of the Lord, and wrought Isai. 10.7.10. Cyril. Alexandr.
in Isai. lib. 1. orat. 6. Sumit enim Deus supplicium de his qui delinquunt,
tradens iram suam veluti virgam in manus hominum non bonorum, qui elato animo
contra eos in quos animaduertitur, ino and in cum qui eos tradidit existunt.
unjustly, that which the Lord most justly would have him execute. And now
that these Sodomites were brought in bondage for their sins (which is the
Basil. lib de Sp. sanct. cap. 2. Serui sunt aut qui potentia oppressi sub
seruitutis iugum ducuntur, aut propter paupertatem, velut Aegyptij Pharaoni,
(Ge 47.25) aut iuxta dispensationem quandam sapientem and arcana^ deteriores
filios parentu^ voce prude^tioribus and melioribus seruire. Sic Jacob Dominus
Esau factus est, and Canaan famulus est suorum fratrum, quoniam indocilis erat
ad virtutem. De caetero, licet hic Dominus, ille dicatur seruus, tamen omnes
iuxta aequalitatem inter nos, tum velut possessio eius, qui fecit nos, conserui
sumus. Macrob. Saturn. lib. 1.
original cause of subjection to all the wicked that be subjected) although
they unjustly lost their liberty to this Elamite, yet justly were they
deprived Muscul. in Genesis 14. Quia indigni sunt qui libere viuant, qui delicijs
immersi, serui sunt omnis generis vitiorum atque facinorum.
of liberty by the Lord: wherefore also their rebellion was August. de mirab.
sacr. Script. lib. 1. cap. 3. In rebelli populo coelestis stamma desaeuit (Number.
cap. 16.) vt qui contra iustos principes iracundiae igne intus exarserant,
foris iustissi ne vindictae fla^ma conflagrarent.
unlawful, because it was resistance against the power and Romans 13.1. Calvin.
in Genesis 14.
ordinance of God. Thus the Lord most righteouslie to punish the sins of men,
sends Isai. 21.3.
transgressors against transgressors, as his rod of vengeance: so that the
wicked ofttimes, Habac. 1.13.
deuoureth him that is more righteous then himself: and the Lord of hosts who
only gives Psalm. 18.47. and 144.10. Pro 21.31.
the victory of war, finds evermore a just occasion of giving victory, in
mercy or in justice, to those on whom he vouchsafes it. It is therefore the
blindness of man's corruption, that sees not the mighty hand of God in
distributing the victories of war; but ascribes it to Saluian. lib. de
prouid. 7. Si quando nobis prosperi aliquid praeter spem nostram and meritum.
Deus tribuit, alius ascribit hoc fortunae, alius erentui, alius ordinationi
ducum, alius consilio, alius magistro, alius patrocinio, nullus Deo. Et miramur
si nobis coelestis manus aliqua non prastat, cui quicquid praestiterit
derogamus?
fortune, to Judge. 16.24. 1. Sam. 31.9.10. Cicero pro Marcel Et certe in armis
militum virtus, locorum opportunitas, auxilia sociorum, classet, co^meatus
multum iuuant: maximam vero partem, quasi suo iure fortuna sibi vendicat, and
quicquid est prospere gestum, id paene omne ducit suum.
Idols or outward means, and holds it not possible Careat successibus opto
-- Quisquis ab euentu facta notanda putet.
to behold the cause, which yet the Lord has opened in holy Scripture. For
never until this day was victory lost in war, which was taken in hand It
appears by Joshua. c. 7.5. Judge. 20.21 where when they did not rightly
prosecute a just cause of war, they lost the victory; but afterward
reforming the administration, they won the field. The like may be observed out
of all histories.
in a lawful cause, and lawfully administered. But because men fail for the
most part in one of these, so that both the warriors become transgressors; the
Lord in justice, often times gives victory unto his enemies, that he might even
by Lament. 1.5. Zach. 1.15.
the^ correct his children, and having scourged them might burn his Isai.
10.5.12.
rod wherewith he smote them. Sometime it comes to pass, that wars are
taken in hand, without 2. King. 14.8. Ezech. 17.13.15. Ambros. offic. libr. 1.
cap. 35. Fortitudo sine iustitia iniquitatis materia est. Quo enim validior
est, eo promptior est vt inferiorem opprimat, cum in ipste rebus bellicis,
iusta bella an iniusta sint, spectandum putetur. Nunquam David nisi lacessitus
bellum intulit.
a lawful cause. Sometime, there is nothing lawful but Cicer. epist fam. lib.
7. epist. 3. de copijs Pompei aduers. Caesarem. Primum neque magnas copias
ostendi neque bellicosas: deinde, extra ducem paucosque praeterea (de
principibus loquor) reliqui primum in ipso bello rapaces, deinde in oratione
ita crudeles vt ipsam victoriam horrerem. Quid quaris? Nihil boni praeter
causam.
the cause. Sometime, neither cause nor discipline are lawful. Wherefore that
wars be rightly administered, and victory may be obtained, these points in
the enterprise of wars must be observed. First, that Genesis 9.6. Numb. 27.21.
Deuteronomy. 31.3. Pet. Mart. Genesis 14. Non est priuati hominis suscipere bella, quia
is non habet vocationem and ius congregandi and armandi multitudinem, imo si
illud faciat seditiosus habebitur ciuis. Est igitur Magistratus bellum
decernere and administrare, qui iusta non modo debet consulere, sed illa etiam
exequi.
we have received authority from God: in this respect it belongs only to
the chief and Sovereign magistrate in common wealth, and those that receive
authority from him. Secondly, that the cause of our war be just and
lawful: as Judge. 20.12.13. Deuteronomy. 13.15.
the punishment of sin, maintenance 2. King. 19.18.15.
of virtue and true religion, defense Ios. 10.6.7.
of innocent persons, revenge 2. King. 13.14.15.
or recovering of injuries, preservation of 1. Sam. 11.12. 2. King. 14.25. Pet.
Mart. in Genesis 14. Si magistratus est certus, se in cum locum a Domino vocatum,
ita vt iure sit creatus, non vitiata electione, sine ambitu; videat praeterea
al^os se loco velle deturbare, vt ipsi in popul^m tyrannidem exerceant, aut
impurum dei cultum inuehant, cumque is vere sentiat in sua functione se and
publico bono and diuinae gloriae studere: non modo pro suo loco potest, sed
tenetur and debet acerrime pugnare; cum tunc non quaerat quae sua sunt, sed
suorum bonum and dei honorem.
the Princes honors or dominions given of God, and the Numb. 25.17. 2. Sam.
10.12.
subjects peace and safety either present or to come. Thirdly, that the
intent and purpose of those that lead the army, be also righteous: as that
they seek only Iosu. 7.9. 2. Sam. 8.1.2.15. Ambros. offic. libr. 1. cap. 40.
Fortitudo quae per bella tuetur a barbaris patriam, vel defendit infirmos, vel
a latronibus socios plena iustitia est.
the honor of God, the administration of justice and equity, the peace and
preservation of the people. Fourthlie, 1. Sam. 30.8. Isai. 8.20. Romans 14.22.23.
that they be assured of their authority, and the goodness of the cause, asking
counsel therein at the word of God. Fiftlie, that they commit the success of
2. Sam. 10.12. and 15 26.
victory to the Lord; repenting of Esra. 9.6. Judge. 10.15.16. Job. 1.5.
their old sins, which might happen to provoke the Lord: restraining new
sins, Ierem. 5.7. Chrysostom. Hom. ad pop. Antioch. 14. Non ta^ interficit ensit
quam iuramenti natura: no^ tam occidit gladius quam iurisiurandi plaga. Qui
jurat, etsi videtur viuere, iam tamen mortuus est.
swearing, Numb. 25.13.4. Valor. Max. lib. 9. cap. 1. The lascivious wantonness
of Campania was greatly (says the Roman Valerius) profitable to our city.
The same embracing invincible Hanibal, made him of the Romans to be conquered:
The same provoked that most vigilant Captain, that valiant army, with
sumptuous fare, abundance of wine, pleasant ointments and use of lechery, to
sleep and pleasure, whereby they were overthrown. Cu^tius lib. 5. de gest.
Alexand. Alexander coming to Babylon, and lying in that city but 34. days,
so weakened his army by the corrupt manners thereof, as that afterward he was
easy to have bin overcome, if after Darius he had found an adversary.
whoring, Virg. de Ven. and Vino, Compedibus Venerem, vinclit co^stringe Lyau^,
ne te muneribus perdat vterque suis. Vina sitim sedent, natis Venus alma
creandit seruiat; hos fines transilijsse nocet. Hos. 4.11. 1. King. 20.16.
Deuteronomy. 23.9.
drunkenness, and Ezech. 16.40. Chrysostom. Hom. in Mat. Hom. 23. Vitiu^ libidinis
facile exotio nascitur: nam definitio amoris hac est, anima vacantis passio.
Vegetius de re milit. lib. 1. cap. 26. Nihil magis prodesse constat in pugna
quam vt assiduo exercitio milites in acie dispositos ordines seruent.
idleness, whereby soldiers are most defiled, and made effeminate in war;
craving by continual prayer the 2. King. 19.14.15. 2. Chron. 14.10.11. Socrat.
histr. libr. 5. cap. 24. Theodosius the Emperor fighting against Eugenius, his
soldiers began to shrink and were put to flight; which when the Emperor saw,
he fell down prostrate and made supplication to God for help: presently
thereupon, his Captains and soldiers as it were revived with new courage,
made an impression upon the enemy, and overcame them: The wind also blew so
strongly for the part of Theodosius, as that it retorted the darts of Eugenius
soldiers upon themselves. The same is also witnessed by Ruffin. Histor.
eccles. libr. 2. cap. 33. Nicephor. libr. 12. cap. 39. and Claudian. in
Panegyr. ad Honorium, O Nimium dilecte Deo cui militat ather.
Lords assistance, and using all godly means of policy and power. Sixtlie,
that in war men be alwaie inclinable unto Deuteronomy. 20.10. Judge. 11.12.14.
Sueton. vita August. cap. 21. Augustus non vlli genti sine justice and
necessarijs causis bellu^ intudit. Tit. Liu. Decad. 1. lib. 9. Belium est
iustum quod necessarium est, and arma sunt pia, quibus nulla nisi in armis
relinquitur spes.
peace, using all lawful means to avoid shedding of blood; and taking war in
hand, as the last and uttermost remedy. Lastly, to be Luc. 6.36. Amos.
1.3.6.13. Polyb. lib. 3. Clementia hostem vincere quam armis praestat. Senec.
libr. de Clem. ad Neron. 1. Crudelitas minime humanu^ malu^ est, indignumque
regio animo: ferina ista rabies est sanguine gaudere and vulneribus, and
abiecto homine in siluestre animal transire.
merciful in war and victory; but not Nunb. 31.16.17. 1. Sam. 15.3. August
quaest. in Ios. 7.16. Nullo modo putanda est crudelitas, quod nullum vinum in
ciuitatibus sibi traditis dimittebat Joshua, quia Deus hoc iusserat. Qui autem
existimans hic Deum ipsum fecisste crudelem, tam perverse de operibus dei quam
de peccate hominum iudicant, etc. Cicero. Brut. lib. epist. ep. 2. Salutaris
seueritas vincit inanem speciem clementia: and si clementes esse volumus
nunquam decrunt ciuilia bella.
forgetting just severity. Hereby withal we may behold the causes that make
wars unlawful. First, when it is administered by men, Such as were Abner,
Absolon, Shiba, etc. yet the Bishop of Rome gives authority to subjects to
rebel against their Princes: Look Carrion in his Chronology in the life of
Henry 3. the Bull of Pius 5. defended by Pighius, Felisius, Sanders, Cope, and
other: and the same Bishop presumes to depose Kings and Emperors: As namely
Henry 3. Frederic. 2. Jews 4 Emperors: witnessed by Platina in vita Gregor.
7. Sabellicus, Na^^lerus, Carrion, etc. Conradus the fourth Emperor, by the
counsel of the same, was taken and beheaded of his subjects, Carrion in vita
Conrad. Of Kings, Philip le Beau King of France. Munster in Cosmog. lib. 3.
Jews the twelfth King of France, John King of Navarre, Bolislaw King of
Poland, Cromer. Histor. Polon. lib. 4. John King of England, Matt. Peris. in
vita John Henry 8. and our most gracious Sovereign Queen Elizabeth, Henry
King of Nauarie, Peter King of Arragon, and other have of the same Bishop been
deposed, and their subjects stirred up to rebel against them: Such devilish
doctrine is Catholic at Rome; such are the fruits of their profession.
without authority, and most of all to be detested, when tributaries, or
(which worse is) natural subjects do lift up their 2. Sam. 20.21.
hand against their Prince. Secondly, when the cause is not 1. King 12.24.
lawful, although the authority be lawful. Thirdly, when it is not for a
right end and purpose enterprised, as when it is for the Iam. 4.1.
satisfiyng of humane lusts and pleasures, wherein we 1. Sam. 18.17. Zach. 7.6.
fight not the battles of the Lord, but of our own. Fourthly, when in the
enterprise Ios. 9.14.
men ask not counsel at the Lord. Fiftlie, when godly and honest Deuteronomy.
23.9.14. Vegetius de re milit. libr. 2. cap 22. In omni praelio non tam
multitudo, and virtus inducta quam are and exercitium solent praestare
victoriam: nam in pugna solet vsus amplius prodesse quam vires. Et si doctrina
cesset armorum nil villanus distat a milite, cum antiqua sit prudensque
sententia, omnes arts in Meditatione consistere.
discipline in war, is not regarded. Sixtlie, when war is rashly
adventured upon, 1. King. 22.3. Lactant. lib. 6. cap. 18 Sapientis and boni
viri non est velle certare ac se periculo committere: quoniam and vincere non
est in nostra potestate, and est anceps omne certame^.
without seeking first the means of peace. Lastly, when cruelty Amos.
1.3.13. 2. King. 8.12.
ouerruleth either in the war or in the victory; or 1. King 20.42. Seneca.
libr. de Mor. Vitia transmittit ad posteros, qui praesentibus culpit ignoscit.
Bonis nocet qui malis parcit.
when those are spared through foolish pity, whom the Lord has appointed unto
death. From hence it happened in the justice of the Lord, that because the
Sodomites were Genesis 13.13.
exceeding wicked; although their cause was lawful to maintain their
liberty, and their authority lawful, when first their liberty was sought;
yet for Saluian. de Prou. lib. 7. Probauit hoc bello proximo infoelicitas
nostra. Cum enim Gotthi metuerent, praesumpsimus nos: cum pax ab illis
postularetur, a nobis negaretur: illi episcopos mitterent, nos repelleremus:
illi in alienis sacerdotibus Deum honorarent, nos in nostris contemneremus:
prout actus vtriusque partis, ita and rerum terminus fuit. Illis data fuit in
summo timo^e palma, nobis in summa^latione confusio.
their sin sake in war, or before in peace, the Lord most righteouslie gave
them up unto their enemies. Now that they were inthralled in subjection, their
authority being lost, with the iustnes of their cause; their rebellion which
was the cause of this new dissension, could not be but most unlawful: unless
they had received a new As Judge. 3.15. and 6.14. 2. King. 9.6. and 23.30. in
which matter we ought now also to seek our direction at the word of God.
authority from God, or had bin freed by him, Like as the Romans gave
freedom to the cities of Grecia: Look Valor. Max. lib 4. cap. 8. Plutarch. in
vita Flamin.
by who^ they were subdued unto servitude, or of some other, who 2. King. 24.7.
had taken away dominion and authority from him. In whose example are also to
be noted: that wars Isai. 8.6.7. Ezech. 14.17. Chrysostom. Hom 35. in Genesis Nam
sicut torrens vehementer inundans, omnis secum rapit and perdit; ita and
barbari illi inuaserunt omnes gentes and omnes prorsus perdid^ unt.
are as a mighty scourge of God to punish wicked men, and those that are
partakers 2. Chron. 19.2. Ambros. de Abraham lib. 1. cap. 3. Itaque Lot
infirmieris consilij pretium luit non terrenarum infoecunditate sed amaenitatis
inuidia deceptus, vt etiam ipse captinus abduceretur, quoniam vitio seruilis
nequitia a potiore deflexerat, and partem flagitiosorum elegerat.
with the wicked: to this purpose is described, the rage of this contention,
and the people destroyed Verse. 5.6.7.
on every side. Moreover, that neither counsel or strength of men, Prou.
21.30. Job. 5.13.
or stratagems of war, prevail any whit against the disposition of the Lord.
For although the Sodomites had brought their enemies into disadvantage Verse.
3.10.
of ground unknown, hoping if not by force, at least by subtlety to prevail
against them; yet nothing hinders the course of victory, when sin had laid
them open unto their foes. Wherefore just authority, and a lawful cause of
war, is a better token of victory, Psalm. 33.16.17. Prou. 21.31.
then preparation of shield or spear: good discipline a surer sauegard, then
Jesus. 7.12.13.
to plot the field, or to fortify the camp: hearty repentance, and true
conversion to the Lord, a greater succor, 2. Chron. 13.14.18. and 20.5.13.

Veget. de re milit. lib. 1. cap. 20. Honestas idoneum militem reddit:
verecundia dum prohibet fugere, facit esse victorem.


then multitudes and power of men. Where these are joined, and the lawful
means of victory 2. Sam. 5.23. 2. Chron. 32.3.4.5. August. contr. Faust. lib.
22. cap. 36. Pertinet autem ad sana^^ doctrinam vt quando habeat quod faciat
homo, non tente^ Dominum Deum suum.
not cast aside; the Lord himself does lead Exodus 33.14.15. Psalm. 44.3.
this army, and will undoubtedly subdue the enemy. Observe moreover 1. verse
4. Only by pride Prou. 13.10.
men make contention. Secondly, it is not lawful for subjects to rebel 1.
Sam. 26.9. Dan. 3.18.28. Romans 13.1.
against their Sovereign Prince, under any color or pretense. Thirdly, verse
5. The sins of a few do often bring punishment upon Numb. 16.22. Iosu. 7.12.
Judge. 20.13.46. Micah. 3.11.12. Prou. 29.8. Horat. epist. 2. Hunc amor, ira
quidem communiter vrit vtrunque: quicquid delirant reges plectuntur Achiui.
a multitude. Fourthlie, verse. 12. Wicked men thorough 2. Chron. 28.9.10.11.
covetousness and pride, do often turn a just cause of war to be unlawful.

Question 2. verse 13. For what cause is Abram here called an Hebrew, and how
that name was left unto the children of Israel.
AFter the overthrow and sacking of the Cities, one that had escaped, told
Abram of the taking of Lot his brothers son: whereof the Scripture
amplifieth, that he told Abra^ the Hebrew which dwelt in the plain of Mamre
the Amorite. Whereby first we understand that although Abram dwelt in the
midst of Canaan, and the flame of war burned round about; yet Genesis 15.1.
Psalm. 91.1.3.4.7. Bernard. in Cant. Sermon. 68. Itane ecclesia suae etc.
the Lord was a strong defense to Abram, no enemy came near his tabernacle.
Furthermore he is called an Hebrew, as Mamre and Aner are called Amorites, to
declare their lineage from which they did descend: but whereof or from whom this
name was derived, it is not so easily to be concluded. There are which suppose
Artapanus apud Eusebius. lib. 9. de praepar. Euangel. cap. vlt.

August. de consensu Evangelist. lib. 1. c. 14 Ab Abraham inquit ge^s capit
Hebraeorum. Sed eandem sententiam retractauit, de ciuit. Dei, lib. 16. cap. 3.
retract. lib. 2. cap. 16. in quaest. in Genesis 9.24 Quid inquit probabilius sit
ab Heber. tanquam Hebraeos dictos, an Abraeos merito quaeritur.


that it came from the name of Abraham himself, as children are often called
by their fathers name; as though they should be called Abrues (or a letter
changed) Ebrues, but this conjecture Neque Hebraicus scribendi modus patitur,
in qua non est vocalis tantum differentia sed and consonantis: nam and nomen
Abram incipit ab Aleph, Heber ab Aijn: dein mutatio vocalis est: tum etiam ipse
Abram sic vocatus est vel ab aliquo praedecessore, aut euentu; non quidem a
seipso.
is far from likelihood, and contains not sufficient ground of truth. Many
other Joseph. Antiq. libr. 1. cap. 7. Heberus a quo Iudai, quondam Hebraei
appellabantur. Eusebius. in Chronolog. Acasius in Catena. Graec. Explicationum in
Genesis Hieron. trad. in Genesis Heber, a quo Hebraei. Beda.
suppose it to be derived from the name of Heber, which the Scripture also
seems to import in saying that Sem was Father of all the sons of Heber,
meaning no doubt of the Hebrew nation, of whom the God of Sem should descend
concerning the flesh. Notwithstanding Translat. 72. reddit (...), id est,
transitori, a (...), transeo. Origin. in Matthew. 14. Non possunt turba in
vlteriorem ripa^ transire velut Hebrai mystice, quae vox sonat nobis
transmissoris.

Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 35. Quia trans Euphratem domicilium habuerat Abraham,
propterea vocatus est transfluuialis sieve transitor.

Theodoret. quaest. in Genesis 60. Quare enim cum alia quam plurimae gentes ex
Heber traxerint originem, soli tamen posteri Jacob appellati sunt Hebraei?
Paulus Burgensis in Gloss.

Aretius in proleg^^. in epist. ad Haebr. Pet. Mart. in Genesis 14. Hebrai non a
nomine Abram, sed a cognomine dicti sunt.


other both grave and learned writers esteem this name to be derived from the
Hebrew word ((...) Heber) which signifies beyond, as a name imposed upon Abram
and his posterity, for that he forsook his country beyond the river, and
came Act. 7.4.5. Heb. 11.8.9. Genesis 19.9. Lot etiam dicitur venisse (...) Lagur
ad peregrinandum.
as a stranger or wanderer to dwell in Canaan. Now although these two sentences
may seem to differ, yet I take them to vary only so, as that being joined
together, they fully agree with the truth it self. The name of the nation is
likely to be taken from the chiefest ancestor of that Genesis 10.14 18. Iosep.
Antiq. 1. cap. 7. Hieron. trad. in Genesis Saba a quo Sabaei; a Sabatha,
Sabatheni, ab Elam Elamitae, ab Assure Assyrij. ab Heber Hebraei.
family, as is common to other nations of the world. So that Heber gave name
unto the A suo nomine nominati, a cognomine Abrahae confirmati.
Hebrews; but whence received Heber the name himself? The fathers in Chrysostom.
hom. in Genesis 21. Non sicut nunc fortuito and absque causa nomina fiunt, etc. It
was not in old time as now it is, that men gave names to their Children at
adventure, or without cause: as they use to say, let him be called by his
Fathers or Grandfathers name: but they gave all diligence to name their
children so, as might induce them into virtue, and might teach other wisdom in
time to come, etc. This indeed is perceived by the interpretation of names
thoroughout the Scripture. It seems the heathen also had regard of this, and
called men by name after their behavior and condition: as Berah signifies a
King in malice, Birsha in impiety, Shinab one hating his father, because as it
seems they were such. Sometime they named them by the contrary, as
Philopater the King of Egypt, that is, a lover of his father, because he slew
his father: and Antiochus Epiphanes, Antiochus the noble, because in his
conditions he was epimanes, furious or mad: so do they (says Polidor
Virgil. de invent. lib. 4. cap. 10.) the Popes of Rome: call him Clement, that
is, unmerciful, Urban, that is, uncivil: Pius, that is, wicked: Innocent,
that is, harmefull: Benedict, that is, one whom the people curse: Boniface,
that is, a dooer of mischief. This would not happily be believed, if it were
not a testimony of their own.
old time gave names unto their children, alwaie significant: as may appear by
Scripture. These godly Patriarks moreover being Prophets, The same does
Chrysostom think, Hom in Genesis 35. of the parents of Abraham, and it may well
be understood of both, Prouidentes (inquit) quod futuru^ erat ipsum ne^pe
transito Euphrate profecturum in Palestinam, etc.
may seem to have foretold of the constancy of Heber even at his birth (as
the father of Noah Genesis 5.29.
did prophecy of him) which Prophecy thorough the grace of God was well
fulfilled in Heber, when he forsook and left the wicked society who builded
Babel, which none of his equals did, but Genesis 10.25. and 11.9
only Heber. Wherefore this name did worthily contiune in his For while there
was but one language, it was not called by any private name, as says Eucherius
in Genesis 11. but when that common language became private to Hebers family, it
began to be called the Hebrew tongue.
language, being now become the speech of the only house of Heber, which
before was common to all the world; and to his lineage, that they should be
called Hebrews, or the sons of Heber. Yet none of Ioctans sons were called
Hebrews, neither any of the other sons Genesis 11.17.
begotten by Heber; but only the race of Peleg: and none of them also enjoyed
that name (that may be perceived by the Scripture) till Abram in this place is
called the Hebrew Abram. Whereby it appears, that Abram also was entitled to
this name, not only for that he came of the stock of Heber, but because he
did As Heber departed from that assembly of Rebels; so Abra^ passed from the
fellowship of Idolaters: for which cause he retained that name, justly
honorable in the Church of God; albeit unto ye wicked a name of disgrace, a
pilgrim, a stranger.
imitate him in virtue and obedience to God: being therefore of the Cananites
called an Hebrew, that is a stranger or wanderer among them, because he was
not only a stranger borne, but continued with them without inheritance. And in
this place it seems he is called an Hebrew, to show the judgment Prou.
29.27. 1. Cor. 1.21. Chrysostom. Hom. 31. Quanto satius vt ipse breui quod
superest tempore hic residens vitam terminem, quam vt senex hinc and inde vager
and omnium scommatis incessar, qui neque id aetatis quietus vinam, sed loca
locis mutans nullibi consictam.
of the world concerning Abram. Namely, that they esteemed of him as of a
stranger, and he that told him, delivered this narration as to a stranger. For
if five kings and their armies were overthrown, what should one private
stranger, strive as it were against so great a stream? Yet such was the Psalm.
9.10. and 45.2. August. in Psalm. 45. Mu^^a sunt tribulationes, and in omni
tribulatione ad Deum confugiendum est: neo aliud refugium debet esse
Christiano, quam saluator eius, quam Deus eius, quo cum confugeret fortis sit.
providence of God, that Abram had knowledge of this overthrow, by one that had
Who this one that had escaped was, is uncertain. Of Abraham's family he was
not; for of the^ none escaped of whom none was taken. Of Lots family it is not
likely: for why should it then be said, he told Abram the Hebrew? Most likely
therefore that he was a Canaanite, whom Gods providence directed to bring
news to Abraham. The Rabbis (after their wonted boldness) affirm that this
one that had escaped was Og the Giant. Their reason is, because those kings are
said to have smitten Rephaim, that is, the Giants; and Og is said to be of the
remnant of the Giants, Deuteronomy. 3.11. But this cannot be likely in regard of time,
for then Og had lived 440. years, which was more then double the age of Abram
or Isaac, or any of the Patriarchs after them.
escaped, before it was too late to follow after them, and received the
victory, goods and captives, being but a stranger, which the kings that were
borne in the country had lost. Wherefore this name which otherwise was of
infamy and disgrace, as it has always bin Genesis 36.14.17. and 43.32. 1. Sam.
4.9. and 29.3. Cicero pro Flacco. orat. calls the religion of the Jews, a
barbarous superstition: Huic barbarae superstitioni resistere seueritatis fuit.
Horat. Satyr. 9. scoffeth at circumcision: Hodie tricessima sabstata, vin tu
curtis Iudais oppedere? when as both that religion and circumcision was the
institution of God himself.
a detestation among the heathen (as afterward Act. 28.22. Ioh. 16.10. Suet. in
vita Neron. cap. 16. calls the Christian religion a new and naughty
superstition. Such like blasphemies does Tacitus utter, Annal. lib. 15. a
pestilent and pernicious superstition. And true Christians were called
Atheists, and heathen and unfortunate people of the very Atheists and heathen
themselves, Arnob. contr. Gent. lib. 1. Tertul. Apolog. ca. 16.
the christian name has bin, and As it appears by the Turkish insolency
against the Christians: and by their contumelies done to the name of Christ at
the taking of Christian cities, especially that of Constantinople. Histor.
Leonar. Chiens. Archiepisc. Sabellic. de bello Rhod. lib. 3. etc.
so continues) yet the Lord would make it famous, and raise it Deuteronomy. 26.19. 2.
Sam. 7.9.
upon high, to be a badge of honor unto his children. Obser. 1. The name and
profession of Gods children is honorable Exodus 38.17. Ioh. 16.27.
in the sight of God, albeit it be despised and neglected of the wicked.
Secondly, the godly must willingly Mat. 10.32. 1. Pet. 4.13.14. Heb. 11.26.
bear the reproach of the cross of Christ, Mat. 5.11.12. 1. Pet. 3.14.
Bernard. in Cant. Nil sibi gloriosius putat ecclesia qua^ Christi portare
opprobriu^.
and count themselves happy if they endure contempt for him.

Question 3. verse 13.14. Whether it were lawful for Abraham to undertake this
dangerous war, and to confederate himself with the Amorites, the people of the
land?
WHether Abraham received a revelation from the Lord, or otherwise, was filled
with his spirit, the Scripture names not: notwithstanding it cannot be As
Judge. 6.34. and 11.29. and 15.14.15.
but he was extraordinarily confirmed in this enterprise by God himself. For
what humane counsel would exhort to pursue a mighty army of four kings,
with three hundredth and Joseph. lib. 1. Antiq. cap. 11. Cum domestica
tricenaria cohorte, and insuper december and acto vernaculis triumque amicoru^
auxilijs tantum exercitum profligauit.
eighteen Caesar. de bell. Gall. lib. 2. In ijs difficultatibus maximo erat
subsidio scientia atque vsus militum, quod superioribus praelijs exercitati,
quid fieri oporteret, non minus commode ipsi sibi praescribere quam ab alijs
doceri poterunt.
inexpert soldiers, in hope to Veget. libr. 3. de re milit. cap. 31. Nemo enim
bello lacessere aut facere audet iniuriam regno vel populo, quem expeditum and
promptum ad resistendum vindicandumque agnoscit.
recover spoil or victory? Surely therefore it was the vprightnes of the
cause, that Verse. 14.
provoked Abram to arm himself. But yet the goodness of the cause was not
sufficient ground for Abram to adventure so perilous attempt, 1. Sam. 14.36.37.
if he had not fully known As Judge. 14.6. Iosu. 5.14. 2. Sam. 5.24.
that the Lord himself did guide his army, and to Abram had given just
authority. Wherefore it makes no security to captains or soldiers, if they
rashly take in hand such hardy enterprises, as in all humane reason do stand
above their power; unless they be armed with like warrant from the Lord, or
provoked Judge 14.6. 2. Sam. 23.12. Quae ipsa necessitas coniuncta cum iustitia,
est a Deo authoritas confirmata. Est enim non scripta sed nata lex, etc. vt si
vita nostra in aliquas insidias, si in vim, si in tela aut latronum aut
inimicorum incidisset, omnis honesta ratio esset expediendae salutis, Cicero
orat. pro Milont. Bernard. Epist. 236. Non est vir fortis cui non crescit
animus in ipsa rerum difficultate. Virgil. Aenead. 2. Vltima spes victis nullam
sperare salutem.
with extremity of peril or necessity: for it is not Lactant. lib. 6. c. 18.
Fortitudo si nulla necessitate cogente, aut non pro causa honesta certum
periculu^ subire^, in temeritatem conuertitur.

Gregor. Moral. lib. 5. cap. 14. Fortitudo destruitur nisi per consilium
fulciatur: quia quo plus se posse conspicit eo virtus fine moderamine rationis
deterius in praeceps ruit.


fortitude, but rather temeritie, that without wholesome counsel does put in
hazard the doubtfulnes of war. Now the cause why Abram did take in hand this
war, was not for the rescue of the Sodomites, who were in bondage justly,
because unjustly they had rebelled: but to rescue and deliver his brother Lot,
whom they had vnrighteouslie taken prisoner. The cause therefore of Abram was
just and lawful, for Abram was first provoked with manifest injury: Lot his
brothers son was taken away, who of Chrysostom. Hom. 31. Mores adolescentis no^
multum a iustitia aberant. Na^ cu^ propositi es essent duo fratres ipse
iustiori adhaerebat.
religion and godliness had accompanied Abram unto Canaan. Wherefore also it was
meet, that Abram should now deliver him, seeing that Because the first
occasion of his suffering was his coming out of his country with Abraham.
for righteousness sake he suffered injury. Therefore albeit that Abram had
naught to do to defend the people of the land, as being a stranger, and
having no possession with them: yet in regard of the promise made to Abram that
the land should be his own; he had therein received a kingly Calvin. in Genesis
14. Sed dubium non est quin sicuti spiritus virtute instructus in bellum
descendit, sic coelesti mandato fuerit munitus ne vocaetionis sue metas
transilires: neque hoc nouu^ videri debet, cum specialis eius erat vocatio.
Creatus iam erat rex illius terrae, licet possessio in aliud tempus
differebatur.
authority to defend himself, his friends and family from force and
invasion of foreign power. This war was therefore justly taken in hand,
because it was to Genesis 9.6. Psalm. 72.4. and 82.4. Aristot. Rhetor. ad Alex.
lib. Oportet iniuriam passos pro seipsis arma capere, sieve pro cognatis and
beneficis, itemque socijs iniuria affectis auxiliari. Cicer offic. lib. 1. Qui
non defendit nec obsistit, si potest, iniuriae, tam est in vitio, quam si
parents aut patriam aut socios deserat.
revenge injustice, to deliver them that were unlawfully oppressed; by him
that had from God Numb. 31.2. Romans 13.1.4. Chrysostom. in epist. ad Romans Hom. 23.
Vide quomodo ora illius obstruat, dum magistratum velut militem armatum
delinquentibus terribilem praeficit.
authority of revenge. It was also necessary, because Lot could no other way
be free from bondage; neither was it convenient, in respect of the glory of
God, that Because in the primitive age of the Church, the Lord used to allure
men with external benefits, and to lead them by shadows unto truth. Iren.
lib. 4 cap. 28.
Lot at this time should suffer such affliction. It was also advisedly, and
soberlie attempted, knowing his power (although inferior in multitude) to be
of more force then 2. King. 1.16.
theirs, because he was to fight under the standerd of the Lord. And for that
cause he requires not the aid of the people of the land, he seeks not
assistance of the wicked; but armeth them to the wars, that were borne and
brought up (...) Chanichau, institutos eius vel ab eo; such as were instructed
by him, namely in religion or husbandry, not in feats of war.
in his house, whom he Genesis 18.19.
had taught to fear the Lord. Wherein we learn, that although the policy of
Princes is often commended, who Veget. de re milit. lib. 1. ca. 6. Ex vultus, ex
oculi, ex omni conformatione membroru^ eos eligans qui implere valiant
bellatores, namque non tantum in hominibus, sed etia^ in equis and canibus
virtus multis declaratur indicijs. Curt. lib. 2. de reb. gest. Alexa^dri. Non
iuuenes robustos, nec primo aetatis flore, sed veteranos plerosque etiam
omerita militiae qui cum patre patruisque militanerant elegit.
chiefly esteem of soldiers that are expert in the wars: yet the policy
of them is much more profitable, that 2. Sam. 6.2. 2. Chron. 17.9.10.11.12.
train up their soldiers in true religion, that cause the pure preaching of
the word to be spread abroad; that soldiers having by it, experience of the
goodness of the Lord, and having learned therewith the Christian Romans 13.5.
obedience unto the Magistrate, might for conscience sake and piety to God 2.
Sam. 21.17.
seek to subdue their Princes enemies, and be 2. Sam. 10.12.
valiant and courageous for the people and religion of their God: having first
made peace with the Lord by true repentance, so that through guilt of
conscience they be not Ierem. 38.19. 1. King. 16.15. Ambros. in Luc. cap. 6.
libr. 5. Est autem fortitudinis iram vincere, indignationemque cohibere; atque
per hoc fortitudo animu^ iuxta corpusque confirmat. Nec perturbari sinis timore
aliquo vel dolor, quibus velut prauis interpretibus pler^mque percellim^r.
Bernard. Sermon. de pri^ord, etc. Impijs nonissima sunt, mors, iudicium and
Gehenna. Quid metuis si ad ista non trepidat, non expanescit, non timore
concutitur. Sed qui been vixerit, non potest male mori, sicut vix been moritur
qui male vixit. August. de doctrine. Christian. lib. 1.
entangled with the fear of death, and not provoking God by public sin, to
take 1. Sam. 2.34. and 4.3.11.
away their lives in battle, or to be their enemy in the field. Thus joining
piety with prudent counsel, and counsel with courage in the wars: they
should undoubtedly suppress the rage of enemies, As examples prove: this of
Abraham, afterward of Joshua, David, Hezechiah, of Constantine, Theodosius,
Huniades and other.
and obtain as many victories, as withstand encounters of their adversaries.
Some cauilling spirit may happen to object, that Abram herein transgressed the
rule of Christ, Matthew. 5.35.
resist not evil. But in deed this example of Abram does teach and
Conciliatio. 22.
direct us unto the meaning of the words of Christ: namely, first that it is
not lawful August. cont. Faust. libr. 22. cap. 70. Ille gladio vsus, gladio
cadet qui nulla superiori ac legitima potestate vel iubente vel concedente in
sanguinem alicuius armatur.
for private men, in private injuries, to seek revenge. For Abram not as a
private person, much less a subject, but as a Magistrate lawfully called,
does exercise the authority that was given him by the Lord. Secondly, where
men may defend themselves without repelling violence with violence, they may
not seek Augustine. epist. 5. Quomodo poterant gubernare atque angere
rempublicano, quam ex parua and inopi magnam and opulentam (Romani) fecerunt
nisi accepta iniuriae ignoscere, quam persequi malebant.
or take occasion of revenge. Thirdly, that when we have received authority
to punish wickedness, we exercise the means that are permitted, not Hieron. in
Ruffin. Apolog. 3. Qui semetipsum vindicat, vltionem domini non meretur.

August. de verb. Dom. in mont. lib. 2. Apud veros dei cultores, etia^ bella
paerata sunt, quae non cupiditate aut crudelitate, sed pacis studio geruntur,
mali coercentur, boni subleuantur.


for requital of revenge, but to repress the growing of ungodliness.
Notwithstanding the Magistrate Genesis 9.6. Deuteronomy. 19.18.19.20.
by commandment of God, and the rule of equity must and ought to Ambros. in
epist. Romans cap. 13. Manifestum est ideo rectores datos, ne malum fiat. Nam
quoniam futurum iudicium Deus statuis, and nullum perire vult, hoc in saeculo
rectore^ ordinauit, vt terrore imposito omnibus velut paedagogi sint;
erudientes illos qui seruent, ne in poenam incidant futuri iudicij.
resist and repress the evil of his subjects within his government; and the
Ambros. Offic. libr. 1. cap. 40. Fortitudo quae per bella tuetur a barbaris
patrian, vel defendit infirmos, vel a latronibus socios, plena iustitia est.
Lactant. lib. 6. cap. 11. Nam qui succ^rrere perituro potest, and non
succurrerit occidit. Cic. ad Qu. frat. epist. libr. 1. epist 2. Est enim regum
omniumque imperantium little quibus prasins commodis vtilitatique seruire.
evil of foreign power that would oppress or offend his people: wherein not
he, but 1. Sam. 15.18. Numb. 17.10.
the Lord by him, resists evil. And the private subject molested with
injury, may resist that evil, by flying to the Magistrate Deuteronomy. 19.16.17. 1.
King. 3.10.11. Deuteronomy. 17.8. 2. King. 4.13. August. in Psalm. 118. Conc. 24.
Constituit autem talibus causis ecclesiastitos Apostolus cognitores, in foro
prohibe^s iurgare Christianos. scil. coram infidelibus. 1. Cor 6. sed omnes
causas litigan. di praecidendas docet, quantum per verbum ipsum Dei liceat. de
Sermon. Domin in Mont. lib 1. and 2.
to be defended: in which not the private party, but the Magistrate; nor yet
the Magistrate, but the Lord himself, by these appointed instruments,
resists the evil, and brings the mischief of the wicked upon the head of
him that had invented it. But our Savior gives further precept to all his
followers, Matthew. 5.44.
to love their enemies. We are in deed to love our enemies, but yet to hate
Ephesians. 5.11. August. Sermon. de temp. 134. Esto similis medico: medicus non
amat aegrotantem, si non edit aegritudinem vt liberet agrotum febrem
persequitur. Nolite amare vitia amicorum vestrorum, si amatis amicos vestros.
Beda in Luc. cap. 6. Verus amor veritate^ amat, in veritate iudicat, pro
veritate certat, cum veritate opera consumit.
their sin; to love our enemies, but not Psalm. 139.21. Gregor. pastor. part.
3. cap. 23. Inimicos autem Dei perfecto odio odisse, est and quod facti sunt
diligere, and quod faciunt increpare; mores prauorum premere, vitae prodesse.
to love the enemies of God: to love them as our selves, but to love the Lord
Bernard Hom. in Cant. 20. Diligendus est Dominus est Dominus toto and pleno
cordis affectu: diligendus tota rationis vigilantia and circumspectione:
diligendus tota virtute, vt nec mori pro eius amore pertimescat. Deuteronomy. 6.5.
Cant. 8.6.
above our selves; because Prou. 16.4.
for himself, he has created us. He therefore that performs this duty of
love unto the Lord, loves his mercy in saving sinners, and loves his August.
in Psalm. 78. Iustus magis cupit inimicum suum corrigi quam puniri; and cum cum
videt a Domino vindicari, non eius delectatur poena, quia non cum odit, sed
diuina iustitia, quia Deum diligit. Sic igitur inimicus diligatur, vt non
displiceat diuina iustitia, qua puniatur.
justice in punishing sin: so that when the Lord appoints sinners unto
punishment, by revealing his will, by his written word, by lawful means
ordained; he loves this justice, and either is the means to execute, or
consents to the execution, that the Lord may be loved above the creature. And
yet though he punish, as the executioner of God, yet he loves the party
Iosu. 7.19.25.
whom he punishes, desiring that by the course of justice, he might be
August. in Psalm. 78. Denique si in hoc seculo in cum vindicatur; vel pro illo
etiam laetatur si corrigitur, vel certe pro alijs vt timeant cum imitari.
brought to the knowledge and mercy of the Lord. Thus Abram destroyed the
army of the kings, because the Lord required of him to execute his justice.
Abram therefore loves the Lord above his enemies, and therefore smites them
whom the Lord had delivered into his hand. For because the Lord had taught him
that only mean to deliver Lot from his captivity; he justly executes the
wrath of God, but desires not August. cont. Faust. lib. Nocendi cupiditas,
vlciscendi crudelitas, implicitus and implacabilis animus, seritas rebellandi,
libido dominandi, and siqua sunt similia, hac sunt quae in bellis iure
culpantur.
the destruction of his enemies. So Paul delivered up 1. Cor. 5.5.
the Corinthian unto Satan, but yet desires to save his soul. So the
Magistrate, that strikes with the sword of justice, punishing the offender
with deserved death, seeks by temporal pain, Iosu. 7.19.^5. 2. Sam. 1.14.
and 4.9.10. etc.
to bring him to the sight and knowledge of his sin; that thereby he may
escape eternal torment. The minister of the word, that confuteth Tit. 1.9.
Tertul. lib. contr. Hermog. Doctat Her^^ogenes scriptum esse: si non est
scriptum, timeas Vae illud adijete^tibus aut detrahentibus destinatum. Hieron.
in Agg. cap. 1 Quicquid absque authoritate and testimonijs scripturaru^, quasi
traditione apostolica sponte confingunt, percutit gladius dei.
by the word, the heresies of the wicked; shows not hatred to the Quemadmodu^
impijs mos est. Cyprian ad Demetriad. Ad nos saepe studio magis contradicendi
quam unto discendi veniunt, and clamosis vocibus personantes malunt sua
impudenter ingerere quam nostra patienter audire.
persons of men, but to the heresies that they profess: which when he
reproves, because the Lord Tit. 3.11.
detesteth them, and he as the Isai. 58.1.
trumpet of the Lord, is to sound his voice among the people, he ought not to
be thought to break the bounds of brotherly charity, when by the mouth of
Christ he represseth heresy. But those that slay the innocent Just. Mart.
Apolog. 2. Tantum quippe principes opinionem veritati praeferentes valent,
quantum in solitudine latrones.
whom God has commanded to preserve; or which to maintain Papista and alij.
their private error obscure the Romans 11.18.
truth, destroy or persecute the persons of men professing that doctrine which
Qualem nostram esse confirmatur.
cannot be convinced by the word of God: hate contrariwise not sin, but men,
for not being 1. Pet. 4.4.
partakers with them in their sin; and clearelie descrie themselves to be
children Ioh. 8.44.
of that father, from whom 1. Ioh. 3.8.
sin, falsehood, hypocrisy and murder have issued forth into the world.
Furthermore it may happen to be called into doubt, whether Abram offended not
in that he joined in society with Mamre, Aner, and Eshchol, which were
Amorites of the posterity of Canaan; because the Lord not only forbad Exodus
23.32. and 34.15. Deuteronomy. 7.2.
the Israelites, the making of any league with the people of the land, but in
all ages Pro. 14.7. and 22.24 2. Cor. 6.14. Ephesians. 5 7. Chrysostom. Hom. in
Matthew. 19. Bonus si male connectitur, aut pares ambo reddantur aut cito ab
inuicem separentur: amicitia enim pares aut querunt aut faciunt. Ide^. Et rerum
natura sic est vt quoties bonus malo coniungitur, non ex bono malus melioretur
sed ex bono malus contaminetur.
of his Church has prohibited his children to have society with the wicked.
To this it Conciliatio. 23.
must be answered; that the godly are not forbidden, to make or maintain
peace with Genesis 34.15. Nazianz. in Apolog. orat. 21. Melior est talis pugna qua
Deo proxi^^^ facit, quam pax illa qua separat a Deo.
wicked men, so that such peace contain not a conspiracy against the Lord,
and the sincerity of true religion; unless they have authority from God to
Deuteronomy. 7.2. Judge. 2.2.3. 1. King. 20.42.
afflict them for their sin, as had the Israelites. For we are commanded to
have peace with Deuteronomy. 20.10.11. Romans 12.18. Matthew. 5.9.
all men, so much as lies in us, and to be not only peaceable, but furtherers
of peace. Wherefore if any Heathen or Idolator shall seek unto us for peace,
we are to answer him Iosu. 9.7.14 15. 2. Sam. 8.10. 1. Sam. 8.14.
with peace, and to show the fruit of our religion, which is to be peaceable
Ioh. 13.35. Gal. 6.10. Luc. 10.5. August. contr. epist Parmen. lib. 2. cap. 1.
Quisquis ergo vel quod potest arguendo corrigit, vel quod corrigere non potest,
saluo pacis vinculo excludit, vel quod saluo pacis vinculo excludere non potest
aequitate improbat; hic est pacificus.
and good to all. For this cause did Abram make covenant with Aner and his
brethren, and with Abimelec Genesis 21.22.24. and 26.28.31
requiring peace. Thus David and Solomon did join in league with the king of
2. Sam. 5.11. 1. King. 5.10.11.
Tyrus: and so ought godly Princes being sought unto, if it be not Ierem.
40.8.14. and 41.1. Ambros. lib. de Virgin. 1. Venena non dantur nisi melle
circumlita, and vltia non docipiunt nisi sub specie and vmbra virtutu^.
under pretense of fained friendship. But in our distress to 2. Chron. 16.7.
seek for help of them, or in their adversity to be helpers unto 2. Chron.
19.2.
them that hate the Lord, unless it be Iosu. 10.6.7.
to defend our selves by succouring them, or that they be yielded unto our
power: this is condemned in the Scripture, for it is Philip. 3.19. Ierem. 17.5.
to prefer the love of men before the Lord. Neither is it lawful to expect
their assistance, Esra. 4.2.
whom we may not requite with help again: wherefore it may not Sicut Hebraeoru^
sententia est in Bereshith Rabb. in Cab. etc.
unjustly be esteemed, that these confederates of Abram were the servants also
of the Lord, either won unto godliness by Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 33. Postea
enim and Cananaea inhabitatores clare iusti virtutem didicerunt.
Abram, or more ancient maintainers of the truth, as was Verse. 18.
Melchizedek: the further proof whereof, because the Scripture does not fully
testify, we commend Iren. lib. 2. cap. 48. Quaedam autem commendamus Deo, etc.
to God as a case unknown. Obser. 1. verse 14. The godly are by Abrams
example to 2. Sam. 10.12. Matthew. 10.37. Origin. in Cant. Hom. 2. Te vult
diuinus sermo diligere patrem, filium, filiam: vult te sermo diuinus diligere
Christum: nec inordinatam habere charitatem, aut magis te filium and filiam
diligere, quam verbum, magis te parents amare quam Christum.
adventure life and goods, for the service of God, and welfare of his Church.
2. True fortitude consists only Prou. 24.5. and 28.1 and 16.32. Lactant.
lib. 6. cap. 18. Si quis lacessitus iniuriae ledentem persequi caperit, iam
victus est. Si vero motum illum ratione compresserit, hic plane imperat sibi,
and hic regere se potest. Qui autem refer iniuriam nititur, cum ipsum a quo
lesus est gestit imita^i: neque vero minus mali est refer iniuriam quam
infer. Hieron. Commentur. in Joel. cap. 1. I^sti and fortis viri est, nec
aduersis frangi, nec prosperit subleuari: sed in vtroque esse moderatus.
August. contr. Iul an. Pelag. lib. 4. cap. 3. Sed absit vt sit in aliquo verae
virtus, nisi fuerit iustus etc.
in them that fear the Lord. 3. Verse 15. It is lawful for ye godly, in
lawful war, to Iosu. 8.4. Judge 20.29. Dolu^ an virtus quis in host requirat.
Virg. Aenead. 2.
subdue their enemy with force or subtlety, so there be no falsehood August.
quaest. in Iosu. 10. Hinc admonemur, non unjust fieri ab his qui iustum bellum
gerunt: vt nihil homo iustus praecipue cogitare debeat in his rebus, nisi vt
iustum bellum suscipiat, cui bellare fa^ est, Cum autem iustum bellum
susceperit, vtrum aperta pugna, vtrum insidijs vincat, nihil ad iustitiam
interest. Sed iustum bellum non est vbi foedus unjust frangitur.
or injustice found therein. 4. Verse 16. The Lord gives success to godly
enterprises, Iosu. 1.5. 2. Sam. 8.14. 2. Chron. 25.7.8.11. etc.
where sin does not provoke him to punish wickedness. 5. The wicked are
often Genesis 19.21. Exodus 12.38.
partakers with the godly of deliverance, as the godly conuersing with the
wicked are partakers of the scourge.

Question 4. verse 18. Who was this Melchizedek, that met Abram and blessed
him? And to what purpose brought he forth bread and wine?
COncerning this Melchizedek, both of his person, and his access to Abram,
have diverse opinions been raised in the Church; contrary to the soundnes of
wholesome doctrine. For first concerning his person, were those gross and
brutish heretics which Epiphan. Here Is. 55. Melchisede^ianos alij scipsos
vo^d^. Hi Melchisedec, in scripturis relatum glorifica^t. and esse non solum
virentem quandam, sed esse maiorem Christo asserunt. August. Haeres. 34.
called themselves of the name of Melchizedek: who affirmed that Melchizedek
was a greater person, then was Christ himself, because Christ was compared
unto Melchizedek. But the plain words of Scripture confute their blindness,
which say not that Heb. 7.3.
Christ was compared as inferior to Melchizedek, but that Melchizedek was
compared unto the son of God. Some other suppose Author. quaest. mixed. inter
oper. August. qu. 109. Igitur per hac apparet Melchizedec vltra hominem esse,
quia non erat vnde melior esset quam Abraham, nisi sola pre^edat illum natura.
Quam ipsissima^ sententiam haereticam esse doces Augustinus. Haeres. 24.
that he excelled the nature of men, because he is said to be Heb. 7.4.7.
greater then Abraham, and therefore esteem him to be Epiphaen. Haeres. 55.
Aliqui autem ipsum putant natura filium Dei. in humana specie tunc Abraham
apparuisse. Sed excidunt and ipsi a proposito.
Jesus Christ in person, Epiphan. Haeres. 55. and 67. Hierat quidam
Melchisedecianorum hunc Melchisedec putat esse spiritum sancium, eo quod
assimilatus est, inquit, filio Dei.
or else the holy Ghost. Other also guess Hieron. epist. ad Euagrium. Origenes
multiplici sermon disputant, illu^ tandem denolutus est, vt cum angelum
diceret. Transiui ad Didymum sectatorem eius, and vidi hominem pedibus in
magistri isse sententiam.
that he was an Angel, because he is said to be without father or mother. But
these errors likewise are evident by the Scripture, which in manifest words
affirms that Melchizedek Heb. 7.1.2. King of Sale^, King of peace: by
analogy of the history, and verse. 4. (...), consider how great this man was.
etc.
was king of Salem, that is, undoubtedly, a certain man which was king of a
certain City called Salem: which City, although in the name thereof it do
aptly signify the kingdom of the faithful, wherein dwells peace and
righteousness; yet may we not by reason of the allegory take away the truth of
history. Again, it is signified he Heb. 7.6. (...), it is manifest therefore
that he had a kindred, which was not counted or described.
had kindred in the flesh; although not reckoned among the kindred of the Jews.
Neither says the Scripture that he had no father or mother, but Heb. 7 3.
Psalm. 110.4. (...) gnal-dibrathi: that is, according to my word or report of
Melchizedec, that is, that report which is by me delivered of Melchizedec:
namely Genesis 14. Epiphan. Haeres. 55. Quod autem sine patre and sine matre
dicitur, non eo quod non habuit patre aut matrem, dictum est; sed eo quod non
sunt manifestissime in scripturis nominati.
that he is described without father and mother, that in show of eternity, he
might be likened unto the son of God. The Rabbis of Hieron. epist ad Euagr.
Tradunt Hebrai hunc esse Sem primum filium Noa, and eo tempore quo ortus est
Abraham habuisse aetatis annos 390. Rab. Rasi Thev^th rationem reddit, quia
scil. dicitur Melec Salem, in quo reperiuntur litere Sem. Iuanis coniectura.
the Jews and other Lyra in Genesis 14. Carthus. in Genesis Comment. Praeterea
dictum est communiterque tenetur, quod Melchizedech fuit Sem filius Noae.
after them, do teach that this Melchizedek was Sem the son of Noah. Many
other both famous and reverend interpreters of Scripture Hippolitus, Irenaeus,
Eusebius Caesariensis, Emissenus, Apollinarius, and Eustachius: citantur ab
Hieron. epist. ad Euagrium. Item Epiphanius Haeres. 55. Theodores. quaest in
Genesis 63. Calvin. in Genesis 14. Pet. Mart. in Genesis Comment. 14.
do rather think, that because the parentage of Sem is declared in the
Scripture, and that the distance of time was so great The Greeks who followed
the Septuagint translation, found it not possible in respect of the time (for
that translation adds to every Patriarch from Sem to Abraham 100. years, and
with Cai^an intruded 150.) and therefore followed the other sentence: but the
occasion being taken away in the truth of the Hebrew text, the judgment of the
Fathers is therein reconciled.
from Sem to Abraham, that For Sem by the computation of the Septuagint, died
shortly after the birth of Peleg, when as by the truth of the original, and as
we find it in our English Bibles, he is found to have lived until the 50.
year of Isaac.
therefore he was not Sem, but some one of ye seed of Canaa^: which being
affirmed, if it might sufficiently be proved, would notably express the
exceeding mercy and goodness of the Lord, who out of that Genesis 9.25. Act.
10.34. Sui las in nomine Melchisedech, ite^ Eustath. Antioc. dicit est ex Side
filio regis Aegypti, and scorto impurissim^ esse genitum, and hac de causa,
ipsi^us genus non proditum esse literis. Sed nimis impudenter philosophati sunt.
accursed family, would choose so noble a Peer of righteousness.
Notwithstanding although the Scripture signify that Melchizedek is described
without father and mother, it is not thereby to be gathered, that either he was
destitute of father and mother, or that his father and Heb. ^.3. (...), without
genealogy, which is very rare of any of the faithful in the old Testament.
parentage is no where else declared: but only that in the history of
Melchizedek, in the description of his Priesthood and his kingdom, there is no
mention made of them, as here we see; that in them all, he might be likened
unto the son of God: for neither this Melchizedek or any other, of whatsoever
family, but have in the former history their original declared. Neither is
there let in respect of life, but that Melchizedek may be even Sem himself:
for the scripture plainly shows that Sem was yet remaining, and continued
until Genesis 11.11.12.32. and 12.4. he died before Abram five and twenty
years, as appears by the account of ye years of his life.
near the death of Abraham. Nevertheless seeing the scripture of purpose would
be Heb. 7.3.
silent in this description of Melchizedek, both of his parentage and his
posterity; it behooves men to restrain themselves from curiosity, least
while they seek too busily, to open that which the Lord himself has closed
up, they August. libr. 1. de Genesis contr. Manich eos cap. 2. Compescat se humana
temeritas, and id quod non est non querat, ne id quod est non inueniat.
miss also of the knowledge of that which is more manifest, and embrace Council
Chalcedo^. act. ^. edict, Valentin. and Martiani imp. Quisquis enim post
veritatem repertam aliquid vlterius disentit, mendacium quarit, no veritate^.
a lie in steed of truth. Of this Melchizedek the Scripture says: he brought
forth bread and wine, and blessed Abraham Hebr. 7.1.
when he returned from the slaughter of the kings: concerning which his
action, the truth of history is also well to be considered, and the falsehood
of heretics to be confuted. And Melchizedek king of Salem (says the text)
brought forth bread and wine; and he was a Priest of the most high God. And he
blessed him saying, etc. The word translated he brought forth ((...) Hotzi) is
(...) Iatzah in Call. exire, egredi.
in his first and native signification, to go forth, as many Genesis 10.11. and
24.5 Exodus 16.4. Ierem. 19.2. Ieb. 38.29.
places of the Scripture do declare. In this form, it signifies (as Ceualer.
Rud. Gram. tract. 2. cap. 4. Martin. Gram. Hebrae. libr. 1. cap. 10. In hac
forma gemina fere actio significatur.
Grammarians teach) a double action, one of the doer, another of the thing, as
thus: he made to go forth, or he brought forth. And so this very word in
other Scriptures is Exire facere, educere. Exodus 12. verse 51. 2. Sam. 12.30.
Ierem. 51.10.
used to the very same effect. The thing or matter that came or was brought
forth, was bread and wine: to whom he brought it, the text does not express;
but by comparing that which went before, and that which follows: The king of
Sodom came forth to meet with Abram, in the vale of Shaueh, being near The
valley of Shaueh, is also called the Kings dale; the Kings dale was not fair
from Jerusalem, as it seems 2. Sam. 18.1^. Borcard. in descript. Terr. Sanc.
part. 1. cap. 6. Number. 9. says it is a plain under the mountain Tabor.
to Salem, which is Hieron. epist. ad Euagr. denies that this Solemn was
Jerusalem, but says it was a certain town near to Scythopolis, which is
(says he) till this day called Salem, where the palace of Melchisedec is to be
seen; and also gives this reason; for that Abram coming from the slaughter
of the kings, came not by the way of Jerusalem, but by Sichem, which lay in the
way from Dan. Whereunto may be answered, that Jerusalem declining somewhat
toward the West, was notwithstanding not so far distant but that Melchisedec
might easily meet him in the way to Hebron, not far from Salem.
Jerusalem, and the king of Salem brought forth bread and wine. Wherefore they
came both to meet with Abram, and to rejoice with him for his victory. But
why brought Melchizedek bread and wine? Surely to refresh the wearied
soldiers, and to relieve the Captives, as both the Compare verse. 18. and 2.
Sam. 17.27.28.29.
Scripture does import, and interpretors Philo Iudaeus lib. de Abraham.
Melchisedec manus ad coelum tendens fausta Abrahae precatus est, mactatisque
victimis splendidum epulum omnibus socijs dedit. Joseph. Antiq. lib. 1 cap. 11.
Hic Melchisedec milites Abrahami hospitaliter habuit, nihil ijs ad victum
deisse pasius. Clem. Alexand. Sirom. lib. 1. Qui vinu^ and panem sanctificatum
dedit nutrimentum in typum Eucharistia. Hieron. epist. ad Euagr. Nec enim mirum
si Melchisedec victori Abrahae obuiam processerit, and in refectionem tam
ipsius quam pugnatorum eius panes vinumque protulerit and benedixerit et, cum
abuepoti suo hoc iu^e debuerit. Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 36. Postquam autem and
Melchisedec re^ Salem panes and vinum attulit, ab illo accepit oblata.
Theodoret. quaest. in Genesis 63. Idcirco panem and vinum and massam farinae dedit
Abraha.
both old and new Vatab. Annot. in Genesis 14. Nimirum vt lassum and famelicum
exercitum regia liberalitate resic^res. Calvin. in Genesis Comment. 14. Pe^ Mart.
Comment. in Gent. cap 14. Ca. etan. Cardin. in Genes. 14. Nihil hic scribitur
de sacrificio sieve de oblatione, sedde prolatione sieve extractione panis and
vini, quam Josephus dicit factum ad reficiendu^ victores.
do testify. And the Scripture names but bread and wine, yet it means all
refection that was convenient for the time and people, according to the
royalty of a king, as by conference As Exodus 18.12 to eat bread, that is,
they feasted and eat of the sacrifices after ye Law. Psalm. 136. verse. 25.
which gives bread to all flesh, that is, convenient food. 2 King. 6.22. bread
and water is used for great preparation.
of other Scriptures is plain and manifest; the custom whereof, and phrase of
speech is, to call a feast, by the name of bread and wine. Thus the Scripture
having spoken of the kingly bounty of Melchizedek, proceeds unto his other
dignity: And he was a Priest of the most high God. And he blessed him
saying, etc. Wherein we see, that Melchizedek as a king relieved Tertul. libr.
aduers. Iudaes. Melchisedech Abraha iam circumciso de pral^o reuerte^ti panem
and vinum obtulit incircumcisus.
Abraham, and as a Priest of God most high he blessed him: in both which
offices united, he was more excellent then Abram, and bare the pattern of the
Priesthood of the son of God. For therefore was he Epiphan. Haeres. 55. Beza
in Annot. in Heb. 7. Nunc igitur de vtroque diceres, explicans quis sit orde
ille Melchisedech, nempe aeternus and Leuitico eminentior cum aeterno regno
coniunctus.
more honorable and great then Abram, because he had a kingdom, reallie
conjoined with his Priesthood; and for that cause more meet to express the
royal Priesthood of our Savior Jesus Christ, then all the Priests and Kings
of the loins of Abraham. Now the Church of Rome has forged out a Tertul.
aduers. Prax. lib. Quo peraeque aduersus vniuersas haereses iam hinc
praiudicatum sit, id esse verum quodcunque primum: id esse adulterinum
quodcunque posterius.
new exposition of this Scripture, whereon it has Joan. ^^kius de sacrific.
miss. lib. 1. Faber. Stapul. de missa. lib. 2. and 4. Iodoc. Clictou. de
propugnac. eccles. lib. 1. Caietan. tom. 3. tract. 10. de sac^ific. Joan.
Driedo. de Eccles. Dogmas. lib. 4. cap. 5. Melchior Canus de hic. Theolog.
libr. 12. cap. 12. Bellarm. tom. 2. cont. 3. de Euchar. libr. 5 cap. 6. Qui
omnes commune petunt principium a sacrificio Melchisedec. Et quod pro omnibus
est Council. Trident. sess. 22. cap. 1 2. Sacerdotem secundum ordinem
Melchisedec, se in aeternum constitutum declarant, corpus and sanguinem suum
sub speciebus panis and vini Deo patri obtulit.
set the foundation of their sacrifice the mass. Wherein first they begin with
false translating of the words of Scripture, proceeding from thence to a false
and perverse understanding of them: and thirdly defend it, by manifest abusing
the authority of the Fathers, is in the sequel it shall appear. The words
by them are thus translated: And Melchizedek king of Salem In some ancient
copies, as is confessed by Andradius, Defens. Synod. Tride^t. libr. 4. and the
Roman Massall does thus acknowledge: Can Missae. Supra quae propitio ac sereno
vultu respicere digneru^, sicut dignatus es quod tibi obtulit Abel and Abraham,
and summus sacerdos tuus Melchisedech sanctum sacrificium, immaculatam hostiam.
offered bread and wine, for he was a Priest of the most high God. And whereas
Martin. Chemuis. exam. Trident. Conc. part. 2 tu de Missa.
they are charged by us of this corruption (because Moses speaks not of
offering, but of bringing forth, neither makes it a reason, he brought forth,
for he was a Priest; but being king of Salem he brought forth) therefore they
answer two things. First, that in their Andrad. Defens. 2. Synod. Trid. lib.
4. De offerendi autem vocabulo non est Chemniti quod digladi^mur, cum and in
correctioribus Latinis examplaribus, and sanctis patribus, qui locum hunc
Eucharistiae accommodant, extet proferens.
corrected copies (being ashamed of the grossenes of the fault) it is wholly
read, he brought forth, and not he offered. Secondly, that although the word
be, he brought forth, and not he offered, yet it Bellarmin. Tom. 2. contr. 3.
de M^ss. lib. 1. cap. 6. Quod tamen verbum licet ex se nihil aliud significat
nisi proferre seu adducere, tamen pro loci exigentia saepe vsurpatur pro
adductione hostiae ad immolandum.
must needs be understood he offered. And this they fight for, by many
arguments, because in this little word, is grounded a maine corner stone of
their religion. One reason or argument is this: The same Bellarmin. ibid. cap
6. Genebrard. says this word is Sacrificale, belonging to sacrifice.
word is sometime understood of bringing forth an offering for sacrifice; for
Judge. 6.18.19. This place is brought in by Bellarmine and Pererius: but to how
great a purpose let the reader judge.
Gedeon was commanded to sacrifice that which he brought forth: which is, as if
they had said: some have sacrificed that which they brought forth, therefore
Melchizedek did sacrifice his bread and wine which he brought forth. The second
reason. Melchizedek was a Priest of the most high God: therefore Melchior Canus
de loco Theolog. lib. 12. c. 12. Sacerdos erat Dei altisssini: sacrificium ergo
offerebat Deo, omnis enim sacerdos constitunem vt sacrificium offerat: at non
legitur aliud quam panem and vinum obtulisse.
he offered sacrifice to God. But he is not read of, to have offered any
sacrifice, except we say this bread and wine; therefore he offered bread and
wine. Thus brutish blind are they that will not behold the truth. For to leave
that which Philo Iudaeus lib. de Abraham. Having slain the sacrifices, he made
a bountiful feast to Abram and all his associats. Clem. Alexand. Stro^. 4
ancient writers do affirm, that he sacrificed beasts, as custom was of
sacrifice: the Scripture shows, he Psalm. 116.17. Hos. 14.3. Heb. 13.15.
offered a sacrifice of praise and thanks to God: blessed be the most high God,
that has delivered thine enemies into thy hand. The third reason. Melchizedek
being a figure of Christ did offer such a Council. Trident. Sess. 22. cap. 1.
Annot. Remist. in Hebrae. 7. sect. 8. Bellarm. de Miss. lib. 1 cap. 6.
Differentiae dua sunt inter duo illa saecerdotia Melchisedeci and Aaronis:
prim^ and potissimae posita est in externa specit sacrificij (vbi hoc didicit
in scripturis nescio) saecrificia enim Aaronicae cruenta erant, and sub specie
animantium occisorum, Christi mortem repraesentabant. Melchisedeci sacrificium
incruentum fuit, and sub specie panis and veni eiusdem Christi corpus and
sanguine^ figurauit. quare si Christus sacerdos secu^dum ordine^ Melchisedech,
and no^ Aaronis, sacrificium instituere debuit incruentum.
sacrifice in respect of the matter, as did Christ: but Christ offered (say
they) an unbloody sacrifice of bread and wine: ergo Melchizedek offered also
bread and wine. Herein they notoriously profane the holy Scripture; which
teaches that Melchizedek was a figure of Heb. 7.3.
Christ in deed: but shows wherein only he was likened unto him; namely,
Heb. 7.1.
that he was a King and Priest. Secondly, that he was king of righteousness.
Thirdly, that he was king of peace. Fourthlie, in that he is Chrysostom. Hom.
in Genesis 35. and Christus quia non habet in coelo matrem and in terra patrem
absque genealogia dicitur.
described without father and mother. Fiftlie, in that he is described without
beginning of days, or end of life. Sixtlie, Epiphan. Haeres. 55. Melchisedec
non amplius post se successionem habuit, sed neque sacetdotij ablationem. Heb.
7.4.5. etc.
in that his Priesthood was more excellent then that of Aaron. Wherefore
seeing the Scripture compares of purpose Melchizedek with Christ, and shows
wherein they are to be compared; and notwithstanding compares them not in the
matter of sacrifice: it is manifest, they are not in the matter of sacrifice to
be compared, and by consequent either the Papists argument is false; or else it
follows, that there was error or negligence committed in the Scripture, which
is blasphemy Exemp. Policarpi, qui ad omne^ blasphemiam sibi solebat anres
obturare. Eusebius. eccles. Histor. lib. 3.
not to be endured of christian hearts or ears. The causes which they assign,
why the Apostle compares not the sacrifice it self, are vain and false. One
cause was (say they) Bellar. de Miss. lib. 1. cap. 6.

Bellarm. de Miss. lib. 1 cap. 6. Causa cur Apostolus non meminerit sacrificij
panis and vini primaria, notissima est: quia videlicet id ad propositum eius
non faciebat.


because it made not to the Apostles purpose in that place, to handle it. And
yet nothing indeed, as they themselves acknowledge, could make more for the
likeness of the Priesthood (which was the Apostles scope to prove) Perer. ibid.
The eleventh likeness between Melchisedec and Christ, which is the greatest and
most worthy, and for which chiefly and properly Christ is called a Priest
after the order of Melchisedech, is placed in the singular and unwonted kind
of sacrifice, etc. How worthily do Papists make the matter of Sacrifice the
greatest point in ye likeness o^ Christ unto Melchisedech, and yet ye Apostle
acknowledges it not at al, and they themselves confess it was without the
Apostles scope, whose purpose and words do tend to this, to show wherein
Christ was like Melchisedech?
then the sacrifice, if there had bin likeness in the Sacrifice. Again (say
they) the Apostle would not unfold the mystery of the Sacrament, Bellarm. de
Missa. lib. 1. cap. 6. Accedit quod Apostolus dedita opera omisit oblationem
panis and vini, ne cogeretur explicare mysterium Eucharistiae, quod altius erat
qua^ vt ab illis capi tunc posset.
because it was greater then could of them be understood. But the Apostle
confuteth this himself, Heb. 6.1.2.
whereas he says: they had bin taught before, the doctrines of the beginnings
of Christ, as of repentance, of faith, of the Sacraments, of the resurrection
of the dead, and of eternal judgment: and therefore requires of them, that
they need not the laying again of such foundations, but to be led forward unto
perfection. Neither says the Apostle (as is by them alleged) of this
Melchizedek are many things which cannot or may not be uttered; but which are
Heb. 5.11. (...): which the vulgar translation falsely reads
ininterpretabilis, that cannot be interpreted, which is Bellarmines objection.
hard to utter: neither says he, because you cannot hear or understand; but
(...), Segnes.
because you are dull of hearing. Besides, it is gross and childish to reason
thus: Melchizedek offered Bellarm. de Miss. lib. 1. cap. 6. In missa verum
sacrificium offerri probatur, ex sacerdotio Melchisedec.
an unbloody sacrifice, therefore Christ did also offer an unbloody
sacrifice: and then to prove that Melchizedek offered such a sacrifice,
Bellarm. ibid. Colligitur ex vi typi and sigurae. Fuit enim Melchisedec in illa
ceremonia panis and vint, figura manifestissima Christi sacramentum
Eucharistiae instituentis etc. Astute scilicet agit, vt ex vi typi doceret
Melchisedeci prolatione^ esse sacrificium: and praeterea ratio (inquit)
manifest docet eam veram esse expositionem.
because Christ (as they say) did offer bread and wine. Moreover it is as
false, that Christ ever sacrificed Heb. 9.25.28. and 10.12.14.
bread and wine, if we For as the fathers do sometime take Sacrifice we
deny it not, namely figuratively; and as S. Paul calls the benevolence of
the Philippians a Sacrifice, Philip. 4.18.
mean a sacrifice taken in his own and proper signification. And therefore if
Melchizedek sacrificed bread and wine, it had been altogether unlike the
sacrifice of Christ. The fourth reason to persuade that Melchizedek offered
bread and wine is made, Lyra in Genesis Postil. cap. 14. Bellarm. libr. 1. cap. 6.
Nulla erat causae cur refectionem praeberet Melchisedec Abrahe, nam redijt ex
praelio cum ingenti praeda, and milites Abrahae iam cibum sumpserant antequam
occurreret Melchisedec.
that Abram returning from the spoil, had food sufficient of himself. To
which they shall be answered Hugo. Sanct. Victoris in Annot. in Genesis Apud
priscos (inquit) oblitio panis and vint venientibus ex bello beneuolentiae and
pacis fuit Symbolum. Perer. in Genesis 14. disp. 5. Sed parum in hac ratione
videtur esse roboris. Dicat enim quispiam, nescisse id Melchisedec: at licet id
seruisses voluisse suam erga Abraham beneuolentiam declarare.
from among themselves, that it might be a deed of courtesy, as well as of
necessity, to bring forth bread and wine; which Melchizedek might do of his
abundance, his city being untouched, and the king of Sodom could not, because
his dominions were spoiled. The fifth reason is, the Bellarm. lib. 1. de Missa.
cap. 6. Perturbant totam distinctionem. Nam in Hebrae^ codice post illa verba
(dei altissimi) inuenitur Soph Pasuc qui indicat ibi terminari periodum. Quare
no^ potest illud, and erat sacerdos, coniungi cu^ sequentibus.
placing of the words in the Hebrew text: for after these words: he was a
Priest to the most high God, there is a distinction and end of the sentence:
therefore it is to be understood, that as he was a Priest he brought forth
bread and wine, which is in their interpreting, he sacrificed bread and wine,
because, or for that he was a Priest to the most high God. In which reason is
contained a double falsehood. First, in that observing one distinction At homo
acutissimus. Pausam Athuah, quae etiam disiungitur clausula a priori, videre
no^ potuit: nam de primo dixit, rex erat and protulit, dein adhibita breui
distinctione, and erat sacerdos, inquit.
they miss and ouerpasse another: for thus stand the words distinguished, as
were before recited: And Melchizedek king of Salem, brought forth bread and
wine: and he was a Priest of the most high God. And he blessed him, etc. So
that it is Falsus igitur Bellarminus.
no perturbation of the text, but manifest and plain, that as he was king he
brought forth bread and wine, which is more manifest In the Bibles Complutens.
Greek, is added (...), ipsi, he brought forth to him, that is, to Abraham.
by some Greek translations, which expound it, he brought it forth to him;
that is, to Abraham. Again, where the Scripture says, and he was a Priest, As
Bellarmine himself cannot deny.
making it an addition unto his other office, and therefore stays therein:
they Bellarm. ibid. Licet ad verbum non sit in Hebraeo, erat enim sacerdos, sed
and erat sacerdos: tamen illa particula co^iunctiua frequentissime locuns
obtinet causalis. Certum est, sed non vbi nulla causa redditur: fallaecia no^
causae pro causa.
falsely translate it, for he was a Priest, making it a reason of his
sacrifice. But a simple reason, being unwarranted of the word, that because he
was a Priest, therefore he sacrificed bread and wine: the text says more
plainly, he was a Priest and blessed Abram Verse 10.11. Some of the Rabbis
unadvisedly affirm, yt Melchisedech sinned here, because he first blessed
Abraham, before he praised God: and that therefore the Priesthood was taken
from his posterity.
and praised God. The sixth reason is, that the fathers affirm that Bellarm de
Missa. lib. 1. cap. 6. cites twenty Fathers and Schoolmen, and after them
two Jewish Rabbis out of Pet. Galatin. lib. 10. cap. 4.5. of whom there is not
one father that makes for his purpose, or scarsely gives any color or show
thereof, but are altogether misinterpreted by him.
Melchizedek sacrificed bread and wine. This reason is a false and unjust
slander of the Fathers, and a mere deceit. For none of the Fathers which the
church of Rome alleges, do confirm it, in the sense of the church of Rome.
Some of the Fathers say Clem. Alexand. Strom. 4. Sanctificatum dedit
nutrimentum, He gave hallowed nourishment: he calls it nourishment or meat,
not bread; because Melchisedech made it a feast, Joseph. Antiq lib. 1. c. 11.
he calls it hallowed, because that withal he offered not an unbloody, but
bloody sacrifice, Philo lib. de Abraham: and so Clement doubtless does
understand it, saying, he gave, not he offered; therefore to Abram, not to God.
Tertul. aduers. Iudaeos. Melchisedec Abrahae panem and vinum obtulit: that is,
gave to Abraham bread and wine. Author. quaest. mixed. inter oper. August.
quast. 109. De Melchisedec legimus quia obuiauit Abrahae reuertenti a caede
regum, and protulit panes and vinum, and obtulit ei and benedixit ei: that is,
he met Abraham, and brought forth bread and wine, an ^ffered them to him, and
blessed him. Ambros. de Sacram. lib. 4. cap. 3. Tunc Abraham recijt ^ict^r, and
occurit illi Melchisedec sacerdos, and obtulit ei panem and vinum: and offered
to him. Idem in Epist ad Hebraeos. c. 7. Nec esse nouum si Melchisedec victori
Abraham obuiam processerit, and in resectionem tam ipsius qua^ pugnatoru^ eius
panem vinumque protulerit: And for his resection and his soldiers brought
forth bread and wine. Hieron. Epist. ad Euagr, In resectionem ipsius qua^
pugnatoru^ eius, panes vinumque protulerit: For his resection and his soldiers
he brought forth bread and wine. Theodoret. quest. in Genesis 63. Id^irco panem
and vinum and massam farinae dedit Abrahae: He gave Abraham bread and wine.
he offered bread and wine, but add their meaning, he offered it to Abraham not
to God. Now this is not to sacrifice in the proper signification of But Papists
teach that Melchisedech did sacrifice properly: Rhemist. Testam. annot. on the
Hebrews, chap 7. Bellarmine etc.
sacrificing. Some other call it Hieron epist. ad Marcel. Qui iam tunc in typo
Christi panem and vinum obtulit: that is, who even then offered bread and wine,
in a type of Christ. August. epist. 95. Prolato sacramento mensae Dominicae,
nouit aeternum eius sacerdotium sigurare. In bringing forth the matter of the
Sacrament, he knew how to figure his eternal priesthood. Idem 16. de ciuit.
Dei, cap. 22. Leo de vniuersar. assump. suae sermon. 2. Eusebius. Emissen. sermon. 5.
de Paschate. Arnob. Comment. in Psalm. 109. Ioh. Damascen. lib. 4. de Orthodox.
f^l. cap. 14. Theophylact. in cap. 5. ad Hebraeos. Al of the^ indeed speak of
a sacrifice of Melchisedech, but say it was a type or figure (themselves
speaking metaphorically) not meaning he did actually sacrifice: which
Epiphanius evidently declares, Here Is. 55. Melchisedec Abraha ob^^iam venit,
and proposuit ipsi panes and vinum mysteriorum aenigmata proferens and
exemplaria, quum Dominus noster dicat, ego sum panis viuens: and exemplar
sanguinis ipsius qui ex latere ipsius compuncto fluxit ad purgationem
inquinatorum, and respersionem ac salutem animarum nostrarum. And Cyprian ad
Caecilium epist. 63. Vt ergo in Genesi, per Melchisedec sacerdotem benedictio
circa Abraham posset rite celebrari; praecedit ante imago sacrificij Christi in
pane and vino constituta: Melchisedech therefore did sacrifice. But how? By
blessing of Abram, as Cyprian does expound it, before which went the image of
the sacrifice of Christ in the bread and wine. But how was the bread and wine
an image of Christ's sacrifice? Epiphanius answers, in a type figuring the
benefit of Christ himself, the true and living bread. Of what sacrifice was it
a type or image? Of that one true sacrifice (says he) made upon the Cross,
etc. But Papists make it a shadow of that which they call the sacrifice of his
Supper, to which they adioyne their sacrifice the Mass.
a sacrifice (not of bread and wine) but mean of August. quaest. Euangel. lib.
1 qu 34. Intelligendum templum and altar ipsum Christum: aurum and donum,
lauds and sacrificia precum, quae in eo per eum offerimus: We must understand,
the Temple and the Altar to be Christ the gold and the gift, to be the
sacrifices of praise, which in him we offer by him. In this sense we also say,
that Mel^hisedech did sacrifice bread and wine, when as he gave it to Abram, to
the honor of God, to relieve the need of Abram, in Christ, and for his sake.
mercy or thanksgiving, and praise to God; according Psalm. 116.17. Hose.
14.2. Heb. 13.15.
as the Scripture often speaks. Wherefore also those that liken this bringing
forth of bread and wine, with Clem. Alexand. Strom. 4. Qui vinum and panem
sanctificatum dedit nutrimentum in typum Eucharistiae. Eusebius. Caesariens. de
demonst. Euangel. lib. 5. cap. 3. Quemadmodum ille etc. August. epist. 95.
Prolate sacramento mensae Dominica etc.
the Supper of the Lord ordained by our Savior Christ; although they go
beyond the Scripture, yet they go not against the Scripture, being taken
according to their meaning and intent. For as Melchizedek did comfort the
weary and hu^gry, with bred and wine; so Christ refreshes those which Matthew.
11.28. Ioh. 6.35. Romans 4.11. and 10.17.
are weary of their sins, and hunger for his righteousness, with his comfortable
promises, and with the Sacraments: and as Melchizedek did sacrifice with
blessing and thanks to God, so ought Mark. 14.26. 1. Cor. 11.26.
we christians in the supper of the Lord. But that Melchizedek did not
sacrifice his bread and wine, if this place of Scripture were not evidence
enough, there are arguments abou^dant, to convince this error. First the word
here used to bring forth, does And the same, beside the authority of the
Hebrews, Caietan confesses, Nihil hic scribitur de sacrificio vel de
oblatione: that is, here is nothing written of the sacrifice or oblation. And
Bellarmine de Missa lib. 1 cap. 6. says, the word of it self signifies
nothing else, but to bring forth.
in no place of scripture signify, to offer, or to sacrifice: therefore when as
yt speech is only of bringing forth, and not of sacrificing; it is only to be
understood of bringing forth, and not of sacrificing. Secondly, Melchizedek
brought forth bred and wine, and bestowed it on Abram, as the Andrad. 2.
defens. Trid. Syn. lib. 4. Atque ego cum illis sentiam, qui lassos Abraha
milites et diuturna pugna fractos Melchisedec cum pane vinoque refec^sse aiunt.
Peter. in Genes. 14. disp. 5. Eandem aijs sententiam tuto teneri posse. Canus
lib. 12. cap. 12. Non insicior etc. Bellarm. de Missa lib. 1. cap. 6. No^ non
negamus, etc.
adversaries, themselves confess: but this act, which is The Scripture
speaks of no other act of Melchisedec, but his meeting, his bringing forth,
his blessing: and where some Fathers say he sacrificed, they mean it
spiritually, in phrase of Scripture, Hos. 14.3. Philip. 4.18. If any would
reply, that they meant properly as Papists do; I answer, their words are
against it, where they expound themselves: or if they had so meant, where had
they their authority to teach that for a doctrine of faith, which not any
Scripture in old or new Testament does justify?
the only act ye scripture speeketh of, is not properly, to sacrifice bread and
wine: therefore Melchizedek did not sacrifice his bread and wine. Thirdly,
Melchizedek Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 36. Hieron. epist. ad Euag.
of his kingly bounty brought bread and wine; but it pertains not Albeit, as
Aristotle teaches, Kings were wont to offer sacrifice, Pulit. lib. 3. cap. 10.
and 7. cap. 9. and Philo says he sacrificed beasts; and he were both a King
and a Priest: yet he performing diverse functions, discharged them no doubt
according to his diverse offices.
to kings to sacrifice: therefore he brought forth, but did not sacrifice his
bread and wine. Fourthly, if the sacrificing of bread and wine, were not the
proper Ex confesso aduersarioru^, qui hoc sacrificium propeta^ statuu^t
functionem sacerdotij. Canus de locis Theolog. libr. 12. cap. 12. Melchisedec
erat sacerdos Dei altissimi, sacrificium ergo offerebat Deo: at non legitur
aliud quam panem and vinum obtulisse. Bellarm. lib. de Miss. 1 cap. 6. Cum
scriptura ut in locis describat nobis sacerdotiu^ Melchisedec, debuit profecto
alienbi tradere quael^ fuit sacrificium Melchisedec. Rhemist. annot. Hebrae. 7.
sect. 8
act of the Priesthood of Melchizedek; then did he not sacrifice bread and
wine, but only brought it forth of his kingly liberality: but the proper work
of the Priesthood of Melchizedek, was yt Verse. 19. Hebr. 7.1. Cyprian Epist.
63. ad Cacilium. Qui ordo vtique hic est, de sacrificio illo veniens, and jude
descendens, quod Melchisedec sacerdos Dei summi fuit, quod panem and vinum
obtulit, quod Abraham benedixit.
he blessed Abraham, for which he received also tithe of Abraham: therefore he
did not sacrifice in bread and wine. Fiftlie, if Melchizedek had sacrificed
bread and wine; the same his sacrifice must have had resemblance unto the
sacrifice of Christ: but the sacrificing of Melchizedek, if he had sacrificed
bread and wine, had not been like the sacrifice of Christ: therefore he
sacrificed not. The former part of this argument is Bellarm. cap. 6. Colligitur
ex vi typt and figurae.
confessed by every Papist: the latter proposition is proved thus. It was
neither like the true sacrifice of Jesus Christ, which was when he offered
This Bellarmine himself denies, De Miss. lib. 1. c. 6. Sacrificium crucis, si
per se confideretur, non est secundum ordinem Aaron, nec secundum ordinem
Melchisedec: That is, the sacrifice of the cross, if it be considered in it
self, is neither after the order of Aaron, nor of Melchisedec. And least any
should think the Fathers herein to be more absurd then Bellarmine; where they
compare this act of Melchisedec with the sacrifice of Christ: it must be
understood that they mean not any sacrificing of bread and wine, as though
Melchisedec had sacrificed, or any way consecrated his bread and wine; but a
sacrifice of liberality and godliness in relieuing Abraham; of praise and
thanksgiving; wherein the gift of Melchisedec is like the act of Christ, in
giving his righteousness to us: and his thanksgiving, like that of them who
truly receive the Sacrament, in which two the whole administration of the
Sacrament does consist.
up himself upon the cross, which is his only Heb. 9.25.26.28. and 10.12.14.
sacrifice: neither like the false imaginary sacrifice, which the church of
Rome ascribes unto Christ; which neither scripture, nor ancient council, nor
father calls a sacrifice, in the August. contr. Faust. lib. 20. cap. 21.
Sacrificium Deo frequentissime facimus, illo duntaxat vitu quo sibi sacrificari
noui Testamenti manifestatione pracepit. Huius sacrificij caro and sanguis ante
aduentum Christi per victimas similitudinum promittebatur: inpassione Christi,
per ipsam veritatem reddebatur: post ascensum Christi per sacramentum memoria
celebratur. Christus igitur cum hoc sacrificium instituerit, commemorationem
sui instituit, and gratiarum actionem proprit sacrificium non instituit.
proper signification of a sacrifice. For in that sacrifice (as Paschasius
Abba^ Corb. libr. de corp. and sang. Dom. cap. 10. Hic primus hanc haeresin
libello defendit. Vixitque circa annu^ Domini 880. vt referi Trithemius lib. de
Eccles. scriptor. Lanfra^cus Arch. Cantuar. libr. de Euchar. Corporali siquide^
(inquit) ore corporaliter manducamus and bibimus ipsum Dominicum corpus.
Guitmund. Aduers. de verit. Eucharist. lib. 1 Algarus de Sacram. lib. 1. cap.
5.6. Odo Cameracens. missae canon. exposit. 3. Council. Trident. Sess. 13. cap.
1. Principio docet sancta synodus, and aperte and simpliciter profitetur; in
almo sancta Eucharistiae sacramento, post panis and vini consecrationem,
Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum, verum Deum atque hominem, vere, realiter ac
substantialiter sub specie illarum rerum sensibilium contineri. Idem can. 1.
ibid. Et si quis negauerit, aut dixerit remanere substantia^ panis and vini,
etc. anathema sit.
they teach that do defend it) the bread and wine which by Christ was offered,
was reallie and carnally changed, and converted into the very body and blood
of Christ: so that he offered bread and wine, and yet the very matter of the
sacrifice Bellarm. Tom. 2. contr. 3. de Euchar. lib. 3. cap. 18. Ecclesiae
(scil. Romanae) sententia est esse totalem conuersione^ substantiae panis and
vini in corpus and sanguinem Domini.
was his body and his blood: he offered really and carnally his body and his
blood, Council. Trident. sess. 22. cap. 1. Deus and Dominus noster, in caena
nouissima, qua nocte tradebatur, corpus and sanguinem suum sub speciebus panis
and vini Deo patriobenlit. Idem cap. 2. Et quoniam diuino hoc sacrificio, etc.
but yet an unbloody sacrifice. But Melchizedek offered (if at all he offered)
but only bread and wine; and none dare affirm, that it was transubstantiated
into the body and blood of Christ. Therefore if Melchizedek had offered bread
and wine, it had been unlike that offering of Christ; whereupon it also
follows by evident reason (seeing Melchizedeks offering depends upon
resemblance unto the offering of Christ, and the offering of bread and wine by
Christ, is grounded by them upon the offering Bellarm. de Missa lib. 1. cap. 6.
Melchisedeci sacrificium incrue^tum fuit, quare Christus debuit incruentum,
etc. Melchisedechs sacrifice was an unbloody sacrifice, therefore Christ's
sacrifice must be an unbloody sacrifice.
of Melchizedek) that neither Melchizedek nor Christ did offer sacrifice of
bread and wine. Sixtlie, neither Yea, they renounce it in as much as they teach
all matters of faith concerning Melchisedec, and yet of his sacrifice nothing.
testimony of Scripture, nor exposition Of the most part we have already
spoken, for the rest we are here to answer. Theodoret upon Psalm. 109.
Inuenimus Melchisedec sacerdotem and regem esse, and offerentem Deo non
sacrificia ratione carentia, sed panem and vinum: That is, we find
Melchisedech to have been both a Priest and king, offering to God not
sacrifices without reason or proportion, but bread and wine. Primasius in
Comment. cap. 5. epist. ad Hebra. Quia Melchisedec panem offerens Deo: That is,
Melchisedech, to God offering bread, etc. Oecu^nen. in Comme^t. in cap. 5. ad
Hebrae. Melchisedec fuit primus qui hostiam sine sanguine panem and vinum
obtulit: That is, Melchisedech was the first that offered sacrifice without
blood, being bread and wine. To which I answer: Theodoret is plain against
it, Quest. 63. cited before, saying, he gave to Abram, etc. whereby it is
evident his meaning is, in offering it to Abram, he offered it to God; for as
much as he did it for the honor of God unto his Prophet. Primasius is to be
taken in the same sense, as his words declare. The meaning of Oecumenius is, to
show yt Melchisedech was the first who is in Scripture compared with Christ,
his offering was without blood (for as he thinks he offered no material
sacrifice) being bread and wine given to Abraham, with the blessing. Secondly,
it may be thought they make this giving of bread and wine to Abraham, with
blessing him, which they call a sacrifice to God, to be a type or shadow of the
Supper, which is also a receiving and giving of bread and wine with giving
praise to God, as does Eucheri. lib. 2 cap 18. in which (as Augustine says)
the Church does offer up her self to God. De ciuit. Dei lib 10. cap. 10.
of ancient father does confirm that Melchizedek did offer this bread and
wine to God, in the proper signification of a sacrifice: therefore he
sacrificed not in bread and wine. Seventhly, as that doctrine cannot stand
which is not grounded upon Iren. lib. 3. cap. 1. Euangelium in scripturis
tradiderunt, fundamentum and columnam fiaci nostra futurum. Chrysostom. in
Psalm. 95. Si quid dicitur absque scriptura, auditorum cogitatio claudicat.
the foundation of the Scripture; and as Non poterat aedisicare mendacium sine
demolitione veritatis. Tertul. in Marc lib. 2.
heresies are always disagreeing with the truth, and within themselves: so
this error holden of the sacrifice of Melchizedek, overthrows many other
fantasies of the church of Rome. For if Melchizedek sacrificed bread and wine,
and that sacrifice were such a perfect pattern of that sacrifice of theirs the
mass, which is founded thereon: first because the bread and wine in the
sacrifice of Melchizedek was not reallie changed into the body and blood of
Christ; therefore in that their sacrifice, Bellarm lib. 1. cap. 6. hereof
teaches, that Melchisedechs sacrifice should agree with their sacrifice the
Mass, not in substance, but in representation of accidents: but here are no
agreements, so much as of accidents; for in the Mass they are accidents
without substance, in the other they should be joined with the substance; in
the one they are dead, yea none at all; in the other they flourish and are
united with their being and proper nature. Secondly, who would say, the
Eucharist or Supper might differ from the Eucharist in substance: for a type to
differ from the truth is allowable, but to differ from it self is unreasonable.
the bread and wine is not carnally converted: so that transubstantiation is
thereby ouerturned. Secondly, Melcizedeks sacrifice And this is necessary,
since both are types of Christ's sacrifice, that they should thus agree in one.
was not propitiatory for sin, because it was an unbloody sacrifice, and
Heb. 9.22.
without blood there is no remission: therefore their propitiatory sacrifice
available for quick and dead, is hereby adjudged and condemned. Thirdly,
Melchizedek if he sacrificed bread and wine, distributed to Abram It seems
they would deny this also, but for the authority of the Fathers.
and his company both bread and wine: wherefore the church of Rome which
distributeth bred only, but not wine Which was admitted in the Counsel of
Trent, Sess. 22 but referred to the Pope.
in their sacrifice, are convinced by But much more by the institution of
Christ.
this example to be robbers and murderers. Fourthlie, neither this sacrifice
was Papists do divine, that he did often offer such sacrifice: and what would
they not avouch to uphold the Mass? but the Scripture reme^breth it not once.
ever repeated by Melchizedek: therefore (as by the truth of Christ's Heb
9.12.26. and 10 3 10 11.12.
sacrifice, which was never to be repeated) they are condemned of their
succession of Priests, and their daily sacrifice. Fiftlie, if Melchizedek were
to be compared unto Christ in the matter of the sacrifice; then were
Melchizedek to be likened unto Christ alone For the Apostle compares
Melchisedech to Christ (although not in the matter of the sacrifice) and
shows how that, wherein the comparison stands, as to be a king and priest,
without beginning or end of days, etc. did only belong to Christ; and neither
could nor can be understood of any other: which if it could, then might the
Jews also lawfully expect a new Messiah after the order of Melchisedech.
Therefore Melchisedec in whatsoever he was a figure of Christ, he shadowed
Christ alone, according to the purpose of the Apostle. Heb. 5.6.7.9.10. and
6.20. and 7.1. etc.
in the manner of sacrificing; the matter of his sacrifice to have been
agreeable unto the matter of the sacrifice of Christ: but the church of Rome
does teach, Bellarm. Tom. 1. cont. 4. lib. 4. cap. 8. Respondeo, sacerdotium
Aaronicum fuisse temporale, and solum durasse vsque ad inchoationem noui
Testamenti: deinceps autem capisse sacerdotium secundum ordinem Melchisedec a
Christo institutum.
that not Christ alone, but every sacrificing Priest (who neither figureth
Christ nor was figured by Christ) is also of the order of Melchizedek; but the
matter of the sacrifice must in Council. Triden. Sess. 13. can. 1. Si
qui^negauerit corpus and sanguinem vna cum anima and diuinitate non contineri,
sed tantummodo esse in eo vt in signo, vel figura, aut virtute, anathemasit.
no wise agree in substance, forasmuch as the one is reallie and substantiallie
converted into flesh, the other remained bread and wine: therefore the church
of Rome herself overthrows this comparison of Melchizedek and Christ in the
matter of the sacrifice; and by consequent the order of their Priesthood does
want foundation: their daily sacrifice is not only contrary to the Supper
of the Lord, but also to this sacrifice of Melchizedek in bread and wine,
having neither pattern, authority or proof from Christ himself, or from
Melchizedek. Therefore seeing that if Melchizedek did sacrifice the bread and
wine, the church of Rome does forfeit their transubstantiation, their
propitiatory sacrifice, their half communion, their daily sacrifice, and the
resemblance of the same unto the sacrifice of Christ. If he did not sacrifice,
then neither Christ did ordain the representation of his death to be a
sacrifice; but the church of Rome which has invented such a sacrifice, are
therein usurpers and idolaters. And seeing neither Scripture, nor Council, nor
ancient Father does affirm, that Melchizedek did offer a sacrifice of bread
and wine, in the proper signification and manner of a sacrifice; therefore the
church of Rome has falselie taught the doctrine of the mass, of
transubstantiation, of the merit of their sacrifice, and continuance thereof;
has in this place falsified the Scripture, both in translation and exposition;
and it remains by the Scripture, by the evidence of reason and sound consent
of all the godly, that Melchizedek brought forth, but did not sacrifice bread
and wine.

Question 5. verse 22. For what cause did Abram refuse to take the goods that
were given him by the king of Sodom: also how far forth he abstained from
the use of them?
ALbeit it may seem a deed of Kingly Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 35. Honesta
regis liberalitas: sed vide and optimos mores iusti.

Pet. Mart. Comment. in Genesis 14.


magnificence to give unto Abram so rich a spoil: yet we are to consider
withal, the condition of Abram, that he victoriously had attained it by war.
For the Franc. Iun. Anal. in Genesis 14. Sic enim statuebat rex Sodomi iure
gentium nihil sibi ab Abram creptum esse, sed ex eo iure Abramum Dominu^ factum
esse rerum quas bello parauerat.
laws and customs of the nations do give unto the conqueror, whatsoever he
wins by lawful battle: whereby it appears rather, that the king of
Sodom, not Calvin. in Genesis 14. Pieri etiam potest vt seruilis modestiae
simulatione capta^^rat Abrahae fauorem, vt salte^ captives and vacuam vrbem
sibi haberet. Certe postea videbimus Sodomita's accepti beneficij fuisse
immemores, dum superbe and contu^^liose sanctum Lot vexarunt.
sufficiently touched with the consideration of his own loss, and the
victory of Abram, to know thereby the author both of servitude and liberty:
neither amending with his Claudian. Regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis.
Bernard. epist. 22. Quare pulchorrimus ordo est, vt onus quod portandum
imponis, tu ports prior, and ex te discas qualiter oporte^^ alijs moderari.
subjects their former life, by so great affliction, for fear least a worse
Ioh. 5.14.
thing (as shortly after did) should befall unto them; did seek by policy to
compound with Abram, for his own behoof, rather then respecting the wealth of
Abram; that if Abram would render him the Musc. in Genesis 14. Potior pars hominis
anima est, quare scriptura hominem interdum vocare solet animam.
souls or persons of his pray, he would surcease the claim of all the
substance. But Abram although he could not but epsy the secret intended
subtlety of the king, seeking as it were under color of friendship, to
challenge a part of the profit of his labors; and being not ignorant of his
right and title to the persons and the goods, by the common laws and customs
of the nations: yet he denies and Onchelos Chaldaeus Paraphrast. ita reddit,
Leuaus manus meas per orationem coram Domino: quasi votum fecisset, cum bellum
susciperet, non iuramentum. Sed aliter Chrysostomus and plurimi interpretes.
binds with an oath, that he will enjoy of the persons or the goods, so much
as a thread or the latchet of a shoe, of all that pertains to the king of
Sodom. The Anabaptists Calvin. Comment. in Matthew. 5. Anabaptista hoc praetextu
valde tumultuati sunt quasi nullam ob causam iurare permittat Christus, dum
omnino iurare vetat.
will reply, that Abram offended herein by swearing, forasmuch as our Savior
in the Gospel has commanded, Matthew. 5.34. Iam. 5.12.
swear not at all. But they themselves do rent and abuse the words of our
Savior Christ. For he says not Conciliatio. 24. Calvin. in Genesis 5. Atqui non
aliunde pere^da est expositio quam ex verborum contextu; continuo enim
sequitur, neque per coelum neque per terram. Quis non videt species istas
exigetice additas fuisse, quae prius membrum distincta numeratione clarius
exprimerent? vnde colligimus particulam (omnino) non ad substantiam sed ad
formam referri.
swear not at al, and therein cease his commandment, forbidding all
persons at any time by swearing to take witness of the name of God; but swear
not at all, says he, neither by heaven, nor by earth, nor by Jerusalem:
forbidding therein to Chrysostom. Hom. in Matthew. 17. and in oper. imperfect. Hom.
12. Eorum autem qui iurant per elementa, execrabillor Iniquitas est. Coelum
enim and terram and caetera Deus ad ministerium fibi creauit, non hominibus ad
iuramentum. Ecce enim in lege praecipitur, vt per nullum iuretur nisi per Deum:
qui ergo jurat per coelum aut per terram aut quicquid illud est per quod jurat,
deificat illud. Propterea Idolatra^ se facit omnis qui per aliquid aliud a Deo
jurat, etiamsi iurare liceret.
swear by the creatures, or rashly or August. lib. de Mendac. ad Cons. cap.
15. Ne scilicet iurando ad facilitatem iurandi veniatur: de facilitate ad
consuetudinem, de consuetudine ad periurium decidatur. Gregor. in 1. Reg. cap.
14. Non penitus iurare prohibuit, sed occasionem periurij, quod perfectius est
euitare docuit.
vainelie to make an oath. But to swear by the name of God in Deuteronomy. 6.11. and
10.20. Ierem. 4.2.
truth, in judgment, and in righteousness, is often in deed commanded, but no
where forbidden in the Scriptures: which was also religiously observed of this
holy Patriarch. I have lifted up my hand (says he) to Iehoua the most high
God possessor of heaven and earth. The lifting of the hand to God is an outward
August. in Psalm. 62. Ipsas manus cogitas in bonis operibus exercere, ne
crubescant leuari ad Deum.
token of the lifting of the heart; the lifting of the heart Clement. Alexandr.
Sirom. lib. 7. Est enius iusiurandum quidem confessio definiti^a, cu^ d^uina
assumptione.
an express image of lawful taking oath: as namely, when we swear, we
should behave our selves, Nazianz. in dialog. de surament. Quia fidei Deum
interponis medium. Quare iuramentum etiam hosti seruandum est: nec
co^siderandum cui, sed per quem iuraueris: multo enim fidelior inuentus. est
ille qui propter nomen Dei tibi credidit, and deceptus est, quam tu qui per
occasionem diuinae maiestatis, hosti tuo, imo iam amico molitus es insidias.
Hieron. in Ezech. 17.
as in the presence of the Lord, with reverence calling him to witness of a
truth, in Clem. Alexand. Padagog. libr. 3. cap. 11. Qui aliquid vendit, aut
emit eorum qua a se venduntur aut emuntur, nunquam dicat duo pretia; absit
autem iusiurandum, author omnium quae venduntur; absit. etia^ in alijs
iusiurandum, and ita philosoph^ntur negotiatores forenses and caupones. Eos qui
prater haec faciunt, qui sunt auari, mendaces, hypocrita, qui veritatem
ca^ponantur, ex paterna aula expulit Dominus.
a matter of importance, and Ierem. 4.2.
to the glory of his name. For this cause does Abram declare the manner of his
reverence, before the matter for which he swear, I have lifted up my hand,
etc. Moreover, we may not swear Genesis 21.21.22. Ios. 2.11.12. August. ad
Consentium lib. cap. 18. Christus dixit, ne iurate omnino: vt nunquam
voluntatis approbatione fieret, sed necessitate infirmitatis alterius, id est
malo alterius, cui non aliter persuaderi posse quod dicitur nisi iurando fides
fiat. Hieron. ad Celant. Mentiri igitur and iurare lingua tua prorsus ignoret,
tantusque in te sit very amor, vt quicquid dixeris iuratum pute^.
or take witness of the name of God, when either our speech of it self is
credible, or we may sufficiently prove it by other testimonies. And who would
not have believed Abram Chrysostom. in oper. imperfect. Hom. 17. Si timet Deum,
etiam fine iuramento non mentitur. Si autem non timet, neque cum iuramento
potest dicere veritatem.
without an oath, if by word only he had given all the pray unto the king of
Sodom? Nevertheless if we diligently observe the purpose of the history, we
shall soon epsy diverse weighty reasons, why Abram made this oath in religious
and godly wisdom. It is commonly perceived, how Senec. lib. 1. De moribus.
Hoc habet omnis affectus vt in quod ipso insanit, in idem putet cateros
insanire.
men do measure their neighbors by their own affections. The king of Sodo^
seeking subtillie to be possessor of the persons, would surely have doubted
some deceit, or at the least, inconstancy in Abram, in offering him the
persons and the goods, if he had not by witness from the Lord, protested that he
did freely and fully deliver all. Secondly, for the peoples sake, because of
false supition, Ambros. libr. de Abram. 1. cap. 3. Minuis enim fructum triumphi
mercedis suspicio, and beneficij arrodit gratiam. Plurimum enim refers, vtrum
pecunia an gloriae dimicaneris. Alter merconarij loco ducitur, alter dignus
habetur conseruatoris gloria.
least he should have bin thought to have bin hired to the wars, or for hope
of booty or spoil allured. For this cause he protests, that he will not
take unto himself; no not that which otherwise he might, of the king of Sodom:
whereby it might be evident, that he warred not for gain, or covetousness,
vain glory or ambition; but for the sauegard of his brothers son, seeking
only the glory of the Lord, and the wealth and sauegard of his children. But
whether was it lawful for Abra^ to refuse the benefit of this gift of the king
of Sodom? or not to be possessor of the goods, which otherwise were lawfully
his own? For when the Lord does vouchsafe us riches, and we may enjoy the^ by
gift, inheritance, or lawful Deuteronomy. 8.18. 1. King. 3.13. Clem. Alexand.
Padagog. lib. 3. cap. 6. Sunt ^onquo habenda diuitiae, vt est rationi
co^fentan^um: sunt que benign non autem sordide nec insolenter communicanda.
Boda in Luc. 12. Non reprehenditur dines, quod terram cotuerit, vel fructus in
horrea congregauerit, sed quod fiduetiam vitae in illis posuerit, nec
pauperibus erogauerit, vt ab ijs reciperetur in aeternis tabernaculis.
contract; it cannot be but prodigality Prou. 27.23.24. 1. Tim. 5.8. Ambros
offic. 2. cap. 21. Non enim prodigos nos docet esse scriptura sed liberales.
Liberale est hospitio suscipere, nudum vestire, redimere captinos, non habentes
sumption, iauere. Prodigum est, popularis fauoris gratia exinanire proprias
opes.
to waste or forgo them by negligent regard: and great unthankfulness, if we
account them not Genesis 32.10. Job. 1.21.
as the blessings of the Lord. All this undoubtedly was not unknown to
righteous Abram. But yet as there is a time Eccles. 3.6. Basil. Hom. de inu^d.
Diuitia sunt communia vita instrumenta, viaticum ad iustitiam, ministerium ad
virtutem. Vnde ego concludo: Sunt igitur honesta ad dei cultum nostramque
necessitatem conferuandae. August. epist. 1^0. D^uitia se^ulares si desunt, non
per mala opera quaerantur in ^^^ndo: si autem adsunt per bona opera seruentur
in coelo. Animum virilent and Christianum nec debent fi^^ccedant, extollere;
nec debent frangere, si recedant.
to get, and hold our commodities for the glory of God and our own behoof;
so is there a time Eccles. 3.6. 2. King. 5.16. Deuteronomy. 16.19. 2. Pet. 2.15.
Gregor. in 1. Reg. cap. 7. Ardor auaritiae causa accipiendorum munerum, and
acceptio munerum causa est peruertendi iudicij. Idem. Moral. lib. 12. Quis
autem non erub^sca^ dicere, quid mihi dabis vt tibi iustitiam faciam? Nonne
simile est ac si dicatur, quid mihi vultis da^e, vt veritatem abuegem, officium
perdam, and Deum vendam?
to spend and to forgo, when by our expenses of riches, we may more promote
the glory of God, then we may prevail by keeping of them. For this cause
says Abram, I will not take of thine, so much as a thread or the latchet of a
shoe, least thou should say, I have made Abram rich. The Lord had promised
to bless Genesis 12.2.
Abram: wherein was contained Ios. 1.5. Heb. 13.5.
wealth and riches. Abram now delights to take Sicut Deuteronomy. 7.18.19 Romans 5.4.
Peter Mart. Comment. in Genesis Deus vult vt maneat suus bonos illique soli debere
suas diuitias. Vnde quod supra dicitur cum ogrederetur Abram ^n Aegypto illum
abundasse gregibus, and armentis; ego accipio illa aucta dei beneficio illi
fuisse, non regio Pharaonis liberalitate, cum deus eius diuitiarum solut, vt
hic apparet author esse voluerit.
experience, and to give an example unto the world, of the fidelity and
goodness of the Lord; that according to his promise he would more directly
enlarge the wealth of Abram. Therefore he, for this cause refuses the
Chrysostom. H^^^. in Genesis 35. Habeo Do^^^ qui iunu^^^a mihi suppeditat bona:
superna gratia innitor, non opus mihi diuitijs tuu: non indige^ h^manis
fatultatibus: contenius sum Dei in me beneficentia: scio illius largitatem.
wealth of Sodom, to the end to make the fulfilling of the promise, to be more
notorious and manifest. And this is plain by the manifest words of Scripture.
For he does not Chrysostom. ibid. Non accipiam, acceptu ijs, etc. hoc inquit
permittam accipere portionem.
absolutely refuse the use of the goods of the king of Sodom, as though it had
been unlawful for Abram to convert of them to his commodity: but first
concerning the necessary food of his servants and confederates, he excepteth
by them the diminishing of the Verse. 24.
spoil. Secondly, he gave tithe unto Melchizedek Chrysostom. ibid. Franc.
Iun. in Anal. in Genesis 14. Vicissim Abram Deo and Melchisedecho regi gratias
quas potuit habuit. De omnibus enim spolijs rebusque bello captis decima^ quas
sibi iure poteras vendicare, nulla resibi iure mancipij conseruata, consecrauit
Domino deditque sacerdoti illius. Quin and scriptura tradit decimas fuisse
solutas priusquam reliqua sunt Sodomo concessa.
of all the substance that he had taken: for why, it was meet that he should
Like as Numb. 31.49.50. 2. Chron. 20.28. Bernard. Epist. 66. Danti rependi
quicquam gratius ab accipiente non potest, quam si gratum habuerit, quod gratis
accepit. Nam spiritui gratia contumeliam facit, qui beneficium dantis grata
mente non suscipit.
thereby declare his thankefulnes to God, in offering unto him an oblation of
all the spoils, who had bin the author of all the victory; that it might
appear, that Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 35. Ille enim coeli and terrae conditor,
ille and nobis in hoc bello victoriae and triumphi author.
the conqueror himself did acknowledge wholly the victory from him.
Thirdly, he adiudgeth Verse. 24.
the division of all the spoil to every one of his confederats a part;
declaring thereby his authority in the whole: so that where he only
resigneth his part unto the king of Sodom, he declares that he did it Ambros.
de Abraham. libr. 1. cap. 3. Ideoque quoniam sibi mercedem ab homine non
quaefinit, ali ipso Deo paulo post accepit.
only for religion sake, and that his chiefest treasure was Coloss. 3.2.3.
Matthew. 6.20.
hid with God. Thus does the father of the faithful teach his children,
Bernard. sermon. In Cant. 56. Sermo quide^ vinus and efficax, exempium operis
est, plurimum faciens suasibilem: tunc quoque intendimus quod dicitur dum
monstratur scibile quod suadetur.
by his own example, to love the Lord, his Matthew. 10.37. Origin. in libr.
Judge. Hom. 2. Vnusquisque quod prae cateris colis, quodque super omnia miratur
and diligit, hoc ei Deus est. Si quid est quod in dilectionis lance
praeponderat, hoc tibi est in Deum. Sed vereor ne apud quam plurimos
praeponderat auri amor, and auaritiae pondus pressa satis lance denergat:
vereor and in alijs ne libidinis and voluptatis amor; in alijs ne amor gloria
secularis, and humana dignitatis cupiditas super omnia praegrauet. August.
Confess. lib. 4. cap. 9. Beatus qui amat te, and amicum in te, and inimicum
propter te. Solus enim nullum charum amittit, cui omnes in illo chari sunt qui
non amittitur. Te nemo amittis, nisi qui dimittis, and qui dimittit, quo it aut
quo fugit, nisi a te placido, ad te iratum.
glory, and dignity; above their own preferment, riches or commodity. Obser.
1. verse 17. The friends of the rich are many, and Prou. 19.4.6.
every one seeks the face of him that gives gifts. Secondly, verse 18.
Christian charity requires to be Matthew. 5.44. Galat. 6.10.
good to all, but chiefly to those that profess the faith. Thirdly, the Lord
has his Church throughout 1. King. 19.10. Romans 11.5.
the world, although they remain unto us unknown. Fourthlie, the office of
Priesthood, Exodus 23.1. 2. Heb. 5.4.
is an institution of the Lord, which none must take unto himself without the
calling of the Lord: which seeing now it is Heb. 7.27. and 9.12.26. Justin.
Mart. Dialog. in Triff. Supplicationes fimul and gratiarum actiones quae a
dignis peraguntur solat perfectas esse, and Deo charat victimas ipse quoque
affirmanerim. Ha^ vero solas facere Christiani didicerunt in ipsius etiam
alimonia sua recordatione aridae iuxta and liquidae: in qua and passionis quam
pertulit per ipsum Deus Deum, meminit. Iren. lib. 4. cap. 34. Genus oblationu^
reprobatum est: oblationes enim and illic, oblationes autem and hic. Sed
species immutata est tantum, etc. offerimus enim ei quae sunt eius, congruenter
communicationem and vnitatem praedicantes. Quemadmodum enim qui a terra panis
percipiens vo^ationem Dei iam non communis panis est, sed Eucharistia ex duabus
rebus constans terrena and coelesti: sic and corpora nostra percipientia
Eucharistiam, iam non sunt corruptibilia spem resurrectionis habentia.
ceased, in the external and proper act of Priesthood (which is offering up
of ceremonial sacrifice) and Jesus Christ is become our only Heb. 7.24.26.28.
August. de ciuit. Dei. lib. 10. cap. 20. Christus cum in forma dei, sacrificium
cum patre sumat, cum quo and vnus Deus est; tame^ in forma serui, sacrificiu^
maluit esse quam sumere: per hoc and sacerdos est, ipse offerens, and ipse
oblatio: cuius rei sacramentu^ quotidianum esse voluit ecclesiae sacrificiu^,
quae cum ipsius capitis corpus sit, scipsam per ipsum discit offerre. Quid aijs
Augustine? Imo ipsum per scipsam offere Romana ecclesia. At quo Christus denu^
offeratur, nemo patrum somniauit sacrificium. Videtis ergo quod sacrificium
dixcrin^ patres, and quid per sacrificij nomen intellexerint.
Priest; they are usurpers and idolaters Hos. 8.4. 2. Pet. 2.15. Heb 5.4.
which do take unto themselves, that honor which is only due unto the son
of God. Fiftlie, verse 19. The blessing rightly given by the minister of God,
Numb. 6.6.23.27.
is the blessing of the Lord himself; for Ierem. 15.19. Malach. 2.7.
he is the mouth and messenger of the Lord of hosts. Sixthly. verse. 20. We
ought to praise God Psalm. 103.2. 1. Cor. 4.7.
upon all occasions of his benefits, and to acknowledge them only to proceed
from him. Seauenthlie, we ought to be careful 2. Chron. 29.3. and 34 3.
to promote religion, and the true worship of the Lord; and to Exodus 25.2.3. 1.
Chron. 29.3.
distribute our goods, for the maintenance thereof. Eightlie, verse 21. The
wicked do ever seek to circumuent the just Psalm. 37.32. 1. Sam. 18.21.
and simple men, and to be enriched by their labors. Ninthlie, verse 22. An
oath for confirmation of truth, in weighty matters, ought Genes. 23.24.
to be taken for the glory of God, wherein we must only swear Deuteronomy. 6.13. and
10.20. Exodus 22.10.11. and 31 50.53.
by him, when the truth by other testimony cannot be proved. Tenthlie, verse
33. When possession of goods do hinder the glory of God, it is 2. King.
5.20.26. 1. King. 13.8. Act. 4.36.
not lawful for Christians to enjoy them, although they may otherwise by
Haereditate vt Barnabae, Petri, etc. Matthew. 10. contractu vt Act. 8.18.20.
civil equity, claim the right and property of them. Doct. eleventh, we
are with equity to look unto the Exodus 22.5. Ezech. 18.18.
commodity of our neighbor, and to give the labourer Deuteronomy. 14.15. 1. Tim.
5.18. Iam. 5.4.
his deserved hire.

Finis partis primae tomi primi.
Deo vni and trino, soli sit gloria per mediatorem filium in sempiternum.
A TABLE OF SVCH PLACES OF SCRIPTVRE AS ARE briefly interpreted or reconciled.
Genesis. Chap. 15. verse. 1. p. 222. v. 7. p. 458. c. 17. v. 1. p. 219. v. 9.
p. 497 v. 13. p. 496. v. 17. p. 463. c. 18. verse. 25. p. 75. c. 21. v. 19. p.
128. c. 22. v. 12. p. 58. c. 25. v. 8. p. 463. c. 27. verse. 1. 15. p. 422. c.
34. v. 3. p. 341. c. 35. v. 27. p. 468. c. 39. v. 9 p. 151. v. 20. p. 323. c.
42. v. 16. p. 393. c. 47. verse. 9. p. 468. c. 49. v. 10. p. 497. Exodus. Chap.
3. v. 14. p. 335. c. 6. v. 6. p. 245. c. 7. v. 1. page 376. c. 8. v. 8. p. 440.
c. 9. verse. 16. p. 109. c. 12. v. 24. p. 496. c. 15. v. 18. p. 496. c. 18. v.
19. p. 376. c. 19. v. 19. p. 134 c. 20. v. 4. p. 180. v. 5. p. 245. v. 11. p.
47. v. 24. p. 338. c. 23. verse. 32. p. 520. c. 24. v. 9. p. 468. c. 33. v. 11
p. 468. v. 20. p. 248. 469. Leuiticus. Chap. 1. v. 2. p. 333. c. 2. v. 13. p.
333. c. 10. v. 3. p. 185. c. 11. v. 1. p. 262. v. 7. p. 262. c. 18. v. 5. p.
152 v. 6. p. 197. c. 25. v. 9. p. 277. c. 26. v. 5. p. 263. Numbers. Chap. 11.
v. 11. p. 391. 416. v. 21. p. 391. ver. 22. p. 393. c. 12. v. 1. p. 410. c. 21.
v. 10. p. 391. c. 24 v. 4. p. 468. Deuteronomie. Chap. 3. v. 11. p. 233. c. 5.
v. 14. p. 47. c. 7. v. 4. p. 236. c. 7. verse. 8. p. 152. c. 8. v. 3. page 40.
c. 8. v. 16. p. 160. v. 18. p. 162. c. 12. ver. 32. p. 147. c. 13. v. 3. p. 58.
v. 11. p. 192 c. 14. v. 4. p. 262. c. 15. v. 17. p. 496 c. 19. v. 16. p. 518.
c. 28. v. 1. p. 228 c. 31. v. 25. p. 377. c. 32. v. 8. p. 423 443. ver. 10. p.
246. v. 21. p. 246. v. 49. p. 294. Joshua. Chap. 5. v. 13. p. 468. Judges. Chap.
3. ver. 9. p. 376. c. 4. v. 6. p. 294. c. 10. ver. 16. p. 246. c. 14. v. 3. p.
237. v. 6. p. 360. v. 7. p. 237 c. 20. v. 13. p. 381. Ruth. Chap. 4. ver. 18.
page 461. 1. Samuel. Chap. 2. v. 29. p. 158. c. 15. v. 11 p. 250. verse. 22, 23.
p. 334. v. 29. p. 245. c. 17. ver. 36. p. 360. c. 18. v. 11. p. 6. c. 20. v. 3.
p. 323. c. 24. v. 4. p. 178. c. 27. v. 1. p. 341. 2. Samuel. Chap. 5. v. 11. p.
520. c. 11. v. 4. p. 393. 1. Kings. Chap. 6. v. 2. p. 168. v. 14. p. 198 c. 8.
v. 46. p. 252. c. 11. v. 2. p. 236. 2. Kings. Chap. 2. v. 11. p. 224. c. 7. v.
19. p. 292. c. 12. verse. 2. p. 338. c. 20. v. 9, 11. p. 109. Hester. Chap. 8.
verse. 11. p. 151. Job. Chap. 1. v. 6 p. 230. c. 4. v. 18. page 247. c. 5. ver.
3. p. 353. ver. 4. p. 192. 202. c. 7. v. 1. p. 218. c. 9. v. 31. p. 257. c. 11.
v. 7. 335. c. 14 v. 4. p. 213. 257. c. 19. v. 26. p. 228 c. 21. v. 14. p. 373.
c. 25. v. 5. p. 247 v. 6. p. 252. c. 26. v. 7. p. 16. c. 29. verse. 1, 15. p.
356. c. 33. v. 24, 25. p. 161. c. 34. v. 18. p. 343. c. 38. v. 6. p. 16. v. 8.
p. 285. v. 9. p. 268. v. 10. p. 13. c. 40. verse. 14. p. 360. c. 41. verse. 25.
p. 359. Psalms. Psalm. 2. v. 4. p. 443. v. 7. p. 230. ps. 3. v. 6. p. 360. ps.
5. v. 4. p. 220. v. 9. p. 137. ps. 7. v. 9. p. 220. ps. 9. v. 16. p. 75. ps.
10. v. 4. p. 373. v. 5. p. 373. 220. psalm. 11. v. 5. p. 248. ps. 14. v. 1. p.
343 ps. 18. v. 8. p. 246 v. 10. p. 335. ps. 19. verse. 5, 6. p. 15. ps. 27. v.
8. p. 246. ps. 33. v. 6. p. 7. v. 7. p. 285. ps. 34. v. 14. p. 489. ver. 15. p.
246. ps. 36. v. 6. p. 413. ps. 37. v. 1. p. 165. v. 5. p. 477. v. 8. p. 165. v.
25. p. 325. v. 35. p. 201. ps. 42. ver. 2. p. 162. ps. 44. verse. 3. p. 245.
ver. 23. p. 303. ps. 51. v. 1. p. 391. v. 5. p. 213. v. 7. p. 213. v. 8. p.
399. v. 16. p. 336 ps. 53. v. 1. p. 6 ver. 5. p. 191. ps. 55. v. 22. p. 375.
ps. 58. verse. 10. p. 397. ps. 62. v. 5. p. 75. ps. 72. ver. 1, 2. p. 376. ver.
4. p. 376. ps. 73. verse. 6. p. 373. v. 19. p. 303. ps. 76. verse. 5, 12. p. 108.
ps. 82. v. 4. page 376. ps. 90. ver. 4. p. 107. v. 10. p. 218. ps. 97. ver. 7.
p. 150. v. 12. p. 396. ps. 98. ver. 4. p. 105. ps. 104. v. 5. p. 16. ver. 6. p.
12. 285. 298. v. 16. p. 413. v. 22 p. 359. ps. 105. ver. 18. page 323. ps. 106.
v. 33. p. 393. ps. 107. v. 34 p. 162. 332. ps. 109. ver. 6. p. 396 ps. 10. p.
192. ps. 110. v. 4. p. 523. ps. 119. v. 24. p. 345. v. 106. p. 220 ver. 176. p.
134. ver. 267. p. 151. ps. 139. ver. 6. p. 336. v. 7. p. 435. v. 16. p. 335.
ps. 143. v. 3. p. 161. ps. 145. v. 7. p. 304. v. 18. p. 359. ps. 147. v. 15,
18. p. 306. Proverbs. Chap. 5. v. 10. p. 158. v. 17, 18. p. 413. c. 3. v. 2. p.
228. v. 9. p. 433. v. 11. p. 394. verse. 33. p. 472. c. 6. v. 26. p. 412. c. 8.
v. 15. p. 376. v. 27 p. 15. c. 10. v. 20. p. 162. ver. 24. p. 437. c. 11. ver.
31. p. 228. c. 13. v. 19. p. 502. c. 14. ver. 1. p. 156. ver. 7. p. 520. ver.
9. p. 205. v. 20. p. 163. c. 16. verse. 2. p. 338. ver. 4. p. 185. v. 25. p.
338. c. 17. ver. 21. p. 153. c. 19. v. 20. p. 158. c. 28. v. 13. p. 137. c. 29.
v. 11. p. 477. c. 30. v. 6. p. 311. v. 8. p. 484. v. 30 p. 356. Ecclesiastes.
Chap. 1. v. 5. p. 15. v. 7. p. 288. v. 14. p. 164. c. 3. v. 10. p. 152. v. 21
p. 367. c. 5. v. 10. p. 163. c. 10. v. 13 p. 160. Isaiah. Chap. 1. verse. 11. p.
336. v. 15. p. 337. c. 5. ver. 8. p. 443. c. 6. v. 1. p. 468. c. 7. v. 18. p.
305. c. 8. v. 20. p. 345. c. 9. v. 13. p. 360. c. 10. v. 5. p. 505. c. 11. v.
1. p. 152. v. 2. p. 145 c. 23. v. 3. p. 65. c. 28. v. 15. p. 434. c. 40. v. 8.
p. 317. v. 12, 17. p. 28. ver. 22. p. 9. ver. 28. p. 335. v. 29. p. 305. c. 41.
v. 23. p. 21. c. 42. v. 8 p. 150. ver. 22. p. 15. c. 43. ver. 25. p. 152. c.
44. v. 6. p. 158. v. 25. p. 21 c. 46. ver. 9, 10. p. 343. c. 53. v. 5. p. 151.
c. 54. v. 8. p. 228. v. 9. p. 342 c. 55. ver. 8, 9. p. 343. c. 48. ver. 1. p.
509. c. 59. ver. 21. p. 451. c. 64. ver. 6. p. 257. 334. c. 66. verse. 1, 2. p.
338. v. 3. p. 336. Jeremiah. Chap. 4. v. 22. p. 212. c. 5. v. 22. p. 13. c. 7.
ver. 25. p. 238. c. 9. v. 22. p. 285. c. 10. v. 1. p. 21. v. 23. p. 212 c. 14.
ver. 22. p. 21. c. 15. ver. 19. p. 339. 455. c. 16. v. 16. page 412. c. 17. v.
9. p. 351. c. 18. v. 6. p. 399. c. 20. verse. 14. p. 391. c. 23. verse. 6. p.
152. 255. v. 24. p. 28. 196. 435. c. 26. v. 6. p. 345. c. 31. v. 37. p. 16.
Lamentations. Chap. 5. v. 21. p. 395. Ezechiel. Chap. 1. v. 4. p. 469. c. 8. v.
12. p. 344. 373 c. 13. v. 18, 22. p. 412. c. 16. ver. 6. p. 152. c. 18. ver.
20. p. 399. ver. 29. p. 108. v. 32. p. 81. c. 20. v. 24, 25. p. 339. c. 36. v.
6. p. 407. v. 13, 14. p. 343. Daniel. Chap. 3. v. 27. p. 109. c. 7. v. 9. p.
469. Hosea. Chap. 1. v. 10. p. 230. c. 9. v. 13. p. 153. c. 13. ver. 3. p. 292.
ver. 14. p. 152. c. 14. v. 2. p. 338. Amos. Chap. 2. v. 13. p. 251. c. 3. v. 2.
p. 495. c. 6. ver. 8. p. 246. c. 9. v. 6. p. 16. Jonah. Chap. 1. v. 3. p. 391.
c. 3. ver. 4. p. 250. Micah. Chap. 6. v. 8. p. 370. c. 7. ver. 5. p. 424. v.
19. p. 257. Habacuk. Chap. 1. v. 14. p. 188. Zephanie. Chap. 1. v. 12. p. 345.
c. 3. v. 5. p. 345. Haggi. Chap. 2. v. 13. p. 179. Zachary. Chap. 1. ver. 8.
p. 469. c. 2. v. 8. p. 246. c. 5. v. 3. p. 119. 129. c. 12. v. 10. p. 251.
Malachie. Chap. 1. verse. 2, 3. p. 246. c. 2. v. 10. p. 230. v. 16. p. 92. c. 3.
v. 16 p. 119. 335. Matthew. Chap. 1. v. 21. p. 145. c. 3. v. 16 p. 471. c. 4.
v. 3. p. 112. c. 5. ver. 6. p. 161. v. 9. p. 491. v. 18. p. 317. v. 32. p. 100.
v. 35. p. 517. c. 6. v. 9 p. 437. v. 28. p. 101. v. 33. p. 166. c. 7. v. 6. p.
114. v. 3. p. 399. v. 13. p. 477. v. 29. p. 107. c. 10. verse. 16. p. 105. 475.
v. 26. p. 477. ver. 28. p. 360. v. 29. p. 248. v. 37. p. 455. c. 12. 42. p.
411. c. 15. v. 8. p. 180. v. 18. p. 350. c. 16. v. 3. p. 20. c. 16. verse. 24.
p. 485. c. 17. v. 6. p. 114. c. 18. v. 12. p. 134. c. 19. verse. 11. p. 84. 88.
v. 12. p. 84. 160. v. 13. p. 94. c. 20. v. 15. p. 111. c. 23. v. 9. p. 58. c.
24. ver. 15. p. 282. v. 23. p. 106. v. 24. p. 106. v. 29. p 345. v. 40. p. 244.
c. 25. ver. 5. p. 215. v. 32. p. 136. v. 44. p. 138. c. 26. v. 26. p. 146. 339.
ver. 74. p. 393. ver. 52. p. 489. c. 27. v. 4. p. 191. v. 42. p. 68. Mark.
Chap. 9. v. 49. p. 333. c. 10. v. 8 p. 225. c. 11. v. 13, 14. p. 41. c. 13 v.
24. p. 345. c. 16. v. 20. p. 441. Luke. Chap. 3. v. 36. p. 444. c. 14. v. 28 p.
472. c. 16. v. 17. p. 317. ver. 31 p. 244. c. 17. v. 6. 360. v. 10. p. 258 v.
30. p. 281. c. 20. v. 18. p. 169. c. 21. v. 8. p. 106. c. 23. v. 29. p. 153 v.
30. p. 102. c. 24. v. 31. p. 128. v. 45. p. 126. John. Chap. 1. v. 2, 3. p. 6.
v. 3. p. 43. v. 12. p. 152. c. 3. v. 4. p. 391. v. 5. p. 230. v. 13. p. 225. v.
16. p. 131. c. 4. v. 24. p. 335. c. 5. v. 39. p. 223 c. 6. 44. p. 133. c. 8. v.
44. p. 212. v. 56. p. 485. c. 10. ver. 28. p. 303. c. 15. v. 5. p. 176. 223. c.
16. v. 20. p. 154. Acts. Chap. 2. v. 3. p. 442. v. 3. p. 471 c. 4. v. 19. p.
158. c. 7. ver. 2. p. 454 v. 4. p. 459. v. 5. p. 492. v. 59. p. 224 c. 10. ver.
15. p. 263. c. 11. v. 23. p. 220. c. 13. ver. 39. p. 253. c. 14. v. 17. p. 330.
Romans. Chap. 1. ver. 15. p. 149. ver. 19. p. 330. c. 3. v. 23. p. 350. c. 4.
v. 2, 3 p. 178. c. 5. v. 11. p. 253. v. 16, 17. p. 351. c. 6. v. 12. p. 393. c.
7. v. 7. p. 213. 349. v. 15. 18. p. 393. c. 8 v. 7. p. 188. v. 20. p. 159. 162.
v. 26. p. 58. c. 9. v. 4. p. 317. v. 11. p. 389 v. 13. p. 246. v. 16. p. 389.
v. 21. p. 399. v. 22. p. 155. c. 11. verse. 4. p. 499. c. 12. v. 18. p. 520. c.
13. verse. 1, 2. p. 158. v. 4. p. 376. 377. c. 14. v. 2. p. 365. v. 10. p. 102.
v. 13 p. 399. c. 15. v. 4. p. 281. 1. Corinthians. Chap. 1. v. 20, 21. p. 330. c.
3. v. 18. p. 330. c. 5. v. 5. p. 519. c. 6. v. 17. p. 351. c. 7. v. 1, 2. p.
84. v. 9. p. 89. 92. v. 28. p. 86. v. 32. p. 86. v. 38. p. 94. c. 10. verse. 11.
p. 281. c. 11. v. 7. p. 38. c. 12. v. 12. p. 351 ver. 22. p. 131. v. 24. p.
173. c. 15. v. 20. p. 369. v. 41. p. 26. 2. Corinthians. Chap. 1. v. 20. p. 346.
389. c. 5 v. 2, 10. p. 102. v. 21. p. 255. c. 7. v. 10. p. 190. c. 11. v. 3.
page 121. c. 12. v. 4. p. 436. Galathians. Chap. 1. v. 8, 9. p. 89. c. 3. v.
13. p. 151. v. 24 p. 345. v. 27. p. 102. c. 4. v. 29. p. 153. c. 5. v. 17. p.
393 Ephesians. Chap. 1. ver. 5, 11. p. 343. c. 2. v. 1. p. 151. v. 3. p. 213.
c. 4. v. 4. p. 152. ver. 6. p. 230. v. 14. p. 335. v. 23. p. 208. v. 24. p. 32.
c. 5. v. 11 p. 455. v. 26. p. 155. v. 28. p. 156. v. 32. p. 225. 351. v. 33. p.
158. c. 6. v. 13. p. 144. Philippians. Chap. 3. ver. 9. p. 351 Colossians.
Chap. 1. v. 17. p. 196. c. 3. v. 10 p. 32. 210. v. 18. p. 155. 1.
Thessalonians. Chap. 4. v. 13. p. 228. 2. Thessalonians. Chap. 2. ver. 9. 409.
v. 10, 11. p. 92. 1. Timothy. Chap. 1. v. 13. p. 391. c. 2. v. 14 p. 121. c.
3. verse. 12. p. 156. 185. v. 16. p. 152. c. 4. v. 4. p. 364. v. 16 p. 441. c.
5. v. 14. p. 155. c. 6. v. 8. p. 483. v. 16. p. 13. 226. 2. Timothy. Chap. 2.
v. 19. p. 499. c. 3. v. 16 p. 345. Titus. Chap. 2. ver. 5. page 94. Hebrews.
Cap. 1. v. 2, 3. p. 230. c. 2. v. 14 p. 351. ver. 16. p. 155. c. 4. v. 13. p.
107. c. 6. v. 4, 5. p. 142. c. 7. v. 3. p. 523. ver. 4, 7. p. 522. c. 8. ver.
9. p. 394. c. 9. v. 14. p. 346. c. 11. v. 5. p. 226. v. 7. p. 281. verse. 8. p.
455. v. 16. p. 403. v. 33. p. 360. v. 36. p. 282. c. 12. ver. 6. p. 165. ver.
7. p. 160. c. 13. v. 4. p. 92. 175. v. 5. p. 166. James. Chap. 1. ver. 8. page
221. v. 14. p. 108. 186. 213. v. 15. p. 186. v. 17 p. 245. c. 2. v. 13. p. 136.
c. 5. v. 16. p. 352. 1. Peter. Chap. 2. v. 2. p. 335. c. 3. v. 7. p. 156. verse.
19. p. 80. 133. v. 20. p. 405. c. 4. v. 17. p. 185. c. 5. v. 8. p. 152. 2.
Peter. Chap. 1. v. 20. p. 396. c. 2. v. 13 p. 158. c. 3. v. 3. p. 205. v. 4. p.
282 v. 8. p. 107. v. 13. p. 159. Jude. Verse. 6. p. 44. 80. 133. Revelations.
Chap. 2. v. 13. p. 409. c. 3. v. 18. p. 126. c. 5. v. 3. 5. p. 152. c. 6. v. 6
p. 451. v. 10. p. 396. v. 16. p. 102. c. 9. v. 2. p. 149. c. 11. v. 3. p. 227.
c. 16. ver. 10. p. 149. c. 12. ver. 12. p. 129. c. 22. v. 2. p. 173.
A TABLE OF THE PRINCIPAL MATTERS contained in this Book.
A
ABstinence ceremonial from meats is superstitions. page 365. Abstine^ce from
blood, a ceremony. page 366. 370 Adams sin wherein is co^sisted: and whether
it were the greatest of all other. page 118. Adams punishment was personal or
natural. page 123 Adams punishment wherein it consisted. page 162 Adams
punishment the fountain of all temporal miseries. page 164 Adam saved by
Christ. page 124 to Add or diminish from the word of God, how dangerous. page
114 Amazons. page 155 Ambition is spiritual murder. page 415 Angels no helpers
in man's creation. page 30 Angels sin unpardonable, wherefore. page 142
Anticipation used in the Scripture. page 54 Apocrypha scripture to be warily
read. page 233 Ask and the measure thereof. page 272 Arts interpreters of
Nature, and handmaides to Divinity. page 28 Astronomy commendalie and
profitable. page 24 Astrology unlawful. page 20. 21. 22. etc. Astrologicall
predictions are presumptions against God, as the Heathen witness. page 22
Ast^^logie, in^ented by Devils, sacrilege to God, with^^^ ground of Arie,
unprofitable, hurtful. page 25
B
BEasts wherefore counted unclean. page 262 Beasts none unclean by nature,
but either in ceremony or use of food. page 262. etc Beasts how many prese^^ed
in the Arc. page 271. 273 Beasts why they are scared, and why they sc^^e man.
page 354 ^^^^ull Beasts ought to be killed. page 373 Blessing of the Lord is in
the horse of the righteous. page 472 Body of man bears the image of God,
how. page 33 Body of man why it is to be covered. page 132 Bodies resurrection
proved. page 57 Buildings superfluous provoke God. page 443
C
CAlling must be expected of Magistrates and Ministers. page 416 Chastity as
well in marriage as in single life. page 94 Children are within the covenant of
grace, and therefore to be baptized, albeit they have not actual faith. page
389 Children shall not bear their fathers sins. page 399 Church of Rome
corrupts the Fathers, Councels, etc. page 322 Commandments of God must be
valued in three points. page 75 Commandment to Adam contained the whole law.
page 78 Conscience wounded is hell. page 129. 130 Conscience guiltines drives
from God, but not to God, without grace. page 131 Conscience wounded, breeds
in the wicked desperation. page 190. etc. Contentions of man and wife, and the
cause thereof. page 98 Conte^tion in general, and the cause. page 484. 502 to
Covet imperfections. page 400 Creation how it was performed. page 5 Creator was
Jesus Christ. page 6 Creation wherefore continued six days. page 45 Creatures
all are good by creation. page 42 Creatures why some obey man and some rebel.
page 44 Creatures why called Gods hosts. page 46 Curiosity reproved. page 3
Curiosity dangerous. page 8 Custom of sin takes away the sense of sinning.
page 366
D
DEath comes by sin. page 70 Death of soul what it is. page 79 Death of
body and the use thereof. page 81 Devils not evil by creation, but by fall.
page 44 the Devil spoke by the Serpent. page 105 Difference in men's judgments
not hurtful, unless it be maintained with contention. page 308 Drunkards
condemned by Noah his example. page 394
E
EArth without form. page 3. 4 Earth and Sea are one compass. page 12. 15
Earth hangs, and that upon nothing. page 16 Ever, what it signifies in
Scripture. page 496 Examples of Gods justice why they are not now so manifold
as in former time. page 345 Experience of Gods mercies profitable and
comfortable. page 499
F
FAlse Christ's forewarned. page 106 Filthy speaking forbidden. page 179
Firmames, the substance, measure and use. page 89 Flesh of beasts whether
permitted to be eaten before the flood. page 41. 361 Flood of Noah came in
April, or in the beginning of May. page 280 Floods after Noah's flood. page 331
Food of Paradise abundant without flesh of beasts. page 40 Fruits of the earth
more pleasant, plentiful and nourishable before the flood. page 41 trees bare
Fruit at all seasons before the curse. ibid.
G
GIants their names and nature. page 232 Gluttony taxed. page 39 God only
without beginning. page 2 God needs none of his creatures. page 2. 74 Gods
omnipotency. page 3 Gods power created and preserves all. page 7 Gods power
to work without and against means. page 14. 465 Gods providence universal.
page 108 Gods foreknowledge no cause of evil page 109. etc Gods decree
effectiue and permissi^e. page 109 Gods gift are free. page 389 God only good
of himself. page 111 God is without a body, or affections or passions: And
what the Scripture means by ascribing such to God. page 245. 246 God cannot
repent. page 247 God is incomprehensible. page 248 Gods proper attributes are
his proper nature. page 438 Gods will the fountain of goodness and justice.
page 73 Gods wisdom and love showed in man's redemption. page 151 God
wherefore he suffers the godly to be persecuted. page 185 Gods word the only
rule of ma^s obedience page 72 Good in part and absolutely good. page 82
H
HEathen Fables of Antiquity. page 56 Heathen remembering the flood of Noah.
page 328 Heathen Philosophers but fools in true wisdom. page 330 Hebrew
language was common to all before the confusion. page 104. 429 Hebrew language
not used of the Jews in the time of Christ preaching. page 448 Hebrews whereof
they are so called. page 511 Henoch died not. page 224 Henoch wherefore he was
taken away. page 227
I
Idolatry in representing God by an Image. page 32 Ignorance a deadly sin.
page 481 Image and likeness. page 31 Image of God in man wherein is co^sisted.
page 33 Image of God a spiritual substance with perfect qualities. page 35
Image of Adam in all men. page 207. 209 Image of God corrupted in Adam, is
Adams Image. page 208 Image of God how far it is in man corrupted. page 210
Infirmities of Abraham, and all the Saints of God. page 478 Invention of Arts
by Adam. page 204 Invention of Arts commendable if not abused. page 432 Injury
how it may be resisted. page 518
K
Kindred not always friends. page 424
L
Lascivious looks are adulteries. page 481 Life of the Patriarchs prolonged by
nature, not by miracle, and the causes thereof. page 116. etc. Life of beasts
is their blood; man's life is in his blood. page 368 Light created before the
Sun, and wherefore first. page 13 Light and darkness how they are
distinguished. page 14
M
MAgistrates authority, author, end. page 376 Magistrates duty. page 416 Man a
more noble creature then the heavens. page 29 Man's excellency defaced by
sin. page 30 Man's inabilitie to come to God without help of grace. page 136
Man a little world. page 60 Man's misery and the cause thereof. page 105 Man's
nature corrupted is an enemy to God. page 185 Man cannot convert, unless he
be converted. page 189 Marriage necessary now, as in the Creation. page 85
Marriage of Ministers approved by Scriptures, Councels, Fathers, and
experience. page 89. etc. Marriage has nothing hurtful, but abuse or
punishment of sin. page 94 Marriage what it is. page 99 Marriage in the kindred
wherefore forbidden. page 197 Marriage no les to virtue and godliness. page 221
Marriage with Atheists ^r Papists unlawful, and hurtful to the Church of God.
page 235 Mass stands upon a false foundation. page 526 Meditation of the
creatures a work of the Sabbath. page 45 Merits of man what they are. page 341
presumption of Merits a vile sin against God. page 337 Moon by what cause
varieth her light. page 26 Mountains of marvelous height. page 294 Murder
severely punished. page 195 Murder ought to be punished without parcialitie.
page 372
N
Nakedness of man wherefore it is loathsome. page 101 Nature what it is. page 12.
109. 300 Natures works which are done of men, are honest in themselves. page
175 Natural reason no sufficient guide to godliness. page 181 Nobility. page
202 Nobility joined with tyranny is spiritual hunting. page 413 Nobility,
the use and end thereof. page 414 Nobility consists in religion. page 424
O
OBedience commanded unto man for man's benefit. page 72 true Obedience wherein
it consists. ibid. Original sin what it is. page 213. 350 Original sin
remains in and after Baptism to them that are not by faith sanctified, and
so far as they are not sanctified. page 351
P
Paradise, the pleasantnes and situation. page 61. 62 Parents blessing their
children is effectual. page 400 no Pe^ce to the wicked. page 201 Peace with
the wicked may be held, not sought. page 520 Penalty of laws the bond of
societies. page 371 Popes in times past have been Clerks unlettered. page 148
Persecution of the godly, for what cause it is suffered by God. page 185 Prayer
has his special fruit. page 352. 388 Pride in apparel extreme madness. page
16 Pride and ambition fight against God. page 430 Priesthood ceased in Christ.
page 544 Promises of God are steadfast. page 340 Promises of God are
conditional. page 497 Punishments civil and their end. page 192 Why Abrams
seed were afflicted with greater punishments. page 495
R
RAinbow, the matter, form, use. page 384 Rashness in war disallowed, and
dangerous. page 514 Recapitulation used in Scripture. page 54 Reconciliation in
contentions, and the means to be used. page 484 Reconciliation must go before
prayer and sacrifice. page 498 Religion must not for any cause be dissembled.
page 480 Religion always a devisio^ unto Atheists. page 513 Repentance of the
wicked what it is. page 191 Repentance truly wherein it consists. page 191
Resurrection proved. page 57 Resurrection of the body certain. page 228
Revenge unlawful, and how far it may be permitted. page 517 Righteousness is
active or passive, that is, by works or by faith. page 253 no man is Righteous
in himself: yet the faithful, in Christ are perfectly righteous. page 225
Riches have inconveniences. page 483 490 why all men are not Rich. page 483
Convenient food the chiefest Riches of this life. page 484
S
Sabbath ought to remember the works of Creation. page 45 Sabbath blessed and
sanctified by God. page 49 Sabbath how it is sanctified. ibid. Sabbath
necessary for man before and after the fall. page 51 Sabbath observed before
Moses. page 52 Sacrifices commanded before Moses. page 179. 181 Sacrifices
commanded, or not accepted. page 333 Sacrifices their use. page 181 Scriptures
scope is to teach us the knowledge of God and of our selves. page 55 Scriptures
manner in expounding it self. page 54 Scriptures ought not to be altered in
one letter. page 147 Scriptures authority. page 198 Scriptures pure from all
error. page 311. 317 Scriptures most sincere histories. page 391 Scriptures a
perpetual and perfect guide to salvation. page 466 Scriptures are a Chronicle
of Gods works. page 46 Scoffers at the Scripture threatened. page 169 Scoffing
at sin is dangerous. page 205 Security a token of destruction. page 244
Security is often taken asleep. page 282 Sea and earth are one compass. page
12 Sea-waters heaped in the deep. page 12. 285 Sea ebbing and flowing, by what
cause. page 19 Serpents not hideous by creation. page 105 Search the
Scriptures. page 338 Single life wherein to be preferred before marriage, and
wherein not. page ^6 Single life is to be applied to the service of the
Gospel. page 94 Single life is not meritorious. ibid. Sin is either lurking
or reigning. page 393 Sin in all men, and none is free. page 392 continuance
in Sin brings deadnes of security or desperation. page 206 Soldiers that
are religious are most profitable for their Prince. page 516 Sun created
after the light. page 14 Sun compasses the earth. page 15 Sun is the
chariot of light, and inlightneth all. page 26 Sun and Stars are greater
then the earth. page 27 Soul of man what it is. page 57 Souls death and
prison. page 81 Speech is the image of the mind. page 426 Speech confounded
was by miracle. page 427 Speech which was the first. page 429 Speech how it was
confounded. page 442
T
TIdes of the sea, how they are caused. page 289 we may not Tempt God, but use
lawful means. page 477 Time what it is. page 2 Time was the beginning of all
things, and nothing before is but God. ibid. Tokens and warnings of judgments
are unregarded, where Gods word is vnreuerenced. page 282 Traditions before the
word written, were in steed of the word: but we have a more sure testimony. 1.
Pet. 1. page 334 Trinity distinguished in the work of Creation. page 6. 7.
The Trinity always acknowledged in the Church. page 7 The Trinity. page 30.
31 Tyranny and bloodshedding revenged by God. page 374
V
VIsions wherefore given unto the Patriarchs. page 468 Visions, how God
appeared who is invisible. page 471 Vows of chastity unlawful. page 85
Vulgar Latin translation corrupt. page 308. etc.
W
Wait on God and have good success. page 325 VValking with God what is
means. page 222. 252. VVarres success is always disposed by God. page 501
War always wins where good cause and good discipline are joined. page
505 War that it be lawful what it requires. ibid. War made unlawful by
what means. page 507 the miseries of War. page 508 War taken rashly in
hand is disallowed and dangerous. page 514 Waters of the deep do stand above
the mountains. page 12. 285 VVater-springs how they are caused. page 288 a
Wicked man can do no good work. page 177. 178 Will of God, secret or revealed.
page 248 Will Worship a sin. page 334 Wine, the benefit and use. page 391
Woman is the image of God as well as man. page 37 Woman the image of man, in
what sense. page 38 Woman her nature and end. page 93 Woman wherein she is to
be an helper to man. ibid. VVomans punishment in conceptions, sorrows and
subjection. page 154. etc. Woman were to have no pain of childbirth by
creation. page 154 World created in the first moment of time. page 2 World for
what cause created. ibid. World and all creatures made of nothing. page 7
Y
Years and months in Scripture, equal to ours in length of time. page 217
Year begins diversely to diverse nations. page 277 Year ecclesiastical and
political. page 278
A TABLE OF HERESIES AND ERRORS, BRIEFLY CONfuted in this Treatise.
A
ADamites beastly heretics. 100 Anabaptists of co^munitie of goods. 490
Anabaptists of swearing. 540 Anselmus his opinion of single life. 88 Andronici
of the sex of women. 94 Anthropomorphites, of Images. 32 Anthropomorphites of
the substance of the soul. 35 Apelles of the Arc of Noah. 270 Aquinas of the
Cherubims of Paradise. 172 Aquinas of natural knowledge. 180 Aristotle of ye
eternity of ye world. 1. 426 of man's natural righteousness. 254
Arrians of the persons of the Trinity. 7 Astrologers grounding prediction on
the authority of Scripture. 18. etc. Atheists, of contradictions in the
Scripture. 38 Atheists of the garden of Paradise. 65 Atheists of Adams
apparel. 168 Atheists of Cains building a city. 198 Atheists of the age of
the Patriarks. 217 Atheists of the flood. 291. 295 Atheists of the mortality
of the soul. 369 Atheists of Noah his drunkenness. 392 Atheists of the
confusion of tongues. 425 Atheists of the Scriptures. 446 Atheists of the
success of war. 404
B
BAbylonians of abstinence. 267 Basilides of the worlds eternity. 1
Bonauentura his opinion of Paradise. 61 Berosus cou^terfeit history of the
flood. 273
C
CAini, who worshipped Caine as a Saint. 188. 192 Caietan his opinion of the
waters. 285 Clemens Alexandr. his opinion of the salvation of Philosophers
which knew not God. 178 Carthusian of single life. 221 Cyprian his opinion of
the sons of God. 231
D
DEmocritus of the substance of the soul. 59 Dicearchus of the substance of
the soul. ibid. Diogenes of ye substance of the soul. ibid.
E
EMpedocles of the substance of the soul. 59 Eunomij of the Trinity. 7
Eusebius his opinion of the sons of God. 231
F
FAustus the Manichee of Abraham. 475
G
GAlen of the substance of ye soul. 60 Greeks of the sex of women. 94
Gregory his opinion of the coming of Henoch and Eliah. 226
H
HEathen fables of Deucalion. 328 Hierome his opinion of single life. 8^. 175
Hyppocrates of the substance of the soul. 59 Hippon of the substance of the
soul. ibid. Homer of the sex of women. 94 Hugo Sanct. Vict. of the sons of
God. 231
I
Jews of man's creation. 30 of Henoch and Eliah his coming. 226 of Apocrypha
Scripture. 234 of man's righteousness 254 of abstinence from meats. 359. 363
Illyticus of original sin. 349 Indians of abstinence. 259 Iosephu^, of the
sons of God. 331 of the age before the flood. 241 of the beginning of the
year. 278
Julian, of the Scripture. 28. 43 of the Serpents speech. 104 of the building
of Babel. 432
Julius 3. Pope his blasphemy. 75 Justin Martyr his opinion of the salvation
of Philosophers which knew not Christ. 178 of the sons of God. 231

L
LActantius his error of the sons of God. 231 L^cucippus of the substance of
ye soul. 59 Lyra his opinion of Paradise. 172
M
MAcedonij of the Trinity. 7 Manichees of the substance of the soul. 35 of
the Scriptures. 38. 48. 84. 369 of two beginnings. 42 of the substance of the
Deity. 60
Marcionites of two beginnings. 42 Melchizedeciani of Melchizedech. 522
Metrodorus Chius of the worlds eternity. 1
O
O Leaster of the taking away of Henoch. 223 Ophitae who worshipped ye Serpent.
125 Origin his opinion of Paradise. 61 of the release of the damned. 141 of
Adams apparel. 164

P
PApists of authority of Magistrates. 376 of authority of Scripture. 446 of
deposing of Princes. 507 of fasting. 267. 363 of forgiveness of sins. 160 of
Images and Idolatry. 32. 146. 149 of interpretation of the Scripture. 307. 320
of the Mass. 523 of Merits. 177. 337 of man's righteousness. 254. 257 of
original sin. 348. 351 of single life. 84. 87. 95 of traditions. 458 of
works of good intent. 333
Pelagians of man's righteousness. 254 Pererius his opinion of the Cherubims of
Paradise 172 Philastrius of the division of tongues. 427 Philo of Paradise. 61.
of the sons of God. 231 of the age before the flood. 241
Plato of the creation of the woman. 93 of the community of goods. 490 of the
nature of life. 367
Procopius Gazeus, of Henoch. 221 Pythagoras of the substance of the soul. 59
of abstinence. 267 of community of goods. 490 of man's power to virtue. 254

R
Rabbis of Adams nakedness. 100 of Adams creation. 125 of Ada^s continuance in
Paradise. 175 of the age of the Patriarchs. 217 of Henoch his taking away. 223
Rupertus of the Cherubims of Paradise. 172
S
SEleuciani of Paradise. 61 Seruetus of the substance of the soul. 35 Sethiani
of Seth borne without sin. 213 Seueriani of the sex of women. 94 Simon Magus of
the Creation. 1 Simplicius of the Scriptures. 4. 28 of Paradise. 65
Strabus of the Cherubims. 172
T
TErtullian his opinion of Paradise. 61 of single life. 88
Thales of the sex of women. 94 Turks of the Messiah. 404
Z
ZEno of natural power to virtue. 254 Zenocrates of the soul. 60
FINIS.
To the gentle Reader.
Gentle Reader, I am to admonish thee concerning the escapes incident to
printing, which I hope are as few as ordinarily in any copy: yet some there
are; as page 32. lin. 17. for Physiognomie read physnomie: page 204. lin. 30.
for wife read sister: and lin. 31. read was the sister and supposed to be.
Other literal escapes, if any be; since I have neither help to confer,
neither space or leisure to reuise, I am compelled to commit to thy favorable
consideration and correction.


