GERARDS Meditations, Written originally in the Latin tongue By JOHN GERARD
Doctor in Divinity, and Superintendant of Heidelberg.

Translated and revised By RALPH WINTERTON Fellow of Kings College in
CAMBRIDGE.

The fifth edition.

Printed by Thomas Buck, and Roger Daniel Printers to the Universitie of
Cambridge. MDCXXXVIII.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE the Reverend Father in God JOHN Lord Bishop of
ROCHESTER.
IT was the answer of Vespasian to Apollonius desiring entrance and access for
Dion and Euphrates two Philosophers: (...). My gates are always open to
Philosophers: but my very breast is open unto thee. What Vespasian professed in
word to Apollonius, the late Reverend Dean of SALISBURY has performed indeed
to me: The gates of his liberality and hospitality have never been barred
against scholars and strangers: but the inward temple of his divine breast was
unlocked unto me, and through that I saw his heart flaming with affection
toward me. The experience of that his divine Philanthropie moved me formerly
to desire entertainment for a stranger, not doubting of his wonted Philoxenie,
not for Dion or Euphrates the Philosophers, but for Gerard the Divine, having
then new put on an English man's habit. I obtained my desire. At SALISBURIE he
was welcome. In city and country afterward he found good entertainment.
After three years he came again to Cambridge. I furnished him with ink and
paper. Then he resolved to take another progress. On New-yeares day I left him
on his way to Rochester. He promised not to divert to any place till he had
seen your Lordship, and presented my most humble service. Happy Gerard, that
may see your Lordship. O that I might but see once again those heavenly eyes
whose first aspect and influence blessed me! O that I might but kiss those
saving hands which raised me! O that I might but visit that temple, and worship
that divine breast, where my soul found sanctuary! If Gerard may, in part I
shall. That which I cannot see with mine eyes, my daily thoughts shall present
unto me: Him whom I cannot reverence with cap and knee, I will always honor
in heart and mind: whither with the feet of my body I cannot walk, I will
travel with all dutiful affection. But what shall I do to express my
thankfulness? He that has escaped shipwreck will hang up his sails to Neptune
for a monument: I have none other sails but such as are made of thin paper, and
those scarce yet dry. He that has passed through the pikes, and is come off
safe and sound, will offer a (...) unto Salus: I have no other (...) but my
self: and that is but a poor scholars service. He that is recovered of a
dangerous sickness, will do his devotions at Aesculapius his temple: My
prayers shall always be directed to Almighty God, who has the hearts of all
men in his hands, who opened the good Dean of SALISBURIES heart unto me: Unto
him shall my prayers early and late be directed, to open unto the Bishop of
ROCHESTER the treasury of all blessings temporal and eternal: And I hope the
Reverend Father in God will accept this tribute of a devout soul. Servatus has
nothing else to give: But he shall always remain

Your Lordships most humbly devoted servant R. Winterton.

To the ancient, religious, and learned Lady, the Lady COPPEN.
THe earth is watered with drops from above, and in vapors sends them up
again: The rivers come from the sea, and flow back again: The air will cleave
the rock to get up to its place again: The fire came down from heaven, and
thither it tends up again. From the mixture of these elements, all bodies have
their temperaments: Those have in them a character of natural gratitude, and
these should follow them. This character an illiterate man may see in creatures
without sense; and he that is learned may read to the life in creatures that
have sense. Man is the Epitome of all perfections in other creatures: But
without this character he is like to none of them. He has spent his time ill
at the University that denies the first principles, and he would be sent back
again to learn the first elements. In the soul of man, as Galen says, there is
an art of arts, and in the body of man an instrument of instruments: Reason is
the art, and the hand is the instrument: I have both, and both are the Lady
COPPENS. I have reason to acknowledge it, and an hand to subscribe to it.

Your Ladyships servant Ra^^h Winterton.

To the Right Worshipful my most munificent friend and benefactour, Sr JOHN
HANBURIE Lord of Kelmash in Northamptonshire.
A Generous benefactour writes what he gives in running water; so does Sr John
Hanburie: A thankful receiver writes what he receives in a pillar of marble;
so would Ralph Winterton. The one professes the art of forgetfulness; so do
you: The other practices the art of remembrance; so will I. Six years are
passed since the golden streams of your bounty flowed down upon me: But the
water of Lethe has not yet washed them out of my memory. I hope I shall never
be sick of a lethargy: But it is good to use a help for memory. A benefit
once received ought always to be remembered: Man's always is not always: Come
death, farewell memory. Letters after the death of them to whom they are sent,
are usually burnt for waste papers. Therefore I durst neither trust the one nor
the other with keeping the record of your bounty, and my thankfulness:
knowing that death for certain will blot out memory, and fire may burn up the
Registers office. It may be your bounty would have been well pleased with a
private acknowledgement: But my duty could not be satisfied without a public
monument. None more public then that which has passed through the press: For
that of one can make a thousand; so it did formerly. But now I have made
fifteen hundred witnesses of my thankful remembrance: and more may hereafter.
Gerard where he is known is in favor every where: But he is no where without
Sr JOHN HANBURIE,

At whose service GERARD is and his Translatour RALPH WINTERTON.

To the Worshipful my very worthy friends, Mr Nathanael Henshaw of Valence in
Essex, Mr Benjamin Henshaw of Cheap Side in London, and Mr Thomas Henshaw of
Saffron-Walden in Essex.
IT is reported by Tacitus, that Licinius grew so stupid, that if he had not
been put in mind by others, he had forgot himself to be a Prince. If I should
forget the HENSHAVVES, I should forget my self to be a man: For an unthankful
man is no man, but an enemy to God and man: so the Persians were wont to call
him. Where bounty has an hand to give, thankfulness should have an hand to
write received. I have formerly recorded with mine own hand your names in the
catalogue of my benefactours: And that hand should deserve to be cut off, if it
should now expunge them. The old copy may decay: I thought good therefore now
to renew it. Gerards Meditations had never seen English light for me, if yours
and others bounty had not set my head on work to find out some occasion to
give public testimony of my thankfulness: If Gerard had not been, I might
still have been to seek for an occasion. As often therefore as Gerard and I
live together, at every impression you may challenge at my hands a new
expression of my service. This debt I shall be always ready to pay, but not
as men pay money: for that being once paid can be required no more: But this I
shall be always paying, and still remain your debtor.

Ita testor R. WINTERTON.

SOme say that plants do better grow*
When they are translated to and fro:
I Am sure, when books translated be,
They more and more do fructify.
Gerard did bring forth fruit before,
But now it is derived to more:
What be beyond the sea did sow,
Now Englishmen at home may mow.
Come Countrymen, take what is yours,
The crop's brought home unto your doors.
John Boh^am.

IF pleasure may or profit may thee move:
Here Is that which may deserve thy chiefest love.
If thou desire riches to enjoy:
The door is open to the treasury.
If beauty please: On this glass cast thine eye,
Here Is that will soul and body beautify.
If honor please: The way's prepared for thee,
To honor him whose service honors thee.
If thou be hungry, thirsty: Taste and see
Christ's flesh and blood presented unto thee.
If thou be naked: To this wardrobe hie,
Where Christ his robe of righteousness does lie.
If sick thou art: For every malady
Here is a very present remedy.
If thou thy self defiled have with sin:
Here is a fountain for to bathe thee in.
If thou delightst in flowers: Here do grow
Such flowers as Art and Nature never could show.
Choose what thou will, here is what thou can desire,
Riches, and beauty, honors, and attire,
Meat, drink, and medicine, and a living spring,
A paradise of every pleasant thing.
Here Is heaven on earth, (if heaven on earth can be)
And so I wish thee to go in and see.
Francis Winterton.

GErard of late was but in Latin read,
But now he has his language altered:
Behold a change! see how Arts pencill can
A Latin turn into an Englishman.
Gerard in this ten thousand does excel,
In three months space to speak our tongue so well.
Thomas Bonham.

REader, if thou fain would know,
To whose labors thou do ow
These sacred lines, think who't may be
Seeks thy souls good, and that is he.
Some say these writings Gerards be:
He wrote indeed, but not to thee.
He was to those that learned were,
To thee he was not though be were.
Before, thou could not understand,
He Is now translated to thy hand.
Read him, and use him as thy friend,
And he will be thine unto the end.
William Norrice.

THou that desir'st on earth a blessed end,
And seek'st the way to the heavens to ascend,
Resort to Gerard: he will direct the way
Whereby thou may ascend and live for ay.
Thou needst no guide, it is easy to be gone,
All lets removed are by Winterton.
The way's made plain, which was before obscure,
That thou thereby may heavenly bliss procure.
Endeavor then this way to walk aright:
And it will lead thee to eternal light.
T. Gore.

UPon a good the more communicate
We always set a better estimate:
The sun it self, though of it self most bright,
None would admire, did not he see its light:
Gerard himself, though of himself he is good,
Had not been so to us, not understood.
This moved my friend this Gerard to translate,
Gods glory and thy good to propagate.
Edward Bonham.

The table for direction to find out any Meditation contained in this book.
Meditation 1 OF confession of sin. Page 1 Meditation 2 An exercise of
repentance, from the cross of Christ. Page 7 Meditation 3 Of the fruit of true
and serious repentance. Page 12 Meditation 4 A meditation upon the name of
JESUS. Page 19 Meditation 5 An exercise of faith, from the love of Christ in
the agony of death. Page 23 Meditation 6 Consolation for the penitent, from
the cross of Christ. Page 28 Meditation 7 Of the fruit of the Lords passion.
Page 34 Meditation 8 Of the certainty of our salvation. Page 39 Meditation 9
That God alone is to be loved. Page 44 Meditation 10 Of our reconciliation with
God. Page 51 Meditation 11 Of the satisfaction made for our sins. Page 56
Meditation 12 Of the nature and properties of true faith. Page 61 Meditation 13
Of the spiritual marriage of Christ and the soul. Page 68 Meditation 14 Of the
mystery of Christ's incarnation. Page 74 Meditation 15 Of the saving fruit of
Christ's incarnation. Page 80 Meditation 16 Of the spiritual repast of the
godly. Page 85 Meditation 17 Of the fruits of Baptism. Page 91 Meditation 18
Of the saving communion of the body and blood of Christ. Page 97 Meditation 19
Of the mystery of the Lords supper. Page 102 Meditation 20 Of due preparation
before we come to the Lords supper. Page 107 Meditation 21 Of Christ's
ascension. Page 112 Meditation 22 An homily of the holy Ghost. Page 118
Meditation 23 Of the Churches dignity. Page 125 Meditation 24 Of
predestination. Page 132 Meditation 25 Of the saving efficacy of prayer. Page
139 Meditation 26 Of the holy angels guarding us. Page 146 Meditation 27 Of the
devils treacheries. Page 153 Meditation 28 General rules for the leading of a
godly life. Page 159 Meditation 29 Of shaking off security. Page 166
Meditation 30 Of the imitation of the holy life of Christ. Page 174 Meditation
31 Of the denying of a man's self. Page 180 Meditation 32 Of the true rest of
the soul. Page 187 Meditation 33 Of a pure conscience. Page 193 Meditation 34
Of the study of true humility. Page 201 Meditation 35 Of fleeing from
covetousness. Page 206 Meditation 36 Of the properties of true love and
charity. Page 214 Meditation 37 Of the study of chastity. Page 222
Meditation 38 Of the flitting swiftness of this present life. Page 229
Meditation 39 Of the worlds vanity. Page 236 Meditation 40 Of the profit of
tentations. Page 244 Meditation 41 Foundations of Christian patience. Page 250
Meditation 42 How we must overcome tentations by perseverance. Page 257
Meditation 43 Of the daily meditation of our death. Page 262 Meditation 44
Consolation at the death of friends. Page 268 Meditation 45 Of the last
judgment. Page 277 Meditation 46 Of the desire of eternal life. Page 283
Meditation 47 Of the beatificall vision of God in heaven. Page 290 Meditation
48 Of our fellowship with the angels in heaven. Page 296 Meditation 49 Of the
grievousnesse of hell torments. Page 302 Meditation 50 Of the eternity of
hell torments. Page 309 Meditation 51 Of the spiritual resurrection of the
godly. Page 316
Meditat. I. Of true confession and acknowled^ment of sin.
Confession is to cure sin
A very present medicine.
HOly God, just Judge, my sins are always in my sight, Levit. 1^.45. Psalm.
7.11.
I have them always in my mind: every day I think of the judgment, because
death hangs over my head every hour. Every day I think of the judgem^^^
because I must give an account for every day, 2. Co^* ^.10*
in the day of judgment. I examine my life, and behold, it is altogether vain
or profane. Vain and unprofitable are many of my actions, my speeches much
more, and my thoughts most of all. Neither is my life vain only, but profane
also, and ungodly: I find in it nothing that is good: for though something in
it may seem good, yet it is not truly good and perfect, because the contagion
of original sin and my corrupt nature has polluted it. Job 9.28.
Holy Job said, I was afraid in regard of all my works. If the holy man so
complain, what shall the ungodly do? Isa. 64.6.
All our righteousness is as the cloth of a menstruous woman. If our
righteousness be such, what then shall our unrighteousness be? If you shall
do all things (says our Savior) which are commanded you, Luke 17.10.
yet say, We are unprofitable servants. If we are unprofitable when we obey,
surely we shall become abominable when we transgress. Anselm.
If I owe my self unto thee, and all that I can, yea though I should not sin:
what shall I be able to give unto thee, holy God, to redeem me from sin?
Gregory in his moralls.
Our seeming righteousness, if it be compared with the divine righteousness,
is mere unrighteousness. A little light may shine in the darkness: but being
set in the light of the sun, is darkened. The wood not brought to the rule
may appear straight: but, if it be applied to the rule, is found, by some
eminent exc^escence, where it is crooked. The image of the seal may appear
perfect in the eyes of the beholders, and yet it may be much imperfect in the
eye of the artificer: Even so, that which glittereth in the estimation of the
worker, is oftentimes base and sordid in the discretion of him that judges:
Isa. 55.8.
For the judgments of God are of one kind, and the judgments of men are of
another. The memory of many sins does affright me: and yet there are many
more that I do not know of. Psalm. 19.12.
Who knows how often he offends? cleanse me, O Lord, from my secret faults. I
dare not lift up mine eyes unto heaven, because I have offended him which
dwells in the heavens. In earth I find no refuge: for what favor can I
expect of the creatures, when I have offended the Lord of the creatures?
Austine.
My adversary the devil accuses me, and says unto God, Thou most just Judge,
judge him to be mine for his sin, that would not be thine by grace. He is
thine by nature, but he is mine by delighting in his sins. He is thine by thy
passion, but he is mine by persuasion. He is disobedient unto thee, and
obedient unto me. He received of thee the robe of immortality, and innocence:
He has received from me the rags of unrighteousness. He has cast off thy
cloth, and put on mine. Adjudge him therefore to be mine, and to be damned with
me. All the elements accuse me: The heaven says, I have given thee light for
thy comfort. Hugo.
The air says, I have given thee all manner of fowls to be at thy command.
The water says, I have given thee diverse kinds of fishes for thy meat. The
earth says, I have given thee bread and wine for thy nourishment. And yet thou
have abused all these to the contempt and dishonor of our creator: Therefore
let all our benefits be turned to thy punishments. The fire says, Let me burn
him. The water says, Let me drown him. The air says, Let me fan and winnow
him. The earth says, Let me swallow him up. And hell says, Let me devour
him. Heb. 1* 14
The holy Angels, which were appointed by God to minister unto me in this life,
and to be my consorts in the life to come, they accuse me: And by my sins I
have deprived my self of their ministry in this life, and hope of their
fellowship in the life to come. The voice of God, that is, his divine law
accuses me: either I must fulfill it, or perish. To fulfill it, it is
impossible: To perish everlastingly, it is intolerable. God the most severe
judge, and most powerful executour of his eternal law, accuses me: Him I
cannot deceive, for he is wisdom it self: From him I cannot fly, for he is
power it self reigning every where. Psalm. 139.7. Austine upon the 32 Psalm
Whither then shall I fly? To thee O Christ my alone Redeemer and Savior. My
sins are great indeed: but thy satisfaction is greater. My unrighteousness
is great, but thy righteousness is greater. I acknowledge: forgive thou. I set
open: shut thou. I uncover: cover thou. In me there is nothing, but that which
will condemn me: In thee there is nothing, but that which will save me. I have
committed many things, for which most deservedly I might be condemned: Thou
have omitted nothing, whereby I might be saved. I hear a voice in the
canticles, which bids me hide my self in the clefts of the rock. Cant. 2.14.
Thou art that rock, thy wounds are those clefts of the rock: In them will I
hide my self against the accusations of all the creatures. My sins cry
aloud, even unto heaven: Heb. 12.24.
but thy blood, which was poured forth for my sins, cries louder. My sins
are strong to accuse me before God: but thy passion is of more force to defend
me: The unrighteousness of my life is powerful to condemn me: but thy most
perfect righteousness is more powerful to save me. I appeal therefore from
the throne of thy justice to the throne of thy mercy: Neither dare I appear
in judgment, unless thou interpose thy most holy merits betwixt me and thy
judgment.

Meditat. II. An exercise of repentance from the cross of Christ.
Thy Savior on the cross did choose,
To save thy life, his own to lose.
BEhold thou faithful soul the grief of him that suffered, Bernard.
the wounds of him that hanged, the torments of him that died on the cross.
That head, at which the angels tremble, is crowned with thorns. That face,
which was most beautiful above the sons of men, is defiled by the spittings
of the ungodly. Those eyes, which were more bright then the sun, are darkened
in death. Those ears, which were wont to hear angelical praises, do ring now
with the proud speeches, and the derision of sinners. That mouth, out of which
did proceed most divine oracles; that mouth, which taught the angels, has no
other drink but gall and vinegar. Those feet, which are to be adored, are
fastened with nails. Those hands, John 19*
which stretched forth the heavens, are stretched forth on the cross, and
nailed. That body, which was the most sacred temple of the deity, is whipped,
and wounded with the spear: neither remains there any part in him save only a
tongue, and that, to pray for them that crucified him. He that reigns with
the Father in the heavens, is by sinners grievously afflicted on the cross:
God dies upon the cross: God suffers: God pours forth his blood. Judge the
greatness of the danger by the greatness of the prize. Judge the danger of
the disease by the value of the remedy. Surely those wounds were great indeed,
which could no otherwise be cured, but by the wounds of the living and
quickening flesh. Surely that disease must needs be great, which could not be
cured but by the death of the physician.

Consider, thou faithful soul, Gods most fierce anger against us. After the
fall of our first father, the eternal, only begotten, and well beloved son
of God becomes suter unto his Father for us: And yet his anger was not turned
away from us. He by whom the world was made, interceded for us, 1. John 2.2.
became our advocate, and took the cause of us miserable sinners upon himself:
And yet his anger was not turned away from us. Our Savior took upon him our
flesh, that by the glory of the divinity, communicated unto the humanity, he
might expiate and purge our sinful flesh: that by the saving virtue of his
most perfect righteousness communicated unto our nature, he might wipe away
that venomous quality of sin which cleaves to our nature, and in stead
thereof confer grace upon us: And yet his anger was not turned away from us.
Our sins and the punishment of our sins he takes upon himself. His body is
bound, whipped, wounded, pierced, crucified, buried. His blood, like a dew,
distilled most copiously down all his members at his passion. His most holy
soul is made sorrowful above measure, yea even unto death. Matt. 26.38.
He feels the pains of hell. The eternal Son of God cries out that he is
forsaken of God. Matt. 27.46.
So great was his bloody sweat, so great was his anguish, that he which
comfort the angels, stood in need of an angel to comfort him. Luke 22.43.
He dies who is the author and giver of life to every living thing. Luke 23.31.
If this comes to pa^se in the green tree, what shall become of the dry wood?
If this comes to pass in the just and holy, what shall become of sinners? How
shall God punish us for our own sins, who is so wrathfully displeased with
his own son for other men's sins? If his son is so grievously punished,
shall we his servants think to escape always unpunished? What shall the
reprobate suffer, if such be the sufferings of his best beloved? If Christ
departed not without a scourge, and yet came into the world without sin, what
scourges do they deserve which come into the world in sin, live in sin, and
depart in sin? The servant rejoices, whilst the son is in grievous dolor
and pain; and that, for his sin. The servant heapeth up the anger of God,
whilst the son does thus labor to pacify and appease his Fathers wrath. Oh
the infinite anger of God! oh his unspeakable fury! oh the inestimable rigor
of his justice! He which is thus enraged against his only and best beloved
son, the partaker of his own essence; and that, not for any sin of his own,
but because he intercedeth for the servant: what will he do to the servant that
persevereth and continues still securely in his sins? Let the servant fear
and tremble, and be sorrowful for his own merits, when the son is thus
punished, and yet not for his own. Let the servant fear, who cease not to
sin, when the son of God is thus afflicted for sin. Let the creature
fear, which has crucified his Creator. Let the servant fear, which has slain
his Lord. Let the sinner and the ungodly fear, which has thus tormented the
pious and the godly. Beloved, let us hear his cries, let us behold his tears:
he cries from the cross. Behold O man what I suffer for thee: Bernard i^ his
sermon of the pa^^sion.
I cry unto thee, because I die for thee: behold the punishments that I suffer:
behold the nails with which I am pierced, and see if any grief be like unto my
grief. Although my outward grief be thus great, yet my inward grief is more
grievous, because I find thee so unthankful. Have mercy, have mercy on us,
thou whose property it is to have mercy, and convert our stony hearts unto
thee.

Meditat. III. Of the fruit of true and serious repentance.
Our Savior cried, Repent, repent,
As John that before our Savior went.
THe foundation and beginning of holy life is saving repentance. For where
there is true repentance, there is remission of sins: And where there is
remission of sins, there is the grace of God: And where there is the grace of
God, there is Christ: And where Christ is, there is his merit: And where there
is Christ's merit, there is satisfaction for sins: And where there is
satisfaction for sins, there is righteousness: And where there is
righteousness, there is joy and tranquillity of conscience: And where there
is tranquillity of conscience, there is the holy Spirit: And where the holy
Spirit is, there is the sacred and holy Trinity: And where the holy Trinity
is, there is eternal life: Therefore where there is true repentance, there is
eternal life. Where there is not true repentance, neither is there remission
of sins, nor the grace of God, nor Christ, nor his merit, nor satisfaction
for sins, nor righteousness, nor tranquillity of conscience, nor the holy
Spirit, nor the holy Trinity, nor eternal life.

Why therefore do we defer our repentance? and why do we procrastinate it
from day to day? To morrow is not ours, and to repent truly is not in our
power: And in the day of judgment we must give an account not only for to
morrow, but also for the present day. To morrow is not so certain, as the
destruction of the impenitent is certain. God has promised remission to the
repentant: Austine*
but he has not promised to morrow. There is no place for Christ his
satisfaction, where there is not true contrition in the heart. Isa. 59.2.
Our sins do separate betwixt God and us, so says the Prophet Esaias. And by
repentance we return again unto him. Acknowledge and bewail thy sins: so
shall thou find God in Christ appeased toward thee. I blot out thine
iniquities, Isa. 43.25
says the Lord: Therefore our sins are enrolled in the court of heaven.
Psalm. 51.9.
Turn away thy face from my sins, begs the Prophet: Therefore our iniquities
are set in the sight of God. Be converted unto us O God, prays Moses:
Therefore our sins do separate us from God. Isa. 59.2. Verse. 12.
Our sins have answered us, complains Esaias: Therefore they accuse us before
Gods judgment seat. Psalm. 51.2.
Cleanse me from my sins, prays David: Therefore our sins appear most
foul and filthy in the sight of God. Psalm. 41.4.
Cure my soul, for I have sinned against thee, prays the same David:
Therefore sin is the disease of the soul. Whosoever shall sin against me, I
will blot him out of my book, Exodus 32.32.
says the Lord: Therefore for our sins are we blotted out of the book of
life. Psalm. 51.11.
Cast me not away from thy face, prays the Psalmist: Therefore for our sins
God casts us off. Take not thy holy Spirit from me: Therefore as bees are
driven away with smoke, Basil upon the 33 Psalm.
and pigeons with ill savours: so by our sins is the holy Spirit driven out
of the temples of our hearts. Restore me the joy of thy salvation: Psalm. 52.12.
Therefore sin does torment the mind, and dry up the moisture of the heart.
The earth is defiled by the inhabitants thereof, Isa. 24.5.
which have transgressed the law, cries Esaias: Therefore sin is a contagious
and infectious poison. Out of the deeps have I cried unto thee O Lord, says
the Psalmist: Psalm. 130.1.
Therefore our sins press us down unto hell. We were sometimes dead in our
sins, says the apostle: Ephesians. 2.1.
Therefore sin is the spiritual death of the soul. By mortal sin man
loses God: God is the infinite and incomprehensible good: Therefore to lose
God is an infinite and incomprehensible evil. As God is the chiefest good, so
sin is the chiefest evil. Punishments and calamities are not absolutely evil:
for many times there comes good of them. Yea rather it appears that they are
good, because they come from God who is the chiefest good; from whom can
proceed nothing but that which is good. They were in the chiefest good, to wit,
in Christ: And the chiefest good cannot partake in that which is evil truly so
called. And moreover they lead us unto the chiefest good, Luke 24.26.
that is, to life everlasting. Christ by his passion entered into his glory:
And so do Christians by tribulations enter into eternal life: Acts 14.22.
Therefore sin is the chiefest evil, because it withdraws us from the
chiefest good. The nearer thou come unto God, the further thou departest from
sin: The nearer thou come unto sin, the further thou departest from God.
How saving therefore is repentance, which withdraws us from sin, and brings
us back again unto God! Sin is measured by the greatness of him that is
offended: But him the heavens and the earth cannot contain: In like manner such
is our repentance as he unto whom we return by repentance. The sinner is
accused by his conscience, which he has defiled; by the Creator, whom he has
offended; by the sins, which he has committed; by the creatures, which he
has abused; and by the devil, by whom he has been seduced. How saving then is
repentance, which frees us from such accusations! Let us make haste therefore,
let us make haste to such a saving medicine for such a grievous disease. If
thou repentest at thy death, Aust. of repentance.
thou do not leave thy sins, but thy sins leave thee. Thou shall scarce
find any one that repented truly at his death, unless it were the thief upon
the cross. Fourteen years have I served thee, Genesis 31.41.
said Jacob to Laban, it is time now that I should provide for mine own house:
And if thou have served the world and this life so many years, is it not fit
that thou should begin now to make provision for thy soul? Every day does
our flesh heap sin upon sin: Let the Spirit therefore every day wash them
away by repentance. Christ died that sin might die in us: And shall we suffer
that to live and reign in our hearts, for the destroying whereof the son of
God himself died? Bernard.
Christ enters not into the heart of man by grace, unless John Baptist prepare
the way by repentance. God pours not the oil of mercy, but into the vessel
of a contrite heart. God does first mortify us by contrition, 1 Samuel 2.6
that afterward he may quicken us by the consolation of the Spirit. He first
leads us into hell by serious grief, that afterward he may bring us back again
by the taste of grace. 1 King. 19 11.
Elias first heard a great and strong wind, overturning mountains, and
cleaving rocks; and after the wind an earthquake; and after the earthquake
there appeared fire. At length there followed a small and still voice. Verse. 12.
In like manner terror goes before the taste of Gods love, and sorrow before
comfort. God binds not up thy wounds, unless thou lay them open by
confession, and bewail them. He covers not, unless thou first uncover. He
pardons not, unless thou first acknowledge. He justifies not, unless thou
first condemn thy self. He comforts not, unless thou first despair in thy
self. This true repentance God by his holy Spirit work in us!

Meditat. IIII. Of the name of JESUS.
Blessed, blessed name of Jesus,
Who tormented was to ease us.
O Good Jesus be thou my Jesus: Bernard.
for thy holy names sake have mercy on me. My life condemns me: but the name
of Jesus shall save me: For this thy names s^ke, do unto me according to thy
name: and seeing that thou art a true and a great Savior, surely thou do
respect those that are sinners indeed, yea great sinners. Have mercy on me, O
good Jesus, in the time of mercy, that I be not condemned in the time of
judgment. If thou receive me into the bosom of thy mercy, Anselm.
thou shall have never the less room. If thou bestow upon me the crumbes of
thy goodness, yet thou shall want never the more: Isa. 9.6.
For me thou wast born, for me thou wast circumcised, to me also thou art
become a Jesus: How sweet and delightful is this name! For what is Jesus, but
a Savior? and what harm can happen to those that are saved? what else can we
desire, or expect beyond salvation? Receive me, Lord Jesus, into the number of
thy sons, that together with them I may land thy holy and saving name. Though
I have lost my integrity: yet thou have not forgotten thy mercy. Though I had
power to lose and condemn my self: yet thou in thy mercy art more powerful
to save me. Lord do not thou so look upon my sins, as to forget thy mercy: do
not so ponder and weigh my offenses, that they overpoise thy merit: do not so
remember my wickedness, as therefore to forget thy goodness. Remember not thy
anger against my guiltiness: but remember thy mercy toward my misery. Thou
who have given me a mind to desire thee, withdraw not thy self from my desire*
Thou who have showed unto me my unworthiness, and just damnation, hide not
from me thy merit, and the promise of everlasting salvation. My cause is to be
tried at the heavenly tribunal: but this is my comfort, that in the court of
heaven thou have assigned unto thee the name of a Savior: for that name was
brought down from heaven by an angel. O most merciful Jesus, Luke 2.21.
to whom will thou be Jesus, if not to miserable sinners that seek thy grace
and salvation? They that trust in their own righteousness and holiness, seek
salvation in themselves: but I fly unto thee my Savior; for I find nothing
in my self worthy of eternal life: Save the condemned: show mercy to the
sinner: justify the unrighteous: absolve the accused. Thou Lord art truth,
John 14.6.
thy name is holy and true. Let thy name also become true in respect of me, and
become thou my Jesus and Savior. Be thou unto me Jesus in this present life,
be thou unto me Jesus in death, be thou unto me Jesus in the last judgment, be
thou unto me Jesus in the life which is everlasting. I know thou will, sweet
Jesus: for as thou art immutable in thy ess^nce, so also thou art immutable in
thy mercy. Thou will not change thy name, Lord Jesus, for my sake alone, who am
a miserable sinner: Yea rather thou will become my Savior; For thou do not
cast out him that comes unto thee. Thou that have given me a will to come unto
thee, grant also unto me that coming I may be received: For thy words are truth
and life. Let the propagation of original sin within me condemn me: John
14.6
yet thou art my Jesus. Let my conception in sin condemn me: yet thou art my
Jesus. Let my forming in sin and under the curse condemn me: yet thou art my
Savior. Let the corruption of my nativitie condemn me: yet thou art my
Savior. Let the sins of my youth condemn me: yet thou art my Jesus. Let the
course of my whole life, defiled with most grievous sins, condemn me: yet
thou art still my Jesus. Let death the just punishment of my many and grievous
sins and offenses condemn me: yet thou art my Savior. Let the severe
sentence in the last judgment condemn me: yet thou art my Jesus. In me is
sin, reprobation, damnation: In thy name is righteousness, election,
salvation. I was baptized in thy name: I believe in thy name: In thy name will
I die: In thy name will I rise again: In thy name will I appear in judgment.
In this name are all good things prepared for us, and shut up as it were a
treasure: So much are they diminished, as my diffidence is increased: which
that it may be far from me, I beseech thee by this thy name, good Jesus, that
for my sin and unbelief I be not damned, whom by thy precious merit and
saving name thou would have saved.

Meditat. V. An exercise of faith from the love of Christ in the agony of
death.
The grace of Jesus Christ to me
Is the only true felicity.
SEe Lord Jesus, how injurious I am to thy passion: My heart is vexed, and my
soul is very sorrowful; because I have no good works of mine own; because I
have no merits: when as thy passion is my action, thy works my merits. I am
injurious to thy passion, when as I seek for the supplement of my works,
whereas it is in it self all-sufficient. If I should find righteousness in my
self, thy righteousness would profit me nothing, or else I should not so much
desire it. If I seek for the works of the law, by the law shall I be condemned:
But I know that now I am no longer under the law, but under grace. I have lived
wickedly, I have sinned, Luke 15.2
holy Father, against heaven and before thee, I am not worthy to be called thy
son, yet thou will not refuse to call me thy servant. Deny me not, I pray
thee, the fruit of thy passion: let not thy blood wax barren, but let it bring
forth fruit, and deliver my soul. My sins have always lived in my flesh:
but, I entreat thee, let them at length die with me. Hitherto the flesh has
always ruled over me, but let the Spirit at length triumph: Let the outward
man be subject to corruption and worms, that the inward man may be glorified.
Hitherto I have always given way to the suggestions of the devil; but grant
hereafter, I beseech thee, Romans 16.20.
that I may trample them under my feet. Satan is ready at hand to accuse me;
but he has nothing in me. The sight of death affrighteth me; but death is the
end of my sins, and the beginning of an holy life. Now at length shall I be
able perfectly to please thee, O my God: Now at length shall I be confirmed in
goodness and virtue. Satan terrifieth me with my sins, but let him accuse
him which took upon him my infirmities, Isa. 53.4*
whom the Lord has smitten for my sins: The debt which I ow is great indeed,
and I cannot pay any part thereof: but my trust is in the riches and bounty of
him that has undertaken the payment. Let him discharge me, who has made
himself surety for me: Let him pay for me, who took my debt upon himself. I
have sinned, O Lord, and my sins are many and grievous: But this horrible
sin I will not commit, to make thee a liar, who by thy words, works, and oath
do testify that satisfaction is made for my iniquities. I am not afraid by
reason of my sins: for thou art my righteousness. I am not afraid by reason
of my ignorance: for thou art my wisdom. I am not afraid of death: for thou
art my life. I am not afraid of my errors: for thou art my truth. I am not
afraid of corruption: for thou art my resurrection. I am not afraid of the
sorrows of death: for thou art my joy. I am not afraid of the severitie of
judgment: 1. Cor. 1.30.
for thou art my righteousness. Distill upon my withered soul the dew of thy
grace and quickening consolation. My spirit waxes dry: but it shall shortly
rejoice in thee. My flesh does languish, and is withered: but it shall shortly
bud forth. I am subject to corruption: but thou shall deliver me from
corruption: for thou have delivered me from all evils. Thou have created me:
How then can the workmanship of thy hands be dissolved? Thou have redeemed me
from all mine enemies: How then can death have rule over me? Thou have bestowed
thy body and blood and all that thou had, yea even thy self for my salvation:
How then shall death withhold them, which thou have redeemed with so precious a
ransom? Thou, Lord Jesus, art righteousness it self: So then my sins cannot
prevail against thee. Thou art life it self, and the resurrection: So then my
death cannot prevail against thee. Thou art God: Therefore Satan cannot prevail
against thee. 2. Cor. 1.22.
Thou have given me the earnest of thy Spirit: in that do I glory, in that do
I triumph, and am fully persuaded, without doubting, that I shall be admitted
to the marriage of the Lamb. Most dear bridegroom, Rev. 19.7.
thou art my wedding garment, which I put on in baptism: thou shall cover my
nakedness, Gal. 3.25*
neither will I sow the supplement of my righteousness to this most precious
and beautiful garment. What is man's righteousness, but the cloth of a
menstruous woman? Isa. 64.6.
How then can I dare to patch that most precious garment of Christ's
righteousness with this abominable ragge? In this garment will I appear before
thy face in judgment, when thou shall judge the world in righteousness and
equity: Act. 17.31.
In this garment will I appear before thy face in the kingdom of heaven: This
garment shall cover my confusion and reproach, that no man remember it any more
for ever: There shall I appear glorious and holy in thy sight: And this my
flesh, this my body shall be arrayed with beatificall glory, which glory shall
be everlasting, and without end. Rev. 22.20.
Come Lord Jesus, and whosoever loves thee let him say, Come.

Meditat. VI. Consolation for the penitent, from the cross of Christ, gathered
chiefly out of Anselm.
Christ's cross my crown I do esteem,
Whats' ever heathen men do deem.
ALl the glory of the godly consists in the ignominy of the Lords passion:
Bernard.
All the rest of the godly consists in the wounds of our Savior, our life in
his death, our glory in his exaltation. How great is thy mercy, O heavenly
Father and Almighty God! Of my self I could offend thee, but of my self I could
not appease thee: Thou therefore in Christ do reconcile me unto thee.

Behold therefore, holy God, the holy pledge of his flesh, Anselm.
and forgive the guiltiness of my flesh: Have respect unto what thy Son has
suffered for me, and forget what thy wicked servant has done against thee: My
flesh does provoke thee to anger: Let the flesh of Christ I beseech thee, move
thee to mercy. It is much that my wickedness has deserved: but it is much
more that the holiness of my redeemer has merited. Great is my
unrighteousness, but much more great is the righteousness of my redeemer. For
as much as God is higher then man, so much is my wickedness lower then his
goodness, both in quality and quantity. I am wholly thine by condition,
grant also that by love I may be wholly thine. Thou that make me to ask, make
me also to receive; Matt. 7.7.
Thou that grantest unto me to seek, grant unto me also to find; Thou that
teach me to knock, Matt. 7.7.
open unto me when I knock. To desire, I have from thee: Let me have from thee
also to obtain. Phil. 2.13.
To will, I have from thee: Let me have from thee to do also. Holy God, just
Judge! If my sins be concealed, they are uncurable: if they be seen, they are
detestable: they do burn me with grief, and do much more terrify me with fear.
Do not withhold, I pray thee, thy true mercy where thou find so true
misery. Great is the sin which thou find here, but let thy grace be
greater and more plentiful. Holy Father, pour not I beseech thee thy wrath
upon me, seeing that thou have smitten thy Son for me.

O holy Jesus, deliver me from the wrath of God, thou that did take it upon
thy self for my sake upon the cross. O holy Spirit, protect me by thy
consolation against the wrath of God, thou that in the gospel have declared
mercy to the contrite and penitent. O holy God and just Judge, I find no
place to fly unto from the presence of thy wrath: If I ascend up into heaven,
thou art there: Psalm. 139.8.
If I descend into the deep, behold thou art there also: 9.
If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the utmost parts of the sea,
10.
there also shall thy hand lead me, and thy right h^nd lay hold on me: Unto
Christ therefore will I fly, and hide my self in his wounds. O merciful God,
behold the body of thy Son wounded in every part, and look not upon the
wounds of my sins. Let the blood of thy Son wash me from all my spots.
Hear his most ardent prayers offered unto thee for the salvation of the elect.
O holy God and just Judge, my life affrights me: Anselm.
for if it be exactly examined, it is either sin, or barrenness: And if
there seem to be any fruit in it, it is either counterfeit, or imperfect, or
some ways corrupted; so that it cannot please thee, yea it must needs
displease thee. Truly, all my life is either sinful and damnable, or
unfruitful and contemptible. But why should I separate unfruitful and
damnable? Certainly, if it be unfruitful, it is damnable: for every tree that
brings not forth good fruit, Mat. 3.10.
is hewn down and cast into the fire. Not only the tree that brings forth
ill fruit, is cast into the fire: but that also which brings forth no fruit.
The goats affright me, for they were set on the left hand of the judge, Mat.
25.41.
not because they did any evil, but because they did no good. To the hungry
they gave no meat: To the thirsty they gave no drink. Therefore thou withered
and unfruitful tree, which have deserved everlasting fire, what will thou
answer in that day when thou shall give account for all the time spent in this
life even to the twinkling of an eye? An hair shall not perish from thy head,
nor a moment from time. O the straits! On this side shall be thy sins
accusing: On that side justice terrifying: Underneath thee the horrible pit of
hell gaping: Above thee the angry judge condemning: Within thee thy conscience
burning: Without thee the world flaming. Pet. 4.18
The just man shall scarce be saved: Whither then shall the sinner thus taken
unawares betake himself? To lie hid, it is impossible: To appear it is
intolerable.

From whence then shall I seek for the salvation of my soul? Bernard.
from whom shall I seek counsel? Who is he that is called the Angel of great
counsel? It is Jesus: He is the judge between whose hands I tremble. Fear not
then, O my soul, be comforted, despair not: Hope in him whom thou fear,
betake thy self unto him from whom thou have fled. O Jesus Christ, for this thy
names sake do unto me according to thy name. Look upon me miserable man, that
call upon thy name: If thou receive me into the most ample bosom of thy mercy,
thou shall no whit be straited. It is true, O Lord, my conscience has deserved
damnation, and my repentance is not sufficient for satisfaction: But it is most
certain, that thy mercy is greater then my offense. In thee, O Lord, Psalm.
31.1.
do I put my trust, let me never be confounded.

Meditat. VII. Of the fruit of the Lords Passion.
My hope on Christ is fixed sure,
Who wounded was my wounds to cure.
AS often as I think of the Lords passion, I presume much of the love of God
and the forgiveness of my sins. He bows down his head to kiss me: Bernard
upon the Passion.
He stretches forth his arms to embrace me: He opens his hands to give unto
me: He opens his side that I may see his heart flaming with love: He is
lifted up from the earth that he may draw all unto him: his wounds are blue
with grief, and shining with love: Therefore by the opening of his wounds we
ought to enter into the secrets of his heart. With him there is most plenteous
redemption, because his blood distilled not down drop by drop, but flowed down
most plentifully from five parts of his body: As the grape cast into the
wine press is squeezed, Bernard.
and pours forth liquour on every side: So the flesh of Christ being pressed
with the weight of Gods anger, and our sins, does on every side pour forth
the liquour of blood. When Abraham would have offered his son for a
sacrifice, the Lord said, Genesis 22.12.
Now I know of a truth that thou love me: Do thou likewise acknowledge the
infinite love of the eternal Father, in that he would deliver his only
begotten Son to death for us. John 3.16
He loved us when we were his enemies: Romans 5.10
And can he forget us when we are reconciled unto him by the death of his
Son? Can he forget the precious blood of his Son, when as he tells the
tears and the steps of the godly? Psalm. 56.8.
Can Christ in his life forget those, for whom he was willing to undergo death?
Can he in the time of his glory forget those, for whom he suffered so great
torments? Consider thou faithful soul, Luther.
the manifold fruits of the Lords passion. Christ poured forth for us a bloody
sweat, that in the agony of death a cold sweat might not oppress us. It was
his pleasure to wrestle with death, that we might not faint in the agony of
death. It was his will to suffer most grievous anxietie and sorrow even unto
death, that he might make us partakers of everlasting joy in the heavens. He
would be betrayed with a kiss, which is a sign of friendship and good will,
that he might blot out the sin by the which Satan betrayed our first parents
under the color of friendship. He would be apprehended and bound by the Jews,
that he might set us at liberty which were bound in the chain of our sins,
and subject to be cast into everlasting damnation. He would begin his passion
in the garden, that he might purge away sin which took its beginning in the
garden of paradise. He would be comforted by an angel, that he might make us
angels fellows in the heavens. He was forsaken of his own disciples, that he
might glue unto himself us, who had most shamefully revolted from God. Before
the Council he was accused by false witnesses, that Satan might not accuse us
by the law of God. He was condemned on earth, that we might be absolved in
heaven. He that committed no sin was speechless, that we might not in the
day of judgment be stricken dumb by reason of our sins. He was willing to
be buffeted, that we might be freed from the sting of conscience and buffetings
of Satan: He suffered himself to be mocked, that we might insult over Satan the
insulter: His face was covered, that he might remove from us the vail of sin
by which we were hindered that we could not behold the face of God, as being
involved in damnable ignorance: He would be disrobed, that he might restore
unto us the robe of innocence, which we had lost by sin: He was pricked with
thorns, that he might cure the compunctions of our hearts: He underwent the
burden of the cross, that he might take from us the burden of everlasting
punishment: He cr^^d out that he was forsak^n of God, Matt. 27.46.
that he might purchase for us an everlasting habitation with God: He thirsted
on the cross, that he might merit for us the dew of Gods grace, and free us
from everlasting thirst: He would be scorched in the fire of Gods anger, that
he might free us from the fire of hell. He stood as guilty, that he might
absolve us. He was condemned, that we might be delivered from condemnation. He
was scourged by the hands of the unrighteous, that he might free us from the
scourges of the devil. He cried out for grief, that he might preserve us from
everlasting exclamation. He poured forth tears, that he might wipe away tears
from our eyes. He died, that we might live. He felt the pains of hell, that we
might never feel them. He was humbled, that so he might cure our sinful
tumor. He was crowned with thorns that he might merit for us a celestial
crown. He suffered of all, that he might save all. His eyes were darkened in
death, that we might live in the light of celestial glory. He suffered
ignominy and reproaches, that we might hear the angels sing cheerfully in
heaven. Despair not then, O faithful soul: An infinite good was off^nded by
thy sins, and an infinite price is paid for them. Thou should have been
condemned for thy sins: But the Son of God took upon him the sins of the
whole world, and was condemned for them. Thou deservedst to be punished for thy
sins: But God has punished them already in his Son. The wounds of thy
sins are great: But the balsam of Christ's blood is more precious, and of
virtue to cure them. Deuteronomy. 27.26.
Moses pronounces thee cursed, because thou have not kept all that was wrote
in the book of the law: But Christ was made the curse for thee. In the court of
heaven there is an handwriting against thee: But Christ has cancelled that
with his blood. Col. 2.14.
Let thy passion therefore, O Christ, be my last refuge!

Meditat. VIII. Of the certainty of our salvation.
My hope shall never be confounded,
Because my hope on Christ is grounded.
WHy art thou troubled, O my soul, and why d^st thou still doubt of the mercy
of God? Remember thy Creator: Who created thee without thee? Psalm. 139.15.
Who formed thy body in secret in the lower parts of the earth? Who took care
of thee when thou wast not? will not he have care of thee, now he has made
thee after his own image? I am the creature of God, to the Creator do I
convert my self: Though my nature be infected by the devil, though it be
wounded by thieves, that is, by my sins, Luke 10.30.
yet my Creator lives: He which made me, can also renew me: He which created
me without any evil, can take all evil from me, whatsoever has entered into me
by the suggestion of the devil, by Adams prevarication, by my own action, yea
though it has overrun my whole substance: Therefore my Creator can reform me,
if so be that it stands with his good pleasure and will: and certainly he will,
for who ever hated his own workmanship? Are we not before him like clay in the
hands of the potter? If he had hated me, certainly he would never have created
me, when I was nothing. 1. Tim. 3.10.
He is the Savior of all men, but especially of them that believe. He created
me wonderfully, but he redeemed me more wonderfully: Bernard.
It never appeared more plainly that he loved us, then in his wounds and
passion. Surely he is truly beloved, Clem. Alex.
for whose sake the only begotten Son of God is sent from the bosom of his
Father: I^ thou did not desire my salvation, Lord Jesus, why did thou
descend from heaven? But thou did descend upon earth, to die on the cross.
God to redeem a servant, spared not his own Son. Romans 8.32.
Therefore assuredly, God loves man with a wonderful love, seeing that he
has delivered up his Son to be afflicted, slain, and crucified for the
redemption of man. Very dear, 1. Pet 1.18.
and very great was the price of our redemption: Therefore great and dear is
the mercy of our Redeemer. It might seem to some that God loves his adopted
sons, as dearly as his only begotten Son: For that on which we bestow any
thing, is dearer then that which we bestow: That he might make us his adopted
sons* he spared not his natural and coessentiall Son: It is no wonder then
if he has prepared for us mansions in his heavenly house, Joh. 14.2.
seeing that he has given us his own Son, in whom is the fullness of the
divinity. Certainly, where there is the fullness of the divinity, there is
also the fullness of life and glory everlasting: But if he in Christ has given
unto us the fullness of life everlasting, how shall he deny unto us a little
particle thereof? Assuredly our heavenly Father loves us his adopted sons
with exceeding great love, seeing he has delivered up his only begotten Son
for us. Assuredly the Son embraces us with exceeding great love, seeing that
he has delivered up himself for us. To make us rich, he endured extreme
poverty: for he had not where to lay his head. Matt. 8.20.
To make us the sons of God, he is made man: neither does he neglect us now,
having finished the work of our redemption, but still intercedeth for us, Romans
8.34
sitting at the right hand of the divine Majesty. What thing is there
necessary for my salvation which he shall not obtain, seeing that he has
bestowed himself to merit salvation for me? What will the Father deny unto his
Son who became ob^dient unto him unto death, even the death of the cross?
Phil. 2.8.
What will the Father deny unto his Son, seeing that long ago he has
accepted the price of our redemption paid by him? Let my sins accuse me, yet
in this my Mediator do I trust: He which excuses me, is greater then he that
accuses me: Let my weakness affright me, yet in his strength will I glory:
Let Satan accuse me, if my Mediator excuse me: Let heaven and earth accuse me,
and mine iniquities prove me guilty; it is sufficient for me that the Creator
of heaven and earth, and righteousness it self does intercede for me. The
sufficiency of my merit is to know that my merit is not sufficient: Bernard.
It shall be sufficient for me to have him propitious, against whom only I
have sinned: Whatsoever he has decreed not to impute, shall be as if it had
not been: Neither does it trouble me that my sins are both grievous and
diverse, and often repeated: For if I were not burdened with sins, what need I
desire his righteousness? Austine.
If I had no disease, what need I implore the help of the physician? Mat. 9.12.
Mat. 1 21. 1. Cor. 1.30.
He is the Physician, he is the Savior, he is righteousness it self, he
cannot deny himself: I am sick, I am condemned, I am a sinner, I cannot deny my
self. Have mercy on me, O thou my Physician, my Savior, and my righteousness!
Amen.

Meditat. IX. That God alone is to be loved.
By love cleave fast to God above:
For naught on earth deserves thy love.
Anselm.
RAise up thy self, O faithful soul, and love that chief good in whom are all
goods, without whom there is no other true good. No creature can satisfy our
desire, because no creature is perfectly good, but only good by participation.
Some current of good does descend upon the creature from the Creator, but the
fountain is still in God: Why therefore should we forsake the fountain, and
follow the current? All good in the creatures, is but the image of that perfect
good which is in God, yea, which is God: Why therefore should we lay hold on
the image, and let go the thing it self? Noah's dove could not find on the
moveable waters where her foot might rest: Genesis 8.9.
Even so our soul amongst all sublunarie things cannot find out which can
fully satisfy her desire, by reason of their inconstancy and frailty. Does
not he wrong himself which loves any thing unworthy of his love? Now the soul
of man is more noble then all the creatures, because it was redeemed by the
passion and death of God: Why therefore should it love the creatures? Is it not
contrary to that majesty unto which God has exalted the Saints? Whatsoever we
love, we love either for power, or wisdom, or beauty: And what is more
powerful then God? what is more wise then God? what is more beautiful then
God? All the power of earthly kingdoms is from him, and under him: All the
wisdom of men compared with the wisdom of God is foolishness: All the
beauty of the creatures compared with the beauty of God, is deformity. If
some powerful king should treat by messengers with a virgin of mean rank and
condition concerning marriage: should she not do foolishly in neglecting the
king, and settling her affection upon the messengers the kings servants? So God
by the beauty of all the creatures desires to call us unto him, and invite us
to love him: why therefore should our soul, which Christ would have to be his
spouse, cleave unto the creatures the messengers of this spiritual marriage?
The creatures themselves cry, Why do ye cleave unto us? why do ye place the
end of your desire in us? We cannot satiate your appetite: Come ye rather to
the Creator of us both. From the creatures we can expect no reciprocal love:
The creatures did not begin first to love us: But God who is love it self, 1.
John 4.16.
cannot but love those that love him: Yea he prevents our desires and our love,
by loving us first: How greatly then is God to be loved, who in the first place
has loved us so greatly! He loved us when as yet we were not: For it was the
love of God that we came into this world. Romans 5.10
He loved us when we were his enemies: For it was his mercy and his love that
he sent his son to be our redeemer. 8.
He loved us when we were fallen into sin: For it is his love that he does not
presently deliver us to death in our sins, but still expects our conversion.
It is his love that beyond our merits, yea contrary to our merits, he
translateth us to the celestial palaces. Without the love of God thou can
never come to the saving knowledge of God: without the love of God all
knowledge is unprofitable, yea hurtful: Wherefore love exceeds the knowledge
of all mysteries, because this may be in the devils, but that cannot be but in
the godly. Why is the devil most unhappy? Because he cannot love the chiefest
good. Contrariwise, why is God most happy and blessed? Wisd. 11.24*
Because he loves all things, because he is delighted in all his works. Why is
not our love of God perfect in this life? Because the measure of our love is
according to the measure of our knowledge. 1. Cor. 13.12.
Now in this life we know but in part, and in a glass: In the life to come we
shall be perfectly blessed, because we shall perfectly love God: We shall
perfectly love God, because we shall perfectly know him. No man can hope to
have the perfect love of God in the world to come, which begins not to love
God in this world. The kingdom of God must begin in the heart of man in this
life, or else it cannot be consummated in the life to come. Without the love of
God there is no desire of eternal life: How then can any one be partaker of
the chiefest good, which loves not, which seeks not, Savanar.
which desires not? Such as thy love is, such art thou; because thy love
transformeth thee into it self. Love is the chiefest couple, because the lover
and the thing loved become one. What has conjoined the most just God and
wretched sinners? What has conjoined them being infinitely distant one from
the other? Infinite love. And yet that the infinite justice of God might not be
weakened, the infinite price of Christ interceded. Again, what has conjoined
together God the Creator and the faithful soul created, things infinitely
distant? Love. In the life which is eternal, we shall be joined to God in the
chiefest degree. Why? Because we shall love him in the chiefest degree. Love
uniteth and transformeth: if thou love carnal things, thou art carnal. If
thou love the world, thou shall become worldly: 1. Cor. 15* 50. Kempis.
But flesh and blood cannot enter into the kingdom of God. If thou love God
and celestial things, thou shall become celestial. The love of God is the
chariot of Elias ascending up into heaven. The love of God is the joy of the
mind, the paradise of the soul, it excludes the world, it overcomes the
devil, it shuts hell, it opens heaven. The love of God is that seal by
which God seals the elect and believers: Rev. 7.3.
God at the last judgment will acknowledge none to be his, but those that are
sealed with this seal. For faith it self, the only instrument of our
justification and salvation, is not true, unless it does demonstrate it self
by love. There is no true faith, unless there be a firm confidence; and there
is no confidence without the love of God. That benefit is not acknowledged, for
which we do not give thanks; and we do not give thanks to him whom we do not
love: If therefore thy faith be true, it will acknowledge the benefit of our
redemption wrought by Christ; it will acknowledge, and give thanks; it will
give thanks, and love. The love of God is the life and rest of the soul: When
the soul departs from the body by death, then the life of the body departs:
When God departs out of the soul by reason of sins, then the life of the soul
departs. Again, God dwells in our hearts by faith, Ephesians. 3.17.
God dwells in the soul by love, because the love of God is diffused in the
hearts of the elect by the holy Spirit: Romans 5.5.
There is no tranquillity to the soul without the love of God: The world and
Satan do much disquiet it: But God is the chief rest of the soul: There is no
peace of conscience but to those that are justified by faith: there is no true
love of God but in them that have a filial confidence in God: Therefore let
the love of our selves, the love of the world, the love of the creatures die in
us, that the love of God may live in us: Which God begin in us in this world,
and perfect in the world to come!

Meditat. X. Of our reconciliation with God.
Fear not my soul, be not dismayed:
For Jesus Christ thy debts has paid.
CHrist truly took our infirmities, Isa. 53.4. Mat. 8.17*
and bare our griefs and sicknesses. O Lord Jesus! That which in us merited
eternal punishment, thou tookest upon thy self: That burden which would have
pressed us down into hell, thou have undergone: Thou wast wounded for our
iniquities, thou wast broken for our sins: Isa. 53.5.
By the bluenesse of thy wounds are we healed: 6.
The Lord has laid upon thee the iniquities of us all. Surely wonderful
indeed is this change. Thou take our sins upon thy self, and bestowest thy
righteousness upon us: Death due unto us thou undergoest thy self, and
conferrest life upon us: I cannot therefore by any means doubt of thy grace, or
despair by reason of my sins. The worst thing that was in us, thou tookest
upon thy self: How then can thou despise that which is the best in us and
thine own work, to wit, our soul and body? Thou will not leave my soul in hell,
Psalm. 16.^0.
neither will thou suffer thy holy one to see corruption: For he is truly
sanctified whose sins are abolished and taken away: Blessed is the man whose
iniquities are forgiven, and to whom the Lord imputes not his sins: Psalm.
32.1.
How can God impute our sins to us, when he has already imputed them to
another? For the wickedness of his people he has smitten his best beloved
Son: Isa. 53.8.
By the knowledge of him therefore he shall justify many, and shall bear their
iniquities. How shall he justify those that are his? Hear and attend, O my
soul: He shall save them by the knowledge of him, that is, by the saving
acknowledgement and firm apprehension by faith of the mercy and grace of God
in Christ. This is life eternal, Joh. 17.3*
to know and acknowledge thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou
have sent: Romans 10.^*
And therefore if thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and
believe in thy heart that God raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved.
Faith apprehends Christ's satisfaction: He bare the iniquities of those that
are his, he suffered for the sins of many, he interceded for the
transgressors: For he should have had very few just, unless in mercy he had
received sinners. Thou should have had few just, O Jesus, unless thou had
remitted the sins of the unjust. How then shall Christ judge according to
severitie, the sins of the penitent, which he has taken upon himself? How
shall he condemn him that is guilty of sin, seeing that he himself was made
sin for us? Will he condemn those, 2. Cor. 5.21.
whom he calls his friends? Joh. 15.14*
Will he condemn those, for whom he has entreated? Will he condemn those, for
whom he died? Lift up thy self therefore, O my soul, and forget thy sins,
Ezekiel. 18.22.
for the Lord has forgotten them. Whom do thou fear as the punisher of thy
sins but the Lord, who himself made satisfaction for thy sins? If any other
had paid the price of my redemption, I might have doubted whether the just
Judge would accept of that satisfaction: If a man or an angel had satisfied for
my sins, yet still there might be a doubt, whether the price of redemption
were sufficient: But now there is no place for doubt. How can it be that he
will not accept of that price which he has paid himself? How can that choose
but be sufficient, which is from God himself? Psalm. 42.5. Psalm. 25.10 Psalm.
119.137. Psalm. 42.5.
Why art thou troubled O my soul? All the ways of God are mercy and truth:
Just is the Lord, and just are his judgments: Why art thou troubled O my soul?
Let the mercy of God raise thee up, let the justice of God also raise thee up.
For if God be just, for one offense he will not exact double satisfaction. For
our sins he has smitten his Son: How then can he smite us his servants for
them? How can he punish our sins in us, which he has already punished in his
Son? The truth of the Lord endures for ever: As I live, says the Lord,
Psalm. 117.2. Ezekiel. 33.11.
I will not the death of a sinner, but rather that he turn from his wickedness
and live. Matt. 11.28.
Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you,
says our Savior. Shall we make God a liar, and labor by the weight of our
sins to bear down his mercy? To make God a liar, and to deny his mercy,
Austin^.
is a greater sin then all the sins of the whole world: and therefore Judas
sinned more in despairing, then the Jews in crucifying Christ. But rather where
sin has abounded, Romans 5.20.
there also grace has abounded much more, and overweigheth our sins by
infinite degrees. For sins are but the sins of men; but grace is the grace
of God: Sins are temporal; but the grace of our Lord is from eternity to
eternity. Satisfaction has been made for our sins, and the grace of God is
repaired by the death of Christ, and is established for ever: unto which I
betake my self as a devout suppliant.

Meditat. XI. Of the satisfaction made for our sins.
The death of Christ is life to thee,
If thou a Christian truly be.
Mat. 11.28
COme unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you:
they are the words of our Savior. It is true indeed, Lord Jesus, I am burdened
overmuch, and I sigh under the weight of my sin: But I make haste unto thee
the fountain of living water. Come unto me, Lord Jesus, that so I may come unto
thee: I come unto thee, Lord, because thou first came unto me: I come unto
thee, Lord Jesus, and with anxietie I desire thee, for I find no goodness in
my self. But if I found any goodness in my self, I should not with such
anxietie desire thee. True, Lord Jesus! I labor and am heavy laden; neither
can I compare my self with any of the saints, or penitent sinners, unless it
be with the thief upon the cross. Lord have mercy upon me, thou which had
mercy on the thief upon the cross. I have lived wickedly, I have lived i^
sin, but I desire to die the death of the holy and righteous: But holiness
and righteousness are far from my heart: Therefore to thy holiness and
righteousness do I fly. Let thy soul, Lord Jesus, succor me, let it succor
me, seeing that thou layedst it down for a price of redemption for many! Let
thy most sacred body which was afflicted with rods, Mat. 20.2^*
spittings, buffetings, and thorns, and fastened to the cross for me, let that
succor me! Let thy sacred and holy blood, O Jesus, let that blood succor me,
Joh. 19.34
which ran out of thy side at thy death and passion, which cleanses us from
all our sins! Let thy most holy divinity succor me, 1. Joh. 1.9^ Iren.
thy divinity which upheld thy humanity at thy passion, which also resting
and not showing it self, the great mystery of our redemption was finished,
which added infinite strength and weight unto thy passion, Act. 20.28
Insomuch that God by his own blood has purchased unto himself me miserable
man. Let thy wounds succor me, in which all my cure consists! Let thy most
holy passion succor me! Let thy merit succor me, as being my last refuge, and
a remedy against my sins! For in that thou sufferedst, thou sufferedst for
me: Therefore in that thou meritedst, thou meritedst for me and for mine
unworthiness: Romans 5.8.
Therefore God commends his love toward us, and proves it by a testimony
surpassing the understanding of all men, yea of the angels themselves, in that
Christ died for us when as yet we were sinners and the enemies of God. ^0.
Who can choose but admire this? Who can choose but be astonished at it? The
Son of God entreated by no man, yea hated of all men, in great mercy
entreated for us who were sinners, and his enemies: Neither entreated he only,
but also satisfied Gods justice for us, by his most poor nativitie, by his
most holy life, by his most bitter passion, by his most cruel death. O Lord
Jesus! Thou that intreatedst for me, sufferedst for me, and diedst for me,
before I could desire thy merit and passion, or move thee by my prayers to pay
the ransom for me, how can thou cast me away from thy face? How can thou
deny unto me the fruit of thy most holy passion, Psalm. 130.1.
when as now out of the deeps I cry unto thee, and beg the fruit of thy merit
with tears and sighs? I was an enemy by nature when thou diedst for me: but I
am made by grace thy friend, thy brother, and thy son. Thou heardst an enemy
before he prayed unto thee, and how can thou despise thy friend which comes
unto thee with prayers and tears? Thou will not cast out him that comes unto
thee, Joh. 6.37.
because thy word is truth. Thou have spoken unto us in spirit and truth, and
we have received from thee the words o^ eternal life. 68.
Attend and raise up thy self, O my soul: Before, we were sinners by nature;
but now, we are just by grace: Before, we were enemies; but now, we are friends
and kinsfolks: Before, our help was in the death of Christ; but now, it is in
Christ his life: Before, we were dead in sins; but now, we are quickened in
Christ: Oh the exceeding love of God, Ephesians. 2.4.
wherewith he loved us! Oh the superabundant riches of his grace, whereby he
has in heaven provided a place for us! Oh the tender mercy of our God,
whereby the dayspring from on high has visited us! Luke 1.78.
But if the death of Christ has brought unto us righteousness and life, what
shall his life do? If our Savior dying paid the price unto his Father, what
shall he do now being alive and interceding for us? For Christ lives and
dwells in our heart, if the remembrance of his most holy merit live and
flourish in it. Draw me, Lord Jesus, that I may possess in the truth of the
thing, that which here I expect by the firmness of hope! Let thy servant, I
pray thee, be with thee, and let him behold the glory which the Father has
given to thee, Joh. 17.24
and let him inhabit the mansion which thou have prepared in thy Fathers house!
Joh. 14.2.
Blessed are they that dwell in thy house, O Lord! They shall praise thee for
ever and ever. Psalm. 84.4^*


Meditat. XII. Of the nature and properties of true faith.
Faith is not faith, or if it be,
Faith is but dead, wants charity.
O Thou beloved soul consider the power of faith, and give thanks unto God who
is the only giver thereof: It is faith alone that does in such manner ingraft
us into Christ, that as vine-branches do draw their sap from the vine, Joh.
15.4*
so we also from him do draw life, righteousness, and salvation. Adam fell
from the grace of God, and lost the divine image by his incredulity: But we
are again received to grace; and the image of God begins to be renewed in us by
faith. By faith Christ becomes ours, and dwells in us: And where Christ is,
there is the grace of God: And where the grace of God is, Ephesians 2.8.
there is the inheritance of eternal life. By faith Abel offered unto God a
greater sacrifice then Cain: Heb. 11.4
So by faith we offer unto God spiritual sacrifices, Heb. 13.15. Heb. 11.5
that is, the fruit of our lips* By faith Enoch was translated: So faith takes
us from the society of men, and makes us have our conversation in heaven,
Philip. 3.20.
yea whiles we are here upon earth. Christ even now dwells in us, we have
already eternal life in us, Heb. 11.7
but it is hid. By faith Noah prepared the ark: So we by faith do enter into
the Church, in which our souls are preserved, when all other perish in the vast
sea of this world. By faith Abraham left the idolatrous land: 8.
So by faith we go out of this world, leaving our parents, brethren, and
kinsfolks, and cleave unto Christ, who calls us by his word. By faith Abraham
went into a strange country in expectation of the promised land: 9.
So we by faith do look for the celestial Jerusalem which God has prepared in
the heavens. Rev. 21.2.
We are strangers and pilgrims in this world, Psalm. 39.12
and travel by faith unto a celestial country. Heb. 11.11.
By faith Sarah conceived her son Isaac in her old age: So we being
spiritually dead, have received by faith strength to conceive Christ
spiritually. For as Christ was once conceived in the sanctified womb of the
virgin Mary: So in the faithful soul, which has kept it self pure from the
contagion of the world, he is every day spiritually born. By faith Abraham
offered up Isaac: 17.
So also we by faith do spiritually mortify and sacrifice our own will, which
is the beloved son of our soul: Mat. 16.24
For he which will follow Christ must deny himself, that is, renounce his own
will, his own honor, and the love of himself. By faith Isaac blessed Jacob:
Heb 11.20
So we by faith are made partakers of all divine benedictions: For in the ^eed
of Abraham, that is, in Christ, Genesis 2^.18.
all nations shall be blessed. Heb. 11.22
By faith Joseph prophesied of the Israelites going out of Egypt, and gave
commandment concerning his bones: So we by faith expect an egresse out of ^he
spiritual Egypt of this world, and a blessed resurrection of the bo^ie. By
faith Moses was preserved ^or three months: 23.
So faith hides us from the tyranny of Satan, until at length we be brought
into God^ royal palace, and be adopted spiritual kings. By faith Moses chose
rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, 25.
then to live in the glory of Egypt: So faith begets in us the contempt of
glory, honor, riches, and the pleasures of this world, and excites in us the
desire of the kingdom of heaven. By faith we choose rather the ignominy of
Christ, then the treasures of this world. By faith Moses left Egypt, and feared
not the kings anger: 27.
So faith does animate and confirm us, that we are not terrified by the threats
of the tyrants of this world, but rather obey the call of God with a courageous
and constant mind. By faith Israel celebrated the Passover: 28.
So also we by faith do celebrate a Passover. Christ was sacrificed for our
Paschal lamb whose flesh is meat indeed, an^ whose blood is drink indeed. Joh.
6.55.
B^ faith the Israelites passed through the red sea: Heb. 11.29.
So we by faith do pass^ through the sea of this world. B^ faith the walls of
Jericho fell: Josh. 6.^0.
So w^ by faith destroy all the munitions of Satan. By faith Rahab was saved*
Heb. 11.3^
So in the universal destruction of this world, by faith we shall be saved
from destruction. By faith the Fathers overcame kingdoms, 33.
stopped the mouths of lions, and quenched the force of fire: So we by faith
destroy the kingdom of Satan, escape the treacheries and rage of the infernal
lion, and are delivered from the scorching of hell fire.

But faith is not a naked opinion, and profession, but a true and lively
apprehension of Christ propounded to us in the gospel, a full persuasion of the
grace of God, the confident rest of our soul, and peace which relies only upon
the merit of Christ. This faith is begotten of the seed of Gods word: For faith
and the Spirit are one, and the word is the coach by which the holy Spirit is
brought unto us. The fruit does follow the nature of the seed: Faith is a
divine fruit: Therefore the seed must be divine, and that is, The word. As in
the creation light was made by the word of God; for God said, Let there be
light, Genesis 1.14
and there was light* So the light of faith arises from the light of the word
of God: In thy light shall we see light, Psalm. 36.9.
says the Psalmist. Seeing faith does join us unto Christ, seeing it makes us
one with him, therefore it is the mother of all virtues in us. Where there is
faith, there is Christ; where Christ is, there is an holy life; to wit, true
humility, true gentleness, true love. Christ and the holy Spirit are not
severed: where the holy Spirit is, there is true holiness: Therefore where
there is not an holy life, there is not the sanctifying Spirit. And where there
is not the Spirit, neither is there Christ; where there is not Christ, neither
is there faith. Whatsoever branch does not suck its life and nourishment from
the vine, Joh. 15.4.
is not to be judged a part of the vine: So neither are we yet joined to Christ
by faith, unless we suck our life and nourishment from him. Faith is a kind
of spiritual light: For our hearts are enlightened by faith: Therefore it
spreads abroad the rays of good works: But where the rays of spiritual life
are not, there is not yet the true light of faith. Bad works are the works of
darkness: But faith is light: 2. Cor. 6.14.
And what communion is there between light and darkness? Bad works are the
seed of Satan: But faith is the seed of Christ: And what communion is there
between Christ and Satan? 2. Cor. 6.15.
By faith our hearts are purified: But how can there be any inward purity in
the heart, when the words are impure, and the outward works appear impure?
Faith is the victory which overcomes the world: 1. Joh. 5.4
And how can there be true faith there, where the flesh overcomes the Spirit,
and leads it as it were captive? By faith we have Christ, and in Christ
eternal life: But no impenitent sinner that persevereth in his sins, can be
partaker of eternal life: How then can he be partaker of Christ? How can he be
partaker of faith? Kindle in us, O Christ, the light of true faith, that by
faith we may obtain eternal salvation.

Meditat. XIII. Of the spiritual wedlock of Christ and the Soul.
Christ is by marriage knit to thee,
If thou to him by sanctity.
Hos. 2.19.
I Will betroth thee unto me for ever, says Christ unto the faithful soul:
Christ therefore would be present at the marriage which was celebrated in Cana
of Galilee, John 2.1.
to show that he came into the world to spiritual marriages. ^sa. 61.10.
Rejoice in the Lord with gladness, and leap thou faithful soul, for joy in
thy God, who has clothed thee with the garments of salvation, and compassed
thee about with the robes of righteousness, like a spouse adorned with jewels
and bracelets. Rejoice for the honor of the bridegroom: Austine.
Rejoice for the beauty of the bridegroom: Rejoice for the love of the
bridegroom. His honor is the greatest that can be: For he is true God blessed
for ever. Romans 9 5.
How great then is the dignity of this creature, I mean the faithful soul,
seeing the Creator himself is willing to betroth her unto himself! His beauty
is the greatest that can be: For he is beautiful above the sons of men, for
they saw the glory of him, John 1.14 Mat. 17.2.
as the glory of the only begotten of the Father: his face shined like the
sun, and his garments were white as snow. Psalm. 45.2* Psalm. 8.5.
His lips were full of grace, and he was crowned with glory and honor. How
great then is his mercy, that he being the chiefest beauty, does vouchsafe to
choose the soul of man to be his spouse, whereas it is defiled with the stains
of sin* On the bridegrooms part there is the greatest majesty: On the
spouses part there is the greatest infirmity. On the bridegrooms part there is
the greatest beauty: On the spouses part there is the greatest deformity. And
yet far greater is the love of the bridegroom toward the spouse, then of the
spouse toward the bridegroom, whose honor and whose beauty does so far
excel. Ansel^
Behold thou faithful soul, behold the infinite love of the bridegroom! It was
his love that drew him down from heaven unto the earth: It was his love that
bound him to a pillar: It was his love that fastened him to the cross: It was
his love that enclosed him up in the grave: It was his love that he descended
into hell. What could make him to do all these things? Surely, it was his love
toward his spouse. But our hearts are stony, and heavier then lead, if the
bond of so great love cannot draw us unto God, whereas it has drawn God unto
us. Naked was his spouse, Ezekiel. 16.22.
and being naked could not be admitted into the royal palace of the heavenly
King: Isa. 61.10
And he has clothed her with the garments of righteousness and salvation,
whereas she lay enwrapped and involved in the foul coat of her sins, and the
most filthy rags of iniquity: He has granted unto her to be arrayed in fine
linen, Rev. 19.8.
clean and white: the fine linen is the righteousness of Saints: That garment
is the righteousness which was obtained by the death and passion of the
bridegroom himself. Jacob labored fourteen years to obtain Rachel to be his
wife: Genesis 29.27.
But Christ for thirty four years almost endured hunger, thirst, cold,
poverty, ignominy, reproaches, bonds, whips, the bitterness of gall, and
death upon the cross, to purchase unto himself the faithful soul to be his
spouse. Samson went down and chose out of the Philistines, Judge. 14.1
which were adjudged to destruction, a wife unto himself: The Son of God came
down and chose unto himself a spouse out of men that were condemned, and
subject to eternal death. The whole stock of the spouse was at enmity with
the heavenly Father, and he by his most bitter passion has reconciled it unto
his Father. The spouse was prostrate upon the face of the earth, Ezekiel. 16.22.
and polluted in her own blood: But he has washed her with the water of
baptism, and cleansed her with a most holy laver: He has cleansed the blood
of his spouse with his own blood: For the blood of the Son of God does
cleanse us from all our sins. 1. Joh. 1.7*
The spouse was deformed: But he has anointed her with the oil of grace and
mercy. Ezekiel. 16.9
The spouse was not honorably apparelled, but he has put bracelets and
eare-rings upon her: He has adorned her with virtues and diverse gifts of the
holy Spirit. 11.
The spouse was very poor and had no pledge to give unto him: Tertull.
Therefore has he left unto her the pledge of his Spirit, and received from
her the pledge of his flesh, and has carried it up into heaven. The spouse was
hungry: But he has given unto her fine flour^ and honey and oil to eat: Ezekiel.
16.19.
He does feed her with his flesh and blood unto eternal life. The spouse is
disobedient, and often breaks her marriage faith; she commits fornication
with the world and with the devil, and yet the bridegroom out of his infinite
love does receive her again into favor, as often as she returns unto him by
true repentance. Acknowledge and confess, thou faithful soul, these so many
and so great arguments of his infinite love. Love, Austine.
thou faithful soul, the love of him that for love of thee descended into the
womb of the virgin: We must love him that delivered up himself for us, Anselm.
so much more then our selves, by how much he is greater then us: Let us make
our whole life conformable unto him, who for the love of us made himself wholly
conformable unto us. He is justly to be accounted most unthankful, who loves
not again him of whom he was first beloved. How greatly therefore ought we to
love him, who for the love of us, did as it were forget his own majesty! Happy
soul, which by the bond of this spiritual marriage is joined unto Christ! She
does safely and confidently apply unto her self all the benefits of Christ:
even as in another case, by wedlock the wife does shine glorious by the
reflection of the husbands rays upon her. Now by faith alone are we made
partakers of this blessed and spiritual marriage, as it is written, Hos. 2.19.
I will betroth thee unto me in faith: Faith does ingraft us into Christ, Joh.
15.5.
as a branch into the spiritual vine, that we may suck our life and
nourishment from him. And as they which are joined in marriage, Mat. 19 6.
are no more two but one flesh: So they which by faith are joined unto the
Lord, 1. Cor. 6.17.
become one spirit with him, because Christ by faith dwells in our hearts:
Ephesians. 3.17. Gal. 5.6.
And this faith if it be true, it works by love. As in the old Testament the
priests were compelled to marry virgins: Lev. 21.13
So the celestial priest does spiritually couple unto himself such a virgin as
does keep her self pure and undefiled from the embracements of the devil, the
world, and her own flesh. Vouchsafe, O Christ, at length to admit us unto the
marriage of the Lamb. Rev. 19.7.
Amen.

Meditat. XIIII. Of the mystery of Christ's incarnation.
Admire, my soul, the mystery
Of Jesus Christ's nativitie.
LEt us withdraw our minds a while from these temporal things, and let us
contemplate the mystery of the Lords nativitie. The Son of God came down
from heaven unto us, that we might obtain the adoption of sons. Gal. 4.5.
God is made man* that man may be made partaker of divine grace and nature. 1.
Pet. 1.20.
About the evening of this world would Christ be born; to show that the
benefits of his incarnation concern not this life, but that which is
everlasting. In the time of Augustus the peacemaker would he be born; Luke 2.1.
because he made peace between God and man. In the time of Isreal's servitude
would he be born; because he is the redeemer and deliverer of his people. Under
the reign of a foreign king would he be born; Joh* 18.^6
because his kingdom was not of this world. He is born of a virgin, to
signify that he is not conceived or born, but in the hearts of those that are
spiritual virgins, that is, whose minds adhere not unto the world and the
devil, but unto God in one spirit. His birth was pure and holy, to sanctify
our impure and polluted nativity. Tertull.
He is born of a virgin betrothed to an husband, to honor matrimony, which was
Gods institution. He is born in the darkness of the night; because he was the
true light which illuminateth the darkness of the world. He is laid in a
manger, because he is the true food of our souls. Luke 2 7.
He is born betwixt an ox and an ass, that men which were become like unto the
beasts, might be restored to their former dignity. He is born in Bethlehem,
that is, in the house of bread, Mat. 2.1.
because he brought with him most plentiful food of divine benefits. He is the
first and only begotten of his mother upon earth, because he was according to
his divine nature the first and only begotten of his Father in heaven. He is
born poor and needy, to purchase for us celestial riches. 2. Cor. 8.9
He is born in a stable, to bring us to his royal palace which is in heaven.
From heaven is sent the messenger of this so great a benefit, Luke 2.9.
because no man on earth understood the greatness thereof: And further it was
meet that the messenger of celestial gifts should be celestial. The armies of
the angels rejoice, 13.
because we are by the incarnation of the Son made partakers of their
happiness. To the shepherds first is declared this so great a miracle, 8.
because the tru^ shepherd of our souls came to bring back the lost sheep into
the way. To the ignoble and those that were despised is the matter of so great
joy declared, because no man can partake thereof, unless he become vile in his
own eyes. To them that watch over their flocks is his nativitie declared,
because they only whose hearts do watch unto God, and not they that lie
snorting in their sins, are made partakers of so great a gift. The quire of
heaven, which was made sorrowful for the sin of our first father, 13.
does now sing and rejoice. The brightness and glory of that Lord and King
appears now in the heavens, whose lowliness men despised here on earth. The
angel says unto them, Fear not, because he was born, 10.
who would quite take away all cause of fear. Joy was declared from heaven,
because the author and giver of joy was born. Joy is commanded, because enmity
between God and man, the cause of all sorrow, is removed. Glory in the highest
is rendered unto God, 14.
which our first father, by his unlawful transgression of the commandment,
would have taken away. True peace is obtained by his nativitie, because before,
men were enemies unto God; before, their own conscience was their adversary;
before, they were at dissension one with another. True peace is restored to the
earth, because he is overcome which held us captive. 14.
Let us go with the shepherds to Christ's manger, 15.
that is, to the church, and in his swadling-clothes, that is, in the sacred
scriptures, shall we find the infant enwrapped. Let us with Mary the holy
mother of our Lord, 19.
keep the words of so great a mystery, and let us every day recall them to our
memory. Let us follow with our voice the angels which sing before us, 13.
and let us render unto God due thanks for so great a benefit. Let us rejoice
and be glad with all the heavenly army. For if the angels do so greatly rejoice
for our sake: How much more ought we to rejoice, seeing unto us he is born and
given? Isa. 9.6.
If the Israelites did lift up their voices with jubilee when the ark of the
covenant was brought unto them, 2. Sam. 6.15.
which was but a figure and shadow of the Lords incarnation: How much more
ought we to rejoice, unto whom the Lord himself is come, and has taken our
flesh upon him? Joh. 8.56.
If Abraham rejoiced when he saw the day of the Lord; when the Lord, Genesis 18.^*
in an humane shape assumed for a time, appeared unto him: What should we do
now Christ has coupled unto himself our nature by an everlasting and
inviolable covenant? Let us admire here the infinite goodness of God, who
himself would descend unto us, seeing that we could not ascend unto him. Let us
admire the infinite power of God, who of two things most distant, I mean the
divine and humane nature, could make one, so nearly, that one and the same
should be God and man. Let us admire the infinite wisdom of God, who could
find out means to work our salvation, when men and angels saw no means. An
infinite good was offended; and an infinite satisfaction was required: Man had
offended God; of man was satisfaction required: But by man neither could an
infinite satisfaction be made, neither could Gods justice be satisfied without
an infinite price: Therefore God was made man, Anselm.
that both he which had sinned might satisfy, and he which was infinite might
pay an infinite price. Let us admire this wonderful temper of Gods justice and
mercy, which no creature could find before God did manifest it, and none
could fully perceive after it was made manifest. Let us admire these things,
and not curiously pry into them: Let us desire to look in, though we cannot
conceive all: Let us rather confess our ignorance, then deny Gods omnipotence.

Meditat. XV. Of the saving fruit of the Incarnation.
Christ was conceived in Virgins womb,
That thou might son of God become.
I Bring you tidings of great joy, says the angel at our Saviors nativitie:
Luke 2.10.
Of great joy indeed, that is, such as passes man's understanding. It was a
very great evil, that we were held captive under the wrath of God, under the
power of the devil, and under eternal damnation: But it was yet greater,
because men either knew it not, or else did neglect it. But now, great joy is
declared unto us, because he that delivers us from all evils, is come into
the world: He is come, a physician to the sick, Hugo*
a redeemer to the captives, the way to the wanderers, life to them that were
dead, and salvation to them that were condemned. Exodus 3.10.
As Moses was sent from the Lord to deliver the people of Israel from the
servitude of Egypt: So Christ was sent from his Father to redeem all mankind
from the devils slavery. As the dove after the drying up of the waters of the
deluge, Genesis 8.11
brought an olive branch into the ark of Noah: So Christ came into the world,
to preach peace and the reconciliation of man with God. Therefore we have cause
to rejoice, and conceive great things of the mercy of God. Romans 5.10
He which loved us so, being his enemies, that he did vouchsafe to assume our
nature to be united to his divinity, what will he deny unto us being joined
unto him by participation of our flesh? Who ever hated his own flesh? Ephesians. 5.29.
How then can that chief and infinite mercy repel us from him, being now made
partakers of his nature? Who can in words express, or in thought conceive the
greatness of this mystery? Here is the greatest sublimitie, and the greatest
humility; the greatest power, and the greatest infirmity; the greatest
majesty, and the greatest frailty: What is higher then God, and lower then
man? What is more powerful then God, and weaker then man? What is more
glorious then God, and more frail then man? But that chief power found out a
means to conjoyn these, seeing that the chief justice did necessarily require
such a conjunction. Who also can conceive the greatness of this mystery? An
equivalent and infinite price was required for the sin of man, Anselm.
because man had turned himself away from the infinite good, which is God. But
what could be equivalent to the infinite God? Therefore infinite justice it
self takes as it were of himself an equivalent price: and God the Creator
suffers in the flesh, that the flesh of the creature should not suffer for
ever. An infinite goodness was offended, and none could intercede but a
mediator of infinite power: And what is infinite, but God? Therefore God
himself reconciled the world unto himself, 2. Cor. 5.19.
God himself became mediator, God himself redeemed mankind by his own blood.
Act. 20.28
Who can conceive the greatness of this mystery? The chief Creator was
offended, and the creature sought not with care to appease him, and to be
reconciled unto him: So he which was offended, assumes the flesh of the
creature, and becomes Reconciliatour. Man had forsaken God, and turned away
himself unto the devil the enemy of God: and he that was forsaken makes
diligent inquisition after the forsaker, and invites him most bountifully to
come again unto him. Man had departed from that infinite good, and fallen into
an infinite evil: And that same infinite good, by giving an infinite price of
redemption, delivered the creature from that infinite evil. Is not this
infinite mercy far exceeding all the finite understanding and thought of
man? Our nature is become more glorious by Christ, then it was dishonored by
Adams sin. We have received more in Christ, then we lost in Adam: Where sin
did abound, Gods grace did superabound. Romans 5.20
In Adam we lost our innocence, in Christ we have received perfect
righteousness. Let others admire Gods power: But his divine mercy is yet more to
be admired; although power and mercy in God are equal, for both are infinite.
Let others admire our creation: But I had rather admire our redemption;
although creation and redemption are both acts of infinite power. It was a
great thing to create man, having deserved nothing; for as yet he had no being:
But it seems yet to be greater, to take upon him to satisfy for the debt of
man, and to redeem him when he deserved evil. It was a wonderful thing that
our flesh and our bones were formed by God, Genesis 2.23.
but yet it is more wonderful that God would become flesh of our flesh, and
bone of our bones. Be thankful, Ephesians. 5.30.
O my soul, unto God, who created thee when thou wast not, who redeemed thee
when for sin thou wast condemned, and who has prepared for thee, if by faith
thou adhere unto Christ, the joys of heaven

Meditat. XVI. Of the spiritual refection of the godly.
Christ unto thee, if thou art his,
Both light, and food, and med^cine is*
OUr most bountiful God has prepared a great feast: but hearts that be
hungry must be brought unto it. He that tastes not, Mat. 22.4*
feels not the sweetness of the heavenly feast: and he which hungreth not,
tastes not. To believe on Christ, is to come to his heavenly feast: But no man
can believe unless he confess his sins with contrition, and repent him of
the same. Contrition is the spiritual hunger of the soul, and faith is the
spiritual feeding. To the Israelites God gave Manna in the wilderness, being
the bread of angels: Exodus 16.15. Psalm. 78.24, 25.
In this feast of the new Testament God gives unto us the heavenly ^anna, that
is, his grace and forgiveness of sins, yea his Son, the Lord of the
angels: Christ is that spiritual bread which came down from heaven to give
life unto the world. Joh. 6.51.
Luke 15.16.
He that is full with the husks of the swine, that is, with the delights of
this world, desires not that sweetness. The outward man perceives not what is
sweet unto the inward. God gives his Manna in the wilderness, that is, where
all earthly meat, and all earthly consolation is taken from the soul. He which
had married a wife, Luke 14.20.
refused to come: But the chaste virgins, that is, those souls which neither
cleave unto the devil by sins, nor to the world by delights, do come unto
this feast. 2. Cor. 11.2.
I have espoused you, as a chaste virgin, to one husband, says the Apostle.
Our soul must not commit spiritual adultery, that so God may contract
spiritual marriage with her. Luke 14.18.
He which had a desire to go see his field, refused to come: They which love
the pleasures of this world, come not unto the sweetness of the heavenly
feast. The desire is the foot of the soul: Our soul comes not to this mystical
feast, unless it desires; and it cannot desire the heavenly sweetness, if it
be full with this worldly comfort. When the rich young man heard that for
Christ he should forsake his riches, unto which his soul did cleave, he went
away sorrowful. Mat. 19.22*
Christ the celestial Elisha pours not the oil of celestial sweetness but
into vessels which are empty. 2. Kings 4.4.
The love of God enters not into the soul, unless self-love and the love of
the world first go forth Where our treasure is, there will our heart be also:
Mat. 6.2^.
If thou make the world thy treasure, thy heart will be on the world. Savana^.
Love has force to unite: If thou love earth, thou art united to earth. Love
has force to alter and change: If thou love the world, thou shall become
worldly. Luke 14.19
They which buy oxen, and are negotiating, come not unto Christ: Psalm. ^2.20*
They which set their hearts upon riches, desire not the heavenly riches.
Earthly riches by a kind of false show of sufficiency satisfy the desire of
the soul, that she may not seek after her true sufficiency in God, which only
does fully satiate the appetite. All earthly riches consist in the creatures,
in silver, gold, building, ground, cattle: but no creature does fully satisfy
the soul, because she is more excellent then all the creatures; for they were
all made for her use. How insufficient the creatures are to satiate and fulfill
our desires, it appears at death, when all creatures forsake us. It is
wonderful that we should so firmly stick unto the creatures, when as they
stick unto us so weakly and unconstantly. Genesis 3.6.
Adam, when he turned away from the consolation of God, and sought delight in
the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, was driven out of Paradise: Our
soul, if it turn away from God unto the creatures* is deprived of celestial
comfort, and is quite driven away from the tree of life. But what remains unto
them that neglect this feast? The world passes away, and so do all they that
cleave unto it: 1. Joh. 2.17.
The creatures pass away, and all they that put their trust in them. Our
heavenly Father swears, that they which prefer oxen, fields, wives, that
is, any earthly things whatsoever, before the sweetness of the heavenly feast,
Luk 14.24
shall never taste of his supper. After supper there is no further provision of
meat made: and, if we neglect Christ, there is no other remedy left for us.
Those contemners shall be punished with eternal famine, and live in eternal
darkness. They which would not hear Christ thus inviting them, Mat. 11.28
Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, shall hear him at
length denouncing, Mat. 25.41
Go ye cursed into everlasting fire. The Sodomites were consumed with fire,
Genesis 19.14.
because being called to this feast by the preaching of Lot, they would not
come. The fire of Gods wrath, which lasts for ever, shall consume them who
being called by the gospel, have despised this feast. At the coming of the
bridegroom, Mat. 25.8.
the virgins that had no oil in their lamps, 10. Granat.
staying too long, were shut out: So they whose hearts in this world are not
filled with the oil of the holy Spirit, shall not be admitted by Christ to the
participation of joy, but they shall have the gate of indulgence, the gate of
mercy, the gate of consolation, the gate of hope, the gate of grace, and the
gate of good works shut against them. Christ has yet an inward kind of
calling: and happy is he that hears it! Rev. 3.20.
Christ often knocks ^t the gate of our hearts by holy desires, devout sighs,
and pious cogitations; and happy is he that opens unto him! As soon as thou
feel in thy heart any holy desire of heavenly grace, assure thy self that
Christ knocks at thy heart: Let him in, lest he pass by, and afterward shut
the gate of his mercy against thee. As soon as thou feel in thy heart any
spark of godly meditations, persuade thy self that it was kindled by the heat
of divine love, that is, of the holy Spirit; cherish and nourish it, that it
may grow to be a fire of love: 1 Thessalonians. 5.19.
Take heed that thou quench not the Spirit, and hinder the work of the Lord. He
that destroys the temple of the Lord, 1. Cor. 3*17.
shall feel his severe judgment: Our heart is the temple of the Lord: And he
destroys it, whosoever refuses to give place to the holy Spirit inwardly
calling by the word. In the old Testament the prophets could hear the Lord
speaking inwardly: In the new Testament all the true godly do feel those inward
motions of the holy Spirit drawing them. Blessed are they which hear and
follow!

Meditat. XVII. Of the fruits of Baptism.
If thou polluted art with sin,
The fountain's open, enter in.
REmember, thou faithful soul, the grace of God conferred upon thee in the
saving laver of baptism. Baptism is the laver of regeneration: Tit. 3.5.
Therefore he that is dipped in the laver of baptism, is no longer altogether
carnal as before: John 3.5.
But because he is born of God by water and the Spirit, therefore, he is also
the son of God; Romans 8.14
and because a son, therefore an heir also of eternal happiness. As the
eternal Father at the baptism of Christ uttered this voice, Mat. 3.17.
This is my beloved Son: So all those that believe and are baptized, he
adopteth to be his sons. As at the baptism of Christ the holy Ghost appeared
in the shape of a dove: So also is he present at our baptism, and gives force
unto it: yea, he is conferred by baptism upon the believers, and effects in
them new motions, that they become wise as serp^nts, Mat. 10.16 Ravan.
and innocent as doves. As it was at the creation, so is it also at our
regeneration: At the first creation of things the Spirit of the Lord moved upon
the waters, Genesis 1.2.
and gave a vital force unto them: So also in the water of baptism the holy
Ghost is present, and makes it a saving means of our regeneration. Christ
himself our Savior would be baptized, that he might leave a testimony, that
by baptism we are made his members. Oftentimes medicines are applied to the
head to heal some other parts of the body: Christ is our spiritual head; He
received the medicine of baptism for to heal his mystical body. God in the
old Testament made a covenant with his people by circumcision: Genesis 17.11.
So by baptism in the new Testament we are received into the covenant of God.
Baptism succeeded in the place of circumcision: He therefore that is in the
covenant of God, need not be afraid of the devils accusation. In baptism we
put on Christ: Gal. 3.27.
And from hence it is that the Saints are said to have made their robes white
in the blood of the Lamb. Rev. 7.14.
Christ's perfect righteousness is that beautiful robe: whosoever therefore
has put on this robe, let him not fear the stains of sin. There was a pool
in Jerusalem about the sheep-market, into which at a certain time the angel of
the Lord descended and troubled it, John 5.4.
and he that first descended into it after the troubling of the water, was
cured of what disease soever: The water of baptism is that pool, which heals
us of every disease of sin, when the holy Spirit descends into it, and
troubles it with the blood of Christ, who was made a sacrifice for us: In like
manner in time past the sacrifices were washed in that pool at Jerusalem.

As at the baptism of Christ the heavens were opened: Mat. 3.16.
So also at our baptism the gate of heaven is opened unto us. Luther.
At the baptism of Christ all the holy and sacred Trinity was present: And so
likewise at our baptism: And so by the word of promise, which is annexed unto
the element of water, faith receives the grace of the Father adopting, the
merit of the Son cleansing, and the efficacy of the holy Ghost regenerating.
Pharaoh and all his host was drowned in the red sea; Exodus 14.27.
The Israelites passed through safe and sound: So in baptism all the host of
vices is drowned; and the faithful safely attain to the inheritance of the
kingdom of heaven. Therefore also is baptism that sea of glass which John
saw: Rev. 4.6.
Through it, as through a kind of glass, the brightness of the sun of
righteousness enters into our minds. And that sea was before the throne of
the Lamb: The church is the throne of the Lamb, in which only the grace of
holy baptism is to be had. The prophet Ezekiel saw waters going out of the
temple, Ezekiel. 47.1
which did quicken and heal all: In the spiritual temple of God, that is, in
the church, the saving waters of baptism do yet spring forth, into the
profunditie whereof our sins are thrown: Mic. 7.19
Whosoever come unto it, shall be healed and live. Baptism is the spiritual
flood in which all flesh of sin is drowned. The impure crow goes forth like
the Devil: But the dove like the holy Ghost flies and brings the olive branch,
that is, peace and tranquillity unto our minds. Remember therefore, thou
faithful soul, the greatness of the grace of God conferred upon thee in
baptism, and render due thanks unto him.

The more plentiful grace is conferred upon us in baptism, the more diligent
must we be in the custody of the gifts conferred. Romans 6.4.
We are buried with Christ by baptism: Therefore as Christ was raised up from
the dead unto the glory of his Father: So let us walk in newness of life. Joh.
5.14.
We are made whole, let us sin no more, lest a worse thing happen unto us. We
have put on the most precious robe of Christ's righteousness: Therefore let us
not defile it with the stains of sin. Our old man is crucified and dead in
baptism: Let the new man therefore live in us. We are regenerated and renewed
in the spirit of our minds by baptism: Ephesians. 4.23.
Therefore let not the flesh domineer over the spirit. 2. Cor. 5.17.
Old things are past: Behold a^ things are become new: Let not therefore the
oldnesse of the flesh, prevail against the newness of the spirit. We are made
the sons of God by spiritual regeneration: Let us therefore live as it
becomes the sons of such a Father. We are made the temple of the holy Ghost:
Let us therefore prepare a thankful seat for such a guest. We are received
into Gods covenant: Let us take heed therefore that we do not serve under the
devil, and so fall from the covenant of grace. Effect in us all these things, O
blessed Trinity in Unity! Thou that have given us such grace in baptism, give
us also the grace to persevere in it.

Meditat. XVIII. Of the saving participation of the body and blood of Christ.
He that does eat and drink by faith
Christ's flesh and blood, salvation has.
HE that eats my flesh, John 6.54.
and drinks my blood, shall live for ever, says Christ. Exceeding great was
the bounty and goodness of our Savior, in that he did not only assume our
flesh, and exalt it to the throne of celestial glory, but also feeds us with
his body and blood unto eternal life. Oh the saving delicates of the soul! Oh
the heavenly and angelical food to be desired! 1. Pet. 1.12. Heb. 2.16
Although the angels did desire to look into this mystery, yet he did not
assume the nature of the angels, but the seed of Abraham. Our Savior is nearer
unto us, then unto the angels: for we have knowledge of his love by this, 1.
John 4.13.
in that he has given us of his own Spirit; neither of his Spirit only, but
of his body and blood: For so says Truth it self, of the bread and wine in
the Eucharist: Matt. 26.26, 28.
This is my body; This is my blood. How can the Lord forget those whom he has
redeemed with his body and blood, and whom he has nourished with his body
and blood? Joh. 6.54.
He that eats the flesh, and drinks the blood of Christ, remains in
Christ, and Christ in him. I do not much marvel therefore that the hairs of
our head are numbered, Matt. 10.30. Luke 10.20. Isa. 49.16. Isa. 46.3.
that our names are registered in heaven, that we are described in the hands of
the Lord, and that we are carried in his bosom, seeing that we are fed with
the body and blood of Christ. Without doubt great is the dignity of our
souls, seeing that they are fed with a price of redemption of such value. Great
also is the dignity of our bodies, which being redeemed, and fed by the body
of Christ, become the habitacles and temples of the holy Ghost, and the
dwelling places of the whole and most holy Trinity. It cannot be that they
should remain in the grave, being fed with the body and blood of our Lord.
This is meat indeed. We eat it: But we change it not into the nature of our
body, but are changed into it. We are the members of Christ, and are animated
by his Spirit, and fed with his body and blood. This is the bread which came
down from heaven, Joh. 6.51.
and gives life unto the world: He that eats thereof, shall never hunger.
This is the bread of grace and mercy; Of this whosoever eats, Psalm. 34.8.
Joh. 1.16.
he shall taste and see how sweet the Lord is, and receive of his fullness
grace for grace. Joh. 6.50.
This is the bread of life, not only the living bread, but the quickening
bread: Whosoever eats thereof, he shall live for ever. Joh. 6.58.
This is the bread which came down from heaven; neither is it only heavenly,
but it makes those that eat thereof heavenly: They which eat it savingly in the
spirit, shall become heavenly, because they shall not die, but shall be raised
again at the last day. Joh. 6.54.
They shall be raised again, but not to judgment; because he that eats of
this bread comes not into judgment, nor into condemnation; Romans 8.1.
because there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus: but they
shall be raised to life and salvation. For he that eats the flesh of the
Son of man, John 6.56
and drinks his blood, has life in himself, and shall live through Christ.
55.
His flesh is meat indeed, and his blood is drink indeed. Let us be filled
therefore with the meat, Isa. 55.2.
not of our works, but of the Lord. Psalm. 36.8.
Let us be abundantly satisfied with the fatness, not of our house, but of the
Lord. This is the true fountain of life; He that shall drink of this water
shall never thirst; John 4.14
but it shall become in him a fountain of water springing up unto eternal
life. All ye that thirst come unto these waters, Isa. 55.1.
and ye that have no silver, make haste, buy without money. Let them that
thirst come, and come thou my soul that art vexed with the raging heat of
sin. But if thou be destitute of the silver of thy merits, make haste the
rather: If thou have no merits of thine own, make haste the more ardently to
the merits of Christ: Make haste therefore, and buy without silver. Here is the
chamber of Christ and the soul, from which let not thy sins deter thee, and
into which let not thy merits enter. For what can be our merits? Isa. 55.2.
They lay out their silver, and not for bread; they labor, and not for
fullness. Our labors do not satiate, neither is the grace of God bought with
the silver of our merits: Therefore hear O my soul, and eat that which is
good, and thou shall be delighted with fatness. These words are spirit and
life, John 6.63
and the words of eternal life. The cup of benediction is the communion of the
blood of Christ, 1. Cor. 10.15.
and the bread which we break is the participation of the Lords body. 1. Cor.
6.17.
We cleave unto the Lord: Therefore we are one Spirit with him. We are united
unto him, not only by the communion of nature, but also by the participation
of his body and blood. I do not therefore say with the Jews, John 6.5*
How can this man give us his flesh to eat? But rather cry out, How does the
Lord distribute unto us his flesh to eat, and his blood to drink! I do not pry
into his power, but do admire his benevolence: I do not examine his majesty,
but I reverence his goodness: His presence I believe, the manner of his
presence I know not: I am certainly assured that it is most near and inward.
Ephesians. 5.30.
We are members of his body: flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones. Joh.
6.56.
He dwells in us, and we in him. My soul desires to dive by cogitation into
this most profound abyss, but cannot find with what words to set forth and
declare that goodness; and therefore is altogether amazed at the sight of the
greatness of the grace of the Lord, and the glory of the blessed.

Meditat. XIX. Of the mystery of the Lords Supper.
Be wise: Do not to far enquire
'To that thou rather should admire.
IN the Lords holy Supper there is set before us a mystery to be trembled at,
and to be adored of us by all means: There is the treasure and treasury of
divine grace. We know that there was a tree of life planted by God, Genesis 2.9.
whose fruit might have conserved our first parents and their posterity by the
fertility and felicity thereof. There was also placed in paradise a tree of
the knowledge of good and evil: 9.
But even that which was appointed by God for their salvation and life, and for
an exercise of their obedience, became unto them an occasion of death and
condemnation, whilst they, poor wretches, obeyed the devils allurements, and
their own desires. Here also is prepared a tree of life, that sweet wood, whose
leaves are for medicine, and whose fruit for meat: Ezekiel. 47.12.
The sweetness thereof does take away the bitterness of all evils, yea of
death it self. Unto the Israelites was given Manna, Exodus 16.15.
that they might be fed with heavenly food: Here is that true Manna, which came
down from heaven to give life unto the world. Joh. 6.51.
This is the heavenly bread, and the angelical meat, 35.
of which whosoever eats, shall never hunger. The Israelites had the ark of
the covenant, Exodus 28.43.
and the mercy-seat, where they might hear the Lord speak face to face: Exodus
33.11.
Here is the true ark of the covenant, that is, the most sacred body of
Christ, Col. 2.3.
wherein the treasures of all science, knowledge, and wisdom are laid up. Here
is the true mercyseat in the blood of Christ, Romans 3.25
which makes us to be beloved in the beloved: Ephesians. 1.6.
neither does he speak unto us only by his inward consolation, but also
dwells in us: neither does he feed us only with heavenly Manna, but with
himself. Isa. 66.1.
Here is the gate of heaven indeed, here is the angels ladder: Genesis 28.12.
For can heaven be greater then he that is in heaven? Can heaven be more nearly
united unto God, then the flesh and humane nature which he has assumed? Heaven
indeed is the throne of God: Isa. 11.2.
But in the humane nature assumed by Christ rests the holy Spirit. Col. 2.9.
God is in heaven: But in Christ dwells the fullness of the divinity.
Ambrose.
Certainly, this is a great and infallible pledge of our salvation. He had no
greater thing to give unto us: For what is greater then himself? What is so
closely united unto him as his humane nature, which is assumed into the
fellowship of the most blessed Trinity, and made the treasury of all heavenly
goods? What is so nearly conjoined unto him as flesh and blood? And yet with
these most heavenly nourishments does he refresh us miserable worms, and make
us partakers of his nature: And shall not he then make us partakers of his
grace? Who ever hated his own flesh? Ephesians. 5.29.
How can the Lord then despise us whom he feeds with his own flesh and blood?
How can he forget those, unto whom he has given the pledge of his own body?
How can Satan be able to overcome us, seeing that we are fed with heavenly
food, that we faint not in battle? We are dear unto Christ; because he bought
us at so dear a price: We are dear unto Christ; because he feeds us with such
dear and precious things: We are dear unto Christ; because we are his flesh
and members. Ephesians. 5.30
This is the only Panacea of all spiritual diseases, Ignatius.
this is the medicine of immortality: For what sin is there so great,
Bernard.
that the sacred flesh of God cannot expiate? What sin is so great, that the
quickening flesh of Christ cannot heal? What sin so mortal, that is not taken
away by the death of the Son of God? What fiery darts of the devil can be so
deadly, that they cannot be quenched in this fountain of divine grace? What so
great stain of the conscience, that this blood cannot purge? The Lord was
present to the Israelites in a cloud, and in fire: Exodus 13.21. Mal. 4.2.
But here is no cloud, but the sun of righteousness, the present light of
our souls: Here is not felt the fire of Gods fury, but the heat of his love;
neither does he depart from us, but makes his mansion with us. Our first
parents were brought into paradise, John. 14.23. Genesis 2.8.
that most sweet and fragrant garden, the type of eternal beatitude, that
being put in mind of Gods bounty, they might perform due obedience unto their
Creator. Behold! Here is more then paradise in this place. For the creature is
filled with the flesh of the Creator: The penitent conscience is cleansed by
the blood of the Son of God. By the body of Christ are nourished the members
of Christ the head. The faithful soul is fed with divine and heavenly
dainties. The sacred flesh of God, which the angels adore in the unity of
person, which the archangels reverence, at which the Powers do tremble, and
which the Virtues admire, is our spiritual food. Let the heavens rejoice,
Psalm. 96.11.
and let the earth be glad, but much more the faithful soul, upon whom such
and so great benefits are bestowed.

Meditat. XX. Of serious preparation before we come to the Lords Supper.
A wedding garment put thou on,
Or keep from this communion.
HEre is no common cheer, nor the feast of some ordinary king; but here is
the holy mystery of the body and blood of Christ to be handled of us:
Therefore a due preparation is required, lest we find death in stead of life,
and receive condemnation in stead of mercy. How did that most holy Patriarch so
famous for the strength of his faith, Genesis 18.2.
how did he fear and tremble when the Son of God appeared unto him in the
shape of man, and threatened that he would destroy Sodom? Here the Lamb of God
is not set before us to look upon, but to be tasted and eaten. 2. Chr. 26.16.19.
Vzziah coming inconsiderately unto the ark of the covenant, was by the Lord
suddenly smitten with a leprosy: What wonder is it then, 1. Cor. 11.27.29.
if he that eats of this bread, and drinks of this wine unworthily, eats and
drinks his own condemnation? For here is the true ark of the new covenant,
which was prefigured by the old. Now the apostle teaches true preparation in
one word: 1. Cor. 11.28.
Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of this bread. Now as all divine
examination is to be squared according to the rule of divine scripture, so also
is this, which Paul requires. Let us therefore consider in the first place our
own infirmity: For what is man? Genesis 18.27.
Dust and ashes. We were made of the earth, we live of the earth, and we return
to the earth.

What is man? Stinking seed, Bernard
a sack of dung, and meat for worms. Man was born to labor, and not to honor.
Man is born of a woman, and therefore with guiltiness: He lives but a short
time, and therefore in fear: he is full of many miseries, and therefore of
weeping: many indeed, because both of body and soul. Man knows neither his
beginning nor his end. We have our being for a while like a fading flower: But
this short life has long sorrows and labors. Let us consider in the second
place our unworthiness: Verily, every creature in respect of the Creator, is
a shadow, a dream, nothing: Therefore man also. But man is unworthy in a
greater and more grievous manner: For he offended his Creator by his sin.
God is just by nature and by essence: Therefore by his nature and by his
essence he is offended and displeased with sin. What are we stubble to that
consuming fire? Deuteronomy. 4.24
How shall our most filthy deeds appear? How shall our iniquities which thou
set before thee, Psalm. 90.8
and our errors which thou placest in the light of thy countenance? God is
infinite, and always like himself, of infinite justice and infinite anger: And
if in all his works, then certainly in his anger, justice, and revenge, God is
altogether great and wonderful. He that spared not his own Son, Romans 8.32
will he spare his own workmanship? He that spared not the most holy one, will
he spare the wicked servant? God so hates sin, that he does punish it even
in the best beloved; as it appears by Lucifer the prince of the angels. But let
not this examination respect us only, but the blessed bread also, which is the
communication of the Lords body: Then shall the true fountain of grace, and
the inexhaustible spring of mercy appear. God cannot altogether neglect us,
seeing that he makes us partakers of his own flesh: Ephesians. 5.29.
For who ever hated his own flesh? Therefore this holy banquet shall transform
our souls: This most divine banquet shall make us divine men; until at length
we be made partakers of future happiness, Nazian.
being made capable of God wholly and only, and wholly like unto God. What we
have here by faith, and in a mystery, there we shall have in deed, and openly:
Yea our bodies have attained to this dignity, that in them we shall see God
face to face: I say our bodies, 1. Cor. 13.12.
which are now the temples of the holy Ghost, and are sanctified and quickened
by the body and blood of Christ dwelling in us. This most holy medicine cures
all the wounds of sin: This quickening flesh overcomes all mortal sin:
This is the most holy seal of divine promises, which we may show before Gods
judgment. Having this pledge we may glory, and be secure of eternal life. If
Christ his body and blood be exhibited unto us, assuredly all other benefits
by that most holy body and most blessed blood are prepared for us: How can he
that has given us the greater things, deny us the less? He that has given
his Son to us, John 3.16
how shall he not give all other things with him? Romans 8.32 Rev. 19.7.
Let the spouse therefore be glad and rejoice; for the time is at hand when she
shall be called to the marriage of the Lamb: Let her put on precious apparel,
let her put on her wedding garment, Matthew. 22.12.
that she be not found naked. This garment is the bridegrooms righteousness,
which we put on in baptism: But our righteousness is so far from being a
wedding garment,, that it is as the cloth of a menstruous woman. Isa. 64.6.
Let us be afraid therefore to bring the most filthy and stinking rags of our
works to this nuptial solemnity. Let the Lord cover us, 2. Cor. 5.3
that we be not found naked.

Meditat. XXI. Of Christ's ascension.
Christ is ascended up on high:
And we must up like eagles fly.
MEditate upon thy bridegrooms ascension, thou faithful soul: For Christ
withdrew his visible presence from the faithful, to exercise their faith: And
blessed are they that see not, and yet believe. John. 20.29. Mat. 6.21.
Where our treasure is, there let our heart be also: Christ our treasure is in
heaven: Let our hearts therefore be set upon those things that are heavenly,
Col. 3.2.
and meditate upon the things that be above. The spouse desires with most
earnest sighs the return of her beloved: So let the faithful soul desire the
coming of that day, when she shall be admitted to the marriage of the Lamb:
Rev. 10.7.
Let her put her confidence in the pledge of the holy Spirit, which the Lord
left unto her at his departure: Let her put her confidence in the body and
blood of the Lord, which she receives in the mystery of the supper: And let
her believe that our bodies which are filled with this incorruptible food,
shall at length be raised up again. That which we now believe, we shall then
see: Our hope shall then be real fruition: The Lord is present unto us here,
while we are on the way, in a strange shape: But in the mansion of our heavenly
country we shall behold him and know him as he is. It was our Saviors will,
Acts 1.12.
to ascend up from the mount ^ Olives. The olive is a sign of peac^ and joy:
Therefore not without cause did he ascend up from the mount of Olives; because
by his passion he has purchased peace and tranquillity for terrified and
amazed consciences. Not without cause did he ascend up from the mount of
Olives: For the court of heaven did exceedingly joy to receive him. The mount
does call and invite us to heavenly things: seeing therefore we cannot follow
him with our bodily feet, let us follow him with the fee^ of our holy desires.
Moses also in like manner ascended up unto the Lord in the mount. Exodus 19.3.
Joh. 4.20. Genesis 13.11, 12.
The holy patriarchs worshipped in the mount. Abraham made choice of the mount,
and Lot of the plain: Let the faithful soul leave the plain of this world, and
by holy devotion go up to the heavenly mount: So shall she feel God speaking
unto her inwardly, and that most sweetly: So in her prayers may she worship in
spirit: Joh. 4.24.
So shall she be able with Abraham to escape the everlasting fire prepared For
the plain of this world. Bethanie signifies a village of humility and
affliction, by which we must pass to the kingdom of heaven, even as Christ
himself passed from the place of affliction to the joys of heaven. Till this
time heaven was shut, and paradise, which is above, was kept by a flaming
sword: Genesis 3.24.
But now Christ being conqueror does set open heaven unto us, to show us the
way into our heavenly country, from which we had fallen away. The disciples
stood lifting up their eyes, and looking up toward heaven: Acts 1.11.
So let the true disciples of Christ lift up the eyes of their heart to behold
heavenly things. Granat.
Lord Jesus what a glorious clause followed thy passion! How happy and sudden
a change is this! How did I see thee suffering on mount Calvarie, and how do I
behold thee now in the mount of Olives! There thou wast alone; here thou art
accompanied with many thousands of angels: There thou did ascend up to the
cross; here thou do ascend up into heaven in a cloud: There thou wast
crucified between thieves; here, thou rejoiced among the companies of angel^*
There, thou wast nailed to the cross as a condemned man; here, thou a^^ at
liberty, and do deliver those tha^ were condemned: There, dying and
suffering; here, rejoicing and triumphing. Ephesians. 5.23.30.
Christ is our head, we are his members: Rejoice therefore and be glad thou
faithful soul for the ascension of thy head. Max. of the resurrection.
The glory of the head is the glory also of the members. Where our flesh does
reign, there let us believe that we shall also reign: Where our blood does
rule, let us hope that we shall also obtain glory: Though our sins do hinder
us, yet the communion of nature does not repel us: Where the head is, there
shall the other members be also: Our head is entered into heaven: Therefore the
members have just cause to hope for entrance, not only so, but that they have
possession there already. Eusebius.
Christ descended from heaven to redeem us; and again he ascended up into
heaven to glorify us. Unto us was he born, for us did he suffer: For us
therefore did he ascend. Bernard.
Our charity is confirmed by Christ's passion, our faith by Christ's
resurrection, our hope by Christ's ascension. We must follow Christ our
bridegroom not only with our ardent desires, but also with our good works.
Into that city which is above, nothing shall enter that is defiled: Rev. 21.27.
In token of this the angels that came from the heavenly Jerusalem appeared in
white apparel; Acts 1.10
by which purity and innocence is figured. Eusebius.
With the Doctor of humility there ascended no pride; with the Author of
goodness there ascended no malice; with the Lover of peace there ascended no
discord; and with the Son of the Virgin there ascended no lust. After the
Parent of virtues there ascend no vices; after the Just there ascend no sins;
and after the Physician there can ascend no infirmities. He that desires to see
God hereafter face to face, let him here so live as in his sight. He that hopes
for celestial things, let him contemn terrestrial. O draw our hearts thee,
good Jesus!

Meditat. XXII. An Homily of the holy Ghost.
God seals by his holy Spirit
As many as shall life inherit.
OUr Lord ascending up into the heavens, and entering into his glory, Acts 2.4.
sent the holy Ghost unto the disciples upon the day of Pentecost. As in the
old Testament God when he proclaimed the law in mount Sinai, Exodus 19.11.
came down unto Moses: So when the gospel was by the apostles to be propagated
throughout all the world, the holy Ghost came down upon them. There, was
thundering and lightning, and the loud sound of the trumpet; because the law
does thunder against our disobedience, and makes us subject to Gods
indignation: But here, is the sound of a gentle wind; for the preaching of the
gospel does lift up the souls that are cast down: There, was the fear and
trembling of all the people; because the law works wrath: Romans 4.15
But here, the whole multitude does flock together to hear the wonderful
things of God; for by the gospel we have access unto God: There, the Lord
descended in fire, but it was in the fire of his wrath and fury; therefore was
the mountain moved, and did smoke: But here, the holy Ghost descends in the
fire of love, so that all the house is not shaken by the wrath of God, but is
rather replenished with the glory of the holy Ghost. What wonder is it if the
holy Ghost be sent from the court of heaven to sanctify us, seeing that the
Son was sent to redeem us? The passion of Christ had not profited us, unless
by the gospel it had been preached unto us; For what use is there of a treasure
that is hid? Therefore our most merciful Father did not only prepare a great
benefit by the passion of his Son, but also would have it offered to all the
world by sending the holy Ghost. The faithful mother gives unto her tender
infant both her dugs. God who is faithful does send unto us both the Son and
the holy Ghost. But the holy Ghost came upon the apostles, when they were
assembled together at prayer with one accord: Acts 2.1. Zech. 12.10.
For he is the Spirit of prayer, he i^ obtained by prayer, and he moves us to
pray. Wherefore? Because he is that bond by which our hearts are united with
God, as he does unite the Father with the Son, and the Son with the Father:
For he is the mutual substantial love of the Father and the Son. This our
spiritual conjunction with God is wrought by faith: But faith is the gift of
the Spirit. It is obtained by prayer: But true prayer is made in the Spirit. In
the temple of Solomon, when incense was offered unto God, 1. King* 8.11.
the temple was filled with the glory of the Lord: So if thou offerest unto God
the sweet odours of prayers, the holy Ghost shall fill the temple of thy heart
with glory. Let us here admire the mercy and grace of God: The Father promises
to hear our prayers, Psalm. 50.15. Romans 8.34 Gal. 4.6. Austine.
the Son makes intercession for us, and the holy Ghost prays in us. The
angels carry our prayers unto God, and the court of heaven is open to receive
our prayers. God of his mercy does give unto us the affect of prayer; because
he gives unto us the spirit of grace and prayer: He gives unto us also the
effect of prayer; because he does always hear our prayers, if not according
to our will, yet according to that which is most profitable for us. The holy
Ghost came when they were all met together with one accord in the same place.
Acts 2.1.
For he is the Spirit of love and concord that joyneth us unto Christ by faith,
unto God by love, and unto our neighbor by charity. The devil is the author
of discord and separation: by our sins he separates us from God; by hatred,
contention, and brawling, he separates men one from another: But the holy Ghost
as in Christ he has conjoined the divine and humane nature, by his wonderful
overshadowing: Luke 1.35.
So does he by his gifts poured upon us, conjoyn men with God, and God with
men. As long as the holy Ghost remains in man by his grace and gifts, so long
does man remain united to God. As soon as man by sin falls from faith and
love, and shakes off the holy Ghost, he is separated from God, and is deprived
of that most blessed union. He that has the holy Ghost hates not his brother.
Why? Because by the Spirit he is made partaker of the mystical body of
Christ, whose members all the godly are: Ephesians. 5.29.
And who ever hated his own members? Yea more, He that is governed by the
Spirit of the Lord, loves even his enemies. Why? 1. Cor. 6.17.
Because he that cleaves unto the Lord, becomes one spirit with him: And God
causes his sun to rise upon the good and bad: Mat. 5.45. Wisd. 11.2^*
And hates nothing which he has made: He that has the Spirit of God is
ready to be servant unto all, he to his power does good unto all, he is
ready for all to make use of, because God is the fountain of all mercy and
grace to all. Now the Spirit of God effects in man such motions as he himself
is: As the soul gives unto the body life, sense, and motion: So the Spirit
makes man spiritual, seasons his mind with divine saltness, and directs all
his members to the performance of all duties toward God, and toward his
neighbor. From heaven came that sound which was the sign of the coming of the
holy Ghost: Because the holy Ghost is of an heavenly nature, to wit, of the
same nature with the Father and the Son; from whom, that is, the Father and
the Son, he proceeds from all eternity. Moreover, he makes men to think
upon heavenly things, and to seek those things which are above. He which
cleaves unto earthly things, and is by his love united unto the world, is not
yet made partaker of the heavenly Spirit. He came in the type of breath:
Ambrose.
Because he affords unto the afflicted quickening consolation; and because we
live according to the flesh by the reciprocal breathing out and sucking in of
the aeriall spirit. He came under the type of spirit and breath: For he gives
unto us, To live according to our better part. The wind blows where it
lists, John 3.8.
and thou hear the sound thereof, but thou know not whence it comes, or
whither it goes: So is every one that is begotten of the Spirit. And it was
meet that he should come in the type of breath: Because he proceeds from the
Father and the Son by one breathing from eternity. It was a powerful
breath: Because the grace of the holy Ghost comes with power. The holy Ghost
moves the godly, in whom he dwells, to all that is good; and so moves them,
that they regard neither the threats of tyrants, nor the treacheries of Satan,
nor the hatred of the world: He conferreth upon the apostles the gift of
tongues: Psalm. 19.24.
Because their sound was to go into all lands: And so the confusion of tongues
(which was the punishment of pride and rashness in the building of the tower
of Babel) was taken away; Genesis 11.7^
and the dispersed nations, by the gift of the holy Ghost, through diverse
tongues were gathered together into the unity of faith. It was meet that he
should come in the figure of tongues: Because the holy men of God did speak as
they were inspired by him; 2. Pet. 1.21
Because he spoke by the apostles; and because he puts the words of God into
the mouths of the ministers of the church. For these so great gifts blessed
and praised be the holy Ghost together with the Father and the Son for ever
and ever!

Meditat. XXIII. Of the churches dignity.
Great is the churches dignity,
Which chosen is Christ's spouse to be.
COnsider, thou devout soul, what a great benefit God has bestowed upon thee,
in calling thee to the communion of the church. Can. 6.9.
One is my beloved, says the bridegroom in the Canticles: One indeed; because
there is but one true and orthodox church, the beloved spouse of Christ.
Without the body of Christ there is not the Spirit of Christ, Romans 8.9.
and he that has not the Spirit of Christ is not his; and he that is not
Christ's, cannot be made partaker of life everlasting. All that were without the
ark of Noah did perish in the flood: Genesis 7.21.
And they that are without the spiritual ark of the church, must needs be
overwhelmed in everlasting destruction. Austi^e.
He shall never have God to be his Father in heaven, that has not the church
for his mother upon earth. Consider, thou devout soul, that every day many
thousands of souls descend into hell for this cause, because they are without
the bosom of the church. Nature has not separated thee from them, but only
the grace of God that shows mercy. When Egypt was involved in palpable
darkness, Exodus 10.21.
the Israelites only had light: So in the church only is the light of divine
knowledge. They that are without the church, do pass from the darkness of
ignorance in this present life, to the darkness of eternal damnation in the
life to come. Chem.
He that is not a part of the militant church, shall never be a part of the
church triumphant: For these things following have a near conjunction
together, that is to say, God, the word, faith, Christ, the church, and life
everlasting. The holy church of God is a mother, a virgin, and a spouse. She is
a mother: Because she brings forth spiritual sons unto God every day. She is
a virgin: Because she does keep her self chaste from the embracements of the
devil and the world. She is a spouse: Because Christ has betrothed her unto
himself by an everlasting covenant, and has given unto her the pledge of the
Spirit. Mat. 8.23. Chrysostom. upon Mat.
The church is that ship that carries Christ and his disciples, and brings them
at length to the haven of everlasting felicity: The church sails through the
sea of this world with a prosperous course, having the stern of faith, God for
her pilot, and the angels for her rowers, and carrying the companies of all the
saints: In the midst thereof there is erected the saving tree of the cross,
upon which do hang the sails of evangelicall faith, by which she is carried to
the security of eternal rest, by the breathing of the holy Ghost. Mat. 21 33
The church is that vineyard that God has planted in the field of this world,
which he has watered with his blood, about which he has set an hedge of
angelical guard, Isa. 5.2.
in which he has made the winepresse of his passion, and gathered out the
stones and impediments thereof* The church is that woman clothe^ with the
sun: Rev. 12.1.
Because she is arrayed with the righteousness of Christ. She treads the moon
under he^ feet: Because she despises earthly things that are subject to sundry
changes. Consider, thou devout soul, the exceeding great dignity of the
church, and render due thanks unto God. Great are the benefits which are in the
church of God, but all do not meet with them. It is a garden enclosed, Can.
4.12.
and a fountain sealed up: No man sees the beauty of this enclosed garden, but
he that is in it: Neither does any one know the benefits that are in the
church, but he that is himself in it. This spouse of Christ is black without,
Can. 1.5. Psalm. 45.13
but beautiful within. For the kings daughter is all glorious within. This
ship is tossed with many tempests of persecutions: Matt. 8.24
This vineyard being bound does rise up, and being cut down grows up. For
this woman the infernal Dragon lies in wait after diverse manners. Rev. 12.^3.
The church is a fair lilie: Cant. 2.2. Ambrose.
But yet among thorns. The church is a most beautiful garden: But when the
Northwinde of tribulations does blow upon it, the spices thereof fall. The
church is Gods daughter: But she is exceedingly hated of the world: She looks
for an heavenly inheritance: and therefore she is compelled to be a pilgrim in
this world. In this pilgrimage she is oppressed, in her pressure she is silent,
in her silence she is strong, in her strength she overcomes. The church is a
spiritual mother: But she is compelled to stand under the cross with Mary the
mother of Christ. John. 19.25.
The church is a palmtree: Because under the weight of tribulations and
tentations she grows most. Consider, thou devout soul, the dignity of the
church: And beware thou commit nothing to her dishonor. The church is thy
mother: Take heed therefore that thou contemn not her voice. She is thy mother:
Therefore thou must always hang upon her breasts. The breasts of the church
are the Word and the Sacraments. The church is a virgin: If therefore thou art
her true son, abstain from the worlds embracements. Thou art a member of the
virgin the church: See therefore that thou prostitute not the virgins members,
and so commit fornication with the devil, by sin. The church is the spouse of
Christ, and so is every devout soul: Let her beware therefore that she cleave
not unto Satan. Thou art the spouse of Christ: See thou lose not the earnest of
the holy Spirit which he has given thee. Thou art the spouse of Christ: Pray
continually that the bridegroom would make haste, and lead thee in unto the
celestial marriage. But the bridegroom will come in the night of security:
Matt. 25.13.
Watch therefore, lest when he comes he find thee sleeping, and so shut thee
out of the gate of eternal salvation. Let the oil of thy faith shine, lest at
the coming of the bridegroom thou be constrained to desire it in vain. Thou
art carried in the ship: See therefore that thou do not throw thy self
headlong into the sea of the world before thou come to the haven: Thou art
carried in the ship: pray that thou be not swallowed up by the tempests of
afflictions, and waves of tentations. Thou art called into the Lords vineyard:
Matt. 20.1
See that thou labourest stoutly: Think upon the penie, and not upon the days
labor. Thou art the Lords vineyard: Cast away all unprofitable branches, that
is, the unfruitful works of the flesh, and think the whole time of thy life to
be the time of pruning. Thou art a vine-branch in Christ the true vine: See
that thou do remain in him, and bring forth much fruit: Because the heavenly
husbandman will take away every branch that brings not forth fruit, John 15.2
and purge that which brings forth fruit, that it may bring forth more fruit.
Thou have put on Christ by faith, Gal. 3.27.
and art clothed with this sun of righteousness: See then that thou treadest
the moon, that is, Mal. 4.2. Rev. 12.1.
all earthly things under thy feet: And esteem all other things little worth in
respect of eternal goods. O good Jesus, thou that have brought us into the
church militant, bring us at length also into the church triumphant*

Meditat. XXIIII. Of Predestination.
In Christ we are by God elect,
Without Christ God does all reject.
O Devout soul, as often as thou will meditate upon thy predestination, behold
Christ hanging upon the cross, Romans 4.25
dying for the sins of the whole world, and rising again for our
justification. Austine.
Begin from Christ lying in the manger, and so thy disputation of
predestination shall proceed orderly. Ephesians. 1.4.
God elected us before the foundations of the world were laid; but yet he
elected us in Christ: If therefore thou art in Christ by faith, do not doubt
but that election belongs unto thee: If with a firm confidence of heart thou
adherest unto Christ, do not doubt but that thou art in the number of the
elect. But if thou go further beyond the limits of the word, and wilt search
into the profunditie of predestination, it is greatly to be feared that thou will fall into the profunditie of desperation. Without Christ God is a
consuming fire: Deuteronomy. 4.24
Take heed therefore of coming too near this fire, lest thou be consumed.
Without Christ's satisfaction, God by the voice of his law accuses all, and
condemns all: Take heed therefore that thou drawest not the mystery of
predestination out of the law. Search not into the reasons of Gods counsels,
lest thy cogitations do much seduce thee. God dwells in light that no man can
attain unto: 1. Tim. ^.16.
Presume not therefore to come unto it rashly: But God has revealed unto us
the light of his gospel; and in this thou may safely inquire into the
doctrine of this secret; and in this light thou shall see true light. Psalm.
36.9.
Leave the profunditie of this eternal decree made from eternity, and convert
thy self to the clearness of the manifestation which was made in time.
Justification made in time is the glass of election made without time. Luther.
Out of the law take notice of the wrath of God for sin; and repent: out of
the gospel take notice of the mercy of God through Christ his merit, and apply
that unto thy self by faith: Take notice of the nature of faith, and show it by
thy godly conversation: Take notice of Gods fatherly castigation in crosses,
and endure through patience: And then at length begin to handle the doctrine of
predestination: This method the apostle teaches: This method let him that is
the apostles disciple, follow. There are three things always to be observed in
this mystery: The mercy of God loving us, the merit of Christ suffering for
us, and the grace of the holy Ghost by the gospel sanctifying us. Gods mercy
is universal; because he loved the whole world. The earth is full of the Lords
mercy; Psalm. 33.5.
yea his mercy is greater then heaven and earth: For it is as great as God is:
For God is love. He has witnessed by his word, that he will not the death of a
sinner: Ezekiel. 33.11.
And if this be too little, he has confirmed it with an oath: If thou can
not believe him for his promise, jerome.
believe him for his oath. He is called the Father of mercies; 2. Cor. 1.3
because it is his property to spare and to have mercy. Bernard.
The cause and original of showing mercy, he has from himself; of condemning
and punishing, from another: Insomuch that it may appear, that mercy and
punishment proceed from him after a far different manner. The merit of Christ
also is universal; because he died for the sins of the whole world. What can
then more plainly prove his mercy, then that he loved us, when as yet we were
not? For it was his love that he created us. Moreover he loved us when we were
turned away from him; For he sent his Son to be our redeemer. To the sinner
adjudged to eternal torments, and not having wherewithal to redeem himself,
the Father says, Take my only begotten Son, and give him for thee. The
Son himself says, Take away me, and redeem thy self. Cant. 2.1.
Christ was a flower of the field, not a flower of the garden; because the
odor of his grace is not shut up to some few, but laid open to all. Doubt not
of the universalitie of Christ's merit: Christ suffering, prayed for them that
crucified him; and poured forth his blood for them, by whom it was poured
forth. The promises of the gospel are universal; because Christ says unto
all, Come unto me all ye that labor. Matt. 11.28.
That which was performed for all, is also offered to all: As far as thou
travellest amongst these goods by the foot of trust and confidence, so much
also shall thou obtain. God denies his grace unto no man, Bernard upon the Cant.
but unto him that thinks himself unworthy of it. Consider therefore, thou
faithful soul, these three props of predestination, and rest upon them with
the firm confidence of thy heart: Consider the benefits of Gods mercy that are
past; and thou will not doubt of final perseverance. Bernard upon the 116 Psalm.
When as yet thou wast not, God created thee: When by the fall of Adam thou
wast condemned, he redeemed thee: When thou livedst in the world out of the
church, he called thee: When thou wast ignorant, he instructed thee: When thou
wentst astray, he redeemed thee: When thou sinnedst, he corrected thee, When
thou stoodst, he upheld thee: When thou wast fallen, he lifted thee up: When
thou wentst, he led thee: When thou came unto him, he received thee. His
long-suffering appeared, in that he expected thee; and his mercy, in that he
pardoned thee. Psalm. 23.6.
Gods mercy prevented thee: Hope firmly that it will also follow thee. Austine*
Gods mercy prevented thee, that thou might be healed; and it shall also
follow thee, that thou may be glorified: Savanar.
It prevented thee, that thou might live godly; it shall also follow thee,
that thou may live with him for ever. How came it to pass that in thy fall
thou wast not ground to pieces? Who put his hand under thee? Was it not the
Lord? Be confident therefore hereafter in Gods mercy, and hope assuredly for
the end of perfect faith, that is, eternal salvation. Bernard upon the 31 Psalm.
In whose hands does thy salvation consist more safe and certain, then in those
which made both heaven and earth, Isa. 66.2.
those hands that are never shortened, Isa. 59.1.
those hands that do abound with the bowels of mercy, and those hands that
have holes in them by which mercy may flow forth? But consider O devout soul,
that we were elected of God, Ephesians. 1.4.
that we might be holy and blameless: Whosoever therefore study not to live
an holy life, to them belongs not the benefit of election. We were elected in
Christ: In Christ we are by faith: Faith shows it self by love. Therefore where
there is not love, neither is there faith; where there is not faith, neither is
there Christ; where there is not Christ, neither is there election: 2. Tim.
2.19.
The foundation of God stands sure, having this seal, The Lord knows who
are his; But let him depart from unrighteousness, whosoever calls upon the
name of the Lord: The sheep of Christ shall no man take out of his hand, John
10.28.
but yet let the sheep of Christ hear his voice. 27.
We are Gods house; Heb. 3.6.
But let us retain our confidence and the glory of hope firm, even unto the
end. O Lord, thou that have given us to will, Phil. 2.13.
give us also to perfect.

Meditat. XXV. Of the saving efficacy of prayer.
Our prayers do pierce the starrie sky,
And fetch down blessings from on high.
IT is an exceeding great benefit of God toward us, Austine.
in that he requires us to confer with him familiarly by pious prayer: He
bestows upon us the gift of prayer, and the fruit of prayer. Great is the
force of prayer which is poured forth on earth, but has its operation in
heaven. The prayer of the righteous is the key of heaven: Prayer ascends, and
deliverance descends from God: Prayer is a saving buckler, by which we repel
all our adversaries darts. Ephesians. 6.16. Exodus 17.11. Ambrose.
When Moses stretched forth his hands, Israel prevailed against the Amalekites:
If thou stretchest forth thy hands toward heaven, Satan shall not prevail
against thee. As the enemy is kept off by the wall: Hierome upon Ezekiel.
So the anger of God is repelled by the prayers of the saints. Our Savior
himself prayed, not that he had any need, but to commend unto us the dignity
thereof. Prayer is the tribute of our subjection: Because God has commanded
that we should every day offer unto him our prayers, as a spiritual tribute.
It is the ladder of our ascension unto God: For prayer is nothing else but the
souls traveling unto God. Nazian.
It is the buckler of our defense: For the soul of him that continues in
prayer, is secure and safe from the assaults of the devil. It is our faithful
messenger unto God: Bernard.
For it goes up unto his throne, and solicits him to aid us. This messenger
never returns in vain: For God always hears our prayers, if not according to
our will, yet to our profit and salvation. We may assuredly hope for one of
these two: Either he will give us that we ask, or else that which he knows to
be more profitable for us. God gave his own Son that most excellent gift,
being not entreated: What will he do then if he be entreated? We cannot doubt
of the Fathers hearing, Number. 7.89.
or the Sons interceding: Upon all occasions thou may with Moses by prayer
enter into the tabernacle, Kempis.
and consult with God the Lord: And thou shall speedily hear his divine
answer. Christ was transfigured when he prayed: Luke 9.29
So in the time of prayer there are many changes wrought in the soul: For
prayer is the light of the soul, Bernard upon the Cant.
and oftentimes leaves him in joy, whom she found in despair. Chrysostom.
With what face can thou behold the sun, unless thou do first worship
him, who sends that most pleasant light for thee to look upon? How can thou
at thy table fall to thy meat, unless thou do first worship him, who in his
bounty bestows it upon thee? With what hope dare thou commit thy self unto
the darkness of the night, unless thou do first arm thy self by prayer?
What fruit can thou expect of thy labors, unless thou do first worship
him, without whose blessing all labor is unprofitable? If therefore thou
want spiritual, or temporal blessings, ask and receive. If thou desire
Christ, Matt. 7.7.
seek him by prayer, and thou shall find: If thou desire that the gate of
divine grace, and eternal salvation should be opened unto thee, Knock and it
shall be opened unto thee. ^erth^r.
If in the desert of this world the thirst of tentations, and the penury of
spiritual goods afflict thee: 1. Cor. 10.4.
Come unto the spiritual rock, which is Christ, come with devotion, and strike
it with the rod of prayer, and thou shall feel the streams of divine grace cool
the thirst of thy penury. Exodus 17.6.
Would thou offer an acceptable sacrifice unto God? Offer thy prayers: so
shall God smell a sweet odor, Genesis 8.21 Cyprian.
and his wrath shall cease. Would thou every day converse with God? Love
prayer, which is the spiritual conference between God and the devout soul.
Psalm. 34.8.
Would thou taste how sweet the Lord is? Invite the Lord to the house of thy
heart by prayer. Anselm.
Prayer pleases God, if it be made in a due manner: Whosoever therefore
desires to be heard, let him pray with wisdom, with fervencie, with
humility, with faith, with perseverance, and with confidence: Let him pray
with wisdom, that is, for such things as tend to the glory of God, and the
salvation of his neighbor. God is omnipotent: Therefore do not thou in thy
prayers tie him to means. God is most wise: Therefore do not thou in thy
prayers prescribe him an order. Let not thy prayers break forth rashly, but let
them follow the conduct of faith: Now faith has respect unto the word:
Therefore such things as God has promised in his word absolutely, pray for
absolutely: and such things as he has promised with a condition, as temporal
things, pray for with a condition: and such things as he has in no wise
promised, in no wise pray for. Bernard.
God oftentimes gives in his wrath, that which in his mercy he does deny:
Therefore follow Christ who resigned his will wholly unto God. Pray with
fervencie: For how can thou desire that God should hear thee, when thou
hear not thy self? Would thou have God mindful of thee, when thou art
not mindful of thy self? When thou will pray, Mat. 6.6.
go into thy closet, and shut thy door. Thy heart is the closet, Austine.
thou must enter into it: If thou will pray as thou ought, thou must shut
the door, that the cogitations of worldly business may not trouble thee. Thy
words come not unto Gods ears without the affection of the heart: The mind
must be so inflamed with the heat of cogitation, that it may far surpass
what the tongue expresses: And this is to worship in spirit and in truth, Joh.
4.23.
as the Lord requires: Christ prayed in the mount, Luke 6.12.
and lifted up his eyes unto heaven: Joh. 17.1.
So we must turn away our minds from all the creatures, and turn them unto
God. Thou do injury unto God, if thou prayest unto him to attend unto thee,
when thou do not attend unto thy self. ^. These. 5.17.
We may pray without ceasing, if we pray in the spirit,, that is, if our minds
do always by holy desires watch unto God. There is not always need of
clamor; because God hears even the sighs of our hearts, seeing that he
dwells in the hearts of the godly. There is not always need of words;
because he is present even with the thoughts. Oftentimes one sigh moved by the
holy Ghost, and offered to God in the spirit, is more acceptable to God then
long repetitions of prayers, where the tongue prays, and the heart is plainly
d^mbe. Luther.
Let him pray with humility, and place no confidence in his own merit, but in
the grace of God only. If our prayers rely upon our own worth, they are
condemned, yea though the heart for very devotion should sweat drops of blood.
No man pleases God but in Christ: Therefore no man prays aright but through
Christ and in Christ. The sacrifices did not please God, which were not offered
on the only altar of the tabernacle: So prayer pleases not God, unless it be
offered upon the only altar, which is Christ. God promised to hear the
Israelites prayers, if they prayed with their faces turned toward Jerusalem: 1.
King. 8.
So we in our prayers must convert our selves unto Christ, who is the temple of
the divinity. Christ at his passion being about to pray, cast himself to the
ground: Behold how that most holy soul humbled it self before the divine
majesty! Mar. 14.35
Let him pray with faith, Anselm.
let him offer himself to want all joy, and to suffer all punishment. The
sooner one prays, the more profitably; the oftener, the better; the more
fervently, the more acceptably with God. Kempis.
Let him pray with perseverance: For if God delay his benefits, he commends
them, and does not deny them: The longer things are desired, the sweeter they
are being obtained. Let him pray with confidence, Austnie.
that is, ask with faith, without doubting. O most merciful God, who have
commanded us to pray, give us grace to pray aright!

Meditat. XXVI. Of the holy angels appointed by God to be our keepers.
The angels of the Lord protect
All those that are the Lords elect.
COnsider, thou devout soul, how great the goodness of the Lord is, who has
made his angels thy keepers. Our heavenly Father sends his own Son to redeem
us: The Son of God is made flesh to save us: The holy Ghost is sent to
sanctify us: The angels are sent to protect us: So then all the court of
heaven does as it were serve us, and convey their ben^fits unto us. I do not
wonder now that all the inferior creatures were made for man, Psalm. 34.7.
seeing that the angels themselves, creatures far more excellent, do not deny
their ministry unto us. What wonder is it that the heaven ministers light
unto us by day, that we may labor, and darkness by night, that we may rest,
seeing that those that dwell in heaven do minister unto us? What wonder is it
that the air affords us vital breath, and all kinds of fowls to our
service, seeing that the celestial spirits watch over us for our safety? What
wonder is it that the water affords us drink, purges away our filth,
waters things that are dried, and brings forth sundry kinds of fishes, when
as the angels themselves are present with us, and do refresh us, when we are
weary with the heat of calamities and tentations? What wonder that the earth
bears us, and nourishes us with bread and wine, and furnishes our tables
with all kinds of fruits, and living creatures, when as he has given his
angels charge to keep us in all our ways, Psalm. 91.11.
and to bear us up in their hands, 12.
that we dash not our foot against a stone. The angels were solicitous
concerning Christ. Luke 1.31 Luke 2.10.
For an angel foretells his conception: An angel declares his nativitie: An
angel bids him flee into Egypt: Mat. 2.13. Mat. 4.11. Luke 22.43.
The angels minister unto him in the desert: The angels minister unto him in
the whole ministry of his preaching: An angel is present with him at the
agony of death: An angel appears at his resurrection: 44. Mat. 28.2. Act.
1.10.
The angels are present at his ascension: The angels shall be with him when he
returns to judgment. Mat. 24.31.
So then, as the angels waited upon Christ in the days of his flesh, so also
are they solicitous for all them that are incorporated into Christ by faith. As
they served the head, so do they also serve the members: They rejoice to serve
them on earth, whom they shall have their companions in heaven. They do not
deny their ministry unto them, whose most sweet fellowship they hope for
hereafter. Genesis 32.1.
The angels of God appeared to Jacob in the way to his country: So in this
life, which is the way to our heavenly country, the angels are the keepers of
the godly. The angels defended Daniel in the midst of the lions: Dan. 6.22.
So likewise they defend all the godly from the treacheries of the infernal
Lion. The angels preserved Lot from the fire of Sodom: Genesis 19.16.
So by holy inspirations and protections against the devils tentations they
often preserve us from the fire of hell: Luk 16.22.
The angels carry the soul of Lazarus into Abraham's bosom: And so they
translate the souls of the elect unto the palace of the heavenly kingdom. The
angel leads Peter out of prison: Act. 12.7
And so he does often deliver the godly out of most apparent dangers. Great is
the power of our adversary the devil: But let the guard of the angels lift us
up. Hierome.
Doubt not but these will be present to aid thee in all dangers; because the
Scripture describes them with wings, Exodus 25.20. Isa. 6.2.
under the figure of Cherubim and Seraphim, that thou may know assuredly,
that they will come with incredible celeritie to bring aid and succor. Bernard.
Do not doubt but these will be thy protectours in all places; because they are
most subtle spirits which no body can resist: All visible things give way unto
them, and all bodies alike, though they be solid and thick, by them are
penetrable and passable. Do not doubt but these spirits know thy dangers and
afflictions; M^t. 18.10.
because they always behold the face of thy heavenly Father, and are always
ready pressed for his service. Know also, thou devout soul, that these angels are
holy: Therefore study for holiness, if thou would enjoy their fellowship.
Likeness of conditions does most beget friendship: Accustom thy self
therefore to holy actions, if thou desire to have the angels to be thy
keepers. In every place and angle stand in awe and reverence of thy angel, and
do nothing in his presence which thou would be ashamed to do in the sight of
man. These angels are chaste: Basil.
Therefore they are driven away by filthy actions: Smoke drives away bees, and
an ill savor drives away doves: So, lamentable and stinking sin drives away
the angels the keepers of our life. If by sin thou deprivest thy self of
their tuition: How can thou be safe from the devils treacheries? If thou
be destitute of the angels protection: How can thou be safe from the
invasio^ of many dangers? If thy soul be not fenced by the wall of the angels
defense: the devil will easily overcome it by his deceitful persuasion. Heb.
1.14.
The holy angels are sent by God as his messengers to us: Luther.
Therefore thou must be reconciled unto God by faith, if thou will have an
angel to be thy keeper. Where the grace of God is not, neither is there the
guard of angels: Let us behold the angels as Gods saving hands, which are moved
to no work without his direction. There is joy in heaven before the angels over
one sinner that repents. The tears of the penitent are as it were the wine
of the angels: But an impenitent heart puts to flight the angels our keepers.
Let us therefore repent, that we may cause the angels to rejoice. The angels
are of an heavenly and spiritual nature: Let us therefore think upon heavenly
and spiritual things that they may take pleasure to be with us. The angels are
humble and hate pride altogether; because they are not ashamed to tend little
children: Why then is earth and ashes proud, Ecclus. 10.9.
when the heavenly spirits so humble themselves? At death especially the devils
subtlety is to be feared, because it is written that the serpent lies in wait
for the heel. Genesis 3.15
The heel, which is the extreme part of the body, is the last term of our
life. In that last agony of death, the angels guard is most necessary; that
they may deliver us from the fiery darts of the devil, and carry our soul when
it is gone out of the prison of our body, into the heavenly paradise. When
Zachary was in the temple busy about his holy function, the angel of the Lord
came unto him: Luke 1.11.
So likewise if thou delightest in the exercise of the word and prayer, thou
may rejoice to have the angels thy protectours. O most merciful God, thou
that leadest us through the desert of this world by the conduct of the holy
angels, grant that we may at length be carried by them into the kingdom of
heaven!

Meditat. XXVII. Of the devils treacheries.
The devils treacheries who knows?
A thousand ways he seeks our woes.
COnsider, thou devout soul, in what danger thou art, because the devil thine
adversary is always lying in wait for thee. He is an enemy, for boldness,
most ready; Lactant.
for strength, most powerful; for subtlety, most cunning; for engines, well
stored; in fight indefatigable; into all shapes changeable: He enticeth us into
many sins, and having enticed us he accuses us before Gods judgment seat.
He accuses God to men, Chrysostom.
and men to God, and men one to another. Came^.
He exactly considers every ones natural inclination; and then he lays for
them the snares of tentations. As in the besieging of cities the besiegers come
not against the strong and fortified places, but where they find the walls
weak, the ditches plain, and the turrets without guard: So the devil when he
assaults the soul of man, first sets upon that part which he finds softest,
and best affected for him the easier to work upon: If he be once overcome, he
does not presently remove, but comes again to tempt with greater force; that so
he may by tediousness and neglect overcome those whom by violence of
tentations he could not overcome. Against whom will he not use his subtle
tricks, when he was so bold as to set upon the Lord of majesty himself with
his craft and subtlety? Matt. 4.3.
What Christian will he spare, Luke 22.31.
when he sought to winnow Christ's apostles themselves like wheat? He deceived
Adam in his nature instructed: Genesis 3.4.
Whom cannot he deceive in his nature corrupted? He deceived Judas in the
school of our Savior: And whom will he not deceive in the world the school of
error? In all states the devils treacheries are much to be feared. In
prosperity he lifts us up with pride: In adversity he drives us to despair:
If he sees a man delighted with frugalitie, he entangleth him in the fetters of
unsatiable covetousness: If he sees a man of an heroical spirit, he sets him
on fire with flaming anger: If he sees a man somewhat merrier then ordinary, he
incites him to burn with lust: Those whom he sees to be zealous in religion, he
labors to entangle in vain superstition: Those whom he sees exalted to
dignities, he pricks them forward with the spurs of ambition. When he
allureth a man to sin, he amplifies Gods mercy; and when he has cast him
headlong into sin, he amplifies Gods justice: First he will lead a man to
presumption* and afterward he labors to bring him to desperation. Bernard.
Sometimes he assaults outwardly by persecutions; sometimes he assaults
inwardly by fiery tentations: Sometimes he sets upon us openly, and by force;
sometimes secretly, and by fraud. In eating he sets before us gluttony; in
generating, Austine.
luxury; in exercising, sluggishnesse; in conversing, envy; in governing,
covetousness; in correcting, anger; in dignity, pride: In the heart he sets
evil cogitations; In the mouth, false speakings; In the other members wicked
actions: When we are awake, he moves us to ill works; when we are asleep, he
moves us to filthy dreams. So then in every place and in every thing we must
beware of the devils treacheries. We sleep, but he watches: We are secure, and
he goes about like a roaring lion. 1. Pet. 5.8.
If thou should see a lion ready to assault thee; how would thou fear and
tremble! When thou hear that the infernal lion lies in wait for thee; do
thou sleep soundly on both ears? Consider therefore, thou faithful soul, the
treacheries of this most potent enemy, and seek the aid of spiritual arms:
Ephesians. 6.14.
Let thy loins be girt with the girdle of truth, and covered with the
breast plate of righteousness: Put on Christ's perfect righteousness; and thou
shall then be safe from the devils tentations. Hide thy self in the holes of
Christ's wounds, Can. 2.14.
as often as thou art terrified by the darts of this malignant serpent. The
true believer is in Christ: as therefore Satan has no power over Christ, Joh.
14.30
so has he no power over the true believer. Let thy feet be shod with the
preparation of the gospel of peace. Ephesians. 6.15.
Let our confession of Christ be always heard in our mouths: So no tentations
of the devil shall hurt us. The words of the enchanter do not so drive away the
corporal serpent, as the voice of constant confession does put to flight this
spiritual serpent. Take the shield of faith, to quench all the fiery darts of
this most wicked enemy. Ephesians. 6.16.
Faith removes mountains; Mat. 17.20
understand the mountains of doubts, persecutions and tentations. The
Israelites whose doore-posts were signed with the blood of the paschall Lamb,
Ex. 12.13.
were not smitten by the destroying angel: So likewise those whose hearts are
by faith sprinkled with the blood of Christ, shall not be hurt by this
destroyer. Faith relies upon Gods promises: Now Satan cannot overthrow Gods
promises: Therefore Satan cannot prevail against faith. Faith is the light of
the soul, and the tentations of the malignant spirit do soon appear through
this light. By faith our sins are thrown into the profound Mic. 7.19.
sea of God^ mercy; and in that the fiery darts of the devil shall be easily
quenched. We must put on likewise the helmet of salvation, that is, holy hope.
Ephesians. 6.17. Gregor.
Endure tentation, and expect an issue out of the tentation: For God is the
moderator of them that contend, and the crown of them that overcome. If there
be no enemy, then no fight; Savanar.
if no fight, no victory; if no victory, no crown. Better is that fight that
brings us nearer to God, then that peace which alienateth us from God. We must
also take the sword of the Spirit, that is, the word of God. N^zianz.
Let the consolations in Scripture prevail more with thee, then the
contradictions of the devil. Christ overcame all Satan's tentations by the word:
Matt. 4.4.
and still by the word Christians overcome all Satan's tentations. To conclude,
In prayer thou have great aid against tentations. Austine.
As often as the little ship of the soul is ready to be overwhelmed with the
waves of tentations, awake Christ by thy prayers. We overcome visible enemies
by striking, but we overcome our invisible enemy by pouring forth prayers.
Fight thou, O Christ, both in us, and for us, that so through thee we also may
overcome!

Meditat. XXVIII. General rules of a godly life.
He Is only wise who God does know,
And does by life his knowledge show.
EVery day thou drawest nearer to thy death, judgment, and eternity:
Therefore think every day how thou may be able to stand in that most strict
and severe judgment, and so live for ever. Look diligently unto thy thoughts,
words, Eccles. 12.14.
and deeds, because hereafter thou must give an exact account for all thy
thoughts, words, and deeds. Every evening think that thou shall die that night:
Every morning think that thou shall die that day. Do not defer thy conversion
and good works till to morrow; because to morrow is uncertain, but death is
certain, and hangs over thy head every day. Nothing is more contrary to
godliness then delay: If thou contemnest the inward calling of the holy
Spirit, thou shall never attain to true conversion. Ecclus 18.22.
Defer not thy conversion and good works till thy old age; but offer unto God
the flower of thy youth. It is uncertain whether the young man shall live till
he be old: But it is certain that destruction is prepared for the young man
which is impenitent. No age is fitter for Gods service, then youth which
flourishes in strength both of body and mind. For no man's sake undertake an
evil cause; for it is not that man but God that shall hereafter judge thee. Do
not therefore prefer the favor of men before the grace of God. In the way of
the Lord either we go forwards, or else we go backwards: Therefore examine thy
life every day whether thou go forwards or backwards in the study of piety.
To stand in the way of the Lord, is to go back: Do not delight then to stand
still in the course of godliness; but study always to walk in the way of the
Lord. Bernard.
In thy conversation be courteous toward all, grievous to none, familiar with
few. To God live piously* to thy self chastely, to thy neighbor justly. Show
favor to thy friend, show patience toward thy enemy, show thy good will
toward all, and thy bounty to whom thou art able. In thy life die daily unto
thy self and unto thy vices: So in death thou shall live unto God. Let mercy
appear in thy affection, courtesy in thy countenance, Hug^.
humility in thy attire, modesty in thy neighborhood, and patience in
tribulation. Always think upon three things past, the evil committed, the good
omitted, and the time pretermitted. Always think upon three things present,
the brevitie of this present life, the difficulty of being saved, and the
pa^citie of them that shall be saved. Always think upon three things to come:
Death, then which nothing is more horrible; judgment, then which nothing is
more terrible; the pains of hell, then which nothing is more intolerable. Let
thy evening prayers amend the sins of the day past. Let the last day of the
week amend the faults of the days past. In the evening think how many are
plunged that day into hell; and give thanks unto God for granting thee time to
repent. There are three things above thee, which never let slip out of thy
memory: The eye that sees all, the ear that hears all, and the book wherein
all things are written. Bernard.
God has communicated himself wholly unto thee; Communicate thou thy self
wholly unto thy neighbor. That is the best life which is busied in the service
of others: Show obedience and reverence to thy superior, give counsel and aid
to thy equal, defend and instruct thy inferior. Let thy body be subject to
thy mind, and thy mind to God. Bewail thy evils past, and esteem not the
goods that are present, and desire with all thy heart the goods which are
future. Petrarch.
Remember thy sin, to grieve for it: Remember death, that thou may cease
from sin: Remember Gods justice, that thou may be kept in fear: Remember
Gods mercy, that thou may not despair. Bernard.
As much as thou can, withdraw thy self from the world, and addict thy self
wholly unto the service of the Lord. Always in delights think that thy
chastity is in danger; in riches think that thy humility is in danger; in
many businesses think that thy godliness is in danger. Study to please none
but Christ: Fear to displease none but Christ. Always pray thou unto God to
command what he will, and to give what he commands. Pray unto him to cover what
is past, and to govern what is to come. As thou desire to seem, so also thou
must be. For God judges not according to the show, but according to the truth.
In thy words take heed of much babbling: Matt. 6.7. Matt. 12.36.
because for every idle word thou must give an account in the day of judgment.
Thy works, be they what they will, do not pass away; but are cast as certain
seeds of eternity: If thou sowest in the flesh, Gal. 6.8.
of the flesh thou shall reap corruption: If thou sowest in the spirit, of the
spirit thou shall reap life everlasting. The honors of the world shall not
follow thee after death; neither shall thy heaps of riches follow thee; neither
shall thy pleasures follow thee* neither shall the vanities of the world follow
thee: But, after all, thy works shall follow thee: Rev. 14.13.
As therefore thou desire to be at the day of judgment, to day appear to be
such in the sight of God. Cyprian.
Do not esteem those things that thou have; but rather esteem those that thou
want. Be not proud for what is given thee, but be humbled rather for that
which is denied thee. Learn to live whiles thou may live: In this life is
eternal life either obtained or lost: After death there is no time to work,
but the time of recompense begins. In the life to come working is not expected,
but the reward of working. Let holy meditation bring forth in thee knowledge,
and knowledge compunction, and compunction devotion, and let devotion make
prayer. Kempis.
The silence of the mouth is a great good for the peace of the heart. The more
thou art separated from the world, the more acceptable thou art unto God.
Whatsoever thou desire to have, ask of God; whatsoever thou have, give unto
God. He that is not thankful for that which is given already, is unworthy to
receive more. Gods graces cease to descend, when our thanks cease to ascend.
Bernard.
Whatsoever happens unto thee, make use of it for good: When thou art in
prosperity, think that thou have then an occasion to bless and praise God:
When thou art in adversity, think that thou art then put in mind of thy
repentance and conversion. Show the strength of thy power in helping, Lud. Vives
the strength of thy wisdom in instructing, and the strength of thy riches in
doing good. Let not adversity cast thee down, neither let prosperity lift
thee up. Let all thy life be directed unto Christ as unto the mark; Follow him
in the way, that thou may overtake him in thy country. In all things have a
special care of profound humility, and ardent charity. Let charity lift up
thy heart unto God, that thou may cleave unto him: And let humility keep
thy heart down, that thou be not proud. Judge God to be a Father, Tertull.
for his clemency; a Lord, for his discipline; a Father, for his power and
gentleness; a Lord, for his severitie and justice: Love him as a Father,
piously; fear him as a Lord, necessarily: Love him, because he wills mercy;
fear him, because he wills not sin: Psalm. 37.5.
Fear the Lord and trust in him: acknowledge thy misery, and proclaim his
mercy. O God, thou that have given us to will, Philip. 2.13.
give us also grace to perfect.

Meditat. XXIX. Of the shaking off security.
To live it is not, but to die,
To live in all security.
COnsider, thou devout soul, what an hard matter it is to be saved; and thou
shall easily shake off all security. Bernard.
At no time, and in no place is there security: Neither in heaven, nor in
paradise; and then much less in the world. An angel fell in the presence of
the divinity; and Adam fell in the place of pleasure: Adam was created after
the image of God, Genesis 2.27
and yet notwithstanding he was deceived by the treacheries of the devil:
Solomon was the wisest of men, 1. Kin. 3.12. 1. Kin. 11.3.
and yet his wives turned away his heart from the Lord. Judas was in the school
of our Savior, and did every day hear the saving word of that chief Doctor;
and yet was not he safe from the snares of Satan: Luke 22.3.
He was plunged headlong into the pit of covetousness, and so into the pit of
eternal punishment. 1. Sam. 1^.14.
David was a man after Gods own heart, and he was unto the Lord as a most dear
son; and yet by murder and adultery he became the son of death. 2. Sam.
12.6.
Where then is there security in this life? Rely with an assured confidence
of heart upon the promises of God; and thou shall be safe from the invasions of
the devil. There is no security in this life, but that which is infallibly
promised to those that believe, and walk in the way of the Lord: But when we
come unto future happ^nesse, then at length we shall have full security.
Gers^^.
In this life fear and religion are coupled together; neither must one be
without the other: Be not secure in adversity, but whatsoever adversity
happ^neth unto thee in this life, think that it i^ the reward of thy sins.
God often punishes secret offenses by open corrections: Think upon the
grievous stains of thy sins, and fear him that shall judge thee for thy
sins according to his justice. Be not secure in prosperity: For God is angry
with him that is not punished in this life. Nazian.
What are the afflictions of the godly? Bitter arrows sent from the sweet hand
of God. God esteems many in this life unworthy to be punished, whom
notwithstanding he reprobateth for ever. Outward felicity is oftentimes a
sign of eternal damnation: Nothing is more unhappy then the happiness of
sinners, and nothing more miserable then he that knows no misery. Austine.
Whithersoever thou turnest thine eyes, thou see cause of grief, and find
remedies against security: Think upon God above, whom we have offended: Think
upon hell beneath, which we have deserved: Think upon the sin behind, which
we have committed: Think upon the judgment before, which we stand in fear of:
Think upon the conscience within, which we have defiled: And think upon the
world without, which we have loved. Bernard.
Consider whence thou came; and be ashamed: Consider where thou art; and be
sorrowful: Consider whither thou go; and tremble. The gate of salvation is
narrow; Mat. 7.14.
but the way of salvation is yet narrower. God has given unto thee the
treasure of faith, but thou carriest it about thee in vessels of clay: He gave
thee the angels to be thy keepers: But the devil is not far off; 2. Cor. 4.7
Psalm. 91.11
and he is ready to seduce thee. Thou art renewed in the spirit of thy mind:
But yet thou have much of the oldnes of the flesh. Ephesians. 4.23
Thou art set in the state of the grace of God: But yet thou art not set in
eternal glory. There is a mansion prepared for thee in heaven: But yet thou
must endure first the afflictions and assaults of the world. God has promised
forgiveness to him that repents: Anselm*
But he has not promised will to repent to him that sins. The consolations
of eternal life expect thee: But yet thou must expect to enter in through many
tribulations. Act. 14.22
The crown of eternal reward is promised unto thee: But first thou must fight
the great fight, and be conqueror. God does not change his promise: Neither
must thou change the study of holy life. Cyprian.
If the servant does not what the Lord commands, then the Lord will do what he
has threatened. Isidor.
Let a man therefore lament and grieve, shaking off all security, lest in the
just and secret judgment of God he be forsaken, and left in the power of the
devils to be destroyed. If thou have the grace of God, Bernard.
so delight thy self in it, as knowing that it is the gift of God, and that
thou do not possess it by any hereditarie right: Yet be thou so secure
concerning it, that thou can not lose it, lest on a sudden when God shall
withhold his gift, and withdraw his hand, thou be discouraged, and become
more sorrowful then is fit: But happy shall thou be if thou labourest with all
care and diligence to avoid security the mother of all evil. God will not
forsake thee: But take heed that thou do not forsake God. God has given thee
his grace: But pray thou unto him that he would also give thee perseverance.
God bids thee be certain of thy salvation: but he bids thee not be secure. 2.
Tim. 4.7.
Thou must fight valiantly, that thou may at length triumph gloriously. Thy
flesh within thee fights against thee: And the enemy the nearer he is, the
more he is to be feared. The world about thee fights against thee: And the
greater the enemy is, the more to be feared. The devil above thee fights
against thee: And the more potent the enemy is, the more to be feared. Through
the power of God fear not to encounter with these enemies: Through the power of
God thou shall be enabled to obtain the victory. But thou can not overcome
these so great enemies by security, but by assiduity in fighting: The time of
life is the time of fight: Then thou art most assaulted, when thou know not
that thou art assaulted: Then do thy enemies most gather their forces together,
when they seem to grant truce. They are vigilant: And do thou sleep? They
make themselves ready to hurt: And do not thou make thy self ready to resist?
Many faint by the way, and never come home into their country: How many of the
Israelites died in the wilderness, and never came to see the promised land! How
many spiritual sons of Abraham do perish in the wilderness of this world,
Deuteronomy. 1.35
and never come to enjoy the promised inheritance of the kingdom of heaven!
Nothing is more powerful to make us shake off security, then to think of the
paucity of them that endure to the last. Let it therefore be our only desire,
to attain to the glory which is in heaven: Let it be our only love to come
thither: Let it be our only grief that we are not already come thither: And
let it be our only fear that we come not thither: That so we may have no joy
but in those things that either further us in the way thither, or give us hope
of coming thither. What profits it thee to rejoice for a moment, and to
lament for ever? Anselm.
What joy can there be in this life, when that which delights passes away,
and that never passes away which tormenteth? We live in security, as if we
were past the snare of death and day of judgment. Christ says, that he will
come to judgment at such an hour as we think not of. Matt. 24.24.
This says Truth it self, and again he repeats it: Hear this and fear. If the
Lord will come at such an hour as we think not of, we have great cause to
fear; that so we come not unto judgment unprovided. If we come unprovided; How
shall we be able to endure the strict examination in judgment?
Notwithstanding, that which is lost in this one moment cannot be recovered
again for ever. In the shortness of one moment, judgment shall pass what we
shall be for all eternity. In this one moment life or death, damnation or
salvation, punishment or eternal glory shall be appointed to every one. Lord,
thou that have given us grace to that which is good, give us also perseverance
in that which is good!

Meditat. XXX. Of the holy imitation of Christ his life.
Christ's life must be a rule to thee,
If Christ's disciple thou will be.
THe holy life of Christ is the most perfect pattern of all virtues: Gregor.
Every action of Christ serves for our instruction. Many would come to Christ;
Bernard.
but they will not follow him: They would enjoy Christ; but they will not
imitate him. Learn of me, Mat. 11.29
for I am meek and lowly in heart, says our Savior: Unless thou will be
Christ's disciple, thou can never be a true Christian: Let not Christ's passion
only be thy merit, but let his action also be thy example to live after: Thy
beloved is white and ruddie: Can. 5.10.
Be thou also ruddy, by the sprinkling of his blood; and white, by the
imitation of his life. For how do thou love Christ, if thou love not his
holy life? If ye love me, Joh. 14.15
keep my commandments, says our Savior: Therefore he that keeps not his
commandments, loves him not. Christ's holy life is the perfect rule of our
life: And this one rule of Christ's life, is to be preferred before all the
rules of Francis or Benedict. If thou will be the adopted son of God,
consider what was the life of his only begotten Son. If thou will be a
coheir with Christ, thou must be a follower of Christ. He that lives in vices,
has given himself to the service of the devil: And he that will be with the
devil, how can he be with Christ? To love sin, is to love the devil; 1. Joh.
3.8.
because all sin is from the devil: How then can he that is a lover of the
devil, be a lover of Christ? To love God, is to love holy life; because all
holy life is from God: How then can he that is not a lover of holy life be a
lover of God* Gregor.
The doing of the work is the trial of love: It is the property of love to
follow and to obey him that is beloved, to will the same that he wills, and
to be affected as he is: If then thou love Christ truly, thou will obey his
commandments, thou will with him love holy life, and being renewed in the
spirit of thy mind, Ephesians. 4.23.
thou will think upon heavenly things. Joh. 17.3.
Eternal life consists in the knowledge of Christ: And he that loves not
Christ, knows him not. He that loves not humility, chastity, gentleness,
temperance, and charity, loves not Christ: Because the love of Christ was
nothing else but humility, chastity, gentleness, temperance, and charity.
Christ says that he knows not them, Mat. 7.23.
that fulfill not the will of his Father: Therefore they also know not Christ,
that fulfill not the will of their heavenly Father. But what is the will of our
heavenly Father? It is, according to the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 4 3. Romans 8.14
our sanctification. He is not of Christ that has not the Spirit of Christ:
Now where the Spirit of Christ is, he is present with his gifts and fruits. But
what are the fruits of the Spirit? Gal. 5.22.
Love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness,
temperance. As the holy Ghost rested upon Christ; 23. Isa. 11.2. Mat. 3.16.
So does he also rest on all those that are in Christ, by true faith: Because
the spouse of Christ does run in the odor of Christ's ointments. Cant. 1.3. 1.
Cor. 6.17. Mat. 19.5.
He that cleaves unto the Lord, is one spirit with him: As the carnal
copulation of the man and the woman makes of them one flesh: So the spiritual
conjunction of Christ and the faithful soul makes of them one spirit. And
where there is one spirit, there is one will; and where there is the same will,
there are the same actions. Therefore he that does not conform his life to the
life of Christ, is convinced that he neither does cleave unto God, neither has
his Spirit. Grana^.
Is it not meet that we should conform all our life to the life of Christ, who
in love conformed himself wholly unto us* God manifesting himself in the flesh,
1. Tim. 3.16.
set before us an example of holy life; that whosoever does not live an holy
life, might be without excuse as concerning the flesh. No life is more pleasant
or quiet then the life of Christ; because Christ is true God: And what can
enjoy more pleasure or tranquillity then God, who is the chiefest good? This
life brings forth short joy, but draws with it eternal sorrow. To whomsoever
thou conformest thy self in this life, to him also shall thou be conformed in
the resurrection: If thou beginnest here to conform thy self unto the life of
Christ; thou shall in the resurrection be more fully conformed unto him. If
thou conformest thy self unto the devil by sin; thou shall in the
resurrection be conformed unto him by torment. He that will follow me, Mat.
16.24.
let him deny himself, says our Savior, and take up his cross daily. If in
this life thou deniest thy self; at the day of judgment Christ shall
acknowledge thee for his. If for Christ here in this life thou renouncest thine
own honor, the love of thy self, and thine own will; in the life to come
Christ will make thee partaker of his honor, of his love, and of his will. If
in this life thou partakest of the cross; in the life to come thou shall
partake of eternal light: If in this life thou partakest of tribulation; in
the life to come thou shall partake of consolation: If in this life thou
partakest of persecution; in the life to come thou shall partake of a most
large retribution. He that shall confess me before men, says our Savior,
Mat. 10.22*
him also will I confess before my Father which is in heaven: But we must
confess Christ not only by the profession of doctrine, but also by conformity
of life; So shall he at length at the day of judgment acknowledge us for his.
Whosoever shall deny me before men, 33.
him also will I deny before my Father which is in heaven. Christ is not only
denied by words, but also, and that much more, by wicked life: Whosoever
therefore does in this life deny Christ by his deeds, shall in deed be denied
by Christ at the day of judgment. He is not a Christian that has not the true
faith of Christ: But true faith ingrafts us into Christ as vine-branches into
the spiritual vine. Every branch that is in Christ, Joh. 15.2.
and brings not forth fruit, the heavenly husbandman takes away: But he that
remains in Christ, and in whom Christ dwells by faith, Ephesians. 3.17.
brings forth much fruit. That branch is not in the vine, which draws not
from the vine its sap and nourishment: So neither is that soul in Christ by
faith, which draws not from Christ the sap of love by faith. Conform us, good
Jesus, unto thy life in this world; that in the world to come we may be fully
conformed unto it!

Meditat. XXXI. Of the denial of a man's own self.
Thou from thy self must first depart,
Before thou can in Christ have part.
Mat. 16.24
WHosoever will follow me, let him deny himself, says our Savior: To deny
ones self, is to renounce the love of ones self: For the love of ones self does
exclude the love of God. If thou will be Christ's disciple, it is necessary that
self-love should altogether die in thee. No man loves Christ, unless he
hates himself. Joh. 12.24
Unless the grain of wheat which is cast into the earth do die, it does not
bring forth fruit: So thou can not reap the fruits of the holy Spirit,
unless self-love do die in thy heart. The Lord said unto Abraham, Go out from
thine own land, Genesis 12.1
and from thine own kindred, and from thy fathers house, unto the land which I
shall show thee: Thou can not be the true disciple of Christ, and a true
spiritual man, unless thou go forth from the love of thy self. Genesis 32.24,
31.
Jacob in his wrestling with the Angel was lamed in one foot, the other being
sound and whole: Granat.
By the two feet is understood a double love; the love of ones self, and the
love of God. Then shall a man be partaker of Gods blessing, when he halts upon
the foot of self-love, the other foot, that is, of the love of God, remaining
sound and whole. Joh. Clim.
It is impossible for thee with one eye to behold heaven and earth: So it
cannot be that with one and the same will a man should love himself
inordinately, and love God also. Love is the chiefest good of our soul:
Therefore we must give the chief good of our soul to the chiefest good, that
is, to God. Thy love is thy God, that is, whatsoever thou love chiefly thou
set in the place of God: But God is truly the chief being. Whosoever
therefore loves himself, judges himself to be God, and sets himself in the
place of God, which is the greatest idolatry that can be. Whatsoever thou
love chiefly, thou make it to be the end of all other things, and thou
judge it to be the last complement of all thy desires: But it is God only
who is the beginning and the end of the creatures, Rev. 1.8.
he is the first and the last, he only fills the desire of our hearts, and
there is no created thing that can satisfy thy desires: Therefore thou must
prefer the love of God before the love of thy self. God is the beginning and
the end: In him therefore must our love begin, and in him also must it end. The
essence of God is without all the creatures, as God was in himself from all
eternity: So withdraw thou thy love from all the creatures. Such as thy love
is, such are thy works: If thy works proceed from true faith and love of God;
they are acceptable unto God, and appear great in his eyes, though in the eyes
of all men they seem but small: If they proceed from self-love, they cannot
please God. Self-love defiles the most excellent works. When Christ was in the
house of Simon a certain woman broke a vessel of precious ointment, Mat. 26.6
7. Joh. Arn.
and anointed the head of Christ: The work seemed to be small, and yet
notwithstanding it was acceptable unto Christ; because it proceeded from true
faith, pure love and serious contrition. Sacrifice in the old Testament was a
work acceptable unto God; and yet God was not well pleased that Saul set apart
the spoils of the Amalekites to offer sacrifice unto God. Why? 1. Sam. 15.15.
Because this did not proceed from the love of God: For if he had loved God
truly, he would not have contemned the commandment of God about the burning of
all the spoils: He loved himself, and his own devotion. Love is a kind of
fire: For so the Church prays; Come, O holy Ghost, and kindle in the
faithful the fire of thy love. Fire does not cleave fast unto the earth, but
always tends upwards: So thy love must not rest in thee, but it must be lifted
up unto the Lord. Again, to deny ones self, is to renounce his own honor:
Unto the chief good alone is due the chiefest honor: And God is the chiefest
good. He that seeks his own glory, cannot seek Gods glory, as our Savior
said unto the Pharisees, Joh. 5.44.
How can ye believe, which receive honor one of another? Behold the example of
Christ, and follow it: He often witnesses of himself, that he seeks not his
own glory, Joh. 5.41.
that he receives not honor from men, and that he is humble in heart. Mat.
11.29.
All thy gifts thou receivest from God: Therefore render them again unto God.
The rivers of all goods do flow from this fountain of Gods goodness: Therefore
let them all flow back again into the sea. The herb which is called Tornsol, or
Heliotropium, does always turn it self unto the sun, by virtue whereof it
draws its life and nourishment: So do thou with all thy gifts and honor turn
thy self toward God, and attribute nothing unto thy self. If thou have any
thing of thine own, thou may seek thine own honor, and attribute thy gifts
unto thy self: But seeing that thou have nothing of thine own, but all from
God, therefore thou must seek, not thine own honor, but the honor of God. The
seeking his own honor does turn a man away from God: We have an example in
Nabuchadnezzar, who said, Dan. 4.30
Is not this great Babylon that I have built for the house of my kingdom, by
the strength of my power, and for the honor of my majesty? But what follows?
31.
Whiles the word was in the kings mouth, a voice came from heaven, saying, 32.
To thee, O Nabuchadnezzar, is it spoken: Thy kingdom is departed from thee,
thou shall be cast out from the company of men, and thy dwelling shall be with
the beasts of the field: Even so if thou out of vain-glorie and pride do
boast of thy Babylon, that is, the building of thy good works, and take the
glory thereof unto thy self, and not give it unto God; thou shall be cast away
from the sight of God. Last of all, To deny ones own self, is to renounce his
own will: We must always obey the best will: And Gods will is always the
best: We must obey his will, 1. Cor. 4.7*
from whom we have all that we have: And from God comes all that we have. We
must obey his will, who leads us always unto life and that which is good:
Delight in the Lord, Psalm. 37.4.
and he shall give thee thy hearts desire. Our own will leads us unto death,
and unto damnation. By what did our first father fall from the grace of God,
and state of salvation, into eternal damnation? By leaving the will of God,
and following his own will. He neglected the commandment of God, and gave ear
unto the persuasion of the devil: Therefore the true disciple of Christ
renounceth his own will, and desires to follow the will of God. Behold Christ!
Mat. 26.39.
He being in the agony of his passion, offered his own will as a most
acceptable sacrifice unto God: Offer thou also unto God thine own will, and so
shall thou perfect that denial of thy self, which Christ requires. Mat. 6.10.
Let thy holy will, O Lord, be done in earth, as it is in heaven!

Meditat. XXXII. Of the true rest of the soul.
Thy soul can nothing satiate
But God who did thy soul create.
IN the transitory things of this world the soul often seeks for rest, but
finds it not: Why? Because the soul is more worthy then all the creatures, and
therefore she cannot find peace and quietness in them as being more vile. All
worldly things are flitting and transitory; but the soul is immortal: How
should she then find true rest in them? All those are terrestrial, but our
soul has a celestial original: How should she then satiate and fulfill her
desire in them? In Christ she finds rest, Mat. 11.29
he can satisfy and fulfill her desire. Against the wrath of God she rests in
the wounds of Christ: Against the accusations of Satan she rests in the power
of Christ: Against the terror of the law she rests in the gospel of Christ:
Against the sins which accuse her she rests in the blood of Christ which
speaks better things, Heb. 12.24.
before God, then the blood of Abel: Against the terror of death she rests
with confidence in the session of Christ at the right hand of the Father: And
thus our faith finds rest in Christ, and our love finds great rest also. He
that by his love cleaves unto earthly things, has no true rest; because
earthly things themselves have it not in them: They cannot fully satiate the
souls appetite; because they are all finite: But our soul being created after
the image of God, does desire that infinite good in which is all good. As
therefore our faith ought not to rely upon any of the creatures, but upon the
merit of Christ only: So also our love should not be settled upon any of the
creatures, nor upon our selves. For self-love hinders the love of God: We
must prefer the love of God before all. Our soul is the spouse of Christ: To
him alone therefore must she adhere. Our soul is the temple of God: Therefore
she must give entertainment to none but him. 1. Cor. 3.16.
Many seek for rest in riches: But without Christ there is no rest to the soul.
Mat. 8.20.
Where Christ is, there is poverty, if not in act, yet in affect. He being the
Lord of heaven and earth, had not where to rest his head: And so would he
commend and sanctify poverty unto us. Riches are without us: But that which
will quiet the soul must be within. To what shall our soul cleave unto at
death, when we must leave all worldly things? Either our riches forsake us, or
we them: often in our life, but always at our death. Where then shall our soul
find peace and rest? Many seek for rest in pleasures: But pleasures can bring
no rest or delight unto the soul; although they may unto the body, for a time:
At length grief and sorrow follow as companions. Pleasures belong unto this
life: But the soul was not created for this life, because she is by death
compelled to depart. How then should she find rest in pleasures? Without
Christ there is no rest to the soul: But what was the life of Christ? Extreme
grief from the first moment of his nativitie, even unto his death. By this
means he the true prizer of things would teach us what to think concerning
pleasure. Many seek for rest in honors: But miserable are they that at every
change of popular breath are compelled to want their rest. Honor is without,
and a flitting good: But that which will give rest unto the soul must be
within. L. Vives.
What can thou say more of the praise and glory given by men, then of Apelles
his commended picture? Consider the corner wherein thou keep: What is the
proportion thereof to a whole province, to all Europe, and to all the habitable
world? That is true honor indeed which God shall hereafter give unto the
elect. The rest of a thing is in its end: neither does a thing rest naturally,
until it has attained to its end and place. God is the end whereunto the soul
was created: For it was made after the image of God. Therefore it cannot be
quiet and at rest but in its end, that is, in God. As the soul is the life of
the body: Austine.
So is God the life of the soul. As therefore that soul does truly live in
which God dwells by spiritual grace: So likewise that soul is dead, which
has not God dwelling in it. And what rest can there be to the soul that is
dead? That first death in sin does necessarily draw with it the second death
of damnation. Rev. 20.15.
Whosoever therefore does firmly cleave unto God with his love, and inwardly
enjoys divine consolation, his rest can no outward things disquiet. In the
midst of sorrows, he is joyful; in poverty, rich; in the tribulations of this
world, secure; in troubles, quiet; in the reproaches and contumelies of men,
still; and in death it self, living. He regards not the threats of tyrants:
Because he feels within, the riches of divine consolation. In adversity, he is
not made sorrowful: Because the holy Spirit within, does comfort him
effectually. In poverty, he is not vexed: Because he is rich in the goodness
of God. The reproaches of men do not trouble him: Because he enjoys the
delights of divine honor. He regards not the pleasure of the flesh: Because
the sweetness of the Spirit is more acceptable unto him. He seeks not after
the friendship of the world: Because he seeks the love of God, who is
merciful, and a friend unto him. He gapeth not after earthly treasures:
Because his chief treasure is hidden in the heavens. He fears not death:
Because in God he always lives. He does not much desire the wisdom of the
world: Because he has the Spirit within to be his teacher. That which is
perfect takes away that which is imperfect. He fears neither lightning, nor
tempests, nor fire, nor water, nor floods, nor the sorrowful aspects of the
planets, nor the obscuration of the lights of heaven: Because he is carried up
above the sphere of nature, and by faith rests and lives in Christ. He is
not drawn away by the allurements of the world: Because he hears within him
the voice of Christ which is sweeter. He fears not the power of the devil:
Because he feels Gods indulgence. He that lives and overcomes in him, is
stronger then the devil, that in vain labors to overcome him. He follows not
the enticements of the flesh: Because living in the Spirit, he feels the riches
of the Spirit; and by the vivification of the Spirit mortifies and crucifies
the flesh. Gal. 5.24.
He fears not the devil his accuser: Because he knows Christ to be his
Advocate. 1. Joh. 2.1
This true rest of the soul he grant unto us, who is the only author and
giver thereof, our Lord God blessed for ever!

Meditat. XXXIII. Of the purity of conscience.
Labor to have a conscience pure:
When all things fail, that will endure.
IN every thing thou take in hand have a great care of thy conscience. If the
devil incites thee to any sin, stand in fear of the inward check of thy
conscience. If thou art afraid to sin in the presence of men, let thine own
conscience much more deter thee from sin. The inward testimony is of more
efficacy then the outward: Therefore, although thy sins could escape the
accusations of all men, yet they can never escape the inward witness of thy
conscience. Thy conscience shall be in the number of those books, Rev. 20.12.
that shall be opened at the judgment to come, as is testified in the
Revelation. The first is the book of Gods omniscience; in which the thoughts,
words, and deeds of all men shall manifestly appear. The second book is
Christ, Rev. 13.8.
which is the book of life; in this book whosoever shall be found written by
true faith, shall be carried by the angels into the court of heaven. The third
is the book of the Scripture, according to the prescript rule whereof our faith
and good works shall be judged: The word that I have spoken, Joh. 12.48.
says our Savior, shall judge them at the last day. The fourth book
contains in it the testimonies of the poor, which in the day of judgment
shall receive us into an everlasting habitation. Luke 16.9.
The fifth book contains the inward testimony of the conscience: For the
conscience is the book in which all sins are written: Bernard.
The conscience is a great volume in which all things are written by the finger
of truth. The damned cannot deny their sins at the day of judgment; because
they shall be convinced by the testimony of their own consciences: They cannot
fly from the accusation of their sins; because the tribunal of the
conscience is within, and at home. Nazianzen.
A pure conscience is the most clear glass of the soul, in which she beholds
God and her self. A filthy eye cannot behold the splendor of true light:
Hereupon says our Savior, Blessed are the pure in heart; for they shall see
God. Mat. 5.8. Camer.
As a beautiful and fair face is pleasing to the eye of man: So a pure and
clear conscience is acceptable in the sight of God: But the putrified
conscience begets never-dying worms. Let us therefore in the present have a
sense and feeling of the worm of conscience, and labor to destroy it* But let
us not foster it, lest it live with us for ever. All other books were invented
to mend this book: Bernard.
What does much science profit, if there be a foul conscience? Thou shall be
judged hereafter before the throne of God, not by the book of thy science, but
by the book of thy conscience. If thou will write this book right indeed, write
it according to the copy of the book of life: Rev. 13.8.
Christ is the book of life: Let the profession of thy faith be conformed to
the rule of Christ's doctrine, and let the course of thy life be conformed to
the rule of Christ's life. Thy conscience shall be good, if there be purity in
thy heart, truth in thy tongue, and honesty in thy actions. Use thy conscience
for a lanthorn in all thy actions: Nil. Bish^
For that will plainly show unto thee what actions in thy life be good, and
what be evil. Avoid that judgment of thy conscience in which one and the same
shall be both defendant, Cyprian.
and plaintiff, witness, judge, tormentour, prison, scourge, executioner, and
slaughterer. What escape can there be there, where it is the witness that
accuses, and where nothing can be hid from him that judges? Gregor.
What does it profit thee, if all men commend the^^ and thy conscience accuse
thee? What shall it hurt thee, if all men detract from thee, and thy conscience
defend thee? This judge is enough to accuse, judge, and condemn every man.
This judge is incorrupt, and cannot be moved with prayers, or corrupted with
rewards. Bernard.
Whithersoever thou go, and wheresoever thou art, thy conscience is always
with thee, and carries about her whatsoever thou have laid up in her, whether
it be good or evil. She keeps for the living, and restores to the dead that
which was committed to her keeping. So it is true that a man's enemies are they
of his own household: Mat. 10.36.
So in thine own house and amongst thine own family, thou have those that do
observe, accuse, and torment thee. Lud. Vives
What does it profit thee to live in all abundance and plenty, and to be
tormented with the whip of conscience? The fountain of man's felicity and
misery is in his mind: What does it profit a man in a burning fever to lie
upon a bed of gold? What does it profit a man t^^mented with the firebrands of
an ^^conscience, to enjoy all outward felicity? As much as we regard
everlasting salvation, so much let us regard our conscience. For if a good
conscience be lost, faith is lost; and if faith be lost, the grace of God is
lost; and if the grace of God be lost, how can we hope for everlasting life? As
the testimony of thy conscience is, such judgment may thou expect from
Christ. Sinners shall become their own accusers, though none accuse them, or
bring ought against them. Chrysostom.
As the drunkard, while he is overwhelmed with wine, has no sense of the hurt
which he receives by the wine; but when he has slept out his drunken fit,
then he feels the hurt: So sin, whiles it is in action, does blind the
mind, and like a thick cloud does obscure the brightness of true judgment:
But at length the conscience is roused, and gnaweth more grievously then any
accuser. There are three judgments; The judgment of the world, the judgment
of thy self, and the judgment of God: And as thou can not escape the
judgment of God: So neither can thou escape the judgment of thy self;
although sometimes thou may escape the judgment of the world. No walls can
hinder this witness from seeing all thy actions: What excuse can save thee,
when thy conscience within does accuse thee? The peace of conscience is the
beginning of everlasting life. Thou may more truly and heartily rejoice in
the midst of troubles, having a good conscience, then thou can in the midst
of thy delights, having an evil conscience. Against the backbiting of all that
bear thee ill will, thou may confidently oppose the defense and excuse of
thy conscience. Enquire of thy self concerning thy self; Bernard.
because thou know thy self far better then any other man does. At the
last judgment what will the false praises of others profit thee, or the
backbitings of others without a cause, hurt thee? By Gods and thine own
judgment shall thou either stand or fall: Thou shall not stand or fall by the
testimony of others. The conscience is immortal, as the soul is immortal:
And the punishments of hell shall torment the damned as long as the accusation
of conscience shall endure. No external fire does so afflict the body, as
this inward fire does inflame the conscience. The soul which is burned, is
eternal; and the fire of the conscience is eternal. No outward scourges are
so grievous unto the body, as these inward whips of conscience are unto the
soul. Avoid therefore the guilt of sin; that so thou may avoid the torment
of conscience. By true repentance blot thy sins out of the book of thy
conscience; that they may not be read at the judgment, and that thou may
not be afraid of the voice of Gods sentence. Mortify the worm of conscience by
the heat of devotion; that it do not bite thee, and so beget eternal horror.
Extinguish this inward fire by thy tears; that so thou may attain to the
joys of an heavenly cooler. Grant, O Lord, that we may fight the good fight,
2. Tim. 4.7.
keeping faith and a good conscience; that at length we may come safe and sound
into our heavenly country!

Meditat. XXXIIII. Of the study of true humility.
What is a bubble? Such is man,
Whose l^fe in length is but a span.
COnsider, thou faithful soul, the miserable condition of man, and thou shall
easily avoid all tentations of pride. Man is vile in his ingresse, Bernard.
miserable in his progress, and lamentable in his egresse. He is assaulted by
devils, provoked by tentations, allured by delights, cast down by tribulations,
entangled by accusations, bestripped of virtues, and ensnared in evil customs.
Wherefore then art thou proud, Ecclus 10 9.
O earth and ashes? What wast thou before thou wast brought forth? Stinking
seed. What is thy life? A sack of dung. What after death? Meat for worms. If
there be any thing good in thee; it is not thine, but Gods: Nothing is thine,
but sin. Challenge therefore unto thy self nothing that is within thee, but
thy sins. Kempis.
He is a fool and an unfaithful servant that will be proud of his masters
goods. Bernard.
Behold, O man, the example of Christ! All the glory of heaven serves him; yea
he himself alone is the true glory: And yet he rejected all worldly glory. And
still he cries, Mat. 11.29
Learn of me, for I am meek and humble in heart. He is the true lover of
Christ, that is the follower of Christ. He that loves Christ, loves also
humility. Let the servant that is proud blush and be ashamed, seeing that the
Lord of heaven is so humble. Our Savior says of himself that he is the Lily
of the valleys; Cant. ^.1.
because he, the most noble amongst flowers, is born and bred, not in the
mountains, that is, in proud and lofty hearts, but in the low valleys, that is,
in the contrite and humble minds of the godly. For the soul that is truly
humble, Austine.
is a seat and delectable bed for Christ, as a godly man says. True grace does
not lift a man up, but does rather humble him: Therefore he is not yet partaker
of grace, who walks not in humbleness of heart. The fluents of Gods grace
flow downwards, Bernard.
not upwards. As water by nature does not seek high places: So the grace of God
does not flow upwards, but downwards upon the hearts that are humble. The
Psalmist says, God dwells on high, Psalm. 113.5.
and yet beholds he the things that are humble in heaven and in earth.
Surely, this is a mavelous thing, that we cannot draw nigh unto God, who is
the highest of all, unless we walk in the path of humility. Bernard.
He that is vile in his own eyes, is great in the eyes of God. He that
displeases himself, pleases God. Heb. 11.3.
Of nothing did God create the heaven and the earth: And as it was in the
creation, so also is it in the reparation of man. God creates of nothing, and
repairs of nothing. Therefore that thou may be made partaker of regeneration
and reparation, seem nothing in thine own eyes, that is, arrogate and attribute
nothing unto thy self. We are all weak and frail: And think thou no man more
frail then thy self. It hurts not to make thy self inferior to all, Kempis.
and by humility to put thy self under all: But it hurts very much, to
prefer thy self before any one. The twenty four elders, ^ev. 4.4.
that is, all the church triumphant, cast down their crowns before the throne,
10
and give unto God all righteousness and glory: And what then should the vile
sinner do? Isa. 6.2.
The holy angels the Seraphims cover their faces before the face of Gods
majesty: And what then should man do, who is so vile a creature, and so
unthankful to his Creator? Christ the true and only begotten Son of God in
wonderful humility descended from heaven, and took our weak nature upon him,
and condescended to take upon him our flesh, to die, and to be crucified: And
what should man do, who by his sins is gone so far astray from God? Behold,
O faithful soul, with what wonderful humility Christ has cured our pride!
And do thou still desire to be proud? By the way of humility and his passion
Christ entered into glory: Luke 24.26.
And do thou think ever to come to the glory of heaven walking in the way of
pride? The devil for his pride was banished out of the kingdom of heaven: And
do thou having not yet the fruition of celestial glory think to come
thither by the way of pride? Genesis 3.24
Adam for his pride was cast out of paradise: And do thou think to come to
the celestial paradise by the way of pride? Let us rather wish to serve,
Granat.
and to wash the feet of others with Christ, then to seek ambitiously with the
devil for an higher place. Let us be humbled in this life; that we may be
exalted in the life to come. Beda.
Think not, O faithful soul, what thou have, but what thou want. Grieve for
the virtues which thou have not, rather then glory for the virtues which thou
have. Bernard.
Cover thy virtues; but lay open thy sins: For thou have great cause to fear,
that if thou show the treasure of thy good works by glorying in them, the
devil will steal them away by making thee proud of them. Fire is best kept, if
it be covered with ashes: So the fire of charity is never more securely kept,
then when it is covered with the ashes of humility. Pride is the seed of all
sin: Take heed therefore of being lifted up, lest it happen that thou be
cast headlong into the abyss of sin. Pride is a pleasing bed for the devil:
Take heed therefore of being lifted up, lest it happen that thy miserable soul
be made subject to the devils yoke. Pride is a wind that burns and dries up
the fountain of Gods grace: Take heed therefore of being lifted up, lest it
happen that thou be separated from the grace of God. Cure, O Christ, the
tumor of our pride! Let thy holy humility be our only merit in this life,
and let it be the pattern of our life! Let our faith firmly embrace thy
humility, and let our life constantly follow after it!

Meditat. XXXV. Of fleeing from covetousness.
The man that covets, is but poor,
Although he riches have great store.
AS thou do tender the salvation of thy soul, see that thou do hate the
sin of covetousness. The covetous man is the poorest amongst men; because he
wants as well that which he has, as that which he has not. The covetous man
is the most miserable of all men; because he is good to no man, and worst to
himself. Pride is the beginning of all sin; 1. Tim. 6.10.
and covetousness the root of all evil: That, by turning us away from God; and
this, by turning us unto the creatures. Riches bring forth sweat in the
getting, create fear in the possessing, Savanar.
and bring grief in the losing: And, which is worse, the labor of the covetous
shall not only perish, but shall also cause them to perish. Riches do either
forsake thee, Bernard.
or thou do forsake them: If therefore thou put thy trust in riches, what
will be thy hope at the hour of death? How will thou commend thy soul unto
God, if thou do not commend the care of thy body unto him? Lud Vives.
God which is Almighty has a care of thee: Wherefore then do thou doubt
whether he can sustain thee or no? God who is most wise has a care of thee:
Wherefore then do thou doubt how he will sustain thee? God who is most
bountiful has a care of thee: Wherefore then do thou doubt how he will
sustain thee? God who is most bountiful has a care of thee: Wherefore then
do thou doubt whether he will sustain thee or no? Thou have the word and bond
of Christ, who is the Lord of all that is in heaven and earth, Mat. 6.33.
that they which seek the kingdom of God, shall want nothing that is necessary
for man. Trust in this promise of Christ, he will not deceive thee: For he is
truth it self. Covetousness is the greatest Idolatry: Colos. 3.5.
Because it sets the creatures in the place of God. The covetous man puts
his trust in the creatures, whereas he should put his trust in God. Whatsoever
we love more then God, we prefer before God; and whatsoever we prefer
before God, we set up in the place of God. Esau sold his birthright for a
mease of pottage: Genesis 25.33.
So many sell the inheritance of the kingdom of heaven, which was purchased by
Christ, to get things temporal. Judas sold Christ for thirty pieces of silver:
Mat. 26.15.
And covetous men sell Christ for temporal riches. How can he ever come to the
kingdom of heaven, who is filled daily with the husks of the swine? How can he
ever come unto God by lifting up his heart unto him, who studies to seek rest
for his soul in riches? Riches are thorns, Mat. 13.22
so says truth it self: He therefore that loves riches, does indeed love
thorns. O ye thorns, how many souls do ye choke! Thorns do hinder the increase
of the seed: And even so does the solicitude and care about riches hinder the
spiritual fruit of the word. Thorns do afflict the body with punctures: And
even so do riches torment the soul with cares. Thou shall be sure to perish,
Austine.
if thou gatherest only such treasures as do perish. They which lay up
treasures here on earth, are like unto them that lay up their fruits in low and
moist places, not considering that there they will soon come to rottenness.
What fools are they that place the end of their desires in riches! Billius.
How can that which is corporal satisfy the soul which is spiritual? when as
that rather does so comprehend corporal things by the virtue of its spiritual
nature, that it cannot be distended and filled by any quantity. The soul was
created for eternity: Thou do wrong unto her therefore if thou placest the
end of thy desires in temporal and momentanie things. The soul the more it is
lifted up unto God, the more it is withdrawn from the love of riches. All
things the nearer they are unto heaven, the less they ^o^et and hoard up: As
the fowls of the air, which neither sow nor reap. Mat. 6.26.
It is a great sign that the soul is busied about heavenly things, if it do
undervalue and contemn earthly things. Mice and creeping things hoard up in
the holes of the earth: for they are of a worse condition and of a baser nature
then the fowls. It is a great sign that the soul is turned away from God, and
fastened unto the creatures, if it cleave unto riches with an inordinate love.
God gave a soul unto thee: And will thou not commit thy body to his care? God
feeds the fowls of the air: And do thou, which art created after his
image, doubt whether he will sustain thee or no? God clotheth the lilies of the
field: And do thou doubt whether he will provide clothes for thee or no? Be
ashamed, that faith and reason should not effect as much in thee, as a natural
instinct does effect in the fowls. The fowls neither sow nor reap, but commit
the care of their bodies unto God. The covetous men do not believe the words of
God, before they make provision for their own sustenance. The covetous man is a
most unjust man: Wherefore? 1. Tim. 6.7.
Because he brought nothing with him into this world, and yet he is so troubled
about these earthly things, as if he meant to carry much with him out of this
world. The covetous man is a most unthankful man: Wherefore? Because he
enjoys many gifts which come from God, and yet is never lifted up unto the
giver thereof by the confidence of heart. The covetous man is a most foolish
man: Wherefore? Because he leaves the true good, without which nothing is good
indeed, and cleaves unto that which is not good without the grace of God. He
that is held bound by the love of earthly things, does not possess them, but
is possessed of them. Covetousness is neither diminished by plenty, nor want:
By want it is not diminished; because his desire of having does still increase,
when he cannot attain what he has long desired: And by plenty it is not
diminished; because the covetous man, the more he gets, the more he desires:
And when he has got what he covetously desired, he has still a new occasion
ministered unto him to desire more: Like unto fire; which, as more wood is still
laid on, the more it increases. Gregor.
Covetousness is a torrent at first small, but afterward increasing
infinitely: Set a term therefore to the desire of riches, lest thy
covetousness at length draw thee into everlasting destruction. Many devour in
this life that which they must afterward digest in hell: Austine.
And many whilst they thirst after gain, Leo.
run unto most certain death. Think upon these things, O devout soul, and as
much as thou can, flee from covetousness. Thou shall carry to judgment none
of thy riches, but those which thou have given to the poor. Do thou refuse
to give thy temporal and fading riches to the poor, for whom Christ refused
not to give his life? Give unto the poor, that thou may give unto thy self:
That which thou do not give unto the poor, another shall have. He is too too
covetous, Bernard.
to whom the Lord is not sufficient. He does not yet truly hope for heavenly
things, who overprizeth earthly things. 1. John 3.16.
How would he lay down his life for his brother, who denies his temporal
substance to his brother that asks? The hand of the poor is the treasury of
heaven: That which it receives it lays up in heaven, that upon earth it may
not perish. Would thou perform an acceptable office unto Christ? Show thy
bounty to the poor: That which is done unto his members, the head takes as
done to himself. Mat. 25.40 Austine.
Christ says unto thee, Give unto me of that which I have given unto thee. Do
good with thy goods, that thou may obtain good. Give thy earthly things
liberally, that thou may keep them: For in keeping them too frugally thou
losest them. Hear Christ admonishing, that thou be not compelled to hear
him at the judgment saying, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, Mat. 25.41, 42.
because ye fed me not when I was hungry. The holy seed of almes-giving, as
it is sowed sparingly or bountifully, 2. Cor. 9.6
so it shall be reaped sparingly or bountifully. If thou would be in the
number of the sheep, do good unto the sheep. Let the goats cause thee to fear:
Nazianz. Mat. 25.33.
For they are placed at the left hand; not because they took any thing away,
but because they gave not. Incline our hearts, O God, unto thy testimonies, and
not to covetousness. Ps. 119.36


Meditat. XXXVI. Of the properties of true love and charity.
The sign by which the Saints we know,
It is by love their faith to show.
TRue and sincere love is an inseparable property of the godly: No Christian
without faith; and no faith without charity. Where there is not the
brightness of charity, neither is there the heat of faith: Take away light
from the sun, and thou may take away charity from faith. Charity is the
outward act of the inward life of a Christian man. Jam. 2.26.
The body is dead without the spirit; and faith is dead without charity. He
is not of Christ, that has not the Spirit of Christ; and he has not the
Spirit of Christ, that has not the gift of charity. Charity is the fruit of
the Spirit: Gal. 5.22.
The tree is not known to be good unless it bring forth good fruit. Col. 3.14.
Charity is the bond of Christian perfection: As the members of the body are
knit together by the spirit, that is, the soul: So the true members of the
mystical body are united by the holy Spirit in the bond of charity. In
Solomon's temple all was covered with gold within and without: 1. Kin. 6.21.
So in Gods Spiritual temple let all be beautified with love and charity
within and without. Luther.
Let charity move thy heart to compassion, and thy hand to contribution:
Compassion is not sufficient, unless there be also outward contribution:
Neither is outward contribution sufficient, unless there be also inward
compassion. Faith receives all from God, and charity gives it again unto our
neighbor. By faith we are made partakers of the divine nature: But God is
love. 1. Joh. 4.8
Therefore where charity shows not it self without, let no man believe that
there is faith within. No man believes in Christ, which loves not Christ: And
no man loves Christ, unless he love his neighbor. He does not yet apprehend
the benefit of Christ with true confidence of heart, whosoever does deny unto
his neighbor the office which he owes unto him. That is not truly a good
work which proceeds not from faith: Romans 14.23.
Neither is it truly a good work which proceeds not from charity. Charity
is the seed of all virtues: Bernard.
It is no good fruit which springs not forth from the root of charity: For
charity is the spiritual taste of the soul: For unto it alone is every good
thing sweet, every hard thing sweet, all adversity sweet, and all pain and
trouble sweet; yea more, the taste of charity makes even death it self most
sweet: Cant. 8.6.
For love is strong as death, yea stronger then death; because love brought
Christ to die for us: And love does so stir up the true godly, that they
doubt not to die for Christ. All the works of God proceed from love, yea
punishments themselves: So let all the works of a Christian man proceed from
love. In all the creatures God has set before us the glass of love. The sun
and the stars shine not to themselves, but to us: The herbs purge not
themselves, but us: Air, water, beasts, and all creatures serve man: Do thou
also give thy self wholly to serve thy neighbor. Tongues profit not without
char^tie: 1. Cor. 13.1. 1. Cor. 8.1 1. Cor. 13.2.
Because without charity knowledge of tongues puffs up, but charity
edifieth. Knowledge of mysteries profits not without charity: Because the
devil also has knowledge of mysteries; but charity is only proper to the
godly. Faith also which can remove mountains, profits not without charity: For
such faith is the faith of working miracles, and not of salvation. Charity is
better then the gift of doing miracles: Because that is the undoubted mark of
true Christians; but this is sometimes granted to the wicked. It profits not to
give all that one has unto the poor, if there be not charity: For the
outward action is done in hypocrisy, if there be not inward love. Rivers of
bounty profit not, unless they spring from the fountain of charity. Charity
is patient: 4
For no man is easily angry with him that he loves truly. Charity is
bountiful: 4
For he that by charity has bestowed his heart, which is the chief good of
the soul, how should he deny the outward goods, which are less? Charity
envieth not: 4
Because he that is in charity looks upon another good as upon his own.
Charity thinks no evil: 5
No man easily hurts him whom he loves truly, and from his heart. Charity is
not puffed up: 4
Because by charity we are all made the members of one body; and one member
prefers not it self before another. Charity does not behave it self undecently:
5
For it is the property of an angry man to bear himself undecently; but
charity is the bridle of anger. 5
Charity seeks not those things which are her own: Because that which one
loves, he prefers before himself, and seeks the profit thereof more then
his own. 5
Charity is not provoked to anger: For all anger proceeds from pride; but
charity puts it self under all. Charity imagines no mischief: 5
For it plainly appears that he is not yet in perfect charity, whosoever
works mischief against any one. 6
Charity rejoices not in iniquity: For charity makes another misery to be
her own. Charity bears all things, 7
believes all things, hops all things, endures all things: For charity
refuses not to do unto others as she desires that others should do unto her.
Tongues shall cease, prophesies shall cease, and sciences shall be destroyed:
But charity shall* not cease; but the imperfection thereof shall be taken
away, and the perfection thereof shall be complete in the life to come. God
commanded two altars to be built in the tabernacle; and fire was carried from
the outward to the inward: God has congregated a twofold Church, a militant
and a triumphant: The fire of love shall at length be translated from the
militant to the triumphant. Think upon these things, O devout soul, and study
after holy love: Whatsoever thy neighbor be, yet he is one for whom Christ
vouchsafed to die: Why then do thou deny to show thy charity to thy
neighbor, when as Christ did not stick to lay down his life for him? Bernard.
If thou love God truly, thou must also love his image. We are all one
spiritual body: Ofiand.
Let us therefore have all one spiritual mind: It is unfit that they should
be at variance upon earth, which must at length live together in heaven.
Whilst our minds agree in Christ, let our wills also be conjoined. We are the
servants of one Lord: It is not fit that we should be at variance. That member
of the body is dead, which has not a sense of another grief: Neither let him
judge himself a member of Christ's mystical body, whosoever does not grieve
with another that suffers. We have all one Father, that is, God, whom Christ
has taught thee daily to call our Father: L. Vives.
And how shall he own thee to be his true son, unless thou again own his
sons to be thy brethren? Love him that is commended unto thee by God, if he
be worthy; because he is worthy: and if he be not worthy, yet love him; because
God is worthy whom thou ought to obey. If thou love a man that is thine
enemy, thou show thy self to be the friend of God. Do not mark what man
does against thee, but what thou have done against God. Observe not the
injuries offered thee by thine enemies; but observe the benefits conferred upon
thee by God, who commands thee to love thine enemy. We are neighbors by the
condition of our earthly nativity, Austine.
and brothers by the hope of our celestial inheritance: Let us therefore love
one another. Kindle in us, O God, the fire of love and charity by thy Spirit!

Meditat. XXXVII. Of the study of chastity.
The soul that is chaste is Christ his spouse,
His bed of rest, his lodging-house.
HE that will be the true disciple of Christ, must study to be chaste and holy.
Our most gracious God is a pure and chaste Spirit: And thou must call upon him
with chaste prayers. It was the saying of a wise man, Berosus.
That the chastity of the body and the sanctity of the soul are the two keys
of religion and felicity. If the body be not kept pure and immaculate from
whoredom, the soul cannot be ardent in prayer. ^.Cor. 6.19.
Our body is the temple of the holy Ghost: We must beware therefore, and be
very careful that we pollute not this holy habitacle of the holy Ghost. Our
members are the members of Christ: 15
We must beware that we take not the members of Christ and make them the
members of an harlot. Let us cleave unto the Lord by faith and chastity; 17
that we may be one spirit with him: Let us not cleave unto an harlot; that we
be not made one body with her. 16 Genesis 19.11.
The Sodomites burning with lust were smitten by the Lord with blindness
corporal and spiritual: And such is the punishment of unchaste men even unto
this day. The Sodomites lust was punished with fire and brimstone* falling down
from heaven: So God shall inflame the heat of this evil concupiscence in
whoredoms with everlasting fire. This fire is not to be extinguished: Rev.
14.11. Rev. 22.15.
But the smoke of the torments ascends up for ever and ever: Without, that
is, without the heavenly Jerusalem, are dogs, that is impure and lustful men.
Christ has washed us with his precious blood in baptism: And therefore we
must beware, and be careful that we do not defile our selves with filthy lust.
Even nature her self has taught men to blush and to be ashamed to commit such
filthiness in the sight of men: And yet they are not ashamed to commit it in
the sight of God and his angels. No walls can hinder God from seeing; for his
eyes are brighter then the sun: No angles, or corners can exclude the
presence of the holy angels: No secret turnings can keep away the testimony of
the conscience. This is a wonderful thing, That the heat of lust should ascend
up into heaven, Granat.
when the stink thereof descends even unto hell. This short pleasure shall
bring forth everlasting sorrow: Beda.
That which delights is momentany, but that which tormenteth is everlasting:
The pleasure of fornication is short, but the punishment of the fornicatour is
for ever. Let the memory of him that was crucified crucify in thee thy flesh.
Bernard.
Let the remembrance of hell quench in thee the heat of concupiscence. Let the
tears of repentance extinguish in thee the fire of lust. Let the fear of God
wound thy flesh, that the love of the flesh deceive thee not: Consider with thy
self that the appetite of lust is full of anxietie and folly; the act full of
abomination and ignominy; and the end full of repentance and shame. Look not
upon the fawning face of the devil inciting thee to lust, but look back upon
his tail, when he flies, which is full of pricks. Think not upon the shortness
of the pleasure; but rather think upon the eternity of the punishment. Hierome*
Love the knowledge of the Scriptures; and then thou will not love the vices of
the flesh. Be always doing somewhat, that the tempter when he comes may find
thee busied. 2. Sam 11.2. Genesis 39.8.
He deceived David when he was idle: He could not deceive Joseph; for he was
busied in his masters service. Think every hour that death is at hand; and
thou will easily despise all the pleasure of the flesh. Love temperance; and
thou shall easily overcome evil concupiscence. The belly set on fire with wine,
does presently some with lust. Amidst thy dainties thy chastity is in danger:
If therefore thou feedest thy flesh daintily and immoderately, thou nourishest
thine own enemy. So feed thy flesh, that it may serve thee: keep it so under,
Hugo.
that it be not proud. Think upon the terror of the last judgment, and thou
shall easily extinguish the fire of lust: For at the day of judgment the
secrets of the heart shall be revealed; 1. Cor. 4.5
and then how much more those things that are done in secret? Matt. 12.36.
Thou must give an account for unprofitable words: And how much more then for
filthy speeches? Thou must give an account for filthy speeches: How much more
then for impure actions? As long as thy life has been, Bernard.
so long shall thy accusation be: As many as thy sins have been, so many
shall thy accusers be. Those thoughts which men make no reckoning of, shall
come to judgment: What then does it profit thee to have thy fornication for a
time concealed from men, seeing that it must be revealed in the sight of all
men at the day of judgment? What does it profit thee to escape the
judgment seat of an earthly judge, seeing that thou can not escape the
judgment seat of the supreme judge? This judge thou can not corrupt with
gifts; for he is a most just judge: This judge thou can not move with
prayers; for he is a most severe judge: This judge his province and
jurisdiction thou can not flee from; for he is a most powerful judge: Him
thou can not deceive with vain excuses; for he is a most wise judge: From his
broad and proclaimed sentence thou can not appeal; for he is the supreme
judge. There shall be truth in the inquisition, Bonavent.
nakedness in the publication, and severitie in the execution. Therefore, O
soul devout toward God, let the fear of this judge be always before thine
eyes; and the fire of lust shall not deceive thee. Be thou the rose of
charity, the violet of humility, Bernard.
and the lilie of chastity. Matt. 11.29.
Learn humility of Christ thy bridegroom, and of him learn also chastity.
Erasmus.
Great is the dignity of chastity, which was consecrated in the body of
Christ: Great is the dignity of chastity; because whiles we are in the flesh
it makes us to live as out of the flesh. As nothing is more vile then to be
overcome of the flesh: So nothing is more glorious then to overcome the flesh.
Neither must we only avoid outward fornication, but also impure cogitations:
Because God is judge, not only of the outward acts, but also of the inward
thoughts. Piety is often wounded by the looks, and chastity is often wounded
by the eyes: Hear what truth it self says: He that looks upon a woman to
lust after her, Mat. 5.28.
has already committed adultery with her in his heart. As the fight is
difficult: Bernard.
So shall the victory also be glorious. It is a difficult thing to quench the
flaming fires of lust. Lust incites them that are not yet come to the years of
youth; it inflames those that are young; and it wearieth those that are old and
decrepit: It despises not cottages, neither does it reverence palaces. But as
difficult as it is here to fight, so laudable shall it be hereafter to triumph.
The first sparks are presently to be quenched; and we must not add fuel to
the fire of evil concupiscences. The Apostle, when he reckons up the vices with
which we must strive, Camerar.
bids us not fight with fornication, but flee from it: Flee, says he, ^. Cor.
6.18.
from fornication: For even as a stranger feigning simplicity comes to us like
a beggar to deceive us: if we deny him entrance, he goes his way; if we
receive him in, he becomes our guest, and gathers strength: and at length, if
we consent, he becomes our lord and master: So the motions of evil
concupiscence assail us: if we foster them not, they depart away; if thou
would not have this enemy to rule over thee, receive him not into the house
of thy heart. Keep us, O God, in sanctity of life, and chastity of body!

Meditat. XXXVIII. Of the flitting swiftness of this present life.
The life of man's a rolling stone,
Moved to and fro, and quickly gone.
THink, O devout soul, upon the misery and brevitie of this life, that thy
heart may be lifted up to the desire of the celestial inheritance. This life
whiles it increases, it decreaseth; whiles it is augmented, it is diminished:
Whatsoever is added to it, is also taken from it. Seneca.
It is but a point of time that we live, yea it is yet less then a point:
Whilst we turn our selves, immortality comes upon us. We are in this life, as
in a strange house: Abraham had not in the land of Canaan a place to dwell in;
Genesis 23.4
but only an hereditarie place for burial: So this present life is like unto
an inn, and to a burying-place. The beginning of this life is presently the
beginning of death. Ambrose. Gregor.
Our life is like unto him that saileth; for whether he stand, sit, or lie
down, still he comes nearer and nearer unto the have^, and goes thither,
whither he is carried by the motion of the ship: So also we, whether we sleep,
or wake, lie down or walk, will or nill, are carried still moment after moment
till we come to our end. This life is rather a death; because every day we die:
Bernard.
For every day we spend some of our life. This life is full of grief for things
past, full of labor for things present, and full of fear for things to come.
Austine.
Our ingresse into this life is lamentable; because the infant begins his life
with tears, as it were foreseeing the evils to come: Our progress is weak;
because many diseases afflict us, and many cares torment us: Our egresse is
horrible; because we do not depart alone, ^evel. 14.^3.
but our works follow us, and we must pass from death to Gods severe
judgment. Heb. 9.27 Bernard.
We are conceived in sin, we are brought forth in misery, we live in pain,
and we die in anguish. We are begotten in uncleanness, we are nourished in
darkness, and brought forth in sorrow. Before we come forth, we are a burden
to our wretched mothers; and when we do come forth, we do like vipers tear a
way. Austine.
We are strangers in our birth, and pilgrims in our life; because we are
compelled to depart away by death. The first part of our life is ignorant of it
self; the middle part is overwhelmed with cares; and the last part is burdened
with grievous old age. All the time of our life is either present, past, or to
come. If it be present, it is flitting; if it be past, it is then nothing; if
it be to come, it is then uncertain. Sol. Salam.
We are filthiness in our original, we are bubbles in our life, and we are meat
for worms at our death. From earth we come, on earth we go, to earth we must
return. The necessity of our birth is base, our life miserable, and our death
lamentable. Sidonius.
Our body is an earthly house in which do dwell together sin and death, which
every day consume it. All our life is a spiritual warfare. Above, devils lie
in wait for our destruction: On the right hand and on the left, the world
oppugnes us: Beneath and within, the flesh fights against us. The life of man
is a warfare: Because in this life, Gal. 5.17.
there is a continual fight between the flesh and the spirit. What true joy
then can a man have in this life, when there is in it no certain felicity?
What thing present can delight us, when other things do pass away, but that
which hangs over our heads, does never pass away? And again what can delight
us, when that which we love is quite ended, and grief that shall never have
end, does approach still nearer unto us? This is all we gain by long life:
Nazia^z.
To do more evil, to see more evil, and to suffer more evil. This is all that
long life does for us: It makes our accusation the greater at the last
judgment. What is man? The slave of death, and as a passenger on the way: He
is lighter then a bubble, shorter then a moment, more vain then an image, more
empty then a sound, more brittle then glass, more changeable then the wind,
more flitting then a shadow, and more deceitful then a dream. Bapt. Mant.
What is this life? The expectation of death, the stage of mockeries, the sea
of miseries, an hemine or phial of blood which every light fall breaks, and
every fit of an ague corrupts. The course of our life is a labyrinth; we
enter into it when we come out of the womb, and we go out of it by the passage
of death. Ware naught but earth, and earth is but a fume:
A fume is naught, as naught do we consume.
This life is frail as glass, is sliding as a river, is miserable as a
warfare: And yet it seems to many much to be desired. This life seems outwardly
as a gilded nut: Gregory*
But if thou openest it with the knife of truth, thou shall see that within
there is nothing but worms and rottenness. There are apples growing about
Sodom, which are pleasing for outward beauty: But being touched they fall to
dust. The felicity of this life does outwardly delight; but if thou pressest
it with a more weighty consideration, it will appear to be like unto smoke and
dust. Therefore, O beloved soul, do not suffer thy cogitations to set up their
rest in this life: But let thy mind always pant and breathe after the joys
to come. Compare the short moment of time granted unto us in this life, with
eternity which never shall have end: and it will appear what a foolish thing
it is to cleave unto this life that flitteth away, and to neglect that which is
everlasting. This life of ours posteth away: And yet in it do we either get or
lose everlasting life. This life is most miserable: And yet in it do we either
get or lose everlasting life. This life is subject to many calamities: And yet
in it do we either get or lose everlasting joy. If therefore thou hopest for
life everlasting: in this flitting life desire it with all thy heart. Use the
world; but let not thy heart cleave to the world: Negotiate in this world; but
fix not thy mind upon this present life: The outward use of worldly things
hurts not, unless thy inward affection cleave unto them. Heaven is thy
country; the world is but the place of thy sojourning: Be not so much
delighted with the momentanie entertainment of this world, as to have thy mind
withdrawn from the desire after thy heavenly country. This life is our sea;
but eternity is our haven: Be not therefore so much delighted with the
momentanie tranquillity of this sea, as that thou can not attain to the haven
of everlasting tranquillity. This life is sliding, and does not keep faith with
her lovers, but does often flee from them when they never think of it: Why
therefore will thou trust it* It is very dangerous for thee to promise unto thy
self security for one hour: For oftenti^es in that one posting hour this l^^e
is ended. The safest way then is, to expect our departure out of this present
life every hour, and to prepare our selves for it by serious repentance. In
the gourd wherewith Jonas was delighted, Jon. 4.7.
God prepared a worm that it might wither: So in these worldly things,
whereunto many cleave so fast, as if they were glewed to them, there is no
certainty; but the worms of corruption do breed in them. Austine.
The world is now so worn away with a long consumption, that it has even lost
the face by which it was wont to seduce: And therefore they that delight to
perish with the world now perishing are as much to be blamed and condemned, as
they are to be praised and commended, that flourished with the world then
flourishing. Withdraw, O Christ, our hearts from the love of this world, and
stir up in us a des^^^ after the kingdom of heaven!

Meditat. XXXIX. Of the worlds vanity.
Love not the world: The world is vain:
But love those things that ay remain.
1. John 2.15.
SEt not thy love, O devout soul, upon those things which are in the world: 1.
Cor. 7.31. 2. Pet. 3.10.
The world shall pass away, and all the things therein shall be consumed with
fire: Where shall thy love be then? Love that good which is everlasting; that
so thou may live for ever. Romans 8.20.
Every creature is subject to vanity: Whosoever therefore cleaves with his
love unto the creatures, shall also become vain himself. Love that good which
is true and stable; that thy heart may be quieted and established. Why does
worldly honor delight thee? He that seeks the honor of men, John 5.44.
cannot be honored by God. He that seeks the honor of the world, must be
conformed unto the world: and he that pleases the world, Gal. 1.10.
cannot please God. All things are un^^able and must perish, whatsoever are
given by those that are unstable and do perish: How then can the honor of the
world be stable? He that was yesterday extolled to the skies by the praises of
men, is brought down again to morrow with disgrace. Desire therefore to please
God; that thou may be honored of God: For that is the true and stable
honor. Kempis.
What is a man the better for being reputed great by man? If a man be great in
the sight of God, then is he great indeed, not otherwise. Christ being sought
for to take a kingdom, Joh. 6.15.
fled from it; but being sought for to be reproched, and to be ignominiously
crucified, he offered himself: Joh. 18.5. Bernard.
Delight therefore rather in the disgrace then the glory of the world; that so
thou may be conformed unto Christ. He that does not despise the world for
Christ, how would he lay down his life for him? There is no way to true glory
but by contemning the glory of the world: Luke 24.26.
for so Christ entered into his glory, by the ignominy of the cross. Be
content therefore to be despised, to be vilified, and to be rejected in this
world; that thou may be honored in the world to come. Christ taught us by
his life how we should esteem of the world. Bernard.
All the glory of the heavens serves him, yea he alone is even glory it self:
And yet he rejected worldly glory. Therefore the more a man is honored, and
the more he abounds in bodily consolations; the more deeply and inwardly must
he become sorrowful, that he is so far from being conformable unto Christ.
Vain is the praise of man, Kempis.
if an evil conscience accuses within: What does it profit a man sick of a
fever, if he be laid in a bedsted of ivorie, when as notwithstanding he is
tormented with raging heat within? It is the testimony of thy conscience that
is the true honor and praise indeed. There is no juster judge of thy doings,
then God and thine own conscience: Desire to approve thy deeds before this
judgment. Is it not enough for thee to be known of thy self, and, which is
most of all, to be known of God? But why do thou so much covet after riches?
Bernard.
He is too covetous unto whom the Lord is not sufficient. This life is the way
to our eternal country: What then do much riches profit? They do rather
burden the traveller, as great burdens do a ship. Christ the king of heaven is
the riches of Gods servants. L. Vives.
The true treasure must be within a man, and not without him. Kempis.
That is the true treasure which thou can carry with thee to the general
judgment: But all these outwaad goods are taken from us in death. The goods
gathered together do perish; Bernard.
but first he that gathered them does perish, unless he be rich in the Lord.
Poor thou came into the world, Job 1.21.
and poor must thou go out: And why should the middle differ from the
beginning and the end? Dionys.
Riches are appointed for our use: And how few will be sufficient! A little
gift of grace and virtues is better then all earthly riches. Wherefore? Because
virtue pleases God, but riches do not please him without virtue. The poverty
of Christ must be more acceptable unto us, Bernard.
then the riches of the whole world. Poverty was sanctified through Christ. He
was poor in his nativitie, poor in his life, and poorest of all at his death.
Why do thou stick then to prefer poverty before worldly riches, when as
Christ preferred it before heavenly riches? How will he commit his soul unto
God, who does not commit unto him the care of his body? How will he lay down
his life for his brother, who does not bestow his riches upon him? Riches bring
forth labor in the getting, fear in the possessing, and grief in the loosing:
And, which is most to be lamented, the labor of the covetous does not only
perish, but it causes them also to perish, as Bernard teaches. Thy love is
thy God: Mat. 6.21.
Where thy treasure is, there will thy heart be also: He that loves these
bodily, worldly, and perishing riches, cannot love the spiritual, heavenly,
and eternal riches. Wherefore? Because those press down the heart of man, and
draw it downwards; but these lift it upwards. Austine.
The love of earthly things is as the birdlime of spiritual punishments, as
one of the true lovers of Christ said. Genesis 19.26.
Lots wife which was turned into a pillar of salt does yet preach unto us, Not
to look back to those things which are in the world; but to go straight on to
our heavenly country. Mat. 4.22.
The Apostles left all and followed Christ. Wherefore? Because the knowledge of
the true riches takes away the desire after false riches. If we have tasted
the Spirit, Gregory.
the flesh pleases not our taste. If Christ be sweet to a man's taste, then the
world is bitter unto it. But why do thou so much seek after pleasures? Let
the remembrance of him that was crucified, crucify in thee all desire of
pleasure. Let the remembrance of hellfire quench in thee all the fire of lust.
Compare the short moment of pleasure with eternal punishments. Pleasures are
brutish, and they make us like brutes. Bernard.
The sweetness of the kingdom of heaven pleases not his taste, that is daily
full with the husks of the swine. Granat.
Let us mortify all sensual pleasures, and let us with Abraham offer to God
as a spiritual sacrifice this our beloved son, Genesis 22.3.
that is, the concupiscences of our soul, by renouncing voluntarily all
pleasure, and by embracing the bitterness of the cross. It is not a plain way
strewed with roses, but a sharp way and set with thorns, that leads unto the
kingdom of heaven. The outward man increases by pleasures; but the inward man
by the cross, and by tribulations. As much as the outward man is augmented, so
much is the inward man diminished. Pleasures serve the body; but the true
godly have least care of their body, and the greatest care of their soul.
Pleasures do captivate our hearts that they cannot be free in the love of God.
Not pleasures, but the contempt of pleasures at death shall thou carry away
with thee, and bring to judgment: Let the fear of God then wound thy flesh;
that the love of the flesh deceive thee not. Bernard.
Keep always in thy mind the memory of Gods ju^gement; that the perverse
judgment of thy sensual appetite lead thee not into bondage. Look not upon
the flattering face of the serpent; but look back upon his stinging tail.
Overcome thou by the grace of Christ; that at length thou may as conqueror
be crowned by Christ.

Meditat. XL. Of the profit of tentations.
The palm tree grows the more pressed down,
And crosses prove the Churches crown.
IT is profitable for the faithful soul, to be tried and confirmed by
tentations in this world: Our Savior himself would wrestle with the devil in
the wilderness, Matt. 4.1.
that for us and for our salvation he might overcome him, and be the first
champion in our quarrel. He descended first into hell, and afterward ascended
up into heaven: So the faithful soul does first descend into the hell of
tentations; that so it may ascend into celestial glory. Josh. 23.
The people of Israel could not come to possess the promised land of Canaan,
before they had overcome diverse enemies: Neither can the faithful soul promise
unto it self the kingdom of heaven, until it has overcome the flesh, the
world, and the devil. Tentation proves, Di^nys*
purges, and enlighteneth us. Tentation proves us: For faith shaken by
adversity is confirmed more strongly in the rock of salvation, it enlarges it
self more into the boughs of good works, and rises up higher unto the hope of
deliverance. Genesis 22.10.
When Abraham being commanded to sacrifice his son, showed himself ready to
obey Gods command: after the tentation the angel of the Lord appeared unto him,
saying, 12.
Now know I that thou fear God, seeing that for my sake thou have not spared
thine only son. Even so in tentations if thou shall offer unto God the
beloved son of thy soul, that is, thine own will, thou shall be reputed one
that truly fears God, and thou shall in thine heart hear God speaking unto
thee. Fire proves gold, and tentation proves faith. The soldiers valor is
seen in the fight: And the strength of our faith appears in tentations. When
the whirling winds and the stormy waves beat upon the ship of Christ, Mat.
8.24.26. Judge. 7.4.
then it appears of how little* faith some of the disciples are. The
Israelites whom God commanded to be led forth to overcome the Midianites, were
first proved at the waters: So they which are to be admitted into their
heavenly country after the conquest of their enemies, are first to be proved
in the waters of tribulations and tentations. Whatsoever adversity therefore,
whatsoever tentations happen unto the faithful soul; let her think with her
self that they are for trial and not for denial. Bernard.
Tentation also purges. To purge out the pestilent humor of self-love, and
the love of the world, Christ our Physician uses many grains of bitter Aloes.
Tribulation sends us to search our conscience, and recalls to our memory the
sins of our life past: And further, as Physic preserves the body from
contagious diseases: So also does tribulation preserve the soul from sins.
Man is always prone to sin: But more in time of prosperity then in
adversity. Matt. 13.22.
Riches are thorns to many men: Therefore God plucks out the thorns; that they
may not choke their souls. Variety of worldly business hinders many from
the service of God: Therefore God sends diseases upon them; that they may
come to themselves, and begin to die to the world, and to live to God.

Some men have tumbled down the hill of great prosperity:
And have enjoyed truest rest in their adversity.
The honor of the world puffs men up with pride: Therefore God brings them
into contempt, and withdraws from them the fuel of pride. Last of all,
Tentation enlighteneth. We come not to know the frailty and vanity of all
worldly comfort, but by tentations. Acts 7.56.
Stephen when he was stoned, saw the glory of Christ: So Christ manifests
himself unto the contrite soul, in calamities. There is no true and solid joy
but where God dwells; and Gods dwelling is in the contrite and humbled
spirit. Isa. 57.15.
Affliction it is and tentation which humbles the spirit, and makes it
contrite: Therefore true and solid joy is in the soul of the afflicted.
Tentation is the way to come to the knowledge of God: Therefore the Lord says,
Psalm. 61.16.
I will be with him in trouble, I will deliver him, and make him see my
salvation. 16.
Blind Tobie saw nothing either above him, beneath him, or before him, and
therefore he saw not himself: But being enlightened of God by the angel Raphael,
he saw all things, which before he could not see, using no other medicine but
the gall of a fish: Tob. 6.8.
To show, that our eyes are to be anointed with the gall of bitterness; that
so we may be enlightened, and come to the true knowledge of our selves and
worldly things. Why says the Apostle, that we know but in a glass? Because in
tentations we come to know that God makes the elect joyful under the show of
sorrow, 1. Cor. 13.12.
and quickens them under the show of death, and heals them under the show
of sickness, and enricheth them under the show of poverty. Therefore must the
cross and tentation be welcome unto him, Bernard.
whosoever is not unthankful to Christ who was crucified and tempted for us. O
good Jesus! Let me be burned here, let me be smitten here, that I may be spared
hereafter! O good Jesus! Thou which do often cast us off from thee by sparing
us, make us to return unto thee by striking us! Afflict and press the outward
man; that the inward man may grow and increase! O good Jesus! Fight within me,
against me: Be thou the moderatour of the fight, and the crown of my victory!
Whatsoever adversity I feel in this life, Greg. Nyss.
let it tend to the strengthening and increasing of my faith! O good Jesus!
Help my weak faith! For so thou have promised by thy holy prophet: As a mother
comfort her children, so will I comfort you: Isa. 66.13. Weller.
As a mother cherishes and nourishes her sucking infant with much care: So do
thou (O good Jesus) erect and confirm my languishing faith! Grant that thy
inward comforts may prevail more with me then the contradictions of all men and
the devil himself, yea and the cogitations of mine own heart! O thou good
Samaritane, pour* Luke 10* 34.
the sharp wine into the wounds made by my sins, but pour in also the oil of
divine comfort! Multiply my crosses, but give me also strength to endure them!

Meditat. XLI. Here are foundations of Christian patience.
Take up thy cross do but endure:
To overcome thou shall be sure.
BE quiet, O devout soul, and endure with patience the cross which God has
laid upon thee: Consider the passion of Christ thy bridegroom. He suffered for
all, of all, and in all. He suffered for all, yea even for them, which despise
his precious passion, and wickedly trample his blood under their feet. Heb.
10.29.
He suffered of all. He is delivered, he is broken in pieces, he is forsaken of
his heavenly Father, Matt. 26.56.
he is forsaken of his disciples, he is rejected of the Jews his own peculiar
people: For they preferred Barabbas the thief before him: Matt. 27.21.
He is crucified of the Gentiles. He suffers for the sins of all men: And
therefore he is afflicted of all men. He suffered also in all: Matt. 26.38.
His soul was sorrowful even unto death, and being pressed with the sense and
feeling of Gods anger, cries out that he was forsaken of God: Matt. 27.46.
All the members of his body are in a bloody sweat: His head is crowned with
thorns: 29.34. Psalm. 22.16. John 19.34.
His tongue tastes a cup of gall and vinegar, his hands and feet are boared
with nails, his side is wounded, his whole body is scourged, and he is
stretched forth on the cross: He suffered hunger, thirst, cold, contempt,
poverty, reproaches, wounds, death, and the cross: And then how unjust a thing
were it for the servant to rejoice, when the Lord suffers! How unjust were it
that we should rejoice in our sins, when our Savior is so grievously
punished for them! How unjust were it that the other members should not
condole, when the head is afflicted! But rather it is necessary that we enter
through many tribulations into the kingdom of heaven: Acts 14.22.
as it was necessary that our Savior should by his passion enter into
celestial glory. Luke 24.26. Romans 8.18
Consider also the bountiful reward: The sufferings of this present life are
not worthy of the glory which shall be revealed unto us. How great soever our
suffering is; it is but temporal, yea sometimes but for a day: But the glory
is everlasting. God does exactly observe all our adversities, and will at
length bring them to judgment: Eccles 12.14.
How disgraceful a thing then will it be at the general assembly of the whole
world, to appear without the jewels and bracelets of the cross, and passions!
Isa. 25.8. Rev. 7.17.
He shall wipe away all tears from the eyes of those that are his: O happy
tears, which shall be wiped away by the hand of such a great Lord! Dionys.
O happy cross, that shall find a crown in heaven! David was not ten whole
years in his exile, but he was forty in his kingdom: 2. Sam. 5.5
Here we have the shortness of our suffering prefigured, and the eternity of
the glory which is to follow. It is but a moment of time wherein the Saints
are exercised by the cross: But the mercies by which they are comforted are
for ever. And thus after adversity in the morning, follows prosperity in the
evening. Consider also the tribulation of all the Saints. Job 2.8. Matt. 3.4.
Behold Job mourning on the dunghill, John hungry in the wilderness, Peter
stretched out upon the cross, James beheaded of Herod with the sword! Behold
Mary the blessed mother of our Savior standing under the cross! John 19.25.
She was the type of the Church the spiritual mother of our Lord. Blessed are
ye, says Christ, Matthew. 5.11, 12.
when men shall persecute you for my names sake: For so have they done to the
Prophets. O glorious persecution which makes us conformable unto the Prophets
and Apostles, and all the Saints, and even unto Christ himself! Maca^.
Let us therefore suffer with those that suffer, let us be crucified with those
that are crucified, that we may be glorified with those that are glorified. If
we be true sons indeed, let us not refuse the condition of the rest of our
brethren. If we truly desire the inheritance of God, let us accept it wholly:
For the sons of God are not only heirs of joy and glory in the world to
come, but also of heaviness and sufferings in this present world. Heb. 12.6.
For God scourges every son whom he receives: He punishes their sins
here, that he may spare them at the judgment to come: He multiplies
tribulations here, that he may multiply their reward hereafter: And so not
only the persecution, but the reward also is increased. Consider the happy
condition of the cross. Bernard.
It plucks the love of the world out of us by the roots, but it sows in our
hearts the seed of the love of God. The cross begets in us an hate of worldly
things, and lifts up our mind unto heavenly things. When the flesh is
mortified, the spirit is quickened; and when the world waxes bitter, Christ
becomes sweet unto us. Great is the mystery of the cross, for by it God
calls us to contrition, to true fear, and to the exercise of our patience. Let
us open to him when he knocks, and we shall hear what the Lord will say
within us. The sight of the cross is contemptible in the sight of the world,
and in the carnal eyes of the outward man: But it is glorious in the sight of
God, and in the spiritual eyes of the inward man. What was reputed by the Jews
more base and vile then the passion of Christ? And what was more glorious and
precious in the sight of God? For it was the price paid for the sins of the
whole world: 1. John 2.2.
Even so the just man is afflicted; the just man dies, and no man considers
it: Isa. 57.1.
But precious is the cross, Psalm. 116.15.
and precious is the death of the Saints in the sight of the Lord. The church
which is the spouse of Christ, is black without, Cant. 1.5.
by reason of calamities and persecutions: But she is beautiful within, by
reason of divine consolation. The Church and every faithful soul is as a
garden enclosed, 4.12.
and none knows the beauty thereof but he that is in it. We shall never fully
and perfectly feel the consolation of the spirit, unless our flesh be
afflicted without. If the love of the world dwells in us, the love of God
cannot enter in. A full vessel cannot be filled with new liquour, unless the
first be emptied. Let us therefore pour out the love of the world, that we may
be filled with the love of God. Therefore God by the cross does extinguish in
us the love of the world, that there may be room for the love of God. Besides,
the cross drives us to our prayers, and is an occasion of virtue. When the
North-winde blows upon the garden, Cant. 4.16.
that is, when persecutions assault the Church, then the spices thereof are
scattered abroad, and the virtues thereof are increased, and they cast forth an
odor pleasing unto God. The beloved bridegroom of my soul is white and ruddy;
5.10.
white for his innocence, and ruddie for his passion: And so is also the
beloved spouse of Christ; white for her virtues, and ruddie for her sufferings.
And thus the grace of God can produce oil and honey out of the most hard rock of
afflictions: And so, out of the bitter root of calamities God knows how to
bring forth the most pleasant fruit of eternal glory. Unto which he bring us
and admit us! Amen.

Meditat. XLII. How we must overcome tentations by perseverance.
Let not tentations cast thee down:
For perseverance shall thee crown.
HOly Lord Jesus, the most loving bridegroom of my soul! when will the time
come that thou will lead me to the solemnity of thy marriage? Rev. 19.7. Psalm.
39.12.
I am a pilgrim and a banished man from thee: But yet I most firmly believe and
nothing doubt, but that I shall be shortly set at liberty out of the prison of
my body, and appear before thy face. Psalm. 55.5.
Fear and trembling are come upon me; because I carry my treasure in vessels of
clay: 2. Cor. 4.7
My mind is prone to error, and my will is prone to sin; and therefore my
spirit within me is not always ready, Matt. 26.41.
but the flesh is always weak. Sin leads me captive, and the law of my
members is repugnant to the law of my mind. Romans 7.23.
Fear and trembling are come upon me; Psalm. 55.5.
because Satan lies in wait for my treasure: His subtlety is great, his
desire to hurt is most earnest, and his power is exceeding great. He deceived
Adam in paradise, Genesis 3. John 13.27.
and Judas in our Saviors school: And how then shall I be safe from his
treacheries? Fear and trembling are come upon me, Psalm. 55.5. 1. John 5.19.
because I am still in the world, which is altogether set upon wickedness: The
delights of the world entice me, adversities in the way of the Lord affright
me, sometimes the enticements of the world are pleasing unto me, and all the
world is full of snares: Miserable man that I am! how shall I be able to escape
them? Joys do assault me, and sorrows do assault me: Miserable man! how shall
I be able to stand? Fear and trembling are come upon me, Psalm. 55.5. Phil. 2.13.
because it is God that works in me both to will and to perfect. I am afraid
lest I should force God, by my negligence and want of care, to take from me
that good will which he has given me. I make not a right use of remission of
sins, and I refuse the first grace which was given freely: And therefore I
have cause to fear, lest God in his secret and just judgment justly take from
me that which I have unjustly abused. I am afraid lest I be forsaken of him,
whom after my first conversion I have so often forsaken. How grievously am I
vexed when I consider, that the heavy and severe judgment of God shall follow
after his benefits, if I make not a right use of them! But the infinite mercy
of God raises me up; because as he has given me to will, he will also give
unto me to perfect; for he is God and is not changed: His mercy also is
confirmed toward me, Psalm. 117.2.
and shall not be changed: 2. Tim. 2.16.
The foundation of God is sure; sure indeed, because it is in God, in whom
there is no change: Jam. 1.17.
Sure indeed, because it is confirmed by the blood of Christ, Heb. 12.24.
which always speaks loud before the throne of God: Sure indeed, because it
is signed with the sure seals of the Sacraments. If I should seek never so
little salvation in my self, I must needs doubt of my salvation: But as all my
righteousness is in Christ, so in him also is all the hope of my salvation. If
I had apprehended and laid hold upon Christ of mine own free will, I might yet
fear, lest my will should change, and so I should loose Christ: But he that was
found of him that sought him not, will not assuredly withdraw himself again
after he is once found. He that has translated me out of the shadow of death
unto the participation of light, Luke 1.79
will not suffer me to return again unto my former darkness. Romans 11.26.
The gifts of God are without repentance, and our vocation by God, as
concerning the will of God: But I could wish that even I also were unchangeable
in that which is good. That treasure is always present; but the hand that
should apprehend it does sometimes languish: But I shall be able to apprehend
Christ; because as he has revealed himself unto me in his word and promises,
so likewise he will grant unto me of his goodness that I may believe his word
and promises. I will use the help and support of prayer to strengthen my faith,
and I will not suffer the Lord to depart out of the chamber of my heart, until
I have obtained salvation. 1. Pet. 1.5.
By the power of the Lord I shall be able to be preserved unto salvation: The
power of the Lord does lift me up and comfort me, but mine own infirmity does
cast me down and make me sorrowful. 2. Cor. 12.9.
But the power of the Lord shall be perfected in my weakness: He shall
strengthen me, from whom comes all the strength of my faith: The grace of God
does lift me up, but mine unworthiness does cast me down: But if there were
any worthiness in me, then it were no grace, but a reward. If of works, Romans
11.6 Austine.
then certainly not of grace: For grace is not any way grace unless it be
every way gratis. Therefore have I no respect unto my works: Bernard.
That which is amiss, he will amend; that which is wanting, he will make up;
that which he will not impute against me, shall be as if it were not. Therefore
is my salvation only from God, Hos. 1.39.
and therefore sure.

Meditat. XLIII. That we must think daily upon our death.
Think every day to be thy last*
And when night comes, thy life is past.
O Faithful soul, look for death every hour: Because it waits for thee every
hour. In the morning when thou risest, O man, think that it is thy last day:
And in the evening when thou go to bed, think that it is thy last night upon
earth. Whatsoever thou do, whatsoever thou go about, look about thee, and
consider with thy self first, whether thou would do such things or no, if
thou should die that hour, and so go to Gods judgment: What! Do thou
think that death does not approach, because thou think not of it? or do
thou think that it draws nearer, because thou think upon it? whether thou
think upon it or no, whether thou speak of it or no, it hangs always
over thy head. Life was lent unto thee, not given as a freehold. Upon this
condition thou did enter in, that thou should go out: Job 1.21.
Naked thou came, and naked thou must go. This life is a pilgrimage: when
thou have traveled a good while, then thou must return home again. Thou art
but a farmer and tenant in this world, and not a perpetual lord: Every hour
think with thy self whither thou hastenest every moment. In this we are
deceived, in that we think we die then, when we breathe out our last: Every
day, every hour, every moment we die: Whatsoever is added unto our life is
taken from it, and as it increases it also decreaseth: we fall not into death
suddenly, but walk into it step after step. This life of ours is a way, and
every day we must rid some of it: Life and death seem to be most distant, but
they are as near as near can be: For one passes away, and the other comes
on. As it is with those that travel by sea, they oftentimes come to the haven,
and yet they neither feel, nor so much as think whither they are carried: So
likewise it is with us: whatsoever we do, whether we eat, drink, or sleep, we
draw nearer always to our death. Many have passed away their life, even in the
time whiles they were seeking after things belonging to the sustentation of
this life. No man entertains death joyfully, unless he has long before
prepared himself for it. In this life die daily unto thy self; that so in death
thou may live unto God. Before thou die, let thy sins die in thee: In thy
life time let the old Adam die in thee: So at thy death Christ shall live in
thee. In thy life time let the outward man daily decay, that at thy death the
inward man may be renewed in thee. 2. Cor. 4.16.
Death translateth thee from time to eternity: for as the tree falls, so it
lies: Eccles 11.3.
How carefully then ought we to think upon the hour of death! Time passes
away, but the infinite space of eternity remains behind: In time therefore
make thy self ready for eternity. What we shall be for ever, whether blessed
or miserable, it shall be decreed at the hour of death: In that one moment, is
eternal felicity either enjoyed or lost. Wherefore, O faithful soul, how
solicitous and careful ought thou to be in preparing thy self for that
hour! Thou will easily contemn all worldly things, if thou considerest with
thy self that thou must die: Consider that thine eyes shall be darkened in
death; and thou will easily turn away thine eyes from beholding vanity: Psalm.
119.37.
Consider that thy ears shall wax deaf at thy death; and it shall be easy for
thee to stop thy ears against impious and filthy speeches: Consider that thy
tongue shall be tied at thy death; and thou will have more regard unto thy
words: Set before thine eyes the cold sweat and anxietie of those that are
ready to die; and thou will easily contemn all worldly delights: Look upon the
nakedness of them that depart out of this world; and poverty in this life
will not seem grievous unto thee: Consider the trembling of the whole body at
the point of death; and thou will easily contemn the splendor of the world:
Consider the mourning of the soul being compelled to go out of the house of the
body; and thou will easily beware of the guilt of all sin: Consider the
corruption that follows after death; and thou will easily bring down thy
proud flesh: Consider how naked thou art left at thy death, being forsaken of
all the creatures; and thou will easily turn away thy love from them, and turn
it toward the Creator: Consider how narrowly death looks to thee, that thou
carry away nothing with thee at thy death; and thou will easily contemn all
the riches of the world: He that in this life dies daily through his sins,
does pass from death temporal unto the punishments of death eternal. No man
is translated unto everlasting life, but he that begins here to live in Christ.
That in death therefore thou may live, be ingrafted into Christ by faith:
Let death be always in thy thoughts; because it is to be expected always.
^rent.
We carry death always about us; because we always carry sin about us, Romans
6.23.
and the wages of sin is death. But if thou would escape the bitterness
of death, keep the word of Christ. Faith does conjoyn and unite us unto Christ:
Therefore they which are in Christ, die not: For Christ is their life. 1. Cor.
6.17.
He that is joined unto God by faith, is one spirit with him: And therefore the
faithful man dies not for ever; because God is his life. Exodus 1^.18.
The people of Israel passed through the Red sea unto the promised land; but
Pharaoh and his host were drowned: So the death of the godly is unto them the
beginning of true life, and the gate of paradise; but the death of the wicked
is not the end of their evils, but it coupleth together those evils which are
past and those that follow after: They pass from the first unto the second
death. Rev. 20.14
So near is the union between Christ and the faithful, Romans 8.38
that death it self cannot dissolve it. In the thickest cloud of death the
torch of Gods grace shines before them: In their dangerous journey Christ
provideth for his beloved the angels to be their protectours. The bodies of the
Saints are the temples of the holy Ghost: 1. Cor. 6.19.
The holy Ghost will not suffer his own temples altogether to be destroyed by
death. 1. Pet. 1.23.
The word of God is the incorruptible seed: It is not destroyed by death; but
it is hid in the hearts of the godly, and shall quicken them in their due time.

Meditat. XLIIII. Consolations at the death of friends.
Grieve not when friends and kinsfolks die:
They gain by death eternity.
THink, O devout soul, upon Christ thy Savior, and thou shall not be afraid
for the terrors of death. If the violence of death does make thee sorrowful,
let the power of Christ make thee joyful. The Israelites could not drink the
waters of Marah by reason of their bitterness; ^xod. 15.^.
but God showed unto Moses a tree, which being cast into the waters made them
sweet. 25.
If thou art affrighted by reason of he bitterness of death, God shows unto
thee a tree which turns it into sweetness; that is, a branch that did spring
from the root of Jesse: Isa. 11.1.
This branch is Christ, and whosoever keeps his word shall never see death.
This life is burdensome: John 8.51. Ambrose.
And therefore it is good to be eased of it. The misery of a Christian dies:
But the Christian man dies not. That which we call death is but going a
journey; it is not an end of life, but a beginning of a better life. Ter. of
patience.
We do not lose our friends at their death, but send them before us; our
friends do not die, but life enjoy; they go before us, they do not go from us
for ever. Cyprian^
It is not death, but a departure: When the godly depart out of this life, they
enter again into life: The death of the godly is gain unto them. Austi^^.
Do our friends die? Make this interpretation of it: That they cease to sin,
they cease to be tossed, and they cease to be miserable. Do they die in the
faith? Interpret that thus: That they depart out of the shadow of life, that
they may pass unto true life; from darkness, to light; and from men, to God.
Our life is a navigation, and death is the haven of security, and safety:
Therefore we must not grieve that our friends are dead; but rather rejoice in
their behalf, that out of the turbulent sea they are come safe to the haven.
This life is the souls imprisonment, but death sets her at liberty: Therefore
old Simeon being about to die, cries out, Lord now let thou thy servant
depart in peace. Luke 2.29.
He desires to be set at liberty, being shut up in the prison of the body: We
must rejoice therefore in the behalf of our friends, that they are as it were
delivered out of prison, and received into true liberty. In like manner the
Apostle desires to be dissolved, Phil. 1.23
as being bound to his body of earth in a kind of miserable servitude. What?
shall we be sorrowful that our friends are delivered out of their bonds and
set at liberty? Cyprian.
What? shall we for their sakes put on black mourning clothes, when as they
have put on white robes? For it is written, that unto the elect are given white
robes, Rev. 7.29.
in token of innocence; and palms in their hands, in token of victory. Shall
we macerate our selves with tears and sighs for their sakes, when as God has
wiped all tears from their eyes? Rev. 7.17.
Shall we mourn and trouble our selves with grief, when as they are in the
place where there is neither mourning, nor grief, Rev. 21.4.
nor any cry heard, Rev. 14.13.
but they rest from their labors? Shall we for their departure kill our selves
with immoderate grief, when as they do enjoy the fellowship of the angels, and
true solid joy? Shall we for their sakes weep and wail, Rev. 15.3.
when as they sing a new song of the Lamb, 2
having harps and golden phials? 7
Shall we grieve that they are departed from the earth, when they themselves
rejoice that they are departed? Cyprian.
What profit it is for to depart out of this world, Christ showed, who when his
disciples were sad, because that he said he should depart, answered, If ye
loved me, John 14.28.
ye would rejoice rather. If as thou were sailing, a stormy tempest should
arise, and the winds lift up the waves, and threaten shipwreck, would not
thou haste to the haven? Behold the world staggereth, and reeleth, and
threatens her ruin not only for her old age, but also by the end of things:
And do not thou thank God, and art not thou glad for thy friends, that being
departed the sooner, they are delivered from ruins, shipwracks, and imminent
plagues? In whose hands art thou kept safer then in the hands of Christ? In
what place can the souls of thy friends rest safer then in the kingdom of
paradise? Hear what the Apostle says concerning death: Phil. 1.21.
Death is gain: It is gain to have escaped the increase of sin; it is gain to
have left the things that are worse, and to have passed to the better. Although
those whom by death thou have lost were very dear unto thee: yet let God be
more dear unto thee, whose will it was to take them unto himself. Be not angry
with the Lord for taking away what he has given: He has received his own, he
has taken nothing from thee. Do not take it ill that the Lord does require
what he did only lend thee: It is only the Lord that foreseeth evils to come:
It was his providence therefore to take away thy friends that they might not be
entangled in the misfortunes to come. Rev. 14.13.
They that die in the Lord rest sweetly in their graves, when those that are
alive are tormented grievously even in the palaces of their kingdom. Bernard.
If by death thou have lost those that were dear unto thee: Believe that thou
shall hereafter receive them more dear unto thee. A little distance of time
does separate thee from them: But blessed and secure eternity shall join thee
again unto them. Austine.
For we hope upon a most true promise, that we shall depart out of this life,
from whence some of our friends are departed before us; and that we shall come
to that life, where the more known the more dear they shall be unto us, and
amiable, without fear of any dissension. What'ever souls have been before, or
shall hereafter be, Bapt. Mant.

Shall be received in the theater of huge capacity.
There shall we know the face of them that of our kindred be,
And speak and answer in our course each interchangeably.
There with the brother sister shall, and son with father be:
And there they shall keep holy day for all eternity.
Therefore think not only upon the time of thy friends forsaking thee, that
is, at their death; but think also upon the time when they shall be restored
again unto thee, that is, at the resurrection. To them that firmly believe the
resurrection, death seems not death, but rather a quiet sleep. The whole
universe seems to be a glass, Tertull.
in which we may behold the resurrection: The sun that sets every night,
rises again in the morning: The herbs that are dead in the winter, shoot up
again in the spring: The Phoenix at her death renews her self again: When
times and seasons are past they return again: After fruits are come to
maturity, still there succeed others: Seeds unless they die and be corrupted,
they rise not again with increase: All things are preserved by perishing, and
generated by corrupting: Shall we think then that God has to no end or purpose
set before us these types in nature? Shall nature be more powerful then God,
who has promised that our bodies shall rise again? Austine.
He that quickneth the grain of the seeds that are dead and rotten, that thou
may live thereby in this world, shall not he much more raise up thee and
thine, that thou may live with them for ever? God has called thy loving
friends unto their beds: Isa. 57.2.
And do not thou envy them their quiet rest: The resurrection will shortly
come. It may be, thou did hope that thy friends before their death would have
been profitable members of the militant Church: But it has pleased God to make
them members of the Church triumphant: Seeing it has so pleased God, be thou
also well pleased. It may be, thou thoughtest that thy friends before their
death would have attained to the knowledge of diverse things: But it has
pleased God to take them up into the heavenly Academie, there to learn true
wisdom: Seeing therefore it has so pleased God, be thou also well pleased. It
may be, thou did hope that thy friends before their death would be raised out
of the dust, and be set with princes: Psalm. 113.^.
But it has pleased God to make them the fellows of heavenly princes, that is,
the holy angels: Seeing therefore it has so pleased God, be thou also well
pleased. It may be, thou did hope that thy friends before their death would
have gathered together much riches: But it has pleased God to make them
partakers of the delights of his heavenly kingdom: And therefore seeing that
it has so pleased God, be thou also well pleased. Holy God, thou have taken
away nothing but what thou gave, blessed be thy name for ever and ever!

Meditat. XLV. Of the last judgment.
Remember that Christ Jesus shall
Thoughts, words, and deeds to judgment call.
THe Father judges no man, John 5.22
but has committed all judgment to his Son. I know, Lord Jesus, Carthenius
that thou will come as the severe Judge of all men, to bring their thoughts,
1. Cor. 4.5
words, and deeds to light, though they were done in darkness. Above, there
shall be a severe judge; beneath, hell gaping; within, the conscience gnawing;
without, the fire flaming; on the right hand, sins accusing; on the left
hand, the devils terrifying: The good angels keeping out of heaven, and the
evil angels pulling down to hell: Then, Lord Jesus, to whom shall I betake my
self in these my straits? I am afraid of all my works, knowing that thou
sparest not every one that offends. Job 94.28.
I shall there be set between time and eternity: Time will be past, but the
infinite space of eternity will remain behind. The malignant spirits will
require their wicked works, unto which they have persuaded me; and in that
severe judgment they will produce all they know against me, that they may draw
my soul into the fellowship of their torments. Isa. 34.4.
All the host of heaven shall consume away, the heavens shall be rolled
together like a scrole, all the host of them shall fall, even as a leaf falls
from the vine or fig tree. The sun shall be ashamed, and the moon shall be
brought to confusion: Isa. 24.23.
But if these the works of thy hands, which never committed any evil against
thee, if they flee away from thy sight, how shall I miserable sinner be able to
appear before thy face? The heavens of heavens are not clean in thy sight: Job
15.15.16. 1. Pet. 4.18.
What am I then that drink iniquity like water? But if the righteous shall
scarce be saved, where shall the sinner appear? Whither then shall I fly, or to
whom shall I go, but unto thee, O Lord? Thou shall be the Judge of my sins,
who diedst for my sins: For the Father judges no man, Joh. 5.22.
but has committed all judgment unto his Son: The Father delivered all
judgment to the Son; but the Son again was delivered for our sins. For God
so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, Joh. 3.56.
not to condemn the world, but that the world might be saved through him: How
can thou then condemn me, Lord Jesus, when as thou wast sent by thy Father to
save me? Thou ^idst fulfill the will of thy Father in all things: How then will thou not fulfill it in saving me miserable sinner? It is not the will of thy
Father that one of the little ones should perish: Matthew. 18.14.
And I am a little one in thy sight, and a little one also in mine own sight:
Genesis 18.27.
For what am I but dust and ashes? Neither only dust and ashes, but also a
very little one, and a very dwarf for proficiencie in piety: Perfect therefore
in me little one the will of thy Father. Thou came, O Jesus, to save that
which was lost: Matt. 18* 11.
How then can thou condemn him that desires to be saved? My sins will
accuse me, and call upon the Judge for severe sentence: But thou have taken my
sins upon thee: Joh. 1.29
Thou take away the sins of the world: How then have thou not taken away
mine also? How can thou condemn me for my sins, when thou diedst for them?
Thou diedst for the sins of the whole world: 1. John 2.2.
How then have thou not died for mine also? Certainly, Lord Jesus, if thou
had meant to deal with me in thy strict judgment, thou would never have
descended from heaven to take upon thee my flesh, to die, and to be crucified.
The devils will accuse me, and require of my soul the works whereunto they have
persuaded me: John 14.30.
But the prince of this world is condemned, and has nothing in thee; and if he
has nothing in thee, then certainly he has nothing in me: For I believe in
thee, O Lord, therefore thou abidest in me, John 15.4
and I in thee: He will accuse me, that am thy friend; He will accuse me, that
am thy brother, that am the beloved son of the eternal Father: How then
can thou deal with me in thy strict judgment, seeing that I am thy friend,
thy brother, and thy son? At that judgment Moses will accuse me, Deuteronomy. 27.26.
and pronounce me accursed, for not keeping all that is written in the book of
the law: But thou, O Christ, wast made a curse for me, Gal. 3.13.
that I might be freed from the curse of the law. I shall be cursed by Moses,
but blessed by thee: For I desire to hear that voice; Matt. 25.34.
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you. Moses
will accuse me: But thou will not accuse me to thy Father; yea, thou make
intercession for me. Romans 8.34
Therefore I am not afraid of Moses his curse; because thou have blotted out
the handwriting which was against me. Col. 2.14.
The damned will accuse me, and pronounce me guilty of the same fault with
them: I confess, Lord Jesus, my guiltiness does conjoyn me with them: but the
acknowledgement of my guiltines, and the saving knowledge of thee does disjoyn
me from them. He that hears thy word, and believes on him that sent thee,
John 5.24
has life everlasting, and shall not come into condemnation. I hear thy word,
Lord, and in thee I believe with weak faith, Mar. 9.24.
but yet faith: Lord I believe; yet help thou my unbelief* Lord I believe; but
yet do thou increase my faith: Luke 17.5.
Although I am not free from all the sins of the damned, yet thou, O Lord,
shall deliver me from unbelief. All my accusers do terrify me, but thou being
my Judge do comfort me: To thee has the Father committed all judgment. Joh.
5.22. Matt. 11.27. Romans 8.32
Into thy hands has he delivered all things; and again, thee has he delivered
up for us all: and thou have delivered up thy self for the Church, to sanctify
it, and cleanse it by the washing of water through the word: Ephesians. 5.26.
How can thou then according to severe judgment judge those for whom thou
have delivered thy self to death, even the death of the cross? Ephesians. 5.29.30.
Thou can not hate thine own flesh: we are members of thy body, of thy flesh,
and of thy bones.

Meditat. XLVI. Of the desire of eternal life.
All earthly things tread under thee,
And let thy thoughts in heaven be.
DEvout soul, thou must not love this life which is transitory; but rather
that which remains for ever: Ascend up by thy desires to the place where
there is youth without old age, life without death, Austine.
joy without sorrow, and a kingdom without change: If beauty delight thee;
Anselm.
The righteous shall shine as the sun: Matt. 13.43. Matt. 22.30.
If swiftness, and strength; The elect shall be like unto the angels of God:
If a long and healthful life; There shall be healthful eternity, and
eternal healthfulnesse: If fullness; The elect shall be filled, when the glory
of the Lord shall appear: If melody; There do the quires of angels sing
without end: If pure pleasure; God shall make those that are his, drunk in the
torrent of pleasure: If wisdom; The very wisdom of God shall show it self
unto them: If love; They shall love God more then themselves, and one another
as themselves; and God shall love them more then they themselves: If concord
delight; There they shall be all of one mind: If power; To the elect shall all
things be easy; they shall desire nothing but what they shall be able; and
they shall desire nothing but what God will have them to will, and to desire:
If honor and riches delight; God will make his faithful servants rulers over
many things: Matt. 25.23.
If true security; They shall be as certain never to want that good, as they
are certain that they themselves would never lose it willingly; and that God
that loves them will never take from them against their wills that which they
love; and that nothing is more powerful then God, to separate God and them
asunder. Bonavent.
Whatsoever the elect can desire, there they shall find; because they shall
behold him, 1. Cor. 13.12.
that is all in all, face to face. So great are the goods of that life that
they cannot be measured; Pelarg.
so many that they cannot be numbered; and so precious that they cannot be
valued. There shall be eternal health unto our bodies, and great purity unto
our souls; there shall be glory and fullness of divine pleasure; there shall we
have familiarity with the saints and angels for ever, having our bodies of
admirable clearness and brightness. Bonavent.
The elect shall rejoice for the pleasantness of the place, which they shall
possess; for the pleasant society, in which they shall reign; for the glory
of their bodies, which they shall put on; for the world, which they have
despised; and for hell, which they have escaped. Austine.
The least crown of eternal life shall be more worth then a thousand worlds;
because they are all finite, but this is infinite: Neither is there any fear
that they shall envy one another brightness; because there shall reign in
them all, unity of love: By reason of that high degree of love, whatsoever
happens to one of the elect, the rest shall as much rejoice at as if it were
their own. There is no greater good then God, in heaven and in earth: Therefore
there can be no greater and perfecter joy, then to see and possess God:
Therefore to see God for one moment, shall go beyond all joys: For we shall
see God in himself, God in us, and our selves in God: In the way of this life
we have Christ with us, Bernard.
but hidden under the covering of the word and sacraments. We know him not here
as he is, but in the life to come we shall behold him in presence, when he
shall distribute unto us the bread that satisfies for ever: As the disciples
knew him not upon the way, Luke 24.35.
but in the Inn at length, when he broke bread unto them. The heavenly
Jerusalem has no temple made with hands, neither sun nor moon; because the
temple thereof is eternal, Rev. 21.23.
and God is the life thereof. Vision succeeds in the place of faith, attainment
in the place of hope, and perfect fruition in the place of love. As at the
building of Solomon's temple there was heard neither the sound of ax nor hammer:
Berthor. 1. Kings 6.7.
So in the heavenly Jerusalem, there is neither pain nor tribulation felt;
because the materials of this temple, to wit, 1. Pet. 2.5.
the spiritual stones are prepared by tribulation in the world long before. 1.
Ki^^ 10.2.
The queen that came to Solomon is the soul traveling to the heavenly
Jerusalem, unto Christ: She enters in with a great train of the holy angels,
with gold and precious stones of diverse virtues: She will wonder at the wisdom
of Christ the King, the order of his ministers, that is, the Angels and the
Saints; the fare of his table, that is, (...) 9.9.
the fullness of eternal repast; the price and value of his clothes, that is,
(...) 17
the bodies glorified; the beauty of his house, that is, the greatness of the
heavenly palace; the sacrifices, that is, the multitude of divine praises: She
will be turned into astonishment, and confess she could not believe what she
now sees with her eyes. Therefore let the faithful soul lift up her self, and
consider what good things are prepared for her: Thither let the spirit be
directed whither at length it shall go: In time we must strive to go thither,
where at length we must remain for all eternity: Into this glory of the Lord
shall no man enter but he that desires to enter: Bernard.
Do thou hope to appear hereafter before the face of the Lord? Study then
after holiness; because he is holy. (...) 11.
Do thou look for the fellowship of the heavenly angels? Take heed then that
thou do not by thy sins deprive thy self of their ministry. Ber^*
Do thou hope after things eternal! Why then do thou so much desire things
temporal? (...). 13.
Do thou seek for a city to come? Why then do thou desire here an abiding
place? ^^rian.
Do thou desire to come to Christ? Why then do thou fear death? It is the
property of him that would not come to Christ, to fear death. Do thou desire
to enter into the heavenly Jerusalem? Why then do thou defile thy self with
so many and such grievous sins? Whereas it is written, that nothing which is
defiled shall enter in there. Rev. 21.27
Do thou desire to enjoy at length the tree of life? Lay hold then on Christ
the true tree of life, Rev. 22.2.
by true faith in this life. For it is written, 14
Blessed are they that have their robes washed in the blood of the lamb, that
they may have part in the tree of life, and enter into the city by the gates.
Without, are dogs and sorcerers: Beware therefore of the loss of chastity.
Without, are murderers: Take heed therefore of anger. Without, are idolaters:
Beware therefore of covetousness. Without, are liars: Beware therefore of all
the malice of sin. If thou desire to enter in to the marriage of the Lamb,
desire the bridegrooms coming. Rev. 19.9.
The Spirit and the Spouse say, COME. If thou have not the earnest of the
Spirit, by which thou may cry, Rev. 22.17 Ephesians. 1.14.
Come Lord: the bridegroom will never lead thee in unto the heavenly marriage.
Thou art not the spouse, if thou desire not the coming of the bridegroom.
Would thou have a place in the new heaven, Rev. 21.1.
and the new earth? Why then do thou so cleave unto the old? Would thou be
made partaker of the Creator? Wherefore then do thou so cleave unto the
simple creatures? Do thou expect the building of God, 2. Cor. 5.1.
the house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens? Why then do thou not
desire, that this earthly house of thy dwelling may be dissolved? Do thou
desire to be clothed? Why then do thou not provide for thy self, that thou
be not found naked? If the holy Trinity dwells not in thy heart by grace
in this life* it shall never dwell in thee by glory in the life to come. If
thou have not a taste of eternal felicity in this life thou shall never have
a full draught in the life to come.

Meditat. XLVII. Of the beatificall vision of God, in heaven.
The saints are pilgrims here below,
And toward their country heaven go.
Joh. 14.2.
IN my Fathers house are many mansions, they are the words of our Savior.
Lord, I desire to see that place where thou have prepared for me an everlasting
mansion: Psalm. 39.12
For I am a stranger and a sojourner here, as all my fathers were: Genesis 47.9.
The days of my pilgrimage are few and evil: Therefore in this life, wherein I
live in exile, I do long after my heavenly country. Phil. 3.20.
My conversation is in heaven: Psalm. 27.13.
I desire to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living. This life
passes away in a shadow, my days are measured out, and my substance is even
as nothing in thy sight: What then is my hope? Psalm. 39.7.
Is it not the Lord? Lord Jesus, when will it be that I shall come unto thee?
Psalm. 42.^.
When shall I appear before thy face? As the heart pants after the fountain
of waters, Psalm. 42.1.
so does my soul after thee, O God. Oh the true, perfect, and full joy! Austine.
Oh joy of joys surpassing all joy, without which there is no joy! When shall
I enter into thee, that I may see my God that dwells in thee? Thou shall fill
me, O Lord, with the joy of thy countenance: At thy right hand there are
pleasures for evermore: Psalm. 16.11
I shall be abundantly satisfied with the plentifulnesse of thy house: Psalm.
36.8.
and thou shall give me to drink of the brook of thy pleasures: For with thee
is the fountain of life: 9 Austine.
Oh life to be desired! Oh blessed felicity! in which the most holy Trinity
shall be the perfection of our desires, which we shall see without end, love
without loathing, and praise without being weary. To see God, will surpass all
joys: To see Christ, to live with Christ, to hear Christ, will surpass all
the desires of our hearts. O Jesus Christ the most sweet bridegroom of my soul,
when will thou lead thy spouse into thy royal palace? Bernard.
What can there be wanting there? What to be desired, or expected, where God
shall be all in all? He shall be beauty to the eye, honey to the taste, music
to the ear, balsame to the nose, and flower to the touch. 1. Cor. 15.28.
God shall be all in all, and shall distribute unto every one good things
according to the desires of his own heart: If thou desire life, if health, if
peace, if honor, God shall be there all in all. The mysteries which are now
sealed up in the great doctors of the Church, shall be then revealed even unto
babes: The blessed humanity of Christ shall be there present unto us, and
shall preach unto us with a most sweet voice concerning the mystery of our
salvation. Cant. 2.14 Psalm. 45.2. Psalm. 8.5.
His voice is sweet, and his face is comely: Full of grace are his lips: And he
is crowned with glory and honor: Bernard.
But if God shall be all in all, then shall he be fullness of light to the
understanding, plenty of peace to the will, and continuance of eternity to the
memory. The Son will satisfy the understanding with perfect knowledge, the
holy Ghost will satisfy the will with most sweet love, and the Father will
satisfy the memory with the remembrance of both. Austine. Psalm. 36.9.
Thou O God shall be our light, and in thy light shall we see light; that is,
we shall see thee in thy self, in the brightness of thy countenance, when we
shall see thee face to face: Neither shall we only see thee, but we shall also
live with thee; neither shall we only live with thee, but we shall also praise
thee; neither shall we only praise thee, but we shall also rejoice with thee;
neither shall we only rejoice with thee, but we shall also be like unto the
angels; Mat. 22.30.
neither shall we be like unto the angels only, but even unto God himself,
blessed for ever. 1. Joh. 3.2*
Let the faithful soul be here astonished, and adore the mercy of her Savior:
He does not only receive us his enemies into favor, but he does also forgive
our sins; neither does he forgive our sins only, but he does also bestow
righteousness upon us; neither so only, but he does lead us also into our
heavenly inheritance; yea he makes us like unto the angels and even unto
himself also. Oh most blessed city! Oh heavenly Jerusalem! Oh the holy seat of
the most holy Trinity! when shall it be that I shall enter into thy temple?
The Lamb is the heavenly Jerusalem, Rev. 21.^2
to wit, Joh. 1.29. Rev. 13.8.
the Lamb which takes away the sins of the world, and was slain for them
from the beginning of the world. When shall the time come that I may in that
temple worship my God, that is, God in God? when will that sun rise upon me,
which enlightneth that holy city? I am yet a banished man from my country,
Rev. 21.23.
but there is laid up for me an ample inheritance. To those that believe, power
is given to be made the sons of God: Joh. 1.12. Romans 8.17
And if we be sons, we are then heirs, heirs of God, and coheirs with Christ.
Lift up thy self, O my soul, and long to come to thine inheritance. The Lord is
the portion of mine inheritance, Psalm. 16.5.
and my exceeding great reward: Genesis 15.1.
What could the most ample mercy and bounty of God bestow upon us more than
this? He bestows life; He bestows his Son; He bestows himself: And if he had
any thing else greater in heaven or in earth, he would bestow even that also
upon us. In God we live, Gods temple we are, Act. 17.28* 1. Cor. 3.16. Austine.
God we possess, here indeed in the spirit, and in a mystery, but there in
truth: There shall our hope become fruition, and there shall we not only
remain, but dwell for ever.

Meditat. XLVIII. Of the most comfortable fellowship of the angels in heaven.
If thou be here a child of grace,
Amongst angels thou shall have a place.
AT the resurrection of the dead they shall neither marry, Matt. 22.30^
nor be given in marriage, but shall be like unto the angels of God in heaven.
Who can worthily set forth with praises this honor of the blessed? Into whose
heart has this glory of the blessed ever entered? 1. Cor. 2.9
The elect being renewed by a glorious resurrection, shall enjoy the saving
vision of God, without all fear of death, and without any spot of corruption. I
have seen the Lord face to face, and my life is preserved, Genesis 32.30.
says the holy Patriarch. But if the sight of God for a moment could bring so
great joy: What joy will it bring to see him for ever! If the sight of God
appearing in the shape of man, brought salvation and life unto the soul:
Certainly the seeing of him face to face shall bring life and everlasting
felicity. What then can be added to this felicity? What can the elect desire
beside the fruition of the sight of God? And yet notwithstanding they shall
enjoy the most sweet and blessed fellowship of the angels: Neither shall they
only enjoy their fellowship, but they shall be also like unto them for the
nimblenesse, brightness, and immortality of their bodies: We shall be clothed
with the same garment that they are; Rev. 7.9*
we shall stand before the throne of the Lamb, clothed with long white robes,
and sing unto the Lord an everlasting song: we shall shine in the same crown of
virtues; we shall rejoice in the same privilege of immortality. Judge. 13.22.
We have seen the angel of the Lord, and we shall surely die, cries out
Manoah: But we shall see thousand thousands, Dan. 7.10
and ten thousand times ten thousand angels, and yet we shall live for ever.
And if we shall be like unto angels, surely we shall have no cause to fear lest
we be separated from them by the unlikenesse of our sins. We shall put off
the ragged coat of our sinful nature; and our nakedness shall be covered with
the garment of salvation, Isa. 61.10.
and we shall be clothed with the white robe of righteousness. Austine.
No man there receives hurt, no man is angry, no man envious; there is no
slandring, no concupiscence, there is no ambition after honor and power: We
shall not be laden with the burden of our sins, neither shall we be constrained
to weep and wash away the spots of our sins with penitent tears, neither
shall we have cause to fear the deadly wounds of our soul: Rev. 5.5.
For the Lion of the tribe of Judah has overcome, and through his virtue have
we all overcome. Again, if we shall be like unto the angels, we shall have no
desire after meat or drink: Aust. upon ^he 50. Psalm.
God shall be our meat, with whose pleasures we shall be satisfied: God shall
be our meat, which only does refresh us and is never deficient. The blessed
shall neither hunger, Rev. 7.16.
nor thirst any more, the sun and the heat shall not scorch them: because
their merciful Father shall feed them, ^7.
and shall lead them unto the living fountains of waters. Joh. 7.38*
Out of their bellies shall flow rivers of living waters: There shall be a
feast prepared of marrow and fatness, and wine clarified. Isa. 25.6.
We shall feast, and be merry, and sing joyfully for the joy of heart. Lord
Jesus! these things shall be fulfilled in spirit and in truth: Mat. 26.29
Of the fruit of the vine shall we drink in thy Fathers kingdom; but yet in
spirit and in truth: For the words which thou spakest unto us are spirit and
life, Joh. 6.63
and thou declarest the joy of the world to come, by the language of this
world. Again, if we shall be like unto the angels, we shall be free from the
fear of death: For death shall be swallowed up in victory, 1. Cor. 15.54.
and shall be trod down for ever, and God shall wipe away all tears from the
eyes of his people. Rev. 7.17. Rev 21.1. Austine.
Therefore there shall be joy without sorrow, which contains everlasting joy;
health without sickness; life without death; light without darkness; love
which shall never wax cold; joy which shall never decrease: No sighing shall be
heard there; no grief felt; no sorrowful thing seen; but there shall be joy
for ever. There shall be great and certain security, secure quietness, quiet
pleasure, pleasant happiness, happy eternity, eternal blessedness, the
blessed Trinity, the Unity of the Trinity, the Deity of the Unity, and the
blessed sight of the Deity. Lift up thy self, O my soul, and weigh with thy
self the honor conferred upon us by Christ: We shall be made fellows with the
companies of Angels and Archangels, Matt. 22.30. Col. 1.16.
with thrones and dominions, with principalities and powers: Neither shall we
only be fellows with them, but we shall be like unto them. We shall there know
the angel that was appointed by God to be our keeper in our life time; neither
shall we stand in need of his ministry, but we shall be delighted with his
sweet company: We shall not desire his protection, but we shall rejoice for
his good fellowship, and we shall behold his brightness with eyes enlightened.
Again if we shall be like unto the angels, our frail, weak, and mortal bodies
shall be changed, and they shall be made spiritual, 1. Cor. 15.^^.
nimble and immortal. They shall be light; because they shall be near unto
God, who dwells in light, that no mortal man can approach unto, 1. Tim.
6.16. Psalm. 104.2.
and is covered with light as with a garment. They shall be incorruptible;
because they shall be made conformable unto the angels, Phil. 3.21 ^. Cor. 15
and unto the glorified body of Christ: They are sown in corruption, but they
shall rise again in incorruption; they are sown in dishonor, 42
but they shall rise again in glory; 43
they are sown in weakness, but they shall rise again in power: It is sown a
natural body, 44
it shall rise again a spiritual body: Dan. 12.3.
and it shall shine like the brightness of the firmament for ever. Come, Lord
Jesus, and make us partakers of that glory!

Meditat. XLIX. Of the grievousnesse of the torments in hell.
If into hell thou would not fall,
Be there by thoughts continual.
THink, O devout soul, upon the grievousnesse of hell torments, and thou shall
easily get the mastery of all wicked pleasure in sin. There shall be the
presence of all evil, Carthenius
and the absence of all good. What evil can be wanting to them who are punished
for the greatest evil, and that is sin? what good thing can be present to
them, who are removed from the chiefest good, and that is God? There shall be
the heat of fire and the freezing of cold; There shall be perpetual darkness;
There shall be smoke and continual tears; There shall be the terrible sight of
the devils; There shall be crying for ever; There shall be dryness, thirst,
the stink of brimstone, the worm of conscience, fear, grief, shame and
confusion for sins made manifest to all, envy, hatred, sorrow, want of the
divine vision, and loss of all hope. By the power of God the light of the fire
shall be separated from the burning quality; the light shall serve for the joy
of the saints, and the burning quality for the torment of the damned. It shall
shine to the damned, but not as an object of comfort, that they may see it and
rejoice: But to the increasing of their misery, that they may see and grieve
the more. The sight shall be deprived of the light of the sun, moon, and all
the stars, as also of the sight of Christ and all the saints: And it shall be
punished with weeping, smoke, and the sight of the devils and all the damned.
The ears shall hear schreetchings, and frequent blasphemies of the damned,
and the horrible roaring of the devils The taste shall be afflicted with hunger
and thirst, and shall be deprived of all the pleasure of meat and drink. The
smell shall be tormented with the stink of brimstone. The touch shall feel the
fire within and without, burning and piercing even to the marrow. The bodies of
the damned shall be deformed, obscured, slow, and heavy: The memory shall be
tormented with the remembrance of sins past; neither will she grieve so much,
that she has sinned, as that she has lost her pleasures. One spark of
hellfire shall more torment the sinner, then if a woman should remain in labor
and travail a thousand years: There shall be weeping for grief, and gnashing
of teeth for madness: Mat. 22.14
In the flesh they shall be tormented by the worm of conscience. Bernard.
There is no sin which shall not there have its proper torment. As there is
nothing to be desired in the kingdom of heaven which may not be found: So in
hell there is nothing found that is desired. It will nothing profit the damned
there, to have enjoyed diverse pleasures in their life: yea the remembrance of
them shall grievously torment them. It will nothing profit the damned to have
lived here in this life in perpetual fullness and drunkenness: for then they
shall not obtain so much as a little drop of water. Luke 16.24
It will nothing profit them, to have been clothed with costly garments:
because they shall be covered with confusion, and have their bodies clothed
with shame. It will nothing profit them, to have lived in honor: for in hell
there is no honor, but continual sighing and dolor. It will nothing profit
them, to have heaped up riches in this life: because they shall be all there
poor alike. Bernard.
They shall be removed from the beatificall vision of God. Not to see God,
exceeds all the punishments of hell. If the damned which are shut up in the
prison of hell could but see Gods face, they should feel no pain, no grief, no
sorrow. They shall feel the wrath of God, and yet they shall never see the
beatificall face of God: They shall feel punishments from his face, and yet
they shall never behold his face. Polycarp.
The fury of the Lord shall always kindle the fire of eternal damnation like
a river of brimstone. Neither shall they only be removed from beholding God,
but they shall be also miserably tormented by the sight of the devils. They
shall feel their whips, whose commands they have followed in this life. If the
sight of a seeming ghost does almost exanimate a man in this life, what shall
the horrible sight of the devils which shall last for ever? Neither shall they
only be compelled to be with the devils, but they shall feel themselves
tormented by them for ever. If in this life by Gods permission, the devil does
so grievously afflict the saints: How grievously shall he torment the damned
which are given up to his power for ever! The damned shall not only be
tormented by the devils outwardly, but by the worm of conscience also inwardly.
All sins whatsoever they have committed, shall be set daily before their
eyes: And their torture shall be so much the greater, because there remains no
more the benefit of repentance. When the virgins that are prepared are entered
in with the bridegroom, the gate shall be shut presently: Mat. 25.10. Granat.
Understand thou the gate of indulgence, the gate of mercy, the gate of
consolation, the gate of hope* the gate of grace, the gate of holy conversion.
The damned shall cry, Revel. 6.16.
and say to the mountains and rocks, Fall upon us, and hide us from the wrath
of the Lamb: But their cry shall be in vain; because heaven and earth shall
flee from his wrath, as it is written, Every island fled away, Rev. 16.20.
and the mountains were not found. Whatsoever is given to the elect to the
increasing of their glory, all that shall turn to the damned to the increasing
of their sorrow. There shall be indeed degrees of punishments: But yet he that
feels least torment, shall receive no ease thereby. He that is tormented with
greater punishments shall envy him that is tormented with less. The damned
shall receive no ease from this, that some of their kinsmen and friends are
received into the heavenly palace: Because the elect shall not grieve at all,
that some of their kindred are gone to hell to be tormented for ever. So great
shall the pain and torment be in the damned, that their mind can think upon
nothing but that whereunto the force of pain drives them. The damned shall
hate all the creatures of God, they shall hate one another, they shall hate the
holy angels, and the elect, and even God himself, but not in himself, and in
his own nature, but in the effects of his justice. All the evils of this life
are single: One is troubled with poverty, another is tormented with grievous
sickness; one is oppressed with hard servitude, another is laden with the
burden of reproaches: But there all at once shall be tormented with all evils.
The pains there, shall be universal, in all the senses, and in all the
members. In this life, hope of release mitigateth all troubles: But there, is
left no hope of deliverance. The punishments of hell are not only eternal,
but there is no ease so much as for a moment. And hence it is, that if all men
since Adam to this present day, and all that are yet to be born, should live to
the last day, and should suffer but one punishment in hell, as the soul that
sins must suffer for one sin, every portion of that punishment, which any
one of them should suffer, would be greater, then all the torments, that all
fellons and malefactors have ever suffered. O Lord grant unto us, that we may
think upon hell, that we never fall into it!

Meditat. L. Of the eternity of Hell Torments.
The pains of hell do far extend
Beyond all times, world without end.
THink, O devout soul, upon the eternity of hell torments, and thou shall more
truly understand the grievousnes thereof. Paulinus.
In hell there is a raging flame which burns without end. The life of the
damned is to die without end; the death of the damned is to live in eternal
torments: For neither is the tormentour wearied, Bernard.
neither does the tormented die. So does the fire consume there, that still it
leaves somewhat; So are the torments there increased, that still they are
renewed; So shall the damned die, that they shall always live: So shall they
live, Isidor.
that they shall always die. For a man to be tormented without any end, this
is it that goes beyond all the bounds of desperation: For what is more
grievous, then always to will that which shall never be, and to ni^l that
which shall always be? The damned shall never obtain what they would, and
shall be constrained ever to suffer what they would not. When the wrath of God
shall cease, then shall the torments of the damned cease: But the wrath of God
is eternal, and therefore the torments are eternal. When the damned shall
truly repent, then they shall be delivered from their sins: But the time of
repentance is past, and therefore there remains no hope of indulgence. When the
devils shall cease to torment, then shall the damned cease to be tormented: But
the fury of the devil shall never cease, therefore the torments of the damned
shall never cease. When Gods justice shall be changed, then the torments of the
damned shall be changed: But the justice of God is unchangeable, therefore the
torments of the damned shall be eternal. Gregor.
The sentence of severe judgment requires, that they should never want
punishment, who in this world never want sin. It is just, that there should
be no end of the punishment of the damned; because, as long as they could, they
would make no end of sinning. The damned sinned in their eternity, that is, as
long as they lived: Therefore it is just that they should be punished in Gods
eternity. Their sin had an end, because their life had an end: But they
would have made no end of sinning, but that they were forced to make end of
living, that so they might have sinned without end. The matter of hellfire is
eternal, that is, the stain of sin: And therefore meet it is that the
punishment should be eternal. The filthiness of the sins of the damned can
never be removed out of the sight of God: How then can the greatness of
punishments appointed for sin be removed? Besides, sin is an infinite evil;
because it is committed against an infinite good; and Christ paid for it an
infinite price: And therefore meet it is that their punishment, who die in
their sins, should be infinite. Man destroyed in himself the eternal good:
And therefore in the judgment of God he does justly fall into everlasting
evil. God at the beginning created man after his own image, Genesis 1.26.
that he might live with him for ever: God by Christ reformed man after his own
image, when he was fallen into sin: He has provided for all, means of
eternal salvation; and he has offered unto all, the reward of eternal life:
And therefore it is just, that they which would voluntarily want everlasting
rewards, should be made subject to everlasting punishments. An evil will shall
never be taken away from the damned: Therefore the punishment of their evil
will shall never be taken away from them. The damned made choice of momentanie
pleasure and finite goods, before God the infinite good; they longed after the
delights of this short and flitting life, rather then the riches of eternal
life: It is just therefore that they should suffer eternal punishments. Oh
eternity not to be termed! Oh eternity not to be measured by any space of
time! Oh eternity not to be conceived by humane understanding! How much do
thou augment the punishments of the damned! After innumerable thousands of
years they shall be compelled to think, that then is but the beginning of
their torments. What a grievous thing is it to lie, though in a very soft bed,
for thirty years without moving! And how grievous shall it be then to burn in
that lake of brimstone thirty thousand thousand years! Oh eternity, eternity!
it is thou alone that do increase the punishments of the damned beyond all
measure. Dionys. Carthus.
Grievous is the pain of the damned for the cruelty of the punishments; it is
yet more grievous for the diversity of the punishments; but it is most
grievous for the eternity of the punishments. Gregory in his Morals
There shall be death without death, end without end, defect without defect:
because death ever lives, and the end ever begins, and the defect is never
deficient. The damned shall seek life, and shall not find it: Rev. 9.6.
they shall seek death, and it shall flee from them. After an hundred thousand
thousand thousand of years they shall return without end to the same
punishments. The thought of the continuance of their sorrow shall torment them
more then the sense of outward torment. What can be more miserable then so to
die that thou may always live, and so to live that thou may always die?
That life shall be mortiferous, and that death shall be immortal: If it be
life, why does it kill? and if it be death, why does it always endure? What
eternity is, we do not perfectly know; and it is no wonder: For what created
mind can comprehend that which cannot be measured by any time? But if thou
would guess what the space of eternity is, think upon the time that was
before the world was created. If thou can find Gods beginning, then may
thou find when the punishments of the damned shall have an end. Imagine thou
saw an exceeding high mountain* which for its greatness exceeded heaven and
earth: Imagine also that some bird every thousandth year should carry from
this mountain one grain of the smallest dust: There might be some hope that at
length after the end of many incomprehensible thousands of years the
greatness of that mountain might be consumed: But it cannot be hoped that the
fire of hell should ever go out. The rewards of the elect shall never be ended;
therefore the punishments of the damned shall never be ended: Because as the
mercy of God is infinite toward the elect, so the justice of God is infinite
toward the reprobate. Imagine that the damned had so many kinds of torments,
as there are little drops in the vast sea: Imagine also that at every
thousandth year some little bird should fly thither, and suck a small drop
thereof: There might be some hope that at length the sea would be exhausted and
become dry: But it cannot be hoped that the punishments of the damned should
ever have an end. O devout soul, think always upon the eternal punishments of
the damned: To think upon hell, preserves a man from falling into hell. Kempis.
Have a care to repent, whiles yet there is time for pardon. What else shall
the fire devour but thy sins? The more thou heapest up sins, the more
matter thou layest up for the fire. O Lord Jesus, which by thy passion have
made satisfaction for our sins, deliver us from eternal damnation! Amen.

Meditat. LI. Of the spiritual resurrection of the godly.
Does Adam die, Christ in thee live?
Christ shall eternal life thee give.
Christ's resurrection profits thee nothing, unless Christ also rise in thee.
As Christ must be conceived, born, and live in thee: So also must he rise in
thee. Before resurrection goes death, because none rises again but he that is
fallen: And so it fares in this spiritual resurrection. Christ rises not in
thee, unless Adam first die in thee. The inward man rises not, unless the
outward man be first buried. The newness of the spirit will not come forth,
unless the oldnesse of the flesh be first hidden. It is not enough for thee,
to have Christ once risen in thee: because the old Adam cannot be extinct in
one moment. The old Adam will revive in thee daily: And thou must daily
mortify him, that Christ may begin to live in thee daily. Christ ascended not
into heaven, neither entered he into his glory before he rose from death: So
neither can thou enter into celestial glory, unless Christ first rise in
thee and live in thee. He is not a member of the mystical body of Christ, in
whom Christ lives not: Neither shall he be brought by Christ into the Church
triumphant, who has not been a member of his body in the Church militant.
Betrothing goes before matrimony: And that soul shall not be brought in unto
the marriage of the heavenly Lamb, which is not in this life betrothed to
Christ by faith, Hos. 2.19. 2. Cor. 1.22.
and sealed by the earnest of the holy Spirit: Let Christ therefore rise, and
live in thee, that thou may live with him for ever. Rev. 20.5, 6.
This is the first resurrection: Blessed and holy it be that has part in the
first resurrection: over him shall the second death have no power. If thou will
at the resurrection come forth unto life, Christ must daily rise in thee in
this life. At the resurrection of Christ the sun rose: Man. 16.2.
So if Christ be spiritually risen in thee, the light of the saving knowledge
of God shall rise in thy soul. How can the light of the saving knowledge of God
be there, where the darkness of most grievous sins still has place? The
fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom: Psalm. 111.1^.
How then can heavenly wisdom be there, where the fear of God has no place?
But he that is destitute of the light of divine knowledge in this life, how can
he be made partaker of eternal light in the life to come? The sons of light
only do pass unto eternal light, but the sons of darkness unto eternal
darkness. Christ at his resurrection triumphed over death: So he, in whom
Christ is spiritually risen, Joh* 5.24.
is passed from death to life: For he cannot be overcome by death, in whom
Christ the conqueror of death does live. Christ rising again brought with him
perfect righteousness: Romans 4.25
for he died for our sins, and rose again for our justification: So he also,
in whom Christ is spiritually risen, is justified from his sins. For how can
sin have place there, where the perfect righteousness of Christ lives and
flourishes? Now this righteousness of Christ is applied unto us by faith.
Christ rising from the dead, got the victory over Satan: for in his descent to
hell, he destroyed his kingdom, spoiled his palace, and broke his weapons in
pieces: And so also in whomsoever Christ is spiritually risen, against him
shall not Satan prevail: for how can he be overcome of Satan, in whom Christ
lives who overcame Satan? At Christ's resurrection there was a great
earthquake: Mat. 28.2.
So the spiritual resurrection with Christ is not without the earnest
commotion and contrition of heart. The old Adam cannot be overcome without
striving and resistance: Therefore Christ also cannot rise in thee spiritually
without great commotion. There is no spiritual resurrection with Christ,
unless there be a blotting out of sin; and there is no blotting out of
sin, unless acknowledgement of sin go before; and there is no true
acknowledgement of sin without serious contrition of heart: Therefore there
is no spiritual resurrection of Christ in thee, without inward contrition of
heart. (...). 38.13.
Holy Ezechias said, As a lion has he broken in pieces my bones: Behold great
contrition! But he adds presently, ^6.
O Lord, so shall they live again, and so shall my spirit be quickened: Thou
shall correct me, and thou shall quicken me. Again, Thou have cast all my
sins behind thy back: 17.
Behold a spiritual resurrection from sin! At Christ's resurrection an angel
of the Lord descended from heaven, Mat. 28.2.
and sat upon the sepulcher: So if Christ be risen in thee spiritually, thou
may rejoice in the fellowship of the angels. Where the old Adam lives and
reigns, there is a pleasing bed for the devil: But where Christ lives and
reigns, there the angels rejoice to dwell. For it is written, Luke 15.7
There is joy in heaven over one sinner that repents: But where there is true
repentance, Luther.
there also is Christ risen spiritually, Where Christ is not yet risen
spiritually, neither is there yet the grace of God; and where there is not yet
the grace of God, neither is there the guard of angels. Where Christ is not yet
spiritually risen, there still does the old Adam reign; and where the old Adam
does reign, there does sin also yet reign; and where sin does reign,
there the devil does reign: And what communion can there be between the
blessed angels and the devil? Christ after his resurrection presented himself
alive unto his disciples: Luke 24.15.
So if thou be made a partaker of the spiritual resurrection by faith, show
thy self to be a lively member of Christ by love. A man is not judged to be
alive, unles he show forth outwardly the actions of life. Where Christ is,
there is also the holy Spirit; where the holy Spirit is, there he inciteth and
moves to every good work: because they which are led by the Spirit of God,
Romans 8.14
are the sons of God. If therefore we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in
the Spirit. Gal. 5.25.
The light of the sun does every way disperse the brightness of his beams:
So the light of faith does every way diffuse the heat of love. Take light from
the sun, and thou may separate love from true faith. Sins are dead
works: If thou walk in dead works, Heb. 9.14.
how do thou live in Christ, and Christ in thee? Sins belong unto the old
Adam: If the old Adam does still reign in thee, how art thou spiritually risen
with Christ? Sins belong to the old flesh: If thou walk in the old flesh,
how does the new man live in thee? Raise us up, O good Jesus, from the death of
sin, that we may walk in newness of life! Let thy death kill the old Adam in
us, and let thy resurrection raise up the inward man unto life! Let thy blood
wash us from our sins, and let thy resurrection put upon us the robe of
righteousness! (...)

To the virtuous gentlewomen, Mris Anne Henshaw, Mris Elisabeth Dilk, and Mris
Helen Probey, (the daughters of Mr. William Bonham, late citizen of London, now
citizen of the celestial Jerusalem) health and happiness.
Virtuous Gentlewomen, It was the respect which I owed unto your father, and to
your fathers house, that first moved me to translate Gerards Prayers, and being
translated to dedicate them unto you: But the Stationer (whom I would not name,
because he is dead; and yet I must name, for fear lest by my silence I may seem
to wrong others) Richard Jackson of Fleetstreet, to whose trust I committed the
book to be printed, usurped the dedication, and obtruded it upon a Religious
Countess, whose name for honor I conceal: Hereupon I committed it unto the
press at Cambridge, being first purged from innumerable errates. Since
Jacksons death, the copy it seems came to one Williams his hands Stationer in
Popes-head-alley: With him I had conference as one desirous to restore unto you
what of right belonged unto you: But in stead of satisfaction, I received
nothing but ill language. To conclude, I bade him, if he thought good, go on to
do you wrong: but I promised withal that you should find one to do you right
as long as I lived. In part I hope I have made good my promise: If you accept
of this my service as a scholars New-yeares-gift (for so the time of the
Edition makes it) I have my desire, and shall always remain

A true lover of your family, R. W.
From Kings College in Cambridge January 1. 1631.
Pray always, Luke 18.
DIstressed soul, if thou conceiv'st what it is
To mount unto the tower of endless bliss^,
Embrace this work: it reaches to the sky,
And higher, if beyond it ought do lie.
Man's dull capacity, weak humane sense,
Wide worlds expansion, stars circumference,
Cannot it comprehend: Prayer presses even
To Gods pavilion, to the imperial ^eaven.
That is the golden chain fixed to Gods care:
Knock, and he will open; call, and he will hear:
This surely, this is blessed Jacobs ladder,
On which our souls climb by Christ to Christ's Father:
Faith is prayers chief attendant, Christ the way,
Gods Spirit both moves, and helps how to pray:
True love admittance gains, humble confession
Both helps devotion, and procures remission.
Edmund Sheaf.

IF lothed ulcers do thy soul possess;
See, see a medicine, hither make address:
Or if tentations, fears, or future harms;
Against such assaults receive these powerful charms.
These prayers may prove, if well these prayers thou note,
Against those a balm, against these an antidote.
Th. Bonham.

THe sun does shine, the blind man does not see:
Light is but dark, if eyesight none there be.
Gerard to Latins gave a glorious light,
But in our English Hemisphere 'twas night:
The eclipse is past, night gone, it is now high day,
Gerard has learned in the English tongue to pray.
Fr. Winterton.

A Margarite's a precious thing:
but he that has no skill
^steemeth it no more then that
the cock found on the hill.
A candle lights not if it be
in lantern dark concealed:
But turn the lantern, and there is
an useful light revealed.
The Englishman knew not the worth
of Gerards Margarite:
But now it is in English prized,
there is profit and delight.
The lantern's turned, the light appears
which was before concealed:
And now there is English, none so blind
to whom it is not revealed.
John Noare.

The contents of this book: divided into four parts.
I. Confession of sins.
Prayer 1 HE weighs and considers the grievousnesse of original sin.
Page 1 Prayer 2 He recalls to our memory the sins of our youth. Page 4
Prayer 3 He reckons up our daily falls and slips. Page 6 Prayer 4 He examines
our life according to the first table of the commandments. Page 8 Prayer 5 He
examines our life according to the second table of the commandments. Page 11
Prayer 6 He shows that we often partake in other men's sins. Page 14 Prayer
7 He shows that we are many ways convinced of sin. Page 17 Prayer 8 He
argues us to be convinced of the grievousnesse of our sins, by the effects of
contrition. Page 19 Prayer 9 He aggravates our sins by the greatness of Gods
benefits. Page 22 Prayer 10 He considers the severitie of Gods anger against
our sins in the passion and death of Christ. Page 24
II. Thanksgiving for Gods benefits.
Prayer 1 HE renders thanks to God for forming us in our mothers womb, and for
our nativity. Page 28 Prayer 2 He renders thanks for our sustentation. Page 31
Prayer 3 He renders thanks for our redemption wrought by Christ. Page 33 Prayer
4 He renders thanks for the incarnation of the Son. Page 36 Prayer 5 He
renders thanks for the passion of Christ. Page 39 Prayer 6 He renders thanks
for our vocation by the word. Page 42 Prayer 7 He renders thanks for the
expectation of our conversion. Page 45 Prayer 8 He renders thanks for our
conversion. Page 47 Prayer 9 He renders thanks for the forgiveness of our
sins. Page 50 Prayer 10 He renders thanks for our continuance in good. Page
53 Prayer 11 He renders thanks for all the gifts of the soul and body, and for
external goods. Page 56 Prayer 12 He renders thanks for the sacrament of
Baptism. Page 59 Prayer 13 He renders thanks for the sacrament of the Lords
supper. Page 62 Prayer 14 He renders thanks for our preservation from evil.
Page 65 Prayer 15 He renders thanks for the promise of eternal salvation. Page
68
III. Petitions for our selves.
Prayer 1 HE prays for mortification of the old man. Page 72 Prayer 2 For
conservation and increase of faith. Page 74 Prayer 2 For conservation and
increase of faith. Page 74 Prayer 3 For conservation and increase of hope. Page
77 Prayer 4 For conservation and increase of charity. Page 80 Prayer 5 For
conservation and increase of humility. Page 83 Prayer 6 For the gift and
increase of patience. Page 86 Prayer 7 For the gift and increase of meekness
and gentleness. Page 89 Prayer 8 For the gift and increase of chastity. Page
91 Prayer 9 For contempt of all earthly things Page 94 Prayer 10 For denial of
himself. Page 97 Prayer 11 For victory over the world. Page 100 Prayer 12 For
consolation in adversity, and true rest of the soul. Page 103 Prayer 13 For
victory in tentations, and for deliverance from the snares and treacheries of
the devil. Page 106 14 For a blessed departure out of this life, and a blessed
resurrection unto life everlasting. Page 109
IIII. Supplications for others.
Prayer 1 HE prays for the conservation of the word, and increase of the
Church. Page 114 Prayer 2 He prays for pastors and hearers. Page 117 Prayer 3
He prays for Magistrates and subjects. Page 121 Prayer 4 He prays for
houshold-government, and private families. Page 124 Prayer 5 He prays for
parents, brethren, sisters, kinsfolk, and benefactours. Page 128 Prayer 6 He
prays for enemies and persecutours. Page 131 Prayer 7 He prays for those that
are afflicted and in misery. Page 134
The disposition and method of this daily Practice of piety.
THis Practice of piety is reduced to four heads, according to the number of
the objects about which it is employed: For we must every day weigh and
consider with our selves, 1 The grievousnesse of our sins: and ask pardon
thereof for Christ's sake. 2 GODS benefits: for which we must offer humble and
hearty thanksgiving. 3 Our own necessities: where we must pray for
conservation and increase of the gifts of the Holy Spirit, and for a spiritual
victory in all tentations. 4 Our neighbors necessities: where we must pray for
all things needful for them, for this life, and that which is to come.


The first Part. Of Confession of sins.
The Argument.
The meditation of our sins comprehends in it these two heads, of original
and actual sins. Actual sins are committed in thought, word, and deed: By
the committing of evil, and by the omitting of good: Against GOD, our
neighbor, and our selves The offenses of our youth a^e many, and our daily
infirmities many. We are often tempted of the flesh, and we do often yield unto
it. We partake many times in other men's sins: and in many things we are
defective our selves. We are convicted of our sins by all the creatures: and
we behold the severitie of GODS anger against our sins, in the passion and
death of CHRIST.

PRAYER I. He weighs and considers the grievousnesse of original sin.
HOly God, and just Judge! I know that I was conceived and born in sin: Psalm.
51.5^
I know that I was formed of unclean seed in the womb of my mother: Job 14.4.
That poison of sin has so corrupted and putrified my whole nature, that no
faculty of my soul is free from the contagion thereof: That holy pledge of the
divine image, which was committed unto me in our first father, is perished in
me: There is no power at all in me, to begin to come unto the saving knowledge
of thee, the fear of thee, confidence in thee, and love of thee: There remains
no sufficiency in me, to perform obedience unto thy commandments: My will is
averse from thy law: Romans 7.23
and the law of sin in my members, being repugnant to the law of my mind,
makes my whole nature become corrupt and perverse. I wretched and miserable
man, do feel the power of sin cleaving fast to my members: I do feel the yoke
of wicked concupiscence grievously pressing me: For although I am regenerate,
Titus 2.5.
and renewed by the spirit of grace, in the laver of baptism; yet am I not as
yet wholly free from the yoke and captivity of sin. For that root of
bitterness, which lies hidden in me, does always desire to put forth new
branches: The law of sin reigning in my flesh, does strive to captivate me: I
am full of doubts, distrust, and desire of mine own honor: Matt 15.19.
Out of my heart proceed wicked cogitations: Filthy thoughts defile me
throughout in thy sight: Out of that poisoned fountain flow forth rivers of
poison. Psalm. 143.2.
Enter not therefore into judgment with thy servant, O Lord; but be propitious
unto me, Psalm. 51.1. Psalm. 42 8.
according to thy great mercy: The deep of my misery, calls upon the deep
of thy mercy: For this uncleanness and filthiness of my polluted nature, I
offer unto thee the most sacred conception of thy Son: For me he was born:
Isa. 9.6.
For me therefore he was conceived. For me he was made sanctification, 1. Cor.
1.30.
and righteousness: For me therefore he is become purification and cleanness.
Through him, and for him, thy Son, have mercy on me, O thou most highest:
Psalm. 90.8.
and set not in the light of thy countenance that hidden corruption that
cleaves to my nature; but look upon thy beloved Son my Mediator, and let
his most holy and immaculate conception succor my misery! Amen.

PRAYER II. He recalls to our memory the sins of our youth.
Psalm. 25.7. Jer. 31.34.
HOly God, and just Judge! Remember not the offenses of my youth, and call to
mind no more my sins that are past. How many venomous fruits has the
vicious root of concupiscence, that is inherent in me, brought forth! In my
childhood what an innumerable brood of actual transgressions has the evil of
original sin hatched! Genesis 6.5.
The very thoughts of my heart are wicked and perverse, even from my childhood;
yea, even from my tender infancy: For when I was an infant but of one day, I
was in no wise innocent before thee. As many as the days of my life are, so
many offenses do burden me; yea many more by far in number, Pro. 24.16
seeing that the just man falls seven times in one day: But if the just fall
seven times in one day, then I wretched and unjust man, without doubt have
fallen seventy times seven times. As my life has increased, so has the web of
my sins increased: and as much as has been added to my life by thy bounty;
so much has been added to the course of my sins, by the wickedness of my
corrupt nature. I examine my life that is past: and what else do I behold, but
a filthy stinking cloak of sin? I attend unto the light of thy precepts: and
what do I find in the course of my years that are past, but darkness and
blindness? The tender flower of my youth ought to have been crowned with
virtues, and offered to thee for a sweet savor: The best part of my age past
did ow it self unto thee the best Creator of nature: But the dirty filth of my
sins has most foully polluted the flower of my age, and the stinking mud of
my offenses has in a wonderful and miserable manner defiled me. The first age
of man is amongst all the rest the fittest for the service of God: But I have
spent a good part thereof in the service of the devil. The memory of many
sins, which the unbridled looseness of my youth has committed, is set in my
sight: and yet there are many more which I cannot call to memory. Psalm. 19.12.
Who knows how often he offends? cleanse thy servant from secret faults. For
these offenses of my youth, I offer unto thee (holy Father) the most holy
obedience, and perfect innocence of thy Son, who was obedient to thee unto
death, even the death of the cross. Phil. 2.8. Luke 2.42.
When he was but a child of twelve years old, he performed holy obedience
unto thee, and began to execute thy will with great alacrity. This obedience I
offer unto thee (just Judge) for a price and satisfaction for the manifold
disobedience of my youth. Amen.

PRAYER III. He reckons up our daily falls and slips.
HOly God, and just Judge! There is no man innocent in thy sight, no man free
from the spot of sin: And I am bereaved of that glory, which I should bring
with me to judgment: I am stripped of that garment of innocence, with which I
ought to appear arrayed before thee: Prove. 24.^^. M^tt. 26.^1.
Seven times, yea and oftener every hour I fall: seventie times seven times I
sin every day. The spirit indeed is sometimes ready; but the flesh is always
weak: The inward man flourishes, and is strong; but the outward man
languisheth, and is weak: Romans 7.19
For I do not the good that I would, but the evil that I would not. How often
do vain, wicked, and impious cogitations arise in my heart! How often do vain,
unprofitable, and hurtful words break forth! How often do perverse, wicked,
and ungodly actions pollute me! All my righteousness is as the cloth of a
menstruous woman: Isa. 64 6.
Therefore I dare not plead for my righteousness before thee: But I humbly
prostrate my self before thy most just tribunal, and out of the deeps do I cry
unto thee: Lord, Psalm. 130.3. Psalm. 143^3.
if thou shall decree to impute sin, who shall abide it? If thou will enter
into judgment, who shall stand? If thou will call me to appear according to
the severitie of thy justice, how shall I come before thee? Job 9 3.
If thou will exact a strict account of my life, I shall not be able to answer
thee one for a thousand: Therefore my mouth is stopped, and I acknowledge before
thee, that I have deserved eternal torments; and withal I confess with
tears, that thou may justly cast me into prison for ever. Therefore for these
daily sins of my life, I offer unto thee (holy Father) the most precious
blood of thy Son, which was poured forth on the altar of the cross, which
washes me from all my sins. My sins which lead me captive, are many in
number, and most powerful: But the ransom of thy Son is much more precious,
and of more efficacy: Let that most perfect, plenarie, and holy price paid by
Christ, obtain for me remission of sins! Amen.

PRAYER IIII. He examines our life, according to the rule of the first table of
the commandments.
HOly God, and just Judge! Thou gave unto us thy Law in mount Sinai, Exodus
20.1.
and thou would have it to be the rule of all our actions, words, and
thoughts: That whatsoever is not squared by it, should in thy judgment be
accounted sin.

As often as I look upon that most clear glass, I perceive mine own
filthiness, and tremble every part of me. I ought to love thee (O my God)
above all things: But how often do I love the world, and forget the love of
thee! I am bound to fear thee (O my God) above all things: But how often do I
consent to sin, and let thy fear slip out of my memory! Thou requirest, that
I should trust in thee (O my God) above all things: But how often in adversity
does my soul waver, and anxiously and carefully doubt of thy fatherly
goodness! I am bound to obey thee (O my God) with all my heart: But how often
does my refractary flesh resist the resolution of obedience, Romans 7.23
and lead me captive into the prison of sin! My cogitations ought to be holy,
my desires pure and holy: But how often is the quiet state of my mind troubled
with vain and impious cogitations! I ought to call upon thee (O God) with all
my heart: But how often does my mind wander in prayer, and does anxiously
doubt, whether her prayers be heard or no! How often am I remiss in prayer,
and demisse in conceiving confidence! How often does my tongue pray, and yet I
do not worship thee in spirit and in truth! Jo^. 4.23.
How profound oblivion of thy benefits does seize upon me! Thou do daily
pour thy benefits upon me in a loving manner* and yet I do not daily return
unto thee thanksgiving. How cold is my meditation of thy immense and infinite
gifts bestowed upon me! What slender devotion is there for the most part in my
heart! I use thy gifts, and yet I do not praise thee who art the giver. I stick
in the rivers, and come not to the fountain. Thy word is the word of spirit and
life: Joh. 6.51.
But I through sin and corruption have destroyed the work of thy holy Spirit
within me. The sparks of a good resolution often inkindled, I as often
extinguish: and yet I do not sue to thee for increase of thy gifts. For these
and all other my sins and defaults, I offer unto thee (O my God) the most
pure and perfect obedience of thy Son, who loved thee in the days of his
incarnation most perfectly with his whole heart, and cleaved unto thee most
firmly with all his soul: in whose deeds, words, and thoughts, there was found
no blot of sin, Isa. 53.9.
nor spot of the least offense. That which I want, by faith I draw from his
fullness: Therefore for this thy wel-beloved Sons sake, have mercy Lord upon
thy servant* Amen.

PRAYER V. He considers our life according to the rule of the second table of
the commandments.
HOly God, and just Judge! It is thy eternal and immutable will, that I should
honor with due respect my parents, Exodus 20.12.
and the magistrates: But how often do I think too meanly of their authority!
How often do I in heart refuse to obey then! How often do I traduce their
infirmities! O how often do I omit by serious prayers to further their safety!
I often cherish anger conceived ag^i^st them, whereas I ought with patience to
submit my self unto them. Thy sacred will requires that I should do good to my
neighbor in all things, to my power: But how often does it irk me to do him
good! How does it go against my stomach to forgive him! How often am I
solicited by my flesh, to anger, hatred, envy and brawling! How often does the
fire of my angry heart burn within me, although contentious words be not heard
without! Thy holy will requires that I should live chastely, modestly, and
temperately: But how often has the love of drunkenness and lust, made my soul
captive to sin! How often do fires of lust flame within me, although my
outward members be restrained! Mat. 5.28.
He that looks upon a woman to lust after her, has already committed
adultery with her in his heart, says the Text: How often therefore in the
sight of God do we commit adultery! The inordinate and immoderate use of meat,
drink, and wedlock, often steals upon us, and makes us appear guilty before
thee, if thou would enter into judgment with us. Thy holy Writ requires,
that in bargaining I deceive not my neighbor in any sort; but that I rather
further, and procure his good; that I traduce not his faults, but rather cover
them with the cloak of charity; and that I do not censure him rashly and
unadvisedly: But how often do I seek mine own profit by injustice! How often do
I spend my judgment rashly upon my neighbor! Thy holy will requires, that my
spirit, mind, and soul be free from concupiscence: But how often does my flesh
solicit me to sin, and contaminateth my spirit with wicked concupiscences!
As a fountain does abound with continual bubbling of water: So does my heart
always swell with evil concupiscence. For these, and all other my sins and
defects, I offer unto thee (most holy Father) the most perfect obedience of thy
Son, who loved all men with perfect love, and in whose mouth was found no
gui^^* Isa. 53.9. 1. Pet. 2.22.
(...) whose words and deeds no aberrations, no corruption in nature: To this
propitiation I flee with true faith, and by faith I ^uck out of his wounds,
Romans 3.28.
as much as is sufficient to justify me, and save me: Have mercy on me my God,
and my Father. Amen.

PRAYER VI. He shows that we often partake in other men's sins.
HOly God, and just Judge! Thou ^ast committed unto me, not only the care of
mine own soul, but also the care of my neighbors: But how often does my
neighbor through my negligence suffer great loss of godliness! How often do
I neglect freely and boldly to chide him, when he sins! How often do I, being
hindered either by favor or fear, reprove him for his sins more slightly then
I ought! In pouring out prayers for his salvation, 2. Tim. 2.1.
I am too remiss; in reprehending his sins, I am too-too timorous; in
furthering his salvation, I am too slothful: insomuch that thou may justly
require at my hands the blood of my neighbor that perishes. Ezekiel. 3.21.
If there were in me a perfect and sincere love of my neighbor, surely from
thence would proceed freedom in reproving of sin. If the fire of sincere
charity did burn in my heart, surely it would break forth more clearly into
the spiritual incense of prayers to be made for the salvation of my
neigh^ours. For a man to pray for himself, it is a duty of necessity: But to
pray for the salvation of his neighbor, it is a deed of charity: As often
therefore as I neglect to pray for the salvation of my neighbor, so often I
condemn my self for the breach of the commandment of the love of my neighbor.
My neighbor dies the death of the body, and sorrow fills all with lamentation
and mourning; when as yet the death of the body brings no hurt to a godly man,
but rather gives him a passage into a celestial country: My neighbor dies
the death of the soul, and behold. I am nothing troubled at it: I see him die,
and grieve not at all; when as yet sin is the true death of the soul, and
brings with it the loss of the inestimable grace of God and eternal life. My
neighbor delinquisheth against the king, who can only kill the body; and
behold, I seek by all means his reconciliation: but he sins against the King
of all kings, Mat. 10.28.
that can cast both body and soul into hellfire: and yet I behold it in
security, and consider not that this offense is an infinite evil.

My neighbor stumbles at a stone; and I run presently to save him from a
fall, or otherwise to raise him up, if he be fallen: He stumbles at the
cornerstone of our salvation; and behold I securely pass by it, Psalm. 118.22.
and labor no^ with care and diligence to lift him up again. Mine own sins
are grievous enough: And yet I have not been afraid to participate in other
men's sins. Be propitious (O God) unto me great sinner, and overburdened. To
thy mercy I flee in Christ, and through Christ promised unto me, I come unto
this Life, being dead in sin: I come unto this Way, having gone astray in the
path of sin: I come unto this Salvation, being by reason of my sin guilty
of damnation. Quicken me, guide me, and save me, thou which art my Life, my
Way, and my Salvation for ever and ever. Amen.

PRAYER VII. He shows that we are many ways convinced of sin.
HOly God, and just Judge! If I look up to heaven, I think with my self, that I
have many ways offended thee my God and Father: Luke 15.18.
I have sinned against heaven, and before thee, I am not worthy to be called
thy son. 19.
If I look down upon the earth, I think with my self, how I have abused thy
creatures by my sins: I have infinitely abused not only the darkness of the
night, but also the light of the day to work works of darkness. If I look upon
the examples of sinners, upon whom thou in thy just judgment have inflicted
punishment, I find that the weight of my sins will counterpoise theirs. If I
look upon the examples of the saints, I find that I come far short of them
in my holy service of thee. If I think upon the angel my keeper, I find that
often I put him to flight by my sins. If I think of the devils, I find that
I have often given place to their suggestions. If I weigh with my self the
rigor of thy law, I find that my life is many ways irregular. If I look upon
my self, I find that the very cogitations of my heart do accuse me before thy
judgment. If I think upon the hour of death to come, I find that it is the
just reward of my sins, Romans 6.23
and (unless thou of thy mere mercy for Christ his sake shall receive me)
the gate and entrance into everlasting death. If I think upon the judgment to
come, I find my deserts such, that thou may justly call me to the most exact
account, and punish my sins according to the strict severitie of thy law. If
I think upon hell, I find that I have deserved by my sins the most just
punishment there. If I think upon eternal life, I find that I have by my
sins justly fallen away from all hope of attainment. All things therefore
convince me of my sins: Only thou, O my God, be not thou extreme against me!
To Christ thy beloved Son my only Mediator I betake my self: By him I most
firmly believe I shall obtain thy grace and remission of my sins. Thy
creatures accuse me; the book of my conscience accuses me; both the tables of
thy divine law accuse me; Satan accuses me day and night: But take thou upon
thee my patronage, O sweet Jesus! To thee the poor man is left, bereft of all
solace of the creatures. All my refuge is placed in thy satisfaction for my
sins, and in thy intercession at the right hand of the Father for me. My
soul, take thou the wings of the morning, and, like a dove, hide thy self in
the clefts of the rock, that is, Cant. 2.14
in the wounds of Christ thy Savior. Hide thy self in this rock, till the
anger of the Lord be passed by: and thou shall find rest, and thou shall find
protection, and thou shall find deliverance therein. Amen.

PRAYER VIII. He by the effects of contrition argues us to be convicted of the
heinousness of sin.
HOly God, and just Judge! My heart is contrite and humbled, my spirit is heavy
and in a great strait, by reason of the burden of my sins wherewith I am
oppressed. The courage of my heart has failed, and the sharpness of my eyes
is decayed. My heart is pressed, and from thence gush out tears: My spirit is
oppressed, and I forget to take my bread: My heart is wounded, and from thence
gusheth out blood, and a fountain of tears. Who knows how often he offends?
Psalm. 19.12.
Who knows the sorrow of the heart, that is in a great strait by reason of
offenses? My soul is dry and broken in pieces, and thirsts after the fountain
of life: Psalm. 42.2.
O Christ feed me with the dew of thy Spirit of grace. My heart that is in a
great strait sigheth unto thee: O thou true joy, give unto me peace and
quietness of heart, that being justified by faith, Romans 5.1.
I may have peace with God.

1. John 3.20.
My heart condemns me: But do thou absolve me, who art greater then my heart.
My conscience accuses me: But do thou absolve me, who have fastened to the
cross the handwriting of my conscience. Col. 2.14.
I offer unto thee (O my God) my contrite and humbled heart, Psalm. 51.17.
for a most acceptable sacrifice: I offer unto thee my sighs as the messengers
of true and serious contrition: I offer unto thee my tears as abundant
witnesses of my unfeigned grief. In my self I despair: In thee is my trust. In
my self I faint: In thee I am refreshed. In my self I feel straitness: In thee
again I find enlargement. Mat. 11.28.
I am troubled and burdened overmuch: Thou shall refresh me, and give rest unto
my soul. Psalm. 130.1.
One deep calls upon another: The deep of my misery calls upon the deep of
thy mercy. Psalm. 130.1. Mic. 7.19. Psalm 38.3.
Out of the deeps do I cry unto thee: Cast thou my sins into the deep of the
sea. There is no sound^esse in my flesh by reason of thy anger: neither is
there any rest to my bones by reason of my sin: For mine iniquities are gone
over my head, and become too heavy for me. Cure my soul thou heavenly
Physician, that I be not swallowed up of eternal death. Take the burden of my
sins from me, thou that have taken it upon thy self on the cross, that I
despair not under the intolerable burden thereof. Have mercy on me, thou
fountain of grace and mercy. Amen.

PRAYER IX. He declares the number and greatness of Gods benefits unto us,
and the grievousnesse of our sins.
HOly God, and just Judge! By how much the more benefits thou have bestowed
upon me, by so much the more I grieve, that I have so often displeased thee so
loving a Father. As many gifts as thou have heaped upon me, so many bonds of
love have thou sent over unto me. Thou would have bound me unto thy self:
but I have forgotten thee and thy beneficencie, and linked sin unto sin.
Father, I have sinned against heaven, Luke 15.19.
and before thee: I am not worthy to be called thy son: make me as one of thy
hired servants. I am altogether displeased with my self: Make thou me
altogether to please thee. Thy large bounty, and wonderful patience, ^om. 2.4.
have often invited me to repentance: But hitherto I have been backward to
come. Thou have often called me, (O most bountiful God) by the preaching of
thy word, by the teaching of thy creatures, by the punishment of the cross,
and by inward inspiration: But I have stopped the ears of my heart altogether
at thy call. All the faculties of my soul, all the members of my body are thy
gifts: I ought therefore with all the powers of my soul, and parts of my body,
be ready to do thee all holy service, which is due unto the^: But I have made
them (the more is my grief) the weapons of iniquity and unrighteousness. The
breath which I fetch is thine; the air which I suck in is thine; the sun,
whose light I see daily, is thine: All these ought to have been unto me as
furtherances and instruments to sanctity of life: But I have abused them, the
more is my grief to the slavery of sin. Thy creatures I should have used to the
glory of thee the Creator: But I have wickedly abused them to thy dishonor.
In the light of the sun I should have put on the armor of light: Romans 13.12.
But therein have I committed the works of darkness. How much soever is added
unto my life, comes all from thy bounty: Therefore my whole life ought to be
employed in thy service, on whom it does wholly depend: And yet I have scarce
bestowed the least part thereof in thy service. As many good inspirations as I
have felt within me, so many handmaids of thy grace have thou sent as
ambassadors to invite me mos^ lovingly to return unto thee by true repentance:
But alas, how often have I stubbornly refused to give them audience! But yet
receive him, who now at length returns unto thee with sighing and a contrite
heart: Sprinkle me with the blood of thy Son, that so being purged from all
the pollutions of the flesh and the spirit, 2. Cor. 7.1
I may become whiter then snow, Psalm. 51.1.
and with all thy elect praise thee in the heavenly Jerusalem world without
end* Amen.

PRAYER X. He considers the severitie of Gods ange^ against our sins, in
the death and passion of Christ.
HOly God, and just Judge! I behold thy Son hanging upon the cross, and
pouring forth plentiful rivers of blood: I behold him, and behold for very
terror, I faint altogether. My sins are those iron nails with which I have
bored his hands and his feet. My sins are those pricking thorns with which
his most sacred head (which is to be reverenced of the angelical powers) was
crowned. My sins are those stinging thongs, with which his most ^ure body
(the proper temple of Di^inity) was scourged. Genesis 37.33.
A cruel wild ^east has torn in pieces the heavenly Joseph, and embrewed his
coat with his blood: I miserable sinnner am that wicked beast: for my sins
did make an assault, and rush upon thy most beloved Son. If thy most obedient
Son is so vexed and troubled for other men's sins: Isa. 53.5.
What cause has the undutifull and disobedient servant to fear in regard of
his own sins! The wounds of my soul must needs be great indeed and mortal,
when as thy only begotten Son is so miserably smitten for to cure them. The
disease of my soul must needs be great indeed and mortal, when as the heavenly
Physician, and life it self, does die upon the cross to cure it. I see the
torment of his most holy soul: I hear the miserable exclamation of my most
holy Savior upon the cross: For me it is he is so vexed: it is for my sins
that he complains that he is forsaken of God. Matt. 27.46.
If the weight of other men's sins does so exceedingly press the Almighty
Son of God, that it wrings from him a bloody sweat: How intolerable shall the
anger of God be, and how unmeasurable shall be his wrath against the
unprofitable servant! O thou dry and unhappy wood, that have always served as
a slave the everlasting fire of hell! What must thou fear, when thou see
these things come to pass in the green wood! Christ is the green tree: In the
root of his divinity, in the love of his humanity, in the boughs of his
virtues, in the leaves of his holy words, and in the fruit of his good works.
He is the cedar of chastity, the vine of joyfulnesse, the palm of patience,
and the olive of mercy. But if the fire of the divine anger inflames this
green tree of life: How much more shall it consume the sinner like dry wood for
his unfruitful works! In what capital and bloody letters are my sins
ingrave^ in the body of Christ! How conspicuous (O thou most just God) is
thine anger against mine iniquities! How strait must that captivity needs be in
which my soul was held, when so precious a ransom was paid for her delivery!
How great must the stains of my sins needs be, when rivers of blood flow down
from the body of Christ to wash them away! O thou most just God, and yet most
merciful Father, consider what indignities thy Son has suffered for me; and
forget the wicked works of me thy unworthy servant! Behold the profunditie of
his wounds; and overwhelm my sins in the profound sea of thy mercy! Amen.

The second part. Of thanksgiving for benefits.
The Argument.
The meditation of Gods benefits, does gather out of the garden of nature, and
of the Church, sundry, and those most fragrant flowers of divine gifts: and
recreating it (...) with the odor thereof, offers again to God the
sacrifices of the lips, for a savor of sweet smell. Now the immense and
innumerable benefits of God may be divided according to three articles of our
Christian faith; God has created, redeemed, and sanctified us. He heapeth his
benefits on us in this life, and has promised greater unto us in the life that
is everlasting. He conferres upon us the gifts of the mind, of the body, and
of fortune, which we call external goods. He preserves us from evil, and
conserveth ^s in good. That which is past he covers, that which is to come he
governs. His privative blessings are more then his positive. In brief, we can
neither in word express, nor in thought conceive, the number and dignity of
Gods benefits, which will afford unto us hereafter in the world to come, most
plentiful matter of eternal praise and thanksgiving.

PRAYER I. He gives thanks for our forming in the womb, and for our nativity.
ALmighty, eternal God, Father, Son, and holy Ghost: I give thanks to thee,
I praise thee, Job 10.8.
I glorify thee: because thy hands have fashioned me, and made me wholly round
about. Thou formedst me like clay in my mothers womb. 9
Thou did draw me like milk. 10
Thou did curdle me like cheese: 11
With flesh and skin have thou covered me, and compacted me together with
bones and sinews. 12
Thou have given me life and mercy, and thy visitation has preserved my
spirit. This thy great mercy bestowed upon me, I will celebrate with perpetual
praises. Thy goodness I will sing of in continual songs. Psalm. 139.13
Thou did protect me in my mothers womb. I will confess unto thee: For I am
wonderfully formed: 14
Mavelous are thy works, and that my soul knows right well. 15
My bones are not hid from thee, which thou did make in secret, and deckedst
me with diverse members in the lower parts of the earth. 16
Thy eyes saw me yet being imperfect, and in thy book were all my members
written, which day by day were fashioned when as yet there were none of them. 17
How precious unto me are thy thoughts, O God! how great is the sum of them!
18
If I go about to reckon them, I find them multiplied above the sands of the
sea. Thou did show thy mercy unto me before I understood it: Thou did
prevent me with thy blessings before I did desire them: Thy bounty did embrace
me on every side, before I could give thanks for it. Thou art he who not only
did form me wonderfully in the womb, but also did take me out: Thou art my
hope even from my mothers breast: Out of my mothers womb I was cast upon thee:
Thou art my God from my mothers womb. As often as I think upon many that have
been extinct, and never came to the light of this life: So often I admire and
praise thee for thy mercy, which brought me out of that prison into the theater
of this world safe and sound. How many years are past in which I was not, and
yet thou did erect for me this house of my body, and did bring me out of
that bottomless pit, and the darkness of my mothers womb! Thou gave unto
me a reasonable soul: Thou made me a man, not a stone, or a serpent. To thee
(O my God) for this thy mercy be honor and glory for ever! Amen.

PRAYER II. He renders thanks for our sustentation.
I Render thanks unto thee, Almighty and merciful God, for that thou have
sustained me from the very first days of my life. Naked I came into this
world, and thou coveredst me most graciously. Hungry I entered into this world,
and thou have hitherto fed me most bountifully. In thee I live, move, and have
my being: Without thee I fall again into nothing, and die. Through thee I bow,
and move my members: Without thee I can neither be partaker of life, or motion.
Thine is the sun that gives me light, Mat. 5.45.
which I see daily with mine eyes. Thine is the air which I draw in with
continual breath. The night is thine, and the day is thine, whose intercourses
serve for my labor and rest. Thine is the earth, whose fruits do nourish me
most plentifully. Every creature in heaven, air, earth, and sea is thine, and
is appointed for my use and service. Silver is thine, Hag. 2.8.
and gold is thine. Whatsoever is necessary for the sustentation of this my
present life, all that I receive from thy most liberal and bountiful hands. O
God, how liberal art thou to mankinde^ All things thou createdst long ago for
the use of man: All things thou do as yet preserve for the good of man.
Whatsoever thou, of thine infinite goodness, affordest to the other creatures,
thou affordest also unto me; for as much as thou do wonderfully form,
furnish, and conserve them for my sake. Some of the creatures serve to obey me;
some to nourish me; some to clothe me; some to cure me; some to chastise me:
But all of them to teach and inform me. Who can reckon up those diverse kinds
of nutriments, which thou have created, and do as yet produce out of the
earth unto this day to nourish us? Who can enumerate those diverse species of
herbs which thou do every year cause the earth to bring forth, to cure us?
Who can in words comprehend those sundry kinds of living creatures, which were
made for man's use, and do yet all serve him? To thee be praise and honor for
ever, who art the Creator and Conserver of all things! Without thee the true
sun, I should vanish away as does the shadow: Without thee the true life, I
should presently depart out of this life: Without thee the true being, I should
suddenly fall to nothing. To thee only is due, that I live, move, and have my
being. Therefore to thee alone will I live and adhere for ever. Amen.

PRAYER III. He renders thanks for our redemption wrought by Christ.
I Ow unto thee (O eternal and Almighty God) most hearty thanks for that thou
have created me when I was nothing: But much more for that thou have redeemed
me when I was lost and condemned. I did hang in the jaws of hell: And thou
did pluck me out by the blood of thy Son. Col. 1.14.
I was the slave of Satan: but thy grace has delivered me out of the power of
the devil, and translated me into the kingdom of Christ. I ow my self wholly
unto thee: because thou createdst me wholly. My tongue ought always to praise
thee: because thou gave it unto me. My mouth ought always to set forth thy
praise: because the air and breath which it draws is thine. My heart ought
always to cleave unto thee with perpetual love: because thou did form it.
All my members ought to be ready for thy service: because thou did
wonderfully frame them, how many and how great soever they be. But if I ow my
self wholly unto thee, because thou createdst me: What shall I repay unto thee
for redeeming me out of slavery and captivity! The lost sheep thou have
delivered out of the claws of the infernal wolf. The fugitive slave thou have
plucked out of the prison of the devil. The lost groat thou have sought out with
great carfulness. Luke 15.8.
In Adam I fell, and thou have erected me: In Adam I was captivated in the
bonds of sin, but thou have set me at liberty: In Adam I was lost, and again
thou have saved me. What am I worm, that thou should be so solicitous for
redeeming me? What am I worm that thou should be so prodigally bountiful
for saving me? If thou had altogether cast off our first parents after their
fall, and had thrown them with all their posterity out from the presence of
thy glory into the lowest pit of hell, there is none of us could justly
complain of any wrong done unto him: For they had received, and we had received
for our deeds a just reward. What else could we have desired or expected from
thee, who createdst us after thine own image, and furnishedst us with power and
sufficiency to have kept our innocence. But in this thou did manifest thy
incomprehensible and unspeakable love toward us, in that thou did promise
unto our first parents after their fall, thy Son for their Redeemer, Gal. 4.4.
and in the fullness of time did send him unto us, to call us from death to
life, from sin to righteousness, and from the infernal pit unto celestial
glory. O thou lover of man, whose delight is with the sons of men, Prove. 8.3^
who can worthily set forth the praise of thy love to man? Yea, who can in
mind conceive the worthiness thereof? These are the incomprehensible riches of
thy goodness: This is the infinite treasure of thy gifts which the
slenderness of our capacity and understanding cannot conceive. Was a servant
so dear unto thee, that thy Son must be delivered to death for his
redemption! Was an enemy so much to be beloved, that thou should appoint
thy most beloved Son to be his redeemer! My soul is astonished with the very
consideration of this thy goodness* and does wholly turn and dissolve it self
into the love of thee. Amen.

PRAYER IIII. He renders thanks for the incarnation of the Son.
I Render thanks unto thee, Jesu Christ, thou alone Mediator, and Redeemer of
mankind, for that thou have in the fullness of time personally united unto
thee the true humane nature, Gal. 4.4.
and have vouchsafed to be born of a Virgin. How great is thy love to man, Isa.
7.14. Heb. 2.16.
in that thou did not assume the nature of angels, but the seed of Abraham!
1. Tim. 3.16.
How great is the mystery of godliness, that thou being very God, would be
made manifest in the flesh! How great is the inclination of thy pity, that
descending from heaven for my sake, thou have endured to be born of a Virgin!
For me most vile creature, Creator Almighty, thou art become man. For me most
abject servant, most glorious Lord, thou have put on the shape of a servant,
that by taking flesh upon thee, thou might set my flesh at liberty. To me
thou art born: Isa. 9.6.
Whatsoever celestial good therefore thou bring with thee in thy Nativitie,
shall be mine. To me thou art given: And therefore all things with thee. My
nature in thee is more glorified, then it was in Adam dishonored: For thou
do assume it into the Unity of thy Person, whereas it was weakened with
accidental corruption only by Satan. Thou art flesh of my flesh, and bone of
my bone. Ephesians. 5.30.
Thou art my brother: And what can thou deny unto me, seeing thou art most
nearly joined unto me in the same flesh and affection of brotherly love? Thou
art the Bridegroom, who according to the good pleasure of thy heavenly Father,
have coupled unto thee by a personal league, the humane nature, as a spouse:
To the joy of those nuptials I do proclaim and thankfully acknowledge that I my
self am invited. Mat. 22.2.
I wonder now no more that the heaven, the earth, the sea, and all things that
are in them were made for man by God, seeing that God himself would for man
become man. Thou can not utterly divorce me, and cast me away from thee,
seeing that thou can not deny that thou art a man, and therefore my brother.
Thou can not altogether forget me, because thou have graven me in thine own
hands: Isa. 49.16.
For the very communion of the flesh does daily and continually put thee in
mind of me. Thou can not altogether forsake me, seeing that it has pleased
thee to conjoyn unto thee the humane nature, in a most near bond of personal
union. Although therefore my sins do hinder me, yet the communion of nature
does not repel me. I will adhere wholly unto thee, because thou have wholly
assumed me wholly. Amen.

PRAYER V. He renders thanks for Christ's passion.
HOw great thanks do I ow unto thee, O most holy Jesu, for that thou have taken
upon thee the punishment of my sins, and have endured hunger, thirst, cold,
weariness, reproaches, persecutions, sorrows, poverty, bonds, whips, pricking
of thorns; yea, and that most bitter death of the cross for me sinner! How
great is the flame of thy love which forced thee of thine own accord to throw
thy self into that sea of passions, and that for me most vile and unthankful
servant! Thy innocence and righteousness made thee free from all sufferings:
But thy infinite and unspeakable love made thee debtor and guilty in my room.
It is I that trespassed, and thou make satisfaction. It is I that committed
rapine, and thou make restitution. It is I that sinned, and thou undergoest
the passion. O Jesu most benign, I acknowledge the bowels of thy mercy and the
fiery heat of love. Thou seem to love me more then thy self, seeing thou
deliverest up thy self for me. O most innocent Jesu, what have thou to do with
the sentence of death? O thou most beautiful amongst the sons of men, what
have thou to do with spittings upon thee? O thou most righteous, what have thou
to do with whips and bonds? These things belong not unto thee: They are all due
unto me: But thou of thine unspeakable love did descend into the prison of
this world, and take upon thee the shape of a servant, and most willingly
undergo the punishment that was due unto me. I was for my sins to be adjudged
to the lake that burns with everlasting fire: But thou by the fire of love
being burnt upon the altar of the cross, do free me from it. I was to be
cast away for my sins from the face of my heavenly Father: And thou for my
sake complainest that thou art forsaken of thy heavenly Father. Matt. 27.46.
I was to be tormented of the devil and his angels for ever: And thou of thine
infinite love do deliver thy self unto the ministers of Satan to be afflicted
and crucified for me. As many instruments as I see of thy passion, so many
tokens do I see of thy love toward me: For my sins are those bonds, those
whips, and those thorns which afflicted thee, all which of thine unspeakable
love thou enduredst for me. Thy love was not yet satisfied with taking my flesh
upon thee: but thou would make it as yet more manifest, by that most bitter
passion of thy soul and body. Who am I, most mighty Lord, that for me
disobedient servant, thou thy self would become a servant so many years? Who
am I, most beautiful Bridegroom, that for me the most filthy vassal of sin,
and whore of the devil, thou have not refused to die? Who am I, most bountiful
Creator, that for me most vile creature, thou have not been afraid of the
passion of the cross? I am to thee, most loving Bridegroom, the true spouse of
blood, for whom thou do pour forth such plenty of blood. I am to thee, most
beautiful Lily, a thorn indeed that is full of prickles. It is I that laid
upon thee a heavy and sharp burden, with the weight whereof thou wast so
squeezed, that drops of blood did distill abundantly from thy sacred body. To
thee, Lord Jesu, my alone Redeemer and Mediator, for this thine unspeakable
love will I sing praises for ever. Amen.

PRAYER VI. He renders thanks for our calling by the word.
Unto thee, O Lord my God, is most due, all praise, honor, and thanksgiving,
for that thou would by the preaching of thy word make manifest unto us that
thy Fatherly will, and determinate counsel concerning our salvation. By nature
we are darkness; Ephesians. 5.8. Luke 1.79
we sit in darkness, and in the region of the shadow of death: But thou by the
most clear light of the Gospel do dispell this darkness. In thy light do we
see light; Psalm. 36.11. John 1.9.
that is, in the light of thy word we see that true light that lighteneth every
one that comes into this world. What use were there of a treasure that is hid,
and a light that is put under a bushel? Mat. 5.15.
I do therefore declare with thankfulness that great benefit, in that thou
have by the word of thy Gospel revealed unto us that treasure of benefits in
thy Son. Isa. 52.7. Nah. 1.15
How beautiful are the feet of those that bring good tidings, and tell of
salvation! This peace of conscience, and salvation of the soul, by the
preaching of the Gospel thou do yet declare unto us, Romans 10.15.
and call us unto the kingdom of thy Son. I was led into the bypath of
errors, as it were a weak and miserable sheep: But thou have called me into
the way again by the preaching of thy word. I was condemned, and utterly lost:
But thou in the word of thy Gospel do offer unto me the benefits of Christ;
and in the benefits of Christ, thy grace; and in thy grace, remission of
sins; and in remission of sins, righteousness; and in righteousness,
salvation and life everlasting. Who can sufficiently in words express those
bowels of thy mercy? yea, who can in mind conceive the greatness, and the
riches of thy goodness? Romans 11.25.
The mystery of our salvation kept secret from eternity, by the manifestation
of thy Gospel thou do lay open unto us. The counsels which thou had
concerning our peace before the foundations of the world were laid, thou do
reveal unto us by the preaching of thy word, Psalm. 119.105.
which is a lantern unto our feet, whiles we go through this darksome valley
into light everlasting. What had it profited us to have been born, unless by
Christ thou had delivered us when we were captivated through sin? What had
it profited us to have been redeemed, unless thou had by thy word declared
unto us the great benefit of our redemption? Thou do spread forth thy hands
unto us all the day. Isa. 65.2. Rev. 3.20.
Thou knockest at the gate of our heart every day, and call us all unto thee
by thy word. O Lord most benign, how many thousand thousands of men do live in
the blindness of Gentilisme, and in errors and have not seen that light of
thy heavenly word which thy bounty has granted us of all men most unthankful!
Alas, how often through our contempt and unthankfulness do we deserve that
thou should take from us the candlestick of thy word! But thou of thy long
patience do make as if thou saw not our sins; Rev. 2.5. Wisd. 11.23.
and of thy unspeakable mercy do yet continue unto us that most holy pledge,
and most precious treasure of thy word. For which thy great benefit we render
unto thee eternal thanks, and we humbly beseech thee to continue it still unto
us. Amen.

PRAYER VII. He renders thanks unto God for the expectation of our conversion.
I Render unto thee, most merciful Father, immortal thanks, for that thou
would with so great patience and long-suffering expect my conversion; and
have brought me out of the path of sin, unto the fellowship of thy kingdom.
How great is thy long-suffering, Romans 2.4.
that thou have not cast me away from thy face, and thrust me down into
everlasting torments, whereas I have deserved it a thousand times! How many
thousands has death prevented before they could attain unto true repentance!
How many sinners has the devil made obstinate, that they might not obtain
forgiveness of their sins! There was no distinction in nature between me and
them; only thy goodness and long-suffering: My offense was no less then
theirs; but thy grace did abound. Thy mercy strove with my misery: I went on
in my sin; and thou did go on in thy mercy: I deferred my conversion; and
thou did defer my punishment: I went astray; and thou did call me: I
refused to come; and still thou did expect me. This thy goodness, most
indulgent Father, I cannot extol with sufficient praises. This thy long
patience, most merciful God, I cannot recompense with any merits. Thou did
preserve me from many sins, whereinto the corruption of the flesh, the deceit
of the world, and the persuasion of the devil, would have thrown me headlong as
well as others. Neither have thou only kept me from falling into sin; but
also have most graciously expected my conversion from sin, into which I had
fallen. I find thee more merciful then I am sinful: I sinned; and thou
made as if thou did not see it: I contained not my self from wickedness;
and yet thou did abstain from punishment. Bernard in his 2 Sermon. of the seven
loaves
I did long time prolong my iniquity, and thou did prolong thy pity. What
were then my deserts? Surely evil, and the worst of evils, to wit, my sins,
many in number, most grievous for weight, and detestable for variety.
Therefore to thy grace and bounty alone do I attribute it, that thou have so
long expected my conversion, and delivered my soul out of the snares of ^^nne.
To thee, O Lord, be praise, ho^our, and glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

PRAYER VIII. He renders thanks for our conversion.
I Render thanks unto thee, my God, for that thou have converted my heart that
was hard, and knew not how to repent; and for that thou have taken from me my
stony heart, and given me an heart of flesh. I had of my self power to sin:
But I had not of my self power to rise again to repentance. I could go astray
of my self: But I could not return again into the way without thee. Grana. in
the 2 book of the life of Chr. chap. 2.
For even as he that is born crooked from his mothers womb, cannot be made
straight by natural means, but only by divine and supernatural power* So my
soul being by nature crooked and prone to sin, and the love of earthly
things, could by no humane power, but thy grace only, be rectified, and lifted
up to the love of thee, and heavenly things. I could deform my self by my
sins most foully: But thou only could reform me. As the Ethiopian cannot
change his skin, Jer. 13.23
nor the leopard his spots: S^ neither can I do that which is good, being by
nature addicted unto the love of that which is evil. Thou my God did convert
me, and I was converted; and when I was converted, Jer. 31.19
then I repented; and when I was instructed, then I smote my thigh. Ephesians. 2.5.
I was dead in sin: And thou did quicken me. As much power as a dead man
has to raise himself: So much had I to convert my self. Unless thou had
drawn me, I had never come unto thee; unless thou had stirred me up, I had
never watched unto thee; unless thou had illuminated me, I had never seen
thee. My sins were more sweet unto me then honey and the hony-combe: But I am
to thank thee, that now they are sharp and bitter unto me; for thou have given
me a spiritual taste. The works of virtue were more bitter unto me then gall
and aloes: But I am to thank thee, that now they are become pleasant and sweet;
for thou have by thy Spirit changed the corrupt judgment of my flesh. Isa.
53.6.
I went astray as a sheep that is lost, and declined to the way of iniquity:
But thou, Grana. out of August. meditations.
which art the good shepherd, have found me out, and brought me again unto the
flock of thy saints. It was late ere I knew thee; for there was a great and
darksome cloud of vanity before mine eyes, which would not suffer me to see
the light of the truth: It was late ere I saw the true light; because I was
blind and loved blindness, and walked through the darkness of sin, into
the darkness of hell: But thou have illuminated me; thou soughtest me, when I
sought not thee; thou calledst me, when I called not upon thee; thou
convertedst me, when I was not converted unto thee; and thou said with a most
powerful voice, Let there be light in the inward parts of his heart, and there
was a light; and I saw thy light, and I knew mine own blindness. For this thy
immense and infinite benefit, I will praise thy name for ever and ever. Amen.

PRAYER IX. He renders thanks for the forgiveness of sins.
I Ow and render unto thee, eternal and merciful God, great thanks, for that
thou have not rejected me when I came unto thee, Joh. 6.37
but did most readily receive me, and most mercifully forgive me all my
sins. I was that prodigal son, most indulgent Father, I was that prodigal
son, Luke 15.13.
that by living riotously wasted his Fathers substance: For I have defiled the
gifts of nature; I have refused the gifts of grace; I have deprived my self of
the gifts of glory. I was naked and destitute of all good things: and thou
coveredst and enrichedst me with the robe of righteousness: I was lost and
condemned: and thou of thy free grace have bestowed upon me eternal salvation.
Thou of thine ardent mercy did embrace me and kiss me, in sending thy most
beloved Son that is in thy bosom; and thy holy Spirit, Joh. 1.13.
which is the kiss of thy mouth, Cant. 1.2.
as ample witnesses of thine infinite love. Thou clothedst me with my first
robe, in restoring me my former innocence. Thou gave me a ring for my hand,
by sealing me with thy Spirit of grace. Ephesians. 6.25.
Thou did put shoes upon my feet, by arming me with the Gospel of peace. Luke
15.23.
Thou killedst the fat calf for me, by delivering thy most dear Son to death
for me. Thou did cause me to feast and make merry, by restoring the joy of
heart, and the true peace of conscience unto me. I was dead; and through thee I
was restored to life: I went astray; and through thee I came again into the
way: I was consumed with poverty; and through thee I entered again into my
former possession. Thou might in thy just judgment have rejected me, seeing
that I was polluted with so many sins, covered with so many offenses, and
corrupted with so many iniquities: But thy mercy did abound above my sins;
Romans 5.21
thy goodness was greater then mine iniquity. How often have I shut the gate
of my heart when thou did knock! Therefore when I knocked thou might
most justly have shut the door of mercy against me. How often have I stopped
mine ears, that I might not hear thy voice! Therefore when I sighed unto
thee, thou might most justly have stopped thine ears, and not hearkened
unto my voice. But thy grace was more abundant then all my sin and
transgression. Thou did receive me with thy hands spread forth, Isa. 65.2.
and put away mine iniquities as it were a cloud, Isa. 38.17.
and cast all my sins behind thy back. Thou remembrest my sins no more,
but receivest me into the most ample bosom of thy mercy. For this thy
inestimable benefit, I will give thanks unto thee for ever. Amen.

PRAYER X. He renders thanks unto God for conserving us in that which is good.
TO thee Lord, be honor and glory, and blessing, Rev. 6.12.
and thanksgiving: for that thou have not only in mercy received me upon my
repentance; but also have enabled me to abstain from sin, and live more
reformedly. What should it profit a man, to be free from his sickness, and
presently to fall into a worse relapse? What should it profit, to be absolved
from sins past, unless grace be conferred to lead a godly life? Thou, God
most faithful, have showed all the parts and offices of a faithful and
skillful Physician in the cure of my souls wounds. My wounds were deadly, and
thou did cure them by the wounds of thy Son: But there was cause to fear,
that the wounds that were healed might wax raw again: And thou by the grace of
thy holy Spirit, as it were a fomentation, have hindered it. How many be those,
that after remission of sins obtained, return again to their former course of
life, and reiterating their sins, more grievously offend God! Alas, how many
do we see, that being freed from the yoke of sin, return to their former
captivity, and being brought out of the spiritual Egypt, look back again to
the pots! They have fled from the pollutions of the world, 2. Pet. 2.20.22.
by the knowledge of Christ, and do wallow again in the same, by repeating the
former conversation of their most wicked life. They were freed out of the bonds
of Satan by their conversion, and again are held entangled in the same, by the
delusion of wicked spirits: Surely, their latter end is worse then their
beginning: 2 Pet. 2.21.
And it had been better for them never to have known the way of righteousness,
then having known it, to turn away from the path of the holy commandments,
which were delivered unto them. These are the dogs that return again to their
vomit; 22.
and sowes that after their washing, wallow again in the mire. Whatsoever has
happened unto them, might have happened unto me; but that it has pleased thee
by the grace of thy power, and the efficacy of thy holy Spirit, to enable me
to continue in that which is good. The same wicked spirit that vanquished them,
assaulted me: The same world that seduced them, enticed me: The same flesh that
overcame them, allured me. Only thy grace protected me against their assaults,
and furnished me with power sufficient for victory. Thy strength was powerful
in my weakness: 2. Cor. 12* 9.
From thee the strength of the Spirit descended, with which I was enabled to
bridle the assaults of the flesh. Whatsoever good there is in me, it descends
all from thee, who art the fountain of all good: for in me by nature there is
nothing but sin. Therefore as many good works as I find in me, which
notwithstanding are impure and imperfect, by reason of my flesh; so many gifts
they are of thy grace, I must needs confess. For this thine inestimable gift
conferred upon me, I will give thee thanks for ever. Amen.

PRAYER XI. He renders thanks for all the gifts of the soul and body, and for
external goods.
I Render unto thee, eternal and merciful God, as it is most due, eternal
thanks: for that thou have not only made me a body and a soul; but moreover
have furnished me with sundry gifts of the soul and body, and also with
external goods. Thou which art wisdom it self, teach man all knowledge:
Psalm. 94.10
If therefore I know any good, it is a demonstration of thine abundant grace
toward me. Without thy light, my mind is darksome: Without thy grace, my will
is captive. If there be in me either any wit or prudence, it is all to be
attributed to thy clemency. Wisdom is the eye of the soul, and divine grace
is the eye of wisdom. Whatsoever we know, we know either by the light of
nature, or by the revelation of thy word: But from thee, O thou light of
eternal wisdom, does the illumination of nature spring: From thee also does
the revelation of the word come: Therefore whatsoever we know, descends unto
us as thy gift. Thou, O indeficient fountain of life, art my life, and the
length of my days. Thou, O eternal health it self, art the strength of my
body, and the vigor of my virtue. Man lives not by bread only, Mat. 4.41
but by every word that proceeds out of thy mouth: So then man is not
preserved in health and strength by bread only; neither is he preserved from
diseases by physic only: but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth
of God. Tranquillity of the mind preserves the health of the body: And true
godliness begets tranquillity of the conscience. From thee (O thou chief
good) all true godliness, all tranquillity of the mind without disturbance,
and all wished-for health of body does come. Moreover, whatsoever external
good I do possess, all that I ow unto thy liberality and bounty. A crust of
bread is not due unto my deserts: How much less then are all these external
goods which thou do heap upon me? They are called indeed the gifts of
fortune: But they are in deed and in truth the gifts of thy grace. There is
nothing more blessed then to do good, and to be liberal to others: and thou
have made me partaker of this blessedness, by bestowing liberally these
outward goods upon me. Thou have sowed in me the seed of thy grace, that from
thence there may arise to others an harvest of liberality and beneficency. Thou
have committed many things unto me, as unto a steward, that I might have
wherewithal to do good to my fellow servants. From thee the fountain of all
good, there descends upon me streams of goods: Whatsoever I am, whatsoever I
possess, whatsoever I bestow, depends all, I confess, upon thy bounty. For
this thine inestimable mercy, I will give thee thanks for ever. Amen.

PRAYER XII. He renders thanks for the sacrament of Baptism.
TO thee, O eternal and merciful God, Father, Son, and holy Ghost, I render
humble tha^^s, for that thou have washed me in the holy laver of baptism from
all my sins: and for that thou have received me into the covenant of grace,
and made me an heir of everlasting life. I acknowledge it is thy gift that I
was born of Christian parents, and by them brought unto this heavenly fount.
How many thousands of infants are born in Gentilisme, and without this
sacrament do die in their sins! There is no difference in nature between me
and them: Only thy superabundant grace has made a difference. I was joined
with them in communion of sin: But I was separated from them by participation
of thy grace. How great is this thy goodness, that thou did find me,
Matt. 7.^.
when I sought thee not; that thou did hear me, before I asked; that thou
did open unto me, before I knocked. This thy mercy exceeds all praise, yea
and all admiration. Mat. 28.19.
I was baptized in thy holy name, thy name for me was called upon: Therefore I
am received into the heavenly family, being made the son of my heavenly
Father, the brother of Christ, and the temple of the holy Ghost. This is an
holy and heavenly laver: In it therefore I am washed and purged from all my
uncleanness. It is the laver of regeneration and renovation: By it therefore I
am regenerated and renewed by the grace of the holy Ghost. Whatsoever Christ my
Savior merited by his most holy obedience, and by the effusion of his most
precious blood; of all that he has left the saving fount of baptism as a
pledge. Therefore the conferring of baptism, is the besprinkling of the blood
of Christ. That precious blood of Christ does make me clean from all my sins,
1. Joh. 17
and makes me whiter then snow in the sight of God. Psalm. 51.7.
O eternal God, thou have made an eternal covenant with me in baptism; unto
which I have always recourse by true and serious repentance. Thou have
betrothed me unto thee for ever in judgment and righteousness, in grace and
mercy: Hos. 2.19.
Thou have given me an earnest and pledge of thy Spirit in baptism: Ephesians. 1.14.
Therefore thou will not cast me away from thy face; but being mindful of thy
promise, thou will lead me into the joys of the celestial marriage. As at the
baptism of Christ my Mediator and head, the heavens were opened: Mat. 3.16.
So by the communion of the same baptism, thou have opened unto me the gate of
paradise. As at the baptism of Christ, the holy Ghost descended upon him, and
a voice from heaven did testify that he was the beloved Son of God: So by
the same communion of the same baptism, I am made a partaker of the holy
Ghost, and adopted to be a son of God. For which inestimable benefit, I will
give thanks unto thee, my God, for ever. Amen.

PRAYER XIII. He renders thanks for the sacrament of the Lords supper.
HOw great thanks do I ow unto thee, most high God, for that in the most sacred
mystery of the supper, thou do feed me with the body and blood of thy Son!
What is there in heaven or in earth of more price and excellency, then that
body which is united to thy Son personally? What more certain testimony and
pledge of thy grace can there be, then the precious blood of thy Son poured
out for my sins, on the altar of the cross? The very price of my redemption
thou bestowest upon me, that I may have a most certain testimony of thy grace
toward me. As often as I fall through my sins from the covenant of baptism:
So often by true repentance, and the saving use of this supper, I am restored
unto it again. It is a sacrament of the new Testament, and it always enriches
me with new gifts of the Spirit. In this body life it self dwells, and
therefore it refreshes me, and quickneth me unto everlasting life. By the
effusion of this blood, satisfaction is made for our sins: And therefore by
the drinking thereof, the remission of my sins is confirmed unto me. Christ
says it, Truth it self says it; Joh. 6.54.
Whosoever shall eat my flesh, and drink my blood, has eternal life, and I
will raise him up at the last day, that is, to the life of glory. 50*
For this is the bread of life which descended from heaven, that whosoever
shall eat thereof, may not die, but have everlasting life. It is the eating by
faith that Christ so commends, which must needs be added unto the sacramental
eating, that so that which was appointed to life, may be received by us unto
life. I come therefore with true faith unto this heavenly banquet, being firmly
persuaded, that the body which I eat, was delivered unto death for me, and the
blood which I drink, was poured forth for my sins. I cannot in any wise doubt
of the remission of my sins, when as it is confirmed by the participation of
the price which was offered for my sins. I cannot in any wise doubt of Christ
his dwelling in me, when he seals unto me the same by the communion of his body
and blood. I cannot in any wise doubt of the assistance of the holy Spirit,
when my infirmity is strengthened with such safeguard. I am not afraid of Satan's
assaults, when as this angelical food does make me strong to fight. I am not
afraid of the allurements of the flesh, Hilar. in his 8. book of the Trinity,
page* 141.
when as this quickening and spiritual food does corroborate me by the virtue
of the Spirit. These taken and drunk do make Christ to dwell in me, and me in
Christ. The good shepherd will not suffer the sheep that is fed with his own
body and blood, to be devoured by the infernal wolf: Neither will the power of
the Spirit suffer me to be overcome by the weakness of the flesh. To thee (O
Savior most benign) be praise, honor, and thanksgiving, for ever and ever.
Amen.

PRAYER XIIII. He renders thanks to God, for preserving us from sundry evils.
TO thee (O eternal and merciful God) I render eternal thanks, for that thou
have hitherto preserved me from infinite evils and dangers, and have kept me
safe by the guard of thy holy angels. Thy privative blessings, by which thou
do keep me from evil, are more in number then thy positive, by which thou
do confer good upon me. As many evils of soul and body as I see in others;
so many tokens do I see of thy mercy toward me: For my deliverance from those
evils is to be attributed as due only to thy goodness. How great is the power
of the devil! How great is his subtlety! As often therefore as that malignant
and most subtle spirit, and our most potent adversary does labor to do us
any mischief; so often by the buckler of thy benignity, and by the guard of thy
holy angels being protected, I have been able to escape his nets. But who can
reckon up the treacherous assaults and invasions of the devil? Who can
therefore reckon up the riches of thy bounty? When I sleep by night, the eye of
thy providence does watch over me, that the infernal enemy which goes about
like a roaring lion, may not be able by his strength and subtilty to oppress
me. When by day Satan by his tentations does set upon me, the strength of thy
right hand does most bountifully comfort and strengthen me, that the deceitful
tempter may not allure me into his snares. When an innumerable host of evils
hangs over my head, thy blessed angels encamp about me like a fiery wall. Psalm.
34.7. Zech. 2.5.
There is no creature so vile, so weak, and so little, of which I do not stand
in danger many ways. How great and immense a benefit is it therefore, that thy
providence does preserve me safe from them! My soul is prone to sin, and my
body to falling: Therefore (O Lord most benign) my soul thou governest by thy
blessed Spirit, and my body by thy angelical buckler: Psalm. 91.11.
For thou have given thy angels charge over me to keep me in all my ways, and
to bear me up with their hands, that I dash not my foot at any time against a
stone. Lam. 3.22
To thy mercy I attribute it that I am not consumed. New dangers compass and
environ me about every day: Thy mercy is therefore renewed unto me every
morning. Psalm. 121.4.
Thou do neither slumber nor sleep, O thou faithful and watchful keeper of
my soul and body: Thy grace is the shadow on my right hand, that the noontide
rays of open and violent persecution strike me not, nor the darkness of the
night cause me to fall into the secret and hidden snares of the devil. Thou
do keep my ingresse; thou do direct my progress; thou do govern my
egresse: For which thy great benefit, I will sing praises unto thee for ever.
Amen.

PRAYER XV. He renders thanks for the promise of everlasting salvation.
I Render thanks unto thee, heavenly Father, for that thou have not only given
me free remission of my sins, and the inward renewing of the Spirit, but also
an assured promise of everlasting salvation. How great is thy goodness, that
to me poor miserable man, and a sinner, having had so often experience of thy
mercy, thou have given boldness to hope even after heavenly things, and to
conceive an assured hope of habitation in the everlasting mansions of thy
heavenly house! The goods of that true and everlasting life are so great, Bern.
in his 2 sermon of the 7 loaves, p. 181. Bonavent. in the 7. book of his Compend.
cap. 32.
that they cannot be measured; and so many, that they cannot be numbered; so
far extended, that they cannot be termed; and of such price, that they cannot
be valued. How great therefore is thy goodness and bounty to me undeserving
wretch, in that thou do in the prison and workhouse of this life, make me
blessed in part, with an infallible promise of those goods! That I am already
saved by hope, Romans 8.24.
the Apostle of the truth does manifest: Romans 5.5.
And that hope makes not ashamed, it is proved by evident testimony. Why
therefore is the ship of my heart, in which Christ is carried by faith, so
often tossed up and down with storms and waves of doubtings? Thou have given
unto me a promise of salvation, O God, thou God of truth: How can I therefore
any longer doubt of the certainty and immutability of thy promise? That promise
of life comes of thy mere free will: And therefore it depends not upon the
merit of my works. I am by faith as surely ascertained of the benefits promised
of thy grace, as I am assured by the sight of mine eyes of those which I
already have. Thou feedest me with the body and blood of thy Son. Thou
sealest me by the inward testimony of thy Spirit: What more certain testimony,
or more precious pledge can there be to confirm unto me the promise of
salvation? I find in very deed that thou art with me in the troubles of this
present Psalm. 91.15.
life: How can it otherwise be but that I shall be with thee in that most
blessed fellowship of eternal life? If thou bestowest upon me such great
things in the poor cottage of this world: How much greater will thou bestow in
the palace of the heavenly paradise! Whatsoever thing to be hoped for thou have
promised, is as certain unto me, as all those things, which thou have given me
for my use in this world. Thy mercy and truth is strengthened and shall be
strengthened over me for ever. Psalm. 117.2.
Thy mercy did prevent me, Psalm. 23.6.
and thy mercy shall follow me: It prevented me in my justification, and it
shall follow me in my glorification: It prevented me that I might live piously,
it shall follow me that I may live for ever with thee. Therefore I will praise
and sing of thy mercy and truth for ever. Amen.

The third part. Of Petitions for our selves.
The Argument.
The meditation of our own wants, does show that (...) have of our selves no
manner of spiritual good: And therefore that it becomes ^s to renounce all
confidence in our own strength, and to flee to the aid (...) succor of Gods
mercy, promised unto us through Christ: By this consideration of our manifold
wants, (...) soul is lifted up unto God, and begs of him mor^^fication of the
old man, and renovation of the new, which is necessary for all those that are
born again. ^his renovation consists in the conservation and in^^ease of
faith, hope, charity, humility, patience, ^entlenesse, chastity, and the
other virtues: And ^^erefore we ought with serious prayer to sue unto (...) for
it. Moreover, seeing that daily we are assault^^ by the flesh, the world, and
the devil: insomuch (...) our flesh solicits us unto the love of earthly (...);
the world with hatred, and Satan with his ^^eacheries oppugnes us: We have just
cause to pray (...) unto the Lord of hosts, who proposes unto us (...) battle,
and a reward of victory, For contempt (...) earthly things: For denial of our
selves: For ^^nquest over the world: For comfort in all ad^^rsitie, and true
tranquillity of the mind: For ^^ctorie in tentations, and preservation from
the de^^ls treacheries. And to conclude, seeing that the aid (...) assistance
of God in the hour of death, and the (...) of judgment, is most necessary:
Therefore we must (...) day humbly pray for a blessed departure out of (...)
life, and a blessed resurrection unto life (...).

PRAYER I. He prays for mortification of the old man.
MOst holy and most merciful God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, through the
same thy beloved Son by thy holy Spirit I humbly beseech thee, that thou
would be pleased to work in me a daily mortification of the old man, tha^
according to the inward man I may in thee be strengthened. Romans 7.17.
Sin dwell^ in my flesh: But give thou unto me the strength of the Spirit,
that I do not suffer it to reign in me. Romans 6.12 Psalm. 90.8.
Thou do set my secret sins before thee in the light of thy countenance:
But set thou them, I beseech thee, in the light of my heart, that I may see
them and grieve, and humbly sue unt^ thee for pardon. I am not as ye^
altogether free from sin dwelling in me: But grant, I beseech thee, i^
mercy, that I may be free from the guilt thereof, and from condemnation. Romans
7.23
The law of sin in my members is repugnant unto the law of m^ mind which is
renewed: But giv^ unto me the Spirit of thy grace, that I may captivate the law
of sin, and not be captivated by the old flesh. The flesh within me lusts
against the spirit, Gal. 5.17.
and the spirit against the flesh. The spirit indeed is ready, Mat. 26.41.
but the flesh is weak: Grant therefore unto my spirit the riches of thy
strength and virtue, that it may overcome the evil concupiscences of the
rebellious flesh. Judge. 6.6.
That whorish Dalilah with her allurements does daily set upon me: Ephesians. 3.16.
But strengthen thou me by thy Spirit in the inward man, that at length she
overcome me not. O how grievous and hard a thing is it for a man to fight
against himself, that is, against his flesh! How difficult and hard a matter is
it for one to overcome a domestic enemy! Unless in this combat thou do
arm me with thy heavenly strength, there is great fear that I shall be
constrained to yield unto this enemy, by reason of her secret and hidden
treacheries. Press, burn, ^aunce, mortify the old man, that I may escape his
fawning deceit and seducement. Grant unto me that I may daily die in my self,
that by the allurements of the flesh I be not separated from the life that is
in Christ. Kindle in my heart the fire of the Spirit, that I may sacrifice unto
thee the beloved son of all my evil lusts, 1. Cor. 15.50.
and mine own will. Flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God: Let
them therefore die in me, that I be not excluded from the kingdom of heaven.
They that live according to the flesh, Romans 8.13
shall die: But they which by the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the flesh,
shall live. They that are Christ's, Gal. 5.24.
do crucify the flesh with the lusts thereof: Therefore strike through and
crucify my flesh, O Christ, thou that wast upon the altar of the cross
pierced through and crucified for me. Amen.

PRAYER II. He prays for the conservation and increase of faith.
THou have lighted in my heart, thou living and eternal God, the light of
saving faith: which I humbly beseech thee, of thy goodness and clemency, to
keep and increase. I often feel weakness of faith, I often waver, and am
tossed with storms of doubts and fears: Therefore I humbly call upon thee with
thy blessed Apostles, Luke 17.5.
that thou would vouchsafe to increase it. My heart propounds unto thee a
good word. Isa. 42.3.
Thou will not break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax. 2. Cor. 4.7*
I carry my treasure in a vessel of clay: The torch of faith I bear about me
in a brittle vessel. What else remains there, but that with serious prayers and
sighs I commend it unto thy custody, and daily pray unto thee for increase of
the same? In the darkness of this life and present world, make me partaker of
the heavenly light of faith. Thy word is light and life: Grant unto me of thy
mercy that by true faith I may stick unto thy word, and be made by thee a
son of light and life. Against all the tentations of Satan, against all
oblocutions of the world, yea against the cogitations of mine own heart, let
the comfort of thy word prevail in me. One word of Scripture is of more worth
then heaven and earth, in that it is more firm then heaven and earth. Luke
21.33.
Effect in me by thy holy Spirit, that I may firmly believe thy word, and yield
my reason and my senses to the obedience of faith. Thy promises are of thy mere
free grace, neither do they depend upon the condition of my worth and merits: I
may therefore with most assured faith rely upon them, and with my whole heart
trust in thy goodness. Ephesians. 3.17. Gal. 2.20.
By faith Christ dwells and lives in my heart: Conserve therefore in me the
free gift of faith, that my heart may be and always remain the habitacle of
Christ. Faith is the seed of all good works, and the foundation of holy life:
Conserve therefore, most bountiful Lord, and confirm this in me, that my
spiritual harvest, and dwelling, suffer no loss. Strengthen my faith, that it
may overcome the world, 1. Joh. 5.4. Matt. 5.16.
and the prince of the world: Increase the light thereof, that it may daily
cast forth more clear beams outwardly: Conserve it in the midst of the
darkness of death, that it may cast a light before me to true life. Rule me by
thy holy Spirit, that I lose not this faith by consenting unto the lusts of the
flesh, and taking pleasure in sin against my conscience: But confirm in me
that good work which thou have begun, that by perseverance of my faith I may
obtain the inheritance of eternal life. Amen.

PRAYER III. He prays for the conservation and increas^ of hope.
ALmighty, eternal, and merciful God, I beseech thee by the most sacred
wounds of thy Son, to uphold in me the prop of saving hope. Sometimes my
heart does wave lik a ship in the midst of the sea: But grant thou unto me the
safe and firm anchor of immovable hope; Heb. 6.^
Still the waves of tentations and doubts: Thou that art the God of hope, and
all consolation. As certain and immovable as the truth of thy promise is, so
certain may the firmness of holy hope be in me. I rest upon thy promises: And
thou will not leave me destitute of aid. My confidence is in thy bounty: And
thou will not leave me destitute of comfort. I know on whom I have believed, 2.
Tim. 1.12. Bern. Sermon 3. of the fragments of the 7 loaves, col. 183. Phil. 1.9.
and I am sure that he is able to keep that which is committed unto him by me,
against that day. I am most certainly persuaded, that thou which have begun a
good work in me, wilt also finish it until the day of Jesus Christ. There are
three things that lift me up when I am prostrate; that uphold me when I am
falling; that direct me when I am wavering: to wit, thy love in my adoption;
the truth of thy promise; and thy power in performance. This is the threefold
cord, that thou let down unto me into this prison, out of my heavenly
country, that thou may lift me up, and draw me unto thee, unto the sight of
thy glory. This hope is the anchor of my salvation: This is the way that
leads unto paradise. The meditation of thy command makes me hope: The
meditation of thy goodness suffers me not to despair of thy mercy: the
meditation of mine own frailty suffers me not to hope and trust in my self, or
mine own power and merit. By how much the less my hope is fastened on these
frail and fluxible sands of present goods and humane aid: By so much the more
solidly and certainly it is stablished upon the firm and immovable rock of thy
promise, and celestial things. Unite my heart unto thee, that I may altogether
withdraw my self from the wo^ld, and cleave unto thee with all my heart. Unto
thee I flee, as unto the throne of grace, and altar of mercy, Heb. 4.16
and ark of the covenant, and sanctuary of liberty, Psalm. 18.2.
and the rock of my strength, and horn of my salvation. In me there is nothing
but sin, death, and condemnation: In thee there is nothing but
righteousness, life, health, and consolation. I despair therefore in my self,
and I hope in thee: I am dashed in pieces of my self, and I am raised up by
thee. Let tribulations be multiplied, so that thy quickening consolations be
present unto me, and erect my hope. Romans 5.3.
Tribulation works patience; and patience, experience; 4
and experience, hope; and hope makes not ashamed. 5
In thee, O Lord, do I put my trust, Psalm. 31.1.
let me never be confounded. Amen.

PRAYER IIII. He prays for the conservation and increase of charity.
Eternal and merciful God, who art charity and love it self: 1. Joh. 4 8.
Grant unto me the riches of true and spiritual love. My heart is cold, my
heart is earthy: O thou that art fire, O thou that art love it self, kindle me.
My heart is hard and stony: O thou that art the rock, O thou that art love it
self, soften me. My heart is full of thorns and thistles of anger and hatred: O
most gracious Father, O thou that art love it self, Psalm. 18.1, 2.
weed me. I will love thee, O Lord my strength, my rock, and my tower of
defense, my deliverer, my God, my buckler, and the horn of my salvation.
Whatsoever I see in the creatures either good or excellent, all that I find in
thee, who art the chief good, more abundant and excellent. I will love thee
therefore with all my heart above all things, in whom I know there is such
plenty and excellency of all good. It is so much the better for me, by how
much the more I come unto thee, then whom there is nothing better: But I will
come unto thee, not walking on the feet of my body, but loving thee with the
affection of my heart. If I desire beauty, thou art the most beautiful of all:
If I desire wisdom, thou art the wisest of all: If I desire riches, thou art
the richest of all: If I desire power, thou art the most powerful of all: If I
desire strength, thou art the strongest of all: If I desire honor, thou art
the most glorious of all. Thou did love me from eternity: I will therefore
love thee again unto eternity. Thou did love me in giving thy self for me: I
will love thee again in rendering my self up wholly unto thee. Let my heart be
set on fire; let every creature seem vile unto me: Do thou only become sweet
unto my soul. It was thy will that the humane nature should be united unto thy
Son by an unseparable union: How much more is it fit that my heart be joined
unto thee by an unseparable bond of love? A divine love drew thy Son from
heaven to earth, tied him to a pillar to be whipped, and fastened him to the
cross to be crucified: Should not as fervent a flame of love lift up my heart
from earth to heaven, and bind me to thee the chief good, and that
unseparably? I should offer much injury unto thee and unto my self, if I should
love terrene, vile, and mean things, when thou have so much honored me, and
given me such large promises, to the end I might love thee. From this love of
thee, let there arise in my heart a sincere love of my neighbor. Joh. 14.15.
^. Joh. 4.20.
Whosoever loves thee (O thou chief good) keeps also thy commandments:
seeing that the doing of the work is the trial of love. Wherefore seeing that
thou have commanded us to love our neighbors, 1. Joh. 4.20.
therefore (...) man loves thee sincerely, which pays not unto his neighbor
the debt of love. Whatsoever my neighbor is, he was so dear unto thee, that
thou did wonderfully create him, mercifully redeem him, and graciously call
him to the fellowship of thy kingdom: In thee therefore and for thee I ought
to love my neighbor, whom I see to be raised by thy grace and mercy to such an
height of glory. Strengthen and increase in me this true and sincere love, thou
that art love eternal, and unchangeable. Amen.

PRAYER V. He prays for the conservation and increase of humility.
ALmighty and merciful God, which art a severe hater of all pride, grant that
I may be the rose of charity, and the violet of humility: that I may by my
deeds of charity cast forth a good and fragrant smell, and think humbly of my
self in my heart, What am I Lord in thy sight? Dust, ashes, a shadow, nothing.
Wherefore seeing that I am nothing in thy sight, grant that I may seem to my
self nothing in mine own sight. Keep down that swelling pride that was born
together with my heart, that I may receive the dew of thy heavenly grace: For
the streams of thy grace do not flow upwards to the high mountains, but are
carried downwards to the low valleys of the humble heart. There is nothing at
all mine but infirmity and iniquity: Whatsoever good thing there is in me, it
descends from the fountain of thy goodness unto me. Therefore I can challenge
no good unto my self, seeing that there is nothing properly mine. By how much
the more I think highly of thee: By so much the more I think basely of my self.
Far be it from me, most gracious Lord, far be it from me, to be proud of
thy blessings, and in respect of them to despise others. The treasures of thy
riches thou did depose in the chest of my heart, as many and as great as it
pleased thee: God forbid that I should attribute them unto mine own worth, and
ascribe them unto my self. Thou did kindle in my heart, by thy Spirit, the
fire of piety and love: Grant, I beseech thee, that I may cover it with the
ashes of humility. How little is the honor that by man is given unto man! How
little is the praise wherewith man is graced by man! But he, O most mighty
Creator, is great indeed, that is great with thee. He that pleases thee,
pleases the true prizer of things: But no man pleases thee, unless he
displease himself. Thou art the life of my life: Thou art the soul of my soul:
I therefore resign my life and soul into thy hands, and with an humble heart
cleave fast unto thee. Let thy highness look upon my lowliness: Psalm. 1^3.7.
Let thy loftiness look upon my baseness. Alas! why do I so desire to be
extolled in the world, seeing that there is nothing in the world to be desired?
Why do I so much lift up my self, when as the yoke of sin does so keep me
down? Let the goad of thy godly fear prick my heart, lest it die of the most
dangerous disease of spiritual tumor. Let my sins which are innumerable be
always in my sight. As for my good works, let them be buried in oblivion. Let
the remembrance of my sins make me more sorrowful, then the glory of any
work that I do, seemingly good, but indeed unclean and imperfect, merry and
joyful. In thee alone do I rejoice and glory, who art my joy and my glory for
ever. Amen.

PRAYER VI. He prays for the gift and increase of patience.
ALmighty, eternal, and merciful God, with humble sighs I implore thy grace,
that thou will grant unto me true and sincere patience. My flesh coveteth after
things pleasing unto it, that is, soft and carnal, and refuses patiently to
endure things contrary. I beseech thee powerfully to repress in me this desire
of the flesh, and underprop my weakness with the power of patience. O Christ
Jesu, thou doctor of patience and obedience, furnish me within with thy holy
Spirit, that I may learn of thee to renounce mine own will, and patiently to
bear the cross that is laid upon me. Thou enduredst for me things more
grievous then thou layest upon me: and I have deserved more grievous
punishments then thou inflictest. Thou did bear the crown of thorns, and the
burden of the cross; thou did sweat blood; thou did tread the wine press
for me: Isa. 63.3
Why therefore should I refuse with patience to endure such small sufferings
and afflictions? Why should I be loath to be made conformable unto thy
sorrowful image in this life? Thou did drink of the brook of passions in the
way: Psalm. 110.7.
Why then should I deny to drink a small draught out of the cup of the cross?
I have by my sins deserved eternal punishments: And why should not I suffer
a little in this world a fatherly correction? Romans 8.29.
Those that thou from eternity, before the foundations of the world were laid,
did foreknow, thou have decreed that they should be made conformable unto the
image of thy Son in the time of this life. Therefore if I should not endure
patiently this conformity by the cross, I should despise thy holy and
eternal counsel concerning my salvation: which far be from me thy unworthy
servant! It is for trial and not for denial that thou do so exercise me
with sundry calamities. As much of the cross and tribulation as thou layest
upon me, so much light and consolation do thou confer upon me: neither is
my chastisement increased so much as my reward is. The sufferings of this life
are not worthy of that heavenly consolation which thou sendest in this life,
Romans 8.18
and that heavenly glory which thou promisest in the life to come. Psalm. 91.15
I know that thou art with me in trouble: Why therefore should I not rejoice
rather for the presence of thy grace, then be sorrowful for the burden of the
cross that is laid upon me? Lead me which way thou will, thou best Master and
Teacher, through thorns and bushes I will follow thee; only do thou draw me,
and make me able to follow thee. I submit my head to be crowned with thorns,
being fully persuaded that thou will hereafter crown me with an everlasting
crown of glory. Amen.

PRAYER VII. He prays for the gift and increase of gentleness and meekness.
O Most gracious Lord, that do so lovingly and kindly invite us to
repentance, and with such long patience do wait for our conversion: Romans 2.4.
give unto me the riches of long-suffering and meekness. The fire of anger
does flame in my heart, as often as I receive the least detriment from my
neighbor: Therefore I humbly pray thee, that by thy Spirit thou would
mortify this sinful affection of my flesh. What hard words, and harder blows,
and most hard punishments did thy beloved Son endure for me! Who when he was
reproched, reproched not again, 1. Pet. 2.23.
but referred all to him that judges all things most righteously. What pride
is this therefore, and stubbornness in me, that I miserable and mortal dust
of the earth, and ashes, Gen 18.27
cannot endure a rough word, and overcome with meekness of heart the offense
given me by my neighbor! Learn of me, O learn of me, Matt. 11.29.
for I am meek and humble in heart; thou cryest out, O Christ. Receive me,
receive me, with sighs I humbly entreat thee, into that practick school of thy
Spirit, that I may learn there true meekness. With what grievous and diverse
sins do I offend thee, most gracious Father, whose daily pardon I stand in
need of! Why therefore do I being a man harbor anger against man, Ecclus 28.^^
and presume to ask pardon of thee, who art Lord of heaven and earth? Were it
not absurd for me to take no pity upon man that is like unto my self, and to
ask of thee, Lord, remission of my sins? Matt. 8.35
Unless I shall remit unto my neighbor his offenses, neither can I hope for
remission of my sins. Therefore, most gracious Lord, that art of much mercy
and long-suffering, give unto me the spirit of patience and meeknes, that I do
not presently conceive anger when my neighbor offends me, but that I may
shun it, as the enemy of my soul: or if it steal upon me unawares, that I may
presently lay it aside. Let not the sun go down upon my wrath, Ephesians. 4.26.
lest it depart as a witness against me: Let not sleep seize upon me whilst I
am angry, lest he deliver me in my anger to death his sister. If I desire to
take revenge of mine enemy, why do not I set my self against mine anger, which
is my greatest and most hurtful enemy, seeing that it kills the ^oul, and
makes me subject to eternal death? Set a watch before my mouth, and give me
prudence to govern the actions of my life, that I offend not my neighbor
either in word or deed. Grant that I may be unto my neighbor by the fragrant
smell of my virtues, a sweet senting rose; and not by offenses and detractions
a pricking thorn. Grant, good Jesu, that I may insist in the footsteps of thy
meekness, and with a sincere heart love my neighbor. Amen.

PRAYER VIII. He prays for the gift and increase of chastity.
HOly God, thou which art a lover of modesty and chastity, and a severe hater
of filthiness and lust, for Christ his sake the most chaste Bridegroom of my
soul, I entreat thee to work and increase in me true chastity inward and
outward, of the soul and of the body, of the spirit and of the flesh: and
contrariwise to extinguish the fire of evil concupiscence that is in my heart.
Let the holy fear of thee wound my flesh, that it rush not headlong into the
fire of lust. Let the celestial love carry my soul up unto thee, that it
cleave not through inordinate love unto the unsavourie things of the world.
Shower down a upon me the streams of thy heavenly grace, that the flames of
concupiscence may thereby be extinguished, as fiery darts are in the water. My
soul was created after thy image, and repaired again by Christ: I should offer
great injury unto thee therefore my Creator, and Redeemer, and unto my self
also, if I should be-black the beautiful face of my soul with the smoke and
stains of dishonest love. Christ dwells in my heart: The holy Ghost dwells
in my heart: Ephesians. 3.7. 1. Cor. 3.16.
Let him therefore replenish me with the power of his grace, and the larges of
his spiritual gifts, that I may be holy in spirit, and holy in body. 1. Cor.
7.34. Heb. 2.14.
Without holiness no man shall see thee, who ^rt the most pure light: As much
therefore as thy beautiful vision is to be loved and desired, so detestable
and odious let the decrease and loss of chastity be unto me. The holy Spirit
is made sorrowful with the sparks of filthy speeches: Ephesians. 4.30.
How much more then with the flaming fire of lust! Bernard of conversion, chap.
2.
The very appetite of lust is full of anxietie and folly: The act is full of
abomination and ignominy: And the end is full of repentance and shame. The
heat thereof ascends up into heaven, and the stink thereof descends even
unto hell: Why therefore should I open the door of my soul to this most filthy
enemy, and receive him even into the inward chamber of my heart? Give unto me,
thou God of holiness and fortitude, thou Lord of hosts, give unto me the
strength of the Spirit, that I may overcome that enemy, which within me
fights against me: Grant unto me that I may not only abstain from unlawful
embracings, and outward acts of filthiness, but also that I may be freed from
the inward flames and desires thereof: seeing that thou do not only require
a pure body, but also a pure heart, and do behold with thy most pure eyes not
only the outward, but the inwards also. Crucify in me (O Christ thou which
wast crucified for me) my flesh and the concupiscence thereof, I beseech thee.

PRAYER IX. He prays for contempt of earthly things.
HOly God, heavenly Father, I call upon thee through thy beloved Son, that by
thy holy Spirit thou would withdraw my heart from earthly things, and lift
it up unto the desire of heavenly things. As fire by nature does tend upwards:
So let the spiritual fire of love and devotion kindled in my heart, tend to
heavenly things. What are these earthly things? They are more brittle then
glass, more moveable then Euripus, more changeable then the winds. I were a
fool therefore, if I should set my heart upon them, and seek rest for my soul
in them. We must leave all earthly things when we die, though it be against our
wills: Grant therefore that with a free and voluntary affection of the heart, I
may first forsake them. Mortify in me the love of the world, that the holy
love of thee may increase in me. Preserve me by the aid of thy holy Spirit,
that I settle not my love on this world, lest my heart become worldly. 1. Cor.
7.31.
The figure of this world passes away, the momentany glory thereof passes
away: the dissolution both of heaven and earth is at hand: Bend my heart
therefore, that I may become a lover of the life that lasts for ever, and not
of this world which soon flees away. Whatsoever is in this world, 1. John 2.16.
is concupiscence of the flesh, concupiscence of the eyes, and pride of life:
But how vain a thing is it to love the concupiscence of the flesh! How
dangerous a thing is it to satisfy the concupiscence of the eyes! How hurtful
a thing is it to make choice of the pride of life! He cannot truly love Christ,
which is the heavenly bread of life, that is full with the earthly husks of the
swine. He can not freely fly up to God, Luke 15.16.
whose heart is held captive with the love of this world. The love of God
cannot enter in there, where the heart is full with the love of this world.
Quench in me therefore, O God my love, the desire of earthly things: Take from
me this bond of the love of the world; scour the vessel of my heart, that I
may love thee with sincere love, and cleave unto thee with a perfect heart. 1.
Joh. 2.25.
Alas! Why should I love those things which are in the world, seeing that they
cannot satisfy my soul which was created for eternity, nor recompense me
again love for love? Him shall my soul love, with whom she shall dwell for
ever. Thither will I send before the desires of my heart, where eternal glory
is prepared for me. Mat. 6.21.
Where my treasure is, there shall my heart be also. Psalm. 55.6.
Give unto me the wings of a dove, that I may fly on high unto thee, and hide
my self in the holes of the rock: lest the hell-hunter catch me in the snares
of this worldly love, and draw my soul again to earthly things: Let all the
world wax bitter unto me, that Christ alone may become sweet unto my soul. Amen.

PRAYER X. He prays for denial of himself.
O Jesu Christ, Son of the living God, which proclaimest in thy word,
Whosoever will be my disciple, Mat. 16, 24.
let him deny himself, take up his cross, and follow me: I entreat thee by
thy most precious death and passion, to perfect in me that denial of my self
which thou requirest. I know it is easier to forsake all other creatures, then
for a man to deny himself. That which I cannot therefore in my self perfect,
perfect thou in me I beseech thee. Let the desires of mine own will keep
silence, that I may hearken unto thy divine oracles. Let the rootie strings of
the love of my self be rooted out of my heart, that the most sweet plants of
divine love may grow in me. Let me die wholly unto my self, and mine own
concupiscences, that I may live wholly unto thee, and thy will. My will is
changeable and moveable, wandering and unconstant: Grant therefore that I may
submit my will to thy will, and cleave inseparably unto thee, who art alone the
immutable and eternal good. Then do divine virtues grow in us, when natural
strength decays in us us: Then at length are our works done in God, when our
own will is mortified in us: Then are we truly in God, and live in him, when we
are annihilated and made nothing in our selves. Therefore, O thou true life,
mortify in me mine own will, that I may begin truly to live unto thee.
Whatsoever in us ought to be approved, and please God, must from him descend
upon us: Therefore, to God alone must all good be ascribed, and to him must we
leave that which is his own. Whatsoever does shine and glitter in us, does come
from the eternal and immutable light, which lighteneth the natural darkness
of our minds. Let our light therefore so shine before men, Mat. 5.16.
not that we our selves, but that God may thereby be glorified. O Christ, thou
which art the true light, kindle this light of true knowledge in my mind. O
Christ, thou which art the true glory of thy Father, work in my heart this
abnegation of mine own honor. It is better for me in thee, then in my self:
Where I am not, there am I most happy. My infirmity desires to be strengthened
by thy virtue: my nothing looks up unto thy being. Mat. 6*10.
Let thy holy will be done in the earth of my flesh, that thy heavenly kingdom
may come into my soul. Mortify in me the love of my self, and of mine own
honor, that it may not hinder the coming of thy heavenly kingdom. If it be
the total good of mankind to love God; then it must needs be the total evil
to love himself. If it be the nature and property of the true good to
communicate it self: then surely man's love of himself must needs be a great
evil; because he challenges his own and others good unto himself. If all glory
be due unto God alone, then is it sacrilege to challenge honor; for he that
challenges it, challenges that which is another. Extinguish in me this love
of my self and mine honor, O Christ blessed for ever. Amen.

PRAYER XI. He prays for conquest over the world.
Almighty, eternal, and merciful God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, give
unto me the grace of thy holy Spirit, that I may get the conquest over all the
tentations of the world. The world sets upon me with hatred, flattery, and
perverse examples: Teach me to contemn the hatred of the world, to decline her
allurements, and to shun the imitation of evil examples. What can the world
with her hatred do against me, if thy grace like a buckler protect me? What
shall it hurt me though all men should persecute me with hatred, if thou my God
do embrace me with love? Again, what shall it profit me, though all men
should love me, if the fury of thine anger shall pursue me? The world passes
away, the hatred of the world passes away: But the grace of God alone endures
for ever. Remove therefore, O God, out of my heart that inordinate fear, that I
be not afraid of the hatred and persecution of the world: But ingraff in my
soul a full confidence, and an ardent heat of the spirit, that I may learn to
contemn all worldly things, because they are transitory clouds. Mat. 10.2^
Why should I be afraid of them that kill the body, but cannot kill the soul? I
will rather reverence and fear him that is able to cast not only the body, but
the soul also into the everlasting fire of hell. 1. Joh. 5.4.
Our faith is the victory that overcomes the world: For by faith we have an
eye unto the joys to come, that so we may with patience endure these present
sorrows. By faith we rely upon the divine goodness, that so we may abide
humane hatred. Neither does the world assault me on the left hand only with
her hatred, but on the right hand also she labors to ensnare me with her
fawning allurements. She has a sting in her tail, but she has a smooth face.
Grant unto me therefore, O Christ, a taste of the sweetness of the heavenly
joy, that I may lose the taste of earthly things. The taste of my soul is
corrupt, and coveteth after earthly things; and the contempt of the worlds
allurements does seem bitter unto it: But thou, the true prizer of things, have
taught me to loathe the enticements of the world; and would have my soul to
soar aloft after heavenly things. Turn away therefore, O turn away my heart
from the allurements of the world, that being turned unto thee, it may enjoy
the true and spiritual delights. What have these things profited the lovers of
the world after death, to wit, Vain glory, short pleasure, slender power? What
has the momentanie pleasure of the flesh, and store of false riches profited?
Where are they now, that not many days ago were here with us? There remains
nothing of them but ashes and worms. They did eat and drink being secure, they
passed their life being made drunk with carnal pleasure: But now their flesh
is here given to the worms for meat, and their soul is there tormented in
everlasting fire. All their glory is fallen like the flower, and like grass
withered. Suffer me not, O God, to follow their steps, lest that I come to the
same term of misery: But by the victory of the world lead me unto the crown of
celestial glory. Amen.

PRAYER XII. He prays for consolation in adversity, and for the true rest of
the soul.
MOst gracious Father, God of (...) hope and consolation, 2. Cor. 1.^
grant unto me in all adversities thy quickening consolation, and the true rest
of the soul. I feel much straitness in my heart: But thy consolation shall
make glad my soul. Psalm. 94.19.
Vain and unprofitable is all the comfort of the world: in thee alone is the
strength and support of my soul. The weight of diverse calamities presses me
sore: But thy inward speaking unto me, and thy consolation makes it light. No
creature can make me so sorrowful, but thou can make me much more glad by
the spirit of gladness. No adversities can so straiten my heart, but thy grace
can much more enlarge it. The fiery heat of sundry calamities does torment me:
But the taste of thy sweetness does refresh me. Rivers of tears distill from
mine eyes: But thy most bountiful hand does wipe them all away. Rev. 7.17.
As thou did show thy loving countenance to Stephen the first Martyr, Acts
7.56.
even in the very heat when his enemies stoned him: So vouchsafe to give unto
me in all adversities the joy of thy comfort. As in the most grievous agony of
death, thou did send an angel unto thy Son to comfort him: Luke 22.43.
So in this my wrestling send, I beseech thee, thy holy Spirit to uphold me.
Without thy support I fall down under the burden of the cross: Without thy
help by the assault of sundry adversities I am cast down flat. Extinguish in me
the love of the world, and of the creatures: so shall not the calamities of
this world, nor the changeableness of the creatures bring any bitterness unto
me. He that with all his heart does cleave unto the world and to the creatures,
can never be made partaker of the true and eternal rest; for all terrestrial
things are subject to continual alterations and changes: But whosoever does
not cleave unto the present goods of this life with an inordinate desire, he
will not be grieved much for the loss of the same. Pour out, O God, pour out
of my heart the love of the world, that the celestial Elisha may pour into
the widows pitcher, that is, 2. Kings 4.2.
into my soul devoid of earthly comfort, the oil of celestial joy. Let all
earthly things be troubled, and changed, and turned upside down: Yet
notwithstanding thou art the immovable foundation and most firm rock of my
heart. Psalm. 7^.26.
Can a poor and weak creature disturb the quiet of my soul, which I possess
in thee my Creator sure and immovable? Can the waves of the world that most
unquiet sea, cast down the rock of my heart, which is fixed in thee the chief
and immutable good? No: For thy peace passes all ununderstanding, and
overcomes the invasion of all adversities. Which inward peace, most bountiful
Father, I beg at thy hands with most humble sighs. Amen.

PRAYER XIII. He prays for victory in tentations, and deliverance from the
devils treacheries, and invasions.
BE present unto me, thou God of Zebaoth, thou God of strength and mercy, that
I yield not unto the tentations and invasions of Satan: but being safe by thy
guard, and upholden by thy aid, I may become at length the conqueror. Within
are fears, 2. Cor. 7.5
without are fights: For within the devil does wound my soul with venomous and
fiery darts of tentations: Without he wearies me with sundry adversities, and
a thousand kinds of treacheries. He is a serpent for his subtlety and
fallacy, a lion for his violence and invasion, a dragon for his cruelty and
oppression. He attempted to assault the very captain of the heavenly host: And
will he spare me a common soldier? He did not doubt to set himself in
opposition against the very head: And what wonder then if he go about to
overthrow a weak member of the mystical body? There is no power in me to
withstand him being strong and armed: There is no wisdom in me to escape the
snares and gins of this enginer, that has a thousand stratagemes. To thee
therefore with humble sighs do I betake my self, whose power cannot be termed,
and whose wisdom cannot be numbered. Be present with me, O Christ, thou which
art the most strong Lion of the tribe of Judah, Rev. ^.5.
that in thee and through thee I may be able to get the conquest over that lion
of hell. Thou have fought and overcome for me: Fight likewise and overcome in
me, 2. Cor. 12 9.
that thy strength may be perfected in my weakness. Enlighten the eyes of my
mind, that I may discern the treacheries of Satan. Direct my feet, that I may
escape his hidden snares. Let the victory in tentation be a testimony unto my
heart of my heavenly regeneration. Let the presence of thy grace confirm unto
me the promise of victory. Furnish me and arm me with the strength of thy
fortitude, that in this combat I may be able to stand, and hereafter judge him,
1. Cor. 6.3
of whom I am now oppugned. The more in number, and the more dangerous the
treacherous assaults of this enemy are, the more ardently do I flee unto the
aid of thy mercy. One while he inspires into me the unsatiable desire of
earthly things, that having bound me in the fetters of avarice, he may lead me
out of the way of righteousness. Another while he inflames me with the fire of
anger, that my heart may burn within me, till I have done my neighbor some
mischief. Another while he solicits me to lust, and the love of pleasures.
Another while he suggests into my mind envy and ambition. Before he
precipitates and throws me headlong into sin, he persuades me it is lighter
then the air, or a feather, or an autumn leaf; and this is to make me secure:
And when he has precipitated me into sin, then he tells me it is greater then
the universe of heaven and earth, and more weighty then the balance of Gods
mercy; and this is to make me despair. These so many and so great and
treacherous assaults and fallacies I cannot foresee: How much less then shall
I be able of my self to escape them? Unto thee therefore do I flee, who art my
strength, and the rock of my fortitude for ever. Amen.

PRAYER XIIII. He prays for a blessed departure out of this life, and for a
blessed resurrection unto life everlasting.
O Jesu Christ, Son of the everliving God, thou that wast crucified and
raised up again for us, thou that did destroy our death by thy death, thou
that have merited by thy resurrection a blessed resurrection for us unto life
everlasting: I worship thee, I pray unto thee with my whole heart, the only
true God, together with the Father and the holy Spirit, to grant unto me a
happy egresse out of the miseries of this life, and a blessed ingresse in the
resurrection, and in the day of judgment unto life everlasting. I know that
there is an appointed term of my life in thy divine determination, Heb. 9.27.
and that after death follows judgment. Be present with me in the hour of
death, thou that sufferedst death for me on the cross: Protect me in the day
of judgment, thou that wast for me unjustly condemned. When the tabernacle of
this my earthly house shall be dissolved, 2. Cor. 5.1.
lead my soul into an habitation in my heavenly country. When my eyes shall be
darkened in the agony of death, kindle in my heart the light of saving faith.
When my ears shall be stopped in the hour of death, speak unto me inwardly by
thy Spirit, and comfort me. When a cold sweat does come forth out of my dying
members, make me to remember thy bloody sweat, Luke 22.44.
which is a sufficient ransom for my sins, and a defensive remedy for me
against death. In thy sweat there appears fervency, in thy blood a price, and
in the running down thereof sufficiency. When my speech shall begin to fail me
in that last agony, grant that I may sigh unto thee by the grace of thy holy
Spirit. When those extreme distresses seize upon my heart, be thou present with
me by the consolation and help of thy quickening grace, and take me into thy
charge and tuition when all other creatures deny me aid. Grant unto me that I
may patiently endure all horrors and troubles: and bring my soul at length out
of this prison. I beseech thee by thy most sacred wounds which thou enduredst
in thy p^ssion upon the cross for me, to grant unto me that I may be able to
quench the fiery darts of Satan, Ephesians. 6.16*
wherewith he does strike at me in the hour of death. I beseech thee by those
most bitter torments which thou sufferedst, that I may be able to endure and
overcome all the violent invasions of the infernal powers. Let my last word in
this life be the same with which thou did consummate all upon the cross: and
receive my soul, Luke 23.46.
which thou have redeemed with so dear a price, when I shall commend it into
thy hands. Let a blessed resurrection follow a blessed death: In that great day
of thy severe judgment, deliver me from that cruel sentence, thou which in my
life did with thy ready help protect me. Let my sins be covered with the
shadow of thy grace, Psalm. 32.1. Mic. 7.19.
and overwhelmed in the bottom of the sea. 1. Sam. 25.29.
Let my soul be bound up in the bundle of the living, that with all the elect I
may come into the fellowship of everlasting joy. Amen.

The fourth Part. Of Supplications for others.
The Argument.
The meditation of our nei^hbours wants and indigencies, concern, the common
good and welfare of the Church and Commonwealth, an^ makes us look upon others
miseries as our own. This is the fruit of true and since^e charity, which
binds us altogether into one mysti^all body, under one head, which is Christ;
and commends unto us a serious care of the whole Church, and of all the
particular members thereof. That is not a true member of the body, which
labors not, as much as in it lies, to preserve in safety the whole structure
of the body: That is not a true member of the (...) that suffers. And the
same reason is of force in the mystical body of Christ. Whosoever therefore is
a true and a living member of the Christian Church, let him daily Pray For the
conservation of the word: For pastors and people: For magistrates and
subjects: and, For the Oeconomicall and household estate. For these are those
three Hierarchies, and ho^y magistracies, (...) by God for the safety and
preservation of this life, and for the propagation and increase of the heaven^y
kingdom Let him pray also For his kin^folk, and his benefactours, to whom he
must acknowledge himself to be bound in some special bond of duty. Let him
pray For his enemies and persecutours, and seriously desire their conversion
and salvation. Let him pray likewise For all those that are afflicted and in
misery, and show h^^^elf to be moved with a fe^low-feeling of their calamities.

PRAYER I. He prays for the conservation and continuance of the word, and for
the propagati^^ and increase of the Church.
Almighty, eternal, and merciful God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that
by thy holy Spirit do gather thy Church out of mankind, and in it do keep
the heavenly doctrine committed unto it: In humility I adore and worship thee,
and pray unto thee, that thou would be pleased to continue unto us the
saving doctrine of thy word inviolable, and every day propagate and enlarge the
bounds of thy Church. Thou have of thine infinite mercy lighted unto us that
were in the darkness of this world, the light of thy word: Suffer not
therefore the clouds of humane traditions to extinguish it, or to obscure it.
Thou have given unto us thy word for the wholesome meat of our souls: Suffer it
not therefore by the delusion of the devil and the corruption of men, to be
turned into poison. Mortify in us the sinful lusts of the flesh, that
thirsts after earthly things; that so we may taste the spiritual delicates
of thy word which is that heavenly Manna: No man can feel the sweetness
thereof, but he that will taste: and no man can taste, whose palate is
corrupted with abundance of worldly delights. Thy word is the word of spirit
and life, of light and grace. Take away therefore the carnal affections, and
the corrupt senses of our hearts; that it may shine to us within, and be a
light to lead us unto the light of everlasting life. From the light of thy word
let there arise in our hearts the light of saving faith, that in thy light we
may see light, in the light of thy word, Psalm. 36.9.
the light of thy Son. As in the old time that heavenly Manna descended in
the wilderness with a wholesome dew: So likewise by the hearing of thy word
let our hearts be filled with the fire of the Spirit, that our cold and
lukewarm flesh may be excited, and may be tempered against the boilings of
sinful lusts. Let the seed of thy word take deep root in our hearts, that by
the dew of thy holy Spirit watering it, it may bring forth wholesome fruit, and
plentiful increase like standing-corn. Protect, O Lord, Psalm. 80.15 Isa. 5.2.
the vineyard of thy Church, in which thy word is as seed scattered, and fruit
is gathered unto everlasting life Set an hedge of angelical guard round about
it, that the wild boars and the foxes break it not down: the wild boars by
violent persecutions, and the foxes by fraudulent delusions. Erect up in it an
high tower of thy fatherly providence, that by thy custody it may be free from
all devastation. But if thou shall at any time think good to press the grapes
of this vineyard in the press of the cross, and of calamities, let them be
ripened first by the heat of thy grace; that they may yield the most delicious
fruits of faith and patience. Whatsoever is put into the root of the vine, is
converted in the grapes into the most sweet liquour of wine: Grant, I beseech
thee, that whatsoever shall happen unto us in this life, whether scoffings,
persecutions, praises, or whatsoever else, our souls may turn it into the wine
of faith, hope, and charity, and into the fruit of patience and humility. Out
of this militant Church translate us at length into the Church triumphant: And
let this tabernacle of clay be changed into that most beautiful and
everlasting temple of the heavenly Jerusalem. Amen.

PRAYER II. He supplicates for pastors and their hearers.
O Jesu Christ, Son of the living God, our alone Mediator and Redeemer, who
being exalted at the right hand of the Father, do send pastors and teachers
of thy word, by whose ministry thou do gather together unto thee thy Church
amongst us: I humbly entreat thee, Ephesians. 4.11.
the only true God, together with the Father and the holy Spirit, to govern
these thy ministers in the way of truth, and to turn the hearts of their
hearers unto the true obedience of the faith. There is no state or condition of
men that is more subject to the hatred and treacheries of Satan, then the
ministers of thy word: Defend them therefore by the buckler of thy grace, and
furnish them with the strength of patience, that Satan by his sleights may not
supplant them. Give, I beseech thee, unto thy ministers, that knowledge that is
necessary for them, and a pious vigilancie in all their actions; that they may
first learn of thee, before they presume to teach others: Govern and illuminate
their hearts by thy Spirit; that being in the place of God, 1. Pet. 4.11.
th^^ preach nothing else but the oracles (...) God. Let them feed the flock
that is committed unto them, Acts 20.28.
which thou have bought and redeemed with the precious blood. Joh. 21.15
Let them feed the flock out of true and sincere love, and not for
covetousness and ambition. Let them feed them with their mind, with their
mouth, and with their works. Bern. 2. sermon of the resurrection, col. 134.
Let them feed them with the sermon of the mind, with the exhortation of the
word, and with their own example; that they may be followers of his steps, to
whom the cure of the Lords flock was three several times commended. Stir
them up; Heb. 13.17.
that they may watch ^ver the souls that are committed unto them, as being to
give a strict ^ccount for them in the day of judgment. Whatsoever they exhort
by ^he word of their holy preaching, Greg. 3. book of Pastoral Cure, cap. ^.
let them studiously labor to demonstrate the same in their actions: lest that
being lazy themselves, and loath to work, they labor in vain to stir up
others. Unto what good works ^oever they stir up others, let them shine by
the same first themselves, being set on fire by the holy Spirit. Before the
words of exhortation be heard, let them first proclaim by their works,
whatsoever they shall speak with their tongues. Thrust forth faithful
laborers into thy harvest; Mat. 9 38.
that they may gather together many handfulls of saints. Act. 16.14
Open likewise the hearts of the hearers; that they may receive the seed with
holy obedience. Give unto them thy grace; that with a pure heart they may keep
thy holy word committed unto them, and bring forth plentiful fruit with
patience. Let them hearken attentively; let them hear carefully; let them
practice fruitfully: that the word which is preached unto them, for want of
faith condemn them not in the last day. John 12.48. Heb 4.2 Isa. 55.11
There is a notable promise of thy bounty, that thy word shall not return unto
thee spoken i^ vain: Be mindful of this thy promise, and bless the labor of
him that planteth, and him that waters. Suffer not the infernal crows to
pick out of the field of the hearers hearts, 1. Cor. 3 7 M^t. 13.4.
the seed of thy holy word. Suffer not the spinie thicket of the thorns of
pleasures, Luke 8.14
and riches, to choke it. Suffer not the hardness of the stony ground to
hinder the fructification of it: 13.
But pour down the dew of thy heavenly grace from above, and water thy
heavenly seed; that the fruit of good works like standing-corn may spring up
most plenteously. Knit together in a near bond of love and charity the hearts
of the pastors and of the hearers: that they may labor together with mutual
prayers, and raise up one another with mutual comfort. Amen.

PRAYER III. He prays for Magistrates and subjects.
ALmighty, eternal, and merciful God, Lord of hosts, that do translate and
establish kingdoms, Dan. 2.21. Romans 13.1*
from whom is all power in heaven and in earth, whom the Angels in heaven
adore, whom the Archangels praise, whom the Thrones worship, to whom
Dominations are subject, and Principalities serve, whom Rulers honor, and
Powers reverence: I join my prayers and humble requests with those holy and
powerful spirits, and call upon thee, to replenish our magistracy here on
earth with the spirit of wisdom, and to protect it with the strength of thy
fortitude. Be present by thy grace with all Christian Kings and Governors:
that the greater their dangers be in respect of the highness of their state,
the greater they may find the abundance of thy grace toward them. Kindle in
their hearts the light of thy heavenly wisdom: that they may know and
acknowledge themselves to be subject unto thee the Lord of all, and to be thy
vassals, and that they are bound to give unto thee hereafter an account of
their government. Let them study for peace, seeing that they are thy servants,
who art the God of peace: Let them study for justice, seeing that they are thy
servants, who art the God of justice: Let them study for clemency and mercy,
seeing that they are thy servants, who art the God of mercy: Let them keep and
observe both the tables of the commandments, and become nursing-fathers unto
thy afflicted Church upon earth: Let them put on a fatherly affection toward
their subjects: Let them always administer right judgment: Draw their hearts
away from the splendor and brightness of their earthly dominion, that there
creep not upon them a forgetfulness of true godliness, and of the heavenly
kingdom. Govern them by thy holy Spirit, that they be not high-minded, and
that they abuse not the authority that is granted unto them, Isidor. 3. book,
48 chap.
and do that which is wicked. Grant that in this world they may so execute
their functions, that they may reign with thy elect without end in the
kingdom of heaven: and that they may pass from the flitting glory of this
present world, to everlasting glory in the world to come. Rule them and keep
them in, that they tyrannize not over thy people, and so descend, for all their
costly robes and precious gemms, naked and miserable, to be tormented in the
pit of hell. And unto us, whom thou have made subject to them as thy Vicars and
Vicegerents, give an obedient heart, and ready mind to serve them with all
readiness and cheerfulness, that under their government we may lead a
peaceable and quiet life, 1. Tim. 2.^
in all godliness and honesty: that we may honor them, and perform loyal
obedience unto them, knowing that they have just power and dominion over us;
and that we may obey their honest and godly commands, and so by submitting our
selves unto the laws, be made partakers of the true liberty. For this is true
liberty, To serve God, the magistracy, and the laws. Let us honor them with
our hearts, with our mouths, and with our works: because thou (O most gracious
God) have made them thy Vicegerents here on earth. Let the eyes of the
Magistrates be watchful, Prove. 20.12.
and seeing: let the ears of the subjects be open, and hearing: And let the
gates of heaven be hereafter set wide open to them both, to receive them. Amen.

PRAYER IIII. He prays for the private family, and household estate.
ALmighty and merciful God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who besides the
Ecclesiastical ministry, and the Politic government, have appointed also in
thy most wise counsel an oeconomicall and household estate: I adore thee, I
worship thee, I call upon thee with my whole heart, to keep holy that Nurserie
of the Church and Commonweal. Give unto virgins, widows and married persons
true sanctity of mind, and pure chastity of body: Let virgins cleave unto
thee without any distraction: Let widows persevere in prayers and supplications
night and day: 1. Tim. 5.5
Let those that are married love one another with mutual love: Let them all
serve thee, with their whole heart in holiness: Let the marriage bed be
undefiled, Heb. 13.4.
and let the minds of them all be unspotted: Let them be violets of humility,
and lilies of chastity: Let them be roses of charity, and balsam of sanctity.
Tie the hearts of them that are knit together in holy wedlock, with the bond of
chaste love: that they may mutually embrace and obey one another, and persevere
in thy holy service. Preserve thou them from the treacheries of Asmodeus, that
they burn not with mutual hatred one toward the other. Tob. 3.8.
Let the wife be an help unto her husband, Genesis 2.20.
and comfort him in adversity: Let the indissoluble bond of matrimony be a
token and seal unto us of the love that is between Christ and the Church. Ephesians.
5.3*
By how much the nearer the society is between the man and the wife: by so
much the more fervent let their zeal be in prayer. By how much the more
obnoxious and subject they are to dangers and calamities: by so much the more
conjoined let their minds be in piety and prayer. Be present by thy grace
with religious parents, Ephesians. 6.4.
that they may bring up their children in holy admonitions and instructions and
good discipline: Let them acknowledge those fruits of wedlock to be thy gift,
and restore them again unto thee by godly and faithful instruction: Let them
shine before them by the example of their godly life, and not become guilty of
that grievous sin of scandal. Bend likewise the hearts of the children, that
they may perform due obedience unto their parents: that they may become
sweet smelling plants of the heavenly paradise, and not unprofitable wood
adjudged to the flames of hellfire. Let them cast forth a most pleasant smell
of piety, obedience, reverence, and all kind of virtue: that they fall not
into that most filthy sink of sin, and so consequently into the pit of hell.
Let them remember the commandment of honoring their parents: let them be
careful to recompense their parents after the manner of storks: let them
remember to feed them as they have been fed by them, that they precipitate not
themselves into the gulf of sundry evils. Let parents and children with joint
desires study in this life to worship thee the true God: that they may bear
parts in consort, and together praise thee in the life to come. Ephesians. 6.5.
Let servants obey their masters with alacrity, and with fear, and with
singleness of heart: not with eye-service, or to please men, but as it
becomes the servants of Christ. In like manner, let masters embrace their
servants with fatherly kindness: that they turn not their just government into
tyrannical cruelty. Let their society in their private house be an
oeconomicall private Church, beloved of God, and of the angels. Amen.

PRAYER V. He prays for parents, brethren, sisters, kinsfolk, and benefactours.
MOst holy and merciful God, from whom large heaps of sundry benefits descend
down upon us; who have given unto me kinsfolk and benefactours to be helps unto
me in this present life: I beseech thee to bestow upon them in the life to come
everlasting rewards. Those whom thou have joined unto me in a special bond of
nature and blood, I do specially commend unto thy protection. Those unto whom I
do ow special love and respect, with serious and fervent prayers I commend
unto thy keeping. Grant that my kinsfolk may with joint consent and unanimitie
serve thee in the true faith, and with true piety: that they may receive all
of them hereafter a crown of eternal glory. Unto my parents whom thou have
made, next after thee, the authors of my life, and my informers in true
piety, I cannot by any means render deserved rewards: I humbly beseech thee
therefore, who art the author of all good, and the rewarder of all benefits,
to recompense their benefits here with temporal rewards, and hereafter with
eternal. Let the example of Christ thy Son, who about the agony of his
death commended unto his disciple the care of his mother, let his example teach
me even to the last breath to take care for my parents. Let nature it self, by
the example of the stork, teach me that I ow perpetual thanks and rewards unto
them for their merits. Unto thee, merciful Father, I commend the care and
tuition of my brethren, sisters, and kinsfolk: Let them become the brethren and
sisters of Christ, and so heirs of the kingdom of heaven. Let us all be joined
together in the kingdom of grace, whom thou have joined together in the life
of nature: And let us all, together with those whom by death thou have
separated from us, and taken unto thy self, let us all at length be joined
together in the kingdom of glory. Make us all citizens of the heavenly
Jerusalem, as thou have made us in this life members of the true Church. The
same likewise I entreat of thee for all my benefactours, whose health and
welfare both of soul and body I am bound to desire and further even by the law
of nature. Receive them into the everlasting tabernacles of the city which is
above, whom thou have used as thy instruments to confer upon me so many and
so liberal benefits. My heart propounds unto thee the infallible promise of
thy word; that thou will of thy mere free grace recompense even a cup of cold
water: Mat. 10.42.
How much more then will thou be liberal and bountiful to those that with
full hand bestow benefits of all kinds upon those that want! Let not thy
graces cease to run down upon them, that pour forth so plentifully upon
others. Let the fountain of thy goodnsse always spring unto them, from whom
such plentiful rivers of liberality do flow. Grant, I beseech thee, most
merciful God, that they which sow temporal things so liberally, 1. Cor. 9.^^.
may re^p with much increase things spiritual. Fill their souls with joy, that
feed the bodies of the poor with meat. Let not the fruit of their bounty
perish, though they show it by bestowing of the goods that perish. Give unto
them that give unto others, thou that art the giver of every good gift, blessed
for ever. Amen.

PRAYER VI. He prays for enemies and persecutours.
LOrd Jesu Christ the only begotten Son of God, that have prescribed us in
thy word this rule of charity; Love your enemies, Mat. 5.44.
bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, pray for them that
despitefully use you, and persecute you: I beseech thee, who art most gracious,
and most ready to forgive, to forgive mine enemies, and the persecutours of
the Church. Give unto me the grace of thy holy Spirit, that I may not only
forgive mine enemies from mine heart, but also pray for their health and
salvation even from my soul. Whet not against them the sword of severe revenge,
but anoint their heads with the oil of thy mercy and compassion. Extinguish
the sparks of hatred and anger that are in their hearts, that they break not
forth into the infernal flames of hell. Let them know and acknowledge that our
life is but a vapor and a smoke that soon vanishes away; Jam. 4.14.
that our body is but ashes and dust that flies away: that they bear not
immortal anger in their mortal bodies, nor entertain into this brittle
tabernacle of clay their souls enemy. Let them know likewise, that inveterate
hatred is their greatest enemy: because it kills the soul, and excludes them
from the participation of heavenly life. Illuminate their minds, that they
beholding the glass of thy divine mercy, may see the deformity of anger and
hatred. Govern their wills, that being moved by the example of thy divine
forgiveness, they may leave off and cease to be angry and to do harm. Grant
unto me, merciful God, that, as much as in me lies, I may have peace with all
men: ^om. 12.8. ^ph. 4.4.
and turn the hearts of mine enemies to brotherly reconcilement. Let us walk
with unanimitie and concord in the way of this life, seeing that we hope all
for a place in our celestial country. Let us not disagree upon earth, seeing
that we all desire to live together hereafter in heaven. We all call upon thee,
our Lord, and our God which art in heaven: And it is not meet for the servants
of the same Lord to fall out one with another. We are one mystical body under
Christ our head: And it is base and shameful for the members of the same body
to fight one with another. Ephesians. 4.5.
They which have one faith and one baptism, ought to have one spirit and one
mind. Neither do I pray alone for my private enemies, but also for the public
enemies and persecutours of the Church: O thou which art truth it self, bring
them into the way of truth: O thou which art power it self, bring to naught
their bloody endeavors and attempts. Let the brightness of the heavenly
truth open their blind eyes, that the raging madness and desire to persecute,
which they have in their minds, may hereafter cease. Let them know, O Lord,
and acknowledge that it is not only a vain thing, but also very dangerous,
Acts 9.5.
to kick against the pricks. Why do they imitate the fury of wolves, when as
they know that the blood of Christ the immaculate Lamb was poured (...) for
us? Why do they thirst to shed that innocent blood, for which they know that
the blood of the very Son of God was poured ^orth upon the altar of the
cross? Convert them, O Lord, that they may be converted unto thee from their
heart, and so obtain the fruit of their conversion in this life, and in that
which is to come. Amen.

PRAYER VII. He supplicates for those that are afflicted and in misery.
ALmighty, eternal, and merciful God, 1. Tim 4.10.
which art the Savior of all men, especially of the faithful, and by thy
Apostle have commanded us to make prayers for all men: 1. Tim. 2.1.
I entreat thee for all those that are afflicted and in misery, that thou
would support them by the consolation of thy grace, and succor them by the
aid of thy power. Indue with power and strength from above those that labor
and sweat in the most grievous agony of Satan's tentations: Make them partakers
of thy victory, O Christ, thou which did most powerfully overcome Satan: Let
the cooler of thy heavenly comfort raise up those, whose bones are become dry
with the fire of grief and sorrow. Bear up all those that are ready to fall,
Psalm. 145.14.
and raise up those that are already fallen. Be merciful unto those that are
sick and diseased, and grant that the disease of the body may be unto them the
medicine of the soul; and the adversities of the flesh, the remedies of the
spirit. Let them know that diseases are the handmaids of sin, and the
forerunners of death. Give unto them the strength of faith and patience, O thou
which art the most true Physician both of soul and body. Restore them again
unto their former health, if it be for the everlasting salvation of their
souls. Protect all those that are great with child, and those that be in
labor: Thou art he that do deliver children out of the straits of their
mothers womb, and do propagate mankind by thy blessing: be present with
those that be in labor, O thou lover and giver of life: that they be not
oppressed with an immoderate weight of sorrows. Nourish those that are orphans
and destitute of all help and succor. Defend the widows that are subject to
the reproaches of all men, thou which have called thy self the Father of the
fatherless, Psalm. 68.5.
and the judge and defender of the widows. Let the tears of the widows, which
flow down from their cheeks, break through the clouds, and rest not until they
come before thy throne. Hear those that be in danger by sea, which cry to
thee, and send up their sighs unto thee, seeing before their eyes their
neighbors suffer shipwreck. Restore liberty unto those that are captive: that
with a thankful heart they may sing of thy bounty. Confirm those that suffer
persecution for righteousness sake: Mat. 5.10
that they may get the conquest over all their enemies, and purchase the
everlasting crown of martyrdom. Be present with all those that be in danger
and calamity: and grant that they may possess their souls in true patience,
and denying their own wills, take up their cross. Matt. 16.12.
Let them follow him under the cross, on whom they believe that he died for us
upon the cross. And especially I commend unto thee, most gracious Father,
those which are about the gates of death, and are between time and eternity,
and wrestle with all their strength with that last enemy. Confirm them, O thou
most potent Conqueror of death: Deliver them, O most glorious Captain and
Author of life: that they be not overwhelmed in the waves of tentations, but
by thy conduct they may be brought unto the haven of everlasting rest. Have
mercy upon all men, thou which art the Creator of all: Have mercy upon all
men, thou which art the Redeemer of all. To thee be praise and glory for ever
and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
The sum of Gerards prayers red^ced into a form of morning prayer for the use
of an English family.
The four capital words signify the four parts of Gerards prayers, and the
Arithmeticall figures point (...) every prayer of those parts.

HOly God and just Judge. Thine eyes are more pur^ then the sun, and cannot
behold any thing that is unclear* The Cherubims and Seraphims cover their faces
before thy glorious majesty: The heavens of heavens are not clean in thy
sight. How the^ shall earth, sinful earth, dust and ashes appear before thee?
We presume not, O Lord, to come before the tribunal, to plead for our
righteousness; for all our righteousness is a^ filthy rags: But we prostrate
our selves with all humility of body and soul at thy mercy-seat, to make
CONFESSION of our sins. Hear Lord, and have mercy!

We confess that 1 We sinned in the loins of our first parents; we were
conceived in sin; we were shapen in iniquity. 2 In our childhood original
sin brought forth actual: and actual sins have increased in us ever
since, as our days have increased. Who can reckon up the sins of his youth?
Who can tell how often he offends? The just man sins seven times a day: But
3 We have sinned seventy times seven times every day. ^, 5 All thy holy laws
and commandments we have broken in thought, word, and deed. 6 We have been
partakers of other men's sins. 7 We are many ways convinced of our sins: We
are convinced 8 By the contrition of heart, and the testimony of our
conscience: 9 By the greatness of thy mercy, and thy benefits bestowed upon
us: 10 By the severitie of thy justice declared in the death and passion of thy
Son our Savior Jesus Christ. Thou art an holy God; and nearest not sinners:
Thou art a just Judge; and thy justice must be satisfied. We are sinners; and
the wages of sin is death: Thy justice must be satisfied; or else we cannot
escape death. We have nothing of our own to give for the ransom of our souls:
Therefore we offer unto thee, holy Father, that which is not ours, but thy
Sons: 1 For our original sin, we offer unto thee, just Judge, his
original righteousness, who is righteousne^ it self; for our conception in
sin, we offer unto thee his most sacred conception, who was conceived by the
holy Ghost; for our birth in sin, we offer unto thee his most pure nativitie,
who was born of a pure virgin. 2 For the offenses of our youth, we offer unto
thee his most perfect innocence, in whose mouth was found no guile. 3 For our
daily slips and falls, we offer unto thee his most perfect obedience, who made
it his meat and drink to do thy will in all things. 4, 5 For our often breach
of thy commandments, we offer unto thee his most perfect righteousness, who
fulfilled all thy commandments. 6 For our communicating in other men's sins,
we offer unto thee his most perfect righteousness communicated unto us. 7, 8,
9, 10 For our most wicked and ungodly life, we offer unto thee his ^ost cruel
and bitter death. For us was he conceived, for us was he ^orn, for us was he
crucified: His ^loud still cries unto thee in our ^^half, Father forgive them.
Accept, ^e beseech thee, the inestimable ^rice of thy Sons blood for a full
and plenarie satisfaction for all our ^innes: yea, O Lord, we know that ^hou
have accepted it already.

Therefore with confidence we put ^p our PETITIONS unto thee. As ^hou have
redeemed us by thy Son, ^o also we beseech thee to sanctify us ^y thy holy
Spirit. 1 Mortify in us ^very day more and more all sinful ^usts and
affections, and quicken in ^s all saving graces and virtues. 2 In^rease our
faith. 3 Confirm our hope.

Inflame our charity. Teach us to ^mitate the life of Christ, the true pat^ern
of perfect obedience, and only ^^ue rule of a godly life. Teach us ^
Humility, 6 Patience, 7 Meekness, Gentleness, 8 Chastity, Temperance. Teach
us 9 To contemn all earthly things, 10 To deny our selves, 11 To ^vercome the
world. 12 Grant us consolation in adversity, and true tranquillity of the
mind. Grant us 13 Victory in tentations, and deliverance from the devils
treacheries. Grant us in thine appointed time 14 A blessed departure out of
this life, and a blessed resurrection unto life everlasting.

We pray not for our selves alone, but in obedience to thy commandm^^ we make
our SUPPLICATION^ unto thee for all men. 1 Save and defend thy universal
Church: enlarge thou her borders, and propagate thy Gospel. 3 Bless all
Christian king^ and governors, especially thy servant Charles our most
gracious King and governor: Bless together with him our gracious Queen Mary:
Bless unto them, and us, and our posterity after us, our hopeful Prince
Charles* season him betimes with true religion, that he may be an instrument of
thy glory, the joy of his parents, and the blessing of thy people. Remember
David and all his troubles, the Lady Elisabeth our Kings only sister, and her
princely issue. Suffer them not still to mourn in a strange land: out restore
them, if it be thy will, to their former inheritance. Bless all ^ur kings
loyal subjects from the ^ighest unto the lowest: Give unto ^he Senators
counsel and wisdom: To the magistrates justice and for^^tude; to those that
are under them Christian subjection and obedience: To the ministers of thy word
holi^esse of life, and soundness of do^trine; to the hearers of thy word
di^^gent attention to the word preach^d, and a care and conscience to live
^hereafter. Bless 4 Every family in his kingdom, this especially and all that
belong unto it. Bless our 5 pa^ents, brethren, sisters, kinsfolk, be^efactours
and friends. 6 Forgive our ^nemies. 7 Show pity and compas^^on to all those
that are afflicted and (...) misery: Relieve them according to their several
wants and ne^essities. Be thou a Father to the ^therlesse, a Comforter to the
com^^rtlesse, a Deliverer to the ca^tives, and a Physician to the sick: ^rant
that the sickness of their bo^ies may make for the good of their ^uls:
Especially we beseech thee to be present with those that are at the point to
die: Fit them for their journey before their departure: Ar^ them with faith and
patience: Seal unto them by thy holy Spirit the pardon and forgiveness of all
their sins: And so let thy servants depart in peace, and be translated from
death to life, to live with thee for evermore. Hear us, we beseech thee,
praying for our brethren, hear out brethren for us, and Jesus Christ our elder
brother for us all: We know, O Lord, that thou hear him always.

Hear us likewise, we beseech thee, for his sake, and accept our THANKSGIVING.
We render most hearty thanks unto thee for our Saviors 4 Incarnation, for his
5 Passion, for our 3 Redemption by his most precious blood: We thank thee for 1
forming us in our mothers womb, for 12 washing us in the laver of baptism,
for 6 c^lling us by thy word, for 7 expecting our conversion, for 8 converting
us unto the faith, for 23 strengthening our faith by the participation of
Christ's body and blood, for 9 sealing unto us the pardon of our sins, for 15
giving us a promise of everlasting life: We thank thee for all other thy
blessings 11 corporal and spiritual, internal and external, for our 10
continuance in that which is good, for 14 deliverance from all evil: We thank
thee for thy often deliverances of this Church and kingdom from foreign
invasions, and homebred conspiracies. We thank thee for 2 preserving us ever
since we were born, for defending us this night past from all perils and
dangers, for the quiet rest wherewith thou have refreshed our bodies, for thy
mercy renewed unto us this morning. Let thy mercy be continued unto us this
day, let thy Spirit direct us in all our ways, that we may walk before thee as
children of the light, doing those things that are pleasing in thy sight. Let
the dew of thy blessing descend upon our labors: for without thy blessing all
our labor is but in vain. Prosper thou the works of our hands upon us, O
prosper thou our handywork: Grant that we may consci^onably in our callings so
seek after things temporal, that finally we lose not the things which be
eternal. We are unworthy, O Lord, we confess, to obtain any thing at thy
hands, either for our selves or any others, even for the sinfulness of these
our prayers: But thou have promised to hear all those that call upon thee in
thy Sons name: Make good therefore, we beseech thee, thy promise unto us now
calling upon thee in thy Sons name, and praying as he has taught us in his
holy Gospel,

OUr Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name: Thy kingdom come: Thy
will be done in earth, as it is in heaven: Give us this day our daily bread:
And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us:
And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. For thine is the
kingdom, the power, and the glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

An Evening prayer for a family, gathered here and there out of Gerards
Meditations and Prayers.
MOst glorious Lord God, whose dwelling is in the highest heavens, and yet
beholdest the lowly and the humble upon earth, we blush and are ashamed to lift
up our eyes unto heaven, because we have sinned against thee which dwell in
the heavens: But look down, we beseech thee, from heaven thy dewlling place,
and behold the humility of thy servants here on earth, which prostrate
themselves at the footstool of thy mercy, confessing their own guiltiness,
and begging pardon for their sins.

We confess, Almighty Creator, that thou made us at the first after thine
own image, thou clothedst us with innocence as with a garment, thou seatedst
us in paradise a place of all delight and pleasure: But we have defaced thine
image, we have cast off our first covering, we have thrust our selves out of
that pleasant place. We ran away from thee, and were not obedient unto thy
voice: We were lost and condemned before we came into this world: Our first
parents sinned against thee, and we sinned in them: They were corrupted, and we
are inheriters of their corruption: They were the parents of disobedience, and
we are by nature the children of wrath: Sinful and unhappie children of
sinful and unhappie parents! Thou might in thy displeasure after their fall
have plunged them into the bottomless pit, and made them the fuel of hell,
and sent their posterity after them: And neither they nor we could justly have
complained. Righteous, O Lord, art thou in thy judgments: And our misery is
from our selves. But great was thy mercy unto us. We came into this world in a
flood of uncleanness, wallowing in our mothers blood; and thou did set open
a fountain for us to wash in: We were washed in the laver of Baptism; and we
have returned with the swine to our wallowing in the mire. We came from a place
of darkness into this world, we lived as children of darkness, we sat in
darkness, and in the shadow of death: Thou gave us thy word to be a lantern
unto our feet, and a light unto our paths, that in thy light we might see
light; that so walking in the way of truth, we might attain everlasting life:
But we have loved darkness more then light, and have not been obedient unto
thy word. We came into this world crooked even from our mothers womb; and thou
gave us thy law to be a glass wherein we might see our deformity, and a
rule whereby to square all our actions, words, and thoughts: But we have shut
our eyes that we might not see, and we have refused to be ruled by thy law: The
law of sin in our flesh does daily captivate us. The root of original sin
which lies hidden in us, does every day put forth new branches: All the parts
and faculties of our bodies and souls are as so many instruments of
unrighteousness to fight against thy divine Majesty. Our hearts imagine
wicked things, our mouths utter them, and our hands put them in practice. Thy
mercies every day are renewed unto us, and our sins are every day multiplied
against thee: In the day of health and prosperity we forget thee, and we never
think upon the day of sickness and adversity. Thy benefits heaped upon us do
not allure us to obey thee: Neither do thy judgments inflicted upon others
make us afraid to offend thee. What could thou, O Lord, have done more for
us, or what could we have done more against thee? Thou did send thy Son in
the fullness of time to take our nature upon him, to fulfill thy law for us,
and to be crucified for our sins: We have not followed the example of his
holy life, but have every day afresh crucified him by our sins. And now O
Lord, if we shall become our own judges, we cannot but confess that we have
^eserved everlasting torments in hell^ire. But there is mercy with thee, O
Lord; therefore will we not despair. Our sins are many in number: But thy
mercies are without number. The weight of our sins is great: But the weight
of thy Sons cross was greater. Our sins press us down unto hell: But thy
mercy in Christ Jesus raises us up. By Satan we are accused: But by Jesus
Christ we are defended. By the law we are convicted: But by Jesus Christ we are
justified. By our own conscience we are condemned: But by Jesus Christ we are
absolved. In us there is nothing but sin, death, and damnation: In him there
is treasured up for us righteousness, life, and salvation. We are poor: He is
our riches. We are naked: He is our covering. We are exposed to thy fury
pursuing us: He is the buckler of our defense, and our refuge: He is the rock
of our salvation, and in him do we trust: His wounds are the clefts of the
rock: Give us, we beseech thee, the wings of a Dove, that by faith we may hide
our selves in the clefts of this rock, that thine anger wax not hot against us
to consume us: Let not thy justice triumph in our confusion, but let thy mercy
rejoice in our salvation. Pardon the sinful course of our life past, and guide
us by thy holy Spirit for the time to come: Amend what is amiss, increase all
gifts and graces which thou have already given, and give unto us what thou best
know to be wanting. Be gracious and favorable to thy whole church;
especially to that part thereof which thou have committed unto the protection
of thy servant and our Sovereigne King Charles: Grant that he may see it
flourishing in peace and prosperity, in the profession and practice of thy
Gospel all the days of his life; and after this life ended, crown him, we
beseech thee, with a crown of immortal glory. Let not the scepter of this
kingdom depart from his house, neither let there be wanting a man of his race
to sit upon his throne so long as the sun and moon endures. Of this thou
have given us a pledge already, in blessing the fruit of the Queens womb. Let
the Queen still be like a fruitful vine: And let the Prince grow up like a
plant in thine house. Let thy mercy be extended to the Lady Elisabeth our
Kings only sister, and her princely issue. How long, Lord just and true, how
long shall their enemies prevail, and say, There, there, so would we have it?
It is time for thee to lay to thine hand: for they have laid waste their
dewlling place. Arise, O Lord, and let their enemies be scattered, and let them
that hate them flee before them. Carry them back again into their own country
(if it may be for thy glory and their good) make them glad with the joy of thy
countenance, and let them rejoice under their own vines. We return home again,
and beseech thee to be gracious and merciful to the Kings Counsel, the
Nobility, the Magistracy, the Ministry, the Gentry, and the Commonaltie.
Give unto those whom thou have used as instruments for our good, rewards
temporal and eternal. Forgive those that be our enemies, and turn their
hearts. Forget not those that groan under the cross. Clothe the naked, feed
the hungry, visit the sick, deliver the captives, defend the fatherless and
widows, relieve the oppressed, confirm and strengthen those that suffer
persecution for righteousness sake, cure those that are broken in heart, speak
peace unto their consciences that are tormented with the sense of their sins,
suffer them not to be swallowed up in despair. Stand by those that are ready to
depart out of this life: When their eyes shall be darkened in the agony of
death, kindle in their hearts the light of saving faith: when their ^ares shall
be stopped, let thy Spirit speak unto them inwardly and comfort them: and when
the house of their earthly tabernacle shall be dissolved, then Lord receive
their souls. As we have made bold to make our prayers and supplications unto
thee for our selves and others: So also we render unto thee all possible praise
and thanksgiving for all thy benefits bestowed upon our selves and others. We
thank thee in special for our election, creation, redemption, vocation,
justification, for all the blessed means of our sanctification, and for the
assured hope of our future glorification: We thank thee for our health,
maintenance, and liberty, for preserving us ever since we were born, for
blessing us in all that we have put our hands unto this day. Let thy mercy
still be continued unto us, we beseech thee. Let the eye of thy providence
which never slumbreth nor sleeps watch over us, and let the hand of thy power
protect and defend us: Cover us this night under the shadow of thy wings, that
no evil happen unto us. Grant that our bodies may be refreshed this night with
such moderate rest, that we may be the fitter for the works of our vocation,
and thy service, the n^xt morning. Hear us, we beseech thee, for Jesus Christ
his sake our Lord and only Savior; in whose name and words we call upon thee
further praying,

Our Father which art, etc.

FINIS.

